







'V-
%
2
/ft*




No. 1. Captain Cook’s first Landing-place. Sunrise.






TAHITI
A SERIES OF PHOTOGRAPHS
TAKEN BY
COLONEL STUART-WORTLEY
WITH LETTERPRESS BY
LADY BRASSEY
Of all that is most beauteous imaged there
In happier beauty; more pellucid streams,
In ampler ether, a diviner air,
And fields invested with purpureal gleams.
London
SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON, SEARLE, & RIVINGTON
CROWN BUILDINGS, 188, FLEET STREET
1882
[All rights reserved.]


LONDON :
FEINTED BY GILBEKT AND KIVINGTON, LIMITED,
ST. JOHN’S SQUABE.


PREFACE.
The Photographs contained in this book were
taken by me in Tahiti two years ago. Taken at the
time with no idea of future publication, they are now
published owing to the great advantage they have been
able to secure in having letterpress written to them by
Lady Brassey. That lady knows and loves Tahiti so
well that no one could approach her in writing an
account of its beauties. For the photographs them-
selves I must make some apology, merely suggesting
to those who are inclined to criticize them too closely
that photographing in the intense heat of the South
Seas is very fatiguing work, and development in a
tent under a constant temperature of over go° not con-
ducive to the highest technical excellence as regards
the results. The gelatine plates on which the photo-
graphs were taken I prepared in England, by a process
devised by myself specially to resist the effects of the
unusual heat. The result, chemically speaking, was
satisfactory; but alas! how inadequate photography or
A 2


painting is to render adequately the exquisite beauty
of Tahiti scenery! Much as I had before travelled —
familiar as I am with the beauties of some of the
loveliest spots in the world, Ceylon perhaps the
loveliest for tropical scenery —the glorious beauty of
Tahiti was a revelation to me. The central mountains
of the island rising in fantastic shapes into the clear
blue sky, the road round the shore of the island
disclosing at every turn new loveliness of sea and
shore, the foliage so delicate with beauty, 1 and the
wealth of colour in the flowers, combine to make the
drive round the island, from the first hour to the last,
a dream of beauty. And then, beyond all else, the
wonders of the coral reef! We were fortunate enough
to get one day of dead calm off the shore of Eimeo. 2
We were crossing from Tahiti to the latter island, and
as we slowly paddled over the coral reef, the absolute
stillness of the water revealed to us all its treasures —
the hundreds of tiny fish of all the most brilliant
colours, looking as though a box of jewels had fallen
into the sea, the lovely feathery tentacles of many-
hued polyps waving to and fro, crabs of the quaintest
forms dressed in the brightest livery, sea-anemones of
1 Pre-eminently lovely among the foliage are the ferns, two of
which, faithfully drawn, ornament the cover. The larger one festoons
the trees, its fronds hanging down twenty to thirty feet in length.
2 Called also Moorea.
IV
Preface.


wondrous beauty of shape and vivid colour, and shell-
fish of every form and hue ! The beauty of some
of the latter cannot be imagined by those who are
only acquainted with dead shells in museums, the
glorious colour borne by the living animal fading all
too quickly in death. To myself personally the study
of the marine fauna of the South Seas was one of
unalloyed pleasure, having for many years collected
and kept in aquaria the choicest marine treasures of our
own sea-coast.
Ihe drive round the island took eleven days, stop-
ping every night at one of the native villages on the
shore, where a tiny native hut was always placed at
our disposal. Eleven days seem a long time to take to
go about ninety miles, but in such lovely scenery one
can only dawdle, and the road, though so called, is at
the back of the island no road at all; frequently we had
to go breast-high through grass and creepers ; and
most of the little wooden bridges having broken up
from decay, we had often to go out in the shallow
sea, as the only method of circumventing the numerous
rivers that crossed our path on their descent from
the mountains.
We made the journey in a tiny open carriage drawn
by two ponies, and driven and cared for by a Chinese
coachman. I cannot speak too highly of Ah-Fa, the
excellent Chinaman aforesaid. The care he took of
V
Preface.


us, the still greater care he took of his ponies, and the
persevering patience with which he removed or circum-
vented the many obstacles we found along our road —
notably once, when he had to fetch all the men of a
neighbouring village to carry ponies, carriage, baggage,
and ourselves across an uncircumventable river—was
beyond all praise. Moreover, he was strictly honest;
and having in various wanderings had servants of
almost every nationality—Arabs, Hindoos, Cingalese,
Hottentots, Kaffirs, Negroes, Turks, Greeks, and
many others —I am bound to say that Ah-Fa surpassed
them all, with perhaps the one exception of a full-
blooded negro who was with me once in the interior of
South Africa. Both these men, singularly enough,
were remarkable for their love of animals; Ah-Fa,
besides the care of his ponies, having been greatly
attached to our dog, who accompanied us. “ Bruce,” 3
the latter’s name, was quickly caught by Ah-Fa as
“ Boo,” and many a pleasant talk they had together as
the dog sat on the box by his new-found friend’s side.
As to all the natives of the island, their gentle, lazy
ways are very winning, and they were always willing to
do all they could for us.
8 Bruce is a dog of unusual intelligence, faithful and brave.
During an attack by bushrangers on his former master’s farm in
the Australian bush, he was wounded, and his tail diminished in
length. He was presented to me in Sydney, accompanied us to
Tahiti, and thence to England.
VI
Preface.


But no account of Tahiti would be complete without
mention of the missionary work that has now for so
many years been carried on there by the London
Missionary Society. Any one who has travelled much,
and taken interest in the religious state of the various
people among whom he has travelled, will know how
dismally missionary enterprise has in many cases
failed—not so much because the people were unwilling
to listen, but because the fire of enthusiasm has been
wanting in those who tried to gain their attention.
It seems to be little understood at home that the
mere training of young men for missionary work
is only adapted for turning out instructed machines;
and the great necessity of missionary work, enthu-
siastic devotion, is, even if present at first, dulled
and “ trained ” into something very different, and very
ineffectual. How different has been the earnestness
and fervour of the men who have preached the Gospel
under the London Missionary Society in the South
Seas, and the equally earnest men who have carried
the Gospel for the Church Missionary Society through-
out India and other heathen lands! How little
“training” they required or received, and yet what
results God has given into their hands! Let us look
for a moment at the results of missionary work in the
islands I am writing of. The population of Tahiti,
and its neighbouring island Eimeo, is 10,000; and out
VII
Preface.


of these 2250 are communicants, or enrolled members
of Christian churches. Over 1100 children attend
Sunday-school; and the people have raised and spent
yery nearly 16,000/. in the two islands, within the last
twelve years, in the building of churches. In the same
period too, about 220/. annually has been spent by the
people in the purchase of the Bible, printed in their
own language ; and all this has been done in the face
of the fact that the dominant power on the island is
Roman Catholic—a power that has, however, been
unable to shake the simple faith of the islanders, owing,
mainly, to the faithfulness and earnestness with which
the teachings of the Bible, pure and simple, have been
grounded in their minds. It is due, however, to the
French authorities to say, that many invidious restric-
tions formerly imposed on the English missionaries
are now removed, and that the management of the
government school is now transferred from the Roman
Catholic sisters, to a secular direction, the head and
staff of which is exclusively Protestant.
A French Protestant Missionary Society also works
in Tahiti; and the Rev. James L. Green, for many
years the London Missionary Society’s missionary in
Tahiti, tells me that the most cordial relations exist
between the two societies, their one common aim
being to preach the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ.
VIII
Preface.


While in Tahiti I took pains to talk personally with
very many of the natives on religious matters, and
found them singularly simple in their religious con-
victions ; and after having held a service in a native
church in the interior of the islands, I was surprised
and pleased with the intelligent appreciation of the
little I had been able to say, by those that I had the
opportunity of speaking to afterwards.
One thing so unusual occurred to us that I must
mention it here.
We had to cross one night from Eimeo to Tahiti, in
a canoe paddled by four Tahitians. The weather was
unsettled and the sea rough. When passing from
island to island in the coral seas, it is always necessary
to pass through a break in the reef of coral surrounding
the islands. In this case we had to pass through an
unusually narrow opening, through which the sea ran
heavily, and broke on each side very nastily. As we
rowed round the island inside the reef, we were of
course in smooth water; and when we came opposite
the break in the reef where we had to pass out, the
rowers quietly stopped, drew in their paddles, and all
knelt down in their boat, in prayer. The head man,
who could talk a little English, then said, “ Always
pray God before go through,” and it seemed with
them to be a perfectly natural thing to do. We got
out safe, and across to Tahiti, and just before landing
IX
Preface.


the same stoppage was made, and they again knelt in
prayer, the head man this time explaining to me,
“ Now, thank God He bring us safe.” This simple
faith and reliance in God seems to be one of the main
attributes of the religion of the Tahitians. In this, I
think, we have something to learn from them. I need
say no more, beyond that I only wish I could visit
Tahiti again. The quiet restful life, the wondrous
beauty of a land so different to the one which we
northerners are called upon to inhabit; even the simple
food, mainly consisting of pineapples, bananas, oranges,
and other fruits, with an occasional pigling, roasted in
the appetizing fashion of the South Seas, all make
such a welcome change from our busy life! Alas !
I see little chance of such happiness being in store
for me!
H. STUART-WORTLEY.
X
Preface.


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS,
BEING PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN BY COLONEL STUART-WORTLEY,
AND PRINTED IN AUTOTYPE.
I'AGE
Captain Cook’s first landing-place. Sunrise . . Frontispiece
View of Point Venus, where Cook landed . ... 7
A street in Papeete . . . . . . , , .13
The first bridge built in Tahiti . . . , . . .15
Native and hut, Papeuriri . . . . . . , .20
Native hut in the woods ; east side of the island . . .22
Our washerwomen, Papeete , . . , , . .23
Our family of servants at Tahiti. . . . . . .25
A little Tahitian princess ... ... . . 26
Sunset behind Quarantine Island, Papeete Harbour; canoe in
foreground , . . . . . . . . .29
A fisherman’s hut on the sea-shore . . , . , .3!
Group of ironwood-trees at Paea, the spot where the last battle
took place between Christians and Heathen . . . .32
Hitiaa Lake, Tahiti ...... o,
’
Papeuriri Valley, Tahiti . . . . . . . ,34
The Central Peaks, Tahiti, from the sea-shore . , . .35
View of Tiarrapu, from east side of Tahiti . . . . .36
Sunrise in Tiarrapu . . , . . . , _4 Q
Fine tree fern, Tahiti . . . . . , . ,4!
Woman, young girls, and boys, scraping bamboo for house-
building, basket-making, furniture, &c 44
A bit of the road, along the sea-shore 43
House at Mahaena, and native children, Tahiti . . .46


PAGE
Thirsty ! a boy climbs a tree to fetch us a cocoanut . . .48
A witch and prophetess, Tahiti . . . . . -49
Little pig and bananas in the oven, ready to be covered up for
roasting 5°
Various masks, paddle, &c, . . . • • • -53
Going to a picnic ; our servants with provisions . . . .57
Eimeo, from Tahiti ...•••••• 58
Sunset at Eimeo -59
Study of a cocoanut palm . . . • • • • •61
A bit of our road round the island . . . • • -63
A bit of tropical foliage —breadfruit-tree 66
XII
L Ist of Illustrations.


TAHITI.
To write, as I have been asked to write, a description
of Tahiti, is to me alike a labour of love and of difficulty.
However truthful, from my point of view, the descrip-
tion may be, it is almost certain to incur the criticism,
not only of those who from actual experience are best
qualified to express an opinion as to its worth, but of
those whose impressions on the subject have been
formed at home. The latter will feel convinced that
exaggeration has been indulged in, while the former
will protest that due justice has not been rendered to
what they not unnaturally regard as an earthly
paradise.
Tahiti is one of those places that must be seen to
be appreciated. There is a subtle something in the
air and in the climate that predisposes one to the
intense though lazy enjoyment of existence. More
than once I have observed the mere mention of Tahiti
bring an expression to the faces of grey-headed men,
who had visited the islands of the South Pacific in
B


their youth, which the remembrance of no other country
could produce. The gratification of talking about
lovely Tahiti with one who had been there recently
was to them great and unfeigned; and lam therefore
encouraged to hope that these pages may be the
means of affording pleasure to others, by recalling the
memories of the past.
Perhaps before attempting to describe the island as
it presented itself to us, it may be well to begin with
some information, derived from various sources, as to its
inhabitants, its history, and its general features, which
will at all events tend to show that I am not alone
in my appreciation of this “gem of the Southern
Ocean.”
As an elementary piece of information it may
perhaps be remarked that the word Tahiti should be
pronounced as it is spelt, so as to rhyme with “ mighty,”
and not according to the generally accepted English
fashion, which is incorrect. This is what Captain Cook
himself says, and the remark, of course, holds good
to the present time.
Melville writes as follows :
“Tahiti, or Otaheite, an island of the South Pacific,
the principal in the Society Archipelago, is situated in
lat. 17 0 40' S., long. 150° 30' E., about 130 miles S.E.
of Raiatea. It is an elongated high ridge of land,
composing two peninsulas, each rising gradually from
the sea-shore to an altitude of 7000 feet above the
sea level, and covered to the summit with the most
2
Tahiti .


luxuriant foliage. The one section is in length about
25 miles, and is nearly the same in breadth ; the other
is about 20 miles in length by 15 miles in breadth.
From the great central peaks of the larger peninsula
—Orohena, Aorai, and Pirohitea—the land radiates on
all sides to the sea in sloping green ridges. Between
these are broad and shadowy valleys, watered with fine
streams, and thickly wooded. Unlike many of the
other islands, there extends nearly all round Tahiti a
belt of low alluvial soil, teeming with the richest
vegetation. Here chiefly the natives dwell. Seen
from the sea, the prospect is magnificent. It is one
mass of shaded tints of green, from bush to mountain
top ; endlessly diversified with valleys, ridges, glens,
and cascades. Over the ridges here and there, the
loftier peaks fling their shadows far down the valleys.
At the head of these the waterfalls flash out into the
sunlight, as if pouring through vertical bowers of
verdure. Such enchantment, too, breathes over the
whole that it seems a fairy world, all fresh and bloom-
ing from the hands of the Creator. Upon a nearer
approach the picture loses not its attractions. It is
no exaggeration to say that, to a European of any
sensibility, who for the first time wanders into these
valleys away from the haunts of the natives, the
ineffable repose and beauty of the landscape is such
that every object strikes him like something seen in a
dream; and for a time he almost refuses to believe
that scenes like these should have a common-place
B 2
3
Tahiti.


existence. No wonder that the French bestowed upon
the island the appellation of the New Cythera : i Often/
says De Bougainville, ‘ I thought I was walking in the
Garden of Eden.’ ”
“ The climate is fine, and the soil is a fertile blackish
mould, producing spontaneously a great variety of
edible fruits, roots, and vegetables. Of these the most
common and most useful are the artocarpus, or bread-
fruit ” (of which there are above fifty varieties), “ cocoa-
nut, jambo, thirteen sorts of bananas, the arum, potato,
yam, sugar-cane, and the paper-mulberry, of which the
inhabitants make their cloth. The guava, though only
introduced about thirty years ago, now composes the
greater part of the woodlands and bush in the lower
lands. Dogs, hogs, rats, are numerous. Saddle-
horses are imported from South America, and the
missionaries possess a few hundred head of cattle. The
birds are of various kinds, and the natives rear the
domestic poultry common in Europe. There are also
wild ducks, turtle doves of a green colour, large pigeons,
small paroquets, kingfishers, cuckoos, and herons. Of
the small birds which abound in the forests, some are
remarkable for the melody of their notes. The ants
are troublesome, but no species of serpent has yet been
found ; and frogs, toads, and scorpions, if they exist
at all, are rare. The sea on the coast abounds with
fish, among which is the sea-snake, of which the bite
is mortal.”
“ The natives are well-made. Their mode of life—
4
Tahiti.


which affords them exercise, without subjecting them
to severe labour —imparts to their bodies much of that
strength and elegance which the human frame exhibits
under good training. Some of the other inhabitants
of the islands of the Pacific, and, among the rest,
those of the Friendly Islands, may be more hardy
and robust, and may display a greater appearance
of muscular strength; but none of them seem so
generally to unite that strength and elegance of shape
which is often seen in the natives of Tahiti. Their
colour is tawny, and of a shade much lighter than that
of the inhabitants of the Friendly Islands ; sometimes,
particularly in the case of those of the higher ranks,
it approaches to what we call fair, but the cheeks never
display that glow by which the Northern Europeans
are distinguished. The hair is generally black, but
sometimes brown, red, or flaxen, and frizzled—but
never woolly. The eyes are black, the nose flat, the
mouth large, and the teeth white and even. The
women are distinguished from the men by greater
delicacy of form ; and their skin is fine and soft,
which condition is produced by their frequent bathing,
and copious use of the oil of the cocoa. The chiefs—
like the mandarins in China —used to be distinguished
by their long nails. The practice of tattooing was
nowhere more prevalent than in Tahiti, and the custom
was common to both sexes. The dress of the
Otaheitians is formed of a kind of cloth resembling
paper, made of the paper-mulberry; but as the sub-
5
Tahiti.


stance cannot long resist the rain, the garments
formed of it are thrown aside during wet weather, and
their place is supplied by others made of a kind of
matting.
The missionaries introduced the culture of the cotton
plant, and taught the natives to manufacture a coarse
cotton cloth, and dress in a becoming manner. The
climate of this country renders houses almost super-
fluous, and as the inhabitants require little shelter,
they have been proportionally careless in the construc-
tion of their habitations. These generally consist only
of a shed or roof, resembling the roof of a barn in
Europe, supported by three rows of pillars, one in the
centre and one on each side. They are thatched with
palm-leaves; and the floor is strewed with hay and
covered with mats. A few blocks of wood serve as
stools by day, and by night as pillows. The food
commonly consists of bread-fruit, bananas, plantains,
yams, apples, and a sort of sour fruit, which is used as
a relish to the roasted bread-fruit. The most general
dish is popoi, which is made of the mountain plantain,
beaten up to a paste or jelly with cocoanut-milk.
Every kind of fish is eagerly devoured. The small
canoes used by the fishermen are formed of a single
tree, and each carries from two to six men. The larger
canoes are formed of several planks sewn together,
and are either fitted with an outrigger, or two of
them are fixed together with planks. The seams are
caulked with rushes, and the whole is covered with
6
Tahiti.






No. 2. View of Point Venus —where cook Landed,.




a gummy substance which serves the purpose of
pitch.”
Tahiti was first discovered by the Spaniards in 1605,
and was called by them La Sagittaria. Captain
Wallis, in the Dolphin , rediscovered it in 1767, took
possession of it, hoisted the British flag, and called it
King George’s Island, ignorant or heedless of the
claims of the Spaniards. In 1768, M. de Bougainville,
in a French ship, took possession of it, and rechristened
it La Nouvelle Cythere. In the following year Lieu-
tenant James Cook was sent out in H.M.S. En-
deavour, with a large staff of scientific men, to observe
the transit of Venus. He anchored in Batavia Bay,
and the spot whence his observations were taken is
now marked by a lighthouse, on Point Venus, and a
tamarind-tree, planted by himself. He also surveyed
the island thoroughly. In 1772 the Spaniards came
again, and tried to form a colony; but the death of
their commander, Captain Bonnecho, in 1775, caused
them to abandon the attempt. In 1777 Cook revisited
the island, and found that all the deserted houses,
graves, &c., of the Spaniards had been carefully pre-
served by the natives.
Eleven years now passed without any intercourse
between Europe and Tahiti, at the end of which period
Lieutenant Bligh, who had sailed with Cook, as master,
came hither in command of the Bounty , which was
commissioned by George HI. to transport the bread-
fruit-tree to the British West India Islands. She
7
Tahiti .


arrived at Batavia on October 26, 1788, and remained
five months, during which time the crew were said to
have acquired a familiarity with the attractions of the
island and the charms of its inhabitants, which was
probably not without its influence in connexion with
their subsequent well-known mutiny, though the un-
necessary severity of the commander had much to do
with it.
Young hearts which languish’d for some sunny isle,
Where summer years and summer women smile, —
Men without country, who, too long estranged,
Had found no native home, or found it changed,
And, half uncivilized, preferr’d the cave
Of some soft savage to the uncertain wave;
The gushing fruits that nature gave untill’d,
The wood without a path but where they will’d;
The field o’er which promiscuous plenty pour’d
Her horn; the equal land without a lord;
The wish—which ages have not yet subdued
In man —to have no master save his mood;
#***#*
The freedom which can call each grot a home ;
The general garden, where all steps may roam,
Where Nature owns a nation as her child,
Exulting in the enjoyment of the wild;
Their shell, their fruit, the only wealth they know;
Their unexploring navy, the canoe;
Their sport, the dashing breakers and the chase ;
Their strangest sight, an European face ;
Such was the country which these strangers yearn’d
To see again; a sight they dearly earn’d.
The Pandora frigate, commanded by Captain
Edwards, was sent in search of the Bounty and the
8
Tahiti.


mutineers, in 1790. She arrived at Tahiti in March,
1791, and took away those of the crew who had re-
mained in the island, fourteen in number, three of whom
were afterwards executed at Spithead. Vancouver
also visited Tahiti in the same year.
The foregoing voyages, made by order of George
111., excited much attention in England, one result
being the formation of a Missionary Society in
London, whose first operation was to fit out a vessel
—the Duff— which was to carry missionaries and
the Bible into these newly-discovered lands. The
Duff sailed from the Thames on August 10th, 1796,
and after visiting the groups to the eastward, arrived
at Tahiti on Sunday, March sth, 1797. Perhaps the
original success of these missions was the indirect
cause of their subsequent failure, inasmuch as it led
to the introduction of an exclusive system of treatment
of the natives, and to the adoption of what, there is
too much reason to suppose, were harsh and intolerant
measures.
The success of the French mission in the Gambier
Islands and other places induced the Roman Propa-
gandists to send two priests, MM. L. J. Laval and
F. Caret, to Tahiti, to establish their rule of faith.
This step was fiercely opposed by those at the head
of the existing order of theological opinions, and the
consequence was that these two persons, with a third —
A. Vincent, a carpenter —were forcibly ejected from
Tahiti. This act of aggression against French subjects
9
Tahiti.


naturally attracted the attention of their Government,
and the frigate La Reine Blanche , under Admiral
Du Petit Thouars, arrived, and demanded 2000 piastres
as the expense of the priests’ voyage to France, and
obliged Queen Pomare to sign a treaty, by which
liberty was allowed to all French subjects. This was
in 1843. The ice once broken, and the French power
having already been established in the Marquesas, it
was not difficult to find a pretext to lay stronger hold
on this important island, in some points the key of the
Pacific Ocean. After various controversies, therefore,
backed by the presence of a powerful fleet, Captain
Bruat, early in January, 1844, landed in strong force,
hauled down Queen Pomare’s standard, and hoisted
the French flag, taking possession of the island in the
name of Louis Philippe, King of the French. Since
that time it has nominally been under French protection,
which, however, in the abstract, is but a name; for in
reality the power wielded is absolute, and there will
shortly be no evidence left of the years of labour, and
the immense expense, bestowed in rendering this
beautiful island and its people civilized in an English
sense. But the protectors, with their military system,
have proved to be but poor colonizers, and have neither
developed the few resources of the island nor greatly
changed the character of the natives.
After a voyage of five weeks, from Valparaiso to
Tahiti, during which we had only seen two ships, and
those, curiously enough, on the same day, but which
10
Tahiti.


had been saved from monotony by constant and
regular occupation, we arrived off the harbour of
Papiete. I look back on that voyage now as one long
dream of azure seas, and purple, gold, and crimson
sunrises, —
When the morning star fades in the light that she loves,
On a bed of daffodil sky,
to usher in a cloudless day, with a brightness and light-
ness all its own, succeeded by a sunset of even greater
splendour than the dawn. Such gorgeous masses
and depths of colour I had never seen nor conceived.
The evenings again were followed by nights in which
mere existence was a luxury, made radiant by the
effulgence of a moon by whose light it was quite easy
to read, while the heavens were still further illumined
by myriads of stars, through which flashed and darted
meteors of a brilliancy hitherto unknown to us.
On the morning of December 2nd, 1876, the weather
was unfortunately thick and rainy, and we were obliged
to stand on and off, until at about half-past four a.m.,
we made the lighthouse on Cape Matavai, where Cap-
tain Cook first anchored, and soon afterwards entered
the beautiful harbour of Papiete, the chief town and
only port of Tahiti.
The rain fell in torrents, and we lay-to outside the
reef for a short time, until a French pilot came on
board and took us in through the narrow entrance. It
was curious, while we were tumbling about in the rough
11
Tahiti.


sea outside, to see the natives placidly fishing in the
tiniest of canoes on the lagoon beyond the reef, the
waves beating all the time furiously on the outer surface
of the coral breakwater, as if anxious to seize and
engulf them.
At nine o’clock the rain ceased, and the mist lifted;
the sun shone brightly, and we were able to see the
enchanting features of the shore. Our impression as
we first rowed towards it I cannot adequately describe.
The sky above is of azure blue ; a girdle of luxuriant
and intensely green tropical vegetation, gorgeous with
gaily-coloured leaves, and blossoms, and golden-hued
fruit, encompasses this delightful harbour; while
corals, sea-weeds, zoophytes, and fish of every possible
tint and colour, are seen, as in a wild garden, beneath
the transparent waters on which we are floating.
Truly may we say, —
There, far below in the peaceful sea,
The purple mullet and gold fish rove ;
There the waters murmur tranquilly
Through the bending twigs of the coral grove;
There with its waving blade of green,
The sea-flag streams through the silent water,
And the crimson leaf of the dulse is seen
To blush like a banner bathed in slaughter..
There with a light and easy motion
The fan-coral sweeps through the clear deep sea,
And the yellow and scarlet tufts of the ocean
Are bending like corn on the upland lea.
12
Tahiti.






No. 3. A Street in Papeete.




And life, in rare and beautiful forms
Is sporting amid those bowers of stone,
And is safe when the wrathful spirit of storms
Has made the top of the wave his own.
The surface of the water exhibited every imaginable
tint, from the palest aquamarine to the brightest
emerald, from the pure light blue of the turquoise to
the deep dark blue of the sapphire, and was dotted
here and there with patches of red, brown, and green
coral, rising from the mass below. On shore there
was the rich growth of tropical vegetation, shaded by
palms and cocoanuts, and enlivened by the presence
of native women in red, blue, and green garments,
and men in motley costumes, carrying fish, fowls,
and bunches of cocoanuts, borne, like the grapes
brought back from the land of Canaan by the spies,
on poles.
The harbour of Papiete is large and commodious,
the view from it most exquisite, past Quarantine Island
to the beautiful Island of Eimeo. On landing one
finds oneself in the midst of a fairy-like scene, bewil-
dering in the brightness and variety of its colouring.
The magnolias and yellow and scarlet hibiscus over-
shadowing the water; the velvety turf on to which one
steps from the boat; the white road running between
rows of wooden houses, whose little gardens are a
mass of flowers; the men and women, clad in the
gayest robes and decked with flowers; the piles of
unfamiliar fruit, lying on the grass, waiting to be
13
Tahiti.


transported to the coasting-vessels in the harbour; the
wide-spreading background of hills, clad in verdure to
their summits—these are a few of the objects which
greet the vision of the new-comer.
The streets of the town are far more like avenues
running through a gentleman’s park, timbered with
tropical trees, and bordered on either side by a low
paling. They run back at right angles to the beach,
and all rejoice in wonderfully grand names, suck as
Rue de Rivoli, Rue de Paris, &c. Under the shade of
the trees are built huts and houses, of cane or bamboo,
so small and so daintily put together that they look
more like summer-houses than real dwelling-places.
Close by is what is called the Chinamen’s quarter,
through which we walked, and which consists of a
collection of regular Chinese-built bamboo houses,
whose occupants all wore their national costume, pig-
tail included.
The French Commandant lives in a charming resi-
dence, surrounded by gardens, full of what to us are
the rarest and most exquisitely scented plants. Round
the outer paling is a sort of creeping hedge of ste-
phanotis and vanilla, the mixed perfume of which I can
never forget. On the opposite side of the avenue is
the palace of the late Queen Pomare, who was, during
our visit, at Bola-Bola, taking care of her little grand-
child, aged five, the queen of that island. She had
gone down there in a French man-of-war, the Limier ,
about ten days before our arrival, to quell a rebellion;
14
Tahiti.






No. 4.The first fridge built in Tahiti.




and had been obliged to remain, owing to the continued
disturbances among the natives. She was an interest-
ing person, and did her best during her life to govern
her country wisely and well.
Not far from this is the first bridge made in Tahiti.
The island abounds in fresh-water streams, many of
which we crossed in our subsequent journey, sometimes
fording them, but more frequently passing over simple
rustic bridges, composed of trunks of large trees, just
thrown across from bank to bank, with roughly sawn
planks laid on the top. The rains are of course of
tropical violence, but it does not appear that the
streams are often sufficiently flooded to make them
impassable, or to do any serious damage, so that
the same primitive style of bridge-building is still
adhered to.
The English missionaries have done much good in
some of the islands of the South Seas ; but here they
have not managed matters judiciously. They were too
numerous, and of too many different sects; and the
spectacle of their squabbles amongst themselves was
not edifying to the natives they had come to teach.
At last the latter lost patience with them, turned them
all out of the island, and established a national church
of their own, somewhat in the style of the Methodists,
in which none but native ministers are allowed to
preach, except by special invitation. In every village
there is a French Protestant and a Roman Catholic
church ; but the people, who were formerly nearly all
15
Tahiti.


Protestants, like their ancestors converted by the early
missionaries, have now very generally embraced the
religion of their masters, the French. In the opinion
of those who have lived amongst them, they really
hardly know the difference between the two religions;
and it seems almost a pity not to leave them to prac-
tise one or the other, and devote the labour which
would thus be spared to other islands, where efforts to
improve the condition of the Inhabitants are much
needed.
The first missionaries taught the natives to wear a
graceful dress, which is almost universal throughout
semi-civilized Polynesia, consisting of a long bright-
coloured gown, put into a yoke at the shoulders, and
flowing thence loosely to the ground, which completely
conceals the wearer’s form, even to the tips of her
toes. I think these dresses must come from England
or America, for they are evidently machine-made, and
the cotton-stuff of which they are composed has the
most extraordinary patterns printed on it I ever saw.
Cherry and white, dark blue and yellow or white stripes,
red with yellow spots, and blue with yellow crosses,
appear to be the favourite designs. The islanders
were induced by the missionaries to give up infanticide
and other more or less barbarous customs. But people
here seem to think that the improvement effected is in
reality more or less superficial, and that the moral
feeling of the natives is much the same as it was in
Captain Cook’s time ; the only difference being that
16
Tahiti.


they now do secretly, in the darkness, what they then
did openly, in the light. Surely, however, this is
something to be grateful for. Even a doubtful Chris-
tian is better than an unmistakable savage ; and it is
not only in Polynesia that people are not what they
seem. I believe it is perfectly true, for instance, that
the old dances and songs, about which so much has
been written, can still be got up at very short notice
for the amusement of strangers. At Tahiti, as in more
civilised communities, there always has been, and
always will be, a certain class of people ready and
willing to do anything for money.
In the evening of our first day at Papiete we went
in our boats to see the coral reef, illuminated by
the rays of the setting sun. Who can describe those
wonderful gardens of the deep, on which we gazed
through ten and twenty fathoms of crystal water?
Who can enumerate, still less give a description of, the
strange creatures we saw moving about and darting
hither and thither, amid the masses of coral forming
their submarine home ? There were shells of rare shape,
brighter than if they had been polished by the hand
of the most skilful artist; crabs of all sizes, scuttling
and sidling along; sea anemones, spreading their deli-
cate feelers in search of prey; and many other kinds
of zoophytes, crawling, wriggling, and dragging their
length slowly over the surface of the reef; scarlet,
blue, yellow, gold, violet, spotted, striped, and winged
fish—short, long, pointed, and blunt, darting about like
C
17
Tahiti.


birds among the coral trees and plants, which looked
like exquisitely coloured palms, and ferns, and flowers.
When we reached the outer reef the sea broke
far above our heads, though inside we were safe
and secure. There were one or two native fisher-
men, walking along the reef whipping the water,
at the imminent risk of being washed away; but
they appeared only to have caught a few small
rock-fish, pretty enough to look at, but not good to
eat.
All too soon it became twilight, and almost im-
mediately afterwards dark. Then the bay was illumi-
nated by the torches of the native fishermen, in canoes
on the reef. Each canoe contained at least three men,
one of whom propelled the boat; another stood up
waving about a torch dipped in some resinous sub-
stance, which threw a strong light on the water • while
the third stood in the bows, armed with a spear, made
of a bundle of wires tied to a long pole, not at all
unlike a gigantic egg-whip, with all its loops cut into
points. This he aimed with great dexterity at the fish,
who were either transfixed or jammed between the
prongs. The fine figures of the natives, lighted up by
the flickering torches, and standing out in bold relief
against the dark blue starlit sky, would have served as
models for the sculptors of ancient Greece.
Sunday morning here is a great day for the market,
which commences before daylight at four a.m. The
natives come in from the country and surrounding
18
Tahiti.


villages, by sea and by land, in boats or on horseback,
to sell their produce, and buy necessaries for the
coming week. We walked through the shady streets
to the two covered market-buildings, partitioned across
with great bunches of oranges, plantains, and many-
coloured vegetables, hung on strings. The salesmen
and women had apparently passed the night amongst
their wares, judging by the mats, beds, and pillows
still lying about. The gaily-attired, good-looking,
flower-decorated crowd, of some seven or eight hun-
dred people, all chatting and laughing, and some
staring at us—but not rudely —looked much more like
a chorus of opera-singers, dressed for their part in
some grand spectacle, than ordinary market-going
peasants. Whichever way one turned the prospect
was an animated and attractive one. Here, beneath
the shade of large, smooth, light-green banana leaves,
was a group of earnest bargainers for mysterious-
looking fish, luscious fruit, and vegetables; there,
sheltered by a drooping mango, whose rich clusters
of purple and orange fruit hung in tempting proximity
to lips and hands, another little crowd was similarly
engaged ; orange-trees were evidently favourite rendez-
vous ; and in front of a hedge of scarlet hibiscus
and double Cape jasmine, a row of flower-sellers had
established themselves. Every vendor carried his
stock-in-trade, however small the articles composing
it might be, on a bamboo pole, across his shoulder,
occasionally with ludicrous effect, as, for instance,
C 2
19
Tahiti .


when the thick but light pole supported only a tiny
fish, six inches long at one end, and two mangoes at
the other. Everybody seemed to have brought to
market just what he or she happened to have on hand 7
however small the quantity. The women would have
one, two, or three new-laid eggs in a leaf basket, one
crab or lobster, three or four prawns, or one little trout.
Under these circumstances, marketing for so large a
party as ours was a somewhat lengthy operation, and
I was much amused in watching our proveedor, as he
went about collecting things by ones and twos, until
he had piled a little cart quite full, and had had it
pushed off to the quay.
About six o’clock the purchasers began to disperse,
and we were just preparing to depart likewise, when an
old man, carrying half-a-dozen little fish, and followed
by a small boy laden with vegetables and fruit, intro-
duced himself to us as the brother-in-law of Queen
Pomare IV., and chief of Papiete, and after a short
talk, invited us to visit him at his house. We agreed,
and following him, presently reached a break in the
hedge and ditch that ran along the side of the road,
beyond which was a track, bordered by pine-apples,
and dracaenas, leading to a superior sort of house, built
in the native style, and surrounded, as usual, by bread-
fruit, cocoanut, banana, mango, and guava-trees. We
were conducted into the one large room, which con-
tained two four-post bedsteads, and four mattresses
laid on the floor, two or three trunks, and a table in
20
Tahiti.






No. 6. Native and hut. Papeuriri .




the corner, on which were writing-materials and a few
books. The chief himself spoke a very little English,
his son an equally small amount of French. The conver-
sation therefore languished, and after a decent interval
we rose to depart. Our host asked if he might “ come
and see my ship,” and procured pen, ink, and paper —•
not of the best quality—for me to write an order for
him to do so, “in case lady not at home.” He also
presented me with some pictures of soldiers, drawn by
his son —a boy of about eleven years old, of whom he
seemed very proud, and expressed his regret that we
could not prolong our stay, at the same time placing
at our disposal the whole house and garden, including
a fat sow and eleven little pigs.
A friend of his lent me a horse, and volunteered to
show us something of the neighbourhood. Accord-
ingly, leading the way carefully over all the rough
places, he took us through groves and gardens to the
grounds belonging to the royal family, in which were
plantations of various kinds of trees, and a thick
undergrowth of guava. The latter plant was first
introduced by the missionaries, and it now overruns
the whole island, and cannot be got rid of. In
the portion of the town inhabited exclusively by
natives, every hut is built under a large bread-fruit or
mango-tree, amid cocoanut-trees, whose graceful stems
and feathery crowns tower above a mass of orange
and lemon-trees, plantains, bananas, guavas, yams,
sweet-potatoes, and pine-apples. Where there is such
21
Tahiti.


an abundance for all, and where the inhabitants have
little else to do but to stretch out their hands and
pluck the fruit, that almost falls into their mouths, it
is neither surprising that the people are lazy, nor that
they should not take the trouble to fence in and divide
what I suppose they look upon as common property.
The houses themselves are neatly built, some of small
bamboos, fastened together, though not closely, with
sinnet, made of cocoanut fibre. They are light and
cool, and one can perfectly well see from the interior
all that goes on outside, though the walls are imper-
vious to the glance of passers-by, unless they put their
eyes quite close to the crevices. Others are of bamboo
leaves, loosely interlaced in a sort of diamond pattern,
but are not nearly so tidy-looking or so durable as
those just described.
Adjacent to the principal dwelling is generally a
roughly-built cooking-hut, in which the work of pre-
paring the morning meal—if we might judge by the
savoury smells we encountered—was actively pro-
ceeding at the time of our visit. The mode adopted
is to light a fire, and to make a number of suitable
stones red hot. With these a hole in the ground is
lined, in which are laid, one above the other, the
various courses of fish, vegetables, pig, and fowl, each
wrapped in plantain leaves. More hot stones, leaves,
and earth, are then placed over all, and the food is left
to cook for two or three hours.
The various members of the family meanwhile per-
22
Tahiti,






No. 7. Native Huts in the woods. E. side of Island.








No. Our Washerwomen. Papeete.




form their ablutions, both of person and clothes, in the
nearest stream of fresh water, completing their toilet
in the verandah or under the trees, as the case may-
be. Many of them were so occupied as we passed,
some of whom rushed into the stream to hide them-
selves, while others calmly continued the brushing out
of their luxuriant tresses, anointing them afterwards
with cocoanut oil, arranging them in long plaits, and
decorating them with flowers.
The work of the laundress is here done in the most
primitive fashion. The women go down to the streams,
and, seated either on the stones or in the water, beat
the clothes till they are sufficiently clean, diversifying
their occupation with an occasional dip and a swim,
either with or without their garments, which, though
long and completely covering them, are simple and
easily removed, or dry quickly in the hot sun if not
taken off. Anything more graceful than a group of
native girls, diving and swimming and gambolling in
the water, cannot easily be imagined.
At ten o’clock there was service at the native church,
close to the landing-place. The building is shaded
by yellow alamanda and scarlet hibiscus-trees, whose
scarlet and yellow blossoms dropped off and floated
away on the surface of the glassy blue sea, among
the white coral rocks, that peeped upwards like the
lovely flowers of the tropical submarine forest. It
was full to overflowing. The windows and doors were
all wide open, and many members of the congregation
23
Tahiti.


were seated on the steps, on the lawn, and on the
grassy slope beyond. They were listening to a dis-
course in the native language, delivered by a young
man with an intellectual and expressive face, who was
formerly tutor to the Marquis of Lome. Most of the
people wore the native costume, which, especially when
made of black stuff and surmounted by a little sailor’s-
hat, decorated with a bandana handkerchief or a
wreath of flowers, was very becoming. Sailors’-hats
are universally worn, and are generally made by the
natives themselves from plantain or palm leaves, or
from the inside fibre of the arrowroot. Some rather
elderly men and women in the front rows were taking
notes of the sermon. I found afterwards that they
belonged to the Bible-class, and that their great pride
was to meet after the service and repeat by heart
nearly all they had heard. This seems to show at least
a desire to profit by the minister’s efforts, which, we
must hope, were not altogether in vain.
After the usual service there were two churchings
and two christenings. In the latter case the men
held the babies throughout the ceremony, looking ex-
tremely sheepish all the time. One baby was grandly
attired in a book-muslin dress, with flounces, a tail at
least six feet long dragging on the ground, and a lace
cap, with cherry-coloured bows ; the other was nearly
as smart, in a white-worked long frock and cap,
trimmed with blue bows. The churchings and
christenings over, there was a very long hymn, some-
what monotonous as to time and tune, but sung with
24
Tahiti.






No. 8. Our family of Servants at Tahiti.




much fervour, followed by the administration of the
sacrament, in which cocoanut milk took the place of
wine, and bread-fruit was substituted for bread. The
proper elements of bread and wine were originally used,
but experience proved that, though the bread went
round pretty well, the cup was almost invariably
emptied by the first two or three communicants, some-
times with unfortunate results.
After church we drove out to Fuatahua. The road
was bordered with pine-apples, which grow wild every-
where, but especially along the sides of the roads,
where they spring up in luxuriant abundance from the
crowns thrown away by the people after eating the
fruit on their way to and from the market. They are
the most delicious I ever tasted, and their cost is one
halfpenny a dozen ; consequently our sailors despised
them, and thought them unfit for food. On reaching
the open country we drove past trim little villas and
sugar-cane plantations, until we turned off the main
road, and entered an avenue of mangoes, whence a
rough road, cut through a guava thicket, leads to the
main gate of Fuatahua —a regular square Indian bun-
galow, with thatched roofs, verandahs covered with
creepers, windows opening to the ground, and steps
leading to the gardens on every side, ample accommo-
dation for stables, kitchens, servants, &c., being pro-
vided in numerous outbuildings, where the servants
sit about and chatter and gossip and smoke when not
engaged in their work.
Thirty or forty years ago, when the owner of Fuata-
25
Tahiti .


hua came out here, and established himself as a
merchant, he did an immense deal of good by his
enterprise, and was looked upon almost as a king by
the islanders. He married a granddaughter of the
late king and the Queen Pomare, who is the chief ess
of the large district of Eimo. One of the sisters-in-
law of the British Consul, an English lady, is married
to the heir-apparent to the throne ; another, who owns
the Scilly Isles, not far from here, where the best
pearls are found, is the wife of the American Consul;
and a third is married to a gentleman at Valparaiso.
All are “ chiefesses,” as they call them here, —not at
all an empty title, when it indicates the possessors of
several pearl islands, acres of land, and thousands of
cocoanut-trees. Captain Cook says that the Tahitians,
like the Israelites of old, choose their chiefs for being
tall of stature and beautiful in person, good qualities
which appear to be hereditary.
Soon after breakfast, we drove to the outskirts of a
dense forest, through which a footpath leads to the
waterfall and fort of Fuatahua. Here we found horses
waiting for Mrs. Godefroi and myself, on which we
rode, accompanied by the gentlemen on foot, through
a thick growth of palms, orange-trees, guavas, and
other tropical trees, some of which were overhung and
almost choked by luxuriant creepers. Specially notice-
able amongst the latter was a gorgeous purple passion-
flower, with orange-coloured fruit as big as pumpkins,
that covered everything with its vigorous growth.
26
Tahiti .






No. 5. A little Tahitian Princess.




The path was always narrow, and sometimes steep,
and we had frequently almost to creep under the over-
hanging boughs, or to turn aside to avoid a more than
usually dense mass of creepers. We crossed several
small rivers, and at last reached a spot that com-
manded a view of the waterfall, on the other side of a
deep ravine. Just below the fort that crowns the
height, a river issues from a narrow cleft in the rock,
and falls, at a single bound, from the edge of an
almost perpendicular cliff, 600 feet high, into the
valley beneath. First one sees the rush of blue water,
gradually changing in its descent to a cloud of white
spray, which, in its turn, is lost in a rainbow of mist.
Imagine that, from beneath the shade of feathery
palms and broad-leaved bananas, through a network
of ferns and creepers, you are looking upon the Staub-
bach, in Switzerland, magnified in height, and with a
background of leafy mountains, and you will have some
faint idea of the graceful beauty of the fall of Fuatahua,
as we beheld it this lovely day.
A little stream came tumbling from the height,
And straggling into ocean as it might,
Its boundary crystal frolicking in the ray,
And gush’d from cliff to craig with saltless spray.
Close on the wild wide ocean, yet as pure
And fresh as innocence, and more secure,
Its silver torrent glitter’d o’er the deep
As the shy chamois’ eye o’erlooks the steep,
While far below the vast and sullen swell
Of ocean’s alpine azure rose and fell.
27
Tahiti.


The fort itself is a place of considerable interest,
where the natives held out to the very last against the
French. On the opposite bank, the last islander who
was killed during the struggle for independence was
shot while trying to make his escape. Situated as
the fort is in the centre of a group of mountains, with
valleys branching off in all directions, it could hold
communications with every part of the coast, and
there can be but little doubt that the siege would have
lasted much longer than it did, but for the treachery
of one of the garrison, who led the invaders, under
cover of the night, and by devious paths, to the top
of a hill commanding the position. From this spot
the French poured down their fire upon the people
inside, who, unable to offer any effectual resistance,
were thus compelled to surrender, after a vigorous but
ineffectual struggle.
There are now no signs of the fierce warfare that
once raged in this beautiful spot, and the ramparts
and earthworks are overrun and almost hidden by
roses. Originally planted by the new-comers, they
have spread rapidly in all directions, till the hill-sides
and summits are quite ablush with the fragant bloom.
One of the French gardtens brought us the key
and admitted us through the gate. Inside all was
quiet and peaceful, kitchen-gardens and strawberry-
beds occupying the space where so many lives had
been sacrificed; for it seems that the two old soldiers,
left up here to look after the place, take advantage of
28
Tahiti.






No. 9. Sunset behind Quarantine Island ; Papeete Harbour.
Canoe in foreground.




its high elevation and its sheltered position to cultivate
European ‘fruit and vegetables for Monsieur le Com-
mandant, down below, in the town.
On our homeward journey the view across the
harbour towards Quarantine Island, in the glowing
light of the setting sun, with the opalescent tints on
the surrounding water, was one of the most exquisite
things I ever beheld. We lingered long on the shore,
and some girls brought us mats to sit on, and laid
Oranges and cocoanuts and various fruits at our feet.
We sat and looked and thought and dreamt, till the
most distant glimmer of the dying sun was gone, the
stars came out one by one, and the southern cross was
high in the heavens pointing upward, ever upward,
Dear is to me the hour when daylight dies,
And sunbeams melt into the silent sea,
For then sweet thoughts of other days arise,
And memory breathes a vesper sigh to thee.
At daybreak the next morning, when I went on deck,
it was a dead calm. The sea-breeze had not yet
come in, and there was not a ripple on the surface of
the harbour. Outside, two little white trading schooners
lay becalmed; inside, the harbour tug was getting up
steam to go to meet one of Messrs. Brander’s vessels
from Valparaiso, which we could just see in the offing.
On shore, a few gaily-dressed natives were hurrying
home with their early market produces, and others
were stretched lazily on the grass at the water’s edge
or on the benches under the trees. Our stores for the
29
Tahiti.


day, a picturesque-looking heap of fish, fruit, vegetables,
and flowers, were on the steps, waiting to be brought
off, and guarded in the meantime by natives in cos-
tumes of pink, blue, orange, and a delicate pale green
they specially affect. The light mists rolled gradually
away from the mountain tops, and there was every
prospect of a fine day for our projected excursion.
I went ashore to fetch some of the fresh-gathered
fruit, and soon we had a feast of luscious pine-apples,
juicy mangoes, bananas, and oranges, with the dew
still upon them. The mango is certainly the king of
fruit. Its flavour is a combination of apricot and
pine-apple, with the slightest possible suspicion of
turpentine thrown in, to give a piquancy to the whole.
It sounds like a strange mixture, but I can only say
that the result is delicious. To enjoy mangoes
thoroughly they ought not to be eaten in company,
but leaning over the side of the ship, in the early
morning, with sleeves tucked up to your elbows, using
no knife and fork, but tearing off (or removing grace-
fully, would perhaps be a better expression) the skin
with your teeth, and sucking the abundant juice.
A little before eight o’clock we started in a vehicle
something like a char-a-bancs, with three seats, one
behind the other, all facing the horses, and roomy and
comfortable enough for two persons, though rather
small, I should think, for three, the number that is
generally crammed in. A Chinese coachman and a thin
but active pair of little horses completed the turn-out.
30
Tahiti .






No. 11. A fisherman’s Shot on the seashore.




The heat of the sun was almost overpowering as
we emerged from the leafy groves of Papiete, but there
was a nice breeze, and sometimes we were in the shade
of cocoanut-trees. We reached Papea at about half-
past nine, from which point onwards the scenery
increased in loveliness, and the foliage was, if possible,
more luxuriant than ever. In fact, it becomes im-
possible to describe its exquisite wealth of beauty.
The gorgeousness of the flowers was so shaded and
softened by the deep green leaves, that the whole was
one graceful harmony by sight and of smell, a rhythm
in colour, that compelled one to gaze till one could
gaze no more, and at last obliged one, from sheer
fatigue of beauty and satiety of colour, to close one’s
eyes and indulge in a vision of what seemed as if it
could scarcely be reality. The flowers, the fruit, the
colours worn by every one, the whole scene and its
surroundings, seem almost too fairylike to have an
actual existence. lam in despair when I attempt to
describe all these things. I feel that I cannot do any-
thing like justice to their merits, and yet I fear all the
time that what I say may be looked upon as an
exaggeration.
We passed by extensive coffee, sugar-cane, Indian -
corn, orange, cocoanut, and cotton plantations, and
vanilla, carefully trained on bamboos, growing in the
thick shade. Near Atemavao we passed the house of
Mr. S., the great cotton planter, and, shortly afterwards,
the curious houses, or rather huts, of some islanders
31
Tahiti,


he has imported from the Kingsmill group, to work his
plantations. They are a wild savage-looking set,
inferior to the Tahitians in appearance. Their dwell-
ings are raised on high wooden platforms, approached
by ladder-like steps, the lower part covered in with
mats, the upper story composed of wooden pales, laid
transversely, and the whole thickly covered with
thatch.
I believe that in their own country they dwell in
marshes near the sea shore, where such habitations are
of course necessary, and that they have continued to
follow the customs of their ancestors, notwithstanding
the altered circumstances of the case.
The cotton mills, which formerly belonged to a
company, are now all falling to ruin; and in many
other parts of the island we passed cotton plantations
uncleaned and neglected, and fast running to seed and
waste. So long as the American war lasted, a slight
profit could be made upon Tahitian cotton; now it is
hopeless to attempt to cultivate it with any prospect
of adequate return.
Near these mills the last battle was fought between
the Christians and heathen. The exact spot, which
was pointed out to us, is marked by a group of ironwood
trees, Casuarina equisetifolia , two names derived
from the hardness of the wood and the fancied resem-
blance of its fine heavy foliage to a horse’s tail.
On our way we met an intelligent Norwegian car-
penter, who gave us much interesting information about
32
Tahiti.






No. 10. Group of Ironwood Trees, at Paea, the spot where the last
tattle took place between Christians and Heathen.








No. 12. Hitiaa Lake. Tahiti.




the island. When we told him that we had been in
Norway, and said we knew something of Christiania,
he was delighted, and asked us no end of questions
about the country, which he has not visited for thirty
years.
The sun was now at its height, and we longed to stop
and bathe in one of the many fresh-water streams we
crossed, and afterwards to eat our lunch by the wayside ;
but our Chinese coachman always pointed onwards,
and said “ Eatee much presently; horses eatee to.”
At last we arrived at a little house, shaded by cocoanut-
trees, and built in an enclosure near the sea-shore, with
“ Restaurant ” written up over the door. We drove in
at the front gate, and were met by the proprietor, an
old French soldier from Martinique, with what must
have been rather an embarrassing multiplicity of women
and children about his heels. The cloth was not laid,
but the rooms were clean, and there was a heap of
tempting-looking fish and fruit in a corner. We said
we were starving, and after begging him to let us have
luncheon as soon as possible, strolled down to the
beach in the vain hope of finding a sheltered and
comparatively shady spot in which to repose until it
should be ready.
The beauty of the scene made up for what was
deficient in other respects. Not every day can one
behold such tempting pools among reefs of gracefully
branched coral overhung by luxuriant tropical foliage,
the blossoms of which drop into the water around and
D
33
Tahiti.


float away, while lovely little blue, scarlet, green, and
yellow fish dart about in the limpid depth beneath.
On our return to the “ Restaurant,” where we had
been led to expect nothing in the shape of a meal,
except fruit, vegetables, and fish, cooked in the native
fashion, we found the table enticingly laid out, with
little scarlet crayfish, embedded in cool green lettuce
leaves, fruit of various kinds, good wine and fair bread,
all arranged on a clean though coarse table-cloth. The
only thing that was not tempting was a dish of salt
beef and cabbage, which we thought was the piece de
resistance, and to which accordingly we tried to do jus-
tice. But it was not appetizing, this hot day. This was
followed by a savoury omelette, so good that we asked
for a second ; when, to our astonishment, there ap-
peared a plump roast fowl, with most artistic gravy and
fried potatoes. Then came a hifteck aux champignons ,
and some excellent coffee to wind up with. On making
our host our compliments, he said, “ Je fais la cuisine
moi-meme, Madame.” In the course of our repast we
again tasted the bread-fruit, but did not much appre-
ciate it, though it was this time cooked in the native
fashion, —roasted underground by means of hot stones,
in company with a little pig, plantains, bananas,
and beans.
Afterwards I conducted a sort of conversation with
the numerous women and children busily occupied near
the house, and watched the operation in which they
were engaged, of drying heche-de-mer —a kind of sea
34
Tahiti.






No. 13. Papeuriri Valley. Tahiti.








No. 31. The Central Teaks, Tahiti, from the sea-shore.




slug ( Holothuria ) —for exportation to China, where it is
largely used. Some were also plaiting hats of palm-
leaves and the interior fibre of the arrow-root. Those
made of the latter material are very fine and expensive,
costing from twelve to fifteen dollars a piece.
On resuming our journey we crossed innumerable
streams, full not only of water, but also of bathers and
washerwomen ; for the Tahitians are very fond of
water, and always bathe once or twice a day in the
fresh streams, even after having been in the sea.
Near the two great central peaks of the island there
is a fine lake, called Hitiaa, which at the time of our
visit it was unfortunately impossible to reach, on
account of the recent heavy rains and the consequent
landslips. This caused us great regret, as the finest
scenery in Tahiti is said to be in the neighbourhood
of this lake, including that of the three valleys leading
therefrom towards the sea-shore. Of one of the most
beautiful of these, Papeuriri, the photograph will give
some idea.
In many places along the road people were making
hay from short grass, and in others they were weighing
it preparatory to sending it into town. But the grass
grown here is not at all nourishing for horses, and
most people get their hay from Valparaiso.
The road that encircles the island is called the
Broom Road. Convicts were employed in its original
construction, and now it is the punishment for any one
getting drunk in any part of the island to be set to
D 2
35
Tahiti.


work to sweep, repair, and keep in order, a piece of
the road in the neighbourhood of his dwelling. It is
the one good road of Tahiti, encircling the larger of the
two peninsulas close to the sea-shore, and surmounting
the low mountain range in the centre of the isthmus.
From an elevated point we obtained our first view
of the Tiarrapu, as the smaller peninsula of the island
of Tahiti is called, and very beautiful it looked in the
afternoon light. The neck of land known as the
Isthmus of Taravao which forms the connecting link
between the larger and smaller peninsulas of Tahiti is
so low and narrow that it is not visible from a distance,
which makes it easy to imagine that there are two
islands instead of one only. The natives call the
larger peninsula Opoureoun (Cook) or Tahiti-mu
(Great Tahiti) and the smaller Tiarrapu, or Tahiti-iti
(Little Tahiti).
Before long we found ourselves close to the isthmus,
and commenced to ascend the hills that form the
backbone of the island. The road was narrow, and
just as we were approaching the top we heard a great
noise and shouting, apparently in front of and above
us, though nothing could be seen, owing to the abrupt
turns in the road. Immediately afterwards two carts
full of natives came tearing down as hard as they
could go. Fortunately they heard our driver’s shouts
in time to enable them to put on the breaks, and so to
stop at a portion of the road just wide enough to allow
us to creep by, though we seemed to overhang the
3 6
Tahiti.






No. 14. View of Tiarrapu from E. side of Tahiti.




precipice in doing so. We climbed up and up, till at
last, when the horses were nearly exhausted, we reached
the summit, and beheld a magnificent prospect on all
sides.
A short sharp descent, a long drive over grass roads
through a rich forest, and again a brief ascent, brought
us to the French fort on the Isthmus of Taravao,
whose garrison keep watch over the inhabitants of
both portions of the island. A little farther on, we
came to our sleeping-quarters for the night, the Hotel
de risthme, situated in a valley in the midst of a
dense grove of cocoanuts and bananas, and kept by
two retired French sailors, one old and disfigured by
wounds, the other young and good-looking, but both
active, clean, and obliging. They came out to meet
us, and conducted us up a flight of steps on the side
of a mud bank to the four rooms forming the hotel.
There were two sleeping-apartments, a salon, and a
salle-a-manger , the walls of which consisted of flat
pieces of wood, their own width apart, something like
Venetian shutters, with unglazed windows and doors
opening into the garden. The means of ventilation
were thus plentifully provided, but alas, the air was
wanting, for not a breath stirred the foliage of the
deep valley, and the atmosphere was close and op-
pressive.
We left our luggage, took our bathing-gowns, or
rather gave them to a big native to carry for us, and
walked about four hundred yards, along a grassy road,
37
Tahiti.


to the sea, where we paddled about in shallow water
and amused ourselves by picking up coral, shells,
and beche-de-mer , and watching the blue and yellow
fish darting in and out among the rocks, until at last
we found a sandy bottom among the coral reefs, which
made a capital deep water bath. Dressing again was
not such a pleasant affair, owing to the mosquitoes,
which settled on our arms and shoulders, and bit us in
the most provoking manner, much faster than we
could whip them off or put on our clothing. After-
wards we strolled along the shore, which was covered
with cocoanuts and drift-wood, washed there, I suppose,
from some of the adjacent islands, and on our way
back to the hotel we gathered a handful of choice exotics
and graceful ferns, with which to decorate the table.
The dinner itself really deserves a detailed description,
if only to show that one may make the tour of Tahiti
without necessarily having to rough it in the matter
of food. We had cray-fish and salad as a preliminary,
and excellent soup to commence with, followed by
delicious little oysters, that cling to the boughs and
roots of the guava and mangrove-trees overhanging
the sea. Then came a large fish, name unknown, the
inevitable houilli and cabbage, cotelettes aux pommes ,
hifteck aux champignons , succeeded by crabs and other
shell-fish, including wurrali , a delicate-flavoured kind
of lobster, an omelette aux abricots, and dessert of
tropical fruits. We were also supplied with good wine,
both red and white, and bottled beer.
38
Tahiti.


Perhaps I ought to add that the cockroaches were
rather lively and plentiful, but they did not form a
serious drawback to our enjoyment. After dinner,
however, when I went to my room, where it was dark,
hundreds of these creatures, about three inches long,
and broad in proportion, scuttled away as I lighted the
candle; and while we were sitting outside we could see
troops of them marching up and down in rows between
the crevices of the walls. Then there were the mos-
quitoes, who hummed and buzzed about us, and with
whom, alas, we were doomed to make a closer ac-
quaintance. Our bed was fitted with the very thickest
calico mosquito curtains, impervious to the air, but not
to the venomous little insects, who found their way
in through every tiny opening, in spite of all our
efforts to exclude them.
During the night the heat was suffocating, and soon
after twelve o’clock we woke up, feeling half stifled.
There was a dim light shining into the room, and I
thought, “ Thank goodness, it’s getting daylight;” but
on striking my repeater I found to my regret that this
was a mistake. In the moonlight I could see columns
of nasty brown cockchafers ascending the bed-posts,
crawling along the top of the curtains, dropping with
a thud on to the bed, and then scuttling down over
the side to the ground. At last I could stand it no
longer, and opening the curtains cautiously, I seized
my slippers, knocked half a dozen brown beasts out
of each, wrapped myself in a poncho —previously well
39
Tahiti.


shaken —gathered my garments around me, surmounted
a barricade I had constructed over-night to keep the
pigs and chickens out of our room, and fled to the
garden. All was still, the only sign of life being a
light in a neighbouring hut, and I sat out in the open
air, in comparative comfort, until driven indoors again
by torrents of rain, at about half-past two o’clock.
The morning broke, and the sun rose bright and
resplendent. Our sea-bath, inside the coral-reef,
shaded by the graceful foliage of a tall cocoanut-
tree, and sheltered from the gaze of any possible,
though most improbable, passing native, by hibiscus,
alamanda, and guava bushes, was indeed a luxury.
Among the bushes we found numbers of large hermit-
crabs, crawling, or rather running, about in whelk-
shells, half a dozen of them occasionally having a
grand fight amongst themselves. I should think we
picked up twenty different sorts of gracefully shaped
pieces of coral. Shells too were abundant, and of an
infinite variety of form and colour, including cowries,
helmet-shells, the shells from which cameos are some-
times cut, mother-of-pearl shells, and a large spiral
univalve, nearly a foot long, with dark brown spots and
stripes on a delicate cream-coloured ground, like the
skin of a tiger or leopard. On our way back to the
inn we examined several of the canoes drawn up on
the beach, in which were some fish-spears and a fish-
hook, nearly three inches long, made of solid mother-
of-pearl, the natural curve of the shell from which it
40
Tahiti.






No. 15. Sunrise in Tiarrapu.








No. 16. Fine Tree Fern. Tahiti.




was cut being preserved. A piece of bone was securely
fastened to it by means of some pig’s hair, but there
was no bait, and I understand that the glitter of the
mother-of-pearl alone serves as a sufficient allurement
to the fish.
One of the most noticeable specialities of the Tahiti
is the profusion with which tree-ferns abound in all
parts of the island. Their slender stems rise to a
height of from ten to forty feet, their fronds branching
out to a distance of from fifteen to thirty feet, and
forming a huge yet delicate green lace umbrella, which
even the rays of a tropical sun can scarcely penetrate;
fit pavilion of state or bridal canopy for a fairy king
or queen.
At half-past seven the horses were put to, and we
were just ready for a start, when down came the rain
again, more heavily than before. Our host had been
extremely anxious that we should stay here for two
days, and explore the smaller peninsula thoroughly,
which would be a work of time, as there is no good
road round it, and you have consequently to go as far
as you can along one side, and then return to your
starting-place and take a fresh departure. But we
had been told that the scenery was very similar to
that of the rest of the island, and we had decided,
before leaving Papiete, that the journey would hardly
be worth the trouble it would involve. As we had
talked about it at first, however, our coachman, with
whom we could hold but little communication, was
41
Tahiti.


firmly impressed with the idea that he must not let us
off until we had done the whole thing. The horses,
he assured us, were tired ; we should find no change at
Paponoa until Wednesday ; it was twenty-one leagues
(sixty-three miles, instead of twenty-five, as we had
been told) to Papiete; we could not possibly get there
in one day with the same horses ; and, finally, there
was no accommodation for eating or sleeping on the
road, and we should have to take our chance of
passing the night at a chiefs house. We did not
believe all these statements, and adhered to our deter-
mination to start, though I really felt rather sorry for
our two landlords, who had evidently expected us to
stay longer, and had made preparations accordingly.
But they behaved very well under these somewhat try-
ing circumstances, and although our bill, amounting to
three dollars a head —which was exceedingly moderate,
considering what an out-of-the-way place we were in—
had been paid, they filled up the carriage with all the
provisions they thought we should be likely to want
during our journey, without extra charge.
At last the rain ceased and we started, but at first
progressed slowly, owing to the soaked condition of
the ground. The road was most wonderful in places,
and diversified beyond measure, sometimes running
along the white sandy shore, or crossing little gulfs,
where the hoofs of the horses and the wheels of the
carriage splashed through the shallow blue sea, crush-
ing the lovely white coral and frightening the many
42
Tahiti.


coloured fishes from their hiding-place ; sometimes
passing over a stony beach or through a dense bush
of mangroves, or a forest of cocoanuts and palms,
where neither sun nor air seemed ever to penetrate.
These forest depths reminded us faintly of the hot-
houses at Kew, only that they were ten thousand
times more beautiful. Every rare palm and plant, of
which one is accustomed at home to see small and
puny specimens, were here found growing in the wildest
luxuriance, their natural beauty developed to its fullest
extent. Stephanotis, passiflora, and laxonias of all
kinds climbed to the top of the tallest palms, throwing
down, not single stems or tendrils, but a perfect cur-
tain of foliage, interspersed with gorgeous flowers and
luscious fruits. Imagine such a scene as this, magni-
fied to an infinite extent, and traversed by a soft
grassy mossy road for miles and miles.
Among the trees most frequently met with in Tahiti
is the bamboo, the manifold utility of which appears
to be as much appreciated here as it is in China and
Japan, From its roots, its stem, and its leaves, articles
of clothing and house furniture and implements of all
kinds are made. The house of which a photograph is
given a little further on (with a group of children in
front of it) is built and roofed with the stems and
leaves of the bamboo. Drinking-cups and other vessels
are made from the larger stems divided at the joints;
while knives, forks, spoons, and other useful articles
are made from the smaller branches. We passed
43
Tahiti.


several groups of natives occupied in scraping the
bamboo stems and preparing them for the purposes
above mentioned.
After a two hours’ drive through the forest we came
upon a large shed in which a boat, modelled in the
European fashion, was in course of construction, close
to a cheerful-looking cottage and garden. We stopped
to speak to the man who was at work on the boat, and
who told us he was the son of one of the first mis-
sionaries sent out to these islands, named Henry. He
spoke with considerable bitterness of the French efforts
at religious conversion, and of the establishment of
the national church, and the incompetency of the native
preachers. Occasionally he officiates himself, but only
when specially invited to do so, and he evidently
thought things would go better if he were allowed a
little more latitude in this respect. He pressed us to
go in and see his wife and daughters and take some
refreshment, and though we should have liked to have
done so, we felt that we ought to push on, as the
horses were tired* the road was bad, and we were
uncertain of the distance we had to go. We pro-
mised to take some letters for them to the Sandwich
Islands, where Mr. Henry has several sisters, married
to other missionaries. A ship seldom sails direct for
those Sandwich Islands from here, and as the mail
only goes once a month to San Francisco, thence
once a month to Honolulu, and thence again once a
month to Hilo and other parts of Hawaii, the delivery
44
Tahiti .






No. 17. Women, young girls , and boys sorcaping bamboo, for
house-building, basket-making , furniture, &c.








No. 20. A bit of the Road, along the seashore.




of letters is always a lengthy and generally a very
uncertain matter.
After parting from the boat-builder the road or track
got worse and worse. Many rivers we crossed, and
many we stuck in, the gentlemen having more than
once to take off their shoes and stockings, tuck up
their trousers, jump into the water, and literally put
their shoulders to the wheel. Sometimes we drove out
into the shallow sea, till it seemed doubtful when and
where we should make the land again. Sometimes
we climbed up a solid road, blasted out of the face
of the black cliffs, or went along the shore of the
tranquil lagoon, frightening the land-crabs into their
holes as they felt the shake of the approaching
carriage.
Calm and careless heaved the wave below,
Eternal with unsympathetic flow,
Far o’er its face the dolphins sported on ;
And sprung the flying fish against the sun
Till its dried wing relapsed from its brief height
To gather moisture for another flight.
At Mahaena we alighted and entered the house
of a chief, which appeared to be the abode of many
families. It was about eighty feet long by fifty broad,
built of straight bamboos laced together with cocoanut
sinnet, like most of the native dwellings. The roof
was supported on long poles, converging to a centre
rafter, and the base of each was covered with the
finest plaited matting, with patterns stained upon it,
45
Tahiti.


which produced the effect of carved wood-work.
One end of the floor, which was strewn with dried
grass, was covered with baskets of fruit, ready
packed for sale, and piles of passion-fruit, oranges,
cocoanuts, and fresh vegetables. A canoe full of
cocoanut oil, and two or three other canoes, highly
decorated, were also at this end of the building. In
the centre groups of natives were squatted about on
the floor, some making baskets, some plaiting hats
and wreaths, and others making what looked like
creamy-white feather plumes, somewhat similar to
those worn by officers in their cocked hats, only softer
and more graceful. This is called reva-reva, and is
made from the inner pith of the young centre shoots
of the cocoanut-tree; and as its manufacture involves
the destruction of the trees from which the material
is procured it is rather expensive. It is, as a rule, only
worn by the chiefs at great feasts, as a trimming to
their cloaks, though a small tuft is sometimes used by
other people as a decoration for their hats. At the
other extremity of the building, behind a very trans-
parent open-work screen, there were about twenty
large ordinary-looking four-post bedsteads, which
looked altogether sadly out of place, and which ap-
peared to have been just put down anyhow, according
to the whim of their owners, without the slightest
attempt at order or method in their arrangement.
Troops of natives kept pouring into the shed, and
we learnt from the chief—a fine-looking man, who
46
Tahiti.






No. 19. House at Mahaena ; and Native Children. Tahiti.




could speak a little French —that the annual visit of
the tax-gatherer was hourly expected, and that all the
inhabitants of the district were coming to meet him,
in order to pay their head-money. This was rather a
fortunate circumstance for us, as we saw many more
people than we should otherwise have done, all dressed
moreover, in their best. The chief himself, in bid-
ding us farewell, expressed his intention of coming
to pay his respects to us at Papiete, and to beg
our acceptance of some pineapples, cocoanuts, and a
Pig-
At the first river we came to, we met a gentleman
on horseback, who looked like a French missionary;
and at the next we passed the tax-gatherer, a fat,
comfortable-looking Frenchman, decorated with the
Legion of Honour, He was in a light American
waggon, with his strong-boxes at his feet, a money-
bag strapped across his capacious chest, and another
man riding behind him, to act, I suppose, as renfort
in case of need.
At every village where we stopped, the chief or
headman would tell one or other of the bystanders to
fetch down some cocoanuts from the trees close by,
and after cutting off the ends would offer us a drink
of the fresh cool milk, which was all the sweeter and
better for the fact that the nuts were not nearly ripe.
In order to procure the nuts the boy or man tied a
withy of banana leaves round his feet, and proceeded
to climb, or rather hop, up the nearest tree, raising
47
Tahiti.


himself with his two hands and his two feet alternately,
with an exactly similar action to that of our old friend
the monkey on the stick. Those who have only tasted
the cocoanut in England can have no idea what a
delicious fruit it really is when nearly ripe and freshly
plucked. The natives dexterously remove the outer
husk, just leaving a little piece to serve as a foot for
the pale brown cup to rest on. They then smooth off
the top, and you have an elegant vase, something like
a mounted ostrich egg in appearance, lined with the
snowiest ivory, and containing about three pints of
cool sweet water. Why it is called milk I never can
understand, for it is as clear as crystal, and is always
cool and refreshing, though the nut in which it is
contained has generally been exposed to the
sun. In many of the coral islands, where the water
is brackish, the natives drink scarcely anything but
cocoanut milk ; and even here, if you are thirsty and
ask for water, you are almost always presented with a
cocoanut full of its own fresh milk instead. While
this was going on other natives would bring us more
cocoanuts and fish and fowls, laying them at our feet
as a present. The fish were of endless variety. Some
were of a dark brown colour like bream, others were
long and thin, with a pipe-like nose and four fins, some-
what resembling the wings of a flying fish.
Many of the villages we passed through contained
wonderfully pretty little houses, surrounded by lovely
gardens, full of flowers, and fruits of all sorts, and
48
Tahitz.






No. 25. Thirsty! A boy climhs a, tree to fetch us a cocoa-nut.








No. 21. A Witch and Prophetess. Tahiti.




each had its church, its school, and its chiefs house.
Crowds of children were playing about on the grass,
or paddling and swimming in the little streams and
creeks; for except in a few places, the road really
runs round the outside of the island, very close to the
edge of the sea, if not exactly on its borders. At one
place we were taken to see a witch or prophetess, who,
as far as we could judge, was only a wild-looking, but
not in other respects very remarkable woman, inhabit-
ing a large and apparently comfortable hut, and living
alone except for the companionship of her three cats,
her dog, and her little pig, the latter being tied up to
a dog kennel in a corner.
Pigs are great pets here; and in Papiete it is by no
means uncommon to meet ladies walking along with
their little favourites carefully brushed and combed,
with dainty blue or red rosettes and bows on their
necks and tails, and led by a long ribbon like the pug
dogs in some of the old Dutch pictures. Indeed
these South Sea Island pigs somewhat resemble pugs
in their size, gait, and colour, notwithstanding the diffe-
rence in the length of their nose. Their tameness and
docility are marvellous. I had one for some time on
board the yacht, after we left Tahiti. He was only
about ten inches long, but looked at least a hundred
years old, and was altogether the most quaint old-
fashioned little object imaginable. He took a great
fancy to the dogs, and trotted about after me with
them everywhere on the tips of his little toes —even up
E
49
Tahiti.


and down the steep cabin stairs. We called him
Agag, because he walked so delicately.
In nearly all accounts of voyages in the South Seas,
much space is devoted to the description of the pur-
chase, or rather barter, of hogs. Their flesh is ex-
cellent, fully confirming Captain Cook’s statement as
to the superiority of South Sea Island pork to any
other; which is doubtless due to the fact that the
pigs are fed entirely on cocoanuts and bread-fruit.
Still it seems a pity to eat such tame little creatures
as some of the pigs are; for it is not only as pets that
they are esteemed by the islanders. We saw one as
we passed through a village that had already been
prepared for cooking in the native fashion, that is to
say surrounded by bananas and lying in a hole in the
ground ready to be covered up for roasting ; and very
excellent is the result of this culinary arrangement.
There is no mutton, except in a preserved state, to be
had at Tahiti, and beef is only to be procured occa-
sionally when cattle arive from New Zealand or Aus-
tralia, so that it is perhaps just as well that the pigs
are good.
We were now approaching the end of our journey.
Having been met by fresh horses, sent out from
Paponoa, it was not long before we found ourselves at
Point Venus, where Cook’s tamarind-tree was pointed
out to us in the distance. Here we got on to a good
piece of road, down which we rattled rapidly to the
plains outside Papiete.
50
Tahiti.






No. 22. Little Pig and Bananas in the oven ready to he
covered up for roasting.




On the morning after our return from our expedition,
Messrs. Brander’s mail-ship, a sailing-vessel of about
600 tons, sailed for San Francisco, and we took the
opportunity of sending by her our letters for England.
The passage to the United States occupies twenty-
five days on an average, and is performed with great
regularity once a month each way. The vessels em-
ployed on this line, three in number, are well built, and
have good accommodation for passengers, and they
generally carry a full cargo. In the present instance
the latter consisted of a peculiar kind of fungus, and
tripang ( heche-de-mer ) for China, oranges for San Fran-
cisco, a good many packages of sundries, and a large
parcel of pearls, entrusted to the captain at the last mo-
ment. So brisk is the trade carried on between Tahiti
and the United States, that the cost of this vessel was
more than covered by the freights the first year after
she was built. In addition to these ships, there are
those which run backwards and forwards to Valparaiso,
and also the little island trading-schooners; so that
the Tahitians can boast of quite a respectable fleet of
vessels, not imposing perhaps in point of tonnage, but
as smart and serviceable-looking as could be desired.
The trading-schooners are really beautiful little craft,
and I am sure that, well-kept and properly manned,
they would show to no discredit among our yachts
at Cowes. Not a day passes without one or more
entering or leaving the harbour, returning from or
bound to the lonely isles with which the south-west
E 2
51
Tahiti .


portion of the Pacific is studded. They are provided
with a patent log, but their captains, who are intelli-
gent men, do not care much about a chronometer, as
the distances to be run are comparatively short and
are easily judged.
We heard rather an amusing account of the manner
in which negotiations with the natives are conducted.
The more civilized islanders have got beyond barter,
and prefer hard cash, in American dollars, for their
pearls, shells, cocoanuts, sandal-wood, &c. Having
received the money, they remain on deck for some time,
discussing their bargains amongst themselves. Then
they peep down through the open skylights into the
cabin below, where the most attractive prints and the
gaudiest articles of apparel are temptingly displayed,
alongside a few bottles of rum and brandy, and a supply
of tobacco. Before long the bait is taken ; down go
the poor natives, the goods are sold, and the dollars
have once more found their way into the captain’s
hands.
I had a long talk with one of the men who had
arrived from Flint Island —a picturesque-looking indi-
vidual, in a bright red flannel shirt and an orange
coloured neckcloth, with a straw hat jauntily surmount-
ing a good-looking brown face and a mass of black,
shiny, curly hair. Flint Island is a place whose
existence has been disputed, it having been more than
once searched for by ships in vain. It was therefore
particularly interesting to meet some one who had
52
Tahiti .






No. 23. Various masks, paddle, &c.




actually visited, and had just returned from, the spot
in question. That islands do occasionally disappear
entirely in these parts there can be little doubt. The
schooners of this spot were formerly in the habit of
trading with a small island close to Rarotonga, whose
name I forget; but about four years ago, when pro-
ceeding there with the usual three-monthly cargo of
provisions, prints, &c. 5 they failed to find the island,
of which no trace has since been seen. Two mis-
sionaries from Rarotonga are believed to have been
on it at the time of its disappearance, and they seem
to have shared its mysterious fate.
While at Papiete, I had also an interesting conver-
sation with a man named Flockton, who had done a
great deal of surveying work in the adjacent islands.
He told me that when he first landed at Flint Island,
which is one of the richest guano islands in the neigh-
bourhood, he was unable to find any trace of previous
human habitation, but that, after removing a deposit
of fifteen feet of guano, he had himself discovered two
stone axes. One he broke with the same stroke of the
pickaxe that brought it to light, the other he gave to a
friend. I tried very hard to trace it and gain possession
of it, but could not succeed. At Voslok, another guano
island, there have also been discovered some very
curious remains.
He had also succeeded in collecting a number of
gods or idols, paddles, masks, and other curiosities,
which I tried hard to persuade him to part with ; but
53
Tahiti.


they were all promised to Mr. Godefroi for his museum.
I succeeded, however, in inducing him to take them to
be photographed, together with a very curious Easter
Island stone inscription, and some gods from the same
place. The former will, I hope, some day be the means
of throwing a light, not only on the manner in which
this archipelago originally became peopled —whether
from the south-west or from the north-east —but also
on the meaning of some of the Himyaritic and Chaldean
inscriptions, the interpretation of which has hitheito
baffled the efforts of antiquaries. What is so curious
is, that the same gods and the same hitherto untrans-
lated inscriptions are found both in Easter Island,
which is at the extreme south-west, and in the Ladrones,,
which are at the extreme north-east corner of this
archipelago, while in most, or at all events in many,
of the intermediate and more central islands there is a
total absence of such interesting relics and remains.
A good many curiosities were brought on board for
our inspection during our stay at Tahiti. Among them
were two handsome cloaks, of the kind worn by chiefs
at feasts. They were of tapa cloth, beautifully woven,
and dyed a bright yellow, trimmed with fringe and
ornamented with knots of the graceful reva-reva. Sixty
dollars were asked for them, but I was told this was
too dear, and bid thirty, an offer which was declined
at the time, but subsequently accepted.
One day a gentleman came and asked me if I should
like to see some remarkably fine pearls, and on my
54
Tahiti.


expressing my wish to do so. he took me to his house,
where I was introduced to his wife, whom I recognized
as having been on board the yacht previously. They
were worth going to look at, but were too expensive
for me, one pear-shaped pearl alone having been valued
at 1000/. The lady told me they came from an island
belonging to her, and presented me with two shells
containing pearls in various stages of formation,
promising at the same time to send some more
curiosities, of which they have an interesting collection,
to me on board the yacht. Altogether, it was rather
a strange visit on my part, for I had not the least idea
who my new friends were, or even what was their name,
and they must have been almost as ignorant about me.
While at Papiete we paid a visit to Messrs. Brander’s
stores, where all sorts of requisites for fitting out ships
and their crews can be procured. It rather surprised
me to find how plentiful were the supplies of the
necessaries, and even the luxuries of civilized life, in this
far-away corner of the globe. You can even get ice
here, for the manufacture of which a retired English
infantry officer has set up an establishment—! believe
with great success. But what interested me most
were the products of this and the neighbouring islands.
There were tons of exquisitely tinted pearl shells, six
or eight inches in diameter, formerly a valuable article
of commerce, but now worth comparatively little.
The pearls that came out of them had unfortunately
been sent away to Liverpool—looo/. worth by the last,
55
Tahiti.


and 5000/. by the previous mail-ship. Then there was
vanilla, a most precarious crop, that must be carefully
watered and shaded from the first moment that it is
planted, and that has to be gathered before it is ripe,
and dried and matured in a moist heat, between
blankets and feather beds, in order that the pods may
not crack and allow the essence to escape; edible
fungus, exported to San Francisco, and thence to
Hong Kong, solely for the use of the Chinese ; tripang,
which, either living or dead, fresh or dried, looks equally
untempting, but which is highly esteemed by the
Celestials j coprah, or dried cocoanut kernels, broken
into small pieces in order that they may stow better,
and exported to England and other parts, where the
oil is expressed and oil-cake is formed; and various
other articles of commerce. The trade of the island
is fast increasing, the average annual value of the
exports for each period of five years between 1845 and
1874 having risen from 8400/. to 98,000/. exclusive of
the value of the pearls, which would increase it by at
least another 3000/. or 4000/.
I speak from personal experience when I say that
every necessary for life on board ship, and many
luxuries, can be procured at Tahiti. American canned
fruits and vegetables are far better than those procured
from England. Preserved milk is uncertain—some-
times better, sometimes worse, than what one gets at
home. Tinned salmon is much better. Australian
mutton, New Zealand beef, and South Sea pork, leave
56
Tahiti.






No. 56. Going to a Picnic: our Servants with provisions.




nothing to be desired in the way of preserved meat.
Fresh beef, mutton, and butter are hardly procurable,
and the latter, when preserved, is uneatable.
The day before sailing from Tahiti we had arranged
to go to the coral reef with the children, to have a
picnic there, and had accordingly given the servants
leave to go ashore for the evening ; but it began to
rain heavily just as we were on the point of starting,
and we had to remain on board the yacht. You
see therefore that there are occasionally drawbacks
to perfect enjoyment, even in this lovely climate,
when—
The hooded clouds, like friars,
Tell their beads in drops of rain.
A picnic in the South Sea islands, it may here be
remarked, is quite a different affair to a picnic at home,
at any rate as far as the materials for the feast are
concerned, and also in regard to mode of carrying them,
as will be seen from the accompanying photograph.
One of the most exquisite of the many lovely objects
that attract the eye in the lovely harbour of Papiete is
the island of Eimeo, especially at sunset, when daylight
dies and the crimson sun sinks behind masses of cloud—
Not with lingering sweep,
As in the the north he mellows o’er the deep;
But fiery, full and fierce, as if he left
The world for ever, earth of life bereft.
Findlay, in his “ South Pacific Directory,” thus
describes the island :
57
Tahiti.


“ Moorea, or Eimeo, was discovered by Captain
Wallis, July 27th, 1767, and by him named Duke of
York Island. The distance between the reefs of
Tahiti and that of Eimeo, as measured by the United
States Exploring Expedition Ship Vincennes , with
the patent log, was ten miles. Eimeo is a beautiful
object in the view from Tahiti, and its beauty is
enhanced on a nearer approach ; its hills and mountains
may, without any great stretch of imagination, be con-
verted into battlements, spires, and towers, rising one
above the other, their grey sides clothed here and
there with verdure, which, at a distance, resembles ivy
• • •
of the richest hue. Eimeo has, if possible, a more
broken surface than Tahiti, and is more thrown up into
separate peaks ; its scenery is wild, even in comparison
with Tahiti, and particularly upon the shores, where
the mountains rise precipitously from the water, to the
height of 2500 feet. The reef which surrounds the
island is similar to that of Tahiti, and has no sound-
ings immediately outside of it. Black cellular lava
abounds, and holes are found in its sheltered ridges,
among which is the noted one through which the god
Oroo is said to have thrown his spear. The inhabitants
of Eimeo reside upon the shores, where there are
several large villages on the southern side of the island.
Coffee, small cotton, sugar, and all other tropical plants
succeed well at Eimeo, and sugar is made to a con-
siderable extent.”
It is said to be the finest island of the Georgian
58
Tahiti.






No. 27. Eimeo from Tahiti.




group, and we all regretted that we were unable to
spare the time to visit it. From afar it reminds one of
the Dolomite Mountains, in the Tyrol, and it is said
that the resemblance is even more striking on a near
approach. The harbour is a long narrow gorge,
between high mountains, clothed with palms, oranges,
and plantains, and is one of the most remarkable
features of the place.
As the time fixed for our departure from Tahiti
drew nearer and nearer, so did our regret at having to
leave these fairy-like scenes increase. One feels in
this delightful climate, where all is so bright and joyful,
and where most visitors from afar are but such fleeting
guests, the wisdom of the poet’s advice:—
Gather ye rosebuds while ye may,
Old time is still a flying;
And then some flower that smiles to day
To-morrow will be dying.
If day had its charms, they were equalled, if not
eclipsed, by those of the night. Each evening seemed
to be more beautiful than its predecessor. On the last
night of our stay at Papiete the moon was so brilliant
that we could enjoy sitting on deck reading, and even
doing some coarse needlework, without any other light.
There was an extraordinary luminous appearance in the
sea, consisting of large isolated globes of light, of
about the size and brilliancy of moderator lamps. I
suppose the strange sight must have been due to
the presence of some large kind of jelly-fish. We
59
Tahiti.


might have imagined it to be an illumination pre-
pared in our honour as a kind of farewell compli-
ment. Presently a splendid meteor appeared. It
was of a light orange colour, with a fiery tail about
two degrees in extent, and described in its course
an arc of about sixty degrees, from S.S.E. to N.N.W.,
before it disappeared into space, far above the hori-
zon. If the night had been darker the spectacle
would have been finer; but as it was, the moon
seemed quite paled for a few minutes afterwards. We
had seen many meteors, falling-stars, and shooting-
stars, since we entered on this vast ocean, but none so
fine as this.
On the reef the fishermen were assembled in large
numbers, their finely made, almost naked figures,
looking like splendid bronze statues from the antique,
in the ruddy torchlight’s glare.
The day of our departure at last arrived. In the
morning, just as the sun was rising, we went off again
to the coral reef, to enjoy its beauties for the last
time. We proceeded past Quarantine Island to the
portion of the reef on the other side of the harbour,
where we had not yet been, and where I think the
coral plants, and flowers, and bushes, showed to greater
advantage than ever, as they were less crowded, and
the occasional patches of sandy bottom enabled one
to see them better. We were so engrossed in our
examination of these marvels of the deep, and of the
fish with which the water abounded, that we found
ourselves aground several times.
60
Tahiti.






No. 28. Study of a Cocoa-nut Palm.




It is on the low shore adjoining the reef that the
cocoanut-tree displays its fullest vigour, flourishing
on the most barren and unsheltered sea-beach, amid
fragments of coral reef and sand, its roots washed by
every advancing tide. The various parts of the tree
are applied by the inhabitants of Polynesia to the same
varied and useful purposes as those to which they are
devoted in other parts of the world. “ Year after year
the islander reposes beneath its shade, both eating
and drinking of its fruit; he thatches his hut with its
boughs, and weaves them into baskets to carry his
food ; he cools himself with a fan plaited from the
young leaflets, and shields his head from the sun by a
bonnet of the leaves. Sometimes he clothes himself
with the cloth-like substance which wraps round the
base of the stalks, whose elastic rods, strung with
filberts, are used as a taper ; the larger nuts, thinned
and polished furnish him with a beautiful goblet, the
smaller ones with bowls for his pipes : the dry husks
kindle his fires; their fibres are twisted into fishing-
lines and cords for his canoes ; he heals his wounds
with a balsam compounded from the juice of the nut ;
and with the oil extracted from its meat anoints his
own limbs and embalms the bodies of the dead. The
noble trunk itself is far from being valueless. Sawn
into posts it upholds the islander’s dwelling; converted
into charcoal it cooks his food, and, supported on blocks
of stone, rails in his lands. He impels his canoe through
the water with a paddle of the wood, and goes to battle
with clubs and spears of the same material.”
61
Tahiti.


Later in the morning we landed, and drove along the
same road by which we had returned from our excur-
sion round the island, and over the steep hill, to Point
Venus and the lighthouse, a plain white building,
erected in the time of Pomare 111. The door was
locked, and the keepers were away, but I believe there
was nothing special to see inside. Afterwards we went
to see Captain Cook’s tamarind-tree, which, there can
be no doubt, was planted with his own hand. It had
many seeds, of which we collected a few to bring home
to England. They have since been sown, and the
plants are doing well. The original tree is now care-
fully railed in and preserved.
Thence we drove quickly to Mahaena, where there
is a well-built house, pleasantly situated close to the
sea-shore, and surrounded on three sides by a planta-
tion of twenty thousand cocoanut-trees. Each tree is
worth from a dollar to a dollar and a half a year, so
that the plantation must be a valuable property.
Besides the cocoanuts there is cotton and vanilla, the
latter of which is one of the prettiest creepers I ever
saw, and some good English stock of various kinds —
horses, cattle, sheep, and pigs.
We had arranged not to sail until the evening, so as
to be able to take part in a native feast that had been
kindly arranged in our honour. Accordingly, after
seeing as much of Mahaena and its beauties as our
limited time would allow, we re-entered the carriages
and drove over to Fuatahua, where we found the chil-
62
Tahiti .






No. 18. A bit of our Road the Island.




dren and maids had arrived just before us. The grand
piano, every table, and the drawing-room floor, were
spread with the presents we were expected to take
away with us. It really made one feel quite embar-
rassed to accept so many beautiful and valuable things,
which we shall indeed prize as remembrances of our
visit to Tahiti, when we get them safely to England.
Many of them it would be utterly impossible to buy at
any price. There were bunches of scarlet feathers,
two or three hundred in number, from the tail of the
tropic bird, which are only allowed to be possessed and
worn by chiefs, and which must be of great value, as
each bird only produces two feathers ; pearl shells,
with rare corals growing on them, red coral from the
islands on the equator, curious sponges and sea-weed,
tapa cloth and reva-reva fringe, arrowroot and palm-
leaf hats, cocoanut drinking-vessels, fine mats plaited
in many patterns, and other specimens of the products
of the island.
All the members of the royal family at present in
Tahiti had been invited to meet us, and arrived in due
course, including the heir-apparent and his brother and
his sister, and Mrs. Salmon and her daughter, from
Eimeo. Mr. Salmon, who had driven over from the
other side of the island, was formerly at school at
Hastings, for five years. He knew us perfectly well
by sight, and remembered with interest my husband’s
first election. He kindly invited us to go and stay
with him, promising some really good fishing, and
63
Tahiti.


the opportunity of seeing many native sports would
have been very interesting ; but it was of course im-
possible for us to accept. All the other guests
were dressed in the native costume, with wreaths on
their heads and necks, and even the servants —■
including our own, whom I hardly recognized —were
similarly decorated. Wreaths had also been prepared
for us, three of fragrant yellow flowers for Mabelle,
Muriel, and myself, and others of a different kind for
the gentlemen.
When the feast was ready, the Prince offered me his
arm, and we all walked in a procession to a grove of
bananas in the garden, where our hostess met us,
surrounded by her servants of all classes, male and
female. They formed two lines for us to pass between,
and at a given signal saluted us with three hearty
English cheers. After this we continued our walk till
we arrived at a house, built in the native style, by the
side of a rocky stream like a Scotch burn. The
uprights of the house were banana-trees, transplanted
with their leaves on, so as to shade the roof, which
was formed of plaited cocoanut-palm leaves, each
about fifteen feet long, laid transversely across bamboo
rafters. From these light-green supports and the
dark-green roof depended the yellow and brown leaves
of the theve, woven into graceful garlands and elegant
festoons. The floor was covered with the finest
mats, with black and white borders, the centre being
strewn with broad green plantain leaves, to form the
64
Tahiti.


table-cloth, on which were laid baskets and dishes,
made of leaves sewn together, and containing all sorts
of native delicacies. There were oysters, lobsters,
wurrali, and crawfish, stewed chicken, sucking-pig
(baked by means of hot stones, in the manner
already described), plantains, bread-fruit, melons, ba-
nanas, oranges, and strawberries. Before each guest
were placed a half cocoanut full of salt water, another
full of chopped cocoanut, a third full of fresh water,
and another full of milk, two pieces of bamboo, a basket
of poi, half a bread-fruit, and a platter of green leaves,
the latter being changed with each course. We took
our seats on the ground round the green table. Mrs.
Brander’s uncle delivered an address in the native lan-
guage, which Mr. Salmon translated for our benefit,
grace was said, and we commenced. The first opera-
tion was to mix the salt water and the chopped cocoa-
nut together, so as to make an appetizing sauce, into
which we were supposed to dip each morsel we ate,
the empty salt-water bowl being then filled up with
fresh water, with which to wash our fingers and lips.
We were all wonderfully successful in the use of our
fingers as substitutes for knives and forks, though we
could not manage the performance quite so gracefully
as those more accustomed to it. Altogether I think I
never enjoyed a meal so much in my life, and I felt
quite disappointed when, toward the end of it, a truffled
turkey, and knives and forks and plates, made their
appearance, our kind hostess, in the plenitude of her
F
65
Tahiti.


hospitality, fearing that we might not have been able
to make a satisfactory repast on the food already pro-
vided, The only drawback, as far as the dinner itself
was concerned, was that it was eaten amid such a
scene of novelty and beauty, that our attention was
continually distracted ; there was so much to admire
around one, both in the house itself, and outside,
where we could see the mountain stream, the groves of
palms and bread-fruit, and beyond them the bright sea
and the surf-beaten coral reef. After we had finished,
all the servants sat down to dinner, and from a dais at
one end of the room we surveyed the bright and ani-
mated scene, the gentlemen—and some of the ladies
too —meanwhile enjoying their cigarettes.
The photograph gives some idea, though a faint one,
of the luxuriance of the foliage by which we were
surrounded. On the right, facing the picture, is a
specimen of the artocarpus incisa , or bread-fruit-tree,
with its bright dark-green glossy, deeply-indented,
leaves, something like a gigantic and extra-beautiful
fig-tree, bearing great round fruit as big as a child's
head. This fruit is a staple article of food in the
island, as in many other places. The natives use the
viscid milky juice, which contains caoutchouc, to caulk
their canoes, and also as birdlime. The wood is
something like mahogany, while from the inner bark is
made a sort of paper-like tappa and coarse cloth.
The jack-fruit-tree, or artocarpus integrifolia , bears
fruit, sometimes weighing four or five pounds, in the
66
Tahiti.






No. 30. A bit of Tropical Foliage.




most curious manner, growing all up the main stem,
with scarcely any stalk. In the foreground are the
great leaves of the taro, from which the national dish,
poi, is made, by pounding the roots, and allowing them
to partially ferment. Many of the natives live almost
entirely on poi, and no meal or royal feast is complete
without it. It is not agreeable as a rule to European
tastes, especially to begin dinner with. Its consistency
is about that of treacle, and it is called “ two ” or
“ three-fingered poi,” according to the strength of the
mixture. The flavour is something like that of paste
gone bad. The custom here is for each person present
at a meal to put two or three fingers, as the case may
be, into his own poi bowl, and then present them to
his neighbour, who opens his mouth to receive them,
and then proceeds to return the compliment, which it is
considered a terrible insult to refuse. Having performed
this little ceremony with your neighbours on either
side, you are then at liberty to proceed with your meal,
carefully washing your fingers between each mouthful.
Everything is spotlessly clean and well served ; but we
used to find it rather trying sometimes to comply with
the hospitable wishes of our friends, by eating as much
as was offered us of the strange delicacies provided
for our entertainment, especially as they were unac-
companied by bread, wine, or salt. Their places were
supplied, or were supposed to be supplied, by bread-
fruit, which I never learnt to like, cocoanut-milk, and
the sea water, with little bits of chopped-up cocoanut,
67
Tahiti.


or sea weed, floating about in it, into which, as I have
already mentioned, you were supposed to dip each
morsel of food before eating it.
When we got back to Papiete, late in the afternoon,
there were so many things to be done in the way of
preparation that it seemed impossible that we could
start the same evening. At six o’clock the pilot sent
word that it was no longer safe to go out of the har-
bour on account of the fast ebbing tide; but sleam
was already up, and it was therefore determined that
we should go outside the reef and wait there for the
rest of our party, some of whom were still on shore.
At last they arrived, the anchor was raised, and we
began to steam ahead, taking one long last look at
Papiete and our kind friends waving regretful farewells
on the shore, as we slowly emerged from the harbour,
and they faded from our view.
THE END.
PRINTED BY GILBERT AND RIVINGTON, LIMITED, ST. JOHN’S SQUARE, LONDON.
68
Tahiti.






No. 29. Sunset at Eimeo.










