

|,833A
TAILS Ut
3y?ji
*■
WtKß^


■
■
■


I


CONTENTS
Stories and Poems by Sylvia Green
SAM.
Page 3
LAUGH LAST LITTLE LONELINESS.
Page 13
Some Tales by Eila Green
A KITCHEN TALE
Page 22
A WINTER’S TALE.
Page 23
A GARDEN TALE.
Page 24
More Stories and Poems by Sylvia Green
BERTRAND THE BRASS BOUND FROG.
Page 26
HIGHLAND FLING
Page 33
MKICIir
PUBLICDTIOn
Lino Cuts by IRVINE GREEN
Edited by CECILY CROZIER
Copyright


RAM
In a large lovely garden with sweet-smelling flowers,
and wide stretches of smooth green lawn and stone
baths for birds to drink from, and have their early
morning wash, there once lived a happy white dog with
one brown car.
His name was Standfast Samuel, and the small boy his
master, who ran and played with him, called him Sam.
During the day Sam chased the mischievous swallows
who swooped down low. He threw his red ball into
the air, and pounced on it biting and worrying it, pre-
tending he had caught a rat. He played in and out
amongst the trees and the little paths with the small boy
his master. Sometimes he sat on a gay striped chair
and watched the boy in a short blue suit jump up
and down in the sparkling water of the green tiled pool.
They were happy. The boy and the dog.
Sometimes the small boy's mother, who had hands clever
at stroking a dog's neck and cars, took them for a drive.
Her hands became strong and important as she turned
and twisted the long nosed car that gleamed in its coat
of cream lacquer.
Sometimes she drove them to the blue hills that started
small and grew bigger as the car drove on. Sometimes
she drove them to the streets full of noise and movement.
Of lights that went red, yellow, green and people who
hurried out in front of cars.
Sam and his little master sat side by side on the seat
and waited when .she disappeared into the crowd walking
in and out of the gay windowed shops. But one day


the little boy went with her and Sam watched till the
big glass door shut behind him, and Sam was left
alone on the seat.
“Stay there/' the little master had said, “Sit quietly,
Sam/’ And Sam sat very still and very quiet and
watched the tramcars passing and the bicycles darting
in and out amongst the traffic. He felt very important.
He was alone. On guard.
Suddenly he stiffened and began to tremble. In the door-
way of the shop that sold bright yellow oranges and
shining green grapes there sat a cat. Orange gold and
white. And it sat there busily licking its paw and
washing its face. It was not beautiful to Sam. A deep
feeling inside him told him that cats, and rabbits, and
mice and rats were things to chase. To exert every
ounce of effort to catch.
The cat stood stiffly up, stretching itself, arching its
back, then catching sight of a leaf blowing down the
street it darted out after it.
In one second Sam had forgotten he was to lie quiet
and still. He had forgotten he was to guard the car.
There was only running cat and chasing dog in the
world for him.
In one second he was out the car window and racing
down the street, bis short white legs barely touching
the ground. He barked frenziedly, excitedly and people
turned round to watch. But the little boy and his
mother were deep in the shop. They did not hear the
barks or see Sam pass the window.
Sam ran some way before he discovered the cat had
disappeared. One moment he was chasing the cat's white
and gold tail, and the next there was nothing.
He ran a little faster, then thinking he saw it on the
other side of the road, he dived into the traffic to gei
to the other side.
He was not a dog who was used to traffic and he did
not understand what had happened when he felt a
bang and he was thrown on to the tram-line. A little
voice inside him told him to get up quick and run
away and hide, and although one foot hurt very much
if he used it, he dragged himself across the street and
into a dark lane. He wanted to sit down and rest, his
body felt bruised and painful, but he knew he must


' f
*** M a
4B|k JHPH
■ ; ■ !•“ ■ Kj||iS


hide. He could only crawl now and when he saw a
dark corner in a cart below him, he pulled himself
down from the platform where there were many big shoes
and boots moving and loud voices above and crept
into a cart with odd bits of cabbage leaves on the floor.
As he sank down in the darkness, the voices, the shout-
ing, the lights above disappeared and little Sam lay like
a dog who is dead.
When the little boy and his mother finished their shop-
ping they returned to the car, the little boy anxious to
show Sam the new sandals he was wearing and let him
sniff them well as he did all things new and strange.
“Sam,” he called as he ran across the street. “Sam,”
he called again when he found no one in the car,
“Mother, where is he, where’s Sam?”
They looked down the street. They looked down the
road. They stopped people and asked them. “Have
you seen a small white Sealyham with one brown ear?
His name is Sam.”
“Sorry, Fm afraid not,” the people said and moved
on quickly. Sometimes they said, “Well, I saw a black
dog with a long tail a few shops back. It wouldn’t
be that, would it?”
“Sam! Sam!” the little boy called and his voice was
choking with tears.
The little boy and his mother drove round the streets.
They called at police stations, they called at the Home
for Lost Dogs. They called at the place where messages
were sent across the air.
ANYONE KNOWING THE WHEREABOUTS OF A
SMALL WHITE SEALYHAM WITH ONE BROWN
EAR AND ANSWERING TO THE NAME OF SAM
PLEASE RING IMMEDIATELY ABC 300.
People heard the message that night as they sat in their
comfortable chairs and listened to the talks across the air.
They called at the places where the paper that comes
every morning and night is made. They put in a large
notice there.
ANYONE KNOWING THE WHEREABOUTS OF A
SMALL WHITE SEALYHAM WITH ONE BROWN
EAR AND ANSWERING TO THE NAME OF SAM
PLEASE RING IMMEDIATELY ABC 300.
That night the little boy cried himself to sleep with
no little ball at his feet to keep him warm. Sam’s rug


H "WK : jgp^«.giW ; > i -
X i»3 >
mf§ ! iM I
fflll , 'll. -I a v 1
JPt? T-iffinvAS
• ** I H^l0KHn
** l|
m xwlWL/s; a V
BBIIb—i—m
was there, but there was no Sam pressing the bedclothes
down.
Sam was away in the country, still and quiet in the back
of the cart that had travelled over many roads and
lanes before it came to a stop in an old dark shed.
He awoke the next morning wondering where he was,
why his body felt stiff and queer and why he could not
see the little master.
He stood up and his front paw sent shivers of pain
through him and he lifted it quickly from the ground.
It took him a long time to crawl down from the cart
and on to the ground. He felt hungry. He wanted
a drink and he wanted to see the little master.
He limped across the wet squelchy grass towards a
tumbledown house near the fence. Sam did not notice
that the windows had no curtains and that they were
dirty and marked by cobwebs. He only knew the water
in the ditch nearby had a smell he found sour and
disagreeable. There were piles of rotting cabbage leaves
and half decayed carrot tops and there were weeds
and long wet grass on the path.
He crept up to the house, fear making his heart tap
loudly and he looked in the open door.
There were some bottles and food on a bare brown
table, stained and ugly. Sam could see it from the step.
There were piles of dirty sacks about and old rusty
tins. It looked and smelt very strange.
Then a man came through the door and stared at Sam.
He was a little short man in dark baggy clothes and he


wore a queer straw hat round and pointed. He stared
then waved his arms and yelled and Sam, not under-
standing the words he used, yet he knew he must go. He
crawled away and lay under a hedge and there he shut
his eyes again and forgot for a while the frightening
place the world had become.
At home in the big garden with the sweet smelling
flowers and wide stretches of lawn, the little boy moved
about lonely and sick at heart. He followed his Mother
from place to place and he said, “Have you heard
anything yet. Mother? Have you heard any news of
Sam?”
That day and the next and the next they drove out
in the car. They drove slowly up and down roads in
the country and the little boy knelt on the seat and
looked out the window. All the time his eyes searched
the rough green brown paddocks, the smooth asphalt
roads and under the hedges and outside the houses.
Hopefully he waited to catch a glimpse of a little white
dog with one brown ear, trotting quietly along the road.
He saw brown dogs with pointed ears and white and
black yapping dogs. He saw big grey loping dogs and
small yellow hairy dogs. But never a sign of Sam.
They looked in the city streets all among the traffic
and everywhere they stopped people and asked, “Have
vou seen a little white dog with one brown ear? His
name is Sam.”
And the people told them about all the other dogs
they’d seen, but never about Sam.
The weeks passed and the little boy became thin and ill.
He didn’t feel hungry for his breakfast. He didn’t feel
hungry for any meal and his knees and his elbows
became bony and sharp. His mother thought to her-
self we must buy him another dog, and she took him
to the places where they buy and sell dogs.
They looked at white and black cocker puppies with
pleading eyes and ears touching the ground. They looked
at handsome Alsations who gravely sat up and shook
hands. They looked at lurching black Scottie puppies
with long waving tails and ears not yet standing stiff
and straight.
But the little boy looked at them all anxiously at first
to sec if they could be Sam, then listlessly, without


interest. They were not Sam.
Sam was beginning to forget he had ever been a happv
little dog in a lovely home. He was thin with his ribs
making bumps on his coat and his hair was dirty and
tangled. No one would know he had only one brown
ear. Both ears, all of him was dusty dirty brown.
Always he kept his nose to the ground smelling the
scents and the smells. Someday he might smell the old
familiar scents that would lead him home.
He had left the house with the shouting man long ago
The man had chased him with a long bright knife one
day because Sam had found a loaf of bread near the
house. He'd been tearing at it with his strong white
teeth when the man had come back across the fields and
seen him and shouted and yelled and chased Sam with
his long knife. Sam heard it dig its sharp point close
in the earth beside him and he had gone away from
that place forever.
He wandered round the long stretches of road, sometimes
sitting down and watching the thin black lizards dart
in and out amongst the wiry grass blades. Or he looked
up to the sky and saw the birds sitting in rows on the
tight stretched wires above him. They could fly s<%
easily. So easily go where they wished.
He watched the cows moving heavily about, slowly
twisting their mouths from side to side while the green
wet grass disappeared within. He saw the young baby
horses gallop with their hair streaming free in the wind
and the old horses gather in groups round the trees.
He often felt tired these days and his leg still hurt. There
was time to sleep but so little to eat. He was afraid of
the houses, and lived on the food he found thrown
away on the roads and beside the fences.
One day he came to a big house where there was a loud
noise of barking dogs.
He was very hungry and he was lonely for a pat on the
head and a word in his car.
Slowly he walked up the driveway and when a girl and
two bouncing puppies came towards him he lay down
with his head on his paws.
“You poor dog," she said. “How thin you are/' and
she pushed away the black inquiring noses of the ppppies
and picked up poor dirty Sam.


She carried him to the house and gave him some bread
and milk, and Sam resting his weignt on his three sound
legs lapped a little of it up, then stopped and looked
around. No one shouted, no one threw things at him,
so he drank some more. Slowly he felt better and for
the first time for weeks, he wagged his tail.
Sam stayed with the girl in the big house for days. She
fed him well, she bathed him and she talked kindly to
him. Slowly he forgot to cringe away when she came
near, and he began to look like the old Sam who had
been a happy dog. But never did he forget be must
go away some day and continue the search for his little
master.
The little master still asked his mother every day if she
had heard anything about Sam. He still stopped people
and asked them, “Have you seen a little white Sealyham
with one brown ear. His name is Sam/'
He still made his mother look every morning in the
paper that came before breakfast. Some day one of the
lost dogs they went to see would be Sam.
So when they read one day a notice saying: FOUND.
A SMALL WHITE SEALYHAM. ONE SORE PAW,
they went to the garage and took out the car as a
matter of course.
The little boy was tense and excited. “Is it far. Mother?”
he said. “Do you think it could be Sam? He didn't have
a sore paw when we left him in the car.”
And his Mother said, “A little further yet, son. Perhaps
he will look like Sam. And he wants a home.”
When the girl of the big house where Sam was living
saw the little boy and his mother, she said, “Was your
dog a small Sealyham?” And they said, “Yes” quickly
“Did he have a sore paw?” “No,” they said, “but he
had one brown ear.”
“Come,” she said, “You must look at the dog.”
When Sam and the little master saw each other after
the long weeks of loneliness, their joy knew no bounds
The little boy clutched Sam to bis heart where he be-
longed, and Sam licked his face with his long wet tongue.
The mother watched them with tears in her eyes and
the girl of the big house said, “Lm glad he turned our
to be your dog.”
So Sam and his little master were happy again and
played their games in the garden with sweet-smelling
flowers and wide green lawns.


There’s blue smoke
in the garden
from the fire of burning leaves.
There’s a hose that’s turning
round and round
and ’way in the corner
blackened and brown
a smoking burning mound.
There’s a little white dog
in the garden
who’s running round in rings.
He waits for the hose
that slowly turns
and snaps at the water
it always brings.
a bad little dog
a mad little dog
in the garden.
I’m all alone
in the garden, to-day
My dog is lost
and there’s no one to play
I’m all alone
in the garden.
I left him sitting
on the seat of the car
and when I came back
he’d gone ever so far.
Right away
I don’t know where.
There’s no one to play
I’m all alone
in the garden.
11


'siliiisH - 3 -
- jgjpjT&s.


L' ■
fAy r : A |
Laugh Last Little Loneliness
It was during the winter months that she was born.
When the nights were cold and puppies snuggled close
to their mothers and refused to leave them till the sun
was glinting gold on the dew drops hanging on the
wire fences.
She was a very small puppy and her brothers pushed
her out of their way when they crawled up strong
and lusty for their meal.
Her mother looked at her small white body without
any brown markings on the head and she said:
“She will have pink eyes.”
And she too pushed her to one side.
But when the strong lusty brothers had drunk their
fill and lay curled up asleep, the little pup put out all her
feeble strength and pulling herself along on her stomach »
she crawled to the mother and drank. She drank till
she too lay back content.
The puppies grew quickly and everyone said:
“What lovely puppies! How handsome they are. But
what is the matter with the little white one?”
And the woman who looked after them said:
13


"‘Aren't they beautiful?" with pride in her voice, and
then “Oh, she's the little runt. I don't know that we'll
keep her." And she spoke with shame.
The strong lusty young brothers fought over their dishes
of food and the little white puppy ate the scraps that
were scattered round the kennel and the strong lusty
young brothers were taken out every day to be brushed
and combed but no one bothered about the little white one.
First one brother was sold and then another till there was
only one left and he was the most handsome of all.
He was taught to walk on a lead and to stand stiff and
still so that when the day came he would pose in the
show ring before the judges and the people. He was
given a name and he was very, very handsome.
Little white puppy lay in a corner of the kennel and
no one wanted to buy her and her big handsome brother
ate most of her food.
Then one day a girl looked into the kennel.
She saw a little white puppy whose eyes were small and
dark and not pink as they might have been and a strange
feeling stirred within her. She did not look at the big
handsome brother bouncing round the kennel. She said
to the woman who looked after them:
“Is the little white one for sale?"
And the woman said, “Well, yes, I suppose so. I'll sell
her cheap. She'll never make a show dog, you know."
And the girl said, “That doesn’t matter. I’d like to buy
her."
And she did and she took her home to her house where
she lived with her mother and three rough voiced sisters
with big feet.
The mother said, “Is that really a Wire haired Fox


terrier?” and the sisters said, ‘‘How little she is!” and
they told the girl not to bring her into the house. And
the girl who was young and lonely and felt love move
her heart whenever she looked at the little white puppy
slipped her into her room at night so she could curl up
into a little warm ball on the foot of her bed.
She gave her meals of rich red meat and gravy and
biscuits. She brushed her white whiskers and caressed
her small back that grew firmer and solider every day.
Never had the little pup had so much to eat. So much
attention.
When the girl came home late in the afternoon from
her work where she sat with her mouth in a small
black cup and with black harness on her head saying.
“Switchboard. Switchboard. Yes, I'll connect you,”
she took the little white puppy out on to the beach
nearby, and they ran and played and dug up the sand
and enjoyed themselves.
One day they met a boy on the beach. He, too, had a
Wire Fox terrier, and it was very handsome. More
handsome even than little white pup's brothers, and
the boy came over to the girl and said: “Do you like
my dog? He's a wonderful dog. He can do tricks and
he goes to the Shows. His names is Champion Mustwin
Mischievous Michael. What's the name of your dog?
She's rather small, isn't she?”
And the girl who had not been able to think of a name
for little white puppy, suddenly decided on one and said:
“Her name is Laugh Last Little Loneliness.”
And the boy showed the girl how his dog could pretend
to be a dead dog and how it could chase a ball into the
white breaking waves and bring it back wet and slippery
and drop it at his feet.
The girl and the little white dog went down to the
beach nearly every day and sometimes the boy just
passed them with a wave of the hand and sometimes
he didn't come at all.
Then the girl taught little white dog whom she called
Lonely for short when they were by themselves, how
to do the tricks that Mischievous Michael could do
Lonely learnt how to lie on her side and pretend to
be dead. She stood with her small white head cocked to
one side and waited for the ball to be thrown that


she must chase into the long curling waves.
Sometimes when they forgot the ball, she chased a piece
of sandy green sea-weed and brought it back shining
and dripping to the girl.
The girl taught her many things and Lonely listened
to all she said and remembered it.
No one saw Lonely do her tricks. No one knew she
was a very clever little dog. It was a secret between the
girl and Lonely.
One day an old man who limped as he walked with his
stick and whose hair above his lip bristled white against
his brown lined face, saw the girl in a blue sweater the
colour of the sea, standing on the beach with her short
dark hair blowing in the wind. In front of her sat
Lonely her pink tongue hanging out with excitement as
the girl threw pieces of bread to the white swooping
gulls.
He stood watching them, then came up to the girl, his
eyes on Lonely. “That's a fine dog you have there," he
said. “You wouldn't care to sell her would you?"
The girl threw some bread to a gull who stood hungry
waiting.
“No," she said, after a minute, “I wouldn't care to sell
her" and she bent down and lifted Lonely into her arms.
The old man made a little round hole in the sand with
his smooth brown stick. “Would you mind if I looked
her over," he said. “I'd like to feel what she's like
under the rough white hair. She looks a good dog to
me. Do you mind?"
The girl put Lonely down slowly, then she smiled
at the old man, “Of course I don't mind," she said.
“Do you really think she's good?"
She told Lonely to stand stiff and still as she had seen the
boy make Mischievous Michael and the old man felt the
little white dog all over.
“She's a very fine dog," he said when he'd finished.
“I'd like to sec her with her hair properly trimmed for
a Show."
The girl was silent a moment.
“Do you mean she's good enough to show?" she
said.
“Why, certainly," replied the old man. “I'd like to pre-
pare her myself. There's a Show in a fortnight. I
16


Hi
trimmed Champion Mustwin Mischievous Michael ready
for it two days ago. She may not do very well the first
time, you know,” he said kindly to the girl who was
alight with excitement.
“I'd love you to get her ready,” she said.
During the next fortnight Laugh Last Little Loneliness
and the girl her mistress had a busy time.
Every late afternoon they went a short walk to the
beach and then climbed up the pale green grass of the
cliff to the old man’s house. He brushed and he combed
Little Loneliness. He trimmed close the fine hair on
her long narrow head and brushed forward her curling
white whiskers. He clipped her finger nails and combed
out the rough hair round her feet.
Every day she grew more beautiful, more clean cut.
And the girl’s heart swelled with pride whenever she
looked at her.
On the day before the Show Lonely was bathed in
warm soapy water. She was rinsed in clear water in
which they placed a little blue, then while she was
drying the old man dusted her with fine white powder.
Her hair was combed into its exact position and her
new white lead tried on.
The girl and the old man looked at her and there were
tears in their eyes.
The girl led her proudly home and there she met her
sister with the large feet and the rough voice.


'‘Why, what have you done to your dog/’ she said. “She
looks quite clean. She’s not a bad looking dog, now
she’s grown. Bring her here.”
Lonely remembered the times when the rough voiced
sister had pushed her away from the house and she didn’t
want to go near her. She pulled back on her lead, and
the sister, quickly angry, snatched it and stepped forward.
She stepped with her large heavy feet on to the small
round foot of Little Loneliness and she dragged her
new white lead in the dirt.
Lonely screamed with pain and the girl jumped forward
and pushing away the sister carried Little Loneliness
to her room, crying and whimpering. Anxiously she
looked at her little foot. The soft pad was split across
and one round curling nail dug into the soft tender skin.
Quickly the girl hurried out of the house along the street
to the beach and the home of the old man. The tears
streamed down her face as she showed him the damaged
paw of Little Loneliness.
He looked at it carefully.
“We can fix it up,” he said, “but Fm afraid we can't
show her to-morrow. She’ll limp for a week or so.”
Tenderly he worked on her paw then put her down
on the floor. Little Loneliness walked two steps then
stopped. She walked another step then limping she
moved to the corner.
“She might just manage it,” he said. He picked her up
again and again bent over her paw. “We’ll try her
shall we? She’s very game.”
The next day was bright with sunshine and the people
were gay in their poppy reds, sky blues, greens and
yellows behind the white fence of the Show ring. The
grass was green smoothly covering the ground, and Laugh
Last Little Loneliness a brilliant white as her mistress
led her limping into the ring.
The people sighed with admiration. “But look ” they
said, “She’s limping. The judge will put her out if
she limps.”
Behind the girl and Little Loneliness came the boy from
the beach and Champion Mustwin Mischievous Michael.
He pulled at his lead and turning tried to fight with
the dogs who followed him in.
The judge came in and all the dogs walked slowly round


in a big circle. The girl’s heart was beating quickly
and she talked quietly to Lonely as they moved around.
“Don’t limp, darling,” she said, “Not yet. Just wait a
while.”
The judge put up his hand. “Now one at a time,” he
said. Each dog walked up and down in front of him
and he watched with eyes quick to notice a foot
turning out or a tail curled forward too far.
Champion Mustwin Mischievous Michael walked in front
of him and he nodded bis head and waved the boy to
one side of the ring.
Little Loneliness walked in front of him. She walked
with each foot touching the ground, white twinkling
over the green grass. He waved her to one side too and
he sent the rest of the dogs away.
Champion Mustwin Mischievous Mitchael and Laugh
Last Little Loneliness now stood side by side.
Champion Mustwin Mischievous Michael stood as a
show dog of experience always stands. Still, tense
and like a statue.
Laugh Last Little Loneliness stood as her mistress had
taught her, her small head high, and her weight evenly
on her feet.
The boy and the girl watched the dogs.
The people watched.
The judge paced up and down.
He took a Blue Ribbon for FIRST PRIZE, and a Red
Ribbon for SECOND PRIZE and walked over to the
girl. He gave her the Blue Ribbon and to the boy he
gave the Red Ribbon, and the people cheered and
called out as Laugh Last Little Loneliness, the Winner,
limped out of the ring.
The next day the girl and Lonely playing on the beach,
met the boy again. He said, “I didn’t get a chance to
shake hands with you yesterday. Your dog deserved to
win. She’s a fine little dog.” He flicked a stone across
the water. “I didn’t know you’d entered her,” he said*
“I was very surprised to see you.” He stood with his
fair hair bright in the light from the setting sun, “Can
you flick stones over the water?” he said.
And Champion Mustwin Mischievous Michael and Laugh
Last Little Loneliness dug in the sand and together they
buried with their noses an old piece of orange peel.


It’s fun to go. down to the beach
and play
for a girl and a pup
near the end of the day.
The white waves curl
they toss and they run
and over them streams
the light from the sun.
The white dog digs
in the wet rough sand
he hunts for the treasure
that lies under the land.
And the slim girl stands
her hair blowing free
and watches the dog
the gulls and the sea.


SOME TALES
EILA GREEN


A KITCHEN TALE
I’m a kettle, you know, all polished and bright
And I sit on the stove all the day and the night;
I’m as proud as can be of my handle of blue
And the knob on my lid that's a lovely blue too;
I’m proud of my whistle that works with the steam
So that when I’m too hot I just puff up and scream.
Now my people are poor so they’re thrilled to possess
What costs them at least two days wages, no less;
I’m often quite useful and come to their aid
When they’re having some trouble or feeling afraid
For I hear '‘Put the kettle on quickly,” they say
‘‘A good cup of tea will send worries away.”
The years have rolled past and I live in a dream
Of the days when they revelled in making me gleam;
And to-day I heard one of them say in a rage
‘‘Oh look!—it’s leaking, it must be old age.”
So they threw me out on the old rubbish heap
And I felt so ashamed as I lay down to sleep.
22


Arfl
Weeks later two Boy Scouts came up to the door.
“We're wanting old kettles to use for the war.
We'd be pleased if you have one to put in our sack
For making the planes aluminium we lack."
So I'm happy that now I'll be cared for and bright
And when next you see me I'll be in full flight.
A WINTER’S TALE
Said the teapot one day with an uppity air
To the milk jug who watched with a frigid-like stare
“I'm cosy and warm in my new knitted vest
While you, poor thing, live in that freezing ice-chest."


m i iillMllI
m xBmH WaBl
9 am HPI^^w|||PVW
si*S09Km*mmW^
A GARDEN TALE
Sammy the Snail set off one night to see what he could find
What he discovered or where he went he really did not
mind.
As long as it was GOOD TO EAT; he thought he'd
try next door
For those young lettuce plants should have new shoots.
for sure.
So off he went with chest puffed out and feelers wide
and high
As happy as the night was long for feeding time was nigh.
But stop! What ugly shape is that approaching from the
Why bless me if it isn't just that greedy Slug called Silas


Now Sammy knew that Silas knew about that hoped
for dinner
And go full out be really must if he would be the winner.
For two long hours they raced across the narrow grassy
stretch
Sammy muttering ‘neath his breath “I'll beat you there,
you wretch/’
Silas hurried, knowing well young Sam was in the lead
But slugs aren’t really built, you know, for travelling
at top speed.
At last their goal came into sight—imagine then their grief
Rupert the Rabbit had been there first and EATEN
EVERY LEAF.
Then, with time to look about, Sam realised dawn
was near,
And a snail must be in shelter when the morning light
breaks clear;
So with a hungry feeling for his dinner he must lack
Sammy sadly sauntered to bis home beneath a sack.


Bertrand The Brass Bound Frog
1c was an unhappy room.
On the window-sill in the brilliant morning sunshine
sat Bertrand the frog, his red glass eyes glittering and
blinking in the light and the brass warts on his back
and his tip tilted brass nose gleaming. His mouth always
open was gaping black ready to say 1 object, I object/
but no one ever heard him. No one ever saw him jump
as the green frogs in the garden do. He leant heavily
forward on his flat front feet, ready to jump, but always
stiff and still.
He was an unhappy frog. He lived in the light
from the sun or the light from the big lamp in the
middle of the room and he thought longingly of the
darkness in the place where he used to live.
He saw the gay pink blossom slip from its green
buds on the tree in the orchard, and lie poised on the
bare brown bough. He saw the blue wrens with their
gay jockey caps hop cheerfully across the green grass,
and the children next door laughing and biting into
their crimson skinned apples. He saw the clear colours
of spring, the rich tones of summer and the golden
dropping leaves of Autumn. He saw the grey branches
etched against the winter sky.
And he longed for the darkness.
He longed for his home far away in a far far country.
He had lived in a little dark corner of a little dark room,
with creeping brass snakes, and vain brass peacocks
with spreading tails, close about him. They had lived
many years in their small dark corner growing greener
and uglier with the passing of time and all they heard
was the soft thud thud of bare feet passing.
Then one day the Frog, whose proper name was
Bertrand the Brass Bound Frog, was taken away from
his corner. He was cleaned and polished till he glittered


P''
I
jm m j.
. . ■■«
o|B 4
T Jtef • .. 1 t jny):' I 'Vj,
mk
and shone and his red eyes blinked with rage in the
light from the hot sun. No one heard when he tried
to say ‘I object, I object’ and he was sold to a new
master and sailed away wrapped in a silk handerchief
across the seas to a new country.
And he lived now on the window sill where there was
no friendly darkness and no creeping snakes or vain
brass peacocks with spreading tails.
He lived on the window sill in the day time but at night
when the lights shone strong and there were friends in
for the evening, the master of the house lifted him on
to the floor where he sat with the other young men
his friends, and they all dropped matches into the mouth
of Bertrand. They pressed their hot burning cigarettes
against the sides of his mouth and they choked him with
and butts.


■m
She bung in the recess now where the old woman who
came in to clean had put her.
She hung there where Archie the Amorous Airedale could
never see her.
He was a china head that lay flat to the wall with his
one brown eye always straining to sec round the corner
to the Charming Chinese Lady. Since the night when
the master brought her home and Archie first saw her as
the men leant over her, feeling with their fingertips the
satin smooth panel and the curves of her head and
neck, Archie had loved her.
He watched her for a week as she sat on the mantlepiece
“He makes a good ash tray/' the master of the house
said to his friends.
It was an unhappy room. Everything in it hated the
old woman who came in to clean and who muttered
to herself as she worked, her tongue darting in and our
like a lizard’s. She would pick up Bertrand and turn
him upside down and he would spit out the ashes and
bits of stick from his throat and she would put him
down on the window sill with a vicious thump and
never hear when he cried despairingly, ‘I object.
I object.’
The old woman who came in by the day to clean, be-
cause the master of the house had not yet found a wife
for himself, was an old woman whom nobody loved.
She did her work in a high black hat, and she wore
skirts that were long and brown and brushed against
the furniture. She moved round the room picking things
up and putting them down again. Her hands weo’
rough and coarse and sometimes a vase would just come
to pieces in them.
The elephant bell on the mantlepiece tolled dismally
when she touched it. The piano screamed up the keys
as she dusted it. The cushions on the chairs winced
before she thumped them, and the Charming Chinese
Lady on the rosewood panel in the recess, alone took
no notice.
She was a lovely Chinese Lady made of opalescent soap-
stone and her skirt which spread out around her as she
sat, had a petal hem pointed like ivory teeth, a fan
in one hand and the other caressed the smooth round
stones of the necklace lying across her knee.


and then the old woman who came in to clean had
moved her and Archie could not see the smallest corner
of her, try as he might.
It was an unhappy room.
Everything in it dreaded the old woman.
As the mornings came nearer they shrank into themselves
and wished that the visit of the old woman who came
in to clean would soon be over. They breathed a sigh
of relief when she went and began all over again to
dread the next morning.
There came a morning when things were worse than
ever. She picked up Bertrand and hit his head on the
floor, once, twice then again. He tried to say *1 object:
I object/ but his voice was weak. He was standing
upside down and no one heard a sound.
She jabbed with a vicious duster at the black notes of
the piano and she knocked upside down the red patterned
elephanjt bell.
She dropped Archie the Amorous Airedale on the floor
and always after that there was a little white mark on
his neck where the china chipped off.
She dragged the couch across the floor and knocked
her black hat sideways.
She muttered and talked as she moved about and Bertrand
heard her saying:
“It's the last time Ido this. It's the last time Ido that/'
The next morning she did not come.
Bertrand the Brass Bound Frog, Archie the Amorous
Airedale, the Charming Chinese Lady, the chairs and
the piano, the elephant bell and the cushions all waited
with dread.
They waited till the next morning.
They waited for morning after morning.
No one came.
The master of the house no longer sat in there or had
his friends in the evening.
The room was still and undisturbed
Then came a day when there was bustle and noise at
the front door. Big blue suitcases and hat boxes and
golf sticks were brought in. The master came into the
room and with him was a lady his new wife.
She looked round the room, she wiped the dust with
her finger tips from the ear of Archie, and stroked his


neck. She gave a little cry of joy when she saw The
Charming Chinese Lady and she said, “Poor thing, how
ugly he is,” when she saw Bertrand the Brass Bound
Frog.
She said: “Oh, no!” when the master pushed his cigarette
into the mouth of Bertrand. She said: “Oh, no, how
could you, dear? He must absolutely hate it.” And she
lifted out the dead cigarette and threw it out the window.
For once Bertrand did not want to say *1 object, I object.’
He stood open-mouthed with surprise.
Then things happened to the room.
From the windowsill Bertrand saw the carpet folded
over and over and covered with a newspaper. The cushions
were taken away and the chairs pushed back. Archie
was lifted from the wall and put on the couch and the
Chinese Lady and the elephant bell lay on the other
end. The chairs and the couch were covered with white
ghostly sheets and men with paint pots and ladders
came in and worked.
The room put on a new face and the cushions came
back dressed in another colour. The chairs and the
carpet were put in new places and Archie the Amorous
Airedale was hung on a nail at the feet o£ the Charming
Chinese Lady where he could see the light on her face
and hands and she looked down at him and he was happy.
Bertrand the Brass Bound Frog was taken from the
windowsill and put on a small dark shelf in the corner
with a gold red brass dragon belonging to the new
mistress beside him.
No one used him as an ash tray any more and no one
put him out in the bright lights and he forgot the
creeping brass snakes and vain brass peacocks with spread-
ing tails and he was happy with his red gold dragon and
the darkness undisturbed about him.


I object I object
said the little brass frog
to the butts and the ash
to the matches and the trash
to the thumps and the pokes
and the laughing china dog.
I object I object
to all they do to me.
They place me in the light
and the things I have to see
arc all so crude and bright
though I long for the dark that used to be.
I object I object
to being here at all.
I don't want to be an ash tray
and always used the wrong way.
I want my far olf corner
with the peacocks and the dragon
with the snakes that creep and crawl
in my corner by the wall.
Mi iI I


m
iLm I 'i
B A
: —
B A 1
■ wr MB A
n t Bk
' ' $ v ■' *•'.’ * V ■■’ x ... ■ /‘i.
Champion Highly Born Highland Fling
Was clever at tricks and that sort of thing
Sit up and Beg,
Salute the King.
She’d been taught how to do
Almost anything.
She could walk up ladders,
Could wipe her nose
And we wanted to teach her the door to close
But whenever she pulled and it banged her toes
She sank to the floor
In a dismal pose.
So we gave up trying and said How Good
When she did all the other things that she could
And no one asked her
To shut the door
We knew she’d think it
A Frightful Bore.
32


HIGHLAND FUNG
Once upon a time there was a little black dog, with small
three-cornered ears and a fine long tapering tail. Her
front legs were very short and straight. Straightcr than
other Scottie’s and when she opened her mouth to yawn
you could see her teeth. Sharp and white as the top
of a white picket fence.
Her name was Champion Highly Born Highland Fling
and she was almost always called Fling, but sometimes
when she walked round the Show ring, her short black
legs trotting on the grass, her red and black tartan collar
shining in the sun, the judge would cry, “First Prize
to Number 100, Champion Highly Born Highland
Fling,” and she would trot straight on. her heart tapping
hard with pride and joy.
Fling had a little home she was very fond of. A small
red painted kennel with a flat roof. She jumped up
there on a fine day to warm herself in the sun, and it
had a small green lawn in front of it.
With her lived her friend an Airedale, whom she loved.
She admired the waving black hair on his back and the
soft fuzzy hair on his nose. His legs seemed very tall
to her and when she lay down at night to sleep she
fitted between his straight front legs and his strong
curving back legs. They lay on their sides, stiff and
straight, like dogs painted on the floor.
The Airedale’s name was Champion Highly Born High
Happiness and he was almost always called Happy.
Fling and Happy belonged to a home where there were
many dogs. Dogs that came and dogs that went.


Boarding dogs and dogs to sell. Little silver white
puppies with blue eyes. Spotted dogs with drooping
ears. Yapping little long-haired dogs. Dogs with their
noses turned up. Dogs with flat noses and short curling
tails. Fling and Happy watched these dogs come and
go passing their kennel, but they themselves, they knew,
would always stay.
Then came a day.
They had both been asleep and woke up with a sudden
start as dogs do. A young man was speaking.
“My dear,” he said, “I should like to make you a pre-
sent of one of these dogs. It would be company for
you when you go walking in the rain, or sit by the fire
reading your books—when I am away at the wars.”
He looked at the young woman standing beside him
whose hair, gold as honey, curled into her neck. And
the young woman slipped her hand into his and leant
lightly against him.
“Thank you, my dear,” she said, “Thank you. But
which shall I choose?”
She looked at Champion Highly Born Highland Fling.
At the way the hairs of her coat fitted one into another.
At her feet small and round as a cat’s with the nails
filed short. She thought this is a fine little dog. Then
she look at her eyes. They were small and black and
the light slid off them as though they were marbles.
Champion Highly Born Highland Fling had shut her
thoughts, her fears, within herself.
The young woman looked at Happy. He was standing
at the fine mesh wire of the fence and he was trying to lick
the hand of the young man.
The young woman looked at him. She saw he was
beautiful. She saw he was friendly and lovable. And
she turned back to Fling. “She’s not very friendly,
is she?” she said.
The young man answered, “Well, what about this chap?
He’d guard you well.”
“Yes,” she said, “I know,” and she looked at Fling.
“May we go inside?” she said to the mistress of the
kennels who was watching the dogs with trouble creasing
her face.
“Certainly,” she answered and opened the high narrow
gate.


The young woman walked towards Fling who sat still
and stony as before but now she lifted the sides of her
lips, and the young woman saw the gleam of her strong
white teeth.
“She’s not very friendly, is she?” she said.
Happy and the young man were having a game. Happv
jumped and tried to lick the young man’s nose and the
young man laughed and put up his hand.
“He’d be a good dog to have,” he said.
The mistress of the kennels opened her mouth to speak,
shut it again, then spoke.
“As a matter of fact these two dogs have never been
parted. They’ve grown up together and I don’t know
that I should sell them to different homes. I’m selling
all the dogs—the war, you know,” she said. “Thev
may fret —”
The young woman looked at the mistress of the kennels
and then at the young man. Her scarlet swinging jacket
was gay against the green grass lawn.
“My dear,” she said, “I should like to make you a pre-
sent of one of these dogs. To play with you and bark
for you when you come home from the wars. To sit
beside your chair when you smoke your pipe and to
lick your hand when I am out.”
The young man slipped his wide brown hand round
hers on the red kennel roof.
“Can we take them at once?” he asked the mistress of
the kennels.
She smiled and brushed away a big round tear from her
cheek. “Certainly,” she said.
Champion Highly Born Highly Fling and Champion
Highly Born High Happiness slept that night on a green
carpet. Green as their lawn but the smell was different.
Before they settled down for the night the young woman
smoothed a woolly rug into a cushion on the floor and
called softly to Fling to sit on it. Fling, who had not
eaten her tea, walked away and lay down where she
could see Happy, already curling himself on her rug.
Their new home had a garden. It had wide spreading
trees with patches of light beneath. It had warm rose
pink brick paths and lonely little pink bricks dropped
into the light green of the lawns.
In one corner there was a long curling goldfish pond


and the first time Happy saw a brilliant red gold fish
with its filmy fins and tail, he jumped with excitement.
He shot out one brown paw and to bis surprise he wa,
struggling amongst the smooth round plates of the
water lilies. Fling sat watching him. Her red wet
tongue hung out and her crinkly edged mouth stretched
wide, laughing at him. The young man laughed, too.
“He’s a silly dog, isn’t he?” he said and he helped Happy
pull himself away from the branches and leaves of the
water lilies.
“They told us Fling was very clever at tricks,” said the
young woman. “They gave me a list of them. Would
you get it for me, my darling, and some cake?” She
turned over on the rug so that the warm brown on he.:
back and legs would deepen yet more.
The young man tied a sky blue shirt about his neck
by the sleeves and banged the gate as he went through
talking to Happy with love in his voice.
The days passed quickly for the young woman, the
young man and the dogs. In the cool of the morning and
the late afternoon they searched out the bright splashes
of sunlight under the trees and they warmed and rested
their bodies.
In the heat of the midday they slipped into the friendly
shadows and the young man and woman read their
books and the dogs lay with their wet noses pushed
under the green blades of grass.
The young man and the young woman smiled when
Fling sat up and begged for a cake. They smiled when
they said, “Salute the King” and she sat up with one
paw raised to her head. She did her tricks quietly, in
a dignified way, quietly and without enthusiasm. She
came when she was called, she did what she was told
but they could not read her thoughts.
Then came a day.
The young man put away his cornflower blue and his
golden shirts. He put away his soft treading sandals
that showed his brown toes. No more did he lie in
the garden and play with Happy and coax Fling to
do her tricks. There was hurry and bustle in the house
and the dogs smelt sadness in the air.
The young man brought out drab coloured shirts, ties
and sox and his rough jacket and great coat smelled
new and strange. He tried on a new ugly face with a


.
' ?- m
jj^F
I B ■
'mSSSKBNBtBWF ii


J u
long grooved nose and he put a round hard shining
hat on top of it. Happy barked with fright and Fling
crept into a far corner and the young woman laughed.
“They don't like your gas-mask/' she said.
She laughed a lot these days but there was something
wrong with her laughter.
She was laughing and the tears ran down her cheeks
when the young man walked out the gate with a long
brown bag over his shoulder and his back covered with
straps and bundles, the colour of his coat.
He shook hands with Fling. He patted Happy’s head,
tenderly twisting his smooth brown car. He kissed the
young woman, his wife, and he walked out the gate to the
wars.
Happy lifted his nose in the air and he cried and the
young woman leant on the high brown fence with her
face hidden and Fling sat watching them her eyes marbles
the light slid away from.
The days moved past and the young woman took the
dogs for their walks and fed them their chopped up
sheep's hearts and gravy beef. She dug with her spade
in the garden and at night she brought out the long
black curling hose and shot streams of water across
the flowers and the growing plants.
Some days were good days when the postman's whistle
called the young woman and the dogs racing out and
she went proudly back with a letter. And there were bad
days and no letters. Happy would lie watching the old
sandal the young man bad give him as a plaything.
One day he growled when Fling feeling her body light
around her trotted up to Happy for a game and nudged
his sandal. He growled and he showed his teeth. The
young woman called to Fling and Fling with sadness
filling her heart went to her. The young woman stroked
her back but Fling trembled and moved away.
That night Happy would not touch his food and cried
and shook in his sleep on the young woman's bed. The


young woman awoke and bent to caress him, but he
growled and snapped. Fling heard them from the floor
and moved over nearer to the bed.
The next morning Happy was well again. He ran and
played with Fling and he threw his ball in the air. And
no one knew what happened to him when suddenly he
fell down on the grass with his legs quivering and hi>
teeth chattering.
The young woman was inside the house and was sur-
prised to see Fling push open the door and walk in.
She walked up to the young woman and for the first
time she looked at her with her eyes no longer marbles.
They spoke her thoughts. And the young woman
followed her through the door and out to Happy.
An old man with stiff white hair above his lips and a
curling grey hat and clothes that smelt well to Fling
came to see Happy. He touched him with he strange
smelling fingers and then picked him up and carried him,
quiet and still, away.
Fling sat at the gate and cried with her nose in the air.
That night in her bed the young woman looked at Fling,
who lay sadly in a corner, her nose on her paws. She
said, “Champion Highly Born Highland Fling, I have
something to tell you. You must listen well and you
must understand. Use your brain that is sharp and
clever and follow my words/'
“Our Happy is sick and has gone away. He has gone
to a place where they look after sick dogs. You must sav
to yourself, ‘Happy will soon be well and home again.
Happy will soon be well and home again/ Say it every
minute of the day as I say ‘My man, who is at the wars
will soon be back and home again." Say these words
always."
Fling with her small black eyes alive with understanding
moved slowly towards the bed. She leant back on her
hind paws and then jumped on to the young woman’s
bed. She curled herself up with a sigh and the young
woman felt for the first time the feel of her soft damp
tongue on her fingers.
So the young woman and the dog were friends and they
settled down to wait for the day when Happy returned
to them and the young man came back from the wars.


,
* .* v *
The Bradley Printers, 40 Glenfenie Road, Malvern, U 7514.
.
.




oommenr
PUBiioonon


