

'


V ( 'i <N


7J IL
THE STORY OR "MANNA"
ers-onNltn Dog
“ 1/1 ”
rianna
Copyright (No. 40,173), 1944, by Sylvia Evans,
"Alwyn," 16 Loftus Street, Arncliffe.
people, dog?, other an\ma\s an d birds- an dtb e incidents*
chronic led in this* boob/ ave, in tbe main, <3utbentic.


from —-i
he Prince of Storij Teller? — \
T wv ■ 9U \
I D ear Manna, \
I very much f °- nR your Boo*
\ P .^^S' rld 1
I remark at th it of th inter estihS
I brea Ttso the of y°
■ does ais be I
1 memoirs- loV ers your hope \
M m ol 1 dOB -p PYf \
\ \
1 »" 4 "SS »”• ‘
■ love tlaax. \
1 andpieture- 1
Yours \
/A Letter of /Appreciation
from —■(
The Prince of Storij Teller? __
I


i
\ V *
f v|
Cl 7409
19 DEC 194
IeJ-tupiepit^
W. A. Thomson, Esq., News Editor, "Wireless Weekly," who, when publishing some of my
early efforts, expressed the opinion that they were excellent, and who later wished me
success with my book. (This opinion from a busy City Editor was very
encouraging).
Miss Elizabeth and Miss May Farleigh, who allowed me to
snoop over the fence in search of material for my story and
to make public the gleanings.
Blackie, their retriever, who makes a very able villain
may not be quite as black as he is painted.
Miss Beatrice Tange, Distinguished Pianist, for permission to use
photographs of Chips and Holwood Flame (David, for short),
and to the dogs themselves, who so far smothered their
snobbish feelings as to appear in print with me.
Norman Frazer, Esq., for allowing me to use pictures
his sealyhams—Mike, Betty-Ann and Wee-Bet.
W. Smith, Esq., for allowing Bob to be associated
me in this book.
Bee Nixon, who although not very fond of dogs
general, always champions me.
Sis Henderson for "Stinkies" and tasty tit-bits.
Grampus Henderson for his dog stories: Dear Grampus,
who would have been so proud of this humble effort, could
he have but lived to see its completion.
Master Alan Evans, whose patience and sense of fun, made the
taking of the photographs an exciting game.
Mistress Sylvia Evans, who, although lacking a dog's superior
Intelligence, has somewhat made up the deficiency by great
understanding and hard work: a combination that bridged the gulf
and made this story possible
To all, my thanks,
r ((anna


' w>r - 'iHiHK. •
A ? an act of tnis* Look.
is* dedicated to
“GUi:


“ A/i
v lanna


V ' “
Cairnsfoot.
Dear Manna,
book was about to go to press, I received the following letter from
His views on me, whilst not enthusiastic, were at least manly.
So you are in print again. Well, all I can say is: " You Lucky
Dog." I have been hearing your Life Story and it seems to me to
be stepping stones to good fortune all through. First you fell from
nowhere, right on to your feet into what was surely " Dog's Haven."
Then when you were silly enough to get lost and upset half the
town about it, you not only arrived home in state, but contrived
to get yourself into the papers as a Personality. Now, crowning
glory, there's a real book about you. I must say, however, that It
was decent of you to dedicate It to me —never thought you had
It in you. I know, of course, 1 am good looking and my manners
are unimpeachable, so I do add a tone to that symphony of yours.
As to your sportsmanship, though, let’s see what happens next time
I come near your fence. I admire your Mistress immensely, for she
does know how to treat a dog, and I would like to see more of her.
If it wasn't tor you, I probably would. However, congratulations,
old dog. Why not let by-bones be by-bones and come In and see
me sometime ?
Yours to a hair,
Pjß/acAie.
Could I possibly have been mistaken in my opinion of


SHAME !
That was the only word to describe it; I knew, without looking around, that
my tail was down. In a Dog's world, that is the badge of failure. As I slunk along,
it attracted attention. There was the arrogant Bulldog, who looked as though he
hoped his eyes were deceiving him, and gruffed out: "Why, dash it all, old
fellow, can't you do better than that, by Jove? Tradition, you know, Tradition."
The Sydney Silky's comments were more to the point: "Hoist it up,
Skipper." It was a Spaniel, though, who made me feel most unhappy; she had
nice kind eyes; made me wish I could remember my own mother. She coaxed
me: "Come on, old chappie, tail up."
Out of kindly interest, I am sure she was going to guestion me: so I pre-
tended to have a very important matter to attend to down the street and hurried
on. I was feeling so sorry for myself, another minute and I'd have been acting
like a whimpering puppy and then spent the rest of my life regretting it.
Any trouble I was in was my own fault. It came about when I decided
to look for a home. The place I'd left could never be called that. The people
there didn't want me; didn't like me; in fact, they treated me so badly I really
had no choice but to leave. The only thing I took away with me was my self
respect: and that seemed to lose some of its value, when, for two days, there was
nothing to eat and nowhere to sleep. You can get very hungry in a couple of
days, when you've had nothing down the inside path but a few drops of milk,
licked from the road, I wouldn't have had that much, if the milkman had been
more careful when he turned off the tap of the milk tank.
It wasn't only hunger that worried me; I was very tired, too, as there had
been no time wasted in getting away as far as possible from the place of my
unhappiness. It was a great bit of luck for me when I saw, at a gate, a puppy
with a lovely meaty bone. No one was about, so I grabbed the bone and ran.
Puppy howled, but made no effort to chase me. By the look of him, I don't think
he could have run a yard. It was not his stomach that was hungry only his
eyes. For an entirely different reason, I was ashamed of my own attempt at
running. It was a very poor show; due to my tummy being so empty and flat,
that when a flea scampered across it, I could feel the tickle right through to my
back.
Thank goodness, I hadn't far to go before I found an open gate. The place
looked deserted, so I staggered in there with the ill-gotten bone and got down to
business. When the meat had all gone, I cracked open the bone and licked out
Page Seven


the marrow with my tongue: what I couldn't lick, I sucked. Then I crunched
up the bone itself and ate it. When all that had disappeared, even the tiniest
splinter, I slept—a long, long sleep.
On waking up, I felt much brighter. My mind was alive and alert again.
Unfortunately, my stomach was the same and made little sguiggles and gurgles
to draw attention to it. At first, I had the idea of sticking to that locality as the pup
would be very useful. I would share with him; my share would be as much as
I could take off him, and, as he was eating enough for two, it would be guite fair.
The idea was tempting, but I changed my mind, because the houses and the
street were so like what I was trying to get away from. If I gave up now and
took the easy way, how could I ever find the sort of home I'd always wanted?
How long I wandered after that, I don't know. By the state I was in, it must
have been weeks. My claws were worn to stumps before the pads of my paws
swelled up over them; my dirty dead-looking coat held my bones together, but
didn't stop them from rattling; and my tummy was so puckered and shrivelled,
it no longer had a voice to be heard. Mercifully, my brain had slowed up too. It
was numbness I felt more than anything else: that —and tiredness.
The nights were so cold I kept on the move. In the daytime there was
a hunt for a warm, and if possible, sunny place to sleep. One night was even
worse than usual, although it began with me having hopes of something to eat.
From down the street I saw a big building where the lights were on, and men
were busy loading lorries. Even from that distance, I could smell rats. When I
went over, the men seemed pleased to see me and pointed out a likely spot to
hunt, under some cases. They went around to one side and pulled; their judg-
ment was sound, for out leapt a half-grown rat. I sprang at it, but it was through
my legs and away. The men were pretty disgusted and my effort had left me
muzzy in the head and trembling all over.
When that case had been loaded we tried again, but drew a blank. The
same thing happened with the next one. Then our luck changed: as soon as the
corner of the last case in the row was lifted, we had results. The catch should
have been easy, only my head was still playing up. In addition to having things
swaying around me, I was seeing double. This proved to me, my weakness
was increasing and it was very urgent that I should catch a meal. I focussed the
wobbling figures as well as I could, but they wouldn't come into line, so I aimed
carefully at the centre. My teeth closed on empty air.
In my keen disappointment, it was a wonder I heard the comments,
although they were shouted at me: "Dang me, if he hasn't missed both the
plaguey varmints."
Would you believe it, as I dodged the piece of wood that accompanied
the words, I was happy? That may seem strange, but it did buck me up to know
that I wasn't as far gone as I had thought. You see, once or twice during the
previous week, I'd seen things look double, but that was the first time one had
appeared twice the size of the other and a different colour. The rest of the night
I plodded on at a dog-trot. Morning found me a long way off, looking for a place
to sleep and forget how hungry I was.
It was from the other side of the street I first saw it. Standing very still,
I shut my eyes, trying hard to keep my head perfectly steady. Should I keep
my eyelids tightly closed, so as not to risk losing what I had seen, or look again
and make sure my eyes were not still playing tricks? Well, I couldn't stand
there like that for ever, so I looked again and from what I saw, believed my search
had ended. It was the kind of home I'd had in mind all those weeks. But what
Page Eight


wBs&x
.% W. /
*V > ?
fv*ji mtjjrt*
fcOSPvEiifc ; Wt
r“ w A Jf
of the people who lived
there? They mightn't like
iSEaaSfo
s£3WKv i *-..<•* ■ i|9b.
v^js
dogs; then there would be
no place for me. When you
: U* M>W j^SS
sKE'fr
«g|b 4 ;
remember how disreputable
# * *•** jt v ** v.,
looking I was, you couldn't
1
«|wgcyf <v T’ .
blame anyone for not taking
*• '•ripe
,2> <>vi*S5
tv
me in.
Someone was in the
\\j% . >»
k u -
JWV ‘i
ns, . • fef.
garden, so I crossed the
street. It was a woman. She
bent over and picked up the
morning paper as I paused
r
flL ‘ <Z>T. *
■ •
*W* V *3*
■ c&V
► y£- a -t^Cb r t Vj<f^Al
Xr* * -“' ‘ ''
oeni over ana picked up me . . jM
morning paper as I paused
at the gate. On seeing me .
she smiled. 'Twas then I * ... A
oner oilmen. i WQb IlifcJll 1 ■
KNEW. THIS was going to
be my home. Not knowing .
what I had in mind, she . ..
said; "You're out early, Thc gardcn was beautiful
little doggie; you had better
hurry home or you will miss your breakfast." It was a blow that she hadn't under-
stood right away. Not that I was unduly disheartened, because I knew enough
not to expect the good things of life to come too easily. That was a lesson learnt
as a puppy, when I was always beaten for best position at feeding time.
I stuck my muzzle as far as possible through the gate and watched her
go in and shut the door. It wasn't till the man of the house had left for work
that I jumped the fence. It was a low brick one, so, even in my wobbly state,
easy to get over. The next thing was to try the side gate, but that was locked,
so I waited in the sun until the woman came out to sweep the path. To find me
there still, was a surprise to her and it was then she really looked at me. There
was no doubt that what she saw aroused her pity. It took her but a moment to go
into the house and bring back biscuits and water. Because it was so early, the
butcher hadn't been, so there was no meat. Not that I minded sugary
biscuits would do me any
time, and seeing it was
only a matter of hours
when a rat had meant so
much to me, biscuits were
I tried the side gate, but it was locked.
a real party. It wasn't until
j they were eaten that I was
j told that I couldn't pos-
I sibly stay, because prize
| gardens and dogs didn't
; go together.
It might have been
partly because of the
lovely garden that I felt
the happiness of the
House. As I looked at
the windows with their
■M*:
draped curtains, they
reminded me of eyes
crinkled to smile.
Page Nine
w # *
v pti#-


After my meal I was gently put outside the gate. Suppose it was taking
a mean advantage to sneak back to the front door. Curled up on the mat, I was
so dead to the world, it took the ringing of the bell to arouse me. The first thing
to find its way through to my sleepy brain was a man's voice: "Are you saved?"
I couldn t help chuckling as I thought: "Yes; only she doesn't know it yet."
Strange, he wasn't talking to me, but to my unknowing adopter, who had
opened the door. The caller rambled on; being a typical "Talker," he hadn't
stopped to see he wasn't welcome, so I thought it time to give a gentle hint by
snapping at his ankles.
Was he surprised? I think it made him realise that saving could be a
very personal matter and it mightn't pay to delay. My new friend was pleased at
me helping her out. One thing it was nice to be saved from, was someone who
rudely pryed into, and belittled, her personal beliefs.
When the breadwinner came home to dinner, he looked at me and I
looked at him. It was very nice and friendly the way he asked me: "What are
you doing there, old chap?" I knew he wouldn't be hard to convince. He was
the kind of man who ought to have a dog like me.
Later, my new friends came out together and looked me over. What a
poor showing I made! It wasn't only that I was the worse for wear: so many
other things were wrong. Closer inspection brought to light the fact that I was
definitely odd-looking. After a good deal of thought, they decided there was a
certain kelpie look about me, but the colour was wrong. My legs and paws
seemed to speak of greyhound, but being only about a third of the size and
fully grown, I couldn't be that. It was a bad moment for me when the man said:
"There's the garden to consider, too. I think I had better ring the police and
enquire if anyone has lost a dog."
He was back in a few minutes with the best possible news. It appeared
that no one was anxious to claim a little dog who might have been kelpie, but
wasn't.
On my part, the settling-in was done with the least possible fuss. I took
every care and hoped that nothing would go wrong with my plans. They asked
me my name, trying me with all the good old-fashioned ones, like Rover, Fido,
Prince, but I turned a deaf ear. With the grand new life I expected to have, I
wanted a new name. It was Mistress who decided. "Well, we will have to call
you something, and as you seem to have dropped from Heaven, we will call
you 'Manna'."
Then they set to work to feed me up. Master said it wasn't much use me
having a name if I didn't live to enjoy it, and he didn't want his dog to look like
a model for an Art class studying canine bone construction. Mistress chipped
in here to say that as I had to be fed, I was going to be fed scientifically. So it
began: so much of this and so much of that, at such and such a time. I did
wonder, though, why chop bones, with little pieces of meat wedged in the
chinks, and sweet sugary things, and well sizzled-up
meat, must all be unscientific.
Not that that could spoil things. Life had
become so wonderful, I was sad with happiness.
f
Page Ten


If S'
There was an awful lot sticking over.
Have you ever met people who are never satisfied with things as they
are? I regret to say Mistress was like that. One day she came out, took off my
collar and carried me inside. Not knowing what to expect, I nearly swooned
with embarrassment when she started to bathe me. Any bath I'd ever had before,
had always been in a water-hole: and then, to have such attention from a woman!
I could only think her zeal out-
weighed her good taste.
They tried washing me in the sink.
I think Master understood,
because next time he said he would
attend to it himself. That wasn't
without surprises, either. To start
with, the tub was nearly full of
water —right up to my chin. And
could Master scrub? It was the
rinsing process which was really
the knock-out, though. A whole big
dipper of water turned upside
down, all at once. I don't think I
could have pulled myself together,
if it hadn't been for the look on
Mistress' face. She seemed as sur-
prised as I was, rubbed my nose and
confided: "It's all right, chappie;
just Master's lavish ways." So I
cracked hardy. Master's lavishness
was easier to cope with than Mis-
tress making a Sissie out of me.
Don't you think having a
bath should be a private matter?
Well, I suppose I'd had a couple of
dozen baths (if it's fine, I'm wet-
cleaned weekly) when Mistress
happened along. Master had me
well lathered and ready for rinsing
when Mistress decided I looked
funny with the starch washed out
Page Eleven


mm
jflf
****** ’y^f^jLV
f)r t toRT^JB*
Wm*M - . ~ lS jf$ fr.afr* 1 'ap?[W^i
P*J^
Gb3m *
«
\)
The washing machine made a more roomy tub.
The lathering was thorough.
of me, so to speak. Well, who could
look well poised in a bath-tub, any-
way? Then two pairs of eyes met
over my wet soapy head. One
member of the family: "How-do-
you-think-it-would-be-if-we ? "
The other member of the family:
''Oh-yes-and-we-could
So many things at our
place started that way. It might be
the garden, or the house but
mostly, it was me. The first time I
heard it, I didn't take any notice.
Afterwards, I ducked—if there was
time. Of course, it only postponed
matters. Still, that was helpful, be-
cause one thing did seem to lead to
another, and the longer I could put
it off, the less time there was for
things to happen to me.
It was a week before I
found out what this latest "How-do-
you-think-it-would-be-if" meant:
then, instead of being taken to the
laundry after my collar was
Resembling a snow~capped mountain or a badly iced cake


removed, I was carried into the kitchen. Now, I was never allowed in the kitchen
as a rule, because Master objected strongly to the possibility of having his food
served garnished with dog's hairs. So it was a shock to me when we pulled up
at the kitchen sink. Next thing, I was in it. Thanks to the fussiness of the family,
I had it all to myself. It would have been no fun sitting on the teapot, with one
paw threaded through the toast-rack, and another wedged in the milk jug, while
I concentrated on keeping my head steady, so as not to leave an eye on the
prong of a fork standing up in the corner. That I was there at all, showed just
how far things could go when the answer was "Ohyesandwecould—"
They not only could, but they did. Not without trouble, I'll admit. Which-
ever way they turned me, there was an end sticking over somewhere, so it was
a bit of a business lathering me.
Then, for the first time in my life, I found out what it was like to be
photographed. I was expected to stand this way and look that; head around; tail
up; legs so: I did the best I could, because if things were not right the first time,
the chances were, there would be a second time. I was terribly self-conscious at
being taken in such a position. There was such a lot of me showing and with my
hair all wet and sticking to me, it was very revealing. In my usual high tub, you
wouldn't have seen nearly so much. That was why I had to be photographed in
something else, so that everyone could see what I really looked like in my bath.
With me trying so hard to do the right thing, it was soon over. Then I had to be
rinsed and dried. Sounds simple, doesn't it; but there was very little water and
very little room. They tried to sit me in the sink, but my tail got wedged over
the side, so I couldn't sit. They stood me upright on my hind legs, but when the
water was poured over me, it ran off all my points, for all the world like a foun-
tain playing full blast. To finish up, I was done in halves —front half in first, rear
half held in the air: then I was reversed and the other end finished off. It was a
trying experience for me. I knew I was slippery with soap and the way my
handlers were laughing I felt they weren't giving proper attention to the job. I'm
afraid that although Master and Mistress were not so young on the outside, they
had ''puppy hearts.''
If I told you that since then I have been bathed in the washing machine,
maybe you wouldn't believe it. You needn't take my word; there are photo-
graphs to prove it. It hasn't been guite determined, to date, whether I most
resemble a snow-capped mountain, or a badly iced cake.
A
(
Page Thirteen


For some time, an abundance of enthusiasm and a lack of discretion
turned me into an "outside dog." If the gauze door was open and interesting
things happened inside, I rushed in and forgot to wipe my feet. It wasn't until
I had been through dreadful experiences which almost left my loved ones without
a dog, that they really came to appreciate me and found that dirty paw prints on
the floor and furniture were not so very important after all.
I had a home of my own in a corner of the back terrace. It was guite a
nice place, roomy and comfortable. There was nothing wrong with the house,
if only they hadn't put that wooden cut-out of a stupid looking dog over the
entrance. They told me it resembled me and it was called "Pooch." I could
never get away from him. Every time I came home, there he was at the front
I lived at The " Manna " House
My home was very comfortable
Page Fourteen


I" return. I protected them from the cut next door.
The fish shared their pool with me. ||p
screamed: I just stood there. Suppose it was the HI f ,,
shock, but 1 just couldn't move. Master came over ■' v '£j&
and picked me up. His hands were trembling, . J I .
so was my inside. After that, whenever I went ' I Vk ,'B
out, it was a! way;-.: on a lead. It wasn't much fun, I V * ifM £ B
because when I hurried along, it pulled against i ■' BMV
my neck. Still, it was ever so much better than
not going out at all. I
One day I was at the back door, standing • v ' ; ■ B
an my hind legs looking in and hoping to go for
I wondered if Mistress heard the wap Puss swore wheti I
persuaded him to take a fltfiny leap over the feme MB'''' |hi*w|BE WiY *
door, with his stupid grin and his big feet. I'm sure I never looked as half-
baked as he did. In addition to having that eyesore in front of me, I was kept
informed of all the things he wouldn't do. ''Pooch'' wouldn't dig holes. "Pooch"
wouldn't fight with other dogs. "Pooch" wouldn't tear someone's trousers (no
allowances being made for it being an accident). "Pooch" wouldn't leave bones
about for people to trip over, nor, on the other hand would he bury them in the
garden. I bet he wouldn't: he was wooden in more ways than one. If only I
could have plucked up enough courage to have climbed up and chewed his ears
off. They were such big "hear-all" ears. Without them he would have been only
half as impressive.
The rest of my home was very swanky. The name-plate proudly dis-
played beneath "Pooch" was specially painted for me by a friend. It said "THE
MANNA HOUSE."
For some time I lived very quietly. Having a home meant so much to
me, I didn't worry about the streets. Then, one day, Master invited me to go
to the shop with him. When once out, it was rather exciting, and on seeing an
interesting looking dog on the opposite corner, I thought it would be nice to go
over and pass the time of day. I did not notice the bus until it was right on
top of me. How the wheels and I missed each other, is a mystery. Someone
screamed: I just stood there. Suppose it was the
shock, but I just couldn't move. Master came over
and picked me up. His hands were trembling,
so was my inside. After that, whenever I went
out, it was always on a lead. It wasn't much fun,
because when I hurried along, it pulled against
my neck. Still, it was ever so much better than
not going out at all.
One day I was at the back door, standing
on my hind legs looking in and hoping to go for


a walk, when a bell rang inside the house. You can guess it was important when
Mistress came and opened the gauze door for me. She said: "Master wants to
speak to you," so I went in (not forgetting what the doormat was for). On looking
around, there was no sign of him anywhere, but when a round black thing was
held to my ear, there was Master's whistle, and he told me he was bringing some-
thing home for me. I really did hear his voice, but it must have been some sort
of trick, because 1 couldn't even smell him.
Master was clever and lots of fun, but Mistress was little and needed
protecting. When Master left for the office, he would bend over me and say,
sort of confidential like: "It's up to you, old man: look after Littlest One," and I
tried to make him understand that I would die for Littlest One.
When Master came home, he found me waiting for him. He guessed I
had been tricked, so told me how a telephone worked. Not that I really listened,
because it was so exciting having a present. It was a proper dog's harness, with
shiny buckles and blue leather straps, the same shade as Mistress' coat. The fun
there was, going out wearing my fine new rig-out. Once, when we went out,
nobody gave us a second 100k —then all was changed. I'll admit I did my best
to play up to it. Sometimes my sense of humour nearly got the upper hand. It
took a lot of determination not to laugh at the looks on the faces of the other
dogs. It was not only the dogs who were impressed, either. People would stop
Mistress and enquire: "Oh, what a lovely little dog. What breed is he?" She
used to answer: "Well, Master thinks he is the progeny of half a dozen of the
best dogs in the State."
Now, I knew that a "best" dog meant something good, but there must
have been a catch in it somewhere, because the quizzer would snigger, and
Mistress would look kind of sorry. Then one day, after such an encounter, she
looked pretty grim and said: "There will be no more of that. From now on,
you're an —er —er —ooer —an Oodlesnoosh."
I liked the name from the start. It seemed to go with my lovely harness
and made me feel fine. When all is said and done, a dog is what you make it.
After that, when we went out, I loved to hear the way Mistress answered people
who wanted to know about me.
"Oh, he is an Oodlesnoosh." The next question was always the same.
"They are very rare dogs, aren't they? Valuable, I suppose."
And as Littlest One scratched me behind my ear, she gravely answered:
"Yes.
I love sharing secrets with my loved ones.
Isn't it funny how easily people can be fooled by fine trappings?
Page Sixteen


I always got excited when Mistress said: "Come on, we're going to visit
the home folk." It was lovely to go and see them and on the way, to have people
make a fuss and admire me, but that wasn't the best of it. The fun started at
the other end of the park, when we walked by a fence at the side of a house.
Halfway across the yard, near the footpath, was a clothes-line post and tied there
was a dog. He was big and at first glance, you would have thought him
grey and brown. I suspected, though, that a bath would have turned him into
a white and tan. The first time we walked along there, he frightened blueroo
out of me. I was only a few inches from the fence, when he lunged with a terrible
growl and poked his head through where there was a space in the fence. Later
on, I saw that for more than a panel, there wasn't a whole full-length paling left.
At one time or another, he had snapped and chewed them all off, from the bottom
to the lower cross bar. When one paling was repaired, he made a gap some-
where else. When his head popped through, I thought he had me and I jumped
sideways, nearly upsetting Mistress into the gutter.
After that scare, we were both ready for him. On coming within easy
hearing distance, we always strutted in a way that would be sure to attract his
attention. He never knew quite what I was going to do; neither did I, until the
last second. Then I might walk straight past and pretend not to see him: or I'd
grin: or pull a face at him: another time I'd show my teeth. It didn't matter what
it was, because any one of them made him mad, and he would chew
and tug at the nearest paling in his fury to get at me. One of the things I would
never do, was to bark back. Then he'd get into trouble for being bad-tempered
and destroying the fence without just cause, and someone would come on to the
back verandah and throw something at him. It was very disappointing when
they missed him. We'd hurry around the corner and Mistress would pat me and
say: "Good boy, good boy." We would chuckle over the joke until we got to the
home folk and then we'd tell Grampus and Mrs. Grampus and Sis all about it.
They were all very good to me, especially Sis, who, thanks be, had no
fancy ideas on being scientific: in other words, she was very understanding.
There was always something tasty put by for me. She saved me the most lovely
"stinkies" I've ever tasted. Just in case you don't know, "stinkies" are bones
allowed to really ripen and mature naturally. Sis knew that a bone taken out of
the refrigerator, had no pep or flavour. She was the only one who ever gave
me real sugary things too.
So as not to go against Mistress' ideas, I ate them when she wasn't look-
ing. You should always respect other people's ideas; especially, when they are
bagger than you are. Not that Mistress would have taken advantage of that, but
Page Seventeen


she took such an interest in bringing me up properly, that it would have beerl
unkind of me to let her see any backsliding. Sugary things melt and go down
quickly, but a stinkie should always be eaten slowly, so that the good, rich flavour
can be thoroughly enjoyed. At first, when Sis would smuggle me one, I'd dive
under the hedge with it, while she kept 'nits.' One day, we were taken by sur-
prise: at least, my look-out was, and she didn't have time to warn me. Mistress
sniffed a couple of times and said she thought some poor little bird must have
been caught in the hedge and died there. Before the search took her to where
I was hidden, I d backed out the other side, leaving big tufts of my hair on the
sharp thorns. It was a most unsatisfactory way of handling stinkies, but it was
many long weeks, even with Sis working hard for me, before I was allowed to
take them home where I could linger over their savour in comfort.
There hadn't been as many stinkies and biscuits as I would have liked
though, so when Sis's birthday came around, I decided to be tactful about draw-
ing her attention to it. That was why I chose a bag as a present for her. It was
no use having a bag unless you put something in it and I hoped Sis wouldn't
be too long in getting the idea. On the birthday afternoon we started off with
the gift. The walk was very much as usual until we came to the house where
the fence-eating dog lived. There he was with his head poked through a con-
venient hole. I stuck my tongue out at him. If he could have had his way, he
would have torn down the entire fence to get at me. I was just going to kick a
bit of dust in his eyes for good measure, when I saw a man standing by his side.
He glared at us and told someone: "It's the same confounded dog back again."
In a twinkling, Mistress had me around the corner and in a breathless
whisper she asked: "The man; did you see his 'fate'?" I thought fate was what
overtook you when things you were trying to do went wrong, but if your
endeavour was successful, it was good judgment. I had never thought of fate as
something you could see. Mistress bent down and whispered again: "His fate;
the turn-ups on the end of his legs." Then I knew Littlest One was excited. When-
ever the words came out with that trace of Irish, it was a sure sign, something was
afoot. For the life of me, I couldn't understand why his feet should be so important,
but if Mistress thought so, there must be a reason.
We were on our best behaviour as we walked up the street, and then we
stopped and spoke to a friend. Mistress asked, in a way that was meant to be
casual: "Who lives in that house back there; the place with the cranky dog?"
and we were told: "Oh, that is where Constable So-and-So lives."
When we were alone, Littlest One said: "I had a feeling those feet weren't
making any mistake." All I could think of was: " —a policeman; and all the
time he had been pretending to be an ordinary man." The things some people
do, you would never believe.
Anyway, I think it is terrible to destroy things and if they couldn't stop
their dog from chewing up the fence, I would have no part in it. So, after that,
Mistress and I walked past on the other side of the road.
Page Eighteen


? mkL ■ ijM i 1
Py|^
uMb-
9|^bssbi|3&. -» r@s^.
I ppy?fj^fw^
v-S^M^j,,. '** 'V
| <VK&
/ i
y *k
M> -
tKIKLi V #-
77 ifas a combination muzzle and
helmet.
The first time they dressed me up.
The helmet was padded with
cotton-wool to protect my ears.
if was terrible.
If 1 sneezed, my nose popped out.
When I breathed it made a
peculiar whistley noise.
With one ear out, I heard many
interesting things.
*, K v XHr ’ j --
W
i.
.If -t SB


Let me tell you dreams do come true! I had become a PERSONALITY
and was I enjoying myself? Can you guess what it was like to a little stray
mongrel dog, to suddenly become famous? The trouble was, Td been giving my-
self airs, and although my folk were all in favour of me keeping my tail up, I
was constantly reminded: A humble heart becomes a little dog.” It was no use
just pretending to have H.H. (humble heart) because it always showed in your
eyes. I tried keeping my eyes down so no one could see the pride in them, but
then I looked at my own paws and that reminded me of another thing I was not
allowed to forget: Put your best paw forward, but keep in mind the others are
not all they might be. Why must there always be something to spoil things?
It was lovely being a celebrity, even if it did come as a bit of a shock.
When my folks showed me the photos in the paper, I was dumbfounded. I
counted the pictures—seven of them. Then to make sure, I counted them on my
toes —four on one paw, then three on the other. It was right: seven! Seven
beautiful big pictures of me, all in different positions, taken by Master and
published in "Wireless Weekly."
That's why it was so difficult to push my best instincts up on top and stop
strutting, even though my fame led back to something which was causing great
unhappiness—something bad, called WAR. That meant lots of people were
unhappy and losing their loved ones. It would be terrible to lose your loved ones:
the same as before I found this home, only worse, because then I'd never had
loved ones, so wouldn't know what I was missing. I'd never been in a War but
Mistress said lots of dogs were in the front line doing their bit. I had thought
of joining up, but once, when a car bowled me over, my shoulder was hurt,
so I didn't think I could pass the medical test. Guessed it was the home front
for me. There was always a chance that I could help in some other way. They
might even let me do modelling, for War Funds.
First time I dressed up, it was awful. When I got used to the idea, it
was my greatest pleasure. The bright idea was carried out by Mistress. You
needed to be chary of her bright ideas, as they didn't all work out as well as
this one eventually did. The war was going all wrong for us with our enemies
coming so close, I expected I'd soon be smelling them. Everyone was telling
everyone else what to do. People who thought they understood animals, went
to work through the papers and radio, telling animal owners what action should
be taken. They expected us to be half crazed by the dreadful noise of things
banging off on all sides and so far forget our manners, as to go biting anyone
within reach. Therefore, special provision should be made for our safety and
the safety of others.
Page Twenty


ki v ■A/
—* ' v. ..
- - ■' W / , jn -vW
/ » .
P* — y 'ir m-M
I A"
m
,
I suppose thousands of
people must have been on the
receiving end of that advice, yet
Mistress was the only one I knew
of who went to such lengths to do
something about it. She decided
that if it was the noise that upset
us, why not start there? So that
was how the helmet idea began.
The idea grew as it went along
and a muzzle was added. I don't
think it was so much that she
didn't trust me, but it kept the
head-piece firmly in place. The
muzzle was made from a leather
belt, cut into strips. The pieces
Was I pleased 1 A full page.
were shaped and sewn to fit my nose. The helmet was mostly material, thickly
padded over my ears with cotton-wool. In addition to
that, the scheme was to plug more of the beastly stuff
into my ears. When I depended so on my hearing,
blocking the sounds made my head feel dull and funny
and 1 don't know why it was, but I felt scared to move.
The big surprise was the first time I sneezed with it on.
The muzzle tickled my nose and the sneeze was an
outsized one. When the blast blew the end bit aside
and my nose popped out, it gave my face a terrible jar.
I think one thing that encouraged the sneeze, was the
little round hole on the strap, where the pin of the
buckle used to go through the belt. It came right on
my nostril and when I breathed it made a peculiar
whistley noise. I was experimenting with that, when
the sneeze caught me.
Another thing I wasn't keen on, was missing
what was being said. Sometimes I wriggled one ear
free on the chance of hearing something, not intended
for me. People didn't say things in front of me like
they used to. If they wanted to go for a walk (leaving
me at home) or eat a biscuit (again without me) or
Seven pictures of me in different positions.
anything like that, they spelt it,
and I couldn't spell—not then.
Then how did I know what they
had been up to? Well, a walk
smells different to a biscuit.
When you do full page stuff, it proves you've
really arrived.
Page Twenty-One


ILf
We didn't have many dog visitors, because one dog in a garden was
enough, so it was always a red letter day when Mr. Chips called. He was an
Australian Terrier, small, fussy, but very bright company. I'll admit at first I wasn't
favourably impressed. I watched him jump out of the car and thought to myself:
''Huh! Glamour boy.'' On getting to know him, I found out that in spite of his
pedigree he was a thorough gentleman. My longer legs enabled me to outrun
and outmanoeuvre him, but he took it all with a great show of sportsmanship.
I liked Mr. Chips. One time he came to see me, he brought David, a
Welsh corgie, a new member of their household. David had a super pedigree
and had just collected three blue ribbons. He was related to Princess Elizabeth's
corgie—cousins, I believe —and had the sort of manner which didn't allow you
to overlook the fact. Sometimes I thought it was a merciful providence which
prevented me knowing my relations.
Because David was so well bred, didn't mean he was kind. He did not
even lower his voice when asking Mr. Chips about me. The terrier was telling
him of my recent success, but he hardly listened—just said abruptly: "Yes, yes,
but who is the fellow? What's his background?" I wished I wasn't so sensitive
about my parentage. The trouble about parents is, it's all decided before you
are born and they are either right or they are wrong. If they happen to be wrong,
there is nothing you can do to alter it. Being a celebrity might help you to forget
about it for a while, but in the long run, it only makes it worse. The more famous
you are, the more people want to know who you are and where you came
from. David was pretty sure of himself, seeing his background would
stand up to investigation. As a matter of fact he welcomed a check-up. Had he
been robbed of famous ancestors he wouldn't have come out of it so well. If
I'd let my manners slip, I'd have said he was something of a hog. The amount
of steak, milk and biscuits he put away, was very good going for a dog of his
size. I don't think too many excuses should be made for the fact he hadn't
finished growing. When he was flaunting his newly won three blue ribbons,
he gave me to understand it was because his physical attributes licked all com-
petitors. Personally I'm not so sure, and I'm going to carefully sound out Mr.
Chips when we get a few minutes to ourselves. There would be one dog not
surprised to learn the above-mentioned ribbons were awarded for something as
undignified as a steak-eating contest.
I wished I could handle David as well as Mr. Chips did. He seemed
to know all the answers. Even the super corgie found it a man-sized job to
stand up to the irrepressible terrier. I didn't wish to seem inhospitable, but I
hoped in future, the magnificent David would be left at home when Mr. Chips
Page Twenty-Two


1V1U.O LC71 lC7i L L11C7 1L VV UO LilU. L
the lawn was the most suitable place for the
function. Mistress sat on the grass and held
me. Master removed the cork from the small
bottle, and so that it wouldn't be lost, handed
’
«.c
it to Mistress to hold. Then he carefully counted
so many drops of green liguid into a capsule,
1
%
sealed it, opened my jaws and poked the
capsule into my mouth. It didn't go beyond the
back of my tongue and I spat it out. We tried
again. That time, Master was more persistent,
-m.:
•sBf
J#, *
and chased it around and around trying to make
me swallow it. I popped it to one side and before
Ini % \
he could catch up with it, I'd slid it underneath
my tongue and over to the opposite side. After
it had been around a few times, I got it between
my back teeth and bit. They fished out the
pieces and started all over again from scratch,
but with a slightly different location. The opera-
«r
tion had started near the fish-pond, but finished
up underneath the wattle tree. In addition to
With him was David,
a Welsh Corgie.
came to see me. If you asked me,
which nobody did, he wasn't fit to
lick the terrier's tail!
David and Chips were
reared on strictly "Clinic" lines.
I thought my feeding was very
scientific, but, when all was said
and done, it was just good whole-
some food. The main feature was
all the fancy things 1 had to do
without. They had all that I had,
but, in addition, their diet included
There was Chips, small, fussy, and very
bright company.
I watched the visitors arrive.
special broths, mashes, cod liver oil, Vitamin D,
and things like that. With it all, I don't think their
health was any better than mine, and when it
came to muscles and a gleaming coat, well, I
could have won paws down at any time.
They were responsible, I'm sure, for
giving my folks the idea that I should be
"wormed." Chips and David may have had
worms —probably did: they provided fine sump-
tuous conditions for any worm to make for. But
no self-respecting worm, fond of his stomach,
would go out of his way to live with me. Still, if
being "wormed" was fashionable for them, it was
decided that it wouldn't do me any harm.
As the first step in the treatment, I didn't
get any dinner and no milk was left in my bowl. The idea seemed to be, to make
the worm so hungry, he would come at anything. The following morning, the
household was early astir, as the dose was to be administered to me before
Master left for the office. It was decided that
Page Twenty-Three


& 'V
$ i* Ah' f
Chips was an Australian Terrier
David and Princess Elizabeth’s Dukie were cousins.
the change of site, the method was altered too. After the dose was pre-
pared, a stick was placed between my teeth so that I couldn't bite. As Master
tried to slide the capsule over the back of my tongue, he kept saying: "Go on,
swallow it, swallow it." Suddenly there was a funny little hiccoughy cough—
not from me, though, but from Mistress. Master looked at her in an enquiring
way. She nodded. See-
ing that we both knew
Mistress' weakness for
helping things along with
actions, it was very foolish
of Master to leave her in
charge of the cork, when
both her hands were full
with me, and she had to
hold the cork in her
mouth.
Anyway, I made the
most of the diversion and
slipped free, leaving them
with a sticky, melting
dose of worm get-ridder-
of. They let me go. If a
worm was simple-minded
enough to want to live
with me, it deserved all it
got. Master said it was
lucky for Mistress he
hadn't given her the pre-
pared capsule to mind.
Since then, no one
has mentioned worms.
Chips and I shared a joke. To annoy
the super David, we would yelp —
Ta Ra and
Boornps a Daisy.


r (I
||H| m
0 ' «• :|
p••* ‘ ‘ ■ \
P'i*'* { ; .• v.Jk>JH
ST f""
Right at the big house next door lived my worst enemy. He was a new
arrival; a black retriever. On first seeing him, I thought everything was going
to be perfect. I'd been peeping through the fence as usual (there was a nice
wide gap where the palings were warped and I could get my nose through),
hoping their cat was going to come over. If puss thought I was out, he came
around in the hope of catching fish from the pond. I would keep watch and if
I saw him coming, I'd pretend to be out. It brought results and although I hadn't
actually caught him, I had been very close. Well, this tim.e I didn't see the cat,
but there was his nibs, the most dignified dog I'd ever seen. I put on my best
manner and invited him over to the crack in the fence to talk business. I thought
that if he didn't want to catch the cat himself, he might send it over for me to
have ago at. Would you believe it, he ignored me completely. I was hurt,
but prepared to postpone judgment. He might be a dog in the manger, or, on
the other hand, it might only mean a very reserved
disposition.
One day, when Mistress was near the
fence, the retriever came over. It must be admitted
that when she spoke to him, he was very polite.
She said she thought we should be friends. Well,
that suited me; the next move was up to him. It
was that move that ruined everything. As we had
men working here, the gates had to be left open,
so I was locked up to prevent me from roaming the
streets. The retriever probably realised what had
happened and thought it a good opportunity to
come in and make up to Mistress. I heard her say:
"Blackie, you have such nice doggie eyes," and
.she even patted him. I know, because I smelt her
hand afterwards. I'm sure Littlest One didn't
mean to hurt me so, but I couldn't make excuses
for him. To come around here, when I was con-
fined to barracks, was, I consider, the action of
a cur.
After that, I spent the days thinking how
nice it would be, when I could get my teeth
around his throat. My first worry, was to think up
some way to reach him. One day I nearly had a
minor success. When he was close to my peep
Was I surprised 1
Page Twenty-Five


gone off very well; the man had
'If* IfnBEfe
The most dignified dog Td ever seen.
departed in a hurry. It was
then she became interested in
what he had left behind. In
addition to the usual spade,
there was a wheelbarrow—
that was something new. She
tried to push it, but although
she was big and strong, she
couldn't make it move like the
man had done. That annoyed
her. Shifting the position of
her head near the right wheel,
she gave a twist and a jerk.
The barrow hardly moved but
¥ V > |Hg’-
|m ■■Bp|,J?jj, v- • jaife.
hole, he was incautious enough to turn in my
direction that part of his anatomy which in
nautical circles is referred to as "The Stern."
I'll admit that through the crack it wouldn't
have been a mouthful but I could have at
least got in a nip, when there was Mistress'
voice at my side, sort of cool and frosty:
"Remember an Oodlesnoosh is
always a gentleman, and anyway, if you
must do an underhand thing, at least do it
in a straightforward manner." Sometimes a
high-sounding title can sit very heavy.
They closed the gap in the palings,
but I found a place where I could see over
the fence and that was ever so much better.
A black Retrieve r.
I could watch everything all at once. The gardener always seemed to be doing
something different. There was mowing and clipping the lawn, trimming hedges,
pruning shrubs, raking up leaves, lopping trees, digging over the beds, plant-
ing out the seedlings, watering the garden, looking after the fruit trees and the
vegetables.
The best part (only the gardener didn't think so) was when he was
working in the orchard. Biddy the cow had her run there and regarded it as
her own special property. Intruders were not welcome. She would seem to take
no notice when he first went through the gate, go on chewing her cud while he
gathered his tools around him, and then she would behave as though suddenly
stung by a whole family of wasps. Her head would be lowered, nostrils work-
ing overtime like a pair of bellows on a badly set fire and with hooves beating
the ground and tail lashing furiously, she would rush to the attack. When a few
yards off, she would bring her head up sharply in a tossing motion. The gardener,
not having eyes in the back of his head, always missed that bit. He wasn't very
big but that didn't interfere with his running, and the way he leapt the fence
(there was no time to fuss about with gates) would have left a kangaroo gasping
with astonishment. Safely on the other side of the fence, he would shout a few
well-chosen remarks to tell her just what he thought. Biddy would listen to every
word and I'd say it wasn't the exertion, so much as mirth, that caused her sides
to heave.
If I was right in thinking she did it for devilment, then last time she paid
a heavy price for her idea of a joke. From her point of view, the first part had
Page Twenty-Six


h. 11 ]ri f 1
v ' - . -i . “ ■ ‘ ■*•
»•*.. - ' ■ -w;
- . . .’ n . ’ * .
v ••. ■* *» - v V ..• 4 - >
„ v i ... .'• V *■* • it;.
. . x ■-■ ■>. i- i%.: ’ •
* ' > > .
something else did; her horn, which
she had used as a lever, somehow
became caught and the jerk snapped
it right off. It was dreadful the way
she cried out and tossed her head
from side to side. At first, I thought
vanity was at the bottom of it —no
one wants to go about looking lop-
sided, but she made it sound as
though she was really hurt. For a
long time the barrow was left at the
scene of the accident. I don't think
the gardener was spiteful, only
hopeful.
getting into the garden. After be-
coming better acguainted with Biddy
over the orchard fence, they settled
down to a meal of lettuce and lupins.
It was left to me to bark sharply and
tell Blackie to get up and do some-
thing about it. The way he neglected
his job was dreadful. If it hadn't been
for my interest in the place, good-
ness only knows what would have
happened to it.
ings, Blackie usually slept. When
strangers called, or Biddy had a lucky
break and sneaked into the garden,
you would be pretty certain to see
him sleeping his stupid head off, on
the front verandah, within a few
yards of whatever was going on. M|
Once Biddy had spied two strange H
cows busily eating the ornamental H
palms in the street. How they hap- "
pened to be there, she neither knew
or cared, but in her big-hearted way,
she invited them inside. They rushed
the suggestion and as the big gate • >
had been left open after the car had
gone out, there was no difficulty about
lie liked to show off.
Page Twenty-Seven


Life had been such fun. Games to play and so many happenings to
make us laugh. Then, over-night, things took a back to front turn. No games,
and not even a smile about the place. It all began on a Sunday when Grampus
came; but a very different Grampus. He walked in and sat down before he
spoke. Then he said very little. Just sort of sat with his hands tightly gripping
his walking stick: and his whiskers, instead of lying flat, stood out straight, on
account of the way he had his mouth pulled. Next thing Mistress had grabbed
her hat and coat and rushed off. For days I was left on my own. No walks:
someone would dash in and feed me, and off again. Some nights, Mistress would
come home, and sometimes it would be morning. I tried to figure it out with the
aid of my nose. She had been with Mrs. Grampus, there was no doubt about
that; but there was always another smell too. Something like when the "Manor
House" was scrubbed out, only different.
Then late one afternoon Master and Mistress came home, but they
brought with them such a strong smell of flowers, it was hard to pick
out individual scents. I could smell people; lots of people, but not Mrs.
Grampus. Next day I was so worried about Mistress, I didn't know what to do.
She was alone and had me in the house with her. That should have been
wonderful, but the way she cried, had me at my wit's end. I'd promised Master to
look after her, but what could I do? The only thing I could think of, was to
crawl under her arm and lick her face, and that tasted all salty. Not that I
minded, as I was anxious to do the best I could. When I looked at her, I couldn't
help being sorry. She was such a mess to behold. Never pretty at the best of
times, she shouldn't have made a bad job worse, by so many tears. It was a
great relief to me, when she got things straightened out a bit, before Master
came home from the office.
After that we went regularly to see the home folk, but Mrs. Grampus
wasn't there. I never saw her again. I missed her not meeting us at the door
and saying: "Come in and sit down, I'm iust going to make a cup of tea." It
was all I could do to stop my tail from drooping. Sis made the tea after that,
and they would sit around and drink it and talk. If an occasional silence tried
to creep in, thev would all talk at once, and all would try not to look at the well-
worn tea cosy beautifully knitted by Mrs. Grampus. Everyone pretended that
nobody missed anyone who wasn't there. It was then, I'd sit hard on my tail.
If it refused to stand up after that, I could always do my bit of pretending and
act as though the sitting down had sent it to sleep.
The weeks went by very slowly, especially for Grampus. If the weather
was fine, we would always find him at his favourite place, waiting for us. He
Page Twenty-Eight


\\
■'jSfiP^*
*•'< . . '~+'ijggm ' /
'^■1
;>•*-".« ‘(f f- >sjgL^
i£b*: -. * < >BE!
W*0? : . J ..
i % ~ ■* * „ air in-
. v V > #
would be leaning on his stick as we turned in the
gate, and he would watch us as we walked up the
path to his seat under the tree. I never let his
welcome outdo mine and I would sit at his feet or
beside him, with my head on his lap, and listen
while he talked to me.
It was always of the past he talked and a
very happy past it had been. I'm sure he liked
talking to me. I think there are many people who
like talking to dogs. Perhaps it is because we are
patient, never interrupt, and are not rude, just
because we have heard it all before.
The story I liked best, was about Toby. It
happened long, long ago, when they lived in the
country. The home was out of the town and there
was an orchard in front of the house, where they
grew juicy red apples and luscious pears. Mrs.
Grampus made the fruit into jams, preserves, pies
and lots of lovely things to eat. Grampus had been
away from home and he wasn't up early because
he had been travelling most of the night. Mrs.
Grampus was busy about the house when the dog,
Toby, rushed in barking something or other to high
heaven. He was shushed, on account of the sleeper,
but it had no effect. A smack wasn't any more
Listening to stories at Grampus ' knee.
successful. He merely ducked underneath her arm, grabbed the hem of her
skirt and tugged for all he was worth. When they got to the door there was
no mystery about all the excitement. The orchard was blazing merrily. The fire
had started outside the fence at the bottom corner of the land and the flames
were losing no time in making for the house. Grampus was out of bed like a
shot, and only stopped
to put on his slippers.
He and Mrs. Grampus
grabbed bags and buckets
of water and down the
orchard they raced. For-
tunately the ground had
been recently ploughed
and that made it easier to
get the fire out, it was also
the cause of Grampus
having burnt feet. He
didn't realise until after-
wards, he had lost his
slippers in the loose soil.
At that point in the story
I would hear things I
don't think I should re-
peat. You see, leaning
over a bit of fence the fire
had missed, was a swag-
gie. When it was a toss
up who would win the
contest for the house, he
Gave me many things to think about.
Ibi
iT|s


just went on leaning, looking and smoking and after the battle was won, he was
still leaning, looking and smoking. Can you wonder at Grampus saying things
he shouldn't have said? Especially when he believed wholeheartedly, it was
the smoker's lighted match which started the blaze.
Anyway, Toby came out of it a singed hero. It was nice to know he
lived to enjoy his fame. A few years before his death, when Mrs. Grampus went
to register him, the policeman wanted to know: "And how many years have
you been paying for him, Mum?" "Fourteen," he was told. "Then, begorrah,
we'll pension him off," said the limb of the law.
After Toby, there were other dogs. Collies, Australian Terriers and Silkies.
The collies were called Laddie and Lassie and their children were beautiful.
Lassie was killed when some school children, sitting in a stationary train, threw
scraps from their lunches on to the railway line. Lassie went under to investi-
gate, the train started suddenly and Laddie was left on his own.
I don't think he ever knew what happened to his mate. Soon after-
wards he left home, perhaps to look for her. The police helped Grampus to
search for him and Laddie was traced to a country town, many miles away, where
a swaggie had had him tied up at his camp. From there, they had both vanished.
Grampus thought it only bore out his opinion of swaggies. When the story was
finished, he would bend down, give my tail a gentle tug and say: "But we've
never had a dog like this in the family before." I wouldn't let anyone else tug
my tail, but we were such pals and when for over eighty years you've had dogs,
perhaps you feel you are entitled to special privileges.
That was how Grampus and I spent our time in the sun. He talked
and smoked by turns. As his stories took him into the past, he would forget to
smoke and the cigarette and holder would roll along the seat where he had
placed them, balance a moment on the edge and then topple over. It was then
I did my part, finding them and making sure he had them before someone came.
Between us, we kept the secret of how little those dim eyes could really
see. Grampus was wonderful at bluffing. I think that when it saved loved ones
worry, it was his happiness. Anyway, you don't need very good eyesight to
look into the past, do you?
Page Thirty


For some time Master was going around bandaged up. He was the peace-
maker, David the piece-taker and me the bone of contention, in a dreadful
mix-up we had at our place on New Year's Day. It was a fine way to begin the
New Year —for David. Mr. Chips and David had come with their people to visit
us. It was a great pleasure to have Chipsie—he said I might call him that as he
was my very best friend. With David it was different. He was always so con-
scious of himself, it made me amused. Not that I regarded him as my enemy—
didn't think enough of him for that. When I once said I hoped he would in future
be left at home, it must have been intuition, seeing the way things turned out.
As he had come I had to make the best of it, and was guite polite to him. I let
him strut and skite about his blue ribbons, without pushing forward my successes.
So that I wouldn't under-estimate him, he left nothing to chance and opened his
mouth wide and had me have a good look at him on the inside, just to prove it
wasn't all outward show. He certainly had a fine set of teeth: I didn't tell him
I thought his tongue too long.
To prevent David pruning the corners off the carpet and making them
dog-eared I entertained the visitors in the garden. It was very hot, so we
stretched out on the back lawn and exchanged gossip. They told me the
Sealyham pair—Mike and Betty-Ann—had left town for their station home. With
them, had gone their twin puppies, all excited at the idea of country life. The
smallest one bore a striking resemblance to a woolly lamb—only more dressed-
up looking. I bet the first time it came face to face with a flock of sheep, the wee
ones gathered around in open-mouthed astonishment and admiration. Wonder
what they thought when one inguisitive lamb, with more courage than the rest,
gave an enguiring "baa-baa” and received a mischievous "woof-woof" in reply?
Mike was not in raptures over the idea of the simple life. The wide open spaces
were alright for some things, but to him, there was one big draw-back: you
could roam around for miles and miles with not a shop in sight. When in town,
Mike always made for shops: there was sure to be at least one, where someone
would buy him an ice-cream. Although the stuff gummed up his whiskers and
tended to spoil his appearance, he never could get around to refusing.
Jeremy—Jemmie to his friends —was in the depth of despair over the loss
of his best pal, Holey: the result of a street accident. One of those things that
happen in a moment and cannot be forgotten in a life-time.
Snowball was down to five teeth: had had the others extracted, because
they were poisoning his system. If the Irish Terrier next door, ever dropped
down to the way he was being bluffed, then Heaven help Snowball.
Page Thirty-One


4 2* ijPf •
Wfy k■ **M
p ft ;
Hr
. .
|| H . \
a*^' *' * I
They knew a lot more tittle-
tattle than I did, because I didn't get
about much. There was, however, my
old friend Bob to tell them about. My
distinguished visitors made a point of
not knowing him personally, because,
like me, he was minus a pedigree:
also, like me, he didn't need one. He
often went by the name of "The Old
Seadog." It was really a courtesy title,
as his sole experience of the rolling
deep had been acquired at the baths,
where he lived with his Master. High
tide was Bob's delight, for then the
baths were fuller and he had more
sea to preside over. As he walked the
deck it was grand to see the way
the oldsters touched their foreheads
and said: ''Aye, Aye, Sir.” Residing in
such a public place gave Bob more
friends than any dog I've ever known.
It was a mixed blessing, though, be-
cause he couldn't resist begging for
anything sweet and sugary that his
picnicing friends might be eating: and
they, on their part, just couldn't resist
giving it to him. The result was, he
Mike had a weakness for ice cream, which gummed up his whiskers.
had grown so fat that he had a problem on his paws to know how to waddle
around. His difficulties were added to, when he had to support all that weight
on legs that were not only bandy, but knock-ankled as well.
Bob was old: and long living had
One of the twins resembled a woolly lamb
made him wise. On "stinkies” he was an
expert and had his own method of preparing
them. First he liked the bone to be junky;
every crevice filled with meat. Then, he
would wait patiently until the tide was low,
take the bone to the water's edge, dig a hole
and bury it. It was left there to be covered
by the tides. Only someone very experi-
enced, like Bob, would know just how long
it should be left. How he knew where to go
to dig it up always puzzled me, but no mis-
takes were made. He always liked to finish
up a stinkie meal with biscuits. If none was
available in the usual way, he went to the
shop opposite. The supposedly empty tins
were left on the floor waiting to be returned
to the biscuit factory. He would carefully
examine the interiors, by lifting the lid with
his nose and then peeping inside. It was very
unusual not to find a few biscuit-pieces.
There had been one outstanding time, when
he'd found a paper bag of whole biscuits.
Carefully he lifted them out of the tin and
Page Thirty-Two


£1 -«.w .5 Mj 8 * 1 --.
_ ' , --'j,
”
t; ; / ''
I’ ijp
' ** ' * 4M t
-w *»
*7 % .
carried the packet from the shop, stopping on
the roadway to examine the inside of the bag
and check the value of his prize. Being
convinced it really was a prize, he had
held the bag carefully by the mouth, taking
care not to spill any of the contents and had
carried it home, to be enjoyed at his leisure.
It was my intention to tell them about
Bob's adventure with an Alsatian, but David
roused from a feigned sleep to enquire of
Chips: "Is that fellow still talking to him-
self?” "That fellow,” of course, meant me.
I told him I liked talking to myself; it was
the only way I could be sure of having
interesting company. Before he could think
of a comeback to that, Master came out and
Bob was old and long living had made him wise
wanted to take a photo; family group sort of thing. He suggested an action shot,
I had had enough experience to know that meant moving about and doing some-
thing. I called to Chipsie: "Come on —let's go.” He was up in an instant, but
David wouldn't budge. I asked Chips what was up with "Corgie the twe, tranch-
wantus, ffrostwr." More than anything else, I said it to show off my Welsh. It was
the only bit I knew, but it must have been good by the way David reacted.
Before 1 could explain to Chipsie it meant a fat, greedy, braggart, David came at
me in a fury. That dog had no sense of humour: took himself far too seriously.
Anyway it was no time to go into that. You can't argue with a madman—l
didn't try. We went along the terrace, over the wall, through the garden, across
the lawn, around the corner and back onto the terrace. First time around I did
alright. Chips took short cuts and caught up at intervals. Second time around
I was all out. For a dog with stumpy legs, David wasn't doing so badly. Going
along the terrace in the third lap, I had to keep my tail rolled up over my back
or tight down between my legs. It would have been folly to leave it trailing in
the breeze. David was too close for comfort, so always being a dog with plenty
of common sense, I yelled for help. We all met at the corner —in fact Chipsie on
a short, short cut was there
before me. I could have
sworn he made a snap at me
as I tried to pass, but later he
assured me, it was purely my
imagination. Seeing we had
always been good friends I
thought it better to believe
him. Anyway, his action was
all that was needed to put
He couldn’t resist begging for any
thing sweet and sugary.
It was a relief for him to sit down
and take the weight off his legs.
Sf *' #
legs were not only bandy but
knock-ankled as well.
\r
kv
i »


£
He certainly had a fine set of teeth.
David right on top of me, and if the corgie could have reached where he was
aiming for, I wouldn't have been sitting down for many a day. Thanks to Master
(who had decided there was such a thing as too much action and had dropped
the photograph idea) I was pulled clear, unharmed, but poor Master wasn't so for-
tunate with his hand. David put his teeth right through it and left a dreadful gash
a couple of inches long and about half an inch deep. Master, with true lavish-
ness, painted the place red. So much blood and the shock of my narrow escape,
made me very sick. If he hadn't got his hand between us in the nick of time,
I know who would have been wearing a scar for the rest of their days. It would
have been such an embarrassing place to carry it too. Now on my chest I could
have been proud of it, it would have at least shown that I was headed in the
right direction.
All the doctors in the district must have been making the most of the
holiday, because there was
no answer to our telephone
calls. When Master went
the rounds looking for
someone to sew him up,
they were not at home, so
he had to go to hospital
for treatment. When he
came home, I think he
showed lack of foresight in
telling Mistress all the
details of the happenings.
If he had stopped at the
swilling and swabbing part
it might have been better
for him in the future; but
no, he had to prattle about
the snipping, trimming, fit-
ting and sewing. Mistress
was very interested in all
he had to tell and thought
-As poor Master’s hand bore witness.
■r


'*<•' * -f ■# •
*$ t^t-:
* .A- - jv^iv
•%* • >5 £, _ ™ Zv &gj
s - af 4.
Small and wistful.
LOYAL AND COURAGEOUS DOG
SAVES MASTER’S LIFE.
if that was all they had done, there was
nothing to it. When it came to the use of
a needle, she knew a few fancy stitches
herself, so there was no reason why, in
the future, they shouldn't be independent
of medicoes who didn't want patients.
After that, you've no idea the care I took
over keeping my skin free from holes.
If Master became a personal practical
demonstration, well, he had brought it on
himself.
Once if I had nothing to do I'd
curl up in the "Manna House" and have
lovely day dreams. Most of them were
about Master and Mistress, and me doing
something heroic for them. Then I'd think
how an account of it would look in the
papers, with my photograph I never
could decide which likeness I'd let them
publish—whether it would be one where
I looked a ferocious man-eater or where I
appeared small and wistful, so people
could say: "Fancy that brave little dog
doing all that by himself." The story was
easier to decide:
LOYAL AND COURAGEOUS
MASTER SAVES DOG’S LIFE.
When two men late yesterday afternoon When two dogs, a Welsh Corgie and an
tried to force an entrance into a house That Was the Australian Terrier were visiting at a
from which the occupants were tern- }louse ]ate yes terday afternoon, it
porarily absent, they were put to flight way u wao looked ]ike tJle finish of the owner’s
by the owner’s dog, a valuable Oodle- supposed to animal, a dog of such doubtful breeding,
snoosh, the only member ot this rare mi „ , -e . ■ • •
breed thought to be living. The animal 90. then classification is impossible The guests
with his Master returned to the house mV df©amS seemed to think they would be doing a
and disturbed the men at their illegal , 1 . . service by eliminating him, a job they
task. On seeing the intruders, this LUmeO lIUO got onto with no loss of time. On see-
loyal and courageous dog immediately nightmares, mg tlie visitors’ intentions, the loyal
sprang at the first man, who was hold- • .-i 0 ,, and courageous Master rushed in and
ing a knife. A desperate scrap fob m CdS© iney seized the unhappy mongrel, pu.lmg
lowed, in which the Oodlesnoosh got hold of him clear, whereupon the corgie sprang
was severely injured by the ruffians. fVip rcM and inflicted a terrible bite on the
After putting the dog out of action the TH© IGdi STOiy man , g ]eft hand< The hero who un .
men escaped. The heroic animal, who and Drint©Q , . . , n ’
hi- Mnatpr ’from , . P doubtedly saved the dog from a severe
undoubtedly saved his Master from
serious injury, was rushed to hospital Hilo.
bleeding profusely. Several stitches
were necessary to close the dreadful
gash. Hopes are held for his recovery.
Whew! I couldn't think why such
dreadful things had to happen to me.
rent in the rear, was rushed to hospital
bleeding profusely. Several stitches
were necessary to close the dreadful
gash. Hopes are held for his recovery.
Ferocious man-eater.


One day last summer I had a lovely surprise when I was snoozing out on
the back lawn, close to the fence, sheltered from the wind. I wasn't asleep, just
had my eyes shut, when I heard a 'plop.' That had me sitting up, all set for a
game. When we played, the bouncing of the ball made a noise like that. Think-
ing Master or Mistress must have thrown it to me, I looked about. There was no
ball, but some lovely ripe nectarines on the grass. I hadn't noticed before that
the tree overhanging the fence was a fruit tree. The fruit wasn't perfect, but as
I cleaned up one after another, I thought: "Never look a gift nectarine in the bad
spot. If you do, you'll probably find wrigglers."
When one nectarine landed from the tree almost between my ears, but
a bit lower down, I had to roll on my back to try to wipe it off, and by the feel,
I'd say there was more in it than fruit.
As things turned out, it was lucky for me I'd had a lazy time snoozing,
resting and eating, because the following day was one of my busiest. I was
terribly tired on account of spending so much time standing on my hind legs:
you would think by standing on half your legs you would only be half as tired,
but that's not so.
When I got up in the morning for my usual look over the fence, I saw
something which kept me there most of the day.
At first I thought it was another dog who had been on the losing end of
a fight with Blackie. He seemed a rather big dog, but the way he wobbled around
on his legs, made my heart go out to him. I mean to say, a fight's a fight and
even if it is an intruder on your own home run, you ought to leave him with
enough strength to make his retreat.
As I watched, the wobbly legs folded up and he went down; the head
end being the heaviest, it hit the ground first. If that black-hearted, four-legged
monster of a Blackie was responsible for this, just wait until I caught up with him.
Having once been an under dog myself my sympathy was all with the new arrival.
Would it be possible for me to get over the fence and offer my protection?
Well my help did not seem to be needed, because there was the cow,
doing her cowy best to lift him with her nose. After some fine leg manipulation
he was up again and my eyes nearly popped out with surprise. It was so un-
expected: no, it wasn't a dog, but a beautiful brand new baby calf.
You know, all the time I'd been looking over the fence I never suspected
anything like that was going to happen. The way that old cow acted: all I could
say was, I didn't know whether she was indifferent or deceitful.
Page Thirty-Six


In spite of the Mother's short comings, the babe was beautiful. Their
Mistress, Miss Elizabeth, called it "fawn-like." It might have been: I only know
it had a coat so soft and sleek looking I wanted to snuggle my muzzle into it—
not to hurt it, mind you. It would have taken someone utterly devoid of manly
instincts, someone like Blackie, to do a thing like that. And talking of him,
reminds me of the laugh of a lifetime he gave me: He was just as surprised as I was
at the new arrival, and he took up a position behind the trunk of an apple tree
and looked and looked. So preoccupied was he, it was ages before he saw my
head over the fence. Then, as usual, he had to try to show off. With a "watch
this" look in my direction, he started a careful creep up from the rear, towards
the calf. Mummie cow was busy feeding. It was a serious business having two
stomachs to fill. Blackie was a couple of yards off, before she showed she wasn't
too busy to attend to him. Down went her head, straight at him. I hoped she'd
toss him and held my breath in anticipation of the sight of him flying over her
back, but no, she rolled him over and over along the ground, through grass
seeds, sand and manure: I'd waited many a long day to see such a sight. There
could be but one ending, Blackie got up and ran, with the surplus pick-up flying
in all directions. Well, I laughed so wide my jaws cracked. I really think the
hurt to his pride was more satisfying than the hurt to his hide would have been.
After that episode, the cow showed some common sense by hiding her
child. If I hadn't been on the look out I wouldn't have known where it was hidden,
screened by the tawny brown leaves on the branches lopped from the camphor
laurel trees. For two days, I hadn't a dull moment. There was the regular routine
of washing, feeding and hiding him, to keep me interested. Then, on the follow-
ing morning, I came out of my pleasant dreams to the sound of the most frightful
bellowing: something was up. I dashed to the fence and looked over. Mummie
cow would pull her tummy up, till it nearly touched her backbone, bellow, let
go, in again, bellow, out. As an exhibition of morning jerks, it was impressive.
Then, in a flash, I had it. Where was the calf? I didn't get on to it right away,
not knowing what to look for. I was so absorbed trying to work it out, that I
paid scant attention to the man busy digging. Not until he stooped and picked
something up, did I guess. It was something limp and fawn-like and he placed
it in quite a big hole (much bigger than the ones I dig when no one is looking).
Then, he carefully scooped the sand back into the hole.
I think Mistress knew I was sad about the calf, by the way she talked to
me. Told me what a lovely place it was to rest under a lemon tree on the side
of a gentle slope. How warm and clinging the sand, and soon the spot would
be regrassed with blow-fly grass, which would make a soft buzzing in the gentle
Spring breeze. The beauty of pale golden fruit against the green glazed leaves,
and, over all, the sweet perfume of lemon blossoms.
Personally, I would have dug the hole deeper: it wasn't fair to place so
much responsibility on a few sweet-smelling flowers, even allowing for the fact
that my sense of smell was so keen.
Page Thirty-Seven


Our garden was full of birds as usual, and they were doing pretty much
as they liked. So many of them had homes there, I'd lost count, but the new
birds'-house was still empty. I'd stand on my toes every day and look up to see
if there were signs of anyone moving in. It was a bit late in the season, but there
is always somebody late for everything, so I kept looking. No one could deny
it, the birds were pampered. Free housing, food, water and bathing pool. In face
of all that, they stole my ''stinkies.'' It became so bad I couldn't leave a "stinkie"
out on the lawn for two minutes. If I only wanted to sneak a look over the fence,
I had to take the bone with me, or hide it. It wasn't very safe taking it with me,
because once when I did that, I spotted Blackie and when I opened my mouth to
tell him what I thought of him, the bone fell out on his side of the fence and I had
the doubtful pleasure of watching him eat it.
On this particular day, I'd left my bone for Mistress to mind. She was
sitting on the back lawn under a tree catching up with the darning, which meant
filling in the holes in Master's socks. Master and I were having a game of catch-
ings. He threw the ball, I caught it, and then in theory he caught me. The game
had lagged a bit on account of my partner being winded: Master is well uphol-
stered. While waiting for the game "to pick up" the most dreadful thing happened.
If I hadn't been so happy and light hearted, I wouldn't have tried to show off. The
trouble began by me being so intent on letting them see how good I was. It
wasn't until it was too late that I realised what I had done. A dove flew right over
me, only three or four feet above my head. I sprang; the hold was right; my teeth
closed and I dropped the dead bird at Master's feet. He picked it up and called
to Mistress: "Look, caught on the wing." Guess he too, must have been more
light hearted than was good for him.
That it should have been a dove was especially unlucky for me. They
were about the oldest inhabitants in the garden. The first pair came many years
ago, and then their children, and their children's children. Seeing all the trouble
Mistress took with the birds, she must have thought a lot of them, so that made
me feel sorry for what I had done. Then I saw she was crying, without making
any noise, and when she said in a guiet little voice: "How could you!" I didn't
know if she meant Master, or me, or both of us, but I felt terrible.
Then she carefully put down the darning, went inside and came back
with a little riding whip. She looked at Master, but it was me she came for, and
she whipped me, in a quiet sort of way I couldn't understand, and I thought my
heart would break —"Oh Littlest One."
☆ ☆ ☆
Caught a rat the other day—lf Master ever lets out it was a dead one he
tossed me out of a trap, I'll never forgive him.
Page Thirty-Eight


on to
the new birds' house was taken. j Ssfitft' 3
There was food for all and % .Jjf ”
water for drinking and bathing.
Ev
I Wiw-
i
■PI
HBrV 77r* /><it A: garden
B&[ I provided accotn-
■!* mod ati on for the
birds.


My first burst of fame wasn't a fluke, because I did it again. Struck print
by way of my photo being in the paper. The first I knew of my success, was a
letter from the Editor of a leading weekly magazine.
" The very interesting dog picture forwarded to us we should like to
use. In view of our advanced publication dates, It will be a month
before it appears and we will forward remittance Immediately after
publication." c - j
r oigned,
2. cl. Hot.
It was a bit of a strain waiting the month, but it was well worth it. When
I received the Christmas week issue, there I was, a full-page portrait. When you
do full-page stuff it means you've really arrived.
Like everything else good, there had to be something disagree-
able attached to it. When I mention something disagreeable, it isn't difficult
to guess where to look. Yes, Blackie, was mixed up in it. Remember the time
the cow rolled him over and I couldn't stop laughing? Master was going to
photograph the calf, but he took a photo of me instead, because never before,
had he seen me enjoy a joke so much. You know, I couldn't bear to be under
even an indirect obligation to that hound next door, so what do you think I did
with the money? Well this will rock you in your seats. My bright idea was to
spend the money on a collar for Blackie. This I did, and when the parcel went
off I was proud of it. The collar was a good one: a creamy tan colour. There were
six big brass studs (about the size of a good sized pea) and a heavy brass buckle.
The name-plate was the chief feature. It, too, was brass, two inches long, and
inscribed: —"BLACKIE FROM MANNA," underneath was his telephone number.
To complete the gift, was a presentation card—seven inches long by eight inches.
In the top left-hand corner was a photo of Blackie looking his dopevest, and in the
opposite corner was a photo of me looking my brightest. Underneath was
printed: "LET SPORTSMANSHIP BE OUR WATCHWORD." It was signed with
an impression of my front paw.
Looking back, I think the wording of the printed part was a mistake. To
talk of sportsmanship to him was a waste of time, and it prevented me tying a
tag to the collar, saying: "I HOPE IT CHOKES YOU." When the parcel was done
up, it was addressed to him personally and posted. I kept watch over the fence
to see if the postman delivered it and when he did, I hung around and waited. It
Page Forty


• W- Hi\,wm I m 3E»fl : «<&■•■ A- m/ S
n < w / IG.kJm r^’a/ wk jjp? dp rf , ff jp K
1:\ . t v*' J Vfwl#¥ >- m\ I
' \ ;> , * 1/ far, m~ f
ti ■* , I * /;■■ |*
«v j i rao^
wasn't long, because next door they knew how to behave and never let a kind-
ness go unnoticed. It was Miss Elizabeth who rang up (she shares ownership of
Blackie with Miss May). Mistress allowed me to come in and listen at the phone
with her. Miss Elizabeth said: "How kind and generous it was of Manna to send
such a beautiful present to Blackie. He really didn't deserve it." (How true). "The
light coloured collar showed up so well on his dark coat, but the strap was rather
tight and he couldn't breathe properly" (perfect). "We had to let the strap out"
(A-A-A-Ah). Then in the background I heard Miss May talking to Blackie. "Even
if you think the cow is a thief, you are going to behave decently about it." When
I heard that, I was so mad I nearly bit a piece out of the receiver. Imagine think-
ing that of me, after all the allowances I'd made for him. I didn't have to take
things, I had my own money to buy them. If Mistress hadn't told me, I wouldn't
have known they were not talking about me. It was Biddy once more. She had
stretched up again and stolen the apples off the tree. When her one remaining
horn had caught in a branch, Blackie had tried to nip her heels and get even
for the time she rolled him in the dirt. Did I talk to Blackie of Sportsmanship?
Later that afternoon Miss May brought Blackie in to thank me personally.
As a present, he brought me a jar of Biddy's milk. Mistress was going to
open the gauze door for me to go in and speak to him. After looking at me hard,
she decided otherwise, and I was expected to say "Thank you" through the gauze.
It was uncanny, the way Mistress could anticipate my actions.
There was a place I could climb up. And look over the fence. It was the postman delivering mg parcel.


|, •! / f j T jjj^m
/ hurried into the office ?7*c p / JOr?e ca// for me > I
The strap was rather tight And nearly choked him. A thief . .After all Yd done for him.


MARCH FIFTEENTH .... That is a date which is unlikely to be forgotten
in the history of brindle dogs. I'll admit I'm pretty versatile, but I never pictured
myself as a foundation stone of history, yet that was the case.
It began so simply: well, that's hardly true, as it took no end of thought
and ingenuity before I succeeded in getting out into the street. The idea was to
pop out on my own and catch up on some fun and then back for dinner. First
part went according to plan: there was fun a'plenty. It wasn't until my com-
panions had deserted me for home and something to eat, that I realised it was
dark and I was mighty hungry. I was still very light-hearted: expected to be
punished for my sins, but felt it was worth it: so HOME! I absent-mindedly started
off, keeping the ioys of the previous few hours as much in mind as possible.
Don't know how long I'd been going before it dawned on me I hadn't the faintest
idea where I was. Doing the worst thing possible, I panicked. Knowing the
dreadful time I had had finding a good home in the first place, you couldn't blame
me; and then to have no idea where it was, the chances were, I would never see
Master and Mistress again. I HAD to find them, I simply had to. I ran faster,
and faster. By running far enough and fast enough it seemed it would be only
a matter of time before I found them. Funny, I'd had an idea I was hungry, but
I really couldn't have eaten a bite. A drink? Yes, that was alright: out of the
gutter?—No matter, it eased a hot dry throat. That was fine! How thankful I
was for a good set of racing legs. I used them as never before. They took me
down a long, long road. I'd gone a couple of miles and there was no end in
sight. Then my hair stood on end in horror. What if the road was taking me
away from home! I got off it quickly, rounded the next corner and found it a
dead end. Doubling back onto the main road, I saw a turn-off opposite, and
crossed to the other side. Out of the darkness something whizzed bv. The
draught ruffled my coat and blew dust into my eyes. Some silly lout had nearly
run me down with his lorry. People who didn't look where they were going,,
shouldn't be allowed on the roads! It was better when I went along the block,
and around the next corner. Corners were friendly: they held hope. You could
be within a few feet of the turn and not know for certain, what was on the other
side. There was always a big possibility it would be the key to whatever you
were seeking.
When first I set out, it was adventure: later, my eyes sought nothing but
security. To help me keep hoping, I turned as many corners as possible. On the
second day I rounded a big building and in front of me there was a park. My
eyes found, and my interest stayed fixed on one person, in that space. Grampus!
I hadn't seen him for months and no one could have known how much I missed
Page Forty-Three


him. He had gone away suddenly, just like Mrs. Grampus had gone. Mistress
told me I would never see him again, and now I had found him. It would be
a big surprise for Littlest One and would make her very happy. At great speed
I raced over to the seat where the old man was sitting, with hands resting heavily
on the stick between his knees. He heard my yelp of joy and looked up: 'twas
then I saw it wasn't Grampus. The same white whiskers and kind eyes: eyes
which through their dimness seemed to be looking for someone in the way I
was, but—it wasn't Grampus. The disappointment was terrible, but I rested
beside him for a while and for old time's sake, "pretended.” When he got up
and walked away with the aid of his stick, I did not follow. My attention was
given to two foot-prints in the sand, big foot-prints, belonging to a big man and
neatly placed between each imprint a small deep round hole, where hands had
lent heavily on a stick. I saw again a gate, a garden path, a tree, an empty seat
beneath the tree, and the impression of two feet, one stick, an impression held
by the sand for many days. I closed my eyes and ran blindly.
☆ ☆ ☆
Looking back, I should have had more faith, and not worried so much,
thinking no one would help me. Master is pretty good at organising and Mistress
has a fair idea of what should be done by working with me so much. The family
had been busy. First my photo to the "Sun" with the following letter: —
Dear Mr. Editor,
I'm lost, and It someone doesn't soon do something about It, I'm In for a
terrible time. Had a good home, didn't know when I was well off and like so many
young things nowadays, longed for the lights of the " Big City.”
Now I don't know where I am and I'll never recover my social position unless
you find me pretty soon. I'm wearing a plain brown unstudded collar with a brass
plate and my name —"MANNA"; underneath is my telephone number.
I should have been all Kelpie, but somehow, there Is only a resemblance.
I'm about the size of a fox terrier and brlndle in colour.
Once before you helped me out of a fix, so I'm turning to you as an old
friend. You published a letter of mine In " Wireless Weekly," with seven photos
of me In battle dress. Since then I have appeared in " Pix," seeing the funny side
of life, but now my sense of humour has dried up.
Won't someone please show me the way to go home ?
Mistress has Five Pounds waiting for the good Samaritan who will do so.
Yours In distress,
r //rnntff
Mistress wrote it in my name, and seeing I wasn't there to direct matters
it wasn't such a bad effort.
Well, my friend the Editor turned out trumps and published a large photo-
graph of me, with particulars. It began: "MANNA, PERSONALITY DOG, IS
MISSING." Above the photograph in large printing appeared: "£5 REWARD
FOR MANNA."
Master then took over. He bought as many copies of the "Sun" as he
could get, and set to work. To Police Stations within several miles radius, he sent
Page Forty-Four


4 f|>
V
*’. '. '■' f* ,> ' w^.-.-. t. *-' •’ *'
mStm] ( /jL *^l[Bhr&'^jjllMP*-
fj ¥ idL.
’Twas then I saw it wasn’t Grampus.
newspaper cuttings and an
appeal for police in the dis-
trict to keep a look out for
me. To five large Metro-
politan schools he made the
same reguest. That probably
involved some ten thous-
and enthusiastic children in
sleuthing. For them it was
interesting, exciting and had
£5 attached to it. So it began.
If only all the stories could
have been collected and
written: The day was bright,
sunny and warm, an invita-
tion to all dogs to step out
and enjoy themselves. Per-
haps you think there are not
many brindle dogs: well, wait
until you encourage some ten
thousand children to look for
them.
BRINDLE No. 1 . . . had
risen early, breakfasted;
groomed himself carefully, in
the hope of making a favour-
able impression on some
pretty wench, and stepped
carefully out of his front gate
onto the footpath. When he
heard some half dozen ex-
cited young voices shouting:
'There he is," he hadn't looked up, but when he realised footsteps were coming
pell-mell in his direction he took one startled glance and what he saw caused
him to flee. To this day, he doesn't know what it was all about, but he's still
grateful to the drain, which gave him protection, even if it did ruin his appearance.
BRINDLE No. 2 . . . was waiting with some impatience outside a butcher's
shop for his Mistress to emerge with the meat. The cry went up, "There he is,"
and before he could move, he was grabbed, with eager young hands wanting
to hold him as "their" find. It took a lot of angry explaining by his owner that
the name on the collar was "Peter," and if they didn't let her dog go, she would
call the police.
BRINDLES Nos. 3 . . . and 4 . . . passed each other going flat out in
opposite directions. Several pursuers changed fancies, and retraced their steps,
having to increase their speed to recover lost ground.
On their part the police caused some embarrassment, but on a much
smaller scale. BRINDLE No. 5 . . . had had a hard time wooing his chosen lady.
He'd never had so much competition before and it was only his experience which
had placed him in such a favourable position. He was very happy, could afford
to be, as she was practically won. It was then the big blue car pulled up and
Man's protector stepped forth. No amount of experience or explaining would
induce a very attractive young lady dog, to bestow her charms on anyone wanted
or examined by the police—saw it for herself, hadn't she?
Page Forty-Five


As the day drew on the hunt spread and if you were chasing one brindle
dog and lost it, no matter: another one would be along in a few minutes. To-
wards evening, things calmed down. Word got around, and if you had a pal of
the chosen colour, you rushed around and warned him to keep out of sight.
As for me, I was in a pretty pickle. News of the hunt hadn't spread to
me: if it had, I'd have been awfully bucked, as I would have guessed I was on
the way to being found. I'll admit my speed wasn't what it had been in the
beginning, but I wasn't done when I paused to lap up some water trickling down
a garden path, where a woman was hosing the lawn. She came over to speak
to me. It seemed quite by accident she looked at my collar and when she saw
the name and telephone number she was very surprised. There was no doubt,
I was the dog mentioned in the paper. Until I was in the car being driven
home, I had no idea how dog tired I really was.
People are hard to understand. If I had found my way straight home,
I'd have been punished for going out. When I was away for days, causing
expense, worry and trouble to many people, not forgetting my contribution to
"Brindle History," I was welcomed home with open arms and no questions asked.
The reunion was wonderful, but I promised never to cause so much trouble again,
if I could help it. It was better to return on time and take what was coming to me.
After the welcome, my first duty was to the Editor of "The Sun."
"THE MANNA HOUSE."
Dear Mr. Editor,
Never let it be said, the only time I think of my friends, Is when I'm In trouble.
I'm now out of trouble—tor the moment, but what a heck of a time I've had. Before
I went adventuring, I should have checked up on myself, and then 1 would have
discovered that where my bump of location should have been, the spot was marked
by a mere dent.
Thanks to you being a true friend and allowing so much valuable space to
be taken up by my picture, I was recognised and now I'm home again.
People have done so much for me, I would like to do something for someone
else, so am sending along £5, feeling sure you will know where It is most needed.
Gratefully yours,
'(/ anna
In transit it passed a letter from the Editor headed this way,
14th March:
dated
I acknowledge with thanks your letter of March 13th.
We had pleasure In publishing a photograph of " Manna " with details in to-day's " Sun."
I hope this will result in his speedy return.
Yours faithfully,
(Signed) 4-/. -(-liliton
Editor.
Page Forty-Six


xpenenee
What a pal!
t” approach to
Board
ners ’
‘ ‘ indust
That wasn't the end of the matter, as
Lost Dog
Returns
tinos. editions of "The Sun" for March 15th carried
iikeiv t the message you see at the left.
41 the
New * When the newspaper people had been
(\.urt la ' 30 kind to me, wouldn't you have thought they
arising would have left out the insinuating remarks
[\ c ei[h about my parentage? Suppose it was thought-
main lessness on their part, but it was hitting below
nHe w< the harness belt and spoilt the pleasure I received
Mo from being called a "Personality Dog."
lecial
of the
s e‘sm
Manna, the personality dog,
who disappeared on Saturday,
was recognised yesterday by his
picture in “The Sun” and re-
turned to his owner, Mrs. V
A.ber-
Exten-
will be
(Mr.
r for
Manna, whose antecedents are
shrouded in mystery, was re-
turned by a woman who did not
d with
Miners ’
McKe
accept the £5 reward offered. coalown
“She seemed embarrassed when Fedei
Master had then to unorganise all he
viuse
Ts had organised and notify the Police Stations and
nxation,
1 offered the money, and Avouldn’t
take it,” said Mrs. VV- . today.
“I Avas so excited over getting
Manna back that she had gone
before I asked her name and
address. ’ ’
it nd Wi Schools to call off the search. It took time and in
being the meanwhile so much had happened to brindle
the con dogs, that Brindle Day will never be forgotten.
Comic It was too late to stop my picture and story turn-
L ™ ul -u ing up in England, though. You'd have thought
yea' that they had enough troubles of their own over
there, without having me thrust upon them. We
The had an Airgraph letter sent from London by a
as < con young R.A.A.F. friend of Master's. He and a lot
hoAv of his pals flew over Europe and dropped things
tod by
Labor
' tills
Mrs. vV.M- forwarded to “The
Sun” the £5 she had offered as
reward to be given to some de-
serving cause.
The money has been handed to
the NSW division of the Aus-
tralian Comforts Fund.
t the
iA-ing
ition,
antially
state,
ng off
IN MJSTR K L\A
il time
that went off with a terrible bang. On those trips
like mine and, would you believe it, MUZZLES, too,
they wore helmets
something
only theirs were not to stop them biting people, but so that they could speak to
each other. The letter said the lad had gone to one of the R.A.A.F. Rest Centres,
opened an old copy of "The Sun," and there I was. He was sorry for me and for
himself, too, because he knew what it was like to be miserable and homesick.
Wonder when he sneezed did his muzzle blow off? I hoped he would soon come
back home so we could exchange notes on our helmets and on being lonely and
unhappy.
For a long time, I was an Oodlesnoosh without knowing exactly what it
was. Then I discovered it was not far removed from an Alsatian. When I was the
object of the search, dozens of people were kind enough to phone Mistress and
report having seen an Alsatian "just like the photo in the paper" at such-and-such
a place. So many people couldn't possibly be wrong, but as lam only 17in. high
and weigh 161b5., it's evident I'm only a miniature one. When I first came here,
I was so long and skinny, I looked like a racing dog. Glad I don't look that way
any more. I'm really proud to be associated with the Alsatian breed. They are
such manly dogs.
You've no idea how ashamed I felt about being lost. Made me look such
a nit wit, not only me, but Master and Mistress. Bee, who was staying with Sis
after Grampus went away, came around especially to welcome me home and
brought me some tasty chook bones. When she was coming home to dinner,
strangers in the bus were discussing my disappearance. One opened his evening
paper and announced to all and sundry: "I see those silly cows have their dog
back."
It was hardly fair to blame my family for what I had done. Anyway, Bee,
who, when she lived many miles away in the country, was wont to say she "could
never understand anyone being potty about a dog," wasn't slow to speak up and
explain I was a very special dog. To add to my troubles, Blackie had been in
Page Forty-Seven


here. He must have done a lot of spying to know the minute I was out, and as I
was away several days, he was in here plenty. The place reeked of him, even
"The Manna House" and my bed. Bet among other things he was trying to see
if I'd left any stinkies hidden. I was mad about it and to make matters worse
Mistress thinks he's wonderful, so I sent a letter to him:
"THE MANNA HOUSE. 1
Blackie,
You're a cad. I can smell where you have been snooping around here while I was away,
and don't feel superior about my absence. There was nothing disgraceful about it. I didn t join
a disreputable pack like you did and prowl around night after night making a terrific row and
keeping the whole neighbourhood awake. Mine was merely a health trip and If all the signposts
hadn't been removed when the Jap scare was on, I'm sure I could have found my own way home.
I'm warning you ; keep on your own premises. The more Mistress likes you, the more
dislike you.
f Uatntff
Afternoon tea was being prepared.
1 invited myself and took a biscuit.


The part about him being out with the lads of the village was guite true.
By the end of the third night I was completely worn out. It was bright moonlight
and I jumped up on to my "look-out" every time I heard them go past, just to see
how things were going. Disgraceful.
When Blackie behaved like that —it was normal for him —my fear was, that
I might be placed in the same class. So many people knew of my little escapade
and I had no way of explaining things to them. In response to "The Sun's" appeal,
information poured in from all guarters. Later, I heard Mistress tell how nobly
the children had tried to help. There was one group in particular, who had tele-
phoned from a public box, one agitated young voice trying manfully to make
itself heard above the babble in the background: "Is that the house where the
dog is missing?" "Yes." "Is he a she or a he?" "He's a he." "Ah." Pause while
a conference went on in the background. "We know where there is a nice she,
and we could get him for you." "Thank you so much, but Manna's home again
and we are not wanting another dog." That seemed a bitter blow: anyhow, they
made of the right stuff and soon rallied. "Ah, gee, but Manna's a beaut
dog. If only all this had been about someone else, it would have been funny.
The day after my return, Miss Elizabeth was having a big party at her
home, to help the Red Cross Funds. With characteristic kindness and courtesy,
she rang up and invited me in for the afternoon, saying people were always inter-
ested in celebrities and she thought it would be nice for me to be present. It was
very flattering, but I reluctantly decided against it. Until I had recovered some
of my old form, I thought it better to keep out of sight, specially out of Blackie's.
He would have enjoyed seeing me looking and feeling the worse for wear. Not
that he wasn't already suspicious, so I answered the invitation, keeping that well
in mind. This is what I said:
" The Manna House,"
Saturday.
Dear Miss Elizabeth,
I was very proud to be invited to the Garden Party this afternoon, but
I very regretfully must decline to be present.
Seeing how angry I feel about Blackie being In here during my holiday,
it would never do.
For your sake I would not like to have to thrash him in front of all the
guests, and if he came making up to Mistress again, that is what would happen.
I hope to-day's function will be the most successful you have ever had.
From my look-out, I will be watching proceedings.
No, I'm not taking another health trip this week-end. To go too often
you do not get the full benefit.
Yours,
e UffHHff
P.S. —How long do you think it will be before the watch on the gate is relaxed ?—M.
Page Forty-Nine


1
Between Master and me, there was a manly understanding. He was, of
course, top dog, but he treated me very well: so he should have, the way I stood
by and helped him in his troubles. There was one spot of bother, in particular,
that Mistress started. She went out early one Friday morning, and thanks to the
attentions of the hairdresser she visited, she came home in the afternoon with
BLUE hair. Knowing her as well as I did, I was prepared for most things, but
even then, her appearance was a shock to me.
When Master came home for dinner, I made it my business to be on
hand. As he walked in the back door, Mistress was standing at the table, attend-
ing to the finishing touches for the meal, with the light from above shining directly
on her hair. It was the kind of surprise which should have been presented from
the darkest possible corner and then been brought out into the light very gradu-
ally and tactfully. To have it sort of spotlighted was a terrible mistake. You could
tell by the way Master came whistling along the terrace and walked through the
door, that he was absolutely care free. Then he pulled up so suddenly, he nearly
fell over his own feet and the whistling must have taken all his wind, for he stood
there gasping for air. When he did get his lungs full, it escaped through his
nostrils like gas from a leaky pipe as he murmured: "Ohmygosh." Mistress was
turning around and around to show him all her head. She wanted to know:
"Don't you think the hair stunning?" He thought it stunning. Didn't he also
think it was much brighter; no longer faded and drab? He admitted it certainly
WAS much brighter !
While all this was going on, I could see he was searching feverishly for
an explanation. It hadn't been raining, so it couldn't be the dye from her hat: yet
hair couldn't go that colour all by itself. Then he remembered where she had
been that morning. During dinner, Mistress explained it all to Master. She
couldn't see why she should always look plain, dull and uninteresting and never
do anything about it. When the hairdresser had suggested a rinse to brighten
up her hair and counteract the rusty look where white hairs showed through, it
seemed a wonderful idea. The operator first suggested Henna, but Mistress
turned that down, flatly: she only wanted things brightened up, not made
sensational. So, eventually, blue was decided upon. I don't know if the mixture
was too strong, but it had very pronounced results. The rusty, faded look had
given way to a deep heavenly blue, like the sky on a bright summer's day. Better
still, Mistress pointed out, the scheme was not likely to flop half-way, because she
had been lucky in getting a whole box of powders, in spite of an acute shortage
and she could keep up the treatment herself for guite a while.
After dinner, they sat as usual in their arm-chairs; one on either side of
Page Fifty


jEgm
the fire-place. I spent my time
sharing their chairs with
them, turn and turn about.
There wasn't much room with
Master, because he had the
evening paper opened right
out and held up in front of
his face. Occasionally, he
would lower it far enough to
bring Mistress' head into
view: but only for a second.
Then he'd shut his eyes
tightly and up would go the
paper once more. On the
next day, Saturday, they had
intended to go out for the
afternoon, but when Master
arrived at the office in the
morning, he found so many
important things to be at-
I could see Master was surprised.
tended to, that he rang up to say he was terribly sorry, but they wouldn't be
able to go out, after all.
Sunday morning, my towels and soap were placed ready and the water
for my bath was run. As Master bathed me, he seemed very thoughtful. Then
he made up his mind and called Mistress. He said I was looking in such good
nick that he would like to take some close-up photographs of me in the garden.
He was anxious they should be extra specials and he wanted my coat to look its
very best, so could he use some of the famous blue rinse? At first, Mistress
thought it was intended as a joke, but when she found out it wasn't she said ''NO
in several different ways; but they all meant ''NO.'' My bather said not to let it
upset her: if she was the sort of person who wouldn't do a little sharing with
someone else, especially when it was for an important occasion, and she had
so much herself, well, then,
not to give another thought to
the matter. It ended up as
usual: Master came back
from the cabinet with the box
full of little packets of rinse.
He took off the lid, and asked
did it matter which packet he
used. It was most unfor-
tunate the box should have
been held over my tub of
water, because, somehow,
and I couldn't think how it
After dinner we sat in the arm chairs.
happened, it slipped right
out of his hand and all the
contents went in with me. In
trying to fish them out, the
packets came open. Master
could have fixed me up with
some fresh water, but he
didn't: I was taken out of the
Page Fifty-One


" * v ■ -t /V
JSSkim. : ' ~ 1b^
- ' 5 gR * -
*AXSl' / J-a
»■ iir JS?* .
JL# M ' A & •» jHrJf 4 .
•
2|P ■'
' m .. • , Uw '-J *%
'
BPw
ip JPr&fl*
L£ F -•• a
pW MBS#*. Jm t *j
f iy •’ ji j
I- *• ' £* mwiimI .%
tub saturated with the rinse. Seeing I'd had such an overdose of the stuff, it was
no wonder I dried out a funny purply blue.
Was I glad our back garden was a secluded one. Not that that allowed
me to escape scot free. I was stretched out, with my eyes closed, trying to find
some compensation in the warmth of the sun, when there was the most whole-
hearted laughter you've ever heard. Perched on the Jacaranda tree, were three
jackasses: two grown-ups and one half-grown: probably Pa, Ma and their off-
spring. And the kid was worse than the other two put together. They were
members of the Kookaburra family from next door, where Blackie lived. They
made their homes in the high pine trees and visited our place, mostly for water,
but always with the hope of doing a little fishing on the sly. On seeing me, they
had forgotten what they had come for. Their unkind merriment attracted the entire
neighbourhood. On all sides, birds came popping out of trees and shrubs. It
was a kindly act of fate that allowed me to see Blackie first, when he joined in
the general movement in my direction. Before he could find a peep-hole in the
fence, I was safely hidden in "The Manna House."
All the excitement was not lost on Mistress. It brought her outside and
as I ran past her, she was very surprised at what she saw. It was the first good
look she had had at me after my bath. Later on, when no one was about, she
crept out to "The Manna House" and lifted me out into the sun for a second look.
Seeing that it was because of her I was in such a plight, she should have been
sorry about it, instead of sitting on the terrace beside my home, hugging me
to her and laughing until the tears ran down her face.
Monday morning, Master was scarcely outside the gate, before we had
lots of activity. Plenty of hot water, towels and soap for both of us, with an extra
shampoo for Mistress. It was the only time in my life I really enjoyed being
bathed by a woman. If the truth be told, I don't think either of us was sorry to
be normal again.
Master came home that night with a present for Littlest One: an out-sized
bunch of her favourite Lilac. Everything was homely and comfortable again. No
guestions asked: none answered.
The jackasses came to laugh at me.
I yawned and pretended I didn't care.
I»
V W .g-rw


V ..
Sunday was usually my best day of the week. Master wasn't in a terrible
hurry to catch his train, and he would sit with Mistress on the terrace and they'd
dawdle over breakfast and the Sunday papers. My favourite possie was on the
blind side of Mistress, close to Master's chair, where he slipped me tit-bits from
the table whilst Mistress gave her attention to the news. It wasn't often that the
contents of the papers interested me much, but when Mistress read out of ''The
Sun'': "George, rat-catching dog in a million on staff of big City store," I was up
like a shot to see what it was all about. They had certainly given George a
spread: there were four photographs and an article which read:
v w w «/v \r-"v ■/'
S “PJEOEGE,” a half-breed kelpie dog, has been legally '
registered as an employee of one of our leading
/ City Stores.
Some months ago, George walked
iuto the firm’s George-street store.
Closely observing a set route,
I George:
• Reports for “work” punctually
at 9 am every day except Sunday.
• After visiting the restaurant,
provision and grocery departments,
he trots to the lift.
• He calls the lift attendant by
barking.
• After visiting every floor, receiv-
ing pats from everybody, he reports
h for duty in the packing department.
• His “duty” is catching rats and
he has practically cleared the build-
ing.
• At 5 pm George signs off —and
vanishes down George-street.
Officially recognising George as on
the staff, a plate has been attached
to his collar, inscribed: “George, /
an employee of Ltd.”
To packers Jack Cosgrove, Chris
Hunt and Bert Faulkiner, who first
befriended him, George is a “dog
in a million,” *"
The staff give George a three-
course meal during the day.
Where he comes from and
where he goes, nobody knows.
I'll admit I was impressed. Besides having what I considered something
in common with him, he struck me as being a regular guy, so I wrote to him and
enclosed an autographed photograph. It wasn't until the next "Sunday Sun"
came around that the blow fell. We both appeared in the news as follows.
Page Fifty-Three


• •'
m ** f igMP
■S *- * Jt f
3L-*. ■ ■ j^gdMflHu
§b ■ ? /I JfcvVi*
4;f 4
If there was one thing I'd never aimed at being,
it was "a glamorous lady dog" with or without "a wide
bewitching smile." I had always tried to live my life in
a manly way, and then to have people thinking of me
as a sissy, was a dreadful blow to my pride.
. .... For several days I was so angry about it, I wasn't
EORGE, champion rat-catch- r., r 1 , T , , ,
ing haif-breed kelpie, who is tit company tor anyone and 1 decided that never again
on the payroll of a city firm, has
received his first fan-mail, from
a canine admirer.
Yesterday a large envelope ar-
rived through the post, addressed
to “George (The Kelpie), Em-
ployee Ltd.”
Inside was a photograph of
a glamorous lady dog, with
a wide, bewitching smile. It
was inscribed: “To George,
Good Hunting, Manna.”
On the back of the photograph
was the following letter; —
Dear (!
1 wonder if by any chance We could
be related. I, too, am part kelpie.
Heaven only knows what the other parts
consist of. Like you, I appeared out of
the blue and made a life for myself, but
except for the occasions when my photo
appears in the Press, I live privately.
That means I haven’t as many rats to
hunt as you have, but I have fun with
the few that are around, and get to know
them personally before I fix them.
would I go out of my way to be kind or encouraging to
a fellow being. I'd had my lesson, with humiliation as
the result. If I could have gone to the City, I would have
waited at the shop for George to sign off and then we
could have fought it out to see who was the sissy. It
was my bet that after the contest, he would be the one
who would need pinning up. At the outset, I could think
only of fight: then, thanks to a sense of humour, I saw
the funny side of it and I wondered whether the laugh
was really on me or was it on George. A nice mutt he
would look when it became known he was wasting his
adoration on a tough he-man like me.
The trouble was, when I laughed over the affair,
I didn't want to guarrel about it, so, instead, I entered
wholeheartedly into the joke and posed for a glamor
the May p T l lvfsi! y you°!ong h Td con- photograph with the idea of presenting one to my
fo nu cLe em wheT e the oill’ (TeCl.VTim admirer. The result was so alluring, I didn't dare send
and the ears hear not, may you be re-
warded as a conscientious and faithful
rvant. I foggily yours. Manna.
Manna has appeared several
times in the Press as “the
personality dog.”
George’s fellow employees in-
tend framing Manna’s portrait
and placing it in his kennel as
a “Pin Up Girl.”
it. If my first likeness had bewitched him so much, then
I imagined what the second enticing pose was likely to
do to his blood pressure. It was possible to carry a
prank too far. I also realised that the impersonation was
too convincing for my own good, so I kept guiet and
left the love-lorn George to his tender dreams.
If George was left alone, I wasn't so fortunate.
Everyone seemed to know about my latest appearance in the Press and some of
my so-called friends couldn't let an opportunity like that pass without making the
most of it. Chips got a message through to me to be on the look-out for David,
■ * 'W? v. yfk o G
* Tin -
t ' :
get : %
|||k; jj 'l
who was seeking an open-
ing to present me with a
pink bow for my collar.
With the gift was to be a
big pin (for pinning-up
purposes) and a message
more pointed than kind.
I didn't mind, though. The
more barbs, verbal or
otherwise, he arranged
for me to slip back on, the
better. Their sharp sting
would encourage me to
rise again.
I posed for a glamor portrait.
* /■
v '- s *


I'd been feeling happy, so very happy, I'd been
dancing around on my toes. Perhaps I shouldn't, but I had !
I'd thrown my reputation to the winds and had a most gorgeous i
fight with Blackie. Mistress was bringing me home from a walk,
i
/ lIBt-
XL
%
when he came out of his gate with Miss May. Do you know, 7 danced around on ™y foes
that mongrel Blackie (wearing my presentation collar) was going to walk straight
by and pretend not to notice me. I kept an innocent look on my face until we
were just about level: then I bared my teeth and sprang. If you could have
seen the look of incredulity on his stupid face. I think he's a slow thinker,
because, before he could move, I was in again. He would have run away, only
I held on. That dog's a coward and I'd have cleaned him up if Mistress hadn't
broken the hold and started pulling me along by my harness. My opponent
thought as my back was turned it was a good time to attack me. It developed
into what you might call a running fight. With Littlest One tugging to get me
home, I was severely handicapped. If Miss May had seconded her dog in the
same way, it would have evened
things up a bit, but you could see she
was very inexperienced when it
came to dog-fights. Thanks to Mis-
tress' methods, I hadn't a clear victory, £
but I think I won on ooints. ■
tress' methods, I hadn't a clear victory,
but I think I won on points.
I was yanked unceremoniously
around the back and Mistress flopped mmJk
down on a chair on the terrace and
by the way she panted, anyone would
have thought it had been her fight.
She told me how appalling it was of TBHF ’ ‘
me to involve a gentle little person • " "
like Miss May in a vulgar street brawl kwPg
and then she brought out a towel and
rubbed me down where that drooling Jr ©R
hound had dribbled all over me. J T 'Mr WmtMML
After scolding me for fighting, she f J
looked for possible injuries. As if that Jr-/ f %
coward could mark me. Then Mistress *
brought me one of the best dinners J/fl
I've ever had and
1 ve ever had and v Jr Jpr
1 didn t have to Happy I’d won the
wait for regulation fight.


Jr t *tT It* *?i. 4
-\mSK--. (* # ®f Hp m K L'^jj^4^^KL**^ n) ;jfi^ 1 ’ ,t M¥ ,« W w^» t
time for it, either. I think one of these days, the Irish streak in Littlest One, will
come out on top. Hope it's while I'm young enough to take advantage of it.
When Master came home, he heard all about what I'd been up to.
Master was a sport and as we were such good friends, he naturally believed in
distributing blame fairly. He said if there hadn't been someone in the background,
whispering belligerent propaganda into my ear, it probably would not have
happened. Littlest One was indignant: very indignant: then she laughed like she
always does, and Master joined in: and while they laughed and laughed, I
listened contentedly and in my heart was a wish. I wished that all homeless or
unhappy dogs would one day walk down a sunny street, come to a neat little
house, pause at the gate, and look into the eyes of someone, and KNOW.
THE END.
Websdale, Shoosmith Pty. Ltd., Printers, 117 Clarence Street, Sydney.


1508
02233185


ui
