

Tales for young
Austratia
By
Ernest Favenc,
"Mab"
James amd Josephine Fotheringhame




fhlAv u-
r/luJuCS ~




Tales for Young Australia


PRINCE CHARLIE.
“Coming towards them, mounted, on a beautiful white horse, was the Prince
himself, looking the picture of a gallant cavalier."
“Just in Time," p. 44.


Tales for Young
Austrlia
BY
ERNEST FAVENC
"MAB"
and
JAMES and JOSEPHINE FOTHERINGHAME
SYDNE.V;
£mpspr\ & sor\, Urmited
Netoben/ House,49York St.
Printed m Bavaria.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
All About Dream Island . . . Ernest Favenc ... 5
A Brave Little Gentleman . . Josephine Fotheringhame . 11
“Dickie” “ Mab ” . . . . 19
The Two Fairies Ernest Favenc . . . 27
Poor Toodles! James Fotheringhame . 33
How the Boys at Trundle’s School
Got a Holiday .... “Mab” .... 39
Just in Time Josephi7te Fotheringhame . 44
Piccolomini’s Baby .... “Mab” . . . . 54
Winning His Epaulet .... Josephine Fotheringhame . 64
Jim the Inkslinger .... Josephine Fotheringhame. 72


All About Dream Island
HE Horny Beremitas stood on the shore of Dream
Island looking out to sea. Nobody ever gave
him his full name, but mostly called him Horny.
Horny was one of the inhabitants of Dream
Island, who lived there always; just then he was
doing his work, looking out for anybody coming ashore.
Now, many people go to Dream Island for a short visit,
but nobody stops there for good, only the inhabitants of the
place. I will tell you exactly where to find Dream Island
on the map. It is bounded on the north, south, and west by
the Ocean of Deep Sleep, and on the cast by the Sea of
Morning. It is generally approached on the south, where there
are two little islands called Doze Island and Snooze Island.
Lullaby Strait divides them from the mainland of Dream Island,
but care must be taken in crossing it, for there is a reef of
rocks in the middle called the Snore Rocks. If the person going
across to Dreamland gets into a current which takes him the
wrong side of the Snore Rocks, he is sucked down into Choke
Whirlpool and cast away upon the Wide Awake Sands. These
sands are quicksands, and immediately they are trodden on
people sink in them and lose sight of Dream Island at once.
Nobody goes to Dream Island on the northern side, because
there the country is rugged and rough and covered by what
are known as the Nightmare Ranges, very black and gloomy.
Horny Beremitas looked out to sea and presently saw


two little heads floating across Lullaby Strait from Snooze
Island. The two little heads had bodies as well, and legs and
arms also, for presently they ran up the sandy beach of Dream
Island. When Horny saw them coming he went down to meet
them, first telling a Coconut Jack to come and take his place.
It was a boy and girl who had come ashore, and when
they saw Horny they both began to laugh, for he was
such a queer-looking fellow, being made of pot-hooks and
hangers, like a writing copy. Now, this boy and girl did
not know each other, but just happened to come to Dream
Island at the same time; for you meet all sorts of strangers
in Dream Island. “Glad to see you, my dears,” said Horny.
“How are they all at home?”
“Very well, thank you,” said the children, wondering
how this funny-looking man knew them; which, of course,
he didn’t, but asked all visitors the same questions. “And
how’s baby and the parrot?” he went on. At this the
children laughed. “We haven’t got a baby,” said the little
boy. “We have,” said the little girl, “and can’t he howl!”
“I know,” said Horny reflectively, “he was here just now;
he’s a bald baby with a pug nose; but they never cry here
in Dream Island. They laugh. Now, what would you like
to cat?” The girl felt very offended, but she luckily remem-
bered that the baby had a bald head and a pug nose, so she
thought she’d better not say anything.
“What have you got nice?” asked the boy.
“Well,” said Horny, “there’s blanket-pie and pillow-slip
custard.”
“Is it anything like apple-pie bed?” asked the boy.


“Oh! very much
nicer,” returned Horny.
“I had some myself for
breakfast, with fish —
sleepy-heads they’re
called.”
“Then we’ll have
some,” said both
together.
“Will you have
mattress jam with it or boiled bolster?” asked Horny.
“Boiled bolster, I think,” they both said together.
“Then come this way,” said Horny, “through Bedstead
Square,” and off he set with one on each side of him.
Presently they came to a great white square that was
soft and springy to walk upon, and here I lorny gave them
some delicious stuff to cat, and offered to sing them a song.
So while they ate, he sang, playing a tune by jingling his pot-
hooks and hangers together; —
“When I was a hot-pot Kickshaw,
And you were a Jambaree,
We lived in a patent Rickshaw
In an island over the sea.
“The wallabies barked and chattered,
The kangaroo gave a howl;
The crocodile's tears down clattered,
The native bear used to growl.
“But we smothered their groans with honey,
We chivied them over the hills,
And when we had taken their money
We left them to settle the bills. '


“How did they settle the bills when you had taken their
money?” asked the girl.
“You ought to know that,” answered Horny; “you did it
all, Miss Kickshaw—you and Master Jambaree there.”
“That’s not my name!” cried the children in one breath.
“Yes, it is. Dream Island names. You can’t tell your
own, I bet you ten months.”
“My name’s ” said the boy.
“And mine’s ” said the girl.
“Your name’s Kickshaw,” said the boy, trying again.
“And yours is Jambaree,” replied the girl.
“Told you so,” shouted Horny; “now you both owe me
ten months. Would you like another song?” he went on.
■ “Not just yet,” they replied; “we should like to see the
sights, if you wouldn’t mind.”
So they strolled round with Horny to see the sights of
Dream Island.
They saw the prize mosquito, who was kept in a glass
case, and was four feet high and big in proportion.
They saw where the old dreams were kept in packages,
thousands and thousands of them, waiting to be dressed up
again.
Then they went to the factory where the dreams are altered
and touched up and turned out as good as new. It is no
good describing how it was done, for one has to be in Dream
Island to understand it.
They saw heaps of beautiful dreams, and Horny told
them that they could choose one for themselves for to-morrow
night, and they did.


Then they went to the
boundary of the Nightmare
Ranges, and saw the hor-
rible creatures and birds
crawling about the gullies.
Jambaree wanted to go and
look at them close, but
Horny told him if he stepped
over the boundary and one
of the monsters came after
him, he’d find that he could
not run a step, and all the
time the monster would be
coming nearer and nearer,
and there he’d be, fast in
the same place. So Jam-
baree didn’t go.
“ And now,’’said Horny,
“we’ll go to the east to
the Sea of Morning, through
the Wood of Half-Awake,
and I’ll sing to you another
song; but would you like some more to eat? there’s palliasse
fry, a very nice thing for breakfast.” "they said they would
try some, and Horny told a Marmalade Girl to bring it; and
while they ate it, he sang them another song: —
“If you want to go afloat,
You should never take a boat;
But a nice little bit of thin orange-peeL


For a boat might quickly sink,
Before you well could think;
But our oranges are made of the best wrought steel.
“If you want to try to fly
In the middle of the sky,
Don’t allow them to sell you any kind of wings.
For the proper things to wear
Are a good cast-iron pair
Of goloshes, pots and pans, and other kitchen things.
“If you want to dig a hole
To look for gold or coal,
On no account go hunting for a spade or pick.
For a bit of soft kid leather,
Brown paper or a feather,
Are the nicest things to dig the earth up with, and very quick.
“ Come,” said Horny, when he had finished his song,
“we must be going. "Listen!”
All around they heard a ringing of faint bells; all sorts
of bells they seemed. Harsh bells, sweet-sounding bells,
cracked bells, loud bells, soft bells, and angry bells. They
seemed to be everywhere, the sound rising and falling, now
coming nearer, now receding again. “Hurry,” said Horny,
“those are the getting-up bells all over the world.”
Immediately they came on the shore of the Sea of
Morning, all glorious with red and gold. “Good-bye, Kick-
shaw!” “Good-bye, Jambareei” “Good-bye, Horny!” was
shouted, and the children ran forward and woke up hundreds
of miles from each other. And to this day Kickshaw doesn't
know if Jambarce was a dream too, and Jambaree believes that
Kickshaw was one. But they were both real children.
Ernest Favenc.


A Brave Little Gentleman.
“He has won his way through the smoke and flame,
That gallant young lad with a royal name ;
Bold answer gave to the redcoat that day,
He loved his father too well to betray.’
was the spring of 1746. In the autumn of the previous
year Prince Charles Edward Stuart had landed in the
Highlands of Scotland, and, at the head of the clans-
men, had everywhere defeated King George s men. But
* of course you have read all about the civil war of the
“’45” in your English history, and consequently know how
in the end the poor young Prince was himself defeated, his
gallant Highlanders and he, on Culloden Moor, and how,
after the battle, the Prince and all who fought for him had
to fly for their lives.
Among the number was James Stewart of Brough, a
gentleman who owned the island ofWestray, in the Orkneys,
and who, with twenty friends' of Prince Charles, took boat to
that place to get out of the way of the redcoats. But King
George had sent a ship of war to cruise round \\ estray, to
catch the rebels, and, some of the marines being always on
the island, Mr. Stewart and his friends, instead of having a
good time at the old house of Brough, as they had intended,
were forced to hide in a large cave where the marines could
not find them. It was a damp, dismal place, but the Lady


of Brough, as Mr. Stewart’s mother was called, sent them
plenty to eat and drink, and by-and-by a storm came on
and drove King George’s war-vessel with every marine on
board far away from the island of Westray. Then, at night,
when all was still, the poor gentlemen in the cave walked
quietly up to Brough and stole into the laundry, which
stood a little apart from the house, and which the Lady of
Brough had furnished with beds and roaring fires, and a big
store of provisions. The presence of her son and his com-
rades was a secret that old Mrs. Stewart only confided to
a couple of faithful servants, for she was afraid that, should
King George’s men get to know, they might burn down the
House of Brough —and so they did, as you shall presently
hear.
Now, there were two children at Brough, a boy and a
girl —Archie Stewart, a handsome, sturdy nine-year-old, and
Isabel, his cousin, a sweet little maid of five. Isabel had
neither father nor mother, only “Gran,” —the kindly old Lady
of Brough. But Archie, although he was motherless, had a
father “away fighting for bonnie Prince Charlie,” as the little
fellow used to say proudly. He didn’t dream that that father,
Mr. James Stewart, was hiding from his enemies in his own
laundry, and the Lady of Brough, who doubted his discretion,
was anxious that her grandson should be kept in ignorance
of the fact.
However, Archie was a restless little chap, always prowl-
ing around where he was not wanted, and he couldn’t under-
stand why the laundry should be kept shut up when hitherto
he had had the run of it. Accordingly, one day, his curiosity


getting the better of him, he poked his finger through the
hole in the door from which the handle had been removed,
lifted the latch, and peeped in. He did get a fright. Close
by the fire sat his father, wearily leaning his head on his
hand, and looking, oh, so sad. But his friends were having
a real good time. Their swmrds and cocked hats were flung
on the ironing-table, and they were drinking home-brewed
ale, and smoking long clay pipes.
Archie never exactly knew r how he managed it, but he
closed the door noiselessly and w r as on the point of running
away when a hand was laid on his shoulder, and turning
quickly, 10, there w r as his grandmother.
“Archie,” said the Lady of Brough, after she had led
him into the garden, “Archie, now tell me true what you
saw ? in the laundry, and I’ll give you a shilling. (She wanted
to find out what he had seen.)
“I didn’t see anything, Grannie,” quoth Archie stoutly.
But his grandmother was not satisfied.
“You shall have a half-crown if you tell,” she said
persuasively. Ihe boy, however, only shook his head.
“A whole crown! come, Archie, and the old lady,
opening her purse, produced the big silver piece. Archie
pushed it away indignantly, his eyes filling with angiy teais,
as he said, “You don’t trust me, Grannie; you think ’cos
1 saw my poor father and the others that I can’t hold my
tongue. But you forget, Grannie, that though Im a little
chap, I’m a gentleman, and gentlemen dont tell tales.
His answ-er charmed the Lady of Brough; she begged his
pardon, and took him into her confidence. Poor Archie! his


bright hazel eyes filled with tears on hearing that King George
had set a price on “bonnie Prince Charlies” head, and how
all who had followed the Prince were in danger of their lives.
The laundry was no longer a safe refuge for her little boy’s
father, she told him; his comrades and he must return to the
cave so soon as darkness fell; for King George’s warship was
again in the offing, and the marines might come down on
Brough at any moment.
This was terrible news for the little gentleman. How-
ever, putting a brave face on it, he begged Grannie to allow
him to bid his father good-bye before that dismal cave again
swallowed him up, and the Lady of Brough hadn’t the heart
to refuse. So, in the gloaming, after Mr. Stewart’s friends
had one by one stolen away to the cave, Archie Stewart
opened the laundry door for the second time that day, and
in a moment was clasped in his father’s arms.
He must be a brave lad, Mr. Stewart said, “help Grannie
all he could, and take care of little Isabel.” And Archie pro-
mised, gulping down the great tears that would well up, for
only the Blessed Lord knew whether he should ever again see
the gallant father he loved so well. Then Mr. Stewart hur-
ried off to join the others, and I am glad to be able to tell you
that, a smuggling lugger coming along that night, his friends
and he took passage in her, and were safely landed in Holland.
But Archie, so soon as his father left him, went slowly
indoors and up to the nursery, where Isabel was sobbing her
heart out in her little cot; for nurse had made off to the
servants’ hall, taking the lamp with her, and alone in the dark
Isabel was in deadly fear of the “bogey man.”


“You poor little girl,” cried Archie, “ what a shame of
nurse!” and he climbed into the cot, put his arm round his
cousin, and petted and comforted her until she fell asleep.
A minute later, and he too had drifted into dreamland, with
Isabel's plump little
hands holding him
tight.
Tick! tick! tick!
went the great clock
on the stairs. Ten!
eleven! twelve! it had
chimed them all. Yet
the children still lin-
gered spellbound in the
Land of Nod. Indeed,
so sound were their
slumbers that they did
not hear the tramp,
tramp of the marines,
nor the clang of their
muskets as they groun-
ded arms on the paved
court below, neither
the cruel command of
the red-coated captain
to burn the house over the head of the rebel, Lord of Brough.
Suddenly, however, both children awoke, half suffocated
by the dense volume of smoke pouring into the room. The
crackle of the flames alow and aloft, and the shouts of the


marines struck terror into their little hearts. Isabel shrieked
and clung to Archie, who, brave boy, putting aside his own
fearfulness, remembered only his fathers charge, “Take care
of little Isabel/' Simple enough words, but the thought of
them made a hero of the nine-year-old. “Don’t cry, Isabel,”
he begged; “I’m going to carry you pick-a-back downstairs,
right out of the smoke;” and he kept his word. But was
there ever such a pick-a-back ride? The great oak stair-
case was on fire. The fierce flames hissed and spluttered.
Yet step by step, his precious burden on his back, Archie
Stewart won his way to the foot, then one bold run across
the hall, and Isabel and he were in the open —safe! They
had fallen against Grannie, who, to be sure, was guarded by
two marines, but who nevertheless contrived to gather her
bairns in her kind old arms.
One moment Archie’s head rested on “Gran’s” shoulder,
the next he was dragged away by the captain of the marines;
for this officer, enraged at finding Mr. Stewart had escaped,
had forbidden a rescue of the children until such time as the
Lady of Brough should discover the hiding-place of her son.
But Archie having meantime saved his cousin and himself,
the officer determined to wring the required information out
of him. “Boy,” he demanded sternly, “boy, where did you last
see your father?” There was no reply. Archie looked, not
at his questioner, but at his grandmother, in whose eyes he
seemed to read his own declaration—-“ Gentlemen dorit tell
tales!" So, on the captain repeating his query sharply, Archie
was ready with his answer —“You have no right to ask me,
sir; neither will I tell you.”


A bold rejoinder, which cost him dear. Snatching a lighted
match from a marine, the enraged officer seized Archie’s wrist
with one hand, while with the other he thrust the match
between the little fellow’s fingers and actually held it there until,
unable any longer to bear the pain of the burning, Archie
Stewart reeled and fell prone 1 at his persecutor’s feet.
The brutal captain had exceeded his orders,- and the pale
face of the unconscious boy perhaps reminded him of the
fact.
Be that as it may, he very soon took himself and his
redcoats off, nor were they any more seen at Brough.
Now, when Archie Stewart came to himself, he was lying
on a bed in the laundry. Beside him knelt little Isabel,
crying quietly the while she kissed his well hand —the poor


burnt one had been tenderly dressed by the Lady of Brough,
who hovered near.
“Grannie,” he cried, starting up, “Grannie, I didn’t tell
that soldier man where my father was, did I?”
“No, laddie, that you didn’t.”
“I citn glad; you see, father told me to take caic of
Isabel, and to help you all I could, and I tried—l did try.”
“Like a brave little gentleman,” said Grannie, and folded
him to her heart.
Ten years later Archie, having re-built the old house of
Brough, procured a pardon for his father, and brought him
home. Then he went soldiering, a handsome ensign in that
famous Highland regiment, the Dim, or “Black
Watch.” Neither did he get killed, but by-and-by returned
to Brough covered with medals and glory.
Little Isabel had waited for him, so there was a great
wedding, and you know the rest. Archie and Isabel lived
happy ever after.
Josephine Fotheringhame.


“Dickie.”
Chapter I.
«NTIL he was eight years old, Dickie Selway’s life
was of the brightest, but, just after his eighth
birthday, one awful morning he was told that his
dear, dear Daddie who loved him so well had
\f gone to that bourne whence no traveller ever
returns. It was dreadful to think that the cheery voice was
stilled for ever, and that only mother was left to love him
and look after him—for little boys, I am afraid, are prone to
selfishness, and think only of their own griefs. So he never
thought of his poor mother's loneliness; his little heart only
ached for himself. But we must not be too hard on Dickie,
for this was his first grief, and he had many more to bear
before his short life was finished.
It was well that Dickie’s father did not know before
he died that his two beloved ones would, throusrh the
o
treachery of others, lose nearly all the comfortable little
income he thought he had secured for them in case of that
happening which did. Dickie, however, was too young to
understand such things, and used to wonder why they lived
in such a wee, wee cottage and kept only one maid. Nor
could he understand why his mother had suddenly taken a
distaste to such luxuries as chickens, fruit, &c.


Poor mother! so long as her boy had not to be deprived
of any of his usual comforts, she cared not for herself. And
Dicky never suspected this, for he was only eight, you know,
and although he loved his mother dearly, he never imagined
that her grief for the loss of his father was as great as his.
Why, did he not cry every night when he went to bed, and
did not his mother say all she could to comfort him, until
at last her gentle voice would lull him to sleep? How was
he to know that it was only after she was quite certain he
was asleep that she would give way to her own grief? and
there was no loving voice to soothe her to sleep.
But after a year had passed away, Dickie had ceased
to cry every night, and it was only when he had a sudden
reminder of his father that his eyes would fill, and his
lips tremble. This was only natural, for children do not
grieve for ever; it is only when people grow old that sorrows
remain with them.
Chapter 11.
One day Mrs. Selway was feeling anxious, as the usual
hour for her boy’s return from school had passed —still no
Dickie. At last, oh, horror! there was the schoolmaster
coming to tell her something about Dickie.
“Don’t tell me he is dead —don’t, don’t, dorit /” she
pleaded.
“No, he’s not dead, only hurt —rather badly hurt, and
I want you to try and bear up, for they are bringing him
now.”


So the poor mother showed a brave face to her darling
when they brought, him in and laid him on his little bed.
Not even a question was asked until the doctor who had
accompanied the boy home turned to her and said, “My poor
lady, you have indeed much to bear—but believe me, I will
do all in my power to save him for his poor father's sake
who was a good friend to me.”
Needless to speak of the agony of that night; but in the
morning when the doctor came, he said Dickie would not
die—not yet. He did not tell the mother then that Dickie
would never run about again, though he knew it—yes, he
knew it.
The accident happened in this way. When Dickie was
leaving school with his companions, some of the bigger boys,
instead of opening the gate, vaulted over it. Dickie, who
was always ambitious to do what the older boys did, tried
to jump over the gate too, but his little chubby legs failed
to carry him forward, and he fell back with a great thud
and injured his spine for ever.
Now, his mother soon found that in order to obtain the
medicines and additional comforts for the invalid, something
must be done to swell her scanty purse. The question
was— what? Yet there was an answer. Before Mrs. Selway
was married she had been a very clever actress. But how
could she, weighed down by grief as she was, go back to
the old life? Still, it would mean luxuries for her boy, and
he need never know what it cost her. So after a mighty
struggle with herself, the little mother went forth, and inter-
viewed the different managers; the end being that she soon


got an engagement. Dickie at first rebelled at being left so
much with no one but the nurse to look after him. But lying
in a sick-bed gives one time for thinking, and one day when
he had been particularly fractious, his mother forgot to hide
her look of pain as she kissed him good-bye before going
to her duties. Now, that look haunted Dickie, and it was
only just before his mother's usual time for coming home
that he came to the conclusion that her life wasn’t a bed of
roses. He had been feeling all that day how nice it would
be if the big strong arms of his father were there to carry
him about.
“I wonder now if mother ever feels sad like I do when
she comes home and there is no Daddie? I’ll ask her to-
night, I just will,” thought Dickie.
Accordingly when just before midnight the gentle form
walked up to Dickie’s couch, and kissed him he said, “Mummy
dear, don’t you never feel sorry when Daddie isn’t here when
you come home?”
One sharp look of surprised agony on the gentle face,
and then—oh! then, such heart-breaking sobs shook the little
mother that Dickie cried, “Oh, mother, I didn’t know you
felt it so. I never knew you felt things at all, ’cause you
always smile so. Poor mother! I ought to have known you
were lonesome same as me.” Then the mother and son
lay locked in each other’s arms till morning broke.
Poor little Dickie! it was hard to see all his companions
at play and to feel that he would never again join them,
for now it was known that before very long Dickie must
follow his father. Thus it became Mrs. Selway’s sole object


to make his life as happy as possible whilst she had him
with her, and, now the truth had come to the boy that his
mother had been for the past two years working and suffer-
ing silently, he too tried his best to make light of his sor-
rows for her sake. It was quite beautiful to sec him watch-
ing his mother preparing for her night’s work. He would
remind her to take an extra shawl to protect her against
the cold, and would playfully declare that he was quite
longing to be left alone as he wanted to read the pretty
story-book the scene-shifter at the theatre had sent him.
This scene-shifter had known his mother in her bright days,
when she had done him a kindness which he had never for-
gotten. He was only a scene-shifter, but he had a grateful
heart. Sometimes, however, Dickie had a struggle with him-
self. One day when his mother was away at rehearsal, a
friend dropped in to spend half an hour with him.
“Look here, Dick,” he said, “I went to the circus last
night, and oh, my! it was grand.”
“Tell me all about it,” cried Dickie eagerly.
“Why, there was ten horses, five elephants, a monkey,
and a man who dived from the roof right down into a net
and when he touched the net he bounded up again and fell
on his feet. Oh! it was fine!”
“Yes, yes, go on; tell me more.”
“Well, then, there was the band, and the lions in the
cage, and —just fancy, Dick—two clowns!”
“ Two clowns, ” murmured Dickie, when, without further
warning, his flushed little face was buried in the pillow, and
big scalding tears forced their way down the wasted cheeks.


Two clowns! Why, when last Dickie was at a circus there
was only one clown, and that was delightful, so what must
two clowns be! Oh, it was hard to think he would never
see a circus again.
At sight of the tears his entertainer beat a hasty retreat,
with a vague feeling that unintentionally he ,had brought
some bitterness to the little sufferer.
But mother would be back soon, and she mustn't know
that he felt bad about the circus, so Dickie dried his tears,
choked back his sobs, and was pretending to read very hard
when she came into the room. He looked tired and wan
the mother thought, as, kissing him, she left him to put aside
her bonnet. But, on returning to the room she was re-
assured, for Dickie had dropped asleep with a sweet smile
on his face, for he was dreaming of the circus and the two
clowns.
I ■ : : ' ■ i ■ ..... ■ ■ -
Chapter 111.
V • ■ ; f
I have but little more to tell about Dickie. His pain
was not great towards the end, and he felt happy in know-
ing that he was able through little • thoughtful ways to make
his mothers burthens lighter. One thing the mother prayed
might be spared her, and that was when the time came for
her darling to go that she might be there on the spot and
not away acting her part at the theatre.
But it was not to be, for, one night when she was en-
acting the part of a witch, the messenger came and beckoned
her off the stage. As she flew past them all in her hideous


paint, wig, and witch’s dress the old scene-shifter saw and
understood, and his heart was heavy for the brave little
woman. His kind hands placed her in a cab, for time was
precious now, and in a few moments the grief-stricken mother
was at the bed-side of her boy.
Poor Dickie lay with his blue eyes staring at the ceiling,
and when he heard his mother’s footstep he could only
whisper, “Come near me, mummy, but —I —can’t —see —
you.”
“Thank God for that,” murmured the heart-broken mother,
as the tears, which would no longer be kept back, rolled


down her cheeks, washing the paint off in their course, and
looking as they dropped on the snowy quilt like “tears of
blood.”
“Mother.”
“Yes, my love.”
“May I tell father you will come soon?”
“Yes, oh! yes."
“Then we will be all three together again, won't we?”
For answer the poor lonely mother covered his dear face
with passionate kisses and murmured loving messages to the
one they both held dear. Only a few moments more and
the little white face was quite, quite still. But the mother
sat on in her witch’s dress beside her dead darling, and
when they tried to lead her away she motioned them off,
so they left her alone with her sorrow.
Dickie and his father had not very long to wait. A
merciful Providence took pity on the sorrowing mother, for
death paid the house a second visit that night. In the
morning they found her with her tired head resting beside
Dickie’s—quite dead.
A shabby man may yet be seen tending the flowers
which bloom over the three graves. It is the grateful and
tender-hearted old scene-shifter.
“Mab,”


The two Fairies.
HE was a melancholy little Australian fairy, and was
■ Wry sitting on the leaf of a water-lily bemoaning her
loneliness. All her friends and relations had gone
away, frightened by the noise of quaitz-ciushing
<xff machines, dust from travelling sheep and cattle,
and all the annoyances of civilisation. But the little fairy
was very fond of this cool lagoon, with its fringe of water-
lilies, and, as it was in a quiet part of the countiy, she
stayed there after all her companions had left, and very
miserable she felt.
She was a pretty little fairy, although quite black, and
as she sat there rocking on the big leaf, she wondered what
she could do to amuse herself. Looking wearily around, she
was aware of a strange figure advancing towards her. It
was about her own size, but quite white, with beautiful gauze
wings and bright golden hair. Although the Australian fairy
did not know it, it was an English fairy. The two fairies
looked at each other for some time, then the English fairy
skimmed across ‘the water and seated herself beside her black
sister. “Do you belong to this countiy? she said.
The Australian fairy nodded and asked in her turn where
the other came from.
“A lone, lone way from here, from another country,
o* o J
was the answer. “I went to sleep in a flower, and a little
girl picked the flower and pressed it between the leaves of


a book. So there I was, a prisoner, for the book was never
opened until they got out here. Then I escaped.”
“Do you want to go back?” asked the Australian. The
English fairy sighed. “Because,” went on the other, “you
might stop here with me —I’m all alone.”
The English fairy looked around. “It’s a pretty place,”
she said, “but what are we to do with ourselves?”
“Oh, we’ll have lots of fun. We will go and stir the
'possums up; they get so mad at being awakened in the day-
time. Then we’ll catch locusts and make them fly about
with us; and there’s a bear up that tree; we’ll throw sticks
at him until he cries—he can cry just like a baby.”
The English fairy looked rather scornful. “In England
fairies don’t play those tricks; the elves and sprites do some-
times.”
“What are elves and sprites?”
“Oh, they are rough sort of creatures, but as long as
you keep them in their proper place, they are right enough.”
“And what do fairies do in England?”
“Why, we dance through the summer nights, and drink
dew, and go and whisper dreams to good people when they
are asleep; and in winter we paint the windows with frost,
and float about on snowflakes.”
Ihe poor Australian fairy looked very puzzled, for she
had never seen frost or snow. “That sounds nice,” she said.
“And then,” went on the other, “there are the elves
and sprites I told you about, and gnomes, and pixies. They
all come to the woods at night, and if there are no stars
visible, the glow-worms light us.”




“We have fire-flies here,” said the black fairy, “but it
must be delightful to have so much company.”
“This is very pleasant just now,” returned the other, as
a wind rippled the water and rocked them about; “but
what do you do at night?”
“Generally I hide.”
“You hide?” repeated the white fairy in astonishment.
“Yes; there’s a bunyip lives in this lagoon, and at night
it comes out and walks about. Then there’s a debbil-debbil
besides, and I am frightened of it. Fortunately I am black,
so they cannot see me well, but they would sec you at once.”
“This is very shocking,” remarked the English fairy;
“what had I better do?”
“I know of several nice places to hide, and I will keep
in front of you always; perhaps you will get black like me
presently.”
“I hope not,” replied the English fairy; “I would sooner
be eaten by the bun whatever you call it.”
The rest of the day the two fairies spent together, flying
about the lagoon, dipping into the cups of the water-lilies,
and telling each other all about their past life. When the
sun went down the Australian fairy led the way to a hole
in a big gum-tree, into which they could just creep, and the
black fairy lay at the entrance so that if the bunyip or the
debbil-debbil looked in they would not notice anything.
The English fairy did not sleep very well, for there
were so many strange noises about, and if a cow or a horse
came near the tree feeding, she thought it was the bunyip,
and trembled all over. So the black fairy held her tight in


her arms until the sun rose, and they went out to get their
breakfast from the flowers. “Would you like to go back
to England?” asked the Australian fairy.
“I would give anything to go,” replied the other; “its
not a nice place for fairies out here.”
“The other day,” went on the black fairy, “I was in
an orchard, and they were packing some fruit in cases, and
I heard them say that it was going to England; I remember
the name. Now, don’t you think you could get into the
case with the apples, and so go to your own countiy?
“It would be delightful, but”—and the English fairy


hesitated —“you would be all alone again.” The two fairies
looked at each other, for they had grown very fond of one
another.
“May I go with you?” said the Australian fairy,.
“I should like it of all things,” replied the English fairy.
Without more ado they flew to the orchard where the
men were packing apples, and very soon were nailed snugly
down in a case. Shortly afterwards their journey commenced,
and for some time it was very pleasant; then it began to
get colder and colder, for they had been put in the chilling-
chamber of a steamer, and the poor Australian fairy thought
she was going to die.
But the English fairy, who did not mind cold, took her
in her arms in her turn, and so kept her warm until they
both fell fast asleep, and did not awake until they were
tumbled out at the docks in London. Fortunately it was
summer-time, so they were warm, although very hungry.
Presently the case was opened in its turn, and the two
fairies came out and floated away to some beautiful woods
the English fairy knew of. There the Australian was presented
to the King and Queen of the fairies, and, being the first
black fairy to visit England, she made quite a sensation, and
was the belle of that season.
“Look here,” said one of the men who was unpacking
the fruit, “these two apples look as though somebody had
been biting them.” The other men looked, but none of them
guessed that two fairies had made their meals off them during
the first part of the voyage from Australia to England.
Ernest Favenc.


Poon Toodles!
- -
EYi y°u sleepers! Show a leg! Turn out there,
s -| if you want any dinner. It’s past eight bells,”
]ld££cl shouted Toodles, one of the starboard watch
aboard the good ship Jane , rolling down to St.
Helena, homeward bound from Sydney to Liverpool. There
were ten of us middies, and we all lived together in a house
abaft the mainmast, called the half-deck.
Toodles (nicknamed so for being so small for his age)
was the favourite on board with everyone, from the captain
to the cook, although scarcely a day passed without his being
in some sort of trouble, through his habit of playing tricks
on everyone. But who could be angry long with dear old
Toodles!
Though none of us knew how dear he was to us until
we had lost him. Old Blowhard, the second mate, used to
say, “He is full of devilment, but his heart is in the right
place, and there’s the making of a good seaman in him.”
I quite agreed with him, for Toodles was my chosen
messmate.
“Come on, chum, let’s get the dinner down,” shouted
Toodles, this time addressing me.
So off we went to the galley, and on arriving there,
n


found we had it all to ourselves, for the “doctor” (cook)
had evidently gone aft to get something from the steward.
An elegant odour of roast duck filled our nostrils, which was
a bit too much for Toodles, for he exclaimed, “How would
you like to have one of these for your dinner, old man,
instead of that beastly salt pork?”
And Toodles coolly lifted a cover off a dish, revealing
a pair of ducks all ready to be passed aft to the cabin table.
“Aren’t they a pair of beauties?” he continued, “and
by the holy sailor, I quite forgot that it was your birthday.
Come, I’ll make you a present of these ducks. Here you
are! Quick’s the word! Off to the half-deck with them,
and I’ll stay behind and fix things up, and be with you again
in a second.”
Ten minutes afterwards, every scrap of duck had dis-
appeared, as if by magic, and didn’t we enjoy them! The
only trouble was there was not half enough. JVe should
have liked one each.
Shortly after two bells (one. p.m.) old Blowhard came out
of the cabin, and sung out, “Lay aft here, all you youngsters
—the captain wants the lot of you in the saloon.”
We would much rather have been excused, but as there
was no help for it, in we went, caps in hand, trying to look
as if we had never seen a duck in our lives. By the Lord
Harry, never shall I forget the sight that met our eyes.
There sat the captain at the head of the table, looking as
black as thunder, and in front of him the dish that oueht
to have held the ducks, but now what do you think was
there ?


Nothing less than one of the cook's old boots! For
Toodles, to make up the weight of the ducks, had substituted
the first thing that came to hand; while the cook, in bliss-
ful ignorance of the trick, had passed the dish to the steward,
who had placed it on the table, thinking it was all right, so
that the transmogrification was only discovered after the
captain had given the order to remove the covers.
“Now,” yelled the skipper, “which of you youngsters
has dared to play this trick?” pointing to the old boot.
You may be jolly sure he got no answer; we all held our
tongues.
o


“Very well,” says the captain savagely, “I’ll punish you
all until I find out the culprit. Now listen ” (as if we weren’t
all listening), “not a mother’s son of you will ever know
what it is to have a watch below until I find out who stole
the ducks, and when I do find out, I'll make an example
of him that he won’t forget in a hurry. That will do; go
on deck and get on with your work.”
Out we bundled, but when we got on deck I noticed
that Toodles had stayed behind, so I sneaked back, and,
listening at the door, heard the captain say, “So you are the
thief, eh, Master Toodles! Did no one help you?”
“No, sir, I did it all by myself.”
“And who helped you to eat the ducks?”
“Please, sir, I won’t tell you.”
Well, I couldn’t stand it any longer, so in I went and
said, “Please, sir, I helped him.”
“Oh! you did, did you!'’ said the captain; “and pray
how many more were in it?”
“No one else, sir; only Toodles and I.”
“Very well, 'foodies and you will have to pay the piper.
Mr. Blowhard, take these young thieves on deck and have
them branded ‘Thief’ on the most conspicuous part of their
bodies, and at tea-time send them aloft on the mizzcn-royal
yard, and keep them there until I call them down.”
Accordingly old Blowhard took us on deck, called a couple
of hands, and as we had on white duck pants, they painted
“Thief” fine and large on the seat of them.
“ You’re fixed up,” said he, “and now off with you, and
at two bells” (five o’clock) “up you go to digest the ducks.”


Well, two bells had just gone, and Toodles and I were
on our way aloft, when crack! the mizzen-royal sheet had
carried away.
“Lay aft there, my lads,” roared old Blowhard from
below, “and clew the mizzen-
royal up; look alive now,
and furl it.”
We did our best, furled
both yard-arms, and had got
the bunt up, when poor old
Toodles gave a pull with
both hands on the lanyard
of the bunt gasket, but the
lanyard being old and rotten,
it carried away, and away
went my poor little chum
down, down on to the poop
deck.
I could hear the thud
when he struck, and turned
sick for a moment.
The next minute I was
on deck beside him, my
hands burnt to the bone
with sliding so quickly down
the back-stays. There lay Toodles, with a calm look on
his bonny face and the lanyard of the bunt gasket firmly
grasped in both hands. Death must have been instantaneous,
for his poor back and all his limbs were broken.


The sailmaker sewed him up tenderly in canvas, after
making fast a large holystone to his feet. Then we picked
him up carefully and laid him on a grating on the after hatch,
covering him with the Union Jack.
Next morning at eight bells we backed the main yard
and tolled the bell for poor Toodles’ funeral, the captain
reading the service. In the middle of it we were all blub-
bering —even old Blowhard was seen to wipe his eyes more
than once —and the captain broke down, saying, as the
tears rolled down his cheeks, “Men, I go on —lower
the poor lad gently.”
Someone was going to remove the Union Jack, but the
captain said, “Let it go with him, for a better or braver
lad never trod a ship’s deck, God help his poor mother.”
James Fotheringhame.


How the Boys at Trundle's School
Got a holiday.
fifty boys attended Trundle’s Collegiate
School, and it would be difficult to meet with
a merr * er set Y oun S ro g ues anywhere. The
jj eldest in the school was about fifteen, but the
ringleader of all the mischievous pranks enacted
at this same school was a certain Jack Fulton, twin-brother to
Lance. The funny part of it was that the two brothers, who
were as like each other in features as two peas, were very
dissimilar in character, Jack being harum-scarum, mischievous,
and popular, whilst Lance was more sober in his ways, good-
hearted, though rather too prone to be “down” on any back-
sliding on the part of his mates to be altogether popular in
the school. At times he felt rather bad about this, for what
boy does not enjoy popularity at school? But at all events
he was all right with the masters, for did they not invariably
turn to him for a truthful version of the various escapades
the boys one and all (himself included—oh, no, he was by
no means perfect) indulged in at times? This thought soothed
him sometimes, but it didn’t quite make up for the evident
preference his comrades showed for his brother.
Well, one fine summer’s day Jack had been at some of
his tricks, and had been told to stay in after school hours.
This didn’t suit Master Jack, for he had a fishing excursion


on with his mates after school, and had undertaken to “shake”
some raw prawns for bait from poor old Paddy Malony’s
fish-shop. To do Jack justice, he always paid Paddy back
when he had the money, and it’s my opinion Paddy always
saw what was going on, although Jack thought himself so
mighty clever. But, however, this has little to do with my
story. A bright idea struck Jack.
“Look here, Lance,” said he, “the chaps say they can’t
do without me this afternoon, so you just take my place and
stay in for me. Trundle will never notice that you aren’t
me. There’s a good fellow now —
Lance shook his head and was very firm in his refusal,
but Jack, cunning fellow, knew he had only to keep putting
his hard case before his soft-hearted brother’s eyes to win the
day. And he did gain his point too, and his mates were
good enough to add their thanks to Jack’s. This, however,
didn’t make Lance feel any better about it, for why shouldn’t
they have been content to have him with them instead of Jack ?
When school was over and Fulton I. was left in the
»
long dusty school-room, he began to brood over his woes.
“To think that I might have been with them all fishing!
How the deuce is it a chap is such a fool as to give up
his time like this? It’s too bad of Jack —it is—it is!” By
this time Lance was feeling exceedingly sorry for himself, and
vowed he wouldn't be cajoled into doing anything so stupid
again. At the same time he knew quite well if Jack asked
him a similar favour to-morrow he would grant it. But the
sun shone so, and he fancied he could smell the briny, and
could feel the wet fishing-line running through his fingers.


Foolishly then he allowed himself to blame Mr. Trundle
for his punishment, and when the hour was just about up,
and he saw one
of the under-mas-
ters coming to
release him, quick
as lightning he
took up a piece
of chalk and
scribbled on the
blackboard which
had been put
ready for the
morning, “/ hate
old Trundle
No sooner
was it written
than Lance saw
the folly of it,
and would fain
have rubbed it
out, but too late!
Mr. Norris was
already turning
the lock, and the
next mo m ent
Lance heard the
words, “ Fulton, you can go now.”
At ten o’clock the next morning the straggling chalk lines


i
on the board stared everybody in the face, and it might have
been noticed that Lance Fulton looked anything but happy.
A dead silence in the school, then the master’s voice,
“Jack Fulton, stand out and take a caning before the whole
school. If you will behave like a small boy” (Lance winced),
“and write on the board what you would not say to your
master’s face, you shall be treated accordingly. Boy, boy,
why can you not be more like your brother?” (here Lance
winced again).
Jack, with a jaunty air and an amused look in his
mischievous eyes, jumped up from his seat, and cast a look
at Lance which seemed to say, “Never mind, old chap, I’ll
take the caning for you, as you did the staying in for me.”
Sooth to say, Jack much preferred the caning to the
staying in, for, as he remarked, it was over quicker.
“Stand there, sir, and stretch out your hand.”
Poor Lance felt wretched, and to make matters worse,
he was held up as an example to Jack, when in this case,
at all events, he was worse —much worse than Jack. It was
jolly hard to do it, but he knew he would hate himself for
ever if he lost his self-respect, so just as the cane was about
to descend on Jack’s case-hardened palm, with one brief
wrestle with himself, Lance almost screamed out, “Stop, sir
—-I done it —I done it!”
“ Lance exclaimed the master, “what you mean?”
“Well, I mean I did it then. It was this way, sir; I
stayed in instead of Jack by private arrangement.” (Plere
Mr. Trundle was forced to turn right round to hide a broad
smile.) “Well,” continued Lance hurriedly, “I felt bad about


staying in and losing the fishing, so I just wrote that on
the board. But I really did not mean it, sir, and I am very
sorry, and now please cane me instead of Jack.”
“Oh, ho, my young hopeful; so you think you are going
to save master Jack twice, do you? Well, I think, as I
can’t punish Jack for what he didn’t do, the least I can do
is to let you off too.”
“What, sir, do you forgive me?”
“Well, I’m afraid if I don’t you may continue to ‘hate
me,’ so in order to get into your good graces again, I am
going to give you a half-holiday.”
Lance turned crimson, and was not quite sure whether
the master was not having a small joke at his expense.
But no, Mr. Trundle looked as if he were in dead earnest.
The fact was the dear old man was one of those who did
not forget that he was a boy himself once, and was always
ready to make the best of his boys, and forgive their boyish
pranks so long as they were not very, very bad. He knew,
too, what it must have cost Lance to “own up,” and was
deeply touched at the display of moral courage in his pupil.
“Well, my lad, what about this half-holiday?”
“Please, sir—please, sir,” stammered Lance, “it would
be grand if all the fellows had one too.”
Of course it ended in all the fellows having a free after-
noon, and after giving three cheers for “old Trundle,” they
actually repeated them right lustily for —whom do you think?
Why, Lance, of course, the boy who had been the means
of gaining them the holiday.
“Mab."


Just in Time.
year 1745 seems a long, long time ago, yet
boys and girls had perhaps as good times then
as they have now. Certainly Jenny Lindsay looked
merry enough one bright autumn afternoon in
Vr that memorable year as she stood at the open
window of a tall house in the Canongate of Edinburgh,
watching the bustle in the street below. Jenny was a win-
some dark-haired lassie of twelve, with laughing hazel eyes.
Warm-blooded, for her cheeks were like roses and her lips
rosy red, and possessed of a kind little heart which always
beat true for her friends.
Born and brought up in the northern town of Inverness,
Jenny had arrived in Edinburgh but two days before, on a
visit to her mother’s friend Lady Gordon, who was a widow
with an only son, Ralph, a lad of fifteen. Those were stirring
times. Prince Charles Edward Stuart, having landed in the
west, had called the clans to buckle on their claymores, and,
as there was little love for King George 11. in the Highlands,
the kilted lads had flocked in thousands to his standard.
Now, marching always southward, the gallant young Prince
and his sturdy following were that very day expected to enter
Edinburgh, many of the citizens, including the Gordons and
little Jenny Lindsay, being all for “ bonnie Prince Charlie.”
Lady Gordon, with other Jacobite ladies, had <jonc to- the


cross to hear the Prince’s father proclaimed King; thus Jenny
was left alone, but Sir Ralph, the boy baronet, had promised
to take her out, for Ralph and Jenny were great chums. And
hark! who but Ralph ever jumped three stairs at a time; yes,
and it was very much Ralph who banged open the drawing-
room door, shouting, “Look sharp, Jenny, on with your
hood! the Prince is in the King’s Park, with all his fighting-
men behind him.”
Quick as thought, Jenny tied on her crimson cloak and
hood; and she looked such a sweet little Red Riding Hood
in them that Ralph told her so, and then he handed her a
lovely bunch of white roses.
“Oh! thank you, Ralph,” cried Jenny, with sparkling
eyes, and in a trice she had pinned a rose in her cloak. “I
have kept one,” she said; “the rest I shall give to the Prince.”
Young Gordon laughed. He was a well-grown lad, with
fearless blue eyes and fair curly hair. His kilts were of
Gordon tartan, his jacket of black velvet, and in Jenny’s
opinion, Sir Ralph was a hero second only to Prince Charlie
himself.
“I am glad you have kept one,” he said, “but now
come along.” And, catching hold of her hand, he rushed
little Red Riding Hood downstairs and away down the street.
That was a gallop, and hurrah! coming towards them,
mounted on a' beautiful white horse, was the Prince himself,
looking the picture of a gallant cavalier. He wore a coat
of Stuart tartan, scarlet breeches, and long military boots, a
blue silk sash was over his shoulder, and a blue velvet cap
with a white rose in it on his head. Yes, and he smiled


on the people as he rode, and Jenny thought him just the
most beautiful Prince in the world; but —she could not muster
up courage to present the roses. Ralph, however, was bolder.
For, doffing his cap, “May it please your Highness,” he said,
“but Mistress Red Riding Hood here hopes that you will
graciously accept her posy.”
“That will I,” cried Prince Charles, and as he took the
flowers, he gallantly kissed the little hand which gave them.
“I shall expect to see mademoiselle at the palace, so do
not forget to bring her,” he added laughingly to Ralph; then,
with the roses in his hand, bonnie Prince Charlie passed on
to Holyrood.
“Three cheers for the Prince!” cried Ralph enthusiasti-
cally, “and if he’ll have me, I’ll enlist to-morrow.”
But Jenny stood looking at the hand the Prince had
kissed.
“It’s such a sun-burnt hand,” she said, regarding it rue-
fully, “and yet he kissed it.”
Whereupon Ralph kissed it too.
“It’s a dear little hand,” he laughed, “and the Prince
is a proper man.”
Well, you may be sure that Prince Charles’s commands
were obeyed. Mademoiselle Red Riding Hood went to Holy-
rood with Lady Gordon and Ralph, and quitted it more than
ever devoted to the kindly young Prince, for had he not told
her that he had known and loved her dead father, brave
Colonel Lindsay.
Ralph too was delighted, for the Prince had said “Yes”
when he offered his services; so he was now, as he proudly


said, “Prince Charlie’s man” —“page” would have been
nearer the mark, but his mother only smiled, and Jenny said
quite seriously, “The Prince will be all the better for having
a leal lad like Ralph near him.”
Events went rapidly after that. Prince Charles and his
Highlanders thrashed King George’s men at Prcstonpans, and
Ralph was in it, and as Jenny said, behaved like the brave
lad he was.
Then the Prince and his page and all his merry men
cleared away over the Border into England, and Jenny went
back to Inverness to her mother, who was an invalid; nor
did she for a long time hear any news of her two heroes,
bonnie Prince Charlie and his “man.”
At last tidings came with a rush. The Highland chiefs
had forced the Prince to turn back, he was again in Scot-
land, at Falkirk had almost beaten General Hawley, but, un-
able to keep his army together —many of the Highlanders
having gone home —was unwillingly obliged to retreat north-
ward, and by-and-by it got about that the Duke of Cumber-
land, King George’s second son, was in pursuit of the Prince
with a splendid army ten thousand strong. Poor Jenny! she
could not help it; her heart sank at the news, and most
earnestly night and day did she pray the good God to keep
bonnie Prince Charlie and his page safe from English steel
and bullets.
I can’t say whether Ralph thought as often of Jenny as
she did of him, but when, in the month of April, the
Prince marched into Inverness-shire at the head of his
half-starved but undaunted Highlanders, ' and encamped on


Culloden Moor, which is not so very far distant from the
town of Inverness, the boy baronet felt his spirits go up with
a bang.
“For,” said Ralph to himself, “when we’ve licked the
fat Duke of Cumberland, I’ll be off to Inverness and give
Mistress Jenny a bit of a surprise.”
He little dreamt that it was Jenny who was fated to
give him a surprise. But so it was, and this is how it came
about.
You have read of the battle of Culloden, fought on the
16th April, 1746, between ten thousand of the flower of
King George's army, under the Duke of Cumberland, and
four thousand starving Highlanders, led by Prince Charles.
How, notwithstanding such fearful odds, the men of the
straths and glens, there, on Culloden Moor with their feet on
the heather, and the bright spring sun above, struck the last
blow, vainly, but right gallantly, for the bonnie Prince Charlie
they loved so devotedly.
Well, Ralph was all agog that day to have at the fat
Duke of Cumberland; so, when the Prince sent him on an
errand to Lochiel, the leader of the Camerons, just as that
chivalrous chieftain was heading his men against the red-
coats, the lad, instead of turning back after delivering his
message, pulled out his dirk, and shouting, “Claymore! clay-
more ! ” with the best of them, rushed headlong with the
Camerons on King George’s men. That was a glorious
charge; the Highlanders burst, like a whirlwind, through one
red-coated regiment; then, with a ringing cry of “For God
and Prince Charlie! ” clashed full tilt into a second. But Ralph


remembered no more of the fight, for a swinging blow from
a clubbed musket stretched him senseless on the heather, and
during the dreamless stupor which held him for hours, the
worst had happened —the clans were broken and scattered,
and Prince Charles was
flying for his life from
the battle-field.
The sun had risen
when the poor lad stag-
geredtohis feet and looked
shudderingly around. For
over the heather, in all
directions, rode King
George’s dragoons, cutting
or shooting down the
wounded and dying.
Cumberland had com-
manded “ Remember,
gentlemen, no prisoners!”
and the dragoons were
carrying out his orders.
Nor was it long before
one keen-eyed trooper had
spied the boy baronet,
borne down upon him,
scruffed him, but instead of, as Ralph expected, putting a
bullet through his head, grimly explained that, as his prisoner’s
velvet jacket entitled him to die in gentle company, the
shooting of him was postponed for a few minutes.
4


But only a few. Tying his hands behind his back, his
captor drove Ralph before him to a low wall surrounding
a deserted farm-house, where four Highland gentlemen,
pinioned like the boy, were ranged along the wall. At a
distance of twenty yards stood the shooting party with loaded
muskets.
This, then, was the end —to be shot like a dog! Ralph
ground his teeth, and when the dragoon tried to bandage
his eyes with his scarf, he cried. “No, I will not be blind-
folded — do you think I’m afraid to die?” and the colour
rushed into his pale cheeks, and his blue eyes flashed. Neither
was he afraid; he had done nothing to deserve death, so,
though his heart beat painfully, he faced the musketeers as
bravely as the four grown men beside him.
But now a strange thing happened. At the very moment
that the order to fire was shouted by the red-coated sergeant,
there darted in between the soldiers and Ralph Gordon a
little figure in a scarlet cloak, whose dark wavy hair streamed
down her back, and, “Jenny! oh, Jenny!” Ralph cried, a
great sob rising in his throat.
Alas! his voice was lost in the rattle of the musketry,
but when the smoke cleared away, the sight the soldiers looked
upon were four dead men stretched on the heather, and a
boy and girl sobbing in each other’s arms, for Ralph had
got his hands free, and they were round Jenny’s neck. It
is said that the two musketeers told off to despatch Ralph,
having a soft spot in their hearts, had fired over the children’s
heads. Be that as it may, the bairns were untouched —Jenny
had been fust in time.


Now, as luck would have it, the Duke of Cumberland
and his staff were riding by at the time, and being, in spite
of his cruelty, extremely fond of children, his Grace pulled
up, and, “What’s the matter, my pretty little girl?” he called
out to Jenny, who turned a pair of tearful but scornful eyes
upon him, for this fat, red-faced young man had conquered
bonnie Prince Charlie, and she hated him accordingly. But
Ralph was in his power, so quickly swallowing her resent-
ment, she said meekly, “Please, your Grace, the soldiers are
going to shoot Ralph, and he’s only fifteen.”
“Sixteen next November,” corrected Ralph, a reply
which tickled the Duke so that he laughed till his fat
cheeks shook again. Then he swore at the soldiers for
making war on die Kinder ; and finally asked the children
their names.
“Hum,” he said, when he heard who Ralph was, and
pondered a bit, and finally, with one of his great laughs,
inquired of Jenny if she would promise to keep Sir Ralph
Gordon out of mischief for the future, and Jenny said “Yes,”
she would; whereupon the Duke, with another great laugh,
asked Ralph if he was quite sure his sixteenth birthday fell
in November.
Then bidding them good morning, Cumberland, followed
by his staff, rode away laughing uproariously. Neither did
Ralph and Jenny linger, but hand in hand ran full pelt in
the opposite direction.
“The Duke ts fat, but he isn’t such a demon as people
make him out,” says Ralph, when they stopped to take breath.
“But oh! Jenny,” the thought of what she had dared for his
4*


sake coming over him, “whatever made you run in between
the muskets and me?" - : m
“I —I couldn’t help it,” quoth Jenny, who, now the danger
was passed, was shaking like one in an ague. “You sec,
Ralph,” she explained, trying to laugh, “I promised your
mother—she arrived at our house yesterday evening, you
must know —that I would bring you back safe and sound,
and I couldn’t break my word.”
And then Jenny related how, half distracted at the news
of the Duke of Cumberland’s wholesale slaughter of his
prisoners, Lady Gordon could hardly be dissuaded from
setting forth in search of her son, until Jenny assured her
that she had a first-rate plan for finding Ralph, and then,
asking Lady Gordon to take care of her sick mother during
her absence, the brave lassie fairly ran away in the middle
of the night.
Of the dangers she encountered during her long dark
tramp to the battle-field, this plucky twelve-year-old said
little, but she was hiding from the soldiers in the deserted
farm-house when she heard Ralph’s voice—and —he knew
the rest.
Yes, he knew the rest. “Why, look here, Jenny,” he
said, “you’re the bravest and bonniest lass in all broad
Scotland,” and then I rather think he put his arms round the
girl that “couldn’t help it,” and gave her a hearty kiss.
You may be sure the two mothers were right glad to
get their bairns back alive and well—for Ralph and Jenny
soon reached Inverness —but the very next day Lady Gordon
carried her son off to Paris —he wasn’t safe in Scotland, she


declared; and it was in the gay French capital, though not
until six years had come and gone, that Jenny, fresh from a
convent school to which she had been sent on her mothers
death, three years previously, met once again her old friends,
the Gordons.
Well, nothing would do but the young baronet must
marry the girl that “couldn’t help it”; moreover, the story
goes that Ralph and Jenny, who returned to Scotland after
the wedding, lived and died the happiest and handsomest
couple in all the “Land of Cakes.”
Josephine Fotheringhame.


Piccolomini's Baby.
f WASN’T a professional musician, but could fiddle
passably well, and when a stranger in Sydney some
years ago I was very glad to take an engagement as
second violin at the Sydney Theatre Royal. The novelty
of the thing pleased me immensely at first, but after
the fourth week it began to pall upon me sadly, and I began
to rebel against the fates which willed me to take my place
in the orchestra night after night, and fiddle away as if I
enjoyed it. In fact, I was deeply sorry for myself. But a
man never appreciates his blessings until he has an insight
into the woes of others. There was poor little Piccolomini,
for instance. Comparing my lot with his, I almost blush to
think of my base ingratitude to the fates for having cast so
few grains of bitterness into my cup whilst his was full to
overflowing.
One day we received notice of an extra rehearsal, as
upon that night the Governor had signified his intention of
attending the opera; so Signor lesti naturally wished every-
thing to go well. We certainly had begun to feel stale over
our work, and needed burnishing up a bit; but, at the same
time, we all resented this extra work. This afternoon was
hot, and everything seemed to be out of gear. Added to
this, our first flute, Piccolomini, had paid no attention to the
call, which put our conductor out of temper to begin with.


His rage knew no bounds, and fines and dismissal were
amongst the mildest things hinted at. Dismissal I knew to
be an idle threat, for —little bit of a fellow as he was —
Sydney didn’t at that time possess such another flautist as
the Italian; but the fine was only what he could expect for
absenting himself. We had not a good time that afternoon.
Our conductor declared there wasn’t one amongst us —with
the exception of the boy—worth his salt. “The Boy” was
a little yellow-haired chap who showed such decided musical
talent that Signor Testi, his musical tutor, prevailed upon
his parents to lend him just for the opera season, as in those
days clarionettists were extremely scarce. The parents de-
murred at first, but the lad’s earnest wish to become a
member of a real orchestra —even for a short time —gained
the day, and here he was amongst us, a conscientious little
performer, who made light of difficult passages which would
have given men, older in the profession, not a little trouble.
Unlike many prodigies, however, he was quiet, modest, and
unassuming, and for this reason principally he was a prime
favourite with us all.
“Yes,” said our conductor, “the boy is the only one
amongst you that I can depend upon.”
Now, I suppose the commendatory words upset the little
fellow’s nerves; at all events, he managed to come in half a
beat too soon, immediately upon which Testi threw down
his baton in despair, exclaiming, “And now I have not even
the boy!” It was indeed the last straw; the look he cast
upon the little musician said plainly, “ Et fit, Brute" but the
answering glance was so full of repentance that Testi’s wrath,


which had just arrived at boiling-point, immediately cooled
down, and after imploring us all to pull ourselves together,
he carried us through the remainder of the rehearsal without
receiving any more shocks to his sensitive nerves.
That night, “5.R.0.,” or “Standing Room Only,” was
very early in the evening posted outside the theatre, for not
only was the opera popular, but, being a command night, that
lent an additional attraction.
We members of the orchestra had taken our seats, but
our first flute had as yet not turned up, and it wanted but
a few minutes to eight. However, in the nick of time he
came from under the stage like a Jack-in-the-box. Testi
darted at him a look in which I read both relief and reproach,
for the flute had an elaborate obligato with the soprano star,
and thus his absence would have caused considerable em-
barrassment. But now all was well. We were in the middle
of the first act when, during a rather long pause for the
orchestra, I heard little Teddie say to Piccolomini, “Is any-
thing the matter with you to-night, signor?” I his question
caused my idle glance to rest upon the flautist’s face, where
I discovered what the quick eyes of the little chap had de-
tected before any of us. dhe countenance of the Italian,
always inclined to melancholy, now expressed the most ab-
ject misery. “My little girl died to-day, Master Teddie.
“Go on!” exclaimed the lad, in a horrified voice, “and
yet you are here to-night!”
“Yes, my boy; though my heart bleeds, I must, for the
sake of those that are left me, do my work all the same.”
“But Signor Testi will send you home when he knows.


I will ask him. Oh, I am sure he will when he understands,”
said the lad, with a child’s hrm belief in the unselfishness of
human nature. The Italian shook his head sadly, and now
his turn came to tootle a brilliant cheerful cadenza. That
over, the boy again addressed him.


“And was that why you didn’t come to rehearsal?”
“Yes, my boy; my little babe died at two o’clock, and
I could not leave the mother so soon—so soon. I know I
will be fined, and perhaps worse, but no matter —I could not
do it.”
Here the poor man grew so affected that big tears rolled
down his swarthy cheeks, for, like most foreigners, he had
a great love for his offspring.
Just now the conductor’s baton was rapped sharply upon
his desk, and for the space of some minutes the continuation
of this sketch from real life had to be postponed.
Another pause, then from the trombone came, “What’s
up r
“First flute’s baby’s dead,” answered the boy, in a small,
quivering voice; “and he has had to leave it to come here.
We had a baby once, but my father hadn’t to leave it. I
think mother would have cried harder than ever if he had.”
“Ay, ay!” answered the trombone, in a hushed voice.
“What did it died of—measles?”
“ No—teeth.”
“You should have given it Swiss milk,” said the man
confidingly. “We’ve brung up five kids on that, and although
it costs is. gd. a week, it's cheaper than coffins, and” (as
if this were but a secondary consideration) “we didn’t lose
the young ’uns.”
The trombone-player was a man whom it was not very
pleasant to look upon —in fact, fie was downright ugly. He
squinted, and his red hair stuck straight up on the top of
his head like Tom Traddles. This night, being a command


night, he had evidently taken some pains to make himself
a little smarter than usual, by greasing his top-knot with
pomade strongly scented with rancid bergamot, but his finger-
nails were, as usual, in deep mourning, and his linen not of
the purest: still, despite these trifling drawbacks, he had his
redeeming points. He played the trombone skilfully, and he
had evidently a heart hidden away in his unlovely frame.
He plainly wished to express his sympathy for his brother
musician, though his manner in doing so was somewhat
rough.
Again the orchestra was called to order, and the first
act came to a conclusion, and, judging by the applause of
the house, every satisfaction was given. Little thought any
of the audience with what heavy hearts some of us were
catering for their amusement.
Signor Testi was in high feather during the interval, for
the Governor sent round one of his aides to compliment him
upon the success of the performance, and intimated that he
would be glad to speak a few words to him if he could go
round to his box.
He was about to follow the aide, when the boy caught
hold of the sleeve of his coat, saying, in an imploring tone,
“You will allow Signor Piccolomini to go home now, wont
you, sir?”
“What does the boy mean?” he asked, looking at us all
questioningly.
“Well, I mean that, of course, when you know that his
little girl is dead, you will not expect him to stay here
amongst all this noise. He says his heart bleeds, sir, and


I know it must hurt most dreadful. So you let him go,
won’t you?”
A look of annoyance passed over the conductor’s face,
for he wasn’t a bad sort, and it no doubt worried him to
refuse the little kind-hearted chap.
I shall never forget the picture as long as I live of the
little yellow-haired boy standing, with his sturdy knicker-
bockered legs wide apart, with the air of one whose request
must be granted.
“Look here, my little man,” said the conductor, “don’t
keep me any longer; the Governor awaits me. You must
be reasonable, you know. The flute has a most particular
part next act, for his obligato comes off then; but” —as if
a bright thought had struck him—“you can tell him I will
forgive him the fine.”
“He does not care for the fine,” broke out the boy in-
dignantly; “he wants to be at home with his little dead baby
and its mother. Oh, sir, did you ever have a little dead
baby ?”
Upon my word I felt very sorry for Testi, for time was
nearly up, and his Excellency still awaited him, and here was
this little pleading fellow with whom he could not find it in
his heart to be angry —but he was terribly hard pressed,
and that last question —“Did you ever have a dead baby?” —
seemed to completely knock him over.
Perhaps it touched an old sore —who knows? However,
he simply answered it by stroking the lad’s head, saying,
“We have all our troubles, my little man, and if there was
only myself to be considered the flute could go, but you


know how it would upset things. Already the soprano is
hoarse, and if she hasn’t the help of the flute she will be
unbearable.”
“Well, then, after the obligato can he go?” asked the
boy, with childish persistence.
“Tut, tut, tut! oh, well—tell him he can go after, the
second act, and now I must go.”
Poor little lad! the tears were in his kind eyes when he


told the flute he could not get off till after the obligato, but
the man was deeply grateful even for that concession, as it
was more, far more, than he expected. When we filed in
to take our seats for the second act, little Teds face was
the picture of distress. Every now and then he would glance
up from the music and cast a look of pity on the flautist,
and I could not help thinking that if sympathy had any
soothing effects, then Piccolomini should feel better, for was
ever such honest sorrow felt for the griefs of others as by
this tender-hearted little musician for those of the little
Italian ?
At last the second act was over, and with a bright look
Ted made way for the flute to depart, who, nothing loth,
with a polite incline of the head to us all and a heartfelt
“ Thank you, my boy,” scrambled down through the orchestra
door. The boy heaved a deep sigh of satisfaction, and be-
fore he went home that night he was made happy by Testi
telling him he would get an emergency man to fill Piccolo-
mini’s place for the next night, so that the Italian could have
a whole day and night in which to nurse his grief.
Next time we saw the flautist was at rehearsal two days
after. The little man wore a huge band of crape on his
arm and looked altogether funereal. Before tuning up he
took a small white paper parcel very tenderly out of his
breast-pocket, and, opening it, disclosed to view a tiny lank
lock of fine black hair.
This was passed round for us to admire, which we all
made a fair pretence of doing, with the exception of the
grumpy old double bass, who shook his head when it was


offered him with a curt, “No, thanks; no, thanks,” but then
he was always a sour old fellow.
Finally the flautist presented the little relic to Teddie with
the words, “Keep it, my boy, as a memento of my little
girl, for you grieved for me and you wept with me, and I
am proud to present you with this gift.”
Poor Ted! his sweet nature divined that in the eyes of
the flautist it was a gift of rare value, so he accepted it in
the spirit in which it was given. On the paper which enclosed
the hair was inscribed: “For my kind little friend, in memory
of Beatrix Piccolomini, aged ten months.”
"Mab”


Winning his Epaulet.
*HAVE seldom seen a likelier young fellow than Gilderoy
Gillingham, sailing-master of H.M.S. Loire. Not a six-
footer—five feet eight, perhaps —but limber and hand-
some. Bright hazel eyes he had, and curly light brown
*1 hair, a firm mouth, and a smile as sweet as a woman’s.
Goodness knows where he got his breeding —before joining
the Loire he had held the position of second mate in the
service of the Hon. the Hudson’s Bay Company —but anyhow
he had it, for all he was only a mechanic’s son and warrant-
officer of a man-o’-war.
Well, in the early days of the century, when King George
and Boney were at loggerheads, and every English lad felt
it in him to knock fits out of at least three Frenchmen —in
those bonnie days, I say, Handsome Gilderoy, as he was
nicknamed, was master of the Loire, as tidy a brig as any
in the navy; while I, a youngster of eleven, had been rated
junior midshipman of the same. I loved the handsome master
with all my heart, for I was a mother’s boy, and until Mr.
Gillingham took me under his protection and taught me better,
neither knew how to use my fists, nor when to hold my
tongue, two things without which a reefer’s education is
incomplete.
Now, the captain of the was one of the fighting


sort who believed in lamming it into every vessel which flew
the tricolour; therefore, he was in high feather when, as we
were beating about outside the Bay of Naples, what should
we encounter but the Vaucluse and the Madame —two big
French corvettes, backed up by a flotilla of gun-boats.
“Long odds, Mr. Gillingham,” quoth the skipper to the
master; “yet we’ll have a slap at the mounseers for all that;”
so the word was passed to beat to quarters, and in a jiff
we had opened fire on the Frenchmen. But, alas! the skipper’s
luck was low, for in the very beginning of the fight his
right arm was so badly splintered that, fainting from loss
of blood, he was carried below. The first lieutenant had
a leg fetched away by a round shot; the second—poor
fellow! was killed outright; consequently the command of the
brig devolved upon the master.
“Tell Mr. Gillingham that I place my honour in his
hands.”
Such was the Captain’s message to Handsome Gilderoy,
and I was the bearer of it.
“But, sir,” I added, with a little bit of a tremble in my
voice—you see, it was the first time I had smelt gunpowder —
“but, sir, it doesn’t seem to me that we’ve the ghost of a
chance —the Frenchmen are too big.”
At this the master laughed merrily, and patted me on
the shoulder.
“Right you are, Dick,” said he, “they are too big; they
can only tear holes in our canvas, but we can go one better —
we've been hulling them, lad, and were going to hull them
some more,"
5


Then I understand. The little Loire lay so low in the
water that all the mounseers could do from their high decks
was to clip her wings, but contrariwise, every shot from the
brig found its billet in the hulls of the corvettes.
However, the blue-jackets hadn’t “savvy” enough to see
this; so what did they do but send the cook’s mate, a
whopping Jamaica nigger, aft to inform the master that it
was high time to throw up the sponge.
“Men say,” quoth the darkey, “dat French ships blow
us to glory if massa no lower him dag.’
Jerusalem! but you should have seen the glare in Mr.
Gillingham’s bright eyes.
“Go back to the cowards who sent you,” he thundered,
“and tell them that I will blow out the brains of the first
man who dares to talk of striking.”
Poor Sambo trembled and went-but, the pity of it!—his
message was barely delivered before a shot from the Madeline
took the darkey’s head clean off his shoulders.
“My God!” cried the master, and his face went deadly
white.
The next moment he was among the blue-jackets.
“My lads,” he cried passionately, “you surely do not
mean to disgrace yourselves and me to-day? Yield to the
French will I never, but you ”
“Divil doubt it, little gamecock, but well standby yez.”
It was big Ted, the Irish gunner, who spoke up, and,
impressed by the master’s pluck, the men were with him, for
their “Ay, that we will,” was as hearty as might be.
“It’s a bargain then—well stick by one another,” says


Mr. Gillingham, shaking hands with the gunner, and smiling
sweetly on the crew—“and now, Ted, see if you can’t
avenge poor Sambo.”
And if ever coloured gentleman was avenged, then Sambo
was that sable aristo-
crat, for the gunner, in-
structed by the master,
kept pelting it into the
mounsecrs, and every
shot told —either crash-
ing into their wooden
walls, or, aimed a trifle
higher, making many a
ghastly lane through the
crowded ranks of the
seamen and marines on
their decks.
“He’s a nagur to
fight, and not even the
Captain himsilf knows
better how to handle
the brig.”
That was what Ted
said of Gilderoy Gilling-
ham, and so thought the crew, for when, as presently
happened, the signalman sung out that the Vaitcluse was
sinking, the blue-jackets gave three ringing cheers for the
master of the Loire .
I was near him at the time, but, hearing a step behind,
5*


we turned simultaneously, and there stood the skipper, as
pale as a ghost, with his arm tied up.
“Mr. Gillingham,” he said, making shift to grasp the
master’s hand with the only well flipper the mounseers had
left him, “Mr. Gillingham, you have won your epaulet nobly,
and it shall be my part to see that you get it. Tut, man,
I’m only speaking the truth” —for the master, looking his
handsomest, stammered out that he had only done duty —
“but now, look sharp and board the Madame; she’s just this
moment lowered her flag.”
Sure enough, the tricolour was down, the gunboats in
full flight, and the corvette’s boats off to help their drowning
comrades on the Vaucluse.
Well, I went aboard the Madame with the master to
receive the captain’s sword, which he handed Mr. Gilling-
ham with a shrug and a grimace.
1 ‘Mon Dieu, monsieur •” he said, “your men they do shoot
c onime le diable and the Frenchman pointed ruefully to his
battered vessel.
“Tis but the fortune of war, sir,” quoth Mr. Gilling-
ham politely, but I knew better —“’twas that nagur to fight,
the master.”
Meantime, the crew of the Vaucluse had been rescued
by the boats from the Madame, our lads lending a hand, and
transferred to the Loire, and all now being as snug as circum-
stances would permit, Mr. Gillingham, who was in charge of
the Madame —he had only a dozen blue-jackets and myself
to help work the corvette —Mr. Gillingham, I say, set sail
for Naples, the Loire following on the same course.


Bringing the vessels safely into port was not the least
difficult part of that glorious day’s work, but it was safely
accomplished, and, once arrived in Naples, Gilderoy Gilling-
ham, to his infinite surprise, found himself the hero of the
hour. The name of the brave Inglise was in every mouth —
songs were sung in his honour, he was feted and feasted,
the dark-eyed Neapolitan girls went mad about the handsome
master, and one lady of rank and wealth actually made offer
of all she possessed and herself thrown in to the “bravest


Englishman in the world; for wasn’t his vessel as little as
o
little, and yet he had conquered two big Frenchmen, not to
mention the flotilla of gunboats.”
This Neapolitan signorina was young and beautiful, but
Gilderoy Gillingham wore the picture of a fairer lass next
his heart, a squire’s daughter, who, mechanic’s son though
he was, had promised to marry the master so soon as he
should have won his epaulet; and now that the captain of
the Loire had recommended him for promotion, handsome
Gilderoy began to dream of his wedding bells. So he thanked
the lady for her kindness, but his heart, he said, wasn’t his
to give.
Well, the signorina went into a convent for love of
him, but Mr. Gillingham was gazetted second lieutenant
of the Loire, and, his epaulet thus won, went home to claim
the squire’s daughter and the pot of prize-money that was
owing him.
I have cause to remember the wedding, because, d’ye
see, Midshipman Dick was Lieutenant Gillingham’s best man.
Nor shall I forget the bridegroom’s speech.
“Ladies and gentleman,” said he, “to win the girl I
loved I won this,” —here he touched the glittering swab on
his shoulder —“and, as the winning of my epaulet has won
me that sweet lass, I’m just the happiest shellback alive.”
My word, how the bonnie bride blushed and the folks
cheered.
But —and how he got there, I’m blessed if I know —but
standing by the dining-room door was Ted the gunner, and
when the cheering stopped, he stepped inside, made his bow
70
TALES FOR YOUNG AUSTRALIA.


to the company, and asked and obtained leave to sing a
ditty composed for the occasion; and this is what he sang —
“ There was a gallant Britisher, they called him Gilderoy,
To lamm it into the Frenchmen it was his greatest joy.
The Madame and the big Vaucluse , he took them one by one;
'Twas thus his epaulet was gained by setting of the sun.”
Ted got a brimmer of champagne for that merry stave;
but Gilderoy Gillingham lived to win his other epaulet, and
to make his mark as one of the pluckiest captains in His
Majesty’s Navy.
Josephine Fotheringhame.


Jim the Inkslinger.
A Christmas Tale of the Diggings.
C
l~mmf ORTY y ears a S°> or thereabouts, Rokewood,
County Grenville, Victoria, was a stirring little
m i n ' n g township. Lucky diggers had pulled
V nuggets, and big ones at that, out of the banks
of the creek which skirts the settlement, while in
W “Elder’s Paddock,” and, indeed, all around Rokewood,
the “finds” continued to be rich enough to keep an
army of miners pegging away.
Among the gold-seekers there were no two chums so
true to each other as Harry Headlong and Jack Juniper.
The latter, a carpenter by trade, was a dark-eyed, handsome
little fellow, with a sharp tongue, and a keen eye to the
main chance; while Harry, a tall Oxford graduate, with clear,
blue eyes, and a pair of broad shoulders, was just his op-
posite —good-natured, and generous to a fault. Now, Jack
and Harry had worked on the same claim for a year, making
little more than enough to keep themselves in clothes and
tucker, when, one day, io! all was changed, for Harry brought
up a nugget worth £6,ooo, and, as nothing would do with
Juniper but Headlong and he must go to Ballarat to cash
the gold and divide it, they went, both of them together,
to the “Golden City.” But five days later, on the 20th


December, a strange thing was seen; a company of Ballarat
diggers tramping it to Rokewood, came upon Jack Juniper
all but dead, lying on the track, four miles distant from the
Golden City. He had been struck down and robbed, and
“Harry Headlong did it,”
was all they could get out
of him. So poor Jack
Juniper was packed into
a wagon which trundled
up at the moment, and
carried back to Rokewood
to the hut where his chum
and he had lived content-
edly until the finding of
the nugget changed it all,
and for the next few
days he lay in his bunk
muttering and tossing,
while outside, every soul
in the township, with two
exceptions, was bitter
against the robber and
murderer, for that was
what the miners called the
blue-eyed digger who,
before the doing of that desperate deed, had been liked by
every one of them.
Now, the two people who believed in Harry s innocence
were the Rev. Joscelyn Joscelyn, or the “White Sky Pilot,


so called because, being a clergyman, he always dressed in
spotless white instead of the orthodox inky black, and James
Douglas, otherwise “the Inkslinger.” The White Sky Pilot
was a pleasant-faced young parson who had rowed in the
’Varsity Eights with Headlong not many years since, who
had built the little wooden church where he preached with
his own hands, who could, and did, set broken bones and
dress wounds, and whose kind words and kinder deeds had
endeared him to the whole community; and very much so to
James Douglas who, next to Harry Headlong, thought the
“White Sky Pilot” just the finest fellow alive.
Jim put Harry first, perhaps because, being big and strong,
he was yet so gentle with and good to him, Jim. “The
Inkslinger” was a bonnie, brown-eyed boy of fourteen, but
there was something the matter with his back, which made
walking even a few yards excessively painful. His father
had died years before, and of his mother he had never heard.
So Jim, belonging nowhere, dwelt by himself in the bush, a
mile from the township, earning his living by writing letters
for such of the diggers as had neglected the study of pot-
hooks in their young days; hence his patrons had nicknamed
him “the Inkslinger.”
Jim’s home was a queer little two-roomed humpy, almost
smothered in gum-trees, but it had been fixed up so nicely
inside and out by the lad’s great allies, Pleadlong and the
parson, that our little hero had reason to be proud of his
tiny dwelling.
But on the night of the 23rd December, the poor little
Inkslinger’s heart was sore, and his big brown eyes very


heavy, for his thoughts were anxious ones, nor had he slept
since Juniper’s accusing words had been repeated to him.
Not that he believed them —no; but where ever was Harry?
He was trying to answer that question satisfactorily, the
while he endeavoured to solve a problem in Euclid, for Jim
was fond of mathematics, and had long ago crossed the
“asses’ bridge.” His mind, however, was on the wander.


The troopers who were scouring the country in search of the
missing man, had called in at the slab hut that morning,
when the sergeant gruffly informed him that, should Head-
long resist, his orders were to shoot him down. Resist!
Jim knew that, innocent or guilty, Harry would never throw
his hands up to any trooper that ever wore blue. But, all
at once, the Inkslinger raised his head, an expression of
painful expectancy on his face. He had heard a
bered step outside; and, sure enough, the lock clicked, the
door slowly opened, and there, on the threshold, stood
Juniper’s chum, miserable-looking and unkempt, the ghost
of the once manly young digger.
Jim’s eyes grew misty at sight of him, yet his voice rang
out joyfully as, stepping forward, he caught hold of Head-
long’s hand, crying, “Come in, Harry! come in. I’ve missed
you just dreadfully! ”
But Headlong hung back.
“Jim,” he said hoarsely, “it’s only fair to tell you that
it's all true'.'
Then the boy’s tears fell, though not for a moment did
he loosen his hold on his friend.
“I’m sorry,” he remarked, “for I didn’t believe it, but
it doesn’t matter; come along,” and Jim fairly pulled the self-
denounced robber into the room, compelled him to sit down;
then, bustling about, got him something to eat and drink.
His strange guest devoured the food like a famished man.
Suddenly, however, he started to his feet in a listening attitude.
“The troopers!” he exclaimed; “I must be off,” and
made for the door. But Jim held him fast.


“It’s only the wind in the gums,” he explained; “the
troopers are down Camperdown way, and you're going to
turn in'.'
He had his way, for in five minutes’ time Headlong,
who was dead beat, was fast asleep on the bed in the inner
room, when the boy, having carefully closed the communi-
cating door, made up the fire, and sat down to think.
One by one the hours were struck by the old eight-day
clock, but the watcher sat on; the logs burned into ashes,
*
the tallow clips flickered and went out, yet there was never
a wink of the boys dark eyes, and daybreak found him still
wide awake, and with a resolute look on his pale face. He
had made up his mind to save Harry from himself. In the
meantime everything depended on the concealment of the
hunted man.
And fortune favoured Jim’s plans, for all day long not
a soul came near the slab humpy.
“It’s because it’s Christmas Eve,” thought the boy, and
he was right; the diggers, being engaged in celebrating the
festival, had no thought for the Inkslinger. Another time he
might have felt neglected, but to-day he was glad. Twice
he had stolen softly into the bed-room, but Headlong still
slept heavily.
“When he wakes, I will tell him what I think,” Jim said
to himself.
About five o’clock in the evening there was a flutter of
white, and the Rev. Joscelyn walked in. He had brought
his little friend some Christmas fare, but he looked almost
as heavy-eyed as Jim.


"‘lt’s a bad business this about Headlong - ,” he began
o ’ o
abruptly. “I have just been with Juniper, who has recovered
his senses, and made a clean breast of it, and this I will
say —he is more to blame than poor Harry.”
“I knew it,” cried Jim; “but please tell me all about it.”
The White Sky Pilot looked doubtful; then—
“ After all, it is but right you should know, although
the tale is for older ears. Well, you are aware that Jack
and Harry went frequently to Ballarat, but never together.
Now, it appears that they both visited at the same house,
that of a miller, a few miles on this side the Golden City.
Juniper was engaged secretly to marry this man’s daughter,
but poor Harry, although he loved her very dearly, would
not tell her so until he had ‘ made his pile.’ He confided
in Juniper, however, who because he hoped to make money
out of the claim which belonged to Harry, listened and sym-
pathised, but kept his own counsel. Then came the finding
of the nugget and the trip to Ballarat, and the sharing of
the gold, but, Juniper’s object being gained, he seized the
opportunity, when Harry, in his simplicity, was taking him
to the miller’s house, to blurt out the truth, and he told his
tale jeeringly, adding a gross insult which I may not repeat.
It earned him the blow which he richly deserved. But revenge
seems to have got the better of Harry, for before he left
Juniper, he stripped him of his gold.”
“I don’t believe he meant to keep it; he shan’t keep it,”
cried Jim excitedly. “Jack Juniper deserves all he’s got, but
Harry doesn't deserve to be a ”
“No, that he does not, my little champion.”


It was Harry that spoke; he had entered the room un-
observed. Unwashed and towzled was he, but he had plucked
i
up heart, for he had heard all.
“I was mad when I took that gold,” he continued, “but
Jims right —I never meant to keep it. A bitter revenge,
that’s what it has been. The stuff is planted in the bush —
I’m off to fetch it.”
And he went, returning almost immediately with a swag,
from which he speedily unrolled a heavy bag of gold and
notes.
“I'm going straight to Juniper with this money,” he said;
“will you come with me, Joscelyn?”
“That will I.” And the White Sky Pilot spoke blithely.
Then Harry stooped and whispered in Jim’s ear; “.Say
‘ Forgive us our trespasses ’ for me while I’m away, dear
lad,” and with that the two men set forth to the township.
The next hour was a bad one for the Inkslinger. For
what if the troopers should swoop down on Harry? But
remembering his request, Jim’s whole soul went out in that
beautiful prayer, “Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive
them that trespass against us.” And when, by-and-by,
Harry, washed and dressed, with head erect and a happy
smile on his face, came back to him, Jim felt that he was
going to have a merry Christmas after all. But Headlong
sat down and took him on his knee—he was such a little
chap.
“I’ve seen Juniper,” he said, “and given him every cent
of the /'6,00o —his share and mine.”
'■'O 7
“And he took it?” incredulously. Harry laughed.


“Like a shot; and it being Christmas Eve we forgave
each other. So now, Jim, I’m my own man again. The
troopers have been squared, thanks to good old Joscelyn;
I’ve /'5O in my pocket, and now I am here to ask the lad
who said I didn’t deserve to be a thief, to go out into the
wide world with me, as far away as Sydney. I want you,
Jim, only you —will you come?”
And the little Inkslinger clasped him round the neck.
“Where you go, Harry, I will go.”
Then the old clock in the corner whizzed thrice, and
struck twelve, whereupon Jim and Harry wished each other
a merry Christmas.
Josephine Fotheringhame.








