

yjaoftU V»> v 1j Wiy r rl3rejg*^frgQra£aaik3&*3re*™ t / - i
MHr —— ]
FOR TIMES I
By BARBARA WOODS
a>
uo
£
z
W 9
9


—. - 'J* ”'p~~ v ' "g^g
j —
The children were fascinated
and wandered round the quaint
little shop for a long time.


Tales
FOR TINIES
BARBARA WOODS
Illustinted hy
DONALD GUNN
Printed and Published by
J. ROY STEVENS
1-7 Knox Place, Melbourne, G.l.


CONTENTS
The Little Brown Elf .... 5
The Fairy in the Clock .... 10
Sammie the Seahorse .... 15
The Toy Shop 22
The First Wireless 26
A Trip in the Santoplane ... 33
At the Zoo 3(5
Elizabeth’s Adventures .... 40
“Chubbie”
“Tip” of the Circus .... 50
To the Land of Nursery Rhymes . . 56
“Humpty Dumpty” .... 61


The Little Brown Elf
FAR away in the heart of the great bushlands is a
crystal pool, clear and beautiful. By the pool
is a huge gum tree, and hidden between its
roots is a little wooden door, which is the entrance
to the Little Brown Elfs home.
This little elf, Brownie, is the friend of all the
animals he knows, and that is a great many. On
this particular day he was up with the first rays


of the sun, and down to the pool. Here Flip, his
rabbit friend, waited. Brownie climbed on to his
furry back, and his day of adventure had begun.
Who knows what dangers may overtake an elf on
a journey up the rainbow to the moon? For that
was his mission. The Fairy Queen wanted a new
dress for the ball she was giving. She had thought
of moonbeams, and had asked one of her subjects
to go on this dangerous errand for her. Brownie
had volunteered to go.
Flip trotted up steadily, passing the Flower Fairies
and Gumnuts on their way to the river. When
Brownie arrived at the Bird Drome, a special carrier
bird awaited him. In a few seconds they were off,
the bird flying higher and higher. It dropped
Brownie on to a cloud, and then descended towards
the earth once again.
This was perhaps the most dangerous part of his
journey, for he had to wait until they moved towards
the rainbow, or another cloud passed the one he was
on. If he did not see any clouds he had to whistle
for Old Man Wind, who, perhaps, would help him.
Brownie grew tired of waiting, so he thought he
would whistle for the wind. “I do hope he is in a
good temper,” thought Brownie, as a puff behind
him announced Old Man Wind’s arrival.
“Please,” said Brownie, “could you blow my cloud
gently as far as the rainbow?”
“No!” shouted the Wind rudely. Then he blew and
blew, because he was very angry for being awakened
out of his sleep. The cloud whizzed past the rainbow


N ? gjssallBifflr / / ,.-'
at a terrific speed. Old Man Wind still puffed and
blew, and the cloud, with poor Brownie clinging to it,
whizzed on. In a short time the cloud had been
blown right round the world, and was nearly back at
the rainbow. Brownie stood up nervously, but
carefully also, and as the cloud passed, Brownie leapt
up and caught the rainbow. Old Man Wind did not
see Brownie’s quick action and kept on blowing
vigorously, so the little elf heaved himself up with
some difficulty and breathed a sigh of relief as he
saw the cloud swept swiftly away. He ascended the
shimmering pathway of many colours. The rainbow
was arched and Brownie found it hard work to


climb. When he reached the top he stayed to rest.
Looking down he saw the world far below him
bathed in silvery moonlight.
A star boat pulled in beside Brownie, who climbed
aboard. The star moved off in the direction of the
moon, glimmering in the silent sky. As it drew
nearer, a door in the side of the moon opened and a
little man popped his head out. “Ah, there you are,”
he said jovially.
“Yes,” answered Brownie, “I was delayed.” And he
told the story of Old Man Wind. “And I must get
back to-night,” Brownie added, “the Queen wants
the Moonbeams as soon as possible,”
“Very well,” replied The Man in the Moon, “Fll
hurry and get them for you.” He returned almost at
once with the precious Moonbeams wrapped in green
moss and tied with cobwebs. “Be very careful, they
are very rare.”
Brownie thanked him, and stepped once more into
the star boat. “Good-bye, and thank you.”
The homeward journey was much easier, as all
Brownie had to do was to slide down the Milky Way,
and land in Mushroom Hollow. Here Flip would be
waiting, and take him first to the Fairy Queen, then
back to his own home.
Brownie arrived safely at the Royal Palace, and
was ushered into the Queen’s presence. She was
most grateful to Brownie, who had really risked his
life so that she might get her Moonbeams frock.


“I shall make you Knight of the Rainbow,” she
told him.
Brownie bowed low. How thoughtful the Queen
was! Knight of the Rainbow! Brownie was so
happy. His own brown suit was to be discarded,
and a flashing suit made from part of the Rainbow
itself. Brownie thrilled with pride. A knight,
unbelievable, but really true.
His name was to be changed to Knight Rainbow,
but Brownie asked to remain just Brownie and to
keep his little home under the trees, where all his
animal friends could still come and see him.


The Fairy in the Clock
VERY clock has a fairy in it, no matter how big
or small. In a hall, in a magnificent house, there
stood a Grandfather Clock. It was so old that
the fairy had grown tired of being in it. In fact, she
took no notice of it at all, and, of course, it stopped.
Mr. Fitzrobert, the owner of the house, had the
clock-mender to have a look at his treasured
possession, for the clock was very valuable indeed.
The clock-mender peered at the works, fiddled with
them, and then shook his head.
“I’m sorry, sir,” he said to Mr. Fitzrobert, “but
your clock cannot be repaired.” Mr. Fitzrobert sighed,
because the old clock was no longer useful to him.
All the same, he kept it in the hall, and the naughty
fairy, Jingle, enjoyed herself immensely. She went
to parties and banquets. She visited fairies in other
clocks and got up to all sorts of mischief.
The old clock was bitterly disappointed. He was
wise, and knew harm would probably come to Jingle,
because she had nothing to do except have fun and
gaiety. He also liked to be of use, and he could not
work without the help of Jingle, and it annoyed him
to see her neglecting her duty.
Then, one day, the King of Clock Fairies made his
appearance. He made regular visits to see that all
the clocks were working properly, and that all fairies
were doing their work well.


When the King visited the Grandfather Clock.
Jingle was at a ball with some Flower Fairies. He
was furious, and gave Jingle a warning when she
returned. “If I find you disobeying our rules again,
you must leave this clock, and never again be seen
in our land.” With a stern glance he left, and Jingle,
no longer bright and smiling, ran through the open
doorway into the heart of the clock. She had to see
that the clock worked now, whether she liked it or
not. Mr. Fitzrobert was so surprised when he came
down next day, and found that his prized clock was
working again. (He, of course, knew nothing
whatever about Jingle.)


Jingle, however, was very sullen at having to attend
to the clock again, and when she had finished her
day’s work, instead of enjoying herself, would sit and
sulk, and that made her most unhappy. Very soon
she was left entirely alone. No one would speak to
her or visit her, and she soon grew silent and
melancholy. The other fairies soon forgot the gay
Jingle, and thought what a silly, foolish fairy she
was. Poor Jingle! It was a hard punishment for the
little fairy, now so dismal and alone.
One dark night, as the cruel wind howled round
the silent house, Jingle thought she heard a cry from
the Cuckoo Clock in the next room. The cry was
repeated again and again, so Jingle crept over the
floor to the Cuckoo Clock. In a few minutes she
had reached the door, where the cuckoo popped out.
She knocked timidly, and pushed open the door. It
was dark inside, and the low moaning which Jingle
had heard was continued. Feeling round, Jingle
came across a lamp, which she lit. The flickering
light showed the Clock Fairy, tossing and turning
in her bed. The wooden cuckoo stood near the
door, unable to open it without the help of the
fairy, and so, could not call out the time.
Jingle knew the fairy was very ill, and enquired
from the cuckoo the trouble. “Well,” replied the
cuckoo, thoughtfully, “she caught a chill yesterday,
and now look at her, poor Flipsy, and I can’t open
the door to call out the time,” he added a trifle
anxiously.
But Jingle was busy with Flipsy. She made the
poor sick fairy comfortable and put food and drink
beside her. “I’ll come again to-morrow,” she promised.


Every day after that Jingle came to see how Flipsy
was getting on. She stayed to fix the machinery as
best she could, and fixed the door so that the cuckoo
could open it himself.
Flipsy was very grateful. “I would have died/’ she
told Jingle, “but you came and saved me. You are
very kind.”
When the King of the Clock Fairies came round
again, Flipsy told him about Jingle. “Could you do
something for her?” she pleaded.
“Well,” the King looked thoughtful. “I will think
about it and see what can be done.”


“Thank you so much,” replied Flipsy.
Several days later all the clock fairies received an
invitation to a ball in honour of Jingle. It lasted all
night. At the end of it the King stood up, “Silence,
please!” he said. “You have heard of the kindness
of Jingle. I think she should have some reward,
don’t you?” “Yes, yes,” cried all the fairies. So the
King called Jingle to come forward, and he presented
her with a brand new clock. She was a very happy
little fairy again, and gave many parties, to which
all the fairies came. So if your clock ever stops, you
will know that Jingle is giving a party and the clock
fairy is there, and is having such a good time that
she has forgotten to come back to see that everything
is all right.


Sammie, the Seahorse
SAMMIE was a tiny grey seahorse. He was very
quiet and shy. His mother was surprised at this,
because all his relations were naughty, adventurous
creatures. Sammy was neither naughty nor adven-
turous; he was too timid. When he went out walking
he crept along by rocks and stones and the seaweed
trees.
Sammie’s mother did not know that his timidness
was really the fault of the butcher.
One day, when Sammie was a baby, his mother left
him alone in his cradle. The butcher arrived while


she was gone, and as no one heard his knocking, he
called out at the top of his voice, “BUTCHER,
butcher.” This gave Sammie a terrible fright.
He had never heard such a noise in all the few months
of his life. Poor Sammie, he had been frightened
ever r’nce.
His mother sent him out to play every morning,
and Sammie always went down Shelley Road and
back up Lobster Avenue.
One day, however, he decided to go in another
direction. It was all new to him, and he gazed
about with eager eyes. Shortly after he came to a
forest of seaweed. Seahorses and fish children
played happily together. Sammie hid between the
rocks and watched them. Then he saw a notice,
and on it was written :
NO ONE ALLOWED
IN HERE
C. CRAB.
He was about to turn away, but he was mystified.
Why was no one allowed in the forest? What was
in there? Who was C. Crab? For once curiosity
overcame Sammie’s shyness. He ventured into the
forest. There was something among the trees just
ahead of him. He stopped, frightened, because the
shape turned. It was a big crab. Sammie screamed
and fled back along the track, the crab following
slowly behind him. As he came out of the forest,
the sea children looked up one laughed, while
another said, “The coward, fancy running away from
dear old Clarence Crab.”
“Yes,” said another, “you’re a coward,”
For Clarence Crab was only an old crab who lived


in the forest. He had put the notice up so folk would
not come bothering him.
Sammie started to cry. He went home as quickly
as he could, tears streaming down his face. His
mother laughed when she heard the story and said,
“Now, Sammie, don’t be a baby. You’re too old to
cry, I have some good news for you, anyway. Miss
McFish, the schoolmistress, called while you were
away. She wants you to go to school and I have
arranged everything. Remember, you must be at
school by nine o’clock to-morrow morning.”
When Sammie heard this he began to cry again.


“I don’t want to go to school,” he sobbed, “I want
to stay at home.”
“Oh, Sammie,” his mother said crossly, “I am
annoyed with you, you’ve done nothing but cry ever
since you came in. Please do stop. I thought you’d
be pleased, but whether you like it or not, you’re
going to school.”
Next morning Sammie’s mother took him to the
school. Miss McFish was an elderly and rather
cross whiting. She greeted Mrs, Seahorse kindly
enough, but she spoke sharply to Sammie.
“H’m,” she said, “bit of a cry baby, eh?” She
turned to Mrs. Seahorse, “We’ll soon cure him of
that. You must have spoiled him, but once he gets
to know the other children he will be all right. I
will show him his class-room. Good-bye, Mrs.
Seahorse.”
Sammie followed Miss McFish down some stairs
along to a room. From inside arose a peculiar
noise. Muffled voices. Shrieks of subdued laughter
and the patter of feet. As Miss McFish opened the
door the noise ceased and the children stood up and
said, “Good morning, good morning, good morning
to you. We hope you slept well, teacher. We did,
how are you?”
“Very well,” answered Miss McFish. “Here is a
new boy. Make room for him. Hurry up, the
lesson should have started three minutes ago.”
Sammie sat down next to a fat little fish who kept
eating the whole time.
“Silence!” ordered Miss McFish. “The lesson,” she
began in a learned manner, “is the danger of fisher-
men. You all know that, with fishing nets and lines,


hundreds of fishermen catch hundreds of fish yearly.
Every fish should know about this. The line has a
hook fixed to the end with bait on it.”
She talked on and on. Sammie could not understand,
and he nearly fell asleep. He was aroused by the
piercing voice of his teacher.
“Did you hear what I said?” she asked
“No,” faltered Sammie nervously.
“Well, I will have to repeat the question. How can
you save a fish who has been caught, and still on the
end of the line? Which is still in the water, of course?”
“I d-d-don’t know,” said Sammie
“What, wasting time by not listening. Bruto will
attend to you afterwards.”
Sammie sat down, crying again. When they all
went out to the playground, a big fish come over to


him. “I’m Bruto,” he said. “You’re a baby, a cry
baby.”
“I-I’m not,” said Sammie tearfully.
“You are, and I’m going to light you.”
“No, no!” cried Sammie. He had never fought
before, and he was terrified.
“You coward,” said Bruto scornfully. “You great
big coward. Well, you can stay one,” and he walked
off.
Not a soul spoke to Sammie, and he went home
tired and sad. His mother was waiting for him.
“Sammie,” she said, “I’m ashamed of you, yes,
ashamed. I happened to hear that in school you
did not listen to Miss McFish, and that you begged
another boy not to fight you. You are a coward,
Sammie Seahorse. My son, a coward.” Mrs. Sea-
horse started to cry a little.
Sammie started to cry, too, because he felt he had
really been a coward. Oh, if only he wasn’t so
timid.
By the end of the week most of the people had
heard about Sammie. He felt more and more
miserable as the days went by. At last he decided
to run away. So one dark night he stole out of the
house and down the road. He wandered on, and by
morning he was far away from home. He had
heard his mother talk of the men who lived on
land. Sammie wanted to see this land, so he rose
up through the waves.
Not far off was the land. Sammie had never
seen anything like it before. The golden sand, with
gentle blue waves washing upon it; farther back
rich green country, with glorious trees and patches


of colour—red —blue —white and yellow flowers. Then
the mountains rose, high up into the clouds, bluish
purple in the distance. And high above in the blue,
little cloudlets raced to and fro in the gentle breeze.
Sammie gazed in wonder and delight and swam
up to the beach. It was then he heard the sound,
like a cry for help. He listened intently. Yes, there
it was again, coming from some rocks some distance
along the beach. He was frightened, but there
didn’t seem to be anyone else about. So he swam
towards the rocks, and there, to his amazement,
he saw a weeny sea-fairy, in a pink frock, with a
small crown on her fair hair. She was crying
unhappily, and when she saw Sammie, she jumped
up. “Oh, could you take me back to my home?”
she asked. “I am Princess Sea Foam, and I ran
away. Now I want to go back, but I can’t.”
Sammie knew where the Sea Fairies’ City was,
just near his own home. It is every seahorse’s
ambition to be ridden by the lovely Sea Foam.
“Please, please do,” begged Sea Foam,
“Well, climb on my back and we will be home in
no time,” replied Sammie, his shyness forgotten.
The King, Sea Foam’s father, was very pleased to
see her again, and asked Sammie if he would like
to be her special horse. Both Sea Foam and
Sammie were very excited about this. Sea Foam
loved to ride fast, and Sammie had sped through
the waves at top speed.
Sammie went back to his mother and told her
the good news. She was very proud of him then,
and all the children and other folk were sorry they
had been unkind to Sammie, and cheered every time
he galloped past with the Princess Sea Foam on
his back.


The Toy Shop
UNCLE 808 had come to stay with Margaret
and Tom. He was a tall, handsome man, with
dark hair and smiling eyes, and his pockets
always seemed to be full of pennies.
Margaret and Tom liked him very much. He was
always kind and jolly, not a bit like a lot of grown
up folk they knew. Nurse, for instance, who made
them eat up all their dinner. Uncle Bob liked ice
cream much better than spinach, and lollies much
better than milk puddings.
However, Uncle Bob’s holiday came to an end and
the children went with him to the station. As he
said good-bye, he slipped a coin into each of their
hands.
They were delighted. “Two shillings!” gasped
Margaret. “What will we do with it, Tom?”
“Spend it, of course,” scoffed Tom, who was older
than Margaret. “I think the old Toymaker down
Ridges Road is a jolly interesting place.
“Let’s hurry before Nurse sees us,” Margaret said
quickly.
So the two children ran down the road while
their Nurse was talking to a friend of hers.
The Toymaker’s Shop was a dark little place, with
dusty shelves in the window, on which were placed
small wooden toys. Inside was very small, with


little light. Around the room were more toys, • and
on the counter was a rusty bell.
Margaret and Tom peeped in the window and
clattered inside. Seeing no one about, Tom pushed
the bell, and an old man came hurrying forward,
rubbing his hands together and smiling jovially.
His grey eyes twinkled merrily as he asked what
the children wanted.
“Could we have a look first,” questioned Margaret.
“We have two shillings each.”
“Would you like to see the workroom?” the old
man asked.


“My word,” replied Tom, following the Toymaker
into another room.
Here all was confusion. Half-made toys lay
jumbled up with pieces of wood and shavings. Nails
lay scattered on the benches and on the floor. Pots
of paint and brushes were everywhere. Several
finished toys were on a box waiting for a coat
of paint.
The children were fascinated and wandered round
the quaint little shop for a long time. Margaret
loved the doll’s house with all the small furniture
in it, “Oh, if it was only two shillings,” she
thought. Tom had a grand time with a fort and
some soldiers. “I suppose it is no use wanting
that,” he said to himself, “it will certainly be more
than two shillings.”
At last they decided to go. “Nurse will be getting
very worried,” Tom announced, “so hurry up,
Margaret. I did so want that fort, but I have
chosen an engine. What did you get?”
“I would have loved that doll’s house,” Margaret
replied, “but it was very expensive, so I have
decided to ask Daddy Christmas for it; I have a
Golliwog now.”
They did hurry, but to their dismay Nurse had
vanished and was nowhere to be seen.
“I’ll find the way home,” said Tom uncertainly.
He was feeling a wee bit frightened for all his
nine years.
Margaret, two years his junior, was nearly crying.
As she ran alongside him she tried hard to keep
back her tears.


“Oh, Tom,” she sobbed, “are we lost?” “ ’Course
not, silly,” returned her brother gruffly. He was
worried, because he was not really sure that they
weren’t lost.
Margaret was crying in earnest now. She was a
timid little girl, and was easily frightened; besides,
it was getting dark. Tom was trying to sooth her
when they saw Nurse hurrying towards them.
“You naughty children,” she scolded. “Where
have you been? I have been so worried. What
will your mother say when she hears about this?”
Tom started to explain, but he was so relieved at
finding that he wasn’t really lost that he started
to cry.
“There, there,” said Nurse, who had a kind heart.
“Don’t you mind, stop crying, and finish your story
later.”
Tom stopped at once, and on the way home told
the rest of his tale, at the end proudly showing his
engine, and telling Nurse about the fort and doll’s
house.
Nurse didn’t tell mother after all. She thought
they had been punished enough, and was quite sure
they wouldn’t run off any more.


The First Wireless
THE bush was silent. No naughty animal children
ran about, playing tricks. No mother animals
bustled to the markets. No fairies flew in and
out of the tall gum trees. No humans even laughed
and chattered in the distance.
All was quiet and very, very still. The reason
for this was the animals were angry. They had
quarrelled with the fairies over some silly matter
and the fairies had left the bush. The Fairy Queen
had told them sternly that the fairies would not
return to the bush until the animals made some-
thing that the humans wanted and could copy.
Now the animals wanted the fairies to come back
to the bush, and so they had tried hard to think
of something that would be of use. But it was of
no use at all. Every suggestion and idea just didn’t
seem right.
The animals crouched in their homes, too angry
and disappointed to even go about their daily duties.
Suddenly a loud cry rent the air. “I’ve got it!
I’ve got an idea, hurray!”
Instantly the bush was in an uproar. Will
Wombat, who had made the startling announcement,
was asked question after question, but he shook his
head and replied, “I won’t tell you yet, as it might
not work, but I want two helpers.”
“Me!” “No, me!” “Choose me, Willy!” “No, not
him, me, me!” Such a chorus of shouts arose that
Willy had to put his paws over his ears. “Order,


order/’ he called loudly, “Listen, please; I think I
had better choose the animals. Quiet now! Don
Dingo and Carlo Kangaroo,”
“Hurray!” shouted Don and Carlo together.
“What do we have to do?” “Come with me,”
answered Willy as he hurried into his home and
shut the door.
“Well, I want to say something here in my home,
and it to be heard, say, at the Meeting Place.”
“However can you do that?” queried Carlo.
“I found a human child’s trumpet,” explained Willy.


Tales for Tinies
“I will put it in a tree at the Meeting Place and
have a pipe or wire or something from it here!”
“I suppose it would be useful in a way,” said
Don, vaguely.
“Of course, it would be useful,” said Carlo,
indignantly. “Willy could tell the animals the news.
We could go out and see what would be interesting
for Willy to say,”
“Yes, that’s what I wanted you both for, as well
as helping me fix the thing up,” replied Willy.
“I never thought of that,” Don said, “and we
must have a name for it.”
“That’s true,” agreed Willy, “have you any
suggestions?”
Don shook his head. “No,” he said, “not one.”
But Carlo wisely said, “How about calling it the
‘ Listener,’ because the others will listen, won’t
they?”
“Very true; I think that the * Listener ’ will be
a good name for it,” Willy said. “And now we
must get to work, Carlo; find me a lot of wire.
Don, you come with me.”
They went out the door, the trumpet under Willy’s
arm. When Don and Willy arrived at the Meeting
Place, they looked around for a tree to put it.
A crowd of curious animals had followed them
and asked many questions, especially why a trumpet
was being put up in the tree.


“What use is a trumpet?” they said to themselves
Willy took no notice of them and went back to
his home as soon as they had fixed the trumpet.
He also warned the animals not to touch it. “And
at sunset come to my house,” he added. “There
will be an important notice on the door.”
They arrived home to find Carlo waiting for them,
a bundle of wires beside him. “First, we must
write a notice to tell them to be at the Meeting
Place to-morrow,” said Willy. They brought a sheet
of cardboard from the cupboard and wrote on it :


AT THE MEETING PLACE
TO-MORROW
GREATEST SHOW OF ALL TIME
BE EARLY
THE “LISTENER” A MASTERPIECE
TIME 10 A.M.
W. Wombat.
Carlo tacked the notice on to the front door.
Soon excited shouts announced the arrival of the
animals.
“I hope it will be a success,” said Willy, anxiously,
that night. They had been working hard, fixing the
wire to the roof, and a pipe from inside the house
to the wire. Now Carlo had done to the Meeting
Place and Willy was going to speak and see if
Carlo could hear him.
“Hullo!” he shouted through the pipe. “Can you
hear me, Carlo?”
Carlo came back to the house with good news.
He had heard, though very faintly, what Willy had
said.
“Instead of the wire fixed on to the roof,” he
told Willy, “push the pipe up higher and fix the
wire on to it.”
“I’ll try it,” said Willy.
This time the “ Listener ” was a success. The
three animals were overjoyed. “You must have a
special programme,” Don said to Willy. “I will,”
Willy answered. “A very good one, too.”


The Meeting Place was crowded hours before time
next day. Every space was filled by eager animals.
Don and Carlo had erected a platform, and now they
were standing waiting for the noise to cease.
“Silence!” ordered Don. “In a few moments this
show will commence. The best for years, but first
my friend here will speak.”
Carlo cleared his throat and said: “Willy Wombat
has been detained. I will explain after the show.
I must ask you to be very quiet.” He sat down
and waited. Minutes passed, the animals grew
restless, Carlo was worried. But everything was all
right. A humming noise started, then Willy’s voice
was heard.
“Good morning, friends. I am in my own home,


but you can still hear me. This is the 'Listener/
Be here at the Meeting Place every day at the same
time and hear the latest news from Bushland.
Entertainments must be provided by you, so if you
can do anything, sing or act, come to me, Willy
Wombat. Good-bye. ”
The animals were amazed and delighted. The
Meeting Place was always crowded to hear all the
news.
One day the fairies were invited to hear the
“Listener/’ They liked it very much, and thought
it was sure to be copied by the humans once they
heard about it. So the quarrel was made up and
the fairies came back to the bush.
“It seems your ‘Listener’ is a success,” said Don,
one day not long afterwards.
“Yes, the humans did copy it,” replied Willy, “but
they have called it the ‘Wireless,’ although why they
should call it a ‘Wireless’ puzzles me.”


,4 Trip in the Santoplane
MARY sat up in bed and rubbed her eyes. What
was that noise she had heard. Perhaps it
was Santa Claus!
“Come on, you are a sleepy-head!” she heard a
little voice say, and, looking down, she saw a little
elf perched on her shoe. “Do hurry,” he was saying.
“We will be late for the Santo-plane.”


“What is the Santo-plane?” asked Mary, as she
jumped out of bed. “Where does it go to?”
“Oh, dear,” said the elf, impatiently. “You’re
very ignorant! It is Santa’s own special aeroplane
and we are going to visit him.”
The elf took Mary’s hand, and together they went
downstairs and outside, where a silver aeroplane
waited for them, glistening in the moonlight.
“Hurry! We are very late,” said the elf.
The Santo-plane flew off very quickly and soon
was in a land of ice and snow. In the distance
was a castle with towers and turrets. As the Santo-
plane settled on the snow, Mary could see wee elves
hurrying to and fro, and tiny postmen with bags
of letters.
“The letters are from boys and girls to Santa
Claus,” said the elf.
They went through an arched doorway to the
room where Santa was busy sorting the letters.
“Hullo,” he said jovially. “Like to see the work-
rooms? They make dolls here, and soldiers there.
This is the workroom where books are made, and
we store toys over there.”
Santa then took them to the kitchens, where
sweets were made. Mary stopped and ate some.
“I like these,” she said.
“Perhaps you will find some in your stocking,”
smiled Santa.


“Santa! Santa!” called a voice from outside
“Oh, dear,” sighed Santa, “I can’t show you
anything more now.” He smiled as he added, “You
see, I have to go to give children their Christmas
presents and it is such fun!”
Outside, the prancing reindeer were harnessed to
a sleigh. The elves were packing the toys and.
lighting little lamps.
“All ready?” Santa asked as he climbed aboard
“Yes!” shouted the elves, and waved their hands
as he sped off into the night, with a chuckle and
a laugh.
Mary turned to ask the elf how she would get
home, but he had vanished. Someone was shaking
her. It was mother.
“Wake up, Mary! You must have been dreaming!
It is Christmas Day!” cried her mother.
Mary jumped out of bed. She looked in her
stocking and found the sweets Santa had promised.
“I did really go to his castle,” she said, as she
munched the sweets. “I really did, and had a
wonderful time!”


At the Zoo
ALL day visitors had been pouring 1 out of the
trams and walking along the paths in the
beautiful grounds of the Zoo. All day they
had been staring at the animals with a long, long
stare, and all day they had been teasing the
animals, and worst of all, eating. No animal likes
anyone to eat ice-creams and lollies and cakes in
front of it, or stare, and tease it.
As this had gone on for a long time, it was no
wonder the animals were in a bad temper. It was
almost closing time and the visitors were going
home. The animals were so pleased, the lion roared
with relief. To his anger, a passing lady remarked
to a friend, “Look at the lion, he must be hungry.”
Visitors always said stupid things like that.
At night, all the animals come out of their cages
and meet near the seal’s pool. The lion always
spoke first, and this night he seemed more im-
portant than usual. There was quite an air of
excitement about him and he kept whispering to
the tiger in a mysterious manner. When all was
quiet, Tiger announced in a pompous voice that
Lion had a suggestion to make.
Lion cleared his throat, put an eyeglass which he
had found to his eye, and said in solemn tones:
“Fellow animals of this Zoo, we have for many
years put up with a lot of fuss from the visitors.
We have been teased and tormented; we have been
stared at, and listened to rude remarks made about
us. I, for one, am tired of it all, and have a
suggestion to make.”
“Hear, hear!” screamed the animals all together.
“Hear, hear!”
S6


“As I was about to say,” continued Lion, “I have
a suggestion to make.
“You weren’t about to say it, you’ve already said
it!” called out a rude monkey from India.
“As I was— —” Lion went on, when he was
interrupted again by the monkey. “Get on with
it!” he cried cheekily.
Lion snorted with rage. “Don’t talk. This is very
important, and I don’t wish to be interrupted. My
suggestion is this. Why don’t we escape from the
Zoo?”
A storm of cheers broke from the animals. They
shouted and jumped about. They made such a
noise that it was like the roar of thunder. It


was deafening. Lion called for order, but he could
not be heard above the dreadful din. It grew quiet
at last, and Lion said:
“You must be sensible, and not go mad over
this. We will go out by the Lower Entrance and
swim across the sea. It can’t be very far, only
about two or three miles,” he added, vaguely.
“But I can’t swim!” exclaimed a Jackal.
“You must try, sh,” muttered a friend in reply.
“Follow me in a straight line!” ordered Lion.
They all trooped behind him, hopping, jumping,
and running in the greatest glee. Soon they were
out of the Zoo and down the road. It was so dark
they could scarcely see where they were going.
“Where is the water?” a Leopard asked. But no
one answered him, for there was a shriek and a
splash. Somebody had fallen in! It was Lion, of
all animals. He had not seen the water and had
tumbled in.
All the animals ran to help him out, and poor
Lion came up shivering with cold. “It’s freezing,
it’s simply awful.”
“Let me try, let me try!” demanded an inquisitive
Squirrel, dipping in a tiny paw. “Lion’s right,”
he said; “that water’s so cold that, that it’s cold,”
he finished lamely. The animals laughed.
“Perhaps we had better not swim after all,” said
the Elephant anxiously.
“Let’s try the road,” said Giraffe.
So they all made their way back up the hill, Lion
still leading.
“I think we should split up into two parties,”
announced Lion. “Elephant can lead one party, and
I’ll lead the other.”


“Good,” Elephant answered. “Come on, my
party!”
“You go that way and we’ll go this,” Lion said,
as he followed the tram line, while Elephant went
along by the road.
A car driving by frightened Elephant and his
party so much that they nearly turned back.
“W-w-what was that?” stuttered Elephant
“I don’t k-k-know,” said Giraffe, “but I’m not
frightened, are you?” “N-n-no, n-n-not at all, of
course n-n-not,” shakily replied Elephant, “but I
wish L-l-lion was here.”
Meanwhile, a tram had scared Lion and his friends
“I d-d-don’t think I 1-1-like the w-w-world,” Jackal
managed to stammer.
“N-n-neither d-d-do I,” replied Monkey, his teeth
chattering.
“L-l-let’s turn this c-c-corner,” Lion said, anxious
to get away from such huge things as trams.
Elephant had said exactly the same thing, and
it so happened that both parties pumped into one
another. In the dark they did not know what had
happened, and they all turned in the direction of
the Zoo, and back they scampered as fast as they
could go.
Lion heaved a great sigh of relief, and said; “I
don’t think that was a good suggestion after all.
I will be contented with my cage after this.”
“Hear, hear!” weakly cried all the other animals


Elizabeth’s Adventures
ELIZABETH was lost. All morning she had
wandered among the trees of the forest near
her home, but now she was tired and hungry.
Suddenly she came to a beautiful glade. Tiny
ferns peeped from behind moss-grown boulders. A
sparkling stream tinkled over the pebbles, while
dainty flowers waved gently in the breeze. Elizabeth
sat down on the soft grass. “Oh, dear, I’m so very,
very tired,” she murmured to herself. “I wish I
could find my way home. I’ll try later on, but I
think I’ll go to sleep now.” She lay down and was
soon fast asleep.
Now this was a Fairy glade, and the fairies often
went there. This day a great many came, even
some gnomes and pixies. When they saw Elizabeth
asleep, a great deal of talking arose. At last a
fairy in a blue dress stepped forward. “Silence!”
she commanded. “This is a mortal. Do not harm
her, because she is only a child; but we must do
something with her.”
“Why not just leave her here?” said Peter Pixie.
“She will be all right, Fairy Bluebell.” Bluebell
shook her head. “No, that will never do. She is
lost, I am sure she is.”
“Take her to Fairyland,” said Fairy Buttercup
unexpectedly.


“Yes, just for a visit,” added Fairy Primrose.
“That’s a very good idea, but we must cast a
spell on her so she will grow small.”
So all the fairies danced round Elizabeth singing:
To Fairyland we’ll take you now,
So smaller you must grow;
Back home you will go safely
After a happy time, you know;


while the gnomes and pixies played a tune on some
Canterbury Bells growing nearby.
This wakened Elizabeth, and she sat up and looked
about her in delight and amazement. “The Fairies,”
she whispered.
“We’re taking you to Fairyland,” said Peter Pixie.
“To Fairyland?” Elizabeth gasped.
r*
“Yes, come along now,” replied Bluebell. “See,
you have grown quite small.”
“Why, so I have,” said Elizabeth.
Shortly afterwards the little party reached Fairy-
land. Elizabeth was so excited. The tiny mushroom
houses and shops among tree roots fascinated her.
She was thrilled when Fairy Primrose told her she
could have a ride on a butterfly. Elizabeth climbed
on a big blue and gold one, and soared upwards to
the clouds. When they descended, Elizabeth asked
if she could visit some of the shops and buy
something.
“Why, yes,” replied Primrose, “but hurry. The
Fairy Queen has asked to see you.”
“O-o-oh, does she really?” Elizabeth jumped up
and down in her excitement. She ran all the way
to one of the shops, and waited outside for Prim-
rose to catch up to her. “What will I buy?”
Elizabeth asked.


“I think a fairy box would be the best to buy/’
answered Primrose, handing Elizabeth some blue
stones, which were used as money in Fairyland.
“It is very pretty,” Elizabeth said, as she picked it up.
The box was made of soft bark, decorated with
ferns and the tiniest of flowers. In between these
were coloured stones of different shapes and sizes.
As Elizabeth left the shop, Peter Pixie ran to her.
“Hurry, the Queen is waiting. Follow me, please!”
He ran ahead of her to the castle.
On either side of the path leading to the door,
gnomes in scarlet suits were standing. Elizabeth
walked between the friendly little fellows, Primrose
and Peter now following her. Lined up on the sides
of the steps were dainty fairies, their yellow frocks
gleaming in the sun. As soon as the party reached
the door it was opened by a tubby little gnome,
who said proudly;
“The Queen is waiting for you. Come this way.”
He led the way to the throne room. The Fairy
Queen was the most beautiful lady Elizabeth had
ever seen.
“You are the first mortal to visit Fairyland,” she
said. “We are giving a ball to-night in your honour.
Now, will you have tea with me?”
“Oh, yes, I’d love to!” Elizabeth exclaimed.


Tales for Times
The Queen smiled, and said Elizabeth could pour
out the tea. So Elizabeth poured the Dewdrop tea
into the acorn cups, and ate honey-cakes and gum-
leaf biscuits. After the meal, the Queen said:
“I will grant you one wish, little mortal. What-
ever you want, you shall have.”
Elizabeth thought for a few moments, then she
replied: “Well, you see, I have no brothers or
sisters, and I’m very lonely, I’d like something to
play with, a pussy or a little puppy.”
“Then you may have a puppy,” the Queen said,
clapping her hands for the tubby gnome.
“Bring me a puppy,” she told him, “for the mortal
child wants one.”
He hurried away and came back leading the
tiniest black pup.
“Oh, thank you, thank you so much!” she cried
delightedly, patting the dog’s head. “What shall I
call him. I know, Tubby! To remind me of you,”
she added to the fat little gnome.
That night the ball was held. It was near a
stream and the stone bridge crossing was hung with
coloured lanterns, as were the trees surrounding
part of the stream.


ht^
Elizabeth had a lovely time, but soon she grew
weary and fell asleep. When she wakened she was
back home in her own bed again, the fairy box on
the table, and the puppy playing near her bed.
Though she often tried to find the Fairy glade
again, she never did.


“Ghubbie”
FAR away in the great bushlands of Australia is
a gum tree. This particular gum tree is men-
tioned because it is the home of Chubbie and
his parents. Chubbie was a cuddly little Koala with
soft grey fur. He was a very mischievous baby,
and too daring for a young Koala, as all his friends
remarked. Mrs. Koala, however, was very proud
of Chubbie and his wild ways.
One day, Chubbie decided home was too quiet,
and he set out in search of adventure. At midday,
when his parents were asleep, Chubbie slithered
down the trunk of his tree, and waddled off. He
had not been very far from home before, but he
was not feeling nervous, dear me, no! In fact,
Master Chubbie was very proud of his escapade.
As he scurried along, the animals he met cast
worried looks in his direction and warned him of
the many dangers of the road. “Best be getting
back home,” said an old kangaroo, “you’re too
young to be wandering round alone.” But Chubbie
took no notice, and continued on his way quite
cheerfully.
It was growing late and darkness descended on
the silent bush, and tiny stars appeared in the sky.
Chubbie was a little frightened, but he found a gum
tree and climbed up into its sheltering branches.
Morning dawned bright and clear. Chubbie woke
up and stretched, then he yawned. He was very
hungry, and ate a huge breakfast of leaves, then
made his way down the tree again.


Several days passed in this manner, and Chubbie
was quite contented and happy. At the end of the
third day he came to a road. He had never before
seen a road or cars or people. When a car rushed
by in a cloud of dust, Chubbie nearly fell over in
surprise, and he was very excited when a car
stopped and a lady, a man, and a little girl stepped
out of it. They had a picnic basket and were going
to have some lunch, when the little girl saw Chubbie,
“Oh, look, Daddy!” she cried, pointing at Chubbie.
and jumping up and down.
“By jove, Judith!” her father exclaimed, “it’s a
koala bear; a baby, too!”


“The mother must have been killed,” said Judith’s
mother. “Poor little thing.”
“Can we take it home? Please, please say yes,”
begged Judith.
“Well, I don’t know,” replied her father. “It will
miss the bush and might not like the city, and it
might easily die without the right food. They only
eat certain types of leaves, you know.”
“Oh, daddy, please! We could give it to the Zoo
if it wouldn’t eat, and—and ”
“Oh, very well,” her father agreed and moved
towards Chubbie, who felt very excited. The city
would be grand. He made no fuss as the little girl
nursed him or when the car moved oif. It was all
part of the great adventure to him.
By nightfall the city had been reached. Judith
made a little bed for Chubbie, and gave him some
bread to eat. He did not like it at all, and thought
of the nice fresh gum leaves. “I do wish they’d
give me some,” he thought. But there were no gum
leaves at all round Judith’s home, and poor Chubbie
was getting very, very hungry.
As the days passed, Chubbie grew more and more
unhappy. He missed the bush and his friends, and
most of all he wanted his mother.
At last he could bear it no longer, and in a
tearful voice he called the fairies. He told them
his tale, and how he wanted to go back home again,
and how sorry he was.


The fairies were very kind to him, so they did
not scold him, and said they would help him return.
He was lifted up and flown over the trees and
housetops to Fairyland, to tell the Fairy Queen
where they were going.
Chuhbie loved Fairyland, and begged to be allowed
to stay there for a few days. The green trees, the
mushroom houses, the tiny villages, were all new
and strange to him.
He spent the days exploring the land, and visited
the Fairy Queen, even though he was not invited.
No—no, indeed, he just went! Of course, the Queen
was too polite to say anything, and anyway, she
really enjoyed Chubbie’s jokes and quaint ways.
Time passed all too quickly for Chubbie, and he
thought it was time he was getting back home.
The fairies carried him to the bush, and dropped
him right at the foot of his own tree.
You can imagine Mrs. Koala’s delight when
Chubbie bobbed up beside her. She had been frantic
with worry at her son’s disappearance, and she was
too overjoyed to scold him. She held a party in
his honour, even though he really didn’t deserve it.
He told the story of his adventures over and over
again, and though he boasted about his “fine time”
as he called it, when a group of friends asked him
to go adventuring with them, Chubbie said “No.”
So I think he must have learned a lesson, don’t
you?


“Tip” of the Circus
TIP was a little boy who lived with a circus. It
was not a very big circus, but was quite
well known.
There was the elephant, a huge grey beast, with
a long, swinging trunk. Then there was a per-
forming monkey, who did all manner of quaint
tricks. There were, of course, the clowns, the man
who rode a horse, and a tight-rope walker. But
best of all were the lions, two beautiful animals
from Africa. The lion-tamer was a short, plump
man with a rosy face and fearless grey eyes. Tip
liked him a lot.
Big Bill, who owned the circus, was kind and
generous to all the men who worked there.
Tip loved horses, and was allowed to work
amongst them. There were quite a lot of them,
some having to draw the circus waggons from town
to town when the circus moved on. Others were
the ones that performed, and were kept separate.
Big Bill, seeing how very much Tip loved the
animals, one day gave him a beautiful white pony.
“It is a wild young thing,” he said, “but if you
can train him, you may keep him, Tip.”
Tip was wild with excitement, and set to work
at once to tame the pony. He knew very little
about horses, but he loved and understood them so
well, that it wasn’t long before Spangle knew him
as his master.
Sam, the lion tamer, had also given Tip a small


•—rr' I
black dog. This gave Tip an idea. He would train
the puppy to ride Spangle, and then they could act
in the big tent. Soon Tip had the dog riding on
the horse in quite a professional way. Tip jumped
about in delight. He then tried to make Blackie,
the dog, turn somersaults as Spangle trotted along.
This Blackie soon learnt to do.
Then when Tip thought they were good enough,
he took them along to Big Bill.
Big Bill laughed and laughed when he saw Blackie
riding Spangle. He called Sam and some of the
other men, and together they watched. At last Big
Bill said: “Tip, that’s great. We will get that horse
and pup into the circus ring for you.”
Tip was so pleased, he ran off telling everyone
the good news.
The great day came when Spangle and Blackie
were to perform. Blackie had a red ruffle round
his neck, while Spangle had a scarlet saddle and
trappings. Silver bells hung from the saddle, which
jingled as the pony trotted along. Tip was there,
too; he had on a smart blue uniform and a tiny
whip. When he cracked the whip, Spangle cantered
round the ring, Blackie sitting very stiff and
straight. When Tip shouted, “Up, Blackie!” Blackie
turned somersaults.


The act was a great success. Everybody clapped
and cheered the little dog and pony. Tip was a
proud boy that night.
Not long after this the circus moved to a town
near the sea.
Tip had never seen the sea before. It was a
strange sight to him. The great blue waves, tipped
with white foam, rolling up the beach proved end-
less amusement. When Big Bill took him out in
a boat, Tip was very excited.
The circus was staying by the sea for several
days, so Tip had a marvellous time.
One day, he wandered off alone along the sand.
Not far away were some rocks which stretched out
as far as an island. Tip decided to explore the
island, and fearing he might not be allowed to go,
he slipped away by himself.
Tip soon found rock-climbing harder than he
expected. They were wet and slippery. Crabs were
scuttling about, and even though the day was hot,
he shivered at the sight of the ugly creatures. Soon
he reached the island.
It was very small, with few trees and little grass.
It did not take him long to explore all around the
island, and feeling drowsy, he sat down. The sea
air, the warm dry sand and his climb over the rocks
had made him very tired, and he was soon fast
asleep.
Meanwhile, Big Bill had missed him, and was very
worried. Nobody had seen him for some hours.
Big Bill sent a man down to the township to
organize a search party. Tip had certainly caused
trouble by his adventure.


When Tip awoke he was surprised to find that it
was late afternoon. Then, to his dismay, he dis-
covered that the rocks had disappeared. He did not
know that at high tide they were completely covered,
or that several hours would pass before he could
get back to the beach.
Tip stood up and looked about him. There appeared
to be no fishermen out, no boats at all, and he was a
wee bit frightened. He looked again, surely that
was a boat. Yes, yes it was. He waved and shouted
as the boat drew nearer. In it was a young boy,


about the same age as Tip himself. He was as
brown as a berry, with black hair and sad blue eyes.
Tip ran down to the water’s edge and explained to
the boy.
“Will you take me back to the beach?” he asked.
The boy nodded. “Jump in,” he said shortly.
On the way back the two boys became friendly.
Tip told about his life at the circus, and the fun of
acting in the ring. The other boy, Tony, was an
orphan, who had no home and tried to earn his
living by catching fish. Tip felt sorry for Tony, and
resolved to ask Big Bill if they couldn’t take Tony
along with them. He could be useful in many ways.
“Would you like to come and see the circus?” he
asked Tony,
“Would I!” said Tony, excitedly. “You bet, but I
haven’t any money.”
“You can see it free,” said Tip, generously
“Oh, gee, that is nice of you.”
By this time they had reached the shore and
scrambled up the cliff.
“See, that’s the circus,” Tip pointed out proudly.
“I’ve never seen one before,” Tony said.
Big Bill was coming towards them. “My, but you
gave us a fright, Tip,” he said. “Where have you
been?”
Tip related his adventures, adding the story of poor
Tony.
“Could he stay with us?” he pleaded. Big Bill
looked down at the two boys, one bright and happy,


full of life, the other unhappy, with no home, no
friends.
“Please,” said Tip.
“Well,” Big Bill pondered, “I suppose we can easily
make room for one more little fellow. Yes, he may.”
“Oh, thanks awfully,” Tip said. “Tony, you can
join the circus, too.”
“0 —oh!” gasped Tony, his eyes now shining with
pleasure. “Can I? Can I, really and truly?”
“Yes, sonny,” laughed Big Bill. “Come on, it’s time
for tea. We will be late.” He hurried in the
direction of the circus, leaving two happy, excited
boys to follow on.


To tke Land of
ISTursersy Rliymes
JOAN and Betty’s mother had just finished her
sewing when the postman rang the front door
bell, and she hurried to answer it.
“It must be a parcel,” Betty said. “He only comes
to the door when it is.”
Just then their mother returned.
“Here is a lovely book for you,” she said. “It is
from Uncle Dick.”
The two children ran forward.
“It’s a nursery rhyme book,” said Joan.
With great glee they opened it, and mother said:
“You can amuse yourselves until tea-time. I have to
go shopping now. Good-bye, and be good.”
“Yes, Mummy, I’ll look after Joan,” said seven-
year-old Betty importantly.
Mother laughed. “Joan is only two years younger
than you are,” she said, as she went out the door.
When she had gone Joan opened the book again,
and to her surprise, a pretty little fairy was sitting
between the pages. “Who are you?” Joan asked.
“I am the Nursery Rhyme Fairy,” she replied. “My
name is Twinkle, and I am going to take you to
the Land of Nursery Rhymes!”


“Oh, how nice!” cried Betty, while Joan clapped
her hands in delight.
“Now close your eyes and count three,” ordered
Twinkle, waving her silvery wand.
The children did so, and when they opened them
again, they were in front of a magnificent castle.
“Whose castle is that?” Betty asked.
“Why, it’s the Castle of Old King Cole!” said Twinkle
“Can we go inside?” asked Joan.
“Of course, perhaps you will even see Old King
Cole himself!”


The three went through the massive doorway and
into a long room, at one end of which was a throne.
Seated on it was Old King Cole. He was plump
and jovial, with twinkling blue eyes. He took no
notice of them whatsoever, but called out something
to a pompous butler who happened to be passing.
In a few minutes in came three thin men with
brown fiddles under their arms. They bowed to the
King in turn, then commenced to play.
“The Three Fiddlers,” whispered Betty.
“If you come down to the kitchen you will see the
Queen of Hearts,” Twinkle told Betty and Joan.
“It’s baking day.”
The trio went on along the passage and down some
stairs into the Royal Kitchen. Here they found the
Queen of Hearts taking some delicious looking tarts
from the oven. The Knave of Hearts was talking
to her, and whenever the poor Queen looked away,
he took one.
“Greedy old thing,” said Joan. “He’s just like
the Rhyme in that book.”
“Come on, I want to see some more Nursery
Rhymes, Twinkle,” Betty said. So they hurried out
the door, and almost bumped into a troop of soldiers
on horseback.
“Where are you going?” questioned curious Joan.
“Over to Humpty Dumpty, he’s sure to fall off
the wall again,” replied one of the soldiers, pointing
to a wall not far away. Sure enough, there was
Humpty Dumpty sitting down. He waved to the
soldiers, but he over-balanced and fell!


“I told you so,” said the soldier. “We’ll have to
take him to Dr. Foster, you know, the one that went
to Gloucester.”
“Yes, I ’member,” answered Joan. “Poor old
Humpty Dumpty. Who is that?” she added.
“I believe it’s Little Miss Muffett,” said Betty
“Yes, it is! She’s eating her curds and whey.”
“Oh, look! the spider! run!” shouted Joan to Little
Miss Muffett.
Little Miss Muffett took no notice until the big
black spider sat down beside her, then with a little
scream she ran away.


The children followed her, Twinkle coming behind
them. In a little while they came to a road. They
passed many characters from their favourite Nur-
sery Rhymes, even Little Boy Blue, fast asleep
under the haystack.
Farther down the road was a funny house that
looked like a pumpkin. “It belongs to Peter Peter
Pumpkin Eater,” Twinkle explained.
In the distance something was shining
“They are the Gates,” Twinkle said. “We must
hurry or they will shut us in. It’s nearly time
for closing.”
As they drew nearer the children saw the gates
were made of silver. A little man was ringing a
bell. “Closing time, closing time,” he repeated.
“Hurry,” Twinkle was saying. But everything
seemed to be going black, her voice grew fainter,
as did the tinkling of the bell.
Betty opened her eyes. They were back home
again. Mother hurried in. “Time for tea,” she
smiled. Joan and Betty related to her their
adventures in Nursery Rhyme Land. “You’ve been
asleep,” she said.
“Oh, no!” said Joan and Betty both together, and
looking at each other. Grown-up folk never seemed
to understand, but they knew perfectly well they
had not been asleep.


“ I lumpty I )umpty ”
THIS is really the true story of Humpty Dumpty.
He had a mother and father and an aunt.
Mrs. Dumpty was very kind, and so was his
father, but his aunt, Miss Dumpty, was stern and
strict.
When Humpty was born he was so tiny you could
hardly see him. Of course, he was an egg, a nice
white one, like his father. As he grew up he also
grew quite handsome.


How proud Humpty was the first day at school!
His mother had made him a pair of red trousers
and a green bow, while his father had bought him
a straw sailor hat to wear. Miss Dumpty had given
him a book of hard sums.
The teachers were not cross or mean, but the
boys gave them a lot of trouble. There was one
egg, Simple Timple, who seemed worse than all the
others put together. Unfortunately, Humpty got
friendly with this young scamp, and sad to relate,
he grew naughty, too! The teachers gave them
warnings, “You’ll end up by getting boiled or
scrambled,” but they took no notice at all.
One sad day, Humpty and Simple, or Sim, as he
was more often called, climbed up a wall and threw
stones at people, often hitting and hurting them.
Humpty was good at this, and he grew more and
more daring, until one day he fell off the wall.
He loved to climb walls, and whenever he could, he
did so. It was very dangerous, but he did not seem
to mind. Humpty became well known for his sitting
on walls. In fact, he got so proud and careless,
that more than once he fell off.
The King even heard of him and sent out his
soldiers to bring Humpty before him at Court. He
had heard the rhyme the townspeople had made up
about him:
Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall,
Humpty Dumpty had a great fall;
All the King’s horses and all the King’s men,
Couldn’t put Humpty together again;
and he wanted to see him for himself.


When he arrived at Court the King liked him so
much that he invited him to remain and be one
of the Court entertainers.
He was not so reckless as he got older, and most
of his time was spent in amusing the King, whose
favourite he quickly became.
Many changes had taken place since Humpty’s
childhood. His kind old father had died, as had the
crochety old aunt, and his mother, Mrs. Dumpty,
now lived in a bungalow erected especially for her
in the Court grounds. Simple Timple, the vagabond,
had been in prison these many years.
Humpty himself had changed. He was tall and
strong, with handsome features and a ready smile.
His kindly nature made him a friend of all he met,
and though he still loved to sit on walls, he very
rarely fell off.
The King was an old man now, and as he had
no sons, he decided that Humpty would marry his
only daughter, and so become King one day.
This eventually happened, and King Dumpty,
together with his Queen, ruled their country wisely
and well, and lived very happily.
THE END


i' ' 1 ' i : ,• ' ' ' - J . : '* ‘* ,4 '
"■ "" ‘ ■ / , • , ■■
y.‘.
'• . v ;
■■ . m*. Ym:' *' v
-
. . .•
i ■; - ~'Sfer
■ ' .• :«. ■>.: '■ » - V a*--•■:. - - - .-are**! wHBfay -
■
■■■..•r;•■.'■•■■ .v'-v'V . ..■■••■■. ■. 1
' - ' * . f .. ' %1 r . ■ T
• ! -V •>. * ■ ••' ' • £'" y . '■ ..‘IB v. «*» “ •’/ ‘ ?<,-•’ <& - '$» *
■ \ ■ -■ ; ■' ■■-4 7 v •; , ’■ ;
* f jy r " < ?
... V ,
■i ''■■.■
*
•. . ‘ ••••• ‘ . ■*' •-'..<w ;• ,“ - p'W ' \
-
■■■ , v &-.V .*? 1 IE- '!>* '■.-L. *! '■,,
v'| .'■ Ill *■ 1*
I
.
''■ ' '••■ '■' ';| ’ /',■/- • ■ ■ 3;‘;,.,j ,. ■■'.‘i''; v ' '. ' ’ ■ .^'V.
*
’■J . ’, . J ■’# r ■ ■■■ \ ' ... ■ ■... ■ ■
,
