

y


“ James Chalmers—the Great Heart of New Guinea.
"A Man I love A Man that took me fairly by storm for the
most attractive, simple, brave, and interesting man in the whole
Pacific.”
ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.
TAMATE,
The Apostle or the Papuan Gulf.
BY
C. STUART ROSS,
AUTHOR OF
THE SCOTTISH CHURCH IN VICTORIA
ETc., ETc., ETc.
PUBLISHED BY
M. L. HUTCHINSON, LITTLE COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE.


DEDICATED
TO THE
DIRECTORS
OF THE
LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY,
WHOSE EFFORTS FOR THE
EVANGELIZATION OP HEATHEN RACES
HAVE BEEN
A BENEDICTION
TO THE
CHRISTIAN WORLD.




BY THE SAME AUTHOR:
u The Story of the Otago Church & Settlement.”
“ Education & Educationists in Otago.”
“ Colonization & Church Work in Victoria.”
“ Dick Arnold : a Tasmanian Story.”
“Life & Times of D. M. Stuart, D.D,”
“The Scottish Church in Victoria.”
Etc., Etc., Etc.


PREFACE.
J AMES CHALMERS takes rank among the
excellent of the earth. His life and work are a
stimulus and inspiration to us to labour ever more
abundantly in the Gospel of Christ. All that he
was and had he laid at the Master’s feet. He
endured hunger and fronted peril with unflinching
and fearless heart. His love to Christ was 'a
glowing passion 'in his soul. His faith in His
promises never faltered. He was willing to spend
and be spent in Hfs service. Hardest and rough-
est experiences could neither daunt his courage nor
quench his zeal. His longing for the conversion of
the heathen was deep and strong. It reminds us
of that of Knox, when he cried out in the dark
night in an agony of prayer, “ Lord, give me
Scotland, or I die.” So Chalmers, more than once,
with a holy daring cried. ‘‘Give me New Guinea,
or I die.” And, in fact, for New Guinea he laid
down his life, surrendering it cheerfully, as he
sometimes prophetically (as it now seems to us)
said he would, in order that the light and healing
power of God’s Word might shine in upon the
darkness of the heathen whom he loved so well.
He stood out with such prominence in the
Mission, prosecuting his work with such devotion


PREFACE.
and energy, and wielding such influence over the
natives, that he was referred to in one report as
“the Apostle Papuan Gulf.” Sir William
Macgregor, who knew him well, declared on a great
public occasion that there was nothing strained in
the definition.
I have read with great interest, “ James
Chalmers ; His Autobiography and Letters,” by
Richard Lovett, M.A. ; and to those who desire
very full information regarding the life and work
of Chalmers, I would recommend a perusal of that
book, which has been published by the Religious
Tract Society, London. But quite naturally, much
is omitted that is of special interest to many in
the Colonies, who were brought into personal con-
tact with Chalmers, and whose love and practical
sympathies he entirely won. To supply that
omission, therefore, I decided to issue this sup-
plementary volume, in the hope that it may con-
tribute in some measure to the creation in our
Christian people of a deeper and more general
interest in the Evangelistic operations of the
agents of the London Missionary Society in
British New Guinea, which has now been brought
into close political touch with our own Australian
Commonwealth.
C. STUART ROSS.
The Manse,
Darlington,
Victoria.
1903.


CONTENTS.
Page
CHAPTER I.
A Mission —Ardour Kindled in Dunedin . . 9
CHAPTER 11.
Moulding Influences, and Work at Rarotonga . 13
CHAPTER 111.
New Guinea 19
CHAPTER IV.
Native Teachers and their Work .... 26
CHAPTER V.
The Hood Bay Massacre 32
CHAPTER VI.
Gospel Light Driving Heathen Darkness Back 38
CHAPTER VII.
Polygamy and its Problem .... 46
CHAPTER VIII.
Trip to Mekeo
CHAPTER IX.
Collections for Princeton Mission Cabinet . 61
CHAPTER X.
Kone, the New Guinea Rain-maker ... 67


Page
CHAPTER XI.
Decked Boat —A Supreme Need of the Mission 80
'CHAPTER XII.
A Munificent Gift to the Mission ... 87
CHAPTER XIII.
Thanksgivings . . . . . . .93
CHAPTER XIV.
The Church’s Vitality Conditioned by Aggres-
siveness 98
CHAPTER XV.
Political Developments—Protectorate . . 108
CHAPTER XVI.
Undenominational Christian Missions . . 113
CHAPTER XVII.
Sir Peter Scratchley appointed Special Com-
missioner 120
CHAPTER XVIII.
Honoured in Melbourne ...... 126
CHAPTER XIX.
Re-Visiting Old Scenes 132
CHAPTER XX.
The Fly River ........ 139
CHAPTER XXI.
Second Visit to Great Britain .... 145
CHAPTER XXII.
Station Established at Saguane . , , 152
CHAPTER XXIII.
Tamate wins the Martyr’s Crown . . . 160
CONTENTS— (Continued.)


CHAPTER I.
A MISSION—ARDOUR KINDLED IN
DUNEDIN.
was in July, 1877, that we first met
Kaw James Chalmers and his wife at
Cintra, the Dunedin residence of the
Hon. Mathew Holmes. They were on
their way from Rarotonga to New Guinea,
and made some pause at Dunedin to visit
relatives who were resident there. Mrs.
Holmes, a saintly woman, had travelled
down the coast with them from Wellington,
and, attracted by the charm of their
personality, and the robust type of their
Christianity, had welcomed them as guests
at her hospitable home at Anderson’s Bay.
We felt drawn to Chalmers at once. His
force and manliness, and splendid en-
thusiasm, laid their spell upon us. His
talk sparkled with uncommon incident and
adventure, and was stamped with such


glowing earnestness and honesty, that he
took us by assault. A few days later, in
the Church at Anderson’s Bay, he held a
large audience fairly captivated by a
stirring address which he delivered on
Mission Work at Rarotonga and the islands
of the Hervey Group. He was our guest
that night, and we sat on till late chatting
on the great subject that lay so near his
heart. The result of that talk was that we
were committed to the cost of maintaining
a native teacher in New Guinea.
On the 7th August following a great
public meeting was held in the Temperance
Hall, Dunedin, by way of welcome to Mr.
and Mrs. Chalmers, and to wish them
success in their great Christian enterprise in
the new land. Speeches full of force and
fervour kindled into practical sympathy
and interest the hearts of that vast
audience. Mr. James McKerras, a leading
merchant of the city, on that occasion
called us from the platform and put £l5
into our hand, which he desired us to give
to the Missionary, with an engagement that
an equal sum, subscribed by himself aasd
two other merchants of the city, would be


paid annually for three years, to maintain
an evangelist in New Guinea. The an-
nouncement of that generous donation and
undertaking elicited a great outburst of
applause. When the Missionary rose to
speak he was greeted with an enthusiastic
welcome, and amid the outpourings of his
thanksgivings and praise, a wistful look
came into his eyes as his thoughts flashed
back to the old humble home at Inverary,
and a deep, sad longing was expressed that
his mother could have been there to witness
the splendid enthusiasm there displayed.
Her recent death had scarred his heart and
tinged with sadness all his joys.
Mr. William Somerville, an elder of the
Church, and one of the kindliest and best of
men, threw himself with ardour into the
mission movement now initiated, and under
his guidance the Sunday School children
took upon them certain obligations in
regard to the New Guinea work. Mr. Eley,
a member of the Church, came to us at the
close of an evening service, and after some
talk about the mission, handed us a cheque
for £l5 to be applied in aid of its
prosecution. Thus men’s hearts were


touched by the magnetic influence that
flowed from Chalmers, and kindled into an
interest that grew and glowed, and that led
them to lay their gold upon the altar that
the heathen might be won for Christ.
Early in September Mr. Chalmers had
reached Sydney on his way to his des-
tination. “ When we get to New Guinea,”
he wrote to us, “1 shall appoint your
teacher and let you know his name. . . .We
leave on the 20th for Somerset, where we
join the Schooner at present engaged in the
New Guinea Mission, and accompany
Macfarlane and Lawes to China Straits.
The “Ellengowan” will not be ready for
some time, so we must press on by the
mail. We pray that your Sabbath School
may indeed be abundantly blessed, and that
the work they are now entering upon in
New Guinea may be the source of great
good to them. May your own dear children
be richly blessed, indeed, and may they ever
feel it an honour to so help in supporting
an evangelist amongst the heathen. God
bless them. Our love to you and yours.
&c.
JAMES CHALMERS.”


CHAPTER II.
MOULDING INFLUENCES, AND WORK AT
RAROTONGA.
*8 AMES Chalmers was born at Ardri-
shaig, Argyllshire, on August 4th,
1841, and received an elementary
education at his village school. It was in
the little Church at Inverary that the first
longing to labour in the Mission field was
awakened in his heart. The Rev. Mr.
Meikle, the minister, for whom throughout
his life he entertained the warmest affection,
read to the class one day, at the close of
the Sunday School lessons, a letter from a
Missionary in Fiji, which was published in
the Record of the United Presbyterian
Church, and which dealt with the revolting
practices of heathenism, and the power of
the Gospel to cleanse the polluted heart.


The reading of that letter kindled a desire
in young Chalmers to devote himself to
Foreign Mission work. He was then only
fifteen years of age, and though the im-
pression which was made gave for a little
while a new direction to his thoughts, yet
it passed away under force of the influences
that daily operated on him.
At eighteen years of age he was brought
tinder religious conviction, which issued in
conversion, and three years later, tender a
quickening of the old longing, he began to
qualify himself for the great work on which
he now set his heart.
For eight months he laboured in con-
nection with the City of Glasgow Mission,
and was thus brought into close contact
with the practical heathenism that existed
in his native land. But he always looked
wistfully across the seas hoping that
the way would open for him to enter upon
the foreign field. It was about this time
that Dr. Turner, of Samoa, crossed his path
and powerfully influenced his future move-
ments. Guided by his counsel he applied
to the directors of the London Missionary


Society, who, satisfied that he was the
stamp of man which they required for their
work, sent him to qualify in Theology at
Cheshunt where he remained for two years.
At Highgate he remained for another year,
following such lines of study as were pres-
cribed for those who were designated to
labour in the foreign field. Then came his
marriage, in 1865, to Miss Hercus, and
shortly after that he set sail for Rarotonga
and was wrecked en route at Savage
Island. He arrived at his destination on
May 20th, 1867.
Rarotonga is the largest and most pic-
turesque island of the Hervey group. It
is some thirty miles in circumference and
has a lofty mountain range running from
East to West, which is clothed with lux-
uriant vegetation to its very summit. The
highest peak is called Teatu-Kura, which
commands a magnificent outlook over a
vast extent of broken volcanic country.
Forty years of Christian teaching in
the Hervey group had produced good
results. Outwardly the people were well
advanced in Christian knowledge and civili


zation ;on many ’of them the Gospel had
laid a firm grip developed in them some
of the finest traits of Christian character.
But the moral tone was low, vices were
rife, and against these the Missionaries had
unceasingly to contend. Chief among the
evils that hindered progress was intemper-
ance, caused by indulgence in foreign spirits
and an intoxicant manufactured locally
and known as “ orange beer.”
Mr. Chalmers did splendid work there,
and displayed a tact and courage in dealing
with hostile elements that had the happiest
results. He had a remarkable power of
adapting himself to circumstances and of
reaching chords in the natives’ hearts that
vibrated to his touch, thus bringing them
out of indifferency into sympathy with
Christian work. His occasional impatience
of staid old methods and ways of doing
things exposed him sometimes to strictures
and admonitions from older workers in the
Mission field. But he went on his way
longing to see the Gospel triumphant and
all men around him conscious of the
throbbings of a new-found life.


He was not satisfied, however, with his
field of operations. His restless, fiery spirit
chafed at its limitations. He felt that the
islands and tribes which had been evangel-
ised might now safely be left to the care of
native pastors and teachers with only
slight European supervision. He had an
ardent desire to go out beyond the furthest
reach of civilization among the very fiercest
and wildest tribes and declare to them
God’s love in Christ. His irrepressible
energy found outlet in exploring every
valley and clambering over every moun-
tain top in Rarotbnga. That was his un-
failing remedy for indisposition and
depression. , ,
At last, in 1876, the Directors invited
him to visit Britain, calling at New Guinea
on his way. His mother still lived and
longed to see him, and he had a great
yearning to look into her face once more.
But in December of that year he received
the announcement of her death. The visit
which he had projected was therefore in-
definitely postponed. “ The nearer I get to
Christ and His Cross,” he said, “ the more
do I long for direct contact with the


heathen.” And it was with great joy that
he received instructions from the Directors
of his society to proceed to New Guinea,
where he knew he would find his longing
abundantly gratified. On the eve of his
departure from the Hervey Islands, the
Mangaians presented him with the sum of
£6O as a small token of their love and
esteem.


CHAPTER III.
NEW GUINEA.
|S|KS|i|OIITH of Australia, some 150
SAwwn m^es beyond the outermost fron-
tier of Queensland, lies New Guinea,
the largest Island in the world. It is nearly
1,400 miles in length, and some 400 miles
across at its broadest part, and is separated
from Australia by. Torres Straits, which are
thickly studded with islands and sand
banks, the busy scene of the pearl fisheries,
which have now developed into an
important industry. In New Guinea there
are tropical forests of marvellous beauty,
where vegetation wantons luxuriantly in a
thousand forms of exquisite loveliness.
Lofty mountain ranges, the birth-home of
innumerable rivers, hide their summits amid
mists and snows. The Owen-Stanley range
which, forty miles back from the sea-board,
rises to a height of some 13,205 feet, is said


to have a swarming population dwelling in
villages built on its ridges and spurs. The
countless streams, which in the rainy season
rush down the gorges and valleys from
those stupendous heights, flood the low
lands, and turn many of them into a vast
morass, the fertile cause of the deadly fevers
which make havoc of the health of the
Christian teachers, who have gone thither
from other isles. The climate of the South-
Eastern coast, which is higher than the
other side, is comparatively healthy from
the wholesome influences which the trade
winds exert upon it. The country is des-
cribed as generally fertile, abounding with
streams and inland lagoons, which swarm
with ducks, and are the home of crocodiles,
of which the natives stand in constant
dread.
There seem to be two distinct races
inhabiting the island, the Malayan and the
Papuan, which differ from one another in
colour and habits, and in the way in which
they treat their women. The houses of the
coast tribes are built on lofty piles or trees,
probably for safety from incursions of
crafty foes.


The condition of the heathen population
of the country awakened interest in the
London Missionary Society, which sent out
agents to break up ground as early as 1871.
Native teachers from various islands in the
South Pacific were also located at various
points. In 1874 the Rev. W. G. Lawes
joined the Mission as superintendent of the
Malayan or Eastern branch, with Port
Moresby as his centre of operations.
Mr. Chalmers, with such a field before
him, vast and unexplored, entered upon his
work with glowing, zeal and heart aflame to
win the heathen for Christ.
Towards the end of the year there came
to us from Murray Island a marvellous
collection of butterflies of unusual size, and
with gorgeously tinted wings ; and, later
on, we received specimens of products of the
land, which told of illimitable sources of
commercial wealth, which only enterprise
and capital are needed to develop.
Mr. Chalmers moved about unceasingly,
opening new Stations, placing teachers, and
visiting Mission districts already formed.


A noble contribution to the Mission cause
was made by the native Churches of
Raiatea and Rarotonga, which sent twenty
additional teachers to the New Guinea field.
But all too soon difficulties and disasters
began to gather and thicken around the
heroic band that laboured there. The
malarious climate and the want of proper
food seriously affected their health, and
some were removed by death, while others
fell victims to the treachery of those whom
they sought to evangelize.
Early in 1878 Mrs. Chalmers made
splendid exhibition of her dauntless courage
and faith when, during the absence of her
husband for six weeks on matters of
urgency connected with the welfare of the
Mission, she, of her own will, decided to
remain among the wild Suau tribe in order
that the work might not suffer hindrance,
and that the native teachers might have the
cheer and the moral support of her
presence. And that sublime act of moral
daring had the best effect on the native
mind. “ They trust us,” the savages said,
"We must treat them kindly. They cannot
mean us harm, or Tamate would not have


left his wife behind.” It is one of the most
luminous pages in the history of Missions,
that which exhibits to ou,r view the frail,
cultured woman, left alone among a wild
cannibal tribe, with only a few native
teachers around her, whose courage she had
to sustain as best she could. But the strain
to which she was then subjected was too
much for her. Her vitality fell low. She
lost the power of resisting the enervating
influence of climate, and, under date. South
Cape, New Guinea, 29th August, 1878, Mr.
Chalmers wrote to us :
“ The enclosed translations explain
themselves. If I have time I shall send you
a copy of ‘My trip across the Peninsula.'
You may do what you like with it —publish
or burn it.
“ I have got a collection of curios and
insects for the Dunedin Museum, but will
not be able to send them on until ‘ John
Williams ’ leaves in November. I shall send
the whole to you, and ask you to present
them. The insects had better be given to
an expert, and ask him to make a complete


collection for yon. My collections of plants
go to Baron von Muller.
“ Mrs. Chalmers is not well, and may
have to go to the colonies. If so, we shall
leave next week for Cooktown. I am in
excellent health, much lighter than when in
Dunedin this time last year. Hence in much
better trim for travelling.
“We are excellent friends with the
cannibals, go about with them, sleep with
them, eat with them, and sit to all hours
yarning with them. They are not bad
fellows, and can appreciate kindness.
“ 31st August . . . Piri’s letter I think
interesting. Parts I have translated separ-
ately. You will see why. I know all is
interesting to you. I had to translate right
off, and have not been able to revise and
copy.
“ I hope soon to clear up about
Orangerie Bay lagoon and the different
rivers flowing into it. Our united love to
you all. Pray for us that we may be
strong in His strength, and evermore live


near to our Lord Jesus. We remember you.
Affectionately yours,
JAMES CHALMERS.”
Mrs. Chalmers went to Sydney, and died
there on 19th February, 1879. “It was
evident to all,” the Rev. J. P. Sunderland
wrote to us, “ she could not recover. She
had every care which loving friends could
show to her, but she fell asleep in Jesu,s.”
Mr. Chalmers had been arranging a visit
to the Home-land, but his wife’s last words
to him—“ On ho account leave the teach-
ers ” —determined him to go back to work ;
and with chastened spirit he threw himself
with renewed energy into it, striving thus
to overmaster the sorrow which had so
deeply bruised his heart.
The translations referred to were those
of letters received from Piri and Pi, the
former being the evangelist supported by
the Anderson’s Bay Sunday School, and the
latter by Mr. McKerras and his friends.
B


CHAPTER IV.
NATIVE TEACHERS AND THEIR WORK.
mortality among the native
WAlli teachers distressed Mr. Chalmers
dsilb greatly. They held a large place in
his heart. Many of them had been trained
by himself at Rarotonga. In many respects
they did admirable work, but they had no
toughness of fibre to resist the miasmatic
fever that smote so many of them down.
Those native evangelists we are apt to hold
of small account, we are slow to appreciate
their courage and devotion, and the great
longing that sometimes fills their hearts to
carry the lamp of truth to heathen lands.
With full knowledge of the perils to which
they would be exposed, the Rarotongans
left the quiet security of their island
homes to pluck the standard from their
dead comrade’s hands, and to carry it
forward into the thickest of the fight. Mr.


Chalmers knew their worth, and waa
always eager to honour them. He never
allowed either them or their labours to be
depreciated. Many of them wielded an
influence that was sometimes powerful, and
that was wholly for good. They not only
taught the people and exhibited in their
view the purity and beauty of a consistent
Christian life, but they also translated
portions of Scripture into the language of
the country, which effectively helped on the
evangelization of the tribes. Piri, and Pi,
and Euatoka were splendid types of native
Christians and evangelists, whose praises
Mr. Chalmers never ceased to sing. And
they were utterly devoid of ambition,
always willing to make sacrifices and endure
toil, without any itching desire for applause
and fame. It was to save precious lives so
often decimated by malaria, that Mr.
Chalmers projected a Training Institution
at Port Moresby, where natives of New
Guinea might be educated to become teach-
ers and evangelists to their countrymen.
An imperative need of the native teach-
ers was a boat, and on Ist April, 1879, Mr.
Robert Brown, of Dunedin, who took a deep


and intelligent interest in Mission work,
sent us a cheque for £35 which had been
subscribed, and which was forwarded to the
Rev. J. P. Sunderland, in aid of the New
Guinea Boat Fund. And, in response to an
appeal made to them by Mr. Chalmers, the
native Churches of Mangaia subscribed to
the same fund the sum of £66 18s., collected
by them on one Sabbath day.
In April Mr. Chalmers returned to
Dunedin, and gave eloquent and fervent
addresses on his work in New Guinea in the
Anderson’s Bay, and other Churches. He
was greatly changed and reduced in weight.
Sorrow had left its ravages upon him. But
the old fire in the eye and magnetic ring in
the voice with their wonted power searched
and thrilled men’s hearts.
The following letter addressed to the
children of the Sunday School, will show
the spirit with which the Native teachers
prosecuted their work ; —“Blessings on you
from God and Jesus Christ our Saviour.
’Tis 1, Piri, who write this letter of love to
you, that you may know the nature of our
stay in New Guinea now. We are doing our


Master's work, every day trying to per-
siiade the people to become people of Jesus,
teaching that the people may know the
Word of God,—and some already know how
to read, and now we follow on, that they
may become as members of the Church of
Jesus, and New Guinea must become a
Kingdom of Jesus. Children, ’tis that I
seek, that I may obtain some souls from
New Guinea as a hand-bearing presentation
in God’s presence. God’s talent is in my
hand, and lam buying (bartering) now,
that I may other talents beside obtain, and
I make known that all-powerful and all-
glorious Name in the presence of the people,
that they may receive Jesus as life for
their souls. If they live I have obtained
more talents for my Master. Should no
soul be saved by my making known the
Name of Jesus, then truly lam like unto
the servant who hid the talent of his lord.
That is my great fear, lest I should become
a worthless and lazy servant and be
thrown out into the darkness, where there
is weeping and gnashing of teeth . . Bless-
ings on you from God, through Jesu,s
Christ.”
'Tis I, PIRI, BOERA.


Mr. Chalmers wrote to us under date,
March 4, 1880 “My dear Brother—With
the teacher, I say, too, ‘Blessings on
you and yours/ We are busy getting wood
for Church building, and hope to have a
good house up very soon. Assisted by two
teachers and two natives, we are trans-
lating Matthew. I hope to be able to keep
at it until we have got to the end of Mark.
At odd times the teachers have translated
Catechisms, which I am revising, and with
new hymns, may soon be able to send to
press.
“I hope in opening the new Church to
baptize a few natives who are now in class,
and whose progress is cheering. I feel con-
fident we have not much longer to wait;
the wall gives way, and we must enter in.
“We are now right in our wet season,
and some days you would be astonished to
find it so cold, sufficient for warm clothes —
thermometer, 75 deg. I wonder how I
would stand the Highlands now; not well,
T fear. Fancy being snowed up in Lochaber,
or, worse still, in a carriage of the High-
land railway, and not able to get along.


I remember you, are now entering on your
cold weather, and will laugh at our cold of
76 deg. One of our inland teachers came
down lately very sick, but has returned
quite well again. All on the coast are at
present well.”
Mr. James McKerras, whose interest in
Christian Missions was always keen and
well sustained, announced to us his in-
tention of subscribing, in conjunction with
Mr. Robert Glendining, £ls a year for the'
support of a native teacher in New Guinea.
Mr. Glendining for many years has stood
well to the front as one of the most gen-
erous and sympathetic friends of the Church
in Dunedin.


CHAPTER V.
THE HOOD BAY MASSACRE.
HARLY in 1881 a sad disaster befell
the Mission in the Hood Bay Mas-
sacre, which was perpetrated at
the instance of Qu,aipo, Chief of Kalo.
Twelve persons were then barbarously
slain, including four Native teachers, who
could ill be spared. The British Govern-
ment sent Commodore Wilson in his flag
ship, the “Wolverene,” to punish the
murderers, and the chief and three others
were killed. How Tamate’s heart was torn
by that cruel tragedy will appear by the
following letter from his own pen or
rather pencil. It is dated Dilend,
Hall Sound, 30th May, 1881 “Dear
Brother Ross—Excuse pencil. I am
living in a tent and cannot find
ink. I came down here last week to begin
work at Maiva, the largest district visited
bv me the end of last year, but a heavy sea


rolling in prevented me landing, so I re-
turned here and have begun work. The
natives are all out to-day cutting wood for
a house. This is really the only good har-
bour in all the Gulf, after leaving Port
Moresby. Some, years ago we had a
station on Yule Island, just opposite, but
two white men having been murdered near
here, the teacher was withdrawn, and since
then nothing has been done. Our hope is
to have stations here at Maiva, Kevai,
Jokea, and Motumotu as soon as we can
possibly get teachers, and at Naara, Cape
Suckling, where my friendly queen is.
“The Hood Bay Massacre was a ter-
rible blow to us, .but I hope not upsetting
or disastrous. Light will arise in the dark-
ness, and this cruel massacre will not be
forgotten or unblessed. Eh ! brother, they
were my ain bairns : three of the men and
the two women were trained by me on
Rarotonga, and since our joining this Mis-
sion we have worked together—they looking
to me as to a father. It was a terrible
heart-raking. The murdering of the women,
infants at the breast and walking children,
was horribly cruel. Anederea's wife and


infant were pinned with one spear. You
will not be astonished at my appreciation
of those imprecatory Psalms, and breathing
them freely. A child of five years, running
from the boat to the Mission-house and
calling on its father, was met and speared
by a youth who nursed him, and for two
years lived about the house. I have been
twice in the Bay since the massacre, but
have not met a Kalo native. They are in
expectation of an attack, and are prepared.
We have returned the Aroma teachers; the
people and chiefs received us well. At
Kerepunu and Hula they beg for teachers
to supoly the places of the murdered ones.
We have written to the various Institutions
of the South Seas, and hope soon to re-
ceive a number. Some will come via Auck-
land.
“How are all in your home ? How the
bairns would enjoy a peep in here ! I do
not suppose they would care for it beyond
an hour —A good tent with fly : my bed a
piece of an old canoe covered with a mat :
my table a camphor-wood box, and a to-
bacco case for a seat : another tent outside
for a store : and, to the North, a fly for a


cook-house : natives in crowds all about,
jabbering frightfully, and a sorcerer trying
to make friends by appearing friendly : but
these are gentlemen I dislike, and do not
feel friendly. There are only three of us.
Bob Samoa, and Keua, the old Port Mores-
by woman who accompanied me in my
inland trips : and this waif Keua says she
is going wherever Tamate goes, and she is
not afraid, because if Tamate lives she will
live, and if they kill Tamate then they will
kill her, and it will be all right. She does
the cooking. I look upon this kind of life
as the pepper and salt to the regular
settled Mission Work. I expect to have a
good deal of it for some time to come.
“Mr. and Mrs. Lawes have returned and
taken their old station. Port Moresby, the
central station of the New Guinea Mission.
I shall have my headquarters with them,
and sally forth after a rest and other work.
God help us to live out our little day for
His praise and glory—in all kinds of work
abundant. If only Christ is glorified all is
well.
“Do you know I never yet felt sick with
hard work, but I have really been sick with


laziness and doing nothing. I have spent
three weeks in an open boat, visiting in all
kinds of weather, and thoroughly enjoyed
it. I have had to tighten my belt to ease
hunger, but have never had any evil con-
sequences. But when resting for a time and
feasting I have got fever. Tell the bairns
honest, hard work for Christ, it matters
not in what situation, will be always bles-
sed, and no evil consequences will follow.
“What is the matter now ? Natives are
shouting, ‘ Tamate, Tamate, come out
quick.’ Must go. It was to see the wood
they had brought in for house. Poor fel-
lows, they are in earnest in this house
business. I hope soon they will be as earn-
est in another business.
“You are right, brother, as to our ups
and downs, lights and shadows. They are
many, but they will lend a grand back-
ground to the future.
“I shall keep Princeton Museum in mem-
ory. I have ju,st finished a collection for
Berlin. I wonder if they will make me a
Baron. Fancy your old friend Baron !
Now Tamate ! What about the world
ending ?


• • • I wonder if ever I shall see you
all again. My path seems plain enough.
My loved one at Home ! My work for
Christ here, uptil He shall say it otherwise.
Do not suppose lam never lonely. God
only knows how* alone T am, and at times
how I feel it. I live the past and sometimes
forget it is a past. But, brother, God is
Home. In Him through Christ there is all.
Have you ever felt you were comforted with
the insects chirping, the sough of the wind
through the trees, or a solitary bird singing
in his loneliness out of tune ? Or have you
ever felt that your, nearest companions and
friends were the seemingly unattached stars
overheard ? And you remembered yourself
and thought, God is here, near, and loved
ones who have gone within are here, near,
and you have felt life change and worth
living.
"Brother, Good-bye. The God of all
grace bless you and yours. Love to you
all. Oh, pray for me : earnestly do I ask
for it.”
Very affectionately yours,
JAMES CHALMERS.


CHAPTER VI.
GOSPEL LIGHT DRIVING HEATHEN
DARKNESS BACK.
MHE publication of the foregoing
letter, and the wide distribution of
copies of a brochure which we wrote
on Mission Work in New Guinea, stimulated
interest in the great enterprise, and Mr.
Chapman, at that time a member of the
Riverton Church, but now in the Church
triumphant, came to us and said, “ The
people are not doing enough for Missions, I
will give five pounds a year if the con-
gregation will raise other ten pounds to
support a native teacher/’ A little boy,
who is now a prominent minister of our
Church in Dunedin, handed us three shil-
lings which he had saved, saying, “Please
use that for Christ’s work among the hea-
then.” Another boy put into our hand a
shilling, which he had earned by some hard


service ; and another handed us two pounds
four shillings—all for Missions.
The following letter addressed to us by
Mr. Chalmers, will shew the steady progress
made by the Gospel in New Guinea :
“Your very kind letter of Ist August I
duly received, and, by last mail, your deeply
interesting pamphlet. Your letters are as
fine cool water to a thirsty soul in this
sun-burnt land.
“I have ink this time, brother, but no
box suitable for a table, and with my wri-
ting case on my knees I write, finding it
easier to do so with my pencil than with
ink, so pray forgive.
“I am here superintending the building
of two houses to be in readiness for teach-
ers expected very soon, so that they may
have comfortable houses, without the hard
work of putting them up when they come
new to the country. To know that we are
remembered in prayer by you and yours is
strength and consolation, and helps us
amazingly in our work. In such ways the
toiling disciples may see the Master stand


ing near coming over the seas to cheer and
comfort,
“We are now really in the Gulf, amongst
a fine sturdy lot of natives, with whom we
get on amazingly well. Our camp is prim-
itive. We shall be glad when our houses are
finished. Your teacher, Piri, is with me, a
splendid fellow with natives, and a right
good workman in every respect. I have
the old Port Moresby woman again and two
boys from Hood Bay. The old woman does
our cooking, and the boys are for the boat.
Working with natives only is slow work,
and requires much patience. I sometimes
wonder if Job’s would be sufficient for
them.
“It will cheer you to hear that on the
Ist of January twenty more natives were
baptized, and seven sat down at our blessed
Lord’s table. In the afternoon an open
service was held, when several spoke, and
some said really good things, testifying to
the good they had derived from the Gospel,
and the effect it has had on the whole tribe,
and that it is their sincere desire to follow
Christ. There were natives present from


various other tribes, some formerly in
mortal dread of the Port Moresby tribe,
and I have no doubt they were astonished
at what they heard and saw, and the effect
on them must be for good.
“In December we opened two Churches
at Aroma (where the Chinese were murder-
ed), which will become centres of light for
that and surrounding districts. There are
now many openings for teachers, and splen-
did scope for thorough, earnest work, which
I hope will soon be undertaken in a truly
Christ-like enthusiastic manner. We need
men in true sympathy with our Lord in His
great work of man’s redemption. Men
living themselves' near the cross will ever
desire to lead the heathen to the cross.
“How I should like to spend an evening
with you, and over a pipe talk of the work
and its prospects, and hear of your work
too.
“The shades of evening are falling ; the
curtain is being drawn, the natives are as-
sembling in front, and the talk begins.
Soon, the Gospel having lost none of its
o


calm Christian men and women, and in the
grand old power, these wild savages will be
evening hour will meet to praise Him who
has redeemed them and given them peace.
Brother, we rest in active work in preaching
Christ, and the curtain will arise to reveal
day breaking and a rising sun, the glorious
Supa of righteousness. Oh, God, what are
we that we should be honoured to take part
in that great Work ?
“Here we shall have a fine lot of chil-
dren, merry boys and girls, to teach and
train.
“We are expecting our new Mission
Schooner soon, and I hope to have a small
vessel to do work the larger one cannot do,
so that the teachers may be constantly vis-
ited, and get supplies regularly.
“Light is going. Brother, good-bye.
Christian love to you and yours. God bless
you in all your work for His dear Son,
with old and young.”
In the midst of all his strenuous labours
to advance Christ’s kingdom in that dark
heathen land, he was stricken down by


sickness, and had to seek change in a cooler
climate. “Schooner came in to-day/’ he
wrote under date Port Moresby, 10th July,
1882,” a vessel leaves in a few hours. Just
time to thank you, yes, thanks, thanks
many, for your remembrance of me. The
box has arrived, not yet opened. . . I have
been very ill with fever, and am a little bet-
ter, but must seek a slight, short change.
Will soon be in Cooktown, and write you
more fully. . . .”
A few weeks later he was back again at
work with all his old energy, visiting and
encouraging teachers, his heart cheered by
signs of progress made on every side. “Our
new Mission schooner,” he wrote, under
date Cooktown, Ist September, 1882, “is
really a failure, and already needs extensive
repairs and alterations ; hence our being
here. We visited ajl the stations on the
coast, and everywhere were greatly pleased
with apparent progress. At South Cape,
where, more than four years ago we were
surrounded by cannibals clamouring for
our lives, the teachers presented twenty-one
Catechumens, some young and some old—
notably one man who gave us much trouble


in former days—and asked that they should
be baptized. We examined all separately,
and were delighted with their answers. We
heard many of them pray in public, and
exhort their countrymen to receive the
Gospel, and believe in Jesus Christ. Hav-
ing to spend some days with them, we were
able to see a little of their lives, and these
corresponding with their profession, we
baptized them. It was a truly blessed
season, and one that ought to stir us all
up to more diligence in the Master s
work. . . •”
“We are at present putting up a new
building,” he wrote, “to be used as a class-
room, where we hope many New Guineans
will receive an education sufficient to qualify
them for pioneer work among their own
countrymen. Students’ houses, native-
built, will be up all round, and we hope
the whole will be finished by the end of the
year. We propose calling it ‘The New
Guinea Institution for Training Native
Evangelists.’
“Last week I was East as far as Aroma
and found all well. We had peculiar


weather for our trip—a scorching hot sun
by day, and drenching rain by night. One
night I had to keep two men baling the
boat.
“Our Schools keep up well. Here (at
Port Moresby) we have an average attend-
ance of over a hundred. There is a very-
large Catechumen Class at this station, old
and young. At other stations along the
coast they have the same.”
Early in 1883 the New Guinea College
was opened with twelve students and their
wives; and before the close of the following
year, nine New Guinea Evangelists, the
first fruits of the College, were placed in
various districts with happy augury of
success.


CHAPTER VII.
POLYGAMY AND ITS PROBLEM.
■gMONG the twenty-one candidates
| for baptism mentioned in the last
chapter, who were sacramentally
admitted to the Church, “there were two
men —the best of them all —’’ Mr. Chalmers
wrote, “who had two wives each, and they,
poor fellows, wondered what should become
of them —must they put away the extra
wives, and which one should go ? In the
early Church, I believe, there were men
with more than one wife ; only the bishop
and the deacon mu,st not have more than
one. Then, as now, the Gospel went to a
heathen people, and found their custom
such. Men believed the Gospel, accepted of
God’s terms of salvation, and sought to
serve Christ. I cannot think they would be
compelled to cause much sorrow and suffer-
ing, by casting out of their homes women


who had for many years been there as their
wives, and who served them faithfully.
Insist on it, and the young woman is kept,
the old one is thrust out—to go where, and
to be looked after by whom ? In the two
above cases it would be a terrible hardship,
and one not sanctioned by the Gospel, I
think. In both cases the wives live com-
fortably together, work together, and
together care for the husband, as he
does for them ; one must be cast
off, and where will she go, poor
body ? Years and work have told on
her ; relations are dead, and those remain-
ing will not be burdened with her support.
Should another seek her, and take her to
his home as wife, how will it be when she
has frequently to meet the man, with his
relations, who has cast her away ? Poor
woman, I sympathize with her, if with her
whole soul she loathes and scorns that ter-
rible Gospel decree that made her a widow,
or worse than a widow, that may even have
made life unbearable to her. Surely not
the glad tidings of a Father’s love, through
the adorable Son, our Redeemer, has caused
such ? No, no, only man’s device ; a re-
quirement our Lord Jesus has not laid


down. Other Missions have required it, it
will be said. I answer : Not what THEY
have required ; but what saith the SCRIP-
TURES, or what is the spirit of the
Gospel ? ”
Questions like that on which he was
forced to take issue with the views of his
Society, caused him mu,ch perplexity and
tribulation of soul.
Then we find him fearlessly facing perils
from which most men would shrink back
appalled. “A friend/’ he wrote from Port
Moresby, under date 12th February, 1.583,
“has copied the enclosed ; will it interest
your children ?. . . Last month I was at
Maiva and Delena, and found all well, and
heartily engaged in their work. Last week
I was at Kabadi, where we hope soon to
have teachers. They had been attacked by
a part of this tribe on their way back from
attacking another tribe. Since then no one
has visited them, all our natives here being
afraid. So I thought I would just like to
see them. I with difficulty got five men
from here to accompany me. We had a
splendid reception. They were glad to see


us and treated us accordingly. 1 was told
I should never leave Kabadi, I should be
murdered, &c., &c. Those with me said,
‘Yes, God has cared for us, and only He
could have caused such friendliness.’ We
have begun work in our New Guinea Coll-
ege. God grant that many real Christ-men
and women shall go forth from here to lead
their countrymen to Him.
‘ 1 wish your new Missionary paper all
success, and only wish I had a good pen to
help you. The following may be of use.
It is an extract from a letter of Mr. Lawes
to ‘ The Queenslander ’ :
‘The first South Sea Island teachers
were landed in Redscar Bay by Messrs.
Murray and Gill, in November, 1872. They
had to be removed on account of sickness,
and in November, 1873, were placed here at
Port Moresby by Mr. Murray. From that
date until now the work has never been
suspended. Mrs. Lawes and I made our
home among the people here in 1874; Mr.
and Mrs. Chalmers came in 1877. These
years have been full of work,with their due
share of anxiety and sorrow ; but no one


here ever lost hope, or despaired of ultimate
success.
‘A great change has taken place in the
people, and they are advancing in civil-
ization and knowledge. True civilization
is always of slow growth, and from within
outwards.
Tt was part of their business at Port
Moresby to rob and plunder. Just as they
had a warrior chief, and a hunter chief, so
they had a robber chief. He is still living
in the village, though his occupation is
gone. Passing canoe® were plundered, in-
land parties who came to the coast to trade
had everything taken from them ; all this
has passed away, but the memory of it
lives. Only two months ago, canoes be-
longing to villages on either side of the
harbour returned from the West with Sago,
and waited for night to pass this place, be-
cause they feared a revival of the past.
There is a good deal of petty pilfering still,
but the people are ashamed of it. They
have learned to respect property. The
character which this coast bore for cruelty
and savagery was deserved, though ex


aggerated. Their greatest honour and
glory was murder. The tattoo marks on
the chests of the men show how proud they
were of what should have been their shame,
for these are the medals of honour worn
only by those who have shed human blood.
Life is now respected, and strangers are per-
fectly safe at almost all the villages along
the coast. I may be reminded of the mas-
sacre of Chinamen at Aroma a few years
ago. Their skulls dangle from the “dubu”
there, and are a warning to foreigners that
the people will stand no trifling with their
women. Men doing as they did would be
lynched in the streets of Brisbane. Com-
modore Wilson, of the “ Wolverene,” could
not blame the people for what was really a
righteous retribution. If Englishmen take
the liberties these men did, their skulls are
likely to ornament a “dubu” too. Respect
for the rights of others, whether in prop-
erty or life, is an important sign of civil-
ization. It’s a miserable shame that the
same respect is not always shown by men
of boasted civilization for native rights.
Tn knowledge the people are advancing.
The Schoolmaster is abroad on New Guinea.


A hundred children attend school at Port
Moresby twice every day. During the past
year 650 children have attended the schools
in this district. This is exclusive of South
Cape and the Stations in China Straits,
which would bring the number up to 1000
at least of New Guinea children under in-
struction. We have sixteen stations occu-
pied between Cape Possession and Cape
Rodney, two at South Cape, and four at
the East end. These are so many centres of
peace and light. They are occupied by
South Sea Islanders, countrymen, many of
them, of Ruatoka, who received a testi-
monial from the Queensland Government
for his kindness to the diggers. He rep-
resents the average South Sea Island teach-
er, and the testimony borne by all classes
to his character would apply equally to
his colleagues.
‘We have reason to believe that Chris-
tianity, the root of all true civilization, is
beginning to be felt as a power in New
Guinea. Greater success has attended our
work as Missionaries on New Guinea than
on many of the South Sea Islands in olden
time —Islands now christianized. The


nucleus of a Christian Church has been
formed. At four different stations we have
men and women baptized on a personal pro-
fession of faith in Christ/


CHAPTER VIII.
TRIP TO MEKEO.
« SprS-jH? HE paper I enclose,” Mr. Chalmers
Sw wrote to us > <Tri P to Mekeo from
fesdwSß Maiva,’ I have not time to read
over. Use it as you like.”
‘During my various visits to Maiva, the
chief, Meauri, and his friends were always
anxious that I should visit a district on
friendly terms with them, some distance in-
land. They spoke of it as being inhabited
by a kindly people, who grew large quan-
tities of various kinds of food, and had betel
nuts in such abundance that they knew not
what to do with them. On two occasions I
met a few men and women from that dis-
trict, who pleased me much. The men were
well covered, and the women wore short,
bushy, grass netticoats, that did not reach
down to their knees. They are terrible


smokers, and had pipes an inch in diameter,
made of bamboo, and open at both ends ;
a large cigar of leaf tobacco was stuck into
one end, and the smoker drew vehemently
at the other, and such clouds of tobacco
smoke I have never seen before.
‘During my last visit Meauri reminded
me of a promise made some time ago,
which I certainly had forgotten, and
begged me to go now and fulfil it. We ar-
ranged accordingly to start on Monday
morning. Meauri was to accompany us,
but when the morning came he found some
plausible excuse to remain behind, and we
started, led by Meauri’s two uncles, and
several cousins following. Dr. Eidgley, who
recently came from Home to join our Mis-
sion, being anxious to accompany us, was
the only other white man with me.
‘We found the swamps at the back of
the inland Maiva villages—between the
latter and the low range of hills —about
half a mile in breadth. I believe it is pos-
sible to take a boat from the mouth of the
creek West of Maiva one mile, and put right
round to Kevori, and out at Cape Posses


sion. We waded through the swamps, and
ascended the range, which has higher peaks
than those near the coast. I do not think
the highest point of the coast range more
than 350 feet high, and that of the other,
500 feet at the outside. I propose calling
both ranges the “Ridgley Ranges.” From
the top of the first, we proceeded along the
top of a ridge that led us to a valley with
several swamps. We then ascended, and
crossed over to the long stretch of flat
country, extending, as far as we could see,
right back to what has been called the
Yule Range, although 1 could never dis-
tinguish that from the Stanley Range,
Mount Yule being only one of the high
peaks of that great New Guinea backbone.
‘Descending into the plain, we constant-
ly crossed creeks and mud swamps, and at
last our leader turned round to me and said,
‘‘Water all finished.” Hoping that now we
were to have pleasant travelling over a fine
level country, we were somewhat cheered by
the information ; but lo ! when scarcely a
rbile on we were again into swamp, which
continued, more or less, for many miles.
We came to the first village, about nine


miles from Maiva, close to a large, deep
swamp. The houses were few, and
built on very high posts. The natives were
much afraid at first. It was soon evident
that our guides had only to order what
they desired, and it was at once fetched.
After being refreshed with cocoanuts, we
again started, and having walked about
four miles, we came to another small vill-
age, where we met Anapanau, Chief of
Aepeana, who was living here because he
had recently lost one of his wives. He is a
fine old fellow, light-coloured, tall and well-
proportioned, with enormous teeth, one of
them being formed like a horse’s hoof. In
the house in which we rested were two large
peculiar-looking things, made from the net-
like bark got near the top of all cocoanut
and sago palm trees. The various pieces
were carefully sewed together with the fibre
from the bark of a tree. They were about
seven feet long, and three feet broad, and
looked like a case in which dead bodies
might be kept. On enquiry I was informed
they were mosquito nettings. Those who
used them crept inside from the top, and
then fastened down the door, preferring
rather to be stewed than eaten. There


were no swamps on the road to the next
village, only muddy patches, the country
tolerably open, with long grass and clumps
of trees. Arrived at the village we were
warmly received by Anapanau’s brother,
Maino Parau. The afternoon being well
advanced, cooking was soon begun, and a
cup of refreshing tea made us feel less tired.
The village is a large one, with an extensive
cocoanut grove encircling it. There are
two rows of houses, with a nice clean street
in the centre, and a miserable reception
house at each end. They bury their dead in
the front of the house, and cover the grave
with a small building, in which the near re-
lations sleep for several months.
'Men and women and children crowded
round our lodgings to see the distinguished
visitors. We felt sure there were some large
villages near at hand. Later on, our
guides told us there were in all a group of
six villages like the one we were in.
'When we made show of retiring, fires
were lighted all round and underneath, the
smoke of which was to protect us from the
mosquitoes. By tucking our nets care


fully under our blankets, we were soon able
to give orders to remove the fires below.
The flooring of our house was only round
pieces of any kind of wood. We slept well,
and were up betimes walking about. Our
last night’s visitors returned, and we de-
termined to follow them. Our guides and
newly made friends objected, but it was of
no use, we must go on. Pushing our way
through rather thick bush for about a mile,
we came to Amoama, a village as large as
the former.
Tn the centre of the village was a
“dubu,” or temple, of considerable preten-
sions, with peculiar stuffed figures outside,
one of them representing a man armed for
the fray, with bow strung and arrow ready
to shoot. Another figure, just- inside, re-
presented a crocodile, and over the door-
way were the representations of a man and
woman. Several old men were seated on
the platform, and, after giving them a
present, we returned. The natives are
altogether a very fine-looking people, light-
coloured, tall, and well-built, and resemble
those of Hood Bay more than any others I
know. Having got our swags ready in the


early morning, we were soon on the road
for our return journey. Our carriers were
heavily laden with betel nuts, and one with
a dead dog and taro.
‘Shortly after our arrival our hosts
killed two dogs to entertain us, which our
followers soon disposed of; the third was
killed and sent to Meauri. In killing the
dogs they struck them on the head with a
large stick, and then broke all their legs.
We arrived at Maiva about 2 p.m., wet and
tired.
‘ln future this district will be worked
from Maiva. Already they are learning the
object of our work from the teachers whom
they constantly visit. All they can at
present understand is peace, tomahawks,
tobacco, and so on.’


CHAPTER IX.
COLLECTIONS FOR PRINCETON MISSION
CABINET.
Ss||?N 1880, Dr. Sheldon Jackson, of the
ffiliw Presbyterian Church of the United
States, wrote to us as follows : —“We
have commenced the formation at Prince-
ton Theological Seminary of a Cabinet to
represent the customs, condition, religions,
&c., of Indian and other native races; also
the character of countries. As you well
know, Princeton is the leading Divinity
School for the training of Ministers in the
United States ; and we wish to keep before
them such an exhibit as shall help to create
in those training for the Ministry a Mis-
sionary spirit. . . . Perhaps you know of
some one in Australia who would take an
interest in making a collection for this pur-
pose in their section. If so, please lay the
matter before them.


“This will be the only collection of the
kind on this continent, and we wish to
make it as large and important as possible,
and hope it may be no unimportant instru-
mentality in creating a greater enthusiasm
for Missions.”
We shipped, in response to that appeal,
a large collection, via San Francisco, which
the agents kindly forwarded free of charge ;
and also endeavoured to interest Mr. Chal-
mers in the movement. Later on, Dr.
Jackson wrote to us as follows : —“ I am
authorized by a friend of the Cabinet to
place in your hands £2O, for collections in
the Islands. If you can use it to advantage
please let me know, and I will forward it
to you. ... If you think that collections
can be made in all the Colonies for Prince-
ton Cabinet, perhaps I can raise £2O for
each. The object is to illustrate the native
races —their customs, handiwork and re-
ligions.”
That will explain the opening sentences
of the following letter, dated 18th May,
1883 : —“I have just written Dr. Jackson.
I will do my best for the Museum, but will


accept of no money. If they like to give a
subscription to L.M.S., good ; but I takd
nothing personal. I have now on hand
several things ; my trouble is how to send
them.
“If my papers will suit your very excel-
lent Missionary Magazine, I can supply you
occasionally. ... I have had a turn over
with fever : am better, but take change for
repairs.
“I am glad you agree with me as to
baptisms. I dislike oddities, and do not
wish the popularity of alopeness as a giant.
I have not yet heard from Mission House.
I wonder, brother, Low far you and I would
agree in many other things—a few pipes
and many long cracks would let us know.
Ah, well, we both agree in this, let the hea-
then know God is Love, and He gave His
Son for them, for us. . . .”
A few weeks later Mr. Chalmers was at
Cooktown, and went on to Brisbane to
shake off the fever, and to see about annex-
ation business, which at that time had
come within the sphere of practical politics.


“We have just finished/’ he wrote, “print-
ing the Gospel of Matthew, a hymn-book,
school book and Geography in the Port
Moresby dialect.’’
“Pi, of South Cape,’’ he wrote under
date 17th August, 1883, “is Mr. Me
Kerras’ teacher, and has been so from the
beginning. I shall see him soon, and get
him to write. He has got on well, and has
been greatly blessed.
“I go to South Cape next month to
open a new Church, and administer the or-
dinance of the Lord’s Supper for the first
time there. There are twenty-one Church
Members, and a number of candidates.
“1 have been travelling inland towards
Mount Owen Stanley. I return soon, and
hope to ascend.
“The Maiva Churches (three) are fin-
ished, and I go West to open them.
“I may go home next April for six
months, but now undecided. I dread civil-
ization, and fear I am too much a savage.


I have now long led a Bohemian life. I do
not think the strictures of English life
would suit me.
“I sometimes think I will propose to the
Directors to give me a lengthened holiday
for New Zealand, and travel through it,
and, try some rich friends to give me a ten-
ton boat. lam getting older, brother, and
fancy a little more comfort. An open boat
by night and day in sun and rain is not all
comfort, and a ten-ton boat would be a
travelling palace, a lengthener of days.
Well, I will see. God will direct aright. . .
My collection for Princeton is growing, and
by end of year will, I hope, be worth send-
ing.”
“I have sent you a letter from Piri,?
Mr. Chalmers wrote under date, Hanua-
bada, 29th September, 1883, “I have also
sent one for Mr. Somerville’s sister, thank-
ing her for the very valuable gift of a
splendid bell. A few more such gifts from
friends would be truly appreciated. I am
waiting daily for the schooner to visit
South Cape, where Pi, Mr. McKerras’
teacher, is stationed. I had a letter from


him lately ; their Church is finished, and he
reports a large class of candidates for
baptism.
“Piri asks for a boat. Of course if you
do assist, let it be understood it is for a
Mission boat to be used by Piri, not his
own private property. . . .
“1 must see if I have got a paper that
would suit your interesting Magazine. I
leave shortly for Boera to spend the Sab-
bath with Piri.
“You will see from the papers of a
large sale of land. If not stopped, it will
lead to serious trouble in the future. No
native understands he is parting with his
heritage for ever.
“I have just got a paper. Would you
read it over and correct. The wind is
springing up, and I am away. . . .”
The paper which he sent was the Story
of Kone, which we reproduce from the pages
of our “Missionary Record.”


CHAPTER X.
KONE, THE NEW GUINEA RAINMAKER.
jSjjg MADE the acquaintance of Kone on
JroSlS beach to the West of Cape Suck-
ling, and from that time to the day
of his death I ever found him a true friend.
We were on our why to the Gulf of Papua,
to visit the Elema District, in order to try
and make peace .between tribes which were
at war with one another.
“We had been sailing and rowing all
day and all night, and feeling tired and
hungry, we anchored the boat to cook food,
and have a sleep during the heat of the day.
A number of canoes were pulled up on the
beach close to us, and natives were sitting
about with a large collection of earthen-
ware pots. I landed and sat down with
them, and found they spoke the Motu dia-
lect. They told me they had come to trade


with Namoa natives, living in a village in
the Naara district, that they would receive
in exchange for their wares pieces of
Kangaroo flesh, and that, on the following
day, they would return to their own village,
Delena, on the mainland near Yule Island.
They were of course greatly delighted to
meet us, and begged me to remain and go
with them. A proposal was made to visit
Namoa, and return in the evening, but the
day being hot and sultry, I feared we should
have heavy rain in the afternoon, and did
not wish to get wet away from the boat.
“Do not be afraid ; there will be no
rain,” said a woman who sat close beside
me.
“Why not ? I am sure there will be, ’ I
replied.
“There cannot be, as the rainmaker is
here, and will conduct the party in. You
need not be afraid, as he is going with
you.”
“Who is the rainmaker ? ”


“Kone, the chief, who is sitting by
you.”
“Well, Kone,” I said, “you, are the
rainmaker. Are we going to have rain ? ”
“No, not to-day, not until we have
finished our trading.”
“I think you are wrong,” I replied.
“But I will go with you and see Namoa,
and the queen, Koloka, of whom I have
heard much, and whom I met once at one
of the other villages.”
“Kone was pleased at my consenting to
go, saying the Namoans would be greatly
delighted to see me. After a late breakfast
we started, Kone keeping close by me. We
left the narrow strip of low level coast
country and got on-to the Leata hills, and,
when within a mile of the village, there
could be no mistake about our being
drenched before we could reach any shelter.
“Kone,” I said, "the wind is now from
inland, and the rain will very soon be down
on us.”


“ Turning in the direction of the coining
darkness, he said, ‘Rain ! remain, and come
not here.’ ”
“I called laughingly on the rain to
come, and soon it did come in earnest, and
said, ‘Kone, my friend, who now is right?’ ’’
“He stopped and turned, and, looking
me earnestly in the face, said, ‘Tamate, did
you think I took you for a mere child ?
No. I knew you were a great chief and had
power, and the rain listened to you. You
should not have called on the rain to come;
but I too am a chief, and have power.
“Kone, I did not make the rain, nor
have I power to make it come. No man
possesses that power ; only the great and
good Spirit who created all things can do
that, and He alone it is who gives us rain.”
“Kone had never before heard of the
great Spirit, the Creator, and during the
remainder of our journey he listened, and I
think, thoughtfully, to what I said.”
“On our arrival at the village, he intro-
duced me to the queen, and to her husband


and people, and gave them to understand
that I was a chief of great power.”
“It was raining heavily, and we decided
to remain. We encamped in the large
“dubu,” or temple, and with a good lire
were soon dry and warm, Kone kept close
by me all night, and, fearing lest I should
be disturbed, he told the people to remain
quiet. The evening was spent in smoking
and chewing betel-nuts, while Kone re-
counted the rain story, and some of what I
had told him on the journey. After evening
prayers, we all lay down by the fire, Kone
lying down close by me.”
“In the early morning I roused the
sleepers, got some yams, sago, and taro
cooked, and having helped these down with
cocoa-nut milk, we returned to the coast,
where all had to listen to the experiences of
the trip. We were followed to the shore by
nearly all the natives of Namoa, carrying
kangaroos and betel-nuts, and a pig for my
party, presented to me by the queen.”
When trading was finished, canoes were
launched, and bidding farewell to our new


made friends, we started for Delena, Kone
leaving his own canoe to have the pleasure
of being by me. On our arrival at Delena,
all the home-stayers were told of the new
friend, of whom they had long heard, but
never seen, and they were told to have food
cooked at once, as he might be hungry.
Kone insisted on my staying ashore, and
taking his “dubu” until I left. He did
everything in his power to make me com-
fortable. In a very quiet and unosten-
tatious way he became servant to us, in-
sisting on attending to all our wants.”
“Now I have written all this, and have
said nothing of his appearance. He was
about five feet six inches in height, and,
though slim, yet well built. He had a true,
kind expression in his face —a face one could
not help loving. His movements were staid
rather than active, giving an idea of calm-
ness not easily roused, and if roused, soon
allayed to return to his old friendship. He
was about forty-five years old, much res-
pected by the people, and known and liked
far beyond his own village. Eh, Kone ! I
have known many savages, but not one I
have loved like vou !


“During our stay Kone insisted on our
using his mats, and said to me, 'Whatever
you want just let me know.’
“On my return from the West, we ar-
rived at his village near midnight, on a
thoroughly wet stormy night. Kone was
soon on the beach with a torch to conduct
us to his “dubu.” He brought his best
mats for us to sleep on, got his wife and
friends to get their pots on, and, helped by
our cooks, we were soon very comfortable.
The next morning, before leaving, he begged
for a teacher. I have no doubt he could see
tomahawks, knives, beads, and tobacco,
through a teacher ; but I know, too, he
saw something else. His tribe being small,
was often threatened by others, and he
could see that if a teacher lived with him he
would be a help to him, and he could also
see that where teachers were, peace pre-
vailed.
“Before teachers arrived among the
Motu tribe, these people were the terror of
the coast, and especially of the Yule and
Delena districts, but now Kone received
them without fear as friends.
B


“Our adversaries say, ‘Pray, what have
Missionaries with the Gospel done for New
Guinea ? ” I say, ‘Ask the Motu tribe, and
then the other tribes from Round Head to
Maiva, and I think their answers will be
sufficient to warrant the statement that the
Gospel has lost none of its power, and is
still the peace for Savage tribes.’
“I wonder if, when Kone asked for a
teacher, he did not even then desire one to
tell him something of the new Great Spirit,
of whom he had now heard for the first
time.
“When preparing for teachers last year,
I put up a house on land given to me by
him, at the back of the village. On my
arriving for that purpose I found Kone in
great sorrow, and living in a small house
built over a small grave, and mourning as
one without hope.
“Oh Tamate,” he said, “I am sore
grieved ; my beloved child is dead, dead ;
and I am glad you have come.”


“Kone,” I said, “you must help me in
building a house” : and right willingly did
he consent, and help me through with it.
“To me the greatest sorrow of New
Guinea is the people’s want of knowledge of
the true God of love, and their ignorance of
the future glorious life in Christ. I cannot
say that the war-horn and the shrieks of
the victims draw any sympathy from me.
They only excite wrath. But when such a
case as that of Kone comes before me, a
man weeping even unto death for a beloved
child, without hope of a future, I feel a
great longing to give them the Gospel of
Jesus Christ.
“I remember, some years ago, in
Orangerie Bay, at Dauni, on Sunday morn-
ing, being awakened by our captain, who
told me he thought the natives were getting
ready to come off to attack us. It was
about three o’clock a.m. On listening, I
could hear the horn blowing, but it was the
pig-horn, and in the village opposite to the
vessel there was a loud wailing. I returned
to sleep, and about ten o’clock landed in a
canoe, the first foreigner to walk through


that village. I sat down with the mourn-
ers, and gave a present to the dead. The
body was that of an elderly man , who had
been only a short time ill, and who had
died during the night. It was dressed in
finery, with scented sprigs through the pier-
ced nose and ears, and, supported with
sticks, was in a sitting posture.
“Soon a young man came running in,
and, with a loud wail, threw himself upon
the dead. I seem to hear it now. It cam?
from his heart, and I think it went to mine.
I cannot forget it. With what intense
agony he cried, ‘Oh ! my father, my father !
Speak, speak to me now ! Speak, my
father, speak ! ’ But from those dead lips
came no sound. Would that they only knew
of Him who says, Tam the Resurrection
and the Life.’
“Well, Kone was in that dense, painful
darkness, ‘without hope.’ Often have I
seen him sitting mourning bV that small
grave, and occasionally have I sat with
him, telling him of the ‘Man of Sorrows,’
the Christ of God, the Light and Life of the
world, and the grave’s destruction. I


taught him a short prayer. It was, ‘God of
Love, give me light ; lead me to Christ.’ I
spent a month with him then, and the most
of that time Kone was near me. He helped
us in house-building, gave us food, killed a
pig, came regularly to services, and many
evenings came alone.
“On another visit, Kone, day and night,
kept near us, was a diligent learner, and
anxious indeed to be taught. When parting
with him, he always came to the boat and
gave me a parting present, and, weeping,
would say, ‘Do come back soon. Day and
night we shall think of you, and long for
your return.’ Last October I went to the
Gulf, to visit tribes near the Bald Head,
and called at Helena -to take Kone on with
me. I shall close this with an extract from
my journal :
“Anchored this morning just round
point, about three miles from Delena, and
at daylight up anchor and ran down to
anchorage. Very soon we saw boat coming,
and Lavao standing up aft, and several of
the men with native cloth on their heads, as
a badge of mourning. I missed Kone, mid


anxiously waited for them to come along-
side. As they approached there was no
loud talking, and all looked sorrowful.
Lavao, the Lolo chief, stepped on board,
and I asked, ‘Where is Kone ? ’
“After a little he said, ‘Oh, Tamate,
Kone, your friend, is dead.’
“Dead, Lavao ? I had to sit down.
“Yes, Kone is dead ; and we buried him
on your ground, near your house, the house
of his one great friend,
“Did Kone die of sickness ?
“No, he was speared by your friend
Laoma. After you left there was a feast at
Delena. Kone and others were there ; also
some Naara natives.
“At night Laoma came with his spears
to kill a Naara man, and when about to
throw a spear, Kone caught the Naara man
and placed him behind him, the spear enter-
ing his own breast. We carried him home,
and on the second moon he died.


“Since then I have met Laoma, and he
tells me the same. My poor Kone !my
kind savage friend ! Shall we meet again ?
Has that prayer of thine, from out thy
darkness, to the God of love, for light and
life, been unanswered ? I cannot think so,
and I can hope that even now they have
been revealed to thee.”


CHAPTER XI.
DECKED BOAT —A SUPREME NEED OF
THE MISSION.
SjSSpr EELTNG that a house was necessary
|» to hold services and school in,” Mr.
Chalmers wrote to us, render date
19th October, “I set about this morning
building a simple, yet suitable house for
the climate. It is thirty-eight feet long and
twenty broad. We have nearly finished, and
hope on Sunday to open it. The natives
assist willingly. God grant that light may
enter the hearts of these poor natives, and
that in this new house some may learn of
Christ as the Light, and their Saviour from
sin and superstition and all their con-
sequences.
“Johnnie (my boy) shot three pigeons
yesterday, which came in well to-day, as for
some days we have not had too much to
eat.


“What a splendid opening there is here
for a teacher at present, and I only wish we
could supply them. The sun is too hot for
working, so I am speculating on the future.
All the Elema tribe (over 20,000) having,
teachers, one white missionary at Maiva,
with a staff of teachers, could undertake
from Cape Possession to Cape Suckling ;
the Port Missionary from Redscar Bay to
Round Head ; one at Hula or Kerepunu,
from Round Head to Mailiu Kolu ; one at
South Cape, from Port Milport to Leo-
cadie ; and one at Dinner Island, from last
group to East Cape. That is in the future.
But the present we can use by pressing on
with the teachers ; only we must have a
schooner of ten or twelve tons. To work
the Gulf and keep the College students
always supplied with food such a vessel is
necessary, and should always be on this
side, and have nothing whatever to do with
the Straits. I am sorry I have no rich
uncle likely soon to go hence, who might
think of his poor nephew’s wants and leave
him £3OO. Not much that to wealth, and
not too much to give in so good a cause.
Some good friend may read this. I want
the boat, need her, the work cannot be done


well without her. I am getting old. Open
boats are very, very nice, but days and
weeks in them are rather stiffening, and
there are times when more than an open
boat is required, because of wind and sea.
The new vessel to be called the "Irene” or
"Maino.”
"Yesterday, brother, I got your letter.
On 19th October I wrote that ; if I get the
money for the vessel in New Zealand, the
vessel can be built either in Auckland or
Sydney. I have a captain and crew, and
would take them with me if I can go South
next year. I would sail the vessel myself,
that is, I would be really captain, and have
a South Sea Islander under me, with a New
Guinea crew. The working of the vessel
would be inexpensive, I pay half, and the
Society half. The vessel to be entirely the
property of the London Missionary So-
ciety. . .
On the 27th March, 1884, Mr. Chalmers
wrote to us as follows :—"I was inland last
week, far, far away, making peace between
tribes, and had a most successful trip. I
had hoped to have got Mount Owen-Stan


ley under my feet, but it rained every day,
and such rain too ! I turned back within
twelve miles of the top. I was only one
week away, and in terrible country, walked
over 170 miles, and must have climbed in all
over 20,000 feet. We brought tribes to-
gether that for many years have lived as
deadly enemies. We had the pipe of peace,
and the friendship so complete, that they
slept in one another’s houses the nights we
stayed.
“I hope your ‘Missionary Record’ flour-
ishes apace. I fear-1 can send you nothing
this time, lam so boxed up. You know my
habits in the matter of letter-writing. Well,
here I am in straits with several mails un-
answered, and if I do not set too in earnest
now, the burden will become too much for
me.
“Our new teachers are suffering from
the climate. One poor woman died very
suddenly last Saturday. Her husband,
poor fellow, is now very ill. God grant
that all may be spared for good earnest
work in New Guinea. Next month, if the
weather is settled, we hope to place them all


at their stations. Our weather at present
is moist, hot, and uncomfortable. I think
light is breaking in Queensland on the
‘Labour Trade/ Its days are numbered,
and not all the bolstering of the politicians
can save it. The ‘Courier and the ‘Queens-
lander’ are now against the island trade,
and being the leading papers, I feel sure the
death is near. Fiji must follow.
“We have had brother Gill with us, and
a fine refreshing time it was. I wish you
knew him.
“1 am busy now with school work,
teaching bairns a, e, i, o, u, &c., &c. We
agree splendidly, i.e., the bairns and your
humble servant ; they learn and romp,
laugh and are sober, and somehow they do
get along, though slowly.
“Piri’s boat.—Rarotonga has given the
boat, a fine large whale boat, so pray for-
give us both, never mind the money.
“The ten-ton boat—l should not think of
asking our Dunedin friends ALONE to sub-
scribe. Auckland will help, so will Adelaide


and Sydney. The islands would help, but
they have already given four whaleboats,
and I cannot just now ask them. Complete,
it should not cost more than £250. ... I
wish I could visit New Zealand soon, but
there are too many teachers to leave in one
man’s hands.
“What say you to this ? Take your first
holiday this way, only let me know when
expected at Cooktown or Thursday Island,
and I will meet you in ‘Ellengowan.’ Let
us a' just a wee, wee nearer tae Him, and
lipoen Him wi’ a’.”-
“Just a hurried line,” he wrote on 26th
April, “I have made out the annexed boat
fund, and believe will get it. I cannot go
South, and must use my friends. Do you
think Dunedin good for £6O, to remit to
Mr. Sunderland, for a 10 or 12-ton boat, to
be called ‘lrene,’ or ‘Maine,’ and to be the
property of L.M.S. ? If you think more
could be done so much the better, as
other places may fall short or fail al-
together
“The teachers are better, and will soon
be placed at their stations. They are anx


ions to get away and be at work. God
grant them many years of earnest work for
Christ, and a sdorious reapine-tame.
“I trust Mr. Gill will write you about
Pi and his work ; he was lately at South
Cape.
“Piri has got his boat. He has finished
his Church, and is well. He goes with me
next week to Kabadi.
“Lawes and his wife may be in Sydney
about September. He might visit New
Zealand. He is a splendid deputation and
a fine fellow. You would be charmed with
him.
“Boat Money.
Society Islands £6O
Hervey Group 165
Adelaide 46
Auckland 30
Wellington 20
Christchurch 20
Dunedin 60
I draw the above on faith.”


CHAPTER XII.
A MUNIFICENT FIFT TO THE MISSION,
SwrjN April, 1884, we received the following
letter, dated from Stewart Island :
eSSS “Dear Sir, —In the ‘New Zealand Mis-
sionary Record’ for February, 1884, Mr.
Chalmers, Missionary to New Guinea, re-
fers to some communication made to him
about a decked boat, showing at the same
time, from the description given of his
journeys, his need of such a thing. Has
Mr. Chalmers got a decked boat yet ? If
not, would a six-ton decked boat be accept-
able for his use ? I have such a boat. She
is a good little boat, though small for a
deck. She has sails, &c., and would not
need any great outlay to make her ready
for Mr. Chalmers. She cost £IOO when
built, a little more than a year ago. The
deck might afford Mr. Chalmers some pro-
tection from the rain he speaks of. I had


intended to sell the boat, but taking up
your little ‘Missionary Record,’ brought
here with me, I was reminded of Mr. Chal-
mers’s need, and, indeed, if he is supplied,
there may be another amongst the New
Hebrides, working for God in your Mission
service, who would be very glad of such a
convenience. All I can say is, dear sir, that
if the boat is required for Mission Work, I
would far, far rather give her for the dear
Saviour’s service than sell her. She is
called ‘The Blessing,’ a name, if your Com-
mittee decide to accept the gift, I should be
glad to have continued, and I would also
beg of you in such case, and earnestly de-
sire, that no mention even of my name be
made in connection with the boat, but that
she be simply accepted as ‘from a friend for
the dear Lord’s Service.’ This letter will be
sufficient authority upon which you (Mr.
Ross) can claim the boat. . . I have had
since I came here very much for which to
lift up my heart, in gratitude to our Heav-
enly Father, so that whilst I do hope for
the continuance of His loving kindness for
the Lord Jesus Christ’s sake, I also feel
thankfu,! that I have something that I can


at least offer to Him for His service, and
most willingly give if required. . . .”
Mr. R. Brown, honorary secretary to
the Otago Auxiliary of the London Mission-
ary Society (which was formed on the
occasion of the first visit of Mr. Chalmers
to Dunedin) wrote with reference to the
timely gift of the boat —“We are sure no
one can read the above correspondence and
not feel moved with admiration of the
ready and generous spirit in which this
munificent gift is presented to the Society
for Mr. Chalmers’ use. It has been well
said that it is ‘more blessed to give than to
receive’ : but we are sure that this is essen-
tially a case in which giver and receiver
partake alike of the pleasure and the bless-
ing. To Mr. Chalmers, labouring arduously
as he is doing in that ‘terra incognita,’ New
Guinea, cut off entirely from the society of
civilized men, exposed for weeks together
to the scorching sun by day and the
drenching dews by night, with no better
shelter than that afforded by an open whale
boat while exploring and mapping out the
harbours, bays, and islands on the coast of
New Guinea, and planting, at immense sac-
s'


rifice of health and all that men account
dear to them, Mission Stations here and
there —su,ch a letter and such a gift must be
cheering in the extreme, and will doubtless
inspire him with fresh hope and courage,
evidencing as it does the deep sympathy
with which his work is being regarded, and
we can scarcely over-estimate the value of
such a work. Three-foryths of our know-
ledge of New Guinea with certainty comes
from Missionary sources ; and while we wit-
ness, as we have again and again during the
last few years, one exploring party after
another returning, baffled and decimated by
climate and disease, and witness at the
same time the unassuming but persistent
labours of these messengers of peace, we
feel that surely it should be our duty to
strengthen their hands in their noble work.
Even looking at their labours altogether
apart from the Christian view, they are of
inestimable value to commerce and science.
What David Livingstone did for Africa, they
are striving to do for New Guinea.”
Mr. Mills, the Manager of the Union
Steamship Company, on hearing of the
terms of the gift, kindly offered to send on


“The Blessing’’ from Dunedin to Sydney
free of charge, and Mr. A. Hill Jack, Man-
ager of the National Insurance Company,
insured her, at his own private expense,
right through to Cooktown.
From all sides there came to us indi-
cations of a deepening interest in Mission
work, and expressions of ardent desire to
help in winning the heathen for Christ,
“It is a most munificent gift,” Mr.
George R. Hercus wrote to us, “and given
in a most gracious spirit. lam sure Mr.
Chalmers will greatly appreciate both.
From the description of the boat, I think it
likely to prove just the thing he has so much
felt the want of, although it is rather less
in size than he snoke of. You would notice
in the ‘Record’ a few weeks ago a donation
referred to of £25 towards the same object.
I sent this to Mr. Sunderland at the
donor’s request, and if any fittings or alter-
ations are necessary to fit the boat for her
special mission, this will be available for
the purpose, so that there seems nothing in
the way of this wish of Mr. Chalmers being
fulfilled.”


“The heart of our Brother Chalmers,”
the Rev. J. P. Sunderland wrote to us from
Sydney, “will be greatly cheered by the
noble gift of our New Zealand friend.” And
later on, he wrote, “ ‘The Blessing’ arrived
safely. ... We have re-shipped her for
Cooktown She is rather small for
open sea work, bu,t I have no doubt the best
use will be made of her by our devoted Mis-
sionary Brother, Mr. Chalmers.”


CHAPTER XIII.
THANKSGIVINGS.
■:R. W. Wyatt Gill, soon after his
; return from a visit to New
wrote to us as follows, under date,
Marrickville, May, 17th, 1884, “At Mr. Chal-
mers' request I forward to you the enclosed
paper, which may possibly suit the readers
of your own excellent ‘N.Z. Missionary
Record.’ If printed kindly send me a copy,
as I am collecting Mr. Chalmers’ papers
(with his knowledge and consent for book
use) as well as send a copy to Mr. Chalmers
himself. Could you not favour me with a
copy of ‘N.Z. Missionary Record’ for Jan-
uary, 1884, containing the second part of
the story of ‘Kone, the New Guinea Rain-
maker.’ Mr. Chalmers gave me the first
part. I saw Kone’s erave, the widow, and
the child.


“My visit to New Guinea was full of
interest : it extended over some weeks. My
brethren showed me everything, and I am
bound to say the Mission is a great success.
I admire the patience and devotedness of
Messrs. Lawes and Chalmers ; and not a
little the heroic zeal of our native pastors.
Only the Master knows the amount of self-
denial and holy consecration manifested by
them all. In the Eastern branch of the New
Guinea Mission there are to-day 116 Church
members ; 1200 children under instruction ;
also 14 students for the native ministry.
Twenty-nine teachers, old and new, are at
work under the brethren. It is twelve years
since my first visit to New Guinea. At that
time Port Moresby and its inhabitants were
not known to be in existence, and now —!
Thank God for what I have seen of the
power of His blessed Word ! In 1872, when
I first landed teachers at Eedscar Bay, they
were always at war with each other. Now
there is no killing all along the coast. This
is the result of Gospel teaching !
“I hear that a gentleman gave Mr.
Chalmers a small yacht. This is just what
he needs. I thank God that help has coined


at last. It seemed to me that Mr. Chalmers
was fast wearing himself out by exposure to
sun and rain in open boats. Who is the
generous donor ? If you, know him, tell him
he has done the right thing, and that the
Master will surely reward him for it. How
is it that the yacht has not yet arrived here
at Sydney, en route for New Guinea ? The
sooner he gets it the better.”
Mr. Chalmers sent us “Koloka, a New
Guinea Queen,” and “Keua, a Friend of the
New Guinea Mission,” two interesting
character sketches, which appeared in our
Missionary Record,” but as they are given
with some fulness in “ Work and Adventure
in New Guinea,” we abstain from re-
producing them here.
“How am 1 to express myself to you for
your manifold kindnesses,” Mr. Chalmers
wrote to us, 4th June, 1884. “Through you
I have got the yacht. Well, you have done
all for the Master, and He will see to it.
Thank you brother, thanks many. She will
be the property of the L.M.S., and used en-
tirely in Mission work. The donor nay rest
assured that she will be used for Christ's


service only. I hope soon to hear of her ar-
rival in Cooktown, and as soon after as
possible 1 will have her here. I put off
writing the donor until I see her. I wonder
if he would object to our turning the name
into native. She is called ‘Blessing’ ; in
this dialect that is ‘Hanamoa.’ The natives
cannot pronounce the English name, and to
them the native one is full of meaning. It
is ‘Blessing/ ‘Praise/ ‘to make good/ <fec.
Should Igo home for a while she will be
kept moving, and will have plenty to do.
We have teachers now in Motumotu (Port
Chalmers) in the Gulf, and to visit them in
a boat is not over safe. The Admiralty
named it Port Chalmers, I suppose, in
honour of this Bohemian Missionary.
Friends say now that I have got my heart’s
desire through you I will not go home. But
I think I will, when, I cannot say. Should
I go home I shall return your way, and hope
then to meet face to face with the donor.
“We have also placed two teachers at
Kivori, a fine district behind Cape Poss-
ession ; and at Naara, one teacher with our
queen Koloka. We leave to-morrow to
place two teachers at Kabadi, the district


of land-sale renown. Two teachers have
also been placed a\ Saroa, behind Round
Head, and we hope, in another month, to
have Kalo and Belerupu supplied.
“We expect a vessel in from the Straits
that may leave before our return from Kab-
adi, and I write hurriedly this note. May
you, yours, and your work be ever
blessed ”


CHAPTER XIV.
THE CHURCH’S VITALITY CONDITIONED
BY AGGRESSICENESS.
■HE success that has attended the
labours of native teachers in New
Guinea proper during- the last few
years must be very gratifying to the friends
of humanity and the London Missionary
Society, and should greatly encourage them
for the future. For twelve years Mission
work has been carried on in New Guinea,
and I know of no Mission connected with
this Society, or indeed any other Society,
that can compare with it in results.
“Believing as we do in the work of our
teachers, we are naturally anxious to be
regularly supplied from the older Missions
of the South Pacific. If these Missions
should confine themselves to home work,
they will suffer and eventually go out.


Everywhere the Church lives according to
her zeal for aggressive work amongst the
heathen, and for the Directors to pass min-
utes preventing Missions sending teachers
would be simply suicidal. We must do all
we can to keep the South Sea Churches
connected with New Guinea, and so preserve
the working sympathetic Christ-life
amongst them. As our knowledge of New
Guinea increases, the Church of Christ in
Britain and the South Seas should be pre-
pared to take up the work. Hitherto the
Directors have put no limit to oty extend-
ing, and we have gqne on doing so.
“Last February, our Mission barque,
‘John Williams,’ visited us, conveying thir-
teen teachers and their wives, accompanied
by our old friend and co-worker, Mr. Gill,
late of Rarotonga. On the ‘John Williams’
leaving us we distributed the teachers
amongst the old stations, that they might
be near to us, and have also the care of the
old and acclimatized teachers, until the
South-East Monsoon had really set in,
when they would be placed at their own
stations. Teachers on first arrival are
& almost sure to have fever, and it is better


that they should stay where they can be
attended to. Some up to the present time
have had no fever, whilst others have suf-
fered much, but are now better.
“Last month we began to locate them
at their own stations, and the first to be
located was lunia, a Tongan, educated by
Mr. Gill, on Rarotonga. Having married
here a widow, who understands the Motu
dialect, we thought they should take Tupu-
selei, a village fourteen miles from Port
Moresby, where formerly a Niue teacher
lived. The natives were highly delighted to
have a teacher again amongst them, and
gave lujiia and his wife a good welcome.
Since the death of their old teacher, they
have had a good deal of trouble with the
hill tribes, old scores thought to be for-
gotten have been paid and repaid, but now
a teacher is with them they will be able to
live peaceably.
“Prom Tupuselei we continued our boat-
ing to Kapakapa, where there were two new
teachers and their wives living with the old
teacher appointed to Taroa, the fine large
district behind Round Head. For long the


Taroa natives have been expecting- teachers,
and knowing when they got them it was
peace all round. For the last few months
they have been busy paying off (for murders
committed by them) debts and making
peace.
"On our arrival at Kapakapa, a large
number of men came in to carry the teach-
ers’ goods, and they told us it was now all
peace. The following morning we started
with a large company, and, taking it leis-
urely, arrived about 10 a.m. at Kigo, the
first of the Taroa villages. A new house
had been finished for the teacher, and from
it the view is unsurpassed in New Guinea.
After placing the other teacher at another
village, about two miles further East, and
visiting other villages, and hearing entreat-
ies for more teachers, we returned to Kigo.
"Having some students and several
Port Moresby natives with us, we went into
the village and spent several hours singing
on one of their large platforms. It was a
beautifully clear moonlight night, and,
leaving the singers, we walked to a good
position at the West end of the village,
where the view was splendid. I have trav


elled much in this great land, but have seen
nothing to surpass the view of that night
for picturesqueness.
“On our right the Gerese Hills, and on
our left the Coast Range, and, lying before
us, the hills and valleys of Taroa and
Manukolo, and, behind these, the higher
hills of Keremu stretching on to the Astro-
labe range of Mountains, and, further
inland, as if guarding these in front, and
rising dark above them all, the Owen
Stanley Range, ending in the high unvisit-
ed mountain of the same name. Every-
where near us were well watered valleys and
ridges with plantations, and villages scatt-
ered here and there containing kindly dis-
posed people. It is to be hoped there will
soon be sufficient teachers to occupy all the
principal villages. We did conceive the idea
that night of building a large, comfortable
native house, to cost about £5, and when
weakened by fever, or needing a change
from the nagging, tiring work of schools,
Ac., steal away awhile to Taroa. We re-
turned to Port Moresby, and after spending
one night, sailed in the ‘Ellengowan’ for
the West.


“Ever since Mr. Lawes joined the Mis-
sion the one cry of the Motu natives has
been ‘Westward ho.’ The largest pop-
ulation, and the freest, kindest, wildest
natives are there. They, especially these
in Freshwater Bay, simply care for no one,
and bounce all the tribes, thinking their
sweet will is law. I know them all well,
and my cry has also been, ‘To the West —to
the West with our youngest, strongest,
bravest, best teachers.’
“We found good anchorage in two fath-
oms just outside ‘Alice Meade Lagoon,’
about two miles from Motumotu. Asrain
and again have the natives of Motumotu
asked for teachers, promising to treat them
well, and to live peaceably with their
neighbours. They have them now, and
they feel our promise is sure, though often
lone delayed through no fault of ours. All
were delighted with their teachers, and no
hard pressure was required to get both
houses pushed on. These are our first
stations beyond Cape Possession, and the
first in the large Elema district. We move
on, I think slowly, I hope surely, and before
long, we shall, I hope, be to Orokolo. To


connect Maiva and Motumotu we want two
more stations, and so have a continuous
line.
“Motumotu is at the mouth of the
‘Williams River.’ I often wished to go up
this river and visit a reported large village,
Moveave, for years at enmity with Motu-
motu, but never could find sufficient time.
We intended spending a few days with the
teachers, so as to give them a good start
with their new demonstrative friends, and
we decided to ascend the river. We got a
canoe, and paddled up one of the branches
into a small creek, where we were dragged
through more mud than water up to the
village. As we neared the village our
friends from Motumotu were somewhat
fearful and anxious ; and not until after we
had been some time in the village did they
gain confidence. The population is very
large, the houses are well built on posts,
and there are many ‘dubus.’ Our old friend
Semese proclaimed words of peace, which
were reiterated by the Moveaveans, and all
felt that it was well, and friendship was re-
stored. We were at first met by a large
armed party—bows and arrows innumer


able ; this was speedily converted into a
noisy demonstrative peace party, and in-
creased much in numbers. Before we had
done visiting the village and 'dubus/ not a
weapon was to be seen. Fires were started,
and pots containing queer viands were soon
placed on them.
“We ascended one ‘dubu’ to the platform
twenty feet from the ground, where we sat
down on a mat given for the purpose. So
great a crowd followed us that the platform
gave unmistakable signs of a very hurried
and unpleasant descent. Several posts and
cross-beams gave way, and we thought it
advisable to get off as quickly as possible.
In the street in front a temporary shade
was erected for us, and mats spread, on
which we squatted, with more than a thous-
and people around us. We got presents of
areca nuts and betel, pepper and cocoanuts,
bananas, and yarns, and various dishes of
cooked food. On the islands of the West
highlands of Scotland the poor people make
porridge mixed with shell-fish. At Moveave
they make sago porridge mixed with the
same, also with dried fish and other things.
Taking one of the dishes, and thinking I got
&


sago and dried fish, began eating heartily,
until I noticed peculiar claws and a rather
long tail, and on inquiry found I had been
relishing stewed iguana.
“After the crowd had enjoyed a smoke
all round, there were loud and persistent
calls that we should sing, so getting cur-
singing companions near us we sang, to
their great delight, and were encored again
and again. Bu,t the sun kept hurrying
down, and before he dipped we wished to be
at Motumotu, so we had to get up and bid
them good-bye, promising soon to return.”
“Last week,” Mr. Chalmers wrote to us
early in 1885, “the ‘Blessing’ came in, sail-
ing, but made fast to the ‘Ellengowan.’
She is a pretty boat, and a handsome gift.
She goes to the Gulf to-day. The man in
charge when coming across from Cooktown,
got overboard and nearly lost his life. We
must get bulwarks or stanchions, or we may
have accidents. I wish I had the ability to
write my thanks to the donor. Union Co.,
and Mr. Jack, and your own self. She will
be used entirely for real Mission work, and
will be a great acquisition. The native


name is ‘Hanamoa' (Blessing), and all
along the coast she will very soon be
known.
“I am in excellent health. We begin
placing New Guinea evangelists, the first
real New Guineans, at various villages.
They are quite full of enthusiasm, and de-
sire greatly to go far away, but we prefer
them near at present. . . .”


CHAPTER XV.
POLITICAL DECELOPMENTS—
PROTECTORATE PROCLAIMED.
HHE exigencies of the sugar industry
in Northern Queensland, which was
always on the watch for new
sources of labour supply, and the spirit of
commercial enterprise which grudged to see
lands of boundless fertility lying in absolute
waste and disuse, caused attention to be
drawn to the great island of New Guinea,
which lay so close to our Australian North-
ern boundary. The discovery of gold also
awakened interest, and allured adventurous
bands of miners across the intervening strip
of sea, to explore and prospect the country,
These may have been in some measure con-
tributory to the movement for the estab-
lishment of a British Protectorate over
New Guinea. But the main reason that influ-
enced the Government to take that step was


a political one, namely, a determination to
forestall annexation of the South-Eastern
portion of the island by a foreign power.
The Missionaries would have preferred that
things should remain as they were ; but as
that seemed to be impossible, they regarded
British annexation as the next best thing
that could happen in the interest of the
natives. It was a time of great anxiety
and distress to Mr. Chalmers, who foresaw,
in certain contingencies, great perils to the
natives whom he and his brother Mission-
aries had done so mu,ch to advance. There
were two things which he strenuously op-
posed, namely, the alienation of the lands,
and the expatriation of the people to labour
on the sugar plantations of the adjacent
colony.
Two men, representing a Sydney syndi-
cate, had bought, as they alleged, 15,000
acres of fine sugar country in New Guinea,
for one penny an acre. The native who sold
it had no right to it ; the real chief and
owner had neither been seen nor had he re-
ceived an equivalent ; he had no knowledge
even of the transaction. Mr. Chalmers, in a
red glow of indignation at what he regarded


as unprincipled spoliation of a helpless
people, never rested till the alleged claim to
the land had been withdrawn. Through
personal interviews with Queensland Minis-
ters, through correspondence with the
Imperial Government, on the platform, and
in the columns of the press he insisted that
the human rights of the natives should be
respected, and that they should not be torn
from their homes and placed in enforced
servitude in a foreign land. His noble and
chivalrous defence of the poor savages who
loved and trusted him had something in it
unspeakably touching and pathetic.
When Commodore Erskine arrived at
New Guinea to proclaim the Protectorate,
Mr. Chalmers, along with Mr. Lawes, ren-
dered service of great value and importance
in gathering the chiefs together, instructing
them in the real nature of the proceedings,
translating and explaining the terms of the
proclamation, and the full signification of
the public ceremonial. Without the help of
the Missionaries, the Commodore confessed,
insuperable difficulties would have fronted
him in the performance of the duties which
he was appointed to fulfil. And there is no


doubt that the lines of policy pursued by
the Government are mainly those which
were suggested by Messrs. Chalmers and
Lawes for the control of the tribes and the
economic administration of the country.
More than most men are willing to ack-
nowledge we are indebted to Missionary de-
votion and enterprise for the development
of trade and the expansion of Empire, and
for the ever-growing enlargement of the
boundaries of scientific and geographical
knowledge.
“When I finished with the Commodore,”
Mr, Chalmers wrote to us, “and Mr. and
Mrs. Lawes went, on in the Flagship, I re-
turned from Peste Island to South Cape,
where we had young New Guinea teachers
and their wives from our College, awaiting
me to be landed —a kind of firstfruits to be
given in evangelistic work to the Lord of
the harvest. I placed four teachers at new
stations, and when finished came on here
and placed four more. Before the arrival of
all the warships, I placed one at Kivori,
near Cape Possession, making in all nine.
They were good, earnest men and women,
who long had been with our South Sea


Island teachers, and for a few years at Col-
lege here. The services setting them apart
were full of interest and great blessing, and
they have gone out full of enthusiasm to do
work for Him whom they love, to lead their
countrymen to Him. I wish you could have
seen them, and felt the thrill of pleasure
when these offerings were laid on Christ’s
altar. Everywhere they had good recep-
tions. We know the Harvest Lord will not
forsake them, and we may expect good
work. It can only be a wee while now, and
He’ll come to look us up. May we have
sheaves to shew Him, and may these New
Guineans have many.
“I shall see Piri, and keep him up to the
mark. I wish I could only keep Tamate up
to it. Gill has all my papers. I must get
the spirit of ink, and write one or two for
the ‘Record.’ Love to you all, and all bles-
sings descend on you all. . . .”


CHAPTER XVI.
UNDENOMEINTIONAL CHRISTIAN MISSIONS.
IpiiQON after our settlement in Victoria,
we projected issuing a Mission
paper, to be conducted largely on
the lines of our “New Zealand Record,’’
giving ample space in it to the publication
of Missionary operations in New Guinea,
and to the work generally of that
marvellously successful and honoured
organization, the London Missionary So-
ciety. But for various reasons, which
appeared cogent enough to us in the cir-
cumstances, we were constrained, to our
keen disappointment, to abandon the enter-
prise, in the hope that differences of
opinion in some of the great Mission
agencies represented in the Colonies, and
the friction engendered by these, might so
far disappear as to lead to cordial
harmony of action and to practical,
if not formal, co-operation in ac


complishing the sublime aim which
they held in common, to conquer
the heathen world for Christ. It has
always seemed to us, that if the great
organized Churches of Christendom can
show a valid historical ‘ raison d’etre ’ for
their separate existence, they can show
none for isolated action in Christian Mis-
sions—for perpetuating denominational
differences in pagan lands. A grand com-
bination of evangelizing agents and concen-
tration of financial resources moving
forward in holy crusade against the follies
and pollutions of heathenism, would be
more impressive and effective than the
present mode of working ; they would
broaden sympathy, stimulate interest, lift
the Churches’ efforts to higher ground with
loftier outlook, if there were blazoned on all
the banners planted in heathen soil, NOT
FOR DENOMINATIONALIS M, BUT ALL
FOR CHRIST.
Hence we think the London Missionary
Society, in the undenominational aspect
which it presents in all its work, is worthy
of admiration and substantial support
from Christians of every name.


“Your letter is so to the point,” Mr.
Chalmers wrote to us, under date. Port
Moresby, 19th August, 1885, “and the
object in view so clear, that I shall send it
to the Mission House at once. Get Gill to
assist you with papers ; he writes well, and
is full of Mission news. A few weeks ago I
had a large case of valuables for Piri. I
divided them out between Piri, Ruatoka,
Isaako, and Pi. Piri also grot parcels en-
closed, addressed to him and wife. Mr.
Somerville sent the case. I acknowledged
it a few days ago. . . .
“Is it not too true that the Christian
Church has neglected her opportunity ?
The apathy in reference to Christ’s com-
mand is indeed depressing.
“Mr. Lawes tells me that Mr. King, of
St. Kilda, Congregational Minister, has a
splendid magic lantern, with good slides.
You might get it for a while from him. I
do not know King personally ; he is an
old Samoan Missionary, and was, and is
highly spoken of as a man and a minister.
“At present I am a prisoner from a
sprained foot, now getting better, and


hope the fetters will be taken off in a day or
two. Until now, since Mr. and Mrs. Lawes
arrived, I have been on the move, and
but for my foot would now be at Aroma.
“Have you heard the Romanists have
come to Yule Island, right in the centre of
our Gulf work ? What is the use of saying
anything ? W 7 e can only work and pray,
and pity the poor natives, who will not
know what to believe.
“Our teachers are all well. At Saroa
two new churches have been opened, and
last week several were baptized at Kapa-
kapa, and Kaile, and at Aroma, Kerepunu,
Helena, and Maiva, there are good
catechumen classes. At Kalo the teacher is
getting on well, and has a fine large Church
nearly finished. The schools are not nearly
so well attended as I could wish, hence that
branch of our work is very discouraging to
the teachers. In the College there is life,
and many are the applications for admis-
sion.
“1 hope, as I ordered, you have got
‘Work and Adventure.’ It is possible
another volume will appear next year.


“I leave next month for the West,
where I shall stay some time in new dis-
tricts. The ‘Blessing’ (Hanamoa) has done
splendid service, and, although small, has
proved herself a capital sailer, and able to
stand a gale of wind. If I could get a
good offer for her, do you think the kind
and noble giver would be vexed if I sold
her, build a larger and more suitable, and
retain the name ‘Blessing,’ or ‘Hanamoa,’
the native of blessing ? I should not like to
hurt the feelings of the true-hearted man'
who gave her. . .
“Work and Adventure in New Guinea,”
by Mr. Chalmers, contains remarkably in-
teresting sketches of Papuan life as he saw
it in the interior. Professedly Christian
people, who boldly aver that the heathen
are happy enough in their natural state,
should read that book and the companion
volume by the same author —‘Pioneering in
New Guinea.’ The information given there
might lead them to change their opinion
regarding the utility and value of Christian
Missions to the heathen. The religion of
the New Guinea tribes, we are told, is one
of fear. They tremble at the falling of a


leaf, the flight of a bird, the appearance of
a stranger in the land. The story of the
deep degradation into which they had sunk
is narrated to us with directness, sim-
plicity and graphic skill ; and there, we
learn, the Gospel has achieved some of its
highest triumphs, and exhibited its divine
power, as in days of old, to transform into
meek and lowly followers of Christ, and
into devoted and heroic extenders of His
Kingdom, some of the basest and most
polluted thralls of a cruel and pitiless
heathenism. The two volumes give a most
animated account of Missionary explor-
ation and work in New Guinea, and form a
valuable addition to the literature of the
great Society which has done so much to
scatter the darkness of heathenism in many
lands.
“Mr. Chalmers has just sent me,” Dr.
Wyatt Gill wrote to us, “his Journal for
1884, written in pencil. Would it not suit
the pages of your Missionary Periodical ?
I am glad that you are pleased with the
book on New Guinea. May it serve as an
impetus to the Missionary spirit and enter-
prise !” “Keep Chalmers’ M.S. for your


own periodical/’ he wrote later on, “as
that would please our friend best. . .
The record of work referred to may be
found in “Pioneering in New Guinea.”


CHAPTER XVII.
SIR PETER SCRATCHLEY APPOINTED
SPECIAL COMMISSIONER.
SENERAL Sir Peter Scratchley was
appointed by the British Govern-
ment to the office of Special Com-
missioner in New Guinea, soon after the
Protectorate was proclaimed, and no man
could have been chosen better fitted than
he for the important position which he was
called to fill. Pull of sympathy with the
Missionaries in their work, and with clear
recognition of the advantages which they
possessed in their knowledge of the charac-
ter and habits of the natives, and in the
great moral influence which they had ac-
quired over them, he was specially desirous
of associating Mr. Chalmers with himself in
his visits to the various districts that
required attention, and in his dealings with


the chiefs with whom he was brought
officially into contact. Indeed it would
have gratified him exceedingly could he
have persuaded Mr. Chalmers to accept
some office of administrative trust under
himself, and devote to the service of the
Crown those splendid gifts, which com-
manded the homage of savage races, and
won for him their unfaltering confidence and
trust. But nothing could induce him to
swerve from the lofty service to which he
had consecrated all his powers. His work
as a Missionary he held to be of supreme
importance, and everything else was sub-
ordinated to that. In the interest of the
people whom he loved, however, he was
willing to render all possible help to '.heir
civic rulers, and to smooth the pathway
for their feet. His work as an explorer and
as an intelligent extender of the boundaries
of science, attracted attention both in the
Colonies and at Home, and his papers and
collections describing and illustrating the
physical geography, flora and fauna of New
Guinea, not only awakened interest both in
the Colonies and in European lands, but
drew men’s eyes upon him as one possessed
of rare daring and fertility of resource, and
H


such confidence was reposed in his judgment
and special qualifications for the position,
that more than once he was offered, and
promptly refused, the leadership of ex-
peditions equipped by learned societies and
others, for exploration and research in that
great unknown land. Bu,t his Divine Work !
Ambassador for Christ to the Heathen !
Bearer of the Glorious Gospel of God’s
grace to those, whose very misery voiced
their clamant need of its Divine consol-
ations. Ah, he felt that he could never turn
aside from that to take up anything that
the world could offer him.
On 6th January, 1886, Mr. Chalmers
wrote to us from Port Moresby as follows :
“Your kind letter of the 23rd October last 1
received a few weeks ago, on my return
from the East end, where I had been with
the late General Scratchley. When at
South Cape I baptized thirteen, and a few
weeks ago Mr. Lawes baptized at Boera,
Piri’s station, five. At various other
stations there are classes of catechumens,
men and women, waiting to be visited.
“I hope your book is out, and that it
will have a large circulation and do much


good. lam sorry you are away from New
Zealand, bu,t ’tis the Master’s work wher-
ever you are. lam glad you have got to a
more agreeable climate, and a sphere that
opens more of life to you. May you be
abundantly blessed in your every work, and
know that Christ is glorified !
<( You are right about over-urging
money claims upon your people. We are
too apt to give the Church the idea that
our religion, our very faith, is money, and
money only. I dislike the begging system
much. When a Church lives, there will be
no lack of funds for all her work.
“General Scratchley’s death was a
terrible bl ow to us. We liked him much,
and we felt he was indeed a fit man to in-
augurate the New Guinea Government. In
his great anxiety to become acquainted
wdtli the people and country he overworked
himself. He was a very temperate man in
food and drink, and we did not fear the
climate w ould take serious effect upon him.
He was only ill a very short time, and we
hoped the quick run to Australia would
quite set him up, and a few quiet months


at Hobart with Lady Scratchley and chil-
dren would so renew him, that his return
next season was secure. ’Tis otherwise;
we must submit. The General would nave
acted right by both races, and would not
be led by any party. Did you ever meet
him ? We cannot help wondering what the
next New Guinea chapter will be; we won-
der and we pray.
“We are now in our North-West Won-
soon, and since Christmas have had plenty
of rain.
“We have got two new Missionaries
from England. I trust they may be kept in
health and prove true workers, thorough
Christ-men, and have many years of glorious
work in this land.
“The ‘Hanamoa' does good work, but
she is too small. In the present state of the
Society’s funds we must be satisfied and
wait. The great distress in Britain tells
much on the Mission funds. I suppose you
also feel it in the Colonies. . . .”
The “next New Ginnea chapter,” about
which Mr. Chalmers felt some anxiety, was


entirely satisfactory in its opening, and in
its political developments. An unwise ap-
pointment to administer the affairs of the
Protectorate might have seriously impeded
the progress of the Mission, and caused
much harm to the natives by sowing in
their minds the seeds of suspicion and dis-
trust, thus hindering their educational and
social uplifting. The Missionaries therefore
welcomed the appointment that was made
as a happy augury for the future prosperity
of the country.


CHAPTER XVIII.
HONOURED IN MELBOURNE.
* EARLY twenty years had passed
since Mr. Chalmers, accompanied
by his young bride, had sailed from
English shores to take up work at Raro-
tonga. Years full of joys and full of
triumphs they had been, and with no small
share of perils and sorrows. The Directors
of his Society had repeatedly requested him
to lay aside his work among the heathen
for a while and visit the Home-land. But
he shrank from leaving his post. His diffi-
dence, and tendency to underrate his own
fitness to undertake the deputation work,
which he knew would be thrust upon him,
made him reluctant to move. But the vast-
ness of the work that lay to hand, the
urgency of the needs of those swarming
tribes, who were living in pitiful darkness
and dying in absolute ignorance of God,


pressed upon his spirit and stamped out
his scruples ; and he braced himself up to
tell out in the face of the British peonle how
alone New Guinea could be won for Christ.
Four months after the date of his last letter
to us, he was in all the bustle of
preparation for a visit to England.
Mr. Chalmers, always on the watch to
commend the Mission to the Christian
public, addressed meetings in the larger
Australian centres. On his arrival in Mel-
bourne, he received a great public welcome
in the Independent • Church, Collins Street.
The Governor, Sir Henry Loch, who pre-
sided on that occasion, said : —“ . . While
we view with admiration and respect Mr.
Chalmers’ Missionary labours, the country
owes him a debt of gratitude for his
services to the State. Whenever differences
have arisen—which lam sorry to say has
not infrequently been the case—between the
natives and Europeans who have gone to
New Guinea, we have ever found Mr.
Chalmers ready to assist in settling those
difficulties in such a way as to avoid fight-
ing and bloodshed. He accompanied Com-
modore Wilson when he went there, and I


believe lam correct in stating that the
manner in which Mr. Chalmers then acted,
saved a very considerable expenditure of
blood and suffering to the natives. Again,
we find him accompanying Commodore
Erskine, when he was despatched to extend
the Queen’s Protectorate over British New
Guinea ; and, on a more recent occasion, he
again accompanied Sir Peter Scratchley,
when that late lamented officer went to es-
tablish the authority of the Crown in that
country.”
Baron F. Yon Mueller moved: —“That
this meeting accord its profound appreci-
ation of the great labours during many
years of the Rev. James Chalmers, in not
only carrying the blessings of Christianity
to the savage populations of New Guinea,
but in advancing also the science of
Geography by penetrating into the wildest
recesses of that large island, thus revealing
to us simultaneously many new forms of
the wondrous works through which Al-
mighty God speaks to us in living nature ;
and that this meeting, further, gratefully
recognises the aid cheerfully rendered by
Mr. Chalmers, and by his estimable col


league, Mr. Lawcs, by which exploratory
efforts were vastly promoted in that great
country, with which indeed Mr. Chalmers’
name will ever be historically identified,
where it will be cherished in the future by a
flourishing community, and be held in
grateful remembrance by the native races.”
He said, “that the representatives of
the Geographical Society were gratified for
the privilege of being present on that occa-
sion. Missionary work required a multitude
of gifts. It needed forbearance and kindli-
ness, blended with firmness and courage,
great tact, the renouncing of the pleasures
of the world, and the braving of difficulties
of all kinds. Mr. Chalmers had engaged in
geographical enterprise, and had con-
tributed much to our knowledge of New
Guinea. Even on his last short journey,
when he accompanied Forbes, he rendered
very important services. He had shown
that the upper regions of New Guinea were
uninhabited, and were therefore undoubt-
edly open to settlers. The chain of
mountains through New Guinea was double
the length of the European Alps, and its
upper climate like that of Great Britain.


It was destined to become the abode of
Colonists. He trusted Mr. Chalmers would
live to see New Guinea free from savage-
dom, and his work there a monument for
all time.”
The Rev. A. Gosman said :—“. . . There
were some men who represented what might
be called the prudence of Christianity. Mr.
Chalmers was one of such enthusiastic
courage that danger had only to leap up to
call out all his manly qualities.”
Mr. Chalmers (who on rising received
an enthusiastic welcome from the great
meeting) said : —“ . . . Great Britain had
secured the grand harbours of the South-
East Coast, and the principal waterways of
New Guinea. There were no harbours on
the Australian coast, excepting that of
Sydney, that could compare with the har-
bours on the South-Eastern coast of New
Guinea. He had visited Tarlon and the
Amazon Islands, where the people were ail
women, but he found the men on the smaller
islands. They were part of the great Aroma
tribe, who had made their way eastward,
driving back the real aboriginals of the


country. They made periodical expeditions
to the mainland, and but for the Mission, it
was probable they would have compelled
the native races to retire to the main-
land. . . .”
The Missionary hero received many
graceful attentions during his stay in
Melbourne. He was welcomed as a <?uest at
Government House, where Sir Henry and
Lady Loch delighted to honour him. His
modesty, his simple, unaffected manliness,
his splendid enthusiasm, his unconquerable
love for the heathen, and contempt for the
perils that fronted him in the performance
of his work—all excited the admiration, and
won the hearts of men. Efforts were made
to detach him from the Mission, and to
secure his services for exploration. But he
firmly resisted them all. “I can’t be any-
thing but a Missionary,” he said, “and
when the Master calls me hence. He will
have to give me Missionary work to do.”—
Such red glow of desire burned in his
heart to tell the lost of the infinite love of
God.


CHAPTER XIX.
RE-VISITING OLD SCENES.
ST was with a strange tumult in his
heart and thrill of his entire nature
that the Missionary exile, after so
long an absence, trod again the streets of
the British Metropolis. His name, and the
important services which he had rendered
in opening up New Guinea to Gospel light
and to Australian enterprise, were well
known to only. a comparatively narrow
circle of Christian people, who had a vital
interest in the evangelization of the dark
places of the earth, and from them as well
as from the Directors of his own Society,
he received a most cordial and inspiring
welcome. His fame, with rapid flight, flew
through the land. He leaped at once into a
popularity that made unceasing and in-
satiable demands upon his time and
energies. The circumstances in which he


was placed evoked all the hidden fire and
forces of his nature, and he threw himself
with a burning zeal and self-abandonment,
a white heat of holy passion into the task
which he set before him of firing the Chris-
tian heart of Britain with a living, glowing
interest in Missions to the heathen. His
fascinating magnetism, rugged eloquence,
supreme Apostolic devotion to Christ
captivated all men’s hearts. Thousands
thronged to his meetings, eager to look
into his face and hear his voice. He was
the “lion” of his day and year —of his
century, some in the ecstasy of their ad-
miration averred. But this is certain, he
touched the people’s hearts and roused their
sympathies as they had rarely been touched
and roused before. Some who filled import-
ant places in the Imperial Service sought his
counsel on matters touching the interests of
the new Protectorate. His papers read
before the members of the Colonial Institute
and before the members of the Royal
Geographical Society, were full of valuable
information, and testified to the keenness
of his observation, and to the diligence of
his research. At the meetings of these in-
stitutions men spoke of his noble courage


and intrepidity, of the potent influence
which he had acquired over some of the
native tribes, and of the immeasurable
value of the services which he had rendered
to Christ and to his Country, as Missionary
and explorer of an absolutely unknown
land.
On his return to his field of labour
towards the close of 1888, he applied him-
self with new ardour and enthusiasm to his
work, ever projecting an extension of
operations along the line of coast, and
planting new Mission Stations in advan-
tageous positions, made to weep at times
over disappointments, and losses sustained
in the removal of teachers either by sick-
ness or treachery. The width and large
comprehensiveness of his views and plans
may be gathered from the following extract
from one of his letters :—“We look too much
for individual cases of conversion. These
are chronicled and made much of. Do not
you think the Gospel is for mankind, and
that it ought to influence whole tribes ? We
potter away with one or two converts ;
good, but strike for the higher—assert for
the nation or tribe. Our statistic system is


all wrong. They will keep the statistics in
heaven, 1 feel sure, and I would leave them
in their hands.” And yet, with all his
broad, ambitious projects for the evangel-
ization of the whole Protectorate, we find
him, with all his soaring aspirations and
dauntless energy, chained down to the
humble task of teaching in an elementary
native school !
Two Missionaries —Messrs. Walker and
Dauncey—arrived in September, 1888, as a
re-enforcement of the working strength of
the Mission, and that was a subject of
thankfulness and praise to him. And there
came into his home life, too, about the
same time a new brightness and joy—one
who became, for all too brief a period, a
courageous and efficient helper to him in his
work for Christ. He married again, a
widow, who had been in the early days an
intimate friend of his former wife. She
stood bravely at her post for a while, doing
faithfully the duty that lay to her hand to
do, and exerting an influence for good cm
the rude savages who were round about
her. But all too soon her work was inter-
rupted. The climate made such ravages in


her health that it became necessary to take
her away for a change.
Mr. Chalmers therefore arranged a visit
to the South Pacific Islands, and travelled
from Sydney to Samoa in company with
Robert Louis Stevenson, the “gentle novel-
ist,” who at once took Chalmers into his
heart, and spoke and wrote in words of
glowing admiration of both him and his
work. It was a happy time, which passed
too quickly away.
After visiting Samoa, Tonga, and other
islands, where his time was filled up with
public work-all more or less directly con-
nected with Missions —he set foot again in
his own old home at Rarotonga, where
sweet memories of earlier days thronged
thickly upon him, and there he had a good
time and a busy time, creating and deepen-
ing in the Islanders a sacred interest in his
own work at New Guinea. And when, at
length, the hour came to leave them, they
clung to him with a tender passionateness,
and would fain have kept him to be with
them always. But he told them that could
not be, as the Master had other work for


him to do; and the parting from Earotonga
was a very pathetic one. In May, 1891, Mr.
and Mrs. Chalmers arrived at Port Moresby,
where they remained for a few weeks, until
the “John Williams” cast anchor and dis-
embarked twenty teachers, a welcome re-
enforcement to the Mission staff, from the
Islands which had been recently visited.
In October, 1888, British New Guinea
was formally annexed, and created a separ-
ate Possession, with a government of its
own. Dr. (afterwards Sir) William Mac-
gregor, was appointed Administrator, and
no man could have been found in the wide
range of the Imperial Service better fitted
than he was for the important office which
he was now called to fill. His high charac-
ter and distinguished abilities had brought
him into prominent notice, and secured for
him responsible appointments in the Crown
Colony of Fiji. His well-known interest in
Mission Work, his manly sympathy with
native races, and warm advocacy of native
rights, his large political experience, and
scientific attainments, were all of special
value in the position to which he was now
advanced. During his tenure of office in
i


New Guinea he rendered valued service in
promoting peace between hostile tribes,
in checking violence and crime, in incul-
cating respect for law and order, and in
enacting wise and equitable laws for the
protection and welfare of the people whom
he was appointed to govern. To him it was
given, first of all men, to plant his feet on
the summit of Mount Owen Stanley, an
achievement which Chalmers had been fired
with an ambition to perform. As an ex-
plorer and a naturalist he won great fame,
and did much to extend our knowledge of
the capabilities and resources of the new
Possession.


CHAPTER XX.
THE FLY RIVER.
jgffij&NXIETIES and sorrows now crowd-
ed on Tamate, and little wonder if
for a while he moved about with a
sad countenance. His wife, though striving
to bear up bravely, was in feeble health.
Some of the teachers whom he had left with
her at Toaripi were prostrated by sick-
ness, while others were removed by death.
He had occasion to go to Cooktown in the
Mission schooner, “ Harrier,” but when
beating up against stormy weather and
high seas, she struck on a sunken reef —all
efforts to get her off being unavailing. Mr.
Chalmers and most of those who were on
board escaped in the whale-boat, and
scrambled up on the lee side of Three
Islands. The captain and four others clung
to the wreck until rescued by a passing
schooner. It was the fourth time Mr. Chal


mers had suffered shipwreck since he had
joined the Mission, but never before had he
faced such perils, or endured such hardships
as those which fell to his lot on that
occasion.
He now found himself in great straits
for want of a boat to carry on his work.
He therefore arranged with Messrs. Burns,
Philp & Co., that one of their boats should
visit the Mission stations to the East of
Port Moresby every two months. And Sir
Thomas Mcllwraith, on behalf of the
Queensland Government, in a magnanimous
spirit, which elicited his warmest gratitude,
lent him, without charge, a schooner for
his immediate needs. It was a kindly act,
and a graceful recognition of the value of
Christian Missions. It was more than that,
it was also a tribute of respect rendered to
Mr. Chalmers personally. For he was well
known to the great political leaders of the
Northern State, and he had deeply im-
pressed them with the practical wisdom of
the views which he had enunciated in dis-
cussing the policy which should rule in the
Administration of the New Possession.


He returned to Toaripi with all speed,
his spirit dulled with the pressure of anx-
ious thought. But on his arrival he foujid
to his joy that his wife was well, and the
teachers much improved in health. “Our
Father in heaven had cared for all,” he
wrote, “ and our songs were those of
thanksgivings.” Then we find him away
again visiting the Mission stations, speak-
ing words of encouragement and cheer to
the native teachers who, though full of
earnestness and devotion to their work, yet
lacked staying power, and their eyes always
brightened with joy when Tamate’s brave,
cheery voice rang in their ears.
The condition of his wife’s health now
awakened such grave anxiety that they had
to face the trial of parting for, perhaps, a
prolonged period ; and she sailed for Eng-
land in March, 1892. Again thus, in God’s
providence, cast adrift from home life, he
seemed to gather into his great heart all
the lost souls of that dark land. Now and
again we get a glimpse of the mighty long-
ing that filled him to carry the Gospel of
God’s grace to the remotest tribes of the
Possession,


“Ten years ago,” he wrote, “when little
was known of the people West of Manu-
manu, in Redscar Bay, I hoped, if God
spared my life, to introduce the Gospel to
all the districts as far as Orokolo, and
thought that the work might occupy a fair
lifetime. We got to Orokolo in January,
1892, and now my desire has enlarged, and
I hope yet to carry the Gospel to the Fly
River, and to the Westward. The plan I
have always adopted is to visit frequently,
get thoroughly known by living with the
people, and, through interpreters, tell them
the story of Divine love, and so prepare the
way for teachers living with them. I
place no teachers where I have not lived
myself, and where I should be willing to live
frequently.”
By instruction of the Directors of the
London Missionary Society he undertook
to work the Fly River and Western Division
of the Mission. He entered upon that new
field with courage and faith, and without
misgivings. But he could not shut his eyes
to its hazardous nature. “This Fly River
work,” he said, “I look upon as my last
and perhaps greatest work for Christ, and


being always with Him, I fear not. God
knows there will be many Gethsemanes, and
it may be Calvarys, but all for Christ, and
it is well/’
No perils among the heathen affrighted
him. “No accounts of unknown districts,”
he said, “I have ever received from natives
equalled in real savagery those relating to
the Namau districts, and of course these
gave a cjiarm to the plan of trying to be
the first to visit it.” When he went to
Namau, the chief presented him with a good
piece of land for a Mission house. “Give
us a teacher,” he said, “and from here to
the river the whole point is yours. We
build the house and we bridge the swamp
for him to walk on.” “I promised,” Mr.
Chalmers said, “as I saw a good opening
here to the whole district, and a convenient
place of call for myself when coming from
the Fly River.” “We had service, the sing-
ing pleasing them much, and the interpreter
told them the story of God’s love to us
all. . . I was tired, and ready as I thought
to sleep under any circumstances. Sleep !
All chance of it had gone. The present and
future are with me. The Gospel is being


preached all through Namau, and I saw
the end of killing and cannibalism, and
another people won to Christ.” Thus
with prophetic eye, and with unfaltering
faith in the fulfilment of the promises, he
saw the old dark days, with their appalling
horrors, for ever closing, and a new era of
light and gladness dawning upon the
people, peace reigning among them, Chris-
tianity pouring its fulness of benedictions
down upon their path.
Recent visitors to New Guinea have been
passing strictures on certain trading trans-
actions on the part of Mission agents,
which came under their observation. Mr.
Chalmers sternly set his face against that.
If he found a teacher waxing cold, perfunct-
ory in the performance of duty, degrading
his sacred office to the common level of a
trader, he removed him from his post and
sent him back to his island home branded
as a failure.


CHAPTER XXI.
SECOND VISIT TO GREAT BRITAIN.
nHE Centenary Celebrations of the
London Missionary Society began
in 1895, and the Directors, believing
that the presence of Chalmers would lend
additional lustre to the meetings, cabled
to him to make his arrangements to visit
Britain. He felt now no reluctance to face
such audiences as he knew that great
occasion would attract. He was conscious
of his power to move men’s hearts when
God’s Spirit fired his own, and his lofty
theme took entire possession of him, and
all his heart and soul cried out in impor-
tunate and pathetic pleadings for Christian
sympathy and succour for the dying race,
whose very misery and haplessness were a
powerful appeal for the peace and joy of the
knowledge of Jesus. His heart leapt with
gladness at the thought that once more the


opportunity would be given to him, to press
upon the Christian people of Britain the
claims of the helpless heathen tribes, whom
he had learned to love with a tenderness
and a self-abandonment of affection, which
find few parallels in the whole history of
Christian Missions.
The warmth of the welcome which he
received on his arrival in England exceeded
that of his previous visit; for he had now
many personal friends there who had learned
to love him with a strong affection, and who
counted it one of their highest privileges to
help on the work with which he was so
closely identified. His health suffered from
the rigour of the English climate, but he
made unceasing and heroic efforts to fulfil
the manifold engagements to which he was
committed ; and now, as on the former oc-
casion of his visit to the home-land, vast
audiences in all the large centres of
population were delighted and thrilled by
his glowing and graphic descriptions of life
and work in New Guinea, and strongly im-
pressed by his passionate demand for men
to lift the heathen out of their darkness
into the light of Christ.


Sir William Macgregor, formerly Gover-
nor of New Guinea, occupied the chair at a
great meeting which was held in the Free
Church Assembly Hall, Edinburgh, on
March 11th, 1895, and which was addressed
by Mr. Chalmers. Sir William, on that
occasion, bore the following noble testi-
mony to the good work done by the Society,
and to the important part borne by the
coloured teachers in that work : —“As a
teaching body, the London Missionary So-
ciety, in the teeth of great and many
difficulties, has effected much good in New
Guinea. Its stations are as yet practically
confined to the coast line, and even on this
they are sometimes separated by great
intervals, which leave numerous populous
tribes totally unprovided with teachers.
There are certainly many hundreds of tribes
living inland from the coast stations, who
have not heard of a Missionary, and who
can never be taught from the posts now
established. To reach these a great acces-
sion of strength is required, and a different
and more extended plan of campaign will
be necessary. Native teachers born and
reared in coast villages will never take


kindly to residence inland ; the boys and
youths of the interior will not, as a rule,
remain long enough at the coast to acquire
the training of efficient teachers. European
Missionaries must therefore leave the coast,
and take up permanent stations among the
tribes of the interior, and educate the future
inland teachers on the spot. It may be
said at once that New Guinea must be
taught eventually by native teachers.
“Let me say a word for the coloured
teacher. He, poor simple soul, leaves, at
our call, his own little world and warm-
hearted friends in the South Seas, to devote
his efforts to his fellow-men in an unknown
country. I believe some eight of the
Society’s teachers have been murdered by
our natives. How many of you ever heard
of those eight men ? Had they belonged to
our own race, we should all have known
much more about their career, their suffer-
ing, their martyrdom. Scores of them have
died splendidly and silently at their posts.
Let me remind you that often less courage
is required to perform a brave and daring
deed on the impulse of the moment, than is
needed in the man that remains, as the


native teacher does, at an obscure and
difficult post for a prolonged term, especi-
ally when he knows that he will get no
credit of any kind for his performance. The
work of the South Sea teacher has the
misfortune of not appealing to the im-
agination. Only those that see his work,
and understand him and his surroundings,
can appreciate him and sympathize with
him. Any Missionary will starve himself to
provide hospitality for his guest —I have
known it done often —and the poor coloured
teacher is certainly no less hospitable than
the white Missionary. Now what, except
the promises of the Gospel and the approval
of his own conscience, has the coloured
teacher to look forward to as his reward ?
In a month or two after he ceases to
work his very name fades like an echo. . . .”
Honours were poured upon Mr. Chal-
mers, which he took at their true value.
His services as explorer of a new land were
recognized by the Geographical Society of
Germany. Then followed recognition by the
various Societies of the Australian Colon-
ies. The Royal Geographical Society of
England also enrolled him as a member.


But what he regarded as the most graceful
distinction of all was the bestowment upon
him of the freedom of the royal burgh of
Inverary. That gratified him—to stand
again among the people who knew his old,
simple, quaint home, and his humble
parentage among them, and receive from
their hands the highest honour in their
gift.
The interests of the Society with which
he was immediately connected stood, in nis
estimation, far and away above all con-
siderations of personal advantage, and gold
given for his own uses he flung without
hesitation into the Mission fund. He occu-
pied on one occasion the pulpit of the late
Dr. Parker, at City Temple. The famous
preacher was laid on his back by serious
illness, and was glad to avail himself of
Chalmers’ help. When Mrs. Parker returned
home from the service, she spoke with gen-
erous praise of the Missionary hero, of his
striking personality, and of the great work
which he was doing for Christ. Dr. Parker
was so interested in what he heard that he
wrote a note to Chalmers, thanking him
cordially for his service, and enclosing a


cheque for £SO, which he specially desired
him to use for his own personal comfort.
The whole amount, however, was sent on to
the Mission Fund.


CHAPTER XXII.
STATION ESTABLISHED AT SAGUANE.
*E. Chalmers left his wife behind
him in England for reasons of
health, and returned alone to his
work in New Guinea towards the close of
1895. In pursuance of arrangements already
made he proceeded to Saguane, in the delta
of the Fly River, where he established his
central station, and whence he hoped evan-
gelizing agents would go forth, in the
course of a few years, to touch with Gospel
influences the wild tribes that lay back from
the sea-board. His mode of life now, early
in 1896, and his weird and wild surround-
ings, formed a sharp contrast to the glad
experiences of those fast fleeting months
which he had spent in Christian Britain,
when kindliest voices had acclaimed him,
and hearts had opened to receive him and


to pour unstinted love upon him—where his
whole nature had brightened under srenial
social intercourse, and had risen in joyous
response to the stimulating power of the
intellectual and spiritual forces round
abou,t him —all of which had made his visit
to the home-land so memorable and full of
pleasant reminiscence to him. And no won-
der that he found it hard —something of a
strain upon his patience and faith, to
gather the lawless, flighty, irrepressible
little savages into the school which
he opened, and to teach them the
simplest elements —the very rudiments
of knowledge. But “ the common round,
the daily task,” —the irksome drudg-
eries to which he put his handy
were exalted and glorified by the vision
which he got by faith of the looming
triumphs of the glorious Gospel of Christ
in that land of foul and indescribable abom-
inations, and of dreary superstitions and
cruelty.
Mrs. Chalmers joined her husband in
August, 1897, and not only brought the
sunshine and comfort of her presence to his
home, but gave him very important help in
j


the school, carrying on the work very
efficiently, and winning the simple affection
and trust of the children, during her hus-
band’s absence at the various stations
which were under his superintendence and
official care.
“My dear Brother Ross,” he wrote to us
under date, “Fly River, Saguane, 6th De-
cember, 1897, “Good, so very good of you
to write. ... I am much more in touch
with the old home-land than with the
Colonies. The only colonial paper I get is
the ‘Otago Witness,’ and Mr. Peter Barr
sends me that. If ever I retired, which I
have no desire to do, I do not think we
should settle in Australia, perhaps in New
Zealand, more likely in London. I love the
great city.
“I have not seen your Life of our good
old Doctor, but will try for it when next in
Thursday Island. I should like just to pop
in and have a good long yarn with you. I
am glad your old Missionary enthusiasm
abides.
“On my return from England, nearly
two years ago, I settled here, right at the


mouth of the Fly Estuary. I was asked
by the Directors to undertake the Ply.
Although teachers from Murray Island have
been here for years, no real impression has
been made. The present indifference is very
great. We are working, watching, and wait-
ing, and know well the blessing will come.
“The children attend school very fairly,
and we hope much from them. The country
about here is very unsuitable for our South
Sea teachers, and our great hope is that
soon some of the people will so give them-
selves to Christ that they will become
teachers.
“Tamate vaine joined me three months
ago, and now it is home. She has kept her
health very well since joining me.
“In Torres Straits it has been/an active
year in Church building. In Saibiai they got
together over £IOO, bought the material,
and built a very fine Church. These people,
twenty-five years ago, were a terror to their
neighbours, as determined skull-hunters.
“In October we opened a very nice
Church on Mabuiagi, which cost the natives


£250, and all paid for by themselves. Now
the natives of Mabhiagi, twenty-five years
ago, were a savage, naked, nomadic crowd,
and living; much as the Australian abor-
igines do in their wild state.
“On Murray and Darnley they are build-
ing fine, large concrete Churches, which
will be opened next year.
“I wish you could come down and see
us. The trip to Thursday Island I should
think the finest in the world, amd in July,
August, September, the weather is delight-
ful on the island, and these are also our
best months here. If afraid of fever, Torres
Straits can be done, and much Mission
work can be seen. I want much to see
Mission Work in China and Japan, and we
may arrange sometime for that trip. Tam-
ate vaine will enjoy it. Love to Mrs. Ross
and yourself. Ever yours faithfully,
TAMATE.”
A few weeks after the date of that letter
he met with an accident —a bad fall, which
invalided him for a while. Enforced in-
action, when there was much to do, tended


to depress him, and as soon as he could
move about, accompanied by his wife, he
set out to visit the teachers in the Straits,
But the season was an exceptionally tem-
pestuous one, no such violent winds and
stormy waters had he experienced for many
years, and his constant exposure in a frail,
wet craft, to appalling squalls and drench-
ing seas, told seriously upon his health.
They put in for shelter at Thursday Island,
and, leaving his wife, who was ailing, there,
Tamate, after a few days’ rest, completed
his visitation of the Mission Stations. He
returned after a brief absence, prostrated by
malarial fever, complicated by other
troubles induced by his fall. But as soon
as strength permitted, he was back again at
his post at Saguane, fighting his way
through difficulties and trials, combating,
by sheer force of Christian heroism revplt-
ing heathen rites, whose roots were struck
deep in the social habits of the people;
and at last, with clear discernment of the
breaking of the dawn, for which he had
longed and laboured and wrestled in prayer,
he was enabled to sing glad songs of vic-
tory, while gathering immortal sheaves for


the gamer of Christ. Manifestations of
the Divine presence were clearly visible;
many were seeking baptism, and affording
cheering indications that the power of God
in the Glorious Gospel of His Son was
touching and transforming their hearts.
In April, 1900, Mr. Chalmers was great-
ly gratified by the arrival of a colleague,
who entered upon his work with ample
promise of a useful career. It was arranged
that the Rev. 0. F. Tomkins should super-
intend the Torres Straits Mission, leaving
Tamate free to explore the Fly River, and
establish stations to operate on the tribes
contiguous to that. His new colleague
gave abundant proof of his fitness for the
position which he filled. He rapidly won
his way into the veteran’s heart, and found
opportunities for the display of qualities
which merited and received the most gener-
ous praise from his lips.
Six months later on, after a prolonged
illness, Mrs. Chalmers died. Her re-
moval was a sore trial to Tamate.
His heart for a time was numbed
with grief. His own health was failing ;


physical infirmities were multiplying upon
him. A sense of loneliness at times com-
pletely overpowered him. But when he
looked around him and saw the misery of
the heathen, a profound compassion filled
his heart, and he roused himself to more
strenuous effort to bring them into living
touch with Christ. Some idea of his
ceaseless activity may be formed from a
statement made by Dr. Lawes, that “of the
130 Mission Stations which the L.M.S. has
in New Guinea, there was hardly one that
did not owe its initiation to Mr. Chalmers.”


CHAPTER XXIII.
TAMATE WINS THE MARTHR’S CROWN.
■|LTHOUGH we have no direct evi-
dence of it, yet there is no doubt
t i ia t Tamate felt that his life on
earth was approaching its close. We have
abundant proof from the tone and tenor of
his latest writings, that the ripening pro-
cess was going on apace. In spite of
decaying physical power he applied himself
with new energy, with eager and tense
activity to his work, as if he would make
the most of the days that still remained to
him. For the heathen lay as a great bur-
den on his heart. He was filled with a
passionate longing for the evangelization
of New Guinea, and with a holy daring he
claimed it from God. Now and again he
gives us an insight into the wonderful open-
ness of his soul’s eye, and clearness of his
spiritual vision. He lived very close to the


supreme realities of eternity, and in some
of the more important crises of his life,
when imminent perils threatened him, he
felt the touch of a Divine hand upon him,
he was thrilled by a Divine voice that
spoke in his ear, and put strength into his
heart, and gave direction to all his goings.
His worldly affairs were all in the most per-
fect order ; and he left on record for the
guidance of others, sagacious reflections on
the best methods of conducting and ex-
tending the Mission, and on the sort of men
that the work demanded —“they must be
men,” he said, “of the Cross, Christ-men,
with hearts aglow with love, and fired with
burning desires to rescue the lost.”
He sailed from Daru on board the
Mission boat “Niue,” in company with Mr.
Tomkins, Hiro, a Rarotongan teacher, the
Chief of Ipisia, and a party of ten Mission
boys. They were 'anchored off the Eastern
end of Goaribari Island on the evening of
Sunday, April 7th, 1901. Soon after the
vessel anchored the natives came off, and
stayed on board till sunset, when Tamate
persuaded them to go ashore, with a prom-
ise that he would visit them in their village


the next day. Early the following morning
the natives boarded the ship, and crowded
the decks, so that there was no room to
move. Their canoes were filled with weap-
ons of war, and they resisted all efforts
made by the Mission party to get them to
leave the ship and go ashore. Tamate
then decided to land, thinking that they
would follow him. In company with Mr.
Tomkins, and the Ipisia Chief, and the Mis-
sion boys, he went ashore in the whaleboat,
intending to return in half an hour for
breakfast. A large number of natives ac-
companied the Mission party, the rest
remained on board and looted the ship,
taking all the barter and stores on which
they could lay their hands. The “Niue/’
suspecting treachery, moved along the
coast, watching and waiting for the return
of the Mission party, but saw nothing of
them, and, on the morning of the 9th
April, left for Daru, to report the matter to
the civil authorities.
The Governor, with a large force,
visited the island, and repelled several at-
tacks which were made upon him by the
natives. He captured a prisoner at Dop


ima, from whom he received full details of
the massacre. The Missionaries were
knocked senseless under blows of stone
clubs dealt to them from behind; their
heads were then cut off, and their bodies cut
up and handed to the women to cook for
the cannibal feast. The remainder of the
Mission party on shore met with a similar
fate. The Governor’s force punished the
cruel deed by burning the “dubus” in the
villages, and all the war canoes which they
found. Some twenty-four natives were
killed in the attacks which they made upon
the invading force..
Thus passed from among us one whose
name and work will be imperishably as-
sociated with the planting and progress of
Christianity and civilization in the great
land that lies contiguous to the Northern
border of our own Commonwealth. Su-
preme peril to life he had often fearlessly
fronted before, and now, when he perceived
the savage mood of the people with whom
he had to deal, he met death dauntlessly,
no doubt joyfully accepting it as the open-
ing of a glorious gateway into a brighter
realm of activity for Christ—out of the


shadows and the sorrows which had so
often darkened his pathway here.
And for us who are left behind to fight
on against sin and darkness —against
pitifulest selfishness, and pride of place and
pelf—there was aching of heart and grief
when the announcement of that dark
tragedy came to us, and we could only bow
our heads in lowly submission to the Mas-
ter’s will, and thank Him that He gave us
in Tamate so noble a gift that we, stimu-
lated by his bright and inspiring example,
may seek to be animated by his spirit, and
do, with courage, and faith, and singleness
of eye to God’s glory, the work which has
been laid to our hand to do.
Very deep throughout the wide Com-
monwealth of Australia, and throughout
the neighbouring Colony of New Zealand,
wherever Tamate’s name was known, was
the sorrow that was felt, and very pro-
found was the sympathy evinced when the
electric wires flashed intelligence of the
tragic close of that brave, unselfish, simple,
consecrated life, that was stamped with all


the finest qualities that give dignity and
grandeur to the character of a man.
The last act of the dark tragedy was
performed on 16th March, 1903, when advan-
tage was taken of the presence of the Mis-
sionary steamer “John Williams,” with a
large party of Missionaries and their
families at Daru, to carry out the burial
ceremonies of the skull of James Chalmers.
It was enclosed in a cedar cabinet mounted
with a silver shield, and inscribed —“Skull
of the Rev. James Chalmers. Recovered
from the Goaribari natives, at which place
he was massacred on April Bth, 1901.”
“It is difficult to do justice,” Vice-
Admiral Bridge said, “in writing, to the
character of this really great Englishman.
One had only to know and live with him
in out-of-the-way lands, to be convinced
that he was endowed with the splendid
characteristics which distinguished our
most eminent explorers and pioneers.”
Admiral Erskine, after speaking of the
great services rendered to the British Gov


ernment by Chalmers, says :—“l cannot
close this letter without expressing my per-
sonal admiration and respect for the noble
qualities which distinguished and adorned
my late lamented friend, and the profound
sorrow and distress with which I-have
heard of his untimely and terrible death at
■the hands of those natives, for whose ben-
efit he spent over twenty years of his life.
An earnest and true disciple of his Master,
he has yielded up a life of self-negation and
devotion to duty, to win immortality and
a crown of glory which fadeth not away.
And it would be entirely in keeping with
his Christian character —a humble follower
of the Great Example—-if his last thoughts
and fervent prayers were offered up in the
last bitter hour for the poor benighted sav-
ages, who unwittingly have done to death
their truest friend and benefactor.”
“GREAT-HEART IS DEAD, THEY SAY—
Great-Heart the Teacher,
Great-Heart the Joyous,
Great-Heart the Fearless,
Great-Heart of Sweet White Fire,
Great-Heart the Martyr.


“CHEAT-HEART IS DEAD, THEY SAY—
Fighting the fight.
Holding the Light
Into the night.
“GREAT-HEART IS DEAD, THEY SAY—
But the Light shall burn the brighter,
And the night shall be the lighter
For his going,
And a rich, rich harvest for his sowing.
“GREAT-HEART IS DEAD, THEY SAY.
WHAT IS DEATH TO SUCH A ONE AS GREAT-
HEART ?
One sigh perchance for work unfinished here.
Then a swift passing to a mightier sphere.
New joys, perfected powers, the vision clear.
And all the amplitude of heaven to work
The work he held so dear.
“GREAT-HEART IS DEAD, THEY SAY ?
Nor dead, nor sleeping ! He lives on. His
name
Shall kindle many a heart to equal flame.
The fire he lighted shall burn on and on.
Till all the darkness of the lands be gone.


And all the kingdoms of the earth be won.
And One.
"A SOUL, SO FIERY SWEET CAN NEVER DIE,
BUT LIVES, AND LOVES, AND WORKS,
THROUGH ALL ETERNITY.” *
•John Oxenham in "The Quiver,” 1901.


INDEX.
Anderson’s Bay Church, 10.
Annexation, 137.
Aroma, 41, 51.
“Blessing,” The, 88, 92, 106.
Boat, Becked, 81.
Bridge, Vice-Admiral, 165.
Britain, Chalmers re-visits, 132 ; Second visit, 145
Brown, Mr. R., 27, 89.
Chalmers, Mrs., 22 ; death of, 25.
Chalmers, Port, 96.
College, New Guinea, 44, 45.
Cooktown, 63.
Dunedin, Temperance Hall, 10 ; Museum, 23, 28.
“Ellengowan,” 12.
Erskine, Commodore, 110, 128, 165.
Fly River, 139.


Gill, Rev. W. Wyatt, 84, 93, 118.
Glendining, Mr. R., 31.
Gosman, Rev. A., 130.
Great-Heart, 166.
“Hanamoa,” 96, 117, 124.
“Harrier,” Wreck of, 139.
Hercus, Miss, 15.
Kerens, Mr. G. R., 91.
Hood Bay Massacre, 32.
Inverary, 13, 150.
Jackson, Dr. Sheldon, 61, 62.
Kone, 67.
Lawes, Rev. W. G., 21, 35, 49, 111, 115, 122, 159.
Loch, Sir Henry, 127, 131.
Mangaia, 28.
Marriage, Chalmers’ Second, 135 ; Death of Mrs.
Chalmers, 158.
Martyrdom, 160.
Mekeo, Trip to, 54.
Moresby, Port, 35, 52, 94, 137.
Mueller, Baron Von, 128.
INDEX— (Continued).


Murray Island, 21, 155, 156.
Macgregor, Sir W., 137, 147.
Mcllwraith, Sir T., 140.
McKerras, Mr. J., 10, 31.
New Guinea, 19 ; “Work and Adventure in,’’ ng -
“Pioneering in,’’ 117.
Owen Stanley, Mount, 19, 82, 102, 138.
Parker, Dr., Rev., 150.
Pi, 27, 64.
Piri, 27, 28, 40, 66, 84, 86.
Princeton Museum, 36, 62.
Protectorate, 108.
Rarotonga, 15.
“Record, N.Z. Missionary,” 49, 83, 87.
Riverton, 38.
Ruatoka, 115.
Saguane, 152.
Scratchley, Sir Peter, 120, 122, 123.
Society, London Missionary, 114.
Somerville, Mr. W., 11.
Stevenson, Robert Louis, 136.
Suau Tribe, 22.
INDEX—(Continued).


Sunderland, Rev. J. P., 85, 92.
Sydney Syndicate, 109.
Teachers, Native, 26, 148.
Tomkins, Rev. O. F., 158, 161.
Training Institution, 44.
Turner, Dr., 14.
Undenominational Christian Missions, 113.
Williams’ River, 104.
H. Thacker, Printer, Btrie Street, Geelong.


