





NOT TO BE PUBLISHED (A.M.R.&O. 1588B)
TANKS
AUSTRALIAN CRUISER
MARK-1
INSTRUCTION
BOOK
(PROVISIONAL)
Prepared and Issued by:
THE DIRECTORATE OF ARMOURED FIGHTING VEHICLES PRODUCTION
MINISTRY OF MUNITIONS
In collaboration with
HEADQUARTERS, ALLIED LAND FORCES,
SOUTH WEST PACIFIC AREA


NOT TO BE PUBLISHED (A.M.R.&O. 1588 B)
TANKS, AUSTRALIAN CRUISER
MARK-1
INSTRUCTION BOOK
(PROVISIONAL)
Prepared and Issued by:
THE DIRECTORATE OF ARMOURED FIGHTING VEHICLES PRODUCTION
MINISTRY OF MUNITIONS
in collaboration with
HEADQUARTERS, ALLIED LAND FORCES,
SOUTH WEST PACIFIC AREA


SCOPE AND PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK.
This provisional handbook has bec-n written, prim-
arily, for the A.G.Mk, 1 Tank driver, and. is not intend-
ed to be a guide to the undertaking of major mechanical
repairs and replacements which are'the duties of work-
shop personnel only. Information, therefore, has been
reduced to the simplest possible terms, commensurate
with accurate explanation of mechanical principles.
Although a high degree of technical knowledge may
not be necessary to drive the Australian Cruiser Tank,
the underlying principles have been explained so that
the crew may detect small mechanical faults before they
develop into major repair undertakings. .If faults can
be discovered and reported at'this stage, repairs can be
undertaken by Light Aid Detachments or Brigade Workshops
thus ensuring that the vehicle is where it is most need-
ed - in action.
A tremendous responsibility also rests with the
crew to carry out lubrication and maintenance in accord-
ance with the schedule and instructions contained in
this manual,
From time to time it is probable that modificat-
ions will be made to increase the efficiency of the
A.G, Ilk. 1 Tank and the accuracy of this
manual will be affected thereby. Any such modifica-
tions will be fully described in the standard printed
edition of this manual to be published shortly, and in
regular supplements.


CONTENTS
£a&e
Scope and Purpose of this Book 1
Condensed Specifications 4
Description of Hull and Fittings 9
Description of Power Unit 21
Description of Transmission 32
Description of Suspension 45-
Description of Electrical System 47
Crew Drill 59
Crew Routine Maintenance 68
Track Group Maintenance 81
Suspension and Sprocket Group Maintenance 89
Steering and Brake Group Maintenance 91
Engine Group Maintenance 93
Fuel System Group Maintenance 97
Clutch Group Maintenance 99
Transmission Group Maintenance 101
Eire Fighting Equipment Maintenance 101
Electrical Group Maintenance 103
Driving Instructions 108
General ITotes on Driving 113
General Operating Data 118
Correct Use and Care of Tools . 123
Don T ts 126
Lubrication Schedules 127
Interchangeable Oils and Greases 134
Trouble Finding. Tables ■ 135
Packing List 139


Fig. 1. General arrangement of principal components


COHDENSED SPSCIFICATIONS
GENERAL DIMENSIONS
Length (overalT) - 20 ft. 9 ins.
Height ” - 8 ft, 4:1 ins.
Width " - 9 ft, f- ins,
Width of track centre to centre - 7 ft. 5-J- ins.
Ground clearance - 15-| ins, '
Minimum turning circle - 58 ft. diameter.
Width of trench spanned - 8 ft.
Weight (unladen) ~ Approx. 26 tons.
Total area of track (steel) in
contact with the ground - 32 square ft.
Bogie wheel loading - 43-1/3 cWt. each*
Ground pressure - 13.4 lbs. per sq.in,
MAXIMOM PERMISSIBLE SPEEDS MAXIMUM TRAINING SPEEDS
AT 3,600' R.1P.11. • r-T-r AT 3. OOP ~ -
Fifth gear 29;5 m r p,h. Fifth gear 24,0 nip.h.
Fourth 77 22.0 irupih; Fourth 77 18.5 m.p.h.
Third ” 1215 mipihi Third. 77 10;5 mip.h.
Second 77 6.0 m.p.h; Second 77 5,0 m.p.h;
First 77 3;o m:p;h. First 77 2,5 m.p.h.
Reverse 77 3,5 m.p.h. Reverse 77 3,0 m.p.h.
ENGINE
Make - Cadillac 77 75 77
Total number of engines - Three
Arrangement - Clover leaf
No, of cylinders per engine - Eight
Firing order - i;8,7,3,6,5,4,2.
Compression ratio - 6.25 to 1
Compression pressure at crank-
ing speed - 110 lbs, per sq, in.
Total combined B.H.P. - 330 at 3.050 r.p.m.
Normal oil pressure - 25 lbs, per sq.’in.
Idle oil pressure - 15 lbs. per. sq, in.
Carburettor:
Make - Stromberg A.A.Y* 26
Type - Downdraft,
TRANSMISSION & DRIVE
Transfer case ratio - 1 to 1
Differential pinion - 17 teeth
Differential crown wheel - 60 teeth
Pinal Drive pinion - 23 teeth
Pinal Drive spur wheel - 73 teeth


Drive Sprockets: Rubber Steel
Track Track
No. of teeth. - 13 20
Pitch - 6 ins. 4 ins.
Tracks:
No. of links - 86 129
G-ear Overall Ratio Engine r.p.m. Road ■ Speed
First 62.04 : 1 3,000 2,5
Second 26.81 : 1 • f? 5.0
Third 10.75 : 1 n 10,5
Fourth 8.4 : 1 ” 18.5
Fifth 6,35 : 1 24.0
ELECTRICAL
Ignition:
System - Delco Remy
Distributor - Delco Remy
Ignition coils - 6 volt
Distributor rotation - Clockwise
Distributor points gap- 0.0125'in, to 0.0175 in.
Spark plugs - 10 m.m.
Spark plug gap - 0.025 in.
Spark advance - Automatic
Timing - 5 degrees before t.d.c.
Generator:
Make - Delco Remy
Drive - Y Belt
Rotation - Clockwise
Batteries;
Type - 6 volt 17 plate
Total number of
batteries: - Five
Automotive - Three: positive earthed
Wireless - Two in series
CAPACITIES
Combined radiators - 23 Imp. gals.
Combined fuel tanks - 140 Imp, gals.
Transfer case - 4 Imp. gals.
Gearbox, differential and .
final drive combined - 17 Imp, gals.
Crankcase (each) - 2-f Imp. gals.


Fig. 2. R.H, side view of A.C. Mk. 1 Tank


Fig. 5.
Driver’s Compartment
1. Tachometer.
2. Oil pressure gauge gear
box pump.
3. Speedometer.
4. Ignition switches.
5. Starter switches.
6. Emergency starter
switches.
7. Fire extinguisher push
button.
8. Starter push button.
9. 12-volt ammeter.
10. Red tell-tale lights oil
circulation.
11. Engine temperature.
12. 6-volt ammeter.
13. Gear box filler.
14. Speedometer drive.
15. Gear shift lever.
16. Clutch pedal.
17. Steering levers.
18. Air pressure gauges.
Fig. 6.
Gunner’s Compartment
1. M.G. water tank.
2. Machine gun.
3. M.G. water pump.
4. .303 ammunition box.
5. Differential filler.
6. Diaphragm air brake.


Fig. 3. Rear view of the A.C. Mk. 1 Tank
Fig. 4. Front and L.H. side view


HULL AND FITTINGS
The hull (see Figs. 2, 3 and 4) consists principal-
ly of four main castings of armour plate; these include
the nose, main body, turret and power unit cover plate.
Nose:
The nose is a separate casting which is bolted to
the machined face of the main body. It houses the
front axle drive assembly, braking components, final
drive and gearbox pinion.
Main Body:
The main body is a large one-piece casting to
which all the above mentioned smaller castings are fit-
ted. For purposes of description it can be divided in-
to three sections - front, middle and rear.
The front compartment, (see Figs. 5 and 6) accomm-
odates the driver and forward gunner for whom individual
seats are provided. These seats slide forward and
backward and are adjustable for tilt. On the right
hand side is the driver’s compartment containing the
various controls and their accessories. On the left is
the forward gunner’s seat, adjacent to which a Tickers
machine gun is installed. A small electric motor, with
a centrifugal pump, is bolted to"the hull above and to
the left of the gear box; its function is to circulate
cooling water through the Jacket surrounding the barrel
of the gun. The motor is described in the section of
this manual entitled "Electrical Sjrstem". The gun is
held in position by clamps (friction plates). Hatches
are provided above the driver’s and the gunner’s seats
and near each of these hatches is a periscope. In the
front of the compartment, and between the driver’s and
gunner’s positions is the gearbox.
The gearbox oil cooler is mounted between the
driver’s and the gunner’s seats; it consists of a radia-
tor through which the oil circulates and a cooling fan
driven from the main cardan shaft.
In the middle compartment, Just above the floor,
are the universal Joints, shafts, transfer box, and
master clutch. Various electrical components and
accessories are also located in this section as well as
ammunition for the main armament and machine guns. See


7. Heavy Ammunition Rack.
8. Earth Strap.
9. 12-volt Generator.
10. Junction Box.
11. Air Reservoir.
12. Master Clutch.
Fig. 7. Central Compartment, looking backward
1. Voltage Regulators.
2. Commander’s Ignition Control Solenoid.
3. Ignition Relays.
4. Fire Extinguisher Push Button.
5. Oil Gauges for Nos. 1,2, and 3 Engines.
6. Air Pressure Gauge.


Fig. 8. Central Compartment, looking forward
1. Gunner’s Seat. 6. Air Compressor.
2. 303 Ammunition Boxes. 7. Batteries for Nos. 1,2, and 3 Engines.
3. Driver’s Seat. 8. Transfer Box.
4. 40-volt Generator. 9. Turret Base Junction Connector.
5. Master Clutch. 10. Oil Radiator.


Fig. 9. Rear engine compartment
1. Fuel tank.
2. Rear exhaust pipe.
3. Air vent.
4. Engine unit lifting eyes.
5. Radiators.
6. Oil filler cap.
7. Oil cleaner.
8. Fire extinguisher pipe.
9. Radiator filler caps.
10. Fan driving pulley.
11. Fire extinguisher bottles.
12. Felt seal.
13. Fuel filler cap.
14. Fire extinguisher bottle.
15. Fire extinguisher bottle.


Fig. 10. Close up of Nos. 1 and 2 engines through bulkhead
aperture


Fig. 11. R.H, view turret interior


Fig. 12. L.H. view Turret interior
1. Periscope. 5. Terminal Box.
2. Control Motor. 6. Traverse Motor.
3. Operator’s Control of 7. Gear Engaging Turret
Motor. Internal Ring Gear.
4. Bevel Gears. 8. Base Junction Connector.
Fig. 13. Turret detached.


J?ig s . 7 and 8). A wheel operated escape baton is pro-
#i"eu Uii eao^l 01 kao Tans:. tee Tip, 1 for location,
Tne rOdi cij:;.pci.i. siiient bouses ihe power unit radio—
°°ro, petrol ian.us ana ran« tee lias, 9 sind 10, Tbe
engines coyer plaue iones the rooi of this compartment
caiicy is oolteci to the isuiii bony, The removal of this
Pg aa f Pynniits one lifnut of iho engines, as a unit out
01 "“ e pEi_ul. _ isree Hatches are located one above each
engine for refilling radiators ana petrol tanks
ana ior adcnr engine oil. Pee Tip. 3.
-ptrack cover plate extends along the full lenath
01 acll s r uG * 0n of oach of these plates,
pai c.llel hi L/ii one centre of tlie hull, is a tool box. Tor
convenes oi imese tool boxes and other equipment attacked
oo tne null, see "Tacking List" at tho back of this manual.
Turret:
... , i!^e turret is supported, centrally, on ton of the
luaiij. Duu.y any in it is mounter the main armament. Sus.-
penaea mnn bhe turret is tne fighting basket v/hi ch
accomodates the commander, gunner and~loader. The turret
is supportgq on ball bearings and can be rotated either
electrically or manually. The commander's cupola forms
yie near-side half of the turret roof. It is divided
into two segments which work on hinges and are rushed open
iron insicie the turret,
A detailed description of the electrical arrange-
ments xor rotating the turret will be found in this manual
unaer one reading "Turret Traverse Operating Mechanism"
in me 1 electrical System" section.
The turret nas a full circle traverse and contains
a iv;o pounder gun, a machine gun and a wireless set. See
aeuaiied description under "Tlectrical System" for
Pyrpicula. s regaining maenme gun water cooling motor
am,, ir.iej.ess circuits. Tigs 11, is and 13 provide
interior ana exterior views, together with the various
components and accessories attached to and contained in
one turret.


Fig. 14. Cylinder block arrangement


Fig. 15. Sectional view of Cadillac engine


Fig. 16. Cross sectional view of Cadillac engine


Fig. 17. Dismantled view of Carburettor


POWER UNIT
Engines:
The power unit is composed, of three Cadillac "75"
engines which are arranged in "clover leaf" formation.
They, together with fuel tanks, radiators and fan ass-
embly, are mounted on a sub-frame and their combined
power is transmitted through clutch drives to the trans-
fer box. For descriptive purposes, a single engine is
taken in detail and divided into five sections:--
Mechanical, Enel, Electrical, Cooling and Lubrication,
The description of the electrical section will be found
under "Electrical System" elsewhere in this manual.
Mechanical:
The cylinders are set at 9C degrees and the blocks
are staggered approximately 1-J ins. to allow the conn-
ecting rods to work side by side on the same crank pin.
See Fig, 14 for cylinder head arrangement. The cylind-
ers and heads are of cast iron and the sump is of sheet
steel. The crankshaft is four throw, with two rods per
throw. The connecting rods are H section and are rifle
drilled for pressure lubrication to the gudgeon pins.
The pistons are T slot aluminium alloy with four rings
per piston, all are above the gudgeon pin. The gud-
geons, which are secured by circlips in the piston boss,
are hollow and full floating both in the rod and in the
piston. There are two compression and two oil rings.
The valves are lifted by hydraulic valve lifters, thus
the clearance is automatically adjusted and no mainte-
nance is necessary excepting'at overhaul periods. The
valve seat angle is 45 degrees. Sectional and cross-
sectional views of the Cadillac engine are supplied in
Figs. 15 and 16.
Each engine is fitted with a Stromberg dual down-
draft carburettor, model A.A.Y, 26. The'carburettor has
the following features: accelerator pump, slow aid fast
idle, thermostatic choke control. An air cleaner of
the oil bath type is fitted to each carburettor'. Fig.
17 provides an exploded view of the carburettor.
Mechanical Fuel Pump:
A standard Cadillac mechanically operated fuel
pump is fitted to each engine.


Fig. 18. Sectional view of autopulse pump. Filter bowl and
screen only to be adjusted by crew. Other components not
to be dismantled by crew


Fig. 19. Fuel system showing tanks, line and controls


Electric Fuel Pump:
To ensure that a sufficient supply of fuel will be
available for the continuous functioning of each engine
even over undulating country with steep inclines, an
additional pump - namely an Autopulse electric pump - is
fitted to each of the three fuel lines. The operation
of these electric pumps is controlled by a float valve
in the near-side front fuel tank. This tank acts as a
header. Fig. 18 shows sectional view of Autopulse
pump.
Fuel Tanks:
There are five fuel tanks, all inter-connected, A
study of Fig. 19 shows how they are situated around the
radiators.
Ignition:
.The ignition is described in detail in the section
of this manual entitled ?? Electrioal System”.
Cylinder Numbering:
The left front cylinder is numbered 1. All odd
numbered cylinders are in the left bank and even num-
bered in the right bank.


COOLING SYSTEM
Three radiators, one serving each engine, are arr-
anged around the sides and rear of the single rear eng-
ine, forming three sides of a box. A cover plate of
sheet metal beeomes, in effect, the top of the box and
the bottom is represented by a'plate attached to the
lower surface of the sub-frame. The sixth and forward
side is open and occupied by the single cooling fan and
its shroud. Thus an air duct is formed which ensures
that the draught'created by the rotation of the fan is
conducted over the cooling surfaces of the radiators.
The space between the fan shroud and fuel tanks is
sealed on both sides by the provision of sheet steel
baffles with sponge rubber sealing strips, arranged so
that the fan shroud has some degree of freedom.
Radiators:
The radiators are of fin and tube core construct-
ion, the core area of each radiator is approximately
6i square feet. Each radiator is fitted with a screw
type filler cap, and pressure relief valve set to blow
off at 6 Ib/sq. in. During operation, the effect of
this pressure is to raise the boiling point of the water
to 228 degrees F, and thus prevent water losses which
would otherwise occur.
The radiators are cushioned by rubber pads and are
secured by straps to the sub-frame which supports the
power unit, petrol tanks etc.
Impeller:
The water is circulated under light pressure,
through the blocks of both cylinders, by a standard
Cadillac impeller (pump). This impeller is situated
in the front of the right hand block looking from' the
clutch towards the generator.
Access Hatch in Radiator Cover Plate:
A hatchway in the cover plate provides access to
the three radiator fillers and to the oil filler for the
rear engine. The hatchway cover is held in position by
four spring-loaded latches - one at each corner.


JJ
The fan is a f our-bladed pi* op ell or of laminated
wood, 27 inch os in diameter.' It is bolted to a
centre hub which is keyed to a shaft. Tho shaft
runs in two ball bearinns which are housed in a meo-
hanitc casting; this casting is bolted to the fan
support structure. Tho fan is driven by six sr \P bolts
which run in a multiple-grooved pulley from the clutch
shaft of the rear engine. Constant tension of the fan
bolts is maintained by a spring-loaded Joehoy pulley.
ran Support Structure:
The fan shaft bearing housing is supported by two
pressed stool channels which are bolted either side of
the roar engine support casting«.


Fig. 20. Engine Oiling System


LUBRICATION SYSTEM
of the three engines has its own lubrication
system which is on the full forced feed principle. The
oil is carried in the sump and is delivered under pres-
sure by a gear-type pump to the oil header which is
drilled lengthwise along the left side of the crankcase.
See Fig. 20.
Other drilled passages branch through the support
webs to the main and camshaft bearings. One from the
main bearings passes through the drilled passages
crank pins, where part lubricates the connecting rod
bearings; a portion flows up from these bearings to the
piston pins. The lubricant is squirted out on to the
cylinder bores from small holes in the connecting rod
big ends.
carried from the rear camshaft bearing to
the distributor, oil pump drive shafts and gears, and
from the front bearing to the timing chain and is piped
to the hydraulic valve lifters*
Sump:
A special large capacity sump has been provided
xor each^ engine in order to compensate partly~for the
wide variations in speeds over which the engines operate
and the difficulty of keeping the engine sumps cool.
Oil Circulation Indicator:
Oil circulation is indicated by a red tell-tale
light on the instrument panel and by a Bourdon type
pressure gauge calibrated in lb. per sq. in., mounted on
the engine compartment bulkhead.
Oil Filters:
These units are A.C, military pattern, detachable
type and are mounted in a horizontal position on
brackets on the cylinder head of each engine.


Fig. 21. Individual engine clutch


Fig. 22. Master clutch operating mechanism


Fig. 23. Transfer box


Fig. 24. Front axle assembly


TRANSMISSION
Each engine has its own drive shaft which is coup-
led to a transfer box. From this transfer box the com-
bined power of the three engines is transmitted to a
master clutch through a single drive shaft to the gear
box, then to the controlled differential and lastly to
the final drive gears and to the tracks.
The drive shafts from the two front engines to the
transfer box are identical. The shafts are splined at
each end, one end fitting the clutch plate and the other
end supporting the universal joint coupling. Each shaft
fits through the clutch plate into a pilot bearing in
the flywheel and is supported by a ball race mounted at
the rear end of the clutch housing,
Tho drive shaft from the rear engine is much long-
er than the others and carries the fan drive pulley.
The universal joints used on these shafts are of
the noodle bearing type and each shaft is free uo move
on the splines at the transfer case end.
Engine Clutches and Master Clutch:
The engine clutches are standard Cadillac equip-
ment of the single dry-plate type, These three
clutches are permanently engaged, thereby eliminating
the hecessity for maintenance. In the event of a break
down, any engine can be isolated by releasing its clutch
or by removing the drive shaft assembly between the
engine and the transfer box. One of these clutches is
shown (dismantled) in Fig, 21.
The master clutch is of the dry multi-plate type
and consists of two driving,"three driven plates and a
spring loaded pressure plate, This clutch is operated
by rod linkage as shown in Fig, 22 and is controlled by
the clutch pedal in the driving compartment.
Transfer Box:
The transfer box contains five helical cut gears
in constant mesh, see'Fig. 23, It is mounted on a
sub-frame clear of the hull floor directly below the
turret. Fig, 24 shows position of transfer box in hulk
As the transfer box is simply a train of gears arr-
anged to transfer the combined power of the three engines


Fig. 25. Position of gearbox


Fig. 26. Front axle assembly, showing Final Drive


Fig. 27. Controlled Differential Assembly


to one main pr op-:.. Hi rig poi.'t ru control is joaoscca-; ■
from tile driving compar Uuont *
The geai shafts for she various accessories, s., ch
as generators, air compressors etc., extend on hoth sides
of the transfer case.
Main Drive Shaft and Universal Joinfcs:
m long tubular main arise shaft is used to transmit
the power from the master clutch to the gearbox. This
shaft is coupled to the master clutch shaft at one end
and the gearbox input shaft at the other by means of
needle roller bearing type urn ; mrsai joints a
These universal joints, which are identical with
those used on ore drive shaft from each engine, absorb
shaft misalignment and so eliminate as much vibration as
possible„
Gearbox:
The gearbox!see fig, 2- ) is of the straight tooth
constant mesh typo and has forward gears and one re-
verse, Selector dog clutches of the crash tyre are used
to engage the various trains of gears and are controlled
by the gear lever situated at the rear of Urn,; gearbox on
the left of the driving scat.
In the . 0 ,1/Ik, 1 Tank gearbox the input shaft on
tie engine side is at a lower level than the outnut shaft
on the front axle side, this being necessary in order to
provide a suitable range of gears and to accommodate
other features of design. unlike a car gearbox, there
is no straight through direct drive, the nearest approach
■to direct drive being in fourth gear where the ratio is
1002 to 1. Too gear represents an overdrive wherein ten
revolutions of the input shaft give 13 revolutions of the
output shaft. It will be noted that In, all forward geais
the output shaft rotates in the opposite direction to ’
fcjiat of the input shaft, but this is corrected in the
final drive gearing.
The gearbox is lubricated by an internal gear type
pump and oil is circulated under pressure to the various
shafts 6 In addition to the internal pump on external
scavenging pump draws off the hot oil and sends it
through an oil radiator,.
Differential:
On the front end of the gearbox, the bevel pinion
on the output shaft meshes with the bevel driving gear


(crown Wheel) transmitting the drive to the controlled
differential in the front axle assembly. See Fig. 26,
The object of the controlled differential is to
enable the direction of movement of the Tank to be
changed at will. It should be remembered that the Tank
can only be steered by making one track move faster than
the other and the controlled differential supplies the
means for slowing down the track on one side and propor-
tionately speeding it up on the other side. This is
accomplished in the controlled differential which acts
in a somewhat similar manner to the differential fitted
to a motor oar, excepting that the usual bevel gears are
replaced by simple Spur gears and an epicyclio train of
gears at each side of the crown wheel.
The following explanation of the construction and
operation of the differential should be read in conjunc-
tion with Fig. 27, of which the numbers in circles re-
present the number of teeth in the, gears and the plain
numbers refer only to its description.
For the sake of convenience of description the
differential can be divided into four sections,-firat
the bevel pinion and crown wheel; secondly, the differ-
ential unit incorporating the small pinions and shafts
(1) and (2) and the large gears (8) and (9) with their
corresponding shafts; thirds, the brake drums and the
epicyclic gears (4) and (6) and (3) and (5), and four-
thly, the main drive shafts (12) and (13). From Fig. 2,
it will be seen that there are three sets of small
pinions (l) and (2). which are supported by the end plate
(16) and the crown wheel centre section. Each pair of
small pinions (1) and (2) are integral with their
respective shafts and are meshed together, as well as
meshing with the large centre gears which in turn are
splined to the driving axles. Gears . (5) and( 6) are
integral with the short shafts (14) and (15) respect-
ively as well as with the brake drums, and these units
as a whole are free to rotate around the main driving
axles (12) and (13), Pinion (l) which is integral with
shaft (17) also carries the integral pinion (3) which
meshes with gear . (s))which in turn is integral with
the brake drum. Correspondingly, on the other side,
pinion (2), half of which meshes with pinion (1), is in-
tegral with shaft (18) and pinion (4) which in turn
meshes with gear * os)and the corresponding brake drum.
When the Tank is moving forward in a straight line
the crown wheel (7) will rotate, carrying with it the


Fig. 28. Tank turning circle with R.H. brake fully applied
and controlled differential steering in action. The ratio of
sprocket drives derived from the computations is 200:122.
Comparison of turning movement of Carrier and Tank


differential assembly. Pinions (l) and (2) and gears
(9) and (8) will not turn individually but will remain
in tlie same ' relation to each other and rotate with the
crown wheel. Similarly, pinions (3) and (4) ahd gears
(5) and (6) will rotate about the shaft without altering
their position in respect to each other. In other
words, with the Tank moving straight ahead and the
brakes in the off position the whole assembly driven by
the bevel pinion rotates as a unit.
Steering:
Let us now consider the case when the Tank is to
be turned to one side. If we require to turn to the
right (as seen from the driver 1 s seat) the right hand
brake steering lever is pulled back causing the brake
band to contract on the drum 10 (See Pig, 27) preventing
control gear (6) from turning with'the differential
assembly as a whole. As the differential assembly
turns it carries the pinion shaft and pinion gears (2)
and (4) with it.
The external pinion (4) however,, must revolve on
the dead gear (6). Consequently pinion (2) which is in-
tegral with the pinion shaft, drives the main drive
shaft gear (8) in a reverse direction to its normal rot-
ation when the Tank is going straight ahead.
The retarding of drive gear (8) through the action
of the controlled differential is less than normal
rotation of the gear when turning at the same speed as
the crown wheel 7,’so that the drive through jack shaft
12, is slowed down.
The converse is the case for the left hand drive.
Pinion (1) meshing with pinion (2) rotates in an opposite
direction. This drives the main drive gear (9) in the
same direction as its normal rotation, causing jack
shaft 13 to speed up as much faster than the crown wheel
as jack shaft 12 has been retarded.
So, by braking on the right hand brake steering
drum, the right hand main drive shaft slows up, decreas-
ing the speed of the right hand track while the left has
been speeded up.
The gearing of the differential is so arranged
that with one brake hard on, the corresponding sprocket
will do 122 revolutions while the opposite sprocket does
200 revolutions. The ratio of these two speeds con-
trols the turning radius. Pig. 25 illustrates this poiit.


Fig. 29. Brake system


Fig. 30. Driving sprocket


Brakes:
Integral with tko dif:ferential (see fig, 29) are
two brake drums which revolve with it, either of which
can be down by m.- nipulaticn nf one oi the
driver 7 s steering contirl lovers* ns explained in the
aeseruption entitled "differential 77 , the incornorat i on
oi an GP-ic/olic gear train prevents the tracks from
stopping altogether except when the vehicle itself is
stopped* these driver T s control levers, one lor each
track, apply the usual type of band brake, and in
addition, have a compressed air system to"assist their
application* -his system, rail oh consists of a com
pressor uriven througn a cake--off on th e transfer box,
snpf-i--l.es air to a receiver located on the floor of the
1 renting cnam.Der iron wnich air is delivered through a
conei'ol value, fhis control valve is operated by a cam
wnicn loins part or the base of the steering control
lever, air being supplied to a aiaphragm^chamber,
u '.e aj.apnragm or wh.ic.ii is linked tlirciwh levers to the
brake shoes.,
This cam is designed for gradual application of
a ibraxes ;.uii. allows ahem to remain aiwliod as lon as
Ul - e lever j.s operates, ..Lt will also allow the iimed-
ic. uo x elea.se or one brake when the control lever is
pushed forward to the "off 77 position*
_Drive :
On eacn oi 'one two extrema,ties of trie different-
main drive shaft passes througn a hollow shaft
to L'.us iindl anve whicn consists oi' a spur gear driven
k3 r a spur pinion; this spur n ini on drives the sprocket
hub.
pack, track is driven by a sprocket which consists
ai \ anner an outer ring. The sprockets used on
vehicles fitted with steel tracks have"2o teeth and
sprockets used in conjunction with rubber tracks have
13 teeiii. fig., 30 explains the method of mounting the
sprockets on each side of the nose of the lank.


Fig. 31. Details of track and suspension arrangements


Fig. 33. Volute and rebound springs
Fig. 32. Bogie assembly


SUSPENSION
The funeral layout of the ’suspension system, to-
got li or with, tlio various components and their relation-
ship to oik; another, can bo gathered from a studv of
Fig. SI.
Throe identical bogie assemblies on each side
carry the weight, of the Tank, , 11aoh assembly consists
of two bogie wheels; each wheel is supported by the
outer ends of an arm (bell crank in shape), the centre
of which is pivoted to the main bogle bracket. See Fig.
33. Located between the upper portion of the arms of
each bogie is a volute spring which is supported on a
horizontal rod, see Fig. 33.
Those springs support the weight of the Tank and
absorb the shocks when travelling over uneven ground
surfaces, A small spiral spring, mounted externally on
one end of the spring rod, acts as a recoil shock ab-
sorber. Tno weight of , the upper portion of the track
is carried by a small rubber tyred roller mounted cn the
top of each bogie assembly.
Two largo rubber tyred wheels support the track at
the rear end of the Tank, The wheels are mounted in
brackets bolted to the hull by four bolts. The bracket
is toll■ .a, at the bolt holes to provide for., and aft
movement for adjusting the track tension, and is operated
by an adjusting screw.
All the bogie and idler wheels are ball bearing
mounted and arc equipped with greasing points and dirt
seals.
Tracks:
The tracks are of two typos (l) all steul, or (2)
stool links with rubber pads. As different drive
sprockets are used for each of those typos of tracks,
the vehicle is equipped according to the tyre of track
to Do used.
feted Track:
Each track consists of links of alloy stool, 4 ins.
Pitch, joined together by pins of y in. diameter, which
ere secured in position by lead plugs, or, alternatively
by expanded tubular containers one to each pin.


Rubber Track:-
2aoil rubber track consists of track links which
are reversible, ' enabling the, wearing surface of each si ot-
to be used.
The rubber track lint: consists of a franc
covered with vulcanised rubber and two track pins mounted
on compressed rubber bushings.
The units are assembled into-an endless track by
steel end connections which are secured to the ends of
the pins by wedges. The steel end connections also
servo as guides to keep tiud track, in alignment with the
bogie whoels,"idlers and drive, sprockets• The outer
ends of:rthe connectors act as driving, lugs and engage
the teeth of tid final drive sprockets,
. lor slippery travel, grousers can bo clipped on
each pad, or alternatively, on every second .or fourth
shoo, according to ground conditions, Those grousers
arc made of steel and fit into the ends of the track., pins
where they aro -secured by screws.- The grousers project
from the wearing surface of the track thus giving" extra
grip on slippery .ground surfaces, with consequent imp-
roved traction. •


ELECTRICAL SYSTEM.
3a.cii of the throe unglues is fitted with its own
generator, voltage regulator, starting motor, distribut-
or, ignition coil and batter:/. To guard against
trouble from flat batteries, the three batteries are
inter-connected by change over switches whereby all the
lamps and ignition loaf can be transferred to any one of
the three batteries.
Similar safety precautions have been applied to
engine starting. • An emergency starter switch is mount-
ed on the instrument panel, whereby each engine can in
turn be started by all three batteries connected in
parallel after first disconnecting at the engine bulkhead
the other two engines by means of their separate
clutches. These circuits will be found fully described
in the wiring system, section of this manual.
A separate generator, complete with voltage regu-
lator unit and batteries, caters for the load taken by
the two machine gun cooling water pump motors, the wire-
less and intercommunication equipment and the fire
extinguisher equipment.
The turret traverse is operated by means of a 4-0
volt electric motor complete with its control unit, the
current being supplied by a generator driven off the
transfer box which is situated below the turret.
In the interests of clarity detailed descriptions
of the above electrical equipment have been itemised
under the following headings.
ENG-INE UNITS: G-ene rator , volta go r egula tor,
starting motor, battery, distributor and ignition
coil.
INSTRUMENT PANEL: Emergency starting, lighting
and wiring circuits.
TWELVE VOLT CIRCUITS: Machine gun cooling water
motor, fire extinguishing system and wireless
circuit.
FORTY VOLT TURRET TRAVERSE OPERATING MECHANISM.


Fig. 35.
Starter switch and solenoid
Fig. 34. Starter Motor, dismantled


ENGINE UNITS
Generator:
The generator is located in the engine - "V" and is
driven at 1,96 times engine speed by-means'of a belt
which also drives the water pump.
The generator is of the two brush type arranged far
six volt earth (frame) return. The output is self-regu-
lating and is controlled by a combined current and volt-
age, regulator unit which inserts additional resistances
in the generator field circuit when the voltage or
current exceeds predetermined values, thus automatic-
ally controlling the output according to the load on the
battery and its state of charge.
■■When the battery is discharged (or flat) the gen-
erator gives a high output, so that the battery-receives
a-quick recharge to bring it back to its normal state in
the minimum possible time. On the other hand, if the
battery is fully charged the generator will only give a
"trickle” charge.sufficient to supply the drain taken by
the ignition coil and to keep the battery fully charged
without causing damage through overcharging.
Voltage and Current Regulator Unit:
. v-
The three voltage and current regulator units 1 are
mounted side by side on : the right hand side of the ;
engine bulkhead, 3ach unit consists of a voltage’ and
current, regulator, the operation of which is described
under "Generator",
The cover of this unit must not be removed, or any
of the wires disconnected from, their terminals, other-
wise the regulator and: generator may be burnt out,
Starting. Motor:
The starting motor of each engine (See■fig, 34) is
bolted to the right side of the engine in front of the
flywheel housing, A solenoid switch and relay (See fig.
35) is mounted on the outside of the motor. When the
starter button on the instrument panel -is pressed, the
solenoid first engages the starter pinion with-'the fly-
wheel ring gear and then closes the switch for the , f
cranking current. To prevent; the starter engaging when
the engine is running, a relay is used in conjunction
with the solenoid and connected to\ the., armature terminal
of. the generator. As soon as the generator commences


to charge, a reverse current flows through the relay
■coil, keeping it open and thus rendering the solenoid
push inoperative, lor correct functioning the idling
speed should always be set high enough to keep the
ammeter indicating on the charge side.
Starter Operation:
One starter push button and three toggle switches
are mounted on the instrument panel whereby all three
or any one or two engines can be operated at will* A
wiring diagram of starter circuit is shown in Fig. 36,
Each engine unit has its own battery. These three
six volt batteries, each having a capacity, of 130 amp,
hours, are located on the floor of the central compart-
ment, two on the right hand side and one on the left,
the positive terminal being earthed.• A metal cover
fits over the batteries to'protect them from damage and
to secure them in position. An inspection opening in
the cover gives access to the filler' plugs, * A flat lid
secured by two wing nuts covers this opening.
On the original batteries a special vent plug and
cell cover are fitted, which make it impossible for the
battery to be topped-up above a safe level. This
device consists of a small rubber bellows, or valve,
which is fitted below the vent plug and expands when the
vent plug is removed, thus closing the gas vents on
either side of the vent plug recess.
Ignition:
Ignition is by six volt battery and coil system.
Located in the instrument panel (see section "Instrument'
lariel") are three ignition switches, one for each engine.
There is also another switch on the left-hand side of
the turret, Just below the hatch; by pressing this
switch the commander can, simultaneously, switch 6ft all
three ignition circuits and thus stop the vehicle.
The distributor is driven by a vertical shaft at
the rear of the engine by means of an extension of the
oil pump drive. The distributor consists of a contact
breaker operated by an eight lobe cam, A condenser is
connected across the contact breaker points to obviate
sparking at the'points and also to assist the function-
ing of the coil, A centrifugal automatic advance mech-
anism is housed in the body of the distributor, Yacuum
advance is also operated by the variation of the vacuum
in the inlet manifold.


Pictorial Diagram: Emergency Starting and Ignition Circuits


[? ]START IN G LIGHTI NG AND WIRING CIRCUITS
nt_ ranel:
Tlie panel is mounted directly in front of the driv-
er. Situated along the top of the panel is a row of
eleven switches. The first.on the left controls the
head lamps, the nest two the tail lamps - one blue and
one red. The next group of three are the ignition
switches, then coxae the three starter switches (one for
each engine) and on the extreme right the two emergency
switches, Below those are the two tail lamp indicators
and the starter push button.
midway down the panel on the left hand side are
five knife switches by which the lamp load, petrol pump,
ignition and solenoid circuits to each engine can be
connected to any of the three batteries in case of fail-
ure of its own battery. These switches should be left
pointing upwards in their :: Normal •' position, unless it
is desired to cut a battery out for any reason.
To the right of the knife switches is the ammeter
for the 12 volt radio, machine gun cooling motors, and
Graviner fire extinguishing circuits, and to the right
of this are the switches for the instrument panel and
interior lights, with the exception of the turret
interior lights, which are operated by a separate switch
in the turret.
Below are three red lights which go out as soon as
the oil reaches operating pressure, and also the ammeters
and temperature gauges for each engine.
To the right of the driver will be found one of the
Graviner fire extinguisher switches and the horn push.
Wiring:
The wiring is carried out in metallic covered
cable, Bach cable is fibbed with a metal sleeve at
either end and has an identification number. A key
setting out these numbers will be found in the Work-
shop Repair and maintenance manual.
So that the engine unit can be removed with dis-
turbing any of the wiring a circular engine plug and
socket consisting of a base having 28 sockets and a de-
tachable plug having 28 pins, is mounted on the engine
sub-frame between the two engines.


-Liie main terminal strip is located at tlie right of
the instrument panel and a fuse box containing six fuses
is located behind the panel. The fuses controlling the
following circuits, reading from left to right, are:-
horn, headlamp, tail lamps, instrument panel and intens-
ion lights, turret lights and fuel pumps.
In order to carry the various six, 12 and 40 volt
circuits to the revolving gun turret, a base junction
connector consisting of a series of brass contacts en-
gaging with a series of slip rings, is mounted on the
floor of the turret, from which the wires are taken to a
five way fuse box mounted on the left hand side of the
turret. This controls the commander’s ignition cut-off
switch, spot light, interior lights, machine gun cooling
motor and the wirdless set.
Lighting Circuit:
The Tank is equipped with two headlamps mounted
on either side in line with the front gunner’s and
driver’s position and two tail lamps, one blue and one
red. These are controlled by the driver from the
instrument panel. On the panel there are two tell-tale
lights which light up with the tail lamps,
NOTE: As the tell-tale lights are wired in parallel
with the tail lamps they only indicate that,the lights
have been switched on; it should be remembered that they
will still be ”on f? even though the tail lamps may be
inoperative due to a broken globe, broken cable, or
similar defect. A spot light is mounted on the side of
the turret; it is controlled by a switch located on the
left hand wall inside the turret and also by another
switch at the spot light.


T[?]ELVE VOLT CIRCUITS
The 12 volt generator is driven from the rear of
the transfer box at slightly under engine speed. The
voltage regulator unit, which controls the output from
this generator, is mounted on the left hand wall of the
front compartment, near the forward gunner r s position.
The generator supplies a 12 volt battery which is
composed of two 6 volt units of 17 plate 130 amp* hour
capacity in series. These are situated in a central
position behind the driver, and require battery mainte-
nance as laid down in weekly maintenance.
Machine Gun cooling motors:
There are two machine gun cooling motors, one sit-
uated in the turret and the other on the forward bulk-
head to the left of the gearbox. These motors drive
rotary pumps which are integral with the drive and cast-
ing. They draw between five and six amps and are pro-
tected by individual fuses, the switch for the forward
motor being situated on the left of the front gunner
while that for the motor in the turret is located to the
left of the traverse control. The forward motor is
supplied directly from the 12 volt terminal strip mount-
ed on the transfer box below the turret floor and the
turret motor is supplied from the turret fuse board.
The motors require very little attention other than
occasional lubrication and brush gear examination.
Graviner Fire Extinguisher System:
This system is installed for the suppression of
fire in the engine compartment and consists of bottles
containing about 6 lbs. of pure methyl bromide at a
pressure of 6C lbs. per sq, in. which can be released by
electric control. Piping from the bottles is taken
round the carburettor and sump of each engine. The
bottles are fitted with a fuse which is ignited electric-
ally, thus allowing the contents of the bottles to dis-
charge. The bottles are arranged, one in front of No,
1 and two in front of No, S engines.
In order that the system may function automatic-
ally two flame switches to each engine are installed.
These switches are designed so that when the temperate
ure in the vicinity reaches 480 degrees P,, a heat sens-
itive unit fires a fuse and closes the operating circuit.
Two of the flame switches are situated in the fan aper-
ture and one at the front of No, 3 engine. The remain-
ing three are lower down, one near the base of each engim ,


Fig. 37. Turret interior showing location of wireless


In addition, and connected in parallel with the
flame switches, are two push button switches which can
be operated manually. One is situated to the right
of the driver and the other on the engine room bulkhead
in the fighting chamber above the oil pressure gauges,
A cover shield over each push button prevents any
accidental operation.
Wireless: •
A 12 volt supply is taken to the lower turret
terminal strip which in turn supplies the No. 19 wire-
less and Intercommunication Set, This is illustrated
in Fig. 37.


FORTY VOLT TURRET TRAVERSE OPERATING SYSTEM.
In order that the turret with its basket may be
traversed clockwise, or- anti-clockwise, at any desired
speed up to its maximum, a specially controlled shunt
motor is employed. The motor is situated in the turret
and geared to an internal toothed circular rack by means
of a pinion driven directly from the traverse motor
shaft,
The motor is supplied, at a pressure of 40 volts,
from a generator situated below the turret floor and
driven directly from, one of the idler gears of the tran-
sfer box.
As the generator is not driven at constant speed
(due to the variable speed of the engines) an adequate
form of voltage regulation becomes necessary. This is
achieved by the generator being wound with two separate
shunt fields each having its own vibrator type regulator.
There is no battery in this circuit, the traverse motor
being fed from the generator.. The output from the gen-
erator is controlled by the two regulators.
The traverse motor is of conventional design, its
only peculiarity being the method of control which in-
corporates a small Shunt motor having a constant speed of
approximately 650 r,p,nu The controller hand traverse
gear is linked up through differential gearing in such'a
way that when hand traverse is employed the motor arma-
ture remains stationary. This arrangement eliminates
the additional friction required to turn the traverse
motor armature which, when the controller is in the "off”
position, is held rigid by means of a solenoid brake
operating through the controller. Both control motor
and'reversing switch are housed in the controller hous-
ing, the reversing switch being so arranged that, when
the controller handle is moved right the turret traverses
right, and vice versa.
To provide against excessive current draw, a
current limiting relay is inserted in the negative supply
line. Normally a spring maintains this in the closed
position. When the load becomes excessive, however,
the operating coll opens the circuit and a "hold on"
coil maintains this condition until the load becomes
normal.


Operation:
As the generator is driven direct from the trans-
fer box the starting of one or all engines immediately
provides the supply to the traverse motor. It is
essential, however, in order that the generator should
not be damaged, that the voltage regulator be correctly
adjusted. Any adjustment or repair to this unit should
only be carried out by competent repair staff.
The speed control motor is connected between the
positive contact of the controller and the negative main,
therefore in other than ff off ;? position of the controller
the control motor will run at its normal speed.
The reversing switch controls the direction of
current flow through, the armature and is connected be-
tween the positive main and the armature, the control
motor being connected to the other side of the armature.
The action of the control motor is such that a series of
impulses are passed to the traverse motor, the period of
these impulses depending on the position of the controll-
er handle. In its ?? full on :t position the controller
connects the traverse motor directly across the 40 volt
mains.


Fig. 38. “Crews Front"


CREW DRILL
1. General:
Crow Drill lays down the proccduro which, will be
followed by the Crow at all times. It includes all
routine whether # the tank be stationary, on the march or
in action.
2. Object:
The object of Crew Drill, the basis of which is
the same for all tanks, and which is modified to render
it suitable for each type, is to ensure that the necess-
ary actions of the crew are carried out in an orderly
and systematic manner and in the most rapid and effic-
ient way.
5, Movements:
All movements around the tank will be carried out
at the double.
4. Interchangeability of Personnel:
In order to ensure that all members- of the crow can in
an emergency, carry out each of the normal tasks allotted
to each other member, personnel of crews will be frequently
changed during Crew Drill.
5. The Crow:
The crew of the A.C. Mk. 1 Tank consist of five men
who are allotted specific individual duties and are num-
bered as under:
No. 1 Crew Commander.
No. 2 Hull Gunner.
No. 3 Driver.
No. 4 Turret Gunner.
No, 5 Turret Gun Loader and Wireless- Operator.
6. Positions of the Crew in the Tank:
No. 1 Observing from Turret,
No, 2 In Hull Gunner*s seat.
No. 3 In Driver*s seat.
No, 4 On left hand side of 2 Pdr. Gun.
No. 5 On right hand side of 2 Pdr. Gun.


Fig. 39. “Crews Right.” Note: Crew is dressed in line with centre of turret
Fig. 40. “Crews Mount”


7 » ;? Grows Front? (See Fig. 38)
This is tile normal position of tlio Crow when dis-
mounted , Crow will be throe paces in front of tank
facing front and "At Lase" and dressed as follows:-’
No* 1 One pace to right of offside track.
No, 2 Ih front of offside track.
No. 3 Tri line with centre of tank.
No. 4 It- front of nearside track.
No. 5 Dtie pace to left of nearside track.
8* “Crews Night? (See Fig, 39)
Crew oh right of tank. Ho, paces from track.;
facing front and in line w 5 GL centre of turret. Grew
commander oh the right.
9. "Crews Left";
Grew on left of tank. No 1. Ig paces from track
facing front and in line with centre of turret.
10. "Crows Hear" :
The crew will fall in as for ''Crews Front", but
throe paces in rear of, and facing rear of tank,
11. "Inspect Maintenance":
The detail as laid down will bo carried out. Grows
will form "Crews Front” and stand "At Faso" on complet-
ion of their duties,
12. "Report":
This order will be given when all the crews have
formed "Crews Front" on completion of paragraph 11 above.
Crew commanders will report to their Troop Leaders
and Troop Leaders to their next senior,
13. Form of Report:
The form of report will be "Maintenance and/or
Armament Correct Sir",
14* "Mount": (See Fig. 40)
On the command "Mount" the crew will como to attent-
ion, turn about and mount in the following order:


Positions
N 0.3 Through Driver’s hatch. Driver’s seat.
N 0,2 Through Hull Gunner’s Hull Gunner’s seat,
hatch.
No*s Through Turret hatch, R.H. side of 2 pdr,
followed by gun.
N 0.4 Through Turret hatch, L.H. side of 2 pdr.
followed by gun
ITo.l Through Turret hatch
Note: If only the command ’’Mount” is given, the engine
will not be started. If the command ’’Start up" is
given previous to "Mount”, No, 5 ana No. 3 will be in
position in the tank when the command "Mount" is given.
In this case, the crew will mount in the following
order; -
N 0,2 As before.
No;4 Through Turret hatch followed by
No,l Through Turret hatch,
15. "Alert":
All resume positions as for "Mount" above.
16. "March at Base";
Crew may relax. No, 1 must be on the alert for
orders. Gunner remains in seat. Remainder of crew
rest, but remain in normal positions. Head phones, will
not be removed,
17. "Dismount?
The crew will "Dismount" in the reverse order to
that laid down in paragraph 14 and form "Crews Front",
INSPECT MAINTENANCE:
The crew will be formed up at "Crews Front" some-
time previously to the time set for the commencement of
the day’s operation. On the command "Inspect Mainte-
nance" the crew will come to attention, turn about and
carry out the duties enumerated below:-
No, 1 Crew Commander:
(a) Inspect for oil leaks on ground under tank,
(b) Inspect general condition of suspension,
(c) With rubber tracks: Inspect track wedges and
nuts for tightness, wear
and for broken track
connectors, any foreign
particles wedged in be-
tween rubber treads.


With steel tracks; Clieck for broken links,
pins and for loose or
missing lead plugs, any
foreign particles wedged
in between links,
(d) Check for track tension i.e. / in. sag be-
support rollers for rubber tracks;
3/16 in, for steel tracks
(e) Check final drive cover case for leaks,
(f) In conjunction with I:To. 5 check lights and
horn.
(g) Inspect sprocket nuts for looseness.
(h) Check external stowage and stowage inside
equipment boxes.
(1) When other members of crew have completed
maintenance and are in position, will notify
Wo, 3 to start up,
(j ) Tracks : v/ill guide tank back two track
lengths while inside wedges and
nuts are checked.
(k) When all members'of crew have dismounted
receives reports,
(l) At all times exercises supervision over
other members of crew and'details No. 2 to
do duties as required.
Duties of No. 2:
(a) Turn about.
(b) Assists No,'l in inspection of tracks and
suspensions,
(c) Is available for any further duties allotted
by No. 1.
Whentank is moved back will inspect inside
offside track for loose wedges, v/edge nuts
and cracked connectors.
Duties of No. 5:
(a) Turn about,
(b) Follows No. 5 through driver’s hatch, close
hatch.
(°) Aslease Null gunner’s hatok lock.
(d) Check oil level in gearbox and final drive,
top up if necessary.
(e) Check oil level in air compressor sump.
(f) Check steering lever (i.e, 1-J- ins. free
travel)
(g) Check all switches off.
(h) Check emergency change over switches all ?r Gj5 ? .


(i) Turn on 6 volt Hastor switch,
(j) Turn on 12 volt Has ter switch.
(k) Check in conjunction with No, 1 all lights,
horn,
(l) When notified by No. I, starts up by ~
1. Switch on throe ignition switches,
2. Switch on three- starter switches,
3, Observe warning lights,
4, Depress clutch to reduce load on
starter motors.
o. Press starter button.
6, When engine starts observe warning lights,
if all lights do not go out stop motor
and ascertain cause,
7. Receive report from No. 5 re oil and air
pressure on gauges,
3. Check 3, 6 volt ammeters for charge.
9, Check 12 volt ammeter for charge.
10. When motors are warmed sufficiently moves
tank back two track lengths under direct-
ion of No, 1 (Do not slip clutch when
doing this)
11. Check motors for operation, acceleration,
idling, unusual noises,
(m) When satisfied motors arc operating correctly
and are fit for operation, switch off.
Opon 6 and 12 volt master switches, dismount,
report to No, 1.
Duties of No. 4:
(a) Turn about.
(b) Mount on to tank.
(c) Assist No. sin opening Turret hatch.
(d) Remove rear inspection plates (3) using
special key.
{o) Remove inspection plate from air passage
around No, 3 motor
(f) Chock fuel and water level, replenish if
necessary.
(g) Chock No, 3 engine oil level.
(h) When notified by No. 5 of the result of check
of oil level in No, 1 and No. 2 engine oil
sumps, will top up if necessary.
(1) Check lor obvious defects, looseness, fuel,
oi 1 .and wat e r 1 o aks .
(j) Replace inspection plates (care must bo taken
with light gauge metal plate over No, 3 engine
as the incorrect fitting of this plate will
cause engines to overheat.


(k) Check stowage in rear equipment bin,
(l) Take post.
(m) When tank is moved back inspect inside of
nearside track for loose wedges, nuts and
cracked connectors,
(n) Report to No. 1.
Duties of No, 5:
(a) Turn about.
(b) Open driver’s hatch.
(o) Pass through driver’s compartment into
turret,
(d) Release turret hatch locking catch and
assist No. 4 in'opening turret hatch.
(e) Check oil in No, 1 and No, 2 engines, and
report results to No, 4.
(f) Check for obvious defects, looseness, fuel,
oil or water leaks,
(g) Grease clutch throwout bearing (3 shots)
(h) Stand by while engines are started and check
oil and air pressure. Report results to N 0,3
(i) Dismount and report to Crew commander,
"Start Up"
This command will be given from the "Crews front"
position. On this command Nos, 1, 3 and 5 will come to
attention and turn about. Nos, 2 and 4 will stand fast.
Nos, 1, 3 and 5 will carry out the duties enumerated below:
Duties of No, Ij
(a) Turn about,
(b) When driver signifies that motors are running
correctly will turn about and stand at ease.
(This will notify Troop Leader that tank engine
is running correctly)
Duties of No. 5:
(a) Turn about,
(b) Mounts into driver’s seat,
(c) Switch on 13 and 6 volt.master switches,
(d) Win start up as outlined in section (1) of
(Inspect Maintenance)
(e) When motor is running satisfactorily will ex-
tend the right hand through driver’s vision
port, palm dovmwards,.
(f) When ITo, 1 turns about will withdraw hand.


Duties of No, 5,
(a) Turn about,
(b) Mount into turret,
(o) Observe oil pressure gauges as engines are
started.
(d) Report to No, 3.
(o) Remain in turret in Loader’s position.
IaiNTJMLiNCE AT THE HALT DURING OIddWfTION:
Maintenance inspection at the halt will be carried
out from the Vi Crews Front w position.
Previous to the dismount signal being given tin;
driver will bo ordered to -Switch off”.
y/hen tno motors are stopped and the crow dismounted
the command will bo ”10 or 20 minutes halt, Inspect Main-
tenance” ,
The following duties will bo performed:-
Duties of No, l:
(a) Turn about;. Chock tracks, sprocket nuts and
suspension for obvious looseness and defects,
(b) Feel all bogie, idler and support roller
bearings for overheating,
(c) Clear away any’stones or debris jamming or
grooving bogie, idler and support rollers,
(d) Question driver re performance of vehicle.
(e) Inspect stowage bins and external equipment
for security,
(f) Exercise general supervision over crow,
(g) Receive reports from crew and report to
Troop Leader.
Duties of No 2:
As for -Inspect Maintenance 1 ' with exception of (d)
Duties
(a) Turn about,
(b) Will report to commander any defects noted
during the period of operation,
(c) Check level of oil in gearbox and controlled
difierontial.
(d) Will inspect generally interior of driver * s
compartment for defects and eil leaks,
(e) Take post and report to No, 1*


Duties of ITo._ 4:
As for "Inspect Maintenance" with exception of (m).
Duties of No, 5:
(a) Turn about and mount through Turret.
(b) Chech oil in Ho. 1 and No, 2 engines, report
result to Ho. 4.
(c) Chech for obvious defects, looseness, fuel
oil or water leaks.
(d) Dismount, report to No, 1.
TERMINATION OF Ti-IN HALT:
At the termination of the halt the command will be
"Crews Front", "Start Up" and "Mount" as detailed
previously.


CREW ROUTINE MAINTENANCE
DAILY MAINTENAITCE ON COMPLETION OF DUTY
CLEAN TALK
Lubricate:
Suspension if Tank has been run through water or mud.
Clutch, extractor race and throttle controls, (Oil
can),
Check:
Fuel level in tanks - replenish ~ dipstick.
Fuel lines and tanks for leaks.
Lubricating oil levels - replenish - dipstick.
Battery electrolyte level if radio has been in use
continuously during the day. Battery terminals for
corrosion. Glean if necessary. Clamps tight after
cleaning. Security of battery in carrier. Filler
caps for security.
Oil lines for leaks.
Level of transmission oil - replenish - dipstick.
Looseness of exhaust manifolds - tighten if necessary
Clean air cleaners if working in dusty or dirty
conditions,
Radiator for water level - replenish. Ho oil in
water.
Radiator, hoses, water pumps and engine blocks for
leaks.
Fan and drive not slipping.
Tighten loose nuts and bolts.
Make any minor adjustments.
Level of oil, air compressor.
TRACK .GROUP
Check:
For cracked, bent or broken links, connectors, wedges
and nuts.
Replace if necessary:-
Lead plugs.
Broken track pins,
Worn rubber plates.


Dead links
Replace plate if necessary
Excessive wear o;* stretch in links or pins.
Track Tension;-^
Adjust if necessary to prescribed tension
Check on level with brakes off.
SUSPENSION IDLER AND SPROCKET CROUP
Check:
Idler and Bogie Mieels for;-
free,and bearings not worn.
Tyres secure and undamaged,no flats.
Sprocket nuts secure.
Track adjusting wheels for:-
Security of looking nuts,lock plates,
and lock pin,
Tolute springs for:-
lamming and sagging.
Brackets and arms for cracks etc.
STEERING AND BRAKE CROUP
Check:
Steering levers fco-
operation and adjustment. Report to Sqn.
Mech. Sgt.
Faulty brake operation generally.
Water drain cock, air cylinder, turn on
until all water out,
ENGINE. GROUP
Check:
Air cleaners for:-
Security and oil level,.'
Water thermometer connections secure -
no leaks,
FUEL SYSTEM GROUP
Check:
Filters for:-
Leaks,
Drain sediment traps.
Fuel pipe for leaks.


CLUTCH GROUP
Check:
Clutch pedal for free travel.
Clutch pedal for bottoming on hull plate before
Clutch . fully disengaged.
Control rods for freedom of movement and not
fouling.
Nuts and bolts secure,
I nAITSMISSI ON (CROUP
Check:
Gear levor operating correctly.
i ! 'inal drive for leaking gasket and nuts tight.
TURRET GROUP
Check:
Cun elevation.
Turret on hand traverse.
Operation of power traverse.
Operation of turret lock. •
Wireless secure in its mounting,
equipment for correct stowage.
Power traverse oil reservoir bevel (dipstick)
INTERIOR HULL
Check:
Drivers compartment for:-
Security and serviceability of all spare
visi on prisms.
Accelerator for correct operation.
Safety belts secure and serviceable.
Equipment for correct stowage.
Hull gunner T s compartment for:-
Freedom of operation of gun, elevation
and traverse„
Equipment for correct stowage.
ELECTRICAL AND WIRING- GROUP
Check:
Lights and warning devices operating correctly.
Ammo ter and voltmo ter re ad ing c orroc tly,
Battery switches turned off.


25 HOUR - 250 MILES MAINTENANCE INCLUDING- DAILY
AFTER DUTY
CLEAN TANK
Check:
Battery charge by hydrometer. Report if any reading
under 1,200, Do not test immediately after adding
distilled water. Top up and' test after a run.
TRACK CROUP
Check:
lor cracked, bent or broken links, connectors, wedges
and nuts. Replace., if necessary.
Broken track pins.
Worn rubber plates.
Dead links, replace plate if necessary.
Excessive wear or stretch in links or pins.
Track tension. Adjust if necessary to -prescribed
tension.
Check on level with brakes off.
SUSPENSION IDLER ADD SPROCKET GROUP
Lubricate:
Each side: .Track adjusting wheel (1 nipple)
Idler wheels (3 nipples)
Bogie wheel bearings (6 nippies)
Fulcrum pins (3 nipples)
Track adjusting thread - oil can.
No nipples lost, blocked or damaged.
Seals not forced.
Check:
Track adjusting wheel for:-
Security of locking nuts,lock plates,
and cotter pins.
Excessive play In wheel bearings.
Wheels true, security of wheels (tyres).
Idler wheels for:-
Excessivc play in bearings,free or no flaits .
Security of mounting. Retaining bolts
secure.


Sprockets for:-
Security of sprocket assembly and
rings. Condition of tooth.
Teeth true.
Bogies for;-
Attaciiraent to hull,not bent or damaged.
Cracks in all components.
Spindles and fulcrum pins secure and for
wear.
Arms, not bent and in alignment.
Springs not broken. Springs not weak.
Wheels free and bearings not worn.
Tyres secure and not worn. No flats.
Arms for nuts and split pins secure
and not lost,
STEERING- AND BRAKE GROUP
Lubricate:
Interior Hull:-
Steering Levers,
Pivot pins.
Control rods and clevises.
Cross shafts and guides.
Controlled differential actuating arms.
(nipples and oil cans)
Air valves. Remove two plugs from valve-
body under driver T s seat and blow water
out. Note: Close air lino cock before
removing plugs. Then turn on momentarily.
Check:
Steering levera for:-
Operation and adjustment. Adjust if
necessary.
Lever holding devices free, soeuro and
undamaged,
Correct free travel of lovers.
Nuts ,^split pins and pivots secure.
Steering and control rods and levers
(mechanical) length correct and not bent.
Controlled differential for:-
Brake band adjustment. Son, uech. Sgt. to *
adjust for faulty brake operation


ENG-INE GROUP
Lubricated■ . ■
Water pumps: Use grease gun with water pump grease.
Generators and starter motors (oil can 3 drops only)
Distributor -shaft, screw down grease cup 3 turns.
Distributor advance mechanism. Few drops of oil on
felt, pad under rotor.
Che ole:
Security of hose clips.
Hoses by feel for internal failures,not perished.
Radiator relief valves and overflow pipes free.
Water pumps for:-/
Security and leakage.-
Security of. nuts and bolts.
Belts for tension.
Fans for:- •
Security of mountings.
Blades true and clear of shrouding.
Bearings for wear.
Belts for condition and tension. Jockey
pulley bearings for wear. Springs for
condition.
Oil canisters for:-
Security and no leaks.
Oil pipes for security and leaks.
Oil cooler for:-
Security, Exterior clean. No leaks.
Engine sump for:-
Cleanliness and no leaks.
Drain plugs secure.
Air cleaners for:-
Security and oil -level.
Correct grade of oil.
Clean element as prescribed*
Drain, washout, refill to correct level.
Air inlet to cleaners not obstructed.
Water and oil gauges for:-
Connections secure and no leaks,
Rev. counter for:-
Security.
Cylinder- head for:-
Holding down bolts tight (tradesmen
only to check).
No sign of head gaskets leaking,•
Exhaust and water manifolds for:-
Security, no leaks and gaskets correct,-
Exhaust pipes secure and not leaking.


star ter motors and generators fop*--
Liounting brackets secure and not* cracked.
Nuts and bolts secure.
Cylinder blocks for:-
Cap screws and gaskets secure and no
leaks.
Engine mountings for:-
Security,
Engine movement normal.
Transfer case oil level (level plug and
dipstick).
FUEL SYSTEM GROUP
Check:-
Fuel tank for:-
Security in hull. No leaks. Filler caps
secure,
air vents and breather pipes clear.
Filters in place and clean.
Fuel pipes for security and no leaks.
Fuel pumps for operation and security,
ho fuel or oil leaks. Drain holes clear.
Filters for:-
Security- and elements clean.
Drain sediment traps.
fate: Use no rags or fluffy materials in cleaning
filters,
CLUTCH GROUP
Lubricate:-
Control rods, clevises (oil can)
Extractor race (1 nipple)
Outrigger bearing (1 nijrole)
Check:
Clutch pedal for free travel.
Clutch pedal for bottoming on the hull plate before
clutch fully disengaged.
Control rods for:-
Froedom of movement and not fouling.
Gecurity of braekets.
TItAITGIIISSIGN GROUP
Lubricate:
Gear control linkage (1 nipple and oil can)


opeedc drive. Remove cable and grease.
Tachometer drive. Remove cable and grease.
Universal joints and splined sleeves, one nipple
each.
Check:
Oil cooler for:-
Cleanliness and no leaks.
Gear lever for:-
Correct operation.
Security.
Final drive for:-
Leaking gaskets.
All nuts and bolts secure.
r'ront axle and gearbox (combined supply)
level of oil,
TURRIT GROUP
Lubricate:
Gun mountings and control linkages.
Turret race (pack under spur drive _ gear)
Leriscope (1 nipple)
Lower traverse gearbox with engine oil as pres-
cribed. Dipstick.
Power traverse control linkages (oil can),
flaps, pistol slits and vision ports (oil can)
Cupola rollers (oil can).
Check:
Gun for elevation.
Turret on hand traverse.
Operation of power traverse control,
Operation of turret lock.
Power traverse electrical connections clean and
tight.
Wireless secure in its mountings.
All fittings secure,
flaps, pistol ports and vision slits for operation,
Equipment for correct stowage.
Ammunition racks secure,
INTERIOR IdJLL GROUP
Driver * s Gonipar trient
Lubricate:
Periscope (1 nipple)
Shutters, flaps etc, (oil can)


Seat linkage (oil can)
Accelerator linkage (oil can)
Check:
Rubber protection pads for security and condition.
Instrument panel for security.
Instruments secure,
LAiions secure, and no leaks.
Connections clean and tight.
Shutters and flaps for free operation.
Seat for adjustment.
Security of all boxes and fittings„
Security and serviceability of all spare vision
prisms,
Safety belts secure and serviceable.
Equipment for stowage.
Nuts and bolts tight.
Accelerator linkage for correct operation.
Hull,Gunner 1 s compartment
Lubricate:
Periscope (1 nipple)
Shutters, flaps etc. (oil can)
G-un mounting linkage (oil can)
Check:
Freedom of operation of gun, elevation and traverse.
All fittings secure and serviceable.
Equipment for c orract s t bwage.
All nuts and bolts tight.
Fire fighting equipment
Chock:
Weight of containers (full)
Security of pipes, and spray holes clean.
Connections tight.
Flame switches not damaged.
Portable extinguish*rs , full, secure and no leaks.
EXTERIOR HULL GROUP
Lubricate:
All doors and flaps, hinges, )
Periscopes. ) oil cam.
Towing shackles hinge bolts. )


Choc:::
Gecurity of all external fittings,brackets otc .
Operation of all doors, flaps,catches and locks.
Distorted, buckled or damaged plates,
Signs of rust. Clean and paint,
All nuts and bolts tight.
DLL’CTRI CAL HID ITHIEG GkOUT
Chock:
(Inside hull wi oh bat tori os switched ”OK”}
Operation of switches and interior lights.
All exposed wires for breaks, and cracks, frays and
foulings.
function boxes for security, fuses intact, spare
fuses correct, connections tight no frayed ends.
1-Ioto: Inspect 'fuses with battery svritchos ■■o. V 7 7,
Conduit screening not frayed, broken or kinked.
Unions tight.
Ammotors r - udl.:cor .01iy.
Starter solenoids for security.
Operation of engine cut-off switches.
Operation of warning devices.
Spark plugs: clean and adjust gap,
(Outside hull)
Security of lamps and brackets.
Operation of all lamps.
Correctly focussed.
Lamps watertight.
Terminals clean and secure.
Conduit shieldings and connections tight.
Huts and bolts tight.
ROAD TEST
By Sqn, Lech, Sgt.
Engine running - Tank stationary.
Check:,
Base of starting.
Idling speed.
Operation of instruments.
Oil pressures and temperatures correct,
Running of each engine separately.
Operation of powered turret.
Unusual noises.
Exhaust smoke (colour)


Tank on movement
Chock:
Instruments,
Engagement of clutch.
Engine's pulling power.
Easy engagomont of gears.
Acceleration.
Eas e o f sto e r i ng.
Unusual noises.
Stop and start on hills
Check:
Efficiency of brakes.
Engine clutches engagement. No slip.
50 NOUNS Oh 500 LIII.EE tIh:mTEi>LINCE
(In addition to Daily or 05 hour or 250 miles maintenance)
CLUTCH GROUP
Lubricate:
Clutch outrigger bearing (1 nipple) grease sparingly,
Clutch withdrawal race (1 nipnle) grease sparingly,
ENG I Hi:! GROUP
Lubricate: /
Clean engine oil filters.
Homovo olemont and 9 lean out chamber of filter.
Change engine oil. '
Apply smear of greasu to distributor cam.
If volt generator, three drops of oil,
100 HOURS OR 1000 MILES
(In addition to Dally and Id Dour or 250 miles maintonance)
Chock:
Drain and refill radiator (or every 6 months)
Wear on clutch linings.


INTERIOR HULL GROUP
Chock:
Ammunition racks secure and clean,
lire fighting equipment.for:
Blockage in lines.
Weight of containers (full)
500 HOURS OR 5000 MILES
(In addition to Daily end 25 hour or 850 miles maintenance)
FUEL SYSTEM GROUP
Check:
Clean filters.
Renew elements (new gaskets)
Drain and clean tanks,
TRANSMIS SlOll GROUP
Lubricate:
Drain and refill front axle, gearbox, and transfer
box according to Lubrication Schedule,
Dismantle and repack universal joints.
ELECTRICAL GROUP
Lubricate:
Starter motors (at overhauls )


Fig. 41. Wrench 1-11009 used on tensioning wheel bracket
nuts
Fig. 42. Adjustment of rear tensioner


TRACK GROUP MAINTENANCE
RUBBER TRACES ;
. The rubber track snipes are reversible and should
be turned when worn to such an extent that further wear
would cause the tubular metal section of" the link to
become'damaged* Damaged qt* unserviceable Units should
be removed from the track and replaced with new units*
To remove a Track:
1, The track tension must be released as far as
possible. Loosen the four lock and clamping nuts sec-
uring the track tensioning wheel bracket to the hull
with wrench No, 1-11009, see Fig. 41. It is important
not to loosen, the two rear nuts too much or unevenly,
otherwise the bracket will dig into the hull at its
front edge and refuse to slide«
Remove the pin and locking plate from the track ad-
justing screw, see Fig e 42 0 Turn the screw anti-clock-
wise with wrench No. 1-11009, see Eig. 43, until the
slots in the bracket have reached the limit of their
travel,
The bracket cannot be drawn forward with the ad-
justing screw, so if the bracket does not slide, do not
force the screw beyond its maximum travel; this occurs
when a circlip on its inner end contacts the threaded
block inside the bracket. Further force may push the
circlip out of its groove and allow the screw to come
right out of the block. Difficulty would then he exp-
erienced in re-engaging the thread in the block. The
next two operations wv.ll usually cause the bracket to
slide c .
2. Drive the Tank forward or push it backwards to
transfer the slack in the track to the front,
3, Place the track strainer tool No. 1-11033 on the
track, as.shown in Fig. 44, with the arms gripping the
sprocket,. Run out the cable and attach the hooks to
the track as close as possible to the first bogie wheel.
Tighten the strainer sufficiently to relieve the
tension from the links to be disconnected,
4. Remove the nuts and wedges from an inside and out-
side connection, midway between the sprocket and the
first bogie wheel card drive off the end connections.


Fig. 43. Wrench 1-11009 used on track adjusting screw
Fig. 44. Track Strainer for rubber tracks with blocking tube
No. 1-11033 in position. Block tube tool shown in position
immediately in front of second bogie wheel


5, Slacken off and remove the track strainer.
6, Move the upper portion of the track towards the
rear of the Tank, over the sprocket and idler wheels,
with a crow-bar.
7, Push or puli the Tank off the tracks. If both
tracks are to be removed, disconnect them before moving
the Tank, The Tank has to be moved 14 feet to clear
the tracks. If sufficient space is not available the
tracks may bo cleared by jacking up the hull, one side
at a time, until the bogie wheels are clear, then haul
the track from under.
To replace a track:
1, Lay the track on the ground and haul the Tank over
it so that the end of the track projects approximately
30 ins. beyond the centre of the front bogie wheel,
2. Bring the other end of the track over the tension-
ing and idler wheels to the sprocket,
3,. Place a blocking tube tool, or crow-bar,, see Pig.
44, in front of the second bogie wheel.
4. Take up as much slack as possible from the top
portion of the track by turning the sprocket either with
the engines or with a long bar. If only one track is
being replaced the opposite side brake should be pulled
hard on.
5. Couple the track strainer to the track as
previously described.
6. Pull the ends of the track together with the
strainer. Driving the sprocket slightly with the eng-
ines and the opposite side brake on will assist in re-
moving the slack from the top portion of the track.
7. If the track is exceptionally tight bring the
ends together with a pair of coupling clamps, tool Ho.
1-11066, see Pig. No, 45, one on each side of the track,
8. Replace the side connections, wedges and nuts.
9. Remove the clamps, strainer and blocking tube, and
adjust the track.


Fig. 45. Turnbuckle service tool in position. Track horn is
shown in the foreground, complete with wedge, bolt and nut


To adjust a. track:
1. The four lock and clamping nuts in tho tensioning
wheel bracket arc loosened as described in track removal.
To tighten the track turn the track adjusting screw
clockwise.
NOTE: The correct track tension is determined as follows.
Place a four feet straight edge on top of tho track be-
tween the track idler wheels; the sag of the track meas-
ured . at the centre of the straight edge should be v in.
h. y/hen the track is adjusted, tighten the clamping;
nuts and lock nuts securing the tensioning wheel bracket
to tho hull with wrench No. 1-11009, see Pig. 45. Re-
place the looking plate and pin on the track adjusting
screw,
To remove or replace a link:
1, Move the Tank so that bhe link to bo removed is near
the top of the driving sprocket,
2. Proceed with operations Nos, 1 to 4 undo:' 1 "Track
Removal". Whon driving the Tank forward'(as described
in "Track Removal" in operation No. 2 ) stop when the
link to be removed is midway botwoon tho sprocket and the
first bogie whcel.
3. One or two links can bo removed or replaced at
this stage.
4, Place the blocking tube tool in front of tho second
bogie wheel.
5. Proceed with operations Nos. 6 to 9 as described in
"Track Replacement",
6, Adjust the track as previously described.
PTPNL TRACK 3
To break track:
1• Loosen off the tensioning wheel as directed in op-
eration No. 1 under "Track Removal" in Rubber Track
Maintenance,
2. Place the track strainer, tool No. 1-11015 on the
track at the tensioning; wheel end as shown in Fig, 46,
letting the holding arms fall into the pockets at tho


Fig. 46. Clamping winch into side recesses of track
Fig. 47. Undoing steel track


outer ends ox* /the links. Run out the cable and attach
the hooks to the track as close as possible to the first
bogie wheel as in Rip, 47. Tighten the strainer until
the portion of the track below the tensioning wheel is
relieved of tension. Any track pin in this section may
then be driven out. See Rig, 47,
To shorten track:
If the track is to be shortened, remove the de-
sired number of links and tighten the strainer until tho
ends of the track are together and the holes lined up
for insertion of the link pin.
To remove track:
1. Slacken off and remove the track strainer.
2. Either use the engines in creeper gear to wind off
the upper portion of tho track, and then tow or push the
Tank back 14 feet to clear the track, or alternatively
tow or push the Tank forward 41 feet .to clear the track.
If both tracks are to be removed, disconnect beta before
moving the Tank,
3. If sufficient space is not available to move tho
Tank the tracks may be cleared by jacking up the hull,
one side at a time, until the bogie wheels clmcr the
track; Haul tho track from under the bogie Js until
clear,
To replace a track:
1. Lay the track on tho ground and tow or push the
Tank on to it, so that the end of tho track projects
approximately 30 ins. beyond tho centre of the front
bogie wheel.
2* Bring the other end. of the track over the tension-
ing and idler 'wheels to tho sprocket,
3 e Place a blocking tube in front of the second bogie
wheel from the sprocket,
4. Take up as much slack as possible from the top por-
tion of the - track by turning the sprocket either with the
engines or with a long bar. If only one track is being
replaced, the opposite side brake should bo pulled hard
on,


Fig. 49. Removing sprocket complete
Fig. 48. Track groove cleaning tool, No. ADD (SR) 76


5. Place the track strainer tool, Nig. 47, on the
track with the extension arms gripping the sprocket. Rum
out the cable and attach the hooks to the track as clos-
ely as possible to the first bogie wheel. Tighten the
strainer until the ends of the tracks are together and
the holes lined up for insertion of the track pin.
6. Drive in the track pin and lock in position with
the lead plug or retainer. When the lead plugs are
driven out of the track links a ring of lead is left in
the locking groove. This must be removed before the
new plug is inserted, otherwise the purpose of the
groove is defeated and the plug will fall out. Nig. 48
shows this tool which has a hardened diamond point.
Pushing the point into the lead and turning in the groove
will remove the obstructing metal.
7. Remove the track strainer and blocking tube. Ad-
just the track as previously described.
SUSPENSION AND SPROCKET GROUP MAINTENANCE
Tighten all the nuts holding sprocket hub to drive
shaft flange with special spanner No. 1-11010, See Nig.
49.
At the same time ensure that the nuts and lock nuts
securing the sprockets to the sprocket hub are tight.


Fig. 50. Adjustment of brake bands


Steering and brake levers and control rods, showing lubrication points


STORING AND BRAKM GROUP MAINTENANCE
To adjust brake bands:
Remove brake inspection covers (one i'roin. each set
of brakes) and tighten"top adjusting nut with special
spanner No. 1-11013, seo Fig. bO,
WARNING-: This tool is for manual operation only, no
other leverage is to be applied.
The adjus ting nut has a groove, 3/16 in, loop,
milled into the inner face. This groove* registers with
the cross pin through which the adjusting rod passes.
It will be realised that, as tho nut is tightened, the
cross pin will rise out of tho groove and. drop back in
again as each half turn is made. The depth of the
groove provides the necessary band clearance, therefore
any greater leverage than that provided with the special
spanner will defeat the purpose of tho groove and result
in a binding brake, Caro must be taken to have tho
groove registering with tho pin when adjustment is com-
plete ,


Fig. 51. Water circulation system
Fig. 52. Nos. 1 and 2 engines through opening in bulkhead


ENGINE GROUP EAINTENANCE
Hose clips:
Use screw driver to tighten where necessary. See
Fig. 51.
Fan Belts:
The jockey pulley keeps an automatic tension on the
belts until the belt stretch becomes excessive. The bolts
will then have to be replaced. This is a workshop job.
Fan Mounting Bolts:
These secure the fan hub to the flange of the fan
shaft. Tighten if required with 13/16 in. ring spanner.
Then replace split pins. See Fig, 52,
Fan Housing Securing Ekolts:
These hold the -fan bearing housing, (a box type
casting) to the two vertical channel members situated in
the centre of the fan aperture. Tighten these bolts
with 7/8 in, ring spanner holding the heads with similar
sized socket wrench. See Fig. 52,
Water Bump Belt Adjustment:
Loosen generator bracket adjusting nut with 5/8 in.
ring spanner and prise generator upwards until belt is in
correct tension, then tighten adjusting nut.
The correct tension of belt is when it deflects from
3/4 to 7/8 in, out of straight line between the two pullers
when pressure is applied halfway between each pulley.
Water Temperature Units:
Those are situated on the right hand cylinder heads
of each engine at the rear or clutch end. See Fig, 52.
Test tightness of electrical connection nut with
pliers. Do not use force.
If the unit is leaking at its joint with the block,
remove the electrical lead and apply 15/16 in. socket
wrench or box spanner and gently tighten. Connect the
wire and replace the nut.


Oil Pressure G-auge unit:' .
Tighten nut with pliers if required. Sue fig., 52 .
for location.
Tachometer or Rev. Counter: . ' , ,
Situated under . turret basket. , Reieove floor .plate
for aeceas . : .’ Tighten flexible' tube unions:, at ..both'"ends'"
if required.■ fTso pipe grip: of pliers,g :,
Exhaust Pipes:
1 Check tightness of clamp-'■‘bolts., use 5/3 in, socket
wrench on lower bolts and 19/32. in. socket on upper ,'T
flange nuts. Hold heads with similar.: spanners. Do not
overstrain, :


Fig. 53. Mechanical Fuel Pump, dismantled view. Bowl and
filter screen only to be adjusted by crew. Other components
NOT to be dismantled by crew


Fig. 54. Dismantled view of Carburettor. See also Fig. 20


FUEL SYSTEM GROUP MAINTENANCE
Engine pump fuel filters:
Remove stirrup nut on top of filter bowl, lift off
bowl and remove gauge screen. See Fig, 53. Clean any
foreign particles from filter gauze by washing in fuel.
Take care not to damage the cork gasket at base of
filter bowl.
Replace the gauze and bowl and before finally
tightening the stirrup nut revolve the bowl to ensure
a good seating on the gasket.
Carburettor Adjustment:
When starting a cold engine fitted with a Strombeig
carburettor, the accelerator should be depressed and then
releasedbefore cranking the engine. This will set the
fast idle."
Idling Adjustment:
1, drop out individual clutches on ilos. 1 and 2 engines.
2, Run the engine to be tested until it is thoroughly
warm so that choke valve is wide open and throttle stop
screw is on slow idle,
3, Set throttle'stop screw so that engine speed approx-
imates 450 - 500 r.,p.m,
4, Adjust the two idle mixture screws so that the
engine runs smoothly without loping or stalling at this
speed. See Fig, 54,
ROTE: Turn screws clockwise to lean mixture and counter-’
clockwise to enrich mixture. Approximate setting is five-
eighths of a turn from seated position.
float Level adjustment:
The fuel level should bo set to five-eighths in,
below the top surface of the float chamber. The level
corresponds to the lower level of the sight plug when the
engine is idling, and may be checked without dismantling
the carburettor.
Important - The fuel level can bo chocked at the sight
plug only wile the engine is running.


Fig. 55. Universal Joints and Master Clutch Lubrication Points


Carburettor air cleaner:
Three Hat" type oil bath air cleaners are used,
one on each carburettor and are attached to'the car-
burettor air horn bjr a band and clamp screw.
To Dismantle:
1, Remove the cleaner from the carburettor,
2, Remove the wing nut from the top of the cleaner
and lift the top out of the lower body, setting it down
in an upright position to prevent the oil in the ele-
ment from running up to the inside of the top cover,
3, Take the lower body and thoroughly wash all oil ■
and dirt out of the sump,
4, Wash the top section and cleaning element thor-
oughly in fuel. Drain or blow the element out with
compressed air until dry,
5, Refill the sump with Engine oil.. See Lubrication
Schedule for grading. Reassemble and attach to the car-
burettor, making sure that the cleaner is properly
seated on the carburettor and the clamp screw is tight.
NOTE: Do not overfill the cleaner, as this will re-
strict the air passage and cause a rich carburettor
mixture,
CLUTCH GROUP MAINTENANCE
Adjustment:
If the master clutch does not disengage when the
clutch pedal is fully depressed, the front linkage rod
should be shortened by removing the clevis pin from the
fork at the front end of the rod fastening to the
clutch pedal. The fork should then be screwed on to
the rod until the desired travel is obtained.
Clutch Maintenance:
The moving parts of the clutch linkage rods should
bo oiled when the vehicle is being greased. The extrac-
tor race is fitted with a nipple for daily lubrication
and the outrigger bearing also has a nipple. See Fig. 55
for location of nipples.


Fig. 57. Final drive cover case showing cap screws
Fig. 56. Goar control lubrication


TRANSMISSION GROUP MAINTENANCE
Gear control lubrication:
The nipple is fitted at the end of the cross shaft.
Other moving parts are lubricated with the oil can. See
Fig, 56.
liain Drive shaft and universal .joints:
In a vehicle of this nature some vibration is al-
ways experienced consequently the inspection and tighten-
ing of the studs securing the universal joint should be
done frequently. See Fig. 55 for location of nipples.
Final Drive:
Tighten all the cap screws securing the final
drive cover plate to the hull (see Fig, 57) using 1|- in,
spanner.
FIRE FIGHTING EQUIPMENT GROUP MAINTENANCE
Warning: The Graviner system should be tested electric-
ally every 25 hours or 250 miles and particular care
should be taken that 12 volt current is not passed to
the bottles as this will cause them to operate.
See that the containers are full by removing the
adaptor plug located on top of each bottle and by
loosening the securing clamp. The weight of the bottle
will than indicate the quantity of liquid it contains.


Fig. 58. Distributor showing timing


ELECTR ICAL GROOP MA INTENANCE
ELE CT RICA L GROU P MAINTENANCE
Battery vent plugs;
To prevent overfilling a special cover is fitted
to each cell of the battery.
This device consists of a small rubber bellows,
or valve, which is fitted below the vent plug in each
cell, and expands when the vent plug is removed, clos-
ing the gas vents on either side of the vent plug re-
cess.
Battery Maintenance:
Add distilled water until the level reaches the
bottom of the vent plug recess, that is to a height
approximately f in. above the separators.
Any excess distilled water will overflow as there
is no escape for the air trapped inside the cell.
Care should be exercised to avoid holding the
valve down when adding the distilled water as this would
defeat the proper functioning of the device,
NOTE: Instructions are moulded on the tops of the plugs
stating that they must be screwed down when charging.
The only time the plugs should be removed is when the
battery is being filled or topped up.
Inspect the battery terminals for cleanliness
and tightness. Loose or corroded connections will in-
crease the generator voltage to dangerous limits and
also cause the starting motor to function indifferently.
The terminals should be cleaned ana smeared with vase-
line to prevent corrosion.
Battery test!ng:
Check the specific gravity of the electrolyte with
a hydrometer. Brush all'dirt from the top of the batteoy
and remove the vent plugs. When using the hydrometer
see that the float is not sticking to the glass wall.
The specific giavity readings at 80 degrees B. should be:
Bully charged 1.260 - 1,240
Half charged 1,190 - 1,180
Bully discharged 1.120 or less


Fig. 59. Front of Engine. Cylinder numbering.
Firing Order: 1,8, 7,3, 6,5, 4, 2


■^, 00 ?F ec^on . of 9* 004 should be added to the specific
ciavioj reading lor each 10 degrees 1. above 80 degrees
or suotracieo. lor each 10 degrees 11,I 1 , below 80 decrees, 9
Do no attempt to taho the specific gravity 0 f a "cell*
just been topped up. .The’reading of each
cell in a battery Should be within 0,020 if "the cells
ar( L in eciual condition. If a reading in one cell
uiiiers greatly fron the other two, it should be resort-
on immediately,
P.i _d.br ibu t o r Ad. ju s tne nt:
Jjo ba_ done onlv under special
ins truc tions : ' ' ~~ ~'*“*
correct adjustment or the contact broader wan
is 0.0125 in, to 0,0175. in. ' * °'- t
v anjust the points, turn the engine until the
.aeel cm sno contact breaker lever is lifted to the full
ezrenc by one of the cam lobes. Then, after slackening
uno contact, supporc locking screw, adjust the gap to
mn bne a cove limits by turning the eccentric screw, •
L-nen uj the locking screw and re-chooking the
gap. nee iirst illustration in dig, 53,
Ignition Timing:
jilmQr ency repalr to bo d one only une or s oec is 1
instructions : ~ ——•—
iu.e ignition snoula be timed so that the spark
occurs whe piston reaches a point five degrees
l UGl °f Z t! ? p -r- aac i CL c cntre (T,D, G. ) The crankshaft pulley
io rameu i. ,G/A. (See third illustration fir . 58) and
wnen unis mark is opposite the small pointer attached
to uie crankcase tne piston in ho. 1 cylinder is five
u>-gi3&s oeiore T.h.G, To time the distributor, set
one engine in the above position, then disconnect the
eaouum line and loosen the distributor housing clamp
sc - l l v/ v , Potato the distributor anti-clockwise until tho
coixuact Dreamer points just separate, with the rotor
u.ie against the air action of rotation and ro tighten
c-is or io up or clamp screw. Ho check the tininn to
nako sure that the distributor did not rotate while
lightening ana re-connoct vacuum lino. A fine adiust-
menu can do obtained, by making use of the slot in the
clamping plate, ’ ~~
0 n T}i ;; f pbing order of the cylinders is as follows:
7 > 1b,5,4, 2. (BCo dig. 59).


Fig. 60
Fig. 61
Fig. 62
Fig. 63
Some Spark Plug Troubles


opark Plug Maintenance:
Spark Ilugs:
The spark plugs, type AG-104 have a 10 m/m thread
the correct gap being 0,025 in, to 0,030 in. The gap
should bo checked every 25 hours or 250 miles.
In setting the gap never bend the centre electrode,
this will probably crack the porcelain insulator. Al-
ways bend the side electrodes in towards the central
electrode,
Gaps set too wide will cause misfiring under load
or at speed. Gaps set too close will cause uneven run-
ning at high speed. If the gaps are incorrectly set,
unsatisfactory performance will result through no fault
of the plugs, •
• •
Some spark plug troubles:
Fouled; Indicated by oil and carbon deposit on
insulator and metal part-of plug. Spark plug will mis-
fire or fail to fire at all, (Fig, 60.1,
To correct: Check spark plug gaps. Clean and test
spark plug for possible insulator fractures. If plugs
are O.K, and fouling is persistent, report.
Burnt and worn: Indicated by blistered and burnt
insulator and possible eroded electrode points; will
cause pre-ignition and faulty motor operation, especial-
ly at high speed and under load. (Fig, 61),
To correct: Fit new spark plugs.
Fractured; A fractured insulator will cause com-
plete plug failure, A fracture above part exposed to
combustion can never be caused by engine heat; it is due
to a hit or to a poorly fitting spanner being used, for
fitting or removing plug. Fractured at part exposed
to combustion may be caused by plug operating at too high
a temperature. (See Fig. 63),
To correct: Fractured above: Replace with new
plug. Fractured at lower ond and insulator appears to
be badly burnt, report.


DRIVING INSTRUCTIONS
A, STARTING- UP:
1. Ensure that engine is correctly warmed up.
2. That instruments are all correct.
3. Depress clutch pedal. .
4. Allow engine revolutions to drop to 350 r.p.m. .
5. Engage second gear normally. If on a steep slope
engage first gear.
6. If. on the level release the knobs on top of steer-
ing levers by pulling slightly on levers, then re-
lease steering levers. (These act as hand brakes)
7. If on a slope release the knobs on top of steer-
ing levers as before thus disengaging ratchet and
pawl, but hold levers on until drive has been taken
up, engine,
8. Rev, up engines to 1500 r.p.m. and gradually let
OUt Clutch.
9. When clutch is fully engaged accelerate until Tank
has gained sufficient momentum to engage next
highest gear.
10. Let up accelerator, depress clutch and move shift
lever into neutral, let up clutch for a couple of
seconds, depress clutch again and move shift lever
into next highest gear, then allow clutch to en-
gage smoothly and accelerate. (Note: Do not
force the lever). Let out clutch smoothly and
accelerate engine ready to engage the next highest
gear. Repeat 9 and 10 until top gear is engaged.
B. OPERATING:
When operating Tank gear changing must be anticip-
ated in advance.
When changing down the following procedure must be
followed:
1, Ensure that vehicle is not moving too fast for
lower gear to be engaged. For example, if the


Tank was moving at 80 m.p.h, in fifth gear, it
would be found that in fourth gear the engine
would have to exceed3*7so r.p.m,
2, Depress clutch pedal,
3, Engage neutral.
4, Engage clutch and. momentarily speed up engine to
increase the speed of the drive shaft so that tho
speeds of the engaging gears will bo approximat-
ely the same•
5, Disengage clutch and quickly move gear shift lover
to engage tho gear,
6, Smoothly engage the clutch,
NOTE: Change down same as normal double clutch on
motor trucks,
/
Engine'revolutions must not be allowed to fall
below 1000 r,p,m, under load.
0• • '
Never"lug’the engine below 1000 r,p.m,
"Lugging’ 1 means having such a load on the engine
that even at wide 6pon throttle the tachometer reads
less than 1000 r.p.m.
Maximum speed is 3600 r,p,m. and should only be
maintained for very short periods.
Maximum permissible speed in fifth speed is 24
m.p.h.
It will be foum that the best method of driving
after tho driver has become experienced in the operation
of this Tank is by keeping the engine speed as constant
as possible and varying the vehicle speed by engaging
higher or lower gears. Instruments must be checked •
frequently, particularly oil pressure and temperature,
if temperature exceeds 200 degrees F. engines must be
cooled off.
G, STEERING-
The steering on this Tank is carried out by means
of two levers situated in driver’s compartment. Those
levers operate brake bands. '.Jhen tho right lever is
pulled back the Tank steers to the right.


When moving^along a cambered. road it will bo found
that tlio Tank tends to run off the camber to the side of
the road If on a country road and there is no traffic
keep to middle of road on top of camber. If on main
road steer by making deliberate corrections. Do not
ride the steering lovers,
.rhe controlled dilforontial form of stoorina rives
minimum turning diameter of 58 foot. Do not fornot'tills
when operating^in congested or wooded areas and go into
your turn earlier than you would with "skid" steering.
Do not -.turn sharply or at excessive snood and
remember than a thrown track on those vehicles takes
hours to replace and usually results in buckled boric
wheels. However, whore it is essential to make a
sharp turn, engage* the next lower gear and keep the
accelerator well down, Whenever turning keep the motor.
pulling ana do noo lot your loot off the accelerator,
Remember, that these tracks usually come off at the
back and if you can keep your track tight at the back
it will not come off.
D. BTOPI ING
olow down by allowing friction of tracks to bring
vahiclo^ to halt whmreevor possible. Remember that the
bxaka-s nave to do tne three jobs of steering, braking
upholding the, vehicle stationary, and use them as
Ixt tie as possi ole, It will generally be found that if
tne Tank is slowed down for the purrose of turning a
corner, a lower gear will require- to he engaged to take
you through the corner, so engage your lower gear in ad-
van oo ana. allow this to slow you down.
Do not, however, make the. common mistake of usina
your gears always for e brake. - * •
In an emergency remove foot from a.c.colerator and at
tho saim- timo pull back both lovers ovonlv,.
Leave one clutch engaged until the Tank has been
slowed up and then disengage the clutch. The engine acts
a ° a hrako and also, which is more important acts as o
steadying agent and helps to prevent those wild swerves'
across the road which, frequently happens'on a sudden
application of tho brakes.


. F ne ? tlie Tank is stopped engine is to be kept run-
nm& nc 000 r # p,m, until ready to be moved off again.
Avoid prolonged idling periods.
E. OBSTACLES
Before attempting to negotiate steep inclines de-
clines, ridges, deep shell holes, trenches, fallen trees
or an j obstacles, always shift the change speed lever *
1 5 t ? 1 a - lower speed and thus prevent needless labouring
of the engine and the possibility of stalling it.
When negotiating a very steep incline a little
experience will teach the operator how to manipulate the
lank at the^ top of the incline. If the slope is very
abrupt,_as in the climbing of a ridge or log, the front
01 the Tank will climb almost to the vertical position
and will drop forward with a severe Jolt if the operator
if AO't skilful in controlling the vehicle as it passes
the balance point. With the vehicle in this position
the experienced operator can control the descent by the
proper application of the brake levers. The vehicle wild
tnen resume a horizontal position easily and without a
oovere jolt. Operators should accustom themselves to
keep some tree or other guide in sight at high angles of
climb so as to be instantly aware if one track is pulling
aneao.. ol tne other, in order to prevent the vehicle from
tipping on its side. Do not attempt to drive on a
slight slope at right angles to the slope, as the side
tnrust on the tracks may throw the tracks off or if the
slope is steep enough, turn the vehicle over.
Trenches too wide to be spanned and too steep to
be descended can be’ negotiated by a towing cable or
cables, the* second• Tank lowering the first Tank over the
graaually, until it is able to secure traction on
tne bottom of the hole. The third Tank assists .the
sec one. the same way, and so on, until the last Tank
reacnes the edge. The last Tank will have to drop from
the line, allowing the others to go on, unless by that
time the ground^on the edge of the trench is worn to a
able to S° over the edge alone. The
• a. bo . Gllbo;r> 'frfro trench should demonstrate its
acidity to climb out of the trench before the others
enter it,
The -Lank should not be used for pushing over stumps
txeos etc, Ine lank is not built for this work and
cames armourplate to protect the crew from gunfire not
o j


to push over trees and stumps. Besides giving away your
position by noise and by observation of the disappearance
of tree tops it damages the Tank. Such parts as the
front step, final drives and mudguards are very vulner-
able to shocks given them which they have not been de-
signed to withstand. Charging earth banks or dropping
into shell holes and washaways can also cause misalign-
ment df the final drive and broken suspensions.
B. TOWING
1. To start engine:
(a) Towing Tank to be in first or second gear.
(b) Towed Tank to be in third or fourth gear.
(c) (This practice is not recommended unless
absolutely necessary).
2. In towing there are several precautions that the
driver must take to avoid trouble or unnecessary delay.
Changes of direction must always be made by a series of
slight turns so that the vehicle being towed is as nearly
as possible directly behind the one doing the towing.
Soft muddy ground is to be avoided, since track may slip
on such a surface. If it is necessary to cross a muddy
area, the driver should be careful to straighten out
both vehicles before entering it, as it is more difficult
to pull a Tank at an angle than when following in tow.
The maximum speed when towing should not be more
than 12 miles per hour.


GEN ERAL NOT ES ON DR IVIN G
Starting engines:
Before starting the engines, check petrol, oil and
water; then make sure that the gear lever (on your left)
is in"neutral" position. All gear change positions are
illustrated in dig, 64. Also check to see that all the
emergency knife switches on the instrument panel are
pointed upwards in the position marked "II” {Normal
position), Now switch on the madtgr switch which is
situated on the right hand about shoulder high
when you are seated at the controls. Next press down
the switches marked "Ignition” on the Instrument panel
and if the fuel is not up to the level of the stand pipe
in the header tank, the Autopulso electric fuel pumps
will automaticaliy operate until the fuel reaches the
aforementioned level.
Now switch on the throe engine "Starter" switches,
press the starter push button and all three engines
should start simultaneously. If trouble is experienced
from weak batteries, see instructions under "Emergency
Starting" for procedure , When engines are running a
period of warm up is required which includes approx-
imately two minutes for air compressor to store suffic-
ient air for brake operation.
Checking oil pressure:
The driver should obtain commander* s O.K, regard-
ing engine oil pressures shown on gauges on rear bulk-
head* The normal operating pressure is 25 lbs, per sq,
in. at 2,000 r.p.rn.
If the red light fails to go out immediately after
starting or comes on while the engine is operating at
ordinary speeds, the pressure gauge reading should at
once be checked. If this is reading low no attempt
should be made to run the engine until the cause has
been asce r ta ine d,
The fault will lie either in the gauge or in the
pump. To find, out which unit needs attention, remove
the gauge connection and turn the engine over with the
starter•
If oil issues at full bore, then the gauge only is
faulty, and the vehicle can still be driven. The first
opportunity should be taken, howover, to have the gauge
adjusted by workshop personnel.


Fig. 64. Gear change positions


If oil does not flow, the indication is that the
pump requires attention. This work must be performed
by workshop personnel only*
Checking. 6 volt Generator .Charging Rates:
When the electrical system is functioning correct-
ly, the reading shown on the three ammeters on the inst-
rument panel is a good indication of the state of charge
of the batteries,’ If a battery is in a low state of
charge the generator will give a high output and a high
reading will be recorded on the ammeter;'' if
during the day time running, the ammeter shows a low
reading, this indicates that the battery is in a fully
charged state and does not require a high rate of charge.
If an ammeter shows a low reading when the battery is
in a low state of charge, the electrical system is at
fault; Report immediately;
Check the running of each engine individually by
switching off the following Ignition switches:
Switches 2 and 3 to test No. 1 Engine
” 1 and 3 " " ?? 2 "
" 1 and 2 ” " " 3 "
Starting off:-'-
Operate the clutch pedal (master clutch control)
and then engage second gear by bringing the gear shift
the position shown in Fig. 64, The first
gear is generally known as the "creeper” gear and is
used only in exceptional circumstances; for this gear
and reverse the gear lever must be latched out.
When second gear has been engaged, ease the clutch
back gently, increase the engine speed by gradual pre-
ssure on the accelerator pedal and the vehicle moves off.
With the two steering levers in the fully forward
position; the Tank will proceed in a straight line. By
pulling on the right hand lever the vehicle turns to the
right and if the left hand lever is pulled the Tank
turns to the left. Conventional changes of gears high-
er than first are engaged at speedometer readings as
specified under the heading of "Maximum Training Speeds ;i '
in the Condensed Specifications section of this manual.
Note: Any rapid movement of the accelerator pedal
causes a jet of petrol to be injected into the inlet
manifold; thus giving a rich mixture.


Do not use the clutch pedal as a foot rest as con-
stant pressure, however slight, will eventually produce
wear of the clutch release bearing and clutch facings.
Always ; let the : clutch ingently and take the load
gradually from a standing start, ' ' ”
Emergency Starting
The throe entities- can-- be..started,, by-two starting
mo tor s.r, but one starting motor is only,, c apable. ..of c rank
ing the three engines when hot and v/hen the battery is
fully charged .Thus it will he seen that the engines
can. always be started even though 'one ol the 7 three
batteries is flat/' ; ;r
Batteries ' ,in Parallel to Three .Starter Motors :
■ .Should, however, the throb, batteries be’ so run
down that the starting motors .are not capable of crank-
ing the engines fast enough to start,, all three batter-
ies should be connected in parallel and the three •
starters' operated 1 - simultaneously. The batteries may
crank the engines, at sufficlentispeed to' obtain a start.
To connect : the three batteries in parallel, oper-
ate the emergency change-over switch ( i.. e, the.'switch on
the extreme right in the top row) whereby the starter
parallel switch can be energised from either No. 1 or
No, 3^ Battery. Then press down the second .switch from
..and .after switching ,? on ?? the three ignition i ....
aud/starter switches, press ■ the starter push ■ button,
All three battdries : are’ now conrificted in. parallel to
the throe starting motors*
Batteries in Parallel to One Starter Motor:
j gg. The three batteries can be-connected in parallel
to- any one,of the three starters by nperating■ the : two
.night hand switches in the top row, as described aboyo,
and selecting the ignition and starter switch for, the
required engine'. This; method requires,, -that the indiv-’.
idual clutches be first disengaged*
n 9 special provision ■ has been« made for operating
the Individual -.qlatches -of the three ppwer units from ■
the driver r s seat but levers■are provided; on the power
unit so that individual clutches qan be -singled out’ for
tune-up purposes.


The clutch levers on No, 1 and No. 2 engines only
are accessible. Disengaging those two clutches will
leave No. 3 engine only connected to the transfer box.
Should an engine be faulty the unit can be located by
disengaging No, 1 and No. 2 individual clutches, using
wood blocks mentioned in Packing List at the end of this
manual.
Next start each engine independently by switching
on its ignition and starter switch, then by pushing the
starter button for each engine in turn. In this manner
the engine. with the faulty battery or starter motor
will be quickly located.
If the starting system on No, 1 or No, 2 engine
is faulty ; it can be started from the other engines by
engaging its individual clutch. If the starting Svstem
on No, 3 engine is faulty this engine can be started by
engaging the clutch on either No, 1 engine or No, 2
engine,
Should a battery be faulty the ignition current to
the engine normally fed by that battery can be supplied
from one or other of the two good batteries by operating
the five emergency selector and change-over knife
switches. The first two knife switches from the left
hand side of the panel control the three batteries,
while the remaining three are connected one to each
engine. If battery No, Pis discharged, pull -down the
first or second knife switch and then the knife switch
for No. 1 engine to the position marked !? E", thus feed-
ing the ignition circuits to No. 1 engine from No. 2
or No, 3 battery.
Similarly, the solenoid and ignition circuit to
any other engine can bo energised by any battery through
operation of the knife switches in accordance with the
plate on the instrument panel.


GENERAL OPERATING DA TA
General .diptes on maintenance :
j
. Military.units are becoming .increasingly dependent
for their efficiency on mechanically propelled vehicles
for both fighting and administration. In the majority
of modern, fighting units’, fire power is cither delivered
or is brought into notion bytmechanically propelled
vehicles,
Thus it is vital .that such vehicles should- bo
maintained, in the highest state of mechanical effieency.
Maintenance is a term usbd j to 'describe the com/
plete system including '“’routine 'mdlntonance ;; , ’’inspect
tion ?/ and '“’repairs''. .Routine maintenance is the per-
formance of certain necessary duties at specified
periods and/or mileages to ensure that wear, deterior-
ationßsnd consequent repair of the vehicle are reduced
to a minimum. '■ ** . o - 3 f
Inspection is a vitally important and integral part
of. any system of maintenance and is necessary to *'do tor- .
mine':- '' ‘ '' ■ ’ ;
,1.,G:. whether routine maintenance is being carried
out efficiently and regularly.
whether- ail;; component parts of the vehicle.
’ ’ ‘ aro in good mechanical.. order,
us... the and cause of wear ,: de.torloration,
fa*iiuf : e and damage,
/Inspection should bq.vfdiiowed by, the prompt exec-
ution pf all repairs ’ or, ad justnents as .'may be ' necessary.
Drivers should' concentrateon. tho - simple, masks of ' clean-
ing, lubrication-,. minor adjustments and .preservation as
• Wdlfcnoting and reporting of defects. Unit ;
officers and/U.'CrO T s should; frequently inspect a‘iid i/ i;
supervise routine .malntenahoc ,to ''ensure that, .Jbhis work
is performed efficiently-and ; regularly;:. //}//..
; As. distinct from, methods adopted in-.■prlvat.d/'df;::''
commercial life,'-the military . system of .routinp/'ls. „>abed
on the capaqity of drivers hot only to operatV, but to
look their vehicles, as well as to be
; bapabl.§ ;^pfr; 'jdJagnpMhg- and .rectifying minor running faults
without continual resort to' technical assistance and
specialised garage .tools and; equipment;;.!- : r >


1L; vi tax adequate time for maintenance and
inspection bo provided. Every opportunity should bo
taken during periods of halt for the vehicle to be look-
ed over. In the field, mechanised units may be called
on to fight for several days in succession, which may
necessitate maintenance being carried out at night, 'it
■ should be a point of honour in mechanised units that no
vehicle crew goes to sleep, oven after the hardest day,
until their vehicle is as fit as they can make it.
As far as possible, the crew of any A.F.V. should
be allotted permanently to a'vehicle and" should always
work together at maintenance. Not only does this en-
sure that maintenance is done quickly and efficiently,
but also that, in spite of casualties, there will always
be a .man in the crew who knows the peculiarities of the
particular vehicle.
General Notes on Lubrication:
The lubrication of the individual components of
the Tank has been discussed in detail and the recommen-
ded periods and lubricants are sot out in the appended
schedule, as well as in the Lubrication Chart,
It should bo borne in mind that the periods re-
commended for the lubrication of these various compon-
ents are based upon normal operating conditions.
Exigencies of active service may necessitate the Tank
being operated under conditions which depart consider-
ably from the normal. In these circumstances, the
selection of suitable periods must bo left to the dis-
cretion of those responsible for the maintenance of the
vehicle.
It is impossible to lay down rigid schedules for
draining periods for the reason that, under 1 service
conditions, the vehicle may bo operated in low gear
other indirect gears) under extremely heavy loads
for long^periods, Such conditions’are not truly re-
flected in tho speedometer readings, whereas the
schedule is made out in terms‘of mileage. It is all
the more necessary, therefore, to accept the mileage
figures as the maximum and from intimate knowledge of
work actually done by the vehicle, to select suitable
draining periods and provide adequate general lubric-
ation.
Tho importance of regular and adequate lubricat-
ion of tho various components of the Tank cannot be


Fig. 65. Underside of Tank showing covers for drain holes


over-emphasized, • The attention of all those concerned
with the driving and maintenance of the vehicle is drawn
particularly to the necessity for cleaning funnels and
filters used in replenishing lubricating 0i1,... as ex-
plained elsewhere in this manual, as well-as for clean-
ing nipples and lubricating points before applying the
grease gun or lubricant container.
Oil Filters:
j_t is important tho.t proper at sent ion bo given to
draining of sediment and changing of the filter cart-
ridge in accordance with the Lubrication and Maintenance
Schedule.
Oil changing:
The sump should be drained and flushed out with
flushing oil if available (not kerosene), See Lubrication
and Maintenance Schedule for other instructions. .It is
advisable allow the engine to idle for five minutes
before draining flushing oil. A circular coverplate in
the bottom of the hull, directly under the engine (see
Fig.'6s) must be removed to obtain access to the drain
plug. The sump should always be drained immediately
after a long run when the oil is hot and sediment in the
oil is in suspension. This sediment should be carefully
examined for metallic and non-mctallic'particles, If
necessary, use a magnet and if the presence of metal is
confirmed the matter must be reported for workshop
attention c
Keep oil and oil vessels clean:
/'
Before opening any oil drum or tin, always wipe
the top of the container clean, otherwise any dirty oil
or dirt which may have accumulated on the top of tho
container may find its way into the engine. Before using
any measure or funnel, make sure that it is clean, .After
use, funnels or measures which have boon used for engine
oil only may bo swilled out with petrol from the spare
petrol can ana the oily potrol returned cither to the
spare can again or poured into the potrol tank, Tho com-
paratively small quantity of cloan engine oil thus intro-
duced into the potrol will not have a detrimental effect
on tho subsequent running of the engine c When flushing
out funnels or measures which have boon used for gear or'
transmission oils, the oily petrol must'be discarded and,
in no case, poured into the petrol tank.


Uso of -Grease gan:
Always'olean grease nippies ’before,nsing:gun,
otherwise grit ancl; dirt : wiil' be f creed into : the bearings
with the lubricant, . ; : r : ; ■ -


CORRECT USE AND CARE OF TOOLS
General Note:
Any tools which have been exposed to moisture
should bo dried and smeared with a light oil film before
packing to prevent rust.
Strainers - Track:
Keep cables free from kinks or overlapping of
coils on drum. Remove all mud and grit after use. Lub-
ricate wearing surfaces with engine oil. Keep serving
on splices in good condition.
Jacks - Lifting:
Remove all mud and grit. Lubricate screw and
pawl with engine oil. Always operate the jack squarely
under the load, otherwise the screw will be subject to
severe bending stress. Close the jack right up before
stowing to protect the screw.
Hawsers - Stool towing:
Keep cables free from, sharp bends or kinks. Use
packing to protect cable if it has to contact sharp or
square corners. Always screw shackle pins right home
before applying load. Do not run over hawsers with
tracked vehicles... Keep serving on spliced ends in good
condition,
Gr q aso Guns -'Lubricant:
Maintain in clean condition at all times. When
taken apart for filling, place components on a clean sur-
face to avoid the entrance of dirt,..
Do not lay the grease gun on the ground at any time.
Glean thoroughly and replace in roll after use. If leak-
age of lubricant occurs at the nozzle or piston,.immed-
iately call attention to the fact.
Wrenches - Stillson:
Only to be used where standard adjustable or fixed
wrenches or spanners will not function.
Do not use on hardened steel surface or damage to
teeth of wrench will result.


Do not apply wrench to any machined surface of
which the finish must ho preserved.
Do not subject the wrench to side strainby.
as bending tool, •, .. n.'f-a:n
Wrenches - Adjustable nr* Crcstalloy:
The wrenches'■■■must -be so placed •on the -the
moving Jaw is ahead of the handle in the direction
which force is applied. If-when operated• qn^a tight
nut the wrench has to bo opened so far that the moving
Jaw extends beyond the body, the next larger; size wroneH
should be selected, ' nf-n''.f '- ■
Wrenches - Box: ' •■-d:.;
Wr onchcs - On on o nd: . •
Always select the correct*size wrench for'the ; Job.
If too largo a wronch is Used it will cadso■damage both
to tho-wronch and the nut. engage the full, depth of the
nut whenever possible,.. To loosernor finally tighten a
hut alwaysuse a box wrench- or ring"'' spanner, whenever
possible, 'Dq.. not use hammers on wrenches
Pliers:
Do not use cutting edges on hardened material.
Diagonal and side cutting pliers, when.-in good condition,
are. excellent for removing■ split pins. ... Lubricate pliers
to keep the Joints free and''keep. ..water out.
Screwdrivers d ■
n Do not use as cold chisels ,or tommy. bars. Have
the blades correctly re-dressed if damaged; faulty blades
will damage screw slots and make them difficult to re-
move or tighten,, Hse the .correct size driver ~ with
blade full width of the sior.
Cold Chisels:
Do not use. an hardened stooli .If dulled, have them
sharpened at ..first opportunity, , Take an angle cut where-
ever possible, ... ....
Hammers:
Do not use a hard face hammer on machined parts,
use copper-drift or wood block*


kilos:
ICoop files free from mud, water and grease. Do
not allow them to rub together in the tool kit. . '
Press on file in cutting stroke only and never
on the return stroke.


DON'TS
ENGINE
Don’t start off without oil,water and petrol.
T? over rev. the engine,
; w ■ over rev. the engine before changing to the
next gear,’
mix oil in the sump. Keep the same grade,
?? forgot to tighten cylinder head hose connec-
tions if necessary,
?? tighten the cylinder head bolts except with
a tension wrench in the proper order.
?? rush off from cold. Lot the engine warm up,
’’ attempt to start the engine in gear.
u drive off with, any rod light showing on dash,
CARBURETTOR
Don’t keep stamping on the accelerator.
forgot to clean the filters in the pumps.
" forget to clean the air filters.
s? pour petrol straight from the drum to the
tank. Use a funnel with a clean filter.
ELECTRICAL
Don’t disturb the breaker points without good cause,
?? keep grinding away on the self starter. Try
to find the reason why the engines won’t
start,
?? check voltage regulators with a spanner to see
which wires are alive,
” overoil the distributor. Two drops are
sufficient.
{? forget to keep the battery topped up,
inspect battery level with a match.
J? forget to see that emergency switches are in
normal position,
DRIVING
Don’t ride the clutch.
ir drive off with the brakes on.
lot the clutch in with a Jerk.
i? slam the air brakes on.
” forget your log book.


Chart
No.
No of
points
Item
Lubricant to
be used
Quantity
Daily or 50
miles
25 hours or
every 250
miles
50 hours or
every 500
miles
100 hours or
every 1000
miles
300 hours or
every 3000
miles
1.
3.
Cadill-
ac Eng-
ines
Engine oil
D D 30 ex-
cept first
fill,then
use I) D 20
Flushing
oil DD 20
Capac-
ity 2-J
galls.
each
engine
Check level
and add oil
if necessaiy.
Dipsticks of
Nos. 1 and 2
engines acc-
essible from
Turret Bas-
ket .Dipstick
of No.3 eng-
ine from
centre hatch
of rear co-
ver plate o
Filler caps
accessible
from same
hatch,
First 250
miles after
new engines
or overhaul.
Drain flush
and refill
with engine
oil D D 20.
Drain plugs
accessible
from cover
.plates un-
derneath
hull.
First 500
miles af-
ter new
engine or
overhaul.
Drain flush
and refill
with engine
oil D D 30
! Drain Hush
and refill
with engine
oil. D D 30
1A
3
Engine
Oil
Filters
Remove
drain plug
when drain-
ing engine
sump,also
after flush-
ing engine.
Replace plug.
If not flush-
ing engine
sump, remove
plug,drain
and replace
plug.
Remove cover
by taking out”,
cap screw. Re-
move used el-
ement. Clean
out container.
Replace new
element, Fit
new gasket un-
der ©over.
Tighten and
check no leaks
with engine
running.
TANK A. C. MK. 1 — LUBRICATION SCHEDULE


Chart
No.
No. of
points
item
Lubricant to
be used
Quantity
Daily or 50
miles
25 hours or
every 250
mile s
50 hours or
every 500
miles
lOO hours or
every 1000
miles
300 hours or
every 3000
miles
30
3
Air
Gleaners
Engine Gil
D~B 30
Capacity
y pint
On dusty roads or
conditions. Drain
clean lower bowl
and wash element
in kerosene or
fuel. Drain and
refill.
Ordinary con-
ditions . D rad n,
clean 1 oarer
bowl and wash
element in
kerosene or
fuel. Drain
and refill
8 and
9
2
Gear Box
and Front
Axle
which in-
cludes
Final
Drives
Engine Oil
D D 30
Flushing Oil
D D 20
17 galls.
Check level. Add
oil if necessary.
Dipsticks of axle
and gearbox in
Filler caps.
Filler cans of
front axle in
front of gunner,
on bulkhead panel.
Filler cap of
gearbox at rear
end near gunner.
At first 250
miles after new
or overhaul,
drain,flush and
refill. Drain
plugs; Gearbox
accessible by
removing cover-
plate under
hull. Front
Axle and Pinal
Drives, plugs
under hull.
At first 1000
miles from new
or after
haul. Drain
flush and re-
fill.
Drain, flush
end refill.
15
/
1
Transfer
Box
Engine Oil
D D 60
A galls.
Check level.Dip-
stick at top
right end of box.
Accessible from
turret basket.
At first 25'D
miles after new
or overhaul,
drain flush and
refill. Drain
plugs under
hull accessible
by removing
coverplate.
At first 1000
miles from new
or after over-
haul. Drain,
flush and re-
fill.
Drain, flush
and refill.
22
1
Air Com-
pressor
Compressor
oil or Engine
oil D D 30
2/3rds
pint
Check level.Filler
plug in sump. Pill
to collar on dug.
When below collar
add oil.
Drain, flush
and refill.


Chart
ho . Of
Item
Lubricant
quantity
Daily or 50
25 hours or
50 hours or 100 hours or 300 hours or
No ,
noints
to be used
miles
every 250
every 500 every 1000 every 3000
miles
Liles miles miles
•* ■
*■■■— - "
23
1
Air Gom-
prea g or
Chain
G,G, (AL)
Lmear grease
over inner
surface of
chain.
.— - -
— -
• * - - -
• •— - -• —
. - - - • - ■
7 and
8
Univer-
L.G.
2 shots ■
Use grease gun
7a
sal
Joints
and
each
nipple
6 joints and 1
spline serv-
iced from
Splines
basket, 1
joint from
forward Com-
partment . 1
from engine
compartrent .
■
. ~—
——
......-
.... .——
- —
• —
-—— -— - —- — — ■—
31
1
Central
propeller
shaft
bearing
(on lions
lug
rear of
fan drive
pulley)
C,G, (AL)
2 shots
Sfr--
T T se grease
. Do not
overforce,
accessible
from opening
in engine
bulkhead be-
tween fan and
celts ,
6
]_
Master
clutch
release
bear ing
f L Cr ,
1 shot
Grease gun, do
not overforce
as grease re-
tainer will be
damaged
6 .
1
Master
clutch
outrig-
ger,
bearing
L.G-o
2 shots
Grease gun .do- -
not ..o-veriorce
as grease re-
tainer v/ill
be 'damaged.


Chart
N O o
No of
point,
Item
s
Lubricant
to be used
Quantity
Daily or 50
miles
25 hours or
every 250
miles
50 hours or 100 hours or 300 hours
every 500 every 1000 or every
miles miles 3000 miles
5
6
Clutch qp-
erating
mechanism
Gross
shaft and
linkage
Engine
Oil D D
30
Eew drops
Use oil can
on all pins
and, bearing
surfaces.
12
1
Gear lever
pivot
C.G. (AT.)
1 shot
Use grease
gun on nipple
12A
4
Gear lever
control
joints
Engine Oil
D D 30
Eew drops
Use oil can •
11
2
Brake cross
shaft
C.G. (AL)
1 shot
Use grease
gun on nipples
16
16
Brake
control ,
joints
Engine Oil
D D 30
Eew drops
Use oil can.
Eew drops on
all joints.
21
3
Acceler-
ator ped-
al and
control
j oints
Engine Oil
D D 30
Eew drops
Use oil can
on all joints
and bearings
29
r 7
o
Engine
Water pumps
Water pump
grease
Two shots
Use special
grease gun on
nipples,
-
i i— f c<5 <—l
3
Distrib-
utor shafts
E.G.
3 turns
Bill'grease
cups, give 3
turns.
19A
5
Distrib-
utor cam
C.G. (AL)
Smear only
on cam.


Chart
No.
No. of
points
Item
Lubricant to
be used
Qu ,antity
Daily or 50
miles
25 hours or
every 250
miles
50 hours or
every 500
miles
100 hours or
every 1000
miles
300 hours oi*
every 3000
miles
19A
Distribut-,
or breaker
arm spind-
les.
Engine Oil
D D 30
1 drop
Use oil can
1 drop only
2b
and
2oA
5
Distribut-
or shaft
advance
mechanism
Engine Oil
d’d 30
3 or h
cirops
Use oil can.
Remove Rotor,
Oil on felt
pad. Replace
Rotor.
27
and
?7A
10
Carburett-
or controls
Engine Oil
D D 30
1 or 2
drops
Use oil can on
all Joints and
bearings each
engine.
15
5
Engine Gen-
erators
Engine Oil
d' d 30
5 drops
only,
Use oil can
each end of
generators.
13 A
1
12 volt
Generator
(2 types)
oil and
grease lub-
ricated.
Engine Oil
D j 30 or
Chassis Grea.s
(al)
3 drops or
2 turns of
grea.se cup
ase oil can or
2 turns grease
cup under
tu rre t b ask e t
273
5
Starter
Motors
Engine Oil
D D 30
3 drops
only
Use oil can,
cup rear end.
25
1
Turret
power trav-
ersing
Gearbox
Engine Oil
D D 30
and Chassis
Grease (hL)
1 pint
Check level and
oil if necessary.
Dipstick in fill-
er cap.
• Use grease gun
on .nipple
Drain, flush
and refill.
\


Chart
■ _ No,
No, of
.points ...
Item
Lubricant to
'be'used'
Quantity;
D ally, or- 50- ,
- miles:;
■ 25' hours 'or
eveiy 250
miles
,50 hours or
_ every 500
miles
100v hours or
OVCiy 1000
miles
30C hours 01
■ every 3000
miles
23A
1
f,
Tupret hand,
control -
tra.versing
gear.
Fibre .Crease
2-shots 1
i
- ' ‘V ’
IJ se gre ase gun
on nipple ;
Dismantle and
smear grease
on gears and
shaft.
:: 25 '
1
Turret tra-
versing rack
and- pinion
!
oha.s sis
...G-rease ; ..(iiL)--
1 lb. !*
Hand .pack under
neath , cover, of
driving pin!on&
revobre turret
into 6 positions
to distribute
grease. -t - ■ ■
I ;
24
1 •■■■■•-
Turret ball
race ring
beating.
Fibre Crease
6. shots in
different
positions
Use. grease gun
on nipple
Repack bearin ;
after disman-
tling.
20
2
Turret
mantlet
mounting
pins
Chassis‘
Crease (id,) :
2 shots ;
each
Use’grease gun
on nipples.
■ ■
•-2-
■
12
Suspension
Bogie
Wheels
' Chassis ;
Crease (AL)
Where relief
valve fitted
several
shots until
grease iss-
ues from
valve •
Use-grease gun
- on nipples, '
where relief
valves not fit
ted, do not
overforce,
_ , '. a'.’- ■ : i
2
2
Tensioning
wheels
{} ff ■
II ST
• — - ■ -p-
:. i
tf ■■ it
i
6
Idler
wheels
ii ii
T! Tf


Chart .
No c i
i
|
No.,, of
points
Item
Lubricant to
be used
Quantity
Daily or SO
mile s
23 hours or
every Z3 ( -
miles
50 hours or
■ every 500
miles■
ICO hours or
every 100C
miles
300 hours or
every 3000
miles
i
k- 1
|
12
Fulcrum
Pins
Chassis
Crease
3 shots
'
, Use grease gun
on nipples.
L-
Abbreviations: 0,,G„ (AL) - Chassis Grease (AL)
P,G, -Fibre Grease


D D Grades
Commercial Equivalent Grades .
Mobile!Is
Mobil-
greases
Shell Oil
and
Greases
Castrol
Atlant-
ic
Ca11 ex
D D 20
Arctic
Silver
Shell ■
Light
,T Gem”
Light
Medium
Motor
Oil 20
D D 30
Mobiloil
?, A"
Single
"C.W,"
or X
Medium
Motor
Oil 30
D D 60
Mobiloil
??
Golden
"C" or
LNL
Sup,
Heavy
Motor
Oil 60
SU; a <1
(Chassis
Grease)
Mobil-
grease ,
2N (Hand
Gun)
2B (Press-
ure Gun)
Aero
Shell
No . D ,
to n
s: * vx *
or
m n
~L • O ■
Chassis -
lube
Chass-
is lube
?? q ??
o
i-iTii n
X , cr •
(Fibre
Grease)
I .obli-
ge ease ’
No *5.
-J.J ~D
' J . 1J a
Grease
TT T
Fibre
Grease
Marfax
No , 2
"W.P."
Water
I limp
Grease
Mobil-
grea s e
No . 6 .
Shell
Water
Pump
Grease
V'J • -i. *
"Water
Pump
W.P.
INTERCHANGEABLE OILS AND GREASES
A. C. MK. 1 TANK
For Eme rg ency Use.
BRITISH WAR DEI/ARTLiENT - Interchangeable Grades
Li 120 s • D D 20
M 160 = DD 30
M 400 . D D 60
Grease G. 3. = lib re Grease,
Grease M»T» = Oliassis G-rease


Engine will not start
Battery run down
Lead disconnected
Faulty starter switch
Bendix drive dirty
Starter does not
crank engine
Start
ine
er cranks eng-
s lowly
Battery partly run down
Terminal ;loose
Connections dirty
Electrolyte level low
.. ..Wrong grade of oil
;m
N
i
Ignition Fuel
o spark at plugs
<
Syste
r
Spark plugs oiled up
Spark plug porcelain cracked
No fuel in carburettor
I
Carburettor
evice fixity. ,
vc chamber cover
ttor
Spark plug gaps too /wide
Spark plug gaps too close
!
«
1
Loose low tension leads
Cracked rotor
Dirty or worn distributor
points
Carbon brush not making
contact
Incorrect distributor point
gaps
Incorrect timing
Faulty condenser
Coil burnt out
High tension lead loose or
broken.
No
Distr
spark at d
Air leak in’ fuel line
Blockage in carburettor pipe line
Faulty fuel pump
Fuel exhausted Fuel in
ibutor --
istributor Jets choked
Easy, starting d
idr leak in val
Water in fuel
Dirt in carbure
Coil
No sp
ark at Coil
1 Batterv
Batteiy run down
Low tension lead loose or
broken.
!
TROUBLE FINDING [?]


LUBRICATION CHARTS
THE NUMBERS APPEARING ON THE SYMBOLS
CORRESPOND WITH THE NUMBERS APPEARING
IN THE LUBRICATION SCHEDULE
KEY TO CHART SYMBOLS
TURRET LUBRICATION POINTS


Engine mis-
, fires.
Engine starts and
stops •
i
Ignition
High tension leads to spark plugs
loose
Incorrect spacing of spark plug
points
Cracked spark plug porcelain
Battery connections loose
Carburettor
Water in carburettor
Fuel line partly choked
Fuel pump pressure lot?
Fuel pump filter choked
Needle valve faulty or dirty
Mechanical
Valves sticking.
Valves burnt or broken
Valve spring broken
Incorrect valve clearance
Ignition
Low tension connection loose
Distributor clainp screw loose
Faulty switch contact
Carburettor
Fuel line blocked
Water in fuel
Needle valve sticking
Engine runs on wide
throttle only
Carburettor
Idling jet'blocked
Idling adjusting screw incorrectly-
adjusted
ruei pump
Fuel exhau
Mr leaks
xauity
sted
Mechanical
Valve sticking
Valve burnt or broken
Valve spring broken
Engine does not givd
full power
Ignition
Ignition retarded
High tension lead shorting
' Faulty spark.plug
Carburettor
' Fuel supply faulty
’ Mr leaks in-carburettor gasket
Jets partly choked
Mechanical
_ p r r*“
Valve burnt dr bad seating
Incorrect valve clearance
Engine runs imper-
fectly
Ignition
Ignition retarded
Faulty spark plug
- Carburettor
Lean Mixture
Pue1 feed faulty
Inlet feed faulty
Inlet valve not closing
Carburettor flooding
Engine'hnocks.
Timing too far advanced
Excessive carbon deposit
Loose bearing - pistons


Sump toms
Possible Causes
Wireless Set:
12 volt battery main switch off.
Loose or broken connections in
12 volt circuit.
No current at
Wireless set;.
'Blown fuse in turret fuse box.
Battery needs attention.
Generator not charging (for
possible causes, refer 6 volt gen-
erator fault finding table).
, Gr a vi ne r System:
12 volt battery main switch ;f 0F]w ?
Loose or broken connection in
Graviner wiring.
Faulty operating switch.
No current at
Graviner bottle
plugs.
Battery needs attention.
M.G. Cooling
No tors:'
12 volt battery main switch n OPF T? .
Notor fails to
operate.
Loose or broken connections in
wiring
Pault3r switch.
Blown fuse.
Battezgy needs attention.
FAULT FINDING TABLE
12 VOLT WIRELESS, GRAVING AND M.G. COLING MOTOR
CIRCUITS


1
Symptoms
Possible Causes
Turret look not disengaged.
Turret will
not operate
Controller
motor does
not operate
’Broken connection in 40
volt circuit:-
Loose connection at Gener-
ator; Regulator; Base
Junction connector;Current
limit relav; Turret lock;
Controller.
Controller
motor oper-
ates ,
Broken or loose connections
between controller and
Traverse motor.
FAULT FINDIE TABLE
40 VOLT TURRET TRAVERSE CIRCUIT


Item
Location
Respirators anti-gas outfits anti-
Carried where
dimming (4) Mm. vi.
convenient..
... .. „
- -■
Bleaching powder (2 lb tins) (i)
R.Ii. outside bin
- ~ - -■ - ...
— .. _
Ointment anti-gas No, 2 (2 oz.
One in each res-
Contrs) (5)
pirator haversack
Pistol, signal No, 1 Mk.lll 3 * (l)
In case L,H«
.... ., ...
_
turret ..wall... „
Plannette (4 yds)
Out sid63. turne t .
bin
**"’ •—
—
Appartus.camouflage.nets 15 ft. x
Outside turret
35 ft. (l)
tin .
— — — — *- — — ■- — — •- — —
~ -
- — — — ■ — — — — —
lacks,Hiting 15 ton screw pyre
(2
H.rl, outside bin
-M- .
lacks, lifting 15 ton base plates
R Ji, outside bin
(2)
— _
— — — — — —
Crowbar, 3 ft. 6 in, with chisel
R.II. outside bin
and olaw ends (1)
-- - - ~ -
... w, ... « M ....
Chisels,cold y in, (Nd.V.) (1):
R.II, outside bin
1 in. (IM .1 , V. ) ( 1 )
... —
— — — -- —. M
Drifts,steel round -g in, x 6 in.
(N.I.Y,) (1); g in. x 6 in. (1);
Ii.Ho outside bln
f in. f x 6 in, (1); in. x 6 in, (1
)
Files Bastard half round 10 in, (1
)
Second cut square 6 in, (1); Smooth
R.II, outside bln
ii , 3 . S , 8 in. ( 1); Ha nd 1 e s me d i urn (
o
I
— —
— ... M
Hammers , engineers ball peln 1-J- lb.
(1); Hammers, handled sledge
R , H o outs 1 do bin
straight . pein 7 lb, (l)
PACKING LIST
ARMAMENT AND ASSOCTATED STORES


Item
Location
Pliers,side cutting 8 in. (N.I.Y.)
(1 pr, )
Pliers, Diagonal cutting 8 in.
(N.I.Y,) (1 pr,)
Pliers,Multigrip 4 in. (N.I.Y.)
(1 pr.)
Pliers, 10 in,(N.I.Y,) ( 1 pr.)
In rolls
R.H. outside
bin
Screwdrivers G-.S.(Aust) 3 in. (1)
6 in, (1) 12 in. (1)
R.H. out-side
bin
Saws , hack 10 in, (N. I. Y. ). (1. j
Saws ,hack, blades medium (N, I. Y.,) (12 )
R.H, outside
bin
Spanners',.adjustable’, crescent-'type-
(N.I.Y.) 6 in. (1),8 in, (1),12
in. {1), 24 in.(1)
R.II. outside
bin
Spanners D.E,,S.A.E-* (N.I.Y.)-
J in. x 5/16 in, (1); f in, x 7/16
in (1); in. x 9/16: in. (1.); in.
x 19/32 in.; 19/32 ,in. x 11/16 in;
(1); f in. x f in. (1); ,-| in, x'
13/l6 in. (l); 25/32 in, .x |r in. (l);
15/16 in. x 1 in. (l)1-1/16 in, x lj
in. (l); 1-| in, x 1-5/16 in. (1);
lj in. x l|- in. (1)
R.H. outside
bin
•Irenches Pipe- (Stillson) 12 in. (1);
lvIultihex,box, long ten degrees angle
pattern (Her brand--No .5723). f in. x
7/16 in. (1); -g- in. x 9/16 in. (1);
f in. r X 11/16 in. (1) -f in. x 13/16 in
(l); in. x 15/16 in, (1); 1 in. x ■
1-1/16 in, (1)
R.H, outside
•
bin
Padlocks, iron, galv. lg in. with
two keys (4)
One each on three
bins. outside.,
One fitted to
main switch / , '
Wire, copper .soft., 20 S.W.G-. (-/ lb.
reels) (2)
Turret bin
Cotton w r aste ,coloured, 2 lbs.
Turret bin


' w-
Item
Location
Axes, felling (X)
" pick 4f lbs (1>
f? heads (1)
" helves (1)
Outside bin
Bucket, water, canvas Mk. V (1)
Turret bin
Shovels, G.S, (2)
Outside bin
Brush, hand, bass Mk. 1 (1)
Outside bin
Manchette-15 in, blade with
sheath and lanyard (2)
Turret bin
Stoves,oil, wickless. No,5 (Primus
(1); Repair outfits (Primus) (1)
R.H.bulkhead
driver’s comp.
Boxes, cartridge illuminating
(12 flares) (1)
L,K. turret
Boxes, grenades, hand (1)
L,H, turret
under cupola
Cases,I,lap G.S. No. 1 Mk. 1 (1)
R.H. rear
roof turret
Periscopes,Drivers complete (1)
Forward gunner’s complete (1)
Commander ’ s complete (2)
Prisms (spare) (12)
Six in turret
over wireless
set,three on
each side of
front compart-
ment in hull
Telescopes,sighting,No,24B;, Mk, V.
Telescopes,sighting,No.24B,, Mk, V.
(spare)
R’.H. front
of turret
Binoculars, prismatic (1 j?r-» )
Container
front turret,
gunner’s res-
pirator .
Cutters,wire folding Mk, 1 (1 pr,)
Cutters, wire,Derniert high tensile
wire, (1 pr,)
Turret bin.


...
■ Location'
.-It 0111
Gloves, wiring (2 prs . )
Turret' bin
Tape insulating -f in. i- lb
(i'lb.)
. rolls
Turret bin
firms,• scmaphore, - (1 sot)
'Hear supporting
■ arm turret
basket.
Strips,and discs (N.I.V.)
and air. communication
ground *■
■■Carried,, whore '
convenient-.
Lamps,signalling,Hellensen
(2 sets)
: L.H. bulkhead
' above escape
hatch.
G-ioves, anti-gas (3 prs.)
Hoods, anti-gas-, (1 pr,)
Jackets, light anti-gas (l
Overboots, anti-gas (l pr.
Trousers, light ahti-gas (
Valises, anti-gas clothing
jP r •
1 pr.)
(1)
In two bins.
One at' rear of
■ driver. One at
rear of for-
ward" gunner.
Outfits, first aid Nor; 248
(D
■ H.H. turret
wall behind•
loader.
Belts, safety (5)
Pitted to
seats.
Clamps,track coupling rubber
track (1)
Outside bin.
Punches, -Short, steel track
removing (1)
Long, steel track
removing (l)
link, pin
■ link pin
Outside bin.)
Tracks,links (spare) (6) •
J? V connections- (spare) (12) ..
7! nuts (spare). (12)...
Strainers-Track, s te e1 or (1)
Track,rubber (1)
Track,handle* (1) d•
Track,handle, ’ exteiisiori-. (1) . ■
Rear of vehicle
-Outside'.bin.. ..
Outside bin:
Outside bin
:: Outside bin
■ .Outside"- bin-
Outside bin.


Item
Location
Tubes, track blocking (14 in, long x
2i ins. bore water or steam pipe) (2)
Outside bin
Wrenches, brake,turret. traverse mot or
(1) ; Spark plug (1j
Outside bin
Track adjusting and Bogie wheel spindle
nuts (l)
Fulcrum pin and bogie wheel
Bracket nuts (1)
Sprocket hub nut s (1)
Grease nipple (1)
Steering brake adjusting nuts (l)
v In box out-
side bin.
Hand!)ook, Tank, A, C .Mk, 1 (1)
Books, records changes (l)
Log book, Tank (1)
Log book, gun (l)
Container on
R.rl. side of
driver.
Belts, fan, spars (3)
Outside bin .
Brackets, fire extinguisher 1 qt. (4)
One in hull,
one in turret,
two outside.
Brushes, engine, cleaning 20 in. (1)
Outside bin.
Blocks,wood, jacking 25 in, x 9 in.
x 9 in. (2)
Outside bin.
Cans,oil 1 pt. (Buffer oil) (l)
Cans,oil cylindrical 1 qt. filled (1)
Cans,oil■ lubricating forced speed a pt.
Cans, 2 gal. oil (2)
Outside bin
(1) ?? ??
y ? y?
Extinguishers, fire, 1 qt. filled (4)
Brackets
Funnels,petrol 6 ins, dia. with 9 in.
stem. (1)
Outside bin
Injectors, lubricant
Hand compressor type 16 oz. (1) .
Hand compressor type 32 oz. (l)
In case out-
side bin..
?? ;?


Item
Location
Bulbs,electric spare -
■ 32-G,A. 6-Y.. (3)
6, C.L. 6 V, (3)
1-5 C.1V 6 ¥. (K)
. L.H. bulkhead
Lamps, electric vehicle - Head (2)
Tail >(2) ; .
Spotlight (1)
Mounted on
v vehicle. :
Horns, electric (1)
Mounted' on
. vehicle :
Bat tery, .6 volt 15 plate (5 )
Buses, cartridge, spare
' BO amps (3)
30 amps (2)
Fitted in'
vehicleo
Carried where
convenient.
G-auges, gap spark plug, univers
al (1)
Outside bin
Lamps, inspection portable 6 volt (2)
One'in case
fitted H.E. side
of water tank
in turret. One
in case in out-
'side bin, -
Hopes,towing,steel, 3l in. x 30
(1) With: eye and thimble both
ft. ■
ends.
Along L.11. side
of hull..
Boxes, ration (5 men 1 day) (3)
Boxes,, Cooker (1)
Boxes', cooking utensils (1 )•
Two on R.H.
-'bulkhead.' One ■
on- L.H. bulk-
■ head.H.E.bulk-
head behind
drivers comp-
artxiien'G. n.n#
.■ . bulkhead.
Covers , canvas A.<3 : .Mk,l Tank (3
pieces) (1 set)
: L.H. track ■
cover -plate .
Tanks, petrol auxiliary 44 gals
(i) -L
■' Hear of eng- A
' ine' compartment-


Item
Location
Brushes,sash tool No.3 (N.I.V,) (1)
Carried where
convenient.
Biles - Contact (l)
Ragne t o (N. I, Y, ) (1)
Carried where
convenient.
Pliers, chain nose 4 ins. (N.I.Y.)(1 pr.)
Pliers,side cutting 4 ins.(N.I.Y,)(Ipr.)
Carried where
convenient.
Sorer; drivers, G.S, (Bust]
Carried where- -
convenient,
Wire , elec trie rush back {Boldin tyre
(IT. I.Y. )~ (10 ft.)
Carried where
convenient
fuse wire, 5 amp, (2 ft.)
1 (3 amp, { 2 f t, )
Carried where
convenient
Cans , lu'br ioating,.No, 11 f Ik ,1 (1)
. Boxes ,R .11,rear
wall of turret
Cups, sponge, No. 4 Hk. 1. (1)
Boxes IN IN roar
wall of turret
Funnels , filling, cylinder ,No . 1 Mk.TT““
(1)
Boxes R.11.rear
wall of turret
G-auses, serxiov. tiro bus ion ITo, 16
0;h. 1. (1)
Boxes ,11.11. roar
wall of turret
Lanyard, 0.0 eking No. 4 Ilk. 1. (1)
Boxes R-.H.rear
wall of turret
Drifts, No, IS Nik. 1. (1)
Boxes' RcII,rear-
wall of turret
Screwdrivers, adjusting,sights, ho. 1.
tilC.'l. (1)
Boxes INK.rear
wall of turret
Wrenches,breech risohanisLi !io . S5S
Wh. 1. (1)
Boxes R ,11.roar
wall of turret
Bags,spent cases, (2 pin. (1)
Boxes R.H.rear
wall of turret


Item
Location
Boxes.spare parts and tools,Ordnance
Q,.P. [2 pr.) Mks . IX to- XA. (W . I, V. ) (1)
, Boxes R.H.rear
wall of turret
Cleaners,bristle, Bo, 1 Mk. 1 (1)
Boxes R.H.rear
wall of turret
Cleaners,wool Wo,5 Mk, 1. (1)
Boxes R.H.rear
wall of turret
Covers,breech,Q,.]?. 2 nr.gun, No, 1.
Mk. * 1. (1)
Boxes R.H.rear
■wall of turret
Covers,muzzle , No, ,3 Mk. 1, (1)
Boxes R.H.rear
wall of turret
Keys,removing, jammed Q,.?. cartridge '
No. 3 Mk.l (1) ■
Boxes R.H.rear
wall of turret
Ordnance Q/.F. 2 pr.
• Mk. X (or) (1)
Mk.IX . ; ■
Mk. X bodies (or)
Mk. IX'bodies (1)
Boxes R.H.rear
wall of turret
Ordnance ,Q..F, 2 pr, Mk.lZ to XA 3 in.
How. Mk.l. and 1A’ and 25 pr,
Mk.ll. ■ . -
Rollers, actuating shaft (siDare) (1)
Bushes,firing, hole Mk. 1(1)
Springs, main Mk, 1,(1)
Boxes R.H.rear
wall of turret
Tommies,actua ting shaft,f.F. 3 pr, 2 cwt
Mk.ll, 2 pr. Mks,, IX.. to ZA and 6 pr. 7
cwt. Mks, 11 and 111 and 3 in, Mks.l and
1A Howr. Mk,1. (1)
Boxes R.H.rear
wall of turret
Handbook 2 pdr, r 1 ) and X (l)
Handbook V.M.G. Mk. XXI C.l; (1)
Bren C,l, (1)
Container R.H,
of driver.
Boxes, magazine, Bren, ,303 iniM-.G.
Mk. 1. (2)
Turret bin.
Brushes,rod., cleaning cylinder,Bren
.303 in. M.G. Mk.l. (1)
Holdall mount-
ed R.H,side of
turret roof.


Item
Location
Guns; machine,Bren. .303 in Mk.l.
(X)
Butt box and clip
R.H, side of
turret,
Barrels,assembled, spare (l)
Mk. I 35 {or )
Mk. 1.
Holdall mounted
R.H. of turret
roof
Springs,return (spare) (l)
Holdall mounted
RJI, of turret
roof.
Holdalls .Bren ,303 in (E.I.
(1)
Y. )
Holdall mounted
R.H, of'turret■
roof,
Magazine,Bren, ,303 in M.G-, Mo,
ilk. 11* (36)
1.
12 in rack L.H,
of wireless.
24 in boxes
turret bin.
Mops,rod,cleaning,cylinder,Bren
.303 in M.G-.'Mk. 1.
L. H.s id e,ab ove
2 pdr, ammuni t—
ion containers.
Wallets,snare parts. Bren ,303
M.G-. Mk.l. filled. (A) (1)
in.
L Hi,side above
2 pdr.ammunit-
ion containers.
Hods, cleaning, ,303 in,M.G, Mk.
■11. : 'B U (1)
L.H. side above
2 'pdr.ammunit-
ion containers.
Sub-machine gun, Thoinps on (IT, I,V.
) a)
Mutt box and clip
R.II,rear of‘turret
Boxes,carrier magazines (l)
front loader f s
seat in turret.
Brushes, cleaning breech (l)
Holdall


Item
Location
Brushes, cleaning, brass (l) „
Holdall
Cans, oil- (1) '
■ Hun ■
Handbook (1)
Publications
container.
Magazines.XX type (box) 20 rounds (15)
Borers carr-
iers magazines'
1ulIttroughs [ 1)
Cause (E) ,, ...
hod's-,- cleaning (1) _ ... . .
j-iuJ.aa.il-
Holdal.1
Holdall
Boxes 1 ,star j parts and tools Vickers
*503 in. : *■:-. filled (B) (2)
Under coimand-
.o.r t s seat .
Cases, 'Spare .parts 'and tools Vickers- ,303
in ht.d.”:uk, i KS filloa; rr (c) (2)
One in turret
wall. One rear
of f orarard
gunner,
Bags, spent cartridges {IT.I.V. ) (2)
— «
Attached to",
'Vicker ’ s :gun
Guns, nr. chine Vickers ,303 .-in I 2. Hal v.i
Coaxial (1)
iluil (1)
-• • . *
One in turret
One in hull A
Pumps , contrif tfgal, eleptrie cooling ■ ; tank,
Vi mchine- guns (N.I.dH;)- : (2)
One in turret
-' *Cne in hull
hanks’ 'water .aVickers machine guns ••• -
-;•/. •"■■dua-:,:. .(if*I,V. ) (.2)- H ; a
'One- In .turret
, End'in hull '
Wir.ele ss SetnyHe , 19 (B f Mk.11 (Aus t)
’’ ... • *
. One in-LoE.
bulkhectd. Quo
HHi:[.rear or
■■ ' turretd
Cases, spare parts, No. 5 (rust) ... - -
. ' , ■
E, •*- ■' ; ■ ; r
;j;Rlii* of turret
■in front- of
loader! s- resp-H
’ire.tor: oontai.n-
or.




