

1 »/oT'
TARIFFS & REGULATIONS
OF THE
EGYPTIAN
TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION;
EXTRACTED AND REPRINTED
THE
PENINSULAR AND ORIENTAL
STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY,
FOR THE
USB OF PASSENGERS BOOKED BY THEIR VESSELS,
AND PROCEEDING THROUGH EGYPT.
N.B. —This Compilation is furnished, GRATIS, to all Passengers
Booked at the Company's Offices, and Passengers will derive much
advantage from making themselves acquainted with its contents, and
from a strict adherence to the Rules and recommendations therein.


BWOITAJUD3H A BTiI}iAT
WAlT^Yx^a
WOITAHTBIWIMQA TlBttAflT
aaTzmaaii tmA aaTOAjrrza
SIHT Y 8
lATwsaao a via flAJUfemwin
jyiAIMOO AOITAOIAAA MA3TB
3HT fiOY
t ajaaaaY jiiaeT Ya aazooa gaaozaaaAa ao aau
.iaYoa houohht oziciaaaoaa clza
atQ'guina'l ILb oJ *BITAH3 bodaimirt ai /ioiJ.BiiqmoO eirfT —.a .VI
dotrm sv »b ILiw a-ra^nsaebS! b«45 ,a99f1&0 9di is bsjfooS
bij s t < xf Jos ail dliw baittistrpos B&vlaaatedi ftaiiUmt moti a^siasvbs
.ui9t9di itoi abusaxmooet biws esLtrH grii oi gongtadba ioitin s xnOTt


[EXTRACTS.]
TEA IST SIT ADMINISTEATION.
GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR PASSENGERS.
Passengers are requested to make over their heavy Baggage to the Transit Officer,
who wall receive the same on hoard the Steamers on arrival. Those coming from
Europe may retain personal charge of any Carpet Bag or other articles required for
use in Transit until they arrive at Boulac (the Port of Cairo,) hut Carpet Bags must,
notwithstanding, he deposited at the Transit Office in Cairo, within proper time to
forward to Suez by an Express Dromedary, as 5 ft weight only are allowed to each
Passenger in the Vans. Passengers however can always have access to their Baggage,
if they make an application to that effect on its arrival at either of the Transit Wharfs
at Boulac, Suez, or Alexandria.
No. I.—ln order to facilitate the conveyance of Luggage through Egypt, Travellers
are recommended to limit the size of their Trunks to the following dimensions —
Length 3 ft. 0 in.
Width 1 u 3
Depth 1 n 2
The weight of each package must not exceed 80 ft.
NOTE. —Weight and size of Packages of Baggage. —The Transit Administration will not be
responsible for the timely arrival at Suez or Alexandria, as the case may be, of any Packages of
Baggage which shall exceed the prescribed limits.
No. 2.—lt is indispensable that every article of Luggage should have the name and
address in full of each proprietor, and his destination, legibly written or painted in
black or white, according to the colour of the Package ; as all Anonymous Baggage,
(unless it can he readily identified as belonging to Booked-through Passengers), wall
otherwise be detained in Egypt, and sold at Public Auction after the expiration of one
Twelvemonth, if not previously identified and claimed ; the proceeds thereof, however,
remaining another Twelvemonth at the disposal of the owner.
All small articles of Baggage should be put in a large package or canvas bag, as they
are exposed to the risk of loss from the difficulty of securely fastening them on camels.
No. 3. It is prohibited for Passengers to carry Merchandize, Specie or Combustible
Articles with Luggage, as if discovered they will be liable to the consequences stated
in Appendix No. 5. All Combustible Materials will he seized.


No. 4.—Passengers intending to remain in Egypt are requested to separate their
Luggage on board the Steamer before arrival at Alexandria or Suez, and land it
themselves at the Custom House to avoid its being mixed with that of the Passengers
in Transit.
No. s.—The Port Authorities at Alexandria having specially appointed a stated
number of Boats similarly painted, bearing consecutive numbers, for the debarkation
of Passengers, it is requested those only will be used, so that Theft, Irregularity or
Insolence on the part of the Boatmen may be traced and punished.
The charge at Alexandria and Suez for each first class Passenger on landing from
any Steamer is Is, and for Children and Servants 6d each, and the same for embark-
ation. Parties are requested to embark only from the Transit Wharfs.
Omnibuses are provided at the expense of the Transit Administration to and from
the landing places, and the Hotel, and Canal at Alexandria, and likewise between
Boulac and the Hotels at Cairo, and vice versa. These conveyances will leave the
Hotels half an hour before the appointed time of starting.
No large packages of Luggage can be put in the Omnibuses, as there are other
conveyances for them.
No. 6.—A1l Passengers are requested to apply at the Transit Office at Alexandria
and Suez on landing, and obtain a Transit Ticket which will carry them through
Egypt with 2 cwt. of Luggage free of all charges including Provisions, except Hotel
expenses at Alexandria, Cairo and Suez, and Wines, &c. on the journey.
No. 7- —Passengers intending to remain at Cairo, but proceeding by the same
conveyances as Passengers to and from India need not conform to Rule No. 4, but
they must separate their Luggage themselves on its arrival at Boulac. The same
-ule is also applicable at Alexandria and Suez for Passengers from Cairo who do not
proceed direct with the Indian Passengers.
No. 8. —Passengers from India proceeding to Europe by the French or Austrian
Steamers must separate their Luggage from that of the Booked-through Passengers
on its arrival at Alexandria, as it will otherwise go on to Southampton.
No. 9. —Passengers will be dispatched by the Vans from Cairo for Suez, or vice
I'ersa, according to the order in which they stand on the Purser’s allotment as arranged
on board the respective Steamers belonging to the Peninsular and Oriental Company,
and subject to the Regulations contained in Appendix No. 2. The form of notice
will be seen in Appendix No. 3.
No. 10.—Passengers crossing the Desert independently of the Transit Adminis-
tration, will be subject to the Regulations contained in Appendix No. 4. They will
likewise be charged freight on their Luggage according to Tariff, if they allow it to be
landed from the Steamer at Suez, and to proceed with the Baggage of the other
Passengers to Cairo.
No. 11.—The Providore arrangements, prices of Liquors, &c., will be shewn in
Appendix No. 6. Insolence of servants or other proper reasons of complaint.


Passengers will be kind enough to make known, in writing, to the Director, and if
Book ed - thro u gh, they will do well by presenting also a copy to the local Agent of
the Peninsular and Oriental Company.
The Contractor is, however, entitled to claim payment at reasonable prices for any
articles which Passengers may break or destroy en route, and is even empowered to
exact from the Administration the detention of their Baggage, to recover the amount
if necessary.
Passengers are not obliged, or expected to give any gratuity to the servants
employed by the Administration.
No. 12.—Local Passengers who pay their passage money, but are afterwards
altogether prevented from pursuing their journey, will be entitled to a return of one
half of their passage money, provided they give notice to that effect before the
departure of the Steamer or that of the Vans, &c., &c.
No. 13.—Local Passengers who may be unable to proceed by the conveyances for
which they were booked, will be allowed to transfer their Tickets to the first sub-
sequent departure; but if they do not proceed by that opportunity, such Passengers
will in that case forfeit all claim to the return of any portion of passage money.
No. 14.—Passengers in Transit who neglect or refuse (except in case of sickness)
to proceed according to the Agent’s request at the appointed hour, by the Vans or
Steamer intended for their conveyance, will have to pay their fare over again, and
incur the risk of losing their passage altogether, if there is no subsequent available
conveyance; but it must be distinctly understood that if there is no vacant seat in any
of the subsequent Vans, they will have to pay the entire cost, (:£ J 36) for an additional
Van if such be disposable. The same punctuality is also required at the different
Stations in the Desert, as the coachmen have orders to proceed after the specified time
for rest allowed at each Station has expired.
No. 15. —All accounts for over weight of Luggage must be settled before leaving
Egypt, otherwise the Baggage will be detained by the Administration. Payments for
Transit Fares, &c. must be made in Egyptian Piastres or English Sovereigns, Spanish
or German Dollars, Napoleons or Five Franc Pieces at the Government rate of
Exchange, sec Appendix No. 7. Neither India or Bank of England Notes will be
received.
order of the Director,
CHARLES BETTS,
Agent.


APPENDIX No. 1.
NOTICE.
No smoking allowed in either of the Saloons or on the Quarter-deck of the Nile or
Canal Steam or Passage Boats, neither can it be permitted in the Omnibuses or Vans.
APPENDIX No. 2.
REGULATIONS
OF THE TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION, REGARDING THE VANS
IN THE DESERT.
The Director of the Transit Administration, with a view to obviate complaints and
prevent misunderstandings respecting the rights of preced. in crossing the Desert
by the Vans, publishes for the information of Travellers the following Rules, viz. :
I.—All Passengers by the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company’s
Steamers, whether “ booked-through ” or not, will be dispatched in Vans according
to the order in which their names shall appear on the list furnished by the Purser of
said Steamers, said list being arranged on board, prior to arrival in Egypt, by first-
class passengers forming themselves into parties of six persons for each Van, and these
parties further arranging amongst themselves, by lot or otherwise, for the right of
precedence of departure.
2. —Should any Passengers, however, omit or decline to make up a party, they will
then have to proceed to Cairo in the order in which their names figure in the passage
list from the port of embarkation, and their departure can only take place subsequent
to that of the parties made up as above described. All passengers by the H. E. I. Co.’s
Steamers from Bombay, without exception, obtain precedence of carriage, according
to priority of personal application and payment at Suez,
3.—The first set of Vans, usually from five to seven in number, according to the
season, will be dispatched as soon as the passengers have landed, and the other de-
partures, in similar trains, will take place in succession at intervals of from four to
five hours. Such Passengers or parties who do not present themselves at the hour of
departure, forfeit their right of precedence, and will be obliged to take the place of
the persons found to substitute them. In no case shall a Van of one of the first
detachments be permitted to proceed incomplete, and if any vacancies occur they will
be filled up according to the option of the Agent.*
4.—The coachmen have strict orders to keep together in the Desert to render each
other assistance in case of need. A limited period of rest, fixed by the Agent, will
* Vide Appendix No


be allowed at each of the principal stations, and any deviation therefrom, or misbe-
haviour on the part of the drivers, will be taken notice of, on a written declaration to
that effect being made to the Director of the Administration.
s.—Passengers before proceeding to Cairo are expected to call at the Office at Suez,
and fulfil the formalities required by the Agents in charge of the Egyptian Transit
Customs.
6. —Passengers en route are entitled to four meals at the stations, viz.. Breakfast,
Lunch or Supper, Dinner and Tea; but whenever Travellers, crossing the Desert,
leisurely for instance, on donkeys or dromedaries, should exceed the stated number of
meals, they will have to pay at the Bungalows as follows: first-class passengers, 4s
for a Breakfast, 3s Tiffin, 6s Dinner, 3s Tea, 3s Lodging for the night; second and
third-class passengers in proportion.
In order to insure celerity of transit, it is particularly requested that all possible expedition be
used by passengers in landing at Suez; that no obstruction or delay take place in the delivery
of the luggage to the officers sent on board to receive it, and that every article of baggage be legibly
addressed and properly secured. All luggage, except stb weight allowed in the Van for special
purposes, will be conveyed direct to the transit wharf at Boulac (the Port of Cairo), where it will
be accessible to the owner after it has been weighed ; but parties who intend stopping at Cairo are
requested to give notice of their intention to the Agents at Suez and Cairo, and deliver to both a
list of their packages, that the necessary assistance may be given for the separation of their baggage.
APPENDIX No. 3.
NOTICE.
The Egyptian Transit Administration request that the Passengers will form
themselves into parties of six persons for crossing the Desert in Vans, and send in
o’clock this
accordingly a list of their names by
day to Mr, the Purser, who with a view of aiding the
Transit Authorities, will then assist the parties in drawing lots, at
o’clock to-morrow, for precedence of Departure from Cairo.
N.B.—Two children from two to seven years of age are entitled to one seat in the Van; two ditto
from seven to ten years, as well as three or four children from two to seven years to two seats, and
three to four children from seven to ten years to three seats in a Van.
A European man servant must occupy an outside place in a Yan, unless his master can obtain
from the other members composing the party their consent to his admission inside, or unless there
should not be just the required number of European men servants; or second-class passengers to
fill up a four or six-seated Yan. No seats are to be reserved in the Vans for infants or children
under two years of age, or for Native or Indian men servants, but these latter will be permitted to
occupy the outside place of a Yan whenever there is one vacant.
Every vacancy in a Yan will be filled up at the option of the Agent, and in no case shall a Van of
one of the first detachments be permitted to proceed incomplete.
Cairo, 30/// September, 1852.


APPENDIX No. 4.
REGULATIONS
FOR, PASSENGERS TRAVELLING ACROSS THE DESERT,
INDEPENDENT OF THE TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION.
1- —Persons desirous of travelling from Cairo to Suez, or vice versa, by the several
modes of conveyance used in Egypt, will be obliged, if they wish to enter the Stations
in the Desert, to procure admission tickets at the Transit Office at Cairo, or at Suez,
previous to their departure, for which they will pay one sovereign, or 97| piastres
Egyptian currency. Children, under ten years of age, and servants pay half price.
2.—lf Travellers, after obtaining their admission tickets, will pay the Transit Ad-
ministration a further sum, in advance, of nine shillings, or 43 piastres and 35 paras
Egyptian currency, they will be enabled to obtain from the purveyor of provisions the
following meals, at either of the three principal Stations, Nos. 4, 8 and 12, viz,;—
BREAKFAST,
CONSISTING OF
DINNER,
SUPPER,
CONSISTING OF
CONSISTING OF
Tea or Coffee,
Bread and Butter,
A plate of Eggs or
a Chicken.
A Chicken or Pigeon,
Potatoes, English Cheese,
Bread and Butter,
A plate of Eggs or
a Chicken.
and Fruit.
N.B. —The use of a Bed,
cording to Tariff.
as well as Wines and
all other extras, must be paid for separately nc-
3.—Persons travelling from Suez to Cairo must, previous to their departure, sub-
mit to have their luggage examined by the Custom-house authorities.
4.—lf, on the arrival of such travellers at Cairo, there should be one of the Transit
Steamers ready to start for Alexandria, they will have a passage allowed them on the
same conditions as others ; but if the Steamer should have already left at the time
appointed, such travellers will not have the right of demanding any extra Steamer.
s.—lt is necessary that the passengers should exhibit their tickets at each Station;
those going to Suez must leave them at No. 12 Station, and those coming to Cairo
deposit theirs at No. 4 Station.
6.—As the Transit Administration will not undertake to provide provender and
water in the Desert for the horses or other cattle which do not belong to the said
Establishment, travellers, previous to their departure, must take care to provide the
same for the animals they may have hired for the performance of their journey.
7.—As the Stations in the Desert were never intended to be made use of as hotels,
but were constructed simply for the accommodation of passengers in transit to and


from India, travellers, except in a case of sickness or accident, will not be permitted
to remain longer at the Stations than the time absolutely necessary to accomplish
their Journey.
N.B. —No person will be allowed to enter the stations without an admission ticket.
APPENDIX No. 5.
EGYPTIAN TRANSIT CUSTOMS.
Alexandria, Ist March, 1845.
It having come to the knowledge of those in charge of the Egyptian Transit Cus-
toms, that merchandize has been introduced at Alexandria and Suez, by travellers to
and from India and Europe, and passed as part of their luggage, thereby defrauding
the revenue of His Highness the Pasha of Egypt, and endangering the free and easy
transit through this country in general of merchandize and personal luggage, belonging
to merchants and respectable travellers, instructions have been issued ny those in
charge of the said Transit Customs, in protection of the rights of all honest merchants
and travellers, to enforce the utmost rigour of the law, conformably with the tenor of
the subjoined 6th article of the late Boghos Bey’s regulations, against those who re-
sort to the dishonorable practice of smuggling ; and, to arrive at this end, all luggage
on which there is the slightest reason for suspicion, shall be detained for examination,
and only saved from confiscation, or fine, or both (as the case may be), when found
to contain no articles liable to Transit or Import Duties in virtue of existing Treaties.
COPY OF THE ARTICLE ABOVE REFERRED TO.
REGLEMENTS
pour fadl'iter le Transit de touts sorts ds Marchandises a travsrs VEgypte, soit de
VEurope et de la Turquie aux Indes, soit des Indes pour V Europe et la Turquie.
ART. 6.
Le droit du Transit sera de demi pour Cent, sur la valeur declaree, et doit etre
acquittee a Alexandrie pour les Marchandises debarquees a ce port, et a Suez pour
ceux venant des Indes. En cas de frauds manifests dam la denomination ou dans
Vevaluation des Marchandises, la Douane, apres avoir constate la frauds par Vou-
verture des colis y imposera un droit de dix pour Cent. II est entendu que les
Marchandises qui resteront dans le pays, payeront les droits etablis par les Traites.
(Signs') BOGHOS JOUSSOUFF.
Alexandrie, le 26 Mai, 1843.


APPENDIX No. 6.
REGARDING THE TABLE SUPPLIES OF THE TRANSIT STEAMERS
AND STATIONS IN THE DESERT.
On board the Steamers Passengers are supplied with the following Meals, according
to the time of departure, viz.—
BREAKFAST,
At Nine a. m., consisting of Tea, Coffee and Milk, Ham, Tongue, Cutlets, Eggs,
Omlet, &c., &c.
LUNCH,
At One p. m., consisting of English Cheese, Butter, Biscuits, and Fruit in season.
DINNER,
At Four p. m., consisting of good hot Joints (roasted), boiled Ham and Tongue,
Vegetables, Tarts, Cheese, Dessert, and Coffee after Dinner.
TEA,
At Eight p. m., with Milk, Biscuits, fresh Butter, &c.
In crossing the Desert it is so arranged that one of the above mentioned Meals is
served to each Division of Passengers, according to the hour of their arrival at the
Station Houses.
TARIFF OF WINES AND
LIQUORS.
Ale and Porter.
Champagne .. .
Claret, 1st quality
Port Wine
Sherry
Medoc
Table Wine
Marsala.. ~
Soda Water
Cognac
a per glass
Lemonade
Tea or Coffee, per cup {extra)
On Board the . ..
At the Stations,
Steamer.


REGULATIONS.
Children under two years of age are conveyed free of charge.
In case that all the seats in the Vans be taken by Gentlemen, Ladies, Children,
and Female Servants, the Administration reserves to itself the right of sending the
Male European Servants and Mechanics by Dromedaries or Donkeys, charging only
£3 instead of £6, although hitherto there have been Vans sufficient to meet every
exigency.
Gentlemen desirous of crossing the Desert on Dromedaries or Donkeys, will be
charged £3 10s instead of £9; but, in this case, the Administration must have due
notice by the previous Mail for Travellers coming from India, and will not be
answerable for their arriving in time for the Steamer at Boulac.
Rates for Extra Luggage, per ]l2fts.
From ALEXANDRIA to SUEZ, and vice versa. ... 14 .. 68 10
/, CAIRO to SUEZ.. . n .... 8 39
ALEXANDRIA to CAIRO „ G .. 29 10
Passengers are furnished with three Meals per diem, during the time they are en
route, free of charge ; but their expenses at hotels must be defrayed by themselves,
as also wines, beer, &c,, during the entire transit.
The Administration undertakes to carry Merchandize from Alexandria to Suez,
and vice versa, by steamers or sailing boats, at the rate of Bs—or 39 Egyptian piastres
per cwt.
Light Goods, forwarded express with the luggage of the passengers, will pay 14s—
or Egyptian piastres 68.10 per cwt.
Silver Specie and Jewels will pay £ per cent., and gold -g per cent, on their value,
from Alexandria to Cairo, and vice versa ; and per cent, on Silver and 4 per cent,
on Gold from Alexandria to Suez, and vice versa; but Silver Groups under the value
of 8,000 piastres, and Gold Groups under 16,000 piastres, will not be received at a
charge of less than 20 piastres from Alexandria to Cairo, and vice versa; and 40
piastres from Suez to Alexandria, and vice versa.
Small Parcels to pay 10, 15 or 20 Egyptian piastres, according to their size, from
Alexandria to Cairo, and vice versa.
The Portmanteaux, Trunks, Carpet Bags, &c., of the Passengers must bear the
name and destination of their owners, such inscription to be legible and well-secured.
On the arrival of each Steamer, the Officer of the Administration will attend to
receive the luggage of passengers.
The Administration will not he responsible for any loss or damage of luggage, nor
for unavoidable detention (nor for its arrival at Suez or Alexandria in time for the
Steamers, should the prescribed limits as to size or weight be exceeded.)
The Administration will, at all times, endeavour to employ the easiest means of
conveyance, such as donkey-chairs, &c., for invalids and sick persons.
Passengers should apply at the Office of the Administration, as early as possible,
to take their places and receive their transit tickets.


APPENDIX No. 7.
EGYPTIAN GOVERNMENT TARIFF OF EXCHANGE.
DESCRIPTION OF COINS.
Egyptian Currency.
English Sovereign .. .
Crown
Half-Crown
Shilling
Sixpence
Napoleon . .
French Dollar (5 Fc. piece)
Doubloon
Spanish Dollar.
Imperial Dollar (Maria Teresa)
Mexican do
Austrian Sequin
Venetian do
fifiitq/gH G 8 to —aBlo sJbt orfl ia ,3hjoif gnilie? to aioinßata ! £d
t lobfru gqi/OT 4 T9vliB Jxrd ■, 04 m soss bnu .sanS ot nbbnfizolA
e 4s iiovr.rm.9d Jorr Ifiw ,8 f r£t3fiiq 000*01 Tobrtir > p/oiD bloD Jhib ,30xtauiq 09
Nissen & Parker, Printers, 4.3, Mark Lane.
