

TASMANIAN FORESTS: THEIR BOTANY AND
ECONOMICAL VALUE.
BY
REV. JULIAN E. TENISON-WOODS, F.G.S., F.L.S.,
Hon. Mem. Roy. Soc. N.S.W., Victoria, Tasmania, Adelaide
Philosophical Soc., &c., &c.


Tasmanian Forests: their Botany and Economical
Value.
By REV. JULIAN E. TENISON-WOODS, F.G.S., F.L.S.,
Hon. Mem. Roy. Soc. N.S.W., Victoria, Tasmania, Adelaide
Philosophical Soc., &c., &c.
[ Read before the Royal Society of N.S.W., 5 June, 1878.]
In February, 1874, I visited Tasmania for a missionary tour
throughout the island, r and for nearly three years traversed its
various districts. I had thus an opportunity of becoming
acquainted with all the inhabited portions, except the north-west
and tw r o or three places on the east coast. I sometimes resided
for weeks together in some localities, and on the south coast made
frequent journeys on foot amongst the splitters and fishermen
on that part of the island. These journeys gave me leisure
for observation, and I was able in some small degree to increase
the knowledge of Tasmanian natural history. Many of the
notes made have been published, and some I hope still to
place in an available shape before the public. Some are of a
strictly technical character, but some have a more simple and
popular aspect. Such, for instance, are the notes made upon the
forests and timber resources, and I venture to think it may be
worthy of a place in the Eoyal Society’s proceedings if I bring
before them what I have been able to note on this subject. It is
well known that Tasmania has in its timber one of its very great
industrial resources, and a more intimate knowledge of what
these are cannot fail to be of service to the public.
Tasmania may be said generally to be a thickly timbered
country. With the exception of the table-lands and the slopes
between the main ranges and the sea, the soil is usually clothed
with forest. But these forests are not the timber-producing
forests of the islands. These are confined to a few localities, and
are limited in extent. They are only found in the narrow deep
gorges and gullies proceeding from some of the highest moun-
tains. They do not appear to be confined to any particular soil,
though some of the best are found on modern (Tertiary) basaltic
rocks ; neither are they confined to any particular height above
the sea level. The fine timber near the Mill-house Falls grows
in gullies 1,000 feet and more above the sea, while the forests on
3 x 5-78


the banks of the Huon and Kermandee descend right down to
the beach. The aspects o£ these forests are most peculiar, and
quite different from the thickly timbered country of other parts
of the island. The vegetation is dense and almost tropical in
character. The most conspicuous objects are the tall and taper-
ing blue gum trees, by which name I shall always refer subse-
quently to the Eucalyptus globulus. They grow so close together
as quite to shut out the prospect, but so straight and wand-like
that the slim lines of bark look like fine ornamental graining.
They are of immense height; 200 feet without a branch
is not at all uncommon, and there are very many trees ranging
from 300 to 400 feet high. Long bands of bark hang down from
their sides and across their branches, and these when set in
motion by the wind keep up a constant rattle and creaking,
filling the gloomy forest with the strangest echoes and sounds.
The great height of the trees would never be imagined from the
aspect they present. As they always grow on very steep slopes
and never crown the summit of the ridges, their*height is lost
against the adjacent ranges. It is only when standing at the foot
of their moss-covered stems, where the roots rise gracefully up
around from the buttress-like base, twisting and turning round
the bole like massive moorings, that one gets an idea of their
enormous size. Far above one’s head, twinkling in the daylight,
which contrasts so strongly with the sombre green atmosphere
around, a moderate tuft of leaves is seen at the summit of the
graceful yet massive stem. The branches look nothing beside
the butt, and in reality the effect of the crown with the straggling
branches and ragged untidy strips of bark is disappointing and
insignificant. Here the true rugged character of the Eucalyptus
asserts itself, which is in the strongest contrast to the regular and
so extremely graceful stem. Beside the E. globulus there is
always a very dense growth of other but smaller trees. In Tas-
mania it is generally what is called sassafras ( Atherosperma
moschaimn), muskwood ( Olearia argophylla) , beech (Fagus cun-
ninghami), pine (Frenela rliomboidea) . IJnderneath this there is
always an almost impenetrable scrub of pear tree (Pomaderris
ellipticd), stinkwood (Ziera smithii), varied with fern trees,
rarely any other than Diclcsonia antartica, with an undergrowth
of Lomaria patersoni, &c. Sometimes the forest is a little
changed in appearance by a dense growth of Bedfordia salicina,
Olearea rosmarinifolia, Senecio lautus, australis, and velleioides,
Olearea viscosa* and glandulosa, Aster ramulosus, &c.; and it is
very beautifully covered over with the showy blossoms, or still
more showy seed-vessels, of the Clematis aristata.
* It is O. viscosa which is said to have a musky odour, but I hare never
observed it, except on 0. argojohylla.


To a casual observer there seems to be absolutely no difference
between these forests and those of the Dividing Range in
Victoria; as, for instance, on the Upper Yarra and along the
Wood’s Point Road, the great bulk of the vegetation is certainly
the same. Thus the Olearea rosmarinifolia, Aster stellulatus,
and ramulosus, Bomaderris elliptica and Bedfordia salicina meet
the eye on every side. The two last, indeed, almost exclude
every other undergrowth, the long narrow stems of the Boma-
derris forming almost impenetrable thickets on the Black Spur.
But the Eucalyptus , though identical in aspect and graceful
height, is not the same species. E. amygdalina* taking the place
of E. glohulus , which is the more singular as they are both
accompanied by stringy bark trees (E. ohliqud), which affects the
same lofty habit in both localities. The fern tree is different; at
least Dicksonia is not so common as Alsophila excelsa ; the other
common plants are the same in both places, such as Olearea
argophylla, Olearea stellulata, Eagus cunninghami , JDrimys
aromatica, and the common Lomaria. A close attention, of
course, will reveal a good many differences. One will miss
numerous familiar beauties of the Tasmanian forests, and their
places will be taken by forms as peculiar and interesting.
This close resemblance is more remarkable if we bear in mind
how very distinct and almost complete these forests of Tasmania
and Victoria are from those of New South Wales at the east side
of the continent. There the Eucalypti are different, and the
undergrowth of shrubs is almost entirely different. The vegeta-
tion is sub-tropical in character; at least as far south as
Ulladulla. The gigantic nettle ( Lnportea gigas') and cedar
(Oedrela australis) take the place of Eagus cunninghami;
while the fern trees are few in comparison with the stately
palms. Seaforthia elegans and the cabbage-tree (Corypha
australis ) shoot up continually, high above the brush, and vie
in elevation with the elegant turpentine (Syncarpia leptopetala)
and ironbark ( Eucalyptus siderophloia). The sub-tropical vines
of various descriptions bind the vegetation into massive walls of
dark shining green, while the stems of the trees are varied and
adorned with immense fronds of the epiphytic ferns ( Asplenium
nidus and Platycerium alcicorne') , which here reach their per-
fection. There are some few points of resemblance between the
Eastern forests and those of Tasmania. Olearia argophylla is
found in both, and it is in the New South Wales forests only
that its odour of musk is fully developed. In Victoria the scrubs
are in some places (on the slopes of Mount Juliet for instance)
crowded very thickly with the dense leafy bushes of Brostanthera
* This tree, known as peppermint gum, has a poor and worthless character
in light soils, but becomes in the shaded gullies of the Dandenong Ranges
one of the finest and loftiest trees of the world.


rotundifolia, a labiate of very pretty flowers but most offensive
odour, which, seems to be given off from a sticky resinous exuda-
tion abounding in the branches and leaves. The same shrub is
very common in the scrubs of the Illawarra and Shoalhaven
districts, equally abundant, and equally offensive. It is found
in N. Tasmania, but I never noticed it among the timber-
producing forests of Tasmania ; indeed there are but few species
common to all three. Those found commonly in Victoria and
Tasmania are not common in New South Wales, and those
common in the forests of the latter Colony are either absent
from Tasmania or from Victoria. Of course this is speaking in
a general way. There are exceptions, which, however, do not go
far beyond those I have mentioned, to which I might add
Leptospernum lanigera, Daviesia latifolia, D. ulicina, JLakea
pugioniformis , Gleichenia dicarpa , Q. Jiahellata, and a few others.
Before I pass on to the consideration of the timber products
I may say a word here as to what I regard as the cause of the
singular height and straightness of the Eucalypti in these forests.
This is a peculiarity almost restricted to Tasmania and Victoria.
The trees grow to a great height in the forests of New South
Wales, but nothing like the altitude they attain in the other
Colonies. In this respect the greatest height seems to be
reached in Victoria. Trees have been felled which measured
over 460 feet, and it is common to see them in both Colonies
rising 200 feet and more, as straight as an arrow, before sending
forth a branch. Now, in what way are we to account for this ?
Eirst of all it must be observed that we never see this kind of
timber except in very deep gullies, where we may say the light
is almost shut out by the rich close vegetation, and where the
subsoil is probably several feet of a humus composed of decayed
wood and leaves. As soon as the seeds of the gum tree germinate
they shoot up with extraordinary rapidity. Young stems may be
constantly seen 25 to 30 feet in height, and the stem not 2
inches across near the ground. At the top there are only a
few leaves, set on small twiggy branches. Some of them
can be seen not more than two years old, because they have
risen around timber that was quite recently felled. I consider
that three causes combine to produce this rapid and straight
growth, which might easily be secured in other countries, where
this (to my mind the most wonderful) property of the Eucalyptus
might be developed. One is the extreme richness and moisture
of vegetable soil; second, perfect absence of disturbance, even
by the wind ; third, the comparative obscurity or modified light,
which causes this young plant to throw out but few branches
or leaves until the light of day is reached, which is often at a
height of 100 feet or more above the root. It must be remem-
bered also that in the young state of Eucalypti, with few


exceptions, the leaves and young branches are quite of a
different pattern and plan from those of the mature tree. The
earlier stages fall away and leave the tree still more bare as it
grows up. That light and shade and absence of movement are
the main causes can be easily seen on the more exposed summits.
At Mount Juliet the trees at the base are very lofty, though not
the most lofty of the range or equalling those of the Black Spur;
but at about 400 feet below the summit the timber becomes
stunted and ragged, and those lofty trees on the slope which send
these branches thus far partake of the knotted twisted character,
and have them all very singularly bent towards the mountain
by the prevailing direction of the winds to which they are
exposed.
It is a very important fact to ascertain if these views as to the
growth of the Eucalyptus are correct. There are plenty of deep
shady gullies in the mountains of Europe where the experiment
might be tried. In Norway and in some of the valleys of the
Alps favourable places might very easily be found. lam convinced
that the trees are of very rapid growth, and even the largest are
not of great age. Cold does not affect them. In many of the
gullies of Tasmania the snow lies around the trees for six months
of the year or even longer; and in Victoria the same trees are
sometimes exposed to a very high temperature. The acclimatiza-
tion, therefore, ought not to be a matter of great difficulty,
neither would much time be required for the experiment.
Baron von Mueller assures us in his “ Select Plants” that the
Eucalypt is much more hardy than the orange or lemon tree.
It is a very interesting inquiry to know how old are the
stately trees which people these forests. Judging from their
size, one would be inclined to attribute to them great antiquity.
I was very anxious to collect data on the subject; but to
nearly all my inquiries I only received mere guesses ; from 200
to 300 years was the general reply. I found, however, in Mr.
Hill, a source of information at once reliable and valuable. Mr.
E. Hill is the proprietor of an extensive sawmill at Honeywood,
on the Huon; he is also a shipbuilder and hop-grower. It is
from him that I have derived the most of the statistical informa-
tion in the paper, and the facts which did not come under my
personal observation : and I take this opportunity of thanking
him for his readiness in affording every aid to inquiry, and
express the hope that the Colony may long profit by his intelli-
gence, industry, and enterprise. Mr. Hill assured me that some
of the gum trees, and perhaps all of them, shed their bark twice
in the year. The stringy bark (E. obliqud) is one of the most
striking instances of this. He further informed me that, hearing
a lecture from Mr. Bicheno on the growth of trees, and the
statement that a ring of wood was added to the diameter each


year of growth, he was induced to test the truth of this. There
was a blue gum tree in his garden in Hobart Town, the age of
which he w r as sure of, as his brother had planted it eighteen
years previously. He felled it and counted the rings, and found
them to be thirty-six in number, or two for every year. From
this, and from the shedding of the bark as described, and a long
series of observations, he concludes that the sap rises twice in
the year. He has for many years watched the growth of the
trees, and he believes that for the first twenty years the average
growth is about one inch in diameter for each year. Out of
thousands of trees felled or cut in his mill, he has not found one
over seventy-five years old, and a very large proportion of the ser-
viceable timber is composed of trees about fifty years of age. Quite
recently he has had a very interesting opportunity of verifying
these observations. At Ladies’ Bay (between Port Esperance
and Southport), a paddock on the farm of Mr. D. Eafton was
cleared for the purposes of cultivation. It was exactly sixteen
years this summer (1877-78) since a crop was taken off it, and
was quite overgrown with saplings, which were all cut down.
Mr. Hill, at my request, wrote to Mr. Eafton, requesting him to
examine the stumps, and I append his reply : “ Ladies’ Bay,
April 26, 1878. According to your request I send you the
result of my examination of the stumps of young saplings in the
paddock which we are now clearing. Number of rings in the
longest saplings, thirty-three; size across the heart-wood where
the rings cease, one inch. The rings, I observe, are not an equal
distance from each other, some of them being three times the
size of the others. On making inquiries I find beyond a doubt
that it is exactly sixteen years this summer since the last crop
was taken off the paddock.—Yours truly, D. Eafton.” From
these facts I think we may safely adopt Mr. Hill’s conclusion
that there are tw r o rings of growtli for each year, and that the
tallest trees of the forest, the giant timber of Tasmania, range
from fifty to seventy-five years old.
I may mention here incidentally two inconveniences to which
the Tasmanian forests are subjected. One is the “ tick.” This is
a small insect which lives on the fern leaves. It burrows readily
under the skin of any animal upon which it creeps and produces
much irritation and inconvenience. It is said sometimes to cause
the death of dogs, calves, and goats. Ido not know whether the
species is the same as that which is found in the fern gullies of
New South Wales and Queensland, where the bite is regarded,
though erroneously, as almost venomous. The other pest is the
abundance of leeches which swarm the undergrowth. After even
slight rain they come out in great numbers, and unless a pedestrian
takes precautions against them, and keeps a careful watch, they
may not only he painful but dangerous in their attacks. A


similar plague used to be common on the open swampy plains of
the south-eastern district of South Australia, especially on the
Mosquito Plains. Cattle suffered much from them in the long
grass, but of late years they have disappeared.
The principal use to which the timber is put is for what is
called “ sawn stuff,” coopers’ staves, shingles, and palings. The
shingles are for the most part now made by young girls, and they
do all the work, even in some instances to the felling of the trees.
It is not every tree that will suit for the purpose. It must be a
young tree, or “ spar ” as it is here called, and must be very
straight in the grain. This is ascertained by cutting a square
block out of the side at about 10 or 15 feet from the ground. A
stout young sapling is first cut down. One with a good strong
fork is necessary, and thus it is seldom a Eucalypt. It is cut to
a length of 18 or 20 feet. A deep notch for a foothold is cut
a little below the fork, and it is then rested against the tree
which is to be tried. The wood-cutter then climbs to the fork,
in which one foot is placed, and the other a little below on the
notch. This gives a firm enough footing to wield the axe. The
tree is then tried, and if found suitable a stage is erected at a
height of 10 or 12 feet from the surface. From this the tree
is felled. It not unfrequently happens, however, that the
labour is in rain, as the timber is so close around that the tree
will not fall—it merely topples over and reclines against its
neighbours. The “ trying ” a great height from the ground and
the stage is seldom necessary except for very heavy timber. The
“ spars ” are more easily dealt with ; when fallen they are rapidly
cut into short lengths with a crosscut saw. The billets are again
split with wedges into the requisite width, and then by a rapid
series of blows with a wooden mallet and a shingle knife, the
shingles are split, two being generally slit with one blow. The
shingle knife is first used as a wedge ; the handle, which is at
right angles to the back of the blade, then is worked as a lever
to widen the opening, in which the hand is inserted while the
knife is worked down. The wet sap of the wood is fall of tannin,
with which the iron of the knife combines to make a deep black
stain wherever it rests. The poor girls who work at this trade
have their hands almost permanently stained a deep inky hue.
Where the useful timber grows the brushwood is always so
thick that regular tracks have first to be cut to the places. First
of all the owners of the different sawmills run out tramways in
various directions for three or four miles. These tramways are
of the simplest kind, being merely cross sleepers, on which square
wooden rails are pegged down ; yet they are rather expensive
structures, because of the many bridges that have to be made
over the numerous creeks. From various points on these tram-
ways tracks are cut into the thick scrub. First of all a gigantic


gum-tree is cut down, and its stem is used as a bridge over the
brushwood, thus leading 300 or 400 feet into the scrub, and often
arching some feet above it; from this the track is carried further,
either by cutting fresh trees, or by using the stems of fern trees
either as flights of steps or pathways. Thus, perhaps, the scrub
will be penetrated for half a mile, and the huge and lofty timber
will be seen rising on every side. The scene is one of peculiar
beauty. Dull green is the light, and the perfect stillness and
quiet is disturbed by nothing but the distant rustling of leaves
far overhead, the sound of some woodman’s axe, or the peculiar
cry of the wattle bird (AnthocJicera inauris), or the loud smack
of ,the whip bird (Pachycephala glaucura). The ground is
carpeted with bright green moss, elegant brakes and flowers
spring up all around, and the brown stems of the fern trees,
bearded with Symenophyllum and surmounted with whorls of
palm-like fronds, shut in the view on every side, and make the
seclusion lovely beyond description. The whole place is, however,
dripping with moisture, so that the poor young workers may be
said to be always wet through. They make their shingles into
bundles of fifty, fastened round with bands of green bark, but as
tight and compact as if the whole mass were ol stone. This is
done by tying up a bundle of somewhat less than the number
and then wedging in the remainder. A bundle of fresh wet
shingles will weigh from 50 to 60 lbs, yet I have seen young
girls of sixteen years of age carrying out two of such bundles
on their shoulders. They divide the labour between themselves
in this way, that a party of four, often sisters, will have two for
splitting and felling and two for “ carrying out.” They arrange
rests or “ spells,” as they are called, every furlong, where is a
small stage of paling about three feet from the ground. The
bundle of shingle has a long peg driven into the centre, and two
bundles are held together by a cross strap of bark. The “ carrier
stoops with her back towards the bundle, raises her hands over
her head, and by means of the two pegs tilts the load on to her
shoulder and staggers along to the first “ spell,” where the
burden is slid down on the stage for awhile. It is certainly
a most unfeminine occupation, and still less is it adapted to
comparative children. The splitters are very often utterly
uneducated ; yet in spite of the way young females are thus
exposed in the midst of the remains of an almost entirely ex-convict
population, they are simple and innocent and wonderfully acces-
sible to religious impressions and teaching. The boys and girls
are able to earn about 2s. 6d. or 3s. a day, while men can make
from 6s. to 7s. There seems to be no scarcity of employment,
but the supply of labour is at least not less than the demand.
Most of the sawmillers keep their own stores, so that most of the
wages are taken out in goods; and though the disadvantages


of this are felt on both sides, yet the very few inducements for
small capitalists to settle in these wild districts renders this
system almost unavoidable.
The larger timber which is useful for heavier purposes than
shingles, is treated in a different way. The trees, when they are
felled, are cut into lengths of 10, 12, and 14 feet, according to
the nature of the “ stuff,” as it is called. The huge round logs
thus resulting are rolled down to the edge of the tramway, or
drawn by bullocks on a kind of wheeled sleigh. It is thus
brought to the sawmill, where it is speedily cut up into “ sawn
stuff.” The thickness and length of course depend upon the
kind of timber required. At the time of the goldfever (1852-3-4),
when the timber trade of the Huon reached a prosperity which
has never been seen before or since, the demand was enormous.
But it could not be cut too light; the thinnest shingles, studs,
palings, and battens were sure to meet the readiest sale. The
state of the roads to the diggings, and the difficulty of carriage,
explain this peculiarity. At the present the trade is very fluc-
tuating, and the supply probably in excess of the demand. The
favourite timber used for sawing is stringy-bark ( Eucalyptus
obliqua ) and blue-gum ( Eucalyptus globulus). The former is
most in use —first of all because it is more abundant, but pro-
bably, also, because it is a softer timber and more “ mellow,” as
they say here, to work. It is preferred for all kinds of carpentry
where more strength is required than pine could furnish. But
there is a second species of stringy-bark which is called here
“ gum-topped stringy-bark.” I have very little doubt that this is
jEucalyptus virgata, of Siebold. The Eev. W. W. Spicer has
made known its existence in Tasmania, which was not hitherto
recorded. It is the “mountain ash” of New South Wales
splitters, and occurs in the south-eastern part of this Colony and
in Victoria. In South Australia it is a mere twiggy bush 15
to 20 feet high. It is exactly like stringy-bark in the fibrous
twisted bark, but it is very much more like the blue gum in the
leaf. I never examined the seed-vessels or flowers. The wood
is lighter in colour than Eucalyptus obliqua, which goes by the
name of brown stringy-bark. The “ gum-top” is close-grained,
and very few are able to distinguish the timber from blue gum.
It is much used for shipbuilding purposes.
But for all work where length, strength, and durability are
required Eucalyptus globulus, or blue gum, is most in demand,
It is generally procured by hand sawyers, who cut up the trees
where they fall in the forest. Its uses are very various. It is
in demand for bridges, railway sleepers, coach and wheelwright
work ; but to shipbuilders it is invaluable. It makes the very
best planking for ships’ bottoms. It has the property of swell-
ing under water to such an extent that it becomes a matter of
B


some difficulty to find the seams when the vessels are put upon
the slips for coppering. When properly seasoned it is the best
timber for keelsons, keels, ribs, knees, beams, and stringers. But
much judgment is required in selecting the timber. All pieces
that contain heart-wood or sap-wood must be rejected. These
are both worthless and soon decay. The true serviceable blue
gum must come from the circumference of the tree, about mid-
way between the bark and centre.
There are other trees used besides these, but they are not the
main sources of supply. The celebrated Huon pine ( Bacrydium
franklinii, Hooker) is much in demand, but getting daily more
scarce ; it is only found in a few remote spots far in the moun-
tain ranges. The sources of the Picton are now the principal
localities whence this timber is derived. Another tree, much used
for spars, is the celery-topped pine ( Phyllocladus rhomboidalis*) ;
it is much more common than the former. Muskwood ( Olearea
argophylla), dogwood ( Bedfordia salicina ) are used for orna-
mental purposes with lightwood, or blackwood, for it goes by
both names (. Acacia melanoxylon ) she-oak ( Casuarina stricta), and
other trees.
The blackwood ( Acacia melanoxylon) is largely used for oil-
casks, and is the only wood we have in Australia, as far as we
know, that is suitable for the purpose. The tree, on good soil
and well-watered valleys, reaches a height of 80 feet, with a
stem several feet in diameter. It is split into staves 6by 3
inches thick and 6 feet long, and then shipped from the Tamar
to Victoria. The wood is also considered most valuable for
furniture, railway carriages, boats, casks, billiard tables, pianos
(for sounding boards and actions), and numerous other purposes.
Silver wattle ( Acacia decurrens ) is also much used for staves,
from 20 inches to 5 feet long; it is shipped in quantity
to Victoria, and used for beef and water casks. Trees from
12 to 24 inches in diameter are the usual sizes worked;
but they become daily scarcer, from the fact that they
are annually destroyed in hundreds of thousands for the sake of
the valuable bark. The bark and gum of this tree are becoming
highly esteemed because of the many dyeing purposes for
which it is found they are almost unequalled. Young trees are
still very common, but the time is not far distant when Tas-
manian colonists will find it worth their while to cultivate them.
The sassafras ( Atdierosperma moschatum) is found to be very
valuable for sash and door work. The myrtle or beech ( Fagus
cunninghami ) is equally prized for the same purposes, and
indeed all kinds of light joinery. Latterly sash and door
* Besides the Tasmanian tree, which is endemic, there are only two more
species of this curious genus known, one in New Zealand and the other in
Borneo.


machinery have been introduced into Hobart, and thus these
trees have come into much demand among the sawyers, though
hitherto they have been in a measure spared. They are both
splendid trees, but the beech, for elegance of foliage—that is to
say, in shape, denseness, and for colour, which varies in every
shade from light orange to a rich dark glossy green —has no
equal in Australia. Its elegant sprays of leaves form lovely
backings for vases of flowers or greenhouses. It is to be
regretted that it is not used more to vary the monotony of the
Moreton Bay fig in our streets and parks ; it is quite equal to it
as a shade-giving tree.
The principal places of export for timber are the Huon dis-
trict, including Franklin, Honey wood (on the Kermandee), and
Port Cygnet; next is Port Esperance, then Southport. All of
these employ two or three sawmills, with some at intermediate
places. At Recherche Bay there is no mill, but some hand work
is done ; and the same at Port Davy, which is a very remote dis-
trict on the extreme south-west of the island. The timber is
brought up from these places to Hobart Town in small cutters or
“ crafts” as they are called, very much like the oyster dredgers
or herring ketch of the British Channel.
Quite a flotilla of these small vessels are employed in the
trade, and the port of Hobart is principally occupied with them.
Were the export trade of timber to fail in Tasmania the harbour
would look barren indeed. There is a considerable trade with
New Zealand as well as with Australia; the former island sends
timber, kauri pine (JDammara australis), to Tasmania, and
receives hardwood (blue gum and stringy-bark) in return.
The question naturally arises whether the supply of timber is
likely to fail. I have had the opinions of some of the most
experienced sawmillers, and they were unanimous that the
supply is rapidly decreasing. But this arises not so much
from the quantity cut as from the absence of timber reserves,
where the sawyer could precede the settler. Under the present
(1876) Waste Lands’ Act of Tasmania, the 24th section binds
purchasers to reside for fourteen years upon the ground he
selects, and to improve it. He generally chooses where the blue
gum grows, as the soil is there of the best description. To
fulfil the conditions of the Act, he “rings” all the standing
timber —that is, he makes a deep incision all round the tree so
that it may die. In about two years the timber is thus rendered
utterly worthless, being full of “ sun-shakes,” as the irregular
splitting and weathering is termed. The consequence is, that
there is daily greater difficulty experienced in finding suitable
trees. If young trees were allowed to grow up to supply those
which have been felled, the supply might be considered inex-
haustible. But this is not the case. If the ground has been at


all well cleared by the splitter or sawyer it is seized upon by the
settler, who grubs the stumps and destroys the saplings, planting
in place raspberry canes, currant bushes, and those fruits which,
next to timber, form the principal export of the Huon.
Yet, in spite of all these drawbacks, there is still a consider-
able supply of timber in the forests which can hardly be ever
selected, as the scrub is too dense. lam informed that, judging
from the area of land worked over in the Huon district for the
last thirty years, there is beyond a doubt a supply for fifty years
at the same rate of production.
The only way to prevent the wholesale destruction of the
timber will be by proclaiming reserves or State forests, as they
have done in Victoria. This is what the sawyers and splitters
are crying out for, but as yet without effect. Ido not under-
take to pronounce an opinion on a question which may have
political difficulties unappreciable by me ; but it does seem a
mistaken liberty to allow selectors to settle on land of great
value as a timber forest but useless for agriculture, until the
whole of the valuable timber is ruthlessly destroyed. It seems
to me that as long as any available land can be obtained
free from timber, or with timber of little value upon it, no
selector should be allowed to destroy the forests. The matter is
one which the Legislature should deal with promptly, or the
forests of Tasmania, peerless and priceless as they once were,
will soon be things of the past.
Sydney: Thomas Richards, Government Printer. —lB7B.


