

TASMANIAN STEAM NAVIGATION
COMPANY'S
GUIDE FOR VISITORS
TO TASMANIA;
OR,
HOW TO SPEND MY HOLIDAY,
1886-7
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
Printed at “The Mercury” Office, Hobart.




TASMANIAN STEAM NAVIGATION
COMPANY’S
GUIDE FOR VISITORS
TO TASMANIA;
OR,
HOW TO SPEND MY HOLIDAY,
1886-7.
all rights reserved.
PRIOE otte shilliitg.
Printed at “ The Mercury” Office, Hobart.




ERRATUM.
Page 24, line 21 —
For “but the express pauses not here in its
course,” read
“ Here the express makes its last stoppage, and
then rushes across the Esk, along a series of
water-meadows, and arrives at the Launceston
terminus within a few minutes of 2 p.m.”


EDITOR’S PREFACE.
The plan of this little Handbook is different from that of
the Guides to Tasmania already existing; but I think its
arrangement is likely to prove the most practically useful to
anyone who comes as a stranger to the island, and who wishes to
see all that is best deserving attention during the few weeks of
his holiday tour. It has been a question to me whether to give
tables of fares so as to enable the tourist to calculate expenses ;
but, as the advertisements annexed to this book will give most
of the required information, I have thought it best not to
break the continuity of the supposed tour which I take in
company with the visitor, who accepts me as his guide. I
have given a complete index of places mentioned in the course
of the book ] for I deem this a most important adjunct to any
work of this sort. Chapters Ito 7 and great part of Chapter
8 have been written from personal recollection of places which
I have visited, or with which I am habitually familiar. For
my description of those parts which I have never visited, and
for supplementing my recollections when they Avere indistinct,
I acknowledge my obligation to the works mentioned on the
Ist page of the Handbook, and especially to some \ T aluable
manuscript notes by the Author of u Through Tasmania. I
also tender my thanks to those friends AA'ho have furnished me
Avith memoranda of their journeys in the less frequented parts
of the island.




Erratum.
Page l.—sth line from bottom for “ Single,
read “ Reduced." 4th line from bottom for
“ Two," read “ Three.”
cl luiLingiit. xne tares are moderate, and during the
Summer Season, return tickets are issued at single fares, and are
available for two months. As the journey from Melbourne to
Launceston occupies much less time than the journey to Hobart, the
great majority of visitors from Melbourne enter the island at the
northern end ; but since the opening of the Main Line Railway, an


HANDBOOK OF TASMANIA.
little Handbook is issued under the direction of the Tas-
iF manian Steam Navigation Company, and is intended as an aid to
A Excursionists in utilising to the best advantage the time which
they may be enabled to devote to a renewal of mental and physical
vigour by a visit to the Sanitorium of the Australian Colonies.. It is
by no means intended to supersede the Guide Books already existing.
The one published by Messrs. Walch in 1871 can still be read with
advantage and pleasure, as a work of considerable literary merit;
but it has not been reprinted ; and very many changes have taken
place since the date of its publication. Thomas Guide to Tasmania
is another work deserving great praise : the spirited publisher
issues a new and improved edition every year ; and Mr. Haywood s
Visitors’ and Colonists’ Guide contains a great deal of practical and
useful information. It may, perhaps, be said, however, of each one
of these, that it contains much which is not wanted by the visitor,
who has no thought of becoming a permanent settler m the island.
The Editor of the present Handbook will endeavour to direct
attention to all that is best worth the notice of anyone, who can
merely spare a few Summer weeks to the enjoyment of the lovely
Scenery and healthful atmosphere of Tasmania ; but will not attempt
a description of every small township, nor of every mountain, head-
land, or river. _ , -
The Tasmanian Steam Navigation Company owns a fine fleet of
well-appointed Steamers running from Melbourne and Sydney to the
two principal Tasmanian ports, Hobart and Launceston. T leir
Steamers run between Melbourne and Launceston twice every week
both ways ; those to Hobart make the journey and its return
about once in 10 days ; those from Sydney run on alternate weeks
to Launceston and Hobart making the return to each town about
once in a fortnight. The fares are moderate, and during the
Summer Season, return tickets are issued at single fares, and are
available tor two months. As the journey from Melbourne to
Launceston occupies much less time than the journey to Hobart, the
great majority of visitors from Melbourne enter the island at the
northern end ; but since the opening of the Main Line Railway, an


arrangement of mutual accommodation has been made by which a
passenger can book his passage right through by rail and steamer,
either from Melbourne to Hobart, or from Hobart to Melbourne.
Hence it comes that the great majority of visitors who arrive via
Launceston proceed at once to Hobart. We shall accordingly con-
sider Hobart as the starting point of the excursionist in Tasmania.
The City of Hobart, which was both officially and popularly known
as Hobart Town up to the year 1881, is beautifully situated on the
lower slopes of Mount Wellington. The visitor who approaches it
by water sees on his right hand a series of wooded hills, surrounding
various bays and inlets, and terminating in one of commanding height
and beautiful contour known as Mount Direction. This, with
another of remarkable and peculiar shape, named the Quoin, closes
the view in that direction. Then, carrying the eye to the left, we
come to Government House, standing on a bright green promontory,
which shuts off the view of the higher bends of the river. This is a
remarkably fine building, constructed of the excellent freestone of
the colony. Further to the left rises the Queen’s Domain, or
People’s Park, which, as seen from the water, presents the appear-
ance of a hill of considerable height, but gentle slope wooded to the
summit. Then in the foreground we see the wharves, and at the
back of them and on the edge of the Domain, the High School,
now known as Christ’s College, standing at the top of a
fine, sloping lawn, of 2 acres extent surrounded by beautiful
shrubberies; and above the High School, the new houses of
Glebe Town, piled in apparent confusion, and standing white
and bright against a dark background. Then in the fore-
ground, as the eye still travels to the left, we have a forest of
masts, and in the background Trinity Church, with perpendicular
Gothic tower, standing on the apex of one of the numerous hills
which form the site of Hobart. Further to the left and in the fore-
ground a mass of fine public buildings, and in the background,
a series of hills, up which the streets of the outskirts and
suburbs seem to run almost into the region of Cloudland;
and then, closing in the view on this side, comes the
grand old Mountain, rising more than 4,000 feet above the
sea level. Should the visitor not have approached the city by water,
he ought to make it one of his first cares to run across the river to
Kangaroo Point by one of the little steamers which ply to the Point
all day long at half-hour intervals. From that side of the water he
could get a panoramic view of the City and Mountain surpassing
in grandeur even that which has been already described.


We will suppose, then, that our visitor has arrived in Hobart,
either by Steamer or by Rail. He will be at once accosted by Hotel
or Boarding-house agents anxious to obtain his patronage ; and he
Ay ill cabmen in numbers eager for his custom. It will be as
well for him to make up his mind where he will go, before he arrives
at the wharf or terminus. He will see in the Steamer or in the
Train advertisements of the principal hotels and boarding houses.
Of the former, Hadley’s in Murray-street, Currie’s in the same
street, the Criterion and the Carlton Hotels in Liverpool-street,
may be confidently recommended without any disparagement to
other respectable Hotels, of v'hich there are several: while, if the
visitor prefers a boarding-house, he cannot fail to find every comfort
at Westella in Elizabeth-street, at Pressland House in Melville-
street, Highfield Hall in Murray-street, or at Bertrams in Byron-
street; though this by no means exhausts the list. After a night’s
repose w e may suppose him setting forth for an inspection of the
town. He will find that the principal streets cross one another at
right angles, and that the handsome and well-stocked shops which he
will see on his way are found chiefly in Liverpool-street and Elizabeth-
-street,—though there are some very fine ones in Murray-street. One
establishment at the corner of Liverpool and Elizabeth-streets has a
fame wdiich may be considered almost historical. It is the book-
of the Messrs. Walch. In the year 1836, Tegg, the London
publisher, a man of great spirit and enterprise, established an
agency in Hobart, w'hich was for some time presided over by one
of his sons. Ten years later, the business was soli to the
father of the present managers, who have retained the old name of
ie firm, J. W alch and Sons, though it might be more accurately
designated Walch Brothers. The Messrs. James and Charles
Walch are men eminently qualified by attainment, as well as by
ong experience, to keep their customers provided with the best
literary productions of the day. Every book which makes its mark in
ng and, is sure to be found on Messrs. Walch’s counter, as soon as
e and distance permit its arrival. The visitor may always spend
a e m- K tfUl h ° Ur iQ lookin S round the shelves of this well-ordered
os a ishment; and if he or she be musical, another hour may be spent
in a arge room on the first-floor filled with pianos and Cabinet
rgans. If alch’s Literary Intelligencer, published once a month,
con ains a valuable amount of information respecting the best
n re ° f , the day ; and their Tas manian Almanac, published
nually and popularly known as Walch’s Red Book, is a perfect
estaEhm°T “ formation rts P“‘i"S ‘he Colony. A more recent
establishment that of Mr. I. L. Hood) at the opposite corner of the


treets, furnishes similar attraction to lovers of books and music. At its
Eastern end Liverpool-street runs out into the domain, while on the
west, after the region of shops is passed, it runs far up into the hills,
and terminates in a series of villa residences. Elizabeth-street runs
down at its Southern end to the wharves, and on the North issues in
the New Town road, which is itself part of the main road running
through the Island fromßobart to Launceston. Parallel with Li verpool-
street is Macquarie-street, which runs from the Domain right up to
the foot of Mount Wellington. It is a street of fine public buildings
and handsome private houses. From the lower end of this street
you can see more than a mile in a straight line, until the view is
shut in by a slight bend, which seems to lead into a region of gardens
and cultivated wood-land, before it is closed by the grand
Mountain back-ground. Few towns can show a street presenting a
more attractive appearance than Macquarie-street. W e should
recommend the visitor who is inspecting the town, by a
morning’s stroll through the streets, to turn down from Macquarie-
street, by St. David’s Cathedral (which he can hardly fail to
recognise as such) into Murray-street, which runs parallel to
Elizabeth-street, and across Liverpool and Macquarie-streets. The
portion of Murray-street intercepted between the two last-named
streets, is noticeable for good shops and good hotels; and will not
improbably be the very first part of the town with which our
supposed visitor makes acquaintance. Having taken a random
stroll through the streets, he will now do well to engage a cab for a
drive round
The Queen’s Domain. —This, which is the chief recreation
ground of the city, is situated at the Eastern side of it, between the
town and the Derwent, and with a frontage looking on the Bay.
Suppose a pear sliced lengthwise from the stalk, and one of the
halves placed on its flat side, —this half-pear will give a tolerably
correct notion of the general contour of the Domain, the smaller end
being that near the city, and the larger end representing the wooded
height already alluded to in our description of the appearance of the
City from the Bay. A road runs round the hill near its base.
Following this road, you come back to your starting point after a
delightful drive of about a mile and a half through a wooded region
sufficiently open to shew a succession of charming views. The road
is on a lower level as we go out by it along the riverside, than it is
on the other side which looks over the town. Going out by the
lower road, and enjoying the view of the bright blue water of the
Derwent, which is here about a mile wide, we soon arrive at the
entrance gates of


Government House. — Thirty years ago, the residence of the
Governors of Tasmania, was a long, low, wooden building, situated in
Macquarie-street, running across Elizabeth-street, so as to shut off
the view of the bay, and occupying with its grounds the whole space
from the higher end of Franklin Square to the lower end of
the Town Hall. The present building was commenced during
the period of exceptional prosperity which succeeded the discovery
of gold in Victoria, and was completed in the year 1858—Sir
Henry Edward Fox Young being Governor at the time. In archi-
tectural beauty it far exceeds the Government House of any of the
other Colonies. Our Excursionist can hardly go wrong in leaving
his card for the Governor and writing his name in the "V isitors
book, and having done this he may consider himself at liberty to
present himself at one of the receptions which successive
Governors have been in the habit of holding weekly or
fortnightly during the Summer months. The ball-room, dining-
room, and drawing-room of Government house will not easily be
forgotten by anyone who has seen them, and the Gardens stretching
down to the river owe something of their beauty to the good taste
of each successive occupant of the "V ice-Rsgal residence. Following
the Domain-road from Government House we come next to the
Royal Society’s Gardens ; sometimes spoken of as the Botanical
Gardens. They lie on the slope of the Domain between the road and.
the water. The Main Line Railway runs through the gardens near
the water side, and is crossed by an ornamental bridge. In the
Gardens are to be found flowers and fruits from every part of the
world. There are numerous seats surrounded by sweet-scented
shrubs, and commanding lovely views of the broad, blue Derwent
with the brown background of wooded hills.
Leaving the Gardens,
We follow the Domain-road which gradually rises till it has
rounded the broader end of the hill, whence get a magnifi-
cent view of the Valley of the Derwent extending for many
miles till it is shut in by hills looking faintly blue in the far
distance. Having rounded the end of the hill we arrive at
a gate which leads out to the New Town road ; a little way outside
this gate we see a handsome private residence w r ith a fine garden
and grounds. This belongs to the family of the Hon. T. D. Chapman,
by whom it was built, and who died there very suddenly in the early
part of the year 1884. From the period when Constitutional Govern-
ment was established in Tasmania, Mr. Chapman was one of the
most prominent characters in the political life of the Colony ; and long


before his death he had succeeded in conquering the esteem and
respect of those who had been his bitterest opponents in parliamen-
tary warfare. We are now on the 'portion of the road which is
called the Upper Domain Road, but the slope is downwards, and we
presently again pass Government House, now lying on our left, till
we arrive at the spot whence we started round the lower road. We
have next on our left hand between the road and the river a ship-
yard, which is somewhat inconsistent with its surroundings, and can
hardly be considered an ornament to the Queen’s park. It was
granted to a firm of shipbuilders by one of the Governors, at the time
when the Governor was all powerful; meanwhile we have passed
the wooded hill and have arrived at a large open space extending to
the river on the left and the harbour in front. Here we find the old
cricket-ground on which were played all matches of importance
until the Cricket Season of 18S1-2, when a larger and much better
one was opened on a plateau some way up the Domain hill, A fine
road has recently been constructed to the new cricket ground. Near
the junction of this road with the lower Domain road, a drinking
fountain has been placed recently as a memorial to the Hon. Charles
Meredith, who was for many years one of the best known amongst
our public men, and a prominent member of three different Ad-
ministrations.
The Upper Cricket Ground is the result of the zeal, energy, and
perseverance of the present Mayor of Hobart, Mr. J. G. Davies,
M.H.A., who has been an ardent cricketer from his boyhood, and
has done more in the cause of cricket than any man in the colony.
On behalf of the southern Tasmanian Cricket Association, of which
he was himself the originator, he obtained a lease from the Govern-
ment of a portion of the Domain well adapted to his purpose. The
funds at his disposal were small, but by constantly keeping the
subject before the cricketing community, and by a large personal ex-
penditure of time, trouble, and money, and by occasional aid from
Government in the w r ay of labour, he succeeded in clearing the
ground, fencing it, new turfing it, constructing suitable pavilions
for the cricketers, and for the public ; and ultimately he was able,
in the name of the S. T. Cricket Association, to throw open to the
use of the several cricket clubs a ground equal to any in the
Australian Colonies. Within the grounds of the Association, but
outside the portion reserved for cricket, is a well-constructed and
well-kept asphalt Tennis Court. This was a gift of Mr. Edward
Butler of the legal firm of Butler, Mclntyre, and Butler. All
members of the Association have access to this on payment of a
small additional subscription.


Returning down the new road from the cricket ground we have in
front of us that open part of the Domain already mentioned which
on the side of the bay terminates in a battery, well-constructed,
with casemates and covered ways, and mounted with several
pieces of heavy ordnance. Here the Volunteer Artillery practise
at stated periods, and here salutes are fired on special occasions,
such as the Queen’s Birthday, the Opening of Parliament, and
the Annual Regatta, which is the especial holiday of Hobart, even
as the Cup Day is that of Melbourne. Turning abruptly to the
right from the new road, and directing our course towards the town,
we pass in front of The High School. This is a fine Elizabethan
building, standing at the head of a sloping lawn of two acres in ex-
tent. The grounds are surrounded by beautiful shrubberies, and on
the side next the town, is a well-kept orchard garden laid out on a
plan which illustrates theHoratian precept, “ Omne tulitpunctum, qui
miscuit utile dulci ,” for, interspersed among the fruit trees and
vegetable beds, there are lawns edged with flowers, and a tennis
ground, which was quite one of the institutions of the youthful Society
of Hobart during the occupancy of the late Rector. At present the
premises are leased to a wealthier Educational body known as
Christ’s College, but, though the active existence of the High School
is temporarily suspended, it retains its corporate existence ; and it is
not likely that the name of Christ’s College as applied to the braiding
will supersede that of “High School” in popular parlance any
time during the present generation. Immediately opposite the High
School grounds and on the other side of the road is the Hobart
terminus of the Main Line Railway.
We are now at the Domain end of Liverpool-street, and, advancing
towards the town, we find on our left hand The Hospital, a Lrge
building with gardens and benches, and on those benches, clad in
warm blue dressing gowns, we see patients in various states of con-
valescence. Admission as a visitor requires an order from the Board of
Management, but there is no great difficulty in obtaining
this through any of the Medical Practitioners in Hobart.
This is the only public building of note in Liverpool-street,
which, as already mentioned, is the principal street for shops.
Next in importance as a street of shops is Elizabeth-streat,
which runs at right angles to Liverpool-street 3-. S we have already
mentioned. Starting from the region of the Wharves, Elizabeth-
street crosses in succession Macquarie-street, Collins-street, Liver-
pool-street, and a number of other streets parallel to those already
mentioned. At the corner of Elizabeth and Collins streets is a lofty


and handsome building of white stone, recently erected by the Aus-
tralian Mutual Provident Society. At the corner diagonally
opposite is a building scarcely inferior to it in grandeur, viz,, the
new premises of the Bank of Van Diemen’s Land, erected on the
site of the old Ship Hotel, the favourite resort in its time of a race of
old Colonists who are fast dying out.
It has already been mentioned that- Macquarie-street is one of the
most noticeable streets of Hobart. It lies parallel to Liverpool-street,
and commences from the Domain. At the Domain end, it crosses the
Railway and the Town Creek, the outlet of which has been recently
beautified and improved by solid stone walls, which render an overflow
almost impossible, and thus greatly diminish the danger arising from
those floods to which the creek is subj ect at uncertain intervals. The Gas
Company’s Works lie just outside the town boundary on the Domain
side of the Creek. Proceeding up the street we find on the left hand
side The Royal Society’s Museum, a fine stone building, containing
valuable collections of coins, birds, beasts, fishes, geological
specimens, and everything that one expects to find in a well-
arranged Museum. It also contains a valuable library of scientific
works. The members of the Royal Society meet once a month
in the Library ; and on these occasions papers on Subjects connected
with Natural History or other topics of Scientific interest are read.
The transactions of the Society are published in a yearly volume.
The Museum is open every day, Sundays included, at convenient
hours. There is no charge for admission. A few yards higher up
the street we come to the Town Hall, another handsome stone
building. It contains the Municipal Chambers and offices for each
department of Corporation Officials; these are on the ground floor.
On the first floor is a handsome and spacious Assembly room, much
in request for balls, concerts, lectures, and public meetings. The room
contains a fine and powerful organ. Afternoon performances designated
Organ Recitals are given by competent performers. One wing of the
building is appropriated to The Public Library, one of the most valu-
able institutions of which Tasmania can boast. It contains about 9,000
volumes well arranged and catalogued. The rooms, which are well
lighted in the evening, are open to the public daily, Sundays in-
cluded at convenient hours and free from charge. In connection
with this, there is also a spacious News Room furnished with the
principal English and Colonial papers, as well as with all the most
popular Magazines and Reviews. Women, as well as men, avail
themselves largely of the privilege afforded by the reading-rooms.
Opposite to the Town Hall is the office of the Mercury Newspaper.


It is utterly unpretentious externally ; but the printing machinery
is well worth a visit, and apart from the newspaper work, there is
a department for general printing and Lithography, which is very
largely patronised. A little higher up Macquarie-street, and at the
corner of Elizabeth-street, is the Telegraph Office, concerning
which there is nothing special to remark.
Next on the right-hand side of the street comes the Commercial
Bank, an elegant structure of quasi-Grecian style in architecture.
On the opposite side of the street is Franklin Square ; this was the
site of the old Government House. The Square is planted with trees
and flowers and laid out in walks. In the centre of it is a statue of Sir
John Franklin, the Arctic explorer, who was Governor of the Colony
between the years 1837 and 1843. In front of the pedestal is a bronze
cannon, captured during the Crimean War and presented to the
Colony by the English Government.
Immediately after the Square, and on the same side of the street,
we come to a large block of Public Buildings extending to Murray-
street. Facing on Macquarie-street are the Supreme Court, with the
Offices of the Judges and Law Officers of the Crown; then the General
Post Office, extending to Murray-street, Then facing Murray-
street are the offices of the heads of departments and of the respon-
sible Ministers of the Crown, the Education Office, and the Treasury.
We have now diverged a few yards into Murray-street, and imme-
diately opposite to the Public Offices we see the Masonic Hall, The
Savings Bank, and the Offices of the Derwent and Tamar As-
surance Company. These are all handsome buildings and orna-
ments to the town.
Returning to Macquarie-street we find the Church of England
Cathedral (St. David’s) standing immediately opposite Post
Office. This is a large stone building, and if ever it reaches completion
will probably be a great ornament to the town. At present it can
hardly be so considered. The interior, though unfinished, is hand
some. There is daily service in the afternoon, and three services
every Sunday. These are performed somewhat on the system of
English Cathedral services. There is a choir of men and boys. Mr.
Frederick Packer is organist and choirmaster.
Crossing from the Cathedral, and proceeding up the street, we find
on the left-hand side the premises of
The Tasmanian Club.— This Society numbers amongst its members
a large proportion of the professional men and merchants of the city,
of the leading government officials, and generally of all those who


occupy a good social position, as such words are commonly understood.
A visitor, furnished with letters of introduction, will seldom fail to
be put down as an honorary member on the Club list. Thi3 will give
him all the privileges of the Club for a fortnight, and he can obtain
an extension of these privileges for further periods of one month,
three months, or six months, upon payment of £1 Is., £3 33., and
£4 4s.
It may not be amiss at this point to deviate about a hundred yards
from our course, and to pay a visit to the
Hobart Club in Collins-street. —The rules respecting honorary
members are essentially the same as in the other Club. The billiard
room of this Club is a particularly fine one, and well-deserving a
visit.
Returning to Macquarie-street, we find, next door to the Club,
The Union Bank, one of the branches of that great corporation,
the Union Bank of Australia, Limited, which has its head-quarters in
London, but has branches in every important town of the Australian
Colonies. Immediately opposite to this is the Bank of Australasia,
which has also a head office in London. Farther up the street,
and at its junction with Harrington-street, we come to St. Joseph’s
Roman Catholic Church, and in Harrington-street, on the side
opposite to the Church is St. Joseph’s Orphanage, an admirable
institution, presided over by a community of Sisters of Charity.
No visitor to Hobart should neglect to pay a visit to the
Orphanage ; and, as the institution is entirely dependent on
voluntary contributions, it may be hoped that no one who
has seen the healthful and happy faces of the children rescued
from a life of misery, and the kindly looks of those religious
ladies, who have devoted themselves to this good work—-will fail to
leave some contribution as an aid in furtherance of their truly Chris-
tian efforts. Proceeding further on, we see on the right hand side of the
road a handsome castellated building with a square tower, and a
copious clothing of ivy. This is The Hutchins School, so named
from Archdeacon Hutchins, the leading ecclesiastic of Tasmania,
before the colony was erected into a bishopric. The Hutchins
School was the first Grammar School established in the island, and
under the management of its originalhead-master the Rev. J. R. Buck-
land, and of his son the Rev. J. Y. Buckland it has had a successful
and useful existence of nearly 45 years. A good way further up, and
on the left-hand side is The Ladies’ College, a proprietary school
which aims at giving the same sort of advantages to girls which the
Hutchins School, Christ’s College, and the other Grammar Schools give


to boys. To reach the end of the street we have still about a mile
to traverse ; but that mile is well worth the walk for the sake of
what lies at the end of it, viz. a glass of delicious ale in the cool
cellar of the Cascade Brewery. The Cascade Ale of Hobart
has been famous from an early period in the present century. The
admirable site of the Brewery was chosen by Mr. Degraves, a French
gentleman driven from his own country in early life by the terrors
of the Revolution. He became a naturalised Englishman, and then a
colonist, and ultimately the founder of the most famous brewery in
the Australian Colonies. After his death the management devolved
on his sons, Messrs. Charles and John Degraves, and his son-in-law
Mr. (afterwards Sir James) Wilson. After the death of Mr. John
Degraves, the last survivor of the three, the brewery was disposed of
to a limited liability company, by whom it is now managed. An
order of admission is easily obtained at the Company’s office in
Collins-street by any visitor of respectability. The building in itself
is well worth seeing, a lofty edifice of rough hewn stone backed by
a richly wooded hill which forms one of the lower slopes of Mount
Wellington.
We have not yet exhausted the objects of interest which a walk or
drive through the town will bring under our notice. Thus, if we go
out along the wharves, and taking the one to the right, keep near the
water side, we come to The Castray Esplanade, which runs up the
side of a hilly rise on which is built one of the suburbs of Hobart,
known as Battery Point. This work was carried out by the energy
of Mr. L. R. Castray, whose name it bears by special authority
of the Corporation of Hobart. The Esplanade passes in front of the
Prince’s Battery, now dismantled as a battery, and called the
Prince’s Park, and i 3 pleasantly planted with trees and pro-
vided with seats, whence a delightful view of the town and
harbour meets the eye, as well as of Kangaroo Point with the
pretty village of Bellerive, about two miles distant across the
bay. Following the street to which the Esplanade leads we
come to St. George’s Hill, so named from St. George’s Church,
which stands on its summit, and with its high tower and cupola forms
an attractive landmark as you approach Hobart by water. Until
within the last five or six years the slope of this hill on the side facing
southward was unenclosed and wholly unoccupied. The owner of
the property seems to have been unaware what a mine of wealth lay
undeveloped on that hill-side, for, on his death, when the ground was
marked out into building allotments for sale, the allotments were
eagerly purchased, and a new town sprung up as it were by magic,
covering the whole side of the hill, which is now terraced with new


streets from top to bottom. Following a *bend at the top of St.
George’s Hill, which leads back to the wharves and the town, we
pass the handsomest private residence in Hobart, that of the Hen.
Alexander McGregor, M.L.C. It is a really grand building,
and, from its commanding position overlooking the harbour, is
one of the first objects that attracts the attention of any new
arrival by ship or steamer. Descending the hill-side past Mr.
McGregor’s we arrive again at the New Wharf, and see in front
of us the Parliamentary Buildings, bearing the words Custom
House carved in large letters over the centre of the edifice.
As a fact the building w T as erected as a Custom House, but when
Tasmania obtained Parliamentary institutions, certain rooms in the
Custom House were deemed temporarily available as Upper and
lower Chambers ; but the exigencies of Parliament, the necessity for
committee rooms, refreshment rooms, library, etc., have so en-
croached upon the available space that the Custom House offices
have been driven into one small section of the building. The rooms
in which the two parliamentary houses meet are commodiously fur-
nished, and should our visitor happen to be in Hobart while Parlia-
ment is sitting it will be interesting to him to visit them occasionally
during the session. The Parliament Houses are open to visitors
daily, from 10 to 4. The Parliamentary Library contains about
8,000 volumes, which are open to the perusal of any person on the
order of a member.
Amongst the Public Institutions of Hobart few are better
worth visiting than St. Mary’s Presentation Convent. It is
situated in Harrington-street, within the same enclosure as the
Roman Catholic Cathedral. The ladies of the Convent devote them-
selves to the work of education, and have a large number of pupils,
mostly boarders, of whom many come from the other colonies. The
Convent is beautifully situated on the side of a hill, and commands a
line view of the town, harbour, and surrounding country. A
stranger wishing to visit the Convent will seldom find much diffi-
culty in obtaining admission, and, if admitted, one of the Sisterhood
will be deputed to shew him round the class-rooms, and to
explain to him the arrangements of this useful and interesting
institution.
The most noticeable ecclesiatical buildings of Hobart from an
_ ,f Here and elsewhere I assume that the supposed visitor has pro-
vided himself with a pocket-map of the City. This should be done
in the case of every town which is visited whether for purposes of
business or pleasure.


architectural point of view are the Anglican Cathedral already-
mentioned, the Roman Catholic Cathedral mentioned in connection
with St. Mary’s Convent, Trinity Church (Anglican),, the Memorial
Church (Congregational), and St. George's Church with its Grecian
front and its composite tower and cupola. The style of St.
George’s Church is that which prevailed amongst the London
Churches that were built about the end of the last, or begin-
ning of the present century, before the revival of Gothic
architecture. Besides these, St. John’s and All Saints Churches
(Anglican) may be cited as very pretty specimens of modern Gothic.
At the Cathedral the daily services of the Church of England are
regularly celebrated, and the Sunday congregations are very large.
The Bishop of the Anglican Church, the Right Rev. Dr. Sandford,
frequently preaches there when in town. The Rev. C. L. Dundas,
M.A., is Dean of the Cathedral, and Incumbent of St. David’s
parish, for the Cathedral is also a parish Church. The Canons of
the Cathedral preach there occasionally, though most of them are
Incumbents of parishes, and can officiate at the Cathedral only when
some substitute is provided for their own Churches. Trinity Church
is the only one in the island which has a peal of bells. These are rung
on public or especially joyous occasions by an able band of volunteer
ringers. The incumbent of the Church is the Rev. Geo. W .
bridge. The Rev. Canon Banks-Smith officiates at St. George’s, the
Rev. H. R.Finnis at St. John’s, Goulburn-street, and the Rev. George
Archer, M.A., at All Saints, Macquarie-street. At the Roman Catholic
Cathedral in Harrington-street frequent week-day services, and
regular Sunday services are conducted by the Most Rev. Bishop
Murphy, aided by the Rev. T. M. O’Callaghan and the Rev.
James Murphy. At St. Joseph’s, Macquarie-street, the Very
Rev. Dean Woods officiates, with the assistance of the Re\s.
P. R. Hennebry, J. A. Sheehy, and M. W. Gilleran.
The Presbyterians are divided between the “Presbyterian Church
of Tasmania ” and the “ Free Church.” This is the only one of the
Australian Colonies in which the Free Church of Chalmers and
Candlish has retained a distinctive organisation. In all the other
Colonies the different Presbyterian bodies have coalesced and become
one in name, as they are also in doctrine and discipline. St.
Andrew’s Church in Bathurst-street, pleasantly embowered in trees
and shrubs, is the oldest Presbyterian Church in the Colony. The
Rev. James Scott is the Minister. At the Chalmers Free Church
the Rev. R. Maclaren Webster officiates. This Church stands at
the corner of Bathurst and Harrington streets.


The Wesleyans can accommodate the largest congregation in
Hobart in their Church in Melville-street. It is a large and commo-
dious building without any pretence of architectural beauty. There
is a smaller Wesleyan Church in upper Davey-street. The Revs. H.
Greenwood and H. E. Merriman are at present the officiating
ministers in the Melville-street Church.
The Congregationalists or Independents have three Churches, one in
Davey-street, which has the benefit of the ministrations of the Rev-
George Clarke, well known as a thoughtful writer and preacher, one
in Bathurst-street, designated the Union Chapel, of which the
Rev. J. Wilkes Simmons is the pastor, and another in Elizabeth-
street known as the “ Memorial Church.” This last is a very
handsome Gothic building with a high-pitched roof and a
graceful spire. It was erected as a memorial of the Rev. Frederick
Miller, who officiated at an old chapel close by, and, who was for
many years the only Congregational Minister in the Australian
Colonies. The Rev. G. W. Sharp is the present minister of the
Memorial Church.
Other denominations have places of worship in Hobart. The
Baptists have a chapel in Harrington street, but it has no regular
minister. They have also a Tabernacle in Elizabeth-street, where
Pastor McCullough officiates. The Primitive Methodists have a
meeting-house in Collins-street (Rev. J. G. Wright), and the Society
of Friends in Murray-street. The Jews have a pretty little Synagogue
in Argyle-street, but they have not had an officiating minister for
several years past.


CHAPTER II.
PLACES WORTH VISITING WITHIN EASY
DISTANCE OF HOBART.
Mount Wellington, the most conspicuous feature of the grand
landscapes which surround Hobart, is generally the first object of
interest to visitors, and no one willingly leaves the City without
having made the ascent of the Mountain. Though there are other
mountains in the island, which rise to a greater height above the
sea-level, there is not one which presents such a lofty appearance to
the eye. Extending its lower slopes to the water s edge, its whole
height of 4,166 feet is seen at a glance, and no part of its grandeur is
lost by any gradually ascending inland approaches. To enjoy the
ascent the visitor should choose a day that is likely to be fine, but
not very hot. The excursion is one which should be made in com-
pany with a few pleasant friends, in order to be thoroughly enjoyed.
The whole day should be devoted to it, and the start should be
made as soon as convenient after breakfast. Luncheon-baskets should
be provided, and the party should proceed in a cab to the kern-
tree Inn on the Huon Road, a distance of about 4 miles from
Hobart. Here they can leave their cab, and, taking their
luncheon-baskets, follow a track, which will be pointed out to them,
and which leads them to the head of the Waterworks, w'hence
the city receives its copious supplies of fresh, cold, clear water.
Here they will see a structure commonly designated by the name
•of Cook’s Monument. It is not, however, a monument either to the
great navigator or to anyone else, but it is a memorial structure
recording the inauguration in March, 1861, of the works constructed
by the Corporation of Hobart, during the Mayoralty of Mr. Henry
Cook. It is situated in a beautiful grove of fern trees, known as
the Bower. Here there are benches and roughly-constructed
tables, eminently convenient for pic-nic parties. Then follows
a climb to the part called “ The Springs,” and by this time
the exertion of the walk will probably have produced a craving for
a drink of the clear and tempting water which runs here over pebbly
channels. As it is of icy coldness the gentlemen would do well to
■qualify it mildly with the contents of their flasks before drinking it
themselves or supplying it to their fair companions. Near the Springs
is a hut, where cooking utensils, plates, tea-cups, etc., can be hired
by the excursionists, if they like to take their luncheon here on the
way up, or to tike a cup of tea on their way down. A steep aseent


from the Springs brings the excursionist to the cslebrated Ploughed
Field, a vast plain of rounded stones of enormous dimensions, firmly
wedged together. After crossing this there is a rather long, but not
very steep ascent to the wide table-land at the top of the Mountain.
Keeping near the edge of this table-land, and on the right-hand side,
we come to what i 3 called the Pinnacle,, the very highest point of the
Mountain. This is marked by a square pile of logs, which can easily
be climbed by men, and without much difficulty by any ladies who
are anxious to feel that they have done the Mountain thoroughly.
It was erected as a signal point for the trigonometrical survey of the
Island. Close beneath thepinnacle is a deep precipice where there must
have been in ancient days a great landslip, laying bare a per-
pendicular face of rocky columns, known as the Organ-pipes.
These form one of the most marked peculiarities of the Mountain
as seen from below. From the top of the Mountain the view is
something bewildering from its extent and beauty. It is too
grand for description to do justice to it. The whole valley of the
Derwent from New Norfolk to Hobart, and the whole estuary
of the Derwent with its islands and peninsulas, lies mapped out in
bird’s-eye view before the eye of the spectator. It will sometimes
happen that a bank of clouds will lie between the top of the Moun-
tain and its lower slopes, thus intercepting the view of the valleys
beneath, while the atmosphere at the summit is quite unclouded.
Should the visitor to Hobart be a good pedestrian, he is advised
to make the ascent by a mountain track leading up the glen in
which the Cascade Brewery is situated. It is steeper, but in many
respects more interesting than the one by the Huon Road, but it
should be made in company with someone who knows the track, and
the party should in this case consist of only two or three.
The ascent of Mount Nelson (1191 feet) is not a formidable un-
dertaking, nor one requiring any special preparation. The Sandy
Bay omnibus (fare 6d.) brings passengers to a point of the road
whence the ascent is easily made without a guide. The view from
the top is very fine. It is even more pleasing than that from Mt.
Wellington, being less bewildering in its extent. On the one side is a
splendid view of the city, and on the other a fine bird’s-eye
view of the estuary and D’Entrecasteaux Channel. There is a Signal
Station on the top of the mount, and the Station officer is generally
willing to allow visitors to use a large standing telescope which has
a very long range and shows distant objects with remarkable clear-
ness. Mount Nelson lies South of the city. On the Northern side,
across the river, and about 4 miles off, lies


Mount Direction (1212 feet high) which is also well worth a visit.
There is no regular conveyance to it, but a cab will take the visitor
as far as Risdon Ferry. The ferry boat is worked by a wheel and
rope. It has a wide platform, and is strong enough and large
enough to take a heavily-laden waggon with its horses across the
river. It was worked for many years by Mr. Jennings, now land-
lord of the Harvest Home Inn on the New Town road, and supposed
to be the largest man in the world. Mr. Jennings had not then
acquired the excessive corpulence which has made him one of the
memorable sights of Tasmania. You can either take your cab across
the river, or leave it at the ferry house. Following the road you
come to a causeway across an inlet of the river. Following this you
arrive at the grounds surrounding the residence of a lady, who owns
the lower slope of the mountain, and from whom leave should be
obtained before commencing the ascent. The ascent is rather toil-
some, but the view from the top amply repays this exertion. A
more lovely combination of landscape and ri\er scenery could har y
be found in any part of the world.
Risdon, though neither township nor village, nor even hamlet, had
for many years a celebrity of its own as the residence of Mr. Thos. Geo.
Gregson, who for nearly 50 years was amongst the foremost public
characters of the Colony. The visitor to Mt. Direction cannot fail to
see the cottage in which Mr. Gregson resided. It stands on a small hill
facing the causeway already mentioned, and it is noticeable also in
the history of the Colony as being the residence of the Acting-
Governor of Van Diemen’s Land, when the island was a dependency
of New South Wales. An old chimney, which still stands in the
garden at Risdon, is said to be the first piece of brickwork ever con-
structed in Tasmania.
An excursion to New Norfolk is perhaps the most delightful of
all the pleasant holiday treats w'hich await the visitor to Tasmania-
There are two ways of reaching it, one by water and one by lan
Fcr a person who has never yet visited New Norfolk, we should re-
commend that he make his first journey thither by river. He will
thus enjoy 21 miles of river scenery unsurpassed in beauty even by
that of the Rhine. The Monarch steamer makes five journeys to New
Norfolk every week, starting from the wharf at 3 - 30 p.m. in the
summer months, and arriving ‘about 6. The steamer passes round
the front of the Domain, past the Queen’s Battery, then past the
regatta-ground, and passing Government House, reaches a part of
the river which is narrow compared to the parts immediately above
and below it. The river here is enclosed between a series of free-
B


stone cliffs on the town side, and rocky hills on the opposite side,
collectively known as Bedlam Walls. Just before arriving at
the part where this narrow portion opens out into a wide sheet
of water like a lake, we pass the Risdon Ferry, w r e catch sight
of the old Government Cottage, (Mr. Gregson’s cottage), and a little
further on pass Mount Direction. Here the views around assume the
characteristic of lake scenery. You seem to be shut in on
every side. Away to your left, lies a deep bay about 3 miles off at
its furthest point, along which lies the district of Glenorchy, in-
cluding the township of O’Brien’s Bridge. By help of a binocular,
the excursionist will be able to distinguish some fine hop-grounds
extending to the water’s edge, a very pretty little Gothic Church, and
some fine private residences ; but the exquisite beauty of this bay,
backed as it is by a portion of the Wellington range, extending as it
does for miles from end to end, showing a succession of farm lands
running far up the mountain side, but ever terminating at a region
of brown forest, which reaches to the mountain top, will so
entrance his eye, that he will scarcely care to look for particular
-objects in this region of enchantment. Passing round a point that
terminates this grand piece of lake scenery, we proceed on our way
to the
Bridgewater Causeway. This is one of the most important and
interesting of the public works constructed in this island, at a time
when the Government had a large amount of labour at command
available for such purposes. The river at this part is very wide,
but it is very shallow, except near its left bank (the bank on the
right as we ascend its course), where there is a deep channel
available for navigation. By means of many thousand cart-
loads of earth and rubbish emptied into the river, year after year,
a strong and permanent road-way was constructed across
the river up to the deeper portion, which was spanned
bv a drawbridge. The main road from Hobart to Launceston
crosses the Derwent by means of this causeway; and so does the
Main Line Railway, which has, however, its own bridge over the
■deep portion of the river. As the steamer Monarch approaches
Bridgewater, the railway bridge is swung round, and the road bridge
drawn back, so as to leave a channel just sufficiently wide for the
passage of the steamer. Up to Bridgewater, we have had a suc-
cession of lake scenes. Soon after passing it, the characteristics of
the scene change, and we have river scenery for the rest of our
journey. On our left hand lofty hills, on our right undulating farm
lands. The river narrows as we ascend, and the banks on both sides


increase in beauty till, as we near the township, they rise into
actual grandeur. A bend in the river opens up the view of the
township, and carries us under crags which overhang, and almost
seem as if they would fall and crush us as we pass. One of the finest
of these beetling crags has been lately destroyed, lest it should
endanger a new line of railway, which has been constructed on the
left bank of the river. It was called the Pulpit Pock. The feeling
of soreness in the minds of the residents of New Norfolk, and of all
who have known it well in past years, is very deep indeed, and will
hardly pass away during the life of those to whom the Pulpit
Rock was a familiar object. The vessel now glides smoothly up to
the steamer’s station on the side opposite the township, and the
visitor sees on the banks facing him a series of handsome houses,
with beautiful and well-kept gardens sloping down to the water
•side. A well-constructed bridge crosses the river at this part, cars
are in waiting to take passengers to the different hotels. Of these,
Allwright’s Hotel and the Freemasons’ afford excellent accommoda-
tion but the best known and most generally popular is the Bush
Hotel. It is probably the oldest one in this island, now that the old
Ship Hotel, of Hobart, has been pulled down ; but, in the hands
of a succession of enterprising proprietors, it has always kept
level in comfort and accommodation with the requirements of
the times. It is a very favourite resort of newly-married
couples, and a week at the Bush Inn is the immediate pendent
of a very large proportion of the marriages contracted in
Hobart. The principal lion of New Norfolk is the Lunatic Asylum.
This is well worth a visit, though the interest is one of a painful
order. The management of this Asylum has unfortunately been
made a matter of party-politics in the legislative bodies of the
■Colony, and an endeavour has been made to procure the removal of
it to a spot nearer town ; but the visitor, who goes through the
wards and apartments under the guidance of a warder, or of one of
the courteous Surgeon Superintendents, will be impressed with the
evidences of order, cleanliness and kindness which characterise the
management; and as regards the situation of the buildings it would
be very difficult indeed to find another which combines all the
advantages of the present site. A few days may be very pleasantly
spent at New Norfolk in trout fishing, for which a license is
required, costing 10s., or in excursions amongst the sur-
rounding hills ; but if the visitor wishes to return to Hobart the
next day he will be able to take a drive in the forenoon to the
Salmon Ponds, which lie a few miles beyond New Norfolk
on the river Plenty a tributary of the Derwent and which


are well worth a visit. The landlord of his hotel will find him a
conveyance. He can return in time for an early dinner, pay his visit
to the Asylum in the afternoon, and return by train in the evening,
arriving in town by 7'30 p.m. The Railway is not open as yet all the
way to New Norfolk, but if you prefer to make your journey thither
by land you can take a ticket for the whole distance at the Hobart
Terminus. The train conveys the New Norfolk passengers as far as
Bridgewater, where vehicles are in waiting to complete the journey.
If the excursionist leaves town by the Express train at 8 a.m. he
will arrive at New Norfolk by 10, and have a good day before him
for looking around. Then if he be equal to the heroic effort of rising
next morning in time to start by the Monarch steamer, which leaves
New Norfolk at 7 a.m., he will enjoy a most delightful journey down,
supposing the weather to be fine. The river near the township has
an exquisite charm in the early sunshine. The banks are so clearly
reflected in the bright clean waters of the river, that when photo-
graphed it is very difficult to tell which is the bank, and which the
reflection.
The visitor to Hobart should make a point of devoting one day
to an excursion to
Brown’s River, officially known as Kingston. This lies about
10 miles south of Hobart. A coach starts every morning from the
Post Office at 9 o’clock, and reaches Kingston about 10-30.—1 t
leaves for Hobart in the afternoon at 4. The chief attraction of
Brown’s River is a beautiful bit of coast, and a horse-shoe beach of
fine firm sand, on which there are generally to be found great
numbers of shells. As in the case of New Norfolk, Brown’s River is
a very favourite honeymoon -resort. The beach with its firm sand
and its low flat-topped rocks, is one of the pleasantest places for a
lounge that can be fancied ; and a whole day might be spent there
in reading, smoking, or simply enjoying the sunshine and scenery.
There is excellent hotel accommodation, and if instead of taking the
public conveyance you prefer to hire a vehicle, you can leave horse
and buggy at the Kingston Hotel, while you take your ramble. Not
far from the beach lies a blow-hole, which is one of the objects of
interest in connection with this township. In a field at no great dis-
tance from the sea and considerably above the sea level, you come on an
opening of considerable width : looking down this you see the water
of the sea washing backwards and forwards, and in stormy
weather sending up a shower of spray, sometimes high enough
to reach the face of the spectator. But apart from the attractions
of the place itself, the journey to and fro is in itself worth the day’s


outing. The road is as well made as any that could be found either
in England or the Colonies. As a mere piece of engineering skill it
is admirable, winding with gentle gradients up the sides of the
lofty hills that skirt the right bank of the Derwent. Leaving the
City by the Sandy Bay road we pass through a pretty suburb,
gradually descending until we reach a point where the road is very
little above high water-mark. From this point the ascent is con-
tinuous for the rest of the journey, beautifully graduated, winding
round the heads of gullies, and opening up views of ravines, on the
land side, while on the other side the view of the estuary with its
islands, promontories, and inlets, increases in extent and beauty, as
the road rises, higher and higher. Not far from the highest point of
the road is Mr. Moir’s Shot Tower, built of the white stone so
plentiful in the island. This, with the owner’s very pretty residence
in a finely kept garden immediately adjoining the Tower, forms an
object of interest and beauty which cannot fail to attract the eye of
the passenger. The Tower is 176 feet high from the basement, but the
fall for the molten metal within the Tower is upwards of 200 feet.
After passing the Tower, the ascent continues about a mile further,
and then comes a rapid but well-graduated descent to the Kingston
township. Visitors from Queensland and New South Wales will
recognise the name of Erown’s River as the place which is pre-
ominent in fame for the excellence of its potatoes. Potatoes from
any part of Tasmania imported into the other Colonies are generally
advertised as Brown’s River potatoes.
Before leaving Hobart and its immediate surroundings mention
should be made of Kangaroo Point, or Bellerive. This lies just
across the river nearly opposite to the outer edge of the domain.
Steamers start from each side every half-hour, and as the crossing
occupies little more tfyen ten minutes, a visit to this pretty little village
may be paid at any time, and without any special preparations. The
convenience of easy access renders it a favourite place of residence
for persons having business establishments in town. It is also a
very favourite resort for persons with young children. On the side
not visible from the town, there is a fine long beach of firm sand
'where a family of young children will find amusement all day in
Egging with their wooden spades. With a basket of buns and
sandwiches or cold sausages, a young family will enjoy a day’s
holiday here at very small expense, or trouble to the mother. As
already mentioned, it is worth while to run across to Bellerive if only
for the sake of getting the grandest view of the town and Mountain,
that is to be obtained at any spot known to the present writer.


Within easy distance of Bellerive is Mount Rumney (1,236 feet),.
Following the Sorell road for about four miles we arrive at a red
gate—passing through this, three roads are seen branching off in
different directions. The middle one leads to Mt. Rumney. It is a
bush track with a good many deviations, but the trees along the
direct route have been blazed, so that there is little danger of losing
your way. As the Mountain is private property it is well to obtain
leave for the ascent, and, as it is used for grazing, dogs should not be
brought by the visitors. The view from the top is magnificent. It
includes the Wellington Range and Hobart on one side, and in
another direction the eye ranges over the fine coast scenery of
Pittwater, Storm Bay, Norfolk Bay, Tasman’s and Forrestier’s
Peninsula and Bruny Island. It is estimated that some hundreds
of miles of varied coast-line are seen from this point at one view,
so deep are the indentations of the coast —so numerous the smaller
islands and peninsulas —and so vast the extent of sea and land visible
from the top of Mount Rumney.
CHAPTER III.
THE MAIN LINE RAILWAY AND LAUNCESTON.
Assuming that our visitor’s time is uncertain, and that he is
anxious to make sure of the Northern Capital before visiting the
country districts, we will now suppose him taking the express train
to Launceston at 8 o’clock, a.m., some fine morning. The whole
journey by express is accomplished in 6 hours. The line winds
round the Domain, past Government-house, through the Royal
Society’s Gardens, past New Town, one of the principal suburbs of
Hobart, then past O’Brien’s Bridge, already mentioned ; and all this
time through beautiful alternations of woodland, garden, mountain,
and water scenery. His first stoppage is at New Norfolk Road,
about half-way to New Norfolk, where coaches meet the train to
take passengers on to that township. The train now traverses the
Bridgewater Causeway, already described, and speeds onwards
through a cleared country to Brighton. Up to this point the course
of the line has not deviated widely from that of the old coach road
between Hobart and Launceston, It now strikes into an entirely
new country, and for 50 miles winds in and out through the ravines


of a thickly-wooded and barren mountain district; the curves are
abrupt, the gradients steep. Very grand scenes open to view from
time to time, but the impression conveyed to a stranger is that of a
barren, stony, range of country not well adapted for profitable
settlement. The next stoppage after Brighton is at Campania,
chiefly important as being the nearest station to the town-
ship of Richmond. We next stop at Jerusalem, near which
there are some coal mines producing a highly bituminous coal.
A long horse shoe bend, with very steep gradient, rounding
a narrow valley shows a tramway at the bottom of the ravine,
leading into the lateral drive, by which the coal is worked.
Soon after this the traveller finds himself between the banks of a
deep cutting, then comes a shrill whistle, and in another moment he
is in utter darkness. He is in a long tunnel. The train going at full
speed takes two minutes in passing through. It is known as the
Flat Top tunnel—so called from the name of the hill through which it
passes. Soon after passing Flat Top we see on our left hand what
looks at first glance like an extensive grass plain ; but closer notice
shows it to be a deep marsh completely overgrown with rushes.
It is called Lake Tiberias, and like its prototype of Galilee, is
enclosed by hills on every side. It is 640 acres (or 1 square mile) in
extent. Scriptural names abound in this part of the Island.
We have passed Jerusalem: the township of Jericho lies near
the Lake, and the Lake is itself the source of the river Jordan,
which winds through the midlands with ver} T circuitous course, till it
enters the Derwent, near Bridgewater. The next stoppage is at the
Oatlands Station, a somewhat deceptive name, since it is in fact
four miles from the township of Oatlands. Here ten minutes
are allowed for refreshments. A branch line called the Parattah
and Oatlands Railway now connects this station with the main line.-
It was opened on May 13, 1885. At Antill Ponds, where there
is a short stoppage, we see an inn near the station, bearing
the name, “Half-way House.” It lies on the Main Road; and
indicates pretty nearly the exact midway between Hobart and
Launceston, as measured along that road. From this point, till about
the last twelve miles of our journey, the Main Road and Main Line
keep close company. We have short stoppages at the pretty
townships of Ross and Campbell Town, which lie on the Main Road ;
at the Corners, a station which indicates the junction of the Main
Road with the road leading to Fin gal; at the Epping Forest Station,
the commencement of an extensive half-cleared woodland plain.
Next, at Evandale, a pretty English-looking village, with an


English-looking church-steeple conspicuous on the hill side—then
two miles further on, at the Evandale Junction, there is
a brief stoppage to allow another train to pass ; for here the
Main Line joins the Launceston and Western Railway, and a train
from Launceston to Deloraine is due just as the express arrives at
the Junction. The Launceston and Western Railway is of older
date than the Main Line. It is a broad gauge line, sft. 3in.
between the rails, while the Main Line is on the narrow gauge,
3ft. Gin. The difficulty of running, on the same line, trains
adapted to different gauges is obviated by an additional rail laid
down between the two wider ones. From the Forest Station to
Evandale the scenery has been rather uninteresting. It now opens
out again into grandeur. The train runs along the side of a hill,
and to the right the eye ranges over deep, wide cultivated vales
bounded by the Ben Lomond range in the distance. The valley
closes in as we near Launceston. We see the course of the North Esk
marked out by a continuous line of high and thick willows, com-
pletely concealing the river. We see a large village on the hillside
opposite with handsome houses, and gardens sloping down to the
Esk. This is St. Leonards, a favourite place of residence with the
citizens of Launceston, but the express pauses not here in its course;
it rushes across the Esk, along a series of water meadows and arrives
at the Launceston terminus within a few minutes of 2 p.m.
Raving arrived at Launceston we take a cab and drive to the
hotel decided on. Launceston so abounds in well-conducted hotels
that the visitor can hardly go wrong if he makes a random choice.
The Brisbane, the International, the Club Hotel, the Launceston, the
Criterion, the Cornwall, and Sutton’s Coffee Palace, are all of them
houses which may be relied upon as affording every comfort and
attention to their guests. The Brisbane is the oldest hotel in
Launceston, and is quite an institution of the town. It is the one
most patronised by the gentry from the surrounding country, and
was the favourite gathering-place of the leading townsmen before
the establishment of the Launceston Club. Sutton’s Coffee Palace,
which lies almost immediately opposite to the Brisbane, in Brisbane-
street, is the newest of the large hotels, and is well worth a visit,
being considered one of the “show-places” of Launceston. Brisbane-
street may almost be considered as [half of Launceston. It is the
great street for shops and hotels. It is the street which dwells dis-
tinctly on the memory of visitors, after their recollection of the rest
of the town has become hazy and indistinct. It commences from the
foot of the hills, which rise abruptly on the south-east of the town,


LAUNCESYON


but all the parts of the town which lie between the hills and Wel-
lington-street mav be considered suburban. Wellington-street may-
be considered as the boundary of the city on the right hand, as you
stand with your back to the Tamar. It runs at right angles to Bns-
bane-street. Of this last-named street, the general course lies from
south and north, or, more strictly speaking, from south-east to north-
west, and commencing from Wellington-street we pass a well-
appointed set of shops, and a number of good hotels. The drapers
shops, the clothiers, the booksellers, are mostly in this street. Messrs.
Walch have a branch establishment in Launceston, trading under
the name of Walch Bros. & Birchall. Another popular book-shop
is that of Messrs. Hopwood & James. In either of these a visttor may
spend a pleasant half-hour, and will meet every courtesy, whether
his purchase be large or small. Parallel to Wellington-street and
crossing Brisbane-street are the following streets, in order as they
occur during our supposed walk through Brisbane-street northward,
viz. : Charles-street, St. John-street, George-street, and Tamar-street.
At the corner of Brisbane and S\ John streets,the Bank of Austral-
asia has recently erected a very handsome building, in the Italian
style. In St. John-street, a few yards from Brisbane-street, another
handsome building-in the same style, has recently been erected by
the Australian Widows’ Fund Insurance Society. A little
further on, at the right side of Brisbane-street, we come to a narrow
street called the Quadrant, bending back into St. John-street,
describing, as its name implies, a quarter of a circle. At the corner of
the Quadrant, where it joins Brisbane-street, the Mutual Assurance
Society of Victoria have erected a splendid set of offices at a cost
of £B,OOO. A little further on, and still on the right-hand side, we
pass the Launceston Club. The regulations of this Club with
regard to honorary members are similar to those of the Clubs in
Hobart. We next come to the Coffee Palace already named, nearly
opposite to which, on the left-hand side of the street, is the pleasant
old-fashioned Brisbane hotel, reminding us by its appearance and
arrangements of an English country-town inn of the old coaching
days. We now come to the junction of Brisbane and George streets,
and, diverging a few steps into the last-named streeu, we find the
newly-erected Academy of Music, calculated to hold 1,000 persons,
and fitted in the most modern style. This is likely to prove a great
accommodation to the Launceston community for they have hitherto
felt the want of a good public room. Proceeding still westward,
along the right-hand side of Brisbane-street, we pass Talmage s Club
Hotel, the principal coaching-house of Launceston some quarter of a
century ago, and still deservedly popular as an hotel. It stands


somewhat back from the street, and is pleasingly shaded by willows-
and acacias. A little further on we come to the Masonic Hall,
a handsome edifice, admirably adapted by its internal arrangements
to all purposes of Freemasonry, and having on its ground floor a fine
room, available for concerts, balls, or public meetings. We now
cross Tamar-street and, continuing our course along Brisbane-street,
we have on our right a series of handsome villas on the slope of the hill,
and on our left the railings of a pretty park, which on a hot and bright
day creates a longing for the enjoyment of its shaded walks and cool
lawns. Skirting the palings, we come to a small gate by which we
enter the park, descending a few steps into a shaded walk. We are
now in the Town Park of Launceston, and can spend a very
pleasant half-hour here strolling through the shubberies, or over the
well-kept lawns, and occasionally resting on one of the comfortable
seats with which the walks abound. The Park is quadrangular, and
can be entered on each of its sides. It has, however, only one
entrance for vehicles. We have entered by the side entrance from
Brisbane-street. If we went out by the similar entrance on the
opposite side of the park we should find ourselves exactly facing the
Main Line Railway Station. We will, however, go out by the main
entrance, near which, and in the Park is a building called the
Pavilion. It is much used for concerts and other public entertain-
ments, and near the Pavilion a space has been railed off for a
collection of birds and beasts. Leaving the Park then by the large iron
gates which close the main entrance at night, we find ourselves in
Tamar-street, and immediately opposite to the gates we enter
Cameron-street, one of those which run parallel to Brisbane-street.
Proceeding along Cameron-street we find near its junction with
George-street and on our right-hand side The Collegiate School
of which Mr. T. Hogg is head-master. Then comes Trinity
Church, a very simple unpretentious building with pointed roof,
but without tower or transepts. A little further on St. John-street
crosses Cameron-street at right angles, and at the corner, facing both
streets, is the Launceston Town Hall, a large stuccoed building
with a Grecian portico. Facing the Town Hall, at the opposite
corner of the junction of St. John-street and Cameron-street, is The
Mechanics’ Institute. Here the visitor will find an excellent
reading-room, to which he may have free access by simply giving his
name to the Librarian. He will find the leading English magazines
and a good choice of English as well as Colonial Newspapers. There
is likewise an excellent library in connection with the Institute; but
subscribers alone can have the benefit of this. The newspaper room
is adorned with portraits of the successive Mayors of Launceston ;


and the magazine room, opening out of the other, has portraits of
all the Governors of Tasmania. Over the library and reading room
is a large room containing a fine organ. This room is much used foi
concerts and other public entertainments. It contains life-size
paintings in oil of the Queen, Prince and Princess of Wales, and
Prince Alfred. These were painted by Mr. Dowling, a native of
Launceston, who has made himself a name in England a. 3. an artist of
merit. A large painting of a group of Tasmanian aboriginals, which
hangs in the reading room is the work of the same artist. This
picture is the more interesting from the fact that the race is extinct
and that all the figures of the group are actual portraits, Turning
into St John-street past the Mechanics’lnstitute, we see on the opposite
side of the road a large brick building with several entrances. Its
principal face is towards St. John-street; but it has another face in
Patterson-street, a street running parallel to Cameron-street and
Brisbane-street, midway between the two. This building contains
the Public Offices of Government Departments, the Telegraph
Office and The Post Office. The latter faces Patterson-street, and
has a covered way, as a shelter from rain, to persons posting letters
or making enquiries. Again crossing St. John-street, and proceeding
along Patterson-street,we pass a very ugly but somewhat pretentious
ecclesiastical building. This is St. Andrew’s Presbyterian Church.
A little further on, and on the right-hand side of the street, as we are
now supposed to be facing eastward, is a very pretty Wesleyan
Church, with a graceful spire. It is built of red terra-cotta bricks,
with stone facings. In the same street we find the offices of the two
daily newspapers, the Launceston Examiner and the Telegraph,
and a good way further on we come to the Invalid Depot, a Govern-
ment institution, in which a number of aged and infirm persons are
supported at the public expense. Attached to the Depot is
a large pleasure ground in which open air concerts are given
in the summer months. In the grounds of the Depot is a we.l
kept bowling-green, appropriated to the use of the Launceston
Bowling Club. Proceeding still along Patterson-street we come in
sight of a graceful iron bridge thrown across the mouth of the South
Esk which runs into the Tamar. In front of us rises a steep rocky hill
with large quarries of a dark iron-stone. This is called the Cataract
Hill. Through a narrow gorge of it rushes the South Esk R.i\ er.
This gorge is of the nature of one of those canyons of the Rocky
Mountains about which we read so much in American literature.
It is a colossal rift between opposing cliffs of black volcanic took.
It is shut in by basaltic rocks, rising on the south side to a height of
about 500 feet. Half-a-mile up the gorge is a transverse barrier of


rock which forms the Cataract. Above this is a large pool called
the First Basin, and still further up are Second and Third Basins,
all of volcanic origin. A new pathway has recently been constructed
by the Municipal Council along the right bank of the South Esk,
as far as the First Basin. This track is already considered one of
the lions of Launceston, affording as it does an easy access to a spot
whence a grand view is obtained of the romantic scenery of the gorge
combined with the view of the city lying on the side of the hills,
which face us in our present position, for Launceston is shut in on all
sides by hills, and the greater part of the town is built on the slopes
of those hills. If our tourist refers to his map he will see that the
streets through which we have conducted him are Brisbane-street
(the main artery of the town) and certain other streets lying between
Brisbane-street and the water. These all lie on the flat ground
intervening between the foot of the hills and the Tamar, and form the
most important part of the town as far as its business is concerned,
but the larger area of the town lies on the hill-sides, overlooking
these flats. Thus the streets parallel to Brisbane-street on the
eastern side, viz.: York-street, Elizabeth-street, Frederick-street,
Canning-street, and others of a more suburban character, run up, on
their northern end, towards the top of the Windmill Hill, with
excessively steep gradients, while those already mentioned, at right
angles to the above, also finish in very steep inclines on the face of
another portion of the curved range which encloses the town. Descend-
ing the track from the basin, and guided by the position of the
shipping, we have little difficulty in finding our way to the Landing
Wharf. This lies at the mouth of the North Esk. It is not
accessible to ships of deep draught, except at high tide, and it thus
happens that the Steam Navigation Company’s vessels have some-
times to lie a few yards down the Tamar, on their arrival, and to
land their passengers by means of boats. The Launceston Office of the
Steam Navigation Company lies in Lower George-street, leading from
William-street to the open space by the Wharf. Proceeding from
the Landing Wharf towards the bridge which connects Tamar-street
with the Invermay-road (see map), we come to the Smelting Works
of the Mount Bischoff Tin Mining Company. Application to the
Manager will generally procure admission. The ore is brought
hither from the mines. It comes in bags by steamer from Emu Bay,
looking like black coarse sand. It comes from the furnace in ingots,
looking like solid silver. It is interesting to think how much these
splendid ingots are daily adding to the wealth and prosperity of the
colony. Our course has now brought us to the bridge above men-
tioned. Just beyond the bridge on the Invermay-road lies the Ter-


minus of the Launceston and Western Railway. Instead of crossing
the bridge, let us turn to our right up Tamar-street, then to our left
along Cimitiere-road, and we shall soon find ourselves at the
Gas Works and also at the Terminus of the Main Line Railway
and opposite to the town side of the Town Park. An
entrance gate to the Park faces the Terminus. Let us go
through this and across the Park. We find ourselves again in
the upper part of Brisbane-street, with a high slope on our right
hand and with large handsome villas and well-kept gardens on the
side of it. Several of the wealthier of the citizens of Launceston
live in these houses. Following the street up hill, avoiding tho
branch which leads off on the left hand into the country, and which
is known as the Elphin-road, we pass another set of handsome
villas with spacious gardens on our left. We are now on the plateau
of Windmill Hill, as it is called, w here we get splendid views of
the Tamar, the valley of the North Esk, and of a large portion of the
town. The hill has several new streets marked out on it, and many
new houses scattered here and there about it. Keeping to the edge
of this hill which skirts the town, we come to Victoria-square,
really a half-square, with two terraces of good dwelling houses,
whence we descend very abruptly into York-street, the next large
street parallel to Brisbane-street. It crosses George-street, St. John-
street, Charles-street, and Wellington-street, and runs on into the
suburbs. If we turn up St. John-street we come to an ornamental
enclosure, somewhat similar to the Franklin-square of Hobart. It is
called Prince’s Square. It is prettily planted, and has seats and
fountains ; it faces on four streets. A little further up is St. John’s
Church, the oldest church in Launceston, and the oldest in the
colony, now that the original St. David’s, of Hobart, has been pulled
down. St. John’s has no architectural beauty, but its internal
arrangements are good and pleasing, and it is a church to which people
become much attached. The minister of it is the Rev. Canon
Brownrigg, an able preacher, and an earnest zealous clergyman. As
lQ Hobart, so in Launceston, all the principal denominations are well
re presented. Besides St. John’s Church there is Trinity Church,
already mentioned, in which Archdeacon Hales officiates, St.
-We g Church, Frankland-street, a graceful little wooden church,
astefully but simply decorated. The Rev. A. Barkway is the
incumbent of it. These are Church of England churches. The
res'byterians have St. Andrew’s, already mentioned, of which the
ev> d- Lyle is minister; the Chalmers Free Church, at the
corner °f St. John and Frederick streets, facing the Prince’s-square.
this the Rev. J. Lindsay is minister. The Roman Catholics


have a church at the end of Elizabeth-street, near the foot of the
Cataract Hill. Services are performed by the Rev. Dean Beechinor
and the Rev. P. Gleeson. The Congregationalists have two chapels,
one in Frederick-street, facing the Prince’s-square, whose minister is
the Rev. W. Law, and the other in Tamar-street, near the gate of
the Town Park. The Rev. Charles Price is the minister of this.
He has been long known in Launceston for his connection
with the school adjoining his chapel, and for his lectures and
instructive illustrations at the Mechanics’ Institute. The Wes-
leyans have two places of worship, one the handsome terra-
cotta building in Patterson-street already mentioned, the other a
chapel in Margaret-street, where afternoon services are held on Sun-
days. The Baptists have a fine chapel in William-street, which
they designate as the Tabernacle ; and unconnected with any par-
ticular denomination is the Mission Church, in Wellington-street,
erected at the cost of Mrs. Reed, a wealthy and philanthropic widow
lady. It has an illuminated clock, which chimes the half-hours.
Ministers of different evangelical denominations officiate here. The
Primitive Methodists have a chapel in Frederick-street.
Amongst the. Institutions of Launceston mention should be made
of the Hospital. It is in a high and healthy situation in Upper
Charles-street. Least of all must we forget the Church oe Eng-
land Grammar School, founded at the same time as the Hutchins
School, Hobart, and with the same object, viz., that of providing
a good Grammar School education to the youth of Tasmania. Under
the management of its late Head-Master, the Rev. W. H. Savigny,
M.A., it attained a high and well-merited reputation. It stands at
the corner of Elizabeth-street and George-street. Our tourist should
also pay a visit to the Presentation Convent, which is near the
Roman Catholic Cathedral. Here, as in the corresponding institution
in Hobart, the nuns devote themselves to the work of education,
and are at all times pleased to conduct through their class-rooms any
visitor who comes properly introduced.
Mention has been made of the Elphin-road a 3 one of the continua-
tions of Brisbane-street. In the rapid increase of Launceston, which
has taken place within the last few years, so many building sites
have been taken up on the Elphin-road, that it may now be con-
sidered as a suburban street. Going out of town by this road, about
a quarter of a mile, we find a turning to our left, which leads to the
Launceston Cricket Ground, originally the racecourse, of one
mile in circuit. This deserves a visit. It is a well-kept
ground, with a good pavilion for spectators, and, if our visit


takes place during the cricket season, we are pretty sure to see
some good play, since Tasmania fully participates in the wonderful
progress which the Australian colonies have made in cricket during
the last ten years. A little further along the Elphin-road we come to a
street marked New-street on the maps, running off to our right, and
immediately beyond the junction of this street with the Elphin-
road is a fine collegiate building, The Methodist Ladies’ College,
just opened with a splendid teaching staff of University men and
lady graduates. Then follows a turn to the left, marked in the map
as Goderich-street, but containing very few houses. Going down
the road, we find on our left the Church of England Burial
Ground. It is well laid out, and nicely planted. The Roman
Catholics have a burial ground on the slope of the Cataract Hill.
The Presbyterians have one on the Windmill Hill; this ground is
rather remarkable for the costliness of some of its monuments. The
Jews have a little burial ground at Invermay, and there is one large
burial ground, open to all denominations, and designated The
Cemetery. It is situated near the Hospital.
Invermay, mentioned above, is a suburb on the country side of the
Horth Esk. The Invermay-road is a continuation of Tamar-street
and connected with it by a bridge over the Esk. On the right
hand side going out of town is a Government reserve designated
Invermay Park. It is the exercising ground of the volunteers, and
contains the rifle-butts. Several good country residences with
large gardens are to be found further on along the Invermay-road.


CHAPTER IV.
VICINITY OF LAUNCESTON.-BEACONSFIELD
AND LEFROY.—LAUNCESTON AND WESTERN
RAILWAY.
Having visited the objects most worthy of interest in the town
and the immediate suburbs, let us take a cab and drive out on the
Elphin-road to Goderich-street, past the Church of England Burial
Ground, across the Railway, across the Esk, by Hobler’s Bridge,
and then along a pleasant country-road, with hawthorn hedges, as in
England. The portion of country we are now traversing is called
Patterson’s Plains. A little way off to the left lie the Waverlet
Woollen Mills, well worth a visit. A drive of about four miles
along this road, brings us to the village of St. Leonard’s a
delightful spot for residence and one which combines the advantages
of town and. country for itis thenearest Railway Station to Launceston,
and it has the benefit of all the trains of the Launceston and Western
line and as well as of all those which run on the Main Line. Many
persons whose business is in Launceston have their residences here.
Some of the houses are very handsome, and well-appointed in every
way, with gardens sloping to the banks of the North Esk. Here, and
for several miles, the Esk is so concealed by willows, that it gives the
impression of a mere dividing ditch, till we penetrate the screen and
find a fine channel of 80 or 90 feet wide carrying an ample volume of
limpid water. If we are lucky enough to be able to borrow a boat
we can enjoy a pull of some miles under the willows, and very enjoy-
able indeed it is on a summer day. Three miles further on we
come to the romantic gorge of Corra Linn, through which the
North Esk rushes in a series of cataracts amidst perpendicular rocks,
the crevices of which are filled with rich green vegetation. A
wooden bridge spans the gorge and furnishes a good position from
which to view the rush of the water. In all pictorial illustrations of
Tasmania, photographic or other, Corra Linn occupies a conspicuous
place.
The Punch Bowl, facing Patterson’s Plains, at the back of
“Penquite,” is a favourite pleasure resort. It is a pool lying
at the foot of a cleft in a greenstone precipice, and about 50
feet below the edges of the cliffs, which form an amphitheatre about
it. The variety of foliage and wild flowers surrounding it add


greatly to its attractions. It may be reached by following High-
street over the Windmill Hill, to the Hobart-road, where a gate on
the left-hand admits to a private road which passes close to it.
The Cataract on the South Esk has already been mentioned ; and
we have supposed our tourist to be paying a visit to it by way of the new
Esplanade leading up to the First Basin. It is well worth while to
visit it also by means of a boat, which can be hired at the wharves.
Pulling up the stream beneath the graceful iron bridge, we find our-
selves between lofty rocks rising almost vertically from the river bed.
Beneath the cliff on the left is a line of shutes to convey water to an
overshot mill below the bridge. The leakage produces clouds of spray
which refract the sun’s light, and brighten up the bare brown rock
with rainbow tints. Landing on the right-hand bank, just below the
rapids, and at the foot of a rock known as the Pic-nic rock, -we
can gain access by a scramble up the precipice to the First Basin,
which we have already had the chance of visiting by the easier
approach of the new Esplanade. It is a sheet of w'ater lying in the
midst of steep high hills crowned with wood. Its eleva-
tion above the Tamar is about 40 feet. Grand hills surround us,
and through the gorge by which we have arrived, we see the iron
bridge, and the northern end of the town beyond.
The Second Basin is comparatively little visited, though it lies
°nly three or four miles out of town. It requires a rough scramble to
reach it, but it well repays the trouble. The water lies smooth and
placid between lofty banks, but issues foaming over rocky channels
round the sides of an island of some acres in extent, formed apparently
by the detritus brought down by the torrents from above. There is
also a Third Basin: it is more difficult of access than the Second,
and few excursionists have the perseverance to reach it. It is most
readily reached by way of Pitcher’s Hotel on the Westbury Road:,
the distance is about seven miles.
Beaconsfield and Lefroy.
While in Launceston, the opportunity is favourable for a visit to
the two interesting goldfields of Beaconsfield and Lefroy. Though
they are not in the immediate vicinity of Launceston, access to them.
ls easy either by land or water. They lie on opposite sides of the
Tamar, and each of them is about 28 miles from Launceston by road.
We will suppose that we take the land route to Beaconsfield. A
coach runs daily thither from Launceston. Driving down towards
the Cataract Hill, we cross the South Esk' by the iron bridge,.
aQ d, diverging to the right where the road divides, we keep along,
C


the West Tamar-road, enjoying many pleasing river views, 12
miles down, where the river opens out into the beautiful lake Winder-
mere, we arrive at Rosevears Point, the place of departure for ocean
mails arriving from distant parts of Tasmania. Near this is
a massive pile of rocks known as Brady’s Look-Out, so named from
having been the hiding-place and watch-tower of Brady, a notorious
bushranger, who infested this district in the third decade of the present
century. The interest of the journey is maintained by the beauty
of the scenery on both sides of the road. On the right-hand side we
are almost continuously in sight of the Tamar, and on the left the
country is varied and generally open, but closed in the distance by
mountains. We arrive at Beaconsfield, after a journey long
enough to be pleasant, and not long enough to be tedious. We are
now in the town which ranks next after Hobart and Launceston
in population and importance. Its growth is of recent date, and is
due mainly to the remarkable productiveness of the Tasmania Mine,
which is at the present moment probably the richest gold mine
in the Australian colonies. If we have come furnished with an order
-of admission from Mr. R. H. Price, of Launceston, who is the legal
manager, we can visit it, descending the main shaft, and goiDg
through the principal adits, after arraying ourselves in such over-
garments as shall prevent our ow*n clothes from being utterly
destroyed by the wet and clay. The Tasmania is not the only mine
in the Beaconsfield district, though far the most profitable, the out-
put being constant and almost unvarying, and the fortunate share-
holders getting their dividends monthly. But there are other mines
in and about the town, and notably the Florence Nightingale, which
pays dividends spasmodically, when the miners are fortunate enough
to strike a rich reef; but which has had great difficulties to contend
with, owing to the influx of water. It is worth while to stay one
night at Beaconsfield, and there is no difficulty in finding a good inn.
The town consists of one long street about a mile and a-half in length,
with several cross streets. It has churches, banks, insurance
agencies, hotels, and everything essential to a well-organised com-
munity. The valuable reef which led to the formation of the Tas-
manian Mining Company was discovered in 1877 by Mr. William
Dally, who unfortunately parted with his interest in the mine,
before it had fully developed its wealth. Beaconsfield lies about two
miles inland from the head of an inlet of the Tamar, where there is
a jetty for landing goods and passengers. It has sprung up in the
neighbourhood of York Town, historically the first spot settled in
the north of Tasmania. Supposing that,instead of returning to Laun-
ceston as we come, we decide to cross the Tamar, and go home


by the other bank, paying a visit to the important gold-
field of Lefroy on our way. To do this we must cross to George-
town, a distance of eight miles from the jetty, in one of the river
steamers. We then have a coach journey of eleven miles to Lefroy,
a small town, which has fallen off in population and prosperity
during the last four or five years, owing to the comparative ex-
haustion of the mines. It received its present name during the period
of Sir Henry Lefroy’s short, but very popular government in 1881.
Up to the time when he visited this gold-field it had been known as
Nine-mile Springs. The Native Youth Mine, the New Chum, and
the West Chum were at one time highly productive, and seemed to
promise a prosperous future to the little township which sprung up
around them, though the Native Youth has ceased to pay its
expenses. It is of all mines in the colony about the best worth
visiting. It is a typical mine above all others. Close by the
office of the company, and on a level with the wall of the office, is a
batten gate, carefully fastened, and just behind this is a square hole
in the ground, utterly black as you look into it. There is nothing
to show us whether it be 10 feet deep or 1,000 feet. The courteous
manager having granted permission for a visit, and lent us the coarse
mining garb which we gladly don on such occasions, and placed a
tallow candle in the hand of each of us, opens the gate aforementioned
and accompanies us, or sends a guide to accompany us, as we enter a
cage or lift that has been elevated to the mouth of the chasm. We
descend 200 feet in utter blackness. Here we reach the first level,
and the cage halts in its descent; we step out and light our candles.
We step forth into a tunnel just lofty enough to enable us to walk
upright. The rocky sides of the tunnel, or adit, as it is called, are
dripping with water. We walk in slush, and sometimes in an actual
stream of water. At one part we catch a breath of the outer
atmosphere, descending a shaft constructed for the purpose of
conveying fresh air to the working levels. We walk about a quarter
a mile, or it may be more, and find a few tributers, probably Chinese,
forking at the end of the tunnel, and opening it a little further
through the rock. We return to the lift, and down again another
200 feet to a deeper level, where we walk half-a-mile, or what seems
about that distance, through a Avinding tunnel, Avith several offsets
a »d stopes. We probably find some men working here, and it is
With something like a feeling of horror that we think there may be
ethers Avorking 200 feet lower down beneath our feet: but we have
n ° chance of seeing them: our guide advises us not to
venture on the 600 feet level. We enter the lift and are drawn
U P to the surface, having obtained quite neAV ideas of the


character of a gold-mine, and of the life of the workers in one.
We enquire, perhaps, where is the ventilation shaft which we noticed
on our underground journey ? A brick tower is pointed out to us on
the other side of the large reservoir, which supplies the town with
water. We have walked right under the bottom of the lagoon -while
going through the upper level. Apart from our supposed visit to the
Native Youth Mine, a day may well be spent at Lefroy. The claims
are numerous, and though the prosperity of the place is at a low ebb
just now, it is at least likely that rich reefs may again be found in a
region so replete with gold-bearing quartz as this. There are good
hotels in the town, and, at the table d’hote of any of these much
interesting information may be gathered respecting the Tasmanian
goldfields. There is fine crushing machinery in connection with the
Native Youth Mine, and several of the other claims sent their quartz
to be crushed there. The Pyrites works are also well worth a visit.
They are used for the extraction of gold from quartz which resists the
ordinary crushing processes.
We now take the coach again for Launceston, and drive thither-
ward by the George Town road, which runs along the right bank
of the river, the opposite bank from that by which we went to
Beaconsfield. For the first halt of our journey we are mostly
out of sight of the river; for the latter half we have it
almost continuously in sight. About 10 miles from Launceston we
pass a pretty house and grounds known as Rostella. About five
miles further on we are on the crest of a hill whence the road
descends nearly all the way to Launceston, and from this point we
get beautiful views of the town lying on the sides of the Windmill-
hill and Sandhill, which at this distance seem like one. Few cities
in the world are more beautifully situated than Hobart and Launces-
ton, and of the two the situation of Launceston is the more striking,
since the eye takes it in at once. Whether we view it from the top
of the Sandhill, where we look down upon it, or from the river,
■where we get the full frontage, or from the roads on the river side,
where we get a slightly oblique view, the situation presents marked
charms, and the first sight of Launceston is one which dwells in the
memory for life.—“A thing of beauty is a joy for ever.”
The Launceston and Western Railway is as fine a piece of
engineering work as can easily be found. Few lines are better
constructed, and there are few on which the traction is easier
or pleasanter. Unfortunately, it was constructed on too
ambitious a scale. A 5| gauge was employed where the narrow
gauge of 3| feet would have answered every purpose. The


expense was beyond all expectation, and quite beyond any
amount which the colony was justified in expending at the period
of extreme depression, when the line was constructed, 1864—7.
Some notions of the engineering difficulties to be overcome or evaded
may be gathered from the circumstance, that, though Deloraine is only
30 miles from Launceston, by coach road, the rail makes a circuit of
45 miles, to avoid the hills which close the town in on the south side.
It must be said, however, that the public got an excellent article for
their money. The Launceston terminus lies on the north side of the
Esk, just beyond the bridge, which connects Tamar-street with the
Invermay Road. The line crosses the Esk by means of a railway
bridge, and joins the main line immediately on the other side of the
river. It has been explained that the Main Line and the Western
Line coalesce from Launceston to the Evandale Junction ; the differ-
ence of gauge being overcome by the contrivance of an inner rail
to meet the requirements of the Main Line carriages, and of the
extension to Formby. We will assume that our object is to visit
some of the most prominent of the principal townships on the
route from Launceston to Deloraine. We will accordingly omit
mention of the minor and less important stations. The first station
a fter the Evandale Junction is Perth, a quiet country village, with
school, churches, and one good hotel. The next station is Longford.
This is the most interesting and the largest of the older
country townships ; and well deserves the rest of our day
least. There is excellent hotel accommodation, but if it have
been our good fortune to bring an introduction to any of the gentry
resident in or about Longford, the probability is that we shall not
Q eed to go to any hotel, and that we shall not get away or wish to
get away till we have spent two or three days in the place, for a
kindlier and more hospitable set of people can hardly be found.
Several of the oldest families in the colony reside in this neighbour-
hood and from an early period in the present century Longford has
r eeu centre of a very important pastoral and agricultural district,
he Longford Stock Show, which takes place annually in October, is
a med throughout Australia, and brings purchasers from all the other
0 onies. An annual regatta takes place here, and Longford is the
°^ ly town in the colony, except Hobart and Launceston, where cabs
P y for hire. The most conspicuous and noteworthy building is the
g man church which is situated in an enclosure of 10 acres. The
urch is large and well built. It has a clock tower which has never
een finished. The clock was the gift of William IV., King of England,
me is an elegant stained-glass window over the altar. With the
e xception of St. David’s Cathedral, this is the largest Anglican


ehurch in the island. The grounds about it are beautifully planted,
and kept in admirable order. In the rear of the church is a stone,
marking the grave of the mother of the first child of European
parents, born in Tasmania. Amongst the fine properties in the
neighbourhood, Woolmers, Fanshanger, Brickendon, and Entally,
may be considered as historical in the annals of the Colony. About
eight miles from Longford we pass a station, bearing the name of
Bishopsbourne. Near this lies the Bishopsbourne estate, which con-
stitutes the principal portion of the endowments of Christ’s College.
The work of the College was originally carried on in certain build-
ings on the estate, which had not been specially constructed for Col-
legiate purposes. The expenses of the institution exceeded the
revenues, and after about 10 years of active existence, it was deemed
desirable to suspend the work of the College, and to nurse its
revenues. The College was closed at the end of the year 1856. It is
rather a strange coincidence that the High School was re-opened
early in 1857, after having been closed for two or three years, and that
on the arrival of the new Rector, the Rev. R. D. Poulett-Harris, the
remnant of the Christ’s College students mostly joined the High School.
The resuscitation of the High School coincided with the closing of the
College, and 28 years later the resuscitation of the College has involved
the aosorption of the High School. The next station which merits a
stoppage is Hagley. It is a pretty little village, deriving its chief
interest from the neighbourhood of the magnificent Quamby estate,
formerly the property of Sir Richard Dry. The beautiful little
Gothic church on the hill with its parsonage was built mainlv at his
expense, and was endowed by him with three farms and a glebe of
eleven acres. His remains lie under the Chancel. A tablet records
as follows : —“This Chancel—beneath which repose the remains of
Sir Richard Dry, Knight, first Speaker of the House of Assembly,
at the time of his decease, Premier of Tasmania, and founder of this
church—was erected by his fellow colonists as a permanent memorial
of their affection and regard.” The Chancel is the finest in the
colony—the pavement is of encaustic tiles. The east window, pour-
traying in stained glass the Crucifixion of our Lord, was the gift
of Lady Dry, who also gave two fine oil paintings—copies of
Italian masters which occupy panels on the north and
south walls. The church is a perfect architectural gem.
Eour miles further on is the scattered township of Westbury. The
surrounding country presents a grand appearance, the western tiers
forming the background of the picture,—Quamby Bluff, an isolated
mountain, standing forward like an outpost of the lofty range. There
are two fine churches in Westbury, belonging respectively to the


Anglican and Roman Catholic communions. The latter is an especially
fine building. It is situated in beautiful grounds, of 5J acres in
extent, laid out, planted, and carefully tended by the \ en. Arch-
deacon Hogan, who for 35 years has been the incumbent of this
church. From Westbury the train passes the large grazing farms
of the Field and Martin families, the latter giving its name to the
hamlet of Exton, beyond which the land is divided into smaller
estates, and we soon arrive at Delokaine, the original terminus of
the line.
This township is prettily situated on the Meander, the buildings
of the town occupying both sides of the river, which is crossed by a
substantial bridge. The town lies high, and from some parts of it,
especially from the Anglican Church of St. Mark, a very fine view is
obtained of a rich grazing country, shut in by mountains, prominent
amongst which are two that are known as Gog and Magog. They
are separated by a mighty gorge, through which run the waters of
the Meander. If our visitor be an angler he may spend a few daj s
in this neighbourhood, fishing for the delicious grayling or cucumber-
fish, rather absurdly designated “the herring,’ in this and some
other parts of the colony. A licence is required, and the fish are
very abundant in the Meander. Anyone who takes an interest in
racing will do well to obtain permission to visit Mr. John Field’s
estate of Calstock, and his stud farm ; and all who are interested in
natural phenomena will be anxious to pay a visit to the wonderful
limestone caves of Chudleigh. The distance of this little township
from Deloraine is 10 miles. It can be reached by a mail coach, .which
starts on the arrival of the first train from Launceston. The caves
lie some six miles from the township ; and to roach them the tourist
has to hire horses at the inn. He must provide himself with candles
and matches. He will do well to take a flask of brandy with him,
for he will have in some places to wade through water of icy cold-
ness ; and it will be well for him also to array himself in the oldest
suit of clothes he has got, taking a change to put on after issuing
from the cave, for he is sure to come thence wet, cold, and muddj.
There are two sets of caves—the “ Old Caves,” so called because
they were the first to be explored, and the “New Caves, which are
those most frequently visited, as being more accessible than the
others. The following description of the “ New Caves is given by
West in his “ History of Tasmania ”:—
! The entrance of the principal cave, which is considerably more, than
two miles in length, is in the limestone rock, at the upper extremity of
a Barrow ravine, down which flows the stream which issues from the
mouth of the cave and extends throughout its whole length. The


opening is 30 feet high and 50 or 60 in width. At a considerable
distance from the entrance light is admitted by two openings in the
roof, the only ones throughout the whole extent of the cave, and when
they are passed the full beauty of the scene breaks upon the view of
the visitor. Stalactites of every form hang like icicles from the roof,
ome presenting the appearance of inverted cones, others that of glistening
semi-transparent tubes, about the thickness of a pipe-stem, and several
yards in length. In some parts the stalactites, meeting with their
opposite stalagmites, form pillars, in appearance supporting a roof of
immense height. In other places they assume the form of elegant and
flowing drapery thrown over the huge rocks which project from the
sides of the cavern. The fringes of this drapery, when struck by any
hard substance, give forth a ringing sound and every variety of note,
high or low, according to their respective length. The floor is covered
with stalagmites of every form, and sparkles as if paved with diamonds.
If the visitor extinguish his torch, myriads of glowworms are seen to
cover the roof and walls, emitting a faint blue light, and making the
stalactites appear like spectres in the gloom. As the spectator pro-
ceeds new objects of wonder appear. In some places the stalactites,
shooting out into all dh'ections into innumerable small fibres, appear
like fur-work along the roof ; in others like masses of elegant drapery,
extending, fold above fold, to the height of 30 or 40 feet, from the floor
to the roof. Near the entrance of the cave they are of a gray or
brownish colour, but in the interior they are of a pure white. There
are several chambers—some of great beauty—which branch off from
the main passage and have been formed by the rivulet which passes
through the cave.”
Such is a description of the caves as they were before they had
become one of the recognised show-places of Tasmania. We find
now, on visiting them, that the devastation of curiosity collectors,
has been at work, and that the stalactites are sadly broken and
mutilated. The mischief effected, however, is not permanent.
Every drop of the water which is incessantly dripping from the roof
carries with it some particles of lime, which harden at the end of a
stalactite, or goes to form a stalagmite, rising from the floor. Hence
if the caves were closed to visitors for a few years, nature would
repair all the devastations, and they would ere long be as lovely and
as wonderful as they appeared to the first explorer.
We have now brought our tourist to Deloraine and its sur-
roundings; and we might take him on to the Mersey by the extension
of the line which was opened to Formby on the coast at the beginning
of 1885. We prefer, however, to leave that new line until we have
visited the coast by a different route ; and so returning to Launceston
by rail, we make our preparations for a run down the Tamar and along
the North-west coast by one of the steamers which ply between
Launceston and Circular Head.


CHAPTER V.
RIVER TAMAR, NORTH-WEST COAST, AND MOUNT
BISCHOFF.
The first four chapters of this book have suggested to the tourist
pleasant occupation for about three weeks, supposing him wishful to
see without rush and hurry what is best worth seeing in Tasmania.
If he now finds that he has sufficient time to extend his excursions
beyond the immediate vicinity of the Southern and Northern
capitals, as Hobart and Launceston are respectively designated,
he ought to make acquaintance with the North-West Coast.
For many years past the County of Devon has been the most
flourishing part of Tasmania, and the one in which there has
been the greatest increase of population and the greatest spread of
cultivation. Long before the tin discoveries had so immensely
enhanced the value of property in this part of the island, the North-
West was known as the part to which population was gradually
though slowly converging, while many of the older-settled districts
were in a state of gradual decay. From the time when this region
became the scene of important mining operations its own importance
and prosperity ha 3 enormously increased.
A very pleasant mode of visiting the North-W est Coast will be by
taking the steamer Devon to Circular Head and returning by the
road, diverging on the way back to pay a visit to Mount Bischoff.
The Devon belongs to a company called the Launceston and North-
West Coast Steam Navigation Company. It leaves Launceston
every Tuesday morning. The hour of leaving depends somewhat
on the state of the tide, but is advertised in the daily papers. A run
down the Tamar is always interesting on a fine day. Even if our
visitor has arrived from Melbourne direct, and has consequently seen
the river once already, he will find that the journey down will be very
far from exhausting the charms of the Tamar. The scenery all the way
is lovely. We pass in the first few miles a number of pleasantly-
situated residences with extensive gardens and shrubberies. The
very abrupt bends of the river produce all the charm which arises
from a frequent change of the points of view. Then, as we go on,
the river expands into wide reaches dotted with islands, and open-
ing into lovely bays. We often, as in the Derwent, seem to be in a lake


shut in at each end. The course lies between wooded hills. Now
and then we catch sight of the George Town road, and of some inn or
other house on the roadside. In some farts where the river
widens out we see with surprise the extent of circuitous sweep
which the steamer must make in order to keep the channel,
and the closeness of the channel to one or other of the banks. About
four miles down we pass Stephenson’s Bend. Here the annual regatta
is held, and on that occasion the hill-side on the right bank is lined
with spectators and presents a brilliant aspect of animation and
enjoyment. The regatta is the one holiday of the year in which, above
all others, whole families take part. Tents are pitched on the hill-
side and picnic parties are organised ; and if the weather is fine, as
generally happens, a bright and happy memory of the event dwells
during the ensuing year on the mind of all who have taken part in
the innocent and healthful pleasures of the day. A little further on
we arrive at Pig Island. It is from this part that the first view of
Launceston is obtained by vessels coming up the river. A few
miles further on the pretty little church of Windermere attracts the
eye ; but the noticeable places on the banks are not many ; the river
itself is of sufficient interest apart from names and associations.
About two-thirds of our way down we see on our left a church and
manse, indicating the vicinity of the township of Sidmouth. About
this part of the river is Whirlpool Reach, a somewhat dangerous
portion of the stream. The water seems to be always boiling and
eddying, and there are some obstructions to the navigation which
have been partly removed by blasting. Steamers can always keep
a safe course through the Reach, but casualties have occurred
to the small sailing vessels which trade along the coast and up the
river. Further on and on the left bank of the river we see the Ilfra-
combe smelting works. There is iron in this neighbourhood which
has been worked to some extent, though not with great profit. The
Lempriere iron works, established here, collapsed some years ago
with heavy loss to the shareholders. We soon arrive now at George
Town, and here the Devon is sure to land a good many passengers,
and will probably take up a few. There is generally a stoppage
here, sufficiently long to enable anyone who pleases to take a good
look round the township. It is a favourite summer resort for
families from Launceston, and from the northern districts generally.
On leaving George Town we are not long before we pass outside the
Heads, then turning to the west we run along a coast which shows
little evidence of settlement or cultivation till we have passed Port
Sorell. This little township, officially known as Burgess, has a
certain importance as the head quarters of an extensive police


district, but is not otherwise of interest. The steamer will probably
make a very short stoppage here, or none at all. From Port Sorell
westward the interest of the coast increases greatly, and evidences
of settlement are frequent. Sandy beaches are backed by low
ranges of hills in various stages of cultivation ; and these again by
high mountain ranges in the far background. Settlers’ dwellings
are dotted along the coast at intervals, and some of these are large
and handsome houses. This line of coast, with the country for
several miles back, has been much resorted to of late years by the
class of settlers who used generally in former days to go to Canada
viz,, gentlemen of small income, who take up land, and work it, as
an aid to their means, without any thought or expectation of making
a fortune by it. Many homes replete with every evidence of refined
taste are to be found in the Devon district.
Twelve miles along the coast from Port Sorell brings us to the
mouth of the Mersey.
Here there are two townships lying on opposite sides of the rivei,
exactly facing one another, viz., Formby and Torquay. The
wharf is at Formby, and the steamer generally lies alongside it
for the night. At Torquay, the accumulation of sand in the streets
is something marvellous. On a dry day you walk knee-deep in
it. Otherwise it is a pleasing little township, though not so
picturesque as its neighbour and rival, Formby. The trade of the
Mersey has greatly increased of late years; and is likely to
do so still further, now that the Launceston and Western Rail-
way has been extended as far as Formby, thus connecting the
Mersey mouth with Launceston and Deloraine, and render-
ing it the most convenient shipping port for the produce of
some of the most fertile districts of the North-West. During the
past export season (of 1885) the Tasmanian Steam Navigation
Company employed one of their steamers to run between the
Mersey and Sydney, carrying large cargoes, thus opening up
communication between the North-West Coast and the other
Colonies. There is little doubt but that the Company will see their
Way ere long to render this communication stable and permanent.
It would not only conduce much to the convenience of travellers but
also to the prosperity of residents in the various coast ports who
re quire a market for their produce. The hour of starting from
Torquay in the morning will depend in great measure on the state
°f the tide, and, if the weather be fine, we have a delightful day
before us, always running near the coast, and able by help of a
B°od binocular to see, not merely fields, hedges, and houses, but
ev en carts, carriages, horses, and men.


We soon arrive at the Forth, and are sure to put in there, tide per-
mitting. Like all the smaller Northern Harbours, this one is afflicted
with a bar which requires humouring. The important township
of Hamilton-on-Forth lies a little way up this river. It is
called Hamilton-on-Forth to distinguish it from another and older
Hamilton in the south of the island. Then on along the coast to the
pretty harbour of Ulverstone at the mouth of the Leven, whence
runs a plank road to the interesting settlement of Castra. Onwards
to Penguin where we may or may not stop according to circum-
stances. Penguin had silver mines, which were to have made the
fortune of the colony, but which proved about as profitable as most
other mines to the investors, Experto crede. It has since had copper
mines, rivalling its silver mines in unprofitableness, and yet it is
not unlikely that better management may one day make this little
township an important centre of mining industry.
We now have a good long coast run to Emu Bay, where we moor
alongside the wharf. Here we find some thousands of small bags piled
up and waiting for embarkation at the return of the Devon. Try the
weight of one of these bags. It is about the size of a bag holding
141bs. of oatmeal. You are hardly prepared to find that it holds an
exact hundred weight (1121b5.) These are bags of tin ore waiting
to be conveyed to the smelting works at Launceston, for at Emu
Bay is the terminus of the Mount Bischoff Railway, and to
these bags, and to the fact that the supply of them is
unintermittent Tasmania mainly owes its revival from that terrible
depression, which lasted from about 1855 till it reached its lowest
point in 1871, or 1872, just before the discovery of the Bischoff tin
mines and the Beaconsfield gold mines. The township which has
arisen around the Bay is officially designated Burnie, but the name
is little used. The place is popularly known as Emu Bay. It will
probably be dark by the time the Devon has transacted its business
at the Bay ; if so, you have in all likelihood retired to your berth,
or rather fallen asleep on the sofa in the cuddy; thus will you
miss the sight of Table Cape and the little township of Wynyard,
lying at the foot of that grand promontory, and when you wake in
the morning and go on deck you will see with mixed astonishment and
admiration the wonderful headland known as the Bluff. It is a
precipitous mass of greenstone, 478 feet high. The top is flat, 80
acres in extent, and covered with rich deep grass, affording excellent
pasture. The ascent is steep, but practicable from the land side,
t the foot of the Bluff lies the village of Stanley. It is probably
r °m the shape of this grand truncated column, that the name


Circular Head has been given to the peninsula on which Stanley is
situated. The occupants of this little township are very much cut
off from the rest of the world, but there is no lack of pleasant and
intellectual society there, and any visitor, fortunate enough to
obtain an introduction to the clergyman of the parish, and to get
the benefit of his companionship for a stroll over the Bluff, will
find his enjoyment immensely enhanced by the company of a
gentleman, who has made himself thorough master of the Natural
History and Geology of the district. The view from the Bluff
extends eastward to the Tamar, and westward to Cape Grim,
with the Barren and Hummock Islands. Stanley is the nearest
Tasmanian Port to Victoria, being only twenty hours from
Melbourne. Communication has been maintained between Stanley
and Melbourne intermittently for several years, by different steam
vessels. Hence Melbourne is practically nearer to Stanley than
Launceston is; and in conversation with the ladies of Stanley
you will generally find that they have been to school in Melbourne,
and that it is to Melbourne that they go when they want a change of
air or a renewal of their wardrobe. The whole of the peninsula of
Circular Head and a large block of land to the south of it belong ta
a company established in 1825, and named the Van Diemen’s Land
Company. The appearance of Stanley indicates age, and it is in fact
the oldest of the townships along the North coast. Many livine men
can remember when there was little else but impenetrable forest from
Leloraine all the way to Stanley, and when a land journey between
the two places would have been impracticable.
The visitor to Circular Head may leave, by the return trip of the
Devon, if he be content with a short visit. If not, he must either
wait a whole week in Stanley, which he will probably remember after-
wards as one of the pleasantest weeks of his life, or he must hire a horse
and ride down to Emu Bay. Under any circumstances I should advise
a stoppage at Emu Bay. It is hence that our traveller must start for
a visit to the wonderful Mount Bischoff mines—the mountain of
tin - A journey of 48 miles, and three hours by the Emu Bay and
Mount Bischoff railway, brings us to Warataii, the mountain
township which has sprung up around the mines in the course of the
last 10 years. Though new, the place has by no means an ephemeral
a Ppearanee. The houses are substantial, and the streets well laid
out. The township has its churches, its hotels, its banks, its
Mechanics’ Institute, its Post and Telegraph offices, and all that is
needed for a well-organised community. The profits derived from
the Mount Bischoff mine by the original shareholders, or by those


who were fortunate enough to buy when the shares were at a very
low price, and tenacious enough to hold when they rose to 10 times,
20 times, and, ultimately, 60 times their original value—their profits,
I say, are something fabulous. Men who hesitatingly invested £IOC
in the purchase of 100 shares, when the speculation was still
doubtful, found themselves in a few years in receipt of an income ol
£6OO a-year from this small outlay of capital. At one time, when
the company had heavily overdrawn its bank account, and had not
yet begun to obtain paying returns, the price of the shares sank
from £1 to 55., so that £IOO would buy 400 shares. Some of the
fortunate men w T ho bought at that time are enjoying incomes
of four or five thousand a year as the result of an outlay of less
than £2OO. It was the knowledge of these splendid profits which
gave such a stimulus to mining speculation, that for several years all
the savings of the trading and professional classes in Tasmania
were invested in mining shares, and in most cases swallowed up
without any return. There is little difficulty in obtaining
permission to visit the works at the mines. In the case of the
principal mine, the one known as the Mount Bischoff mine, the work
is rather of the nature of quarrying than mining. The whole face
of the mountain i 3 laid bare, an! is one mass of stanni-
ferous rock. Having visited the mines, and perhaps stayed
for the night at one of the good hotels which are to be found
in the township, we start on our return journey by rail to Emu Bay.
The railway journey alone would repay the time devoted to the
excursion, the course of this line being grand in the extreme, wind-
ing, as it does, through deep mountain gorges, and round the ends of
fern-tree gullies, rich with foliage, and with pure, bright mountain
torrents rushiog down to meet the rivers in the valleys below.
Arriving at Emu Bay, we secure a seat in the coach. There is one
that leaves just as the train arrives, at 5 p.m., but we should
recommend the traveller to give this evening to Emu Bay, and to
start by the early coach next morning.
Burnie is well worth a few hours to itself. It is a bright,
neat-looking township, with some good private residences'
well stocked shops and comfortable hotels. It is quite a new
place, created by the shipments of tin, and the tramway which
renders this the port of communication with Mount Bischoff.
It has no natural harbour, but it has a fine depth of water near
shore. It has good anchorage, and an admirable jetty has
been constructed, which, as before described, is generally crowded
goods for or from Mount Bischoff. A visitor, furnished with


letters of introduction, will find a friendly and hospitable
reception in any of these North-Coast townships, and it will greatly
add to his enjoyment of the excursion, if he be so furnished. The
road from Emu Bay down the coast is a very pleasant one. It is
always within sight of the sea, and, in some places, it is actually on
the hard sand of the beach. We arrive at Penguin in the fresh fore-
noon. This, as already mentioned, is a region of undeveloped silver and
copper ore. Stay here for the rest of the day if you have intro-
ductions to any of the kindly and warm-hearted residents. If not,
proceed on your way to Ulverstone, at the mouth of the Leven.
This is a flourishing little township of recent date, serving as the
port of a heavily timbered district, which, as the lands are cleared, is
gradually becoming agricultural and richly productive. If our
visitor be an angler, he will find as good sport in the Leven as in any
river in the island. It is thickly stocked with grayling, blackfish,
and fresh-water lobster. Along the frontage of the township, for
more than half-a-mile, are to be seen stacks of split timber and logs
of blackwood awaiting shipment. Further up the river there is some
fine scenery, and especially at a rocky gorge, the “ Seven’s Gates,”
where the stream tears its way between parallel precipices hundreds
of feet high.
When mentioning Ulverstone incidentally in our run along the
coast by w’ater, we spoke of the plank road, leading to the in
teresting settlement of Castra. In the year 1867, the Tasmanian
Government was induced by Colonel Crawford, a retired Indian
officer, to set apart a block of land of 50,000 acres, for selection
by officers of the Indian Army. The terms offered were very
advantageous and the scheme was made known widely throughout
India by means of the Press. It induced a good many Ind ian officers
to come to Tasmania, and in most instances those who came
remained, but very few actually took up the land offered them in
Castra. They found that they could buy cleared and partially cul-
tivated land for less money than it would cost them to clear a
holding in the heavily-timbered Castra district. The result of Col.
Crawford’s scheme, however, has been to introduce a strong Indian
element amongst the gentleman settlers of the North-West coast.
Meanwhile setlement is proceeding at Castra, but the occupants of
the land are chiefly men who have purchased it from the original
selector. Colonel Crawford’s own estate of Deyrah is within the
Castra boundaries.
When our traveller has exhausted all that he wants to see or do
a t the Leven, he will proceed by coach to Hamilton-on-Fortii,


a pleasanily-situated township, with a curiously-shaped bridge
connecting the portions which lie on the opposite sides of the river.
A considerable number of retired Indian officers, Civil and Military,
have properties in the vicinity of Hamilton. There is little to detain
us here, unless we are acquainted with some of the residents.
Amongst the most noteworthy of these may be mentioned Mr. Jas.
Smith, the discoverer of the mineral wealth of the Mount Bishoff
district. The next stage of our journey brings us to the little town-
ship of Leith, more familiarly known as the Don, from the name
of the river on which it stands. The principal objects of interest
here are the establishments of the River Don Trading Company, of
which Mr. Henry is the resident manager. This company owns a
tramway with branch line connecting the port with several districts
and settlements of the interior. They are the largest buyers of
produce of any firm on the coast, and their own vessels trade
from the Don to the other colonies. They have splendid saw-mills
at Leith, and our traveller ought to visit these if he have the luck
to obtain an introduction to the manager of the company.
Three miles more of road brings us to Formby, which has already
been incidentally mentioned in connection with Torquay. It lies on
the left bank of the Mersey, Torquay lying on the right bank t
Until the extension of the railway to Formby, Torquay was the
port of the large and flourishing township of Latrobe. Now Torquay
is out of date, and Formby is likely to carry away the trade of both
the other townships. It is a very pretty village—a good deal
resorted to as a sanatorium. It has a very pleasant esplanade along
the river side, with pretty residences. These will doubtless soon
give way to warehouses and mercantile offices ; and, from being
the abode of persons who have sought it as an inexpensive and
healthful retirement from active life, Formby bids fair to become
the most important mart for export and import on the Northern
coast —Launceston hardly excepted.
From Formby we take the train to Latrobe, the first station
on the new line of rail. Latrobe is a Township, which, from
its size and importance, may well claim to be called a town.
It is the mart of a large agricultural community. The amount
of business transacted here may be judged from the fact that
the Union Bank, the Bank of Australasia, and the Commercial
Bank have branch establishments in this town, conducting their
businesses in handsome buildings erected expressly for the purpose.
The Mersey runs through the town, and spreads out into a wide
shallow lagoon just below it. The bridge over the Mersey is worth.


notice, from the peculiarity of its construction, qualifying it to resist
the sudden rise and rush of water which is apt to follow heavy falls
of rain. Whenever Latrobe develops municipal organisation it is
to be hoped that something will be done to mitigate the plague of
dust which is the torment of the summer months, and which doubt-
less in shape of mud is equally the misery of winter. The visitor
should spend a day in this pretty and interesting town. There
is excellent river-bathing in the immediate neighbourhood of
Latrobe, and a little way up the stream grayling and blackfish
abound. The Mersey widens out into a beautiful lagoon just below
the town, but narrows again near Formby. The lagoon is shallow
with a channel running down the right bank. Little steamers ply
up and down this channel ; and, if time permits, it would be worth
while to take a run again to Formby and back by one of these for
the sake of the views which open to our sight as we proceed. A
pleasanter little water excursion on a fine morning can hardly be
imagined. The left bank of the lagoon, more than two miles off, is
a series of bays and inlets, well-wooded, and studded with farms,
mills, and private residences. There are two noticeable things in
connection with Latrobe besides those already mentioned. It is
the only town in the island which has an organised fire-brigade, and
J t is the only one beside the two capitals which publishes a news-
paper. The Devon Herald is issued at Latrobe every Tuesday
and Friday. When we have exhausted all that we care to see in the
n eighbourhood of Latrobe we shall do well to take the train for
Launceston. There are several stations between Latrobe and Delo-
rame, but none of them are of particular interest. This portion of
the line is quite new, and was opened only in the early part of last
year (1885). Up to that time the journey between Latrobe and
Peloraine was a tedious and dirty one by coach over roads axle-deep
ln mud, or in dust, according as the weather was wet or dry.
We have already made the journey between Deloraine and Laun-
ceston, and shall not linger at the stations on the present occasion.
E


CHAPTER VI.
THE MAIN ROAD.
Until the construction of the Main Line Railway the com-
munication between Hobart and Launceston was by a fine well-
constructed road running right through the island, and passing
through several of the most important townships, as well as through
much of the finest land in the colony. The journey occupied about
fifteen hours. The coaches were built exactly on the model of the
old stage-coaches of England. They were driven four-in-hand, and
the stages varied from eight to twelve miles in length. Fifteen
hours at a stretch was rather too long for enjoyment, but those
who were in the habit of travelling that road in the coaching days
can hardly fail to have a vivid recollection of the intense delight
afforded by the first half of the journey ; and those who, travelling
leisurely, were able to divide the distance, stopping at one of
the midland townships, and completing their journey next day,
found the whole delightful. To visitors from England, old enough
to remember the days of stage-coaches, it was like a renewal of youth
to sit on the box-seat behind four fine horses going at the rate of ten
or twelve miles an hour. The stoppages for change of horses
afforded the opportunity of occasional refreshment, and there was a
nice dinner at the half-way house, with sufficient time allowed to
enjoy it. Except for the difference of time, the journey by the main
road was in every respect a pleasanter one, or at least a more
interesting one, than the journey by rail. The road traversed a finer
country than that through which the rail passes, the views from the
road were finer, and the stranger would obtain a far better estimate
of the general characteristics of the country from the journey by
road than he could from the railway journey. The road itself
is one of the best in the world, and is the finest of the works carried out
by the Government in the days when Tasmania was a Crown Colony.
It is a favourite feat of our young bicyclists to traverse the whole
distance between Hobart and Launceston ; and if our visitor should
happen to be a cyclist he could in no way see the finest parts of the
island so well as by use of his steel pony. If he be not a cyclist
it would be well worth his while to take a horse or a buggy and to
traverse the main road by easy stages, supposing time and means
abundant. The start from Launceston by Wellington-street leads


iip a rather stiff hill; at the crest of this there is a turn to the left,
but, before passing round, the traveller ought to turn and pause to
survey one of the loveliest scenes he has ever beheld. The town,
the valley of the Esk, and the course of the Tamar for many miles
all lie displayed before him in glorious panorama. Within the first
three or four miles from the town lie the Franklin Village and
Toung Town, both named from former Governors of the colony.
We next pass Breadalbane. At a distance of 11 miles from Launceston
we arrive at Perth, already mentioned as a station of the L. and W.
Railway. This was the first stage from Launceston in the coaching
days. About the same distance from Perth we pass a nice wayside
inn, where horses used to change. This and the adjoining hamlet is
named Snakebanks. The next stage brings us to the village of
Cleveland, which always gives the impression of a place that has
seen better days. From this part of the road a fine view is obtained
of Ben Lomond (5,010 feet), the highest of Tasmanian mountains
with one exception. A little before we arrive at Cleveland we have
entered the region of Epptng Forest. All through this part of the
journey the road runs in a perfectly straight line for about 20 miles.
You see it for fully five miles ahead, rising and falling over a gently
undulating country, till the view is closed by a sharp straight line
against the sky, where the road surmounts a rather higher rise than
the average. Emerging from the forest district we shortly come to
a large inn standing on the left side of the road at the junction
with another road which branches off at right angles. This is the
Corners already mentioned in our account of the M. L. Railroad.
The road which branches off at this point leads to Fingal and to
the East Coast. From the Corners Inn coaches run daily for Avoca,
tingal, St. Mary’s, and George’s Bay, and twice a week for Swansea
Vla Avoca. About seven miles of good open road over grass plains
brings us to Campbell Town, the largest and most important of all
the midland townships. It is the centre of an extensive pastoral
district. Many of the original settlers, including a large proportion
°f Scotchmen, took up land on the Macquarie River, not far from
the site of the present township, and their grandsons are still occu-
pying the family estates. Gradually a township was formed on the
track which then served as a road between Hobart Town and
Taunceston ; and from the earliest days to the present time it has
ee n the great gathering place of the midland settlers for sale of
®tock and cattle shows. The Midland Agricultural Association holds
|ts annual show here, and this is considered one of the great events
o the year in Tasmania, and is almost invariably attended by the
overnor and Administration for the time being. To anyone


travelling at leisure, Campbell Town is a very desirable place at
which to break the journey. The hotel accommodation is excellent.
The town consists of one long street forming part of the main road.
A small stream runs through it, and is crossed by a bridge. This is
called the Elizabeth River, and is a tributary of the Macquarie.
Though Campbell Town is not a place of increasing population, and
has lost rather than gained in relative importance as compared with
the two large towns, and with some of the newer ones—such as
Beaconsfield and Latrobe—it has nevertheless a good municipal
organisation. The water supply is excellent, and is the result of a
fine system of waterworks carried out at great expense by damming
up the head waters of the Elizabeth River. Then, again, there is
an excellent hospital, chiefly supported by voluntary contributions,
and even affording to its patients and the public the luxury of
Turkish baths. As we enter the township from the north the first
object that attracts our attention is a graceful church spire rising
above a grove which conceals from view the chancel and the manse.
This is the Presbyterian Church of St. Andrew. Further down
the road we come to a brick building with a square tower —the
Anglican Church of St. Luke—and further on is a handsome Roman
Catholic Church and presbytery. All these are on the left hand to
anyone entering from the north, while on the right hand side, at
about equal distances, are three hotels ; a mere accidental coinci-
dence, but suggesting a somewhat grotesque notion of opposition.
From the Corners onward the road has run across the high central
table-land of the island, with fine grazing plains on each side.
Those who were in the habit of travelling this way before the
completion of the Railway well remember how cold this part of the
journey always was at night, even in summer; for the mountains
which bound this landscape in the distance are too far off to afford
shelter, and we are here many hundreds of feet above the sea-level.
There are no hedges on the road side. It runs straight for many
miles with scarcely an undulation in the ground. A little more than
eight miles of this road brings us to Ross, a pretty little township
lying on the Macquarie River, which i 3 crossed here by a long stone
bridge with strong abutments capable of resisting any force, which
the floods may bring down in seasons of heavy rain. The plains
here cease to present the same uniform appearance, and as we enter
Ross from the north we have rising ground to our left and in front
of us. After crossing the bridge the road turns off abruptly to the
left, and runs straight for about three miles. Near the end of this
stretch of road, we see on our right-hand, a good way off on the


hillside, a large brick building, with a tower. This is the
Horton College, one of the four chief Grammar Schools of the
island. It was founded by Captain Horton, of Summercotes, whose
house lies nearly opposite to it, and close to the road on our left.
The management of the College is vested in the W esleyan Conference.
The President is always a Minister of that denomination,but the office
of President and that of Head Master are distinct. For more than
a quarter of a century the work of the school has been ably
conducted by its Head Master, Mr. W. Fox, 8.A., of the London
University ; the President has been changed more than once during
that period. Soon after passing the Horton College, the road bends
again abruptly, to the right, and just after this turn we pass the
largest and handsomest country residence in the island, the noble
mansion of Mona Vale. It was built by Mr. Robert Hermode
the father of the present owner. The grounds are beautifully lai
out and planted, and a fine ornamental lake adds greatly to their
charm. A few more miles of road bring us to Tonbridge, a
township with very few attractions in itself, but a good starting
point for visitors to the Lakes. It stands on a little river called the
Blackman, a tributary of the Macquarie. It is 56 miles from
Launceston and 65 from Hobart, so that we are fast reaching the
central point of our journey, and, in fact, a few miles further on we
arrive at a road-side inn displaying the name “ Half-way House.
Here in the old coaching days there was always a good long stoppage,
suffioient to enable the passengers to get a dinner; an
the same is now to be obtained here, but the table d hote has ceased
to be spread daily. The district in which the Half-way-House stands
is known as Antill Ponds. It contains several English-looking
country houses with well-kept gardens and fine hedges.
Nine miles further on we came to Oatlands, 1,340 feet above the
sea-level. This is the highest part of the central table-land o
Tasmania, excluding, of course, all actual hills. The c ima e .
consequently colder than that of most other townships, but the air
is clear and bracing. The town is built on the mai & in 0
Bulverton, which in dry summers is often a mere swamp. a'
Tiberias, which we have already described in Chapter 111., ies eig .
miles further on, but is not seen from the main road. Oatlands, is
a neat, clean township, less scattered than many, and consis ing o
one good street, wffiich is itself part of the main road. t con an s
churches, and other public buildings, mostly built of freestone, which
is abundant in the neighbourhood. As the centre of a large pastoral
and agricultural district it must always retain considerable


importance, but it has declined relatively—first, in consequence of
the withdrawal of Imperial expenditure, 30 years ago, and more
recently by the withdrawal of the stage, and mail coaches, from the
main road. Like Ballarat in Victoria, Oatlands is said to be entirely
free from rats—“ No rat gives a ball in Oatlands Town Hall.” The
most prominent object in the surrounding landscape is the Table
Mountain, which can hardly have failed to attract the notice of the
traveller as he approaches Oatlands. It bounds the view to the west,
the top is perfectly horizontal, stretching for many miles, and
terminates in a deep perpendicular precipice. The township is now
connected by rail with the Main Line. It has already been mentioned
that the railway deviates widely from the line of the main road for
a distance of about 50 miles between Brighton and Antill Ponds, and
that the station marked Oatlands is actually four and a-half miles from
it, at a village called Parattah. Omnibuses used to wait at the
Parattah Station, to convey passengers to Oatlands. This is now
done by a branch line of rail, on which there is always a train ready to
convey passengers to Oatlands as soon as the train on the Main Line,
has deposited its freight.
Onwards from Oatlands, another four miles brings us to Jericho,.
where we see Mr. Page’s house and some fine paddocks. The late
Mr. S. Page the father of many sons, all of whom are gentleman
settlers and great connoisseurs in horse-flesh—was for many years’
the proprietor of the admirable stage and mail coach service which
connected Hobart and Launceston. The house stands on a slope
about a mile and a-half from the road, and can be distinctly seen as
we pass it. The township is a scattered one and unattractive ; the
estates about here are mostly sheep-runs. Two stages more, as
matters weie arranged in the coaching days, bring us to Melton
Mowbray. This is a delightful halting place. It is as its name implies
the centre of a hunting country, where, in the season, there are
periodical meets for hunting the kangaroo in the same manner as
foxes are hunted in England. At the junction of the main road and
a cross road leading to Both well, is an excellent inn kept by the
family of the late Mr. Samuel Blackwell. Mr. Blackwell was the
importer of “ Panic, ” probably the finest horse that ever came under
the Southern Cross. “ Sam,” as everybody called him, was a thorough
sportsman, and left an untarnished name, respected throughout the
Australias. His geniality of character, and the admirable manner
in which he kept the hotel, rendered his house a most popular one,
and as the house sustains its old repute, the tourist, who has stayed
one night at Campbell Towm on his way down, might pleasantly


divide the remainder of the journey, by staying another night at
Melton Mowbray. This is what we should recommend, if time is
not pressing.
Four and a-half miles further on we come to Green Ponds, also
called Kempton, from a Mr. Kemp, who settled in this district in the
very early days of the colony, and who has left behind him
numerous descendants. This township is 92 miles from Launceston,
and 29 from Hobart. It is pleasantly situated on a small rivulet
which joins the river Jordan, at a little distance. The village is long
and straggling, and runs in one principal street along the main road.
It has its churches and chapels, a good public library, and a lecture
room, in which lectures and readings are given in the winter months.
We ascend a long hill as we leave Green Ponds. For about two
and a-half miles, we are continually on the ascent before we arrive at
the crest of the acclivity, and here a magnificent view bursts upon
our sight. The character of the scenery entirely changes, and we
look down upon a thorough Scotch landscape of mountains and
valleys in place of the long plains and table-lands through which we
have been passing hitherto. We are at the highest point of the road
over Constitution Hill, and the scene before us is the grandest
sight to be seen in our whole journey from North to South..
The next stage of our journey brings us to Bagdad. This district
is comprised in a valley 6J miles long, and on an average one mile
wide. There are many farms and orchards here in a high state of
cultivation, and fine large stone houses line the road. These are
mostly the residences of old settlers or of their descendants. The
Well-known Butler family, of whom the late Speaker of the House
of Assembly was one, had their head-quarters at Shene, a beautiful
estate, lately occupied by Mr. John Butler, a brother of the late Dr.
Butler. The homestead lies about half a mile back, but is distinctly
visible from the road. Yet a few miles, and we arrive at Pontville,
also called Brighton, only 16 miles from Hobart. Here the long
tend made by the railway has brought it round again to the more
direct line of the main road, and for the rest of our journey the two
roads run pretty close to one another. Mention has been made of
Brighton as a station on the Main Line, but the traveller by lail
sees nothing of the township. We enter it by a rather abrupt
descent from the long stretch of level road from Bagdad. On our
left as we enter is a little Anglican church, of no particular order of
architecture, but pretty and peculiar in appearance. It should have
been mentioned that a coach runs daily between Green Ponds and
Brighton Railway Station. The main street of the township is


steep, and at the foot of the declivity the road bends suddenly
before crossing the bridge over the Jordan ; as a consequence acci-
dents to coaches have been more frequent at this than at any other
portion of the main road. The Jordan, which is a somewhat turbu-
lent stream in winter, is in summer little more than a succession of
waterholes, connected by a small stream flowing through them.
After the bridge the road rises, and we have a four miles’ drive, over
high cleared land, with no particle of wood remaining on it. We
come to a bridge which leads the road round near the head of a
deep creek in an abrupt bend. This is called the Horse-
shoe Bridge, and the bend is a very decided modification of the much
more abrupt bend of the old Horseshoe Bridge, whose ruins we see
a little way off the road to our right. The curve of the old Horse-
shoe Bend was so abrupt that it led to several accidents, and the
new bend was constructed some 15 years ago. Half a mile further
brings us to Bridgewater. The only lion of Bridgewater is the
causeway, but this is a prince of lions. We gave some description
of it in our account of the Main Line Railway. When on our way to
Launceston by train we crossed the navigable channel by means of
a swing bridge. On our way down by the high road we cross it
by means of a drawbridge. The view up the river from the cause-
way is grand in the extreme. We drive across, and arrive at the
junction of the main road with the New Norfolk road. Turning to
the right hand we should find the road which leads to New Norfolk
along the right bank of the river, but, as our destination is
Hobart, we turn to the left, along a fine road, which, after proceed-
ing about a mile on the level, rises with a well-graduated ascent for
about another mile. We have the Wellington range near us on the
the right hand. Near the crest of the hill which we are ascending
we see a little chapel peeping out amidst the trees on a private
estate. We learn that this estate is called Hestercombe, a name
very familiar to those who have lived at or near Taunton, in Somer-
setshire. We also learn that the proprietor is, or was, a Mr.
Govett—and this again is a Taunton name. The road is very
varied, and the scenery both varied and beautiful, as we proceed.
After surmounting the crest of the hill, near Hestercombe, the slope
is mostly downwards. Mountain, woodland, and water are combined
in the ever-varying landscape. At a part marked in the old
itineraries as Austin’s ferry we see on our right hand a model
farmstead with good dwelling-house attached. This is the residence
of Mr. Brent, the third occupant of the farm, and the second of that
name. The ferry has almost ceased to exist, but it was a great con-
venience in its day, before the Bridgewater causeway was constructed.


Some way further on we pass Lowestoft, once the residence of the
Hon. T. Y. Lowes, M.L.C., a wealthy citizen of Hobart, who fixed
his abode here on his retirement from business. We are now in the
Glenorchy district. We pass the village of Berriedale, where there
is a small railway station ; we drive on a little way further, and
arrive at the large and important township of O’Brien’s Bridge, the
centre of population of the Glenorchy municipality. Here there are
extensive hop gardens, and we see the conical domes of the hop-kilns
rising above the vines, between the road and the river. A very
pretty little Anglican church, in the best style of modern Gothic,
attracts our attention as we enter the township. We drive over
the bridge from which the township takes its name ; it crosses a
livulet, which, in rainy seasons, often becomes a torrent, carrying
devastation into gardens and hopgrounds. We pass a handsome
stone church, with square perpendicular tower. This belongs to
the Presbyterian body. The Roman Catholics, too, have a good
stone church here, and other denominations are represented. A
little further on, we notice to our left hand, looking towards the
river, the grandstand of the Elavick racecouse, probably the most
beautifully situated course in the world. All is lovely here. On
our left we have the broad river, dominated by Mount Direction;
on our right the glorious range culminating in Mount Wellington ;
and on the side of one of the mountains we see a long yellow strip
clear of trees, and showing the rocky surface that underlies the soil of
the mountain side. This is the famous Landslip of 1872. In June
of that year heavy and continuous rains swelled Humphrey’s
rivulet and its affluents, which, in their turbid course, brought down
great quantities of soil, of boulders, trees, and undergrowth, until a
dam was formed across the gully, which thus became a reservoir
without bye-wash or sluice. The dam consisted of sufficient timber,
earth, and rock to have formed a causeway across the Derwent.
About 10 at night, an appalling sound, as of a mighty explosion, was
heard for miles. So terrific was the crash that persons residing five or
six miles off across the river sprang out of bed, thinking that the
roofs of their houses had fallen in. The dam had given way, and
this immense mass, urged by the weight of millions of tons of water,
Was borne down the mountain side like an avalanche, sweeping
everything before it. One life only was lost, but buildings,
gardens, and orchards were hopelessly destroyed. A level stretch
of road, from the Elwick course, brings us to New Town, a beau-
tiful suburb of Hobart. On our right we see the Invalid Depot,
once the Orphan Asylum, with its church tower and clock ; on
°ur left some fine villa residences and a church. We are descending


a hill, and from the foot of this descent rises another which we now
ascend. Houses line the road nearly all the way on the left, and are
dotted at intervals on the right. We see that we are in one of
those favourite suburbs in which the dwellers in cities love to choose:
their residence, far away from the dust and noise of the streets. A
long and fine stretch of gradually ascending road brings us to the
crest of Swan’s Hill, so called from the name of a well-known
citizen of Hobart, the progenitor of a large family of the same
name, who built the very pretty villa residence which we see at the
brow of the hill, as we surmount the acclivity of the New Town
road. This marks the boundary between Hobart and New Town,
and now we see the city and the bay in front of us. Our course is
downhill through Elizabeth-street, and we are again in Hobart, after
our pleasant visit to Launceston and the North-West.
CHAPTER VII.
D’ENTRECASTEAUX CHANNEL AND THE HUON.
Ouk, visit to Tasmania would be considered very incomplete if it
did not include an excursion to the Huon. The way to enjoy this
thoroughly is to follow the advice given in Walch’s invaluable “Red-
Book,” viz., to take the steamer from Hobart to Franklin and to
return by coach. The opportunities of such an excursion occur
four times a week. Every Monday and Thursday the “ Huon
steamer leaves the Hobart wharf, at 8 - 30a.m., conveying passengers
and goods to Franklin and the Channel settlements, and it returns
on the Tuesdays and Fridays. The “ Minx ” steamer leaves at the
same hour on Wednesdays and Saturdays, returning every Thursday
and Monday. The steamers are commodious and well managed and
the fares very moderate. Throughout the journey there is always,
something to interest and delight. Looking back as we leave the
wharf, we get that grand panoramic view of the town and mountain
which has been described in Chapter I. of this book. Turning our
back to the town, when we have passed the end of the Castray
Esplanade, we see on our right the whole of Sandy Bay, a
suburb of Hobart, standing at the foot of a range of wooded hills
which culminate in Mount Nelson. The bay extends for about two
miles in a deep curve. Running past it our vessel skirts the coast,


which rises gradually from sandhills to grand sandstone cliffs. We
pass The Grange, a very fine country residence, conspicuously
situated. Two or three miles further on comes The Shot Tower,
surmounting a high cliff and looking like a lighthouse or some grand
memorial column. It was the work of the late Mr. Moir, of Hobart,
and being built of fine white free-stone it stands out beautifully
against the darkly wooded hills which form the background of the
landscape, The cliffs rise higher and higher for about a mile beyond
the Shot Tower, when the coast bends inward with an abrupt dip
towards Erown’s River, celebrated through all the colonies for the
excellence of its potatoes. The river empties itself into a lovely bay-
which is a favourite holiday resort. The town of Brown’s River*
officially known as Kingston, is a favourite retreat of newly married
couples in their state of honey lunacy. Having crossed the mouth
of the Brown’s River bay, we come to a fine headland, Pearson’s
Point, called also Passage Point, on which stands the residence of
the two pilots, Captain Harrison and Captain Cleary. From their
front windows they command such a view of the bay that no ship
can pass unseen into the estuary of the Derwent. Immediately
opposite is the northern point of Bruny Island, which lies low and
does not intercept the view from the pilot station.
Bruni Island (more accurately Bruny) was so named from
General Bruny Dentrecasteaux, who commanded one of those French
expeditions which explored the South Seas about the end of the
last century, and which have left many records of their visits in
the names given to various headlands, islands, and rivers along the
coast of Tasmania. The Huon River itself was named from a
Captain Huon Kermadec, a French explorer, from whose surname,
somewhat blundered, the Kermandie River has been named.
A glance at the map shows that Bruny Island consists of two penin-
sulas, North and South Bruny, connected by a narrow isthmus.
■North Bruny forms the west coast of Storm Bay. The northern
point of this island is almost due west of the Iron Pot lighthouse,
which guards the entrance of the Derwent estuary. Between Bruny
a ud the mainland lies D’Entrecasteaux Channel. The rest of our
journey takes us through this channel till we reach the mouth of
the Huon River. If there has been rough weather on o’ur way down
the bay, we feel a marked difference as soon as we pass Pearson s
Goint and enter the channel. The shelter of the land renders this
part of the journey a sort of river excursion, though we are far
below the line of fresh water. The steamer generally runs across
the channel to a jetty at the head of Bruny. Here they leave a mail-


bag, and generally take up or set down some passengers. We then
run some miles along the island, occasionally putting out a boat, to
accommodate passengers who wish to go ashore, or to take on board
others, who have signalled the vessel by lighting a fire on the beach.
Then we stand across the channel towards Great Oyster Cove,
■once the abode of the last small remnant of aborigines. There is an
air of decay about the place. The bay is shallow, and there is no
good landing place. But passing the next headland, we arrive at
the lovely bay of Little Oyster Cove. Here there is an excellent
jetty on which we are always sure to see many persons awaiting the
arrival of the steamer. Several houses are in sight, with well-kept
gardens and orchards sloping down to the beach. About three
■miles more along the coast brings us to the township of Wood,
bridge, better known by its unofficial designation of Peppermint
Bay. Within the last three or four years this has been rising into
note as a favorite summer resort. There is no hotel or regular
boarding house ; but some of the inhabitants have comfortable rooms
to spare, which they are glad to let to visitors. A good boarding
house is the one thing wanting to render this the favourite watering-
place of Southern Tasmania. It is but three hours’ journey from
town, and there is daily communication by steamer. There are
marked signs of improvement here. In the course of the last year
(1885), a very pretty school-house was opened ; an elegant little
church was erected and consecrated ; and in this there is service
«very Sunday in accordance with the rites of the Church of England.
There is also a small church in which members of different denomi-
nations occasionally officiate. A new court house, and police
station have just been erected ; and the township contains a post
office and telegraph station. Most of the inhabitants of Peppermint
Bay are fruit growers ; and a large, well-constructed jetty with
tram rails furnishes the means of conveying their produce to the
steamer. A road is in course of construction to the thriving town-
ship of Port Cygnet, which is only about eight miles distant by
land, though almost 30 miles distant by water owing to the
windings of the coast. From these causes, and from 'the intrinsic
beauty of the situation and the delightful climate, sheltered as it is
by an amphitheatre of hills, the value of real property in this
neighourhood has much increased within the last year or two. A
run of five miles more along the coast brings us to Long Bay. Here,
too, there is a jetty. The properties in this neighbourhood are
larger than at Peppermint Bay and there is more agriculture, though
fruit is still the staple produce. Three miles further on we arrive
at Three Hut Point, officially known as Gordon. It is situated


opposite the northern point of South Bruni. The vicinity is thickly-
wooded with fern gullies traversing the forest at intervals. Rook-
wood, the residence of the late Mr. J ohn Abbott, used to be a great
attraction to visitors from the beauty of its position and the taste-
fulness of his grounds and gardens. On Mr. Abbott’s property coal
was found in considerable quantities, but the owner was never able
to work it to profit. After passing Gordon our course carries us
westward into the mouth of the Huon and past Huon Island which
is described by the author of “ Through Tasmania” as 105 acres of
fertility. It is a pretty island farm fringed round with sheoak and
lightwood, with a wood of gum trees in the south, and clumps left
for shelter in various parts. Passing Huon Island, we soon arrive at
Poet Cygnet, the estuary of a river which discharges itself into
the estuary of the Huon. The harbour of Port Cygnet is deep and
well sheltered, and would afford safe anchorage to a large fleet of
ships. The township is officially known as Lovett. It is a thriving
place with sawmills and jam manufactories ; coal has recently been
found there and worked to advantage. Crossing to the other side of
the river some miles further on the steamer arrives at Shipwrights”
Point, where a regatta is held annually. It generally takes place
on New Year’s Day, and brings dowrn many hundreds of the popu-
lation of Hobart. The Tasmanian Steam Navigation Company
generally put on one of their large steamers for the occasion and
three or four smaller steamers also lay themselves out for the excursion
and are usually crowded. Somewhere about 1,500 may be estimated
as the average number of visitors from Hobart to the Huon on
occasion of the regatta at Shipwrights’ Point. On leaving Ship-
wrights’ Point the steamer crosses a bar, where dredging operations,
are now in progress, and about 5 p.m. arrives at the capital
°f the district— Franklin —so named from Sir John Franklin*
fhe great Arctic navigator, who was Governor of Tasmania from
1837 to 1843. The town is built on the right bank of the river and
ex tends in a somewhat scattered manner for about a mile. Good
hotel accommodation may be had here ; and a few days may be
pleasantly spent in Franklin and its neighbourhood. The visitor will
probably spend some of his available time in a boating excursion round
gg Island, or to the township of Victoria, a few miles higher up the
river, and he will be charmed by all he sees around him, more
specially by the mirror-like effects of the water. Every object i&
re flected with wonderful accuracy and minuteness of detail ; the
overhanging trees and foliage in all their fantastic forms, the tints of
e clouds and colour of the sky, with the green of the orchards and
gardens beyond, together form a picture which in after days will


often “ Flash upon that inward eye which is the bliss of solitude.”
At the back of Franklin is “ the Tram,” a road made for the con-
veyance of timber from the heart of the primeval forest, A run
along this tram to the sawmills of Geeveston, on the Kermandie,
near Shipwrights’ Point, furnishes an interesting excursion. There
can be seen the process of felling and bringing to the mills the
huge monarchs of the forest, many of which are 200 to 300 feet
in length and six to eight feet in diameter; while the whole
forest scenery in the vicinity is beautiful in its grandeur. Another
pleasant excursion may be made to the fishing grounds below the bar,
where fish are generally plentiful, and the shore offers facilities for
picnics. Peacock’s jam factory is an object of interest. A large
proportion of the fruit produced in the district is preserved here and
exported io the neighbouring colonies, in all of which Peacock’s jam
beam a high reputation. Leaving Franklin by coach we travel for
about five miles near the bank of the river, and, crossing a sub-
stantial bridge, arrive at Victop.ia. At this place the river is much
narrower and the water runs more rapidly. A pleasant stay may
be made here, the Picnic Hotel being noted for its good accommo-
dation for travellers and visitors. The country around consists of
fine orchards and pasture land, reminding one often of the aspect of
Kent or Hertfordshire. There is good fishing in this part of the
river also: the grayling is abundant, and the brown trout may some-
times be caught here. The journey back to Hobart by coach is
made through mountain and forest scenery of great beauty. The
distance from Iranklin to Hobart by road is 28 miles, much less
than halt the distance by water. From the Picnic to Hobart is 23
miles. The road runs tnrough acres of gigantic ferns and picturesque
mountain gorges. It is terraced round tlje spurs of Mount Welling-
ton. In some places the incline on which the road has been cut
is so steep that the tops of enormous gum trees are on a level with
the coach as it bowls along the highway. The necessity for heading
numerous creeks and gorges makes the bends of the road very
abrupt in some parts, and many portions of it are constructed by
means of arches and culverts. The flooding rains of November 29th
and 30th, 1885, made a clean breach of many yards in cne part of
the road, the water having come down in such a volume that
the culverts were quite insufficient to carry it off. Coming
from the Huon to Hobart the incline is almost continuously upward
till we arrive quite near the town, when a bend in the road brings
to view the bright and beautiful panorama of the city and the bay,
and a rapid drive downhill soon lands us at the British Hotel, in
Liverpool-street.


CHAPTER VIII.
SORELL, RICHMOND, EAST COAST, FINGAL, &c.
Twenty years ago a journey to the East Coast was a matter of
considerable difficulty, not unaccompanied by danger. As far as
Richmond there was an excellent road ; but then began a series of
ill-made and ill-kept cross roads, so steep at some parts that they
were equally dangerous to ascend or descend. One part of the road
up Mount Morrison was known as Break-my-Neck, and another as
Burst-my-Gall, then followed tracks on the edge of precipices, so
narrow in some places that there was merely room for the wheels
■of a dog cart, the outer end of the seat actually overhanging descents
of hundreds of feet. Then, in the way of public conveyance, there was
nothing from Richmond onward but a mail-cart, which could take
one passenger on the driver’s seat. Country settlers would sometimes
drive their wives to town in tandem or buggy, by these wretched
Toads ; but it was a journey which the ladies always looked forward
to with dread, and which they took reluctantly when their own
wardrobe or their children’s needed renewal, or when the longing to
break the monotony of country life overpowered the terror of the
journey. In fact, the only way to enjoy the journey was by going
on horseback. Two days’ riding would suffice for the journey between
Hobart and Swansea, without undue fatigue to horse or man, and if
the journey were divided at Buckland or thereabouts it was very
enjoyable indeed. And here it may be remarked incidentally that
•any man travelling by himself, and wishing to make himself
thoroughly acquainted with Tasmania, would find that he could do
Tt in no way so pleasantly or effectually as by riding through the
island on horseback. He could always have a portmanteau conveyed
by carrier to certain indicated points, and he could visit
districts which lie out of the line of regular conveyance, and in
which pedestrianism would be too fatiguing for real enjoyment. There
is no part of the Queen’s dominions in which a serviceable hack can
be purchased at a more reasonable price than in Tasmania, and if our
tourist should have to sell it at half the money it cost him, he would
find that the loss scarcely amounted to the coach or railway fares
Which he has saved.
However, there is no occasion now to shun the coach journey to
ihe East Coast. Instead of the breakneck ascents with the ugly


names, there is now formed a well-graduated and fairly kept road'
winding round the mountain. The dangerous track along the edge
of gorges and ravines no longer forms part of the recognised route,
and from the Campania Station, on the main line, a well-appointed
coach starts twice a week to Swansea, and accomplishes the journey
in one day.
Before we start, however, for our East Coast journey, we will pay*
a visit to an interesting district, which lies some way off our proposed
route, at an easy distance from Hobart. The map of Tasmania shews
a large irregular peninsula dividing the estuary of the Derwent from
Erederick Henry Bay. The upper end of the abovenamed bay
communicates with a sort of saltwater lake named Pittwater, into,
which several rivers empty themselves. At a very early period irr
the history of the colony many settlers took up land on the north-
and east shores of Pittwater, and a township grew up there, which
received the name of Sorell, from that of the Governor who presided
over the affairs of the colony between the years 1817 and 1824. The-
township is 16 miles from Hobart. To reach it we cross to-
Bellerive and take one of the two coaches that runs thence daily
between Bellerive and Sorell. The road leads through the township
of Clarence, the centre of a rural municipality, past the foot of
Mount Rumney, and across Pittwater by means of a causeway three
miles in length. The Sorell causeway is the especial object of
interest to the tourist in his visit to this district. It was completed
and opened in the year 1876, after having been many years in course
of construction and having proved the ruin of several contractors.
Successive governments had from time to time taken it in hand, and
had failed to complete it, owing to miscalculations of expenses and
consequent insufficiency of parliamentary grants. It is an immense
boon to the inhabitants of Sorell, as enabling them to bring their
produce direct by road to the Hobart market; for, it should be
mentioned that among the boats which run between Hobart and
Bellerive (Kangaroo Point) there is one, the oldest of the number,
which is a regular steam ferry, so large and strong that a loaded
waggon can drive straight on board, and be conveyed across without
unloading or unharnessing, so that it may be considered as virtually
forming part of the road. Sorell is a quiet and orderly township,,
the centre of a rural municipality and of an important agricultural
district. The landowners in its neighbourhood are mostly the
grandchildren of the original settlers. Family names have changed
very little since the original settlement. It has its churches, schools
and hotels, but it may be considered as somewhat out of the world.
There is an air of comparative antiquity about it, and something of
the aspect of those small English towns in agricultural districts which,
lie off the routes of railway communication.


Retracing our steps from Sorell, we find a road turning abruptly to
the right near the foot of Mount Rumney. This leads to Richmond
and the East Coast. And if our tourist were on horseback or driving
his own or a hired vehicle, he could not do better than turn off here
and proceed at once to Richmond, without returning to Hobart. If,
however, he avail himself of the ordinary conveyance he will return
to Hobart, and make a fresh start next day for Richmond. Now to
this old and pleasantly situated township there are three routes.
Far the most interesting of these is by way of Risdon, and the old
Richmond Road. This road is one of those grand public works which
were carried out in the days of the Imperial regime, when the
Government had an unlimited supply of labour available for such
purposes. Crossing the ferry at Risdon we proceed along the road
by which we go to Mount Direction, as described on page 17; but,
instead of crossing the creek where it joins the Derwent, we pass
round the foot of the elevation on which stands the old Government
cottage, occupied for so mary years by the late Mr. Gregson. After
passing this the scene becomes wild and grand as we approach
Grass-Tree Hill, up which the road winds terracewise, with a deep
valley on the right hand, and wooded, rocky heights rising abruptly
on the left. Turning from time to time as we near the summit we
obtain a magnificent prospect of which the blue expanse of the
Derwent, Government House, a portion of the City, and Betsy Island
breaking the distant sea line, constitute the most striking features.
Reaching the brow of the hill, where a small inn offers refreshment
for man and beast, we find other charming landscapes greeting us
on the descent. The windings of the road are more marked and
abrupt than they were on the side by which we ascend. Each new
bend seems to show the grand mountain scenery under a new
At length we arrive at a point whence we see a long stretch of nearly
straight road and the little town of Richmond in the distance.
Now this is by very far the most interesting route from Hobart to
Richmond, and the charms of the road impress themselves inefface-
ably on the minds of those who have traversed the beautiful series
of terraces which lead across Grass-Tree Hill; but, unfortunately,
there is no public conveyance this way. There was a Richmond
coach by way of Risdon till the opening of the railway, but it was
withdrawn soon after. Hence special arrangements are necessary for
a nyone wishing to make the journey by way of Grass-Tree Hill; but
the time and expense would be well repaid by the delights of the
excursion. The two other ways to Richmond are : first, by the
railway to Campania, where a mail conveyance meets the express
and mail trains ; or, second, by the same road which we have
E


already traversed on our way to Sorell. This route is the more to be
recommended for reasons which a glance at the map will explain.
Among the country towns of Tasmania there are few more prettily
situated than Richmond. The Coal River valley, in which it lies, is
surrounded by hilly ranges, most of which are of easy ascent and
command an expanse of varied and picturesque landscape. There
are numerous pleasant residences, with gardens and shrubberies, in
the immediate vicinity ; but many of them no longer find tenants.
There is an air of decadence about the whole place—an aspect of
faded gentility, Those whose recollections of it go back a little more
than 30 years remember it as the centre of a pleasant, cultivated
society; but that was in the day of penal establishments, andßichmond
was one of the Government head-quarters. What importance it has
at present arises from the fact of its being the centre of a grazing
country, and from having a good many large estates in the
neighbourhood. There is a pretty English Church, a Roman
Catholic Church, an Independent Chapel, and a good public school.
There are two good hotels and some well-stocked stores. The
bridge over the Coal River is a fine solid structure.
When we have exhausted all that we care to see in and about
Richmond we may take Green’s mail conveyance for Campania. It
leaves in the afternoon at 6 p.m. A drive of about five miles brings
ns to Campania, and, taking a bed at the Railway Hotel, we shall
be ready to start in the morning by George Burdon’s conveyance for
Swansea, vid Buckland, Orford, and Spring Bay. Campania has
already been mentioned as a station on the Main Line Railway. It
is a township called into existence by the line, and has already
become a sort of rival to Richmond. The name Campania was that
of a large estate originally belonging to the father of Sir Francis
Smith, late Chief Justice of Tasmania. The road hence to the East
■Coast goes through many fine properties, and at about the eighth
mile ascends a pass known as Black Charlie’s opening. At the end
of this long pass the scene changes to an open flat known as Brushy
Plains, into which the road slightly descends and traverses the
large estate of Runnymede, formerly the property of Mr. Askin
Morrison, a leading merchant of Hobart and Member for Sorell
in the first Parliament under the Constitution Act. A little beyond
Runnymede the road again becomes an ascent ; and till we reach
Buckland, 16 miles further on, we pass a succession of wild mountain
slopes and gullies generally covered with forests more or less marked
By bush fires. From the last hill before our descent to the rocky bed
of the little river known as Nelson’s Creek we get a pretty glimpse


■of the church and village of Buckland seen over a vast expanse of
•wooded heights, beyond which, blue in the distance, rises the three-
peaked mountain called the Thumbs. Crossing the creek by a ford,
and traversing a mile or two of flat country, we reach the scattered
village of Buckland. Placed in a slight elevation on the table-land,
known as Prosser’s Plains, its surroundings rather than itself are
noticeable. All that it has of beauty are its position, its church, and its
parsonage. From a hill immediately behind the inn a fine view is
•obtained of the rich pastures of the valley and of the hilly ranges
which encompass them. The church, dedicated to St. John the
Baptist, is far above the ordinary colonial village type in design and
execution, and contains a chancel window of stained glass represent-
ing the leading events in the life of the saint to whom it is dedicated.
To the north of Buckland is a broken country much infested by the
Tasmanian Tiger, an animal closely resembling the hyena in s : ze and
appearance. It is very destructive to sheep. After leaving Buck-
land about seven miles behind us we ascend a hill whence we catch
sight of the Pacific, and discern Okehampton Point and Maria
Island. The Prosser’s River flows through a gorge at the foot of the
hill. On the left rise the Castle Rocks, a turreted pile, towering
terrace after terrace high above the river bed, toward which the
road now descends by a spiral incline and enters a wild, rugged, and
most picturesque ravine, to which many years ago the name of
Paradise was given ironically as implying the excessive difficulty of
getting into it. The difficulty and danger was in fact very great before
the present shelf roadway was constructed by hewing and blasting the
rocks which skirt the Prosser’s River. The drive to Orford is now
through majestic scenery ; mighty rocks tower high in the air ; in
some places great masses jut out from the hillside in a manner
which gives rise to the feeling that they may in a moment come
•down with a crash, destroying coach and passengers. The river
widens as we advance, and at length we come in sight of a fine wooden
bridge stretching across it near its entrance into Prosser’s Bay. This
bridge was one of the numerous public works carried out by the
Hon. Charles Mere dith during his several terms of office, and is
popularly known as the Meredith Bridge. A small and scattered
hamlet at the head of Prosser’s Bay is known as Orford. It is marked
m the map as a township but it has not yet developed into one. Its
existence is due to some quarries of splendid freestone which were
in active work about the beginning of the last decade, and which
furnish ed the stone for many of the finest buildings in Melbourne.
The only noticeable thing in it now besides the Meredith Bridge
ls a pretty and tasteful cottage, the abode of Mrs. Charles


Meredith, the widow of him from whom the bridge was named,,
and the accomplished authoress of many well-known works illus-
trative of the land of her adoption.
Crossing the Meredith Bridge, and proceeding about four miles
on a road which now takes a northerly direction, we arrive at
Spring Bay, or Triabunna. This township has a noble harbour.
It is sheltered on the east by Maria Island, and may be safely
entered in any weather by vessels of any size from north or south. The
look of decay observable in all the townships that owed their former
prosperity to the convict system is very marked indeed in Triabunna.
It was the depot for Maria Island at a time when that island was
utilised as a penal [establishment. It was on Maria Island that
Smith O’Brien and the other Irish political prisoners were
detained before their release on parole ; and it was at Spring Bay
that Mitchell, McManus, and Meagher threw up their parole, to the
consternation of the magistrate who received the document.
From Triabunna the road runs northward through half-reclaimed
bush land, used for grazing purposes. About 12 miles brings us to
the head of Little Swanport, an inlet of the sea extending four or
five miles inward but so shallow that at low tide a large extent of
mud flats are left dry. Formerly it was a great resort for swans,
ducks, and other wild fowl, but in consequence of the indiscriminate
slaughter of the birds and the wanton destruction of their eggs they
have now nearly disappeared. From this point the road runs near
the coast. We find no township in the whole 35 miles from Spring
Bay to Swansea. A few miles beyond Little Swanport we pass
through the Lisdillon estate, a large pastoral property belonging to
Mr. Mark Mitchell, who employs a great number of hands with
good wages and comfortable homes. A church has been built by
him, which is also used as a school, and is well supported by himself
and by those members of his family who reside with or near him.
From Lisdillon onward the road runs in close and sometimes
alarming proximity to the sea. It is in many parts a shelf-road,
terraced out on the side of a series of bold cliffs ; high rocky hills on
the left, and a precipitous descent to the sea on the right. It is,
however, a fine and interesting road and a delightful change from
the monotonous bush tracks through which we have been passing
for the last 16 or 17 miles, The evening of the day which saw our
start from Campania beholds our arrival at Swansea, supposing that
we have not broken our journey by stopping at the houses of any of
the hospitable settlers through whose estates we have passed. In no
part of the island could the temptation to do so be greater, supposing
that we have been furnished with thenecessary ..introductions. The


township of Swansea is interesting in many particulars. Its situation
is very fine indeed. It lies near the head of Oyster Bay, a gulf 12 to
15 miles wide between the mainland and Freycinet’s Peninsula with
its pendant, Schouten Island. The southern part of the peninsula
and the island are collectively designated the Schoutens. Of all
sparts of the coast of Tasmania there is none more beautiful than
this. If Swansea were easily accessible by rail, or steamer, it would
probably be the favourite watering-place of the whole island, and
would attract visitors from the neighbouring colonies as well as from
the towns and inland districts of Tasmania itself. The view of the
mountainous Schoutens, with their granite peaks, their . cliffs,
ravines, and many-folded slopes, their turret rocks, their precipitous
gorges and sombre forests affords endless variety and delight to the
eye. In the evening sunshine, more especially, they assume a
variety of brilliant colours which call to mind the most gorgeous of
Turner’s landscapes. Then, again, there is a magnificent beach of
hard sand, where we can get an uninterrupted gallop of nine miles if
we be so inclined. There are excellent bathing places at some parts
of the beach, though, as a general rule, the water of the is
shallow for a considerable distance from the shore. A fine pier, 700
feet in length, facilitates the landing of passengers and produce from
the coasting vessels. The settlers in the neighbourhood of Swansea
are mostly descendants of those who originally took up land in this
neighbourhood about the year 1820. The estate of Cambria is still
the headquarters of the Meredith family a name intimately
associated with the history of the colony; the Amoses, Lynes,
the Quaker family of the Cottons (Quakers of the old school in dress
-and language), and others who could be named have occupied the
Glamorgan district for the last 60 years. Glamorgan is the name of
the Rural Municipality, of which Swansea is the capital. When an
act was passed in 1859 allowing municipal privileges to such country
districts as choose to organise municipalities, Glamorgan was the
first to avail itself of the opportunity, and, under the able direction
of the late Mr. Alexander Graham, it became the first of the
-rural municipalities in point of time, and a model in organisation
for the numerous other rural municipalities which were formed
soon after. The Glamorgan district has a very English appearance.
~The fields are divided by hawthorn hedges. Some Somersetshire
settlers introduced the manufacture of cider at an early period, and,
as in the cider counties of England, so in Glamorgan it is the habitual
drink of the harvesters. There are good inns at Swansea, and it has
its churches and its public school. It is about 35 miles distant from
Town, and may be reached thence by a ride across the
-tiers, or by regular conveyances twice a week vice Avoca.


It is to this last-named place that we will direct our course om
leaving Swansea. Taking the mail conveyance which leaves every
Wednesday and Saturday, a journey of nine hours brings us to Avoca.
There are no townships on our way, but the journey is a very
pleasant one, through grand and romantic scenery, and over the
highest road in the colony. In some parts the road has been cut
out on the side of almost perpendicular rocks crowned with dense
forests. These rocky walls rise in some places nearly 300 feet above
the line of road. Having left Swansea at 8 a.m. in the morning we
arrive hungry and tired at Avoca by sin the afternoon. This
pretty village is well worthy of its poetical name. It lies in a valley
at the meeting of the waters of the South Esk and St. Paul’s rivers ;
under the shadow of the grand Ben Lomond on the north, the Fingal
tiers bounding the other side of the valley, and the St. Paul’s tiers
striking east to the coast. From Avoca we start next morning for
Fingal, the centre of an extensive Rural Municipality. The distance
is 18 miles; the road a good one, along a fine level table land, with
mountains bounding the view on every side; it is a very
pleasant road to travel. Fingal was the first place where gold--
bearing quartz was discovered in Tasmania. For some years, from
1852 onward, gold-mining was carried on here, and the Government
even appointed a warden of the goldfield after the manner of the
neighbouring colonies, but it was found at length that the gold was
not there in paying proportions, and the Government officials and
Government aid were withdrawn, after long fluctuations of hope andi
despondency. . Fingal has a church, a bank, a gaol, and two good
hotels. Within the last few years there has been some revival of
gold-mining at Mangana, the centre of the Fingal goldfield. Tin has
also been found in the neighbourhood, and for many years past a
good bituminous coal has been extracted from the surrounding hills.
But Fingal itself is merely a stage on our way to St. Mary’s Pass,.
which may be considered the chief object of this journey. We start
again after a delay sufficient for rest and refreshment. We cross the
Break-o’-Day rivulet by a neat and substantial bridge, and there now
stretches in front of us the Break-o’-Day valley about 12 miles long,,
and from two to three in breadth. Then we pass through
CullenswGod, a scattered village, which stretches in a straggling
manner along the road till it merges in St. Mary’s. This village
boasts one inn, two general stores, a smithy, and a church. The inn
is situated on the brink of a clear, cool, mountain stream which never
fails. St. Patrick’s Head, with its pyramidal form rises grandly in
front, while another conspicuous hill, the Black Elephant, forms the


eastern boundary of the vale. Horses are changed at the inn, and we
are soon being whirled merrily along through an avenue of fine old
wattle trees, whose branches meet overhead; and, if it be spring-
time, the perfume from their golden blossoms is intoxicating. W e
may now prepare ourselves to see in a very few minutes one of the
grandest pieces of natural scenery in the southern hemisphere.
There are few persons in the Australian colonies who have not heard
the fame of St. Mary’s Pass. Like Venice, or the Bay of Naples,
it is one of the sights of a lifetime. For some time we have been
ascending a gentle acclivity, and when the top is gained we are at
the entrance of the Pass. An abrupt turn in the road, and lo ! far
beneath us is a yawning gulf with almost perpendicular mountains
ascending on both sides. From the narrow rock-hewn road we look
down on the awful chasm with a shudder. There is scarce room for
a foot passenger to pass between the vehicle and the edge of the
gorge. There is no fence except at very sharp turns of the road.
Downwards, ever downwards, is the course of the tortuous cause-
way—higher, and ever higher, ascend the tree-crowned heights.
Every foot of ground is covered with timber and undergrowth ; and
far below, in the cool, mossy depths, can be seen the ever-lovely fern
trees—their tender green contrasting strongly with the deeper hue
of the surrounding gum-trees. At a turn in the road is a stone
trough, fed by a mountain rill which comes leaping down
from a great height in tiny falls, At times the Pass
seems to have turned back on itself, so acute are its
windings, as it round the heads of the many gullies. A little over
one mile of the descent is accomplished when another sharp turn
unfolds to view the ocean rolling in long lines of surge on the shore.
That little hamlet that we see in the distance, consisting of an inn
and some half-dozen cottages, is Falmouth. Down and still down
with endless windings goes the Pass. Hugh masses of rock
overhang and seem ready to come thundering down on the
slightest provocation, carrying death and destruction in their course.
For eight miles we wind along through this wondrous chasm and at
last find ourselves on the sandy plateau of Falmouth, with the ocean
in front and a large sheet of imprisoned sea water on our left, into
which the waters of the gorge empty themselves.
We shall probably feel inclined to stop for a night at Falmouth,
before proceeding to George’s Bay, which is the last point on this
coast usually visited by tourists. Dairy farming is carried on to a
great extent in the neighbourhood of St. Mary s and Falmouth.
The butter and cheese produced in these districts are excellent, and
are largely exported to the neighbouring colonies.


Sixteen miles of sandy road, separated from the beach by two low
sandy hills covered with stunted vegetation, brings us toGEORGE’sBAY,
or St. Helen’s, the principal township of the police district of Port-
land. It is the port of a large section of tin-mining country, now
falling off in output, but still of considerable importance. It lies at the
head of a bay running nearly eight miles inland, and entered by a
narrow channel opening to the Dortb-east. The bay is considered to be
the most picturesque one in the colony, and as a fishing ground is
second to none. Flounders and cray-fish are very abundant, and
there are oyster beds which have not shared the fate of most of
those along the coast of Tasmania. There is also excellent shooting
on some lagoons near St. Helen’s Point, the southern promontory of
those which close the bay. The hotels afford good accommodation,
and are much patronised during the summer months. The public
buildings are of the usual character, Post and Telegraph Office,
Court House, School, Police Station, Churches, and Bank. Within a
short distance of the township are several places worth visiting.
The Lisle Falls ; the bridge at the mouth of a picturesque estuary
named the Golden Fleece ; and a massive granite rock, about 40
feet high, known as Truganini’s Throne. Large gum-trees grow out
of the joints of this rock to a height of 70 or 80 feet. Mr. Wintle,
the well known naturalist and geologist, gave it the name in honor
of Queen Truganini, the last of the Tasmanian aborigines—a Queen
without subjects.
The Warrentinna (Capt. R. A. Hall), which runs fortnightly from
Hobart to Launceston, and vice, versd, calls at George’s Bay.
Good roads and regular conveyances may be considered as ceasing
at George’s Bay. We can now retrace our steps to Avoca, and thence
to the Corners, where we shall be centrally situated on the main
road or railway, and can turn our faces towards Launceston or
Hobart, or any other place which we may choose as a temporary
resting-place after our travels, or as a starting point for future
excursions.


CHAPTER IX.
PLACES WORTH VISITING, BUT NOT INCLUDED
IN THE PREVIOUS ROUTES.
The first eight chapters of this book have furnished more work for
the tourist than he is likely to accomplish in any one season’s visit to
Tasmania. It is scarcely to be supposed, however, that the visitor
who uses this handbook will follow out the routes indicated, in
the exact order in which they are set down, though, indeed, a stranger
to the colony could hardly adopt a better plan for seeing what is
most deserving his notice. By following out the scheme laid down
for him, he will see every noteworthy thing and every noteworthy
place accessible by the recognised routes of rail, steamer, or stage
coach, with a few exceptions which we will proceed to mention.
We shall no longer attempt to combine into connected routes the
places to which we shall now draw the attention of the tourist.
New Town. —This pleasant suburb of Hobart has been mentioned
incidentally in our account of the city and the main road. It is a
favourite residence of the business men of Hobart. It stretches
•about three miles out of town, commencing from Swan’s Hill already
mentioned. Omnibuses constantly run to and fro, and there are two
stations of the Main Line, which are convenient for residents in this
suburb. Standing in clear relief against the dark background of the
Wellington Range is seen a long row of buildings, of yellowish
stone, with a square clock tower rising in the centre. This building
is the New Town Charitable Institution, or Invalid Dei*6t. The clock
tower belongs to the chapel of the Depot, which, from the time when
these buildings were erected has also served as Parish Church to New
Town. The building itself was originally intended as a school for
destitute children, and was popularly known as the Orphan School,
but officially as the Queen’s Asylum. About the year 1876 the
Government adopted the boarding-out system, and those poor children
who have lost their parents, or whose parents are utterly unable to
support them, are now distributed among suitable people all over the
■colony, the administrator of charitable grants keeping a watchful
eye to their welfare. The buildings thus left vacant were utilised for
the accommodation of numerous poor of both sexes, who had been
-maintained at Government expense in various charitable institutions


which are now concentrated in this range of buildings. On an
average about 650 is the number of the inmates. The arrangements
of the institution are admirable, and an order for admission of
visitors is easily obtained from the office of the Benevolent Society, in
Bathurst-street.
Port Arthur. —Amongst the places of interest easily accessible
from Hobart, we should not have admitted to mention Port Arthur,
a spot as lovely in its position as it is ugly in its memories. It lies
in a deep inlet on the South of Tasman’s Peninsula, half-way between
Cape Raoul and Cape Pillar, two grand headlands which never fait
to attract the admiration of passengers by steamers on their way to
or from the port of Hobart. In the old days of penal discipline the
very worst class of prisoners were relegated to Port Arthur. It was
maintained as an Imperial establishment for some time after
transportation had ceased. It was then handed over to the Colonial
Government who continued to use the prison buildings as a penal
establishment, but with a very relaxed discipline ; and, ultimately,
the whole of the establishment was broken up, and the land and
buildings sold to the highest bidder. A good many gentleman
settlers have taken up land on Tasman’s Peninsula. The objects of
interest to visitors are the old prison, admirably well arranged for
its purpose —now happily empty; the model prison an exquisitely
contrived instrument of mental torture ; the pretty houses*
once-occupied by the officials; “Tasman’s Arch,” a rock hollowed
into an arch by the waves; the “Blowhole,” and the “ Tesselated
Pavement,” a curious arrangement of fiat rocks on the beach,,
looking like a work of human art. A steamer runs to Port
Arthur twice a week, returning on the day after its arrival, but,
as there is no hotel within six miles of the wharf, it will be best
take advantage of one of the pleasure trips for which the Steam.
Navigation Company make arrangements two or three times every
summer, and which accomplish the journey down and up in one day,
allowing ample time to see the principal objects of interest.
The two important townships of Bothwell and Hamilton have been
omitted in the preceding pages, since they lie off the line of the
routes which we have traced.
Hamilton.— There is a daily conveyance from New Norfolk to
Hamilton. The distance is 25 miles. We cross the bridge it NeW
Norfolk, and go up the course of the Derwent. The road skirts th&
river for 15 miles, as far as Gretna Green, where there is an inn and
a halt for refreshments. We then lose sight of the river till we arrive
at Hamilton, which lies on the junction of the Clyde and Derwent*


There is an aspect of deadness about Hamilton, as about several of
the old townships, which were important in their day. It is the*
centre of a large pastoral district, and of a Rural Municipality. It
has its Churches, Court House, Post and Telegraph Offices, with all
else that is needed for municipal organisation, and its public school
has the great advantage of being presided over by a gentleman of
high classical and literary attainments.
Bothwell may be reached vid Hamilton, since a road up the
course of the Clyde connects the two places, but the regular mode
of access is by coach from the Brighton station of the Main Line.
Bothwell is the. centre of a Rural Municipality to which it gives its
name. It is one of the oldest towns in the colony. Most of the
families are of Scotch origin. Till a very recent period the Presby-
terian and Anglican bodies in Bothwell held their services in the
same church, each taking an alternate morning and evening service,.
Recently this arrangement has fallen through, owing to some
disputes. Races are held annually at Bothwell under the patronage
of the Southern Hunt Club. There is good fishing in the Clyde,
■which abounds with trout, tench, and eels. It is as well to mention
that a licence is required for fishing in any of the rivers,
which have been stocked with trout or other imported fish. The
licence for the season costs 10s., and in every township there is
someone officially authorised to issue licences. In Bothwell Mr. T.
Perkins can furnish a licence, but anyone wishing to use his rod on
a tour would do well to get his licence in Hobart or in Launceston.
Mr. W. G. Weaver, in Hobart, and Mr. C. W. Rocher, in Laun-
ceston, are the authorised agents for the issue of licences. There
is a grand cascade a little more than a mile from Bothwell. The
whole volume of the Clyde pours over a perpendicular cliff, 40 feet in
height, with a roar which is heard to a great distance. The town
has good hotel accommodation and a public library, A few days
may be spent there very pleasantly, varied by short excursions with
gun or rod.
The Lakes. —The lakes of Tasmania lie in the central mountain
regions of the island at a height of 2,000 to 3,000 feet above the sea-
level. A study of the map shows five principal lakes, Lake Sorell,
Arthur’s Lake, the Great Lake, Lake Echo, and Lake St. Clair.
With respect to these last two, the map also shows that the most
natural mode of access is by way of Hamilton and up the course of
the Dee and Derwent respectively, while a visit to the other three
may best be managed by starting from Tunbridge, whence there is a
track to the Great Lake past Lake Sorell, or by starting from Both-
Well, and following such tracks as keep us near the course of the


Clyde up to Lake Crescent, which is virtually a portion of
Lake Sorell. We must not, however, suppose that a visit to any one
of the lakes is a matter to be lightly undertaken. It involves the
■necessity of tents, rugs, billies, pannikins, tea, sugar, and all
provisions other than bread and meat, which can generally be pro-
cured at the shepherds’ huts. There are no inns in the Lake
District except one at the junction of Lake Sorell and Lake Crescent.
Pack horses will be required, or extra springcarts beyond those
actually needed for seating the excursionists. This supposes that the
•excursion party wish to make a round of the Lake Country, or even
to visit anyone of the more distant lakes ; but if they be content to
visit Lake Sorell, which is the most beautiful of all, much less pre-
paration is necessary. It is only 14 miles from Tunbridge and the
road is safe for springcarts or dogcarts. Consequently it is quite
possible to get a run to Lake Sorell and back in one day, and the inn at
its junction with Lake Crescent will furnish refreshment. Still this
would be a very unsatisfactory visit. The lake, including Lake
Crescent, is 50 miles in circumference, and some time should be
spent in its neighbourhood and at different places on its banks.
Supposing that, instead of starting from Tunbridge, w r e make Both-
well our starting point, we have a journey of 22 miles to the
.junction of Lakes Crescent and Sorell. A writer who has recently
made the journey by this route remarks as follows : —“ The road
from Both well vid Wood’s Quoin through the Dennistoun estate
presents no difficulties to hoofs or wheels. The roads through the
Lake Country are highly creditable to the Bothwell and South
Longford Trusts. They are macadamised in parts and nowhere bad
travelling. Seven miles an hour may be made on horseback from
daylight to dark, and five or six miles on wheels. At the ascent of
a pass by Wood’s Quoin it will be desirable for occupants of vehicles to
walk and ease the horses, but otherwise seats may be kept throughout.
The scenery of Lake Sorell is very fine. Numerous mountain peaks
surround it, far and near. Islets dot the surface of the lake, and
tempting bays and sheltered coves invite the visitors to put off in
boats, and to explore the shores and islands. The diamond beach,
on the west, is strewn with quartz, cornelian, and agate pebble 3.
Thomas Francis Meagher, known in the Irish insurrection of 184 S
as ‘ Meagher of the Sword,’ lived on the shore of this gem of the
Tasmanian highlands during part of his exile, and his cottage is at
Interlaken, a station belonging to Mr. W. A. Kermode, of Mona
Yale. The river Clyde flow's down from Lake Crescent. The Clyde
Water Trust have erected a dam on the west side of Lake Crescent,
which, by reserving several feet more water in the two lakes, renders


the flow ofi the Clyde uniform and perennial instead of being, as
formerly, all floods in winter and a chain of pools in summer.”’
Fifteen miles from Interlaken we reach the Steppes police station.
This is occupied by Mr. James Wilson, the chief constable of the South
Longford police district. He is a great reader, and remarkably well
informed as regards the natural history of the region in which he
resides and the stories of the more troubled times when these districts
were infested by bushrangers. Any party of tourists visiting the
lakes are sure to obtain valuable information and advice from Mr.
Wilson as to their route. About five miles from his cottage off the
great Lakes road are the Arthur Lakes. The road to those Lakes skirts
a great morass marked in the maps as the “Lagoon of Islands.” It may
be questioned whether it is desirable to make the whole round of the
lakes in one season; and if the visit to Lake Sorell and the Arthur
Lake satisfies our present craving for lake scenery we can return to
the Steppes police station and strike a road, near Mr. Wilson’s cottage,,
which leads straight to Bothwell, —but if we prefer to continue our ex-
ploration, 14 miles will bring us from the Steppes to the police station
at Swan Bay on the Great Lake. TheGreatLake is about 15miles long,
and of very variable breadth. The deep indentations of its shores give
it a circumference very disproportionate to its area, and roughly
estimated at 100 miles. Its depth is extremely variable. Its height
above the level of the sea is 3,883 feet. There are five small islands
in the lake covered with a species of cedar. The country in the
neighbourhood is composed of alternate marsh and hill, offering many
tracts available for sheep and cattle runs, while in the distance the
landscape abounds in the picturesque adjuncts of mountains and
forest. A local writer, speaking with rapturous admiration of its
Woody islands and glittering bays, says : —“ England may vaunt her
Windermere, Scotland chant the beauties of Loch Lomond, Ireland
proclaim the graces of Killarney, but not with truer or prouder
tongue than Antipodean Tasmania may boast the mountain glories
and glowing waters of her own sweet lakes, than which none is fairer
or sweeter than the majestic Clarence. ” The Shannon emerges a
full-grown river from the Great Lake whose waters nevertheless
sometimes overflow their borders even during the drier months.
After rain they of course rise considerably, and during tempestuous
■Weather occasionally wear a turbulent aspect like that of an angry
Sea.
The three lakes which we have described form a group to which
Lake Echo can scarcely be considered as belonging ; the natural
a Pproach to them being, as before mentioned, by Tunbridge, or


Bothwell, while the natural approach to Lake Echo is by way of
Hamilton; still, as the northern shore of Lake Echo is little more
than 10 miles from the southern shore of the Great Lake, we might
make our way to it by cross country tracks, though there is no
regular surveyed road. “ Lovelier scenery can hardly be imagined
'than that of Lake Echo,” says a writer, who has recently visited it
by the route just indicated. “ The shore is high, and covered with
heavy timber to the water’s edge ; the lake is clear, deep, blue, and
several miles from side to side. This beautiful lake cannot fail to
charm the tourist, so picturesque are the surroundings. Belts of
forest and wooded spurs, enclosing a succession of bays and inlets,
are its peculiar characteristics. There are islands to the north of
this lovely lake which are called the Haywood and Ash Islands ;
both are thickly wooded, and add considerably to the beauty
of this lake. The fairy islets, the flowery banks, and clear
blue waters of Lake Echo render it by far more attractive
than any of the others.” Our advice, however, to anyone likely
to spend more than one summer in Tasmania would be to
divide the lakes between two seasons, ending his first lake
excursion at the Great Lake, and in the next summer making his
visit to Lake Echo and Lake St. Clair by way of Hamilton. As
regards Lake St. Clair, there is no choice in the matter. It is
accessible only by one route, and that an arduous one. The fol-
lowing brief notes of a visit to this lake by Mr. C. W., of Hobart,
give an excellent notion of the journey and the preparations
desirable for it: —
“Hobart to Lake St. Clair.
“ Hobart to New Norfolk, 21 miles ; New Norfolk to Hamilton, 25
miles; Hamilton to Ouse, 7 miles; Ouse to Victoria Valley, 14
miles; Victoria Valley to Marlborough, 27 miles ; Marlborough to
Mount Charles Hut, 14 miles ; Mount Charles Hut to Lake St.
Clair, 5 miles. Total, 113 miles.
“ Provided with a chaise cart; strengthened the springs; made two
boxes, with divisions and trays, to fit in under seat. Light calico
tent, poles, iron-join ted and spiked, shipped outside cart. A set of
four “ billies,” to fit in one another, and each man with the smallest
quantity of bedding wrapped in waterproof. Five in the party.
Sent on laden chaise cart two days before to New Norfolk. Met it
there on the Monday, and provided a second horse as an “ outrigger.
Started from New Norfolk about 10 a.m. Passed through Hamilton
and camped on the bank of the Derwent at D unrobin Bridge. Next


.4ay passed through Ouse and camped at the foot of Native tiers.
Day very hot and road fatiguing. Had to give the horses a day’s
rest. Started on Thursday morning; part of road very steep.
Camped at Victoria Valley where we left part of our provisions to
pick up on return. Had to take on provisions for the horses.
Second horse could not be used back ; too narrow. Horse in the
chaise cart had to be led to avoid rocks and logs.
“ Friday morning, started for Marlborough. Called at Bronte
Station for provisions and guide ; crossed the River Nive, and camped
a mile beyond. Saturday morning, guide joined us. Road been
•disused for years, overgrown with saplings and young trees, had to
be cleared away with axes ; exceedingly rough ; horse had to be
carefully led. Bridge across Derwent about three miles below
lake destroyed, bad to ford over the Derwent five miles down, and
clear our way on the other side. Camped on the shores of lane at
8 p.m., Saturday. Stayed two days at lake exploring the source of
the Derwent: no boat, as it had been badly moored, and destroyed in
a r gale. Horses very much fatigued. Started back on Tuesday,
and reached Bronte Station that night. Wednesday night camped
■on the Dee. Thursday, rested horses and walked to Lake Echo, about
:six miles north, Friday night, at Hamilton. Saturday, back in
Hobart.
“ February, or even March, would be the best time for the journey,
■as there is a large amount of swampy country which, after a dry
season, becomes hard enough to travel over, and thus avoid many a
lengthy and very rough detour. This is after leaving Marlborough.
Ben Lomond.—As in the case of the lakes, the ascent of Ben
Lomond involves a considerable amount of special preparations for a
few days of out-door and tent life to effect it satisfactorily. With
the exception of the Cradle Mountain, which is far out of the regions
of roads and of cultivation, Ben Lomond is the loftiest of Tasmanian
mountains, rising, as it does, to a height of 5,010 feet above the
sea-level. The following notes from the pen of a gentleman who has
made the ascent more than once will be found very useful to anyone
"who wishes to attempt this very interesting though somewhat arduous
excursion :—“ The best point of departure is from Avoca, where Mr.
Christopher Foster used generally to act as guide. Now there is a
■Well-marked track to Rigney’s Hut under the Butts or southern point
of the mountain, from 12 to 16 miles from Avoca, I forget which,
Since my last visit an inn has been established there. From Rigney’s


Hut there used to be a marked tree track over rough ground and
considerable boulders as you approach the gorge leading to the
top of the mountains. I have taken a party, including ladies, on
horseback to the top, and on to the lakes, and only had to lead the
horses a few hundred yards of the steepest part of the ascent. They
were horses accustomed to rough country and bushwork. The
distance from Rigney’s Hut to the top is about three miles. I
recommend any party going up to allow themselves three or four days
from Avoca, one to reach the inn, or, if tent work is preferred, to
reach the Gorge where there is a grassy spot for camping, well
protected and plenty of water. One or two days may well be spent
in exploring the mountains and various lakes. The interior of the
mountain is about .12 miles long by five miles broad. The view of the
interior is very singular and interesting, like Rhine scenery grouped
with castles. There is much illusion, objects appearing very near
in the morning change to distance in the afternoon, or vice versa,.
according to the state of the atmosphere —a splendid field for an
artist having time to wait for effects. The view from the edges of
the mountain all round is magnificent, and very extensive; but
when you leave the edges to explore the interior you have nothing
but the interior view of the mountain itself, which alone is worth
the ascent. The view of the mountain from Rigney’s Hut is very
grand, looking up to a peak 2,500 feet perpendicular, and magnificent
on a moonlight night, or in early morning. I have never been to
the northern peaks of the mountain, but I feel sure it is accessible
on horseback—if on a bush horse and riding slowly. The best
season for the ascent is from middle of January to middle of
February. I have had to melt the ice in a pannikin on the fire to-
take brandy and water in February, but this, of course, depends on
the state of the weather. Explorers should always take a light
waterproof coat to protect from cold winds as well as from rain or
mist, remembering that the exertion of ascent brings one to the top
in a heated state. The trigonometrical station is on the culminating
point of the mountain south, or, as it is called, ‘the Butts.’ ”
In the above notes mention is made of “The Lakes.” The only-
lake on Ben Lomond known in the drafting department of the
Government Survey Office is “Youl’sLake,” which is the source
of the “Nile” River, a tributary of the South Esk. Persons,
however, who have resided long in the Fingal district, assert
the existence of two lakes, at about four miles’ distance from
the Butts and two from each other, each of them about five,
miles in circumference. Some assert the existence of a third
lake, but the accuracy of this statement is uncertain. As a
fact the mountain has not been thoroughly explored, and on this
account will be the more interesting to any adventurous tourist.


Ringarooma is an extensive police district, so named from the
Ringarooma River, which rises in the Ben Lomond Tange, and
discharges itself into Waterhouse Bay, near the north east point of
the island. It has risen very much into note of late years as a tin-
mining district, and includes a number of new townships, most of
which have sprung up since the discovery of the alluvial tin with
which this region abounds. The principal townships are Ellesmere
and Moorina, where the sessions are held, Bridport, Ringarooma
Port, Gladstone, and Branxholm.
Ringarooma affords very little attraction to the tourist unless he
be interested in tin-mining. The following notes, furnished by a
gentleman who is acquainted w'ith the district, will be useful to any-
one who wishes to visit it, making Launceston his starting-point :
“From Launceston to Ellesmere the road is very fair, and the
latter part, crossing the Meredith range, very fine, passing down
into a deep valley through a dense myrtle forest. The roads beyond
Ellesmere are of a more recent construction, but sufficiently good to
enable coaches to run to Upper Ringarooma and to Branxholm,
lower down the river. Between these is Krushka, where the cele-
brated Brothers’ Home tin mine is situated. Moorina, also on the
River Ringarooma, is below Branxholm, and is near the boundary
of the rich country. From this proceeds the track to Weldborough
(Thomas’ Plains) and to the Blue Tier, both tin-producing localities.
The country between Moorina and the coast is very poor and unin-
teresting. Gladstone (Mount Cameron) is close to the Royal Tasman
and other supposed gold mines. Ringarooma Port (Boobyalla) and.
Bridport are miserable holes, the harbours affording shelter to very
small vessels only. The railway, in course of construction, will go-
to Ellesmere through the Upper Piper country, the route being a
good way north of the coach road. The following notes of a Knap-
sack Journey through the Ringarooma district have been placed at
our disposal by Mr. R. C. L., a young gentleman of Hobart “ Left
Hobart on Friday morning by express train, and took my ticket for
Jerusalem. Inspected the coal mines, and went on by mail train as
far as the Corners ; then took the coach next morning for George’s
Bay, arriving there at 8 o’clock that night, and stayed at Mrs.
Traynor’s. Next morning, Sunday, I left St. Helens for Gould’s
Country in the mail cart. The road is a slabbed one, and uphill the
whole way. I had lunch at Kunnarra, at a nice hotel, after which I
Walked up the road about four miles, and stayed that night at Mrs.
Robinson’s boarding-house. On Monday I inspected the Anchor and.
Lottah tin mines, and slept that night in a hut on the Lottah
F


alluvial mine. Went next morning to the Emu and saw the
Murdoch’s Lease, which was about 13 miles out and back to the hut.
On Wednesday morning I visited the Cambria mine, which was
about four miles from the hut. Thursday morning, I left the Blue
Tier about 5 o’clock, and reached Moorina about 3 o’clock. I can’t
say how many miles I travelled, there being only a mountain track
across the hills. Got some lunch, and went on to the North Brothers’
Home mine, which was eight miles from Moorina. Stayed that
night, in a boarding-house, which was very dirty and uncomfortable.
Friday morning, I inspected Brothers’ Home, Brothers’ Home No. 1.,
and North Brothers’ Home tin mines, which are close together, and
walked on to Branxholm. Met the mail coach at 2 o’clock, and
reached Heazlewood that night. Next day, Saturday, I took the
coach to Launceston and caught the express, and back to Hobart that
night, the whole trip costing me about £ll sterling.”
THE WEST COAST.
If, on a map of Tasmania, we draw a horizontal line about
corresponding to South Lat. 41° 40 ,/ ., and a vertical line about
corresponding to North Lat. 146° 40 ,, ) the whole region included by
those lines and the Western Coast of Tasmania, amounting to
nearly one-third of the island may be considered as an unsettled and
an almost unexplored country. It has been traversed by the
■Government surveyors, who have named the rivers and mountains
and have mapped the country as accurately as uncleared land can be
mapped, but the amount of settlement is very small indeed, —of
recent origin, and almost limited to the immediate vicinity of the
Coast. The discovery of tin at Mt. Heemskirk led to the gathering
of a large number of miners there, and seemed to promise the
establishment of a flourishing community. The discovery of gold on
King River has led to the formation of a township on Macquarie
Harbour. The great majority of the Heemskirk mines have collapsed,
and the miners are dispersed. The gold mining works on the King
River seem likely to have greater vitality, though they are not yet


a pronounced success. Hence there is but little to attract the tourist
to these Western regions of the island, unless he be actuated by the
spirit of a pioneer explorer. Any one penetrating the West of the
island must do it on foot, and, as houses of entertainment cannot be
expected where population is not, it will be desirable to get some
assistance in the conveyance of provisions. Last February, 1885, a
gentleman, whom we will designate as Mr. K., undertook a tour on
foot down the West Coast, up the course of the Gordon, and so across
to the Huon River. He encountered very great fatigue, with much
privation, and narrowly escaped severe illness, but his published
narrative furnishes us with the means of describing a
Knapsack Tour from Mount Bischoff to the Huon via
Mount Heemskirk.
Mr. K., having provided himself w r ith an attendant to help in
carrying provisions, etc., set off from Waratah (Mount Bischoff) at
■9 a.m. on the 13th of February. Two miles after leaving Bischoff
he passed the works of the West Bischoff Mining Company; then
had a very stiff pull over the Magnet range. Further on crossed
Hie Whyte River, and passed an old hut 13 miles from Waratah.
The journey up to this was through thickly wooded and mountainous
country. Soon after crossing the Heazlewood River the character of
the land changed, and the journey was over boggy land, overgrown
with the button-rush. This sort of rush grows in tussocks, and out
of the centre of each bunch a long thin stem grows, with a hard
“knob at the end of it. By 7 p.m. our travellers reached an old hut,
of which they had been told at Bischoff, and which contained some
stretcher beds, on which they slept soundly, having walked 19 miles.
Next morning they started for Corinna, some miles over a tolerable
slab track; then six miles across a button-rush plain—a gold-pro-
ducing country—and then five miles of bauera scrub. The bauera
is a great enemy to the miners. It is a sort of creeper, very tough,
and growing very thick and tangled. Then some miles along a
plain called the John Brown Plain, from an old miner of that name,
whom they fell in with, and who gave them a rest in his hut and a
drink of hot tea ; then, after some miles more of slab track, they
arrived at 5‘30 p.m. at Corinna on the Pieman River.
Corinna is 14 miles from the mouth of the river. It is a hamlet of
five houses, two of which are stores, one a Post and Telegraph Office,
and one an inn. It is the port through which the mining district of
Heemskirk receives its supplies. The Pieman River at Corinna is
150 yards broad, and GO feet deep. After a quiet Sunday at


Corinna, our travellers pulled down to the Heads in a boat on the
Monday (16th October). The river scenery was well worth seeing.
High hills on each side wooded from top to water’s edge. The Heads
are narrow, low on the southern side, and rocky on the northern,
with a nasty surf coming in. A grandson of Fletcher Christian, of
the Bounty, is buried at a point near the Heads. He was a constable
here, and got drowned. A Mrs. Webster, who resides at the Heads,
gave our travellers a luncheon. They walked the rest of the day at
first on the beach, afterwards on an inland track which brought them
to an old hut where they slept uncomfortably, being much troubled
with mosquitoes.
The next day (17th) they had very rough walking till they came
to a new and good track which the Government are constructing
from Corinna to Trial Harbour. They crossed a small stream called
the Tasman River, and about mid-day got to the St. Dizier Co.’s tin
mine, one of the Heemslvirk mines. It was being worked on tribute
by some men who seemed to be doing well. They received the
travellers very hospitably, and gave them an excellent dinner. After
dinner a two miles’ walk brought our friends to a part of Mt.
Heemskirk, known as the Gap, whence they had a splendid view,
extending as far as Macquarie Harbour. Eight miles more of ups
and downs brought them to Trial Harbour, where they w'ere glad to
find themselves snugly ensconced in Mr. Conrad’s hotel. The Harbour
is very small and affords no sort of shelter. There are not above
eight or ten houses in the village, which is officially known as
Remine. A year or two ago, when the Heemskirk mines were in full
swing, it seemed likely to become a prosperous township. Mr. Conrad
expressed an opinion, which is very prevalent, that the failure of the
Heemskirk mines has been the result of mismanagement, and that
several of them would pay well if properly worked. He gave our
travellers a chart showing a track from Macquarie Harbour to the
Huon, marked out by Mr. Jones, the Government Surveyor, at Mount
Bischoff. This was of great use to them. On the 18th (W ednesday)
they arrived at the Henty River, a dangerous one to ford, owing to
quicksands. There is a ferry at a point where it is about a quarter
of a mile wide, and from the wife of the ferryman they obtained a
dinner and permission to rest in her house till next day. Having
crossed the ferry the next morning (19th) they had some very
good walking along a beach, known as the 20-Mile Beach. It
extends from the mouth of the Henty nearly to Macquarie Harbour
Heads. A glance at the map will show why they did not proceed to
the Heads, but struck off eastward to reach the new settlement of


Strahan, on the Macquarie Harbour. They describe it as the most
miserably black place they ever met with, exposed to every wind, and
without trees or any other sort of shelter. The whole population is
hardly 20 persons, including women and children. Our travellers
stayed here till Wednesday, 25 th, as the weather was very unfavourable
for the journey. They met with great kindness and attention from
the little isolated community. Having borrowed a boat, they pulled
up the King River as far as the rapids. The river is described by
them as a very beautiful one, of variable width. The gold dig-
gings, which have given a certain degree of prominence to the name
of the King River, during the last two or three years, are about 10 or
12 miles off from the first rapids, and at the time of Mr. K.’s visit to
Strahan but little work was being done at thsm. On Sunday, 22nd,
Mr. K. (who is not a clergyman, but who is always anxious to speak
a word in season) held a service, which was well attended. On
Monday he explored Swan Basin, a large inlet of the Harbour,
-abounding in black swans and other water-fowl, and with several
pretty wooded islands. On Tuesday he engaged a Welshman, L., in
addition to his Irish attendant, 8., and purchased a tent and a
stock of provisions at the store of Mr. Henry, a brother of Mr. Henry
of the Hon. He left Strahan the same day (24th) in a boat
accompanied by two of the hospitable friends who had entertained
him at the little township, and proceeded to Settlement Island.
In the old days of Van Diemen’s Land an extensive prison establish-
ment was maintained here, the place being chosen as one
from which it was impossible for prisoners to escape
without an almost certainty of being starved to death,
so distant were the settlements, and so densely wooded
the country at the back of the Harbour. And here it would
be as well to diverge from our narrative to say that the same fate
would be very likely to befall any tourist who should attempt to emu-
late the feat of our travellers, and to make his way from Macquarie
Harbour to the Huon. Mr. K. and his companions were experienced
bushmen, and yet, from the time when they parted with their friends
at Macquarie Harbour till the 16th of March, when they first caught
sight of the Huon, their journal is a monotonous record of cold, wet,
weariness, and general misery. When at length they sighted the
Huon, 30 miles above the township of V ictoria, their provisions were
reduced to one pannikin of oatmeal and two pounds of bacon. For
several days they had eaten nothing but oatmeal and bacon, and
were beginning to suffer severely from a want of change of diet. For
17 days they had not seen any human being except themselves, but
about mid-day of Monday, 16th March, they met two men, who had


been sent from the Huon, with a supply of provisions, to meet the
travellers. From this time onward their course w'as easy ; in two
days more they reached Victoria, and were in the realms of civilization.
Now, any man, who is a good walker, and accustomed to pedestrian
excursions, might safely venture on the knapsack journey from Bisehoff
down the West Coast to Macquarie Harbour, and would thus see all
that is most worth seeing on that coast, but it would be well for him
to wait there for the Wakefield steamer which visits the West
Coast about once in three weeks, which would take him round
to Hobart, calling in at Port Davey on the way. The man wdio shall
have accomplished this journey, in addition to the other routes which
we have suggested, may satisfy himself that he has seen all that
Tasmania can show most noteworthy in the beaten tracks ; and much
besides that lies off the regular routes of rail, coach, and
steamer.


INDEX.
Academy of Music, 25
All Saints’ Church, 13
Allwright’s Hotel, 19
Antill Ponds, 23, 53
Austin’s Ferry, 56
Australian Mutual Provident
Society, 8
Australian Widows Fund Insurance
Society, 25
Avoca, 70, 79
Bagdad, 55
Bank of Australasia, 10
Bank of Van Diemen’s Land, 8
(See also Commercial; Union)
Basin, Ist, 2nd, 3rd, 28, 33
Beaconsfield, 33, 34
Bedlam Walls, 17
Bellerive, 11
Ben Lomond, 51, 79, 80
Bertrams, 3
Bischoff (see Mount)
Bishopsbourne, 38
' Black Charlie’s Opening, 6b
Black Elephant, 70
Blackman River, 53
Blowhole, 20, 74
Blue Tier, 81
Bluff, The, 44
Boobyalla, 81 .
Botanical Gardens (See Royal Soc.)
Bothwell, 75, 76, 77
Bower, The, 15
Bowling Club, 27
Brady’s Look-Out, 34
Branxholm, 81, 82
Breadalbane, 51
Break o’ Day, 70
Brickendon, 38
Bridgewater, 18, 23, 56
Bridgewater Causeway, 18, 22, oo
Bridport, 81
Brighton, 22, 55
Brisbane Hotel, 24
British Hotel, 62
Bronte Station, 79 _
Brothers’ Home Mines, 81, 82
Brown’s River, 20, 59
Bruny Island, 59
Buckland, 66, 67
Burgess, 42
Burial Ground, 31
Burnie, 44, 46
Bush Hotel, 19
Butts (Ben Lomond), 79, 80
Calstoek, 39
Cambria, 69
Campania, 23, 66
Campbell Town, 23, 51
Cape Pillar, 74
Cape Raoul, 74
Carlton Hotel, 3
Cascade Brewery, 11, 16
Castle Rocks, 69
Castra, 44, 47
Castray Esplanade, 11
Cataract, 28, 33
Cataract Hill, 27
Cathedral, Anglican, 4 9
Cathedral, Roman Catholic, 12, 13
Cemetery, 31
Chalmers Tree Church, 13, 29
Chapman, Hon. T. D.,Residence, 5
Christ’s College, 2, 7
Churches^'See 10, 11, 13, 14, 29, 52)
Clarence, 64
Cleveland, 51 .
Club (See Tasmanian, Hobart,
Launceston)
Club Hotel, 24, 25
Clyde, 74, 75, 76
Coal River, 66
Coffee Palace, 24
College (iee Christs, Horton,
Ladies’, Methodist Ladies’)
Collegiate School, 26
Commercial Bank, 9
Constitution Hill, 55
Convent (See Presentation)
Cook’s Monument, 15
Corinna, 83
Corners, 23, 51
Cornwall Hotel, 24
Corra Linn, 32
Cricket Association, 6
Cricket Ground, Hobart, 6
Cricket Ground, Launceston, 39
Criterion Hotel, Hobart, 3
Criterion Hotel, Launceston, 24
Cullenswood, 70
Currie’s Hotel, 3
Custom House, 12
Dee, 75, 79
Deloraine, 39 .„ Q .
D’Entrecasteaux Channel, lb, o»,etc
Derwent, The, 5, 18, etc.
Derwent and Tamar Assurance
Company, 9


Devon Steamer, 41
Devon Herald, 49
Direction (See Mount)
Don, 48
Dry, Sir Richard, 38
Dunrobin Bridge, 78
Elizabeth River, 52
Ellesmere, 81
Elwick, 57
Emu Bay, 44, 45
EntaUy, 38
Epping Forest, 23, 51
Esk, North, 24, 32
Esk, South, 27, 33
Evandale, 23
Exton, 39
Falmouth, 71
Fein-Tree Inn, 15
Fingal, 23, 70
Fishing Licence, 75
Flat-Top Tunnel, 23
Florence Nightingale Mine, 34
Formby, 43, 48
Forth, 44
Franklin, 61,
Franklin Square, 9
Franklin Village, 51
Frederick Henry Bay, 64
Freemason’s Hotel, New Norfolk, 19
Freycinet’s Peninsula, 63
Gap (Mount Heemskirk), 84
Gas Company, Hobart, 8
Gas Company, Launceston, 29
Geeveston, 62
George Town, 35, 42
George’s Bay, 72, 81
Gladstone, 81
Glamorgan, 69
Glebe Town, 2
Glenorchy, 18, 57
Gog and Magog, 39
Golden Fleece, 72
Gordon, 60
Gordon River, 83
Gould's Couutry, 81
Government House, 2, 5
Grammar School, Church of
England, 30
Grange, The, 59
Grass-Tree Hill, 65
Green Ponds, 55
Gregson, T. G., Residence, 17, 65
Gretna Green, 74
Hadley’s Hotel, 3
Hagley, 38
Half-way House, 23, 50, 53
Hamilton, 74, 78, 79
Hamilton-on-Forth, 44, 47
Haezlewood River, 83
Heemskirk (See Mount)
Henty River, 84
Hestercombe, 56
Higlifield Hall, 3
High School, 2, 7
Hobart, 2,3, etc.
Hobart Club, 10
Hood’s Book Shop, 3
Hopwood and James’ Book Shop, 25
Horseshoe Bridge, 56
Horton College, 53
Hospital. Hobart, 7
Hospital, Launceston, 30
Hotels (See 3, 19, 24, 62)
Huon Island, 61,
Huon River, 58, 59
Huon Steamer, 58
Hutchins School, 10
Ilfracombe, 42
International Hotel, 24
Interlaken, 76
Invalid Depot, Hobart, 57, 73
Invalid Depot, Launceston, 27
Invermay, 31
Jennings, Mr., 17
Jericho, 23, 54
Jerusalem, 23
Jordan, 23, 56
Kangaroo Point, 2, 11
Kempton, 55
Kermandie River, 59, 62
King River, 82, 85
Kingston, 20, 59
Ladies’ College, 10
Lagoon of Islands, 77
Lakes, —Arthur, 75, 77,
Crescent, 76,
Dulverton, 53
Echo, 75, 77, 79
Great Lake, 75, 77
Sorell, 75, 76
St. Clair, 75, 78, 79
Tiberias, 23, 53
Landing Wharf, Launceston, 28
Landslip, 57
Latrobe, 48, 49
Launceston, 24, 25, etc.
Launceston and Western Railway,
24, 29, 36, etc.
Launceston and N. W. Coast Steam
Navigation Company, 41


Launceston Club, 25
Launceston Examiner, 27
Launceston Hotel, 24
Lefroy, 33, 35
Leith, 48
Leven, 44, 47
Lisdillon, 68
Lisle Falls, 72
Long Bay, 60
Longford, 37
Lovett, 61
Lowestoft, 57
Lunatic Asylum, 19
Macquarie Harbour, 82, 84
Macquarie River, 51
Magnet Range, 83
Main Line Railway, 7, 8
Main Road, 50, etc.
Mangana, 70
Maria Island, 67, 68
Marlborough, 78, 79
Masonic Hall, Hobart, 9
Masonic Hall, Launceston, 26
McGregor, Hon. A., Residence, 12
Meander, 39
Mechanics’ Institute, 26
Melton Mowbray, 54
Memorial Church, 13
Mercury Office, 8
Meredith, Hon. Chas., Memorial, 6
Meredith, Mrs. Chas., Residence,
67
Meredith Bridge, 67
Mersey, 43, 48
Methodist Ladies’ College, 31 _
Midland Agricultural Association,
51
Minx Steamer, 58
Mission Church, 30
Mona Vale, 53
Moorina, 81, 82
Mount Bischoff, 45
Mount Bischoff Railway, 44, 16
Mount Direction, 2, 17
Mount Heemskirk, 82
Mount Morrison, 63
Mount Nelson, 16
Mount Rumney, 22, 65
Mount Wellington, 2, 15
Mutual A. Society of Victoria, 25
Native Tiers, 79
Native Youth Mine, 35
Nelson (See Mount)
Nelson’s Creek, 66
New Norfolk, 17, etc.
New Town, 22, 57, 73
Nile (River), 80
Nive (River), 79
Oatlands, 23, 53
O’Brien’s Bridge, 18, 22, 57
Okehamptcn, 67
Orford, 67
Ouse, 78, 79
Oyster Bay, 69
Oyster Cove, 60
Panshanger, 38
Paradise, 67
Parattali, 23, 54
Park (See People’s, Prince s, etc.)
Parliamentary Buildings, 12
Parliamentary Library, 12
Passage Point, 59
Patterson’s Plains, 32
Pearson’s Point, 59
Penguin, 44, 47
People’s Park, 2
Peppermint Bay, 60
Perth, 37, 51
Picnic Hotel, 62
Picnic Rock, 33
Pieman River, 83
Pig Island, 42
Pinnacle (Mt. Wellington), 16
Pittwater, 64
Plenty (River), 19
Ploughed Field (Mt. Wellington),
16
Pontville, 55
Port Arthur, 74
Port Cygnet, 61
Port Sorell, 42
Post Office, Hobart, 9
Post Office, Launceston, 27
Presentation Convent, Hobart, 12
Presentation Convent, Launceston,
30
Pressland House, 3
Prince’s Park, 11
Prince’s Square, 29
Prosser’s Plains, 67
Public Library, 8
Public Offices, Hobart, 9
Public Offices, Launceston, 27
Pulpit Rock, 19
Punch Bowl, 32
Quamby, 38
Quarnby Bluff, 38
Queen’s Domain, 2, 4
Quoin, The, 2
Railway (See Main Line, Laun-
ceston and Western, Mount
Bischoff)


Remine, 84
Richmond, 23, 65, 66
Rigney’s Hut, 79
Ringarooma, 8L
Risdon Ferry, 17, 65
River Don Trading Company, 48
Rosevear Point, 34
Ross, 23, 52
Rostella, 36
Royal Society’s Gardens, 5
Royal Society’s Museum, 8
Rumney (See Mount)
Runnymede, 66
Salmon Ponds, 19
Sandhill, 36
Sandy Bay, 58
Savings Bank, 9
Schools (See High, Hutchins,
Grammar, Collegiate)
Schoutens, 69
Settlement Island, 85
Shannon, 77
Shot Tower, 21, 59
Sidmouth, 42
Smelting Works, Launceston, 28
Snakebanks, 51
Sorell, 64
Southern Hunt Club, 75
Spring Bay, 68
Springs, The (Mt. Wellington), 15
Stanley, 44
St. Andrew’s Church, Hobart, 13
St. Andrew’s Church, L’ton,27, 29
St. George’s Church, 11, 13
St. George’s Hill, 11
St. John’s Church, Hobart, 13
St. John’s Church, Launceston, 29
St. Joseph’s Church, 10
St. Joseph’s Orphanage, 10
St. Paul’s Church, 29
St. Helen’s, 72, 81
St. Leonard’s, 24, 32
St. Mary’s Pass, 70, 71
St. Patrick’s Head, 70
Stephenson’s Bend, 42
Steppes Police Station, 77
Strahan, 85
Supreme Court, 9
Swan’s Hill, 58
Swanport, 68
Swansea, 69
Synagogue, 14
Tabernacle (Baptist), 14, 30
Table Mountain, 54
Tamar, 33, 41, etc.
Tasmania, passim
Tasmania Mine, 34
Tasmanian Club, 9
T.S.N. Company, passim
Tasman’s Arch, 74
Tasman River, 84
Tasman’s Peninsula, 74
Telegraph, Newspaper, 27
Telegraph Office, Hobart, 9
Telegraph Office, Launceston, 27
Tennis Court, Cricket Ground, G-
Tennis Court, High School, 7
Tesselated Pavement, 74 *
Thomas’s Plains, 81
Three Hut Point, 60
Thumbs, The 67
Tiberias (See Lake)
Torquay, 43
Town Creek, 10
Town Hall, Hobart, 8
Town Hall, Launceston, 26
Town Park, Launceston, 26, 29-
Tram, The, 61
Triabunna, 68
Trial Harbour, 81
Trinity Church, Hobart, 2, 13 *
Trinity Church, Launceston, 26, 2ft
Truganini’s Throne, 72
Tunbridge, 53, 75 •
Tunnel (See Plat-Top)
Ulverstone, 44, 47
Union Bank, 10
Van Diemen’s Land Co., 45
Victoria, 62
Victoria Valley, 78, 79
Wakefield Steamer, 85
Walch’s (Messrs.) Book Shop, 3.
Walch and Birchall, 25
Waratah, 45, 83
Warrentinna Steamer, 72
Waterworks, 15
Waverley Woollen Mills, 3ft
Wellington (See Mount)
Wesleyan Church, 29
Westbury, 38
Westella, 3
Whirlpool Reach, 42
Whyte River, 83
Windermere, 34, 42
Windmill Hill, 28, 29
Woodbridge, 60
Wood's Quoin, 76
Woolmers, 38
Wynyard, 44
York Town, 34
Youl’s Lake, 80
Young Town, 51


FROM HOBART TO
MELBOURNE.
SYDNEY.
BRISBANE.
Direct.
Via Launceston.
Direct.
Yia Launceston.
Saloon
Saloon and First Class Rail
Saloon and Second Class Rail
Steerage
Steerage and Second Class Rail
*£5 0 0
*£3 0 0
*£5 0 0
*£4 0 0
*£2 12 0
without provisions
f£7 0 0
f£5 0 0
f£7 16 0
f£7 2 0
f£5 2 0
f£12 5 0
FROM LAUNCESTON TO
MELBOURNE.
SYDNEY.
BRISBANE.
Saloon
Steerage
"
# £3 5 0
*£1 10 0
without provisions.
f£6 0 0
f£4 0 0
f£ll 5 0
TASMANIAN STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY.
RATES OF EXCURSION FARES.
Issued on the Melbourne lines between ist October, 1885, and 31st March, 1886 ; and on the Sydney
lines between ist December, 1885, and 31st March, 1886. All Excursion tickets expire on the
31st March, 1886.
* Available for two months.
f Available for three months.


MELBOUENE.
SYDNEY.
EDEN.
Direct.
Yia Launceston.
Direct.
Yia Launceston.
Saloon— Single
£3 15 0
£5 0 0
£3 10 0
,, Single and First Class Eail.
£3 15 0
£5 10 0
,, Single and Second Class Eail
£3
5 0
£5 0 0
,, Eeturn
£6 10 0
£8 0 0
£0 0 0
,, Eeturn and First Class Eail
£6
5 0
£!) 5 0
,, Eeturn and SecondClassBail
£5 10 0
£8 10 0
Steerage —Single
£2
0 0
£3 0 0
£2 0 0
,, Single and Second Class Eail
£2
0 0
£3 10 0
,, Eeturn
£3 10 0
FEOM LAUNCESTON TO
FEOM SYDNEY TO
TflDF.N.
MELBOUENE.
SYDNEY.
EDEN.
TWOFOLD BAY.
Saloon —Single
£2 5
0
£4 0
0
£2 10
0
Saloon— Single
£2 0 0
,, Eeturn
£4 0
0
£7 0
0
£4 10
0
,, Eeturn
£3 0 0
Steerage —Single
£1 0
0
£2 10
0
£1 15
0
Steerage —Single
£10 0
without provisions
TASMANIAN STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY.
RATES OF PASSAGE MOETEY.
FROM HOBART TO
Return Tickets available for six months.


Tasmanian Steam Navigation Company.
NOTICE TO PASSENGERS.
The dates throughout the various Lines will be adhered to as closely as
possible, but the Company reserve the right to despatch Steamers in
advance of or later than the dates named, or to withdraw any steamer
altogether, and cannot be responsible for any loss or inconvenience
occasioned thereby.
The following starting signals will be used by the Company s steamers,
except on Sundays, when the whistle will not be sounded One long
and one short blast of whistle at least 15 minutes before starting; one
long and two short blasts fire minutes before starting; one long and
three short blasts immediately before starting. The Cabin bell will be
rung five minutes before starting, when all visitors will be expected to
leave the ship. The above starting signals will not be used in the Port
of Melbourne.
Lights in the Saloon are extinguished at 10'30 p.m , and in the State
Rooms at 11 p.m. The Bar closes at 10-30 p.m.
The general conditions on which Passengers are booked are stated fully
on the Passage Ticket issued by the Company.
Tickets are on no account transferable.
Return Tickets are available on any of the Company’s lines by pay-
ment or refund of difference in passage money, as the case may be.
Children, under three years, free, and under 12 years, half fare.
School children travelling to School, or proceeding for their holidays,
upon production of certificate from Principal of the School at which
they are attending, can obtain Return Tickets at Single Fares.
Clergymen (attending Conference), Football, Rowing, and Rifle Teams,
Theatrical Companies, of not less than five Adults, allowed 20 per cent,
discount; 12 and over 25 per cent, discount; 20 and over 331; per cent,
discount. Such discounts to be off the Ordinary and not Excursion Rates,
and off Steamer Fares only.
Servants are charged Steerage Fare, and allowed to attend their
Employers in the Saloon. If berths are secured for them in Saloon, full
Saloon Fares are charged.


Saloon Passengers are now provided with bedding, linen, and every
requisite, together with the attendance of experienced servants. Steerage
passengers are provided with mattresses.
Ey arrangement with the T. M L. Railway Company (Limited), under
which each Company acts as Agent for the other Company, passengers
booking at the Company’s Offices in Hobart, Melbourne, and Sydney,
may obtain through Railway Tickets, and this Company’s Tickets may
also be obtained at the Hobart Railway Station.
Each Adult Cabin Passenger will be allowed 20 cubic feet of baggage,
free. E ich Adult Steerage Passenger will be allowed 10 cubic feet, free.
All in excess of this quantity must be paid for at the current rate of
freight.
Passengers’ luggage sent direct to Sydney or Melbourne, or vice versa ,
when the owner travels via Launceston, shall be taken free, if not ex-
ceeding above allowance, but if receipt is required making the Company
responsible, then the usual freight to be charged.
The Company cannot hold itself responsible for any loss or damage to
or detention of baggage under any circumstances unless booked as Cargo
and freight paid. Merchandise will not be allowed to be carried under
the designation of baggage.
To avoid mistakes or confusion in the delivery of baggage, Passengers
are urged to have each package fully and securely addressed. Where
Labels are used, it is important that they should be securely pasted,
stitched, or tacked on, otherwise they are liable to be torn off in handling
on board. Gummed slips for baggage to be forwarded by the T.M.L.R,
Co. to Hobart will be supplied by the Company’s officers on board after
steamers enter Low Heads.
Passengers from Melbourne are requested to claim their baggage on
the wharf at Launceston in order that the same may be passed by the
Customs. Passengers travelling by T.M.L.R. south of Launceston must
claim their baggage at the Launceston Railway Station, and give
instructions as to its destination.
As it is the Company’s desire to study the comfort and convenience of
the travelling public as far as practicable, any communication to Head
Office, at Hobart, embodying suggestions in that direction will receive
attention, and any well-grounded complaints shall be promptly inquired
into.


Tasmanian Steam Navigation Company.
Regular Steam communication between Hobart,
Launceston, River Mersey, Melbourne, Eden
(Twofold Bay), Sydney, & Newcastle.
LAUNCESTON AND MELBOURNE LINE,
The s.s. “PATEENA,” 1212 tons, 242 H.P., James R. Young, Com-
mander, and the s.s. “ FLINDERS, 950 tons, 200 H.P., Adam
Drysdale, Commander, leave Launceston and Melbourne Mondays
and Thursdays.
Fares —Saloon, 455.; Return (6 months), 80s.
Steerage (without provisions), 20s.
Excursion Fares (issued between Ist October and 31st March, avail-
able for 2 months), SalooD, 655.; Steerage (without provisions), 30s.
HOBART AND MELBOURNE LINE.
The s.s. “ SOUTHERN CROSS,” 780 tons, 150 H.P., Thomas Capurn,
Commander, leaves Franklin Wharf, Hobart, and South Wharf,
Melbourne, about every ten days.
Fares —Saloon, 755.; Return (6 months), 130 s.
Steerage, 405.; Return, 70s.
Excursion Fares (issued between Ist October and 31st March, avail-
able for 2 months), Saloon, 100 s.; Steerage, 60s.
HOBART AND SYDNEY LINE (VIA EDEN).
The s.s. “FLORA,” 1270 tons, 180 H.P., Henry Bennison, Commander,
leaves Franklin Wharf, Hobart, and the Tasmanian Wharf, Sydney,
every Monday fortnight.
Fares —Saloon, 100 s.; Return (6 months), 160 s.
Steerage, 60s.
Excursion Fares (issued between Ist December and 31st March, avail-
able for 3 months), Saloon, 1405.; Steerage, 100 s.
N o t e> —This Steamer calls at Newcastle each Trip.
[Continued on next page.


Tasmanian Steam Navigation Company, continued.\
LAUNCESTON AND SYDNEY (VIA EDEN).
The s.s. “CORINNA,” 1280 tons, 141 H.P., Herbert Sams, Com-
mander, leaves Launceston every Friday fortnight, and Tasmanian
Wharf, Sydney, every Thursday fortnight.
Fakes —Saloon, 80s.; Return (6 months), 140 s.
Steerage, 50s.
Excursion Fares (issued between Ist December and 31st March,,
available for 3 months), Saloon, 1205.; Steerage, 80s.
Note. —This Steamer calls at Newcastle each trip.
MERSEY (FORMBY), AND SYDNEY LINE.
The s.s. “ESIv,” 854 tons, 110 H.P., James P. Sharpe, Commander,
leaves Formby, and Tasmanian Wharf, Sydney, once a fortnight.
Fares —Same as Launceston and Sydney line.
Any further information can be obtained
by application to
HEAD OFFICE, ELIZABETH STREET, HOBART:
E. M. FISHER, Manages;
P. FACY, Jun., Accountant and Secretary.
LAUNCESTON BRANCH OFFICE:
A. T. WOODS, Manager, Lower George-street.
MELBOURNE:
CHAS. HUDSON, Agent, 1, Queen-street.
SYDNEY:
T. & W. WILLIS, Agents, 15, Pitt-street N.
EDEN:
T. & W. WILLIS, Agents.
NEWCASTLE:
R. B. WALLACE, Agent.
RIVER MERSEY (FORMBY):
JOHN HENRY & Co., Agents.


Tasmanian Steam Navigation Company.
HEAD OFFICE: ELIZABETH STREET,
Franklin Wharf, Hobart.
E. M. FISHER, Manager.
P. FACY, Jen., Accountant and Secretary.
BRANCH OFFICE:
LAUNCESTON. A. T. WOODS, Local Manager,
Lower George-street.
AGENCIES:
MELBOURNE. — Chas. Hudson, 1, Queen-street.
SYDNEY & EDEN.—T. &W. Willis, 15, Pitt-street, N
NEWCASTLE.— R. B. Wallace.
LONDON.— Gilbert J. McCaul & Co., 27, Walbrook.
GLASGOW.—H. R. Robson, 14, Royal Crescent.
N.W. COAST. — John Henry, River Don.
FLEET:
Gross
Commander. H.P. Tonnage.
PATEENA ... Jas.R. Young 242 ... 1212
FLINDERS... Adam Drysdale ... 200 ... 94S
MANGANA... ... 167 ... 752
S. CROSS ... Tlios. Capurn 150 ... 780
CORINNA ... Herbert Sams ... 141 ... 1280
J. P. Sbarpe 110 ... 854
FLORA Henry Bennison ... 180 ... 1278


TASMANIAN STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY.
TARIFF OF WINES, SPIRITS, BEER, &c.
CHAMPAGNE— Qts. Pts.
Best quality 10/ 5/
Extra quality 12/ 6/
PORT AND SHERRY 5/
CLARET 4/ 2/6
COLONIAL WINES—
Red and White ... ••• 3/6 2/
ALE—
Bass’ bottled by Forster and
others ... ••• 1/0 1/
STOUT—
Guinness’ ... ••• ••• 1/0 1/
SPIRITS—
Brandy, Whisky, Geneva, per bottle, 5/.
All Spirits, Port or Sherry, per glass, Od.
AERATED WATERS—
Soda Water, Lemonade, Ginger Ale, 6d.
per glass.
CIGARS—
Havannas, Od. each; Manillas, 3d. each.
TOBACCO—
-3/6 per lb.


TASMANIAN STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY.
TABLE OF DISTANCES BUN BY T.S.N. CO.’S STEAMERS
IN NAUTICAL MILEAGE.
HOBART TO CAPE PILLAR 40 MILES
„ ST. PATRICK’S HEAD ... 140 „
„ CAPE BARREN 212
~ CABO ISLAND ... ... 394 n
„ TWOFOLD BAY 426
„ CAPE ST. GEORGE 550
„ SYDNEY HEADS 634
„ NEWCASTLE HEADS ... 695
„ SWAN ISLAND 200 „
„ CAPE SCHANCK 398
„ PORT PHILLIP HEADS ... 416
MELBOURNE WHARF ... 457
LAUNCESTON TO LOW HEADS 40 „
„ KENT’S GROUP ... 138
„ GABO ISLAND ... 306 „
TAYOFOLD BAY ... 338
CAPE ST. GEORGE ... 462
„ SYDNEY HEADS 546 „
„ NEWCASTLE HEADS. 607 „
„ CAPE SCHANCK ... 218 „
„ PORT PHILLIP HEADS 236
„ MELBOURNE WHARF 277 „


OUR FliilRBiAOY
IS THE
MOST CENTRALLY SITUATED IN HOBART*
AND IS
JHockei) rottl) tljt |tto*t Compltlt Assortment ot
DRUGS, CHEMICALS,
PATENT AND PROPRIETARY MEDICINES,
From the Best ENGLISH & COLONIAL HOUSES.
HOLEpAJ- e AI fD P\ ET A IJ - fjHEJ«IIST,S,
LIVERPOOL STREET.
Distillers of that DELIGHTFUL Perfume,
mm
IP. MILLER;,
PHARMACEUTICAL CHEMIST
(WHOLESALE, RETAIL, AND MANUFACTURING),
Corner of Murray and Liverpool Streets, Hobart, and at
High Street, New Norfolk.
Speciality. —The Dispensing Physicians’ Prescriptions by thoroughly
Competent Assistants Only, with Drugs of Guaranteed Purity.
Note. —As it frequently occurs that special formulas requiring time
for careful preparation are prescribed, it is desirable that all prescript
tions should be left as soon as possible after being written.
Pills, Powders, and other Medicines (not being liquids) may be sent
I>J P°Bt). ;i oC _. .
TASMA! TASMA! TASMA! TASMA!
TASMA ! TASMA!
THE NEW PERFUME,
DISTILLED ONLY
—BIT _A_. IP. X/LXXjIEXEIR^ —
Pharmaceutioal Chemist, Murray-street, Hobart.
Extract from Tasmanian Commissioner’s letter Calcutta, February 19,
1884 I have now the pleasure to inform you that you have obtained a Flßfe a-
CLASS CERTIFICATE and SILVER MEDAL for your TASMA. The
Marchioness of Ripon and Lady Elizabeth Taylor were greatly pleased with it.


CAFE GUNSLER
FIRST-CLASS
CITY RESTAURANT.
25 & 27,
•Collins Street
East,
MELBOURNE,
25 & 27,
Collins Street
East,
MELBOURNE,
Note the Specials.
FINE OLD FORT,
CHOICE AMONTILLADO SHERRY,
OLD HIGHLAND WHISKY,
NOT SURPASSED IN MELBOURNE.


Itnkx t(re f airamtge
Cwbtmor of
Its ©Kellwt# die
IWSH HOTEL
NEW NORFOLK.
The above well-known and favorite Hotel is
beautifully situated on the banks of
the River Derwent, commanding
some of the Grandest Scenery
in the Australian
Colonies.
ALL THE APPOINTMENTS OF A FIRST-CLASS HOTEL
ALSO,
Large Garden, beautifully laid out with Flowers and
Fruit Trees.
ileitis, ilatt, Jtslmtj) <Tiuklr. rtc. etc..
FOR THE USE OF VISITORS.
lilT Visitors are respectfully requested to communicate
direct with the Proprietor, as some self-interested people are in
the habit of saying the house is full when such is often not
the case.
Telegrams and Letters promptly attended to.
Carriages wait the arrival of Steamers to convey Visitors to
and from Hotel, Free of Charge.
TERMS—IO/ per day, or £3 3/ per week. Private Sittingroom extra.
O. BLOCKEY,
Proprietor.


Imon lank of Australia:, fiimtcir.
Established 1837. Incorporated 1880.
Paid-up Capital £1 * 970 000
Reserve Funds ••• «/u,uuu
Reserve Liability of Proprietors d,000,000
Total Capital and Reserve Funds £5,470,000
HEAD OFFICE, I, BANK BUILDINGS, LOTHBURY, LONDON;
B. BuROTi-Smit > T-> w ( ' ! Esq., John Sheriff Hill, Esq., Edward
pWISSif, C. H. Mills, Bart, M.P., Sir C. Nicholson, Bart, Charles
P TSeei-The Right Hon. Lord Wolverton, Sir C. 11. Mills, Bart, M.P.
Edward P. W. Miles, Esq. , „
Bankers —TheßsuikofEnglancC ancLMessrs. Glyn, Mills, Currie, & Co.
COLONIAL ESTABLISHMENTS:
Inspector and General Manager-JonN F. M’Mullen, Esq.
Chief Officer for New Zealand— Joseph Palmer, Esq.
Acscictaiit Inspector —F. M. Innes, Esq.
Tasmania-llohart Launceston, Oatlands, Stawell,
aunes°DaykS,Rochester, Maryborough, Smythesdale, Alexandria, Tarna-
SU -wiw g soui-li Wales— Sydney, with sub-branches, George-street, Newcastle,
M |?S“SS-rSfe PO r~“ York, Albany, Geraldt.n,
Roeburne, Cossack.
Fiji— Levuka, Suva. T i iames , Hamilton (Waikato), Napier, Port
gyXff'lSSflSldirO.Wn, Invercargill, Haw.ra,
agents and correspondents in ail pants of the
SoCXt*.™ SfoXlfeon Bill, on
B Circu!ar Notes are issued by its Branches, in sums of £lO, £2O, or £5O,
negotiable by its correspondents in the chief cities on the Continent Africa!
in'North and South America, Ceylon, Mauritius, India, China, Jap. ! * , '
Share are kept at Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane, Ade-
laide Hobaft? and Launceston, and at Christchurch, New Zealand
to an?’of which English and Colonial Shares can be transferred-the Liink
affording every facility to its Proprietors for this purpose. Dividends aie
paid upon receipt of Telegraphic ad 'j' > e j, mcMULLEN, Junior, Manager
Hobart, January 1, 1886.


T
HE COMMERCIAL BANK OF TASMANIA,
LIMITED (Established 1832).
Capital £500,000
Paid-up Capital 125,000
Reserve Fund ... ... ... ' ... ... 125,000
HEAD OFFICE, HOBART.
Directors.—C. M. Maxwell, J. H. B. Walch, C. J. Barclay.
Chas. J. Barclay, Managing Director.
D. Barclay, Manager.
BRANCHES
Agencies :
LAUNCESTON. Local Directors : JAMES AIKENHEAD and
ALFRED HARRAP. E. D. HARROP, Manager.
LATROBE
OATLANDS ...
LONGFORD ...
GEORGE’S BAY
DELORAINE ...
NEW NORFOLK
W. S. ALLANBY, Manager.
E. WHITESIDES, Manager.
J. H. STEWART, Manager.
B. H. AVRIGHT, Manager.
J. G. LINDLEY, Manager.
C. H. Dignam, Manager.
London: THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
Union Bank of London (Limited), City Bank (Limited), Bank of
Victoria,National Bank of Australasia, Commercial Bank of Aus-
tralia (Lim.), The London and South Western Bank (Lim.), Bank of
South Australia (Lim.), Bank of New Zealand, The Commercial
Bank of South Australia, The Mercantile Bank of Sydney, The City
of Melbourne Bank (Lim.), The National Bank of New Zealand(Lim.)'.
Victoria: THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
National Bank of Australasia, Commercial Bank of Australia (Lim.)
Bank of Victoria, City of Melbourne Bank (Lim.), Federal Bank of
Australia (Lim.), Bank of New Zealand, The Commercial Bank of
South Australia.
New South Wales: THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
Mercantile Bank of Sydney, Federal Bank of Australia(Lim.), Com-
mercial Bank of Australia (Lim.), Bank of New Zealand, National
Bank of Australasia.
Queensland: THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
Mercantile Bank of Sydney,The Commercial Bank of Australia(Lim.).
South Australia: THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
Bank of South Australia (Lim.), National Bank of Australasia, Bank
of Adelaide, Commercial Bank of South Australia, Commercial Bank
of Australia (Lim.), Bank of New Zealand.
Western Australia : The Western Australian Bank, National Bank
New Zealand: THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
National Bank of New Zealand (Lim.), Bank of New Zealand.
Fiji : Bank of New Zealand. Mauritius : Blyth Brothers & Co.
The Bank grants drafts and issues credits on the above establishments; allows
interest at current rates on fixed deposits; negotiates and collects bills of ex-
change ; makes advances against produce shipped on receipt of shipping docu-
ments ; and is prepared to undertake all descriptions of Banking business on
terms which can be ascertained at the Head Office or Branches of the Bank.


DERWENT AND TAMAR EIRE, LIEE, AND MARINE ASSURANCE COMPANY,
HOBART.
Established, 1838. Capital, £lOO,OOO, in 2,000 Shares.
Directors:
C. J. Barclay, Esq. I James Bayley, Esq.
John Pearce, Esq. I George Salier, Esq., M.H.A.
C. E. Walch, Esq.
T / 1 %/ lLSt€@S •
John Pearce, Esq. I C. J. Barclay, Esq.
Utlciyidctzv —o. M. Maxwell, Esq. Accoxafito/fit 1 • -M.*
Evans, Esq. Solicitors —Messrs. Dobson & Mitchell.
Surveyor: John Watson, Esq.
Agents for effecting Insurances —
Launceston: ‘Messrs. C. J. Weedon, & Co.
Melbourne: Messrs. James Henty & Co.
Sydney : A. L. Park, Esq.
London:
Messrs. Richardson Brothers & Co., St. Helen’s Place.
FIRE and MARINE RISKS are taken by this Company and claims for loss or
damage upon the latter are made payable in London if required, policies for the
same being granted in triplicate. Parties insured by this office against risk of
Fire are requested to take notice that Annual Policies which expire on the Ist
of February Ist of May, Ist of August, and Ist November, must be renewed
within 15 ‘days thereafter, otherwise they become void. Receipts hn' tlm
premiums upon such renewals are always ready on those dates at the office of
the Company, Murray-street, Hobart.
Dyers
Gloue and
and Scourers,
Feather Cleaners,
Recommend every lady and gentlemen to send all their faded and soiled
clothes to the Glasgow Dye Works, where every description of ladies’
and children’s dresses, mantles, shawls, table-covers, window-curtains,
bed-hangings, sheepskin mats and hearthrugs, ribbons, lace, etc., etc..
Cleaned or Dyed any colour. Muslin and lace curtains cleaned and
finished equal to new, from 3s. per pair. Ladies’ dresses re-dyed any color,
without unpicking, from 55.; children’s dresses from 2s Gloves cleaned,
6d. per pair ; dyed, Is. per pair. Feathers cleaned, dyed, and curled,
Id. per inch. Velvets, plushes, and crape cleaned, dyed, and dressed.
Gentlemen’s clothing cleaned and pressed equal to new.. Suits from os.;
trousers, 2s. Gents,’ youths,’ and boys’ clothing repaired. Mourning
and other orders executed on the shortest notice. Letters promptly
attended to.
GLASGOW DYE WORKS,
Corner LIVERPOOL and BARRACK STREETS,
And
67, COLLINS STREET (next Westcott’s Library), HOBART.


STEAM TO THE NORTH-WEST COAST.
Launceston and North-West Coast Steam
Navigation Company (Limited).
THE DEVON,
S.S., 1
Leaves Launceston every TUESDAY
morning, calling at George Town, the
Mersey, Leven, Emu Bay, and Cir-
cular Head, returning on Saturday.
"sib 2 -
Particulars as to Freight, Passage Money, etc., may be learned on
application to
LINDSAY TULLOCH, Manager,
LAUNCESTON.
STEAM TO AND FROM NEW NORFOLK.
THE “MONARCH”
LEAVES Hobart during the Summer Months on Mondays, Tuesdays,.
Thursdays, and Fridays at 3'30 p.m.; Saturdays at 2 p.m., and New
Norfolk daily (Sundays and Thursdays excepted), at 7 a.m.
In Winter the Steamer leaves Hobart each Tuesday and Thursday
at 3 p.m., and Saturday at 2 p.m., aud New Norfolk every Monday*
Wednesday, and Friday at 8 a.m.
Fares to New Norfolk: Cabin (Single), 4s. Return, 6s.
Steerage (Single), 2s. Return, 3s.
Fares to Bridgewater : —Cabin (Single), 2s. Return, 3s. Steerage
(Single), Is. Return, 2s. pRED. H. WISE, Franklix Wharf.
The Commodious Steamer Taranna,
Runs Regularly to Leaves Hobart every Mon-
Peninsula, calling at the day and Thursday at B'3o
various Bays. a m-) Leaving Norfolk Bay
on return every Tuesday and Friday at 8 30 a.m.
The Steamer “Taranna,” is available on the intermediate days for fishing,
or pleasure excursions.
WHITEHOUSE BROS., PROPRIETORS.
Good Accommodation for Visitors, Travellers, etc., at Tasman’s Hotel
steamers staying there every evening. Terms Moderate.
Mrs. WHITEHOUSE, PROPRIETRESS.


R. J. ROGERS &
m~k t
ESTABLISHED 1871.
Estate, Mining-, Insurance, & Commission
Agents, Stock and Share Brokers,
Property Valuators,
MURRAY & COLLINS STREETS, HOBART.
LOCAL YLG-lETsTTS
FOR THE
Mutual Assurance Society of Victoria (Limited)
AGENTS FOR THE NATIONAL LOAN BANK.
HEAD OFFICE, MELBOURNE. CAPITAL—£IOO,OOO.
Agents for the Proprietary of the Theatre Royal, Hohart.
Offices of the Hohart Coffee Falace Company.
Hobart Bathing Association,
Masonic Hall Company,
Mount Owen Gold Mining Company,
Briseis No. 1 Tin Mining Company,
Nugget Tin Mining Company.
PARTICULAR ATTENTION GIVEN TO MANAGE-
MENT OF FREEHOLD PROPERTIES.
Lists of Properties For Sale and To Let (Free)
on application.
FURNISHED HOUSES TO LET
IN EVERY LOCALITY.
OFFICE HOURS—9-30 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Saturdays, 9'30 a.m. to 1 p.m.
TELEPHONE EXCHANGE, No. 80.


Tasmanian Land and Estate Agency,
SHIP CHAMBERS, COLLIHS STREET,
HOBART.
WYATT HICKLING,
AUCTIONEER, HODSE, LAM, AM ESTATE AGENT.
Government Agent for Sale and Selection of Crown Lands.
Agent for the Land Exchange and Agency Co., Limited,
Melbourne.
Agent for Australian Alliance Assurance Company, Melbourne.
HAS FOR SALE—Town, Suburban, and Country Properties of every
description ranging from £lOO to £lO,OOO, full particulars of which can
be obtained on application at his offices from 10 a.m. to 5 p m daily or
by letter. J ’
HOUSES AND GROUNDS,
HOTELS,
COTTAGES,
PASTORAL PROPERTIES,
FARMS,
BUILDING SITES.
All enquiries about Houses, Lands, and Furnished Houses, for the
Summer season, from any of the Australasian Colonies, will have prompt
attention and supply.
ECONOMY IN THE GARDEN AND FARM.
JOBV S. OVERBLL,
Wholesale and Retail Seedsman, Exporter and Importer
of Pruit, Hay, Corn, and Produce Merchant,
Shipping and General Commission Agent,
68, Elizabeth Street, Hobart.
Special attention is being given to the SEED DEPARTMENT.
I shall have a large variety of VEGETABLE SEEDS, Colonial
Grown, from IMPORTED SEED, also a large variety of Seeds
Imported Direct from the Growers of England, America, France, and
Germany.
- Slower Seeds are all imported direct from Germany, the principal country
in the world for growing pure and genuine flower seeds.' My Flower Seeds gave
great satisfaction last season. I have ordered a large variety for this season
among them will be floral novelties of merit recently introduced. A choice
•assortment of Flowering Bulbs to arrive in February direct from Holland.
Testimonial.—“l am pleased to say that all the Flower Seeds I
got from you this Season have germinated freely, and are doing
well.— W. Pierce, Dahlia grower, 115, Melville-street. October
17, 1885.”
Country Orders solicited, to which special care and attention will
be given. Securely packed, with despatch. Consignments of Grain
and other Produce received and stored for sale. Agent for Cheese,
Butter, Bacon, etc.


EDWARD CHANCELLOR,
WINS, SPIRIT, AND BEER MERCHANT,
14, ELIZABETH STREET, HOBART
(JUST BELOW THE TELEGRAPH OFFICE),
(Ssgtafiltsfjeti for tlje <Sale of tlje Brands ©itlg.
Jk. LE
Bottled in Quarts and Pints.
n c
lEETJOIEST COACHES.
WEBSTER’S
OYAL MAIL COACHES LEAVE the BRITISH HOTEL, Liverpool-street,
i Every Morning at 9 a.m. for Mountain Road, Fern Tree, Half-way-House,
Victoria, Franklin, and Geeves’ Town. Visitors may leave in the Morning and
meet the Up Coach 17 miles from town at 3T5 p.m., travelling through some of
the grandest Scenery in the Colonies.
Box Seats may be secured on early application.
All the first-class Accommodation of the Hobart Hotels can be found at
Victoria, Franklin, &c. . . ,
Special Coaches and Brakes supplied for Pic-mc Parties, &c., at Moderate
Charges.
Four-in-Hand Drags, Waggonettes, &c., supplied on the most Moderate Terms.
All Parcels must he paid for at the Office.
W. WEBSTER, Proprietor.
m ®
CAN OBTAIN
SUPERIOR ACCOMMODATION
WITS All SOME COMFORTS,
AT “BERTRAMS,”
BYRON STREET AND FITZROY PLACE.
JIATHS, pI/NOP, J)tc.
“BERTRAMS” enjoys, with others, the following advantages:—lts position
is lofty, and, consequently, airy and healthy. It is quite private. It commands
magnificent extensive views of Mount Wellington, the Bay, Brown’s River Road,
&c., and possesses large gardens and grounds. Originally built for a Suburban
Hotel (and, in such, a very favourite resort), it has lately been thoroughly
renewed and much improved for its conversion into a First-class Boarding
Establishment. Whilst contiguous to the most respectable parts of Davey and
Macquarie Streets, it is within but a few minutes’ walk of the sea-shore and
Sandy Bay salt-water baths. It is particularly suitable for families visiting
Tasmania to recruit their health.


PRIVATE BOARDING ESTABLISHMENT.
Rl<
-A-HsTJO cottages,
MELVILLE jj|g| © OHh HOBART,
STREET, IMs TASMANIA.
SUITES OF APARTMENTS, \ Each CONTAINING a PIANO.
TJYZBXjZEI D’HOTE^
PUBLIC DRAWING ROOM, AND EVERY CONVENIENCE APPERTAIN-
ING TO A FIRST-CLASS ESTABLISHMENT.
FINE ASFHALT TENNIS COVET, recently laid out for the con-
venience and amusement of Visitors.
MRS. CLEMENTS, Proprietress.
The Proprietress having rebuilt this old Establishment is now enabled to offer
to her Patrons the best accommodation in the colony.
Pressland House commands a Splendid View of the River, and is within five
minutes’ walk of the Railway Station, Wharves, and centre of the town.
Ml BIBHOP-OBBORNE’S
Mp photographic §allery of <Art,
'pj' 68, MURRAY STREET, HOBART.s^E^
VISITORS TO AND RESIDENTS OF TASMANIA
Will find at the above establishment one of the best and most
extensive Studios for Photographic purposes in the Colony,
and the proprietor (J. 8.-O.) guarantees satisfaction to all
his patrons.
INSPECTION RESPECTFULLY INVITED.
Old Portraits Renovated, Copied, or Enlarged.
Views from all parts of the Island.
Photography of every description executed at the above Studio.
Gold and Silver Medals and First-class Certificates from Tasmanian
and Calcutta Exhibitions.
Portrait and View Albums, Frames, &c., &c., always on hand.
Address j BISHOP-OSBORNE,
68, Murray-street, Hobart.


THE SHIP HOTEL,
COLLINS STREET, HOBART, TASMANIA.
The Old Established Ship Hotel,
UNDER THE MANAGEMENT OF W. STRICKLAND,
LATE OF MELBOURNE.
VISITORS & PATRONS from the ADJACENT COLONIES
OR THE COUNTRY
Will find this Hotel replete with every comfort and convenience, com-
bined with civility and attention.
This Hotel is within five minutes’ walk of Steamers, Railway, Public
Buildings, and easy distance of Baths.
She GHjoiceist Ipranhs of spirit*, anh Ale*
ALWAYS ON STOCK.
LUNCHEON FROM 1 TO 2 P.M. DAILY.
IN, STRICKLAND, Proprietor.
§. £. MARSH & CO.,
GENERAL IRONMONGERS
AND
IMPORTERS,
MURRAY AND COLLINS STREETS, HOBART.
•
FISHING RODS AND TACKLE ALWAYS ON HAND.
Muzzle and Breechloading GUNS, Cartridges, Belts, etc.
A CHOICE ASSORTMENT OF
ELECTROPLATEDWARE and other NOVELTIES
SUITABLE FOR PRESENTS.


12, LIVERPOOL STREET, HOBART.
VISITORS FROM THE NEIGHBOURING COLONIES
Will find all the COMFORTS of a HOME at this Establishment .
It is in close proximity to tlie Baths, Cricket Ground, Theatre,
and six doors from the Railway Station.
SPLENDID GARDEN, PIANOS, HOT & COLD BATHS, &c.
TERMS—2 GUINEAS WEEKLY.
PRIVATE ROOMS AS PER AGREEMENT.
Mrs. T. HEATHORN.
MELBOURNE CAFE AND DINING ROOMS.
(fke&H
97, LIVERPOOL STREET, HOBART.
The REST DINNER to be had in the Colony, of Three Courses, at
this Establishment, for ONE SHIFTING, Daily,
from 12 o’clocli till 2 o’clocli.
RREAKFAST from Half-past 7 till 8 o’clocli a.m.
TEA from 5 o’clocli till 7 o’clocli p.m. Daily.
SEPARATE DINING ROOMS FOR LADIES.
WEDDING BREAKFASTS, BALLS, PIC-NICS, &c., PROVIDED.
WEDDING AND CHRISTENING CAKES ALWAYS ON HAND.
BISCUITS OF EVERY DESCRIPTION, IN TINS OR BOXES,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL.
TEA, COFFEE, CHOCOLATE, HOT PIES, AT ALL HOURS.


E. MACE & CO.,
STOCK AND SHAKE BROKERS,
MINING, ESTATE, INSURANCE, AND
GENERAL COMMISSION AGENTS.
Furnished Houses and Apartments.
Farms, Large and Small, To Let and For Sale.
Estates Managed and Rents Collected .
AGENTS FOR AUSTRALASIAN MUTUAL LIVE
STOCK INSURANCE SOCIETY (LIMITED).
By Appointment to His Excellency the Governor.
n
FLORIST,
and Retail
SEEDSMAN,...
Wholesale
AND_JAM MANUFACTURER.
Our JAMS and JELLIES are prepared expressly for export,
and are sent out in White Jars Only.
Our Collection of Plants and Conifers is the largest in Tasmania.
BOUQUETS AND WREATHS
Of every design executed on the shortest possible notice.
Collections of Tasmanian Ferns, &c., packed for export.
NOTE ADDRESS—
JOHN LATHAM,
LIVERPOOL STREET.
jm- NURSERY GROUND IN HARRINGTON STREET.


INGLE HALL,
OPPOSITE TOWN HALL,
MACQUAWS STftEET, #OB/W,
MRS. TURNER,
|)rihate liourb anti ilcsitu'iuf.
Centrally Situated, Near Post Office, Public Library,
Queen’s Park, Public Baths, Etc.
FINE VIEW OF RIVER DERWENT.
BATHS, PIANOS, ETC. CHARGES MODERATE.
COMMISSION, LIVERY, AND BAIT STABLES,
H. NEWNHAM, PROPRIETOR.
Carriages, Buggies, Wag-
gonettes, Brags, Saddle
Horses on Hire at Shortest
Notice. Horses Broken to
Saddle and Harness.
Wedding Parties Supplied.
Waggonette, Carriage, or Buggy and Pair (with Driver)
£1 per Day.
SEEDS
OF
TASMANIAN WILD FLOWERS,
SHRUBS, AND TREES.
A Packet of Six Varieties sent, post paid, anywhere for One Shilling ia
Stamps.
Address —
“ FLORALIS,”
BUCKLAND,
Tasmania.


To Tourists, Invalids, Mid Holiday Seekers.
WHERE TO GO FOR THE SUMMER:
Penguin, on the IST. W. Coast of Tasmania,
WSSTCBI BK M&W&m,*
THIS charming Sea-side Residence is NOW OPEN for
the RECEPTION of VISITORS. Situated as it is,
close to the Beach, it is known as a most delightful Home for
Tourists and Invalids. Immediately in front extends a broad
Sandy Beach, and Bathing-houses have been erected m close
proximity.
Terms : —Single Lady or Gentleman, £2 per week. I amilies
specially arranged for.
Melbourne and Launceston Steamers land Passengers on the
spot weather permitting, and Coaches run Daily, connecting
with all North-West Coast Towns.
T. SULLOCK, Proprietor.
GIKUI/ATING
65, COLLINS STREET, HOBART
(Late WESTCOTT’S).
Annual Subscription ..
Half-yearly ditto
Quarterly ditto
Monthly ditto
One Set of 3 vols. pei
Single Subscribers of six months or more are entitled to one set of
books and a periodical at a time : of a shorter period, one set ot books
only. Country Subscribers according to arrangement.
New Books direct from Mudie’s Famed London Library.' Also Fifty
Monthly Magazines and Quarterly Reviews for immediate circulation on
their arrival by the Mail.
Magazines to be exchanged daily the first week after that, two
days allowed.
G. W. REYNOLDS, Proprietor.


BRISBANE STREET.
The Largest Hotel in tlie Island; replete with all the comforts of a Home and the-
liberty of a Club.
SPLENDID BILLIARD ROOM.
o:h:_a.:r,q-:es moderate.
S. J. SUTTON, Proprietor.
TELEPHONE NUMBER 39.
UNION HOTEL, GEORGE’S BAY,
FRANK ABEL, Proprietor.
This First-class Hotel, situated as it is at th e head of th e Beautiful
Bay of that name, offers one of, if not the best, Summer Itetrents for
Tourists and Visitors. [.c .
The Climate is acknowledged to be the finest in the Colony, and Shooting and
Fishing abound.
Doats and. Fishing Tackle supplied, and Visitors mav rely on
receiving all the Comforts of a quiet Home.
COACHES RUN FROM THE CORNERS RAILWAY STATION TO THE BAY DAILY.
THE BEST BRANDS OF WINES AND SPIRITS ALWAYS IN STOCK.
TERMS—6s. PER DAY.
CARLTON CLUB HOTEL,
LIVERPOOL STREET,
HOBART.
WELL FURNISHED SUITES OF PRIVATE
APARTMENTS.
SPECIAL ACC oTTmOD ATI ON FOR
COMMERCIAL GENTLEMEN.
—<>•
Me. Frost’s long experience in leading hotels of Europe and
Australia (recently “The Langham,” London ; “The Grand,”Brighton,
England ; and more recently “ The Grand,” Melbourne) should enable
him to conduct the Club in a style unsurpassed by any of the leading
Colonial hotels.
H. E. FROST,
PROPRIETOR.


IMPORTERS
AND
FAMILY BBAPEMS
BROCK’S BUILDINGS,
LIVERPOOL STREET, HOBART,
Each Department is Fully Stocked with
everything connected with
PLAIN AND FANCY DRAPERY,
All Goods being carefully selected.
Special Lines coming forward regularly
from English and other markets.
In order to give every advantage to the
CASH Purchaser, A. M. & Co- allow upon
everything (except Kid Gloves) paid for at
time of Purchase a discount of
TWO SHILLINGS IN THE £.
A. M. & Co. have also, at considerable
expense, fitted up on the premises Two
Dressmaking rooms, Mantle room, Millinery
room, and Underclothing, room, and, by keep-
ing a thoroughly efficient staff for each, are
enabled to turn out Orders entrusted to
them in FIRST-CLASS STYLE.


the
GEORGE GOULET
CHAMPAGNES
ARE THE
CHOICE OF CONNOISEURS THROUGHOUT THE WORLD.
For Quality, Purity, Delicacy of Flavour, and
Exquisite Bouquet are Unrivalled.
THE FAVORITE WINE ON BOARD THE TASMANIAN
STEAM NAVIGATION CO.’S STEAMERS.
IN MAGNUMS, QUARTS, PINTS, AND HALF-PINTS.
To be had from all the leading Wine and Spirit Merchants and Hotels
in the Colonies.
R. H. BLACKWELL, Representative,
7, Market Buildings, William-street, Melbourne.
Jgents at Hobart ... FERGUSON fy CO.
AGENTS AT LAUNCESTON IRVINE & McEACHERN


MURRAY STREET, HOBART,
The Best and Most Centrally Situated Family and Commercial
Motel in Tasmania.
Visitors from England, Foreign Countries, or the Neighbouring
Colonies, will find every Comfort and Convenience.
m.SUITES OP PRIVATE APARTMENTS,^
WITH PIANO IN EACH.
PUBLIC DRAWING ROOM FOR LADIES.
COMMERCIAL AND READING ROOMS.
SAMPLE ROOMS FOR COMMERCIAL TRAVELLERS.
FIRST-CLASS BILLIARD SALOON, BATHS, ETC.
The Cellars will be found replete with the Choicest Brands of Wines,
Spirits, Ales, Etc.
Table d’Hote, ris p.m. daily; Do., during Summer Season, 6 p.m.
TELEPHONE NUMBER, 35.
J. C. HADLEY, Proprietor.
J-. O. HADLEY & CO.’S
HORSE AND CARRIAGE BAZAAR,
THE TASMANIAN TATTERSALL’S
LIVERY AJSTJD LETTING STABLES,
ADJOINING SHIP HOTEL, COLLINS STREET, HOBART.
*s-©se»*e-
Carriages of every description, Waggonettes, Single and Double Buggies,
Four-in-hand Drags, Tandems, &c., &c., with Horses and Harness
of the Highest Class always ready at the Shortest Notice.
Weddings, Balls, and Evening Parties Attended to Promptly t
CHARGES STRICTLY MODERATE. CAREFUL AND COMPETENT DRIVERS.
,7. CHANT, Manager.
N.B.—The Stables are in connection with Hadley’s Orient Hotel, to which is
added, for the convenience of Patrons, the Telephonic Exchange.
TELEPHONE NUMBER, 35.


CZEISTTIR^nii
fiiYcru and fiettinq Stabled
«~<sSs 4j <s^3>
(OPPOSITE THE EMPORIUM),
rpr
DRAGS, CARRIAGES, BUGGIES, PHAETONS, ETC.,
FOR HIRE ON THE SHORTEST NOTICE.
■WEDDING PARTIES STTZPZPHLIIEID-
THOMAS AUSTIN, Proprietor.
O t BK
LINE OF
STEAMERS
BETWEEN KANGAROO POINT AND HOBART.
Enterprise, Success, Result, ani Victory,
TIME TABLE.
2 p.m.
3 p.m:
4 p.m.
5 p.m.
6 p.m.
«■ NOT TRANSFERABLE
STEAMERS EET OUT BY THE DAY.
Franklin Wharf, Hobart.
O’MAY BROS.


Under the Patronage of
jtHl
His Excellency, Sir U. C. Strakn,
K.C.M.G.
HI- IEY. BAILY,
PORTRAIT AND LANDSCAPE
PHOTOGRAPHER,
FROM LONDON,
vO« IIHL
AWARDED THE ONLY
FOR ALBUM PORTRAITS,
Melbourne Exhibitions of 18€6,
1876, and 1881.
M Myksiliai
.Vttt lll
From all parts of the Island, mounted in Albums of different sizes as
Souvenirs, unmounted for Scrap Books.
88, LIVERPOOL STREET, HOBART.
THE MERCURY
PUBLISHED DAILY IN HOBART,
IS THE
LEADING JOURNAL IN TASMANIA
A FORTNIGHTLY SUMMARY IS PRINTED FOR
TRANSMISSION ABROAD.
ALSO,
THE TASMANIAN MAIL,
PUBLISHED WEEKLY IN HOBART.
Received in every home in the Colony, and circulated extensively
throughout the Colonies.
AGENTS : GORDON & GOTCH, Melbourne, Brisbane, Sydney, and
London; and LONDON—F. Algar, Geo. Street & Co., Bates, Hendy,
and Co., F. H. B. Phillips, R. Watson, Clarke, Son. and Platt, T.
Browne. AMERICA—New Haven (Conn.), H. P. Hubbard; San
Francisoo, D. Brown ; Chicago, Chicago Advt. Co.


SHOULD STAY AT
WESTELL A,
ELIZABETH STREET, HOBART.
RESIDENTIAL FAMILY CLUB.
a
:
■
U.II
This Mansion commands one of the finest positions in the city, and is within
easy access of Government House, the Public Buildings, and places of Amuse-
ment ; and embraces extensive views of the beautiful surrounding scenery of
Mount Wellington and the River Derwent.
The Rooms are large, lofty, and elegantly furnished, including Handsome
Public Drawing Room, Dining Hall, Smoking Room, and Billiard Room, with
one of Alcock’s best Tables.
PRIVATE SUITES FOR FAMILIES.
Large Flower and Fruit Garden, Fernery, and Tennis Latcn.
TERMS =
TWO GUINEAS PER WEEK.
THREE GUINEAS PER WEEK DURING THE SUMMER
(From Ist December to 31st March).
TERMS PER DAY IF REQUIRED.
HE CUISINE IS UNDER THE BEST PROFESSIONAL MANAGEMENT.
GOOD STABLING. HOT, COLD, AND SHOWER BATHS.
'm, Visitors are respectfully requested to communicate direct with Mrs.
Westgarth, as some self-interested people are in the habit of saying the house is
full, when such is not the case. nn
Telegrams and Letters Fromidly Attended to. Telephone, No. JJ.


826
\
N £PHEW
PtPKINS
SUED
'2 _ '■■•*■ .*-•■■-■
C>*
(Established 1826).
*tTQ
NOEL WHITE & CO.,
(LATE PERKINS AND NEPHEW)
family Drapers, Silk Mercers, (Miners,
AND *
CARPET WAREHOUSEMEN.
lv
Monthly Shipments of Latest Novelties ex Mail Steamers.
Dressmaking, Millinery, Mantlemaking, and Underclothing
Departments under efficient management.
The above were awarded THREE GOLD MEDALS at the
Tasmanian and Calcutta Exhibitions for
Excellence of Manufacture.
ESTIMATES GIVEN AND DESIGNS SUBMITTED FOR ALI
CLASSES OF WORK. K ALI
Samples and Patterns of any class of goods sent free to any address
2/ in £ CASH DISCOUNT on DRAPERY.
V in £ on CARPETS AND FURNISHINGS.
J 43> *45, i47> Liverpool Street, Hobart.


\jiftr\AK r
HORTON COLLEGE,
NEAR ROSS, TASMANIA,
Founded a.d., 1855, by the late Captain Horton,
S/(hL~ i
President : Rev. FRANCIS NEALE.
Head Master : Me. WILLIAM W. FOX, 8.A., London.
I&Q i Second Master: Mr. SAMUEL PATTERSON, 8.A., Graduate in
Honours, Queen’s College, Galway, Mathematical Scholar, Peel
Prizeman, Assistant Lecturer in Mathematics.
' ' Third Master : Mr. A. R. AYLWIN, Melb. Univ.
Assisted by other Resident Teachers.
OS
r
-r
K 5
£»
cr>
JO
*
UJ
u_
A
'upils from the neighbouring colonies who have paid the usual fare
L te T.S.N. Co.’s steamers, after six months’ residence at the College,
■anted a free passage back.
TERMS
(To be paid half-yearly in advance).
lard and Education
ashing
\/// Medical Attendance
Music
Drawing ...
Drill
above 15 years of age
£5O
60
4
1
8
6
1
0 per annum.
0 .. ..
0 n ii
0 n it
0 ii ii
0 ii ii
0 ii ti




TASMANIA




