

Handbook No. 7.
AUSTRALASIAN COLONIES.
TASMANIA HANDBOOK.
WITH MAP.
ISSUED BY THE
EMIGRANTS’ INFORMATION OFFICE,
31, Broadway, Westminster, S.W.
Note I.—This office has been established under the supervision of
the Colonial Office lor the purpose of supplying intending emigrants with
useful and trustworthy information respecting emigration to the British
Colonies. The information issued to the public is mainly obtained from
the various Colonial Governments and their representatives in this
country. No pains are spared to make the information as accurate as
possible, but the Committee of Management cannot undertake to hold
itself responsible for the absolute correctness of every detail.
Note 2.—The figures and details given in this Handbook do not
always correspond with those given in the Australasian colonies circular,
which should be read with this. The circular is revised quarterly.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE,
EYRE AND SPOTTISWOODE,
PRINTERS to the queen’s most excellent majesty.
And to be purchased from the
EMIGRANTS’ INFORMATION OFFICE; or
EYRE and SPOTTISWOODE, East Harping Street, Fleet Street, E.C.; or
ADAM and CHARLES BLACK, (J, North Bridge, Edinburgh
HODGES, FIGGIS, & Co., 101, Grafton Street, Dublin.
April 1889.
Price One Penny.








Handbook Ho. 7.
AUSTRALASIAN COLONIES.
TASMANIA HANDBOOK.
WITH MAP
ISSUED BY THE
EMIGRANTS’ INFORMATION OFFICE.
31, Broadway, Westminster, S.W.
Note I.— This office has been established under the supervision of
the Colonial Office for the purpose of supplying intending emigrants with
useful and trustworthy information respecting emigration to the British
Colonies. The information issued to the public is mainly obtained from
the various Colonial Governments and their representatives in this
country. No pains are spared to make the information as accurate as
possible, but the Committee of Management cannot undertake to hold
itself responsible for the absolute correctness of every detail.
Note 2.— The figures and details given in this Handbook do not
always correspond with those given in the Australasian colonies circular,
which should be read with this. The circular is revised quarterly.
LONDON;
PRINTED FOR HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE,
BY EYRE AND SPOTTISWOODE,
PEINTEES TO THE QUEEN’S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
And to be purchased from the
EMIGRANTS’ INFORMATION OFFICE; or
EYRE and SPOTTISWOODE, East Haedino Steeet, Fleet Steeet, E.C.; or
ADAM and CHARLES BLACK, 6, Noeth Beidge, Edxnbuegh ; or
HODGES, FIGGIS, & Co., 104, Geafton Steeet, Dublin,
April 1889.
Price One Penny.


Ton of flour
equals
2,000 lbs.
Hundredweight of flour
100
>5
Quarter of flour
25
rWheat")
Maize
Bushel of-<
Beans
Peas
>
60
Tares
L R y e .
Bushel of Barley
50
„ Oats
40
„ Bran or grass seed „
20
n
Table of Weights and Measures in Tasmania.
Coinage.
The coins used are the same as in the United Kingdom.


TASMANIA.
Tasmania is an island, nearly as large as Ireland, situated at Geographical
the southern extremity of Australia, from which it is divided by position.
Bass’s Straits, 120 miles wide.
It was discovered by the Dutch navigator, Tasman, in the year Historv.
1643, and by him named Van Diemen’s Land. At the end of the
next century it was visited by Cook and other voyagers, but was
not inhabited by Europeans till the year 1804, when some
colonists from New South Wales settled in the south of the island.
Tasmania is, therefore, the oldest, next to New South Wales, of
the Australasian colonies. From that time its progress, though
less rapid than that of the sister colonies, has been steady. Being
much smaller than any of them, the amount of land available for
sheep-runs was far more limited than in the other colonies.
Hence properties are smaller, the population is more scattered
over the country, and the villages are more frequent. The whole General
surface of the island is diversified with forests, rich valleys and features,
plains, and mountains rising to 4,000 and 5,000 feet, while
running streams abound in all parts. With the exception of the
western part of the island, which is for the most part densely
wooded, and where the coast is rugged and exposed to frequent
storms, the country is more or less dotted over with settlers. In
some parts, notably in the north-west, the soil is very rich, and
only requires clearing of timber to become excellent agricultural
land. The northern part of the island is generally the most
favourable for agriculture.
Tasmania has an area of 15| million of acres, and the 55 adjacent Area,
islands million acres. About million acres have been sold
or granted to settlers by the Crown, leaving in the hands of the
Crown over 12 million acres, of which over a million acres are
leased by settlers for sheep-runs or other purposes. In 1887
over 55,000 acres of Cro-wn lands in the country were sold to
selectors at an average price of U. 6s. sd. per acre, and 478 acres
of town and suburban lands at an average price of 61. 10s. 6d.
an acre. These sales indicate substantial progress in the Colony,
Tasmania is divided into the following 18 counties, which are Division into
well watered, but in general largely covered with heavy timber counties,
and scrub.
Wellington is in the N.W. corner, and consists of forests of
eucalyptus, myrtle, sassafras, musk, ferns, &c., and of some good
agricultural and pastoral land. Herring, lobster, blackfish, and
I 58336. A 2


other fish are caught along the coast, and in the Leven and other
rivers. The interior is not very accessible, and the population is
mainly settled at Stanley, near which port is a fine grazing
district, and rich potato land, and a large saw-mill on the Duck
river, employing about 40 men; Wynyard, with sawmills and
timber trade ; Burnie, on Emu Bay, the terminus of the Mount
Bischoff line, with brickyards, Ac.; and other places, as Montagu,
along the coast. Communication between these places and Laun-
ceston is by coach to Form by, and then rail, or by steamer the
whole way. Uncleared land may be bought along the railway
from Mount Bischoff to Emu Bay at about 30s. an acre. There
are some sheep-runs, near Mount Cameron, west of the Montagu
river, and between Arthur river and West Point.
Devon is the next county further east; it is heavily timbered in
many parts, but contains more good farm land than any other
part of the colony. The country round Torquay (population 400),
and Hamilton, is mainly agricultural and grazing, with a good
deal of timber; and it is the same round Formby (railway fare to
Launceston, 11s. 8c?.) and Ulverstone, busy seaport towns,
situated in a very pretty district, and round Sheffield, a rising
little place, with dairy farms, &c. Latrobe is at the head of the
navigable portion of the Mersey; there are coal and limestone
quarries in the neighbourhood, and the district of Port Sorell is the
chief potato ground of Tasmania. Deloraine (population 900) is in
the centre of a fertile grazing and agricultural country, a large part
of which is cultivated with grain and root crops, and with orchards.
Beaconsfield is now an important town, as being the centre of a
large gold-mining district; it is 26 N.W. of Launceston by road.
Dokset, in the N.E. corner, is the largest of the counties, being
a little bigger than Norfolk. Lefroy is surrounded by a gold-
mining district ; round Georgetown there are some good farms
orchards and limestone quarries. Large tin fields are being
worked N.E. along the Eingarooma river, especially round
Weldborough and Moorina ; the town of Eingarooma on the north
coast may be reached by steamer from Launceston. There are
also some excellent farms in this district. Much of other parts of
the county is covered by thick eucalyptus bush.
Eussel, on the N.W. coast, is mainly mountainous; its most
important town (population 2,000) is Mount Bischoff (Waratah),
with its large tin mines; the machinery at these mines is entirely
worked by water power; rain falls nearly every day. Nearly all
the ore is hewn out from the open cliff; there is very little
underground working. It is best reached from the north by
rail from Emu Bay; the roads to the south and west are very
bad. Gold is found along the Pieman and King rivers. There
is a little pastoral land, but the situation and climate are not
suitable for agriculture.
Lincoln, S.E. of Eussel, is not much known or settled; it is
generally mountainous, and too cold and wet for stock or grain.
Cradle Mount is the highest mountain in the colony, being over
5,000 feet; in other parts there are lakes and marshes, and in
the south some pastoral land.
Stanley.
Wynyard.
Torquay.
F ormby.
Ulverstone.
Sheffield.
Latrobe.
Deloraine.
Beaconsfield.
Lefroy.
Georgetown.
Eingarooma.
Mountßischoff.


Westmoreland, E. of Lincoln, has some excellent land in the
north part round Longford, Westbury, and Chudleigh, where Longford,
grain, fruit, and stock do well. The wheat crops and numbers of p h es |, b “ r ?’
stock in this part are the largest in the colony. The country u eig
further south is mountainous and includes the Great Lake (13
miles by 8). It is too cold and wet for agriculture, and, except
in summer, for stock.
Cornwall, E. of Westmoreland, extends to the eastern coast,
and has several important towns and industries. Launceston is Launceston,
a fine city on the Tamar, and the chief town of the north.
It has several manufactories of various kinds, and has direct
communication by steamer with Melbourne (Victoria), and by
rail with Hobart. There is some fair farming and pastoral land
in the neighbourhood of Launceston and round Evandale, Avoca, Evandale,
and Fingal, this last-mentioned place being best known for its Avoca, Fingal
extensive gold and coal fields; go id is also now being mined at
Mangana and Mathinna to the north of Fingal; while St. Helen’s St. Helen’s.
is a fair-sized port and favourite watering place.
Montagu, on the W. coast S. of Russell, consists of much
broken country and high mountains, through which travelling
is difficult. Macquarie harbour is its chief port. Gold has been
found in parts, but its most important industry is that of tin
mining round Mount Heemskirk. There is not much land Mount Heems-
suitable for cultivation. . kirk.
Franklin, Montgomery, and Arthur, S. of Montagu, are
also very mountainous and wooded countries, not much known or
inhabited. Some Huon pine is shipped from Port Dover.
Kent is the southernmost county in the island ; settlement is
confined to a narrow strip along the Huon and the D’Entre-
casteaux Channel. There is some fair land here for grain and
stock. Round Franklin are situated the biggest orchards in
Tasmania, the production of apples for home consumption and for
export being very large. There are one or two jam factories
here also. The whole settlement is heavily covered with Huon
pine and other timber, and many of its inhabitants are occupied
in the timber trade and saw mills at Franklin, Dover, and Franklin,
Hythe. Franklin is 28 miles from Hobart. Dover, Hythe.
Buckingham is N. and N.E. of Kent. Hobart, the capital of Hobart.
Tasmania, is very prettily situated on the Derwent, it possesses a
fine harbour, and all the comforts of a modern city, and some
small manufactories. It is a favourite place of residence, and the
country around is delightful. The country round Hobart, New New Norfolk,
Norfolk, Glenorchy, and Kingston is well suited for grain, pasturage, Glenorchy,,
fruit orchards, &c. The country round New Norfolk is the great Kingston,
hop-growing district of Tasmania. Hops are also grown round
Glenorchy, and both these districts produce considerable quanti-
ties of apples and pears. There are large limestone quarries
worked at New Norfolk, The interior of the county is more
mountainous and less settled, but has some tracts of excellent
land.
Monmouth, N.E. of Buckingham, is one of the best pastoral
districts of Tasmania, and carries large numbers of sheep, cattle,


horses, and other stock. Cereals also grow well. The principal
centres are Hamilton, Richmond, Bothwell, Kempton, and
Campania. There are coal mines at Jerusalem.
Pembroke, E. and S.E. of Monmouth, contains freestone and
coal, and considerable numbers of stock are pastured round
Sorell and other villages where the heavy timber and scrub have
been cleared, and some grain is also grown there.
Glamorgan, N. of Pembroke on the E. coast, is settled only
on the W. and along the coast round Swansea, Bicheno, Sey-
mour, &c., where the land is fairly fit for pasturage; most of the
Crown lands remaining unselected are situated on steep rugged
hills clothed in places with a rough kind of pasture, but not
suitable for agriculture. The climate here is rather dry for
farming, but very pleasant to live in. Coal exists over an area of
some 40,000 acres.
Somerset, W. of Glamorgan, contains some fine grazing land
round Tunbridge, Ross, Oatlands, and Campbell Town, all of which
is occupied. It is one of the best pastoral districts in Tasmania,
and supports large numbers of stock. The Crown lands that are
not taken up are rough and stony. Not much grain is grown,
except oats, round Oatlands.
Cumberland, the central county, is too cold and wet for
agriculture, but a large part of it is leased" for pastoral purposes,
for which the southern portion is especially suited. Those Crown
lands which are not taken up are for the most part rough and
rocky.
The climate is very healthy and genial. The winters are much
warmer than in England. Snow seldom falls, or remains on the
ground more than a few hours, except in high situations. The
summers, though rather hotter, from the greater power of the
sun, than in England, are much cooler than in Australia, and the
air is dry and seldom sultry. The summer mean temperature is
61°, and the winter 45°. The greatest heat in Hobart in 1887
was 103° in January, and the lowest 30° in June. On the N.W.
coast at Circular Head the highest was 81°, and the lowest 33°.
The rainfall is very variable; that at Hobart is about the
same as at Greenwich, and rain falls on half the days in the year.
Launceston and the north coast have more rain (32 inches at
Launceston, and 41 at Latrobe, but in 1888 only 18| inches fell
at Launceston); Oatlands and Hamilton have 19; and the W.
and S.W. coasts are very wet, Mount Bischoff having 85 inches in
1888. Many diseases which in England are often serious are
in this climate comparatively slight. The rate of infant mortality
is particularly low. So generally recognised in Australia is the
pleasantness of the Tasmanian climate, that a great number of
persons go there every summer from Melbourne and Sydney to
escape the heat and dust of the continent.
The seasons are nearly the opposite to what they are in
England, the summer commencing in December.
The population of Tasmania on 31st December 1887 was
estimated at 142,478, or 5'43 persons per square mile against
492 to the square mile in England and Wales in 1888. There
were about 10,000 less females than males. In density of popula-
Hamilton,
Richmond,
Bothwell,
Kempton,
Campania.
Sorell.
Swansea,
Bicheno,
Seymour.
Tunbridge,
Ross, Oatlands,
Campbell
Town.
Climate.
Population.


tion it stands third among the Australasian colonies. The popu-
lation of the city of Hobart is estimated at about 27,000, and of
Launceston at about 18,000.
There are sailing ships which go direct to Hobart and Launces- External com
ton, and the blew Zealand steamers call at Hobart, which is the raunication.
most direct way. Passengers can also go by Melbourne in Victoria,
and thence to Tasmania by an inter-colonial steamer. There is
at least one steamer every week from Melbourne to Hobart
(steerage fare about 21.), and another to Launceston (fare about
1/.), and in summer they go more frequently. There are also
regular steamers between Hobart and Sydney (fare 3/.), Launces-
ton and Sydney (fare 21. 10s.), and Hobart and New Zealand.
There are also several coasting and river steamers.
The direct lines of steamers from England to Hobart, with their
London addresses, are—
1. Messrs. Shaw, Savill, and Albion Co., Lim,, 34, Leaden-
hall Street, E.C.
2. The New Zealand Shipping Company, 138, Leadenhall
Street, E.C.
Steamers by one or other of the above lines go direct to Hobart
by the Cape every fortnight: sailing vessels at intervals.
The following lines of steamers go at short intervals by the
Suez Canal to Melbourne or Sydney, whence another steamer is
taken to Launceston or Hobart. It is a little cheaper to go this
wmy to Launceston, and about the same price to Hobart; but
passengers often have to wait a day or two at Melbourne or
Sydney for the steamer to Tasmania, which causes extra delay
and expense. Some of these lines send sailing vessels also at
intervals: they go round the Cape.
1. The Peninsular and Oriental Steam Shipping Co., 122,
Leadenhall Street, E.C. No steerage passengers are taken by
this line.
2. The Orient Steam Shipping Co., 13, Fenchurch Avenue, E.C.
3. Anderson, Anderson, & Co., 5, Fenchurch Avenue, E.C.
4. The Colonial Line, 112, Fenchurch Street, E.C.
5. The Anglo-Australasian Steam Navigation Co., 2, Billiter
Avenue, E.C.
6. Messrs. Houlder Bros. & Co., 146, Leadenhall Street, and
30, Hope Street, Glasgow.
7. The North German Lloyd, via Antwerp, 5 and 7, Fenchurch
Street.
8. The Aberdeen Line, 24, Leadenhall Street, E.C.
9. Messrs. Trinder, Anderson, & Co., 4, St. Mary Axe, E.C.
10. Messrs. Money Wigram & Sons, 7, Leadenhall Street.
11. C. Bethell & Co., 110, Fenchurch Street, E.C.
The Passenger Act, 1855. and other Acts require passenger Passenger
ships carrying emigrants to be seaworthy, have proper accom- cts-
modation, furnish good and sufficient food, provide medicines and,
on large ships, a surgeon, and in other ways protect the interests
of emigrants. Short summaries of these regulations are posted
up in every ship; emigrants who find that they are not being
treated fairly should immediately complain.


Passengers going by lines, such as the North German Lloyd
from Antwerp, which do not clear from English ports, are not
protected by these Acts.
Fares from There are no free, assisted, or nominated passages. The un-
D g an • assisted passages to Tasmania, direct to Hobart or via Melbourne
to Launceston (fares liable to change: consult advertisements in
daily newspapers )
By Sailing Ship
(about 3 months).
By Steamer
(from 40 to 50 days).
3rd class
From 14?, 14s.
From 14?. 14s.*
2nd class
„ 22 1. 4s*
„ 30?.
Ist class
„ 46/. 7s.
„ . 44?. ss.*
* Via Melbourne to Launceston; direct steerage fare from London to
Hobart is 16?. 16s.
As a rule, children from 3 to 12 years of age, half price ; 1 child
under 3 years, free.
Ship kit. Food (3 or 4 good meals a day) and sleeping accommodation
are provided, but third-class passengers must find their own
bedding, knives, forks, &c., which may be obtained for about 20,?.
buggage. Each third-class passenger is allowed 15 cubic feet of luggage
free, and children 7L Two boxes, each 2 feet 6 inches long,
2 feet broad, and 1 foot 6 inches deep, make up 15 cubic feet; but
any sized boxes will do so long as the permitted quantity is not
exceeded. Luggage required for use on the voyage should be
labelled “ Wanted.” By sailing ships the amount of free luggage
varies.
Sailings. Particulars as to the despatch of vessels are advertised in the
daily newspapers; or may be obtained from the various shipping
companies. Emigrants should ascertain the hour the ship starts,
in case it necessitates their being there the day before.
Outfit: No large outfit is necessary, nor need it be new. Emigrants
having knives, forks, spoons, bed and table linen, kitchen utensils,
sewing machine, light tools, and other small articles or ornaments,
should take them, but not heavy furniture nor rough common
tools, as free luggage is limited. Emigrants should take all the
clothes they have, but not loss, if possible, than the following for
(1) for men, the voyage and subsequent use. For men, two pair boots, one
strong suit, two pairs of white or light tweed trousers, and one
jacket of similar cool material, one cloth cap and one broad
brimmed straw hat, one pair slippers or canvas shoes, and one
Overcoat, and six articles of each kind of underclothing. For
(2) for women, women, two pairs strong shoes, one warm and two cotton gowns,
one broad-brimmed straw hat, and one close-fitting hat, one pair
slippers, one cloak or shawl, six articles of each kind of under-
a° T clothing, and sewing materials. For children , one warm cloak
or greatcoat, two pairs strong shoes, two warm suits, and six or


nine articles of each kind of underclothing. Two or three
coloured serge suits for men, and an extra supply of flannel for
women and children will be very useful. If the emigrant is
going by sailing ship, extra waim clothing will be required.
N.B.—There are not many opportunities for washing clothes on
board.
Any time of the year is suitable for arriving; September to Best time for
November for preference before the shearing and harvest begins, arriving.
No special arrangements are made by the Tasmanian Govern- Arrangements
ment. A voluntary immigration committee has been formed in for reception
Launceston. Emigrants should apply to the Secretary, Mr. A. lalt)our
Evershed, who is in communication with farmers and employers tries, &c.
of labour in the northern half of the island. They should also
write to him (and their friends if they have any) beforehand,
mentioning their trade and the ship they are coming by. At
Hobart all members of trades unions and labour societies in this
country would do well to communicate with the Secretary of the
Trades and Labour Council at Hobart on or before arrival. Men
may also apply at the Wharf Club, Macquarie Street, and women
can get lodgings at the Young Women’s Institute, Argyle Street.
183 domestic servants, and artizans and labourers with their Emigration,
wives and children, received nominated passes to the Colony in
1887.
Pauper immigration is restricted by section 3 of No. 4 of the Pauper immi-
Acts of 1885. * gration.
Tasmania has a Governor appointed by the Crown, usually for Government,
a term of six years, and a Parliament consisting of two Houses,
the Legislative Council and the Legislative Assembly. The
Parliament is invested with plenary legislative power, subject to
the assent of the Crown signified by the Governor. The members
of the Legislative Council are chosen by electoral districts, and
each member sits for six years from the date of his election, this
House not being, like the Legislative Assembly, subject to dis-
solution by the Governor. The Legislative Council has 18
members ; the Legislative Assembly 36. The qualification for an
elector to the Legislative Council — is the possession of a free-
hold estate of 20/. or leasehold of 80/. yearly value, or the fact of
being a barrister, graduate, minister of religion, or an officer of
the army or navy. The qualification for an elector to the
Assembly—is to be assessed as owner or occupier of property, or
to be in receipt of income of 60/. a year; rations count as
income; residence for 12 months is necessary. Municipal
government is general.
The laws are substantially identical with those of England. Administration
The Supreme Court has, as regards the Colony, all the powers of justice,
that are vested in the superior courts in England.
The various religious bodies have their own churches or chapels lleligion.
as in England. There is no State Church, but each body manages
its own affairs. The majority of the people are Protestants.
By the Education Act, 1886, education was placed under the Education,
minister controlling the Department of Education. Besides
Government schools there are many grammar schools and private
establishments.


Education is compulsory for children between seven and 14
years, and fees are charged. The teaching is entirely unsectarian,
but opportunities are given for religious instruction where desired.
There are several exhibitions and scholarships to be competed for.
The revenue for 1887 was 594,976/., as against 568,924 in 1886 ;
the expenditure 668,759/., as against 584,756/. in J 886; in each
year from 1884 to 1887 the expenditure exceeded the revenue;
the public debt on 31st December 1887 was 4,109,370 as against
4,026,720/. in 1886.
Revenue and
expenditure.
The total experts in 1887 were 1,449,371/. The principal items
showing increases over 1886 were wool, 415,425/., an increase of
104,491/.; tin 407,852/., an increase of 44,488/.; gold, 140,584/.,
an increase of 36,182/.; sheep 54,337/., an increase of 21,648/.;
rabbit-skins 17,555/., an increase of 10,155/. As there was,
however, a considerable falling off in jam, green fruit, oats,
potatoes, bark, and other products, the net increase was diminished
to 117,831/. as compared with 1886. It will be noticed that the
export of wool and minerals comprise two thirds of the total
export trade. In 1888 exports decreased to 1,333,865/. Those
of wool, gold, fruits, potatoes, and cereals were much less, and
those of hops, bark, tin, sheep, and timber were more.
The total imports were 1,596,817/., or 159,750/. less than in
1886; the chief falling off being 80,587/. in textile fabrics and
dress. Of the exports 99’99 were to, and 96’85 of the imports
were from, the United Kingdom, or British Colonies, mainly New
South Wales and Victoria.
Exports and
imports.
Banks and
money.
The banks at Hobart and Launceston, whose head offices
are in London, are :—Bank of Australasia, 4, Threadneedle Street,
E.C.; Union Bank of Australia, 1, Bank Buildings, E.C. They
have branches in other parts of the Colony. British money is
used. Persons are recommended not to take their money in cash,
but by means of one or more money orders payable to themselves
at any Post Office in the Colony. Large sums should be trans-
mitted through any British bank.
There are various Savings Banks, and the deposits are in-
creasing every year.
There are about 318 miles of Government and private railways
open; the lowest fare is 1 \d, to 2 d. a mile; generally 561bs. of
luggage is allowed free. The principal line runs from Hobart to
Launceston (133 miles), passing through the centre of the island;
fare 20s. At Bridgewater miles), there is a branch (15 miles),
to Glenora; at Conara (98 miles) there is a branch (47 miles)
to Fingal and St. Mary’s; at Evandale (122 miles) there is a
branch (71 miles) to Formby on the N.W. Coast, which is to be
extended to Emu Bay. There is also a line from Emu Bay, on
N. Coast, to the Mount Bischoff Tin Mines (48 miles). The line
from Launceston, N.E. to Scottsdale (47 miles), and one or two
others are under construction. The total profit on working these
lines in 1887 was 14,000/.
It may be taken generally that, where there are no steamers or
railways, all the towns mentioned in this Handbook are connected
with Launceston or Hobart by coach ; there is thus a fairly
complete network of intercommunication throughout the Island.
Savings banks
Railways.
Coaches.


The Colony is connected by telegraph wjth England and other Telegraphs,
parts of the world; and there is connection between the principal
towns and villages in the Island ; the charge for an inland
telegram is Is. for 10 words, and for one to or from the United
Kingdom 9s. 9 d. and 9s. 11c?, a word.
Postage rates, to and from the United Kingdom, are, letters, Post,
6d. per oz,, or 4c?. by long sea route; newspapers, 1c?. per
4 oz. ; book packets under 1 oz,, 1c?. ; 1 oz. to 2 oz., 2 d. ; 2 oz. to
4 oz., 4c?. ; every additional 4 oz. or part, 4c?. Post cards 3d.,
or by long sea route 2c?. Parcels by parcel post Is. 6d. for first 2 lbs.,
9c?. a lb. afterwards up to 11 lbs. Money orders from the United
Kingdom to Tasmania cost 6c?. for sums not exceeding 21., Is. for
sums between 21. and 5/., Is. Gc?. for sums between 51. and 71.,
and 2s. for sums between 71. and 10?. Mails are despatched to
and from England and Tasmania at least once a week.
There are hospitals and invalid depots at Hobart, Launceston, Hospitals and
Campbell Town, and Mount Bischoff ; lunatic asylums at Hobart charitable
and New Norfolk, N.W. of Hobart, and other charitable institutions. inst itutious.
One out of every 172 persons is a pauper, as against 1 out of
every 31 in England,
Public libraries, mechanics’ institutes, &c. are to be found in Libraries
nearly all the principal towns. and institutes.
Among the friendly societies, &c. at Hobart and Launceston are Friendly,
the Rechabites, Odd Fellows, Good Templars, Foresters, Protes- building
tant Alliance, Druids, Orange Institution, Hibernian Australasian societies and
Catholic Benefit Society, St. Patrick’s Benefit Society, St. John’s ot ers ‘
Friendly Society, Young Men’s Christian Association, Masonic
Grand Lodges of English, Irish, and Scotch constitutions, and
several building societies; all these have branches in the country.
Members of friendly societies in England should apply to their
own society for letters of introduction to the corresponding
society in the Colony.
The same sports and pastimes are carried on as in England. Amusements.
There are many cricket, football, rowing, bicycling, and other
clubs ; and there are opportunities for shooting and fishing.
The soil and climate of Tasmania are favourable to the cultiva- Products and
tion of all the English cereals, fruits, trees, and plants, and on Industries:
account of the mildness of the winters, and the greater amount of
sunshine, their growth is more rapid, and the production of fruit (1.) Farming,
especially is much more certain and abundant than in England.
Many plants, such as the geranium, which would not survive a
winter in England, grow luxuriantly without any protection.
As in all countries where land is plentiful and cheap, and
labour scarce and dear, the cultivation of corn is carried on with
little, if any, regard to rotation of crops or manuring, but guano
and bone dust manure is now used to some extent. Consequently
the yield per acre as compared with an old country like England
is not a true measure of the productiveness of the soil. Machinery
is now beginning to be more used.
First-class cleared arable farms with buildings, cost from Price of land.
10/. to 15/. per acre, and generally range from 100 to 300 acres;
capital required to stock and work them is about 300/. for every


100 acres; this land may also be rented at rates up to 205. an
acre. Second-class farms cost 61. to 10/. an acre : capital required,
250/. for 100 acres; rent from 7s. 6d. an acre. Farm imple-
ments are dear. The cost of raising an acre of wheat is put
down variously from 31. to 51. including rent, manure, &c. The
average yield for the Colony of IB bushels an acre would give—if
7s. 6d. is added for straw —a good profit cn the lower estimate,
but not on the higher, unless the yield was greater. There
Land Tax Act , j g a j an( j tax 0 f j n £ on ca pitai value of the
IBBB ' land.
Crops. The quantity of land under cultivation for the year ending 31st
March 1888 was 457,436 as against 446,391 in 1887, of which
about 40,498 acres were in wheat, 21,169 in oats, 564 in hops
mainly at New Norfolk, and 184,653 in permanent artificially
sown grasses. There was an increase in produce over 1887 in
wheat and hay, but a large decrease in oats, peas, beans, &c.
Wheat cultivation is less than what it was 10 years ago, owing to
competition from American wheat in the markets of the world,
and Tasmania has to import considerable quantities for home
consumption. The average produce of bushels per acre for the
whole island was: wheat oats 18; barley 14. Much the
largest crops of wheat, barley and oats, were grown round West-
bury and Longford in Westmoreland, and Port Sorell in Devon,
and in the case of oats only round Oatlands. The average price
at Hobart and Launceston of wheat was 4s. 6d. to 4s. 9d.. of
oats 25. 6d. to 35. 6d. per bushel. The wheat crop for 1888-9 is
said to be generally very good, and the yield probably far exceeds
that of last year. The barley crop is more irregular ; in some dis-
tricts, notably about Quamby, there are some excellent crops, whilst
in others the returns are much less, but on the whole the quantity-
likely to be harvested is greater than last year. The crops to the
westward and north-west of Deloraine are excellent, and one of
the largest yields for years may reasonably be expected. Along
the N.W. Coast the crops are turning out very well. Peas have
received more attention than during the past few years, and the
acreage under crop is fairly large. Potatoes promise well. New
wheat was selling in March at 4s. Hd. to 45. 9d., and oats
25. 4 d. to 2s. 6d. a bushel; new hay 3/. 10s. to 31. 1 5s. a ton.
r 2 Q ar a ens All English fruits and vegetables grow excellently throughout
and orchards, all the settled regions. In 1887 there were 16,394 acres of
potatoes, and 8,865 of gardens and orchards; the average of
orchards has been since reduced. Owing to drought, all root
crops, as well as hops, apples and pears, showed a large decrease
in yield in 1888 as compared with the previous year. The
prices in Hobart and Launceston were 555. to 755. per ton as com-
pared with 705. to 1005. in 1887. In February 1889 they were
about 110 s. The average produce of potatoes was only 2| tons
as compared with nearly 5 in 1887 ; Port Sorell produced a much
larger quantity than any other district. The Franklin district in
the south claims much the largest share in the fruit industry,
157,165 bushels of apples having been grown there during the
year ending March 1888, out of a total produce of 289,904, New


Norfolk coming next with 38,679 bushels. The codlin moth has
become a serious pest; the Franklin and Derwent Valley districts
have hitherto escaped, but Glenorchy has suffered, and the
northern districts have almost given up fruit growing in con-
sequence. The Codlin Moth Act, 1888, was passed to prevent
this pest spreading. Apples sold in Hobart and Launceston at
35. 6d. to ss. 6d., and pears from 35. to ss. 6d. a bushel, both
lower than in 1887. Apples in February 1889 were fetching
25. 6 d. to 45. 6c/. Orchards yield about 507 per acre a year, and
cost about 2007 an acre. An interesting experiment in the pro-
duction of grapes for wine-making has recently been started on
Maria Island, on the East Coast.
There is excellent pasturage for stock in the N.W., N.E., Mid- (3.)
land, and S.E. districts of the Colony. They generally remain in
the open throughout winter and summer. Merino, Leicester,
and Lincoln are the principal breeds of sheep; cattle are
mainly Herefords and Devons. In March 1889 good milch
cows were fetching 10/. to 11/. ; fat lambs 7s. to 145. For
the year ending March 31, 1888, there were over 1,500,000
sheep, 147,000 cattle, nearly 30,000 horses, and over 52,000
pigs ; all, especially pigs, showing a slight decrease as compared
with 1887; the decrease in sheep being probably owing to
rabbits, fluke, and the increasing tendency to fatten stock for
market. The number of dairy cows has also slightly decreased.
The breeding of stud sheep for export to other colonies has
become a most profitable branch of the pastoral industry. The
number exported has increased from 385 in 1880 to over 4,000 in
1888 ; but the nominal value per head has decreased from
387 185. 2d. to 137 4s. 9d. The export of wool in 1887 was
9,740,200 lbs., or 1,564,420 lbs. more than in 1886 ; the average
price also increased from a trifle over 9 d. to 10£o7 per lb. Nearly
half of the total number of sheep are in the midlands round
Bothwell, Hamilton, Oatlands, &c. Cattle and horses are distri-
buted all over the Colony, except in the south-west by Franklin
and Macquarie, where there is very little stock of any kind.
A considerable part of the Island is more or less thickly covered ( 4 -)
with timber, the predominant trees being the blue gum tree,
which grows to a greater height than any other known tree. Its
growth is a proof of the mildness of the climate, as it will not
thrive in a country so cold as England. The pine grows in
the S. and S.W., and is very durable and well suited for boat
building; while the blackwood, red and white myrtle, swamp
gum, Huon pine, stringy bark, &c. are well adapted for smaller
objects; and a good deal of wattle bark is exported for tanning
purposes.
Stock.
Timber.
Gold mining is now a principal industry of the Colony. In 1887 ( s> )
there were 824 persons employed in gold raining, 3iT of whom
were at Beaconsfield; 42,609 ounces were produced, valued at
158,5337, as compared with 31,015 ounces in 1886. About three-
fourths of the gold produced came from Beaconsfield, Other
mines are worked at Lefroy, Denison, Mount Victoria, Lisle (all


in Dorset), Fingal in Cornwall, and along the King and Pieman
rivers on the West Coast, where, however, provisions are very
difficult to obtain. The number of persons employed was less in
1887 than in any year since 1878. Corinna is the centre of the
Pieman river diggings.
(6.) Tin. In 1887 there were (roughly) 2,262 persons, or 763 more
than in 1886, employed in tin-mining, of whom 471 were at
Mount Bischoff in the N.W. {see p. 4), and 1,151 round
Ringarooma. The total production was (roughly) 5,702 tons
(valued at 585,808/.) of which 3,015 were produced at Mount
Bischoff, and 2,191 in the Ringarooma district. In 1886 the
total production of tin was 5,728 tons ; but owing to the rise in
the average English quotation of tin from 97/. 16s. in 1886 to
111/. 15s. in 1887, the total value of the production in 1887
was far greater.
(7.) Coal. The production of coal in 1887 was 27,663 tons, or an increase
of 17,252 tons over 1886. The principal mines are at Fingal, the
production there being over 20,000 tons; 2,320 tons were raised
round Longford, and smaller quantities at Franklin, Port Sorell,
Oatlands, New Town, near Hobart, Adventure Bay south of
Hobart, Jerusalem, 32 miles north of Hobart, and lately at
Dulverton, near Sheffield. The industry at present is but small,
only some 85 men being employed, but is capable of considerable
extension; in 1888 it benefited from the strike at the Newcastle
coal mines in New South Wales. Coal in Hobart cost 255. to
30s. a ton.
(8.) Silver and Among the newer mines the silver mines at Mount Zeehan, on
silver lead. the West Coast, are perhaps the most promising. At present
there are not more than 100 men at work, but this is mainly
owing to the difficulties of access. The easier way from Hobart
is by boat to Macquarie Harbour, and then through a wild
country to the mines, 40 miles off; a Bill for the construction of
a railway from the harbour to the mines was passed last February.
North of these mines, and 13—16 miles from Mount Bischoff, lie
the Heazlewood silver lead deposits, which are at present very
difficult to get at, but promise well in the future.
(9.) Other Copper is said to exist at Frankford, 12 miles South-west of
Beaconslield, and on the S.W. Coast. There are also con-
siderable stone quarries—flag, free, and building stone—round
Launceston, Hobart, and New Norfolk, and smaller quarries at
Bothwell, Ross, Glenorchy, and Clarence, near Hobart ; 144 men
were employed altogether, and the total production was 248,617
cubic feet only as against 402,868 in 1886. The principal falling
off was in Launceston, where, however, a large quantity of road
metal was also quarried. Excellent slate is also quarried at Selby
(in the N.E.) and elsewhere.
(10.) Manu- The manufactories are not very large, as appears by the
factories. number of persons employed in some of the principal ones, in
1887, viz., 764 in the sawmills (Port Sorell and Franklin have
the largest number of mills); 250 in brickyards and potteries
(Launceston and Hobart only); 196 (as against 289 in 1886) in


tanneries and fellmongeries ; 171, male and female, in jam fac-
tories, mainly in or near Hobart; over 119 in flour mills ; 68 in
woollen mills; 239 in engineering establishments and foundries ;
60 in bark mills, and 134 in breweries. There are also tin
smelting and boat building works at Port Sorell, Hobart, Laun-
ceston, &c.; gas works at Latrobe, Launceston, and Hobart only
(the charge is 7 s. 6d. per 1,000 feet, and 15s. at Latrobe) ; and in
every settled district a few small manufactories of some kind;
Hobart, Launceston, and Port Sorell having the largest number.
The manufacture of jams has decreased mainly owing to high
duties put upon imported jam in other colonies.
The vessels engaged in the whale fisheries have gradually (11.) Fisheries,
decreased from 11 in 1879 to 4 in 1887, and only employ now
some 100 men. Trout are caught in the lakes and rivers;
oysters in the Tamar, Spring Bay in the S.E., &c.; flounders,
trumpeters, mullet, crayfish, and many other kinds of fish are
caught in the fishing grounds. About 400,000 salmon ova were
sent over in 1888, in the hope of permanently establishing salmon
in Tasmanian waters. Since 1884, when Government Reserves
were established, the oyster industry at Spring Bay and Little
Swanport Lagoon, has, according to the Inspector of Fisheries’
Report for 1888, wonderfully improved. Oysters are now present
in millions, and afford profitable employment to the local
fishermen.
There is no special opening for professional persons from this Professional
country, and appointments are very seldom made to any but those persons,
already in the Colony. For information as to barristers, solicitors,
doctors, teachers, railway men, civil servants, dentists, &c., see
the Professional Handbook, issued by this office, price Id.
Rabbits being very numerous and destructive in certain dis- Rabbits
triers, a new Act was passed in 1888 to facilitate and compel their Destruction
destruction. Act, 1888.
No child under 12 may be employed in a factory. No child Employment of
under 14 may be employed more than eight hours a day, except Women and '
in jam factories from December to March when nine hours em- lg g 4 ren * ct ’
ployment is allowed. No girl or woman may be employed more
than 10 hours a day, except assistants in retail shops on Satur-
days. Seats must be provided in retail shops for the shop women.
These Acts give summary means of redress to a master for Masters ami
negligence, bad conduct, &c., of his servant, and to the servant for Servants Acts,
non-payment of wages or ill-treatment by his master. J B g 4 ’ J 88 ;?’
r ; w kjj luaotvi. 1884 1887-
Vaccination is compulsory by the Vaccination Act, 1882. , r ’. .
i ~ j j Vaccination.
By the Act of 1870 wages may not be paid in public-houses. w
By the Act of 1874 marriage with a deceased wife’s sister is .
valid. ° ““™f-
This Act restricts the immigration of Chinese, and imposes a immigration
tax of 10Z. on every one landing. Act, 1887.
The reserve price of all Government land suitable for agricul- Crown Land
ture is 1/. per acre, and of pastoral land ss. per acre. The average Regulations,
price af agricultural land in 1887 was 1/. 6s. sd. an acre. The 1885,
Crown Lands Offices are in Hobart and Launeeston, where appli-
cation for land must be made ; most of the best lands are occupied;


land transfer is simple and cheap. Crown lands are generally
heavily covered with timber and scrub, which is expensive and
laborious work to clear; “ burning off” costs 15s. to 255. an acre,
“ clearing,” Bs. to 10s. more if labour is hired, or from 21. to 10/.
per acre, according to density of scrub, before it is fit for farming.
A rough hut may be erected by the settler himself; a three to four
room house would cost 20/. and upwards. It will take him some
years to clear his farm; if he has money he had far better buy a
cleared farm at once. The middle and south parts of the island
are less heavily timbered than the north, where some trees are
300 feet high.
With the view of facilitating the acquisition of Crown laud by
persons of limited capital it is also disposed of on deferred payments
extending over 14 years, but in these cases continuous residence
by the purchaser, his tenant, or servant is required until the
whole of the purchase money is paid, and one third of the purchase
money is added to the price of the land. Thus the cost of 100
acres on this system would be :
(1.) Agricul-
tural and
pastoral lands,
£ s. d.
100 acres at 20s. - 100 0 0
Add one third for credit - - 33 6 8
133 6 8
but the payment of that sum may be made as follows :
£ s. d.
Payment at time of purchase - 3 6 8
„ first year - -500
„ second year - -500
Each of the following 12 years at
10/. per year ... 120 0 0
133 6 8
Under these regulations not more than 320 acres of land can be
purchased by the selector. To the above 133/. 6s. Sd. must be
added 10/. for survey and fees.
Leases are granted for 21 years of not less than 20 acres ; nearly
300 were granted in 1887. The rent for lands containing coal,
shale, slate, or limestone is 2s. 6d. an acre per year ; for other
mineral lands ss. The lessee must spend 3/. an acre every year
in mining operations, or employ one man for every 20 acres during
nine months in each year. By two Acts of 1888 the Government
may make grants in aid of mining.
A miner’s right costs ss. a year for not more than 10 years, and
entitles the holder to mine for gold within a certain fixed area.
Leases, for not more than 21 years, of Crown lands not exceeding
10 acres may be granted for gold-mining purposes; on condition
(among others) that the lessee employ for the first six months one
man for every 2 acres, and afterwards one man for every acre;
191 of such leases were granted in 1887. (Gold Field Regulations,
Government Gazette, 2nd August 1887.)
(2.) Mineral
Lands, other
than Gold,
Acts of 1877,
1884, 1887,
and 1888.
(3.) Gold-
fields Regu-
lation Acts,
1880-85.


Licenses to fell and split ordinary timber from Crown land (4.) Timber
available for the purpose can be obtained through the police, or licenses, &c.
from the Crown bailiffs, on the monthly payment of ss. for each
person employed; to fell and split blackwood and pine, 2s. 6d.
per week for each person employed; to fell and remove ordinary
timber in the log, ss. per week for each person employed; to fell
and remove blackwood or pine in the log, 10s. per month for each
person employed; to strip wattle bark, 10s. per month for each
person employed ; to cut pine in certain areas of the West Coast
(Sept. 1887 Regulations) 1/. per month.
The tariff is rather high, and is largely protective. A complete Customs Act,
copy of it may be seen at this office. There is a specific duty on 1888.
many of the articles, and the ad valorem duties range from 5 to
20 per cent. Harrows, &c. are charged 5 per cent, ad valorem,
and watches, gold and silver jewellery, and plate and plated ware
20 per cent. A large number of articles ai’e admitted free, of
which the following are the most important, viz., other agricul-
tural implements and machinery, live animals, blacksmiths’ bellows,
printed books, engines and fittings and engineers’ tools, cabinet-
makers’ and upholsterers’ materials, jewellers’ and watchmakers’
tools, printing material, saddlers’ materials; tools generally ; all
articles used exclusively in boot and shoe making; hatters’
materials; machinery generally not worked by hand ; manures ;
passengers’ baggage and cabin furniture, except musical instru-
ments and plate, arriving in the Colony at any time within six
months before or after the owner thereof; also household furniture
and effects arriving within six months before or after the owner
thereof, the same having been in the owner’s use for a period of not
less than six months before the removal to Tasmania, such furni-
ture and effects not being for sale; any machines used for the
destruction of rabbits; sewing machines; sheep-shears.
A mechanic, if in full work, should earn from 21. 10s. to SI. a Cost of living
week, and would spend for rent, food, fuel, and clothes, for
himself, wife, and two children about 42 5. a week.
Small cottages in Hobart, Launceston, and suburbs, three to Bent.
five rooms, per week, ss. to Bs., in the country from 2s. 6d. to
65. ; with four to six rooms. 10s. to 155., and in country, 5.9.
to 10s.; larger houses 45/. to 80/. a year ; board and lodging, 15$. Board and
to 255. per week ; for farm labourers, see note 1 below. lodging.
The average retail cost, per lb„ of provisions in the Colony is Provisions.
roughly as follows :
Bacon - 8c?. tc
B d. to Is.
Milk - 3d. to sd. per
Beef - 4 d. to 7 d.
quart.
Mutton - 4 d. to 6d.
Bread - 3 \d. per 2 lb.
loaf.
Potatoes - 3s. to Gs. per
Butter -10 c?. to 2s.
Cheese - 6d. to Is. 2d.
Sugar - 3 d. to 3 \d.
Tea - Is. 6c?. to 2s. 6d.
Coffee - Is. to Is. 6d.
Flour - Is. 3c?. to Is. 6c?.
Tobacco - 4s. 6c?. to ss,
per stone.
i 58336.


Clothing is about 10 to 20 per cent. (2s. to 4 s. in the £) dearer
than in England ; but less is required owing to the warm climate.
Clothing.
The rate of wages in the Colony is roughly as follows :
I. —Without board and lodging :
W ages.
Per week— Miners - -60 s, to 80s.
Bakers - - • 50s. Navies - - 425,
Blacksmiths - -48 s. Painters - - 425.
48s. Painters - - 425.
Bookmakers - - 455. Plasterers -48 s.
Bricklayers and masons - 545. Plumbers -48 s,
545. Plumbers -48 s.
Butchers - - 365. Printers - -50 s.
Carpenters and Joiners -48 s. (mostly piecework).
Engineers - - 545. Saddlers - - 425,
Gardeners - - 365. Tailors - -40 s. to 60s.
General labourers -30 s. Tanners - - 425.
30s. Tanners - - 425,
Lumbermen and Sawyers 365. Tinsmiths -42 s
Milibands: Wheelwrights -42 s
1. Male - - 425.
2. Female - - 255.
Work on an average 48 to 54 hours per week.
ll. With board and lodging:—
(1.) Per week—
Ploughmen -1 12 s. t 0 20i .
Farm labourers - J
(2.) Per 100 sheep shorn
Shearers -12 s. to 165.3 r/.
(3.) Per year —
Shepherds - 35/. to 55/.
Cooks and nurses - 20/. to 35/.
Note I.—Farm labourers
are usually
re, as a rule,
single men are,
with families.
Housemaids
General female I m 2 (
servants - (
Laundresses -J
Nursemaids - 10/. to 20/.
f boarded and lodged ; and
i, preferred to married men
„ 2.—A high rate of wages does not necessarily imply a
demand for labour.
Tasmania, as in climate it is the most temperate of the Aus-
tralasian colonies, so in its industrial and economical aspect it is
perhaps the quietest and least subject to ihe fluctuations of com-
mercial excitement. From its comparatively small size, and from
its not containing any very large towns, it has never had capital
enough to attract and absorb any sudden rush of immigrants. But
the growth of population, if not rapid, has been steady. If fewer
larger fortunes have been made, if labour is not quite so highly
paid as in some other colonies, nowhere, probably, does the mass
of the population live in greater ease and comfort. It has been
suffering like other countries from the late depressions in trade
but this is now to some extent passing off, and the rise in the price
of tin has given the Colony a considerable impetus. The de-
lightful climate of Tasmania, its beautiful hills and valleys, its
abundance of water, its flowers and hedge-rows would seem to offer
more attractions to British settlers than the hot summers, the long
droughts and endless plains of many parts of Australia. There is
perhaps no Colony which offers so many advantages to a man of
Summarj-.


small income who is in search of a comfortable home, a warm
climate, and pleasant society. The manufactories are still very
small, and for capitalists opportunities are continually occurring
for investing in fresh undertakings. There is no such poverty
there as here, the necessaries at least of life are cheap, and wages
are high, and a man with a family will often have a much better
chance of placing out his children well than he would have in
England.
In a comparatively small community, particular branches of Demand for
industry are easily overstocked for a time, as some are at present, labour:
and mechanics must be prepared, if necessary, to do occasionally
Mechanics.
other work than that to which they have been accustomed. Trades
are not so sharply defined as in England. A carpenter, for
instance, will often be called upon to act as a joiner, wheelwright,
cooper, &c., and a bricklayer as mason or stone-cutter. Emi-
grants should accept the first fair offer of work, even though it may
be outside their own particular trade. Outdoor work of some
kind or other is seldom difficult to get. Just at present the best
openings are for blacksmiths and farriers (especially up-country),
bricklayers, tanners, and sawmill hands. A report from Hobart,
dated the 27th of February last, states, “ the demand for mechanics
“ is slightly improved. A great number of tin or silver miners
“ would not have any difficulty in obtaining good wages, viz.,
“ from 60s. to 70s. a week for good men.” A report, dated March,
from Launceston, states, “ demand for mechanics is moderate.”
The cheapness of land makes it easy for persons to purchase enough
on which to employ advantageously any spare time they may have.
Clerks, shopmen, and warehousemen, are warned against Clerks,
emigrating.
Farmers with 200/. capital are, with prudence, likely to succeed Farmers.
in Tasmania; but if they invest their capital before they have
gained experience of the Colony they may not improbably lose it.
In Tasmania, generally speaking, farming means, and is something
very different from the English notion of the term. Even if it
were the same in itself, it is obvious that differences of soil,
climate, and seasons would have to be studied and taken into
account. Such persons, therefore, will do well to work on a farm
in Tasmania first before taking up land there, as the experience
that they will gain by so doing will more than compensate for
the delay it entails. It is necessary to remember that the greater
part of the Island is wild and unsettled, that though Crown land
is cheap to buy it is laborious and expensive to clear, and that to
become the owner of a good farm requires capital or many years
of hard work.
In general farming, such as cereals, hops, or stock raising, dairy
farming, and breeding of stud sheep, there would seem to be good
openings for English farmers. The soil, climate, and herbage are
excellent, and droughts are rare; as it is, considerable quantities
of wheat are imported every year. Fruit farming is probably the
most profitable industry of all, especially for men with families
who can work in the orchards, and now that fresh fruit can be
sent to the English markets, is very likely to be extended; a
good start could be made on alO acre block. In the north-west


of the island especially there is excellent potato and vegetable
land, which brings in good profits.
There is a demand for miners, navies, agricultural labourers,
dairymen, ploughmen, men who are well up in working land,
pruning fruit trees, and nursery Avork, gardeners, bushmen, &c.,
but they must understand their work or they will have difficulty
in getting places. In the harvest of 1888-9 there Avas a great
demand for harvest hands, and some farmers were offering 85. and
95. a day, with rations, in A r ain.
There are plenty of fish around the coast and islands, and a man
avlio could combine fishing and cultiA r ating a plot of ground, Avould
generally get a good living, but he would require a little capital
at first for fishing tackle, &c.
There is a good demand for women and girls as domestic
servants, sempstresses, dressmakers, machinists, &c., but not shop
assistants, or those unaccustomed to Avork at a trade.
Further statistics will be found (1) in the annual “Statistical
“ Abstract for the several Colonial and other Possessions of the
“ United Kingdom, 1873-1887” which may be obtained (price
11 d.), from Messrs. Eyre and Spottiswoode, East Harding Street,
London. (2.) Statistics of Tasmania for 1887, compiled by the
Tasmanian Government, from which the figures in this Handbook
have been largely taken.
Useful information may be obtained respecting the Colony from
the Official Handbook of Tasmania, Hobart, 1888, and the Crown
Lands Guide, 1887, both of which may be obtained from the
Agent-General; the Tasmanian Statutes; Messrs. Hazell and
Hodgkin’s Australasian Colonies (Stanford, Charing Cross, Lon-
don, and at this Office, price 6d., post free, 7\d.); the “ Australian
Handbook” (Gordon and Gotch, St. Bride Street, London, E.C.);
the Colonial Office List, 1889 (Harrison and Co., Pall Mall,
London) ; the Year Book for Australia (Triibner and Co., Lud-
gate Hill, London). The “ Handy Guide to Emigration,”
(S. P. C. K., Northumberland Avenue, London), price 3d., post
free, 4c?., contains a list of the names and addresses of the A r arious
emigration societies, &c. The excellent Tasmanian Mail and
Tasmanian newspapers, and private correspondents in the Colony
have given the Committee of Management some very useful
information. For further particulars respecting the Colony apply
to the Agent General for Tasmania, 3, Westminster Chambers,
London, S.W., or to the Chief Clerk, Emigrants’ Information
Office, 31, Broadway, Westminster, S.W.
Farm and
general
labourers.
Fishermen.
Women and
girls.
Books on
Tasmania.
Note. —(l.) The Committee of Management will be glad
to receive suggestions and information, more especially from
Colonists. Any such communication will, if desired, be treated
as confidential.
(2.) The Committee of Management cannot return excess of
stamps sent for Handbooks; nor accept damaged stamps.
(3.) Revised editions of this Handbook are issued in the spring
of ev-ery year. The Committee cannot undertake to insert in the
Handbook changes Avhich occur during the year.


INDEX.
Amusements - - - 11
Area - - - 3
Arriving, best time for • 9
Avoca - - 5
Banks - - - - 10
Beaconsfield - - -4, 13
Bicbeno - - 6
Books on Tasmania - - 20
Bothwell - 6
Building Societies - 11
Campania - - 6
Campbell Town - - - 6
Charitable institutions - - 11
Children, employment of - 15
Chinese - - - - 13
Chudleigh - - - 5
Clearing scrub - - - 16
Clerks - - - 19
Climate - - - 6
Clothing - - -8, 18
Coaches ----- 10
Coal - -4, 5, 14, 16
Cost of living - - 17
Counties - - 3
Customs - - 17
Demand for labour - 19
Deloraine - - - 4
Dover - - 5
Education - - 9
Emigration - 9
Evandale - - - 5
Exports - - - 10
Fares from England 8
Farm Labourers - - - 20
Farmers and farming - 11,19
Fingal - - -5, 14
Fisheries and fishermen - 15, 20
Food, price of - - - 17
Formby - - 4
Franklin - - - 5,12
Friendly societies - - 11
Fruits • - - !2
Georgetown - - 4
Glenorchy 5
Gold - - -4, 13, 16
Government - 9
Hamilton - 6
Heemskirk - - - 5
History - 3
Hobart - - - 5
Slops - - - - 5,12
Horses - - - 13
Hospitals - - - 11
Hythe ----- 5
Imports - - - 10
Justice - - - 9
Hemp ton - 6
Kingston - - - - 5
Labour registries - - 9
Land, price of - -11,16
„ regulations - - - 15
„ tax - - 12
Latrobe - - 4
Launceston - - - 5
Lefroy - - - - 4
Libraries - - - 11
Longford - - -5, 12
Luggage - - -8, 10
Manufactories - - - 14
Marriage -*- 15
Masters and servants -- 15
Mechanics --- -19
Minerals - ~ - 13,16
Money - -*- 10
Mount Bischoff •• - 4,14
Mount Heemskirk -- 5


New Norfolk 5
St. Helen’s - - -5
Savings banks 10
Seymour - - - 6
Sheffield - - 4
Silver - - 14
Slate - - 14
Sorell - - - 6
Oatlands - - 6
Stanley - 4
Steamers - - - 7
Orchards - - - 12
Outfit - - 8
Stock - - - 13
Stone quarries - - 14, 16
Summary - - - 18
Swansea - - - 6
Telegraphs - - - 11
Passenger Acts - 7
Pauper immigration - - 9
Timber - -3, 13, 17
Population - - - 6
Tin - - - 4,5, 14
Post - 11
Tools - - - -8, 17
Products - - - 11
Torquay - - - 4
Professional persons - - 15
Tunbridge - - - 6
Ulverstone - - - 4
Rabbits - - - 15
Vaccination - - - 15
Railways - - - 10
Rainfall - - 6
Religion - - <)
Wages, payment of - - 15
Rent - - 17
„ rates of - - - 18
Revenue - - - 10
Weights and measures - 2
Richmond - - - 6
Westbury - - - -5, 12
Ringarooma - - - 4, 14
Women, employment of - 15, 20
Ross - - 6
Wynyard - 4




London: Printed by Etee and Spottiswoode,
Printers to the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty.
For Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
[1052.—2500. —4/89.]




The following Publications arc drawn up for the
Emigrants by the Emigrants’ Information Office:—
1. A Poster—exhibited in all Post Offices
2. Quarterly Circulars on Canada, and the Australasian
and South African Colonies -
And the following Handbooks:—
1. Canada. Handbook, with Map
2. New South Wales. Handbook, with Map
3. Victoria. „ „
» >5
4, South Australia. „ „
o. Queensland. „ „
6. Western Australia. „ „
7. Tasmania. „ „
8. New Zealand. „ „
9. Cape Colony. „
10. Natal. „ ~
11. Professional , Handbook, dealing with Professions
in the Colonics -
12. The above 11 Handbooks, bound together in stiff
use of
Price.
Free.
Free.
id.
Id.
Id.
Id.
Id.
1 d.
Id.
Id.
Id.
Id.
cover, with the 10 Maps - - is. 6d.
All the above may be obtained post free from the Chief Clerk,
Emigrants’ Information Office, 31, Broadway, Westminster, S.W.;
the Handbooks may also be obtained, either directly or through
any Bookseller, from Eyre and Spottiswoodc, East Harding
Street, Fleet Street, E.C.; or Adam and Charles Black, G, North
Bridge, Edinburgh; or Hodges, Figgis, & Co., 104, Grafton
Street, Dublin.
