

I
' •" -■ - z - <*■"« St- _*_ - ■^w»s»^ r 1L III i Mttum'jLrT'


* I
IS
m
g -*u
George Howe <iS| IB,, 1
£ c * ZETTE 7 n Jl s3^
i
■
i
i s




Tasmanian friends and foes


TASMANIAN FRIENDS AND FOES
FEATHERED, FURRED, AND FINNED
A FAMILY CHRONICLE OF COUNTRY LIFE, NATURAL
HISTORY,AND VERITABLE ADVENTURE
BY
LOUISA ANNE MEREDITH
AUTHOR OF "MY HOME IN TASMANIA," "SOME OF MY BUSH FRIENDS IN TASMANIA,"
"OUR ISLAND HOME: A TASMANIAN SKETCH-BOOK," &C., &C.
♦
TOtjj Coloured plates, from Urafotngs fog tlje
AND OTHER ILLUSTRATIONS
"Oh! Thou sculptor, painter, poet,
Lay this lesson to thy heart:
That is best which lieth nearest,
Shape from that thy work of art."
LONGFELLOW.
fjttbMm (or gustralia:
J. WALCH & SONS, HOBART TOWN
WALCH, BROTHERS, & BIRCHALL, LAUNCESTON
LONDON: MARCUS WARD & CO.
1880


PUBLISHEES' NOTE.
»♦
•x.
It is due to the Author of this work to state that she is resident in
Tasmania, and that the Proof Sheets have therefore not had the advantage
of her supervision. Great care has, however, been taken in its production,
and it is hoped that no errors or omissions have been made.


£bi6 tDolume
IS AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED TO
ETHEL AND GODFREY,
TASMANIAN-BORN CHILDREN OF SIR THOMAS GORE BROWNE, K.C.M.G., &c.,
FORMERLY GOVERNOR OF TASMANIA; —
MARY YIOLET,
DAUGHTER OF MAJOR-GENERAL P. MAXWELL;
STANISLAUS,
SON OF COUNT ODOARDO COLACICCHI;
ROWLAND,
SON OF COLONEL T, YAUGHTON ;
AND TO MY OTHER
GRAND-NIECES AND NEPHEWS
i
IN EUROPE AND AUSTRALIA,
WITH THE HOPE THAT THEY MAY ALL SHARE THAT LOVE OF NATURE WHICH,
FROM CHILDHOOD TO AGE,
I HAVE FOUND SO PRECIOUS A COMPANION.
*
■ _ * Hotusa 8. Jleretittiß


In Memoriam
THE HONOURABLE CHARLES MEREDITH,
Born at Poyston, Pembrokeshire, 29th May, 1811;
Died at Launceston, Tasmania, 2nd March, 1880.
\
1 m m t
»
HE from whose noble character a few features are feebly portrayed in these pages, has
been removed by death from the scene of his benevolent purpose and earnest effort
ere their publication.
The following extract, from one of the many warm tributes offered to his memory
by Colonial writers, has been selected by his sorrowing wife as a loving tribute for
which no apology need be asked, since the chief interest to be found in this book
consists in his adventures, which are therein faithfully narrated :
" He was the very Rupert of debate, fearless, earnest, honest, truthful, witty, and
withal uncompromising. Few cared about breaking a lance with him. His enmities
were political; he did not make them personal. Ever ready, after a fearless denunciation
of a political opponent and his principles, or a bitter passage of arms in debate, to
welcome the friend with a warm greeting outside, even those who most suffered under
the withering sarcasm of his scathing tongue, whilst they feared, honoured the man, and
paid tribute to his dauntless nature.
\
" Charles Meredith was considerate, full of energy, kindly, generous, and lovable,
a staunch friend, and, what is more, an honourable foe. He was sensitive to the pain
which mars God's beautiful earth; courageous in action as in idea; as a man, honest—
as a friend, faithful—as a magistrate, fearless; whilst not the least of the characteristics
which helped to make his noble nature so lovable was his tender thought for God's
speechless creatures. He truly wore
' The white flower of a blameless life
Before a thousand peering littlenesses.'
Another of Tasmania's sons, one of her most trusty friends, of her most honoured
servants, who has left his work on the scroll of time, is gone ; but his name will be
remembered, and in every remembrance honoured—honoured and loved as that of one
' Who reverenced his conscience as his king;
Whose glory was redressing human wrong;
Who spoke no slander—no, nor listened to it.' "
Sydney Town and County Journal, April 3,1880.
L. A. M.
LAUNCESTON, TASMANIA,
June 8, 1880.


PREFACE
TN the following pages are gathered and woven into connected sequence some
of the incidents and observations which a residence of thirty-nine years
in Tasmania has served to collect. Every adventure narrated is strictly true;
and the anecdotes of birds and animals are facts, set down simply from our own
experience. The one feature in the book in which Fiction may claim a share,
is the personnel of the characters, and the slender thread of domestic story on
which the heads of reality are strung. Even though some reader of enquiring
mind may think he can identify some members of the Merton family, he will
vainly seek originals for the inmates at the " Pines " or " Walloora."
Since writing the chapters on our native animals, I have, for the first time,
read the following observations upon them in the article " Marsupialia" in
Chambers's Encyclopaedia, vol. vi., p. 342
"In accordance with this condition of the brain, these animals are all
characterised by a low degree of intelligence, and are said (when in captivity)
not to manifest any sign of recognition of their feeders."
Whilst regretting that so unjustifiable an opinion should be held by men
of science, I am fain to rejoice over those pages of my unpretending hook, which
I think will supply evidence that the engaging and affectionate animals whose
brief memoirs they contain were far from deficient in intelligence. The gentle
usage and freedom they enjoyed with us would very probably he more favour-


able to the manifestation of sense and attachment than the dreary lives they
would pass in large zoological collections, where the bestowal of a daily dole
/
of food might be all the kindly notice they would receive. The young brush
kangaroo, of which the longest account is given, showed most decided knowledge
of, and preference for, certain individuals. In a morning, before his breakfast
of bread and milk was given to him, he would follow me or the parlour-maid
from place to place until we fed him; but he only so followed us because no one
else was in the habit of feeding him at that hour. In the garden he hopped
round and round in merry races with our sons (then children), seeming as fond
of the fun as they were, or with his little fore paws took hold of one of my
husband's hands or mine, licking them fondly, and evidently liking to pace the
walks with us in our sedater manner; but at the sound of an opening gate he
would quickly and warily rear himself erect, and glance round, with his ever
alert and mobile ears intently listening, and should an unfamiliar step approach,
he invariably took flight, leaping away at racing speed to hide himself amongst
the shrubs. Here, surely, was evidence of clear discrimination.
My tame bandicoots, which used to run up, like great mice, into the folds
of my dress, or creep into my sleeves, never attempted such familiarities with
any other person; and the one which died would cry uneasily if any hands but
my own touched it after it became sick.
A great forest kangaroo, which long ago belonged to the wife of one of Mr.
Meredith's servants, always accompanied her everywhere, as a faithful dog
would do, but never followed anyone else; and the wombat attaches itself to
particular persons with touching fidelity.
My simple, truthful records relating to individuals of the marsupial tribes
cannot prove aught as to their conformation of brain, but may, I venture to
believe, in some degree vindicate them from the suspicion of stupidity or
ingratitude.
Beyond the hope that this homely chronicle may interest young readers,
and perhaps some older ones, whose love of Nature may give it favour in their


eyes, I have one earnest purpose at heart —the desire to devote the best help
which I am capable of bringing to the good work of showing to all, hut especially
*
to the young, how full of healthy, refining, vivid pleasure is that habit of mind
which to ardent, reverent admiration of the Creator's works unites tender care
for the comfort and happiness of our dumb friends and companions.
I do not presume to offer scientific information on any subject, but have
given the proper names of most objects alluded to, so that works of authority on
Natural History may readily be consulted by the inquiring or studious reader.
For his goodness in affixing their proper names to the list of birds and
reptiles observed in Eiverina by my son Charles, I offer my best thanks to
Professor M'Coy, F.Gf.S., &c., &c., of the Melbourne University.
For the names of the fish with whose portraits I have illustrated some of the
descriptions, I am indebted to my friend of many years, the late Mr. Morton
Allport, F.L.S., F.Z.S., F.E.C.1., &c., &c., of Hobart, whose scientific attainments,
and whose ready kindness in imparting knowledge to others, rendered his life
one of active usefulness, and his recent early death such a loss to the interests
of general science (in Australia especially) as is simply irreparable. That his
hearty praise was given to my drawings (and he was a true artist) is the best
guarantee I can offer for their accuracy.
I have to thank another Tasmanian naturalist, Mr. M. Johnston,* for his
assistance in enabling me to name some long-known favourites among our ferns.
To Professor Agardh of Lund I offer grateful acknowledgments for so
valuable a requital for parcels of Tasmanian Algce as the names of those I have
sent to him, the list of which I add to this volume, in the belief that it may be
interesting to collectors.
My gifted artist friend, Mr. N. Chevalier, too, must here see the repetition
of my thanks for his charming sketch of Dumpy the Wombat.
Mr. Gould, whose peerless works have won for him the gratitude of all the
* Author of Field Memoranda for Tasmanian Botanists.


world, most kindly permitted me to use copies of some of bis admirable pictures
of Tasmanian animals and birds; and whether such form any part of these
illustrations or not, my sincere thanks for his liberality are equally due.
The desire of my publishers for an increased number of coloured drawings
has caused considerable delay in the appearance of this book, my fast-failing
/
eyesight rendering the task of making them a longer one than I should have
found it some years ago.
Perhaps it may not be altogether irrelevant to add that these final lines
of the book, in which divers experiences in the past lives of both my dear
husband and myself find utterance, are written on the fortieth anniversary
of our wedding-day.
L. A. M.
MALTJNNAH, TASMANIA,
April 18th, 1879.


CONTENTS.
CHAP. PAGE
I. — (Plate 1) —Introductory—" Loorana"—The Mertons —Gwendoline's Proposi-
tion —Snow-berry, &c. ....... 9
II. —Family Pursuits—Gwendoline's First " Gossip"—Forest Kangaroo—Sir E.
Wilmot's Park—Brush Kangaroo—Tame Pets —Joey's Habits and
Manners—Joey in Disgrace—Death—Giuseppe and Beppo —Guy on
Guinea-pigs ......... 14
111 —(Plate 2) —Freda's Fairy—The Green Mantis .... 23
IV. —Guy's Ploughing—Louis's Brush Fencing . . . . . 26
V. — (Plate 3) —A Spectre ........ 28
VI. —Gwendoline's Second "Gossip"—Wallaby—" Bustle"—Kangaroo Bats —" Trotty "
and "Hoppy " —N est —Forest Bat—Opossum—Possy's Performances —Bing-
tail Opossum—Opossum-mouse . . . . . .30
VII. — (Plate J/) —Bain—A Former Flood—A Waterspout —Native Cherries —Tur-
quoise Gems ........ 39
VIII. —Early Alarm—Giles "up a tree"—Flooded-out Families —The Bescue . 42
IX. —The Lost Orchard—Gwendoline's Third "Gossip"—Wombat—"Dumpy" . 51
X. —" Gossip" continued —Porcupine Ant-eater—Platypus—Musk Bat—Bandi-
coot —"Coota" . . . . . . . .55
XI. —Bain—Guy's "Gossip"—Devil—Tiger—Native and Tiger Cats —"John"—
"Mr. Boker" ........ 62
XII. —Jerry's News —Flood-imprisoned Horses—Becovery—A Faithless Shepherd—
Lost Sheep—Difficulties . . . . . . .70
XIII. —A Wet Winter—Snow—She-oak —He-oak ..... 75
XIV. —A Tragedy of Old Days—Aborigines—An Iron Bule —Study under Peculiari-
ties—Mast-head Leadings . . . . . . .79
XV. —Old Adventures —The Lubras' Warning—A Boy Hermit ... 86
XVI. —Old Adventures —Sheep-driving—Winter Quarters —Beturn —Kind Convicts
—Finding an Old Four-footed Friend . . . . .93
XVII. —Old Adventures Floods —Foresight Bewarded Tree Bridge—Wallaby
Supper —Beturn ........ 99
XVIII. —Gwendoline's Fourth "Gossip"—Eagles—Their Pursuit of Animals—Pet
Lambs —Sea Eagle—Hawk—Crow—Magpie—Black Magpie—Jackass—
Owls —Mope-hawk—Bittern—Crane ..... 103


CHAP. PAGE
XIX. —" Gossip " continued —Parrots —White Cockatoo —Our Tame Acquaintances
—Black Cockatoo—Rose-hill and other Parrots—Swift Parroquet—
Bronze-wing Pigeon —Ground Dove —Wattle-bird —Summer-bird—
Miner 113
XX. —" Gossip" continued —Little Birds—Bobin —Our Particular Friend —Blue-
cap—Fire-tail —Pranks of a Tame Pair —Diamond-bird —Honey-eater
—"Get over!"—" Kitty Wick!"—" Who are you White-eye—
s 122
XXI. —A Journey—" Why carry an Axe —Arrival —Walloora and its Inmates 130
XXII.—An Expedition, and what came of it —Ferns —The Enchanted Grove . 136
XXIII.—The Alarm—The Search—Night—Morning .... 144
XXIV.— I The Deer-park—Emus—Black Swans—Cygnets—A Military Noah Claypole
—Destruction of Swans' Egg Duck —Black Duck—Baldcoot 153
XXV. —A Domestic Discussion —Woman's Work ..... 161
XXVI. —A Keepsake —Departure—Arrival at Home —A Welcome Guest . . 170
XXVII. —Home Avocations —Snakes—Serpents—Iguanas . . . .174
XXVIII—Emus—A New Apostle—Barbarities of Civilisation—Birds in Riverina—
Ducks—Whistling Teal— lbis—Crane—Diver—Night-cries—Drought
—Pigeons—Mallee Hens —Parrots —Little Birds —Native Companions . 180
XXIX. —Mistaken Identity of Lamb and Kid—Equine Damon and Pythias . 191
XXX.—Guy's Grand Idea—Aunt Anne and her Abode—" Gully" saying Grace-
Tamed Wild Gulls —Penguins —King Penguin .... 195
XXXI.—The Boat—The Beach—Skye's Playmates—Sea-gulls—Red-bills—Dottrels
—Hermit Crab Cormorants Pelicans Sea-weeds —" Holy Coat"
—"Coverlet" —Sand-saucers —Blue Crabs —A small new Acquaintance
with a large Name 202
XXXII. — (Plates 5 and 6)— "Fish 0 !"—Blue-head—Parrot-fish—John Dory-
Magpie Perch—Pig-faced Lady—Flat-heads—Cat-fish—Grampus . 211
XXXIII.—"An Hour's Sail" proves a Day's Adventure—A Mountain Scramble—Ferny
Ravine—Varieties of Ferns—White Lichen—Oyster Bay Pine—Gannets
—Eagles ....••••• 216
XXXlV.—Fishing—Submarine Forests of Kelp—Venus's Doves—Shags—Two Fish
on one Hook —Barracouta —Rock Cod —Toad-fish • . . 224
XXXV.—A Shark Coincidence —Primitive Bed-making —Extempore Gridiron—Native
Pepper —New Dinner Service —Dinner d Vantique —A Night Picture
Owl ~.•••••• 229
XXXVI. —Whaling Adventures 235
XXXVII. —Shark Encounters —Airy Bedchambers —Return Voyage —Barracouta-fish-
ing—Arrival ...••••• 240
XXXVIII. — {Plates 7 and 8)— Poseidon's Present—Superb Dragon—Ostracion—lbacus
Ruby-fish—Tortoiseshell-fish—Phosphorescence—Cray-fishing— Migra-
tory Silver-fish —Mrs. Leslie's New Manager .... 247
ALGiE collected at Orford, East Coast of Tasmania, by the Author, and
named by Professor C. S. AGABDH . 255
INDEX


TASMANIAN FRIENDS AND FOES.
CHAPTER I.
A rural home, whose simple annals yield
No stately theme for Fiction's florid pen,
But truthful tales of trial, that may teach
Patience and thankfulness to many men.
"ly/TAMMA, when yon have quite finished your letters, I want to talk to you."
IYJ- The speaker was a girl of seventeen, slight and tall for her age, with a
bright, earnest face, full of energy and intelligence. An open letter, in round
childish writing, was in her hand, and, after reading it through a second time,
she had sat for a while in deep thought before addressing her mother, who was
still intent on her correspondence. The English mail had been received that
morning, and Mrs. Merton had many dear friends and relatives in the Old
Country, whose long letters were an undiminished delight and solace to her,
although many years had passed since she had bidden them farewell, and, as a
young bride, accompanied her husband (who had lived in the Australian colonies
from early boyhood) on his return after a visit to England.
Of the many trials and vicissitudes, losses and crosses, which befel the brave
young couple in the early years of their colonial life, it is not our present purpose
to speak. At the time when Lina sat reading her letter, the family dwelt in a
pleasant country-house in Tasmania, some miles distant from any village or neigh-
bours of their own class, and surrounded by bush and forest. The house, called
" Loorana " (an aboriginal word signifying brushwood), stood on a pretty knoll,
encompassed on two sides by a small, but never-failing river. In the valley


around it, some extensive paddocks had been cleared and cultivated, which bore
abundant crops of grain and roots. Sheep and a few cattle occupied the greater
part of the estate, which was but of moderate extent, for Mr. Merton had neither
inherited wealth, nor drawn prizes in the golden lotteries of Australian specula-
tion. Five children, and their needs of food, raiment, and education, sometimes
pressed almost too heavily on his mind and means; but the household was
nevertheless a cheery one, and such privation as was inevitable was shared
bravely, if not even merrily.
In the pleasant room, where the mother and daughter sat beside the table
strewn with letters, newspapers, and book-packets (welcome gift-guests!), the
furniture, though simple and inexpensive, was well-kept, comfortable, and
evinced an amount of taste in colour and arrangement that is too often lacking
in more pretentious apartments. The pretty wall-paper (put up by Mrs.
Merton's own clever hands) harmonized with the fresh chintz covers of the
easy-chairs and sofa, and with the warmer hues of the carpet, whilst a few fine
old family pictures and choice engravings told both of pride of ancestry and
love of art.
Putting her last letter back into its envelope, Mrs. Merton turned to
Lina.
"And now, dear, what have you to tell me ?"
" You'll not laugh, Mamma, please ?"
" That must depend upon there being anything to laugh at."
" Well, Mamma, I've been thinking. You see Sibyl's letter says how
amused she was with the account I wrote her of our poor magpie, and she wants
to hear more about our pets, and native things of all sorts, for she thinks that
opossums and kangaroos must be much prettier than the rabbits and guinea-
pigs they keep at Woodlands. So I've been thinking, that if you and papa
would help us, Guy and I could write a good many little bits about the live
things here that would interest Sibyl, and our other cousins too. Don't you
think we can 1"
" I think —nay, I am sure you can, if you like to try."
" And if we always use paper the same size, and write plainly, Sibyl can
stitch the leaves all together; and if you will draw something nice for the cover,
Mamma, she will have quite a little book."
Mrs. Merton smiled. " You are certainly galloping to conclusions, Lina, to
talk of binding your book before you begin to write it. But it is a good idea,
and I advise you to put it in practice; only, do not weary of your scheme, as I


have known young people do, of intentions which seemed equally charming at
the outset."
"Ah! that terrible old subject! You never will forget it. I wish you
would, Mamma."
"I am glad your conscience is so tender, Lina; I named no particular
instance of fickleness."
" For all that, I know what you mean—my beginning to press plants for a
collection, and not going on with it. But you know, Mamma, how they would
dry up, and go brown and ugly, and black and brittle, and not look a bit like
the real live darlings. It seemed quite cruel to squeeze them to death in that
way."
" Very well; we will not say any more about the Herbarium; only let its
memory serve you as an admonition not to undertake any scheme until you are
satisfied that you can carry it on to completion, even though the task should
grow difficult or distasteful."
" But, Mamma dear, how could it grow distasteful ?"
" I do not think it ought to do so. I only warn you to ' count the cost'
before you incur responsibility by making promises to Sibyl, which you may
break, and so disappoint her."
"Well, Mamma, as you have so little faith in my perseverance, I will only
make the promise to myself, but go on all the same, sending her what we write;
and when we cannot think of any more to say—why, then, of course we must
leave off."
" Bravo, Linny ! That's what Papa calls a self-evident proposition," cried a
hearty boyish voice at the open window, and an outstretched hand held up a
bunch of native berries, which Lina, with a glad cry, sprang up to receive.
" Oh, Mamma! what a lovely spray of snow-balls!" * Is it not ? And how
purely snowily white they are, with the bright red seed-cells just smiling
through the crevices in the snow; and how prettily the crimson tint is repeated
in the hairy stems! Thank you, Guy—thank you. Do draw them, Mamma:
they will make such a pretty group, with some of the dark blue-purple ones *f*
by way of contrast."
* Gualthcria hispida.— The " Snow-berry " or " Wax cluster " is also called native Arbutus, from
the form of the white flowers which precede the fruit. The latter is of a peculiar brioche-like
form, and as the deep clefts open, the crimson seed-cells peep through.
+ Billardiera longiflora , the well-known beautiful climber, with pale greenish bell-flowers and
purple fruit.


" If you do, Mother/' said Guy, " pray, put in that rare butterfly I found for
you—the ' Emerald King' you called him—all black velvet and green, with his
long-tailed wings; * and you must paint the underside —the lining of his royal
robes—as well, for it is quite different to the upper surface. Well, Linny, and
what is it you are going to do before you leave off ?"
" Come in, and I 'll tell you all about it."
Guy Merton was a year and a-half younger than Gwendoline (whom we
have already introduced by her pet name of " Lina "), a tall, robust lad, with a
broad, bold, frank face, and clear, blue-grey eyes that could not look a falsehood,
even were his lips to speak one —which they never did. His mother had
earnestly desired to see him placed in some profession, and after she had
instructed him herself till he was eleven, he was sent to the (then) best colonial
school; but after four years the means were wanting to continue his education,
and, to Mrs. Merton's bitter disappointment, he remained at home assisting his
father on the farm, and her cherished hope of his future bright career had to be
reluctantly resigned.
If Guy himself as yet regretted the change, is doubtful. To a boy of his
age, energy, and health, an out-door life seems full of charm and enjoyment,
whilst to be confined to desk-work is looked upon as little short of purgatory.
The hard rough labour, early and late, through heat or cold, wet or dry—the
unending anxiety of a settler's life, and the small proportion which the gain
bears to the toil, are alike unknown and unconsidered by many a thoughtless
boy who, because he enjoys a holiday with gun or fishing-rod, thinks he " would
like to be a farmer." And not until too late are the advantages he possibly
rejects in a profession —the daily comforts and refinements of civilised life, the
triumphs of intellectual power and culture, and the pathway to affluence and
distinction seen in their true colours, and estimated at their proper value.
During his school-days, Guy's inclinations led him, too, to esteem the happiness
of a country life above all others; but the final decision lay not with him to
make. Long ere he had expected the change, daily labour took the place of
study.
"And the long and the short of it is, Linny, you want to write a book,"
was Guy's laughing remark, when Lina's little scheme for her cousin's amuse-
ment was duly laid before him.
"Oh no, Guy, I cannot do it by myself; but I thought if you would help,
* Emerald King— Papilis sp. —name not known.


EMERALD KING BUTTERFLY.
SH0W V "" ' r
PLATE 1. CHAR 1
TASMANIAN FRIENDS AND FOE-S


and write what you know about wild things, and if Papa would write down
some of the stories he tells us, that we might "
" Collect scraps enough for your patchwork ?" interrupted Guy. " All right.
You begin, and show us what you want. I'm not much of a hand at spinning
yarns, and besides, I've got lots to do now; but I suppose you go on the
beggar's-wallet principle —'The smallest contribution gratefully received' ?"
" That's not a pretty speech, Guy," said Lina, with a little grimace. " But
very near the truth, I dare say," she added, laughing.
" And now make haste and clear the table, Lina," said Mrs. Merton, gather-
ing up her letters. " Your father is coming up the hill, and dinner is ready."


- - - -
F HUfl ■ 1 ,. , -gSSBBC II I.IW, 1. JIB ■IIBBgg^aCMWBMMB^
IIII —— II III MM III mi ■!■!■ man nun hi i iiin— — -———
CHAPTER II.
Now stir the fire, and close the shutters fast;
Let fall the curtains ; wheel the sofa round,
• • e
So let us welcome peaceful evening in.
COWPER.
A FEW evenings after, the family were seated round the lamp-lit table after
tea, each busy with some occupation, except Lina. Mrs. Merton, her
never-failing work-basket beside her, was making a waistcoat for her husband;
for, aided by a hand sewing-machine, she executed nearly all the tailoring of the
family, and most artistically too, and such an apple of discord as a dressmaker's
hill never disturbed that house. Mr. Merton had a toy cutter on the table
before him, which he had skilfully carved from a block of sassafras wood,* and
which he was now rigging with the neatest accuracy, watched with eager delight
by his youngest boy, Frank, the future owner, who held the hull of the vessel
steady, whilst his father fitted and measured and tied knots of wonderful device
and variety in the slender whip-cord " ropes." Guy was doing his best to copy
a print of a naval review from an illustrated paper, much exercised in patience
by the difficulty he experienced in drawing the masts and spars, and ever and
anon turning to his mother, beside whom he sat, for counsel and assistance.
Louis, the second son, a slight, delicate-looking boy of twelve, was carefully
carving a small piece of pine into the form of a boat, to act as " dingy " to the
cutter. And fair-haired Winifred, a rosy, round little damsel of six, twisted her
pretty lips, and puckered her brows into as terrible a frown as they could make,
whilst pulling a needle, with disproportionately thick cotton, through a piece of
print, to make a doll's petticoat. Gwendoline alone sat unemployed.
* Atherosperma moschata.


"A penny for your thoughts, Lina," said her father, looking up, after
" splicing " some part of his miniature tackle, which had been somewhat difficult
to manage.
Lina's soft colour flushed up into the very roots of her brown hair, as she
said, hesitatingly —
" Oh, Papa, I thought—l wished. Had I not better read you what I was
going to send Sibyl next mail ? I tried to remember about the kangaroos we
have had tame, because she says she saw those at the Zoological Gardens in
London, and thought them such funny things, hopping about like frogs."
So Lina, by general desire, read what Guy ironically entitled her scientific
article, but which we shall better describe as—
GWENDOLINE'S FIEST GOSSIP.
I think, dear cousin Sibyl, that you would indeed say kangaroos were
nicer pets than guinea-pigs, if you had seen some of those we have had tame. I
do not think any animal can have a sweeter expression of
face—unless, perhaps, a fawn or doe of the red or fallow
deer, and I have only seen those at a distance (in parks
where they are kept here), so I am not sure. The
kangaroo's face is
very like a deer's,
with full dark
eyes, and quite
long eye-lashes,
and such beauti-
ful large deli-
cate ears, like
a mouse's, only
magnified I don't
know how many
times. They are
almost always in motion, turning this way and that, in different directions, to
catch every little sound in the air that might give warning of coming danger.
We have never had one of the largest kind—the Forester Kangaroo*—tame,
for they have been so hunted and destroyed that there are very few left in Tas-
* Meter opus giganteus.


mania, and those are in private preserves, or very remote out-of-the-way places,
and rarely seen. Papa says that, when he was a boy, they were plentiful, quietly
feeding in the open country —five, ten, or twenty at a time. The natives (I
suppose I ought to say the aborigines, for I am a native, you know) —the aborigines
called the old father of a flock a Boomer. These were often very large: about
five feet high in their usual position, but when standing quite up, they were
fully six feet, as tall as Papa—only fancy what big creatures they were! —and
weighing 150 or 200 pounds. Papa remembers the wife of one of his shepherds
who had reared a forest kangaroo that was quite tame and gentle, and a good
deal taller than she was. He followed her wherever she went, hopping about
with her, as docile and quiet as a dog. But the usual sad fate of such pets
befel him. He was pulled down and killed by strange dogs.
Mamma has often told us of the nice collection of live native animals which
Sir Eardley Wilmot kept in a little park in Hobart, close to the old Government
House. There was a Boomer named Jacob that Mamma wished to pat and
stroke; but the Governor told her he was not to be trusted quite so far as that
by a stranger. Even the claws of the fore-feet are very strong and sharp, and
can scratch terribly, if the creature chooses. Many of the others in the paddock
were quite tame, and came up to be noticed and fed. How, the pretty old house,
and its conservatory-verandahs, and the little park, and the kind, noble old
Governor himself, are all gone long ago, and great official buildings have been set
up where they used to be.
In Victoria, there are still a great many of the big kangaroos in some
places; but the people there want all the grass for their sheep, and the poor
Foresters have been hunted down in hundreds and thousands, and killed so
cruelly, that Papa thinks they will be quite gone before long. Is it not very sad
for the settlers to be so greedy, and grudge such beautiful creatures a. little of
the food that used to belong to them altogether ? and, besides, they are so good
to eat, that one would think people would value them for their meat, just as
gentlemen at home in England like venison. lam sure it is much nicer than
their fat sheep. We all like kangaroo very much, and when strangers come, and
we have it for dinner, they enjoy it as quite a "dainty dish." I wonder if it is
ever " set before the Queen." I think she would say it was very good, if cooked as
Mamma has it done. When you keep a park of kangaroo, I'll send you her recipes.
Our pets have been of the second-sized kind, the Brush Kangaroo.* They
Meter opus Bcnncttii.


sit between two and three feet high, but are higher when they stand or jump.
I think our last Joey was the dearest of all, and we had him about three years.
I do not know why they are named Joey any more than Johnny; but whether
male or female, that is what young kangaroos or opossums are commonly
called.
We had this one quite young. Our great kangaroo-dog, Bluey, chased and
killed his poor mother; but when the little one jumped out of her pouch, the
dear old dog caught it, and carried it in his mouth quite gently, without hurting
it. So it was brought home, and Mamma, and a maid we had then who was
very kind to all our pets, fed poor little Joey with warm milk from a bottle, and
kept him in some wool and flannel in a basket. He was very soft and thin,
and his long legs seemed so weak and slight you would have been afraid to
touch him. He was taken great care of, and grew quite strong and active, and
used to hop round the garden with us at a flying pace if we ran races. It we
walked quietly, he would take one of our hands in his two little fore paws quite
lovingly, and hop gently beside us. He soon learned to eat his milk from a
saucer, and throughout his life used to expect it in a morning.
In wet weather he certainly was a little provoking, for, as he lived at liberty
in the garden, he always came in the morning to the house-door, and, if that
were open, hopped into the hall and dining-room. So his long wet tail and hind
feet made three long dirty tracks wherever he went —a good deal more to our
amusement than that of his old friend the housemaid, who used to remonstrate
with him very gravely, and ask him how he came not to learn better manners,
and wipe his feet on the mat " like the other young gentlemen."
One summer morning, when the doors were all open, I came alone into the
dining-room, and at the window stood Joey on tip-toe, with one hand resting on
the window-frame, and his pretty bright face peering out in the drollest way at
the cat lying outside in the sun. How I wished I could have painted a picture
of him! He often tried to make friends with puss, but she rejected his over-
tures in a very unladylike manner, spitting, clawing, setting up her back, and
scampering away if he attempted to approach within touching distance.
Nothing could be more graceful than his movements and attitudes. Even
when he sat on the middle of his back, holding his tail straight up in front of
him with one hand, and combing the hair smooth with the other, it was done
daintily; and though it always made us laugh to see him, he never looked
awkward, as any other animal would do in such a grotesque position. If our
merriment disturbed him, he would pause for a moment and look up, as if to


say, "You are very rude to interrupt a gentleman at his toilet. Pray mind your
own affairs !" and then go on combing as busily as before.
There were some borderings of double daisies, of whose flowers he was
very fond: he often made a litter with the little petals he dropped about;
but roses were his favourite delicacy; and dearly as Mamma loves her roses, she
never could scold him for taking them, he did it so prettily —hopping along till
he saw a full-blown one that pleased him, then standing on his toes and tail, and
picking first the one flower so neatly with one hand (for really it is nonsense to
call it a paw), and then sitting erect, holding it in both, and nibbling it leaf by
leaf so calmly and deliberately—never in the least haste, nor trying to gobble, as
many other creatures do when they are fed. Ears of corn, or blades of grass, or
pieces of bread were all taken in the same refined style. lam sure his manners
at meals might have set an example of elegant deportment to many boys and
girls, and older people too; and, when he had done, he brushed the crumbs off
his coat, washed his face and hands (in the best way he knew), and combed his
whiskers, before starting for a game of play, or a hop round the grass plot.
But once our dear Joey got into real disgrace. Mamma had a bed of fine
tulips, which had been very handsome for one or two years, and having greatly
increased, and been carefully replanted, were expected to make a grand show
when they bloomed. The little green shoots were just above the ground, when
we found holes scratched in the bed, and bulbs taken out, and left, half eaten, on
the soil. Great was the consternation, and loud the cries of " Bandicoots!"
"Kangaroo rats!" and bitter reproaches were poured on our two peerless terriers
for want of diligence and betrayal of trust.
"Pepper," a genuine "Dandie Dinmont," and "Bob," of equally illustrious
descent (both brought from Scotland by Cousin George as presents to Papa and
Mamma), were on duty next evening, and made to hunt every nook of the
garden, to the great diversion of the boys; but except terrifying my new kitten,
and sending her, " spitting like fireworks," as Guy said, up a pear-tree, nothing
came of the chase. Still, in the morning, more tulip bulbs lay nibbled on the
bed.
" There must be a hole in the fence, where bandicoots come through," said
Mamma.
So the old gardener went round, with strips of wood and nails, and secured
every slit that a mouse could creep in at; and the terriers kept watch again.
Yet again, in the morning, there lay more nibbled tulips! It grew mysterious;
and we began to wonder if the garden were haunted by goblin thieves with a


taste for bulbs. About the fourth morning, whilst Papa stood for a while in the
verandah, he called softly to Mamma: —
"Here! come quietly—l've found the bandicoot!" You may be sure
Mamma lost no time. And what do you think she saw ? On the centre of the
precious tulip-bed sat Master Joey, looking as innocent and handsome as ever,
with a smooth brown bulb in his paws —yes, I 'll call them paws now, it was so
naughty of him—nibbling off the green shoot, and when that was gone, he
dropped the bulb, and bending down, as you know they must, to put their lore-
feet on the ground, he cleverly scratched out another, and proceeded to eat that
in the same dainty way; but Ido not think he finished the tid-bit, for Mamma
did scold him then, and banished him to his own little paddock, which had been
fenced in for his especial use next the garden, until the tulips were safely past
their tempting age.
That was the only mischief our dear Joey ever did. Several times he
hopped away, when the gates were left open, and once stayed out in the bush
two or three months, always near the house, and frequently seen; but we were
in continual fear lest strange dogs should chase and kill him. All our own
seemed to know him quite well. Each time we enticed him back into the
garden, and he grew large and fat, and so handsome in beautiful thick furry
coat.
But he is gone now. One morning G-uy saw him lying still, stretched out
on the grass plot, and on going to look, found him quite dead and cold. He had
died without the least hurt, and without a struggle, and was apparently in
perfect health. The only reason any one could think of was, that perhaps he
was too fat, having plenty to eat, and less exercise than in his wild state.
You may think how sorry we were ! but I hope he had led a happy life with
us; we tried to make it so.
Mamma never likes us to seek for things to keep as pets. She says we
cannot make them as happy as they are in a natural state where God has placed
them. And, of course, all our care, and wool, and flannel, and milk was very
miserable work to poor Joey, compared with his mother's soft warm pouch,
where he could lie cuddled up so snug —although it was better for him than
perishing wretchedly of cold and hunger after his mother was killed. Yet even
in such a fate as that, there must be less suffering than many poor little creatures
endure in the possession of careless or unfeeling children or grown people. I
have seen some " pets," as they are called, that I have really wished I could
to put an end to their miseries. I never can understand how any one can be


cruel or negligent to poor, helpless, dumb creatures. It is such pain to see
them ill-used, and so very pleasant to feed them and make them comfortable.
With all the care that is possible, many more Joeys die than live, when taken
young from their mothers. I know ours have always been most kindly attended
to, but most of them died soon. -
'• I like to hear Linny talk of killing anything," observed Louis. " She's
almost too soft-hearted to kill a fly."
Don tbe too sure of that, said Gfuy. " I remember how she flew at me,
and gave me a precious good pummelling too, when I took up her kitten, and
said in fun that it would be handsomer if I trimmed its tail and ears."
" That only bears out Lina's assertion," said her father, " that the sight of
tyranny or cruelty arms her with resolution to resist and prevent it. But you
are interrupting the reading; say what you like when it is over."
Once we had two brush kangaroos at the same time, and they used to play
and romp together like kittens, racing round their paddock, and gambolling over
each other in the drollest way. But the funniest thing was to see them waltz
yes, absolutely waltz, dancing round and round on their toes, with their hands
clasped together.
One of the peacocks often flew over the fence and paid, them a visit, seeming
to enjoy theii astonishment and consternation when he spread his tail, and
walked after them, making the odd shimmering sound in his feathers; the
end of the business being usually a hasty retreat on the part of Giuseppe and
Joey into their house. But when the peacock only trailed his gorgeous train on
the ground, Giuseppe, who was full-grown, had a great fancy for following him
in his stately walk, hopping after the brilliant plumes, and stooping to touch
them with his little black hands, as if curious to know what they were made of
or if they were good to eat.
We were all sadly grieved when a strange dog leaped into the enclosure and
killed both the kangaroos. That is one great reason for not keeping pets.
Something shocking is almost sure to happen to them, and then one is so sorry
for their loss. Our own well-bred dogs always knew the tame kangaroos
perfectly, never seeming to think of touching them; and a happy family party of
dogs, cats, and a Joey might often be seen lying together in the verandah, so that
we were apt to forget the danger of interlopers, as it too often happened, with
fatal results.


Lina ceased reading, and folded up her papers.
"That's all, Papa." '
"A very good beginning, Lina. Your description would amuse if I
knew as little about such animals as Sibyl does, so I should think it will interest
her. Is that the rough copy of your letter, or a revised one ?"
0
Lina laughed. "Oh,. Papa, how suspicious you are! Of course Mamma
looked it over, and made some corrections."
" Yery few, I assure you," said Mrs. Merton.
"Ah, well," exclaimed Guy, giving himself a tremendous stretch after
stooping over his drawing, "if that's the sort of thing, Linny, I think I can do
the Tigers and Devils and native Cats for you. They 're more in my line than
yours, I dare say; but I can't this mail—if Ido next. You'd better write some
more, Linny."
" And don't forget little Coopy," said Winifred.
"Nor the Opossum-mouse," added Louis, taking a critical look along the
tiny keel of his dingy. " Talk of guinea-pigs! Some would have said that was
a pretty creature."
"What is a guinea-pig ?" inquired Prank.
" Why, it's a little beast with a big head, and no tail—short, stout, smooth,
sleeky, and smelly—almost round, and patch-coloured, like a tortoise-shell cat,"
replied Guy; " but no more like a pig than you 're like a peacock."
" Then why is it called a pig ?"
"For about the same reason, I suppose, that our Wombat is sometimes
called a badger, because it's quite unlike one."
" That certainly appears to have' been the principle on which a good many
common names in the colonies have been bestowed," said Mr. Merton.
" Creatures more like weasels than aught else are called a dog-like beast is
called a tiger; and, most absurd of all, a bird is known as a, jackass. However, we
must not talk any more now —it is bed-time for you young ones. Here's my
little Freda nodding over her doll. Louis, stow your dingy on the deck of the
cutter, and put all away for to-night. We must be up at dawn, and gather the
home-run. Remember that, Guy."
"Yes, Papa. Ah, Linny! I told you I should not have time to write
anything yet. So you had better go on yourself with another chapter; you've
lots of time."
"Well, Guy," said Mrs. Merton, "Lina deserves credit for very often
making time for extra work. If you have to gather sheep, and assist in other


farm business, she has her daily dairy-work, and helps me in the house in all
sorts of ways, besides teaching Frank and Winifred when I am prevented, and
attending, when she can, to her own studies and music, which, I am sorry to say,
fall very short of the time they ought to get."
"So you see, Guy," said his father, " the fact that Lina writes at all, is an
t
apt illustration of the old saw, ' Where there's a will there's a way.'"
" And it's quite understood, Guy," said Lina, whose cheeks burned un-
comfortably to hear praise of herself, to the possible disparagement of her
beloved Guy, " that when I have told what little more I can of our harmless
animals, you will redeem your promise as to the savage ones."
"All right, Linny. Only don't reckon on one to fill much space in the
book. One page will hold all I can tell, I dare say."
" If you describe everything as shortly as you did the guinea-pig just now,
\
I should think it would," observed Louis, laughing. "You could do the
kangaroo in about six words —' TaU. Brown. Narrow top. Broad bottom.
Eats grass. Hops' See what a deal of time and paper you've wasted, Linny."
" Very good, Mr. Quiz; you 'll have to bring your scrap to the wallet one
of these days, and show what your style's like," was Guy's good-humoured
rejoinder.


CHAPTER III
" Each shell, each crawling insect holds a rank
Important in the plan of Him who framed
This scale of beings."
STILLINGFLEET.
" lyyr AMMA! Mamma! Ido think I have found a Fairy. Please wait. lam
IYJ. bringing it for you to see."
The call came from Freda in the garden, as she advanced slowly, her eyes
fixed on some flowers in her hand. " Look, Mamma, do you see it ?"
" I see some pretty red correa * and lilac *f*. • Ah! yes; there is a lovely
green mantis +on them. Carry it carefully into the drawing-room, and we will
get a large glass shade to put over it, so that we may keep it safely for a day or
two, and watch its singular habits. We will then put it back again in the
garden."
"We must give it plenty of fresh flowers, Mamma. Of course it eats
honey ?"
"It is very natural for you to suppose so," said Mrs. Merton. " I had the
same idea when I first found one; it seemed such a delicate, ethereal creature,
with those exquisite green gauze wings, and long slender legs on which it is
poised so airily, and that wonderfully queer and intelligent head, that delibe-
rately turns round to look at you, with a quaint, inquisitive expression that no
other insect I ever saw is capable of. How we will put our very curious friend
on this white paper, and place the shade over it, leaving the glass a little raised
at one side to admit air."
* Correa speciosa —native fuchsia of Colonies.
f Tetratheca glandulosa —native lilac. So named as resembling lilac both in colour and
fragrance.
J Mantis religiosa.


" But it will starve without some flowers, Mamma."
" It would certainly starve with flowers alone, Freda, although the sweetest
you could select. Your Fairy is not one who sips pearly drops of dew or
pellucid honey from lily or rose. It requires less dainty and more substantial
food, not only catching its own game in a most adroit manner, but devouring
its victims alive, as you will see, if you can capture a few common flies without
hurting them. Its green colour, although brighter than anything in the
vegetable world, still assimilates enough with the various tints of foliage to
render it very inconspicuous when perched on leaves; and so it waits, almost
motionless, for the approach of the flies that frisk about the flowers and shrubs.
But as you might watch it vainly for some time out of doors, even if it
remained stationary, we will feed it here awhile."
Mrs. Merton put the flies in beneath the glass, in which they flew about
and walked round the mantis, which, standing up at its full height, poised on
the four hinder legs, held the two in front (which we may call arms, and which
are adorned with a shaded spot of vivid blue on the second joint) closely folded
together in the supposed devotional attitude which has won for it the name of
praying mantis (and which would well describe it, if for a we write e — preying).
Fixing its eyes on the nearest fly, the mantis watched eagerly, turning its
head this way and that, following the movements of the fly with an eager
0
intelligent expression of face, as a man or sagacious animal might do, but not
otherwise changing its position. The fly, after creeping and flying round and
round, lit on the paper just in front of the mantis, which, with one rapid dart of
an arm, like a clever conjuror's legerdemain, almost too quick for detection,
snatched it up, and, holding it firmly impaled between the double row of sharp
spines with which the points of the arm are provided, lifted it up to its mouth,
and began quietly to eat it alive, first biting off and rejecting the head. Ere it
had taken more than one or two bites, a second fly walked across within range,
and was seized by the disengaged arm of the mantis, which then, like a greedy
child with a cake in each hand, bit sometimes a morsel out of onej sometimes
out of the other, until the bodies of both flies were devoured, and the heads, legs,
and wings lay discarded on the paper.
Freda gazed on the performance in fascinated amazement.
" Oh, Mamma! how can such a beautiful thing be so cruel ? I won't let
him have live flies again. He shall only eat dead ones."
" My darling, He who created the mantis also endowed it with its appetites
and propensities; we cannot alter nor modify them to suit our short-sighted


c**, • i J8r ii
'"*«sr »**3Hi-.i fR ' ®T - , fSP = - ' x
PLATE 11. CHAR 3.
TASMANIAN FRIENDS AND FOES


ideas. The mantis will not accept dead flies, nor even touch those which are
maimed. And, remember, it only eats its flies as we do our oysters—fresh and
alive. I very much doubt if the one victim feels more than the other."
Mrs. Merton's observations were interrupted by a burst of laughter. " Oh,
Mamma! how funny ! do look."
The mantis, with two more flies under discussion, one in either claw, was
intently following, with its weird, eager gaze, the movements of a third—for the
capture of which it had no unoccupied hand left—and its droll expression of
helpless greed was unmistakable.
" But it cannot be hungry now, Mamma ? It has eaten two whole flies, and
most of two more. Ah! see —it drops the little bit of one that was almost
finished, and has caught the new one!"
" My dear, the first mantis I ever saw I carried home from a garden on a
posy of flowers, round which I wound my veil, that I might not lose the strange
and beautiful creature. I kept it for a day or two under a glass like this, with
only flowers for its sustenance, thinking, as you did, that it ate honey.
Fortunately for my poor captive, I was told of its carnivorous habits, and then
put flies under the glass. To my astonishment, the delicate creature caught and
ate up thirteen before pausing in its meal. It must have been almost famished."
" Poor thing!—l mean savage, greedy thing ! But it is so very beautiful!
Shall I catch some more flies for it, Mamma ?"
"Ah!" sighed Mrs. Merton. "Beauty covers more sins than charity
ever did!"
NOTE. —The mantis-portraits in the plate are drawn with careful accuracy from life, life-size. To
exaggerate the quaint, grotesque oddity of the attitudes the insect assumes is impossible; it-is
difficult to do tolerable justice to them.
L. A. M.
4 4 THE MANTES.—These insects have their fore-legs of a construction not unlike that of a sabre ;
and they can as dexterously cleave their antagonist in two, or cut off his head at a stroke, as the most
expert hussar. . . . You will think it singular that both in Europe and Africa these cruel insects
have obtained a character for gentleness of disposition and even sanctity. This has arisen from the
upright or sitting position, with the fore-legs bent, assumed in watching for their prey, which the
vulgar have supposed to be a praying posture, and hence adopted the belief that a child or traveller
that had lost his road would be guided by taking one of these pious insects in his hand, and observing
what way it pointed."
KIRBY & SPENCE'S Entomology.


CHAPTER IV
" Oft have we seen him at the peep of dawn
Brushing with hasty steps the dew away,
To meet the sun upon the upland lawn."
GRAY.
IT was on a bright day of April, mid-autumn in Tasmania, when our chronicle
of the Mertons opened. Then the two busiest times of the year, shearing
and harvest, had been long over, and ploughing was daily going on.
Guy, after beginning by driving the bullock-plough team, and occasionally
trying his skill with the horses, was now promoted to the charge of a quiet,
staunch pair himself, whilst another, in the care of a trusty man, usually worked
in the same field.
Rising soon after four, he fed and groomed his horses, then ate his own
breakfast, also by the light of a candle, finishing by dawn, so as to be ready to
begin work at earliest daylight. When ploughing in a distant field, he carried
a substantial sandwich and bottle of tea with him, for his mid-day meal; but
when the work lay near home, Frank was delighted to take luncheon down to
him, and, when the horses began again after their rest, to hold the plough
himself, for one turn, under Guy's guidance, who would laugh and say—
" Ah, Frank, playing at ploughing's very good fun, isn't it ? I hope you 'll
like it as well when it turns to harvest."
After the horses were stabled, cleaned, and fed in the afternoon, Guy had
to work at the chaff-cutter to prepare their food for the next day, as his father's
system was to have the sheaves of oats cut up, ear and straw together, as being
most thrifty. This, the day's regular work during fine weather, and the many
minor matters in which Guy's assistance was claimed during the remaining
daylight, kept him fully occupied.
Louis had, until recently, spent his mornings at lessons with his mother,


and as he was to go to school after the June holidays, Mrs. Merton was most
anxious that he should benefit as much as possible by her instruction, so as to
take the better place in the school classes. Mr. Merton, though fond and proud
of his boys, and heartily desirous of their success, did not share his wife's
anxious ambition for their mental culture as warmly as she could have desired.
During Guy's school-years, it was his mother who, at each vacation, inquired
and examined into his progress, encouraged him to increased effort, and promised
to double whatever prizes he could win. His father rather wearied of such
topics, and put them aside with a—
"Well, well, these are the holidays; don't worry the boy about lessons
now: besides, it's not of the slightest use. He has the opportunity given
him. If a lad chooses to learn, he will learn, and you can't hinder him; and if
he does not choose, all the talking in the world won't make him."
A very easy-going, off-hand way of dealing with the question, but which,
most assuredly, would only answer in a few exceptional cases —of boys whose
own unquenchable thirst for knowledge impels them to take advantage of the
smallest chance for its attainment, and who can lay the foundation for learning
that wins a world-wide celebrity, in the night-school which they attend after
the day's hard labour.
The home-interest in, and estimate of, an average boy's progress, ought to
have, and usually has, a potent influence 011 his efforts and his career; and those
parents who, from indolence, indifference, or other cause, neglect to use such
wholesome incentives to perseverance, have no small amount of their children's
shortcomings, and their own disappointment therein, to answer for.
Louis's morning lessons had latterly been wholly omitted, as his assistance
was required in the replacement of part of the sheep-run fence, which a bush fire
had destroyed. No other hands save Isaac's and his could be spared, as ploughing
must not be interrupted. So poor Louis laid aside books, exercises, pens, and
pencils, shouldered his axe, and went "brush-fencing" with the best grace he could.
When the order was spoken, his mother gave one sigh—she knew remon-
strance was vain—stitched large and stout outside patches on his moleskin
trousers, made him a leathern bag to carry his daily luncheon, and felt as if
another castle-in-the-air had crumbled at her feet.
Louis saw the unspoken regret on her quivering face, and quietly kissed
her. " Don't mind it, Mamma. I am sorry to be taken off just now. I wish
I'd worked harder when I might, and then it wouldn't so much signify; but I
will when I do get to school, and try to make all up."


"'|"|' 1 1" M I |
-.V
1
CHAPTER V.
" There are insects which live, as it were, by hypocrisy, by getting themselves mistaken—so
perfect is their costume and acting—for the withered leaves and dried-up twigs amongst which they
habitually feed."—From an article in the Spectator newspaper, on " The Hypocrisies of Nature."
" M OTHEE! Lina! where are ?Do come out a minute ; I've something
J- wonderful to show you," cried Guy, hurrying in from the garden one
Sunday afternoon. " Oh! here you are. Come down this walk, where we
planted the native shrubs. Now you see that bush of red Epacris ? Very well:
my wonderful discovery is there. Do you see it ?"
Mrs. Met ton and Lina looked attentively in the direction to which Guy
pointed.
I cannot see anything but the few remaining red flowers, and a great many
dead-looking sticks," said Lina. '
Mrs. Merton gazed still more searchingly. " Nor do I. Your wonder must
have vanished, Guy."
The boy laughed merrily. "Oh, no, Mother; he's there still. I see him
plainly enough; and so ought you, for he's seven or eight inches long."
What nonsense !' cried Lina. " You 're making fun of us."
Stay, said her mother, restraining her from touching the bush. "Look
there I saw something move —a long, brown, jointed leg—and there's another
and another six of them—and having found the legs, we can now trace the
body they belong to—long, brown, and thin—so exactly like one of the dead
Epacris sticks, it is not strange we did not readily discover it."
How very curious!" exclaimed Lina, examining the insect. " I see its
queer round eyes, and its horns are like little strings of the tiniest beads."
Scientific people don't talk of insect's , Linny—we say ," said
Guy, with mock solemnity.


TASMAN IAN FRIENDS AND FOES.
" r % "&6 * v fla& • • •. '*• ' '\£H9&£f^-~
Jp' *' % ** •
V, ffifr
> .5? flPJjV AtfffWv B " - "* v 3^jfe*a^iiidy
bW -. 0B7 'uB
ar *' it^^ r • ..&
J' -O6l^* *'i■ o£lr 1 Jt — V '
•' V-h.
k .'' •♦ - Fu'iiiSi +&*' -?$*'' g
■** jjHt ktf
,Y /- V*
v ' / i^V^^Kn
PLATE III. CHAP 5.


"But what is it, Mamma?" asked Lina. "Did you ever see one like it
before?"
"Never; but I can tell you that it is a creature allied to the mantis family,
if not a member of it. It must be the Tasmanian spectre.* I have bad it so
well described to me, that I am sure of its identity."
" You will draw it, Mamma ?"asked Guy. "It will be something quite new
in art to take the portrait of a spectre!"
"Yes, I shall be very glad to have a sketch of the strange creature. We
will carefully break off the stem of the twig on which it is poised, and carry all
in together."
" I wonder what kind of flies it likes best; I would catch some to feed it
with, if I knew."
" Surely a spectre cannot eat ? That would be a queer paradox," said
Lina, laughing.
t
" It so far conforms to your ideas as to be a strict vegetarian," said Mrs.
Merton, "and never indulges in the carnivorous banquets we have seen our
delicate little beauty the green mantis enjoy so heartily. But this poor fellow
seems almost torpid. It is late in the season for him. We have had one or two
cold nights, and he is probably near death now."
This supposition proved correct; the poor spectre scarcely moved after it
was found. It was a most patient " sitter" for a careful portrait the size of
life, from which the annexed plate is taken, and then the strange-looking but
perfectly harmless creature gradually stiffened into death.
* My kind friend, the late Mr. Morton Allport, of Hobart, to whom I so often used to refer for
aid in any doubtful point of natural history, told me that he believed this species has not been
named, but that it belongs to the genus Phasma. It is rare, and only known on the north coast of
the colony. I have not found a second specimen.—L. A. M. .


CHAPTER VI.
The hawk and crow to roost are gone,
The owl sits on the tree,
The farmer's barley-reaping's done,
And the sheaves set cap-a-pie.
Then down thro' the blossoms,
For frolic and for play,
Go we merry, merry 'possums,
For it is our op'ning day.
The Opossum s Evening Song (freely translated).
THE evenings, which were usually so pleasant to both parents and children
at Loorana, became much curtailed at this season. The early rising, which
was indispensable for Guy and Louis, and their hard work all day, made early
going to bed both necessary and welcome to them. Lina's well-filled time could
not be made elastic enough to admit of her writing so frequently as she wished
to do, so that it was on an evening in June (answering to the English December)
—the season of short days, and, that year, of long and frequent rains, and bleak
cold southerly wind —when we find the little family party seated at their various
avocations, ready to hear
GWENDOLINE'S SECOND GOSSIP.
i
I have only told you yet, dear Sybil, of the two largest kinds of kangaroos;
there are several others here, and more species still, in the great Australian
continent. Of ours, the next in size is the Wallaby,* which is the name by
which it was known to the aboriginal blacks. It is very like the brush
kangaroo, only about half the size. The fur is very soft, of a grey colour,
mixed with a brownish tan, and the pretty creatures are very graceful and
* Halmaturus Billardieri . By using o instead of a, the sound of the aboriginal word is best
preserved.


nimble. They live chiefly in scrubs and thickets, in mountain gullies or near
rivers, and make runs in all directions through the thick growth, like the
passages in a rabbit-warren; so that, when people go to hunt them, they take
sharp, clever little dogs, like our terriers, to follow and put them out.
We had a tame one, a good while ago, that used to hop after us everywhere,
even upstairs, and if you had seen him coming down in a hurry, with his long
tail and long legs slipping and sprawling as he came scuttering down, you would
have felt certain he must tumble over head-first; but he shuffled along all
rio-ht finishing off with a leap over the two or three lowest stairs, and a grand
& y o i-
scamper round the hall aud parlour, as if in delight at his clever performance.
We had a nursery book once, with a story of three hedgehogs—Bustle and
Bristle and Bob; so we called our Wallaby, Bustle, he was such a fussy, brisk,
scampering little fellow.
The kangaroo rat* has not so pretty a face nor so soft a coat as the Wallaby,
and is a good deal smaller, not much more than a foot high. The head, I must
acknowledge, is more like a rat's than a deer's, but those we have had were nice
little things, and grew very affectionate and fond of us. One we called Trotty, and
one Hop-o'-my-thumb —Hoppy for short, of course. They were as playful as
kittens, and followed us like pet dogs.
Luckily for the poor little beasties, no one fancies eating them, probably
because they are called rats; so that giving them an " ill name" has been a great
service to them. Still, they are killed very often, because, like our beloved
Joey, they like digging bulbs and roots for their own eating, and are sometimes
very destructive in gardens. In the earlier years of the colony, they often came
in great numbers at a time, attacking the same garden, night after night, for a
week or two together, eating potatoes and other roots, especially flower-bulbs
when there were any, in large quantities.
Papa once showed me one of their nests. It was made on the ground, of
long dry grass, woven and packed together quite firmly, and snugly covered
over, with only an opening on one side for a door. At a very little distance,
it only looked like one of the dry grass tussocks that were growing all around.
Is it not beautiful and wonderful that animals are so clever ? that the good God
not only makes them able to build warm nests for themselves and their young,
but to take care that they shall not look at all like nests on the outside, so as
not to attract enemies ! The sight of that little rat's house set me thinking of
* Hypsiprymnus apicctlis.


His power and love who has created and cared for all His creatures so tenderly
and wisely, more than any book I ever read in my life.
A much prettier little creature than this is the forest kangaroo rat*—more
elegant in form, and with a more gentle expression of-face—just like a kangaroo
in miniature, and with the softest grey fur you can imagine. Guy caught a
young one quite lately, and brought it to Mamma for a pet. Oh ! such a lovely
little creature! But after a family council held to decide its fate, it was
resolved, nem. eon., to restore its freedom, rather than incur the risk of its
coming to harm in our hands. I think I was just a little sorry ; for I know it
would soon have become quite tame ; but I dare say Mamma was right. So we
carried it in a basket up to the place where Guy saw it start from, and set down
the basket, open. I do believe it was already reconciled to its new house, for,
instead of rushing out at once, it turned round two or three times in the flannel,
as if to go to sleep; but Frank moved, and off went the Joey at such a rate that
none of us, except Guy, could have caught it again, had we wished to do so.
I dare say you have seen opossums,-f* as well as kangaroos, in collections of
animals at home, but you must believe my assurance, dear Cousin, that you do
not know any more of them than if you had only seen Mr. Gould's pictures
(which, indeed, all but live and move), because their habit is to sleep all day,
and play and eat all night; and as you could not very conveniently go to the
Zoological Gardens in the dark, you must miss the sight of their frisky antics.
Like all other native creatures here, they are scarce now compared with
what even I remember them —so many, many thousands are snared and shot for
their warm furry coats, which are made into great rugs, six or eight feet square,
for travellers to use in the bush, or for carriage-wraps; and very warm and
handsome they are, but I never see ours without grieving for the many happy
lives it cost.
At one time we could walk out with Papa on a moonlight night, and,
without going far from the house, be almost sure of seeing some opossums in the
trees, scampering along the branches and up and down the trunks, and often
leaping from one tree to another, as you have perhaps seen squirrels in England.
They live in holes of trees, where they have nice warm nests to curl up in all
day. Now and then we have seen one by daylight, sitting at the opening of his
dwelling—his front door, in fact —high up in some big gum-tree; and sometimes
* Bettongia cuniculus.
f Phalangista vulpina —common opossum.. P. fuliginosa —black or sooty opossum.


they are so imprudent as to sleep on the ground, when, if dogs should come near,
poor Possy is snapped up before he can escape. I suppose they play about till
quite tired out, and'so are too lazy to climb up home.
" I wonder," said Guy, " when the Duke of Edinburgh was in Victoria,
that he liked to be made such a baby of as to let the opossums be caught ready
for him, instead of going out like anybody else, and finding them properly."
" How do you know he didn't ?" asked Louis.
" Because everybody talked of it in Victoria, when Papa was there,"
replied Guy. " One, if not more, of the rich men who entertained the Duke, set
the blacks to catch opossums weeks before; and the poor brutes were kept in
cellars till he came. Then they were put up in the gum-trees by hundreds,
and blacks and dogs posted round the trees day and night to prevent their
getting away, till the Duke was brought out to shoot them."
" I don't believe it," said Louis; "or if it done, you may be sure the
Duke knew nothing about it. He is a brave man—everybody knows that—and
to shoot things in that way would be very mean."
" Mean enough—but not meaner than the way that royal and noble
sportsmen, as they call themselves, slaughter pheasants in English preserves,
where the poor birds are as tame as our fowls, and are driven up to the guns."
" You need not go to England for instances, Guy," said his father; " whilst
in this colony the shameful sight has been, and is too often seen, of a deer,
so tame and gentle that it can scarcely be made to run away, being hunted
again and again within an inch of its life, and, just when death would be
merciful, it is secured to go through like agonies as often as its brave and gallant
pursuers ordain."
"Well," said Guy, "I'm very fond of hunting and shooting too. Yes,
Linny, I am, so you need not shake your head at me, for I shall not deny it;
but I like fair hunting of wild things. That seems to be part of human
nature all the world over and in all ages; and if everybody ceased hunting, I
suppose the beasts would eat us out in time. But I should be ashamed to go
blazing away at a lot of birds or animals that other people had first caught and
secured. It's so childish as well as bloodthirsty! If men have not the pluck
to go and find game in a manly, honest way, they should leave it for those
that have—that's my opinion."
" Ah! my dear Guy," said his mother, " I'm afraid you are only a sort of
noble savage after all. Lou do not seem to realise, with sufficient deference,


that it is only in the highest circles of civilisation and refinement that battues,
pigeon-matches, and diversions of the like nature prevail as amusements. Our
vulgar rustic notions of what is manly or humane must he as an unknown
tongue in such regions."
" Then the sooner the language is learned there, the better for the honour
and well-being of England," said Mr. Merton. " Linny, go on with your
reading."
/
*
At the time when opossums were so numerous, they used to do great
mischief to our cornfields, particularly during harvest. You would not think it
possible for creatures only the size of big cats to make such a mess and such
terrible destruction perhaps in one night. They used to pull the shocks down,
and untie and scatter the sheaves, strewing the wheat or other grain all over
the field; and besides what they ate, a great quantity that could not be bound
up again or collected was quite spoiled. Only pigs could pick it up at all.
Mamma and I were always so sorry to have opossums killed, that Papa
took us to see the dreadful havoc our favourites made, to prove to us that he
was obliged to make war upon them sometimes. In the orchard, too, they
were sadly mischievous, breaking our young trees and knocking off the fruit,
besides eating almost everything, more or less. We often used to hear them
scrambling over the house-roof, and making their odd cry, which is haid to
describe —it seems a sort of hoarse chuckle, low down in the throat. Some
opossums are grey, others of a rich golden brown, mixed with black, which latter
are the most valued.
We have only had one of them tame, for, though we were all very fond of
him, he kept us in such a state of dread and vigilance, whilst he was awake, that
it was resolved, nem. con., never to try a second experiment of the kind. One
of the men-servants brought him to me as a present, after a night's " 'possum-
ing," in which the poor mother had been killed. Almost all our native
animals are marsupial —that is, the mothers have each a pouch or pocket in
front, in which they carry their young until the little ones are strong and active.
The opossum Joeys, too, often cling to the mother's back, and make her
fur all touzled and shabby where they sit and hold on. The men who collect
skins call such as these " Joey-ridden," and valueless.
I was delighted to have my Possy. He was such a soft, sweet-faced, pretty
little thing, about half the size of a squirrel; but his delicate pink feet had
very sharp claws, as my hands and arms soon bore witness. If the little girl in


Punch had cuddled him, she would have said Possies had " pins in their toes,"
as well as kittens ! After I got him safe in his cage, I did not annoy him by
much nursing, which he evidently disliked. At first we were obliged to handle
him, because he had to be fed with milk ; but he soon learned to lap it for
himself. He lived in his box-cage all day, curled up fast asleep in a lot of
wool; but in the evening we always set him at liberty in the house till morning;
and he grew fast, and fat, and handsome, and as large as a cat.
How would you like to take your meals whilst hung up by your frock, and
perhaps one foot, to the side of the room or a beam overhead, and just able
to reach your food with your hands, and put it in your mouth whilst in this
upside-down position ?
Because that is the way Possy best liked to take his supper ! Mamma
used to think he would choke; but Papa said he admired his digestion. He
might have sat comfortably beside his saucer of bread and milk, and taken it in
a commonplace way if he pleased; but he always contrived to hang himself up
by the tail, like a pendulum, and stretch his hands down for the pieces of bread
until all were gone, before coming to lap the milk.
Then, when he had eaten enough, his frolics began, generally by a run up
any coat that hung in the hall, and a general clearance of the hat-pegs. Then
a sudden " flop" on the floor, and the next minute, if the parlour-door were
open, he would be round the room twice or thrice like a small whirlwind, and
up the curtains to the top of the cornice, which was a favourite vantage ground,
and gave him a good view of all going on below, and a capital opportunity to
plan mischief. He seemed to know that he had us all at a disadvantage there,
for we could not get him down without risk of hurting him. Sometimes he sat
for a good while so perfectly still that he was forgotten; and as, when he pleased,
he could descend as softly as a spider, perhaps the next thing would be a shriek
from somebody whose elbow or foot he had gently bitten, in play. lam sure
he enjoyed the fun of making us start, or he would not have gone so stealthily
about his little wickednesses; and when he saw he was detected, he made any
amount of racket—leaping, running, and scrambling over, under, and round tables,
chairs, sideboard, piano, and sofa, for we had then only one sitting-room, doing
double duty as dining and drawing-room. He used to make desperate efforts to
get upon the chimney-piece, but, fortunately, it was rather high, and we guarded
it with care, too, or Mamma's precious old china would have come to an end.
A general putting away of breakables accompanied the first sounds of Possy's
awakening from his day-long slumber, and if that were inconvenient, the


parlour-door was kept shut against his entrance; but, in spite of every
precaution, glasses, jugs, and decanters were sometimes swept off and smashed
in his mad career.
An open work-box was a great attraction to him. He would come slyly
and silently on the table, and peep all round it very gravely, and then, more
quickly than you could see, hook the end of his tail to the lid, and jump off. Of
course there was a grand upset; reels, balls, and thimbles flew in all directions,
and in the same instant the rogue vanished, not to be seen again until order
and quiet were restored, when a pinch of some one's toe, or a' tweak of Papa's
coat, hair, or ear, told of Possy's recovered courage and unquelled impudence.
His tail was equal, in point of use, to another pair of hands. Being
prehensile (that is, able to lay fast hold), he could hang by it from anything that
would bear his weight, and many were his mishaps and tumbles when mis-
taking movables on the table for solid parts of it. Although he had never
climbed in the forest himself, I suppose his instinct led him to believe that
things in a house grew all together like the branches of trees; and my work-box
tumbling down with him was like a bough suddenly breaking off.
I am glad to be able to tell you that our entertaining, troublesome Possy
proved, so far as we know, an exception to the rule that pets come to untimely
ends. He was so free in every way, that we never supposed he cared to go
away from us; but probably those of his kind who used to frequent our roof and
garden were heard by him, and he may have joined them, for he deserted his
%
cage one night, left his supper unsought, and never returned.
I wish I could be sure that, like the heroines of fairy tales, he "lived
happily ever afterwards."
There is a still prettier kind called the ring-tailed opossum; * but that is
not quite a correct name, as, instead of a ring, the tail has a tip of white about
two inches'long. A pair of these built their house, like a great bird's nest, in
rather a low tree near the garden, so that we could watch their elegant and agile
movements quite well, when the evenings were moonlight. The ring-tails are
smaller than the common kind, grey, with a lighter shade underneath ; and in
fun, frolic, activity, and grace, fully equal, if not excel them. We never bad one
of them tame, but I saw one at another house, which came in when the dessert
was served, and went down the table, from one person to another, to be fed with
little dainties of fruit or cakes, taking everything so gently and prettily, and
* Phalangista viverrina.


•sitting np, eating from his hands, in the neatest way imaginable. On a sudden,
something startled him. In an instant his tail clasped itself round the stem of
a wineglass, and he leaped off the table ; no doubt much astonished to find that
his faithless support fell too, in sundry pieces.
Before ending this gossip, I think I ought to tell you of two quite little
creatures here, one called the kangaroo-mouse, and the other the opossum-
mouse. Not any of us have seen the first; we have only heard of it as
being a kangaroo in miniature, three or four inches high. But we have had the
opossum-mice, which, I think, must be the loveliest little creatures in the world,
and are about the size, Mamma says, of an English dormouse. They are most
often found by the tree being cut down in which their nest is made, when they
are easily caught. The nest itself is a marvel of ingenuity, made with soft
fibres and grass, and lined beautifully with down and web. Their grey fur is
the softest I ever touched; velvet is harsh in comparison; and when asleep in
• the daytime, they curl themselves round in a ball, and hide their faces in it.
They have a very innocent, sweet expression, large, lustrous black eyes, and
wide-open, delicate ears; the tail is prehensile, like the opossum's, and the end
of'it is almost always curled and clasped round something or other. My little
mouse had a small box to live in, full of nice soft wool, and the box was
fastened on a little platform of boughs hung from the nursery ceiling. I wish
you could have seen the pretty creature frisking about this odd sort of habitation;
for at night he was just as wide-awake as he was fast asleep all day, and seemed
never tired of scampering and frolicking about. Of course the cat was kept
away from the room when Mousey was at play, for fear he might come down
and be snapped up.
After living with us some time, our tiny pet was carried off in great
triumph by a scientific friend of Mamma's, who took it with him on his return
to England, but the little mouse died before arriving there.
We might have kept others, for two or three have been brought to us; but
we have only had a good look at them, and then carried them back to the exact
place they came from, and put them down at liberty, watching till they were
safe out of sight. I hope they soon found their friends again, and went on
enjoying their happy, innocent lives, instead of being kept prisoners in a solitary,
unnatural state. Do you not think it was the kindest and wisest thing we
could do ?
" What's the use of asking anybody a question, when they 're on the other


side of the world, and can't answer you ? —at least, not for ever so long,"
exclaimed matter-of-fact Guy, when his sister'ceased reading.
" Indeed, Guy," replied Lina, " I did not think about that when I was
writing; hut, perhaps, being asked a direct question in that way may make
Sibyl think the matter over quietly to herself; and if she does, I am sure she
will see how much better it was for the-pretty things to be set free; and if she
makes up her mind that we were right, she may do the same sometime, and
spare some poor little animal or bird the long sad misery of life in a prison."
" Oh, if she has any doubts on that matter, she can see the poor sky-larks
and blackbirds that Papa says are kept in cramped little cages all over London.
I should think they must make any one's heart ache to hear or see them."
" It's so shocking to think of," said Mrs. Merton, " and a disgrace to a
civilised people that such barbarities are suffered."
" Why does not the Queen make a law to prevent anybody keeping birds
in cages ?" exclaimed Louis.
"My boy," interposed Mr. Merton, " the Queen does not make the laws.
She assents to such as are made by Parliament; and I am afraid it will be a
• long time before her Majesty's faithful Commons begin to legislate for little
singing-birds. I agree with you entirely, you well know, as to the wicked
cruelty of bird-catching and caging; but I have more faith in the effect of
rational, wholesome education for the masses of the people, than in any special
law-making on the subject. Had you all been reared in a home where wanton
cruelties were continually practised without condemnation, even you would not
be as rightly sensitive to animal suffering as you now are, after having always
before you my own watchfulness against every kind of inhumanity to God's
dumb creatures, and your mother's tender care for all helplessness and suffering."


CHAPTER VII.
The day is dark, and dull, and dreary;
It rains, and the rain is never weary.
"TTQW persistently the rain continues!" exclaimed Mrs. Merton, listening to
J-J- the heavy downpour, which had not ceased for some hours.
" There 'll be a flood, Papa," said Louis.
"I am afraid there will; a very heavy one. And even if that did not
happen, this continued rain will do great injury to all the crops that are sown,
and prevent our getting to work upon the unploughed land for some time."
" The water-furrows are all drawn, that's one good thing," said Guy. " I
worked an hour later yesterday to get mine finished, for Isaac said he ' looked
for wet' before long."
" And he's found it —more's the pity," said Louis.
" I hope the sheep and cattle are all safe," said Mrs. Merton, anxiously.
"After so much rain, and the ground being so completely soaked, all that now
falls runs off at once, and the river rises so very rapidly when that is the case."
" Yes; and when you remember the mountain tier at the back, and the deep,
almost precipitous ravines and gullies that pour down their swollen torrents into
this river, it is no marvel that it does rise so suddenly."
" But there is always time to get things out of the way," said Guy.
"Well, not quite always. I once saw the first descent of a great flood,
after a thunderstorm with an extraordinary fall of rain, in the hills. I was on
the high bank, near the Crooked Corner, as you children call it, and heard a
roaring sound, - which rapidly increased, and was evidently drawing near.
Looking up the river, I saw a great wave, literally a wall of water, rushing
towards me, and carrying with it, and in it, trees, branches, pieces of fences, and
all manner of wreck. The boulders and pebbles of the river-bed lay bare


beneath me one minute, and the next, were some feet deep beneath the raging
torrent. It was positively frightful; but very grand too."
" I should like to have seen it," exclaimed Louis.
" And I was glad to have the chance of doing so," said Mr. Merton, " for of
course it was by the merest accident. But a still more startling phenomenon
occurred to me in New South Wales, many years ago. I was staying a day or
two with some friends, whose house was built near the foot of a mountain slope
overlooking the farm and a good deal of the sheep-run. It was a very lovely
spot. One day, when the weather was to all appearances tine and settled, and
we were seated at dinner, a sudden indescribable noise was heard, and almost
«
before we had time to say 'What's that!' it grew into the unmistakable roar of
water, and a turbid, furious cascade, carrying rocks and stones of all sizes along
with it, burst through the house, making the spacious hall one channel, which
tilled every room on the ground floor a foot or more deep, whilst two other
branches of the torrent swept round either side of the house, destroying out-
buildings, trees, and garden in their rapid course. Nothing but an earthquake
or an avalanche could have brought more sudden and sweeping desolation. In
a short time, perhaps an hour or two, all was over, and the chasms torn by the
water were fast running dry."
"But, Papa, what made it ?" asked Frank, who had listened intently to the
story.
" The only way in which anyone attempted to account for it was,
that a waterspout had burst high up in the mountains; but as no one
happened to see the original catastrophe, we could only guess *what it
might be by its consequences, and they were disastrous enough to my poor
friends."
" Didn't they go away from that dreadful mountain ?" said Freda.
"No, little woman, they did not. Too much money had already been
spent in settling there. I believe it is very rarely that a second cannon-ball
exactly hits the hole made by a former one, and I fancy my friends had faith in
the unlikelihood of a second waterspout bursting on the precise spot that this
had done; and as I never heard of their suffering such a visitation since, they
were probably right."
" If one of those puffing auctioneers wanted to make a good advertisement
of such a place," said Guy, " he might truly say that ' water had been laid on the
premises regardless of expense.'"
"I wish I had not heard of such a horrid thing just at bedtime," said Lina.


SASSAFRAS OR TORTOISESH ELL BUTTERFLY AND
BROWN OR CINNAMON MOTH.
M9w j^ttif/liil MmEt r *
|NHf isS 7 : V.
"''^jiHi Je -
I| j> ' 8
■ Mjp £H| |9H
lifip' ■ '.j*; BBjte»J *^faw?*£ *?SX*7-"' • •'-.- ...^
Wr ' 1 ?|£j||JMB §&& * *'1j? **!»»*7 f
/ JR / jy.jiMKiiaM' *™ f-': v
§ ' 9 Jx i<^I '"" - ■j^^^^^B^^s^^ESrjr*,,*
jBk& jMmF f> \MSHBmm hv - l$P&>
•zS/f-'Jp <%.• ; 4 j^7\'"**■-->• KJ.-- "if* . f^Sfyi^Q **» / (V
1$ 1^ : w''' >\ ■', Mi'
taFf -7 jrfl5 "c-U
Jr^^HHt w IB
L. A. M. MARCUS WARD 8, CO
PLATE IV. CHAP
TASMANIAN AND FOES


" I shall have the dismal sound of that pouring rain in my ears as I go to sleep,
and dream of floods and drowning, to a certainty."
"How would a dish of cherries serve as an antidote to such horrors said
her father. "If you look on my study table, you will find some."
Lina soon returned, singing—
" ' Cherry ripe ! cherry ripe!
Ripe, I crjr!
Full and fair ones,
Come and buy!'
Only, you know, Papa, these are not our native cherries."*
" But far more deserving of the name than the celebrated Antipodean fruit,
with the c flour outside.' *f* That is most like the yew-berry."
"I quite agree with you," said Mrs. Merton. "These Aristotelias are
certainly longer in shape than a real cherry, but the leaf of the little plant, and
the way in which the stalk is set into the fruit, are very like. There are red and
black cherries in the garden, .as handsome as these are outside, and much nicer
within, but we have not any tame that are quite white, like the delicate ones.
And how soft and lovely these exquisite turquoise gems are, our peerless
Drymophila.\ We often hear it said, as a-reproach, that Tasmania has not any
indigenous fruit worth eating; but no one can refuse to own that she has many
which are most beautiful to look at."
* Aristotelia peduncularis. Varieties with red, white, and black fruit. Plant, a single slight
stem, 12 to 15 inches high.
t Exocarpus cupressiformis (not in plate).
I Drymophila cyanocarpa. Also a single stem, 12 to 15 inches high.


CHAPTER VIII.
The rivers swell,
Of bounds impatient. Sudden from the hills,
O'er rocks and woods, in broad brown cataracts,
A thousand snow-fed torrents shoot at once.
THOMSON.
#
LONG before daylight on the following morning, Guy Merton was aroused by
his father's voice.
• »
" Jump up, Guy, and make haste dressing. Isaac says he has heard some
one coo eying* from the river. There's a tremendous flood. I'm going down to
see what's the matter, and- you may come too. I've lit your candle. Be
quick."
The last injunction was quite unnecessary. Guy's toilet did not include
any study of the graces that morning, but hurrying on his clothes, and donning
a stout waterproof coat and leather leggings, he went out with his father into
the dark cold morning and the pouring rain, when they hastened down towards
the river.
The excellent dreadnought overcoats worn by both were home-made by
the deft fingers of Mrs. Merton herself, the material being thick, strong
unbleached calico, made up, and then well painted over twice or thrice with
boiled linseed oil; forming light, cheap, and efficient " macintoshes." Isaac, in
a serviceable cape of the same manufacture, was in attendance with a lantern.
Suddenly there was a splash, and the lantern performed some eccentric
evolutions. .
" Stop where ye be, Master. The dry bank's all under water, and I'm in
it; but the lantern's safe, as luck has it." • And Isaac scrambled back to Mr.
* The shrill, ringing cry of 44 Coo-ee " is now pretty generally known, I believe, as the one which
travels better and farther on the air than any other, and is universally used in these colonies.


Merton, who could hardly credit the fact of the water having risen to a point so
much higher than any marks of wreck left by preceding floods.
"Coo-ee!" sounded faintly through the darkness, hut only just distinguish-
able above the roar of the river and the streaming rain.
" There, Master. I told ye there was somebody in the water; that's what
I heard afore."
"Coo-ee!" returned Mr. Merton in a strong, cheery tone. "Who are
you ?"
9
" It's me" was the response.
" And who's me ? What's your name ?" bellowed Mr. Merton again.
" Giles Gra-ay," replied the voice.
" Where are you?" shouted Mr. Merton.
" Up a tree-ee."
"Hold on, then!" was Isaac's advice. "It's that half-witted chap that
lives at Stubbs'she exclaimed. " The Missis haint much more sense than the
lad; she's always a-sending him about o' nights for some fool's errand or
another. Eibbin, or ossifers (lucifers ?), or gin may be, from the township. I've
said many a time as some'at would happen him."
" We cannot do anything till daylight, I am afraid," said Mr. Merton.
" Unless we can light a fire here," said Guy. "It might comfort him a
little, only to have the blaze to look at."
"So it would, Master Guy. But I doubt the wood's all too wet to burn."
" I 'll fetch some dry brush from the house. I crammed the oven full
yesterday," said Guy, running off home.
"Coo-ee!" cried poor Giles again. "I'm so cold!" Even this was only
understood after several repetitions, the roar of the river rendering it almost
impossible to hear any other sound.
" Hold on!" cried Mr. Merton. "We 'll try all we can do for you as soon
as it's light. Only hold on /"
Guy's brushwood, lit in the comparatively dry hollow of a tree, soon made
a bright blaze, and Isaac begged his master and Guy to go home till daylight.
" Eor you 'll get your deaths o' cold, and can't do no good to the poor chap if you
stop. I 'll potter about the fire, and sing out to him, and keep his heart up as
well as I can. Lord! how it do pour, to be sure! Do go up, sir; please do."
So they went.
And a very comfortable contrast to the dreary scene outside did the
broad, blazing kitchen-hearth present to the eyes of our dripping friends.


Mrs. Merton had risen when her husband. did, and called up her one maid,
and both had been busy preparing for the reception of any half-drowned wretch
who might he brought up, by putting clothes and blankets to air, and kettles to
boil. The glowing warmth of the clear bright kitchen was voted far preferable
to the just-lit dining-room fire, and breakfast was eaten there, to the delight and
diversion of Frank and Freda, who had availed themselves of the general excite-
ment to come down in a half-fledged condition, and had been detected and taken
back by Lina, as being guilty of the never-permitted negligence of that family
institution, the tub. • Frank's explanation was that he dressed in the dark, and
could not see the tub.
• " Then you should have waited until I came," said Lina.
" Oh! hut," pleaded Freda, "we thought Papa might be bringing the man
home, and we wanted to see him; we never saw a drowned man."
" Pray that you never may!" exclaimed her mother.
Louis's dignity was a little nettled at not having been roused when Guy
was. He always stoutly repudiated the idea that he was less robust than his
brother—an undeniable fact, however, which caused him to be spared unnecessary
exposure to inclement weather.
Day was only dawning when Mr. Merton and Guy returned to the river-
bank, or, more correctly, the margin of the flood, which extended from 60 to 100
yards over either shore, beyond the usual bed of the stream. As they descended
the hill which sloped from the house towards the river, they heard Isaac calling
loudly and cheerily to poor Giles.
" Keep yer heart up, lad, and hold on. Daylight's coming, and so-'s
Master!"
At that instant they heard a heavy followed by the crash of breaking
timber, and a scream of agony from Giles. It was not light enough to see
clearly what had happened, but Isaac cried—
" His tree's broke ! Lord help him, poor chap! He's drowned, I doubt."
" This flood would shift the big timber we felled up above, Papa," said
Guy; " I expect it's some of that has smashed the tree Giles was in."
" Keep still," said Mr. Merton; "he 'll call out again if he's escaped."
They listened for some time. Ho voice was heard—nothing but the wind
and the rain, and the roaring rush of the merciless flood.
By slow degrees a paler mist overspread the blank darkness. The
outline of the nearest hills told faintly against the eastern sky. Then the trees
around loomed out, the rain somewhat abated, and the broad, turbulent expanse
44
Tasmanian Friends and Foes.


of water gradually became visible, pouring along in a whirl of foaming rapids,
carrying down huge trees, branches, masses of heavy dead-wood and post-and-
• rail fencing, all rolling and tumbling over and over in the impetuous torrent.
The large standing trees', round which the flood flowed, had intercepted some of
the timber, which was fast accumulating against their massive trunks, in great
heaps of rude scaffolding, piled up some height above the water. Upon one of
these masses, near the shore, sat a poor rabbit, drenched and soiled, the picture
of misery. Guy soon espied it.
" You could easily knock him over with a stick, Master Guy," said Isaac.
" I'd like very much to get him out, but certainly not to kill him. Poor
little beast! he's wretched enough, and it would be shocking for us to take his
life after even the flood has spared it. I hope he 'll come safe ashore."
" That's more than Giles will, I fear," said Mr. Merton. f
" I wonder if he can swim," said Guy.
t
" The best swimmer living could do little there. Even if the water were
not full of wreck, the current would sweep him over; and with all that timber
knocking along, he would be struck down to a certainty. I'm afraid there's no
hope."
" I doubt not, Master," said Isaac. " The Lord have mercy on him !"
" Good morning, sir!" said another of the farm servants.
" Hallo, Bruce! is that you ? Why, you look as if you 'd been half drowned.
I'm afraid that poor lad Giles is lost. We have been waiting till daylight to
try and rescue him from a tree in the river, but it was just now carried away,
and I fear he must be drowned."
" Lord, sir! I hope not. He was at our place yesterday, about four o'clock,
0
going to the township for a bottle o' gin "
" I said so !" put in Isaac.
" And my missis told him he'd best look sharp, or he'd not get back again,
for the river was a-rising then."
" Your cottage is all right, I hope ?" said Mr. Merton.
Bruce smiled. - •
"Well, sir, I can't say it's all right, exactly. After we went to bed,
my old dog—he lies inside, this cold weather —began howling and whining
in a queer way, but we was sleepy, and took no notice, till the child cried; and
when my wife jumped out of bed to look after it, she was in the water. She
shrieked, and woke me. I'd got some matches in my coat-pocket on the bed,
so we got a light. There was the cradle—leastways the box I made into one—


swimming about the floor, and the child crying, as well he might, for the wet
had come through to him. The old dog was on the sofy. I watched the water for
a bit, and see it rising, and it was then about two foot deep on the floor."
"Two feet?" exclaimed Mr. Merton, incredulously. "I never saw the
slightest indications of a flood ever having reached the bank where I built your
cottage."
" Ho, nor I neither, sir; but there it is."
" Then Johnson's hut's flooded too, I know," said Isaac.
" You 're right there, Ike, but they 're all safe. I got my wife to put some-
thing on her as quick as she could, and carried her out to the big gum-tree by
the corner of the garden. She climbed it once for fun, a good bit ago, so I set
her at it, and up she clawed, into-the fork. Then I gave her up the child, and
nothing would serve but she'd have the cat too. So I fetched the poor thing,
and set her to go up the tree. She was a deal cleverer at that work than her
missis; and there they are now, and likely to stop, as far as I can see."
" What an adventure !" exclaimed Guy.
" How deep is the water now ?" asked Mr. Merton.
" About four feet inside, I expect, sir, and I don't think it 'll be any higher;
indeed it's fell a little, I think."
" I am afraid your clothes and little stores must all be spoiled."
" Ho, sir. I shoved all I could on to the rafters; but a good deal's damaged,
of course."
" You cannot have had any breakfast ?"
"Ho, sir; but I don't mind. I'd be very glad of a drop of warm tea for
my wife, if I might ask the missis."
" Of course, but why not take both wife and child to the house ?"
" Oh, sir, there's a deep channel in the little hollow on this side. It's as
much as I can do to get over by myself, with this stout sapling to help me."
"And where are Johnson's people ?"
" A-top of their ridge-pole, sir. Johnson cut all the trees down that stood
anyway a-nigh, because he said they harboured the parrots, so they couldn't get
into one, and they durstn't stop in the hut, so he helped his wife and the girls
on to the top. I see'd 'em as I came by just now."
" Poor old Hancy Johnson !" exclaimed Guy. " What a tale she 'll have to
tell Mamma about her spazzums and rheumaticals! But won't the cottages be
washed away, Bruce ?"
"Oh no, Master Guy—no fear. You see it's only back-water as comes


round us. There's no rush. It rises as quiet as can be, and as soon as the flood
goes down, the hack-water can run off."
" Well," said Mr. Merton, " the best thing now is for you to go up to your
mistress, and ask her to give you two or three bottles of hot tea—perhaps a
kettleful would be better—and some bread and meat, for your wife and the
Johnsons. Get your own breakfast at the house. I 'll make my way a little
further down this bank, for the chance of seeing that unfortunate boy. Yes,
Guy, you can come; and Isaac, you had better go back, and attend to your
milking. You can do nothing here, I'm afraid. There will be plenty of work
for us all soon, for the destruction of fencing alone must be very serious."
" Lots of posts and rails have been going past, ever since we could see,"
said Guy.
" I wish I could get over to the middle run; but Cox would be sure to get
the sheep off the marsh before dark yesterday, with the certainty of the flood
before him."
" I dare say he would, Papa, if he got back in time, but I'm very much
afraid he didn't."
" Got lack ? where did he go, then ?"
" J list before I came up from the garden in the afternoon, with some green
stuff for the pigs, I heard a dog bark, and saw Cox going up the sandhill, towards
the township."
Mr. Merton said nothing; but his look of mingled dread and displeasure
told that, had he spoken, it would not have been to utter praises of Cox the
shepherd.
0
" Listen, Papa; somebody's calling."
"I hear several voices; they are in this direction;" and Mr.-Merton
hurried through a thicket of tea-tree* to a clear bank by the flooded river,
where half-a-dozen men were eagerly talking together, and at sight of him, they
gathered round.
" Morning, sir. Here's that poor lad Giles, sir."
"Have you found his body ?"
"Yes, sir, and soul, too, I suppose: Leastways, he's up a tree yonder, and
how to get him out we don't know."
Mr. Merton looked in amazement. Yes, there was Giles, clinging to
another tree, almost mid-way across the wide surging flood, more out of reach
* Leptospermum scopctrium.


than in his first refuge. How he had survived the transit was something
• •
marvellous. A huge heap of wreck, which had gathered round the second tree,
had caught him as he was whirled along, and, creeping up, he had managed to
clamber into the branches, where he hung, more dead than alive, wet through,
and half-frozen in the cold southerly wind. He had ceased to cry out, and his
kind-hearted watchers expected each moment to see him drop into the river.
What could they do ?
One big young fellow fairly blubbered. "If I could but swim, I'd get at
him somehow. Oh! sir, he's my brother—and he's a bit soft-like, you know—
but, bless you ! Mother sets more store by him than by all the rest of us. I 'll
never face her again if Giles drowns. No, never. I think I'd reach him if
you'd tie a rope round me. The water can't be so very deep."
"Such a foolhardy attempt would only leave us two to save instead of
one," said Mr. Merton. " I can only see one way."
"And what's that, sir?" cried all at once.
"To shoot a line into the tree. Guy, go and fetch my gun, and the new
large ball of twine, and bring down the two coils of rope out of the loft. Gray
can go with you to carry them. And—stay—on the carpenter's bench are some
narrow, straight strips of wood; bring some'of those. Make haste, for I'm
afraid that poor fellow cannot hold on much longer."
Away they sped, as fast as youth, strength, and good-will could carry
them.
"Cheer up, Giles, my boy!" yelled a friendly voice. "The master don't
like fellows bird-nestin'. •He 'll have ye out o' that in no time. Hold on."
"My hut's the nighest here to take him to," said Brown, a neighbour's
shepherd. " I 'll run up and tell my old woman to have a warm bed ready."
Half-an-hour passed away slowly, very slowly.
" Seems like half-a-day," said one.
" Trouble stops the clock," said another.
Another quarter dragged by; then the cry rose —" Here they come !" and
the breathless messengers dashed up,
A stick was quickly trimmed, the twine unrolled and stretched—one end
tied to the notched stick, the other t.o an end of the rope. Mr. Merton loaded
the gun and fired. The stick fell far short of the tree. Again and again, the
same result. Poor Giles, beginning to understand what was going on, pitched
himself a little higher on his uneasy perch, and stretched first one arm and then
the other, as if to get rid of the numb chill that paralysed them.


"I believe this twine is too heavy," said Mr. Merton, after more vain
attempts.
" Try a little more powder, sir."
"There was a double charge in last time."
" Sam Brown, have your missis finished the fishing-net she was a-making
for her father ?" inquired a looker-on.
" No ; why ?" . .
" 'Cause that's lighter twine than the master's, if you've any left."
Brown's reply was to nod his head, and start off to run home. His hut was
not far distant, and he returned with a hank of fine light twine, which was
quickly fastened to the stick. Another shot. It carried considerably farther,
but not nearly to the tree, and the twine broke in hauling in, losing a good
many yards of it, and the stick as well.
"The distance is too great," said Mr. Merton. "If I could reach the heap
of wreck round that tree" (pointing to one thirty or forty yards from the bank),
" I think I could drop the stick into Giles's tree to a certainty."
"Oh, Papa! pray don't try that," cried Guy. "You see how dangerous it
is. You won't let any one else go. Pray, don't — please, don't, Papa."
" Don't interfere," said his father, sternly, waving Guy back, and going on
with his preparations by fixing another stick.
" There's not so much timber coming down now, Master Guy," said Brown,
and the water's not deep here. If three or four of us get stout poles, and
wade in on this upper side, we can fend off most of the wreck from the master
whilst he gets to the tree."
So said, so done; and Mr. Merton, holding his gun well above the splash
of the water as he breasted the torrent, and passing from one firm hand to
another, reached the pile of wreck, and with some difficulty clambered up the
'
slippery shifting mass till he could pass one arm round the tree. Then,
securing as firm foot-hold as he could, and taking deliberate aim, he fired—the
shout that went up told how successfully. The stick hung in the branches of
Giles's tree, above his head.
" Haul away, lad! Haul away till the rope comes!" they shouted again
and again—for Giles made no attempt to get hold of the stick. At last, the
fact that it meant life and rescue seemed to dawn upon him. He wound up the
thin twine, then the thicker, but the rope came but slowly through the scrub
and water; at last he grasped it.
" Tie it fast round you, and jump into the water," was the next cry. Giles


tied it round him, but hesitated, as well he might, to hurl himself into that
boiling, tumultuous flood. Finally, he tumbled in by accident, a branch by
which he held breaking off.
Then followed more shouting than ears could interpret, but the stout hands
ashore pulled manfully on the rope. Giles disappeared from the moment of his
fall, and the people, terrified lest he should be drowned at last, hauled at the
rope with wild energy. Mr. Merton, safe back from the wreck, looked
anxiously for the poor lad's re-appearance, but the strong current carried him
down the river for some distance.
Seconds seemed minutes in that brief space, so full of dread and danger;
but at last a pale face rose amidst the flood-swept scrub near the shore, and, with
another ringing shout, Giles was hauled through, scratched, bruised, and
senseless, into the joyful grasp of his good friends.
A few spoonfuls of some warm mixture out of a bottle, produced from the
inner recesses of Sam Brown's waistcoat, revived him wonderfully, and he was
taken off at once by his big brother and the rest to worthy Sam's cottage, where
the " old woman," who was moreover a noted nurse and doctoress, soon completed
his recovery.


CHAPTEE IX.
The heart is hard in nature, and unfit
For human fellowship, as being void
Of sympathy, and therefore dead alike
To love and friendship both, that is not pleased
"With sight of animals enjoying life,
Nor feels their happiness augment its own.
COWPEE.
ON their way back, wet as they were, Mr. Merton and Guy made a short
ditowr to look at the new orchard, which had been recently planted at the
foot of the knoll on which the house stood.
As they came in view of it, both stopped aghast.
Was that chaos of muddy water, overlaid by hundreds of tons of uprooted
gum-trees, the neat, fair garden they all had laboured in so hopefully ?
All that remained of it, alas !
The flood, so much higher than any known previously, had burst through a
part of the river bank, and driven one branch of its waters over this hitherto dry
ground, tearing down fences and all else in its course, and carrying enormous
trees from land which was in process of clearing, and depositing them along its
path of desolation, in terrible evidence of its power.
Mr. Merton looked, but did not speak.
Guy could not repress a few tears. "What will Mamma say ? I wonder if
she knows!"
Turning, they saw Mrs. Merton standing a little above them, with Lina and
Louis; Lina sobbing bitterly, leaning her face on her mother's arm.
Mrs. Merton's eyes swam in tears too, but, dashing them away, she met her
husband with a smile. " How thankful I am to see you safe! Iso feared you
would risk your life in helping that poor boy. What has become of him ?"


" Papa saved him. You may be sure of that, Mamma," cried Guy. " He's
safe in bed at Sam Brown's by this time. But oh, Mamma, our poor
w" '
orchard!"
"It is no use to talk about it, dear child. You may think how grieved I
am. I must try and only remember how much I have to be thankful for—
that your father is safe, and has rescued that poor boy from a miserable
death. Come, Lina, crying will not serve any good purpose, or I could cry
too, heartily. Dry your tears, and go on home with Guy." And, laying
her hand on her husband's arm, Mrs. Merton drew him away from the desolate
scene.
Nothing could be done to remedy the injury wrought by the flood, until the
water wholly subsided. The cattle were believed to be all safe. Not any of the
horses accustomed to " run out" had been seen since the rain; but they had
plenty of high ground to retreat to, so that little apprehension was felt on their
... . ' ?
account. Mr. Merton's chief anxiety was for his sheep on the " middle run,"
valuable young ewes and lambs. The run, having a river on either side, was
completely cut off from communication with the house, or other parts of his
estate, during floods. If, as Guy believed, the shepherd had been absent, every-
;'
thing was to be feared.
Bruce and Johnson had twice taken supplies of hot tea and food to their
wives and children, who were still perched aloft in the tree and on the ridge-
pole ; and as it was evident that they would not be able to re-enter their dwell-
ings for another twenty-four hours, if then, Mr. Merton bade the men get their
families up to the house. With some difficulty this was accomplished. Bruce
carried his child and the cat, and then his wife, safe ashore, and next helped his
neighbour. The girls were easily carried, but Mrs. Johnson was a portly dame,
tall and stout, and stout of heart too, so she waded out, with the aid of a good
pole.
The kitchen party was a large and a talkative one that night.
The pleasant dining-room was as bright and warm as though nothing but
sunshine and prosperity lay beyond; but the father sat in his chair by the fire,
silent and thoughtful, anxious about many things.
" Lina," said Mrs. Merton, " you may as well read to us your next paper for
Sibyl. The mail goes out on Monday."
" I)o, my child," said her father ; " I can listen, and I do not feel inclined to
do much besides. Your voice will be a pleasant relief from that sullen roar of
water, which tells of so much care and loss."


GWENDOLINE'S THIED GOSSIP.
If I could only show you the real animals, my dear cousin, as I write about
them; and if, after looking at the delicate, wonderfully lovely little opossum-
mouse, you were next to see a wombat,* you would be amused! It is such a
squat, thick, fat, slow, awkward-looking creature, with a broad flat body, more
the shape of a beetle than anything else I can think of, only just a little larger,
as a wombat often weighs 40 or 50 lbs. It has a broadish kind of snout, very
small eyes, short ears, short tail, and very short legs, on which it shuffles along
"DUMPY," THE WOMBAT. (From a Drawing by N. Chevalier.)
at no very rapid rate, you may suppose. Its extremely thick skin is covered
with long coarse grey hair, and its whiskers are long stiff bristles ; altogether
not the sort of thing you would pick out of a menagerie for a household pet;
and yet we were very fond of our poor " Dumpy," as we named the one we had
for about two years. We had him when quite young, and when we were little
too, and the good-tempered, harmless beastie used to play with us in its gentle,
r .
cumbrous way, and follow us about the house and garden like an old dog.
*Phascolomys wcmbat.


We gave him a broad box, in a corner of a covered shed, to sleep in, with a
large piece of a blanket for a bed. He knew his room quite well, and it was
very droll to see him clamber up and turn himself round in the blanket, and if
part of it had fallen over the side, he would pull it up closely round him with
his hands (for all these creatures use their fore-paws very much in the same way
that monkeys do), just as cleverly as you cuddle the clothes about you on a cold
night. But although this was a warmer bed than he would find outside in his
»
native state, he soon began to covet one more luxurious, and if he could get into
a bedroom without being seen, and find anything to clamber up by, one or other
of us would find Dumpy curled up between our blankets when we went to bed.
The servants objected to this trick of his much more strongly than we children
did; indeed we liked the fun of having him, and Dumpy was not popular in the
kitchen. Once or twice he was missing for a day, or day and night, and then
reappeared, seeming quite knocked up, and slept for an unusually long time.
We heard afterwards that he had been purposely taken away into the bush to be
lost, but had found his way back to us from a long distance. I heard once of a
tame wombat being taken in a boat across a large river to be got rid of, having
become troublesome by the same habits; but in some extraordinary way the poor
thing travelled back to the house it had lived in, and, after such a touching proof
of fidelity, was not sent away any more.
One day, when Papa and I were on a journey, we stayed a night at a friend's
house. At tea the conversation turned on native animals, and I mentioned our
dear old Dumpy, and described him to our hostess, telling her what a docile,
good-tempered creature he was.
" Yes, my dear," she said, smiling, "I know something about wombats too.
If you look, you will see one under my chair. Here, Peter, come out!" and as
she drew aside her dress, out waddled a fat old fellow, so like Dumpy, I could
hardly have told them apart.
The natural homes of wombats are in rocky hollows, or little caves and
crevices in mountains or gullies,- and it is curious how small, sometimes, are
the chinks they manage to squeeze their fat bodies through. They come out
chiefly at night, and descend into lower ground, where the grass-tree and other
plants grow, on the roots of which they feed, scratching for them with their
strong feet and claws.
They are not generally eaten, being fat, coarse, and rankly flavoured.
People who have been starving in the bush have eaten them; but I suppose we
should not be very particular ourselves under those circumstances.


CHAPTER X
LINA'S GOSSIP (Continued).
" And as the Child sat there, a little mouse rustled from among the dry leaves of the former year,
and a lizard half-glided from a crevice in the rock, and both fixed their bright eyes upon the little
stranger; and when they saw that he designed them no evil, they took courage and came nearer to
him. 9 '
The Story Without an End. .
A XD now I am puzzled—quite puzzled how to describe to you another of our
••Tx native oddities; odder and queerer than you can fancy from any description.
I have heard Mamma speak of the little English hedgehogs; indeed, I know
them from pictures, and I think you had better think of a hedgehog as a
starting-point. Our echidna ,* or porcupine ant-eater, is four times as large, or
more, and its thick-skinned coat is of coarse grey fur, with sharp quill-like
spines, three or four inches long, sticking out from amongst it, all over, and its
short tail, which spreads out in a fan-shape, is all spines. Its feet are half-
webbed, with long toes, and long, sharp, black claws; but its face is the strangest
part of it, as instead of a mouth, with jaws and teeth, it has a long, narrow,
round, bill-like snout, nearly twice as thick as a common lead pencil, and quite
two inches long, with only an opening at the very end, through which the
long, straight, sticky tongue shoots out with amazing quickness and dexterity,
picking up the ants, on which the creature chiefly lives. You never saw a
conjuror whose tricks of legerdemain were half so curious or entertaining as our
queer ant-eater's method of catching his dinner.
Just above the top of the bill, where it is set in the fur of the face, are the
droll little black eyes, surrounded by small spines, which gradually increase in
'
size till they equal those of the back. The echidna eats small worms and
Echidna setosa.


insects as well as ants, and often lives in the hollows of moist rocks. It has a
sprawling, shuffling way of walking, but surely nothing ever could scratch and
burrow so cleverly ! Papa brought one from the hills, and put it down on
a sandy beach, only intending to leave it there for a few minutes, but it at
once burrowed down, and was wholly out of sight before he thought it would
have begun to move. He had another carried down for Mamma to see, but as
she knew it was impossible to keep such a creature in confinement with any
comfort to itself, even if it could be maintained alive, she resolved to set it at
liberty. We all had a good look at it first, as you may suppose, letting it crawl
along the floor of the verandah, and when we were quite satisfied with our
examination, Guy carried it to a part of the garden where there were some nests
of ants which annoyed the bees, and there put it down. I followed him pretty
closely, yet before I reached the spot, there was a circular ridge of soil thrown
up, and the wonderful little beast in the centre, scratching so quickly, as he
cork-screwed round and round, that he had quite buried himself in a few
moments. We hoped he would stay and live in the garden, but we never saw
or heard of him again. I suppose he would come up at night, and go off to
some place he liked better.
If you ever noticed one of your English hedgehogs coiled up, with his little
bristles all sticking out, you may fancy what a prickly ball our echidna makes of
himself, as he adopts the same attitude of defence when disturbed or attacked
by dogs ; and very few dogs like to attack him, the spines are so long and
strong and sharp, and are so thickly placed that there is not half-an-inch of the
living ball undefended.
" Our bull-terrier, Grip, used to make very short work of them, though,"
interrupted Guy. "He was game to lay hold of anything. Anybody would
think his mouth was plated like an iron-clad, to see him pitch into them; only
we never let him if we could help it, for the poor little brutes don't do any
harm, and are of no use when killed."
" Old Jerry the shepherd says they 're as good as sucking-pig," said
Louis..
" I know; but he also says that sea-gulls are like partridge. I beg your
pardon, Lina; please, go on."
The last echidna I saw w r as crossing the road just in front of us when Papa
was driving me to town over the Tier, and my little dog began barking and


J ""~* ** W • '
- . //
dancing round in a very innocent way, for I knew he would not dare to touch
it; but Papa thought it a very unsafe place for Master Porcupine, so picked it
up and carried it some distance off the road, and, when set down, it soon
scuttled away among the rocks and scrub.
You are sure to have heard of the duck-billed platypus or water-mole,*
which is found both here and in New South Wales. We have several times
seen them, but never had one of our own, and I never heard of anyone
*
attempting to tame them, except Dr. Bennet of Sydney, the great naturalist
whose account of several he tried to keep alive is very curious and interesting
DUCK-BILLED PLATYPUS.
but all died very soon; and it is sad to read of the numbers of these rare and
harmless creatures killed to assist scientific investigations into their forms and
habits.
Papa says that a great deal of nonsense used to be believed about them, but
that they are very singular little animals is quite certain. They are about a foot
and a-half long, with short tail and short legs, the fore-feet being webbed like a
duck's, and the round head looks as if it had on a queer mask, for the broad
duck-bill that serves it as a mouth does not in the least look as though it
naturally belonged to it; so that we can quite understand the unbelief of the
persons to whom the first specimens were sent, who thought that parts of an
animal and a bird had been put together to quiz or deceive them.
* Ornithorhynchus anatinus.


The fur of the platypus is of two kinds, a short, soft, fine brown coat and an
overgrowth of longer crooked, silvery, shining hairs, giving a feathery appearance.
The odd little creatures are very clever in the arrangement of their dwellings,
which are always entered from a river bank, and consist of an ante-room next
the water, then a winding gallery or tunnel, seldom less than fifteen or twenty
feet in length, ending in a larger apartment, which is used both as their retreat
from pursuit and as the nursery for their young. They have also a second
entrance, beneath the water, by which they can reach home by diving. We
have only seen them here by chance, swimming or splashing about in
secluded nooks of rivers. They are not very rare in the north of the island.
Guy was one. day telling a servant of ours, an old bushman, that he had seen
some dark-looking animal moving about in the water near a crossing-place, and
Sam, listening attentively to the story, observed with great decision —
" I'll tell ye, Master Guy. It mun ha' been a clatterpuss." And we called
them clatterpusses for a long time afterwards.
Another frequenter of river banks is the pretty musk-rat, with whom also
we have only a slight visiting acquaintance, and never had one for an inmate;
indeed their amphibious habits would make it very difficult, if not impossible, to
keep them in confinement, without proper zoological-garden contrivances.
I was once staying at a house placed on the banks of a river in which they
were very numerous, and was exceedingly puzzled during the first night to
think what could be making the fuss that I heard down in the water —splashing
and scuffling in all directions, heavy plops in off the bank, and a general
scrimmaging went on until I fell asleep. In the morning I went to the spot
where the commotion had been, but all was still, and my friends told me that
the noise I had heard was made by the musk-rats, gambolling and playing,
according to their usual custom in summer, when the nights were dark.
We sometimes saw them by day, swimming quietly across the river, leaving
a long diverging wake behind them; but their demeanour then was so steady and
business-like, no one would have suspected them of such mad pranks as must be
carried on at night -to make the racket I had been so mystified about.
Like the platypus, the musk-rats live in holes which they burrow in the
river banks, and we always thought them quite harmless, until we heard an old
fisherman complain that they broke his nets and stole his fish.
They are pretty, gentle-looking creatures, with faces not unlike the water-
vole of England; so Mamma says. They have beautiful soft brown fur, and a
white tip to the tail, and are scented with a rather powerful odour of musk.


<C "~ sc: ~~~
Little "Winifred begs me not to forget to tell you of our pet bandicoots. I
think she liked them better than the larger animals, for the kangaroos used to
frighten her by hopping quickly up to her, and Dumpy the wombat perpetually
upset her by tumbling about her feet.
The first bandicoot* we had, Papa carried home in his waistcoat pocket,
when it was rather larger than a common mouse. One of the dogs had killed
the old one, and this little creature escaped from her pouch and was caught
alive. The bandicoot has altogether rather a mousey character, in its shape, it
THE BANDICOOT.
long sharp face, bright eyes, wide open delicate transparent ears, and little pink
feet. The fur is light brownish-grey above, with dark stripes across the back,
but white beneath; the tail is small and short. Freda called ours " Coota,"
which soon became its household name. It quickly learned to lap milk, and
afterwards ate, besides that, bread and raw potatoes. When full-grown (about
half as large again as a rat, and broader in proportion), we offered Coota his
liberty in the garden, with unlimited advantages in the way of fruit and
* Perameles Gunnii.


vegetables, but he always came back into the house, and selected as his sleeping
apartment Mamma's deep work-basket, where he burrowed down to the bottom,
and curled himself up in some flannel. Here he slept all day, scolding and
snapping at any intruding hand; but in the evening he woke up, and bustled
out in a most energetic manner,- with the air of having a great amount of
business to transact in the smallest possible time. His first dart was always
■BHM made into the corner where his supper of
bread, milk, and potato was placed; and
having eaten that, he began his evening's
occupation of scampering about the room,
just like a great tame mouse, running over
our feet and up our dresses, almost too
quickly to be caught; and as he evidently
disliked being touched, we left off attempting to catch him. One evening we
heard nothing of Ooota, and on looking into his basket-bed, it was cold and
empty. Whether he had changed his opinions concerning the value of freedom,
or much more sad to think of —whether Puss had contrived to elude our
vigilance, and creep into the room, we never knew.
The second bandicoot we had was even more sociable. Its favourite retreat
was below the waist of Mamma's dress, inside amongst the gathers, or, whilst it
was small enough, in her sleeve; and many a slip and tumble had the poor
little pet, when Mamma, not knowing where it was, rose hastily, and it dropped
to the ground. His day-slumbers were thus continually interrupted, but, nothing
daunted, he crept up into his favourite nest again at the first opportunity. Our
short frocks did not offer the same tempting accommodation, but he would lie in
my lap or Freda's, covered by our aprons or pinafores, as long as we would sit
still and nurse him. His evening frisks were as droll and active as those of our
first pet of his kind, and he was with us for some time, perfectly at liberty, and
quite sleek and fat. One unlucky day we gave him a small bit of custard
pudding, after eating which he rapidly sickened, and died in Mumma s hands,
which he would not willingly leave from the time he became ill.
We would never have another, we are always so grieved to lose things
that have grown fond of us, and seem to have such confiding faith in our being
good to them.
o
" I think that is all I have to tell of the gentle animals I have known here,"
said Lina.
" COOTA."


"Well, Linny, I don't want to be a wet blanket on your scheme, but I'm
afraid nobody will care about such descriptions," said Guy, who had finished his
Naval Review, and was hard at work copying an elephant from a book of
Eastern travels.
" Oh, Guy !" sighed Lina, despondingly.
" Were you not highly entertained by the stories about elephants which you
were reading in that Indian book ?" asked Mr. Merton.
" Yes, of course, Papa."
" And do you think they would amuse you as much if we lived in India,
and had elephants of our own, so that you saw them as often, and knew them as
*
well as our horses and dogs ?"
Guy hesitated. " I suppose not, Papa."
" Then, without for a moment exalting Lina's little word-sketches by placing
them on a par with important books, do you not think that young people, to
whom our native animals are as unfamiliar as elephants are to you, may derive
amusement from them ?"
Guy's misgivings were evidently not overcome.
* ■
Are you thinking to get out of your share of the book?" said Louis.
" No, lam not. I've done my slice; part a week ago, and some yesterday,
when the rain drove us in, and the rest this morning, when I was waiting for
Papa. I don't know if it's any good."
" Read it."
"We will hear it to morrow," said his father.


I
CHAPTER XI.
•
Oh for an old, grey traveller,
By our winter fire to be,
To tell us of each foreign shore,
Of sunny seas and mountains hoar,
Which we shall never see.
MARY HOWITT.
ON the day following Giles's rescue, another heavy fall of rain, of several
hours' duration, prevented much investigation of out-door matters, and the
river, which had begun to fall slightly, rose nearly to the high mark of the
preceding morning: No new calamity was reported. The washed-out families
remained, perforce, inmates of the kitchen, ready and anxious to assist in any
work they could find to do. Bessie Bruce was delighted to take Lina's dairy
duty, saying it was " like old times," for she had been a favourite servant at the
Mertons' before she married. Mrs. Johnson's brawny arms scoured and scrubbed
every floor, bench, and table she could get at, and her girls, after helping to
prepare dinner, and baking for the increased household, sat down to some plain
• sewfing they had begged Mrs. Merton to give them.
Louis gladly employed the time in reading and drawing. Guy skirmished
restlessly in and out, sometimes to the threshers in the barn, sometimes to
Isaac, who sat in the stable-loft mending sacks, and sometimes to David, the
crusty old gardener, whose great tribulation at the wreck of the orchard, his
favourite labour during the past two years, fitted well with Guy's deep vexation
and sorrow.
Mr. Merton "wrote up " his ledger, and some arrears of correspondence,
taking one walk round the household before dark. All outside remained in the
same dreary, disheartening condition. The pleasantest sight he enjoyed was the
calf-house, where a party of sleek, fat calves, after being with their mothers all
day, suckled and licked, happy and comforted, as calves always should be, were


cosily nestled down, clean and fragrant, snug and warm, amongst heaps of fresh
straw. The cows and oxen, munching and chewing their evening meal, stood
under a large shed, where they might lie all night, if they pleased.
The dismal, monotonous roar of water still continued, with no perceptible
abatement; and the whole scene around, as the grey gloaming darkened into
night, was gloomy and depressing.
It was well to light the lamp before the usual time, draw the curtains, and
shut out so cheerless a prospect. Tea over, and the usual work and drawing in
progress, Freda climbed with her doll on to her father's knee, and, composing
herself cosily in his arms, said in a comical old-fashioned tone —
" You can read your story now, Guy; we are quite ready to listen."
"Upon my word!" laughed Guy. "How small apples swim! Very
well, little Miss Pert, here goes."
» i •
GUY'S GOSSIP.
It is quite certain that there are people of odd fancies and queer tastes in
the world; but if anyone desires to see a blacker, uglier, more savage, and more
untameable beast than our "Devil,"* he must be difficult to please—that's my
opinion. I suppose those who bestowed such a name on him had pretty good
reasons for it, and knew that they only gave the devil his due.
, *
"My dear Guy!" cried Mrs. Merton, rather shocked.
" What's wrong, Mamma ? I didn't name the beast, you know; and it is
the name it's always known by. I can't help that, can I?"
" Perhaps not —but it is a very ugly one. Go on."
I've heard people say in joke, of others who had very wide mouths, that,
when they gaped, their heads were off; but it seems true of this animal, his jaws
open to such an extent, and a murderous set of faugs they show when they do
open!
The head, which is flat, broad, very ugly, and with little skull-room for
brains, takes up one-third the whole length of the beast, which is usually from
a foot and a-half to two feet, some being larger. The tail sticks stiffly out, as if
made of wood, the feet are something like a dog's, only more sprawly, and with
* Sarcophilus ursinus.


very big claws. It is an awkward beast, and cannot go much of a pace at the
fastest. On fairish ground, a man can easily run one down.
One day I was out with Papa in the back-run, and we found a devil. I
started full tilt after him, and • came two or three good croppers amongst the
rocks to begin with, but I held on, till all on a sudden he stopped short—l
couldn't, so I jumped right over him. He gave a vicious snap at my legs with
his big jaws, but, luckily for me, he was a second too late. I turned and
knocked him over, and Papa came up and finished him—finished killing him, I
mean. We don't show the brutes any mercy; they do too much mischief. The
young lambs stand no chance at all with them. So we hunt them down, or set
traps, or dig pitfalls—any and every way we can destroy them we do. Why,
TASMANIAN DEVIL.
one winter, some years ago, one of Papa's shepherds caught nearly one hundred
and fifty! They seem to go about in families or parties; for when you catch
one, you are tolerably certain of getting six or seven more, one after another,
and then perhaps you will not hear of any for a good while. Of course they are
much scarcer than formerly, and a very lucky thing, too.
• I don't think I mentioned the fur —but it is not fur, it's longish, very
coarse, black hair, almost like horse-hair; and then as to fleas, swarm!
One of the men brought a dead one to the house one day for Mamma, and it was
laid in the garden. Mamma and Lina were soon down on their knees beside it,
peeping at its eyes and teeth and ears and all the rest of it;, when Lina said,
"Oh, look; how very curious! There are small, brown scales, like a coat of
mail, all over it, under the hair." Mamma looked where Lina had parted the


long hair, and didn't she jump! Lina's coat of mail was just a- coat of-fleas.
The post-mortem examination was cut very short, I assure you, the "subject"
summarily disposed of, and two or three buckets of water poured on the place
where it had lain. A pleasant kind of thing for a pet!
There are two sorts of devils—one is all black, the other has a white tail-tip
and a white mark like a cross down the throat and between the fore-legs; but
one is just as hideous as the other. I believe you cannot tame them, and lam
very sure I shall never try. People who have made the attempt say they are
as stupid as they are ferocious, and never seem to know one person more than
another, but growl and bite at all alike.
TASMANIAN TIGER.
There is another charming fellow which all the people here call the Tiger,*
but as a tiger is like a great cat, and this beast is much more like a dog, you
will see how foolish such a name is. I believe naturalists call it the dog-faced
opossum, and that is not much better; for although its head is something like
a dog—though I never saw a dog as ugly, or with as big a mouth—the body is
not a bit like that of an opossum.
In one respect it is like the devil. No care or kindness will civilise it in
the least, even when taken quite young. We never tried to keep one, but have
known those who have done so, and have seen the captive brutes—chained up,
of course, and well fed, but not safe to go near.
These tigers are as large as the biggest kind of sheep-dog, and have a
* Thylacinas cynocephalus.


powerful, well-put-together sort of look. I fancy they must be very strong. If
there were many of them, sheep-farming would be a bad look-out, for they are
even worse than the devils, but we do not hear of them very often now. Their
yellow-brown fur is short and stiff, and not very sleek, and has from ten to
twelve broadish black stripes across the back, small ones beginning behind the
shoulders, and larger ones coming over the loins and hind legs. This is the only
point of likeness to a tiger that any one could find in them. We might as well
say a gazelle was like a buffalo because both have horns. Our tiger's hind legs
are singular, the lower joint being very short, with a callous sole all along it, on
which he usually rests. A skin we have of one measures four feet six inches
from the nose to the root of the tail, and the tail is another foot and ten
inches.
• They are not by any means swift, but seem to be very enduring, and can go
on a long time at their usual steady canter. Very early one morning, some
people Papa knows, who had camped out on the hills, saw a brush kangaroo hop
past their fire. In ten minutes or so, up cantered a she-tiger, with her nose
down, exactly on the track, evidently following the scent, and in another quarter
of an hour her two cubs came by, also in the precise track. It was a very nice
family arrangement, I dare say, for the dear mamma to tire out the poor
kangaroo, and kill him, so as to have breakfast ready for her sweet children
when they arrived. This quite proves they hunt by scent, so there's another
dog-resemblance.
I think the animals for which Mamma and Lina have the most particular
♦
enmity are the " native and tiger cats," * because they commit such wholesale
murder amongst the poultry; and on many a dark night do Papa and I jump
up, scuffle on some clothes, and rush out at the sound of piteous squawks
from the hen-house or duck-pen.
These cats, as they are called, are more like weasels than anything else,
and I think, if their manners and customs were not so obnoxious, we might not
consider them bad-looking; but on the principle " pretty is that pretty does,"
we cannot admire such remarkably ugly-behaved little savages. The tiger-cat
i »
is the largest, sometimes weighing eight or nine pounds. The head is sharp and
fierce-looking, with strong jaws and very carnivorous teeth. The fur is short
and smooth, of a rich chestnut brown, with creamy-white spots—a very handsome
coat, which is in request for making rugs. The tail is rather long and thin,
* Dasyurus.


covered with longish hair, which forms a brush at the end, whence the name
of hair-tails, by which the creatures are known to naturalists.
The native cat is similar, but smaller, and its fur is an ashy-grey with
white spots. We have seen two or three skins quite black, spotted with white,
hut these are very rare.
Dark nights are usually selected by these bloodthirsty vermin for their
visits to our feathered friends. The smallest chink in the walls of the fowl-
house (which are usually made of boards or paling) serves them to squeeze
through; and, once in, they go on killing as long as they remain undisturbed.
An unfortunate bird is gripped by the throat, and some of its blood sucked;
then another and another, till a dozen or more fine young turkeys or fowls strew
the floor. If the poor things don't scream, or if the fowl-house is too far away
from the dwelling for the inmates to hear them, the brute goes on killing and
sucking till quite gorged; and then is, perhaps, found in the morning asleep—
I was going to say on the field of battle, but there is no battle, as the poor
frightened fowls don't show fight; it's a regular murder of the innocents.
The thieves are so sly, too! They will creep in before the fowls go to roost,
and wait, hidden in a corner, till the door is fastened and all quiet, before they
begin the massacre. Not long ago, we heard the well-known signals of distress
before we had gone to bed. Papa ran round to the fowl-house, went in, and
saw a big tiger-cat on the perch, where he had climbed up close to our best
white Dorking cock. Papa soon settled him; but another got in afterwards,
and killed that very same cock. The fowls got so terrified, that they would no.t
roost indoors any more, but took to the trees instead. Of course the cats can
climb the trees too; but then the fowls can fly for their lives, at any rate.
The wife of one of our shepherds had a fine clutch of young ducks, which
lived with their hen-stepmother under a coop. This in the day-time was
%
propped on a stick, for them all to run out and in. At dusk, when the thriving
little family had gone to roost, the coop was lowered down, and covered up with
old sacks. One morning, when the good-wife lifted the coop to let out her hen
and ducklings, there they all lay dead, and the poor hen sadly torn, for she
was sure to fight her best for her children; and crouching at the back of the
coop lay the tiger-cat, which had clearly taken up his quarters before the brood
bad been secured for the night. Some of the sheep-dogs were within call, and
very soon made an end of the cat, though they sometimes have a sharp tussle
with the fierce little beasts, and get their faces terribly scratched and bitten.
On very dark, rainy nights, we often know that native cats are close about the


house by the raging and harking of our dogs, which, if loose, will chase and
worry them if possible; but the cats are very clever, and know how to take up
such safe positions that, unless some of us come and rout them out, the dogs
might tear about all night without reaching them.
We all believe that a tame cat of ours —I mean a real cat —Mamma's
favourite Tom, known by the name of John, a great handsome Tabby, kills
native cats. We know he catches bandicoots, rabbits, and kangaroo-rats, because
he brings them in at night, to eat under the dining-table- (a private entrance
being arranged for his benefit, equivalent to a "latch-key "), and twice, when we
knew that none of the dogs had been in the garden, a dead native cat has been
found there. As John is four or five times their size, I don't see why he should
not kill them, only, as he does not eat them, the good deeds are done on
purely disinterested grounds. I have heard, too, of good rat-catching cats who
do not eat their prey, so that makes John's supposed exploits more probable
still.
John is a generous old fellow too. We often hear a queer, half-smothered
sort of " mow-wow-wow /" sound, coming up the garden, and see John with some
kind of game in his mouth. He lays it down, and keeps watch, while he repeats
the signal in more distinct tones, until the little lady-puss of the house comes
out to accept and appropriate the gallant offering.
Of course dogs constantly catch what they know they must not eat, as well
as things they will not, such as bandicoots and native cats. Papa had one
faithful clever fellow of a sheep-dog, who always kept guard round the house at
night, and was continually catching something. Pie regularly carried his
"game" round to the front, and laid it either on or before the door-step,
evidently with the intention of showing what he had done; and one or more
native cats, kangaroo-rats, or bandicoots used to be found there several mornings
a-week.
#
"That was 'Mr. Boker,'" said Louis; "I remember him. We had been
laughing at that picture in Punch, of the little boy looking at the old gentle-
man's bald head, and saying, ' Oh, Mamma, how funny ! Mr. Boker's got
another forehead at the back of his head!' and as our puppy had a great white
i
spot in the same place, Mamma called him Mr. Boker."
" Don't interrupt G-uy," said Mr. Merton.
" Oh, Papa, that's all I wrote, and I never expected to make a quarter as
much ; but when I once began, I found more to say than I thought there would


be. It can be cut shorter, you know; only, as Linny went into small matters, I
did too."
*
" Unless you do, such sketchy little notes are of no value at all," said Mrs.
Merton. " Carelul scientific descriptions of all these creatures have been written
by learned naturalists for learned people; the only ground on which there is
room for our pens is the familiar every-day knowledge of little habits and
peculiarities, which the greatest professors at home cannot always observe for
themselves."
" It isn't likely, of course, that those big-wigs should keep tame 'possums
and things as we do; but one seems to have so little to tell about them."
" I remember an old friend of mine in England, a good naturalist," said Mrs.
Merton, " asking me to write descriptions of anything and everything I saw out
here; and my natural remark was, that I should not know what had been told
before, nor what was most useful to be observed. His reply was—'Observe
everything, and describe everything. Ninety-nine things have probably been
better done before, but the hundredth may be a welcome addition to general
information.'"


CHAPTER XII.
Wide o'er the brim, with many a torrent swell'd,
And the mix'd ruin of its banks o'erspread,
At last the roused-up river pours along.
# *
Resistless, roaring, dreadful, down it comes
From the rude mountain and the mossy wild,
Tumbling thro' rocks abrupt, and sounding far !
• •••••
It boils, and wheels, and foams, and thunders thro'!
Nature ! Great Parent! whose unceasing hand
Rolls round the seasons of the changeful year,
How mighty, how majestic are thy works !
THOMSON.
THE family had assembled round the breakfast-table on the following
morning, when the maid came in.
"If you please, sir, Jerry's in the kitchen, and wishes to Speak to you."
" Give him some breakfast. 1 'll see him presently. I wonder what news
he brings ?" said Mr. Merton.
" No more bad, I hope," sighed his wife.
" I hope not; but I fear we are not at the end of our list of calamities yet.
I rode up to the big paddock this morning. A great deal of fencing is gone,
everywhere; and about twenty acres of the wheat that looked so well are
washed absolutely away, seed, earth, and all, leaving the plough-marks on the
clay sub-soil, like the joints of a hoarded floor. The river burst over.the bank
just above, so the wheat-field got the first violent rush."
" And I was so proud of my ploughing there," said Guy.
" Yes, you did remarkably well. The loss of seed and labour is bad enough,
hut the • soil being taken is far worse, being irremediable. It is so much
improved freehold gone for ever. Tell Jerry I 'll see him in the verandah, when
he has had his breakfast."


And in a short time the old man came.
" Mornin', sir."
" Well, Jerry, you were not washed out of bed, I hope
" No, sir. The flood wasn't up to my cottage, but I never see one near as
high yet. I couldn't get over any way afore, and I was 'most carried off my legs
now."
" Are your sheep all right ?"
" All right, sir. It was while I was getting them safe on to the hills that
the horses got on to the island."
" What's wrong with the horses ?"
" Over their backs in water, sir."
" What
0
"Well, sir, you know the island, up by my place, where the river makes two
branches —where you'd a pickernick on Miss Linny's birthday ?"
" Perfectly."
" Well, I'd seen the horses all about there for a day or two —it's where the
grass was burnt, and the feed's fresh —and when the rain began, they was on the
bank o' this side, and they was there when I saw 'em on Monday at dusk.
Well, you know how it rained all that night, sir, and the river rose very quick.
In the morning I druv the sheep up the hill first thing, and then I looked for
the horses, and couldn't see 'em nowhere. The hollow where the river parts
round the island looked like a big lake, dnly with trees in it. The island was
\
feet under water. I looked and looked all round for the horses, but ne'er a one
could I see, nowhere."
" They can't be drowned!" cried Guy.
"No, sir, I'll tell ye. After a bit, as I was a-staring about me at the
terrible flood, and the rain was a-pourin' down as if it had just started fresh, I
thought I see some'at move in the water, where I knowed .the island were. I
looked and looked, and got a little nearer, and then I was sure. It was a
horse's head. The Missis's grey mare "
"Oh, Jerry ! my dear old Nell ?"
" Ye's, ma'am, it was; and then I saw more heads, five altogether. Master
Guy's horse had poked his head agin a honeysuckle tree, and the roan were
behind him, and Gipsy and Captain. I knew 'em all, poor things !"
"But do you mean to say you could only see their heads ?"
"Nothin' else, Master. And it seemed as if they got on the highest bit o'
mound there was, to get even their heads above water: for sometimes there was
O / O '


a move, and two or three heads went down, and then came up in another place.
Some big logs came swirling down right amongst 'em, but they didn't seem to get
hurt by them."
" You saw them there on Tuesday morning ? Where are they now ?"
l
" In the very same place, Master."
" And this is Thursday ! and they have been in that fearful plight all this
time!"
" They have so, sir. I never fretted so for anything as I have for them poor
horses. I cried to see 'em, for I could do nothing else. I tried my best to get
over here, and got nigh drowned myself, so I could only wait; and it was as
much as I could do, with a big pole, to come through the hollow this side my
place now. The water was right up under my arms."
" The idea of our having gone to our warm beds these two nights, and those
poor good creatures perishing in the ice-cold water!" exclaimed Mrs. Merton,
shuddering. " I could not have closed my eyes if I had known it."
"Then it's lucky you didn't, ma'am," said Jerry; "but nothing ever made
me so sorry in this world, I think."
"Did you see them to-day ?" asked Mr. Merton.
" 0' course I did, sir—looked at 'em, and called to 'em just afore I started.
I tried to get 'em to swim over, and got a bit o' corn to coax 'em, but they
durstn't, I suppose, till the water goes down a bit; their backs are above it
now, so maybe they 'll venture soon. I wanted you to know about it, sir. in
case you thought of any way to get at 'em."
" If we had a boat, Papa, could we not tow them out ?" asked Guy.
"In the first place, my boy, there is not a boat within reach, and even if
»
there were, I doubt if we could use it. Those two branches of the river, you
remember, have high steep banks on both sides; and even when only moderately
full, the streams are like rapids, so that now I do not suppose a boat would be
of much use. The flood will fall considerably by afternoon, and we will ride up
and see what can be done to entice the horses to swim out, or they must perish
of cold and hunger."
In answer to Mrs. Merton's kind suggestions, Jerry said it was of no use to
get dry, as he must be just as wet again going back; neither would he have a
horse, preferring to trust his own legs to carry him most safely; and away he
went.
Bruce and Johnson anxiously reconnoitred their cottages, but the water
was still about a foot deep on the floors, and all that could be done was


to wait patiently for another day before there was a chance of lighting fires
within.
When Mr. Merton and Guy arrived at Jerry's cottage, the flood on the
island had fallen so as to show the five wretched horses standing up to their
chests in water, and moving slowly about a little at intervals. Guy had carried
a sheaf of barley, strapped on his saddle, which he held up, calling to his horse
as he was accustomed to do. Mr. Merton, too, called loudly, and the poor
creatures turned and pricked up their ears at the well-known voices, hut showed
110 inclination to move. After a little time, the old white Arab, Mrs. Merton's
favourite, advanced a pace or two; then finding herself in deeper water, retreated
again, and tried another place, and another, with like result. At last as though
9 O
impatient and desperate, she plunged forward, and was presently swimming in
the deep water of the current. Carried down by it for some distance, she still
struggled bravely, and, after a hard fight, scrambled out and climbed up the
high bank, neighing a little, and seeming only too glad to feel Mr. Merton's
hand on her mane, and a halter over her head.
The other horses, with more or less hesitation, followed their chief —for the
sagacious old mare was the acknowledged leader of the party—and all were
brought home and well cared for. It was long ere the poor animals recovered
entirely from the effects of their cruel sufferings. Guy's fine young horse after-
wards lost his coat, just as human beings lose their hair after a fever. The
others only became partially bare of hair, but continued ailing and out of
condition until summer. It was marvellous that they survived at all.
On the next day, Friday, Mr. Merton succeeded in crossing to the middle
run. Cox, the shepherd, had then returned, but he had, as Guy said, been absent
during the flood, and the loss caused by his wilful negligence had been most
calamitous. Hot more than a score or two survived of Mr. Merton's most
valuable flock of pure Merino ewes and lambs. Their usual feeding-ground was
a fiat, intersected by numerous little hollows, where the rising waters would
encircle them in little groups, separated from each other, and from the rising
slopes around, as on a number of islands: these soon becoming covered, the
helpless creatures had been swept away and drowned by hundreds. Carried
into the swollen river, they rolled onwards to the sea, and the broad sandy
beaches near the mouth were strewn for miles with the carcasses washed up in
heaps by the tide. ■ •
This, the crowning misfortune of the great flood, was not only Mr.-Merton's
greatest loss, but the one he could the least patiently endure, seeing that all


would have been averted had the smallest effort been made. It was well known
that that particular spot was liable to such visitations, and for that reason a
resident shepherd was placed there, that the sheep might be driven to higher
ground on the chance of heavy rain. But the prospect of an evening in a
brawling tap-room was enough to tempt the selfish hireling from his easy duty,
at the cost of well-nigh ruin to his master.
No attempt could for many months be made to restore the destroyed orchard.
That, though a pleasure and a profit, was not a necessity, and no labour could be
spared from the many other imperative needs. Not a word more was said of
Louis going to school. Even his mother knew it could not be. Hard diligent
work and strict economy alone could enable our poor friends to struggle through
the difficulties which had accumulated around them.
74
Tasmanian Friends and Foes.


CHAPTER XIII.
The keener tempests rise, and fuming dun,
From all the livid east or piercing south,
Thick clouds ascend;
Heavy they roll their fleecy world along ;
And the sky saddens with the gather'd storm.
Through the hushed air the whitening shower descends,
At first thin wavering, till at last the flakes
Fall broad and white and fast, dimming the day
With a continual flow. The cherished fields
Put on their winter-robe of purest white.
THOMSON.
T 7EEY dreary were the weeks and months of that wet winter. The most
" enthusiastic admirers of the Tasmanian climate found small ground for their
wonted eulogy. The utmost that could be urged on its behalf was that
/
" English winters were generally colder, and very often quite as wet " —a faint,
negative sort of praise, only a degree removed from positive condemnation.
" And then," growled Gruy, " it's such horrid waste, to be raining—raining
—raining now, till the sheep are drowned, and the crops rotted in the earth or
washed clean out of it—and those that aren't in, can't he got in. The garden's
like a quicksand; it takes one over boots everywhere. And when summer
comes, we shall he weeks and weeks and months without a shower, till the stock
are dying of famine, and grass, grain, fruit, and vegetables are parched up and
perishing for want of a drop of dew even. And the tanks, ponds, creeks, and
rivers are all dry; it's a pity we couldn't store up a few hundred thousand
million tons of the water we don't want now, against the time that we do !"
" That would he a nice little reservoir," said Louis, laughing.
" Yes, it would; and we could go dry-shod now about our work, instead of
being nearly smothered in mud and slush. If anybody wanted to paint a


picture of Hercules in the Augean stables, I'd recommend him to look at our
Isaac in the big pig-sty ! I'm going to cut ferns for bedding in the calf-house ;
I got it cleaned out this morning. You may as well come and help, and Frank's
quite big enough to carry a light bundle home. Come along, sir; if you re to
he a farmer, you can't study your rudiments too soon."
And off swung Guy, singing at the top of his clear young voice—
" A flaxen-headed cow-hoy,
I whistled o'er the lea."
Except in the high mountain ranges, and the middle of the island, which
is considerably elevated, snow is not frequent in Tasmania; but during this
winter a heavy and very general fall occurred one night in July (answering to
January in England), and great was the excitement of the young Mertons at
sight of the strange white world to which they wonderingly awoke next
morning.
Frank was eager to make snow-balls. Freda hoped Guy and Louis would
build a snow-man (like one she had seen in a picture-book), and Lina, on
household cares intent, inly determined to try if pancakes could really be made
with snow instead of eggs, or whether it was only a joke to say so.
"When they assembled in the dining-room, Mrs. Merton was standing at
the window, rapt in admiration of a large tract of forest, the trees in which
having been killed (by a ring of bark being taken off all round them), were
consequently bare of foliage, which the living native trees never are at any
season. The naked trunks, branches, and twigs, each outlined with snow on the
upper side, exactly imitated an English forest in winter, and recalled to her,
with a vividness almost painful, the far-away times and scenes of her girlish
years. Her eyes grew a little dim as she bade the young people look at the
picture —" Truer than you will ever see painted."
"Mamma, you're crying!" said Freda.
"Am I ? I had travelled a long way into the past, little one, over a bridge
of snow," said the Mother, with a sigh and a smile. " Come to breakfast."
Frank's first essay in snow-balling was hardly to be pronounced a success.
Guy's brisk return of his—fire, may we say ?—happening to hit the back of his
neck, the sensation of a cold trickle down his back did not prove an agreeable
one.
A huge mass of snow was soon rolled together for the body of the snow-
man. Legs were dispensed with, as demanding too much artistic skill to erect,


so he was set up on an iron tank—a legless, sitting figure, as hideous as a South
Sea Island idol, with a head nearly as large as the body, surmounted by an old
hat, and finished off with charcoal eyes and an old black pipe, to the great
satisfaction of the juveniles.
A little tete-a-tete between Lina and her mother, just before dinner, resulted
in a dish of delicious snow-fritters. But Lina was very near making the same
mistake that others have done, by mixing in the snow some time before the
frying began; the correct method being to make a smooth batter of flour and
milk, having ready, in a cool place, fully half as much snow, which is quickly
beaten up in the batter, at the last moment before it is poured into the pan.
" But, Mamma," said Louis, " you couldn't make nice fritters of flour and
water and milk, so how can you of flour, snow , and milk—because snow's only
water?"
"Very naturally argued," said Mr. Merton. "But there is a solution to
the enigma; try and find it out."
" Because snow's cold, Papa," guessed Frank.
" What difference could that make in the hot pan ?"observed Guy.
"I think I've found out," said Louis, critically examining his fritter.
" When you look into it, the batter isn't solid, but full of little holes or spaces,
like a sponge; and I suppose that's where the hard grains of the snow were;
and the stuff was cooked so quickly in the hot pan, they couldn't fill up, and
that's why snow makes light fritters."
" Bightly guessed, I believe, Louis. Every effect has its cause, and it is
good mental exercise to seek it out, even though it concern nothing more
profound than a pancake."
" They 're very good," said Guy. " I 'll get you more clean snow to-morrow,
to make another dishful, Linny."
" Then remember to gather it lightly, and not pack it into a hard mass,"
said Mrs. Merton, " because that would be merely a lump of ice, and we cannot
use that; it is the light fresh snow that is required, for its crystals to keep the
batter open, as Louis found out."
"I quite expect another frost to-night," said Mr. Merton, looking at his
barometer. "I hoped the snow would melt more quickly. My poor sheep
don't find it quite so entertaining as you young folks do. Bring your axe, Guy;
we will cut a few she-oaks for them and the cattle on the hills."
" Let me come too, Papa; I can use an axe now," said Louis; and away
they trooped.


The tree called by colonists she-oak* is another case of misnaming, beincr
o'
totally unlike any description of oak. The foliage consists of long, thin
streamers, jointed like the "horse-tails" of English brooks, which clothe the
branches with waving masses, like great tufts of giant hair, and make a curious
and sadly musical sound when the wind whistles through them. Cattle, sheep,
and horses are all fond of the grassy-jointed branchlets when the tree is in
fruit; but at seasons when there are not any cones on it, the foliage is often
refused by animals usually fond of it. In times when grass or provender is
scarce, it is a common custom to cut down these trees for the stock to browse
on. The cones are of the size of a pigeon's egg, corrugated all over in rough
points. The ground beneath the trees is covered by the shed foliage in a thick
natural carpet, making the shade of a large she-oak a capital spot for laying the
cloth on at a pic-nic. The wood is especially excellent as fuel, "a dry
she-oak log" being an oft-coveted luxury on a cold winter's day; and probably
the broad bright fire on the hearth, which lit up the cosy dining-room of the
Mertons that evening, was mainly composed of such. Grates are comfortless
and troublesome delusions in a wood-burning country: nothing like the open
hearth, with. iron hobs or dogs to rest the logs upon, for convenience and cheery
»
comfort.
Another tree of the same genus, but with very much shorter hair (if the
term be admissible), is accordingly called the he-oak. Both are valuable in the
landscape for their peculiar olive and brown tints and remarkable aspect,
utterly unlike any other kind of tree with which I am acquainted; and often,
with their round form, and straight, pendant streamers, irresistibly suggestive
of a somewhat unkempt head of hair.
* Oasuarina torulosa.


CHAPTER XIV
As once by the margin of rivers
Stalked those birds unknown, that have left us only the footprints.
What, in a few short years, will be left of thy race but the footprints ?
LONGFELLOW.
QUY had entirely relinquished his drawing in an evening, and was busy with
what he termed "a little fancy work," having undertaken to divide with
his father the making of a new seine-net, ready for the summer-evening fishing,
which he so much enjoyed in his visits to his Aunt Ann's sea-side cottage.
Mr. Merton also began work, hanging his netting to a stout hook by the
fireplace. Louis was endeavouring to carve a little picture-frame for his
mother; Lina sewed, and Freda threaded beads for a doll's necklace.
"As I drove over Spring Hill the other day," said Mr. Merton, " I looked
down upon the very spot where the poor Hoopers were murdered in 1834, and
I felt how devoutly thankful we ought to be —and I am —for the blessed change
which has taken place in the conditions of our colonial life since those frightful
times."
>
"What times, Papa ?" asked Louis.
" The old, early days, my boy, when the number of white people killed by
the aborigines averaged eight a-week of our then small population, and the
tragedy to which I was alluding was one of the most terrible. A settler named
Hooper lived in a pretty little valley, near the place at which the present high
road winds up the hill. He had a wife and five or six young children. He had
built a snug little cottage-home, and was an industrious working man, always
at work, ploughing, clearing, digging, or otherwise employed. In those days we,
none of us, as a rule, ever ventured many yards from our doors without a loaded
gun; not that we were in the habit of shooting the blacks—they were much
too quick to give us the chance —but they were not likely to attack us if they


knew we had loaded firearms. Poor Hooper carried his gun daily on the
handles of his plough, or kept it close beside him when at other work; but one
morning, from some cause, he omitted to take it. Two or three days after, a
person going to the cottage found that the whole family had been murdered by
the blacks. The mutilation of the limbs, by breaking every bone, in their
well-known manner, at once showed that the massacre was their work; and
lnan } r years subsequently, a black 'lubra'—as the women were called—
described how she had kept watch, with others of her tribe, on a little hill close
by, for the wished-for opportunity. They had patiently waited three days, or
more, when at last they saw Hooper go out without his gun to fetch water.
Instantly they rushed down and speared him; then the poor wife and her
helpless family fell an easy prey. The object of the blacks was to steal the
few little stores and provisions the unfortunate man had."
"What a horrid thing!" exclaimed Louis, whose carving had gradually
been forgotten as his interest deepened. " Did the blacks really kill the whole
family, Papa ?"
" They did, my boy."
" Even the little children ?" asked Freda, with tears in her eyes.
" Every one."
" But if the poor man had had his gun, it wouldn't have happened," said Guy.
"Possibly not. But the dogged perseverance of the blacks would, no
doubt, have served them in the end. They waited patiently three days as it
was, and would have waited thirteen, if needful."
"And you don't think the man had done any harm to them first?"
"Not the slightest. That is a mistake which is very generally made.
People assume that the first stone, as it were, was thrown by the white settlers.
Nothing can be further from the truth. The aborigines used to come about the
farms and houses in a perfectly friendly manner, getting food and blankets and
other things given to them. They benefited instead of suffered by the coming
of the white people. That, in the long course of years, our occupation of the
country would cause a diminution in their food, by the destruction and
banishment of native game, is most true; but they were quite incapable of
reasoning on the subject, and, as I before said, the first effects of English
colonisation were directly advantageous to them. Amongst other gains on
their part, a very important one was the acquisition of good dogs, given them
by the settlers, which caught kangaroo for them, and saved them both fatigue
and hunger. They then became very wasteful in their wanton destruction of


kangaroo, just like the North-American Indians with the buffalo. They killed
and left them to decay, often not taking even the skins. Sometimes we saw
them with a scrap or two of kangaroo-skin on, but I never knew nor heard of
/
their sewing two together, although they were glad to wear the blankets we
gave them. They were certainly the ver} 7 ' lowest type of humanity; the ugliest,
least intelligent, and least teachable of savages. I have often tracked them
through the bush by the quantities of dead kangaroo left behind them. As I
said, they did not at first exhibit the ferocity they afterwards displayed ; but a
Sydney black, named Mosquito, who had been tried for a very cruel crime,
came and joined a tribe on the coast here, and seemed to teach and incite them
to evil deeds; for directly after his coming the first murder* of a white man
took place, and from that time they never ceased killing the settlers or their
servants whenever they had an opportunity. Many a hair's-breadth escape I
have had of my life."
"Oh, Papa! How?" cried Louis.
"In all sorts of ways, more than I have time to tell, and more than I now
even distinctly remember, for the danger was ever present, and the occupations
of every day were carried on under a pervading sense of haunting but unseen
horror, that kept one's faculties on a constant strain of keenest vigilance.
A phrenologist, who looked. at my head not very long ago, was struck by the
extraordinary development of what he called the organ of cautiousness, and
asked if in early life I had not found special need for its exercise; as most
undoubtedly I had."
" But, Papa," said Lina, " you must have been a little boy then, and ought
to have been kept safe at home, away from such danger."
" I certainly was a little boy, Linny, but no allowance was made on that
score. When I was only eleven years old, it was my duty to take the dogs out
to catch kangaroo for meat, as my father's sheep were all of the valuable
Merino breed, and far too precious in those early days to be killed for the
maintenance of the whole establishment. If I got brush kangaroo, I carried
them home myself; if foresters, which were often very large and heavy, I had
to go again and take a man to help me to bring them in."
"But, Papa," interrupted Guy, "I thought Grandpapa had plenty of convict
servants at that time. Why were you obliged to do such things ?"
Mr. Merton smiled. "To answer that would involve a long story in
itself, and besides the question is simply unanswerable. Your grandfather was
* Vide 44 My Home in Tasmania," by the Author. Murray, London, 1852.


as brave a man as ever lived, naturally noble, kind, and generous. I have seen
him face imminent danger with the coolness of a stoic, and give credence and
liberal aid to impostors whose pitiful tales were the most transparent fictions.
As children, we honoured and yielded him implicit obedience, but the hand he
ruled with wore an iron glove. Your supposition that there was not the
smallest need for my being so employed is perfectly correct. Any one or two
of the scores of half-occupied men on my father's establishment could have
done my allotted duty; but it was his pleasure and command that the duty
should be mine—and mine it was, no matter what the difficulty, toil, or danger;
nor durst I have uttered or looked'a remonstrance."
" It was very cruel," said Lina.
" My own dear mother," continued Mr. Merton, " was, you know, long dead,
and a step-mother bore her name. We need not speak of her. Our present
business is with my hunting expeditions, and one morning's work will serve as
representative of many. You may suppose me starting at dawn into the bush."
" On foot, Papa V' asked Guy.
"Of course. Horses were scarce in those days, and even had they been
plentiful, I don't suppose I should have had the use of one. Leaving the sea
behind me, and striking up towards the hills, after heading the stony creek, the
dogs caught two brush kangaroo, which were as much as I could carry, and I
«
turned again seawards, having made a half-circle of five or six miles, intending to
return along the beach. As I neared the sea, I listened repeatedly, in case any of
the blacks should be about; and on quitting the forest for the more open sandbank,
I crept along on my hands and knees from the shelter of one boobyalla* bush
to another, until I could look down on the broad sands. I then saw that they
were marked freshly by tracks of bare feet. The black tribe had evidently just
passed by, men, women, and children, going north, the same direction in which
I was bound. Had I been a few minutes earlier, I should have been in advance
of them, plainly seen on the long stretch of sand, and, as a certain consequence,
pursued and speared. I could not now be sure that all the tribe had passed; some
might still be behind, and should I venture on the beach, I might be hemmed in
between the two parties. I was very tired with my long rough walk, heavily
laden as I was; but there was only one thing to do—to make my way back by
the same circuitous route I had come, following up the creek—which, as you
know, here means a small river—to the same spot where I had crossed it in the
coming, and striking across the rough hills and forest for home.
*Boobyalla (native name) — Acacia sophorce.


"As- I plodded wearily along, I came upon another set of tracks of the
\
aborigines, and was sorely puzzled which way to go to escape encountering
them; but, keeping the dogs silent, and close beside me, creeping along noise-
lessly and stealthily, and keenly listening for every sound that might warn me of
the enemy's neighbourhood, I got safely home, to be then sharply-taken to task for
having 'dawdled' out so long, and straightway ordered off on some other task."
" That was hard!" exclaimed Guy.
"Yes," said his mother, "your father's boyhood was a very different one
from yours. The rule under which he grew up was indeed an iron one. My
heart aches now to think of the trials and hardships he endured when a mere
child, and so needlessly. He was only your age, Louis, when he was sent to
live out in the bush by himself, in charge of sheep."
"By yourself \ Papa ?" asked Lina.
" Yes, quite alone. But before the time your mother speaks of, I used to
be sent out during the day only, sleeping at home in a tent, which, cold as it
was, was better shelter than I got afterwards. It was sharp work, I can tell
you, to go out before dawn on frosty mornings, and take my 300 Merino sheep
to their feeding-ground. Of course common sense wmuld have converted some
of our abundant timber into fences, and made secure paddocks for valuable stock ;
but common sense was, unfortunately, a rare commodity in our domestic govern-
ment, whilst heroism, valour, self-denial, and tyranny abounded; and so we fought
on, a hard and unequal fight, for many weary years, whilst other families, with
not one quarter of our means or advantages, lived in ease and decent comfort."
"And when you had taken the sheep out so early, they wouldn't feed,
would they ?" asked Guy.
"Of course not. Even you know that now; and they had been better in their
fold, and lin my bed, for two or three more hours; but I had to obey orders."
"You got breakfast first, Papa ?" queried Prank.
" ISTot a bit of it. But in the course of the morning, when it happened to
be convenient, a pannikin of tea and a piece of damper * were brought to me by
any one who thought of it, or had time —perhaps by one of my sisters; and I
did not go home at night till there was barely enough light for me to put my
sheep into the yard. Then I had my supper, and went to my tent. This
routine went on, wet or dry, for many months, when my 300 sheep were
eventually joined to the large flock, and that occupation was gone."
* "Damper" is dough made of flour and water, without yeast or "rising" of any kind, and
baked in the ashes.


"Did you have another such task given you, Papa ?" enquired Lina.
"Oh yes; hut I considered my next 'billet' quite a rise, a promotion in the
world: it was the herding of the milching cows; and in this duty I was not
obliged to go out until I had breakfasted. Then I took away my charge, often
to a considerable distance for good feed, and watched them till they lay down
in the middle of the day to rest. The banks of the stony creek I mentioned
before was a good place for grass, and when I went there I used to amuse
myself by making little boats of bark—or what I called boats —and sailing them
in the creek, whilst the cattle were lying down. Or I sat under a tree and read,
for we had a good though not large library, most of the books having belonged
to my own mother and my grandfather. The poor little lonely cow-herd had
some glorious companions in his solitude! morocco-bound
volumes, that one by one were carried forth in pocket or bosom, proved grand
magicians, that peopled the dreary forest with heroic visions. Shakspere and
his myriad creations lived beside me. Don Quixote and Sancho performed their
feats of arms beneath the gum-tree boughs; and a group of gigantic old stumps
served to personify the windmills. Many a time, whilst in the Don's company,
the sound of my own laughter has startled me from my dream, and, terrified
at the imprudence, I have sprung to my feet, and gazed in fear around, lest some
hideous black shape, spear in hand, should have heard it too. A translation
of Tasso's "Jerusalem Delivered" was another favourite book, and that clever,
quaint old work "The Turkish Spy" instructed as well as amused me. Pope,
Dryden, Goldsmith, Cowper, Thomson, all the English classics of that day, were
read and re-read, thanks to the peculiar opportunities I enjoyed for study."
" How can you say enjoyed, Papa ?" said Lina.
"My child, it was enjoyment; vivid delight, such as no reading since has
ever given me, nor ever will; and perhaps, but for that peculiar opportunity, I
might never have made myself so well acquainted with the works of those
' bards sublime.' I can tell you of another instance where tolerably extensive
reading was acquired under odd circumstances. My noble, brave old friend
Allan Boyd, of the navy, has often surprised me by his apposite quotations, and
intimate familiarity with the best authors, which I, having rarely seen a book
in his hand, and knowing what a hair-brained scapegrace he had been, was at
a loss to understand, and one day told him so. He laughed in his own hearty
genial way, and thus explained the enigma:—'Well, my boy, I'll tell you.
The fact is, when I was a middy, I was always unlucky in getting under terribly
severe captains—regular martinets —and there wasn't a single first lieutenant


I ever knew wlio wasn't a Tartar. They all took a violent prejudice to me.
Odd, wasn't it ?' (And to look at his handsome, winning face, and perfect form,
it did seem odd, till a'droll, audacious twinkle in the bright blue eyes told of an
irrepressible something that would very probably prove trying to the most patient
of commanders.) ' And so they all got into the habit of mast-heading me.
I found it very dull work to pass so much time aloft with no occupation, so I
got books, and always put one in my pocket—for I knew I should be ordered
up during the day—and it's astonishing how much I did read at that time.'"
"Was Mr. Boyd the friend that you said 'Midshipman Easy' reminded you
of, Papa ?" said Guy.
" Yes. I always thought Marryatt had him in his mind when he wrote;
though the type is not a very uncommon one; and in 'Newton Eorster,' the
clever novelist has an incident very like the one I have just told you; so that
mast-head studies are probably often profitable."
"I have no desire," said Mrs. Merton, addressing her sons, "that you
should either be lone boys, passing solitary weeks in the bush, or middies, to
whom mast-heading is a daily incident; but you will do well to bear in mind
how much use may be made of odd, unregarded morsels of time, by always
filling them by reading. Eead systematically and studiously, if you can, but
in any case read. Familiarity even with an old nursery tale may be useful in
its way, as illustration or allusion. Your brain is as a boundless storehouse,
preserving for your service the wealth of ages, and with room besides for medley
collections of odd scraps, that may seem valueless when acquired, but sooner
or later will every one find the nook or corner into which it fits. Never be idle.
Let your mind be busy, if your hands are not.
" In life's unresting conflict,
Work —with soul and brain and nerve,
And when ye fail to win, take heart
In feeling ye deserve.
Be sure two God-sent helpmates •
Of man, in's mortal coil,
Two guardian angels by his side,
Are Energy and Toil."
"What's that out of, Mamma?" said Guy.
His mother smiled. "Well, Guy, it's from 'a psalm of my own
composing,' as our old parish clerk once announced in church."


CHAPTER XV.
Beneath, a patriarehial tree
I lay upon the ground.
LONGFELLOW.
ON the following evening, the fireside talk turned again to the subject of
the early life of Mr. Merton.
"Were not you once saved by some of the black women, Papa?"
asked Lina.
"Yes; I and our boat's crew were saved by them, that's certain. We had
landed on the coast, a few miles from home, to make a fire, boil our kettle, sup,
and sleep ashore. The boat was hauled up on the sandy beach; and the night
was very dark—that inky darkness, in which nothing shows, unless it be the
line of white gleaming surf—and being a dead calm, there was only the merest
ripple on the beach. We habitually kept a sharp ear and a keen eye for all
possible signs of the natives; but on this. occasion, we had apparently good
reasons for believing the tribe usually frequenting that shore to be away hunting
at some miles' distance. Accordingly, preparations for the bivouac were in
progress, with less of vigilant caution than usual. Snatches of boat-songs were
trolled merrily out, the frying-pan chattered of hot johnny-cakes, or some such
delicacy, and a holiday-making mood generally prevailed. I sat by the fire,
whilst the men prepared the meal, when one, who had gone to fetch in more dry
sticks, uttered a sudden, quickly-stifled cry of surprise. All were instantly on
the alert; and, to our astonishment, we saw several black lubras creeping
rapidly but stealthily toward us, and making signs that we should be silent.
Quickly and intelligibly they made us understand that an attack was to be
made upon us, either when we were asleep, or perhaps sooner, the tribe being
only a short way off, and the men ready and armed in their ambush, near


enough—so the women said—to hear us. The profound darkness alone had
enabled them to creep down and give the alarm.
" Instantly all our preparations were abandoned, and the fire partially
quenched by throwing the tea over it; such articles as anyone could snatch up
on the instant were carried down and flung into the boat, which was shoved off
more quietly and in briefer space of time than I ever knew that feat achieved
before —or since—and we tumbled in as she floated away, and pulled literally
for dear life. Noiselessly as we seemed to have made our departure, the savages
had been aroused by it, and rushed down. The red gleam of the still glowing
fire showed the swift black shapes, spear in hand, hurrying to and fro over the
scene of our escape, and their shrill yells and howls of disappointment came
ringing around us through the darkness. But for the friendly warning of the
poor lubras, we should all have inevitably been butchered. I trust their
humane treason remained undiscovered, or they would not survive the
revelation. Poor creatures ! they were so harshly treated by their own people,
that such small benefits as they had at times received from us won this signal
act of gratitude."
/
" That was an adventure !" exclaimed Guy.
" One I have no inclination to have repeated, I can assure you," said his
father.
" Papa," said Louis, " I want to hear about the time when Mamma says you
lived out in the bush by yourself."
" Well, my boy, the story's not a long one. I was then thirteen, slight and
far from strong for my age, for in childhood I was very delicate, subject to
croup and coughs, and other ailments, which my own dear mother thought very
serious; and in England I went in ' purple and fine linen,' and used to be
flannelled and great-coated and ' caded' more even than all of you have been; so
that I naturally felt with additional keenness the roughness and hardship of
those early colonial days."
" And the provoking part of it," said Mrs. Merton, "is that nine-
tenths of the suffering was not only avoidable, but totally gratuitous and
unnecessary."
" Yes; I know now that the chief of our misery was wilfully encountered,
being in great measure the result of my father's inexperience, and partly owing
to other agencies; but at the time when daily labour was extorted from a weak
boy like myself, and we drank out of tin pannikins, there were servants and
artizans of all descriptions on the establishment, and in a large storehouse were


packed away all the house-plenishing for such a home as we had in England;
plentiful services of glass, china, and delf, with quantities of wine, • plate, and
handsome furniture, waiting for the erection of a suitable mansion ere they
might be used; the whole of which were subsequently burned, through the store
taking fire, and were entirely destroyed, without having contributed to the
• .
comfort of any one. So that you can quite understand it was neither from want
of labour, nor of means to employ it, that my poor services were called into
requisition at an age when I ought to have been at school. I have heard of an
actor who, when he was to play ' Othello,' blackened his body all over, to carry
out the character more faithfully; and our early colonial life seems to me now
✓ »
to have been planned on like principles, so that every possible or attainable
difficulty, privation, and labour should perforce be encountered, that any
pioneers of new countries had ever met, or could by ingenuity devise."
" I'm very glad we don't live in such times," said Louis. " But I want to
hear your story, Papa."
"At the time when my very involuntary trial of a Eobinson Crusoe life
was made, my father was absent from the colony, and my elder brother partly
reigned in his stead, and sanctioned, if he did not direct, my employment. Of
the estimate he was likely to form of any hardship, you may guess when I tell
you, that on our voyage out from England, when he was fourteen, he used to
choose to lie on the floor of the cabin, without a pillow, in order, as he said,
to harden him for a colonist's life; and as to personal fear of any description, he
did not know the meaning of the word. Accordingly, I was started off, with 400
choice sheep, and a dog, Neptune, to an appointed part of a wide stretch of
partially wooded sea-shore, sandbanks and grassy marshes, about four miles
from the homestead.
" My outfit consisted of a blanket, an axe, a can to carry water in, a small
t •
frying-pan, a pint saucepan (to boil my tea), a pannikin, a little flour, tea and.
sugar, and a very little bit of meat; Neptune being expected to keep me in
kangaroo.
" Arriving at my location, my first business was to look out for a sleeping-
place, and I selected the lowest and thickest-foliaged honeysuckle* tree I could
find. I first cut down a gum sapling for a pole, and poked that up through the
branches of the tree; then cut a number of boughs, and rested them slantwise
against the pole, on each side of it, leaving a small tent-shaped space below, just
* BanJcsia Australia.


big enough to crawl under. I then cut long grass and reeds to lay over and
amongst the boughs, in rude imitation of thatch; but as I had not anything to
tie or bind, I could not fasten it in any way. A few of the driest ferns I could
find, laid inside on the ground, formed my bed. There was not any water good
to drink within two miles, so I took my can and fetched some. By the time I
returned, it was getting late, and very cold. I struck a light and made a fire.
Lucifer-matches were not then invented, and I had only a flint and steel, with
a bit of oakum and some dry grass. However, with a good deal of care I
succeeded in getting a light, next boiled a little tea and sugar, and fried a bit
of meat for my supper. I had brought a small piece of bread from home, which
I ate with it. Neptune and I rounded up the sheep, which were not disposed
to wander far after being driven, and I sat awhile by my fire, which was the
only light there was, there not being any moon. The roar of the surf breaking
along the beach sounded strangely near and distinct, and I listened to each wave
as it tumbled over, tracing it the whole length of the bay shore, followed ever
by another and another.
" I had passed nights frequently in the bush before, and knew pretty well
the different bird-cries, and other nocturnal sounds, but I had never until now
been utteily alone in the daikness and solitude. A.n owl hooted in the. forest
at some distance, ano. a mope-hawk near to me called out and was answered
by another further away. I never thought their cries dismal before, but, echoing
through that profound gloom, they seemed terrible. I kept the fire blazing for
some- time, watching, half-sleepily, the dancing flicker of the flames, that darted
up in long, rippling, glancing streamers, broke into fragments, and vanished.
Then I thought of the natives, and the chance that some of them might be
about, and see the fire. That thought roused me wide awake, and I stared
round into the black darkness that lay beyond the few near trees on which the
firelight shone, and listened with painful intensity to detect sight or sound of
the dreaded savages. However, Neptune lay still, so I knew they could not be
very near, for our dogs usually warned us of their approach by terrified howls.
At last I got my blanket, rolled myself into it as closely as I could, coaxed
Neptune to come and lie near me, crept into my lowly shelter, and went to
sleep." • ■
" Poor little Papa !" cried Preda, with a pitiful look, as she climbed into
her father's arms, and laid her soft cheek on his.
"How very, very desolate!" exclaimed Lina; "I wish you would tell us
it isn't true."


Mr. Merton laughed. " I wish, for the sake of the forlorn lad of those
days, that it was not true, Lina; hut, unluckily for him, it was, and much more
than I can now recall to mind; for I have striven, and your dear mother has
helped me, to forget, as far as may be, the intense wretchedness of those
years of childish suffering."
" Your father showed me the old tree he lived under," said Mrs. Merton,
" once when we were out riding on the marshes, many years ago."
<> .
" But surely there was some one near—some shepherd or servant — some-
body ?" said Lina.
"Not a soul. I was perfectly alone the whole week; often walking ten,
twenty miles a-day or more after my sheep, taking care that none were lost, and
counting them every night."
" You had a yard, then ?" said Guy.
"Not the ghost-of one. I contrived to get them together and let them
run past me, and so counted them the best way I could; often several times
over, to make sure I was right."
" You said you had flour, Papa," said Prank. " What did you do with
flour ? —make puddings ?"
" Nothing so good, my boy. I used to mix up some flour and water, and
boil it, making a very poor sort of gruel, but it was warm and satisfying; and
sometimes I kneaded up a tough kind of dough (only flour and water), and
baked it in the frying-pan. If the meat I had cooked left any fat in the pan,
that was quite a luxury. But all such matters of rough living were nothing in
comparison with the loneliness. That was my great punishment. The dreary
silence, without hearing a word, or speaking to a human being, the whole week
through. I often used to wonder if my mother could see me —and then hoped
she could not; because she would be unhappy to know I was so miserable.
The little birds that roosted in the tree . over my head seemed to me to
understand all about it, and say to one another, ' Look at that poor lonely
little boy. Let us sing and cheer him up. He has no other boy to talk to and
play with, so he watches us as we hop about;' and I tried to make friends with
them by throwing them crumbs from my rough meals, so they grew quite bold
and familiar."
" I wonder if that's one reason why you are so fond of little birds now,
Papa?" said Lina.
" Perhaps it had something to do with it; for the little birds were very
precious then. And I used to envy the black swans in the lagoon, that were


so happy as they swam about together, talking, as it seemed to me, in their soft,
musical notes. I wished I had been a swan, to have had other swans to live
with, instead of being a poor lonely little boy. Each Saturday evening I was
allowed to walk home, to fetch my week's rations and a clean shirt; and once
or twice, by some rare piece of luck, I was permitted to stay all night. Oh!
what happiness that was! To sit with my brother and sisters in a room again,
with lights and furniture, and the piano, and eat my supper at a table, and then
play a game of c Pope Joan,' and go to a real bed, although still only in the
tent, which my brother and I had shared for so long."
" Why didn't Grandpapa put up some rough wooden rooms, like the cottages
you build for our shepherds ?" asked Louis. " They are better than tents."
" I should think so. We should have considered ourselves luxuriously
lodged in one; but such comforts were not for us. Those Saturday evenings
were, indeed, as white days in my calendar; but when, as was usual, I had to
go back at night, and find my way as I best could through the darkness to my
tree tent, it was a cruel contrast to the light and warmth I left behind. Once
I got leave to carry a cock and hen with me to my camp, and the merry crow
of the cock in a morning was very pleasant as long as it- lasted. But on one
pitch-dark night I was awoke by a terrible commotion in the tree over, my head
and the choking screams of my poor friends. A native cat had attacked them.
I could not see anything, and had not a gun to shoot it if I could; so I lost my
pets, to my deep grief, and of course was not allowed to have any more.
" Once some of the men-servants were sent out to the marsh to mow rushes
for thatch, not very far from my abode, and it was a great comfort and treat
to go and speak to them. I only wished their rush-cutting would last as long
as my shepherding; but it was soon over, and I felt lonelier than ever. I had
been leading this solitary, isolated life for several months, when about the end
of May * heavy rain set in, with a tremendous S.E. gale, that blew without
intermission for thirty hours. My poor bower-tent was no defence even from
a shower—l had often found that out —and this deluge of rain streamed down
through it everywhere, even before the wind scattered my roof, drenching me
to the skin, putting out my fire, and almost washing me away. .So for once I
ventured to take the law into my own hands, and started for home; but on.
reaching the creek, which intervened between me and our homestead, I found
it so swollen by the rain that I could not ford it, and so my retreat seemed
* Corresponding to November in England.


effectually cut off But a cutter, named the , had been blown ashore
in the gale near the river's mouth, and some of the sailors kindly put me across
in a boat. Before I was able to go back to my dreary duty, my father returned
home, made other dispositions for the sheep I had charge of, and so there was
an end to my performance of the hermit of the marshes, for which I was very
thankful. Not that my general employments were in the least more easy, but
they did not inevitably include the condition of utter solitude which had made
the lonely shepherding so severe a trial."


CHAPTER XVI.
Faint and wearily
The way-worn traveller
Treads on drearily,
Afraid to stop.
Wandering wearily, a sad unraveller
Of the mazes of the mountain top.
Old Song.
" '"THEN what did you do next, Papa V' asked Guy.
"My father had a thousand sheep going to town for sale, and my brother
George and I, with two men (convicts, but good servants), were appointed to
take them. We were all to walk, of course, and our horse was to carry the tea,
sugar, and flour we were to use on the long journey of 100 miles. We reached
a certain ' Long Point' the first night, but the horse did not arrive, so we had
*
nothing to eat, but made a fire and lay down; weariness, I suppose, overpowered
hunger, and we slept." .
" Why didn't you get a kangaroo or opossum ?" asked Louis.
"Eor several potent reasons. It was dark when we reached our appointed
resting-place. We had not a dog with us to find game, nor a gun to shoot
it when found. The unprovided condition in which our expeditions were sent
forth was something remarkable. Next day also passed without the appearance
.
of the baggage-horse; and still we were without food. I found a few mush-
rooms, which we roasted in the hot ashes, and ate; but perhaps mushrooms
alone are not quite the best food for starving stomachs, for I became frightfully
ill; convulsed with agonising spasms and cramps, and other symptoms of
what we now call cholera. George believed I should die. I don't think I
cared myself whether I did or not; my life in general was very wretched, and
so that I might escape pain, I cared little on what terms. Without food, and of
course without medicine, nothing could be done for me. I was laid as near the


fire as possible, but I had not a blanket nor overcoat of any kind, although
it was mid-winter, and the nights bitterly cold; hard frost setting in at
sundown."
" Oh, Papa! Papa!" cried Lina, "it is too dreadful to think of. How could
they let you go away without proper clothing and wraps ? Or how could you
be sent at all in such a season ?"
"It seems to me now, Lina, as strange as it does to you. All I know
is that it was so."
" And you didn't quite die, Papa ?" said Frank.
" I suppose not; though I must have been very near it. By the evening of
the next day, when we had been three without food, the man and horse arrived
with our slender supplies, and we had some hot tea and damper for supper. In
the morning we started again, and drove the sheep another fifteen miles, to the
Little Gull river, where an inlet of the sea had to be crossed. We carried some
of the sheep over at low-water—and that was a pretty cold employment too —
and then forced the others to take the water, and go through after them. We
put our flock on a sort of peninsula, the neck of which we guarded by making
our fires there, and very wet and cold we were. I was still ill, and felt the
frosty nights painfully. I had crept as near to the fire as I durst, and, weak
and weary, fell asleep—for how long I cannot tell, but I awoke with pain. I
had probably turned in my sleep, for my feet were in the hot embers of the fire,
which had burned half of one boot, and all my toes were burned too. This was
a real calamity, for my foot was dreadfully sore, and I had to go limping
on through the frost, much worse off than before. From nearly every part
of the track we were following, the views and scenery, as I know now, were
beautiful; but at that time, rest, wholesome food, and a warm room to shelter
me would have outweighed, in my estimation, all the grandeur in creation. On
the evening of this, our fifth day out, we reached a spot called the Duck-holes.
Heavy rain had set in, and we gladly reckoned on getting a night's shelter in an
old hut near; but, on examination, it was found to be too full of fleas to be a
desirable lodging, even for such destitute travellers as ourselves ; and we decided
to camp out as usual, pulling out a handful or two of the dry thatch of the hut
to enable us to make our fire. We had our supper of tea and damper, and lay
down in the rain."
"Ho wonder you have rheumatism now, Papa, after such hardships and
exposure as that," said Guy.
" On the sixth day we went on again, still near the coast, and in sight
y
(ill
0
0
lis
:|C


of glorious sea views; all, alas! lost upon me as I hobbled along, lame and
weak, only craving rest and ease from the acute pain of my sore foot. In six or
seven miles more we reached the wide estuary of a river, which we could not
cross; so turned inland along its northern shore, and over rugged, rocky
hillsides, which in many places became sheer precipices of upright rocks, like
old castle walls. To avoid these, we had to ford the river repeatedly, which, as
we left behind its broad salt-water expanse, flowed through narrow, rocky gorges
in a series of rapids."
" What an awkward road to drive sheep over!" remarked Guy.
" You could not easily find a worse; and by the time we reached our
appointed halting-place, in a valley where the river and a smaller tributary
formed a delta-shaped verdant flat, we were all about knocked up, both
quadrupeds and bipeds."
" I should think so," said Louis.
" We had now been travelling six days without meat, but here a sheep was
killed, and we supped heartily. Next day we remained in the same place, as
there was good feed for the sheep, which needed rest, and we rested too, and ate
mutton. Our eighth day's journey took us over a range of high, stony, rocky
mountains, covered with gum-tree forests, and it was night, and a dark one too,
before we arrived at our camping-place, where a large bush paddock had been
engaged for the sheep."
" Ah! then you were in civilised regions, and would get a house to sleep
in," said Lina.
" A roughly-fenced paddock did not denote any great civilisation, and most
certainly I saw no house appertaining to this. We selected the best she-oak
tree we could find for our house, and lay under that. Next morning my
brother walked into Hobart, fifteen miles, for further orders from my father,
and returned. On the day following, George and one of the men took 500 of
the sheep into town. I and the other man and remaining sheep continued
where we were for a fortnight longer. The days were tolerably fine, but the
nights were frosty and bitterly cold."
" Were you still without blankets, Papa ?" asked Lina.
" Yes, of course. Where was Ito get blankets ? They don't grow on gum-
trees, or perhaps I might. We made fires at night, and lay as near as we dared,
turning first one side to the warmth, and then the other. At the fortnight's
o o
end an order came from my father, that I and the man with me were to go
with the remaining 500 sheep two days' journey to a ferry on the river Derwent,


and having delivered them there, I was to go home. My father remained (as
was his custom for many months in the year) in Hobart, taking a leading part
in political life, and living in all comfort and luxury. It was dairk by -the time
we had got the sheep crossed over in the ferry-boat, and then I started alone to
walk fifteen miles to the first and only village on my homeward route. My
trousers were in rags, and my burnt boots in holes. I went to the house of a
settler whom we knew, and asked for some food. I found this family very
poorly off, and short of provisions themselves; but they very kindly gave me a
night's shelter, and a share of their scanty meal. As I travelled on next day,
being very hungry, I called at the house of a man named Fish (I remember him
well), and asked for a piece of bread, but it was churlishly refused. This a
new experience to me, for though my home was not as liberal to me as it might
have been, all passing strangers were most hospitably treated there. So I
plodded on until nightfall, when I reached the foot of the rocky mountain
range I mentioned before, and which I durst not try to cross in the dark.
I had looked forward, dismally enough, to a night of cold, hunger, and
solitude, but quite a pleasant surprise awaited me. Four or five convict
servants had been sent here by the owner of the land to build a stock yard,
and they were very kind and compassionate, in their rough way, to the
' poor little chap,' as they called me. I know I was very thankful to them.
They were not allowed any supplies of food, but had dogs to catch kangaroo
for their sustenance. They had not even a morsel of salt to season the insipid
food."
" Insipid ? Oh ! I thought you liked kangaroo, Papa ? I think it's very
nice," said Louis.
" Kangaroo, hung till tender, carefully larded, and roasted with a dainty
stuffing, seasoning gravy, and currant jelly, as your mother has it served, is nice,
unquestionably, very nice; but kangaroo, newly killed, roughly cut to pieces,
and boiled in water alone, without, as I said, even a pinch of salt, is as flat and
unsavoury a mess as you need taste; but it allays craving hunger, and after
walking and fasting all day I was very grateful for a share of the tasteless stew
to which my poor hosts made me heartily welcome. They gave me the best
they had, poor fellows! They picked out the cleanest and largest kangaroo-
skins for me to sleep on, and put me in the warmest place by the fire. They
had not any blankets themselves."
" But, Papa," interrupted Guy, " were men-servants used in that way—sent
into the bush without bread, or flour, or tea, or even salt, and without covering ?


Why didn't they complain ? Our men would, I know, if you served them so
for one night."
O
"Our men, my boy, are free men, and can leave my service if they like.
The unhappy fellows I speak of were prisoners, convicts, and in those early days
their condition and treatment were simply what their masters pleased; always
provided that those masters were personal favourites or useful tools of the
Governor or his officials. Any complaint, however just on their part, would
have cost them a severe, horrible flogging for " insubordination," and they knew
better than to make any. Mute endurance of every hardship that avarice or
tyrannical cruelty might devise was their sole chance of evading the most
brutal and revolting punishments; and knowing what I do of the frightful
sufferings wantonly inflicted on thousands of their unhappy class, instead of
marvelling that some few escaped, and became what were called bushrangers,
my astonishment is that the masses submitted to their lives of privation and
torture, and did not rise in a general rebellion, and massacre their tyrants. Men
at that time were transported for such small offences, that a large proportion of
those sent out to this colony were as good men as the average of hired servants
now. The remoteness of this island, the length of time occupied in the voyage,
%
and the want of any regular postal communication with England, all combined
to prevent the Home Government from understanding the condition of the men
after their transportation hither,, The Ministers at home who were supposed to
govern and control the whole system knew absolutely nothing of the atrocities
committed here, in their name, on men who would have been sufficiently
punished, as such offenders are now, by a few hours' or days' imprisonment,
being comfortably lodged and abundantly fed the while. Many of the men who
were here placed in authority over gangs of prisoners acted towards them with a
vindictive and positively fiendish malice and ingenious brutality that is difficult
of belief by those who do not know the truth of the disgraceful facts."
" How far from home were you that night, Papa ?" inquired Louis.
" About seventy miles. The next day I crossed the mountain tier, and
fortunately, in traversing one of the gullies, I came upon an Arab mare of my
father's, which, when a foal, had been a favourite playmate of ours, and which,
known to be somewhere among these hills, I had been ordered to 'find and take
home, with small chance of executing the command, unless, as had most luckily
happened, she put herself in my way. Fortune, and my habitual kindness to
animals, favoured me, and ' Dainty,' who knew me well, and was the most
gentle and docile of her kind, suffered me to catch and mount her. Of course I


had neither saddle nor bridle, but my sore feet were relieved by sitting on her
back, and it was very pleasant to have such a dear old friend for company. I
could talk to her as we went along, and let her graze where any nice feed
appeared. At night we reached the little hut, about twelve feet square, of a
small squatter in the next valley, where I had my supper, and lay by the fire;
and another long day's journey brought me to the sea-coast. I stayed the night
at a sort of out-station of ours, where some of my father's servants did their best
for my comfort; and another long day was ended by my arrival at home."
" How glad everybody must have been to see you safe back again!"
sighed Lin a.
Mr. Merton laughed rather grimly.
"Lina thinks," said her mother, "how we should all rejoice over the return
of Guy or Louis from such a dreary expedition, were it possible that they, or any
other boys, could now encounter similar hardships."
" Which it is not," said Mr. Merton. " And no sympathy was wasted on
me, I assure you. My tattered garments and burned shoes were, I doubt not,
replaced by sound ones, and I was told off to some other occupation forthwith,
and most probably twitted with having been away 'pleasuring.' "


CHAPTER XVII.
Where'er I roam, whatever realms to see,
My heart, untravell'd, fondly turns to thee—
Still to my brother turns.
GOLDSMITH.
"'TVELL 11s some more stories, Papa," was Prank's petition on the following
-L evening.
" Well, I went another expedition that same winter (1824). My brother
George had an order for an additional grant of .1500 acres of land, and the object
of our journey to Anson's Creek, 70 miles from home, was to fix on a spot where
he should take it up. We went on foot, as usual. George was eighteen, I
thirteen, at the time. Our entire joint equipment consisted of one knapsack, in
which we carried a little flour, tea, and sugar; and we had a tin ' billy,' or small
can, to boil our tea in; and one single-barrelled flint-lock gun. Two kangaroo
dogs accompanied us, whose game was to he our food. The furthest station to
the North, and the last habitation we were to pass, was a hut, about fifteen miles
from the homestead, occupied by one of our own stock-keepers, poor Bob Gay !
He was afterwards cruelly murdered there by the blacks. From thence we
walked to Long Point."
"Which Long Point, Papa?" interrupted Guy. "There seem to be as
many Long Points in the island as there are sugar-loaf hills."
" About the same; but the particular Long Point in question has since been
called Seymour. Here we found a hollow log that we could sleep under, and
with singular and unwonted prudence took some trouble, the next morning, to
stuff it full of dry grass and fern, ready for lighting our fire on our return,
meaning to shelter ourselves in the same retreat again. I told you before we
had no lucifer matches, and the way we often got a fire was to plug up the
touch-hole of the gun, and light a piece of rag by the explosion of the powder in


the pan ; then, with dry grass, bark, and sticks, we soon made a tire. Various
kinds of tinder-boxes were also carried by some people; all very clumsy
contrivances beside those we have now."
" And next day, Papa ?"
" Next day—that is, the day we filled our log with dry grass—we walked on
to Anson's Creek, about twenty miles, and in view of the broad blue Pacific
nearly the whole way. Small abrupt conical hills rose a little way inland,
wooded to the summits, and with odd towers and spires of red granite cresting
or flanking them in a singular and grotesque manner. The same beautiful
granite formed dividing promontories, jutting out into the sea between the
snow-white sandy beaches, and the vivid green of the creeping pig's-face plant—
your mamma will tell you its long name [" Mesembryanthemum cequilaterale,"
0
said Mrs. Merton] —spread out over the sandy hummocks above high water, in
great carpets and curtains. We used to eat the fruit, as it is called, as I have
seen you children do. That night, tired as we were, we managed to stick up a
rough shelter of boughs and grass, making one nearly upright bit of wall, and
leaning another against it, stopping one end, so as to leave space enough for us
to creep in and lie down; for, remember, it was winter, and the nights were very
cold. We made our fire opposite the open end of our little nest. Next day we
walked over the marsh-land we came to look at, and my brother satisfied him-
self as to its worth and capabilities. So far we had done very well; we had got
kangaroo, and shot one swan, and had plenty to eat; but our little supplies in
the knapsack were nearly out. And in the afternoon rain came on, with cold
wind from the S.E., both steadily increasing in violence. Our poor loosely-built
grass tent was little or no defence against the searching, violent squalls. We
and our gun were soon drenched. That night and all the next day the rain
came down in torrents —cataracts. We finished our swan, and had only one leg
of a kangaroo left. The poor dogs were footsore, and could not hunt any longer;
and on the third morning of our miserable tent-life we resolved to start on our
return. The wind and rain still came driving in from the sea, by the shore of
which our course lay, and every little rivulet was swollen into a formidable and
rapid stream. We could not get over these without walking sometimes two or
three miles inland, to reach narrower and shallower places to ford. We did
cross one at the bar, but the rapid current swept me away, and if George had
not plunged in after and saved me, I should have been off to sea in no time."
"And drowned, Papa ?" said Preda, pitifully.
"Small doubt of that, little woman, if my brave good brother had not


dashed in after and pulled me out; and even without drowning, I was nearly
finished. The continued cold and wet outside, every thread of clothing upon us
having been soaking for so many hours —days, I may say —and the gnawing
hunger within, at last reduced me to a sort of half-numb agony of desire to
sleep. Twice I purposely lagged behind, sank down on the wet beach, and was
asleep instantly. Oh ! how cruel I thought George, who came back to find me,
and made me get up again. I prayed him to let me sleep, promising that, when
I was rested, I would overtake him. He knew better than to leave me and I
»
know he had a hard task to force me along, but at last we reached the hollow
log we had slept under before. How thankful we were that we had so strangely
taken the precaution to fill it with dry grass! In all probability it saved our
lives, for without it we could not have made a fire. The rain had lasted without
intermission for above sixty hours, and still continued. I crawled in under the
log, and slept—how long, I know not, but George woke me up to swallow some
hot gruel he had made with a little flour and water, which, with the sleep, quite
revived me. But no sooner was I better, than George was seized with the most
frightful cramps, and it was my duty to take care of him. Remedy there was
none, save warmth, and the soaked condition of the wood and sticks made it
very difficult to keep the fire alight. It was an awful time. My poor brother's
sufferings were so terrible, I thought he would die in that lonely, wretched
place. Gradually, however, his cramps abated, and towards morning the stars
came out, and the rain ceased. Again we started, finding every creek a broad
rushing torrent, and having to walk along their banks for miles and miles
through the wet scrub, to find safe fords where we could cross. The Douglas
river threatened to bar our progress altogether, but, by going a long way inland,
we at last found a rough natural bridge. A tree of immense height had fallen
directly over the stream, and by straddling across its trunk, we managed to
scramble and shuffle along it; but this was no easy feat, for, being so very long,
«
the tree swagged deeply in the middle."
" So you must have got wet," said Lina.
"We had not had a chance as yet to get dry, our soaked clothes being kept
wet by the thickets, and by our having to wade through the brooks and lagoons.
That evening we reached the bank of the Apsley river, which was too high for
us to attempt crossing, so we kept on the east side, and in another mile or two
came upon a lot of wallaby, which had been driven out of the river scrub by
the flood. Our poor, hungry, foot-sore dogs caught several, which gave us all
supper. We found a good hollow log, and made our fire in front of it, boiled


our share of the wallaby-meat, adding our last handful of flour to the mess,
half soup, half stew, which we ate thankfully; then dried our clothes, and slept
soundly under the log."
"Poor Papa ! what dirty beds to sleep in!" said Freda.
" Well, I own that a comfortable four-poster, with all its clean and warm
appurtenances, is a preferable commodity; but I can tell you that, after such a
miserable time of cold and wet, our chilled limbs found the dry hollow of that
log, with a blazing fire in front of us, positively luxurious."
" But you had done with the wet then, Papa ?"
" The rain was over, but we had still many flooded rivulets and water-
courses to cross; and next day, as we could not get over the Apsley, we followed
it down to where it runs into the Big Lagoon, then crossed the lagoon at its
mouth, where it was about a mile wide, the water being nearly up to my arm-
pits, and freezing cold; so you see our clothes were not very long dry. We
soon after reached our stock-keeper's hut, where we once more lay under the
shelter of a roof, and finished our pedestrian tour by arriving at home on the
following evening.
" And now, my children, if you are not tired of listening to such dreary
narratives, I am of telling them; so good night."


CHAPTER XVIII.
Hear how the bushes echo. By my life
These birds have joyful thoughts. Think you they sing
Like poets, from the vanity of song ?
Or have they any sense of why they sing ?
And would they praise the heavens for what they have ?
And I made answer, " Were there nothing else
For which to praise the heavens but only love,
That only love were cause enough for praise."
TENNYSON.
" T if T'HO has any letters for the English mail ?" asked Mr. Merton one evening.
V V "To-morrow is our last day for posting letters here for it this month."
" I've a ' gossip' to send, please, Papa," said Lina.
"Oh ! very well. If I have not heard it, you had better read it to us now.
Guy and I will do some netting the while, and I see your mother and Louis are
going to draw; so we are all ready to be silent and listen.
GWENDOLINE'S FOUPtTH GOSSIP.
Are you fond of birds, dear cousin ? If you keep any in cages, I think you
must not say " yes "to the question; because one cannot be cruel to anything
one really loves, and to confine in a little, little prison creatures to whom God
has given, as it seems, above all others of His glorious creations, the power of
* S
enjoying, and, I always think, the right to possess, the blessing of freedom, is so
very sad, that I am sure no one would do it who honestly and humanely
.thought over, or tried to imagine, the amount of suffering which confinement
must inflict on such beautiful, innocent things. A bird in a cage is so sorrowful
a sight, that I wonder any one can see it without pain. So I must take it for
granted that you think as I do, and then you may like to know what little I can
tell you about our feathered friends here.


I suppose his majesty the eagle* claims first place. Mamma says she saw
a Tasmanian eagle in the London Zoological Gardens, and that no other
exceeded him in grand beauty. Of course I never saw any other, so cannot be
a judge; but no representation we know of the eagles of other lands seems to
convey an idea of their superiority to ours. Such a magnificent creature, with
his proud head and peerless eyes! No other living thing has eyes approaching
them in piercing, brilliant beauty. No wonder that he can look at the dazzling
noonday sun. That they are fierce, despotic eyes, one cannot deny, but so
wonderfully beautiful! Their power of sight too must be beyond anything we
can realise, if it be true that, when soaring up so far away that the great birds
are only discernible as small dark specks against the blue, they can distinguish
their prey on the ground. And I love to watch them when, at a more moderate
height, they circle slowly round and round in wide sweeps, gliding majestically
along, and seeming scarcely to
move a pinion. We do not
often see them now. The royal
birds have unfortunately a very
bad reputation for killing lambs,
and are consequently destroyed
without mercy, and will in all
probability soon be extermi-
nated, like all other wild crea-
tures here.
For a long time Papa re-
fused to credit the stories of their lamb-killing, thinking, and wishing to prove,
that they only came to feed on those already dead; but even he has been
reluctantly convinced of their guilt. Sometimes, too, they seem to aim at far
larger prey, as several singular but perfectly true incidents bear witness.
Once, on the farm of an old friend of Papa's, a favourite mare, placed alone
in a small paddock of good grass, was seen wildly galloping round and round
for so long a time that her master went to discover the cause, and then first
observed two eagles following her, flying low and almost brushing the
terrified animal with their wings, and keeping steadily on their course just
beside or over her. The mare, covered with foam and sweat, her eyes bloodshot
and starting with intense terror, was evidently almost spent, and even after the
HEAD OF WEDGE-TAILED EAGLE. About one-fourth
the natural size.
* Wedge-tailed Eagle— Aquilct fucosct (Gould). Aquila audctx.


eagles were scared away, was long in recovering from lier terrible fright. At
another place, some big yearling cattle were driven and frightened in exactly the
same way by a pair of eagles, and Papa says that most probably when the mare
or the calves had sunk down exhausted, the eagles would have alighted, attacked
and killed them; or, what I am sorry to say is even more likely, would have
begun their savage feast ere the quivering life was extinct.
A farmer near, whose land lay chiefly on an open plain, only divided by
fences of posts and rails, had a large number of pigs running out, principally
sows with litters, from which the eagles used to take 30 or 40 in a season,
and might frequently be observed sitting on the fences, seven or eight at a time,
watching their victims; and from their being able to see any person approaching
from a long distance, they kept too keen a " look-out" to be often shot. They
would alight on the ground, and drive the- little pigs apart from their mothers,
who invariably showed fight; but whilst they were courageously facing one
or two eagles, others pounced upon the poor little pigs, and carried them
squeaking away. It was provoking enough for the owner's family at the house
to see this tragedy enacted before their eyes, day after day. One evening, as
was his custom, the farmer walked down to look after his pigs, carrying his gun,
and as he walked eastward, and the sun was very low, his own long shadow
stretched before him. Suddenly another shadow rapidly passed his feet, and,
«
turning sharply to see what was coming, his broad straw hat was knocked off by
an eagle swooping over him. Not waiting to raise his gun to his shoulder, he
fired, and the bird fell only a yard or two off.
"Ah!" said Guy, "and I remember another case of Mr. Eagle's clever
shepherding. I saw our turkeys cutting about, in and out of the little wattles,
where the cattle have grazed off all the lower boughs, and as I wondered what
was up, I ran down to see. There, on the fence close by, sat one eagle, and
«
another was on the ground dodging the turkeys through the trees in the
direction of his mate. They meant having one apiece, I know. I had not a
gun, or I could have shot both."
Not long ago, there was a very sensational picture in a colonial illustrated
paper, representing a poor brush kangaroo attacked by a swarm of eagles; the
artist seemed to have drawn as many as his paper would hold, and the account
given by the person who saw the incident was very sad and shocking. We
know that they do kill kangaroos, and there are stories told here about their


carrying away children ; but I shall not repeat to you anything that we do not
ourselves.know to be absolutely true. Pray remember that.
Mamma and I one day saw the drollest and prettiest subject for a picture
that you can imagine. It would have been a prize for Landseer, Herring,
or Harrison Weir, that wonderful bird-painter. You see we are not without
appreciation of art, even in our remote hermitage-home!
At that time we children had four pet lambs, whose poor mothers had died,
and the forlorn little orphans had been rescued by our own good, dear nursery
governess, who fed them with new milk from a bottle, and, when nicely washed
and delicately white, they were adorned each with'a ribbon round its neck.
Guy's lamb was named Pusy, and wore purple; mine was Prisky, and wore
pink; Louey's was Pat, with green; and Frank's was named Sampson, with
blue. This was an odd name, you will think, for a soft, weak little lamb; but
when Frank was a little fellow, he was so fat and strong that he was in fun
«
called Sampson, and when asked what name his lamb should have, he directly
lisped, " Thamp'n."
Our pretty pets lived in the day-time in a nice field of clover and grass, very
near the house, and from an upper window Mamma and I saw an eagle hover
low down over them, and then alight on the ground in their midst. The
innocent, silly things stood round, peering curiously with their pink faces,
and only looking inquiringly at the strange intruder; but Sampson deported
himself in a manner worthy of his name. He was just in front of the eagle, and
rising erect, and standing on his funny hind legs, he butted at it! Instead of
pouncing on our poor lamb at once, as we expected, the eagle just lifted his
wings, and gave a hop backwards, as if in sheer amazement, when Sampson
again, butted his soft, white head against its breast. I waited to see no more,
but shouted as loud as I could, tore downstairs and over to the field, wdien, at
sight of me, his majesty rose and soared off, leaving the four lambs staring
after him.
I have seen looks- of unbelief in the eyes of people to whom Mamma
has described this scene; but however is wholly and simply
true.
Papa says that ignorance was valour in Sampson's case, as assuredly as
that want of presence of mind lost the amazed eagle a dainty dinner, and saved
our lambs.
On two occasions our shepherds have brought to us eagles, which we have
kept for a time, because the only alternative was captivity or death, and


Mamma could not utter the warrant for execution. One had been shot at
and hurt slightly in one wing, and the other, a young one, had a wing naturally
misshapen, and could not fly. The first lived for some time loose in the garden,
and after a resolute fast of three weeks when first captured, he ate heartily of
raw meat, liver, &c, every two or three days, till a stupid servant either really
mistook him for a wild one, as he sat on a fence, or pretended he did, and shot
him. The second, despite his inability to fly, was continually getting out over
the high paling fence of the enclosure where he lived, and as it was out of
the question to permit such a freebooter to be at large amongst lambs and
poultry, very exciting and troublesome, not to say dangerous, chases ensued
when he was missed, and at last, his wing having become strong and useful,
he got away altogether. As he sat on his usual perch in his own little domain,
we could look closely at him and appreciate his noble beauty, and note the
enormously powerful grip of his great feet with their long black talons. But no
amount of delicate attentions in the way of food ever seemed to make him like
or prefer any of us. The one expression of his wonderful'eyes was, as we read it,
sullen indignation and disdain. And I think, to tell the truth, that Mamma
(and I. am sure I) was glad when our grand, uncomfortable pet had gone his
own way and escaped his impending doom.
Papa Has only once seen an eagle's nest, and that was many years ago, in
a tree growing out of a very steep, unfrequented hill-side. He looked in, and
saw two young downy eaglets, that opened round eyes and wide beaks on
0
hearing a noise, thinking, of course, that the old birds were bringing them
food. He soon after visited the tree again, but the nest was empty. It was a
very rough, untidy affair, made of large sticks, but smooth and soft within.
Many colonists call the eagle an "eagle-hawk," which is about as sensible
and significant as if we said "goose-duck" when naming a goose.
The sea-eagle,* sometimes known' as the fish-hawk, is, I think, as large and
as lordly a bird as the former, and quite as rapacious, carrying off lambs, little
pigs, or poultry with most provoking audacity. Aunt Ann and other people we
know, who live near the coast, have lost the whole of several litters of pigs in
one season; for the birds are so swift and wary, it is difficult to get a shot at
them. They are by no means numerous, and usually build in inaccessible crags
of high rocks, or trees on the summit of steep cliffs. The sea-eagle's plumage
is grey, with white breast; whilst the land bird is very dark, sometimes nearly
black.
* Sea-eagle— lchthyiaetus leucog aster.


" When I was at Aunt Ann's last year, and out fishing with Holdsworth,"
said Guy, " there came a sea-eagle hovering quite near the boat, and all at once
he swooped, and up he went again with a large fish in his hand—paws—claws, I
mean. I always thought they caught prey in their beaks."
" No," said Mr. Merton, " I have often seen them carry off prey, but both
those and the land eagles grip it in their talons. Not long ago, on the marshes,
I saw a number of your mother's favourites, the blue cranes, and I also saw an
eagle sitting on a tree near. Presently he flew down, seized a crane in one
hand, as Guy calls it, and bore it back to the tree, where he perched with
the disengaged foot I
should say holding the
limp, dead crane in the
other. I did not stay to
see him eat it."
" And I did not finish
my story, Papa. We went
on fishing, and it was not
long before the eagle came
o o
• % •
again as before, just hover-
*no above, and again he
made a grand swoop down to the water. When he rose, there was another fish
in his grip. I saw him after —or one just like him—carry off a little pig in the
same way out of the farmyard. Holdsworth knows of a sea-eagle's nest in a
4
great old blue gum-tree, that's been there ever so many years, and every year
the birds make it up afresh, and bring new furniture, in the shape of sticks as
thick as my arm or more, till Holdsworth says the whole concern would be a
good dray-load."
I suppose hawks have even a stronger family likeness to one another
than eagles. Our large swamp-hawk* and the little sparrow-hawk f also
look very much like the birds we see in engravings and pictures of hawking;
and if that picturesque but cruel sport were one of this century's colonial
pastimes, our handsome birds could hold their own, methinks, with any in the
world for beauty. What a prize our white hawk would have been in those
old days! It would surely have been reserved for queenly wrists alone, with
HEAD OF SEA EAGLE. About one-fourth the natural size.
* Brown hawk —lcraciiea berigora.
t Sparrow-hawk— Accipitcr torqicatus.


its plumage of exquisite spotless white, its only touches of colour being those
superb eyes, with their irids of living amber, the black beak, shading off into
yellow next the head, and the rugged, tawny feet. I should think.there cannot
be a more symmetrical, perfect bird. Pity that one's admiration should be
alloyed by fear that her glorious eyes have noted our brood of promising young
turkeys, and that the foolish, helpless things may be picked up and carried
away, one after another, to maintain that peerless form in good condition! Of
course, hawks are shot at every opportunity, but they are as clever as they look,
and I could not say more. The crow* is their only rival in ability, and he is
so nearly, if not exactly, the same as the English crow, that I need not further
describe this very sly and sleek gentleman in black, whose adroitness in
confiscating eggs, chickens, and young ducks must be seen and suffered from
to be believed.
Our beautiful, beloved magpie*}* is, I see, called by naturalists the "piping
crow," so I conclude there must be cousinship between the black freebooter and
our favourite, but their manners are widely different. The bright silver and
jet plumaged magpie is innocent of all his relative's bad habits, and has besides
the pleasant gift of a sweet, merry, carolling song, which we all particularly
enjoy hearing. They come and sing on the grass-plot, as they .pick up, worms
or grubs in the day-time, and on moonlight nights often awaken us by a
serenade chorus under our windows. Mamma says some of their notes remind
her of the English blackbird; and dear Mamma is so staunch in her love for all
O '
old-country recollections, it is a pity the magpies cannot understand how high
a compliment is implied by the comparison.
We have often so far gained their confidence, that they would come when
called, which we think is the most enjoyable way to have birds about us. They
are very valuable on a farm, from the quantity of grubs and insects they pick
up. If ploughing is going on, they follow closely in the furrow to seize their
prey; and come so near to the spade, when any one they confide in is digging,
as to seem in danger of being struck, though I dare say they keep too keen a
watch to get hurt. .
They are, more than any other birds here, cruelly victimised as (so-called)
pets, and are often taught to say words and whistle bits of tunes not half so
sweet and pleasing as their own cheerful songs, and most exasperating to hear,
because they never finish a passage, but break off in the middle of a bar, with a
* Crow— CorvLis Australis.
f Magpie— Gymnorhina organicum.


" tra, la, la, la, la, lee," put their heads knowingly on one side, and look as if
they had achieved something particularly clever. Their plumage is about half-
black and half-white, shining black satin and purest silvery snow, with the very
neatest legs and feet possible; jet-black and lien chaussfa.
Another bird, called here the black magpie,* has only a bar of white across
the wing and tail feathers, and is a very different character altogether; very
destructive in orchards and fruit-gardens, pecking and knocking down quantities
of apples and pears, and eating cherries faster than a schoolboy ! Three or four
of them will soon strip a good-sized cherry tree; and they are so bold and
impudent, that it is a difficult matter to scare them away. As fast as they are
fairly hunted out of one tree, they assemble in the next, and will no on eatintr
even whilst a person is close to them; they will not quite let you put a hand on
them, but very nearly. They have great strong beaks, and make an ugly
squawking noise. Ido not like them. In one orchard we knew they were shot
in such numbers that the gardener used to collect them in barrow-loads. By
burying them for some hours in the earth, to get rid of a peculiar odour they
have, they are rendered fit to cook (being larger than pigeons), roasted, or in
pies, or stewed. Papa is fond of'them. lam not.
Very likely you have heard of the large kingfisher of Hew South Wales,
which is generally called the laughing jackass; for all travellers in Australia
mention it. We too have a "jackass," a smaller bird, and not in any way
remarkable, except for its merry gabbling sort of song; which, when several
pipe up together, always gives one the idea of a party of very talkative people
all chattering against time, and all at once.
Owls, like hawks, have a strong family likeness wherever they dwell, to
judge from our books on natural history, and-our large owl-f- has the great broad
face and peculiar eyes of the handsomest of the tribe. A very fine fellow he is
indeed. Pallas Athene herself could not have possessed a more grave and
sapient-looking familiar. It is now some years since we heard or saw one, or
heard of one being seen. Although the services rendered by owls in catching
mice and other vermin ought to win for them a safe-conduct everywhere, they,
like every other creature, have been so wantonly destroyed by ignorant, stupid
people, whose only impulse in the presence of bird or beast is to " kill kill
kill," that they are now very rare.
* Black Magpie, Sooty Crow, Shrike— Strepera fuliginosa (Gould).
*
+ Chestnut-faced Owl— Strix castanops.


Papa has told us that when he was a boy he had a young owl given to
him, which he kept for some time. The mother-owl found him, and Papa used
to see her bring to her captive nestling, mice, bandicoots, or other small animals
every night, more than he could eat, until the son grew considerably bigger than
his mother, and at last went off with her. An owl of the smaller species used
to frequent our granary, and then a second—his mate, no doubt —came also, and
they constantly went in and out by a broken pane in the window, finding plenty
of sport, I daresay, among the pretty, mischievous little mice. Papa was very
glad to have them about, and gave strict orders that neither they nor mope-
hawks should ever be killed.
• i
Very likely, if these night-birds of prey had not been destroyed so wantonly,
the rabbits would not have increased in our midland districts so as to cause
great losses to sheep-owners, from their consumption of grass.
There is a smaller kind of owl,* too, here, with bright piercing eyes and
dark plumage. We once had one given to us, but all our kindness could not
win his heart. He only made an angry " chop-chop " with his beak when we
fed him, and would have bitten our fingers if he could reach them. So we gave
him his liberty in the garden.
.
The mope-hawk,f or more-pork, is also a night bird of prey, with brownish-
grey feathers of a peculiarly light, loose, gauzy texture, less smooth and compact
than other birds, but seeming as though they must pass through the air the
more noiselessly from their singular fluffiness, if I may use the word; and I
really think the mope-hawk's flight is even more absolutely soundless than the
owl's. He is more like the English night-jar in countenance, with an enormous
cavern of a mouth, that, when it opens, seems to lift the top of his head off.
We had two. young ones given to us, and were trying to feed them. Guy
asked old Isaac if a whole mouse would not be too big for them to swallow;
but Isaac's contemptuous reply was, " Too big ? —not it. Try him with a
hartichoke!" •
They were a great trouble and distress to us in our endeavours to take proper
care of them, and, as soon as they seemed able to do for themselves, were set at
liberty in the granary, where there were plenty of mice.
The noise they make at night is a two-syllable cry like " maw-haw, which
the early settlers familiarised into'"more pork," and so gave that absurd name
to the bird. It is a musical cry; and when several in different directions are
* Spotted Owl —Athene Maculata.
t M ope-hawk — Podargus Cuvieri.


calling and answering one another on a still night, we like very much to listen
to them.
Another strange note sometimes, but now very rarely, heard at night is
that of the bittern ; * a low, smothered bo ; the word exactly expresses it. I
believe ours is very like the bittern of Europe, a large, noble bird, with a fine
eye, and beautiful fringe of yellowish-brown feathers down his neck. They are
very shy, solitary birds, frequenting the tall rushes and reeds on the borders of
lagoons and rivers, where they can hide from sight during the day.
In quiet nooks of the river, where our pretty little native trout *f* play in
the sunny shallows, we sometimes see one, or a pair, of handsome kingfishers £
watching and fishing. If a ray of sunlight gleams across their radiant blue and
chestnut-coloured plumage, the bright spot shines like a jewel in the picture.
I suppose the crane § may be considered a relation of the bittern, though
so much smaller and slighter. How appropriate is the French name of
" demoiselle," given by their old naturalists to this pretty bird, in her dress
of soft silvery bluish grey, with her graceful head and dainty gait, as she picks
her way amongst the shallows of river or lagoon, looking so elegant and delicate,
but snapping up the poor little fish or frogs with the neatest dexterity all the
while. Once only we saw a purely white crane, as beautiful and perfect as the
white hawk ; a " demoiselle in her bridal dress," Mamma said.
* Bittern— Botaurus Austral is.
t Salmo Thymallus.
i Alcyone Diemenensis.
§ Crane— Ardea Novce—Hollandice.


CHAPTER XIX
GWENDOLINE'S GOSSIP (Continued).
" It may be very agreeable to read the descriptions of birds by naturalists, with all their long
Latin names ; but give me a quiet nook to watch them in on a fine summer's day. Their free and
frolicsome motions, their glancing colours, their voices more expressive of joy, of life, of spirit, and of
passion than any Latin; their habits and ways of living, all peculiar to themselves this is a tieat
and a lesson indeed in natural history. I have thus seen the parrots in the Australian woods making
the dusky gum-trees all alive." — MARY HOWITT.
THE parrot tribe contains the birds that are most common here; all so pretty,
but some of them very destructive. The white cockatoo* is unknown in our
part of the country, but in the north they are, or used to be, much too abundant,
coming down in flocks .on newly-sown fields of grain, and picking out the seed.
They are exceedingly "knowing" and wary, and have sentinels always posted
aloft in trees, to give warning of danger to the marauders on the ground, so that
shooting them is not by any means an easy achievement.
Their exquisitely white plumage has not auy gloss or silvery shimmer on
it, like that of the crane or magpie, but is like fruit with the bloom on, always
covered with a fine soft powder, that leaves white marks on one s hands when
stroking it, or on any dark part of dress it touches. At a friend s house w r here
we were visiting, a tame cockatoo was so fond of Mamma, that the black velvet
gown she usually wore was half-grey with white bloom off Cocky s feathers.
The beautiful crest and part of the tail are a lovely lemon-yellow, and the droll,
sly, saucy expression the bird assumes when in a playful mood, rapidly
erecting and depressing this top-knot, as if to point some particular remark, as it
dances and frisks about, is very diverting. We never kept one tame, but have
been on intimate terms with several, belonging to Iriends, which are certainly
most amusing and engaging pets, and seem happy in captivity, so long as the
* White Cockatoo — Cacatua galerita.


persons they are fond of will notice and talk to them; but they often look
piteously sad, as they sit neglected on the perch, to which they are usually
fastened by a long light chain. Although as tame and gentle as household cats,
they unfortunately cannot always be trusted at liberty to follow their own devices,
as these, it is found, usually result in the destruction of any article of furniture
they may take the fancy to bite in pieces, for their strength of beak is wonderful,
often serving them to get free from their iron fetters in an almost incredible
mannei. Much as we all like these clever creatures, we cannot feel happy or
justified in keeping one under the restraint that is necessarv. •
They learn to talk well; but if there should be the possibility of their
hearing objectionable words, those always seem to be acquired in ore readily
than polite phrases, and are sure to be uttered at the most unsuitable times,
causing shame and horror unspeakable to prim or pious owners, who may
be quite unconscious of the extent of Cocky's vocabulary; and frequently a
speech is brought out with such quaint and marvellous fitness to the occasion
i J
that it is impossible not to believe it is uttered with understanding. A friend
of ours has a very clever bird, which had one day sat mute, motionless, and
unnoticed during a lady's long visit and prosy talk. At length she rose to go,
when Cocky suddenly woke up, raised his top-knot, and danced about in delight
o >
crying, with a crescendo expression—" Good-bye ! Good-lye ! GOOD-BYE ! Hooray!"
Mamma many times tried to make a'sketch of him, as he sat on his perch
in the garden; but however sedate and still he had been before, the instant he
caught a glimpse of Mamma and her book, he began to dance, cough, chatter, and
frisk about, so that she could not catch him in the same attitude two seconds
together. The pretty way he holds out his hand to a friend, mutely asking to
be taken on to theirs, and his softly murmured " Kiss Cocky, kiss poor Cocky,"
as he nestles affectionately up to one's face, are quite touching. But he can
scream and scold too ! Their natural utterance is a very shrill, loud screech
which, given by a bird at your ear, is painfully piercing.
Papa once saw a very accomplished cockatoo in Melbourne, of the same
kind as the last-mentioned one, but unfortunately the bird was not in the mood
to exhibit his acquirements. Yainly his mistress coaxed and caressed him
"Do sing, Cocky ; dear Cocky, please sing!" to which Cocky plainly and rudely
replied, "I shan't. Sing yourself!" and when Papa also entreated, he turned
sharply upon him with " You're mad !" and then obstinately continued silent.
I think the happiest, certainly the most independent cockatoo I ever knew,
was one belonging to Mr. Graham, of the Mail-coach Office, Hobart. It was


always at liberty, and used to fly down into town with its master in a morning,
sit on roof, balcony, or lamp-post, or walk about the pavement near the office, all
day, sometimes playing with Mr. Graham's dogs, or accepting very affably the
attentions of passers-by. We always stayed for a talk with him when in town.
In the evening, when his master usually went to the post-office at the time the
%
mail started, Cocky would accompany him, and perch himself aloft as usual, with
as wise and profoundly important an air as though he himself were contractor for
the transit of all Her Majesty's mails in Australia. When the business was
over, and the mail gone, Cocky flew home with his master.
I think the whole town lamented the death of this happy and popular bird.
He had flown with Mr. Graham a little distance into the country, and was by
him left for a short time, sitting in a tree. When his master returned, Cocky
seemed ill and dispirited, and not long afterwards died. Clever though he was,
poor bird ! he could not relate what had happened to him, and I believe it was
never known.
Another cockatoo in Hobart, that was allowed the enjoyment of his liberty,
lived opposite a house where we lodged for some time, and Mamma, who I think
could no more help taking notice of a bird than I could of a baby, soon made
friends with him; and I have often seen her sorely puzzled how to coax him
back into his tree, after he had taken possession of her hand or shoulder; for the
moment he saw her crossing over to talk to him, he would come quickly down
from the topmost bough of the tree to meet her, and talk to her in a soft,
confidential sort of murmur, that seemed to say all manner of loving things.
This cockatoo was taken to England some years ago, and we heard had been
given to H.R.H. the Prince of Wales.
The native food of the white cockatoo in a wild state consists chiefly of the
bulbs of small species of orchids, for the digging up of which the long upper
mandible is well adapted. Large colonies of them annually frequent a range of
white cliffs on the Murray river, South Australia, which are honeycombed by
their nests. .
We do not know an instance of the black cockatoo* having been kept
tame. They feed chiefly, if not entirely, on grubs, which they get out of the
trees, often tearing away masses of bark and wood to get at them; and such food
could not be obtained for them in captivity, whilst the grain-eating white
cockatoo is easily provided for with wheat, seeds, bread, and fruit; but it should
* Black Cockatoo — Calyptorhynchus Xanthonotus.


be carefully kept from any sort of meat and butter, as such diet will disorder the
poor bird, and cause it to peck out its own feathers, and become a miserable,
unsightly object.
The black cockatoos are very handsome, large birds, with the same primrose-
coloured trimmings on their sable plumage as the others wear on their white
garb; and it is very amusing to watch a party of them either at work or at play,
or, as it generally appears, doing a little at both. They talk to each other in
varied, and, as it seems, most significant tones, as some work away with their
powerful beaks, tearing out great pieces of wood (till large heaps lie round the
foot of the tree) to reach the fat white grubs they are so fond of; and others,
wholly devoted for the time being to polite conversation and elegant deportment,
sidle up and down the branches, bow, curtsey, advance and retire, and go through
more graceful and entertaining antics than I could describe in a week. The
elevation and depression of those wonderfully expressive top-knots is a grand
feature in the performance, and when one can get near enough to enjoy a good
view of it, I know nothing more pretty, curious, or amusing. I think Mamma
would be content to sit motionless all day, watching them. She says they
absolutely fascinate her.
When flying from place to place, they utter a loud screaming noise. We
sometimes hear it high overhead, and count them as they fly, usually an odd
number—five, seven, or perhaps thirteen; but we do not see them nearly so
often as formerly. lam sorry so continually to repeat the same sad fact, that
all our native creatures are diminishing and disappearing fast. The black
cockatoos are perfectly harmless, neither touching seed, ripe crops, nor fruit;
and as for the holes they make in the gum-trees, I think the settlers should be
much obliged to them for assisting in the destruction they all carry on so
vigorously themselves.
I do not know how many of the smaller kinds of parrots we have in
Tasmania; and as all have long tails, I suppose they are really parroquets.
There is the blue mountain parrot,* with a good deal of green and yellow in his
plumage as well; and the rare and beautiful ground parrot,-f* green, barred with
black.
"Ah ! but none of us have ever seen it," said Guy.
" I have," said Mr. Merton; " but not for many years now."
* Mountain Parrot — Trichoglossus Swainsonii.
+ Ground Parrot — Platycercus flaviventris


Two or three other common kinds, chiefly green and blue, and the rose-hill
parrot,* a most brilliant creature —a blaze of the brightest colours all together—
scarlet and yellow head and neck, green back, purple and blue wings. I wish
you could see a party of them, as they climb about the garden in the autumn
sunshine, picking seeds, with all their quaint, droll attitudes showing off their
brave attire.
' "London sparrows would look dingy beside them!" interrupted Guy.
I never knew these so numerous as to do much harm, but the kind we call
the common parrot is a dreadful pest, tearing corn stacks in holes, and pulling
off the thatch so as to let in the wet, and when the corn is ripe in the
fields they commit great devastation. For. several years they took all our
gooseberries; we had enough good bearing bushes to supply the table
abundantly, make plenty of jam, and several casks of wine, yet all we really
had for our own share was a couple of pies ! Before they were worth picking,
those wicked parrots destroyed the whole, and left heaps of the seeds and refuse
under every tree. Shooting a few dozen seemed not to make the slightest
difference in the swarms that descended on the garden; whilst the trees of
a neighbour only a mile or two away escaped altogether, not having been
discovered by our robbers. Raspberries and currants also suffered, but not
to the same extent.
0
" Some one told me lately," said Mr. Merton, " that if the very first two or
three parrots which come to a crop of fruit are shot, it is an effectual check
to the invasion ; but, as we have sadly proved, it is all but useless to begin
shooting when the main body of the army has established itself in good
quarters ; we must try this preventive another year."
The smallest of our parroquets j* are the most lovely, delicate little birds,
with plumage of the most vivid velvety green, just touched with coral-red
and purple. They are easily tamed, or are tame naturally, becoming familiar as
soon as taken, if young; and are very docile and engaging. But they rarely
exist more than a year in their new artificial life, although most others ot
the parrot family are long lived.
At two different times we have had one as a pet, but not in a cage. Both
* Rose-hill Parrakeet — Platycercus eximius.
+ Swift Parrakeet — Lathamus discolor.


would climb up our dresses and sit on our shoulders or heads, if permitted; run
about and play with trifles on the table, such as thimbles or cotton-reels, just
like kittens; or strip a pincushion of needles and pins with quiet, persevering
determination. Often they went into ecstasies of fun, scuffling, chattering, and
throwing themselves on their backs on the floor; the favourite place for this
violent performance being where the window-curtains touched the carpet. We
were warned that " some day" they would die in fits after such play ; and after
that we never allowed it to go on long, but. it was very droll to see. They
delighted in running about the table at tea or breakfast, going from one plate to
another to be fed with cake or sweets, and all our vigilance was needed to
prevent them from eating butter. If taken away from anything they wanted,
they would scold angrily, slip from our hands, and fly back to the very dish we
had taken them from, very much like naughty, spoiled children. At dinner-time
they were put in another room. They used to go with us into the garden
and suck honey from the flowers with evident enjoyment, and often pulled our
room-bouquets to pieces, nibbling the flowers that had honey in them. We fed
them with bread and honey, sugar and fruit, and both were plump and in perfect
plumage, evidencing excellent health. They do not learn to talk : their flight is
very rapid, whence they, are called the swift parroquet.
Our first of these exquisite little pets died in a kind of convulsion, and the
second was, to our great grief, accidentally drowned.*
We never had a tame rose-hill parrot, but have seen many. ' Some of them
learned to talk a little, and they live to a considerable age.
Another bird which often becomes very much attached to individuals is the
lovely bronze-wing pigeon, f But these invariably meet a sad end. All we
have known as pets (we never had one ourselves) have been shot in mistake
for wild .ones, because they will fly any distance, if their owner allows their
companionship when he rides or walks out; and so they fall victims to
their bold fidelity, and to the universal thirst for destruction. Ido not think
any of the pigeon or dove family can be more beautiful than this; it has such a
sweet head, and such exquisitely-shaded plumage, with those radiant jewel-like
feathers on the wings, shining in the richest iridescent hues. I often think
it quite a pity it should be eatable; although the fact of not being' good to
eat does not suffice to save many other birds.
* Its history was told in "Loved and Lost," by the writer. Day & Sons. 1861.
t Bronze-wing Pigeon— Phaps calcoptera.


There is a pretty bird, too,, called the ground dove, * that we generally
know as the Tut-a-tut-tut bird, from the sound of the loud, rapid flutter it
makes in rising on the wing when approached.
Quail are becoming very scarce; more, Papa thinks, from the increased
number of English cats gone wild, which are so especially.destructive to them,
than from what he calls " fair shooting." Snipe we have not seen nor heard
of near us for years, although they, like the quail, were formerly abundant.
The pretty, graceful wattle-bird s*f* are, unluckily for them, poor things,
much esteemed for the table, cooked as snipe and woodcocks are in England.
The great quantities shot every winter' m *' m ™
are fast reducing their numbers, and
in many places where they once
abounded they are now rare. I "sup-
pose you never saw a bird with ear-
rings on ? But our pretty, elegant
wattle-bird wears a pair of long
pendant drops, shaded from the deepest
amber to white, lovelier than any gold-
smith's work. Its greyish plumage, too,
is very beautiful; the feathers on the
breast are long, pointed, and tinted with
golden yellow.
The summer-bird is always wel-
come, as you may believe; its appear-
ance, like that of your English cuckoo,
being accepted as the harbinger of
pleasant weather, and the time of roses.
It is graceful in form, and wears a garb
of the loveliest silver-grey, with a hood or opera-cap of black velvet. We
have not an intimate acquaintance with it, but are always rejoiced
to see the one or two usually visible at a time, flying along, or resting on
high trees. Its song is a clear whistle of two or three notes, repeated at short
intervals.
• •
It may seem odd to you that, in this comparatively small island, there
should be birds as well as flowers which, whilst they abound in some localities,
WATTLE-BIRDS.
* Ground Dove— PJiaps elegans.
f Wattle-bird — Anthochcerct inauris.


are nearly unknown in others not far distant, and which appear to us to possess
the same natural characteristics. In most parts of Tasmania, the miners * are
troublesomely abundant, as their ravages in our cherry-trees at former homes
have evinced; but where we now are, not a miner has been seen or heard in our
time. They are the most active, bustling, chattering creatures imaginable; and
in spite of their fruit-stealing propensities, I think we rather miss the long-
familiar cry, which sounds very like " Thief thief I Sportsmen dislike
them very much, for, in the performance of their self-assumed duties as general
busy-bodies and Paul Prys, the miners are always the first to detect the presence
of any intruder, whether armed or pacific; and their quick cries and tussy
demeanour —for they assemble in a fluttering, chattering mob over any
suspicious object —frequently give the alarm in time for the otherwise doomed
game to escape; and when a gentleman has been patiently crawling on his
waistcoat for a score or two of yards through a wet swamp to get a shot at
ducks, I suppose it must be a little exasperating to hear the miner's shrill
warning overhead, which disperses the flock in all directions. Sometimes they
assist us, as frequently, when a chicken-stealing crow or hawk is pursued, and
takes refuge in a thick tree, a crowd of miners flutter and chatter around, till they
attract attention, and the marauder is shot in consequence; so that we cannot
attribute their love of interference to purely philanthropic or neighbourly
intentions, and can only set them down as most inveterate gossips and busy-
bodies.
" Worse than that sometimes, Lina," said Mr. Merton. " I remember, a
good while ago, having fired at and wounded a wattle-bird, which dropped among
some bushes. I loaded my gun again, and then went to pick up the bird. I
heard the cry of the miner as I advanced, and soon found my wattle-bird trying
to get away from a miner, which was holding on by one foot to a low tree, and
grasping the wounded wattle-bird fast in the other, till I took it from him, and
he then flew away. I recollect telling your mamma of the incident when I
came home, for it struck me as very curious; nor can I now in any way account
for the action of the miner, nor what prompted him to do duty as my
' retriever.'"
" Except," said Mrs. Merton, "that habit of busy interference, which appears
to be the ruling impulse of their lives. I have so often watched them, bio
* Miner — Myzantha garrula.


matter what is doing within reach of miners, they must have, as we say, ' a
finger in the pie.' I know they will attack and torment wounded or helpless
hirds; and when there is nothing else to do, they are incomparable at ' nagging.'"
The miner's plumage is shaded grey, touched with black and yellow about
the pert, pretty head. They build a cup-shaped nest, the size of an English
thrush's, of fine twigs and grass.


CHAPTER XX.
GWENDOLINE'S GOSSIP (Concluded).
ALLEGRO.
How pleasant the life of a bird must be,
Flitting about in each leafy tree ;
In the leafy trees so broad and tall,
Like a green and beautiful palace-hall,
With its airy chambers, light and boon,
That open to sun and stars and moon—
That open unto the bright blue sky,
And the frolicsome winds as they wander by.
MARY HOWITT.
PENSEROSO.
, •
How dreary the life of a bird must be,
Shut in from the sun, the breeze, the tree !
Captive and caged in a dull, close room,
Far from forest and fragrant bloom !
Swift wings cramped up in a prison small,
Quick ears unblessed by a kindred call;
Lonely and desolate, sad to see —
How wretched the captive bird must be !
L. A. M.
T HAVE written all this long letter, and have not yet mentioned the darling
1 little birds, of which we are all so fond; and which, besides being so exquisitely
beautiful, do us such good service by destroying insects and grubs of all kinds,
that, without such sharp eyes and adroit beaks to keep them in check a little,
would rum all our gardens and desolate our cornfields. As Papa always says,
" The little birds would do remarkably well without us, but we could not live
without the little birds." It would be quite natural for us to like and preserve
any ugly things which were of so much service, but how good and Divine seems
the ordination that it shall be rendered to us by creatures of such surpassing
f
t


beauty! Surely, if people would only think of the Creator's mercy and benefi-
cence, and how He must love the beings He has so adorned and perfected for
use and beauty, and their own and our delight, there would be more pains taken
to prevent.their destruction! I wish all children were taught this as we have
been, and knew how immeasurably greater pleasure there is found in being kind
and loving to God's dumb creation than in habitual carelessness or wanton
/ •
cruelty.
Mamma says that our robin and the blue-cap have been described again
and again, but to omit them from even my little gossip cannot be thought of;
so you can only "skip" the next page or two, if you know all I can tell you.
The robin* is, Mamma says, certainly more brilliantly beautiful than his
English namesake, the
" Russet bird with bosom red."
Black, red, and white are the colours of his dress, worn with perfect taste. The
black is shining jet, the red, fire, and the white, snow. There is a little white
spot on his tiny black-velvet cap, a white bar across his pretty wings, and his
breast is a living flame of rosy, vivid scarlet. We have one especially favourite
robin now, who has become, of his own accord, very confiding and familiar, and
whenever we are working in the garden, he comes to look for his usual dole of
grubs. When we find a good one, we call to him, and fling the grub high up
in the air. Often, before it falls to the ground, a flash goes past, and robin has
the grub in his beak. Usually he flies on to the fence, or a fruit-tree bough, or
a spare spade or fork stuck erect, and sits there to discuss the delicate morsel,
always knocking it well about before eating it. Sometimes, probably when the
hen is sitting or the young ones are hatched, robin flies straight away with his
beakful, and soon comes again for more. The quantity of fat, white earth-grubs
he will dispose of in a short time is really astonishing. Often he startles us by
darting down close to our feet, or spade, to pick up some small thing we should
never discover. And with this unceasing vigilance, only imagine the swarms of
insects which even one little bird must destroy in a year!
There are, I believe, several varieties of the robin here, but our familiar
favourite is the only one we know well-. The hen-bird is less showy in plumage
than her brilliant mate. They make a beautiful little nest, in a fork or hollow
of a tree —a compact structure of dry grasses, moss, lichen, narrow threads of
bark, and other vegetable fibres, knitted and bound together with cobwebs, and
* Petroica multicolor.


softly lined with feathers, wool, and hair, and sometimes with opossnm-fur
entirely.
We call the female of the blue wren* Jenny, she looks so like the little
birds in the children's story-book, and wears just such a "brown gown" as
Jenny did, very quiet and sober, so far as colour goes; whilst her mate, during
spring and summer, flits about in raiment dazzling to behold, of gorgeous
kingfisher-blue, set off by velvety black. After his young ones appear, as
though the cares of a family impressed him with more serious thoughts than his
own elaborate toilette, Mr. Blue-cap also puts on a greyish-brown coat, and is no
longer readily distinguished from the rest of the active, busy-like group that hop
about the garden and shrubs with such übiquitous celerity, flirting and frollicking,
and cocking those funny little tails of theirs straight up, and even their heads,
in all sorts of queer, quaint, rapid evolutions, and singing the while the sweetest,
smallest little song you ever heard.
Until we learned the fact of his change of plumage, we often lamented the
disappearance, and, as we feared, the death, of the head of the family, taxing our
demure cats with wicked deeds of which they were not guilty. Mr. and Mrs.
Blue-cap make a dainty little nest, generally in some low bush or a tuft of grass,
and weave it with leaves and grass, and line it with feathers or fur.
I am half afraid you will laugh at my praise; of our birds; but really, as I
think of one after another, each seems more beautiful than the last.
■ ♦
The minute and delicate pencilling of the fire tail's j* plumage is "as soft and
exquisite as that of a butterfly's wing, each tiny grey or olive-coloured feather
barred across with wavy hues of a darker shade. Beneath, and on the head and
wings, is a little black, and the back, above the tail, is deep fiery crimson, seen
most plainly when the wings are spread in flying. If they were night-birds, we
might fancy them Titania's torch-bearers.
Some humane, gentle friends of ours kept a pair of fire-tails as tame pet s.
A cage was their nightly abode and protection; but they, like our own
parroquets, were accustomed to play about the room at liberty, and it was a
great delight to watch their pretty, graceful antics as they flew or ran
everywhere without the least fear, perching on chairs and tables, and peering
about inquisitively, quite at their ease. A bit of thread a foot or two long,
dropped on the floor, attracted them at once. Both would pounce upon it, each
* Malurus longicaudus —Blue Wren (formerly "Superb Warbler"),
f Estrelda Bella-^- Fire-tailed Finch.
124
Tasmanian Friends and Foes.


trying to pull it from the other; and the chirp, and flutter, and tussle that then
began, used to send us into fits of laughter. To see such tiny things in a state of
such intense fuss and excitement was irresistibly droll. Giving them two
pieces of thread spoiled the game, unless they got entangled. The enjoyment
was evidently not in the possession of the piece of thread, but in the contest
to obtain it.
A condition of mind by no means limited to fire-tails," said Mrs. Merton.
Their nests are usually grouped together, several in one tree; and, judging
from what we know of their manners in human society, so many of these lively
little birds living in close neighbourhood must form a very busy, animated
community. The nests are large in proportion to the size of the birds, being as
much as ten inches across, and formed entirely of grasses and stalks of plants.
The diamond birds* are daintily finished specimens of bird-plumage too.
The clearness of their yellow and olive tints is enhanced by small, well-defined,
round white spots, more, I think, like seed-pearls than diamonds; only, I
suppose, the exceeding loveliness of the tiny creature seemed to ask of its
discoverer to be the namesake of the most precious of gems. We only know
them from rare and rapid glimpses in their native state.
" I remember how one frightened Papa," said Louis. "We saw a little
hole in a steep bank, and Papa knelt down to peep into it, and had just said,
'I believe it's a snake's hole,' when, like a shot out of a gun, a diamond bird flew
out almost in his face. Papa jumped up very quick ;he was frightened. Now
were you not, Papa ?" ' ■
" I confess it," said Mr. Merton, laughing. " I've seldom been more
startled, for the moment. I was not thinking of anything but snakes in
connection with the hole, quite forgetting that the delicate little diamond birds
make subterranean abodes also."
v •
An elegantly-shaped honey-eating bird, called the spine-bill, j* of the same
form as several kinds of humming-birds, but larger, is a very frequent visitor to
our flowers. Its plumage is of grey, brown, and yellow, in lovely combinations,
with a mark on the throat like a long beard. The long, slender beak and
* Pardalotus jpunctatus.
+ Acanthorhynchus tenuirostris.


penoil-like tongue are beautifully adapted for sucking honey. A large tree,
of the small red fuchsia, which grows by my bedroom window, and is in
blossom most of the year, is a favourite haunt for them; and as some of the
branches stretch across the window, we within the room can observe thfe birds
perfectly, as they throw themselves into a thousand graceful and queer attitudes
to reach the flower-bells with their pencil-tongues. If the theory were true
about the transmigration of
souls, I should think these
pretty honey-birds had been
acrobats in a former existence,
and their favourite position
still is topsy-turvy, putting
their heads in exactly the
attitudes which seem most
impracticable, as they hold on
above with their clever,
slender little feet, and get
beneath the flowers they want
to suck; but so quick are
they, that our eyes are too
slow to mark half their
fantastic motions. Perhaps,
instead of acrobats, they were
*
once conjurors, clever in
legerdemain. In obtaining the honey out of the flowers of a large Abutilon,
which grows by our porch, they do not give themselves the trouble of reaching
up the deep bells, but just perch on the flower-stem, and insert their sharp
bills between the sepals of the calyx, right into the flower-tube. I have often
seen them do it, and wonder how they found out such an ingenious " short cut"
to the honey-cells.
♦
" By that marvellous faculty which we generalise under the name of
' instinct,'" said Mrs. Merton; " but of the range and extent of which we are
profoundly ignorant. The Abutilon is not an indigenous plant here, and the
birds in a purely wild state would never have met with it, so that the occasion
and the device are both original; and the latter looks very much like reason,
and a wise way of utilising a knowledge of cause and effect."
SLENDER-BILLED SPINE BILLS, on a spray of Abutilon.
About one-third the natural size.


Some little birds, whose voices are very familiar to us, I do not yet know
by sight. They say, as we fancy, some words quite plainly. Papa first noticed
one of them when, one day, he was looking about for a fallen tree to serve him
for a foot-bridge over a flooded rivulet, and the bird overhead continued crying,
" Get over! get over!" and following from place to place as Papa kept searching
along the bank, and so ever since we have called it the " Get-over bird."
Another we distinctly heard calling, "Kitty wick! kitty wick! kitty wick!"
whilst a third, perhaps Kitty herself, indignant at so public a repetition of her
name, pertly asks, " Who are you ?"
The pretty little white-eye'* is, I think, the most defiant of all our bird
visitors. Virtuously devoted to the destruction of insects for a great part of the
year, and so our creditor for a share of the good things his vigilance has secured
to us, he sometimes comes to reap his harvest with so numerous a " following "
of his kind, that in some, but I must say very rare, seasons he is a little
exorbitant in his demands. One year they appropriated nearly the whole of our
sweet-water grapes along the terrace wall, coming in such swarms, and showing
such astute generalship in the disposition of their forces, as baffled all pacific
resistance; and we attempted no other. Eight or ten would cling to one bunch,
making it, to all seeming, a cluster of birds instead of grapes, just pecking
perhaps a third of each berry, and leaving the rest to waste and shrivel. We
might quietly go and stand closely watching them, and only the glance of their
saucy eyes betrayed their knowledge of our presence. If shouted at, and really
scared for the time, they rose in scores, and flew round the corner, where they
sat and chattered in a pear-tree till the coast was clear, when back they came
again. Hoping to save some of the grapes in another garden, Mamma sent to
get them picked; but here the little marauders had been still less disturbed, and
the destruction was the more complete. A great basket of empty stalks was all
we gained by the picking. We tried netting, but the bold nimble little birds
darted through the meshes with perfect self-possession and success. So we
began to despair of profiting much from our grapes, unless, in patriarchal fashion,
we were to go and live under our vines whilst the fruit was on. For two
subsequent years, however, the vines were left wholly unmolested by the white-
eyes, and then, as if to punish us for begrudging so large a share as had once
been claimed by them, oidium, that horrible scourge, took possession of the
whole.
In addition to all our very own little birds, we share with you the pleasure
* Zoster ops dorsalis.


of welcoming the swallows in spring, and are as fond of them as you can he.
Papa is so afraid lest our cats should catch the young ones, when they first
begin to fly from the nests under the verandah, that he put up some light rails,
quite high up, just opposite the nests, for them to sit on, and there we can watch
them—droll, round little things ! —-just able to balance themselves, and sitting
with continually opened beaks, waiting for the busy, indefatigable old birds to
feed them in turn. As soon as they are able to fly so far, the whole family go
down to the river for a bathe, and then there is a long toilet performance gone
through on the rail, as the wet feathers are preened and plumed in the sun. The
old ones often fly into the rooms after flies. Once, as Mamma and I sat reading,
we heard a faint chirping and fluttering, and for some time could not trace
whence it came. At last we found that there was a bird down behind one of
Papa's large heavy hook-cases which filled a recess, and we were unable to get
at it in any other way than by the removal of all the hooks, and lifting out the
top and bottom sets of shelves. But we could not leave the poor bird to flutter
to death, so we at once began, and soon had the tables and floor covered with
books, much to Papa's astonishment when he came in. But the moment we
told him, and he heard the poor faint little chirp, he helped us famously; and as
he moved the cases away, a panting swallow flew out, and lit on the table, as if
to recover itself, and then darted off through the window.
On one of our pleasant expeditions to the Schoutens, we saw a swallow's
nest in a most singular place, and such a snug one ! Many of the granite rocks
there are shaped very fantastically; some of the great crags 011 the mountain sides
are at a little distance so like towers and castles, obelisks and pinnacles, that it
is difficult to believe they have not been built there by a race of bygone Titans ;
and the huge boulders, apparently worn by the long action of water into
grotesque shapes, imitate all kinds of odd things. Near a bright brook, beside
which we one day had our picnic luncheon, were many of these; one was like
an enormous skull, but many times larger than the Megatherium's, and beside it
was another, the shape of a lady's muff —only Glumdalclitch herself could not
carry one of the size. And as we sat by the stream, we watched the numbers
of swallows that were busy catching insects, or skimming and dipping in the
water. One pair we saw always flying in and out of the granite muff, and when
we scrambled up and looked inside the great round hollow, we saw the nest,
high up above the entrance —for the hole was like a cavern—quite lofty within;
so you may think what a sheltered, safe, cosy home the wise little birds had
fixed upon.


I think I have now told you about most of the land birds here which are
familiar in our daily life, and were I to extend my gossip to others with which
we are not familiar, and go to books for memoirs of them, my gossip would be
too long altogether; for talking or reading about beautiful creatures is very
different from seeing and knowing them.
You had better come to us for a year's visit before all the native things are
killed, and then you will think I have not said half enough of their beauty and
interest.


L»aa^^g5S;s^A=asg£a5Sg5S^-r-T-r-Mk7T-«^--W-^tgT-iT-irT-r.« < j I. i. H ikJj.dMm ■■ JWIIIIH mill •■ ■ tm*SrriniimnFiB>jummH~>rm «s« I .aiiliflWI I liimiMI— llll*III J.» lUhUJIIIIII flii*»l»^ll»MJII)J3
CHAPTER XXI
44 Fresh fields, and pastures new."
AT the earnest desire of her husband, who thought that a little change of scene
would be beneficial after the dreary winter, Mrs. Merton accepted the
oft-repeated invitation of some friends, residing at the distance of a day's
journey from her own home, to spend a week or two, taking with her Gwendoline
and Winifred.
Mr. Merton drove them over in the tandem-cart, as no public conveyance had
been established, nor were the roads such as to encourage an enterprise of the
kind. In even using the word " road," I fear I may mislead my English
readers; for unless they happen to be acquainted with some of the most remote
and uncivilised corners of Great Britain, they will fail to realise what even the
best of colonial bush tracks really are. If a high rocky mountain lie in the
route to be traversed, the " road " usually goes over the summit, or as near to it
as may be practicable; the utmost essay in road-making being usually the
rolling aside just the largest of the rocks upon it, and leaving anything smaller
than a hogshead as a trifle not worth noticing. If a swamp chance to intervene,
it generally spreads over some acres, affording scarcely what can be termed a
choice of evils, but certainly a wide selection as to the particular portion of the
evil in question which shall be navigated; and it often happens, that after
successive teams have made circuits wider and wider in extent, in the fallacious
hope that such " circular sailing" would enable them to escape the deepest of
the slough, the desperate travellers try back, and plunge straight through the
midst, sometimes sticking fast, but more generally dragging through, to the sore
suffering of their unhappy cattle.
A lady was one day telling our then Governor, Sir Thomas Gore Browne,
of what she termed " a very bad road."


" A bad road," rejoined he. " Can ten bullocks pull a cart through it ?"
She thought they could.
"Ah, then," replied the Governor, laughing, "it's not a bad road. We
used to consider any road in New Zealand a good one that ten bullocks could
pull through."
In some districts of our island the municipal road trusts have done good
service in the improvement of country ways by bridging dangerous fords and
by avoiding the worst mountain passes. But in many cases ignorance of the
simplest principles of surveying or engineering is but too evident, and the
expenditure of the small disposable funds, with all but useless result, is the
m •
outcome.
Our friends could have sadly verified these observations as they pursued
their journey. The destructive floods of the past winter had rendered even
" made " roads worse than those left in primitive bush condition. In one place,
where the road wound terrace-wise round the steep side of a mountain above a
deep wooded ravine, in the bottom of which flowed a river, the outer portion of
the road, built up • of rocks and stones, was washed down, leaving a space
something less in places than the width of the cart-wheels; and on reaching it,
Mr. Merton set down his passengers to walk, he and Lina carefully leading the
horses over the dangerous ground, which extended a quarter of a mile or more.
In another, a causeway of earth, with the road on the top, had been thrown up
across a wide marsh, leaving a small bridged opening for the usual river, but
making no allowance for the enormous additional volume of water which
covered the whole valley during floods. Accordingly, as a natural consequence,
the causeway had been overflowed and swept away in great gaps of 50 or 100
feet long, necessitating a wide detour through a scarcely traversable, boggy
swamp before the remaining portion of the causeway could be regained. A
small amount of common sense and foresight would have prevented this loss
of money and convenience.
•Tor one adventure of the Mertons' short journey, however, no human
sagacity could have been prepared.
At starting from home, Lina, when getting into the dog-cart, struck her
foot somewhat painfully against a " tomahawk " (or small axe), and exclaimed,
" Oh, Papa, that horrid thing! You always will carry it on a journey, and we
have never wanted it yet."
" Never mind. We may."
And they did.


As they drove on, the good horses trotting merrily along another terrace-
road round a very steep hill, with a wall of upright rocks on one side and a
deep gully on the other, Mr. Merton, after passing round a sharp angle, suddenly
pulled up, looking earnestly forward.
A mass of rock, detached from the cliffs above, had fallen into the middle
of the narrow road, completely blocking it up.
" What is to be done ?" was Mrs. Merton's natural inquiry.
" Hold the reins, whilst I go and see."
A careful survey of the obstacle was anything but encouraging, but the
need for prompt action did not then occur to Mr. Merton for the first time. He
came back.
" The only chance for us to get on lies in my being able to heave the rock
over, so as to draw the cart past it. You and the girls may get out if you like,
for it must be a work of time, even if I can accomplish what I intend; and if X
cannot, I'm afraid we must go back to Eock-dell for assistance."
" Oh, Papa! and through that dreadful bog again!" cried Lina, whose
especial horror was a swamp. Over rocky ground she could get out and walk,
and was as brave and active as a chamois; but to sit still and be dragged
».
through a quagmire by the poor struggling plunging horses was terrible both to
her mother and herself.
" Hand me out the tomahawk, Lina," said Mr. Merton, hastily unhooking
the leader's traces, and fastening the horse to a tree. " You will now see that
I was not quite so unwise in bringing it. On it- rests our hope of weathering
this difficulty."
Throwing off his coat, he clambered down over the edge of the road, and
began hewing away, and soon cut several tough gum-saplings (young Eucalypti),
which he stripped of their branches and flung on to the road. Then, climbing
back himself, he used one of the poles as a lever to lift the rock. As soon as
the smallest space was gained, Lina, under his direction, inserted a thin wedge
of stone, and then, as the rock rose a little more, a larger one. By diligently
continuing the process, and replacing the levers with new ones, as they
successively broke under the strain, the rock became tilted up, so as to admit
stones beneath as large as Lina and her mother could carry, and at last, after
nearly two hours' hard work, the mass of rock was finally upset on to the brink
of the road. Preda was greatly disappointed at not seeing it plunge over, and go
thundering down into the river-bed below; but as, by measuring the space, her
father ascertained that the cart could just pass between it and the cliff above, he


was glad not to waste either time or labour. The quiet old shaft-horse drew
steadily through, the leader was hooked on again, and the party continued their
journey; but the long delay had almost exhausted daylight, and it had been
dark some time ere they reached Walloora, the abode of -their friends, Mr. and
Mrs. Bexley.
A great barking in all directions, and the out-rusb of two or three deep-
voiced dogs, greeted their approach. Then doors opened quickly, whence long
i *
beams of light flashed athwart the gloom, gates were flung wide, and the tandem
drew up at a broad verandah, whose clustering roses and Chinese honeysuckle
added a fragrant greeting to the hearty welcome with which the Mertons were
received.
Three daughters and two sons, of ages from eighteen to seven,
formed the juvenile circle into which our young friends were introduced.
Harry, the eldest, was a good-natured, good-looking young fellow, upon whom
every educational advantage attainable in the colony had been lavished
without stint, but whose chief, if not only real interest and amusement
was in field-sports. Edgar, a boy of twelve, was absent at school. Lucy,
sixteen, and Kate, fourteen, were pretty girls of average young-lady ability,
with no particular bent of any kind beyond a tolerably complacent estimate of
themselves, and a capacity for indulgence of every description. Little Janet,
seven years old, was a happy, round dumpling of a child, delighted to receive a
playmate so nearly her own age as Winifred, and the two were usually seen
hand-in-hand during the Mertons' visit.
John Bexley, now a wealthy man, and a "worshipful," with "all things
handsome about him," had begun his colonial career on a younger son's small
patrimony, and, by unceasing industry and singular good fortune, had prospered
in everything he undertook, until the thousands of his yearly income needed
five figures to state them, and his ample mansion and comfortable homestead
were models of luxury and completeness. His old friend, Harold Merton, on
the other hand, with twice as much natural talent, and industry fully equal,
had, from the outset of his career, encountered adverse fortune; and whilst
golden returns rewarded the most commonplace act of the one, losses, privation,
and disappointment had followed the brave, determined struggles and
unquenched energy of the other. He was a practical illustration that " the race
is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong."
Mrs. Bexley looked very much the right kind of woman to be her husband's
wife. Comely, cheerful, and well dressed, she "became" her position well.


Perhaps, on a near view, an observer might discover that in her hospitality there
was a large leaven of ostentation, so that it was not precisely of that kind
lauded by the apostle. A poor acquaintance, brought in to dinner by good John
himself, would be less welcome in her eyes to a share of the family repast, than
would be the advent of some magnate of the land, for whose entertainment the
cook's utmost skill must be put in requisition. She was not equal in- point of
family to Mr. Bexley, but her dower of a few thousands had been one of his
*
early advantages, and assisted his advancement; yet from her usually keen
enquiries as to the rank or connection of others, it might be surmised, by those
unacquainted with the peculiar weaknesses of the universal family of —perhaps
snobs is too strong a term, yet there is not another that suffices —that in her
own belongings flowed the bluest of patrician blood.
On the morning after their arrival, Gwendoline and Winifred, eager to see
the beauties of the place, were taken by Lucy and her sisters into the garden,
which was picturesquely laid out in terraces down a slope to the river's edge,
and they were admiring some fine tame swans, both white* and black,*]- which
swam up quite boldly to be fed, when the breakfast-bell rang, and the party
trooped up to the house.
The morning passed quickly, for Mrs. Merton and her daughters, in delighted
exploration of the conservatory and hot-houses, and their treasures of curious
and lovely plants, many of which were new to Lina, though well known
*
in former years by her mother, to whom they were as welcome as old
friends.
The Bexleys rather chafed at this long lingering amongst the flowers, and
Kate openly avowed her opinion that " the houses weren't worth coming to, till
the grapes and pineapples were fit to eat."
In the afternoon some young visitors arrived to play croquet on the lawn,
which, irrigated and continually mown, rivalled an English one in verdure and
velvety evenness. All the guests remained to dinner, and a dance wound up the
evening; so that to Lina, who usually led so retired a life, the day was full
of interest and excitement.
The two fathers had enjoyed a long ramble amongst "improvements"—
a word which too commonly implies a weary pilgrimage for the doomed guest,
but was in this instance a pleasant' renewal of an old friendship, and a really
interesting inspection of many new and valuable farm implements and
* Cygnus olor.
t Cygnus atratus.


machinery which especially delighted Mr. Merton, who returned home on
the following day, leaving his wife and daughters for two or three weeks.
" Have you any nice ferns near ?" asked Lina one day of Lucy Bexley.
"Oh yes, lots in the steep gully over the hill. Why ?"
Because X should like to get some to take home and plant in a little
rocky fernery I have in the garden."
" Harry! here's Gwendoline Merton wants ferns. Can't you go with us
to the fern-gully to-morrow ?"
"Well, yes; I suppose I can, if I like."
" Then you must like. So mind, we 'll start the first thing after breakfast,
and then we shall easily be back by lunch-time."
Breda was eager to be one of the party, but her mother decided otherwise,
considering the walk too long for her; and the promise of a ride on Janet's own
little pony, instead, quite consoled her for her disappointment.


CHAPTER XXII.
In dells where the forest shades fell dimmer,
In deep, green silent glens—silent, except the fall
Of tinkling streams, that made a monotone musical —
The feathery fern-trees dwell, with palmy crests outspread,
Close interwove and overlapp'd in canopies o'erhead ;
Upborne on massy columns, whence taper ribs upspring,
And leafy traceries flow from their mazy clustering !
"Whilst round each pillar, wreaths of polished verdure cling
With long and shining fronds, in graceful garlands drooping
Adown, and down, till into the spray of the tiny cascade they 're stooping.
Some of my Bush Friends in Tasmania . —L. A. M.
THE three girls, carrying baskets and a trowel, and Harry, with his gun
and kangaroo dogs, set forth in good time, Lucy's little Skye terrier
trotting along too.
For a couple of miles their way lay through the open forest-land of a wide
hill-side, gradually rising, until, on gaining a little stony ridge, the gully, or
fern-valley, lay deep. below them, and Lina gave a cry of admiration as she
gazed down.
The whole valley beneath was filled with noble tree-ferns* of all sizes,
their graceful umbrellas of feathery foliage in many places touching and
overlapping each other, without leaving a stem visible. From the centre of
each crown of adult fronds the young ones of the coming season were springing
up, with their brown in-curving heads forming a second crown of peculiar and
most graceful form —a circle of crosiers, in fact; and their perfect "lines of
beauty" making such infinitely various and exquisite combinations as would
distract the ablest composer of arabesques to imitate with his pencil. Above
the verdant domes of the tree-ferns arose tall, slender sassafras freest, as
* Bieksonia Antarctica.
f Atherosperma moschata.


minarets; and giant Eucalypti, bare of leaf or branch for perhaps 150 feet,
towered up aloft, lifting their diadems of myrtle blossoms high into the sunny
air above, .
" If you go on picking flowers at that rate," said Harry, looking at the
cluster Lina had gathered, " we shall want a cart to carry them home."
" And they 're all common things," said Lucy.
" Not common to me. Several of these I never saw growing, though I
know them, because Mamma has made drawings of most, and I am very glad to
find them. This is the flower of the large Coprosma*' that bears the red berries.
It belongs to the coffee tribe. And here is another pretty greenish bell,*f*
putting one in mind of Solomon's seal, and, from the leaves and its curious
way of growing, each stalk one complete plant, it must be the blossom of those
lovely little turquoise-coloured berries I have seen. And these orchids —the
and the spider§—and these queer helmets, both the plain one|| and
that with the feather in itU, and this darling little bright blue one,** are
all so lovely I could not pass them by. I have only picked one of each kind
to press and keep, for Mamma has always taught us not to gather flowers in
waste. I have seen her quite unhappy when she has observed people plucking
quantities of flowers only to throw away again."
"La !" exclaimed Kate, "asif it mattered. They 're no good."
" Oh yes ; many bees, both native and honey-bees gone wild, feed on these
flowers ; several of our pretty native birds, too, are honey-eaters; and though all
the flowers we might waste would not, perhaps, make much difference, still
it must make some, and the flowers are far better growing and making all
places beautiful where they are, than dying, and being of no use."
"The path lies down here," said Harry, pointing to a narrow track
amongst the tall brake fern that skirted the ravine.
o
" Let's go on to the next turn, Harry," said Kate, " and then Gwendoline
will see the waterfall. I can hear it now."
They went on until, at a short curve in the track round a projecting mass
of rock, the cascade burst into view. A stream of silver, framed in cliffs of jet!
Pouring from a considerable height down a dark chasm in the mountain, the
water fell into a deep black hollow, and then, suddenly changing its character
* Coprosma hirtella.
+ Drymophila cyanocarpa (the fruit is given
in Plate 4, chap, vii.)
J Diuris sulphurea.
§ Caladenia Patersonia.
|| Pterostylis cucullata.
II P. squamata,
** Caladenia barbata.


from the grandly sublime to the softly beautiful, it went dancing along, under
and amidst the ferns, round mossy rocks and lichen-tinted trunks of hoary old
trees, sometimes sleeping stilly in a shadowy pool, and anon tumbling in a
sparkling little fall over logs and boulders.
" Now then, look alive! Sharp's the word, and down you go !" cried Harry,
not quite comprehending Lina's silent, delighted pause of rapt admiration at so
new and glorious a scene, but carefully helping her in her descent as they
scrambled beside the water-course, until the fern-trees they had looked down on
from above, almost as an undulating carpet of verdure, now rose overhead, their
Teek-Fern Forest.
wide-spread feathery crowns varying in height from two to thirty feet, and in all
imaginable variety of form and grouping—some, as Lina said, like very tall
feather umbrellas, and others like green-cushioned foot-stools ; and all around,
• on rocks, tree-trunks, and fern-stems, such a world of beauty in mosses, lichens,
and smaller ferns as-she had never before beheld.
They had wandered on for some distance, each step seeming to Lina to
bring them amidst yet more perfect and wondrous loveliness, when, just
before them, a fine brush-kangaroo bounded over a log and vanished into the
thicket.


" By Jove! what a chance!" exclaimed Harry, as the dogs rushed away,
and he, cocking his gun, leaped after, crying, " I 'll be back directly."
" Can you find us again ?" called Lucy.
" Can a duck swim?" was the rejoinder. He was out of sight in another
instant, and very soon the sounds of the chase died quite away in the distance.
Lina's face probably told of her uneasiness at thus losing their guide, but
the girls ridiculed the idea of any danger, and all were soon intent on their fern-
collecting, climbing over the huge prostrate trees, jumping from rock to rock
across the rivulet, and wandering all about, but, as they believed, still keeping
near the spot where Harry left them. Time flew by unheeded, so busy were they
in searching for, digging up, and safely packing away in damp rags the delicate
little roots of the treasures.
Lina was in ecstasies of delight as she found, one after another in quick
succession, so many of the lovely ferns which abound in such dark glens as the
one into which her young companions had led her. One fern-tree trunk of the
hundreds around, she averred, would find her occupation for a day, clothed and
garlanded and fringed as it was with various species of filmy ferns, all so
exquisitely delicate in material and graceful in form. Semi-transparent, fragile,
and minute in their fairy-like delicacy, each seemed lovelier than the last—some
emulating the lightness of feathers, and covering their brown, rough home as
with plumage of the daintiest green; * whilst the giant brother, whose tall form
they draped, spread over them wide-reaching protecting arms, as though to
ward off all inclement extremes from their frail beauty. On mossy rocks by
the brook-side were even tinier growths, with fronds not an inch in length,-f- yet
branched and subdivided, and tipped with crests of sori in such miniature
completeness, that Titania, if she ever "revisit the glimpses of the moon" in
Austral climes, might commission Cobweb to decorate with them her festal
robe for evening revelry.
I see a book advertised and pleasantly noticed in the English papers—
A Fern Paradise; but could the eloquent author once behold an untrodden,
unspoiled Tasmanian fern-valley, methinks he would feel that he had applied
the epithet too soon. Unhappily, the greedy Vandalism, which covets
and destroys at a blow, has desolated nearly all the fern-groves near
* Hymenopliyllum rarum, H. unilaterale, H. crispatum, H. jlabellatum, Tricomanes venosurn,
Asplenium laxum, Poly podium grammitidis —all growing on tree ferns in shady valleys.
+ Hymenophyllum tunbridgense.


Tasmanian towns. Only in remote nooks can sueli now be found in primeval
beauty.*
Ferns of larger growth -f- than the delicate little parasites grew beneath the
shade and beside the brook : many of these were old acquaintances, others new
to Lina, whose rapture at such acquisition at first amused, and then rather
mystified Lucy, who, though when called upon earnestly for answering
admiration owned they were " pretty enough," yet rather contemptuously
dismissed them as " only common ferns, after all."
At length their young voices, which had rung out with gay mirth and chatter
almost incessantly, gradually left long pauses in the chorus; the search after
plants grew very languid, and Lucy, flinging herself down on a fern-trunk,
exclaimed —
"Well, I'm tired; that's a fact; and I'm hungry too. It must be lunch-
time, I'm sure." Then, looking at her watch for the first time since starting
"Oh ! have you any idea what o'clock it is ? Past four /"
" Where can Harry be ?" said Kate. " I 've neither heard him nor the
since they went away."
"If Harry gets a good run after the kangaroo, he'd never think of it till
it's over," said Lucy. "I vote we get home as fast as we can, or we shall be
too late for dinner as well as lunch. Come along, Lina, this is the way;" and
gathering up her basket, she set off in perfect confidence, Lina and Kate
following.
But all made much slower progress than in the morning. They had walked
a long distance, much farther than they guessed, since Harry went off; for in
such valleys one part is so like another, and the pathless labyrinth of fern, tree,
and thicket often so devoid of any distinctive feature, to any eye but that of an
experienced bushman, as to be deceptive in the extreme.
After plodding on with almost silent perseverance for another half-hour,
Lucy, who kept ahead, cried out, "Oh ! here is a strange place ! I'm quite sure
I never was here before."
When her weary companions came up, they all, as by one impulse, sank-
down on the ground to rest and gaze.
Here was a level floor, of probably half-an-acre in extent, without any small
* See Appendix—" Fern-tree Valleys."
t Pteris incisa, Pohjpodium rugolosum, Imesipteris tasmensis (or tree-fern), OleicTienia dicarpa,
Lomaria discolor, Polystichum coriaceum.


growth whatever, but thickly strewn with the dead dry fronds of the fern-trees,
which grew all over the space at nearly equal distances; the straight brown
stems like columns, and the overarching and interlacing features like the groined
arches oi a Gothic vault. Xo peep of sky could be discerned, but a dim glimmer
of subdued greenish light fell here and there through the dense canopy above,
and appeared beyond the lengthened vistas of the irregular aisles of columns.
The silent, dusk solemnity of the place would have been striking and a little
"gruesome" at any time; the liveliest chatter would have died out at the
threshold; but to the weary, hungry, and, we may now own, frightened girls,
it seemed especially weird and awful.
Lucy, however, who was the most courageous of the triad, still endeavoured
to put on a brave lace, and observed—"Well, Gwendoline, when you first came
clown into the valley, you said it was like fairyland, and I think now we must
have got into an ogre's den."
" It's a great deal more like a church," sighed Kate.
"Or like what is called a crypt," said Lina. " Mamma has books of prints
of old cathedrals in England, and this is just like one of the underground vaults
beneath them. It is very beautiful, and very wonderful; but I cannot enjoy it
as I should have done in the morning. If you never were here before, we must
have missed our way out."
Lucy looked very grave. "Well, to tell the honest truth, we have."
" Then what's to be done ?" asked Lina.
"Why, we can see very plainly here where we came into this queer grotto, or
dungeon, or whatever you call it; so the best thing is to turn round and go out
the same way, and keep as straight on as we can. We shall find the bank of
the valley on the side we got down, and when once on the top of that, the road
home is plain enough."
"Yes, if we can see," said Kate; "but I'm sure it's above an hour since
you said it was four o'clock, so there's not more than two hours' daylight left."
" And there is not any moon now," said Lina.
" I know. So we had better put our best foot foremost, and get along;"
and Lucy, suiting the action to the word, turned her back on the wonderful
natural architecture of the fern-grove, and plunged through the scrub with
admirable resolution, leaving, as did they all, many a torn fragment of attire on
the sticks and thorny shrubs in their route.
They struggled on, with weary feet and anxious hearts, for some time
longer.


" Look at your watch, Lucy," said her sister; " what o'clock is it now ?"
" Half-past six, I think. The sun must he going down, for I can scarcely
see."
Kate hurst into tears. " What shall we do ? What shall we do ? We
never shall get home any more."
Lina made no outcry, hut the tears began to fall. She was thinking of her
mother's distress and anxiety at her absence, but went stumbling after Lucy,
who, without speaking a word, plodded on again. Suddenly she stopped short,
with an involuntary cry of surprise. The others hurried -up.
"We are back again in the church!" and Lucy pointed to the pillared space
• '
• before her, now plainly seen by all.
"It cannot be the same. Perhaps we have found another," said Kate,
hopefully.
" Ho; here is the bunch of ferns I left where we sat. We have come back
again into the very same place the very same way," cried poor Lucy, in a
despairing tone.
" It is really an enchanted valley, I think," said Lina, through her tears.
" And whilst I believed I was going so straight, I've been only coming
round again," sobbed Lucy. "It is getting so dark now, I could not see at all
much longer."
" Surely they 'll come to look for us," said Kate.
"I daresay they will, but I am quite sure we have come a long way.
I never heard anyone speak of this strange place; and Papa, or Harry, or other
people would have mentioned it, if they had ever been here."
" If only we had a compass," said Lina, "we should know which way to go."
" If we only had some dinner, we might not die of hunger," moaned Kate.
" Or some lucifers, we might make a fire, for it is getting very cold' already."
"We have never "coo-ee'd,' said Lina. "Suppose we try. Harry might
hear us. Let us all 'coo-ee' together, to make more sound. How then—one—
two —three — Coo-ee!" . • .
Ho response came, and darkness rapidly increased. Again and again they
» ' ,
" coo-ee'd," but the silence was unbroken.
Kate was sobbing and crying wildly, " Mamma, Mamma! Oh, we shall
never see home any more! . I shall die of cold and hunger, if the tigers don't
eat me."
" Don't be a fool, Kitty," said Lucy, shaking her rather roughly. " Isn't
it as bad for Gwendoline and me? and you don't hear us howling like that.


I'm afraid it is not oi any use trying to get away now until daylight, and this
is a better place to stay in than the wet scrub and deep beds of rotten leaves.
We shall be drier here, at any rate; but it's very horrid."
"I would not care for anything, if only Mamma knew I was safe," was
Lina s lament, thought and spoken many a time, as, worn out with fatigue and"
terror, hungry and very cold, the poor girls drew close and closer together.
In spite of all their fright and misery, they fell asleep for a few minutes at
a time, only to awaken to keener terror and suffering, as the wild cries of owl*
or mope-hawk or booming bittern sounded through the thick darkness, and
several times the patter and thud of night-roaming animals passed almost beside
them. Dandie, the terrier, who coiled himself at the feet of his young mistress,
acted as a most vigilant sentinel, and boldly challenged every sound, proclaiming
his readiness to do battle against all intruders. Lucy had tried to make him
leave them early in the evening, thinking they would follow, and so be led
homewards; but the too-faithful little dog stoutly refused to budge an inch,
evidently believing that his proper place was by the side of his mistress, come
weal, come woe.
Whether that seemingly interminable night appeared longest to the
shivering, awe-struck girls in their cold dark' lair, or to the almost distracted
mothers in the luxurious and silent house, it were hard to tell.


* %
CHAPTER XXIII.
Onward! thro' the swamp, the marsh,
And scrubby moorland, rough and harsh,
With shout and wild halloo !
Lost. —L. A. M.
THE day at Walloora had passed a little wearily to Mrs. Merton. At every
turn she missed Lina, usually her constant companion, and neither Freda's
prattle nor Mrs. Bexley's hospitable attentions could quite overcome a half-
anxious desire for her daughter's return.
When luncheon-time arrived without the girls, Mrs. Bexley took it quite
coolly. Harry was with them, so they were well taken care of. Harry was an
excellent bushman, brave as a lion, and so charmed with Miss Merton, he would
take care that she and his sisters were safe —and so on, and so 011 —pouring
forth the fulness of maternal pride and love; for Harry, her first-born, was
faultless in her admiring eyes.
With some difficulty she persuaded Mrs. Merton to accompany her in a
short drive to return some visits which neighbouring families had made to her
guest. Freda and her friend Janet were also taken, and as at one house they
found a large party of young people assembled in honour of a little son's
birthday, the two children were delighted to join in the games and dances, so
that the carriage only reached home as the first dinner-bell rang, and the last
gleams of twilight were fading out of the sky.
• *s
To Mrs. Merton's anxious enquiries came the alarming reply that the party
had not returned. Mrs. Bexley herself looked perplexed, but said at once—
"Don't be alarmed. They're all right. I know how it is. Harry has
taken them round by the Thorntons. He said this morning he must, see Ted
Thornton about the cricket-match; and once they got there, there'd be no
escape till after dinner."


Mr. Bexley, coming down stairs in his evening dress, wondered to find his
gentle guest seated on a hall chair, pale with anxiety, and in tears; but his wife
quickly gave him her explanation of the cause.
" Gone with Harry !" he exclaimed. " Why, Harry joined me two hours
ago down the river. Here he is. Harry, where did you leave Miss Merton and
\
your sisters V'
"In the fern-gully below the waterfall. What time did they come home ?"
Mrs. Merton's fear became agony. " Oh, Harry, they 're not home ! They
must he lost! Come and show me which way you went!" she cried, hurrying
to the door.
Mr. Bexley caught her hand and led her within. "My dear friend, you
cannot, and—pardon me—you shall not attempt to go out. If needful, I will
go, and take every man on the place with me, hut you must be content to rest
here. I must first learn all particulars I can."
He proceeded to question Harry very keenly, soon eliciting the truth.
" And do you mean to say that, for the brutal pleasure of chasing that
kangaroo, you deserted your trust, and left those poor children by them-
selves in that labyrinth ?"
" I did go back, sir, as I said I would, but I didn't find them, so I thought
they had come home."
" You thought! " echoed his father, in stern contempt.
" John!" cried his wife, " don't be angry; I daresay the girls have gone
t
to Thornton's. We can send the carriage for them."
Mr. Bexley thought that was possible too, and that at all events the
chance should be tried, and went himself to give the order. In a few minutes
they heard the sound of wheels rapidly retreating, and he returned.
" How then, have dinner instantly. If you had not suggested sending
to the Grove, I should not have waited; as it is, I may as well eat something
before I go, in case the children are not there. They 'll be famished, poor
things! Come, Mrs. Merton, we are in the same boat, and you must do as I do,
and have some dinner."
"Do—there's a dear soul," said Mrs. Bexley. "John's grieved and vexed
enough as it is, and if you fret so, and don't come in, that 'll be another trouble
to him."
But a mote uneasy, anxious group have rarely assembled round so
luxurious a table. Every ear was vainly strained to catch some possible token
of the absent ones returning: and the conversation was almost limited to Mr.
O '


Bexley's abrupt queries, and Harry's half-sullen, half-sorrowful replies, as to
their probable whereabouts.
The Grove, whither the carriage had been sent, was little more than three
miles distant; but the night was very dark, and the road bad, so that an hour
and a-half elapsed before the returning wheels were heard. All hurried to
the door.
• Had the girls come ?
Ho —nothing had been heard of them at Linden Grove, but Mr. Thornton,
with his sons and servants, had at once prepared to go out in search of them.
"God bless him!" cried Mr. Bexley. "How then, Mary, pack me a
basket, quick, with some bread and meat, and wine, and give me some warm
4
shawls; and, Walton, do you and the other men in the house make haste
and come with me to the falls."
*
«Why not call up the gardeners and the rest ?" said Mrs. Bexley, whose
alarm had now become intense.
" Because, if we fail to-night, we shall be glad of fresh help in the
morning," replied her husband, very seriously, as he hastily changed his dress.
" I suppose I can come ?" asked Harry.
" Please yourself— you're not likely to be of any use, judging from your
previous performances;" and with a hurried kiss to his sobbing wife, and a
hearty pressure of Mrs. Merton's hand, Mr. Bexley departed with his troop,
the lantern carried by one of the grooms being watched by the two mothers
as long as it remained visible.
A sad and weary vigil was theirs that night. Ho one thought of going to
bed, until Freda, sitting on a stool by the fire, fell asleep, and toppled over, and
was then sent away, with Janet Bexley, in Miss Brewer's charge.
0
Hour after hour crept on. Every few minutes the hall-door opened, and
one or both of the anxious watchers leant out listening; or Mrs. Merton laid
her ear to the ground in the carriage-drive, imagining she heard distant
footsteps—but none came.
The table stood ready laid with a dainty meal; the kettle sang by the fire;
the clock over the chimney-piece' ticked off its weary seconds; and the hours,
as they struck, seemed the saddest of all voices through that long, long night.
Overcome by exhaustion, the poor weary watchers must at length have
slept, for they were awoke soon after dawn by the entrance of Harry, who
had come to summon the other men to aid in the search. His father and
the rest had penetrated into the dense scrub as well as they could—not very


far in the pitchy darkness —rhad lit fires on the high bank, fired guns, cooee'd —
but all in vain. No answering noise had reached them; and now they were
going to form a cordon round the entire valley, and so work up to a centre.
" And then," said Harry, " we must find them."
His torn clothes and scratched face testified to his own exertions and eager
desire to remedy his fault. •
His father, he said, kept the basket of provisions he had taken for the girls
sacredly untouched, so that Harry was thankful for breakfast, of which he
persuaded and encouraged his mother and Mrs. Merton to partake.
" And then," he added, " you had better both go to bed. Be quite sure we
shall find the girls soon, now it is daylight; but they cannot be home for two or
three hours, and you had better sleep the while. Promise me this, that I may
tell my father ;" and, seeing it was their only rational course, the poor mothers
consented.
Taking a reinforcement of nearly a dozen men, and a rough breakfast for
vV %
the party already out, Harry speedily returned to the waterfall, which was
nearer the starting point of the search. Here he found his father and their
good friend Mr. Thornton, with several other neighbours, arranging their plan
of action. Some deemed it wholly useless to spread their band out to the
extreme opposite end of the valley, fully four miles distant in a direct line,
the proposed circuit being ten or twelve; whilst Mr. Bexley contended that
all would be incomplete, and probably ineffective, unless this were done.
"I will take that division myself," said he, "with my own two best
bushmen, Crawford and Brookes."
Both the men named stepped forward with gratified looks, touching their
hats. Harry ranged up beside them.
" Yes —you too."
" I brought your old hunting-horn, Father."
"An excellent idea. Thank you, Harry" —and Harry knew himself almost
forgiven.
"If you and Crawford carry guns, it is enough. 111 take the basket and
the horn, and Brookes the shawls, though they 'll scarcely be wanted now.
Never mind—-take 'em."
" I brought a little billy,* sir, with a drop of tea in, to warm for the young
ladies," said Crawford, a wiry, weather-beaten, clever old stockman.
* A tin can, with a lid, commonly used for bush tea-making.


" All right—now come along. We have a two hours' walk before us."
" I We horses here, Bexley, if you 'll have them," said Mr. Thornton.
" Many thanks. But you know as well as I do that we can go better
afoot through scrub and over rocks. Keep to the plan we agreed on, and
may God give us luck !"
By this it was nearly nine o'clock, and the whole party —about thirty men,
some mounted, but the majority on foot—spread themselves out over a long
line of bush-land skirting the valley of ferns, into which they plunged singly at
various points; those who had horses leaving them safely secured on the bank.
Mr. Bexley was partly piloted by Crawford, whose knowledge of every part
of the district where human foot had trod was universally acknowledged and
deferred to; but he carried a compass too, for his own re-assurance.
After walking for about two hours, Crawford looked carefully at the trees
near them.
"Now, sir, this is where one of us could strike in, and the rest at fifty or
sixty paces apart, along this stony rise."
His master consulted the compass.
"Yes. Quite right. We are now looking across the valley, directly
towards the head of the fall. So if we go down here, and keep straight on, we
must meet some of the others. I 'll begin here; and remember, when any of
you hear a'coo-ee,' to listen silently for a good half-minute afterwards before
replying, or we may drown the poor little voices we want to hear."
" All right, sir."
Harry and Brookes were the next to go into the scrub, and old Crawford the
last, leaving a somewhat long interval between the point of Brookes' entrance and
his own, his never-failing faithful companion, a sagacious old sheep-dog, closely
following his master.
They plodded on alternately through dense thickets of tea-tree,* dogwood,-f
prickly mimosa,j and more prickly coprosma ;§ and through the damp dusk
aisles and columned labyrinths of fern-trees and sassafras.|| Crawford paused
and listened frequently. Solitary shots were sometimes heard from the seekers
on the opposite side, and now and then a shrill but distant " coo-ee," but nothing
indicating discovery of the lost ones.
" Good Lord!" ejaculated Crawford, " what on earth has become of 'em?
* Leptospermum lanigerum. + Bedfordia salicina. + Acacia diffusa. § Coprosma nitida.
|| Atherospermum moschatum.


Seems as if they was just clean swallowed up and gone. Can't make it out —
nohow. Can you, old dog ? I 'll light my pipe, at any rate."
And the old man sat down despondently on a fallen tree, with the dog at
his feet. The pipe was barely alight before Blucher lifted his head, pricked up
his ears, and leaped up upon the log in eager excitement.
" Speak up !" cried Crawford, and the dog barked loudly.
A small " yap-yap" and a faint " coo-ee" replied.
" You met a' heard my heart stand still!" said Crawford afterwards.
"Find 'em!" he shouted. And how he blundered on after his dog over
fallen trees, slippery boulders half under water, rocky hollows, and deep chasms
of the foaming brook, he never knew; but presently a little Scotch terrier leaped
upon him, and another headlong charge through the thick damp growth brought
him in sight of old Blucher, with Lucy on her knees, hugging and kissing him,
Lina and Kate crying for joy, and the noble old dog, who seemed to understand
it all perfectly, as I believe he did, wagging his tail furiously as his share in the
demonstration.
Kate almost jumped into Crawford's arms.
" Oh, you dear, darling old man! how good of you to find us !"
Lina knelt down trembling, saying to herself —
" Thank God! thank God! I shall see Mamma again!"
The stout old bushman's eyes filled with tears too, as he cried, " The Lord
be blessed!" Then quickly recovering himself —"But first thing, I'll signal
the master, and comfort him and everybody else."
Whereupon he fired off both barrels of his gun at a few seconds' interval,
and then, quickly loading, fired a third shot.
" That's to say you 're found," he explained. " Master fixed it. Three shots,
one after another. Now I'll make a fire and warm this drop o' tea. The
master's got nice things for ye; but here's just a mouthful to begin with;" and
he unfolded a snowy napkin, containing some slices of bread and butter, which
the poor girls thankfully devoured, declaring nothing was ever so good before.
The tea was not suffered to get " fairly warm," as Crawford avowed, ere that
also was eagerly shared from a bright little tin cup; the old stockman con-
tinually interrupting his ministrations by uttering ringing " coo-ee's," to draw
Mr. Bexley to the spot.
" One man's coo-ee's just like another. If you young ladies will only try
and give one good 'un, it would be worth all mine."
So once more they raised the cry together. Three answering voices sounded


near, and in a few minutes, scrambling through the thickets, came Mr. Bexley-
and Harry, to be half-smothered with caresses, Brookes quickly following.
How sudden was the rebound from misery to delight! How instantaneous
the revulsion of feeling, and the almost total oblivion of what seemed life-long
agony!
Revived a little by the tea and bread, and infinitely more by the know-
ledge that they were safe, the girls, though very weak, exhausted, and footsore,
could soon laugh at their own torn, forlorn, draggled condition. Lina's sensible
attire of a tough holland dress and stout boots had fared the best, but the more
elegant and elaborate costume of the Bexleys, and their more fragile chaussure,
had, as Harry phrased it, " come to grief " most completely. With his knife and
a piece of twine, he fastened the soles and upper parts of his sister's boots
together, to enable them to be of some little use, and the shawls brought by
Brookes made welcome coverings for garments rent much beyond a picturesque
degree. Lina alone had retained her hat, having taken the precaution of tying
it fast down with her scarf. The others had lost theirs in the evening's
scramble, and their long hair, towzled and dragged by the scrub, was perhaps
the most forlorn-looking feature of all.
As a quartette of short-hand writers would have failed in any attempt to
take down one-tenth of the rapid and manifold questions and replies of that
first momentous half-hour, during which the basket was explored and emptied,
it may be as well to say that Harry was despatched to hasten home with the
glad tidings, having Mr. Bexley's compass and Crawford's directions to assist
him in steering a straight course; as it was now ascertained that the part of the
valley into which the young wanderers had penetrated had not been previously
»
known nor explored, although Crawford was sufficiently acquainted with the
whereabouts to guide the party on their return.
After a laborious struggle, they at length reached what the girls ever after
called the " enchanted church," where they had passed the previous night.
" And where we all said our prayers, Papa," said Lucy, " as well as we
could for crying; for We thought we should never see any of you again. And
you can't think how cold.it was ! and so pitch-dark ! Oh ! so dreadful!"
"And we so hungry," said Kate. "We tried chewing some of the leaves
and twigs, as we have heard of starving travellers doing, but they tasted very
• nasty, and we thought they might be poison, too."
" I believe we might have eaten the roots of the common fern," said Lina,
" but none grew where we were."'
150
Tasmanian Friends and Foes.


• "And did you never hear us last night?" said Mr. Bexley. " Guns were
fired at intervals, and we all coo-ee'd and shouted till we were hoarse."
" Once Lina said she heard a gun; but only once; so we did not suppose
it was fired for us."
" I don't expect, sir," said Crawford, " that you was within three mile of
this all night, and you wouldn't think how sounds and voices get smothered
like in such a thicket."
\ *
" We heard you to-day plainly enough," said Lina; " hut not so very long
before you found us. And one queer noise puzzled me, but Lucy knew it was
your hunting-horn; so that cheered us most of all."
" I cannot understand how you got to such a distance," said Mr. Bexley.
« Why, Papa," replied Lucy, " we must have come a long way at first, after
Harry went."
" The hair-brained blockhead !"
" And then we kept tiring ourselves to death last night, and always getting
hack to the same place ; and this morning I tried my very best to get out, but
I did the very same thing again;" and Lucy's tears fell anew at the remembrance
of her failure and vexation. "So then Gwendoline said she would try and lead;
and she started off from the opposite side of the church, and kept on a great deal
straighter than I did; and we were fighting our way on, hoping to get out
k-- «
somewhere, when Kitty hurt her leg and cried out, and directly after we heard
that dear old dog bark."
"It was Miss Kate as he heard, then," said Crawford. " I knew he'd heard
something, by the way he pricked up his ears and went on; and then I says to
him, Speak up ! and the little dog yapped again."
"We tried to make Dandie show us the way out," said Lucy, " but he
would not stir from beside us, and cuddled up close to us at night, and growled
quite fiercely when anything made a noise. We heard kangaroos go thumping
by pretty near us, and lots of opossums chuckling in the high trees far up over
our heads, and four or five mope-hawks went on calling to each other all night.
" Yes," said Kate; " and if it is ' more-pork' they say, as many people
think, it was very unfeeling of them to talk of pork to us, who were famishing.
" Poor children !" said Mr. Bexley, pitifully. " Poor hungry little Babes in
the Wood!" •
" But, unfortunately, we were the babes without the blackberries, said
Lina.
As the weary, limping girls and their stout escort neared the wateifall, otheis


of the seekers joined them, who, having heard the signal-shots, and also seen
Harry, did not wander further, but waited at the appointed rendezvous until the
found-lost arrived.
Foremost, with a glad and hearty greeting, was Mr. Thornton, who urged
them to go to his house at once; but finding that proposal could not be enter-
tained, continued—
"Very well, Bexley, if you won't, you won't. But there's the carriage
waiting ready in the road just by the corner. I 'll put you and the girls in, and
send you home straight. That's the next best thing." •
As indeed it was.


CHAPTER XXIV.
• The timorous hare,
Grown so familiar with her frequent guest,
Scarce shuns me.
• • • • • • 4
The bounding fawn that darts across the glade
When none pursues, with mere delight of heart,
And spirits buoyant with excess of glee.
COWPER.
I
The swan with arched neck,
Between her white wings mantling proudly, rows
.
Her state with oary feet.
MILTON.
NONE of the party at Walloora felt much inclination for long rambles during
the next few days, although a night's sound rest proved a precious restorative,
both to the weary girls and their terrified mothers, who had gone through by far
the largest amount of real suffering.
Lucy insisted on giving Blucher a weekly ration for life, and a chain-collar
of silver, with her initials and the date of the valley-adventure engraved on the
plate. Crawford was endowed with a liberal pension; Brookes had a handsome
present,and all the other men assisting in the search were well rewarded; whilst
many a public charity and private need benefitted by John Bexley's munificent
and often anonymous " thank-offerings."
A visit to the poultry-yard and the deer-park, which were close at home,
pleasantly occupied one afternoon. The complete range of buildings, and the
spacious divided yards for the various fowls, delighted Mrs. Merton and Lina;
and in a large aviary, where they were being reared to turn out on the estate,
Lina first saw English pheasants and partridges, Mr. Bexley being very fond of
experiments in acclimatisation. .


In the deer-park, which was enclosed by a very high close paling fence, and
consisted of about forty acres of undulating land, partially wooded, and sloping
to the river's brink, the noble red and fallow deer excited Lina's exceeding
©
admiration. English hares too, half-tame, and undisturbed by the approach of
the visitors, leaped about among the long grass and fern. Several fine forester
kangaroo and a pair of emu* also shared with the deer this pleasant domain.
Lina was engrossed by her interest in a tame fallow doe, which ate biscuit from
her hand, supplied from Mr. Bexley's capacious pockets, when Ereda cried—
" Oh! Mamma, is that an ostrich ?"
' Mr. Bexley laughed. " Why, you little Cockney, don't you know your own
country-folk! That's an emu. Here, Tom! Tom ! come and make this young
lady's acquaintance." •
Tom and his mate, hearing the well-known voice, poked their long necks
out inquiringly this way and that, and came stalking gravely up to the group,
and, suddenly quivering all their harsh, singular plumage, made the odd shivery
sound peculiar to them. Freda retreated a little as the great birds came up, but
Lina, completely occupied by her interest in what to her was a new creature,
gazed at them intently and unmoved.
" Mind, Gwendoline! they might peck your eyes out. They do peck at
bright things, you know," cried Harry. " See ! Tom's making for Papa's ring."
"Ah ! diamonds are brighter than Lina's eyes," said Lucy, laughing.
" And now he's coming to the steel buckle on Janet's hat."
But Janet, with a cry of " Keep him off, Papa! I don't like it," got behind
her father for shelter.
"Every glittering object takes their attention, and attracts their brilliant
eyes," said Mr. Bexley. " And no doubt, could they now follow their own
impulses unchecked, every chain, brooch, button, or other ornament they see
would be adroitly picked off, and in all probability swallowed as speedily."
" Swallowed ?" echoed Lina, in amazement.
"Yes. A list of the hard substances, such as nails, knives, pieces of iron,
glass and earthenware, buttons, stones, and all imaginable collections that have
been found in the stomachs of pet emus after death, would astonish yon.
People have been known cruel or thoughtless enough to give them copper
money, which, I believe, killed one or more of the emus in a public institution."
"How horribly wicked!" exclaimed Lina.
* Dromaius Novce Hollandice.


EMU AND YOUNG.




"Yes," said Harry, "I'd like to diet such brutes on brass farthings and
nothing else for a week. Heie s some maize, which our birds find agrees with
their constitutions even better than shingle nails 5 though they stole no end of
those when the carpenter was at work on the new house for them. He could
not make, out where'all his nails went to, till one day he caught Master Tom
here lunching out of his tool-box."
" Are there any emus wild in this island ?" asked Lina.
"They have been very rare ever since I came to the colony," said Mr.
Bexley, "and I have not seen a wild emu these thirty years. There viay
possibly be a stray pair or two in some very remote places."
" And I recommend them to stay there," said Harry; " for if they 're caught
sight of, they won't be emus long. It's a great pity everything's being killed
off at such a rate."
From, the deer-paik our friends proceeded to a very favourite resort of
Mrs. Merton and her girls, a large. enclosure surrounding a piece of water of
considerable extent, where both" native and other water-fowl lived freely and
happily, protected from human disturbance, and supplied with abundance of
food. In some parts tall reeds and bulrushes formed a complete shelter, where
the birds could remove from sight or intrusion ; but usually the broad, open
water was populous with black* and white-f* swans, Cape Barren geese,j and
ducks of various kinds, with pretty blue cranes walking daintily along the
shore-shallows.
The black swans were tame enough to come at Mr. Bexley's whistle and
call, and eat the corn and bread with which his home-coat-pockets were always
supplied. Lina was delighted to see the broods of grey downy cygnets
swimming along with the proud ol'd birds, and often climbing on their mother's
back, and sitting snugly amongst her puffed-up feathers, with only their droll
little heads peering out.
Sharp arguments were sometimes carried on as to whether the black or white
swans were the most beautiful. . The heads and bright coral bills of the black
• •
were unanimously declared to be the handsomest and most intelligent, and their
soft musical voices bore away the palm in that particular. But when the
majestic English birds came on, down the lake, with, as Harry said, "every
stitch of canvas set, studdin' sails and all," it was useless for even the most
patriotic Tasmanian to pretend that any other bird could excel them. So the
* Cygnus atratus. t Cygnus olor. t Coreopsis Novce ffollandico.


final decision was, that the "honours" were equally divided, and that had laris
himself been appointed judge, he must have halved the apple between the two.
Mr. Bexley promised Lina some cygnets of the black kind to take home
for the adornment of their own river.
" And," said he, " what you 'll have to look out for is, not to tread upon
them. When we first had ours they were quite young, and we kept them in
the garden in the front of the house in the day-time, for fear the poultry or
dogs might hurt the poor, soft little things, and whenever we went out they
would creep close to us, trying, if we stood still for a minute, to sit on our feet,
and so, from their extraordinary love of our companionship, and their perfect
confidence, they were in perpetual danger. Then,, when grown up, they were
just the same—poking their heads in at the kitchen window, or walking through
the house, till I made this home for them."
" I have never yet seen black swans quite wild," said Lina.
" I daresay not, they have become very scarce. No one coming now to this
colony, and seeing the rarity of these and all other native creatures, would
credit the abundance in which they existed in the early days, which your
father remembers from a more distant date than I do. The wide shallow hays
and extensive lagoons on the east coast were alive with swans at that time.
You might have reckoned them, not by hundreds or thousands, but by acres, and
the wild ducks the same. Whatever quantity were shot, it was impossible to
make any perceptible diminution in their myriads. The sad change from dense
population to absolute scarcity has been caused by the greedy, sordid, cruel trade
that people carried on in their eggs. The pioneer and ringleader of these wretched
hucksters was a captain in the army, stationed at a central point on the east
coast as police magistrate. This gallant, noble officer had a boat and crew
allowed him for the public service, and these he employed in a systematic raid
upon the swans' nests, far and near, round the bays and lagoons I spoke of.
Hundreds and thousands of dozens of eggs were taken every season and sent up
by him in the Government boat for sale in Hobart. Humbler, but equally
greedy traders, following Captain M 's example, and continuing the traffic
for a long series of years, had nearly succeeded in wiping the black swans from
the face of the waters. I don't believe there would be one alive now in a wild
state, had not an Act been passed in our Parliament for their protection in'the
breeding season; and how all of us who dared to advocate such an unheard-of
measure were ridiculed and assailed with all rnanuer of abuse, perhaps your
father and I know best. However, the bill was passed, and others of like


tendency also, to be, I trust, followed by more, until every native animal,
bird, and fish shall be at any rate secure from utter annihilation."*
" That egg-stealing is such a mean, cruel thing," said Harry. " One cannot
believe anyone guilty of it who was not a regular 'Noah Claypole,' for it seems
just equivalent to his 4 kinchin lay.'"
" When the swans were more abundant," said Mrs. Merton, " they
frequently passed from one place to another at night, flying high overhead in
large flocks,invisible of course; and I used to enjoy listening to their soft, pretty
cries, heard at first far in the distance, then gradually swelling on the ear until
• •
the full chorus sounded just above one, and then died away again, like'
1 Horns of Elfland, faintly blowing
or, as I thought before Tennyson's lines were written, like harp-notes struck in
octaves."
" What handsome birds are those with the bright blue on their wings ?"
asked Lina.
" Fine fellows, are they not ? They are the mountain ducks,"*f" replied Mr.
Bexley; " though why they are so called, it is hard to say. We had some
of those, too, in the yard at the house, for some time, but they were too tame by
*
half. We could not keep them out of the rooms, so they were sent here.
And, look ! there's a dark bird close to the reeds—that's a musk duck: j the
plumage is very sombre and loose-looking —not so sleek as most other ducks ; the
tail, too, is singular, little more than a small fan of short quills. The head ol
the male has a kind of black leathery excrescence under the bill that gives it an
odd expression, and the whole bird has a strong odour of musk, rendering it
quite uneatable : I wish you could see it better, but they are still very shy,
though they have lived here some time now. The pair a,re not often seen
together; even in a wild state, they frequently live alone for a long time. They
* On October 4th, 1860, the Act introduced by the Hon. Charles Meredith for the protection of
Black Swans was passed in the'Tasmanian Parliament (24 Vic., No. 20). Other bills of like
tendency were passed during 1874 and 1876, and on May sth, 1879, "An Act—42 Vic., No. 24 —to
Consolidate and Amend the Laws for the Protection of Game "—now in force—which includes the
following native animals and birds : —Black Swan, Cape Barren Goose, Wild Ducks, Teal, Midgeon,
Plover, Emu, Ground-dove, Bronze-winged Pigeon, Quails, Wattle-birds, Kangaroo—protected during
the breeding season; Magpie, Black-backed Gulls (Larus Pacificus), Silver Gull (Bruchi Zemco
Jervia Jamesonii) —protected entirely. Also, imported Pheasants, Partridges, Grouse, Hares.
A Bill has just been passed depriving hares of protection, on the plea that they would otherwise
become too numerous ! —Sept. 27th, 1879.
+ Casarca tadornoides. J Musk Duck — Biziura lobata.


build a nest of dry reeds on the bank, or sometimes on an old stump. When
the young ones are hatched, the mother bird is .very vigilant; and should any
danger threaten, they get upon her back, and she dives with them to a place of
safety. I never saw this done, but Mr. Gould, who knows a'great deal more
about all our native creatures than we do, and whose splendid works have done
so much to make the world at large acquainted with them, relates the pretty
motherly act, so we know that it is so."
' " And there's a dear old black duck," * cried Lina, " with such a brood of little
• ones! How pretty they are! Papa once brought four, about the same size,
home to me. He had caught them by wading into a lagoon after them, thinking
he should like to keep them tame, and had a place made, fenced in with a plank
wall at least two feet high; but they were no sooner put down inside, than they
were out and off in four different directions, and out of sight. As to catching
them again, it was just useless to try. But they got together, and lived about
the pond in the garden, and under the bushes and hedges, till quite large, and
then we ceased to see them; so I suppose they went down the river to their
relations."
"If we were to come to the lagoon early some morning, or late in the
evening, you would see some bald coots ;j* but they are not always out on the
water by day. In former years they absolutely swarmed in many of the
lagoons, and used to pull great holes in the corn-stacks at night. Of course we
could fence them out from the stackyard, but at one place near a lake, where I
tried to grow oats, they conquered me altogether, coming out in such squadrons
as to blacken the ground, and devour all the seed as fast as it was put in.
I tried my best, you may be sure, but all was of no use, and I had to leave off
cultivating there."
" What black birds are those running along, and jerking up their white
tails at every step ?" asked Lina.
" Where ? Why, those are bald coots. Very pretty birds, too, are they
not ? I can admire them now; but in that old time, if I had been told that one
day I should keep any of my then tormentors as pets, I should have been
amused. ' Circumstances alter cases,' don't they ? We had some very tame,
but I gave them away, and these have not grown so familiar; but you would be
amused to see them eating corn from the ear, they hold it in one hand just as a
parrot does." 1
*'Black Duck — Anas superciliosa. + Bald Coot — Porphyria melanotics.
160
Tasmanian Friends and Foes.


j— —— ' —jm a i I ' u ■■ 11 1 *
CHAPTER XXV.
And Eve, within, due at her hour prepar'd
For dinner, savoury fruits, of taste to please
True appetite.
"With dispatchful looks in haste
She turns, on hospitable thoughts intent
' What choice to choose for delicacy best,
What order so contriv'd as not to mix
Tastes, not well joined, inelegant, but bring
Taste after taste upheld with kindliest change.
MILTON.
Oh ! if to dance all night, and dress all day,
Charm'd the small-pox, or chased old age away,
Who would not scorn what housewife's cares produce,
Or who would learn one earthly thing of use ?
.
Trust me, my dear, good humour can prevail,
When airs, and flights, and screams, and scolding fail.
Beauties in vain their pretty eyes may roll,
Charms strike the sight, but merit wins the soul.
POPE.
/
MPS. MERTON had been absent from home three weeks, when a letter from
Guy to Lina arrived one evening during dessert. Lina, with a glad little
cry, broke the envelope, and then checking herself, and colouring violently, laid
the precious epistle beside her plate.
" Read your letter, my Linnet," said Mr. Bexley, seeing his favourite's little
dilemma, " and tell us how they all are at home.'
She glanced quickly over the brief missive, and suddenly looked very grave.
" Oh, Mamma! poor Nancy has gone home ill, and they ve got that stupid
girl of Black's to cook for them. Guy says her blunders are great fun, as good
as Sophia's; but Papa must be so uncomfortable! Does not it happen unluckily,
now you and I are away from home ?"


" I think it's lucky you are away, if the cook's gone," said Lucy. " You
could do no good."
"No good ? Oh! dear, yes ; I could take care that everything was well
cooked and neatly served."
Lucy laughed contemptuously.
" Now, Lina, how absurd! You don't mean to say that you —an accom-
plished young lady—know how to cook /"
" Indeed, Lucy," said Mrs. Merton, " Lina is a very tolerable cook, and,
were she now at home, would so w T ell supply the place of Nancy, that no failing
or omission \rould be observed by anyone."
" Do you really mean that Lina would roast meat, dress vegetables, and
make puddings ?" said Lucy, in a disdainful tone.
" I should be ashamed of her if she could not. I have always acted on the
belief that my duty, as a mother of daughters, next to training them to be good,
is to teach them to be useful."
" But, dear Mrs. Merton, surely young ladies ought never to go into the
kitchen!" argued Mrs. Bexley, with impressive emphasis.
" I should sincerely commiserate all such young ladies, if ever they became
wives in these colonies, or even in England," replied Mrs. Merton, with quiet
earnestness. "No girl knows what vicissitudes may attend her lot in life. No
human wisdom can assure to her uncliequered affluence; and even should she
enjoy such, it may not always command for her perfectly able and trained
servants. So that in any case, even with the most secure and brilliant prospects,
she ought to be skilled in all those duties which are truly and significantly
summed up as ' woman's work.' Then, if rich, she can direct her household with
independent judgment, and see that each member of it does justice to his or
her branch of service. She will neither be unreasonably exacting, nor an
ignorantly negligent mistress. Her house will be neat and orderly, her family
comfortable and well served, and her servants diligent and cheerful. Should
she see more of the dark side of Fortune's mantle than of its silver lining, her
knowledge of domestic work will be yet more essential; and her cottage-home,
with perhaps only one untaught girl as maid-of-all-work, may be made a nest
of quiet and even elegant comfort; whilst ignorance, and its woful 'sister, fine-
ladyism, would create anarchy even in the mansion, and of the cottage make a
den of misery and discomfort. A man of a naturally angelic temper (may I
say ?) deteriorates under the influence of dinners raw or cindery, and rooms
chaotic and ungarnished. And (may I also dare to hint ?) we do meet with


dome husbands who are not of the angelic type, and whose backslidings from
the courtesies of courtship to the grumble and anathema of discontented married
life might often be prevented by a little wifely care and cleverness.
"Hear, hear V cried Mr. Bexley. "I'm a living evidence of the truth
of every word Mrs. Merton's spoken. For, having by nature one of those
angelic tempers myself—(cries of oh! oh! from Harry, and tittering among the
girls) it has been maintained in perfect preservation by the best wife in the
world, who in our early days made our bush cottage as bright as a new pin, and
cooked the dinner to a turn "
"Do hold your tongue, John," interposed Mrs. Bexley, fidgetting and
reddening.
" And, now we have a good house over our heads, knows how to make that,
as handsome and comfortable as any man's home need to be; and all she has
to do now is to teach the girls to be as clever as herself."
" All very fine, John. But I hope our girls will be superior in many ways
to what I was; and they've got their studies to attend to now. They'll pick
up housekeeping fast enough after awhile."
" When I was a girl," said Mrs. Merton, " my own beloved mother held
somewhat similar ideas. Hot that she despised culinary skill, which, like most
ladies of her time, she possessed in perfection, as well as an unusual share ol
intelligence and accomplishments; but she wished my youth to be devoted to
"ablins other instruction, and thought I could learn the lore of domestic duties
0 o
afterwards, when, to use the usual delusive phrase, my education was finished
as if the education of any rational being ever.could be finished! The longer
1 live, the nearer I find myself to the beginning of mine.
Mrs. Bexley laughed outright.
' " You ? why, I always heard you were such a learned lady, you knew every-
thing. Dr. Smith here the other day said you understood botany, and—and '
" Geology," put in Harry.
" Yes, I daresay that was one—and lots more of that sort of thing. And
we know how you can draw and paint; and Ive never heard anybody play the
piano and sing like you yet; and the other day, when those foreigners came to
dinner, you and Lina beat even Bexley, jabbering Drench. And as to fancy
work, and millinery and plain sewing too, they re all at your finders ends no
matter what —and then to hear you talk of beginning your education,
wonder at you!"
" You enormously overrate my small acquisitions," said Mrs. Merton,


laughing. " But I was going to tell you that I found the error of my dear
mother's system when I first had a home of my own to manage in the colonies,
and very heartily lamented that I had not thoroughly learned to practise a
housewife's duties when I had enjoyed the opportunity. Shall I ever forget
the agony of making my first plum-pudding!" and Mrs. Merton laughed
merrily at . the recollection.
" It's not a very agonising matter now, seemingly," said Mr. Bexley; "so
tell us how it was."
" Well, I don't think I should have suffered so much had I been left quite
alone with my task; hut we had two very decent married emigrant couples as
servants (for Harold wished to spare me the presence of convict women in the
house, if possible), and one of the wives acted as cook, the other as dairy-woman.
I have no doubt now that either of them would have made our Christmas
pudding, after a fashion, but I had said I would do it myself. How bitterly I
repented my rash resolve, words cannot express! However, I collected all the
ingredients as well as I could divine what they must be—raisins, currants,
flour, suet, sugar, candied peel, spice, brandy—all beaten together with milk
in a stiff batter. I buttered the mould well, and desired Hannah to continue
beating the batter for another five minutes. How thankful I should have been
had she uttered a word of advice or comment! But my two sedate serving-
women looked on, with attentive, and, as I thought, mercilessly-critical eyes, in
silence. I tried to think of anything else that ought to go in, but in vain; and
the fatal crisis of putting into the pot was imminent, when the kitchen-door
opened suddenly, and little Buth, the cook's daughter, came in with some eggs
in her apron.
" Oh, is the puddin' done, ma'am ? I thought you'd maybe rather have
duck-eggs for it."
" I could have kissed her on the spot! I wonder I didn't. My credit and
my pudding were saved. With —as I flattered myself—perfect and dignified
composure, I broke the precious eggs, added them to the batter, put it into the
mould, tied it down, and saw it into the pot; but not until that crucial test of
a pudding, the eating —when it proved excellent —did I feel absolute assurance
that I had not composed an original kind of soup instead; and, like Dickens
good Mrs. Cratchit, when the weight was off my mind, I honestly confessed
that I had had my doubts as to the quantity of every article in the composition.
* Mrs. Cratchit said that, now the weight was off her mind, she would confess she had had her
doubts about the quantity of flour. — Christmas Carol.


Next day I sent into Sydney, procured a copy of Dr. Kitchener's Cook's Oracle,
and, following its precepts, dashed off into curries, omelets, and other good
things, with confidence and success, and have gone on collecting culinary
wisdom ever since ; for I am thoroughly satisfied that, to know how economical
and appetising dinners should be served, and, failing expert servants, to be able
to take the work into one's own hands, is no despicable item in the desirable
knowledge of' how to make home happy.'"
"Ah ! a fine pudding you'd have had, with no eggs in it!" observed Mrs.
Bexley.
" And what sort of a pudding would our Lucy make, if left to herself ?"
asked her husband.
Mrs. Bexley rose.
"If you're going to talk nonsense, John, we'll go" and the mothers
and daughters and guests soon dispersed through drawing-rooms and verandah,
John Bexley meanwhile saying to himself —
" But Lucy, and the young ones too, shall know how to cook, and to do true
woman's work, or, by George, they shall learn nothing else. A parcel of trash
and vanity —that's what they learn now, like the rest of the girls. A smattering
of languages not one thoroughly understood. A tasteless squalling and
strumming, in the name of music, that, though they 're my own daughters,
sets my teeth on edge. I don't believe one of them can make herself a frock,
or me a shirt; but all over the house there's a lot of rubbishy 'fancy-work'
as they call it, being devoid of either fancy or invention —that costs more time,
money, and eyesight than would serve for mastering some useful trade or noble
science. I 'll stop it, as sure as my name's John Bexley."
Long and earnest was the discussion held by him and his good wife in
sacred privacy that night.
After breakfast next morning—
" Linnet!" quoth Mr. Bexley, " I've a wager of twenty pounds depending
upon you—will you win it for me ?"
" Oh! I ? What about, please ?"
" Why, I've bet twenty sovereigns—money down —that you will cook the
dinner to-day, entirely yourself. I've secured your mother s consent, and have
given our cook a holiday till to-morrow morning."
" I believe he's gone mad I"said Mrs. Bexley, hastily leaving the room.
Lina's colour went and came, and her heart beat, whilst her little white
teeth compressed her under-lip, ere she spoke.


"Oh ! how could you, Mr. Bexley ! I really do not think I can. I never
did, you know, anything like the dinners you have."
" I think you can, my love," said Mrs. Merton, encouragingly ; " and I am.
sure you will try." . . .
" I don't understand your patent roasters and ovens, and all those things,"
said poor Lina. .
" Perhaps not; but the kitchen-maid does, and will attend to all that.
Your task'is to prepare and compose the dishes, and see that they come to table
all right; just a plain, farm-house dinner. There's a kangaroo for soup, a
turkey, a leg of mutton, and some rabbits. I leave the selection of sweets and
'kickshaws' to yourself. And, my dear little girl," added Mr. Bexley in an
undertone, " in complying with what may seem to you a queer, unreasonable
whim, you will do me an essential service. Bemember that—and fear nothing."
So Lina, donning a large apron, and tucking up her sleeves, entered upon
her unexpected occupations of chopping, larding, stuffing, trussing, making
pastry, custards, and creams—Susan, the good-natured and highly-amused
kitchen-maid, taking care that the ovens were properly heated, and all requisite
utensils ready, but all the responsibility resting on Lina. Long before her task
was done, she quite enjoyed it; the appliances in the capacious, well-furnished
kitchen and larder were so complete and convenient.
Lucy came and looked in once or twice, half-amused and half-angry, and
poor Mrs. Bexley skirmished uneasily about; but her husband, who was evidently
on guard, summarily ejected both, lest, as he said, they might assist Lina, and
claim to divide with her the merit of her success.
Punctually at six, the gong sounded as usual, and Lina, who had been
dressed some time, but had resumed her apron whilst she superintended
" dishing," and gave final touches to gravies, &c., doffed it, and, passing in
with the rest, took her place, a slightly heightened colour being all the visible
evidence of the morning's duties.
The dinner, excellent in every particular, was enjoyed and eulogised, as
it deserved to be. Mr. Bexley was triumphant, his wife somewhat silent and
subdued, convinced against her will. Harry openly taunted his sisters with
their comparative ignorance, when his father interposed.
"Say no more now, Harry. We are going to enter on a new system
altogether. We all see that a young lady is in no whit less ornamental because
she is useful, and I trust it will not be very long ere we sit down to a dinner of
Lucy's cooking ; for, from this day forth, both she and Kate will add housewifery
166
Tasmanian Friends and Foes.


to their otlier lessons, and in turn act as their mother's disciples—apprentices—
aides-de-camp —whatever title they like best, in every department of domestic
arrangement. They cannot have a better teacher, that I know, and I hope they
will endeavour to do her credit. But of this they may rest assured: unless they
learn how to use a frying-pan, I 'll lock up the piano; and if they don't very
soon make me a shirt a-piece, with needles and fingers— not machines —I'll
confiscate every scrap of fancy-work in the house."
The girls pouted a little, and a few tears fell silently and unremarked ; but
though their father was usually indulgent to a fault, they knew that when he
did "pass a law," as they called it, law it was in that house; and they had the
good sense to accept the inevitable without an openly uttered murmur. But
poor Lina felt that she had, all unwittingly, become a bete noir to her young
friends, and with loving gentleness strove to regain her wonted pleasant place in
their affection. Lucy, whose frank, though hasty temper yielded at once, put
her arm through Lina's, and drew her away for a private catechising.
" Now, you naughty girl, a nice mess you 've got us into, with your extra
cleverness! Papa would never really have made drudges of us—much as he
«
often growls —if Mrs. Merton and you had not confirmed all his horrid,
old-fashioned notions. I'm very angry with you."
" But indeed, Lucy, you should not be, for it is a very good thing to know
how to be useful in a house, and—now don't be shocked —but I am quite fond
of cooking nice dishes, and seeing Papa and all our dear people enjoy them."
" I don't want to get my face scorched at the fire, and my hands made
all rough and coarse for anybody else's sake, I assure you," grumbled Lucy.
"Oh ! that's it, is it ?" said Harry, who joined them. " Come now, compare
paws, you two. Ah ! I knew it. Your do-nothing fingers are not in a bit better
condition than Gwendoline's, and not half so well-shaped neither; they 're
thick and dumpy, and hers are quite taper."
" I didn't make my fingers," said Lucy crossly, snatching away her hand.
" And, Lucy dear," coaxed Lina, " your hands need not become coarse in the
least, in doing all that you will need, in learning to cook and to do housework
either.. Look at Mamma's hands, after so many years of constant work of
all kinds. Pew fine ladies' hands are nicer, lam sure; but she takes care
of them, and likes me to do the same. We keep our old kid-gloves for house
wear, and have a pair always in our pockets, which we put on when dusting or
sweeping, or putting things in order in the house, so that we are often busy for
hours without a soil on our hands. If we did not keep the house neat ourselves,


it would soon be terribly untidy; for we do not have nice parlour-maids like
yours, and when the girls we employ first come, they have not a notion of what
we mean by the words clean or neat."
" I wouldn't be bothered with them," said Lucy.
" Then we should often go without any help at all, and that would be much
worse. They are provoking, but what can you expect from a sawyer's or a
shepherd's daughter, who has probably never been in a better dwelling than
her father's hut ? Mamma is very patient with them, if they are willing to
learn, and many of them grow into quite clever servants. Mamma says it is
like keeping a finishing-school, she has had so very many to teach; and generally
as soon as one becomes really able to do her work without constant direction,
and is some comfort in the house, she leaves to be married, and another new
pupil comes to be drilled into the rudiments as cook or housemaid, obliging
us to take up the pudding-making or dusting again."
" I should let things go till the new girl learned," said Lucy.
"Oh dear, that would never do," laughed Lina. "We could not have Papa «
vexed and made uncomfortable ; and, besides, visitors always come if you 're not
ready for them. If no stranger enters the door for a month, some one who you
would wish should find the house nice is sure to arrive if carpets are up or any
ugliness afoot. That's a rule without an exception."
" I suppose it is. If we have not so good a dinner as usual, strangers
always drop in. Ah, well—if anyone had told me a week ago that I should be
ordered to cook, and shouldn't be cross for a month over it, I would not have
believed' them; but, if no worse than you say, I suppose one can bear it; I
fancied any kitchen-work must be so dirty."
" What we do ourselves is not, because there is always some girl or boy
or man to assist, though they could not be trusted to cook. I never cleaned
a saucepan, nor scrubbed a floor nor a table. I have cleaned knives —that's easy
enough-—and I often clean the silver and .wash glass and china if we have
awkward or ' unlucky' servants, but I daresay you will not need to do even
that. Mamma or I always make the preserves, but we do not clean the
preserving-pan. I am sure you will not mind your kitchen-work half as much
as you fancy."
" I begin to think so too. Come and try that new duet with Harry. I 'll
play the accompaniment."
" But you never explained what Guy meant by the new girl being as good
fun as Sophia," said Harry. " What did she do ?"


" All sorts of queer things —and she's presumed to be an experienced cook—
serving two pies on one large dish, like a pair of fowls, and the Governor was
dining with us that day; chopping up quail, and frying them with a quantity
of onions—that was when Mamma and I were away from home, you may be
sure —and other like barbarisms. And one day she put her head in at the
dining-room door, saying in a mincing tone —' The—ah ! mutton for the jerrico,
if you please, Miss;' and the children did not call harricot by its proper name for
a long while after. Another time she said to Mamma, ' You see, 'm, you wants a
knowledgable pusson for your cook. It's lucky you come across me. What use
would some o' them hignorant gells be to a lady like you ? You might horder a
liamlick, or a frogleysee, or a dish o' rustles, and they wouldn't know how to
make such things.' And Mamma said she had to think for a minute before
translating the unknown words into omelet, fricasee, and rissoles. Guy was
particularly tickled by hearing her declare that ' the reesins and currins, and
rice and spice, and things as grows in this country, ain't half as good as them as
grows in England.' Poor Sophia ! I think her ignorance and conceit were about
equal." • '


CHAPTER XXVI.
Oh! welcome guest,
Though unexpected here.
A MONTH passed quickly away for Lina and her little sister, and pleasantly
for their mother also; but the thoughts of home duties, and of the
dear ones left, as it seemed to her, far too long without her loving ministra-
tions, determined her not to accede to any more entreaties for delaying their
return. Not, however, till the letter had been posted which fixed the day for
Mr. Merton to come for them, did she let her warm-hearted friends know what
had been done.
"Ah, well," said Mr. Bexley, after a hearty grumble, "a wilful woman will
have her way, I suppose. Your sex have had it too long to alter now. You
must come again soon, that is all. And now I want my Linnet for ten minutes.
Put on your hat, child."
Walking briskly down the garden to a seat under a huge weeping willow,
he sat down, signing to Lina to do the same, before he spoke.
" Linnet, I want to know which you'd like best —a grand piano, the same
' *
as Lucy's; or Selim, and a new habit and side-saddle."
"Oh, Mr. Bexley!" was all that the astonished Lina could utter for the
moment, but a rosy flush of delight told better than words the effect of his
question. .
"Because, my dear, I wish to give you a keepsake, and what you would
really like best, and would give you most pleasure. So which shall it be ?"
"You are so good —too kind, Mr. Bexley."
"Not a bit of it. Well?"
" But please —if you only would —I'd rather "
"Have a dozen silk gowns ? Very well."


Lina laughed. "Oh no, no, no; I never had one in my life."
" The more reason you'd like them, perhaps."
" No, indeed, nothing like that. Only I wish " and she stopped again,
blushing violently.
"Jewellery ?" guessed Mr. Bexley. " Yery well; what shall it he ?"
"Oh no. But Lucy's piano cost above a hundred and fifty guineas; Mrs.
Bexley told me so."
" Yery well. • What then ?"
" And you would give me one the same ?"
. " The very same. Would not your pretty songs go nicely to it ?" •
"A hundred and fifty guineas!" murmured Lina. "Oh, Mr. Bexley, that
money would make me so happy, if you would only do something else with it.
Don't be displeased with me—pray, don't —hut it would almost keep my brother
Louis at school for three years, and he is so anxious to go; and since that
dreadful flood, Papa found he could not afford it, and we are so sorry Louis has
to work instead of being at school. I'm afraid I have done wrong in speaking,
but —but and poor Lina's brave speech was choked by tears.
Her listener's eyes looked half inclined to follow suit.
" Wrong ? God bless the child. A girl of ten thousand, that she is. And
you'd rather send Louis to school than have a horse of your own, or a new
piano ?"
" Oh yes, yes ; it would make me so happy —all of us so happy —how could
I thank you enough ? But then,- again, Papa might not like my speaking of
it—l'm afraid I've done wrong."
" Don't you trouble your dear little heart about it. Louis shall go to
school with our Edgar, or my name's not John Bexley. I'll settle all that.
But I'm sorry I'm not to go shopping for your lairing, eh ?"
"I am so afraid Papa will he angry. You know Papa's very proud no,
not proud exactly, but independent, you know, in some things, and
" I knew your father before you did, little woman, and I 11 make it all
right; only leave me to do it my own way, and let this little matter be a dead
secret between you and me, till all's settled."
" Thank you —thank you —but I may tell Mamma ? She will be so glad.
" Tell Mamma ? Well, yes, if Mamma can be trusted," said Mr. Bexley,
smiling, as he tucked Lina's hand under his arm, and, after picking lor her a
handful of choice flowers, sent her off with the happy tidings to her mother.
As much amusement and hospitality as could be compressed into the three


days Mr. Merton allowed himself with his generous old friend having been
conscientiously achieved, the morning of departure arrived. If all the gifts that
were pressed upon our friends had been accepted, they would have needed a
baggage-waggon for their conveyance; as it was, so many precious packages of
ferns, plants, and cuttings, besides the basket of cygnets, were stowed away in
the dog-cart, that the feet of its occupants found but scant accommodation—
Mrs. Bexley's own last contribution being a closely-packed basket of substantial
dainties and wine, for luncheon on the road.
All loving farewells were spoken, and Mr. Merton was starting, when a
reminder came from Mr. Bexley.
" And mind you bring Louis over next month, to meet Edgar, as we
arranged."
" All right. God bless you!"
The little conspiracy between Lina and her kind host had evidently
prospered.
The journey was performed without any special incident, and as the last
road-gate was shut, and the windows of home were seen through the trees,
gleaming brightly in the shining sun, one or two short barks of welcome from
the quick-eared watch-dogs were followed by a glad shout, as Guy and Louis,
• with the shorter-legged Erank in their rear, came racing down the drive to meet
the travellers.
" Guess who's come!" cried Guy, as soon as the first greetings were over.
" Papa ! Mamma ! do guess."
" How can IV'said Mr. Merton. " Some very unpleasant person, whom
you dislike extremely, I imagine, to judge by your manner."
" Oh yes ! a dreadful bore," laughed Guy ; " but you don't guess."
" Seeing is knowing, not guessing," said his mother, pointing to a tall,
bearded figure advancing across the lawn.
"Oh ! Uncle Cyril, why did you come out ? I wanted them to guess who
was here."
" This is a pleasant surprise," said Mrs. Merton.
\
" Where have you dropped from, old fellow ?" cried. her husband, heartily
clasping the outstretched hand.
Cyril Forrester, thus gladly welcomed, was an old and valued friend of the
Mertons, and though not related to them, was always styled " uncle" by the
children ; and being a lone man, without living kinsfolk, he said the brevet-rank
he enjoyed under his friend's roof was all the family title he possessed, and so


encouraged its continuance. • Haying a small certain income, which sufficed for
his bachelor needs, he still liked employment, and cherished the idea of some day
making a fortune, when the favourable opportunity—not yet apparent —should
" turn up." He had for the past three years been on a sheep-station in Kiverina
as a "boundary-rider," with several other gentlemen, as well born and educated as
himself, for " mates," each receiving a salary scarcely sufficing to provide the '
rough clothes they wore; and Mr. Forrester, after struggling on bravely against
hard work, heat, and privations of all kinds, until serious illness set in, was now
invalided to Tasmania for such recovery as might be possible.
A happy circle, and a merry one too, met around the tea-table that evening.
The young people were allowed to linger later than usual, and the elder trio
declined to look at the clock when they at last retired.


CHAPTER XXVII.
The serpent, subtlest beast of all the field,
Of huge extent sometimes, with brazen eyes,
• • • • •
"Wondrous in length and corpulence.
MILTON.
VEEY pleasantly busy was the whole family next day. Lina, with garden-
apron and stout gloves, trowel in hand, unpacked her treasured ferns, and
planted them in the shady nook where her brothers had formed for her a suitable
abode for them with soil and pieces of rock. Louis, whilst assisting her in his
usual quiet, kindly way, listened to her admiring descriptions of the well-kept
and extensive grounds and gardens at Walloora, well-pleased, too, to find that he
was destined to see all the wonders for himself so soon, and to have his cherished,
but almost abandoned hope of school realised, though Lina left unrevealed her
own generous share in his good fortune.
Guy was hard at work digging over and carefully weeding a border for his
mother, to make a nursery for the cuttings and young plants she had brought
home, whilst she sat by, trimming and preparing her treasures, and hearing—
albeit the narrative somewhat retarded the digging —details of all the domestic
events of her absence. How many goslings had been hatched, and how the
crows took all the fine brood between breakfast-time and noon, to the intense
disgust of old Isaac, who had carried his gun about ever since, without getting
a shot at the thieves. How a hawk took one of the turkey-chicks, and how Guy
" dropped him pretty quick, and he dropped the chicken, but the poor little beast
was quite dead." How Linny's cow had such a pretty calf, all white; and so
on—a chronicle of farm-yard news, highly interesting to those immediately
concerned.
Frank and Freda were wholly engrossed by the little grey cygnets, feeding


them, and sitting down with them on the lawn, and delighted to see the bold
little birds cuddle up close to them, and squat down all altogether, basking in
the sun.
Mr. Merton and Mr. Forrester, meanwhile, went on a general tour of
inspection round the farm, and on visiting the fencers who were at work near
the river, found that a large black snake had been killed by them that morning,
although so early in the season, the warm sun having probably enticed it out.
In the evening, when the matter was again alluded, to, Guy enquired —
" How hig are the snakes in Riverina, Uncle Cyril ?"
" Six or seven feet long is no unusual size for black snakes.* I have often
killed them as large, and heard of one that measured nine feet. Sweet-looking
creatures they are! and they show fight too. I generally carried my gun when
out boundary-riding (that is, going round the outskirts and divisions of the run,
and seeing if the wire fences are secure, and mending them, if broken) —there's
nothing like a gun in a snaky country —hut one day I met a monster, and, as ill
luck would have it, I had shot away all my powder at wild-ducks, so I threw the
gun at him, thinking to settle him that way, hut, I suppose, missed him, for he
went sailing round and round and over it, biting at it again and again. I had to
wait a good bit to recover my gun; but at last he left, and I got it again, and
followed him, and had another ' shy,' but the long grass prevented my seeing
well, and I don't think he was touched. Again I picked up the gun, and got in
front of the snake, took good aim, and disabled him, so then I finished him with
a stirrup-iron; he was close on seven feet long."
"What a brute !" exclaimed Guy.
"But in the country further north there are serpents —of the python
family, I believe *f* —really tremendous fellows, more like the boa in size. A
man named Jock, on our station, told me a story, which 111 tell to you. He
was once up in Queensland, driving a bullock-team, and a mate of his, Sandy,
had charge of another. One morning he started early to look for the bullocks,
leaving Sandy asleep at their camp. He was a good while away, yet when he
got back, Sandy was still lying as when he left, but across his body, with its
head resting on his chest, was a huge serpent, sixteen or eighteen feet long, and
as thick as a man's thigh. Jock did not know that these big fellows have no
deadly poison fangs, and he feared that his mate had been killed by it. Half-
* P-seulcchis
"f "Python is Indian only; probably Morelia variegata or Liusis fuscus, commonly known as
' Carpet Snakes.'"—Prof. M'COY.


paralysed by grief and terror, he crept as near as he durst, knelt down, took
steady aim at the snake's head, and fired "
" Well —and then ?"
" Sandy jumped up —the snake didn't."
" I'm glad the man was not killed," said Guy. " Snake stories are generally
horrid; but I heard one yesterday that made me laugh. Papa, you know Tom
Allen ? Well, he saw a black snake* the other day, and it went under a little
she-oak, leaving a third of it outside. Tom pulled out a boot-laee, and tied one
end tight round the tail, and the other end round the stick, and left it so, telling
his people at home how he had ' tethered a snake.' Next day he went the same
way again, and there lay the snake, stiff and cold. It had been a hard frost all
night. Tom's sisters had been teasing him to get them snake-bones to make
bracelets of, so he would not lose a dead one, but doubled it up, put it in his
pocket, and rode off towards home. As he was cantering along, he felt something
moving, and saw the snake's head poked out, and the glittering eyes looking up
at him. He yelled, and his mare bolted in a fright. He was so terrified he had
not power to check her, but she luckily made for home. All he could do was to
shake furiously at his coat, and so they dashed into the yard, he shrieking,
' Stop the mare ! stop her!'
" Old Allen stood at the barn-door, staring at him, and exclaimed—' The
lad's drunk ! No—he hasn't had time to get drunk ! He's gone stark mad!
he's mad!' Still Tom yelled, and the more he yelled, the more, the mare
plunged about, till one of the men caught her, and Tom tore his coat off, and the
snake tumbled out. It's really dead now."
Mrs. Merton shuddered. " Such a hair's-breadth escape is much too terrible
to laugh at."
" Well, Mamma, but it must have been so absurd too."
" The blacks are more afraid of snakes than even we are," said Cyril. " The
gins (wives), who are wandering about and coming to the station at all hours,
in a general way, know quite well the season when snakes run at night, and
won't stir after dark if they can help it. They say, ' Too much black fellow walk
about' then. One dark night, as I was riding home through some trees with
low branches, I put up my hand to break one off, and a small snake was on it,
which bit me sharply as I laid hold of him."
"Not a venomous one ?" said Mr. Merton.
* Hoplocephalus curtus.


" That's more than I know; but I tied a cord pretty tight round my wrist
at once, cut and gashed my hand with my knife all round the bite, and sucked
the wound, and I felt no more of it. Accidents and narrow escapes from snakes
are so continually happening, that I only wonder at the comparative rarity of
fatal cases."
" Had you any other kinds of snakes where you were ?" asked Guy.
"Several. The carpet-snakes* are the largest, frequently twelve feet long,
hut not venomous. They climb . trees very quickly, and live on birds and
opossums. We were camping out one night, and I nearly asleep, when my
companion roused me to look at two carpet-snakes in a tree close to us. They
were apparently at play with one another, gliding and frisking among the
branches. I believe they kill their larger prey by compression, as the boa
constrictor is known to do. The brown snakes,'f which abound on the plains,
are deadly, and the blacks dread them more than all the rest. They add
wonderful celerity of motion to the usual list of snake accomplishments, and
when you see one, you must be prompt; for unless you have him very quick, he
will have you. They are literally like lightning, in their dart and spring, i hey
run from five to six feet long, and are very slender in form. The mallee-snake J
is another very venomous one. The largest of these I ever saw was killed at
the station, in our forge. The old blacksmith had been busy outside for some
little time, and on coming back into the shop, saw a malleersnake lying inside,
just across the doorway. A dray-axle happened to rest against the wall, which
the man dropped upon his unwelcome guest, crippling it, when he soon killed it.
This snake I saw measured. It was eleven feet six inches in length, of a diity
ash-colour. I killed many of them three and four, feet long, but none like the
blacksmith's friend. They are a serious and much-dreaded peril in the dense
mallee scrubs, where they run in the thick tangled growth overhead, and when
men are riding through after stock, they get bitten from above and killed.
"Are there not large iguanas near the Lachlan, where you were, Cyril?
asked Mrs. Merton.
"Yes, plenty from four to seven feet in length; the long slendei tail
being more than one-half of that, or two-thirds, I should think.
" Yery ugly things, are they not ?" said Lina.
" I never could think so. Of course they are reptiles, and that san u_,ly
word; but they are beautifully marked with black and white, and are such
* Morelia variegata. + Diemensia superciliosa. J Hoplocephalus curtus.


active, clean-made, clever-looking, bright-eyed creatures, that I always admired,
and rather liked them. When I have come-upon one suddenly and stood still, I
have been amused to see it lift its head up and look curiously at me, evidently
/
taking a careful observation of the phenomenon; but if anything startled it, off
it went at once, and up a tree, if one chanced to be near. They usually ascend
cork-screw fashion, but, if watched, are careful to keep the tree between them
and the observer. The blacks kill and eat them, and dogs generally chase them.
One day I was out on the plains, and saw a man at a little distance, to whom I
had just been speaking, suddenly fling himself into extraordinary contortions,
yelling like a maniac the while. I followed up to see what had happened. The
man's dog had chased a poor iguana* through the grass, in the direction of his
master. The terrified lizard, not seeing any tree to run up, had accepted the
man as the only visible substitute, and mounted to his shoulders almost at a
bound. I "could not dismount for laughing, for I knew there was no danger,
except for the iguana. The man threw himself down and rolled on the ground,
and the dog killed the poor beast."
" But there are more kinds of lizards ?"
" Half-a-dozen, I daresay. The wide, hot plains abound with them, of all
sorts and sizes; and the various species seem to run one into another, so as to
make it difficult for anyone but a naturalist to mark out the distinctions and
definitions!. The largest yew-lizardsj* are eighteen or twenty inches long, with a
large, broad head, and a moderately long tail; all are dark-coloured, but some
have a smooth, others a very rough scaly skin, clearly denoting different species.
The next in size;}; have a short, thick bob-tail, and two little horn-like excrescences
on the head. Those of the third size§ have a still shorter tail, looking as though
cut off abruptly; a fourth is less still.|| In all, the head is large and broad.
There are thousands of them all over the plains, and my dogs were continually
killing them."
" Do the blacks eat them ?" asked Louis.
"I am not sure that they never do, but I think not. I never knew them
eat one. They devour the eggs of all lizards whenever they fijrd them. I came
upon a couple of blacks one day very busy scratching up the earth to the depth
of more than a foot. They had been trying to unearth an iguana, and lost him,
but had found a quantity of eggs—fifty or sixty, I daresay, and of all varieties
* Hydrosaurus varius. f Grammatoph cristata. +G. barbata.
§ G. muricata. II G. ornata.


0 f form— round, oval, short, long, straight, and crooked, of a dingy white colour.
'What will you do with them?' I asked. ' Eat 'em,' was the laconic reply. I
think they roasted them first. _
« You spoke of long grass," said Guy. " I thought there was not any long
mass in those hot places, Uncle ?
° « If you W ere to see the plains about the Lachlan, in what we call a good
season they would astonish you. I have seen the grass over two feet high for
miles and miles of country. The wild-oat grass would cut from one to two
tons an acre over hundreds of miles."
« And do not the station owners make hay of it to feed their wretched
animals in years of scarcity ?" asked Mrs. Merton. - fl
«Yo—l never knew it done; though one would think that anyone with
common sense would do it. What the flocks and cattle can eat, they do, and get
'rolling fat;' and what is not eaten, rots; and perhaps the next season is one
of drought and consequent starvation, but no one ever lays up the abun ance
when it is given. I did urge our chief to have a few stacks of hay made, if only
for the station horses; but I was only laughed at as a Johnny Uewcome, so
shut up and said no more. If I had a station of my own there, wouldn 11 make
hay ? that's all." . „
"It does seem senseless and improvident, to t e as egree.
It is; and many other things equally improvident are done daily on
stations where the general privation and the shortcoming in person* l comfor is
trying enough. Heaven knows, life there is hard, inevitably ; but many things
might be done, which are not, to render it less miserable.


CHAPTER XXVIII.
'Tis born with all : the love of Nature's works
Is an ingredient in the compound, Man,
Infused at the creation of the kind ;
And though th' Almighty Maker has throughout
Discriminated each from each, by strokes
And touches of His hand, with so much art
Diversified, that two were never found
Twins at all points—yet this obtains in all,
That all discern a beauty in His works,
t
And all can taste them : minds that have been formed
And tutor'd, with a relish more exact,
• 7
But none without some relish, none unmoved.
COWPER.
" TTNCLE CYRIL," said Freda, as Mr. Forrester lifted her and her doll on to
U his knee, " did yon ever see. an emn ? I've seen two."
" And I must have seen two hundred, one time or another, little woman;
hut not many at once, except one awfully hot day—a day to he remembered as
hottest even amongst the scorchers I have experienced. The poor emus had got
down into the creek amongst the lignum hushes for a little shade, and I saw
over a hundred then, in different family parties."
" What are lignum bushes ?" •
"Ah! now you have me, Freda. Ido not know what a botanist would call
them; they are something like cane, but with large leaves, which all animals
are fond of, and they grow about eight feet high in the creeks and gullies. I
usually saw emus in parties of about seven, eleven, or perhaps thirteen, not more,
together, and seldom near enough to observe them. But once, as I was busy at
work, stooping down, mending the bottom wire of a fence, I saw a lot of emus
coming gradually nearer and nearer. I wanted to finish my job, and also not to
scare them, so I went on very quietly, and they came quite close, peeping and


prying about, stretching their long necks, and watching me with their keen
bright eyes, as if curious to examine narrowly into my proceedings, and looking
as much as to say,' What are you about, old fellow ? what's your little game V
I kept still, highly amused at their superintendence of my work; and after a
thorough investigation of it and of me for some minutes, they turned and walked
off again. There were two full-grown birds; the rest were young ones."
"And you did not kill any.' lam so glad," said Louis.
"What on earth should I kill them for? They did me no harm, nor
anybody else, that I know of, except that if pursued they would perhaps break
a wire of the fence sometimes. I neither wanted them to eat nor to wear. It
was very pleasant and amusing to see them in their free natural life, and watch
their antics and attitudes. I wished very much that I had been artist enough
to have made a sketch of the family group, it was so quaint and pretty, but it
never entered into my head to hurt a feather of theirs, I can assure you.
" Oh, how like what Papa always says !" cried Lina. " I wish you would go
about the world, Uncle Cyril, and convert people to our creed. How much more
happiness and beauty there would be !"
" Make me the grand expositor of the principles of the
tion and Cruelty-prevention Association, eh, Lina ? Well, I quite go with you as
to the crying need for reforming many of the barbarities of civilisation. Is that
a bull 1 Ho; because true civilisation could not be barbarous, and what we call
such, most decidedly is; but lam afraid a poor apostle of our faith would not
be admitted, far less obeyed, by the ringleaders of the very numerous body of
offenders. Princes and nobles would turn a deaf ear to St. Paul himself, if
proposed to interfere with their savage -pastimes. And your sex would not be a
bit more tolerant; for I should advocate and insist on total abstinence m the
matter of feather ornaments —birds' wings, and all such Eed-Indian squaw
paraphernalia of the present silly and most cruel fashions. Prom the Arct c
seas to tropical forests is now waged woman's war of extermination a Q ainst
whole bird creation. Millions on millions of lovely, harmless—ay, more than
harmless, useful —happy lives are sacrificed every year to giatify the dtpra
fancies of vain, idle women, who, if they cared to realise our ideal of the -,
would be too humane and gentle to endure the thought that a sin o le sp
should be destroyed for their pleasure."
" And what pleasure they can have in sticking a dried-up, crippled mu y
of a bird on their hats, I can't think," said Guy. " Even if they looked as
as when alive, it would be a very silly notion. But of all things in the shape


of ornament , I clo think the greatest failure and the most revolting idea is a
stuffed bird. It is never put in right shape, to begin with; its poor little bright
eyes are vilely caricatured by dim glass beads, stuck in among the displaced
feathers; its beak is shrivelled and deformed; its pretty little feet crippled and
shrunk out of all shape; and the plumage, that, when it's alive, looks as sleek
and soft as if it was all one feather, is ragged and ruffled and dull; and the
whole concern looks no more like a bird than the dried rose leaves in Mamma's
china jar are like roses."
" When lam a rich man," said Louis—" that is, if I ever am —I 'll have ajl
the clever books and good pictures I can get, of all sorts of beasts, birds, and
fishes; and I 'll try and see all I can alive in their own homes and native lands;
but I 'll never have one stuffed to keep in my house, nor shoot them for any one
else to stuff."
"But you did shoot ducks, Uncle Cyril?" said Guy.
"I did, my boy, and so would your father, and most other men, in my
place. I needed'them to eat, and never fired a shot wantonly. I did not kill
very many either, for the black* ducks —which are the best eating—frequent
shallow grassy lagoons, that in rainy seasons cover hundreds of acres, and the
ducks are wise enough to keep well off shore and out of range. If alarmed, they
rise in absolute clouds, and seem to darken the very air with their numbers."
" Were they all black ducks, or other sorts ?"
"Some were wood-ducks,'j- large and brown-plumaged, but not nearly so
good to eat as the black; and there were guard-drakes, J which seemed to me
the same as the Tasmanian mountain duck; and the whistling teal,§ that, when
they rise, make a loud shrill noise, like a brass whistle, or like the wind in fifty
keyholes at once, besides various other kinds. The ibis 11 was one of the hand-
somest birds on the lagoon."
"Ibis ? Like the sacred Egyptian ibis ?" said Mrs. Merton.
" I cannot tell you. It was a bird about two feet high, as big as a small
goose, and with clear black and white plumage, like a magpie. I often saw a
number of them, standing ranked up in a line, on the banks of the lagoons,
probably watching for fish.
" A splendid large white crane 11 came sometimes, but very rarely, and still
* Anas superciliosa.
+ Chlamydochen jubata.
J Casarca tadornoides. •
§ Dendrocygna arcnata.
|| Falcinellus igneus — ' 6 Found in Egypt,
but not the white sacred one." —
Prof. M'COY.
IT Herodias syrmatophorus.


more rarely a second with him. I never saw more. They seemed to prey chiefly
on frogs. But the oddest little party of all was the diver* In the hot summers
of Biverina, these wide lagoons dry up entirely, and every description of water-
fowl disappears for months at a time, perhaps years, if drought continue."
" Where do they all go ?" asked Louis.
" Well, you see, if I had had wings, I might have gone too, and found out ;
but as I hadn't, I didn't, and so I don't know. I have an idea that they flew
away to some blessed region where water was in existence as a tangible fact,
instead of a distant and doubtful recollection."
" And the diver ?" asked Mrs. Merton.
" Yes; after the lagoons have been, as I said, perfectly dry for several
months —not merely boggy-dry, but absolutely dust-dry —and not a diver to be
seen for hundreds of miles, there may be a fall of rain for a few hours, and a
little water, a couple of feet deep perhaps, again appears in the hollows; one
niffit's rain will suffice; and then in the morning, as if by enchantment,
O
numbers of divers may be seen in the lagoon."
" Smelt the water, and flew back," suggested Guy.
" Blew ? Yes, if they could fly, but they cannot; neither can they run.
Their wings are small —no better for flying than the little flippers of a penguin.
They have long legs, but set so far back that they seem unable to balance
themselves. I have carefully lifted them out of the water in the dam, and set
them down on the ground, perfectly unhurt, and they never did anything but
topple over and tumble down."
"What can they do ?" asked Lina.
" Swim; as well as any body, or bird either. But, seeing that they cannot
swim across hundreds of miles of dry land, and can neither walk nor fly, how do
they travel ? And by what means or agency clo they* make their appcaiance in
this mysterious manner ? When caught and put down on land, as I said, they
are quite helpless, and roll over, squeaking piteously; but once in the watei, the)
are all alert and nimble. They have a strong, rank odour, which is a beneficial
safeguard to -them, for the greediest pot-hunter does not care to put in
his bag."
" I should like to hear some good naturalist s opinion on the subject, said
Mr. Merton.
"So should I. I can only tell you what I have myself repeatedly seen, and
* Podiceps Austral


&11 other people who have lived, in the same country will tell you the SBme
thing. It is very odd, and very mysterious. The old philosophers explained
the autumnal disappearance of swallows by a theory of their hybernating under
water, and I do not doubt they would have accounted for that of the divers by
asserting that they burrowed into the earth." *
"Do you remember the invasion of frogs here one summmer evening after,
lono- drought ?" said Mrs. Merton. " That was curious, too. Of course, as
O C 5
compared with Eiverina, the heat .was not remarkable, but the ground was
parched and cracked, and no rain had fallen for many weeks, when one Sunday
evening we saw quantities of small frogs climbing up the windows, and hopping
in all over the house, even on the kitchen hearth. We could scarcely walk a
yard without treading on them, and with them came the rain, first in a dense
Scotch mist, and then a thorough down-pour. In the morning, save a few in
odd corners, our frog-visitors had disappeared again."
" I remember it well," said Lina. " You called us to come and read, and
when we sat down at the drawing-room table, there were frogs on that, and some
sitting on the Bibles and Prayer-books, Guy said it was like one of the plagues
of Egypt; but the only really unpleasant part of it was the danger of killing
the poor little things. We tried to collect them and put them outside, but
it was "
" Yery like bottling up the Ganges," said Mr. Merton; "for each one carried
out, twenty came in. It seemed as though they rose out of the very floors and
carpets beneath our feet; I never witnessed a phenomenon of the kind before
nor since. But I have seen an almost equally sudden arrival of fish. That piece
of land we used to call the middle lagoon had been perfectly dry for a length of
time, having not only lost fill claim to its old title, but become devoid of even a
puddle, when, after a few hours' heavy rain one night, every little hollow where
water stood was found to be full of fish ; not miscros.copic things that you might
* Mr. Forrester's description of the diver, and its mysterious re-appearances, is, as may be
supposed, another instance of popular error, his being the account generally accepted by the
unobservant, and given to me, as an indisputable fact, by several residents in Riverina. Professof
M'Coy, of the Melbourne University, to whom I referred the question, says of these birds They fly,
though unwilling to rise, and with short wings." It is not long since the scientific world was staitled
by the announced discovery in New Guinea of a gigantic bird, whose wings spread over twenty-two
feet, and whose voice was as loud as the scream of a railway engine. This astounding portrait, when
reduced to life-size, proves to be that of the red-necked hornbill, whose wings, when extended, do not
exceed four or five feet ! So that " travellers' tales" are still sometimes told, but, save the above
semblance of one, have no place in my humble chronicle.


say come down in the rain, but two and three inches long. Where did
come from-?"
♦
" I should like to know," said Cyril. " I can only say with Hamlet—
' There are more things in heaven and earth,
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.' "
" Did yon often see eagles ?" inquired Gary, finding that there were not any
more facts to elicit concerning the divers, and having small relish for speculation,
0
" Yes, frequently, and very, large hawks, which prey upon the ducks-and
the pretty painted quail,* of which there are great numbers on the plains. One
day I saw a flock of ducks suddenly rise, and directly after one of them fell to
the ground, struck dead by a hawk. I picked up the duck, and as the hawk
came swooping down after his victim, I shot him. There are several birds called
night-hawks*|* too; some sort of owl, I fancy. After a long day's work, I often
had to ride late at night, on my way home, through pine-scrubs, and the
unearthly screams and screeches of those creatures seemed too horrible for any
bird's throat to produce. Sounding just over one's head, or suddenly close beside
one's ear, in the pitchy darkness, it is what Scotch folks call ' eerie,' I can tell
you. If a London stage manager could get up such effects for the incantation
scene in ' Der Freischutz,' it would be a sensation! The common owls assist in
the chorus too, and their hooting is not exactly cheerful either."
" Oh, Uncle Cyril, I like to hear the owls," said Lina.
" Yery likely. And I have no objection either, to go out now, with any of
you, and hear owls too. That's one thing; but hearing them as I used to do,
away yonder, was a mighty different matter. Tired—body, bone, and soul —with
a long day's boundary-riding of from forty to sixty miles, and mending wire-
fences under a broiling sun that made the wire hot to touch; fasting since six
or seven in the morning, and probably parched with thirst —for after draining my
bottle of water, I might have miles and miles of hot and weary plain to traverse —
my poor faithful dog scarcely able to get along with me, and with no pleasant
belief in any coming good fortune to put life into a dulled brain or energy into
r ,
limp muscles —in such times and moods, Linny, we neither see nor hear with
quite an unbiassed judgment, I suppose; and so I found the ' voices of the night'
in the pine scrubs anything but cheerful."
" How terrible it would have been if your water-bottle had broken,"
said Louis.
* Turnix varius. + Podargus Cuvieri.


" It could not break, being made of fine thick linen or cotton cloth, double,
and closely seamed, with a nozzle sewed in. Of course there was some waste
in slight oozing and evaporation; but we found this kind of bottle answer better
than any other, and the evaporation kept the water cooler. I have many a time
gone short myself, to give enough to my poor dogs to keep life in them, and
several died miserably, in spite of all I could do. I have often carried one
before me on the hofse, some miles, to the nearest well, to save it from dying ol
thirst on the burning plains."
" You had wells, then ?"
" Yes; on one station—not a large one, only carrying 25,000 or 30,000 sheep,
and about 100 cattle and horses —there were four wells of 200 feet deep, each
costing, with all appliances, £l,OOO or £1,200. The water is drawn up by a
horse working in a 'whim,' and attached to each well is a large tank and a line
of iron troughing, raised on blocks of wood, 150 yards in length or more, in three
branches, in a sort of T shape.- The quantity of sheep watered at each well
varied according to the well's supply —sometimes one well would water 00,000,
and another not more than 3,000. We had some very knowing old pensioners
among the crows too, who knew the value of our wells as well as we did. There
were always, in dry times, flocks of visiting crows that came for water to the
tanks and troughs; but we had, besides them, some constant residents, who did
good service in devouring dead sheep about the place, and took out their pay
in water. They were epicures, too, in their liquor, and found that the watei
exposed in the tanks was inferior in coolness to that which collected in the
canvas hose used for filling the troughs, the ends of which, when not in use,
were hung up, allowing a little water to collect in the tube, which these clever
old crows used to tap, making holes in the canvas hose with their beaks. Again
and again I was puzzled to account for leaks in the hose, and at last detected a
crow in the act of pecking the hole, to obtain his cool draught.
" I hope you did not kill him ?" said Lina.
" Kill him ? no, poor wretch. I knew what thirst was myself too well for
that—besides, we could not kill all the crows, and the gift of cleverness was not
limited to one individual. Immense numbers of little birds, too, used to come
round, sitting all along the rails, and as soon as the sheep had gone away, they came
in myriads to get a drink. I have often turned a little water into the empty
trough, that they might have plenty; and the men at work at a well would often
do the same. On a hot day in a dry season —which means a condition of things
as near purgatory as need be—l have seen our favourite big Tom cat at the


station lying on the table gasping, with his tongue hanging out, and the room
full of little birds hopping all about and over him, seeking for water, but he was
too much overcome by heat to even look at them. The acute suffering I have
known animals subjected to, in such seasons, makes one doubt if man is justified
in taking his good dumb servants into a region where they have so much misery
to endure, and where so many perish in agony."
" But man does not take the little birds and the crows there, and they suffer
all the same."
"So they do. It is another part of the great enigma—which wiser men than
I fail to solve —why creatures, innocent of sin, and unable to amend their
condition, should be permitted to suffer. But I have rambled away from the
wells, which we were talking about. They are only needed in dry seasons. In
others the extensive dams afford water. The plains, generally speaking, are a
dead level-; so much so, that I have seen a deep furrow run by a plough for
200 yards with no perceptible variation —water let into it would not run; and
one great difficulty, when we washed our sheep at the well, was to get
an escape for the dirty water. The dams are natural depressions or
hollows, sometimes ' blind creeks,' which receive the rain, and, when banked up,
preserve it for some time. These are made wherever practicable. Some are
half-a-mile long, some ten or twelve miles, and others of all intermediate sizes.
In a few cases a dozen barrow or cart loads of earth will make a dam; others
cost as much as £lO,OOO or £12,000. It is an odd thing, that whilst these dams
are full, nobody sees any fish in them; but as soon as the water shrinks, small
fish are so abundant, that the blacks come and camp on the banks to feast oil
them. We used to catch some too; they made an acceptable change.
" Are there any more birds there ?" asked Louis.
"What boys yon are to catechise a fellow ! Birds ? Yes, plenty more, but
not many that I can tell you much about. You see, Louis, I was not employed
to explore and observe the natural history of Biverina. I was only a poor
boundary-rider, and, like scores more of the same class, who were better educated
(University men, some of them), and possibly even better born than myself —for
all I knew were the sons of gentlemen —we had to work hard to perform our
duties, and earn our wages and our tucker."
" Tucker ?" echoed Lina.
"Well, then, grub —rations —victuals, if I must give dictionary defini-
tions. Two meals a-day, if we were lucky; mutton, and bread or damper,
and tea; no vegetables, no fruit, nor any variety, unless we shot a duck or two,


or maybe a pigeon. There are bronze-wing pigeons,* larger than yours in
Tasmania, and wood pigeons f too —very pretty birds, a sort of cinnamon colour,
with crests of curly feathers, and unluckily for them, they are very good to eat.
And there are mallee hens, j which are not good. Even the blacks will not eat
them. They are like small, beautifully-formed common fowls, with light-brown
or darkish-buff plumage. They live in flocks on the borders of rivers or lagoons,
and have regular runs through the scrub and grass along shore. They wait in
their covert until a man or dog gets pretty close to them, and then away they fly.
The chickens are very pretty little things, and they run!"
" But if the chickens are not good eating, the turkeys § are. Did you often
get them?" asked Guy.
" No; and for this reason only, that all my week-days were full of fatiguing
occupation, not allowing me to go after turkeys—which, by-the-bye, are bustards,
when called by their right name—and I was too thankful to make Sunday really
a day of rest, to feel the least disposition to ride after them then."
"Any parrots ?" asked Lina.
" Yes, several sorts. One || —at least I suppose it's a parrot —is the most
dazzling thing I ever saw. Most of its body is snowy, silvery white, and its
breast the brightest scarlet. You could not find a satin ribbon in a haberdasher's
shop that would come near the colour. And in spring, when the young grass is
vividly green, and a flock of these radiant birds are walking about in the clear
sunshine, it almost makes one's eyes wink to look at them."
" And there must have been little birds there, as well as big ones ?" queried
Frank.
" Lots, my boy, wherever there was a pine scrub, or a bush of any sort. But
though I always looked at them, and enjoyed seeing them hop and fly about, I
really do not know their names, if they have any."
"If ? Of course they have names, Uncle Cyril."
" Their own country-folk, the blacks, don't think so, at any rate. A visitor
who came up to our station, and who rather went in for science, was asking a
black fellow who was with us one day a good many questions, and, pointing to a
little bird on a tree, repeated the oft-asked query, ' What's that ?' The noble
savage glanced contemptuously around, and replied, 'Yah! he too naurangy
(little); he got no name.'"
* Peristera elegans. t Leucosarcia picata. J Leijpoa ocillata.
§ Otis Australasiana. II Liruatis nasico.


"Did you ever see a bird dance, Uncle ?" enquired Freda. " Because there
was a big one at Mr. Bexley's, that he said could dance a quadrille as well as I
can; but it never would, whilst I was looking at it."
"A native companion,* I suppose."
" Yes, that was its name. Something like a great crane." •.
«
" You could not dance a quadrille all alone by yourself, could you ? And
so one solitary bird could give you but a very faint notion of the performance
Mr. Bexley meant. I only wish you could all see it, as I have often done, when
a dozen or twenty of those wonderful birds have been going through their
evolutions. You would never forget it. They are over three feet high,
and stand as erect as soldiers, in a sort of set figure, not unlike a quadrille; and
they step and sidle about, perform solos, advance and retire, set to partners,
circling round each other as if possetting, and cross over and back again, all in
the gravest and neatest way, as if a dozen feathered disciples of Mr. Turveydrop
were giving lessons in elegance and deportment. It is, without any exception,
the most curious, diverting, and pretty exhibition I ever beheld. The pity is,
that so few who can rightly appreciate the wonderful quaintness and eccentricity
of the manceuvres are able to enjoy the sight; for, of course, it is only under rare
circumstances that an opportunity occurs for watching them in their perfectly
free, wild state."
"I have often thought," said Mrs. Merton, "that the attitudes and
deportment of birds display more of coquettish airs and consciousness of
grace and beauty than are evinced' by any other creatures. They seem to
know how lovely they are, and to put on a thousand pretty little affectations
of posture and movement, as though in the very spirit of painting the lily,
or throwing perfume on the violet—or perhaps I should rather say they know
how to place the lily in the best light, and to hold the violet so that its
perfume shall be most widely diffused. They both feel their own beauty and
how to enhance its power. Look at a peacock in full glory, as he shimmers his
starry train up into a canopy, and seems to insist on the admiring homage of the
homely cocks and hens around him ! Or watch a party of rose-bill parrots in
the garden, or a flock of cockatoos, either white or black. They could all pick
and eat their food perfectly well, without any of that graceful and elaborate
attitudinising in which they evidently delight. How differently the horse,
cow, or sheep demean themselves. They do not attempt to go through any
* Grus Australasianus.


distractingly complicated acrobatic feats, but graze and ruminate in a plain
business-like way. Yes; I think that birds—pretty birds, at all events —have
the organ of love of approbation largely developed, and that they keenly enjoy
the possession of their beauty. I do not believe that Cyril's pet friends, the
native companions, would dance so elegantly if they were not quite aware that
they are very handsome birds. Who ever heard of a carrion-convocation of
vultures or condors indulging in the like pretty festivities ? or of a pair of
cormorants treating themselves to a pas deux over a gorge of fish ? Depend
4
on it, mine is the correct theory.
" But here comes the supper-tray. How late you children have sat up!
How, I suppose we must make it later yet, to let you have a biscuit before you
go ; and then —good night."


CHAPTER XXIX.
I understand a fury in your words,
But not the words.
SHAKSPERE.
" I AM satisfied that Old Sailor knew me when I arrived," said Cyril, caressing
f a noble collie of Mr. Merton's. " And three years is a long time for him to
remember; but the very first day, he came and put his nose into my hand, and,
as soon as I had sat down, rested his head on my knee, gazing up at me, and
talking in a low, intelligent sort of half-whimper, exactly as though he would
fain say he was glad to see me again."
"As I have not the least doubt he was," said Mr. Merton. "Dogs have
most tenacious memories. I have satisfied myself on that point repeatedly. The
firm, faithful attachment of animals to man is their most winning characteristic."
"A very odd circumstance happened here a year or two ago," said Mrs.
Merton, " which puzzled me, and has puzzled us all, without a ray of enlighten-
ment. It was a case of mistaken identity, and puts what we understand as
instinct in a new phase altogether, as it seems to me. Lina had had a little kid
given to her, and Guy had at the same time a motherless pet lamb. The two
were reared together, fed from the same bottle, lay in the same bed, and were
inseparable friends, at play or asleep, always together. So they continued, until
fourteen or fifteen months old, when at shearing-time the lamb, a great fat
woolly fellow, was taken to the shed and carefully shorn. As soon as the opera-
tion was over, poor Billy trotted straight home again, and hurried up to his old
friend Nanny, no doubt expecting to find comfort and consolation in her
affection for the indignity and spoliation he had suffered; but Nanny, who had
never ceased baa-ing after him during his hour's absence, and had been looking
and running disconsolately about, asking us all, in her Nanny-goat fashion, what


had become of her friend, faced round on the poor shorn lamb in a fury of anger,
butted him off as an impertinent interloper, and still went on running from place
to place, seeking anxiously for her lost sheep, ever and anon turning short round
to butt poor Billy, who ran after her in answer to the well-known call, only to
meet the cruellest repulse and insult. Nor could all our endeavours serve to
effect a reconciliation. The Billy of Nanny's affection was gone—lost to her
for ever with his woolly coat ; and she evidently believed that the shorn sheep,
so patiently trotting after her, with such a pained expression in his innocent
face, was a total stranger, assuming unwarrantable privileges. It was altogether
so pitiful, that I was-glad for Billy to leave the homestead and join a flock, so as
to have companions of his own kind. Now will you explain this Why did
Nanny fail to recognise her own beloved friend, after his coat was taken off, when
she always knew me, no matter what the change in my dress ? The alteration
from mornin 0 * cotton to afternoon silk or muslin never occasioned her the least
O
hesitation, and certainly the change was fully as marked. My hands might be
bare or gloved, but Nanny's face was gently rubbed against them all the same.
Why did she not know Billy ?" . '
"It is the oddest case I ever heard," said Cyril. " Had the goat sufficient
time to think it over ?"
" She had a fortnight, at least. For I thought she would certainly remember
her old friend after a day or two; but she was quite faithful to his memory,
searching and baa-ing perpetually; would suddenly cease grazing or eating any
dainty given to her, and with an impatient, distressed voice, call loudly in her
old way; but the instant Billy came up to answer, she ran at him with threatening
horns, as if to say, 'You tiresome, silly thing, don't tease me. I don't know you.
I want my own lamb again. Baa-a-a!"
" It was," said Mr. Merton, " a most vexatious and touching verification of
the poet's line—
' Earth hath no strife like love to hatred turned.'"
\
" And we have known one other instance of the rupture of an animal
friendship: in this case, however, there was no mistake of identity, but a
palpable quarrel. Two good-tempered carriage horses, the property of a
gentleman here, and evidently fond of each other, were sold to different
masters, and for some time separated entirely. Several years had elapsed,
when the two owners agreed to be companions in some long journeys, and
literally ' putting their horses together,' drove these two tandem. The affection
192
Tasmanian Friends and Foes.


they had before shown was now renewed unmistakably; and the owner* of
' Duke,' observant for his favourite's comfort, always endeavoured to secure a
stall for him next to that of ' Bobby,' when at inns or other strange stables.
Subsequently the horses were kept and frequently driven together, and their
fondness for each other' was often remarked. If one were away, the other
neighed and fretted in evident distress, and, the instant he could get loose,
trotted up to the street-wall, where he would poke his head. over, looking
wistfully up and down, and neighing impatiently for his comrade, who, on his
return, was received with capers and whinnies of delight. When in the
paddock, the horses grazed side by side, and in all ways so demeaned themselves
that we were almost tempted to re-name them ' Damon and Pythias.' 4 Happily
the suggestion was not carried out; for, unlike the friends whose classic
example "they had seemed to follow, our loving companions quarrelled —on
what grounds 'twere hard to say, and bootless to inquire what the bone of
contention ; but one day sounds of tierce equine encounter were heard, and the
Duke and Bobby seen in deadly combat; kicking and biting in most vicious
earnest. The engagement ended as a 'drawn battle;' the belligerents walked
off sulky and dignified in different directions, and never after that day were the
old amicable relations renewed between them. No two Christian gentlemen of
opposite opinions in politics or religion could evince a more inexorable or
obstinate oppugnancy than did these whilom loving friends; and, as the
horses were not (to our knowledge) members of any public body, the moving
influence for their sudden transition from love to hate seems hard to
comprehend."
"Very. But the goat's inability to recognise the lamb is infinitely more
curious; altogether inexplicable."
The arrival of the mail-bag here changed the current of conversation.
Lina shook out the contents, dealing letters, packets, and papers to their
proper owners, and smiling a little to herself as she placed before her father
an envelope addressed to him in Mr. Bexley's large, firm handwriting.
" I guessed as much," he remarked, as he read the enclosure. Bexley says
Edgar is now home for a few days, and he claims my promise that I would take
Louis over to meet, and return with him to school. He is very good very
generous—-but " ' '
* The Hon. C. Meredith. This, and the preceding incident, were narrated by the writer, and
« .
published in the Australasian some years ago. —H. A. M.
2 B


" Papa! Papa!" cried Lina, impulsively, putting her arm round her father's
neck, and looking imploringly into his face. " You are not going to refuse ?
You never were cruel before; you are not going to begin now ?"
Mr. Merton stroked her hair for a minute in silence, as her other hand
crept up and clasped him fast.
" One half of me would like very much to refuse. It irks me to receive
. such aid from any man; but in this particular instance I suppose I must yield
for your sake, Linny, as well as your brother's. I know all about your generosity
my child "
Lina stopped all further revelation with a thankful kiss.
" Will you get his traps ready to-day, then ? for we will go to-morrow."
And no packing for school was ever more cheerfully accomplished.


CHAPTER XXX.
' ' A pleasant cot
# In a tranquil spot,
With a constant view of the changing sea."
PAPA, I 've such a grand idea," cried Guy, as he hurried down at the sound
of the second dinner-bell, his bright ruddy face aglow with its plunge into
cold water, his curly hair brushed smartly up, and his arms just completing the
struggle into his jacket/'
Ci Have you ? and I 've another \ that a gentleman s time must be curiously
precious, if he cannot get into his coat before appearing in a drawing-room.
Guy laughed. " Ah, but my idea was in a hurry, and couldn t wait. I say,
Papa, what a glorious start it would be if we could all go to Aunt Anne s whilst
Uncle Cyril's with us! That would be fun! He's so fond of boating and
fishing, and would be such a mate for you and "
" What's that young rebel talking about ? Hatching treason, of course,"
said Cyril, entering at the moment, with heightened colour on his brown cheek,
as he caught the utterance of his own name, coupled with that of Aunt Anne,
Q
which, for reasons best known to himself, sounded oddly in his ears.
" Ah!" cried Mrs. Merton, "speak of angels, and ypu shall hear the rustle
of their wings!"
"Eh ! say that again, please. It is the neatest version of an old saw I ever
heard," laughed Cyril.
" Never mind saws now. Mamma, wouldnt it be famous ? Do let us,
Papa."
"Well, there's one point in your favour, Guy. I believe we could not
devise a scheme more likely to do Cyril's health good," assented Mr. Merton.
Guy cleared the ottoman in the middle of the room at a bound, with a
whoop of "Hooray!" that scared away the demure John Puss, who had been


sitting purring in his mistress's lap, and brought in the rest of the family, in the
belief that something terrible had happened.
" "Wild Indians, who leap and yell like maniacs, are not welcome as guests
in any house ; but if you can restrain your energies within proper bounds, and
come to dinner, we will discuss the matter afterwards," said Mr. Merton, with
a good-natured smile.
And the outcome of it was, that Guy's suggestion was adopted, nem. con.
Aunt Anne was duly advised of the contemplated invasion of her domain, and, in
little more than another week, the broad sea beaches in front of her pretty
dwelling displayed divers eccentric specimens of sand architecture, erected with
immense enthusiasm by Frank and Freda, whilst their elder brother and sister,
and the senior quartette, were equally happy in th<jir several ways. Somehow,
everybody was always happy at the "Pines," as Mrs. Leslie called her lowly-looking,
but most comfortable and elastic cottage. Even as the magic garment in a fairy
tale expands to the size of its wearer, whoever he be, so did those neat, snug
rooms seem to increase and multiply, according to the demand for accommo-
dation; and the delight with which Aunt Anne received the present invasion,
and that of the perpetrators thereof, was very evenly balanced.
Mrs. Leslie, Mrs. Merton's youngest sister, had, on the death of her parents,
left England to come and reside with the Mertons. Soon afterwards, she married
an amiable, prosperous settler, whose estate lay on the coast, living a calm,
placid, happy life for two years, when Mr. Leslie's death (caused by a fall from
his horse whilst hunting) left her a young widow; and as by the liberal disposi-
tions of her husband's will the chief of his large property was left to her uncon-
ditionally, she was well dowered, if not wealthy. The busy Mrs. Grundys
of her acquaintance wondered she did not marry again, but their speculations
did not trouble her. With her sheep-run and farm to manage —which, aided by
Mr. Merton's advice, she accomplished successfully—and her garden, orchard,
# •
dairy, and -poultry to look after, besides a thousand-and-one. other pursuits and
interests—a little art, a little authorship, some desultory dippings into science,
and a good deal of reading of any and almost every description—Aunt Anne
seemed to think she could live very pleasantly alone. Not. that she often really
did so, for her many friends and acquaintances provided her with a succession of
guests three parts of the year, and in winter she usually flitted to town, to
" brush off bush cobwebs," as she said. Still very sweet-looking (handsome,
many thought her), with quick bright grey eyes, a fair skin that flushed like a
girl's with pleasure or excitement, a profusion of soft brown hair, simply banded


and coiled in thick braids round her shapely head, crowned by a film of lace
supposed to represent a cap; a pliant trim figure of middle height, always
dressed in perfect taste (although, when in the country, in the plainest materials),
Aunt Anne was as pleasant to look at as she was good to know.
"How's the boat, Anne?" asked Mr. Merton, the morning after his
arrival*
" Quite well, I hope; but Holdsworth has been in a dreadful fuss about her
ever since I told him you were coming. ' She warn't no ways fit to go to sea,'
p e sa id_wanted hauling up, and heaving down, and scraping and painting, and
all sorts of things. I gave him carte blanche, and everything he wanted that was
in the store, and he has been at work at her these four or five days, so you had
better see what he's about. Where do you want to go ?"
" Why, I thought we might fish for an hour or two this afternoon, and
perhaps run over to Crescent Bay to-morrow, if the wind suits, because I must
ride home the day alter, and keep all right there. .
"And mustn't we go out again in the boat till you come back, Papa ? quoth
Guy, with a suddenly lengthened face.
" Yes, I should think you will be quite safe with Holdsworth as sailing
master; but he must be master— remember that—and Cyril will act under his
directions' ?
" All right, Papa," said Guy. " And I 'll be captain, as you often say that
the captain knows less than those he commands. You'll come out with us,
Aunt ?"
" I 'll think about it. I'm a staunch advocate for a fair division of labour,
Guy; and I think, if you catch the fish, and I superintend the cooking of them,
and perhaps paint their portraits, if you bring home anything curious, that will
suit me better than boating."
" Oh, you 'll like it, if it's fine and calm, said Cyril.
" It must be very fine and very calm, if I do," said Aunt Anne, with a little
grimace. " I like to live by the sea, and don't own myself second to anybody in
love for it."
" So long as you 're on shore," put in Mr. Merton.
• " Precisely what I was going to say. There's a certain leaven of cat-nature
in me which renders me incapable of deriving pleasure from being tossed about
in a small boat on a rough sea. I know Letty shares this family peculiarity,
and so most probably we shall help Lina to look for shells and sea weeds
instead; and the first day of bad weather, or disinclination to roam


abroad, we will cultivate science in a small way, and go over my cabinet and
herbarium."
Peals of childish laughter from the garden interrupted and attracted the
talkers outside, where they found. Prank and Freda in ecstasies of amusement at
a fine tame sea-gull* eating his breakfast. The old gardener had. some fish for
him —common black-heads,*f* several inches long; but, having been caught the
previous day, they were rather dry and out of shape, some being stiffly curved
round. A large tazza-shaped stone vase of water stood on the lawn, and as each
fish was given to the gull, he trotted across with it to the water, and took great
pains to wash and soak and soften it, laying it carefully as straight as possible,
then when he had " fixed " it quite to his satisfaction, he gave it an adroit toss
up, and, catching it head-foremost in his bill, gulped it down. The children
were diverted by the grave business-like air with which the whole was
done.
" And he has swallowed such a lot!" cried Frank. . •
" What a beautiful bird I Can he go where he likes ?" asked Lina.
"Oh yes. He's a gentleman at large," replied her aunt, "and follows his
own devices quite freely, but has evidently no present intention of providing his
own commissariat. He often wanders about the beach amongst the wild gulls,
but always comes home to be fed. If by chance we have not any fish, he eats
meat quite affably, and makes a peculiar little plaintive cry at-the kitchen-door
when he is hungry. I will go now and give the fowls some corn; Gully is sure
to follow, and go through his usual performance. Come and see it."
When Mrs. Leslie called the poultry together, and threw down some wheat
to them, the gull hurried up with an important air, as though finding himself
rather late for some special duty, and standing on the middle of the scattered
corn, whilst the other birds stood round, only picking stray grains at a distance,
he first poked his head down under his breast, and then, lifting it suddenly up
in the air, uttered a few odd, sonorous sounds. After repeating this performance
several times, in what one might almost call a pompous style, he turned round
and walked straight off, apparently quite satisfied that he had gone through a
ceremony of vital moment, in a perfectly dignified and irreproachable manner.
As the group were laughing at his quaint ways, the old gardener came by.
"Eum little fellow that! ain't he, Miss Linny ? I say he's the parson
amongst the birds, for when the Missis feeds 'em, he always comes to say grace.
* Larus Pacificus. + Platycephalus Bassensis.


And he won't let 'em come a-nigh to eat till he done it, neither, if he can
help it. He don't eat corn, yon know; he only says grace for the rest, for fear
they shouldn't." ■
"Does he always say the same for himself, before he swallows his fish?"
asked Freda, very gravely.
"Well" —Job took off his hat, and scratched his head thoughtfully —"I
don't know as he do; but maybe he says it to hisself, quiet-like."
" Did you teach him to do it, Aunt Anne ?" said Freda.
" No, indeed, dear; the ceremony is one of his own devising entirely, and
seems to give him great satisfaction. The drollest part is the deference with
which the ducks and fowls wait for his speech. They never offer to drive him
off, nor interrupt him, though they so eagerly pick up the food as soon as he
goes. It pleases Gully, and amuses me; but I don't pretend to explain the
phenomenon."
" When we were up the coast with Papa last year," said Guy, " fishing, and
'prospecting' for tin, our tent was pitched down by the sea, and we soon had a
flock of gulls about us, quite tame. I think they must be very sensible birds.
When we first went, there were two or three on the rocks near, and of course we
did not disturb them; and when we were eating our fish, we threw some to
them. They came cautiously at first, and then nearer and nearer, to pick them up.
Next day more came, and a larger party still the day after, till, we could count
twenty or thirty, as familiar and bold as so many barn-door fowls. I was quite
sorry to leave them when we came away, and I daresay they would miss our fish,
for they seemed very glad of them."
" Does not that little incident show," said Mrs. Merton, " how much
opportunity for enjoyment is wilfully lost by the generality of people ? To
nineteen men out of twenty —nay, I fear to a much larger proportion the first
idea that would occur, if similarly placed, would be to shoot the poor birds, for
no earthly purpose but in pursuance of a thoughtless, cruel, and atrocious habit.
But your dear father would as soon think of taking away a happy, innocent life
uselessly, as even I should; and lucky it is for us both that we are of one mind
on that point. Of course, had you shot at the gulls, they would have been
scared away—those who were not killed —and, with their God-given sagacity,
have passed the news amongst their neighbours, that it would be wise to keep
aloof from such mischievous intruders. But as it was, you had during some
days the great pleasure, as I am sure it was, to see the beautiful creatures come
fearlessly around you, and admire their graceful manners, and hear the pretty


notes they utter in talking to each other. To me it would have been a very
great treat."
" Have Guy's tame penguins * been up lately ?" asked Lina—" I mean those
the old fisherman gave him, and that he reared here, and set at liberty ?"
" I have not seen anything of them for a good while," said Mrs. Leslie. " I
hope they are safe at sea, for I have not heard that any have'been killed near
here. They came many times after Guy went away, and often stayed a day or
night in the outhouse where he used to keep them; and of course they were not
molested in any way."
"How they used to eat!" said Lina. "I have seen Guy cutting up shark
for them, till I'm sure they must have eaten their own weight of it. Five or six
slices, a foot long or more, and a couple of inches wide, used to go down each of
their great throats by gulps, one after another, till I could hardly believe my
eyes."
i •
" Don't you remember what the Chinaman told you, Linny, when you
asked him how he made his gulls so tame?" enquired Guy. "He was more
explicit than elegant in his phrases—but what he said was —' You tame gully ?
Gib belly-full o' fishy.' And I suppose the penguins require similar
treatment."
"I'm very glad to think they are alive and happy," said Lina. " Perhaps
when we are out in the boat we shall see them."
" And know those two particular penguins from all others V\ laughed Guy.
" The worst of penguins is that you can't see them at sea. You may know by
their little squeaks that they are all round the boat; but you must keep a very
sharp look-out to catch a glimpse of one head above water."
" Is not there a bird called the king penguin ?"*f* asked Lina.
" I should think so," replied Guy; " and a fine fellow he is, with his chain
of golden-coloured feathers on, like the Lord Mayor of the birds, at least, and a
big white waistcoat too, to keep up the character. Papa took me to see a tame
one in Hobart, last time we were there. It had come of its own accord to the
rocks, down by the slaughter-yards, seeming weak and famished, and very thin,
and had been fed and kindly cared for by the manager and his people, and soon
learned to follow his master like a dog, evidently knowing quite well the
particular door at which he was to go in for his food. He had picked up his
crumbs very successfully, for he was broad and fat, and his fine plumage as
* Spheniscus minor. *f* Eudyptes chrysocome.


perfect and shining as feathers could he. A plentiful diet of animal food agreed
with his constitution, that was quite clear. I suppose he had been driven up
Storm Bay by a southerly gale, because I know king penguins are not often
found near the Derwent. They live on islands more to the south."
" Poor fellow! His majesty was very fortunate in falling into loyal and
humane hands, whose first impulse was not ' kill him !' It is quite comforting
to hear an instance of the kind," said Mrs. Merton. " I shall go and see him
myself, when I am again in town."


CHAPTER XXXI.
On either side
The white sand sparkling to the sun; in front,
Great Ocean with its everlasting voice,
As in perpetual jubilee, proclaimed
The wonders of the Almighty.
SOUTHEY.
The sands, thick-strewn with many a shell,
Blushed rosy-red with Ocean's flowers—
Weeds often named, methinks not well—
. Brighter or daintier, never bowers
Of earth en wreathed. ~
M. S.
"\/[ES. LESLIE'S faithful factotum, Holdsworth, who had been long in her late
-"J- husband's employ, served in his youth on hoard a man-of-war, and subse-
quently went whaling, so that he was a thorough seaman, and it was a labour of
love to him to keep her fishing-boat in the most perfect order, " all a-taunt o',"
as he said j so that klr. IMerton had little fear that he should find her unseaworthy.
Nor was he disappointed, for just as he, with Cyril and Guy, reached the creek
where she was hauled up, Holdsworth had collected three or four of the men
about the place to assist him in launching her, and, all lending a hand, she was
soon safely afloat, ballasted, and stored with all requisites for a fishin 0 * excursion*
• o ?
a couple of "grab-all" nets, cray-fish nets, and lines and hooks of different
kinds, including some formidable specimens of the latter, each attached to a foot
or two of chain, for the especial behoof of sharks, which have a trick of biting
off any hempen line, and getting away.
•
"Well, Holdsworth, I'm glad the dear old boat's all right," said Guy.
" From what Aunt said you told her, I thought she must have almost gone to
pieces."


"No fear, Master Guy, so long's Jack Holdsworth's got charge of her.
Not but what I'd have had her fettled up a deal better, if I'd known in time as
you was all a-coming down."
" Whv she's as smart as a new pin now ; what else would you have done ?"
%J
asked Mr. Merton.
" Give her a fresh coat of paint—rthree of them; for, what with scraping off
crrass and barnacles, there's not much left on her. I've got a new set of sails
iD
finished; shall I bend 'em, sir ?"
" Never mind, now. We are only going out for an hour or two alter lunch
to catch a few fish."
" Ay, ay, sir. We 'll pull round to the jetty, and he all ready for ye.
The sisters, with Lina and the two children, passed the afternoon very
pleasantly on the beach and among the rocks, which a low tide left uncovered.
Frank and Freda found a charming playmate in Skye, their aunts pet
terrier, who enjoyed a game as much as they did, and chased the sea-biids with
as earnest an ardour as though he really expected to catch them. To one or two
pairs of sea-gulls he was evidently an old acquaintance, and they palpably
joined in the fun with understanding and relish, to the great amusement of
the children. The gulls would continue to walk about, with a delightful
affectation of unconcern, despite Skye's noisy approach, until he was quite close
to them; then they rose, flew a little way out to sea, with bkye bouncing and
splashing through the surf in chase. When he went ashore, they turned, came
after him again, almost brushing his ears with their wings, and, flying slowly, lit
again in front, until he came up; and so the game went on. A flock of dottrels*
sometimes divided with the gulls the dog's attention. Invisible even at a short
distance when not moving, he espied them the moment they began to run, and,
with a " Yap, yap " of delight, was off in pursuit.
" The darling little birds !" cried Lina. "How pretty they are ! And how
they do run ! Yon cannot see their legs, they go so fast. Ah! now they fly to
sea, and look all dark, with their shaded sides next us; then they turn to the light,
and shine like silver. There, they have lit again just before fekye. lam sure
they like the fun of playing with him and teasing him, because they could be
out of his sight in a moment if they wished to get away.
"As the same sport goes on whenever Skye and the birds are heie together,.
I quite agree with you, Lina,' 5 said Mrs. Leslie, "that they really enjoy the fun.
* Hiaticula rufxapilla— Ked-capped Dottrel.


" There are some pied red-bills* on the rocks," said Mrs. Merton, " very busy
pecking at something. Do not disturb them; we have a good view of them here
with their coral bills and legs, and bright handsome shape and plumage. Ah!
they think us too near as it is, and run off."
"Oh, Mamma!" cried Freda, "there is one quite lame, poor bird ! See how
it limps. I'm sure I could catch it. May I?"
" If you could put on a pair of swift wings, perhaps you might overtake it,
Freda; but that pretty bird is no more lame than the others. She has a nest—
if a hollow in the sand deserves the name—somewhere very near, and she is so
clever as to know that if she pretends to be lame, it is most likely that we shall
run after her, and so leave* her precious eggs or dear little birds far behind us,
safe from intrusion."
" What a wise bird! I wonder how- she learned to do such a cunning
thing. God must have taught her, Mamma; lam quite sure no one else ever
could. How good of Him to help her to keep her little ones safe."
Freda! Freda ! do look at those gulls, cried I rank, running up breathless.
You can see them, quite plain, picking up shells and going right up in the air
ever so high, and dropping them on the rocks to break the shells, and then down
the> come themselves to eat the fish. And look on these rocks too what lots
of broken shells. I suppose they had breakfast here, and went on to the next
point to dine. I wish they would not break such pretty ones, though. I dare-
say the common cockles are just as nice to eat."
If we approach carefully and silently, we may go nearer to them," said
Mrs. Merton. I know that flat rock quite well on which they are dropping
the shells. It is not larger than our oval dining-table, and yet with what
accuracy they plumb the centre in their aim. If we could be poised in the air
at the same height, I wonder how many times we should 'hit the gold' at such
a distance. I suspect we should most of us prove ' spoons.' But they never
err."
" That was a big shell that fell then," cried Frank. " And see! a gull on the
ground, that it didn t belong to, has run off with the fish. It was a soldier-crab ;*f*
and now the other poor gull has come down, and looks so puzzled to know what
has become of his booty."
" Are the soldier-crabs here, Mamma, the same as those I have heard you
speak of as being seen on English beaches ?" inquired Lina.
* Red-bill, or Pied Oyster-catcher— Hazmatopus longirostris. + Pagurus Bernhardus.


" I think so; and their ways and manners are certainly identical. I never
but once found one without an abode here, and he was as evidently looking for
lodgings as any paterfamilias just arrived at Margate. He tried two shells,
which were too small, and then, hurrying to a big common murex, whisked his
tail into the aperture, and made himself quite at home."
" What a regiment of cormorants * are ranged up all along the sand by the
bar," said Lina. "Now I do not like them; they are ugly, greedy things.
I watched one this morning fishing. He caught a flounder too wide for his
mouth, and gulped and gulped, and struggled to get it down, till two more
cormorants came to take it from him, and he swam off with his head up and the
fish sticking out. I had time to come and get the glass, and watch him all across
the river, with his friends after him, before he managed to swallow it."
4
" They are very destructive, and I am always glad to haVe them shot," said
Mrs. Leslie; "but they are very cunning too, and seem to know quite well
when they are out of range. The quantity of eels they devour up the river is
almost incredible. I have known fifteen or twenty young eels, many inches
long, taken from their gullets at once."
"Do the cormorants breed in the islands about here, like the penguins ?"
asked Lina.
"No. They frequent the large lakes in the high mountain ranges in the
middle of the island, and rear their young ones there, almost, if not entirely
unmolested. So that there is an increase of cormorants, and I fear a diminution
of fish, perpetually going on."
" Do you ever see pelicans -f* here now, Aunt
" I grieve to say, no. A solitary one came and stayed a day or two on the
bar, and I was very anxious it should not be disturbed, hoping that more
would follow; but my wishes and entreaties proved alike vain. The noble
bird was shot by an idle boy, and that was the last pelican seen here. I was
very sorry and very angry, but the deed of wanton mischief was done, and there
was no remedy."
" You do not remember the beautiful flock of pelicans we used so much to
enjoy seeing when we lived on the north coast, Lina," said Mrs. Merton. " They
frequented the islands in the bay, and we could approach in the boat quite near
them, they were so accustomed to us, as we never disturbed them. And, often as
I saw them, I never lost the feeling of delight and amusement they gave me.
* Phalacrocorax Novce Hollandice. + Pelecanus conspicillatus —Australian Pelican.


We used to keep still and watch them with unchanged interest. I never could
help laughing when they took wing, it was such a gravely-grotesque manoeuvre,
and the whole party of six or eight moved with one accord, as though-they had
been drilled into perfect accuracy. Standing in a line on the sands, they began
#
by making a short jump, and slightly lifting their wings; then a rather .longer
jump, and the wings raised a little more; and so on for five or six jumps, all
keeping time together, until at last they rose sufficiently high, and the wings
were enough expanded to sail away in flight."
»
" How droll! I should like to go and see them," said Lina.
" You would not see our quaint friends there now. When we left our home
on the north coast, both your father and I begged, as a favour to ourselves, that
the person who succeeded us would continue to protect the pelicans; but we
soon heard with sorrow that he had, on the contrary, encouraged their destruction;
and the poor things would fall the more easy prey because they had become so
bold and trusting. We felt as though half-guilty of their deaths."
• " I see a great ridge of sea-weed has been washed up in that corner, said
Mrs. Leslie. " Let us have a search in it. Ah! I thought we should find some-
thing good. Here's enough to start anyone in business as a collector of algae at
once."
" What are those pretty green feathers ?"* asked Lina.
" A new species of caulerpa; that great green mop is another kind, less
beautiful, and, almost of course, more abundant.*!* Two othersj visit this beach'
sometimes, so we may find them."
Lina pounced on some object with a cry of surprise.
" Oh! what is this queer sausage-shaped thing, all over red dots ? Here's
another like three glove-fingers, joined together at the ends."
" A very nice'specimen of gloiosaccion" § said Mrs. Leslie.
" And here are some other bag-shaped plants, not unlike greenish potatoes,
as they lie, inflated with water;|| and oh! what is this great pink, slippery
jelly ?"1T
%
"Ah ! be careful of that, Lina. I want good specimens of it. The common
name is the ' holy coat,' and, when spread out, this will probably be two feet
wide, and will be seen to be fall of holes, like some large kind of lace-work."
" The sea-nymphs have doubtless been amusing themselves with a rivalry
* Caulerpa longifolia . I 0. scalpelliformis , (7. furcifolia. || Asperococcus Tumeric
+ G. trifaria.' § Gloiosaccion Brownii. ' If Rallymenia cribrosa.


in the art," said Mrs. Merton. " I think this should be named ' Point de Vonde,'
in compliment to them." ,
" It is very fragile, and unless quickly diposed of, it melts away to nothing;
another fairy-like or nymphish attribute you will say, Lettie. This is a large
plant, but we must not open it now, or we shall tear the delicate film. Some
new and other rare kinds of chrysymenia* and tridece are found here occasionally;
and look ! there is a reddish, rough, leathery-looking moss, with raised tubercles
all over it, like a knotted bed-quilt, and nearly as big."f
" Quite big enough for a baby's cot," said Mrs. Merton, holding it up—" a
' water-baby,' of course ! Most likely some of those careless Naiads have let it
drift out of Amphitrite's nursery, whilst they were gossiping with Triton, or
doing their back hair in some new submarine fashion. Let us name it the
coverlet, at all hazards. Yes-, it really is over four feet long and three wide, and
quite stout and tough. And see, Lina, this little tiny disc, hardly larger than
one of the tubercles, is the root whence all this great, rough, puckered frond has
grown ! A very small anchor for so large a ship !"
" And, as a natural consequence, the anchor dragged, and the ship came
ashore,' said Mrs. Leslie. " Now, as a contrast, look at this lovely little
ceramium; \ its celled stems are a tangle of microscopic ruby and pearl
necklaces; and this lovely pink delisea,§ so delicate you can scarcely see the
branchlets, or this bright which my carmine cannot rival in tint, each
cobweb filament finer than your hair. I used to call it mermaid tresses, thinking',
* O'
perhaps, they had been emulous of earthly follies, and had been dyeing their
sea-green locks, after the manner of silly mortals."
" And, like poor Tittle-bat Titmouse, had not obtained exactly the required
shade," added Lina.
" It we examine yon little rocky basin," said Mrs. Leslie, I think we shall
be rewarded. Yes, here is the new Borne ll spreading out in a cloudy little
brown tuft from the stone; and long waving olive threads of Liebmannia ** and
Meso-gloia, J- like models in miniature of Laocoon's serpents, but with tangles
and writliings infinitely more intricate. Lina, you will find these snaky-looking
weeds slimy and slippery exceedingly; you need a knife to separate them from
the rock, and get them off entire. Here's another exquisitely delicate little
thing, that asks the aid of a microscope to realise its minute beauty. jj
* Chrysymenia Meredithice. § Delisea elegans. ** Liebmannia ramulosa.
t Gigartina radula. || Griffithsia Antarctica. ++ Meso-gloia vircs-cens.
t Ceramium diaphanum. ' IT Bornetia Mcredithiana. J X Polysiphoma Australis.


"Do you know this handsome bunch of crisp, glossy red fronds ?" asked
Lina.
" Quite well. It is very handsome, and often very abundant here. It is a
Nitophyllum * named, like many things in divers branches of Australian natural
history, in compliment to our dear old friend, Tasmania's veteran naturalist, Mr.
Eonald Gunn, to whose life-long devotion to science we, and the world at large,
owe an incalculable debt of gratitude."
" There is a jointed, transparent jelly-plant, Aunt."
"Ah, that's a Chondria, + of the kind I have several times found, and
spoiled by washing. We will be more careful with this specimen. When put
into fresh water, the little cactus-like joints and globular fruit separate and go
all to pieces in the most provoking manner."
" Mamma, we have found such a funny thing," shouted Frank, running up,
holding something carefully in his hands.
" And I've another," said Freda, " like a shell made of sand."
" More like putrefactions of tea-saucers," said Frank, bringing out the long
word with an air of superior knowledge.
" I suppose you mean petrifactions," said Lina.
" What does it matter ?" returned Frank ; " it's all the same thing."
" Oh, perfectly!" said Mrs. Leslie, laughing. " Ah, you have really found
some sand-saucers; I have picked them up on this beach several times; they are
very curious." >
"They look as though they were made of one layer of boiled sago-grains,
gummed into this shape, and sanded over," said Lina, observing one attentively.
" Are they the eggs of anything, Aunt ?"
" Well guessed, Lina. Yes, they are the eggs of a Natica, or sea snail, of
what particular species I cannot tell you, but believe it to be a larger one than
that which produces the sand-saucers of English shores. When we go home, I
will find for you the clear description given of their formation by Agassiz." j
* Nitophyllum Gunnianum. +
J " No one who lias often walked across a sand-beach in summer can have failed to remark what
the children call 'sand-saucers.' The name is not a bad one, with the exception that the saucer
lacks a bottom. Hold one of them against the light, and you will see that it is composed of countless
transparent spheres, each of the size of a small pin's head. These are the eggs of the common Natica,
or sea snail. They are laid in the form of a broad, short ribbon, pressed between the mantle of the
animal and its shell, and, passing out, they cover the exterior of the shell, over which they are rolled
up, with a kind of glutinous envelope. Thus surrounded, the Natica , whose habit it is to burrow


" What a population of little blue crabs," exclaimed Lina, as they
traversed a low wet part of the beach. " One can hardly step without
crushing them, although they do get out of the way, and out of sight
too, as quickly as possible. How very rapidly they burrow down and bury
themselves."
"If you could watch them quietly, as I often do," said her aunt, " you
would be highly amused to see them very busily at work with their tiny claws,
scratching in the sand, and, as it seems, continually poking something into their
waistcoat pockets —in reality, into their mouths—and when you examine the
scene of the feast, you find little pellets of sand all over the spot. Probably
they obtain some minute creatures from it, and the pellets are as bones that
have been picked."
When the sea-weeds they had collected were thrown into a large basin of
salt water, several long sea worms, with a multitude of legs, like centipedes,
were seen crawling among them, and- numbers of active little shrimps came
out also.
" Here is quite a new acquaintance," said Mrs. Leslie, pointing to an oddly-
shaped creature, whose nimble movements made it difficult to get a steady sight
of it. "A queer little crustacean! Very like the head of a cherub, as carved
on old-fashioned country tombstones, with eyes, double chin, wings, and nothing
else. How it spreads itself out, and what I took for head-wings are seen to be
the long lobes or swimming-feet of the tail, which were stuck out on either
side the face, whilst the centre of the tail was tucked close. in beneath the
mouth. How it is tucked up again!"
" Perhaps nobody ever found it before," said Lina.
" Possible, though unlikely. Although new to us, our queer little friend
under the surface of the beach, soon covers itself with sand, the particles of which, in contact with the
glutinous substance of the eggs, quickly form a cement that binds the whole together in a sort of
0
paste. When consolidated, it drops off from the shell, having, as it were, taken the mould of its form,
and retaining the curve which distinguishes the outline of the Natica. Although these saucers look
perfectly round, it will be found that the edges are not soldered together, but are simply lapped one over
the other. Every one of the thousand little spheres crowded into such a circle of sand contains
an egg. If we follow the development of these eggs, w r e shall find that each one divides into two
halves, these again dividing to make four portions, then the four breaking up into eight, and so
on, till we may have the yolks divided into no less than sixteen distinct parts."— Methods of Study
in Natural History. By L. AGASSIZ.


is, I have small doubt, known and placed, and named by naturalists. But I shall
ask a kind scientific friend to pronounce judgment." *
The swimming-feet of spinigera, as given by Dana, have theii; terminations
abruptly truncated, and those of Mrs. Leslie's specimen taper to a point; the
difference may denote a new variety. Dana says of the animal he describes :
" It is found in bored wood and in pools of water along the shores of Parna
Harbour, Bay of Islands, Hew Zealand."
* Mrs. Leslie's authority, having consulted Dana's Crustacea , gave her the following as the
family history of her small specimen
CLASS —CRUSTACEA.
Sub-class— Edriopthalmia.
Order— Choristopoda or Tetrade-capolis.
Tribe— Cymnothoidea.
Genus— Spheroma.
. Species (probable)— Spinigera.


CHAPTER XXXII
Fish, that with their fins and shining scales
Glide under the green wave, ...
* / >
........
Graze the sea-weed, their pasture, and thro' groves
Of coral stray; or, sporting with quick glance,
Show to the sun their wav'd coats dropp'd with gold.
MILTON.
npHE beach-party had not long assembled in the drawing-room, after the
needful exchange of draggled dresses, &c., for evening attire, when the sound
of a wheelbarrow was heard nearing the yard door, and Guy's clear ringing
voice calling loudly—
" Fish 0 ! Here's your fine fresh fish !"
All hurried out, and surrounded Holdsworth's barrow with cries of
admiration.
" What a glorious bit of colour !" exclaimed Mrs. Leslie.
i
" I thought you'd say that," said Cyril, delighted to see her enjoyment.
"We've had fine sport," said Mr. Merton.
" Look—here's a big trumpeter !" cried Guy, laying hold of it.
" Stop, Guy—don't disturb anything. Let us look a little longer," said his
mother, drawing him back. "It is really very beautiful."
Nobody in particular claimed credit for the arrangement; but it was a
triumph of art, if art at all—probably only accident. Nature's masterpieces can
hardly be grouped incongruously, although some dispositions are more effective
than others.
The barrow had been lined with a huge fresh wet plant of kelp,* with great
* Ivlacrocystis jpyrifera


olive-brown stems, and rippled broad fronds, many feet long, doubled to and fro,
and tumbling in festoons and streamers over the sides; and in amongst this lay
the freshly-caught fish of many kinds, gleaming and glittering like burnished
silver, washed over with melted jewels. There was a great blue-head with
large patches of clear vivid azure that no ultramarine could approach, and
blending into that the brightest orange, shading off into pure yellow. There
were parrot-fish,* with similar and scarcely less brilliant colouring; kelp-fish,j-
heavy-looking and plainly attired; leather jackets,J blue and purple, with big
bright eyes and threatening spines; grand silver trumpeters, § the perfection of
fish symmetry, radiant in their exquisite iridescence and softly graduated
shades; there was a large John Dory, or Jaune doree, |] with pearly and silvery
scales tinted with a thin golden hue, with head, fins, and markings of pure
vermilion, and great topaz eyes that one would think must light up his
submarine way like lamps; there was a magpie-perch,lT well-named, whose
piebald markings of black and white contrasted effectively with the rest. This,
and another fish of similar colouring,-which was, from its peculiar countenance,
named, nem. con., the pig-faced lady,** were armed with long sharp spines
«
in their dorsal and pectoral fins, which must render them uncomfortable
neighbours in a crowd. A few flat-heads "f-f* looked very plebeian in so noble a
company.
" And at the bottom there is an odd fish, Mamma," said Guy. " Holdsworth
calls it a cat-fish. Let me pull him out. There —isn't he an ugly brute ? I've
seen a picture of a fish very like him, with eyes on the top of its head, in a book
of yours, Aunt."
" Yes; the TJranoscopus vulgaris ," said Mrs. Leslie. "This fish is one of the
same family, or of a nearly allied one. The pectoral and ventral fins—look —are
unlike those of most fishes, being soft, thick, and fleshy, I cannot say that the
countenance is very prepossessing in expression, and do not approve of so bad a
compliment being paid to my friend puss as the naming it cat-fish; nor can I
divine any reason for it, unless it be the habit of the creature to sneak stealthily
along the bottom, and then spring on its prey."
" I think he's more like a bull-dog, with that big under jaw projecting so.
* Lohrichthys Riehardsoni. || Zeus Australis.
f Chironemus marmoratus . IF Oheilodactylus nigripes.
J Monacanthus peronii. ** Histiopterus recurvirostris.
§ Latrls Forsteri. ft Platycephalus Bassensis.


I
TASMANIAN FRIENDS AND FOES


He can shoot all his mouth out, quite two inches, to take the bait.* You won t
paint Mm, I suppose, Aunt ?""f*
"Hot now, Guy, because I have made careful drawings of that very
fish—one of the species rather —some time ago, and also of nearly all which
are here. But when I look at them again, fresh and shining, I feel inclined
to go and burn all I have done, my work tails so pitifully short of the
originals." .
" I think that feeling always torments one, in drawing from nature," said
Mrs. Merton. "So long as the flower lam sketching lives before me, I heartily
despise my own work; but when I look at what I have done again, alone, it has
always improved amazingly, and I can accept the praise which my friends bestow
on it as tolerably well deserved. I have sometimes wondered if great artists
experience anything of this feeling. I think they must, because their perception
of excellence being more perfect, their dissatisfaction with any shortcoming
must be the more keen. Freda makes a queer shape on her slate, with four
other strokes striking out of it, and very complacently calls it a cow; but you or
1 might work for a week at a portrait of your 'Daisy' or ' Cowslip,' and though
we have a fair knowledge of drawing, we should not produce a result that would
satisfy our better educated judgment."
" I'd like, just for a day," said Cyril, "to know the sensation of being able
to draw anything and everything I wished, as well as "
" Gustave Dore ?" suggested Mrs. Leslie.
"Well, yes; he's wonderful; but I was going to name our old colonial
Iriend Nicholas Chevalier, who, whether in glorious landscape or quizzical
grotesque, is ever 'good at need.'"
" llow about the feeling of doing without the power after once revelling
in it?"
"Ah ! that's another point of view—a less pleasant one. Suppose we
unpack the fish."
Mr. Frank Buckland, in Curiosities of Natural History, vol. i», p. 259, Writing of a species
ot rock-lish, says—" 1 tound that it had a beautiful contrivance in the conformation of its mouth. It
has the power of prolongating both its jaws to nearly the extent of half-an-inch from their natural
position. This is done by a most beautiful bit of mechanism, somewhat on the principle of what are
called 4 lazy tongs."' The cat-fish [Plate Vl.] possesses a like feature, but on a much larger scale, the
front part of the mouth being capable of being protruded between two and three inches when seizing
prey. The John Dory [Plate V.] has a similar apparatus.
t Kathethostoma Iceve.


The gorgeous blue-head was again examined and admired.
" Ah, Ma'am," quoth Holdsworth, " you think he's pretty now, and so he
is; but, Lord! he's not half as bright as when he came up first. If you 're
a-going to draw one, you should come out and see him caught."
" Holdsworth's quite right," said Cyril. " Fish begin to lose their brilliancy
of colour and surface from the instant they quit the water."
The evening talk was still of the sea.
"We saw a fine school of grampus,* Letty," said Mr. Merton. " You would
have been delighted, had you been with us. I think there must have been two
or three hundred in the bay, and if they had been performing expressly for our
amusement, a greater success was impossible. They came completely round the
boat, flouncing and frolicking in grand style, and if you looked over the gunwale,
you saw them right beneath it. I think Guy expected some of them to come
aboard, they were so near." . *
" And they do seem such jolly fellows," said Guy. " Sometimes they pop
their heads and half their bodies straight up, and before there's time to see what
shape they are, down they go, and up come half-a-dozen tails instead, which are
flapped and smacked on the water till you could hear them a mile off, and the
spray goes up in fountains. Then they have a race, tearing and splashing along
like mad things, forty or fifty together. Next they go in for gymnastics, and
take such leaps through the air that you can count four before they come down
again; or a party start off turning like a lot of wheels, one after another, as
if they were an express train going against time. It is great fun. I never had
so good a sight of them before. They seemed like a lot of fellows who hadn't
anything particular to do, and were brimful of nonsense, and so were just sky-
larking. How big are they, Papa ? It's so hard to guess the size of things
when there's nothing near to measure by."
" That is the difficulty, Guy; but I think those we saw to-day must be from
ten to fifteen feet in length, and would weigh from six or seven hundred pounds
to a ton or more."
" Are they of any use ?"
" Yes, of course. All these creatures, whether' whales, grampus, or porpoise,
yield oil; but unless driven ashore from some cause, they are rarely taken, being,
as you saw to-day, extremely quick ; and even if struck, they sink in dying, and
so are lost. Although so diverting to observe, I suspect they are not desirable
* Orca meridionalis —often called cow-fish in the colonies.


PLATE VI. CHAR 32
TASMAN lAN FRIENDS AND FOES.


visitors, for the quantity of fish of all kinds which they devour must he some-
thing enormous." *
* Since writing the above, I bad an opportunity of seeing one ashore. Mr. Meredith's boat,
sailing between Maria Island and the mainland, ran for some distance amidst a great "school" of
grampus (just as described), and my son Owen, seizing a favourable moment as one of the creatures
rushed close by, flung the harpoon (which formed part of the boat's equipment) so adroitly as to
transfix the poor grampus, passing it through the heart. It died almost immediately, and, being far
too large to be hauled on board the boat, was towed ashore. This, evidently a young one, was nine feet
long, and by careful comparison and calculation was estimated at five or six cwt. I went to look
at it next morning, and was particularly struck by what, in a boat, would be designated the " clean
run" of the form, so beautifully adapted for rapid passage through the,water. The skin, too, was
sleeker than any satin —exquisitely delicate to the touch—more like perfectly polished marble than
anything else.


CHAPTER XXXIII
The skipper he stood beside the helm,
His pipe was in his month,
And he watched how the veering flaw did blow
The smoke now west, now south.
. V, . . o • • » •
And ever the fitful gusts between,
A sound came from the land ;
It was the sound of the trampling surf
On the rocks and the hard sea-sand.
LONGFELLOW.
NOW, Mrs. Leslie," said Cyril, on the following morning, when after,
breakfast a general move was made into the verandah, " come and see a
blue-head caught. We'll only run a mile or two down the shore, and be home
to luncheon. Do come!"
" I thought you intended going over to Crescent Bay," said Mrs. Merton.
" I think not to-day," replied her husband ; " I should like to get our new
seine mounted first, and I can finish and bring it when I return next week. So
we will just do as Cyril says, and both you and Anne had better come. Job
and Fanny will take care of the little ones till you are back.
" The boat's at the jetty now, Mamma," cried Guy, impatiently ; " do make
haste."
Mrs. Merton ran to find Job, and charge him with the care of the children,
whilst Aunt Anne snatched up a basket and hurried to the larder, soon returning,
saying—" Well, I hope we shall be back to lunch, as you say, lor here s only a
small allowance, just in case we might be an hour late, for I know how hungry
one becomes on the water."
" Never fear; you won't have time to get hungry," said Mr. Merton,
hastening to the boat.


Lina brought some thick plaids, Guy carried an extra bucket for any curious
fish they might wish to keep alive, and, in little more time than it takes to read
this, all were aboard, the boat shoved off, and the sails set.
Nothing could be more delightful. The sky was bright and sunny, the
clear green water dashed from the boat's bows in glittering foam, as she rushed
along before a brisk whole-sail breeze. The happy faces of Guy, and even Lina —
who, usually timid on the sea, felt no shadow of fear —won smiles of enjoyment
from Aunt Anne herself, and all was glee and merriment.
»
For a brief space only !
Indications of a nor'-wester had been observed by Holdsworth some half-
hour before the start, but as he was unaware that the ladies would join the
fishing party, he had not thought it necessary to seem officious in calling
attention to the subject, and so off they sailed, but were caught by the gale even
more quickly than the old man expected. To put back against the now furious
north-west wind was simply impossible, nor could they reach the proposed
fishing-ground.
There was nothing for it but to run across to Crescent Bay, twelve miles
\
distant, which Mr. Merton at once resolved to do, reducing his canvas to the
mizen and foresail. The boat, square-sterned (21 feet long and 6 feet beam),
was rigged with a triangular foresail, the tack of which hauled down to the stem ;
a sprit-mainsail, and a lug mizen, the tack of which hauled down to the foot oi
the mizen-mast.
The sea rose rapidly before the still increasing gale, which howled and
roared dismally around, and the spray, with occasionally a few buckets of water,
came over from time to time. Lina, ashy pale, crouched at her mother's feet,
too ill and terrified to move or utter anything but an agonised "Oh, Papa!'
when the boat plunged with unusual violence. Guy subsided into silence, with
a very blanched face, only rousing from his dejected position when the command
came from his father to " bale out!"
Mr. Merton's boating experience in his younger years had been chiefly among
whaleboats, which, skilfully steered, will run safely through very heavy seas;
and in a whaleboat he would have made "fine weather" even of this, but in a
square-sterned boat he found himself, as he afterwards confessed, "in a very
awkward fix." He accordingly kept as close into the long beach at the head of
the bay as was practicable, hoping that, if danger became imminent, he could
put his helm hard-a-starboard, and run in through the heavy surf on to the sandy
beach, and so save life. The great peril was lest the fast following seas should


curl over the stern, fill, and sink the boat. However, she ran well through it up
to the east end of the beach, when Mr. Merton brought her to the wind (her best
point of sailing), set the mainsail, and stretched across to Crescent Bay in safety ;
he and his terrified companions being equally and devoutly thankful for their
escape.
Pale, trembling, soaked, and limp exceedingly, were the feminine trio when
set ashore. Delicate summer muslins certainly have the faculty of becoming the
forlornest of draggled mops under such circumstances; and boots, sodden into
shapelessness, are equally pleasant and comfortable. However, the delight of
being once more on land threw all minor miseries into the background. The
warm sun soon dried the dresses, a few deft touches put dishevelled hair into
comparative order, a fire was lit, at which wet boots were put to dry, and a
proposal to look into the lunch-basket carried The contents just
sufficed, enough being left for Holdsworth, after whose repast a nearly empty
basket remained.
" I recommend that we try to catch some fish," said Mr. Merton. " There
is not a probability of our getting back to-night, and as we have eaten up all we
brought, except a few crusts, I've an idea that we shall indeed be hungry before
Aunt Anne's larder can renew supplies."
" Hot get home, Papa ?" cried Lina; but her father was out of hearing.
" Hot whilst this wind lasts, that's quite certain," said Cyril; "and we may
be very thankful that we are here alive, Linny. I've been in a good many
squalls and other ugly predicaments in my time, but I don't think I was ever so
near ' kingdom come' as we all were to-day for about an hour and a-half."
" I only looked at Papa's face once or twice," said Gfuy; " but I saw very
plainly that he didn't like it. Holdsworth pulled off his pea-coat and shoes,
ready for a swim—l saw that too; and Mamma and Aunt were as white as
sheets. Well, I'm glad it's over."
" How for hooks and lines. I've a bit of raw meat in my pocket for the
first baits, and after that the cannibals will bite at pieces of one another," said
Cyril.
So the four got into the boat, and pulled off to a good fishing-ground.
Lina, with her mother and aunt, went strolling along the beach, the peculiar
beauties of which were its crystalline sparkle and snowy whiteness. The whole
of the land around being composed of granite, its gradual disintegration left the
pure quartz crystals to form the shore. Hot finding many shells, the trio
rambled inland, beside a bright rivulet that came rippling and tumbling down a


steep gorge between two grand granite peaks, which, high above, seemed to pile
their abrupt and broken cliffs against the sky. The dark green depths of the
ravine were densely clothed with exquisite ferns—not the grand, palmy oriental
a-rowths of her fern-valley, but wonderfully lovely in their infinite variety of form
and tint.
Lina was loud in lamentation that she had not convenient means to carry
home any with which she had been hitherto unacquainted for her garden nook.
But many old friends, too, were dwelling and flourishing luxuriantly in that most
picturesque glen; a very paradise for their tribe, with, as it seemed, such a
collection and variety of suitable abodes as must meet the especial needs of
almost every member of the family resident in Tasmania.
Behind the first giant torso of a fallen tree which the explorers climbed
over, and which was so profusely covered with moss and lichen that it might have
been a long round ridge of rock, for all that sight could know to the contrary,
some tall, trembling sprays of maiden-hair* fluttered on their shining stems —
stems so light and frail that the delicate green leaves seemed as though just
loosing the last earth-woven threads, ere floating away on the breeze.
" What noble fronds of the ivy-fern!" j* exclaimed Mrs. Leslie, who had made
her way over logs and rocks to a huge boulder, whose weather-worn front was
draped and wreathed by the clinging, rough stems and long, drooping, polished
verdure. " I'm not sure yet but that this is my favourite among all our
Tasmanian ferns."
" I know why that is, because I share the feeling, said her sister. It
reminds us of the hart's-tongue of home; and on the smooth leaves of this, its
Austral type, we read so many pleasant memories, and see so many blight
pictures of long, long ago. I have now before me the keep and moat of Ragland
Castle, where as a girl I first gathered hart's-tongue. But if we go on conjuring
up dioramas of England, we shall not achieve the ascent of this ' Hill Difficulty.
Ah! what a graceful fern is there —down in the very bed of the stream! What
a group of exquisite plumes! J Could anything be lovelier! I wish we could
grow that at home, Lina. What rare exotic could excel it!
" Here is one I never saw before, Mamma, and so full of fruit! Is it not
right to say fruit? Seeds, then — sori? Oh, very well; so full of sori at the
back of the frond, it is more brown than green.§ And look is not this neaily
* Adianturri JEthiopicum. +
t Polypodiumßillardieri. § odontites.


as beautiful as the ivy fern ? If not so shiny, the fronds are as exquisitely
veined.* Here is another veined like it, only so much smaller."
" Like it certainly," said Mrs. Leslie, " for it is the same, but younger. The
plant varies exceedingly."
"And here, in this deep crevice—chasm, almost —is such a slender, bright-
green species, -f* but without sori."
"Of course the learned have a proper scientific name for kind, said
Mrs. Merton, emerging from a shady cleft with more ferns in her hand; " but I
shall henceforth know it as the yew-tree fern, its sprays are so suggestive of
sprays of yew. J And see this —how slender each delicate pinnule, and how
symmetrically the little oval beads of sori are placed in two rows beneath
each!§ Ah! here's another old friend —the cat's-head fern;|] though why that
name was given to it I have not the remotest idea. Perhaps under a powerful
microscope some part has been fancied to resemble one. It is full of beauty
the pinnules so exquisitely formed and indented, and gemmed beneath with
absolute constellations of sori."
"If you are going to re-name the ferns, Aunt, pray dub this one the
centipede. Don't say, 'Pie, Lina!' but look, does it not remind you of one?lF
No ? Ah, then your imagination must be under a cloud, and less vivid than
usual. I ask its pardon for the ungracious simile, but adhere to it nevertheless."
"What a lovely little bed of parsley-fern !"** said Mrs. Leslie. "It is quite
worth your scrambling over that big log to come and see it so prettily garnishing
this cleft in the rock."
" Aunt, is not this an asplenium ? -f~f* with such a profuse display of fruit — sori,
I mean (only fruit is a better word, I think, for us to use, and we do say fruit in
speaking of sea-weeds). Do look at the double rows, triple even in places, and
the whole plant is so very lovely."
"And here," said Mrs. Leslie, "is another asplenium, of very different
character. We unscientific collectors would not suspect the two to be related.
«
This one J J has little fan-shaped leaves along three-fourths of the slender stem,
and then, having become small by degrees and beautifully less, they cease
altogether, leaving a forlorn, naked portion at the end. And see what abundant,
long sori cluster at the back of the little fans."
* Lomaria procera. § Doodca caudata. Chcilauthus tcnuifolia.
t Ptevis trcmula. II Polystichum rostitum. "M" Asplenium Brownii.
I Gleichinia flabellata. If Lomaria Alpina. +1 Asplenium flabellifolium.


Mrs. Merton here rejoined the others, after a scramble along a smaller
gorge opening out from the main ravine, saying—
" I have gained one more specimen for my pains, and only one, hut it is a
beauty ! See the pointed leaves (I ought not to say ,of course ; but these
are so like leaves), just enough curved to have earned its specific name, and with
a broad furry band of sori along the margin.* And now let us hurry onward."
"Wait until we have packed our ferns," said Mrs. Leslie, laughing.
" ' Necessitas non hdbet legem! So I have transgressed the rules of strict economy
by tearing off and using the flounce of this dabbled dress to wrap up the roots
of our treasures. We can put the bundle into this cool hole in the rock, with a
fragment of flounce tied to a stick by way of landmark, and leave it till our
return."
Not undelayed by still further loiterings among the many flowering shrubs
that abounded in the ravine, the three scrambled on through thickets of tea-
tree,f white with lovely hawthorn-like flowers; Epacris |of every shade, from
white to full crimson—the rosy pink, perhaps the most exquisite of all, peeping
from many a chink and crevice 5 whilst of several kinds, and many
varieties of Acacia, added beauty and colour to the scene.
As they reached higher and drier ground, broad smooth slabs of rock were
covered by carpets of a delicate white lichen. § Lina knelt down to examine it.
" What is this, Mamma ?—like thousands of narrow lace borders all gathered
and puckered up, and neatly laid close together, making a mat over the rocks for
yards and yards of space. Is it coral ? I have seen some coral in Aunt s cabinet
very like it."
"So there is, Lina," said Mrs. Leslie —" so like, that we might fancy one
had been made in imitation or emulation of the other; though whether the
Dryads or Naiads were the plagiarists is hard to say. || This is a lichen. Is it
not lovely ? If carefully stripped from the rock, it retains its beauty for a long
time. We will carry some of it home."
Here Cyril overtook the trio, saying, " I've been put ashore and sent after
you by authority. Merton does not think you should scramble about there
without a stout arm within reach. Hist! look there !'
He pointed to a huge granite boulder, overgrown by creeping ferns and
* Pteris falcata. + E. vnyrtifolict.
+ Leptospermum lanigerum. § Cenomycc rangiferina.
" What a strange, plastic, imitative power there is in nature ! I . H. GOSSE.


orchids.* On a broad fern-frond sat, motionless, with its bright eyes shining
in the sun, a pretty innocent little tree-frog; and lower down, gliding along
amongst the thick growth, was a black snake above three feet long, probably
intending to surprise and swallow the poor frog. It was a picture of contrast.
Cyril struck at the snake, which instantly disappeared into a crevice, and the
frog leaped off unharmed.
Creeping, sometimes under, sometimes between the enormous boulders which
had toppled over from the heights above into the deep gorge, our friends
scrambled on and upwards, revelling in the wild beauty of the scene, and with
hands full of flower-spoils from the luxuriant natural garden through which they
passed. A steeper climb for a short distance brought them to the top of the
ravine, whence a view, rarely surpassed, broke upon them.
High above, to right and left, rose fantastic towers and pillars of granite,
these again being overtopped by the mountain giants from whose flanks they
sprung, and all fringed and draped by hanging woods, chiefly consisting of those
most picturesque trees, the Oyster Bay pines,'f* which, vividly green in foliage,
tapering to a height of eighty or one hundred feet, and by turns symmetrical or
eccentric in form, harmonise and combine with rugged mountain scenery as
no other of our trees here seem to do. They embody the very spirit of the place.
Falling steeply, almost perpendicularly away from the crest on which the party
stood, the forest-robed mountain side was at its base shattered into massive
fragments, over which the sea broke in a long line of silvery surf round a
deeply-indented bay; and the opposite shore, rising height above height and
tower o'er-topping tower, culminated in a lofty cone of pure, shining red
granite, from which, girdled and clothed with wood, lower eminences stretched
O> ' o
to the eastward, and groups of fortress-like rocky islets, rising square and sharp
from the blue water, stood as outposts on which was spent the first onslaught of
the Pacific Ocean billows.
Snowy sea-gulls, like flakes of animated spray, flecked the deep azure sky,
and a few gannets,* intent on a shoal of fish that shot to and fro through the
clear water far below the gazer's eyrie, by turns hung poised aloft on widespread
wings, or, with feathery sails quick reefed, dropped plumb down upon their
prey.
Above the bare crowning peak of the opposite range, a pair of eagles soared
in slow, sweeping circles; little more to the eye than specks upon the blue.
* Dendrobium Milligani. + Frenela rhomboides. t Sula Australis.


The climbers sat down on the rocks, and gazed in rapt admiration on the
glorious scene.
O
"Thanks be to God for mountains!" exclaimed Mrs. Merton, with solemn
fervour. " The words are those of my early friend, William Howitt, but the
thought is ever my own amidst such evidences of Almighty power and
beneficence as lie around us here!" *
*" It was indeed a glorious scene. . . . Unmarred by the presence of any object, mean, or
little, or common-place; for where I stood, no trace of the proximity of man, of his buildings, or his
cultivation, was visible—nothing but the works of God Himself. It was one of those times and scenes,
in which probably most thinking persons have occasionally found themselves, in which we are unfit for
study or for action, but in which the whole soul seems alive and awake to enjoyment."— P. H. GOSSE
—Devonshire Coast.


CHAPTER XXXIV.
The sun in heaven was shining gay,
All things were joyful on that day ;
The sea-birds screamed as they wheeled around,
And there was joyaunce in their sound.
SOUTHEY.
\
THE fishers pulled out a short distance, sheltered by a high rocky point from
the violence of the gale, and dropped their lines at the outskirts of a sea-
forest of the grand, broad-fronded kelp, whose stems many a fathom long, and
wide rippled leaves loaded with oval air-cells, surged to and fro in the throbbing
tide. Catching up a tangled mass of it, Mr. Merton made the boat fast to it, and
thus she lay at anchor. Elocks of the pretty, graceful mackerel-gulls* sat
fearlessly on the floating kelp, just swaying with the motion of the water.
" The nicest of all the sea-birds," was Guy's verdict on their beauty —" they
have such a soft, dove-like look. I think we might call them Venus's doves,
because she might have brought them with her when she came from the sea,
you know."
" There's a long string of them sitting out yonder," said Cyril, " just like a
necklace of pearls. And look at that row of shags f on the rock, with their
broad white waistcoats on, dozing after dinner, like a party of aldermen."
" That one nearest to us seems disposed to exemplify a new maxim," said
Cyril —« < Every gentleman his own clothes-horse.' See how gravely he sits with
wide-spread wings, drying his feathers in the sun."
Guy bent over the gunwale, gazing down into the clear depths with intense
interest. " How plainly one can see the bottom, and those star-fishes on it! I
know the sort —they 're a foot across, at least, those ten or twelve-armed fellows
* Xema Jamesonii. t Phalacrocorax leucogaster.


we find thrown on the beach, but they don't look very big down there. What
an odd, topsy-turvey sort of feeling it gives one, to be looking down tall trees
from above, like a bird, instead of up them from below! And the water is so
clear, that you can see everything, just as if it was only air between us and the
weeds, and shells, and fishes. How pleasant it must be, to go swimming in and
out amongst those waving leaves! The fish seem exactly as if they were
playing at bo-peep with one another, and their fins twinkle in the light, and
their eyes shine Hallo ! I've a bite !"
"So have I, Master Guy," said Holdsworth, and both hauled in fine
flat-heads.
" And Papa has fish on each of his three hooks."
"We shall soon catch enough for supper," said Cyril.
"We had better make sure of breakfast too, whilst we have the chance," said
Mr. Merton; " for we shall want some before we start, even should the wind
serve early, and, if not, we shall need a larger supply."
Again the lines went down, and presently Guy began pulling his in, with
a large flat-head on the hook. Just as it reached the surface, a barracouta *
dashed up and snapped at it. Guy gave a quick clever hoist, and both were
safely captured, to his great delight and amusement.
"We talk of killing 'two birds with one stone,' but I've caught two
fish on one hook. How handsome the barracouta is, alive ! Such grand eyes !
And he shines like burnished silver. He 'll make a meal for us alone. He
weighs seven or eight pounds, I know."
" I never thought sea-fishing so entertaining before," said Cyril; " but
it is amusing to see so plainly deep, deep down, and watch the fish in such
numbers, swimming and playing about. How there's a big rock cod "f*
going straight to my lowest hook, and away scud the flat-heads that were
sniffing round it. He's got it!" and Cyril began hauling away as fast
as he could. Just as the fish reached the boat, the line broke, and down it
4
dropped.
" What a sell! and my good hook gone too!"
" The line must be rotten. Turn it end for end, and put on another hook,"
said Mr. Merton.
To unwind and re-wind the long line, and put on the lead sinker and hooks
anew, occupied some little time. Meanwhile, Mr. Merton pulled up a large
* Thyrsites atun. + Pseudophycis barbatus.


rock cod, and took his hook from its mouth ; then seeing another piece of bait
there, put his finger in again, and brought out another hook.
" Why, you've caught my fish !" cried Cyril.
"No doubt of that; and here's your lost hook. Guy, we must tell this to
your mother, as positive evidence that fish cannot have the acute sense of
suffering which she thinks they possess. And I, too, take comfort from the fact,
for it is very certain that no land animal would care to eat, with an instrument
of proportionate size in its throat."
" I think if I had even such a trifle as a crooked hair-pin stuck in mine, I
should not send my plate for a second piece of beef," said Guy. " I am very
glad to have such a proof that the poor fish are so much less sensitive than I
feared."
" The poisonous little toad-fish * is yet more callous to what we should
suppose mortal injury," said Mr. Merton. " When living near Sydney, on the
Parramatta river, I used to he exceedingly annoyed when angling for bream f by
the toad-fish, which swarmed in the sluices and inlets, and continually took my
baits. Sometimes I used to spear them, and, when impaled, they inflated their
short bodies into absolute balloons. Taking up one which I believed to be quite
dead, I eviscerated him, in searching for the inflating apparatus, which, not
understanding fish physiology, I of course did not discover, and I flung his remains
into the water. In a second or two he gave a wriggle, righted himself, swam
round, and took my bait again, apparently quite unconscious that he no longer
possessed the requisite organs for the reception or use of food, and moved as
briskly in the water as if he were still a perfect fish."
" And yet," said Guy, thoughtfully, " how the least touch frightens fish!
Aunt's gold-fish rush off like lightning if you touch them with a bit of grass."
" So that we cannot suppose it is the absence or dulness of sensation," said
Cyril. " I don't understand it; and unless I could be transmigrated into a fish
—for which I have no desire —I don't suppose I ever shall. Sea anemones, and
others of the lower creatures, exhibit the same paradox. Maimed or divided,
they reproduce themselves without apparent suffering; and yet, when their
delicate tentacles are expanded, and you touch them gently with a finger, how
rapidly they contract! showing keen animal sensibility on the one hand, and
almost vegetable indifference on the other—a marvellous and merciful arrange-
ment. They possess in a keen degree the sense which warns them of peril, and
* Tetrodon Hamiltoni. t Ghrysophrys A ustralis.


bids them exercise all their ingenious devices to avoid it; but seem exempt, or
nearly so, from pain, when injury or destruction come to pass."
" Cyril!" said Mr. Merton, " did you ever see fish fight ? No ? Well, last
summer, when we were camped opposite Hazard's Island, at the Schoutens, I
was witness to a singular scene. I had scrambled out along a reef of rocks that
runs out into the sea midway between the headlands of a little bay, and whilst
examining the geological formation, I noticed a disturbance in the water at my
feet. The vivid whiteness of the quartz sand and perfect transparence of the sea
enabled me to see clearly to the bottom, and showed a circle or wheel, of twenty
feet or more in diameter, formed of a dense shoal of little fish, whirling and
splashing round and round with great rapidity, and evidently in great terror.
I distinctly saw that they were young king-fish,* from three to five inches in
length, their greenish silvery lustre gleaming brightly through the clear water.
Looking carefully for the cause of their panic, I saw, outside this wheel-shoal, a
number of salmon,' ffrom twelve to sixteen inches long, swimming actively to
and fro, and forming a barrier guard, reaching from the end of the reef to the
east horn of the bay, and through which the little king-fish could not pass.
Presently, as if by concerted signal, a few salmon from different parts of the
cordon dashed suddenly in amongst the mass of king-fish, like a pack of wolves
into a flock of sheep, snapping them up in all directions, and covering the water
with fragments as the victims darted about wildly in vain efforts to escape.
The main body of salmon meanwhile kept up their patrol outside, effectually
preventing the scattered shoal from evading their vigilance. Then the salmon
which had been in action, and were, we may suppose, gorged with prey, returned
to the main body, and all continued to swim to and fro as before, until the
dispersed shoal of the poor king-fish gathered together again and resumed its
wheel-shape, the circle being smaller than at first. This occupied perhaps ten
minutes, and then another sortie of skirmishers took place (probably members of
the force who had not dined), and another devouring slaughter ensued, which
left a still smaller circle for the wolfish sentinels to round up and keep compact
for the attack. No well-trained, sagacious sheep-dogs could have performed
their work with more orderly, systematic method. The same routine went
steadily on without cessation; only the circle of the king-fish grew less and less,
and the environing salmon came closer in shore, until, from a diameter of
twenty feet, the living wheel was reduced to three feet or less. Having watched
* Thyrsites solcinderi, 1' Cenlrojpristis salcor (the indigenous fish so-called).


the unequal warfare for more than two hours, I left the reef for a while, and on
my return to look again on the scene of conflict all was still. Both hunters and
game had disappeared, and whether the poor little fish were all eaten up, or
whether, when their numbers were too small to be worth the trouble of pursuit,
the persecuted remnant escaped alive, remains unknown. One fish, longer and
thinner than the salmon, more the form of a gigantic gar-fish, shared the spoil
to the extent of picking up stragglers when the circle was broken by the
onslaught, but did not join actively in the fray. On the day following this
slaughter, as our boat was running from the Schoutens towards the White Bock
(L'ile des phoques), we sailed through a large shoal of adult king-fish, who were
as actively engaged in snapping up and swallowing other fish —salmon probably
as though bent on making the most terrible reprisals. A grand ghostly albatross
hovered above, not disdaining to pick up the quivering morsels that floated
about as the fight and the feed went on.
"I have several times noticed the pretty mackerel-gulls very adroitly
shepherding shoals of small fry on the river shallows for a few minutes at a
time, and picking up a quantity very rapidly; but the evident system pursued
by the salmon in driving the little fish into a dense mass in order that they
might be captured wholesale, and the patient waiting after each dash till the
mass had re-formed before making the next attack, argues more careful and
concerted arrangement than is shown by the birds."
" A very singular occurrence," said Cyril. " I never saw, nor indeed heard
of, a case of the kind before. But we do know so lamentably little about fish!
The question suggests itself to me —Does Neptune take in the fashionable
European journals, and have some of his fast young subjects, emulous of the
favourite and humane diversions of the most moral Courts floridly set forth
therein, desired to witness a ' battue.' If the result of their ambition was the
scene you describe, the imitation must have been very successful.
* Related almost verbatim as told me by my husband, who was the observer of the encounter,
and who published it in the at the time. L. -A. M.


iBI " 1 — r "] j^ggggjgggggggggggg^g^jg^^M^^^r^cafia^^
CHAPTER XXXV.
Land of forest, flower, and fern !
9
Let me loiter where the headlands in the blaze of summer burn,
Where the shifting shafts of sunshine bar with gold the sounding shore,
And the sea-fowl's scream is mated with the bursting billow's roar,
Where the crags are grey and splinter'd—worn of wind and reft of rain—
Let me all the past remember—let me be a boy again !
Illawarra. —F. S. WILSON.
LATE in the afternoon the mountain-climbers and the fishing party met
on the beach, and whilst Guy and Holdsworth were busy on the rocks
cleaning the fish, Mr. Merton and Cyril, after replenishing the fire, looked
about for the most sheltered spots to sleep in. These they found in a near
thicket of tea-tree, and, setting to work at once, cut a quantity of ferns to lay on
the ground by way of beds. A snug little bowery nook was selected for Mr. and
Mrs. Merton, Mrs. Leslie, and Lina, but the others preferred to make their couch
nearer to the fire. The boat sails were carried up and laid over the ferns, and
then Mrs. Merton was requested to inspect the arrangements. As she knew
it would be too late after dark to improve the accommodation, she lay down on
the fern-bed to try the effect, and discovered the chief deficiency in the lack of
pillows or bolster. So, with Lina helping, she gathered and tied up large
bunches of leafy tea-tree into good thick brooms —one for each sleeper—and this
task finished, Lina gravely announced that the beds were made.
A shout from Guy, a great splashing, and peals of laughter drew all to the
water's edge, where a shark, five feet long, was floundering and flapping on the
shore, its tail fast in Guy's grip, who, when his laughter allowed him speech,
explained the event.
" I was kneeling on that flat rock cleaning fish, and dropping the offal into
the sea, when this fellow came cruising round and snapped it up. He came and


got some several times, and at last made a grab at my hands, with his head
fairly out of water. I hit at him with the knife, when he sheered lound, and his
tail came up close against the rock, so I caught hold of it, steered him into
shallow water, jumped in, pulled him ashore, and there he is; and I call that
fishing upon an entirely new principle."
In which most of the party concurred, and Holds worth killed the shark.
Mr. Merton looked quietly on, and then observed, "We all know how oddly
coincidences occur, and your mother has her theory of ' duplicates in events.
How that shark-catching of yours, Guy, is both a coincidence and a duplicate.
" How, Papa ?"
" Because, many years ago, I caught a number of sharks in this same place,
almost in the self-same manner. Our head whaling station was for several
seasons fixed here, and I often visited the place. One day in summer, seeing
sharks about, I tied a lot of offal to a stout line, which I flung out from the
rocks, and as the sharks neared, attracted by it, I drew it in. One after another
the voracious brutes followed it close up to the rock on which I was. When I
drew up the bait, and they lost it, they, in turning to swim, naturally brought
their tails up against the rock, and I caught hold of them and threw them past
me safe ashore. They varied from four to six feet in length. I well remember
once mentioning the circumstance at my uncle's house in England. I told the
tale as a matter of fact, without exaggeration, or an idea of saying anything
extraordinary; but no exploit of Baron Munchausen's ever excited heartier
laughs of incredulity than my true tale "
" Of shark-tails, Papa."
" And when, in all earnestness, I assured my hearers that what I had
related was simple truth, they shouted aloud, and evidently set me down as a
story-teller in the strongest signification of the word."
" I remember your relation of the incident perfectly, said Mrs. Merton,
and very likely it did seem to them as bordering on the marvellous, it did to
me too, then, but to us here, knowing how bold these creatures are, and how
close they come in-shore, it is of course nothing remarkable.
" At a picnic I gave on the coast lately," said Mrs. Leslie, " several of the
party were with me looking into a beautiful little cove at our feet, just deep
enough for a good plunge, and the water bright and clear as a gem. ' What a
charming place to bathe in!' was the general exclamation, when, the very next
instant, the great back-fin of a large shark rose —I believe within reach, had any
of us chosen to touch it —and the monster's cold, hungry-looking eyes seemed to


ask if any of the company would still be so good as to make the plunge
alluded to."
"As you fish on peculiar principles, Guy," said Mrs. Merton, " perhaps you
can originate something in the cooking line, for I don't think we can command
any kitchen utensils beyond a cleft stick to act as toasting-fork."
" What reward shall he deserve who shall improvise an efficient gridiron ?"
asked Cyril. " I think I can achieve a capital oneand off he ran along the beach,
quickly returning with a long piece of hoop-iron, which he bent to and fro in a
zig-zag, with a long end for a handle. It was a complete success, and Holds-
worth straightway began to grill the fish upon it over a clear wood fire,
saying, "Ah! keep a thing seven year, and you'll find use for it —and
this here iron's lain here more nor four times seven, since the last cask
was coopered."
Guy, who had gone with Cyril, was seen busy in the distance, and soon
came, laden with six or eight large, nearly circular plates, of a clean white
material, from six to ten inches across, which he laid out in a row on the
ground, saying—
" I'm crockery merchant. Here's a fine new dinner service of convenient
shape and everlasting durability. Only I don't see any arrangements for holding
gravy; but that doesn't matter, as we've not got any. The contingent
advantages of this splendid service are remarkable. You may dine off the
plates first, and play quoits with them afterwards, without fear of breaking
your china."
" How famous! What are they ?" said Lina.
" The flat bony plates from a whale's vertebrae," replied her father. " See,
they are smooth on one side, though rugged enough on the other. They will
serve capitally for our grilled fish; and we can fetch some of the large joints
of the back to make seats for us old folks, who are so luxurious in our habits
as to prefer sitting upon chairs."
And from the abundant remains of long-defunct whales, seats were soon
brought for the whole party.
"We shall want salt," said Mrs. Merton, " and I saw some just round the
point, where little rocky pools have evaporated, and left fair white salt. Lina,
you remember, for you asked me what the sparkling stuff was; you can find
clean scallop-shells to scrape it into."
" You would like some pepper too, Mamma," said Guy, bounding off to the
rivulet ravine, and coming back with a bough of the handsome red-stemmed


shrub known as native pepper.* "Here are some of last year's berries, so
they 're quite ripe; and by hammering them with a stone on a smooth rock, we
can grind them, after a fashion."
" If you 'll let me dry 'em a bit by the fire, Master Guy," said Holdsworth,
busy with the gridiron, " they 'll smash up a deal better. It's capital pepper
too."
" Something like cayenne and allspice mixed," said Mrs. Merton; " the
aromatic flavour is very pleasant. I have known people who, having first adopted
its use for want of other condiments, continue it from preference. It will be
very acceptable with our fish."*f*
Dinner was announced by a noisy rattling of iron hoops, Guy's best
imitation of a gong. The company being seated on their bone chairs, placed on
the turf, with a wall of tea-tree scrub behind, each was supplied with a plate from
the new service on his or her lap, and a stick-fork to eat with, and Holdsworth,
who entered thoroughly into the spirit of the thing, gravely carried round the
gridiron, for all to help themselves.
"Lina !" said Mrs. Leslie, "it strikes me we are dining in a very royal and
distinguished manner, strictly after the custom of our illustrious forefathers.
You remember the droll, quaint old pictures representing our noble Saxon
ancestors as sitting or reclining at a table, whilst the attendants carry round the
viands on spits, and the guests help themselves in turn ? There is one such
group in the Bayeux tapestry, and others in the Cotton MS. It gives one a
notion of being linked with remote royalty to be feasting in like style with our
far-away forbears."
" Say feeding, not feasting, Anne," said Mrs. Merton. " I suspect the
menu of those royalties and nobilities was not limited to fish, grilled au naturel,
without butter, or even bread."
"No doubt they had venison and game of all sorts —
' Fish, flesh, and fowl, and all of the best'—
like the demon dinner-party in the Ingoldsly Legends. But I opine that the
modes of dressing were some of the oddest, and to most of us the primitive
purity of our grill would be preferable."
* Tasmannia aromatica —see Blackberries in Plate 11.
+ Lest this adventure and the dinner al fresco may seem to savour somewhat of "Family
Robinson Crusoe "-ism, I beg to repeat that I only deal with facts, and that this is one literally
rendered, the personnel of the actors alone being altered. —L. A. M.


" Especially with, that best sauce, a good appetite, and I confess to having
been very hungry," said Cyril.
Holdsworth's gridiron was refilled and emptied several times ere all had
finished dinner. The general beverage was water from the bright rivulet, and
part of a bottle of wine left at lunch afforded the seniors a small glass each.
When twilight began to fall, the fire was well replenished with dry pine
logs, which gave out a brilliant blaze, and the group drew round it on the
land-side.
" I wish we had a good artist amongst us," said Mrs. Leslie, "to paint the
scene just as it is. I can see the elements of a fine picture, though I cannot
paint it. Those trees, standing clearly out in the vivid light, every branch and
twig sharply defined, and their crests of foliage, by turns green, olive, or
black, as they catch the blaze or recede in shadow. And far over their noble
heads see those shattered granite masses, that were so roseate-tinted in the
setting sun, now looming grand and gaunt through the gloom—
' Above the forest, on his throne,
In giant pomp outspread,
Our mountain guardian keeps his watch,
With the stars around his head!'
Even those lower, nearer crags only leap into sight when some brighter flash
blazes up, and then they die out again into space. How grand it all is!"
"Your picture must include the fire and all of us, by way of figures, Aunt,"
said Lina.
" And the line of white surf round the bay, with its ever-sounding swell
and break, and now and then a sea-bird's cry, are our ' voices of the night,'"
added her mother. "It is very wild and beautiful. lam glad we had to stay —
the whole scene and the feeling of it are so new."
" Hark ! that's a mope-hawk !" exclaimed Lina.
" And two more on the other side answered him," said Guy. " Three —four
—five ! They've all struck up at once. Oh ! what's that ?"
All looked up. A large chestnut-owl * passed noiselessly by, full in the
firelight, its wide, soft wings not making the faintest sound as they wafted
along, though the wind from them was distinctly felt.
" What a beautiful fellow ! Did you see his great shining eyes, Mamma ?"
said Lina. " I wish he'd come by again."
* Strix castanops.


«It is not likely he will; hut lam glad you had a sight of him so near."
Mr. Merton and Cyril, sitting by the fire, lit pipes and began to smoke, and
the former called to Holdsworth, who, having also lighted his, was going off along
the beach, to come and sit with them, to which he rather demurred.
"Nonsense, Holdsworth; come along here. I want you to tell my boy
about that time when you were so nearly lost out whaling.
« Do, Holdsworth," said his mistress. " I want to hear the story too; now
is the very time for telling it with proper effect. Are we all ready ? Then,
please, begin."


CHAPTER XXXVI
They that go down to the sea in ships, that do business in great waters ;
These see the works of the Lord, and His wonders in the deep.
«•••••••
He sent His word, and healed them, and delivered them from their destructions.
PSALM cvii.
" 1 A/ELL, Ma'am, it was bay-whaling we were, for black whales, you under-
VV stand "
" I'm not sure that I do."
"Why, you see, Ma'am, there was no ship, only boats employed. The
station ashore was made in the neighbourhood of good whaling-ground, and the
boats started out of a morning mostly before daylight (for winter's the season
for it), and pulled away towards different high headlands, where the headsman
and the boat-steerer landed, and went up to look out for whales. If they saw
any, they were soon aboard again, and pulling away to reach and kill them. If
they couldn't see any, perhaps not with looking about all day, they pulled or
sailed home to the station, praying for better luck to-morrow. The boats were
hauled up on the ways, and the crews got their suppers and turned in.
" One morning our boats at Trumpeter Bay shoved off at daylight, each
bound for their own. 1 look-out.' I was headsman in our captain s boat, and as
we were pulling for our headland, we saw a whale. We fastened to her and
killed her just as the sun was rising; but the whale going into a flurry, as we
say, in her death-agony, she struck our boat and capsized her. As I said before,
winter's the time for whaling, and the water was very cold. The captain and
all of us held on to the boat —she was bottom-up, you understand ; but after an
hour or two the cold began to tell which was the weakest amongst us, and first
one dropped off and sunk—then another was missing, and another, and another


and only the captain and me was left. The captain he stuck a finger into the
boat's plug-hole, so he held on that way, and I held on to him and the boat too.
We were only about two miles off the land, and we knew very well when it was
twelve o'clock, for we heard the dinner-bell at our station ashore ringing as plain
as could be, and we cheered one another up a bit, and says I, ' I hope the
cook'll keep something hot for us agin we get back,' though I don't think
either of us thought we should eat victuals any more. But we held on, hour
after hour and they were long hours too; and when it began to get dark, we
knew our chance for life was close up gone. But just as we were drove to think
the worst, one of our boats, on her way back, by the mercy of God, came within
hail. We shouted our best, you may believe, and they heard us, and came up.
They took us off, cramped and nigh frozen, and towed our boat home."
" How long had you been in the water ?" asked Guy.
" Close on nine hours, sir."
" Why didn't you all get on to the dead whale, at first ?" said Mr. Merton.
" Because, sir, she sank as soon as she was dead.
" I've known the same thing. I remember a whale that was being towed
by three of our boats sank, and took the one nearest her down with her, but the
crew were picked up by the other two boats. Fatal accidents seldom happened
/
if boats went in company."
" I've oftener known boats capsized by cow-whales, when the calf s been
killed first, than any other way," said Holdsworth. " They 're very fond of their
young ones, and when the mother is harpooned, and ever so badly wounded, if
she has a calf with her, she don't seem to care a bit what's done to ; all she
thinks about is her calf, and she goes round it and about it, like a woman
defending her child. But when some fool kills the calf first, she soon finds out
it's dead, and seems to know at once that there's no more she can do for it.
Then—look out! She'll either rush away like a whirlwind, or turn to and
smash boats or anything within reach. I don't blame her! It s a mothers
nature."
" How big is a calf ?" asked Guy.
" Perhaps twenty, thirty feet long, or more, sir."
" I was out in one of our boats," said Mr. Merton, " when a cow-whale was
harpooned, and immediately < peaked her flukes,' that is, raised her huge tail
(which spreads out into two lobes or flukes) perpendicularly out of the water,
and she was so close that they were overhanging the boat. The black enormous
mass, some twenty feet across, hovered just above my head, and, with slight but


most significant movements, as of a blind man's hands feeling for an object, was
investigating its surroundings, so as to discover and demolish anything that
it could touch. I stood in the bows, and crouched as low as I could, ordering
the men to ' pull astern,' and half expecting that even the sound of my voice
would bring down destruction on our heads; but the rapid execution of the
order carried us from under the impending doom. The flukes felt round and
about yet lower, and touched a thin line, which you would not suppose would
be detected by so huge and ponderous a body; but, like lightning, down splashed
the great flukes, beating and churning up the water in wildest fury. One blow
of the many that now fell fast and furious would have crushed our boat to
atoms, and in all probability drowned us all. When a youth, my great sporting
ambition was to kill a whale, as being the grandest exploit to be achieved in that
line, which it certainly is; but Ido not envy the mental condition of the man
who after the exciting novelty has worn off, cares for pastime of so gigantic
i
and perilous a sort."
" Yours was a wonderful escape, Holdsworth," said Mrs. Leslie.
" Well, Ma'am, I suppose it was. But I reckon our time wasn't come, or
we should have gone down like our poor mates."
" The suddenness of such deaths is so awful," said Mrs. Merton.
"Another of my captains had a wonderfuller escape than mine, though,"
said Holdsworth. " But that was in the sperm-whaling."
" Tell us about it," cried Guy, eagerly, flinging more sticks on the fire, and
illuminating even the waves with the brilliant glare.
" Yes," said Cyril. "To lie here listening to such really true yarns, and
with that dash and rumble of the sea, and the wind in the tree-tops for music,
is a chapter of life that one don't often get the reading of."
"You go in ships after sperm whales, don't you ?" asked Guy.
" Yes, sir ; ships of three, four, or five hundred tons they are, that s mostly
fitted out of Hobart Town for an eighteen months' voyage. And as the speim
whale don't like the water warm, nor yet very cold, the usual ground lies
between the two."
" From about thirty to forty-five degrees of latitude, said Mr. Merton.
"Just so, sir. Well, our ship was the Magna Charta, 400 tons; and one
morning, just as the crew were going to breakfast, the look-out man at the mast-
head sung out, ' There she spouts /' Nobody thought any more about breakfast
then. The boats were lowered, and away we went in chase, the captain in his
boat, and two boats besides. We were not long coming up with the ' school,'


and fastening to a whale, but she ran a long way to windward, and though we d
harpooned her early in the day, it was dark when she died, and the ship was
far away to leeward, almost out of sight. So we lay all night under the lee of
the dead whale. Towards morning it came on to blow hard, and at daylight we
saw the ship, still some miles to leeward, trying to beat up under single-reefed
topsails and courses."
" Did you bring anything to eat with you ?" asked Guy.
The old man looked amused at the idea. " Not a mossel, sir. We'd none
of us had a mouthful for six-and-thirty hours then. You see there was so few left
aboard the ship, they couldn't properly handle her; and as they weren't able to
haul the yards smartly in stays, she made but slow way, beating up to the dead
whale, and the three boats that lay under her lee. So the captain he made up
his mind to run down to the ship in his boat, and so take six more hands to
help to work the ship. And off he went. There was a heavy sea running, and
in rounding to, under the ship's counter, a big wave capsized the boat. The
men clung on to her as long as they could ; but the ship was so poorly manned,
by reason of eighteen men being away in the boats, that those who were on
board could not get to pick up the poor fellows, and one by one they dropped
off and drowned, till the captain was left by himself. In such a sea, the upset
boat soon got lost sight of. The ship went and made fast to the dead whale,
took in the other two boats and my messmates and me, and drifted bodily to
leeward, all hands giving up the last hope of ever seeing the captain again. We
might have drifted for an hour, or maybe more, for we were all cold and hungry,
and glad to make up for lost time, when there was a cry alongside, and there
was our captain, clinging fast to his upset boat! We'd drifted right down
upon him, and he was saved after all."
"I wish the poor sailors had been saved too," said Lina. "Were any of
your men ever lost, Papa ?"
" I am sorry to say yes. I suppose no large whaling establishment ever
escaped calamities of the kind. I saw one boat go down in a heavy sou'-west
gale in this very bay, when crossing to fetch the week's supply of rations. She
was too distant, and the gale too violent, for the chance of rescue. Another
time I feared we had lost one of our boats. Three had gone out in the morning,
but only two returned at night to the station. Supper was over, and still no
sign of the missing one, so the two crews launched their boats again (I went in
one of them), and we pulled out to sea. We had guns, and fired them off, and
shouted with all our might; but no answer came. Still we pulled out, and to and


fro. It was a bitter frosty night, so that any sound would be audible at a great
distance. After a long time, and when we began to despair, I thought I could
hear a faint note of music. All listened breathlessly, and all was still. Again
I heard it. Yes, we could just detect, at intervals, a note or two of a familiar
chorus often sung by the men. And as we pulled with redoubled spirit, in the
direction of the sound, it gradually grew more distinct, and led us right to our
missing boat. Her crew had killed a whale at sea, some seven or eight miles
outside of Maria Island, but, by some mischance or inadvertence, had no anchor
with them for securing the prize, so were slowly and laboriously towing it home.
We were provided with anchors, and soon made the whale fast, and left it; and
all came back together, going down afterwards in the schooner to cut it in. I
seriously remonstrated with the headsman—who had caused the alarm by going
so far alone —on the imprudence of his habit, for he always liked and tried to
have the merit of a capture unassisted. All my good counsel was, unhappily, in
vain. The next year he went off one day alone as usual, and neither he, nor his
brave crew, nor any vestige of their boat were ever heard of more."


1 "
CHAPTER XXXVII
The ghastly-grinning shark.
FERGUSSON.
Off ! off !" said the stranger —
Off, off, and away,
And away flew the light bark
Over the silvery bay.
Song.
THE last-spoken words were followed by a sad, thoughtful silence, which was
suddenly broken by Guy's asking—
" Where was the biggest shark you ever saw, Papa V
The question came abruptly enough, but Guy, boy-like, enjoyed the novelty
of the occasion and the sensationalism of hearing what he called " good yarns,"
and desired to postpone the break-up of the bush-fire circle to as late a time as
possible. His father unconsciously fell into the snare laid for him, and replied
" Very near here, at our whaling station in the bay your mother was looking
down into to-day from the ravine above. We had a whale, seventy feet long
or more, lying at the shears, being cut in.'
"With sharp shears %" asked Lina.
Her father laughed. "Ho, goosey; the shears in question were the two
tall mast-like timbers to which the windlass and tackle are attached for bearing
weights, and by which the huge slice of blubber was lifted, as gradually cut off,
corkscrew-wise, round and round the great carcass, by a man standing on the
whale, armed with a sharp spade of peculiar form. As the slice was raised, it
was cut off in what were called ' blanket-pieces,' eight or ten feet long, four feet
wide, and about a foot thick. These were either taken ashore at once to the
try-works (that is, to be melted), or a number of them were formed into a raft,
and anchored out until required."


" And then cut up smaller, I suppose," said Guy.
"Yes. First into slices nine inches wide, called horse-pieces, and these
again, with what was termed a ' mincing-knife,' into small pieces like rashers of
fat bacon (this is now done by a machine like a turnip-cutter), before being
transferred to the cauldrons or ' try-pots.' It is a very singular fact that, in the
early days of whaling, people thought of the oil only as a profitable matter
(though the price of that was only £l4 a-ton, and now is £80), and totally
neglected to utilise or preserve the whalebone—l do not mean the bones such
as we are sitting on, but the mouth-bones, used for umbrella ribs and so many
other purposes. On Slopen Island alone, whalebone worth many thousands of
pounds was left as refuse. Well, I was on the rocks, directing operations, when
an immense shark seized the whale's head, and, to the astonishment of us all,
shook the whole enormous body from end to end for about half-a-minute. We
always suffered great losses from the number of sharks which used to come like
so many hungry dogs and bite off pieces of blubber, and they always swarmed
about the works; but this was so evidently one of extraordinary size, that I
ordered out a boat and crew to go and kill it. Whilst the men' were getting the
boat, the stupid fellow on the whale flung his spade at the shark. The keen
weapon sunk into his side, and he sheered off, going slowly away; but as he
passed by, outside of an old boat twenty-seven feet long, which was lying
alongside, I noticed that his head projected beyond one end of the boat, whilst
I could see his tail beyond the other end, plainly showing me that he must be
nearly, if not quite, thirty feet in length. The old boat, close to which the shark
deliberately passed, gave me too accurate a measure for any possible mistake
on that head. I wish I had known enough then of the interest which might
attach to our acquaintance with like monsters in after years, to have noted such
peculiarities of form as would now assist naturalists in identifying their species;
but a shark was a shark in those days of rough adventure and hard work, and
we neither knew nor thought of scientific distinctions. This enormous
individual might have been a deep-water monster out of his usual abiding-place,
or some exceptionally gigantic specimen of a common breed. I never saw
another that approached it in size."
" How big are they usually ?" asked Guy.
" Ten, twelve, or fourteen feet. I had an odd little adventure with one in
this bay, one summer when I had come over with a gang of men to assist
our cooper in rolling out and re-coopering a quantity of casks of whale
oil, which, having been left unshipped, were leaking in the hot sun. We
2 H


had been busy all day, and in the evening, thinking I would have a swim,
I got into the dingy, and sculled myself round the next point, away from
our people, for my bath. But, as so often happens in this climate, a
southerly wind came suddenly up, as cold as ice, which soon made me feel more
inclined to relish a warm pea-jacket than a peel-off and a swim, so I began to
scull back again. Hearing a rushing noise, as of another boat coming up with
me, I turned to see what it was. There was a large shark, whose great back-fin,
cutting through the water, and rising between two and three feet above it, made
o o 7 o
the noise I had heard. He came quite boldly, close alongside, being as near as I
could guess about the size of the dingy, twelve feet long, and four each in
breadth and depth. I looked at him, and he looked at me, and then I made a
blow at him with the paddle, right between his eyes. He made no fuss, neither
started nor splashed, but quietly began to dive, and disappeared under the boat.
I sculled on, and almost immediately saw my friend again, first at the stern of
• the dingy, and then, as before, close alongside me. I looked at him for a while,
and not liking his company any better than before, I struck at him with the
gaff, which hooked into his hack fin. Still his composure was unruffled. He
neither splashed nor made the smallest demonstration of surprise nor annoyance,
but again went slowly down, down. My foot was on the gunwale, and I held
on to the gaff till I found I must either let go or go down too, which latter, in
such company, was not a tempting alternative. So, thinking how stupidly I had
lost my gaff, I sculled on again. Presently something popped up out of the
water near me, and I recognised the handle of the gaff, the iron at the other end
keeping it upright. I recovered it, and went on, when fqr the third time the
shark rose, with a plainly visible rent in his fin, and followed me for some
distance, probably until the water shoaled more than he thought good for his
safety. I then went on board our schooner, unrove a stout rope, fixed a
harpoon on it, went out again in the dingy, and sculled about till it grew nearly
dark, hoping to meet my persevering acquaintance yet once more."
4-
"And didn't you, Papa?" said Guy, eagerly.
" Very luckily for me I did not, for if I had I should have struck him, and
in all probability he would in return have attacked me, boat and all, and
bitten us both in pieces, as even his maw could not have gobbled us whole."
"It isn't a trifle as they can't manage, though," said Holdsworth. "I
mind one, killed off Wedge Island, as we hauled up and cut open, and there, in
his inside, was as big a wether-sheep as ever you see, with a long fleece of wool
on him, clean swallowed whole, not bitten; the sheep had likely been thrown


overboard from some of those cattle-ships. And there was a shark catched close
inshore down south of here, with a pair of boots and a large tin of preserved
meat, whole, in him, besides a lot more odds and ends."
" What a selection!" exclaimed Cyril. " The presence of the tin of meat
showed his penetrating sagacity in predicating something good within, and he
had perhaps faith in the power of his gastric juices to dissolve the solder; but
the boots are mysterious, unless he had digested the owner, and they were the
remaining fragments of the feast."
"They 're savage brutes, sir," said Holdsworth; " and the more ye see of 'em
the less ye like 'em. The small young uns are mostly timorsome, but the
hungry, big old fellows are 'feared o' nothing, and if ye come across any o' them
in the water, the Lord have mercy on ye !"
"We used to run risks very thoughtlessly," said Mr. Merton. " I once shot
a teal here, and being only wounded, it swam out, so I stripped and went after
it. When I had swam perhaps half-a-mile, and got the teal, which I held in my
mouth, I just remembered that I was in the place of all others on this coast the
most notorious as abounding in sharks. I thought what a fool I was! But had
I gone home and owned that I had shot a duck, and lost it for want of a swim,
I should never have heard the last of it; and as it happened, luckily for me, the
usual voracious frequenters of these waters were engaged elsewhere that
afternoon. My wonder now is, that fatal accidents did not happen frequently
in those old days; for the swarms of sharks round the whole of this coast were
something prodigious, and as comparatively few were destroyed, the reduction
of their numbers must be mainly owing to the removal of whaling stations, and
also to the fact, unfortunately too well known, of the diminution in the quantity
of all kinds of fish on the coast. I believe, though, that sharks prefer animal
food; for a bait of garbage always attracted them. In crossing one day in our
schooner to Maria Island, with stock for the penal settlement there, which we
then supplied, we were becalmed. We let go the kedge to prevent drifting back,
and as a sheep had been killed on board, I hung the liver, &c., from a rope over
the main boom, just to the water's edge. Soon a large shark came up, and raised
himself part out of water to reach the bait. As he opened his great jaws to seize
it, I struck at him with a harpoon, which went down his throat."
" Like St. George spearing the dragon. You had him then, Papa,' cried Guy.
"He thought otherwise. Bapidly plunging round and round, he twisted up
the iron shaft of the harpoon like a bit of rope, snapped it short off, and
swam away."


" And didn't come back to be caught again, like my rock cod," said Cyril.
" I saw no more of him, at all events; and now, as Ido not mean to sit up
here till quite daylight, I vote that we all go to bed."
" I wish we could," said Mrs: Merton; " I'm very tired. However, we will
console ourselves with the romance of sleeping under the canopy of heaven, as
the phrase is."
" And we have a boat-sail for counterpane," said Lina. "Uncle Cyril and
Guy have only their pea-coats."
" Ah! but our bed's close to the fire, so we 're best off. I 'll just make a
good blaze, to light you upstairs to your room," laughed Guy.
The ladies and Lina wrapped round them the plaids they had brought,
Mr. Merton coiled himself in his boat-cloak, and all lay down, looking up at the
stars, and listening to the mope-hawks and the surf until they fell asleep.
Once Lina sprang up, hearing the thud, thud of a kangaroo just behind her
head, and the other party said they heard it too, and also another sound, as of a
large animal slowly treading through the bush near; but all was soon still again,
and they slept till sunrise.
Had the wind changed ? was the first question. Yes, and the heavy sea of
the preceding day had very considerably subsided, so that the sail home might
be easily accomplished.
" Come for a swim, Papa —do," said Guy.
" Well, it's not a bad idea. What say you, Cyril ? Just whilst Holds-
worth gets the fish cooked ?"
And the trio went off round the rocky point.
" Breakfast, consisting of grilled fish and cold water, was barely ready when
the bathing party came back, laughing merrily as they approached.
" Your swim seems to have done you all good," said Mrs. Leslie.
"To a remarkable degree —seeing that we didn't get it," laughed Cyril.
"Ho?"
,
Mr. Merton smiled queerly, but said nothing.
"Why, Mamma, I'll tell you how it was," said Guy. "Papa, as usual, was
ready first, and walked in only a little way, for the water deepened fast, and he
had his hands up, just going to plunge in head first, when "
"A pair of great, cold, hungry shark's eyes met mine, as the brute came
up with a wave in the very spot I aimed at; and —I retired."
"And which of the two was the most astonished, Merton or the shark,
would be hard to say," added Cyril. "We saw it all in a quarter the time it


takes to tell. The dear old Inciter ran ashore, and the other gentleman put out
to sea with all despatch."
"Another hair-breadth escape!" exclaimed Mrs. Merton. "I do wish you
would, once for all, resolve never to venture into these seas."
Pooh! nonsense. However, in case our visitor might recover his presence
of mind and come back, we decided to postpone our dip to a more convenient
season."
The not too luxurious repast having been partaken, Guy carefully washed
up and packed the dinner service, and our friends were soon on board the boat,
dashing along before a whole-sail breeze, all gay and cheerful, and presenting a
very different aspect from that of the sick and terrified group driven before the
furious gale of yesterday."
" Did you see, sir, in the papers," said Holdsworth, "as they'd had a launch
up in town, without a proper christening of the vessel ? She 'll come to no good
—you mind my words, sir. It's flying in the face of "
" Hot Providence, exactly," interrupted Mrs. Leslie.
Perhaps not, Ma am. But it's clean contrary to all seafaring ways, and
looks mean, too."
" Supposed righteousness, not meanness, was the moving influence, I have
no doubt," said Mr. Merton. " The breaking a bottle of wine at a launch is a
relic of an ancient heathen rite, and so thought by these good people to be
better omitted. But seeing that, by long usage in Christian lands, it has, like
many another popular custom of like origin, become a naturalised and respected
ceremony, I think the observance would have been more honourable than the
breach. Only a very few peculiarly-minded individuals could entertain the
most remote imaginary scruple .about the fulfilment of the time-honoured
custom, and the very large majority feel that the occasion was defrauded of
its legitimate celebration."
" The launch of the Oxford life-boat was very differently managed," said
Cyril. " I read the two accounts the same day; and Oxford, it strikes me, is
quite as likely to know what's proper, and what's pious too, as any little town
in Australia. But can't we fish as we sail across ?"
" There was lots of barracouta in the bay when we ran over, sir," said
Holdsworth. " Very likely we'd catch some now, if we put some hooks out."
Mr. Merton was steering, but Cyril and Guy soon had hooks astern. The
apparatus for catching barracouta is particularly simple. A rather large hook is
firmly lashed on to the end of a piece of wood about nine inches long and


one and a-half broad. Cedar is often used, or, if deal, it is painted red, or a red
rag is fastened on it, for a touch of red is indispensable. A stout line is attached
to the other end of the wood, which floats astern, and as in a brisk wind the
boat makes good way, the hook goes swiftly along the water, and if barracouta
are around, some are pretty certain to fall victims to the undisguised snare.
Four noble fish were quickly secured, each about three feet long, and from
six to ten pounds weight, when Mr. Merton desired that no more might be
taken, not being required, and the lines were accordingly coiled away.
"I should not like one of those fellows to give me a bite," said Guy,
examining their strong pointed jaws, well armed with sharp teeth.
" How very bright their silvery shine is!" said Lina.
" And how easily we can understand their wonderful swiftness," added her
mother, " when we note their long taper form and large fins. They must shoot
like arrows through the water."
" And gobble up a frightful quantity of fish," said Guy. " They look like
most voracious customers."
By ten o'clock the boat reached the jetty at the " Pines," to the great joy
and relief of Mrs. Leslie's household and neighbours, many of whom had watched
her running before the gale of the preceding day, with fear, and well-nigh
despair, as to the safety of all on board. Job had been the only hopeful
observer.
" An' I see the smoke of a fire begin to rise just about the time I reckoned
you'd have landed, so I told 'em all I'd bet my head you was all safe, as, thank
God, ye be!"


CHAPTER XXXVIII.
There I gazed upon wonders ! The fishes with wings,
And the glimmer of magnified eyes that look'd up
From the gloom of the bottom, like pearls in a cup.
THOMAS HOOD— Lycus, the Centaur.
If he be not in love with some woman, there is no believing old signs. He brushes his hat o'
mornings ; what should that bode ?
SHAKSPERE.
OEE what presents of marine jewels our mighty neighbour Poseidon has sent
us, by way of compensation for our yesterday's sufferings on his dominion!"
said Mrs. Leslie, as she entered the drawing-room, where her sister and niece
were already seated, after a refreshing bath and change of dress. " Wait till I
have set down my load, and then—look with all your eyes !"
The large wide glass fish-globe she carried, being placed on a table by the
window, it at first seemed as though a few small rainbows were performing
gymnastics within; but on a calmer investigation the radiance resolved itself
into three forms of fishy character, careering round and round with flashing
speed.
*
"What wonderful creatures!" cried Lina, dropping on her knees to look
closely. How splendid is that scarlet dragon-shape,* with blue, yellow, and
purple markings!—and dark red fins all down its tail, exactly like leaves of
seaweed! Its head is something like a hippocampus, but so vivid in colour.
And what a bright eye !"
"My own idea," said Mrs. Leslie, "is that we have here a model in
miniature of one of his majesty's own royal sea-horses. Who but he should
have ocean-coursers so gorgeously caparisoned, and bestrewn with pearls and
living jewels from stem to stern 1 I must make haste and get a sketch of the
* Pliyllopteryx foliatus


glorious creature ere it fades; for fade it will, and die, I fear, all too soon for our
delight."
"I think the alternate stripes of green and blue in this little Ostracian*
quite as beautiful a bit of colour," said Mrs. Merton. " How closely the full tint
of one approaches that of the other! Yet there is neither hard line nor
perceptible shading off. Painted by the finger whose every touch is gloiious
and perfect! You can hardly detect the existence of the pretty little fins, they
are so translucent —like a dragon-fly's wing—and they quiver so rapidly as the
creature swims about."
"And what a droll little pursed-up mouth," said Lina —"just as if it were
going to whistle; and the eyes are so clear and bright!
" You would scarcely recognise that dry little mummy in my cabinet as one
of the same fish, Lina ?" said her aunt.
" What—the little cow-fish ? No—and yet now I see every now and then,
as these move about, just the position in which they resemble a cow's head, with
one pair of spines for her horns. The second fish is quite quietly coloured, only
buff and brown, in a sort of zebra-pattern. As the little things are covered with
bone-armour, the rich colouring must be in the thin skin that coats it. These
and the splendid dragon must both live on very small creatures, for their mouths
are so very tiny."
"My fisherman brought me some other specimens too. See, here is one of
those curious crustaceans that I have heard called ' butterfly lobsters.'+ Look,
Lina, how singularly the shell of the head and body (properly known as the
carapace) expands into something like wing-forms, entirely hiding the legs
beneath them. What an odd expression of face the queer creature has !"
Lina, meanwhile, had unfolded many wrappings of wet kelp, and disclosed
the two strange fish depicted in Plate VIII.
" Oh, Aunt Anne! what a splendid monster !" she exclaimed, raising the
bright red and yellow one, and displaying its brilliant carmine fins, j
"Ah ! that must be the jewel-fish that old Donald said I should find. He
said it glittered and shone £ all manner o' colours,' as he pulled it up, ' like the
Queen's crown in the Tower o' London." §
* AracanactvTztcc. t Ibcccus PCTOTLH. -*■ ScoTjpc&nct
§ Whilst I was making the drawing of this ruby-fish (as I named it), and using the brightest
tints that my palette afforded, my son George, who had caught it, and was watching my progress,
repeatedly criticised my work, saying, "Not half bright enough, Mother nothing like the brilliancy
of the creature when first drawn up." —L. A. M.


f - • * •:
I -*■
*1
PLATE VII. CHAP 38.
TASMANIAN FRIENDS AND FOES.


" But this is by far the most curious," said Mrs. Merton, examining the
other.* "It has fins like feet; one small pair where pectoral fins usually are,
and a larger pair, with absolute elbows to them, and apparently shoulder-blades
too, only those do not belong to the fore pair of feet! A very antipodean
arrangement truly ! The markings on the body and on the delicate pellucid fins
are like tortoiseshell. It seems a link between fish and reptiles."
Mrs. Leslie used all diligence in making accurate portraits of the fish, often
complaining that no tints her palette could furnish were able to realise half
their beauty. Her drawing is copied in the illustration, reduced to one-third the
size of the original. The " superb dragon" is very rare.
Mrs. Merton was busy arranging the ferns she had collected for her
herbarium, and Lina read aloud, until her father came in tired, and threw
himself into an easy-chair, saying—
" I really ought to have gone home to-day, Anne, hut your factotum, Morris,
bested me to c so round a bit,' as he said, and a fine dance he has led me,
Oo o ' ' '
looking at fences and stock and one thing or other. I think I shall arrange to
have your shearing done first this year. I can either get mine over afterwards,
or Cyril will attend to it for me before he goes."
" Goes? —goes where ?" asked Mrs. Leslie, hastily.
" Back to that broiling country that has half-killed him already. I have
said all I can say to dissuade him; but he seems quite determined."
Mrs. Leslie's drawing engrossed her whole attention for some time. Then
she rose and left the room, asking Lina to come and assist in arranging flowers.
" What has decided Cyril on such a sudden return ?" Mrs. Merton asked
her husband.
" Were I to say I know, it were more than the truth; but I believe that
he is just as fond of Anne as when he left us before, and "
" Then why not marry her ? I'm sure she likes him." t
" Because his pride rebels at the idea of proposing to a woman so much
richer than himself."
" And are two good, kind, loving creatures to have their lives spoiled for
such a silly scruple ? Cyril ought to know better —and shall, too. Bich women
ought to marry poor men, and rich men poor women ; there would he sense and
justice in that. But, instead, the matrimonial market is too often like a
concourse of magnetic money-bags, where the largest attracts the largest."
* Cheironectes politics.


"My dear, you are a "woman —and argue very like one. But say no more.
Anne's here."
As they all sat in the verandah in the evening, Guy was urging his father
to go out and catch cray-fish.
"Boating again !" cried his mother. " Surely, Guy, you have had enough
for one day!"
" Nothing like enough, Mother dear; and if Papa and Igo to-morrow, this
is the last chance for a while, and we could take some fish home with us, you
know. It's quite calm, and Holdsworth's all ready. Do come, Papa ! Come,
Uncle Cyril!"
" I 'll not pull a stroke if I do," said Mr. Merton. "I am tired ; but if you
like to take me to sit still, very well."
Guy beguiled Lina also into venturing, and the three soon reached the jetty,
where Holdsworth and the boat waited; Cyril did not follow, so they pushed off
without him.
Half-an-hour's rowing brought them near a high rocky promontory, on a
favourable ground for cray-fish, and a couple of nets (cup-shaped, lashed on
iron hoops, and baited with meat) were quickly lowered, whilst Mr. Merton
dropped a hook astern for whatever booty might approach. The phosphores-
cence of the sea delighted Lina. Each dip of the oars awoke flashes of soft
bluish-white light, and the water dripping from them was as molten silver.
When a net was raised with cray-fish in, they too were blazing with the same
effulgence, and so were the hands of the fishers, and Lina's too, when she
plunged them in the sea.
" How weird and wonderful this phosphoric light is, Papa !" she exclaimed.
" I have read descriptions of the minute creatures which cause it; I should like
to see them. The light gleams and flashes in such a peculiar way, that no one
spot holds it for an instant."
"Do you remember the star-fish we once found here," said Guy, "with
long, thin, many-jointed arms, almost like centipedes, that kept on shining all
the evening, and, if touched, went into a general illumination, like strings of
blue lamps ? The large fungus that sometimes grows on dead wood or trees
lights up with much the same effect. Is it phosphorus or electricity that
makes the light, Papa ?"
"I believe," said Mr. Merton, "the cause is not known with absolute
certainty. Some flowers emit flashes of light, and this is supposed to be electric;
whilst the luminous appearance often observed on stale fish, decaying vegetable


matter, and other substances, is probably phosphoric. The light around us now —
so beautiful and so wonderful —owes its existence, as we know, to active life, not
decomposition; for it soon ceases to be visible in water taken from the sea."
A few fine cray-fish were soon caught, all the hen-fish with spawn being
conscientiously put back again in the water.
"A greater fallacy never gained credence," said Mr. Merton, "than the
popular idea of a lobster or cray-fish being in perfection for the table when
carrying spawn externally. In that stage they are impoverished in condition
and poor in flavour."
" I know that the shells of such as have spawn are scarcely half full of
meat," said Lina; " because at home it is my task to pick them for cooking, and
it is an invariable fact. The little eggs themselves too are absolutely tasteless.
Potted fish looks redder and prettier for having them in, and that is all the
advantage ''
"Of a most destructive practice," said her father, "and which I hope ere long
to see prevented as far as possible. We laugh at the fable of the man who killed
the goose with the golden eggs, but many current customs evince like ignorance
and greed, and none more palpably than the destruction of these fish, when, with
a single one, in a state almost unfit for eating, myriads of ova perish."
"And it's no wonder, sir," said Holdsworth, "that the cray-fish are got
scarce here, when you think how they've been taken wholesale for years now
by those John Chinamen. They've made fortunes, lots of 'em, by drying fish on
this coast."
"How do they dry them ?" asked Guy.
" They boil the fish, sir, and then pick all the meat out. They first dry it
in an oven, and then in the sun, till it will break like biscuit, and then it's
packed and set off to China. They dry the mutton-fish* the same way. They
pay the boatmen about here six shillings a hundred for those, or else so much a
basketful —but it comes to about the same. There are not a great many fisher-
men who are clever at that business; there's a good deal of ' knack' in it."
" They spear them, don't they," asked Guy, "off the rocks under water ?"
" Yes, sir, with a sort of barb or button on the end of the iron, which is
rigged on a pole some eighteen or twenty feet long. The outside of the shells
are so grown over with one thing or other, that a new hand most likely wouldn't
see them at all, let alone striking them many feet below water; but I know one
* Haliolis rubra.


man who bets that he 'll strike a half-crown, or a shell that size, twice out of
three times at twenty-five feet—and he does it too. I've known poles used
thirty feet long, hut that's not common."
"What are they made of ?" asked Guy.
" A young blue-gum * sapling makes the best, sir, because the wood is
tougher than any other, and heavier too. The man stands on the boat's bow or
thwart to spear, and if the pole snaps as it strikes, he's pretty sure to go
overboard. The Chinamen first showed our people how to get the fish, but John
soon got beaten hollow here at that business, so he buys them instead of
catching them. But there's a deal of difference amongst men. Some go over
a ground, and think they've cleared it, when another fellow comes along and
prods up fish right and left that the first never saw. They don't bring 'em up
singly, but wait till they have six or eight on the iron."
" What a pity to break such beautiful shells !" said Lina.
"Are lobsters, such as they get in England, better eating than our cray-
fish ?" asked Guy.
"It is so many years, Guy, since I ate fresh lobster, that I am not a
reliable authority, and the cray-fish is so good a substitute, I will not hazard
ungrateful comparisons; hut the absence in our fish of the large claws of the
lobster, which contain such delicate meat, is one certain point of inferiority that
must he confessed. A true lobster inhabits the fresh-water streams on our
north coast, and a little cray-fish lives in our rivers too, but I never knew them
abundant."
" I wonder when the silver-fish-J- will pay us another visit," said Guy;
* Eucalyptus globulus.
+ Caranx Georgianus. ln April and May, 1869, immense shoals of these fish suddenly appeared
on the east coast of Tasmania. Ten and fifteen hundredweight were sometimes taken in our own
seine in an evening, without any perceptible diminution of the masses which filled the bay; they
remained for about a month, then entirely disappeared, and not a single individual of the species has
been seen here since to this time, August, 1876. "We were told that the same fish, in like enormous
shoals, had, some years previously, visited the southern coasts of New Zealand, and had in the same
way entirely departed. To convey anything like a correct idea of this extremely beautiful fish, it
should be "laid in" with a ground of burnished silver, and the delicate tints added. The skin is
scaleless, and like satin, embossed all over in little raised freckles, and with symmetrical dark lines,
resembling the veining of a leaf. In quality, they are a good deal like mullet. (The fish above
mentioned have not re-appeared on our east coast yet, September 25th, 1879. The name Caranx
Georgianus, written by Mr. M. Allport on my careful life-size drawing of this elegant fish, is, I see,
used in a recently published list as that of the common trevally, which is totally different in form and
colour, and has scales.)


jfiM& 4 $&$&%&£
"ftu - / 'i.' |k.
%
PLATE VIII. CHAP 38.
TASMANIAN FRIENDS AND FOES


"or where they are now ! I think comet-fish would be a good name for them.
Their orbit in the sea seems as eccentric and mysterious as that of a comet in
the universe."
*
Mr. Merton's whole attention had been for some minutes devoted to his line,
and the "playing" of the fish which he felt had taken the hook. Suddenly he
exclaimed, "Look out!" and, with Holdsworth's assistance, hauled into the boat
a great conger eel,* whose violent contortions rather astonished Lina, as it shone
like a fiery serpent, gleaming all over with pale blue phosphorescent light.
The broad pleasant verandah at the Pines was usually the scene of morning
greetings. The sitting-rooms all opened into it by Trench windows, which,
during calm summer weather, were rarely closed; and when Mr. Merton stepped
from the breakfast parlour early on the following morning, he found Mrs.
Leslie and Cyril already out, enjoying both the fresh delicious air, laden with
flower odours, and the wide, glorious ocean view.
" Harold," said the former, with a flush somewhat rosier than usual on her
pleasant face; " last evening you were very kindly arranging about my shearing,
but I —l hope—l do not think that I shall need to trouble you this year."
Her brother-in-law looked puzzled ; whilst Cyril, smiling very happily, and
drawing her hand upon his own arm, said, touching his hat with mock humility—
" Please your honour, I'm the new manager! —just engaged "
"To manage not only my shearing, but myself into the bargain," added
Aunt Anne, looking almost girlish, in the flush of her new happiness.
Purther explanation was needless. Mrs. Merton, who just then joined the
group, saw the state of affairs at a glance, and conveyed her glad congratulations
in a sisterly kiss. Then after a moment's pause she remarked—
" This is a delightful solution of the shearing difficulty which you and
Cyril have arrived at, and one which I most heartily approve, only I do not very
clearly see how the immediate business arrangements are to be carried out, so
that your new manager can supersede your old one."
"By having a quiet wedding, as befits rational people, before shearing
begins," said Cyril, with deliberate earnestness. " I have already served three
years for you; for I never should have gone to Eiverina had I been a rich man,
and so, in the world's estimate, an eligible suitor, with the right to propose long
ago; and three years there is quite equal to seven anywhere else, I assure
you, my Each el."
* Conger vulgaris.


" If yon call me Bachel, yon must serve fourteen."
"If I were to act as your ' help,' before being legally constituted your
help-mate, Mrs. Grundy and her legion of proprietors would be agonised
beyond recovery. That idea therefore, my dear Anne, cannot be entertained for
a moment. I shall put it to the vote—wow—or six months hence, and I go
back to the Lachlan, or Darling Downs, or Queensland, or some other money-
earning furnace in the meantime."
Even Aunt Anne's solitary demur was but faintly uttered, and the amend-
ment of now was carried by a majority of three.
Could a more orthodox conclusion be devised for a simple chronicle of
country home-life ? With the merry music of wedding-bells floating around, I
bid my gentle readers, young and old, a kind Farewell!


ALGE
COLLECTED AT ORFORD, EAST COAST OF TASMANIA, BY THE AUTHOR, AND NAMED BY
PROFESSOR C. S. AGARDH.
Apjohnia Icete virens.
Aresdiougia Australis.
„ Lawrencia.
Asparagopsis armata.
Asperococcus sinuosus.
Ballia callitriclia.
„ scoparia.
Bornetia Meredithiana.
Bryopsis plumosa.
Callitliamnion —new species.
Callopliyllis carnea.
„ coccinea.
„ Harvey ana.
„ Lamberti.
Carpoglossum confluens.
Carpomitra cabrerce.
Caulerpa longifolia.
Centroceras clavidatum.
Ceraminm diaphanum.
~ rubrum.
Cliampia obsoleta.
Cliondria clavata.
„ dasyphylla.
„ opuntioides.
Chondriopsis.
„ Harvey ana.
Clirysymenia Meredithice.
Cladoplwra Bainesii.
„ gracilis.
Codium tomentosum.
Corynecladia umbellata.
Curdiea —new species.
Curdiea laciniata.
Cystopliora paniculata.
„ retorta.
Dasya ceramioides.
„ elongata.
„ Gunniana.
„ napalatlirix.
Delisia elegans.
„ pulchra.
Dictymenia Harveyana.
Dictyota dichotoma.
„ Nigricans.
~ paniculata.
Dumontia prolifera.
Ectocarpus siliculosa.
Enteromorpha clatlirata.
Epymenia Hallymenioides.
Erythroclonium Muelleri.
Fucodium gladiatum.
Gigartina brad data.
„ pinnata.
„ radula.
Gloioderma Australis.
Gloiosaccion Brownii.
Gracila/ria compressa.
„ confervoides.
„ secundata.
Griffithsia Sonderiana.
Haloplegma Preissii.
Halymenia Kallymenioides.
Halyseris Muelleri.
Hemineura froudosa.


Jeannerettia lobata.
Kallymenia cribrosa.
„ Tasmanica.
Laurencia botryoid
„ elata.
„ thyrsoid
Lenormandia marginata.
Liebmannia Australis.
„ ramulosa.
Mesogloia virescens
Mychodea carnosa.
„ membra
)f termina
Nereia Australis.
Nitophyllum cri
G
Phacelocarpus
Phyllospora comosa.
> Plocamium costatum.
„ flexuo
„ procerum.
Pollexfenia pedic
Polycaelia fastigiata.
Polysiphonia —new species (V)
abscissa.
5 , Australis.
cancellata.
7 7
frut ex.
Hoolteri.
, Hystrix.
Polyzonia incisa.
Porphyra laciniata.
Ptilonia Australasi
Ptilota articulata.
~ Rhodocallis.
Ehabdonia nigre
verticillata.
Rhodoglossum l
Rhodophyllis Gunnii.
~ membranacea,
„ ramentacea.
Rhodymenia corallina.
„ foliifera.
Rytiphkea Australasica.
Sargassum parado
„ Sonderi.
„ varrucu
Seirococcus axillaris.
Solieria chorda/is.
Sphacelaria affinis.
„ paniculata.
„ Tasmanica.
Sporochnos candatus.
„ radiciformis.
„ scopa
Spyridia furcifolia.
„ near to C. Muelleri
„opposita.
„prolifera.
„ scalpelUformis.
„ trifaria.
Thallymenia Polycoelioides.
Thamnocarpus Harveyana.
Thamnoclonium
proliferum.
Tridcea —new species.
„ polycarpa.
Ulvarigida.
Valonia gigas.
Wrangelia ballioides.
„ nobilis.
„ protenta.
~ setigera.
Zonaria Turneriana.
(Many of these are marked by Professor Agardh as " new species. )


ABORIGINES, 79.
Abutilon, 126.
Acacia diffusa , 148.
Acacia sophorce, 82.
Acanthorhynchus tenuirostris,
125.
Accipiter torquatus , 108.
Adiantum JEthiopicum , 219.
Alcyone Biemensis , 112.
superciliosa , 160, 182.
Anemones, 226.
Anthochcera inauris , 119.
Aquila audax , 104.
~ fucosa , 104.
Aracana avrita , 248.
Arbutus, native, 11.
Ardea Novce Hollandice, 112.
Aristotelia peduncular is, 41.
Asperococcus Turneri, 206.
Asplenium Brownii, 220.
„ flabellifolium , 220.
~ laxum, 139.
~ odontites , 219.
Athene maculata, 111.
Atherosperma moschata, 136,148.
BALD COOTS, 160.
Bandicoot, 59.
Banlcsia Australis, 88.
Barracouta, 225, 245.
* P
Bedfordia salicina, 148.
Bettongia cuniculus, 32.
Billardiera longifiora, 11.
Bittern, 112.
Biziura lobata, 159.
Black-heads, 198.
Blue-cap, 124.
Blue-gum tree, 252.
Blue-heads, 212, 214.
Blue wren, 124.
Boobyalla, 82.
Boomer, 16.
INDEX.
Bornetia Meredithiana, 207.
Botaurus Australis , 112.
Bream, 226.
Bronze-wing pigeon, 118, 188.
Brush kangaroo, 16.
Bustard, 188.
Butterfly lobsters, 248.
Cacatua galerita, 113.
Caladenia Patersonia, 137.
~ barbata, 137.
Calyptorhynchus Xanthonotus,
115.
Cape Barren geese, 157.
Caranx Georgianus, 252.
Carpet snakes, 175, 177.
Casarca tadornoides, 159, 182.
Casuarina torulosa, 78.
Cat-fish, 212.
Cat, native, 66.
Cat's-head fern, 220.
Caulerpa furcifolia, 206.
~ longifolia, 206.
~ scalpel liformis, 206.
~ trifaria, 206.
Cenomyce rangiferina, 221.
Centropristis salar, 227.
Oeramium cliaphanum, 207.
Cereopsis Novce Hollandice , 157.
Cheilanthus tenuifolia, 220.
Cheilodactylus nigripes , 212.
Cheironectes politus, 249.
Cherries, native, 41.
Chestnut owl, 233.
Chironemus marmoratus , 212.
Chlamydochen jubata, 182.
Chondria dasyphylla, 208.
Chrysophrys Australis, 226.
Chrysymenia Meredithice, 207.
Cockatoo, black, 115.
~ white, 113.
Conger eel, 253.
Conger vulgaris , 253.
Convicts, 97.
Coprosma nitida , 148.
„ hirtella , 137.
Cormorants, 205.
Corrcea, 221.
~ speciosa , 23.
Corvus Australia , 109.
Cow-fish, 214, 248.
Crab, blue, 209.
Crane, 112.
~ white, 182.
Cray-fish, 250.
Crows, 109, 186.
~ sooty, 110.
Cygnus atratus , 134, 157.
~ ofor, 134, 157.
Basyu/rus , 66.
Delisia elegans , 207.
Bendrobium Milligani , 222.
Bendrocygna arcuata , 182.
Devil, Tasmauian, 63.
Diamond-birds, 125.
Bichsonia Antarctica , 136.
Biemensia super chliosa , 177.
Biuris sulphurea, 137.
Diver, 183.
Dog-memory, 191.
Dogwood, 148.
Boodea caudata , 220.
Dottrels, 203.
Dove, ground, 119.
Bromaius Novce Hollandice , 154
Brymophila cyanocarpa , 41,137
Duck-billed platypus, 57.
Duck, black, 182, 160.
~ mountain, 159.
~ musk, 159.
~ wood, 182.
EAGLE, SEA, 108.


Eagle, wedge-tailed, 104.
Eagle's nest, 107.
Echidna setosa , 55.
Emerald king butterfly, 12.
Emu, 154, 180.
Epacris imprcssa 9 221.
~ myrtifolia 9 221.
Epacris, red, 28.
Estrelda bella 9 124.
Eucalypti , 132, 137.
Eucalyptus globulus , 252.
Eudyptes chrysocome , 200.
Exocarpus cupressiformis 9 41.
Falcinellus igneus 9 182.
Eiretail, 124.
Eish-fight, a, 227.
Elat-heads, 212, 225.
Eorester kangaroo, 15.
Forest kangaroo rat, 32.
Frenela rhomboides , 222.
Frogs, invasion of, 184.
GANNETS, 222.
Geese, Cape Barren, 157.
Get-over bird, 127.
Gigartina radula 9 207.
Gleichenia dicarpa 9 140.
~ Jlabellata 9 220.
Gloiosaccion Brownii , 206.
Goat, memory in a, 191.
Grammatophora barbata 9 178.
~ cristata 9 178.
~ muricata 9 178.
~ ornata 9 178.
Grampus, 214.
Griffithsia Antarctica , 207.
Ground dove, 119.
Grus Australasianus , 189.
Gualthcria hispida , 11.
Guard drakes, 182.
Gymnorhina organicum 9 109.
Haliolis rubra , 251.
Halmaturus Billardieri , 30.
Hawk, brown, 108.
~ mope, 111.
~ night, 185.
~ sparrow, 108.
~ swamp, 108.
He-oak, 78.
Herodias syrmatophorus, 182.
Hiaticula ruficapilla 9 203.
Histiopterus recurvirostris, 212.
Hcematopus longirostris, 204.
Honeysuckle, 88.
Hoplocephalus curtus , 176, 177.
Horses, quarrel between, 193.
Hydrosaurus varius, 178.
Hymenophyllum crispatum , 139.
~ flabellatum 9 139.
~ rarum 9 139.
~ tunbridgense 9 139.
~ unilaterale 9 139.
Ibacus Peronii , 248.
Ibis, 182.
Ichthyiaetus leucogaster , 107.
leracidea bcrigora , 108.
Iguana, 177, 178.
Imesiptcris tasmcnsis , 140.
Ivy fern, 219.
JACKASS, 110.
Jewel-fish, 248.
John Dory, 212.
Kallymcnia cribrosa , 206.
Kangaroo, brush, 16.
~ forester, 15.
~ mouse, 37.
~ rat, 31.
~ rat, forest, 32.
Kathethostoma lxve 9 213.
Kelp, 211.
Kelp-fish, 212.
King-fish, 227.
Kingfisher, 112, 227.
Larus Pacificus 9 198.
Lathamus discolor , 117.
Latris Forsteri 9 212.
Leather-jackets, 212.
Leipoa ocillata , 188.
Leptospermum lanigerum 9 148
221.
Leucosarcia picata 9 188.
Lichen, 221.
Liebmannia ramulosa, 207.
Lignum bushes, 180.
Lilac, native, 23.
Limatis nasico , 188.
Liusis fuscus, 175.
Lobrichthys Richardsoni , 212.
Lomaria Alpina 9 220.
~ discolor , 140.
~ jluviatilis , 219.
~ procera , 220.
MACKEREL-GULLS, 224, 228.
Macrocystis pyrifera , 211.
Macropus Bennettii , 16.
~ giganteus , 15.
Magpie, 109.
~ black, 110.
Magpie-perch, 212.
Maiden-hair, 219.
Mallee hens, 188.
~ snakes, 177.
Malurus longicaudus , 124.
Mantis, green, 23.
Mantis religiosa , 23.
Marsupials, 34.
Mesembryanthemum cequilaterale,
100.
Meso-gloia vires-cens 9 207.
Mimosa, 148.
Miners, 120.
Monacanthus peronii 9 212.
Mope-hawk, 111.
Morelia variegata 9 175, 177.
"More-pork," 111.
Mountain ducks, 159.
Musk duck, 159.
Mutton-fish, 251.
Myzantha garrula , 120.
Natica , 208.
Native cat, 66.
~ cherries, 41.
~ companion, 189.
~ pepper, 231.
Native women, 86.
Night-hawks, 185.
Nitophyllum Gunnianum , 208.
OPOSSUMS, 32.
Opossum-mice, 37.
Opossum, ring-tailed, 36.
Ora& meridionalis , 214.


Orchids, 137, 222.
Ornithorhynchus anatinus, 57.
Otis A ustralasiana, 188.
Owl, chestnut-faced, 110, 233.
~ spotted, 111.
Oyster-catchers, 204.
Oyster Bay pines, 222.
Pagurus Bernhardus, 204.
Pardalotus punctatus, 125.
Parrakeet, swift, 117.
Parrot, blue mountain, 116.
~ common, 117.
~ ground, 116.
~ rose-hill, 117.
Parrot-fish, 212.
Parsley-fern, 220.
Peacocks, 20.
Pelecanus conspicillatus , 205.
Pelicans, 205.
Penguins, 200.
~ king, 200.
Pepper, native, 231.
Perameles Gunnii, 59.
Peristera elegans, 188.
Petroiea multicolor, 123.
Phalacrocorax Novae Hollandice,
205.
~ leucogaster, 224.
Phalangista fuliginosa, 32.
~ viverrina, 36.
~ vulpina, 32.
Phaps calcoptera , 118.
~ elegans, 119.
Phasma, 29.
Phascolomys wombat, 53.
Phyllopteryx foliatus, 247.
Pigeon, bronze-wing, 118, 188.
~ wood, 188.
Pig-faced lady, 212.
Pines, Oyster Bay, 222.
Piping crow, 109.
Platycephalus Bassensis, 198,212.
Platycercus eximius, 117.
~ flaviventris, 116.
Platypus, 57.
Podargus Cuvieri, 111, 185.
Podiceps Australis, 183.
Polypodium Billardieri, 219.
~ grammitidis , 139.
Polypodium rugolosum, 140.
Polysiphonia Australis, 207.
Polystichum coriaceum, 140.
~ vestitum, 220.
Porcupine ant-eater, 55.
Porphyrio melanotics, 160.
Praying mantis, 25.
Pseudophycis barbatus, 225.
Pseulechis porphyriana, 175.
Pteris falcata , 221.
~ incisa, 140.
~ tremula, 220.
Pterostylis cucullata , 137.
~ squamata , 137.
QUAIL, 119, 185.
RED-BILL, 204.
Rock cod, 225.
Robin, native, 123.
Ruby-fish, 248.
SALMON, 227.
Salmo Thymallus, 112.
Sand-saucers, 208.
Sarcophilus ursinus, 63.
Sassafras trees, 136, 148.
Scorpoena cruenta, 248.
Sea-eagle, 107.
Sea-gull, 198.
Shags, 224.
Shark, 229, 240.
Sheep-driving, 95.
~ watering, 186.
She-oak, 78.
Shrike, 110.
Silver-fish, 252.
Snake, black, 175.
~ brown, 177.
~ carpet, 175, 177.
~ mallee, 177.
Snow-berry, 11.
Soldier-crab, 204.
Sooty crow, 110.
Spectre insect, 29.
Spine-bill, 125.
Spmigera, 210.
Spheniscus minor , 200.
Star-fish, 224, 250.
Strepera fuliginosa, 110.
Strix castanops, 110, 233.
Sula Australis, 222.
Summer-bird, 119.
Superb warbler, 124.
Swallows, 128.
Swans, black, 134, 157.
„ white, 134, 157.
*
TASMANIAN DEVIL, 63.
~ tiger, 65.
Tasmannia aromatica, 232.
Tea-tree, 47, 148, 221, 229.
Tetratheca glandulosa, 23.
Tetrodon Hamiltoni, 226.
Thylacinus cynocephalus, 65.
Thyrsites atun, 225.
~ solanderi, 227.
Tiger-cat, 66.
Tiger, Tasmanian, 65.
Toad-fish, 226.
Tree-fern forest, 138.
Tree-ferns, 136.
Tree-frog, 222.
Triehoglossus Swainsonii, 116.
Tricomanes venosum, 139.
Trout, native, 112.
Trumpeters, 212.
Turkeys, 188.
Turnix varius, 185.
Uranoscopus vulgaris, 212.
WALLABY, 30.
Water-mole, 57.
Wattle-bird, 119.
Wax cluster, 11.
Whales, 235.
Whistling teal, 182.
White-eye, 127.
Wombat, 21, 53.
Wood ducks, 182.
~ pigeons, 188.
Xema Jamesonii, 224.
YEW-LIZAED, 178.
Yew-tree fern, 220.
Zeus Australis, 212.
Zoster ops dorsalis , 127.


MARCUS WARD & CO.,
PRINTERS,
ROYAL ULSTER WORKS,
BELFAST.








