

Vi V'r
G )f
'Jr
TASMANIA.
COPY OF
LEADING ARTICLE
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENCE
FROM THE
“TIMES,”
WITH AN APPENDIX.
LONDON:
LAKE & SISON, 4, WESTMINSTER CHAMBERS, SAC.


- LONDO N calling at PLYMOUTH
and from SYDNEY, MELBOURNE & ADELAIDE respectively. i|A R«-iiS^BSA,
AUSTRALIA, TASMANIA & NEW LEAL AND,


TASMANIA.
The following Letters and Leading Article, relating
to the Colony of Tasmania, appeared in the London
Times on the dates given
“ Times,” 15 th October, 1881
TASMANIA.
[from ouk correspondent.]
Melbourne, 29 th August, 1881.
Among the emigration fields open to the redundant population of
the mother country, certainly not the least interesting is Tasmania.
Nearly as large as Ireland or Ceylon and with a better climate and more
productive soil than either, its population is yet not much over 100,000
souls —men, women, and children, all told. The health resort of the
surrounding colonies and even of far-off India itself, it yet has not
advanced in anything like the same measure as its neighbours. Some
explanation of this may be attempted a little further on, but at present
I wish to call the attention of your readers to the rapid progress the
island is now making mainly on the strength of its mineral resources.
The Mount Bischoff Tin Mine, one of the richest, if not the very
richest tin mine in the world—described as a mountain of metal quarried
rather than mined—has now been worked some seven or eight years, and
is paying such enormous dividends that a mining fever has set in, and
the consequent floating of new companies is the infatuation of the hour.
The precious metals have also been discovered in various parts of the
island, and several gold mines have been worked with great profit to the
owners, Until carefully explored, however, by Victorians, the Tas-
manians themselves were ignorant of the variegated treasures around
them and beneath their feet.
It was in the year 1872 that large deposits of tin ore were first dis-
covered at Mount Bischoff, on the northern side of the island, opposite
to Victoria. From the outset, the mine in its product of tin proved to
he what the Burra Burra of South Australia was at first as a copper
mine, viz., a deposit so vast as to render superfluous the ordinarily tardy
and expensive operations of mining. A mining fever set in, and suc-
cessively were discovered, not merely many more tin deposits, but also
gold, silver, bismuth, antimony, iron, and coal apparently inexhaus-


title. From the year 1866 to June 30, 1879, the returns of gold were
48,7530 z. from the alluvial and 72,1860 z. from the quartz. People
begin to talk of Tasmanian millionaires, the floating of companies has
become a sort of profession, and many speculative and enterprising
spirits have already left Victoria to try their luck on the gold and tin
fields of North Tasmania. The cry is for population, and employers say
“ What are the emigration clauses worth, of which we read so much in
The Times , unless some reasonable share of any exodus from the mother-
country shall be poured into these colonies, instead of to the United
States ? ” Surely, a not unreasonable question. Every British emigrant
landing at New York becomes an alien to the country he has quitted,
and yet not at once a citizen of the land of his adoption. Every
British emigrant landing here is at once at home among his countrymen,
and if sober and steady may not only secure a comfortable livelihood,
but if also intelligent may attain, as not a few operatives have already
attained, honourable and responsible positions in the administration of
the affairs of the country.
I have made within the last few weeks my third visit to Tasmania.
About 24 hours’ steaming takes us from the Queen’s Wharf, Melbourne,
to the town of Launceston, situate about 40 miles up the beautiful river
Tamar. As we pass the picturesque points and through the winding
reaches of this noble stream, we are sure to overhear some European
tourist amid his raptures remark “ that a sprinkling of ruined castles
alone is wanting to give us here an Australian Rhine.” Artists and
young ladies make use of their sketch-books, and the time seems short
which brings us to the shallowest, shoaliest, most cramped, and incom-
modious port (if port it deserves to be called) in all these colonies.
Nevertheless, being, as it is, the head of the navigation of the river, it
is the best, and so the good folk of Launceston get on with it as well as
they can. Now that they are becoming rich and ambitious and have
started a sort of stock-exchange and share lists, they are beginning to
make vested interests nervous by discussing the policy of starting
another port nearer the mouth of the river, nearer Bass’s Straits, and,
above all, nearer to Victoria.
With much heaving, and grounding, and windlassing, and some
impatient expletives from less experienced travellers, the steamer is
hauled hither and thither, now on the mud and now off, until we are at
last brought alongside the wharf. The passengers pour down the
gangway for their respective destinations ; not a few, like myself, bound
per rail for the salmon pounds, and the trout streams, and the shooting
on the southern or Hobart side of the island. There is, therefore, a
rush for the afternoon train.
Of all the railways I have ever trusted my life to—and I have
crossed from New York to San Francisco—l take the line which
connects Launceston and Hobart, the northern and southern sides of the
island, as the most boldly defiant of engineers’ misgivings touching the
sharpness of curves. When, half-expectant of being hurled by centri-
fugal force down some of the Tasmanian gullies, we, with more or less
rapid, snake-like motion, wind our way round the steep sides of heavily
wooded hills, and look down into apparently bottomless deeps, and are
occasionally whisked round such bends that we can look out of window


and every now and then see the locomotive as if about to come back to
us, the experience may be regarded as exciting rather than pleasant.
Nevertheless, the Tasmanians are able to boast their exemption hitherto
from serious accident, and, therefore, they rather pride themselves than
otherwise in possessing a railway which seems to go round corners, and
which, eccentric as it is, can so confound the wisdom of the scientific.
The run across the island in seven hours brings us to Hobart, the
capital (for some aesthetic reason the inhabitants have abandoned the old
name of Hobart Town), and here we find—wore obstante the alleged
general slowness—that the Hobartians are little behind the rest of the
world in the comfort of their hotels and not at all behind them in their
charges.
On the following morning, which rises so fresh, sunny and exhilarating,
that indoor life seems to us like something lost to human happiness, we
start for New Norfolk, and are borne along the sweet-briared and flower-
decked banks of the beautiful Derwent. A few hours before sundown
we find ourselves in a comfortable, thoroughly old English hotel. The
picturesque little township of New Norfolk is situate on the left side of
the Derwent, going from Hobart, and we have ample time before dinner
to stroll through and around the place and admire its beautiful hop-
gardens, and orchards, and snug homesteads, with their ruddy, flaxen-
haired, sunburnt little children discontinuing their games for a while to
stare at the new arrivals by coach and steam. We have time, too, to
choose our point of the rivfer for attacking the trout, and whether we are
successful or not, we are not without resource. We have a sketch-book
and the last fortnight’s (our last fortnight) file of The Times and we have
the “ Guide to Tasmania.” Moored in our boat, between the towering
and magnificent cliffs, which here enclose the fair river on either side,
we may have a picture gallery, too, in the reflected glories of these bosky
rocks in the glassy depths of the Derwent —pictures which the artist
gazes at with mixed delight and despair as he strives in vain to secure
even some faint suggestion of them on his canvas.
I pass over angling successes and failures as of no interest to your
readers, for the operation of trout fishing is the same wherever there are
trout to be caught. But I must here remark that the salmon trout grows
to such a size in Tasmania that some experts assert that the product is a
hybrid —notwithstanding the richness of his spots—between the salmo
solar and the English trout as imported. A small boy in a boat near mine
caught one weighing nearly 20 lbs. avoirdupois and the young captor was,
of course, the hero of the hour. The trout is now naturalised in every
Tasmanian river, the Clyde, Forth, Huon, &c., and the Government
charge 10s. for the annual license to fish in any part of the island.
To return to the character and resources of the country. Its climate
has been justly compared with that of Jersey or the Isle of Wight; and
the exquisite variety of mountain and valley, and lake and river, we meet
with in our travels in this island is not to be found in any part of the
adjacent continent. The very names of the counties have evidently been
suggested by their topographical similarity to the corresponding scenery
of old England:—Kent, Cumberland, Devon, Dorset, Cornwall, Somerset,
Buckingham, Lincoln, Westmoreland, Pembroke, Monmouth, Glamorgan.
The land gradually rises towards the centre of the country and two


mountain chains, the eastern and the western, run through it in a
northerly and southerly direction. The eastern range has its Ben Lomond,
above 5,000 feet high, and Ben Nevis is 3,910 feet high. In the western
range we have Mount Humboldt, 5,520 feet; Valentine Peak, 6,ooofeet;
Mount Arrowsmith, 4,075 feet; and Dry’s Bluff, 4,500 feet. Mounts
Wellington, 4,170 feet; Dromedary, 3,245 feet; the Thombs, 1,800 feet;
Bruni, 1,660 feet; and Cape Pillar—are on the southern side of the
island. The noble mass, Mount Wellington, immediately at the back of
Hobart Town, is a fine feature in the landscape, and is consulted as a
“ weather glass ” by the surrounding inhabitants, who look for rain or
sunshine just as the clouds may range themselves about “ Old Welling-
ton’s ” head. The lakes of the island are numerous and all of them fresh,
“ The Great Lake ” (as Mr. Wildey states in his “ Australasia and the
Oceanic Region ”) is 50 miles in circumferance, and has an area of 50,000
acres, and is situated on the central plateau ; it is 3,822 feet above the
level of the sea, and very deep.” Lake St. Clair, 10,000 acres, is west of
the Great Lake, and Lake Arthur 15,000 acres is east of it. Lake Sorrell,
15,000 acres, is east of Lake Arthur. These are all very deep. Lake Echo,
2,600 acres, is 2,000 feet above the sea and west of Hobart Town. The
rivers are numerous, and some of them, such as the Derwent, the Tamar,
and the Huon, are navigable for many miles; “ and the Nile, Florentyne,
Dee, Broadriver, Ouse, Clyde, Russell Falls, Styx, Lachlan, Humphrey,
and New Town rivers flow into the Derwent.” This latter, when it comes
abreast of Hobart, is rather an arm of the sea than a river. By far the
larger portion of the good arable land (very much of it yet available for
new arrivals) lies on the northern— i.e., the Launceston side of the
island, and were this harbour only of one-fifth the capacity of that of
Hobart nothing could prevent Launceston from soon becoming the
capital city of the country. Even as it is she is fast overtaking Hobart
in population, as she has already outstripped her in commerce. In the
broad plains and valleys the soil is generally very fertile, and although
in some parts sheep farming on a large scale is carried on, as in the
neighbouring colonies, there is a far larger proportion of solid, thriving
homesteads of the English style than are to be found in some younger
settlements. Green lanes and fields, divided from each other frequently
by black and white thorn and sweetbriar hedges, and the homesteads
enclosed in brick walls, make us almost think we are in old Kent or
Sussex; and the farmyards, barns, manure heaps, duck-ponds, pigsties,
stables, and cattle stalls, as well as the orchards and flower and kitchen
gardens, are so completely of the home style that we need no other
assurance that English farming men have been busy here for more than
one generation In all parts of the island, too, save the western region,
country gentlemen’s well-kept mansions and grounds are very much
more commonly met with than in the younger colony of Victoria.
Fishing, shooting, and hunting are the favourite recreations; and
following the Nile Hunt, sometimes nearly 100 Nimrods turn out in
their gay green uniform. The hospitality of these prosperous sportsmen
is proverbial, although, perhaps, not many of them can, like the
Hon. Thomas Reibey, the late Premier of the Tasmanian Government,
give a chance visitor to his beautiful place, Entally, a run with his own
capital pack of beagles. Such a life is, perhaps, deemed slow by those


whose whole thoughts are bent on money-making. But, after all, there
is something in the monition “ Carpe diem,” These Tasmanians live,
and live a healthy life, while too many of our Victorians are merely, in
their feverish pursuit of wealth, only going to live some day—if they are
not snatched away before the day comes.
Various causes have contributed to retard the growth of Tasmania
in population and other elements of material progress. The principal
one may be the convict origin of this community, and the dependence of
so many of its free, as well of its emancipated inhabitants, for so many
years, on the large Imperial expenditure which took place while the
transportation system was in force. The spirit of enterprise thus dulled
could not he expected to suddenly acquire strength when the system was
brought to an end in the year 1853. But further affecting the progress
of Tasmania was the discovery of gold in Victoria and New South
Wales two years before the abolition of transportation. The immediate
effect of this was to draw from the island almost all the able-bodied men
who could get away to the gold fields. Farms were abandoned, shops
shut up, private houses left untenanted, and the cases were common in
which very old men and women and young children were obliged at
shortest notice to tend the flocks and herds which had been abandoned
by the shepherds and stockmen. Although the island is famous for the
beauty, and more especially for the brilliant complexions of its girls, it
was one of the facetice of the day that, as all the bachelors had cleared
out of Tasmania, there was nothing for it but for the girls to follow, and
many of them did so. Even Victoria never dreamt of laying an import
duty on Tasmanian belles for the purpose of protecting our own damsels’
marriage interests. As time rolled on, things adjusted themselves.
As all could not make their fortunes at the gold fields, the reflux
of Tasmanian youth to their own fine country soon restored society
to something of its former condition. It is now in its turn attracting
population from the surrounding colonies ; and it will continue to do
so. For so small a community it is singularly well provided with all the
means and appliances of civilization. There are 116 public schools in
the colony—viz., seven in Hobart, three in Launceston, and one in every
country township. There are also four high schools—Horton College,
Hutchinson’s School, the High School, and the Church of England
Grammar School, besides many other private schools. From all these
schools pupils can be sent up annually to compete for the degree of
“ Associate of Arts,” which entitles the graduate to further compete for
a scholarship of £2OO, tenable for four years, at a British University.
Education is compulsory, under a money penalty for breach of the law.
The census of 1874 gives the whole number of churches and chapels in
the colony as 316 and the ministers as 129. The various sects are
enumerated as follows :—Church of England, 53,047 ; Roman Catholics,
22,091 ; Church of Scotland, 6,644 ; Free Church of Scotlrnd, 2,420 ;
Wesleyans, 7,187; Independants, 3,931; Baptists, 931; Jews, 232;
Society of Friends, 82 ; other sects, 2,763. The Roman Catholic body
have started a new cathedral within the last year in Hobart. The pride,
pomp, and circumstance of the opening—at which I was present —were
impressive in their way, and well calculated to excite the respect of
minds which, as Bacon says, “ are educated to believe.”


“ Times.” loth October, 1881.
LEADING ARTICLE.
Our Correspondent at Melbourne describes a visit to a country which
may set many old eyes longing after it. We are all of us bom with a
taste for na.ure, wild and tame in due proportions, for sporting of all
kinds and farming of all kinds, for pretty landscapes and neat enclosures,
for forests and orchards, for the country as our forefathers found it, and
as we find it too. It is said that people never enjoyed the solitude so
thoroughly as they did when they had the option of company. Here is
just such a place, quite accessible, practically as near as the United
States when they bade us good-bye a century ago, and inviting us to
share its very pleasant lot. Tasmania seems to have been reserved for
the present crisis of English aspirations. We have not a word to say
against Canada, but it is not every adult constitution that can stand half-
a-year of frost and snow, relieved by sledging, wrapt up in a buffalo skin,
cutting wood in a barn, and brushing up what remains of one’s school-day
learning and literature. We have to concede that Canadians like Canada,
and look with utter contempt on our one-horse flies, our two-stalled
stables, and our dozen of fagots at a time from the greengrocer. It is
from the English standpoint we speak. What paradise can be described
more to our taste than that seen through the simple story of our Corres-
pondent? It has been reserved for this epoch. No one thinks of
Scotland under a thousand a year. A millionaire can amuse himself
there, but even a millionaire cannot make money there. We are all
under orders to quit Ireland, and consequently not to go there. There
could not be a stronger instance of utter fatuity than for a man to risk a
penny on the soil or the industry of that country. In this country it is a
universal complaint that farming will not pay, and that it is impossible to
purchase land except where nobody wants it. Tasmania is still in the
market. Its ambitious and saucy Australian neighbours have long
despised it and laughed at it. They had the wit to see there was a
certain spell upon it, and they called it Sleepy Hollow. The gold dis-
coveries drained its male population, till Tasmania was the only British
colony in the world in which the sexes were in equal proportion. There
was nothing going on there; not even the floating of new companies.
The hotels were no better than English country inns. The people
vegetated and were genteel. They felt exclusive and shy in the presence
of visitors from faster Australian circles. This is like keeping girls too
long at school or at home. But the spell is broken at last. The earth
has opened its treasure house, and Tasmania can show now her vast
deposits of tin, gold, and other precious minerals. Fortunes can be
made there, if not in a day, yet more quickly than by sowing wheat and
planting potatoes. Meanwhile, if you are not obliged to be always at the
grindstone, you can fish everywhere with the line and the net, paying
10s. for your annual licence; there is the charming scenery to put on
paper; there are mountains higher than any in the British Isles within
easy reach; there is a temperature which may be favourably compared to
that of St. Helier and its suburbs, the group called the Channel Islands,


and there appears to be an abundance of organisation for no more than
a hundred thousand people. More than all, there are country gentlemen,
living in mansions, with parks, tenantry, servants, and, at least, with a
pack of beagles, occasionally bringing together a field of a hundred
hunting men in the costume of the colony.
Our Correspondent has gone there, be it kept in mind, not for
business, but for a holiday. It is the third time he has gone to the
island to recruit his spirits and his strength; and he has returned to it
with renewed interest. He had, indeed, to traverse the island on a
railway which reminds one of Fell’s line over Mont Cenis, where you
were always turning round corners, shooting to the very edge of an
abyss, and pulling up in the nick of time, seeing your leader—that is,
your locomotive —turning round upon you, and dancing, as it were on a
tight rope, on the edge of a precipice, This, however, only shows the
romantic beauty of the scenery. It is a thing to be borne in mind, even
when utility is the main object. There is no international playground,
or holiday resort, in all Europe that cannot supply all that is here
summed up in a tight little island. It is true there are features of the
older civilisation that are missed in Tasmania. Our Correspondent
glided through scenery that reminded him and his fellow travellers of the
Rhine, but there were no castles or cathedrals. Well, there is something
to be said even to this want. You will not have to spend the best hours
of the day in being shown dismal ruins or questionable skulls, and he
charged two shillings a head for it. You will not ascend a hill or a
church tower, and see a dozen cities chequering the plain, or breaking
the horizon with their tall spires. But you may see all these with the
eye of faith. You may conceive a Tasmania of the future untainted with
the greater European scandals and crimes. There could not be planned
a better ground for a new country, for the origin of families, for honour-
able enterprise, for that mixture of hard work and innocent recreation
which makes the Englishman. It is frequently said here that old
English life is gone. The country is ploughed up and fenced in to the
road side; and the towns are too big, too busy, too smoky and dirty for
gentry to live in, if they can possibly live elsewhere. For several
generations to come Tasmania promises to combine an open country and,
so it is said, good society, either in the country or in rather old-fashioned
towns.
If we venture to recommend a careful perusal of this letter with a
a practical view, of course we are not addressing ourselves to the golden
youth of this fine old country. There are fortunate classes to whom it
is evidently vain to suggest emigration, even under the most favourable
circumstances. If a man is blessed with fond parents, affectionate
sisters, confiding elderly friends, or a large circle of admiring acquaint-
ances ready to drain themselves of their last shilling at his call —nay, if
he has before him the splendid prospect of a place in a Government
office rising from £lOO a year by ten at a time to £3OO, or of a living of
£2OO a year to come to him when somebody dies, then he had better
stay at home and render himself every year a greater object of charity.
A large part, perhaps the greater part, of our youth still possess the
noble instincts inherited from many generations of industrious and inde-
pendent men. From boyhood they have read the narratives of dis-


coverers, settlers, founders, sailors, and soldiers. They have looked
forward with eagerness, not dread, to the race of life, and have acquired
the feeling that the pleasure of the race is the race itself, not the casual,
fleeting, and precarious prize. Were it put to our schoolboys, even at the
very mature age at which hoys are now found at school, we feel sure the
majority would prefer to try their fortunes in a new ground, seemingly
created and preserved for their special use, rather than flock together and
hang in helpless crowds before the choked-up avenues of official pro-
motion or commercial adventure at home. In these days of universal
education the accident of having been at a good school or college is of
much less use to a man than it was even fifty years ago, and it is now
very common to hear of men occupying high positions in every depart-
ment without having passed through what were once thought the
necessary ideals, indeed, as much self-taught men as the late President
of the United States. Our Universities have utterly lost what monopoly
they had, and the man with a good head on his shoulders, good manners,
and habits of business beats any number of scholars, wranglers, and
prizemen out of the field. What inducement is there now for a youth
to stay at home ? Even our nobility, hitherto thought to have the world
before them, are selling wine, coal, tea, soap, candles, shoes and stockings
—anything for a respectable living. If the comparison is to he with
trade, we may be excused our old English preference in favour of
country pursuits. But the universality of this taste necessarily limits its
exercise. All Englishmen wish to he gentlemen farmers ; but all cannot
be, for England is a small country, and Scotland and Ireland, being like
us in their tastes, are keeping their country to themselves. If, therefore,
we are really bent on indulging our genius and putting ourselves in cir-
cumstances fit for our full natural development into old English country
gentlemen, we must go to a colony like Tasmania while there is still room
for us.
“ Times,” 1 9th October, 1881.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “TIMES.”
Sir, —I have read this morning with great satisfaction the excellent
letter on Tasmania from your correspondent at Melbourne, together with
your leader on the subject, and beg to record the conviction that
The Times to-day has thus rendered to the little island colony a service
for which she will be sincerely grateful. Surrounded and long over-
shadowed by stronger and more prosperous neighbours, who have
naturally attracted chief attention in the mother conntry, her claims
have in the past been somewhat overlooked, simply because the facts
respecting her climate and resources have not been sufficiently known.
As in all new countries, the great want of Tasmania is population of the
right sort; and it is certain, had her advantages been better understood,
a larger number of those seeking new and sunny homes would have
emigrated thither and not been disappointed. It would be imsossible
in the same space for anyone, however familiar with the island, to give
a more interesting and correct account of its leading features than is


furnished by the letter from Melbourne. Your Correspondent writes as
a holiday visitor, and presumably with the glow of a holiday feeling, may
be generously disposed to chronicle pleasant impressions; but those who
associate with the country recollections of work rather than of play will
be forward to declare that he has not put too much colour in his picture.
Having lately returned, after a residence of about seven years as a
clergyman a few miles from Launceston, a position affording one ample
opportunity for visiting different parts of the colony, and for knowing
intimately all classes of the people—perhaps you will kindly permit me to
add a few observations to the information already given in your columns.
Situated between 42deg. and 44deg. south latitude, the climate of
Tasmania is proverbially one of the most healthy and delightful in the
world. The annual rainfall averages 24 inches. The mean mid-winter
temperature is about 46 deg. F., and that of mid-summer 63deg. F.
There are no great extremes of heat or cold; the winter is scarcely severe
enough to merit the name ; cattle are turned out in all seasons ; and life in
the open air may be enjoyed all the year round. Snow rarely falls on
plains and valleys, but the highest mountains are capped two or three
months in the year. Brilliant sunshine without oppressive glare and
heat; long stretches of fair weather, which may be counted on from day
to day; clear, starry nights, always deliciously cool, even in the hottest
seasons—these are the prevailing features. The scenery is in harmony
with the climate, and is more English in its character than that of other
colonies. Lofty mountains lifting blue summits to the skies, magnificent
forests with inexhaustible supplies of timber, spacious park-like landscape,
with pasture and stream, rivers everywhere with an unfailing flow of
pure water, rich agricultural lands, pleasant homesteads, picturesque
villages, and the two beautiful though small cities of Hobart and Laun-
ceston —such are the scenes that meet the eye and linger afterwards in
the mind. It is not surprising that Tasmania is a favorite resort for people
from neighbouring colonies and travellers from a distance, aud that it
is a sanatorium for Indian officers. The hot winds of the Australian
continent have to cross Bass’s Straits, 120 miles of sea, before they reach
Tasmania, and are then no longer hot, The purity of the atmosphere
prevents zymotic diseases. The general death-rate is only about 10 or
12 per 1,000 of the population.
Your correspondent justly mentions the early convict system as one
of the chief hindrances to the progress of Tasmania. Transportation
ceased a quarter of a century ago, and society now retains no appreciable
marks of moral degradation. The statistics of crime, the security of
person and property, the tone of domestic life, and the virtue and in-
telligence of the people generally, bear favourable comparison with other
British communities. Practically there is nothing to remind one that he
lives in a land that was once a penal settlement.
The aborigines, who presented one of the lowest types of savage
tribes, numbered probably about 5,000 when colonization began in 1803.
So rapidly did they fade before the pale faces that Queen Truganinni,
the last of her race, died five years ago.
Like the other colonies, Tasmania has a Governor of her own
appointed by the British Cabinet, who holds office for 6 years. The
Parliament consists of the Legislative Council w ith 16 members, and the


House of Assembly, with 32 members, both elective. The business
capacity, debating power, and fairness of the representatives, and the
high character of judges and magistrates, are a source of satisfaction and
a guarantee of liberty and justice.
In addition to what your Correspondent says with regard to the edu-
cational advantages of the country, it may be mentioned that there
is no lack of mechanics’ institutes, public libraries, and scientific
societies. New books and leading British and American periodicals and
journals arrive regularly, exercising their usual influence on thought
and taste. The local Press is conducted with enterprise and ability.
Although there is no Established Church in the colonies, ample provision is
made by the different denominations for the religious wants of the people.
Next to New South Wales, Tasmania is the oldest colony of the
Australian group. It has fallen behind the others in the race, being
called “ Sleepy Hollow.” But there are signs of awakened activity and
enterprise. The population is composed proportionately of English,
Irish and Scotch, almost without any admixture of foreign nationalities ;
and although numbering at the recent census only 115,651, yet this shows
an increase of 16,323 since 1870. Mineral and other resources are being
vigorously developed, and by liberal land laws and other advantages such
encouragement is given to immigration as affords reasonable prospect of
a steady, although it may not be a rapid, increase of population. The
construction of roads, bridges, and public works generally has recently
been prosecuted with energy and liberality. Railways and telegraph
lines connect the different centres ; a submarine cable unites the island
with Australia and New Zealand, with which there is also almost daily
steam communication. The chief exports are wool, tin, timber, gold,
fruit, hops, grain, wattle-bark, stud-sheep, hides, &c., amounting to
somewhat less than a million-and-a-half pounds sterling annually. The
imports are of similar value. The yearly revenue and expenditure are
respectively slightly under £400,000. The national debt is under
£2,000,000. There are not many colonists of great wealth, such as
abound in Victoria and New South Wales ; some of the merchants and
sheep farmers are in affluent circumstances ; the majority of the people
are comfortable ; extreme poverty is almost unknown.
As pointed out in your leader, Tasmania may not attract “ the golden
youth of this fine old country,” but is well adapted “ for the origin of
families, for honourable enterprise, for that mixture of hard work and
innocent recreation which makes the Englishman.” Besides the class
who with moderate means and energy may reasonably expect to gratify
a taste for gentleman-farming, there is plenty of room and inducement
for those with humbler aspirations. Labourers, mechanics, small farmers,
all who with vigour of brain and muscle are prepared to work and wait,
will find in Tasmania, not an El Dorado for rapidly amassing fortunes,
but a fair and promising field for realizing a competency amid conditions
favourable to health and happiness. The delicious and salubrious climate
already described, and the quiet, refined habits of the people, render it a
most desirable residence for persons of delicate constitution, and for those
who, wishing to live economically in retirement, may—as numerous
Indian officers, for example, have done—establish for themselves pleasant
bush or suburban homes. Then it should be remembered that, in case


of disappointment, the mistake is not so serious as if the colony were
isolated; the remedy is at hand. All Australasia is practically at
the door, with sufficient choice of climate, occupation, and other
circumstances that affect the welfare of individuals and families.
I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
ROBERT S. DUFF, M.A.,
Late of Evandale, Tasmania.
Craven-street, Strand, Oct. 15.
“ Times,” 20 th October, 1881.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ TIMES.”
Sir, —The letter from your Melbourne Correspondent and the valuable
article which appeared in The Times of Saturday last will, we are sure,
take Tasmanians by surprise, as they are not accustomed to have their
colony taken so much notice of, but rather called hard names and to be
otherwise “ run down. ” They were confident, however, that the time
must come, sooner or later, when their lovely island and its resources
would be properly recognized, not only by Englishmen here, but also
those in the sister colonies.
Tasmanians are, as your Coarespondent remarks, not such “go-a-head”
folks as the other Australasian colonists, but they find themselves the
better for it, and are content to work slowly but surely, rather than by
leaps and bounds and large accumulations of public debt. We venture
to state that the present financial position of the colony and its future
prospects are (as is shown by the soundness of its securities in the
London market) as good, if not better, than those of its neighbours.
As it may be useful for people contemplating emigration to Tasmania
to know that the colony is really progressive, we quote a few statistics
which may be interesting. The population, which in 1870 was 99,328,
has now reached 115,715 souls, and this without the aid of free emigra-
tion. The public debt of the colony on the 31st of December, 1879,
was £1,786,000, or £ls. 17s. per head of population, as against
£1,268,700, or £l2. 13s. Bd. per head, in 1870. The rate of taxation
per head of population in 1879 was £2. 16s. lOd. The revenue for 1880
was £437,523, against £270,128 in 1870, the value of imports for the
same periods being £1,369,223, against £792,916. The export of gold
was £199,613 against £7,475, and of tin £361,672 against £220, the
total exports being £1,511,931 in 1880 against £648,709 in 1870. If
savings-bank returns are any criterion, there is no doubt that the people
in Tasmania are progressing in the right direction, the amount at the
credit of depositors in 1880 being £310,000, as against £220,000 in 1870.
It has not hitherto formed part of the Government policy to vote
large sums of money for the encouragement of immigration, assisted
passages being granted only to persons nominated in the colony and to
good female domestic servants ; but people who are able to pay their
passage and intend to settle in the colony are furnished at this office
with a “ warrant ” entitling them to “ free grants of land ” on their
arrival. This inducement is not unfrequently taken advantage of by
retired officers of the Army and Navy and other gentlemen with mode-


rate incomes who desire to live comfortably in a colony possessing an
excellent climate under the British flag, and where there is some chance
of their children, when grown up, becoming manly and experienced
colonists.
We are, Sir, your obedient servants,
THE TASMANIAN GOVERNMENT EMIGRATION
AGENTS.
25, Queen Anne’s-gate, S.W., Oct. 19.
The following article appeared in the European Mail, of 21st
October, 1881.
SPECIAL COLONIAL NOTES.
Major Sir George Strahan, K.C.M.G., left Plymouth on October 15,
on hoard the steamer “ Cotopaxi,” to take up his duties as Governor of
Tasmania. It is a fortunate circumstance that, contemporaneously with
the departure of the gallant Major, there has appeared in the Times a
letter from its Melbourne correspondent giving a glowing description of
the colony of Tasmania, and describing the rapid progress it is making,
mainly on the strength of its mineral resources. This letter has drawn
forth a leading article on the subject, a long letter from the Rev.
Robert S. Duff, M.A., late of Evandale, Tasmania, and now residing in
London, and a shorter one from the Tasmanian Government Agents,
showing by statistics the progress the colony has made since 1870. We
have always considered it most strange that the colony whose destinies
are now entrusted to the able hands of Sir George Strahan should
receive so little attention at home. It is hardly ever spoken of even
amongst Australian colonists, but, with all its natural advantages, which
include an exquisite climate, which has justly been compared with that
of Jersey or the Isle of Wight, a charming variety of mountain and
valley scenery, an abundance of fishing with the line or net, and vast
deposits of tin, gold, and other precious minerals—we say, with all these
advantages to recommend it, one would have thought that Tasmania
would have attracted to her shores a fair proportion of the travellers,
sportsmen, capitalists, and labourers who are continually leaving the
mother country. It has, however, not hitherto done so, and it remains
to be seen how far the position of the colony will be improved under the
new Governor. Sir George has the reputation of being an able and far-
sighted administrator, and no matter what he has to do, or where he has
to go, he throws his whole heart and soul into his work. We hope that
the attention which the colony has just received in the leading London
daily will lead, if not some of “ the golden youth of this fine old
country ” to emigrate to its shores, certainly some of our labourers,
mechanics, and small farmers, who will find in Tasmania, if not an
Eldorado for rapidly amassing fortunes, a fair and promising field for
realising a competency amid conditions favourable to health and
happiness.
Information as to Passages , Sfc., can be had at the Tasmanian Emigration
Office , 25, Queen Anne’s Gate, Westminster, London, S.W.


APPENDIX.
ABEA.
Tasmania contains 16f million acres of land, of which the islands
connected with it contain million ; 4 J million acres have been sold
or granted to settlers by the Crown, leaving the Crown land property at
about 12J million acres, of which about 2,600,000 acres are leased by
settlers for sheep-runs or other purposes.
CLIMATE.
The temperature is so genial, and the air so pure, that the diseases
which in England add so much to the general death-rate have here a
minimum of intensity.
No part of the world is perhaps more favourable to infant life than
Tasmania. About nine out of every ten children survive the first year of
life, and the mortality from that age up to about fourteen years old
decreases at a wonderful rate. The deaths in 1,000 children between
3 and 14 years old only average about five per thousand annually.
The rainfall, on an average, is a little more than 22 inches, but there
are not more than 40 days on which out-door work cannot be done.
Snow seldom falls, or remains on the ground more than a few hours,
except in the elevated portions of the island. It is never too hot in
summer, nor too cold in winter, for out-door occupations to be carried on.
The readings of the thermometer at Hobart in 1879 were, in July, highest
54-0 in the shade, and lowest 32T0 on the grass; the average for the
year being, highest 65-24, lowest 37'0, the average highest in the sun
being 100-60.
POPULATION,
The population of Tasmania is 115,715, of whom 61,162 are males
and 54,553 females. The death-rate of 1880 was 16-17 per 1,000 of the
population. The black aboriginal population is extinct, the last individual,
a woman about 70 years of age, having died in 1876. The number of
houses at the date of the last Census in April, 1881, was 24,391.
By the Census of 1870 it appears that three hundred and sixteen
churches and chapels had then been erected in various parts of the Colony;
and the religious wants of the population were provided for by a large
body of earnest ministers of all denominations. Since then several places
of worship and ministers have been added.


CHIEF TOWNS.
Hobart is the capital city and seat of Government, It is situated on
the navigable River Derwent, on the south-east side of the Island, and
has a population of 21,118.
The next town of importance is Launceston, on the north side of
the Island, on the River Tamar, having a population of 12,763. There
are also many country townships, or villages, and seaports of minor
importance.
PUBLIC EDUCATION.
The system of education is under the control of a Council and a
Board of Education, nominated by the Governor. The Council hold
examinations and confer the Degree of “Associate of Arts,” and award
Scholarships. The Board have the management of the Public Schools,
appointing teachers, framing regulations, &c.
Besides four principal Grammar Schools and numerous private
establishments, there are 171 Government Schools under the Board
of Education, having over 12,000 scholars on the rolls. Several Scholar-
ships are maintained by the Colony, the best being two annual Tasmanian
Scholarships of the value of £2OO per annum each, provided by the
Government, and tenable at a British University for four years.
There are in addition a Gilchrist Scholarship, tenable at Edinburgh
or London; and several local Scholarships. Twelve Exhibitions from
the Public Schools under the Board of Education, and two under the
Council, are also awarded annually, and are tenable for four years at
Superior Schools.
Every child between the ages of 7 and 14, resident within two miles
from any Public School, must be sent to school. The teaching is entirely
unsectarian, but opportunities are given for religious instruction where
desired.
The Government Grant in aid of Public Schools in 1880 amounted
to £lB,OOO.
EXPORTS.
The total value of exports in 1880 was £1,511,931, the chief articles
for the past five years being as follows;
1876. 1877. 1878. 1879. 1880.
£ £ £ £ £
Wool .. .. 439,102 522,885 479,165 407,227 542,244
Tin .. .. 99,544 296,941 316,311 303,303 341,736
Fruit and jam .. 136,670 147,289 151,468 151,202 132,674
Timber.. .. 63,793 72,909 72,989 69,713 51,973
Gold ~ ~ 41,757 26,904 59,124 145,723 201,655
Hops .. .. 46,235 38,943 33,096 26,512 30,885
Grain .. .. 42,688 84,801 36,763 22,396 34,167
Livestock .. 31,880 17,724 19,049 38,504 23,444


£
s.
d.
Cash at time of purchase ..
3
6
8
First year ..
5
0
0
?*
Second year
.. 5
0
0
LAND LAWS.
The lowest upset price of Crown land fit for agriculture is fixed by
Act of Parliament at £ 1 an acre; and the lowest upset price of pastoral
lands at a sum equal to 12 years rental, but not less than ss. an acre.
Any person may select for purchase, by private contract with the
Government, one lot of agricultural land not exceeding 320 acres at £1
an acre, on the following terms, as exemplified to the extent of 100
acres:— £ s. d.
100 acres at 20s. .. .. .. 100 0 0
Add Ird for credit .. .. .. 33 6 8
133 6 8
„ Third and following
years, up to 14 years .. 10 0 0 a-year.
And so in proportion for any greater or smaller area than 100 acres.
Section 45 of “The Waste Lands Act” allows selectors to pay up at
any time within 14 years, and a rebate is made on the amount added fox-
credit at the rate of 5 per cent, per annum for the unexpired period of
credit.
Credit is allowed on all purchases above £l5.
When 500 acres shall have been sold in not less than 10 lots
adjoining or close to each other, the Governor-in-Council is empowered
to raise a sum not exceeding half of such purchase-money for the purpose
of constructing a road or roads in the vicinity of the lots.
After paying the expenses of the Lands and Works Department,
one-fourth of the Land Revenue and Licence Fees is set apart for the
construction of roads and bridges by the various Road Trustees.
Licences for pastoral lands are issued at rates having regard to the
class of the land and the number of sheep and cattle which can be fed
thereon, the rent being calculated on the carrying capacity of the land, at
the rate of from 4d. to Bd. per annum for eaclx sheep, or 2s. to 4s. a-head
for cattle.
FREE GRANTS OF LAND.
Persons (not free or assisted emigrants) proceeding to the colony
either as first-class or intermediate cabin passengers must apply to the
Government Agents in London (see below) for a warrant, which will
enable them, on arrival, to select 30 acres of land for himself, 20 acres
for his wife, and 10 acres for each child.
Steerage passengers will be supplied with a warrant authorizing them
to purchase lands at any of the Government auction sales, without
payment, to the value of £lB for each member of the family over 15
years of age, and £9 for each member above 12 months and under 15
years.


For
a man and his wife and all their children
under 12 years of age
£15
For
a single man ..
10
For
a single woman ..
5
Lands to be granted under these warrants must be selected within
one year after the date of issue, and the holder must reside live years in
the colony before the actual freehold title will be granted him. The land
will not be forfeited by death if any of the family remain in the colony.
ASSISTED PASSAGES.
A limited number of assisted passages are granted to labourers who
have relations residing in the Colony, and to good female domestic ser-
vants, upon the following terms :
Application for assisted passages must be made at the office of the
Government Emigration Agents.
ENGLISH AGENCIES.
Emigration Agents.
The Emigrant and Colonists’ Aid Corporation, Limited, C. Dugald
Buckler, Esq., Secretary, 25, Queen Ann’s Gate, Westminster, to whom
all applications for “ Land Order Warrants,” as well as general informa-
tion about the Colony, shoidd be made.
General Agents for Government Business.
W. C. Sargeaunt, C.M.G.; Captain M. F. Ommanney, R.E.;
E. E. Blake, Esq., Colonial Office Buildings, Downing Street,
London, S.W.
London Bankers for the Government of Tasmania.
The Consolidated Bank, 52, Threadneedle-street, London; the Bank
of New South Wales, 64, Old Broad Street, London.
TASMANIAN AGENCIES.
Immigration.
Hobart —B. Travers Solly, Esq.
Launceston—George Smith, Esq.
Lake & Si son, Printers, &c., 4, Westminster Chambers, S.W.


S. W. SILVER & Co.,
SUM COURT, 67, CORNHILL
LONDON, E.C.,
SUPPLY EVERY NECESSARY FOR USE ON BOARD SHIP AND IN THE
COLONIES, INCLUDING
CLOTHING, CABIN FURNITURE, BEDDING,
CHAIRS, TRUNKS, BOXES,
FIREARMS, Ammunition, Loading Implements, TOOLS,
&c., &c.
PASSAGES SECURED. INSURANCES EFFECTED.
LISTS OF NECESSARIES FOB VOYAGE TO AND RESIDENCE IN ALL
PARTS OF THE WORLD.
Passengers' Baggage and Goods of all hinds Received , Packed and Shipped.
CIRCULAR NOTES (IN DUPLICATE) PAYABLE ALL THE WORLD OVER.
HANDBOOKS AND MAPS to thk various colonies.
EMIGRANTS TO TASMANIA
Paying the full cost of their Passage are entitled to a
LAND ORDER WARRANT
Upon the terms stated at page 15, and those
Passengers desiring to take out Labourers or Servants
CAN BE FURNISHED WITH
BOUNTY TICKETS FOR THEM AT REDUCED FARES.
Applications for Land Order Warrants, Bounty Tickets,
Passages, and for general information about the Colony,
should he made to the Government Agents,
The Emigrant and Colonist's Aid Corporation , Limited.
C. Dugald Buckler,
35, Queen Anne’s Gate, Secretary.
W ESTMINSTER, S. W.


