



,■ :
■


Catholic Presbyterian, May, 1883.]
TASMANIA.
THE history of the Australian colonies is practically confined to the
present century. It is, therefore, not surprising that till recently
people well-informed on other subjects were contented with vague
notions of these distant territories, not realising how full of interest
they were as a scene of future empire.
Since interest in the subject began to become general, the
larger colonies Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland, South
Australia, and New Zealand —have naturally attracted chief attention.
While they have become household words, Tasmania, although starting,
next to New South Wales, earliest in the race, has hitherto been
the least flourishing of the group, and is consequently less accurately
known than most of the others. The beautiful island-colony, over-
shadowed by prosperous neighbours, holds comparatively a lowly place,
and there is danger of her just claims being partly overlooked. Her
brief and chequered story is full of varied interest, and is worth con-
sidering in view of the brighter future dawning on her shores. We
may, first of all, advert to some of the salient features of the country,
Tasmania, formerly Van Diemen’s Land, is a triangular-shaped island,
120 miles south of the Australian continent, between 40 degrees and
44 degrees south latitude, and 144 degrees and 148 degrees east longi-
tude. In extent it is 170 miles from north to south, and 160 from
east to west, with an area of over fifteen millions of acres. It is nearly
the size of Scotland. The climate is one of the most healthy and
delightful in the world. The annual rainfall averages twenty-four
inches ; the mean mid-winter temperature is about 46 degrees Fahren-
heit, and that of mid-summer, 63 degrees. There are no extremes of
heat or cold ; cattle are turned out in all seasons ; and life in the open
air may be enjoyed throughout the year. Brilliant sunshine without
oppressive glare and heat; long stretches of fair weather which can be
reckoned on from day to day ; clear, starry nights, always deliciously
cool even in the hottest seasons : these are the prevailing features. The
scenery is in harmony with the climate. There are lofty mountain ranges
lifting blue summits to the sky, magnificent forests, spacious park-like
landscape of pasture and stream, rich agricultural lands, pleasant home-
steads, picturesque villages, and the two beautiful though small cities of
Hobart and Launceston. Such are the scenes that meet the eye and
linger afterward in the memory. Tasmania is a favourite resort for
people from neighbouring colonies and travellers from a distance, and
affords a sanatorium for Indian officers. Sir Alexander Michie has
justly described the salubrity of the climate in the following terms :
“So genial are the seasons, and so pure the air, that the death-rate is
much lower than that of England, and the colonial statistics show us


[Catholic Presbyterian, May, 1883.
that nine out of every ten children survive the first year of life, and
from that age up to fourteen years old the mortality decreases at a surpris-
ing rate. The deaths between three and fourteen years old average only
about five per thousand annually.” In country districts the rate of
mortality for all ages is about ten per thousand of the population.
Many remarkable instances of longevity are found. It is often said that
people going to the colony in mature age obtain a fresh lease of life.
From a letter lately received, the present writer learned that a member
of his former congregation at Evandale, near Launceston, had just com-
pleted his one-hundredth year. Another person on the same village
communion-roll is about ninety-four. In the graveyard of the adjoin-
ing parish of Avoca there is a tombstone to the memory of a couple who
died, the husband two years before the wife, each aged ninety-eight.
The discovery of the island was made in 1642 by a Dutch navigator,
Abel Tasman, who called it after Anthon Van Diemen, Governor-General
of Batavia, where the expedition had been fitted out. It does not
appear to have been again visited for one hundred and thirty years, the
native savage in the interval enjoying undisputed possession of his
magnificent hunting-ground. The Dutchman came and saw, but left it
as he found it, a sealed book, till Captain Cook and his contemporaries
penetrated the unknown. It is a strange fact to us in this age of
crowded events, that history could transact itself so leisurely in com-
paratively recent times as to permit such a long period to elapse between
the first discovery and the settlement of Tasmania and the other
territories of Polynesia. A wise and beneficent Providence, while per-
mitting the western world a glimpse of a promised land, preserved it in
pristine solitude till it should be of greater value to over-peopled
countries. The work of exploration was further prosecuted towards the
close of the eighteenth century by a succession of adventurous navigators,
the British and French for a time dividing the honours. As in the case
of New Zealand many years later, and, indeed, as generally has
happened in modern times, the genius of British colonisation prevailed.
The rivalry between Britain and France may have hastened the
settlement of the colony. There was another more immediate cause.
When the century closed, the penal establishment at Port Jackson,
better known as Botany Bay, near Sydney, had been in existence twelve
years, and six or seven thousand prisoners having been transported to
it, “ dispersion became necessary to security, to repress alike the vices
of the convicts and the growing malversation of their taskmasters.”*
Van Diemen’s Land being an island, remote in situation, and of com-
paratively small extent, seemed well adapted to purposes of penal
restraint, and was accordingly selected to relieve Port Jackson of many
of its most dangerous felons, to be, in fact, a “ Botany Bay of Botany
Bay.” In such moral eclipse and degradation the history of the colony
began ; and, while chapters of crime and darkness cannot be blotted
* “ History of Tasmania,” by Rev. John West, vol, i. p. 27.


THE PENAL SETTLEMENT—ABORIGINES. 353
Catholic Presbyterian, May, 1883.]
from her annals, it is creditable to the Tasmania of a subsequent period
that she has recovered from this terrible nightmare of the dawn.
The first immigration took , place in 1803, when Lieutenant Bowen
brought from Sydney a party of soldiers and prisoners, landing at
Risdon on the east bank of the Derwent. Convicts and a large staff of
officers were sent out from England. Settlers from the old country
shortly arrived, and the colony advanced, attracting the favourable
notice of the British press. At the close of the Peninsular
War some hundreds of emigrants came from England with “ capital,
enterprise, and home habits,” which led to the opening up of new land
and to much general improvement. In due course there followed the
establishment of the Supreme Court, the formation of the Yan Diemen’s.
Land Company for promoting pastoral interests, the building of churches,
schools, banks, and mechanics’ institutes, as also the construction ol
roads and other public works.
One of the most noteworthy events of Tasmanian history was the
abolition of transportation, which took place only after the colony had
existed half-a-century, and after the question had long been agitated
between the home and colonial governments. In 1856 the event was
signalised by changing the name of the island from Yan Diemen’s Land
to Tasmania, in honour of its rightful discoverer. The old name of ill
omen is avoided by the residents as unpleasantly suggestive of a phase
of history there is naturally a desire to forget. It would be a mistake
to suppose that society retains appreciable marks of moral degradation
in consequence of the early convict element. A large proportion
of the prisoners were sent out for trifling offences, many of whom
on regaining liberty became respectable citizens, while some left the
colony. The statistics of crime, the security of person and property,
the tone of domestic life, and the virtue and intelligence of the people
as a whole, compare not unfavourably with average Anglo-Saxon
society anywhere. Practically there is nothing to remind one that he
lives in a land which was once a convict settlement. Bushranging
depredations have for many years been unknown.
The story of the Aborigines is another closed chapter of Tasmanian
annals ;it has on this account a specially pathetic interest. Ihere are
many questions regarding the original inhabitants which it is not easy
now to answer conclusively. Their numbers, for example, in the early
years of the century have been variously estimated, the rapidity of
their movements having rendered an accurate computation impossible. A
moderate calculation would represent them at about five thousand at the
time of the first settlement. So quickly did they fade before the pale faces
that the last of her race, Queen Truganinni, died at Hobart in May, 1876.
Had their treatment been uniformly humane from the commence-
ment of colonisation, the process of decay would have been more
gradual; but as there were numerous causes in operation, especially
such as were necessarily involved by innovations in their habits
VOL. IX. NO. LIU. 2 A


364 TASMANIA.
[Catholic Presbyterian, May, 1883
of life, it may be doubted whether it could have been quite prevented.
In consequence of continued atrocities by the blacks, an attempt was
made in Governor Arthur’s time to gather them all into Tasman’s Pen-
insula, where they could be kept and provided for. Nearly 5000 men,
including military and constabulary, engaged in the expedition for
clearing the island, by forming a cordon across it. After a great
deal of hardship and loss of time, besides a cost to Government of
£35,000, the attempt proved a ludicrous failure, the whole result
being the capture of two blacks, one of whom was an old woman.
Although the campaign failed, a measure of success attended the
efforts of Mr. G. A. Robinson, whose name is honourably connected
with the protection of the natives from 1830 to 1835. At great per-
sonal risk, he was able, by uniform kindness, to bring to Hobart about
300, nearly all that then remained, who were placed under his care in
Flinder’s Island. In 1847 forty-four survived, and in 1869 only two, —
the old queen, already referred to, and her husband, William Lannie,
better known as King Billy. When violence was no longer a cause of
their decay, their diminution rapidly continued, in consequence of the
total change in habits, the clothing and some of the vices of civilisation
producing disease to which they easily succumbed. The origin of the
natives is hid in obscurity. History does not go further back than
Tasman’s discovery in 1642. They are generally concluded to have
been a branch of the Australasian family settled in New Holland, and
probably were, intellectually and physically, among the most degraded
types of the savage races.
The discovery of gold in the neighbouring colony of Victoria in 1851
produced a social revolution in Tasmania, chiefly among the labouring
classes, —large numbers of them leaving home and occupation, crossing
the Straits “in the fierce race for wealth,” some to be successful, many
to be disappointed. The same year is memorable for the establishment
of representative government. Legislative power, as in the other
colonies, is vested in a Governor and two Houses of Parliament—the
Legislative Council, with sixteen members, and the House of Assembly,
with thirty-two members, both elective. The vice-regal term of office is
six years. The business capacity, debating power, and fairness of the
representatives, and the high character of judges and magistrates, are a
source of satisfaction, and a guarantee of liberty and justice.
There is no more pleasing feature than is presented by the system of
education. In the public schools, numbering one hundred and seventy,
instruction is compulsory, secular, and free. Perhaps instead of “ secu-
lar ” one should say “ unsectarian for Scriptural extracts are used ;
in some cases the Bible itself is in the hands of the children ; and
ministers of the different denominations may visit the schools at certain
hours for the purpose of imparting religious teaching. “By a system
of exhibitions from these schools, a certain number of pupils of both
sexes are enabled annually to proceed to the, best private schools, and


EDUCATION', POPULATION, WEALTH. 355
Catholic Presbyterian, May, 1883.]
thus qualify themselves eventually for examination for the local degree
of Associate of Arts. Two Tasmanian scholarships of £2OO a-year
each, tenable for four years at a British university, are annually
awarded to male Associates of Arts who pass a prescribed examina-
tion.” #
There is no lack of mechanics’ institutes, public libraries, and scien-
tific societies. New books, and the leading British and American
periodicals and journals arrive regularly, exercising influence on thought
and taste. The local press is conducted with enterprise and ability.
With such advantages, and with the evident desire to make the most of
them, it is not too much to say that the people are enlightened. Like
the other colonies, Tasmania is loyal to the British throne, and while
developing her own practical tendencies, she does not despise the polish
of ancient manners or the strength and elegance of British culture.
Having for a time fallen behind the other colonies in the race, Tas-
mania has been called “ Sleepy Hollow.” According to census returns
of 1881 the population is 115,651, being a gratifying increase of
16,323 since 1870. It may now be stated in round numbers at
120,000. Hobart contains over 20,000, and Launceston 12,000
inhabitants ; Latrobe, Deloraine, Longford, Westbury, Campbell Town,
Oatlands, Beaconsfield, and numerous other less populous townships
are scattered over the island at the natural centres of its agricul-
tural, pastoral, and mineral interests. The population is composed
proportionately of English, Irish, and Scotch, without almost any
admixture of foreign nationalities. During the first five years of the
past decade, the emigration exceeded the arrivals by 4381 ; but in
1876 the tide turned in favour of the colony. There are now signs of
awakened activity and enterprise, giving hope of a prosperous future.
Mineral and other resources are being vigorously developed, and by
such advantages as liberal land laws, encouragement is given to im-
migration, affording reasonable prospect of a steady, though it may not
be a rapid, increase of population. The yearly revenue and expenditure
are about £400,000 respectively. These figures represent an increase
of nearly double during the past ten years. Not many of the colonists
possess great wealth, like the squatters of Victoria and New South
Wales ; but some of the merchants and sheep farmers are in affluent
circumstances. The majority of the people are comfortable, and ex-
treme poverty is almost unknown. In an eloquent paper on Tasmania,
Past and Present,” read by the late Dr. J. L. Miller, of Launce-
ston, before the Royal Colonial Institute in London, he speaks of the
flowers and fruits in these glowing terms : —“ In my own garden,
bushels of peaches and plums of the choicest varieties have often lain
rotting beneath the trees ; while the whole seasons fruit on many
cherry-trees has dried in the sun and then fallen to the ground. . . .
Flowers grow in great profusion, and need comparatively little caie ,
* Official pamphlet, prepared for Sydney Exhibition, 1880.


[Catholic Presbyterian, May, 1883.
roses do particularly well ; and many plants that in England can only
be cultivated under glass flourish in the open air all the year round.”
All the fruits of temperate climes grow in abundance ; and, as might
be expected, the usual cereals are successfully cultivated.
Tasmania, like the colonies generally, presents special attractions to
those usually designated the working-classes, who are, of course, the
most desirable immigrants. It would exceed the limits of this paper to
attempt to give even a few illustrations from personal knowledge of
families and individuals in all parts of the island who have attained a
fair measure of prosperity, and of whom one may say with certainty,
that, had they remained at home, they could not have risen above a lot
of toilsome routine and penury. Skilled workmen are well remunerated,
and have excellent opportunities for starting business on their own
account; the heads of almost every flourishing firm belonged to this
class. We describe no Utopia. The labourer worthy of his hire gets
it, but he must labour. The outlets for his energies are manifold.
Instead of engaging in ordinary farm work or as shepherds, many pre-
fer a succession of employments as occasion offers, or as the seasons or
their own special aptitudes favour. The difficulty of obtaining good
domestic servants secures for that class excellent wages and treatment.
Next to those now described, persons with a little capital, willing to
invest in land or otherwise for moderate returns, are among the most
desirable colonists. For clerks, teachers, governesses, and warehouse
assistants there is practically no demand, the native youth furnishing a
sufficient supply ; and young Tasmania has for some time shown such a
predilection for the professions of law and medicine as probably to keep
pace with the requirements of the colony. Although comparatively few
are as yet devoting themselves to the sacred ministry, and although
there is room in all the Churches for efficient men, we should not advise
those to go out who have failed at home.
Without giving details as to the expense of living, it may be stated
generally that while, for example, meat is cheaper and clothing dearer,
the cost of the necessaries of life is not greatly different' from* that in
the old country ; and, as wages are higher, people fare better. The
most remote bush home is well supplied with wood for fuel and with
water.
It is still too soon to speculate on the peculiarities of race that the
climate and fresh surroundings of Australian life may develop. Here,
too, Tasmania will share the fortunes of the neighbouring colonies!
Definiteness of result and accuracy of observation must for generations
be affected by the constant infusion of new blood by immigration. The
descendants of the early colonists often appear less robust than were
those hardy pioneers, but the physique is not below the British average ;
and it would be rash to generalise from so limited a field of observation
as is yet available. Some characteristics, however, are already well
marked. The open-air life so general has a beneficial effect on health.


STATE OF RELIGION. 357
Catholic Presbyterian, May, 1883.]
It tends to stimulate tlie perceptive rather than the reasoning faculty,
which may account for parents believing their children quicker in
intelligence than those at home. Another feature is noteworthy as
partly resulting from climate. Without confidently asserting the
opinion, we nevertheless venture to state our impression that the native-
born are less addicted to intemperance, and that, so far as they are
concerned, drunkenness is not so likely as in Britain to be the prevail-
ing vice and curse of the country. The composite nature of the popu-
lation —English, Irish, and Scotch proportionately blended—will lead to
interesting results, which can be already traced in the thought and
habits of the whole ; for the tendency is decidedly to let traditional
features and distinguishing qualities be less prominent, and to move
forward in the line of common interest and common sympathy.
As a natural consequence, the religious character becomes more facile.
Making little of distinctive opinion is apt to degenerate into having no
very strong opinion at all ; while, on the other hand, dazzled with
material prosperity, often rapidly attained, and habituated to the
sensuous in ordinary life, men are disposed to look increasingly to the
externals of worship and less to the spirituality. Danger lies in these
two currents. Happily the thoughtful in the Churches are not blind
to it, but are seeking to demonstrate in their own conduct that loyalty
to the faith of their fathers is compatible with Christian charity, and
that the fairest worship is in the beauty of holiness.
The religious wants of the people are provided for by the usual denomi-
nations. There is an Anglican, as also a Roman Catholic bishop. The
ministers as a class are exemplary and highly respected, exercising a
worthy influence on the education, morals, and piety of the colony.
The majority are hard-working, and in country districts the discharge
of their duties involves a great amount of physical activity. The bush
minister has usually two, frequently three stations, including the
village church, at which he holds service every Sunday. These are
generally a considerable distance apart, and are reached by driving or
riding, the roads in nearly all localities admitting of the former. The
light American buggy is the favourite mode of conveyance. The day’s
duties would in most cases be represented by two or three services, and
travelling from twenty to thirty miles ; there is thus a wide field for
pastoral visitation during the week. The life is laborious, but is plea-
sant and useful when a man’s heart is in it. If a good horseman, he
will be in the saddle nearly every day, finding his way to some of the
homesteads of his people, and occasionally to remote cottages, whose
inmates perhaps seldom attend public service. There is no Established
Church. Until the passing of the State Aid Commutation Act some
twenty years ago, the clergy of the churches of England, Scotland, and
Rome were in the position of colonial chaplains, receiving their salaries
from Government. This arrangement was then discontinued, each
denomination being paid a lump sum in debentures, the interest of


358 TASMANIA.
[Catholic 1883?
which now supplements the voluntary efforts of the peoplpf who -sliow
on the whole a creditable liberality in providing for their, ministers.
There are handsome churches in Hobart and Launcestorf? and nearly all
the country districts are well supplied with suitable buildings for religious
purposes.
To Tasmania belongs the distinction of having had the first Presby-
terian minister in Australasia. He was settled as early as 1823. A
Presbytery was formed a few years later. No regular connection has
been sustained with any particular Church in the old country. The
door has ever been open to all duly-accredited Presbyterian ministers ;
and at present the pulpits are filled by representatives of the Scottish,
Irish, and Victorian Churches. It is seldom that the supply comes
direct from home. In most cases the ministers are those who, after
labouring a few years in Victoria, have accepted a call to the island
colony. It is therefore chiefly dependent on its more powerful neigh-
bour, and naturally takes a deep interest in that Church maintain-
ing the high character of its pastorate. The need of men from home
is not urgent as formerly. Only those of superior character and
attainments, of whose probable success in the old country there is no
doubt, can now be welcomed by the colonies. The hope of an effective
native ministry is yearly increasing. The larger Churches have a con-
siderable number of students under training, and even in Tasmania
there are encouraging signs in this direction. Australia, as a whole,
has practically solved the question of union. Each of the neighbouring
colonies finds one Presbyterian Church enough, and strong because it
is one. Tasmania, unfortunately, presents the anomaly of a very
small section standing apart from the rest; but it is expected that
this division will be healed at no distant date.
It must be admitted that the Presbyterian cause has been less
successful in Tasmania than in the other colonies. There are only
thirteen fully-equipped charges, and two or three mission stations.
The number of adherents probably does not exceed 10,000, while,
according to census returns, Episcopalians are over 50,000, and Roman
Catholics over 20,000. Some obstacles that seriously retarded pro-
gress have been removed ; and the Church stands with its face to the
future, eager, by the Divine blessing, to do for the colony what the
colony has a right to expect from a Church with a great name and
history like those of Presbyterianism, Fresh zeal in home and foreign
missions and increased attention to the various departments of Church
organisation are hopeful signs ; so, too, are the training of students
for the ministry for the first time in our history, renewed ardour in
working among the young, the cultivation of Christian union, and the
publication of a monthly magazine, which is an important aid in all our
work.
Within the past two years there have been unmistakable signs of
vitality and progress. The Presbytery of Tasmania, which had hitherto


Catholic Presbyterian, May, 1883.]
been the governing body of the Church, has sought further to develop
its constitution by the formation of a Synod with two Presbyteries, one
in the north and one in the south of the island. This is an important
step in advance, not only with regard to general organisation, but also
as providing a more convenient and effective arrangement for the over-
sight of congregations and districts. At the General Council held at
Philadelphia in September, 1880, the Church of Tasmania was formally
received into alliance—one of the most remote as one of the weakest
members. The connection will be inspiring and salutary. The little
Church now realises that she is, by recognised right, as she has always
been in heart, part of the Presbyterianism of the world.
The New Hebrides Mission is properly the special care of the
Australian Churches, and Tasmania last year ordained and sent her
first labourer to that field. Formerly satisfied with contributing a little
to the general fund, this large advance on previous undertakings is one
of the most hopeful features of her present attitude. Altogether, in
view of such symptoms, it is not too much to express the conviction
that, as Tasmania has unquestionably a future in the Colonial Empire
of the Southern Seas, so to the Presbyterian Church in the island,
despite a chequered past and a day of small things, there is a future
of usefulness and influence not unworthy of the land and the Church
of our fathers.
Robert S. Buff.
-—' ft? /<?BB,


livelWt fancy could invent. The distinguishing work of all /whose
has opened, is that they desire to turn their lives to/the best
account In His service. It is also a happy fact that not sex/any more
than age, dmnplexion, social position, or nationality, opens /he door to
Church privileges, but only a “ new creation ; ” it can be no accident,
therefore, in the sight of Him by whom the very hairs/of our head are
all numbered, at least two-thirds of our Church members are women
and girls. The peculiar achievement of Christian Ldve, which, through
Church ties, binds us together alike in our weakness and in our strength,
indicates that the is opened as it nevet has been before & for
Christian women in their own sphere to “ serv/ their generation by the
will of God,” as well as for men in a sphere more extended.
Within the happy wallk of the family/Circle we find the crownino-
effect of woman’s influenA The histo/y of the Church furnishes a
long list of ministers distinguished foiytheir usefulness to others, who
acknowledged their indebtedness to gosly mothers.
It is said that the future mautor is made at six years of age.
The after process is but the filWig up of previous outlines. These
years are spent in the family the atmosphere created by the
warm influence of a mother s Religion never appears so lovely to
a child as when its ardour glows in to, mother’s countenance, nor its




NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
