

Tasmania-Past and Present,
A LECTURE
GIVEN AT THE
TOWU COLCHESTER,
ON WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 3rd, 1877,
tjje IfTcmkrs of tlje (£oldjrstcr Institution,
SIR CHARLES HU
CANE, KC.M.G.,
Ex-Guvemor of the Colony;
With Map and Appendix of Information to iiUmdiny
Kin-iyrants.
(£okljtster:
PRINTED AT THE “ ESSEX STANDARD ” OFFICE,
1 877.








Tasmania-Past and Present,
A LECTURE
GIVEN AT THE
TOWIN' H-A-IjlEj, COLCHESTER,
ON WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 3rd, 1877,
Co tlje Hlemkrs of t|re Coltjjeste ITitoarg Institution,
SIR CHARLES HU CANE, K.C.M.G.,
Ex-Governor of the Colony.
Cokjtfsier:
PRINTED AT THE “ESSEX STANDARD” OFFICE.
1877.


COLCHESTER ;
PRINTED AT THE ESSEX STANDARD OFFICE, HIGH STREET.


Tasmania —||asl anb
Ladies and Gentlemen, —Since I consented to the request
of your Committee that I should give a lecture on some
subject connected with my Colonial experiences, I have not
unnaturally thought a good deal over the form it should take,
and I have decided on calling it “ Tasmania—Past and
Present,” and on making the Colony which was for six years
.
my very happy and very peaceful home, the principal subject
matter of what I have to say. It is true that during my
Tasmanian Governorship I visited the neighbouring Colonies
of Victoria, New South Wales, and South Australia, and even
found my way over a week of rolling seas as far as New
Zealand. No doubt if I were to fly hastily from one Colony to
another, I could give you a more varied, and perhaps a more
amusing lecture, but where time is limited, it is better not to
attempt to do too much, and I would rather, if I can, send
you away with a tolerably clear and definite idea of one
Colony of the group, than add to that confused and hazy
mixing up of one with another, that I have found to be so
prevalent in English society. The well-known lines in which
Ovid describes the family resemblance and the family
difference between the Nereid daughters of Doris, have been
frequently, and not inappropriately, applied to our Australian
Colonies:—
Facies non omnibus una,
Nec diversa tamen, qualexn decet esse sororum.
That is to say “All have not the same features, nor yet are
they remarkably different, but their points of resemblance
and difference, are such as those of sisters ought to be.” But
the general English rendering of these lines, so far as our
Australian Colonies are concerned, appears to me to be rather


“ One is so like t’other, we can’t tell neither from whichand
I have noticed instances of this where one has a right to look
for better things. For example, it is not so very long ago
since I was startled by seeing a heading in the Times, “ The
Australian Budget,” which, on further investigation, I found
to be a short resume of the financial position of the single
Colony of Victoria. I need hardly say that each of the six
Colonies composing the Australian group, has its separate
Government, separate Budget, and system of taxation, and
to speak of an “Australian” Budget in reference to Victoria,
is almost as great a misnomer as it would be to call the
Budget of France, or Germany, or Italy, the Budget of
Europe. When such confusion of terms appears in the lead-
ing journal, I was not in the least surprised at being asked as
I was not long ago, by a lady, whether I had not enjoyed in
Tasmania, the beautiful things they made in sugar, being a
trifling mistake, as I subsequently discovered, between Tas-
mania and Trinidad. Neither do I much wonder at a story
told me by a former Premier of New Zealand of his having
been gravely asked by a Member of Parliament of high
standing, whether he had not been Premier of New Zealand
during the Jamaica insurrection —Maori war, and Jamaica
insurrection, were, doubtless, in the view of the M.P. afore-
said, synonymous and convertible terms.
With your permission, then, I will treat this evening almost
entirely of Tasmania, adding, if there be time, a few remarks,
subsequently, on matters of more general Colonial interest.
And, in speaking of Tasmania, I will begin at the very be-
ginning, so far as that beginning is known to the civilised
world.
Tasmania then, let me say, is an island about 120 miles
below the South-Eastern extremity of Australia, from which
it is separated by Bass’s Straits. It lies between lat. 40° 45'
and 43° 35' S., and long. 144° 50' and 148° 20' E., is in shape
like a heart or an irregular triangle, and in size about two-


thirds the extent of Ireland. Its estimated area contains
about 24,000 square miles. The shores are generally hold
and rocky, especially on the West coast, which, with the
exception of Macquarie Harbour, presents one almost un-
broken range of barren cliffs of columnar basalt. On the
North coast, however, there are several fine ranges of sandy
beach, and amongst other harbours the fine estuary of the
Tamar in particular, forty miles from the mouth of which,
on the river Tamar, now stands Launceston, the second
principal town in the Colony, with a population of over 12,000
inhabitants. On the South and South-East coast there is an
almost uninterrupted series of anchorages, which for shelter,
bottom, and depth are scarcely surpassed in any other part
of the world. In particular may be mentioned D’Entrecasteux
Channel, which stretches for about thirty miles between the
South coast, and the island of Bruni, with a breadth varying
from two to eight miles, and forms the South-West entrance
to the River Derwent, at the mouth of which stands Hobart
Town, the capital of the Colony. The whole of this Channel
presents a continuous range of land-locked harbours, in the
midst of beautiful scenery, while the special harbour of
Hobart Town, I have been assured by naval officers, is
without a rival in the world for its combination of extent,
safe anchorage, and accessibility in all weathers. Tasmania
was first discovered in 1642, by Abel Jans Tasman, a Dutch
navigator, who anchored in the Dutch ship Zeehan, in a bay
on the S.E. coast, since called Frederick Hendrick’s Bay.
Tasman christened the land Van Diemen’s Land, after Van
Diemen, the Dutch Governor of Batavia, with whose daughter
Maria he was said to be deeply in love. At all events, he gave
the name of Maria to the largest of the islands he saw near the
coast, and so it is called to this very day. Whether his
devotion was ever rewarded by the hand of the lady I cannot
say, nor do I know anything more of Tasman than that he is
said to have had a wooden leg, and that a hole in the rocky


beach of Tasman’s Peninsula, of subsequent evil convict
fame, was said to be the petrified imprint of the said wooden
leg, on his first setting foot, or rather going on the stump, on
the land he had discovered. The hole is, undoubtedly, like
the hole such a stump would make, but I regard the story
myself as having been made to fit the hole, rather than the
hole as being the impression of Tasman’s, or any other man’s,
wooden leg. From that time, for 130 years, the island
appears to have been unvisited; but on the 4th of March,
1772, Marion Du Fresne, of the French navy, anchored in the
same bay; and in the following year Capt. Fumeaux, of
H.M. Ship Resolution, landed on a large island, since called
Bruni Island, on the south coast, and this would seem to
have been the first visit of an English ship to any part of Van
Diemen’s Land. In 1777 and 1778 the island was visited by
two men celebrated in England’s naval annals. In the first
year came the gallant and ill-fated discoverer Cook, destined
within two years afterwards to close his brilliant career of
exploration by death, in combat with the natives upon the
shores of Otaheite. In the second came that hot-tempered
martinet, but withal most gallant and warm-hearted sailor
Bligh, destined but a few months afterwards to become the
hero of that most interesting and most sensational narrative
of privation, suffering, and sustained courage, “ The mutiny
of the Bounty.” In 1792 Admiral D’Entrecasteux, of the
French Navy, visited the island in the Recherche and the
Esperance, with Captain Huon de Kermandee as second in
command. The Huon River, Port Esperance, Recherche Bay,
and last, not least, D’Entrecasteux Channel, of which I
have already made honourable mention, are names which
serve as records of this visit, which would seem to have
been one of considerable duration. Six years later on comes
a memorable date in old Tasmanian annals, for in that year
Dr. Bass and Lieut. Flinders, of the Royal Navy, sailed in an
open boat through the straits known since as Bass’s Straits,


and discovered Tasmania to be an island. Up to that time
it had always been supposed to be a part of the main continent
of Australia, and a few days since I found an old globe which
had been banished from my library to the nursery, and
which bore the date of 1782, in which Australia ends with an
oblong shaped promontory, called Diemen’s Land, and Bass’s
Straits have no existence. I sincerely trust that this ancient
globe is not employed in the instruction of the younger
branches of my family in modern geography. In 1803 Lieut.
Bowen sailed from Sydney, in New South Wales, went up
the River Derwent, to a place since called “ Rest Down ” or
“ Risdon Creek,” some three miles above the site of the future
Hobart Town, and landed at a remarkably picturesque spot,
of which photographs are now sold in Hobart Town as the
landing-place of the first Tasmanian settlers. This was the
first occupation of the Island on behalf of Great Britain, and
on the 19th of February in the following year, Col. David
Collins landed with a party of marines and convicts where
Hobart Town now stands, having been appointed the first
Lieut.-Govemor under the Governor of New South Wales.
New South Wales was in fact at that time Australia, so far as
England was concerned, and the Governor was virtually
Governor-General of Australia. The settlement in Van
Diemen’s Land was made with a view of relieving New South
Wales of a large portion of its convicts, and especially of
transplanting to more suitable country the convict establish-
ment on Norfolk Island. From this date of 1804, as Mr.
Anthony Trollope points out in his resume of the early history
of the Colony, down to 1856, when responsible Government
was established in its present form, the history of Van
Diemen’s Land is purely the history of a convict establish-
ment—
“ How to manage convicts, how to get work out of them with the
least possible chance of escape, how to catch them when they did escape,
how to give them their liberty when they made no attempt to escape,


how to punish them, and how not to punish them, how to make them
understand that they were simply beasts of burden, reduced to that
degree by their own vileness, and how to make them understand at the
same time that if under the most difficult circumstances for the exercise
of virtue they would cease to be vicious, they might cease also to be
beasts of burden; these were the tasks which were imposed on the
Governors and their satellites, not only on all officers, military and civil,
not only on the army of gaolers, warders, and such like, which was
necessary, but also on every free settler, and on every free man in the
Island. For no one who had cast in his lot with Van Diemen’s Land
could be free from the taint of the establishment, or unconnected with
the advantages which it certainly bestowed,” —(Trollope, Australia and
New Zealand, vol. 2, page 9).
In the earlier days of the settlement’s existence there seems
to have been a periodical scarcity of provisions, and con-
sequent high prices. For instance, in the year 1804, I see
that flour was quoted at .£ll2 a ton; while in 1807 the wheat
crop failed, and wheat rose to £4 a bushel, or £B2 a quarter.
It is somewhat amusing now to read that a Garrison Order
was then issued forbidding the settlers to charge more than
£4 a bushel. No doubt the corn-producing portion of the
settlers were very indignant at this arbitrary violation of all
the laws of political economy; but I think that if our Essex
farmers at this moment could make sure of £4 a bushel for
their wheat, they would submit cheerfully to the imposition
of a maximum, Adam Smith, Stuart Mill, and all other
political economists notwithstanding. I should imagine,
also, that in those days tea could hardly have been the
universal Australian drink that it now is, as in 1817,1 observe
it quoted at 15s. a lb. at the beginning of the year, rising
to 40s. in the May following, and so continuing for a con-
siderable time. But scarcity of provisions was not the only
difficulty with which the youthful settlement had to contend.
The records of the time contain frequent notices of hostile
collisions between the settlers and the Aborigines, who at
that time were estimated, I believe, at between 4,000 and
5,000 in number. In anything like an open encounter the
Aborigines were pretty sure to get the worst of it, and, indeed,


in 1815 they were killed in such numbers that Governor Davy
issued a proclamation remonstrating against the unnecessary
slaughter, but frightful tales are still current of their re-
taliations upon outlying settlers and their wives and families.
As, however, time went on, the convicts who escaped and
took to the bush seemed to have inspired far greater dread
than the blacks, and no doubt many very horrible stories
of murder and outrage are very rightly fathered upon them.
But to narrate the story of the deportation to Flinder’s
Island in Bass’s Straits, and gradual extinction of the blacks,
or to give a selection from the chronicles of the bushrangers
would either of them require a volume to itself. Suffice it
to say, with respect to the blacks, that when I arrived in
Tasmania, but one male and one female survived of the
entire aboriginal race, that the gentleman died soon after I
came to the Colony, and the lady soon after I left it, so that
the race is now actually extinct. The man, who was a
sailor, known as William Lanne, or King Billie, I never saw;
but the woman, whose native title was Queen Trucaninni,
but who was better known by the more poetical name of
Lalla Rookh, was a very quaint looking little old lady of over
seventy years of age, under four feet in height, and of much
the same measure in breadth. She was well cared for by
the Colonial Government, and every now and then paid us a
visit of ceremony at Government House, where she would
laugh and chuckle like a child over a piece of cake and a
glass of wine, and occasionally favour us with a few words in
English. On one occasion she eyed me intently for some
moments, and then burst into a laugh like that of a Christy
Minstrel, and said “ This fellow he too much jacket,” meaning
thereby that I had become stouter than comported with her
notions of viceregal dignity. At my farewell Levee she sat
in great state, and, dressed in very gaudy coloured raiment,
felt and looked no doubt every inch a Queen, in her own
estimation. If such has been the peaceful ending of the


last of the Aborigines; not less peaceful promises to be that
of the last of the bushrangers, who, after baying, I believe,
been more than once sentenced to death, has survived after
all to publish his adventures in a good sized volume, and to
live in easy and dignified retirement upon a small farm of his
own, near Hobart Town. But, if the truth must be told, the
earlier period of the history of Tasmania as a convict settle-
ment is not a very pleasant page of history for Englishmen
to contemplate. If the outrages which the escaped convicts
frequently committed on the settlers were horrible, I very
much fear that for many years the discipline of the two
principal penal settlements of Port Arthur and Macquarie
Harbour was well calculated to develop all that was brutal,
and extinguish the faintest spark of good in those who were
its victims. The station of Macquarie Harbour on the west
coast was the one to which only the most abandoned and
desperate criminals were sent. From all I have ever heard
or read of it, I should think it could have been little short
of a hell upon earth. Scarcely any other punishment for the
disobedient was known than heavy irons and the lash, and
the more insubordinate a man was, the more he was lashed
and the heavier were his irons, till either his spirit was utterly
broken, or he became a human fiend. At the entrance to
Macquarie Harbour might well have been written the last
line of the inscription over the entrance to Dante’s Inferno,
“ Leave hope behind, all ye who enter here.” Escape by sea
was impossible, while by land it was separated from any
settled portion of the island by some sixty miles of almost
impenetrable bush, through which ran a single ill-defined
track. If a party of convicts escaped and kept to the track,
they were sure to be hunted down, brought hack, and lashed
and ironed more severely than ever. If they left the track,
and plunged into the bush, they either died of starvation, or,
worse horror still, lived by cannibalism, drawing lots which
should die in turns for the need of his companions. Such


was Macquarie Harbour; but eventually Macquarie Harbour
was abandoned, and Port Arthur remained the one great
Penal Settlement of the Colony. This station is situated on
Tasman’s Peninsula, at the South-East extremity of the
Island, which Peninsula is an irregularly formed piece of
land, about twenty-five miles in length and twelve in breadth,
indented by various bays and creeks of the sea, very hilly, and
almost entirely covered with primeval gum-tree forests. It is
connected with the rest of Tasmania by a very narrow isthmus
of land, called Eagle Hawk Neck, which is washed on one
side by the South Pacific Ocean, and separated on the other
from the opposite shore by a narrow creek, which, near the
neck, so far as I remember, could scarcely have been more
than a quarter of a mile across. At all events, the swim over
would have been child’s play for a good swimmer, but the
creek had a reputation for swarming with sharks. When a
prisoner attempted to escape from Port Arthur, or any of its
offshoots on the Peninsula, he made at once for the Neck,
which was always kept closely guarded by armed men and
savage dogs, and a prisoner’s escape was promptly signalled
to the Neck by telegraph. Of course, in the day-time the
runaway’s chance of eluding his guards’ vigilance would be
slender indeed, and at night the dogs were kept on the alert
by their kennels, which were usually large casks, being
turned bottom upwards. The dog might sit on the top of his
abode, and bay the moon or bark himself hoarse, but into his
home and bed he literally never went till morning and day-
light did appear. Thus the luckless runaway had his choice
of running the gauntlet between men and dogs on land, and
sharks in the water, and I believe that the last was by far the
most dreaded alternative. If, however, his foes were baffled
and he reached the opposite land, he still had many a weary
mile of bush to fight through before he could near the haunts
of men. Some of the stories of escape from Port Arthur are
hardly less horrible than those from Macquarie Harbour, and


in earlier days I believe that the discipline of the Settlement
was hardly less severe. But when I first made acquaintance
with Port Arthur, those evil days had long since passed away.
For several years previously, an intelligent and humane
Civil Commandant had ruled over the Peninsula, and the
discipline of the place was on a par with that of our best-
regulated English Prison and Convict Establishments. The
use of the lash had long ago been discontinued; all the able-
bodied convicts were employed in useful work, in making
their own clothes and shoes, in cutting timber and firewood,
or in cultivating a farm, which supplied no small portion of the
food of the Establishment. The imperial convicts that once
had numbered thousands, had dwindled away to ninety; when
I left Tasmania, there were but thirty-five, and Port Arthur
itself had been handed over to the Colonial Government.
Though they may maintain it for a while on a very limited
scale as a prison and pauper establishment of their own, yet
the days of the once notorious Convict Settlement are
drawing to a close; the Peninsula, I am sure, will be shortly
abandoned, and the Settlement of Port Arthur will in all
probability crumble into ruin.
If it were but in England, I could fancy an enterprising
Hotel Company at once pouncing upon the Settlement and
converting the huge Penitentiary into a vast Hotel, with all
modern appliances and comforts. I could fancy railway
trains and daily steamers bringing crowds of excursionists.
I could fancy the shores of the Harbour covered with lodging-
houses and bathing machines, and the Harbour itself dotted
with yachts and pleasure boats, bent on exploring the lovely
scenery of the coast, or enjoying the excellent sea-fishing.
For, indeed, apart from its melancholy associations, Port
Arthur is really a beautiful spot, and it would be difficult to
find throughout the world bits of grander coast scenery than
are to be met with on Tasman’s Peninsula, and especially in
the neighbourhood of Eagle Hawk Neck. Even the Prison


establishment itself has the outward appearance, as Mr.
Trollope has well described it, of a large clean, well-built
village, with various factories, breweries, and the like. The
Church, with its tall and tapering spire, was by far the most
thorough English looking country church I came upon in the
Colonies, while close by it nestles a charming little cottage,
built for the use of the Governor, with a verandah running
round it covered with roses and other creepers—just such
a cottage as some fond and romantic Edwin and Angelina
would select for their life-long bower of bliss. It was difficult
indeed to believe as one looked from the cottage verandah
upon the lovely Harbour, and cast one’s eyes upon the sur-
rounding scenery, that so charming a spot had been for so
many years the abode of so much crime, and so much
suffering. It was difficult to believe that even at that moment
there were confined at a few yards distance from where I
was, a last residum of the most desperate and untamable
ruffians to be met with in criminal annals, a record of whose
life, whether in prison or out of it, would make the blood run
cold. Truly it was one of those scenes,
“Where every prospect pleases,
And only man is vile.”
But yet a few years more, and the vileness of man will cease
to pollute it, and then prison building, spired Church, and
verandah’d cottage, will crumble into dust, to be visited only
at rare intervals by some occasional excursionist. Yet as
decades roll by, and the population of our vast Colonial
Empire draws onward to that 80,000,000 prophesied for it in
the year 1955, by Mr. Forster, my fancy of what would have
been Port Arthur’s English future may yet be realised, and a
flourishing Harbour of commerce, or a fashionable watering-
place rise where once stood that which Tasmanians now
reproachfully stigmatise as the plague-spot of their country.
But the history of the Colony as a convict settlement had
its brighter side also. It must not be supposed that all the


men and women sent out from England were locked up at
Port Arthur or Macquarie Harbour, or even employed upon
road-making and other Government works under close sur-
veillance. On the contrary, by far the greater majority both
of men and women were assigned out as servants to the free
settlers, who were responsible for their custody. There were
no doubt to be found amongst those so assigned, incorrigibly
idle and vicious servants, and amongst the free settlers
extremely harsh and tyrannical masters, and when a man of
harsh and tyrannical disposition chose he could make things
very uncomfortable for an assigned servant. For instance,
he could, and did not unfrequently, for some slight breach of
discipline despatch him to a neighbouring Magistrate with a
brief and pithy note to this effect—“ Dear Sir, please give
the bearer of this three dozen, and return him to yours
truly,” and the neighbouring Magistrate very rarely, I
imagine, refused to see that the order was executed. But
there is also no doubt that many of the masters were humane
and kind in their servants’ treatment, and were well served
in return for their humanity and kindness. Often during my
six years’ residence did I listen to laments from old settlers
thatthose “good old times” had passed away, when the labour
assigned to them was not only plentiful in quantity but
excellent in quality, as compared with the free labour of
the present degenerate days. It must be remembered that
in those times men were sent across the seas from the
mother country for comparatively trivial offences, for which
now a few months’ imprisonment at home would be reckoned
an ample punishment. Many an able-bodied and naturally
industrious labourer, who through sheer ignorance, had been
induced to join in some machine-breaking riot, or other act of
insubordination, left his country with the stigma of convictism
attaching to his name, and brought his strong arms and not
unwilling hands to till the soil and reap the harvest for an
Antipodean master. There is no doubt, too, that many of


the men so sent ont upon short sentences, or who were even
nominally sentenced for life, and subsequently pardoned, not
merely became free and independent, but rose also to wealth
and respectability, and even filled positions supposed to
confer honour on the holder. I found also that the ladies
were more especially given to recall those days, with a sigh
of regret that they had passed away. Those who were
mistresses in those times of house and home regretted the
loss of a constant supply of excellent female servants, while
those who were then young and unmarried had an even
pleasanter recollection. They thought of the days when
Hobart Town and Launceston between them were the head
quarters of two regiments of Her Majesty’ Service, when the
barracks and the streets re-echoed to the strains of martial
music, and there was no lack of red-coated partners at the
balls given at Government House and elsewhere. Nor can
it be said that the Colony did not rapidly advance in material
prosperity. In those days Hobart Town in the South and
Launceston in the North developed into large and flourishing
towns, with good Schools, and other public institutions, and
it was convict labour that connected them by 120 miles of
macadamised roads, that are certainly not surpassed, even if
they are equalled, by any of the most celebrated coach roads
in England. The maintenance of the transportation system
alone necessitated an annual Imperial expenditure of .£350,000
in the Colony. Settlement progressed with great rapidity,
and with equal rapidity the settlers waxed rich. The energy
and enterprise of Batman, Gellibrand, Henty, and Fawkner
led them across Bass’s Straits to the opposite mainland,
where they identified their names inseparably with the first
foundation of that which has since grown into the most
populous of all the Australian Colonies, under the name of
Victoria. Where the rival parties of Batman and Fawkner
forty years ago sheltered themselves in two sod huts, and
selected a site for settlement, now stands Melbourne, a city,


by tlie last census, numbering with its suburbs, over 206,000
inhabitants, a city whose rapidity of growth is without
parallel, as I fairly believe, in the history of the world.
While Tasmanian enterprise was thus extending itself to
“fresh woods and pastures new,” and founding a Colony
destined in the future to become the home of many millions
of the English race, Tasmanian, or they would then be called,
Vandemonian, sheep and horses, Yandemonian wool, wheat,
and fruit of all kinds were in high demand amongst their
Australian neighbours. But as the country thus waxed fat,
so stronger and stronger grew the inclination of the settlers
to kick at the conditions still imposed on them by the
Imperial Government with respect to transportation. “It
“ began to be unendurable to them that their beautiful island,
“ the sweetest in climate, the loveliest in scenery, the richest
“ in rivers and harbours, the most accessible of all Great
“ Britain’s eastern Colonies should be known to the world
“ only as Great Britain’s gaol. So Tasmania spoke her mind,
“ and of course had her way, as has been the case with
“ all Great Britain’s children ever since the tea was thrown
“ over at Boston.” [Trollope, vol. 2, p. 3.) How long the
Imperial Government would have continued to hold out I
cannot say, but in the middle of the agitation came the
great gold discoveries in Victoria, and transportation to
the Australian Colonies was at an end, save to the remote
settlement of Western Australia. When every one who could
muster enough to buy a pickaxe and shovel was rushing to
the diggings of Ballarat and Bendigo at the rate of 500 a
day, when public offices were deserted, ships left unmanned,
domestic service utterly repudiated, sheep shearers on strike
for £7 a day as a minimum, the Imperial Government
naturally hesitated to send further ship-loads of ruffianism
from the mother country. Indeed, things for a time were bad
enough as they were, for when the news of the gold discoveries
reached Van Diemen’s Land and New South Wales, the


•convict element, both male and female, began rapidly to pour
into Victoria, with what effect upon the social and moral
condition of the new settlement may be easily imagined.
Robbery and murder, before almost unknown, became every-
where common, and even in the close vicinity of Melbourne,
on the public road, an unprotected traveller was as safe to be
invited to “ stand and deliver” as he would have been upon
Hounslow Heath in the last century. All this time, too, men,
women, and children, at the rate of fifty, sixty, and even
seventy thousand a year were landed from the British Islands
on the shores of Port Philip, of whom by far the greater
portion were doomed on their arrival to bitter disappointment.
Not only were they destitute of all employment, but all the
necessaries of life rose rapidly to the most exorbitant prices.
In the absence of any accommodation in Melbourne itself,
they were forced to become dwellers in tents outside it, and
this was the origin of the once notorious Canvas Town, an
encampment of thousands of families crowded together with-
out any order or sanitary arrangements, and consequently the
scene of much disease, suffering, and death. Many are the
quaint stories told of the rush to the diggings in those days,
and of the reckless extravagance of the diggers. In the town
of Geelong, for instance, it was said that but one man was left,
and he had but one leg, which was tied by a rope to a post;
but at last the man’s struggles broke the rope, he hobbled
after his two-legged fellow-citizens, and for some considerable
time the male population of Geelong was literally left without
a leg to stand upon. I myself, too, was told upon good
authority of a fortunate digger who came over on a holiday
from Melbourne to Hobart Town with his pockets full of
gold. The day after his arrival he swore that none should go
upon wheels that day in the whole town but himself, so he
hired every available carriage, omnibus, cab, and cart in the
place, and was driven himself through the streets, followed by
a long and somewhat nondescript procession of empty vehicles.


Haying accomplished this feat, and having feasted and rioted
during the day to his heart’s content, at eventime he found
his way to the wharf where he had landed, and having yet
several sovereigns left in his pockets, he literally made
ducks and drakes of his money till the last coin vanished in
the water. What became of him then, whether he imitated
the example of the elderly gentleman who sat by the side of
a murmuring stream, and followed his cane, wig, and hat
into its depths, I was not informed, nor must I lose sight of
the main reason why I first introduced the subject of the
Victorian gold discoveries.
It was no doubt owing to the social chaos which they
caused in the first instance, that in 1854 transportation to
Van Diemen’s Land became a thing of the past, and shortly
afterwards Van Diemen’s Land itself became Tasmania. But
this was not the only great change which befell the Colony.
With the cessation of transportation ceased the absolute
necessity for its being governed directly from home, and there
was no apparent reason why the wish of the Colonists for a
responsible Government of their own should not he granted.
So in 1856 Tasmania ceased to he a Crown Colony, and
blossomed by degrees into a full-blown Constitution of her own
with a Legislative Council of fifteen members, answering to
our House of Lords, and a Legislative Assembly of thirty
members, answering to our House of Commons. She also
tasted the first delights of freehold and household suffrage, of
electoral districts, and the Ballot. But in return for these
boons she made one not altogether unimportant sacrifice, for,
of course, with the cessation of transportation there was a
cessation also of .£850,000 annual imperial expenditure.
Then, of course, there was an end to road-making, and
other useful public works, save at the expense of the
Colony, or in other words with an expenditure raised by local
taxation. So it fell out that within a very short time
after Van Diemen’s land became Tasmania, a reaction of


feeling began to take place, and many of the hottest anti-
transportationists began to think that they had been some-
what in a hurry. They began to doubt whether after all
they had not killed the goose that laid the annual golden
egg, and from that time till the day I arrived in the Colony,
and through the first half of the time I lived there it was
almost looked upon as a bad compliment to their Colony by
many Tasmanians, if you did not condole with them on
its hopeless depression; and inevitably approaching ruin.
During the latter half of my residence the force of cir-
cumstances got too strong, and the signs of returning
prosperity too evident for this complaint to be general; but
even so the tone of many reminded me of the compliment
paid by a friend to a well-known gentleman of very cada-
verous aspect on his improved appearance, “ I never saw you
looking better, nor any man looking worse.” Now, whether
the Tasmanians were right as a matter of policy in going in
as they did for the cessation of transportation, and a full-
blown Constitution all at once is no doubt a question open to
a considerable amount of argument on both sides. Apart
from the sentimental aspect of the question, in which my
sympathies would go with the Colonists, there is no doubt
that the sudden withdrawal of the Imperial expenditure,
followed as it soon after was by the cessation of the Victoria
gold fever, and a consequent heavy fall of the high prices
which had prevailed throughout the Australian Colonies, did
produce a very considerable depression. But since then nigh
twenty years had passed away, and I must offer my humble
opinion in the first instance, that if Tasmania is ever ruined,
it will mainly be the fault of her own Government, and of
her own people, and not of the cessation of transportation
and Imperial expenditure. Secondly, I must maintain that
not only is she not near to ruin yet, but that far younger
men than I am will never live to see the day when ruin will
befall her. That in common with all new countries she will


have her ups and her downs, her years of fatness and of lean-
ness, is certain enough, but that in spite of all this tendency
to croak, her people will put their shoulders to the wheel
when required to fight through their difficulties, is to my
mind also, an equal certainty.
In point of fact, all the time Tasmanians were thus with
open mouths proclaiming their ruin, the credit of their Colony
stood high and unimpeached in the London market, they had
contrived to make a line of forty miles of railway through the
finest of their agricultural districts, and, not content with the
best coach road in the world, were negociating for the con-
struction of a main line of 120 miles, which has since been
completed, between Hobart Town and Launceston. Without
the aid, too, of Imperial protection they have been able to
embellish their two principal towns with several handsome
public buildings, while the private munificence of the mem-
bers of the Church of England has reared in Hobart Town a
Cathedral, worthy in every respect of being the great central
parish Church of the Diocese. They have been able also to
open up fresh tracts of country, to make roads and bridges, to
span arms of the sea with causeways, to realize, in short,
many of those works enumerated in Pope’s well-known
lines—
“ Bid harbours open, public ways extend,
Bid temples worthier of the God ascend,
Bid the proud arch the dangerous flood contain,
The mole projected break the roaring main,”
Works such as these, the poet goes on to say, are “ imperial
works, and worthy kings,” and in my opinion they are
certainly not such works as we should look to find proceeding
in a country that is in a state of premature decay, and
verging upon ruin. I do not believe, then, in any great
financial or other catastrophe impending over Tasmania.
Nor do I believe in the ultimate ruin of any country which
undoubtedly possesses great and comparatively undeveloped
resources, and which, beyond all others upon earth, save,


perhaps, portions of New Zealand, is to my mind suited to be
the home of English men, women, and children. And this
leads me from the narrative of Tasmania’s past and present
position, to attempt to give some little description of the
country itself, its climate, scenery, productions, and general
resources.
It is a fact, perhaps not generally known, that considerably
more than half Tasmania is as yet uninhabited, settlement
being confined to its Eastern, Northern, and North-Western
portions. In six of the eighteen Counties into which the
Island is divided, I should doubt whether a single human
being has a permanent local habitation, while several other
large tracts of country are to be found uninhabited, and, save
for the report of an occasional land-surveying or gold-pro-
specting party, almost unknown. The last published volume
of the Statistics of the Colony, that for 1875, gives the total
population at 103,663, and the total acreage at 16,778,000,
while the number of acres sold or granted on Crown leases
up to the end of last year was only 4,024,808. The high
mountain ranges by which the Colony is intersected, have
hitherto proved a great bar to settlement, in addition to
which the reports made from time to time of the most
solitary of these regions, go to show that they contain many
tracts unfit either for agricultural or pastoral purposes.
The settled districts of the country contain several fine tracts
both of pastoral and agricultural lands, both in the North,
South, and East, the most extensive of the latter being the
district in the North running fi’om Launceston to the town-
ship of Deloraine, through the heart of which runs, as I
think I have already mentioned, some forty-five miles of
railway. Beyond Deloraine, a considerable line of agri-
cultural settlement has extended itself along the North-West
coast, running to a promontory called Circular head, within
forty miles of Cape Grim, the furthest North-Western ex-
tremity of the Colony. There are also in this part of the


Colony several fine tracts of agricultural soil, upon which,
no doubt, in process of time, settlement will take place.
The soil is of a rich chocolate colour, and is admirably
adapted to grow both grain, potatoes, and root crops. There
is also in the North-Eastern County of Dorset a district
called the Ringarooma District, in which a considerable
amount of settlement has already taken place, and in which
there are also large unreclaimed tracts of fine agricultural
and pastoral country. The drawbacks to settlement are the
present very imperfect means of communication, and the
huge gum-tree timber, and dense under scrub of tree fern,
musk, and other shrubs with which the country is covered.
The under scrub rises often to more than forty feet in height,
and any one wishing to penetrate it has to hew his way
through with an axe. The lowest upset price of Crown land,
such as I am describing, which is fit for agriculture, is fixed
by Act of Parliament at £1 an acre, and the lowest price
of pastoral lands at a sum not less than ss. an acre. Any
person wishing to buy land may select for purchase, by
private contract with the Government, one lot of agricultural
land not exceeding 320 acres at =£l an acre, and he may
pay for his purchase by a system of instalments extending
over fourteen years. Newly-cleared land, such as I have
been speaking of, will, in favourable seasons, grow very
abundant crops, especially of oats or potatoes. I see that a
Paper of information for intending emigrants, issued last year,
under the authority of the Tasmanian Government, gives the
average crop per acre from such land at close upon 4 quarters
of either wheat, barley, or oats, and from 3 to 10 tons of pota-
toes. These, however, the paper goes on to say, have been
very largely exceeded in good seasons and good situations, as
much as 60 bushels of wheat, 60 bushels of barley, 100 bushels
of oats, 15 tons of potatoes, 37 tons of carrots, and 70 tons of
mangolds having been known before now. Not only in
quantity, but in quality also, is the grain of Tasmania all


that a farmer can desire, and altogether it is quite possible
to paint a very attractive picture of agricultural felicity. I
have no wish to mar the effect by throwing in unnecessarily
any darker touches of colouring, but it is as well to remember
that a man who purchases, let us say, from 50 to 100 acres
of such land has first of all got to clear it—that the operation
will cost him at least from £4 to £5 per acre, and can at best
be but a very gradual one. He must begin by ringing the
bark of all his huge standing timber trees, and burning his
under-scrub, after which he hoes, or, as they call it there,
“ chips in,” his first crop upon land which bears about as
much resemblance to a well-farmed English corn-field as does
the back of a porcupine, with its bristles up, to the smooth
and polished crown of a bald man’s head. He will get little
or no return for his labour for the first two years; he will
have to wage constant war against the inroads of the briar
and the thistle, and, worst and most dreaded foe of all,
against the ravages of rust in his wheat. Even if Nature
favour birri in the growth of his crops, he has to get them to
market as best he can over bush tracks, in comparison with
which an English fallow field newly steam ploughed is as the
freshly-laid wood pavement of Piccadilly. He must have
learned, too, before he begins his life in the bush, to be his
own smith, his own carpenter, his own horse-breaker, and it
would be well if he also knew how to be his own doctor and
surgeon. I remember well on one occasion meeting a
bullock dray jolting along a road such as I have described, in
which an old lady sat fastened in a chair, with an expression
of much agony depicted in her countenance. On enquiry I
found that she had had a fall, and dislocated her shoulder, and
they were taking her in quest of the doctor of the district,
whom they hoped to hear of somewhere within a radius of sixty
miles. Fortunately, before they had gone twenty, they fell
in with a doctor who was making a non-professional tour in
the neighbourhood, and I was not surprised to hear that the


said medico required the aid of a rope and pulley and four men
to reduce the dislocation. Had the unfortunate victim gone
the whole of the anticipated journey, I should think that a
seven-horse-power steam-engine at least would have been
necessary.
I have often thought, while riding in summer on the bush
track cut through one of these primeval forests, that the
settler who hardens his heart, and strikes the first blow with
his axe, on the first tree of his newly-purchased allotment,
had not only need be the most muscular of muscular
Christians, from the hair of his head to the soles of his feet,
but had need also be a very Mark Tapley in his determination
to be jolly under the most discouraging circumstances. Ido
not say that they do not make themselves as jolly as can be
expected. Ido not say that many a hardy settler in these
districts has not done battle with, and routed his enemies
with signal success, and fought his way manfully to inde-
pendence. All I say is, that such a settler has need of his
fullest strength of muscle and sinew to fight his battle, and
that his victory must be won by the strength of his arm, and
the sweat of his brow, and by constant, unremitting, un-
flinching work. Yet, hard and unremitting as the toil may be,
I am sure that its load is not seldom lightened to the man who
is engaged in it, by the sense that the house in which he lives,
and the land which he cultivates, is his own. It has been
well said, that the house which we build with our own hands
is always a palace, and the pioneer who thus wins a territory
for himself and rears his palace in its midst is doing a noble
duty by the country of his adoption, and contributing his
share to its material wealth and progress. No sentiment has
been more often quoted than that of Dean Swift, that the
man who succeeds in making two blades of grass grow where
only one grew before, does more to benefit mankind than the
whole race of politicians. What then must be his rank
amongst the benefactors of mankind who wrenches the soil


of his country inch-by-inch from the grasp of the primeval
forest, and converts the tangled wild wood into smiling
corn-fields rich in golden grain. I can only say that from
the bottom of my heart I honour and respect men who are
so engaged, and that there is no portion of my life in Tasmania
which I remember with a more genuine interest than my
journeys to these remote bush Settlements. I remember
well the pleasant character of the journey itself, and the
varied nature of the scenery through which we passed in
each day’s forty or fifty miles ride. Sometimes our path
would suddenly emerge from the forest and lead us by the
sea-side, along the edge of beetling rocks, where one might
almost say as Edgar did of the Cliffs of Dover, that —
“ The murmuring surge
That on the unnumbered idle pebbles chafes
Cannot be heard so high.”
Then a scrambling descent of horse and man down a pre-
cipitous gully would land us on a tract of solid and unyielding
sea-sands over which we could gallop merrily for miles at a
stretch, and which in some remote Tasmanian future are
doubtless destined to be crowned with Antipodean Brightens
or St. Leonards. Then a turn inland would plunge us once
more from the noontide glare into the dense and sunless
forest depths, with the lofty gum-trees overhead almost
shutting out the light of day, and the tree fern below growing
to its fullest height and in its most luxuriant beauty. Not
even the cry of a solitary bird would break the stillness of
these realms of perpetual silence, as we threaded our way
slowly for many miles along the narrow track, the sole sound
heard being the tramp of our horses, and our own frequent
and earnest exhortations to them to hold up as they tripped
over the stubs and roots with which the tracks are so thickly
studded. Then perhaps the sound of an axe would strike on
the ear, and the track would emerge upon a small patch of
newly cleared and cultivated ground, in the middle of which


was the hut of the settler, who could boast he was monarch
of all he surveyed. The man had always a kindly and loyal
greeting for His Excellency the Governor, and his wife, as a
rule, had tea ready to offer for the refreshment of our party.
Then as the shades of evening began to close over us, would
come the approach to some little seaside town or harbour,
and the reception of His Excellency by the loyal inhabitants
of the district. The character of this reception was almost
invariably the same. The Governor was met about a mile
from the township by a number of mounted horsemen, who
as he rode up gave him three cheers, and then turning right
about face, invited him to follow, at a smart trot, close at
their heels, giving him, at the same time, the full benefit of
the terrific dust storm raised from the sandy road by their
horses’ hoofs. I confess that as a general rule lam not par-
tial to dust, especially when it is a cross between that of a
brickfield in redness, and a colliery in blackness, and the dust
of a Tasmanian bush track presents, as a general rule, a
nicely balanced admixture of both these elements. But I
remembered how some twenty years ago the loyal inhabitants
of Colchester paid His Royal Highness the late lamented
Prince Consort precisely the same compliment on a far larger
scale between Colchester and the Park of Wyvenhoe, and how
His Royal Highness’s Field Marshal’s uniform resembled a
miller’s coat in whiteness on his arrival at the Park gates. So
I looked on the dust as necessary to give a finishing touch to
all loyal demonstrations, and learnt to estimate the loyalty
of the demonstrators by the density of the cloud they could
succeed in raising. For the rest I remember how I was struck
by the patient energy which these remote settlers displayed
in contending with the many difficulties of their position, and
the general absence of a desponding tone, which on my first
arrival, I found far more prevalent in the older and more
settled districts. Now and then a man would shake his head
and rue the day on which he had ever purchased his allot-


ment. But nearly all the addresses presented to me spoke
confidently of future progress and prosperity—" If our own
Government would only do more in helping us to improve our
means of communication to open up our country, if the
Victorian Government would only modify its prohibitory
duties on our timber and the produce of our soil, we should do
well enough,” was the general cry. lam hound to say that
both those “ if’s,” in my humble opinion, were based upon
reason and justice, and commanded my entire sympathies.
But this is a subject on which I may have a word or two
to say presently, and in the meanwhile I must quit the settlers
in the remote and newly opened districts of the Colony, with
my hearty good wishes for their future welfare. If I have
seemed to dwell at some length on my visit to these districts,
it is because I think that the settler’s life in them brings colo-
nization home to us in its earliest and most interesting aspect,
it shows us over again what must have been the indomitable
energy and endurance of those who laid the first foundation
of our Colonial empire, it shows in short what in a highly
civilized country like England we cannot realize, and with
which if 'we wish for a practical acquaintance we must go to
a Colony. In the long settled districts of Tasmania we come
upon the life over again of an English agricultural and pas-
toral county. We come upon country squires with English
looking residences with their gardens and grounds laid out
with English trees and flowers around them. We are in an
atmosphere once more of Members of Parliament, unpaid
Magistrates, landlords and tenant farmers, stage coaches,
municipal institutions, county cricket clubs, and last, not least,
Agricultural Associations, with their show yards, luncheons,
dinners and speeches. I well remember the first annual
Show which I attended of one of the oldest established Agri-
cultural Associations in Tasmania. As Governor, I was
received with the honour always accorded to my position,
and when I came on the ground the hand played the National


Anthem. I may here perhaps remark, that though “ God
Save the Queen ” is played as a rule when the Governor
appears at the theatre or any other public occasion, yet I be-
lieve that each colony has an air which is identified with
the Governor himself, and is played, if a band be present,
when his health is drunk at a public dinner. In New Zealand,
for instance, I have been told that when the Governor’s
health was drunk the band invariably played “ The King of
the Cannibal Islands,” while I have heard of the Governor of
another colony, when he went to open his Parliament, being
received by his guard of honour with the inspiriting air of
“ Kafoozelum.” In Tasmania the Governor’s air was “ The
fine old English Gentleman,” which in my case must have
seemed remarkably appropriate, as upon my first arrival in
the colony, on the day when I was sworn in, a Hobart Town
paper described me as being “ a very young looking man, in
the first prime of life.” I remember also that at one public
dinner at which I was present, and some singers gave their
services, when my health was proposed, the singers immediately
sang the whole six or eight verses of which the song is made
up, and I felt considerable embarrassment in rising to my
legs just after the company had been told of me, in most
pathetic accents, that
“ Declining gently to the last, this good old man he died;
And also how
“ The widow’s and the orphan’s tear bedewed my cold grave side.’
But to return to my agricultural meeting. I was duly
escorted round the show yard, I was shown in turn some
very fair cattle, some passable horses, and an admirable
exhibition of those fine woolled Saxon merino sheep, which
are Tasmania’s pride and glory. “And now,” I said to my
conductors, “ take me to the implement show; where is it ? ”
And as I spoke, I recalled to mind the rows of steam engines,
threshing, reaping, and other machines, at full work, which


are to be seen at the shows of our County Associations.
“Implement Show, Sir!” I was answered, “Why! oh! ah!
yes! there it is, close behind you;” and turning round, I
tripped and nearly fell over a solitary hand plough, which
was ticketed “ First Prize,” and represented the entire “ Im-
plement Show” on that particular occasion. I confess that I
concurred in the comment of the next day’s local journal,
“ If we were inclined to play the part of an over fastidious
critic, we might possibly object that the Implement Show,
though excellent so far as it went, was open to the charge of
a slight want of variety.” I hope, however, that it will be
understood for the honour of the Colony that I am speaking
of an exhibition which took place in an almost purely pastoral
district, and that in the more purely agricultural districts
I subsequently saw shows of implements which would have
been creditable to a much older country, and what is more to
the purpose, the best and newest of the machinery found ready
purchasers among the leading farmers of the colony. For
here and there farmers are to be found in Tasmania, who set
an excellent example to their brethren, going in extensively
for the use of manure, for rotation of crops, and for supple-
menting the great deficiency of manual labour by the use of
machinery. But as yet, I regret to say, such farmers are the
exception, and the general state of Tasmanian agriculture
may be not inaptly described by the following brief extract
from what I believe is almost the first known printed book
on English farming, “What eie doth not pitty to see the
“ great weakness and decay of our ancient and common
“ mother the earth, which is now grown so aged and stricken
“ in years, and so wounded at the hart with the ploughman’s
“ goad, that she beginneth to faint under the husbandman’s
“ hand, and groaneth for the decay of her natural balsam.”
Sir Hugh Platt wrote his “ Jewell House of Art and Nature ”
more than two centuries before the first English settlers
landed in Tasmania, and yet throughout all their finest


agricultural districts the soil has already grown aged and
stricken in years. It has long since been “ wounded at the
hart with the ploughman’s goad, and waxed faint and weary
under the husbandman’s hand.” The Tasmanian Farmer in
many parts seems to have had but two ideas, to get as many
wheat crops out of the land as he could in succession with-
out putting anything into it, and when his land would no
longer grow wheat, to encourage it to grow thistles for the
benefit of his neighbours. At a certain time of the year, on
some of what ought to be the finest corn-growing land in the
Colony, I have seen the thistle-down literally lying inches
deep in the fields, and rising piled like a snow drift against
the fences on either side of the road. Under such circum-
stances it is not very surprising to hear that Agriculture as a
general rule in Tasmania does not pay. It would be very
wonderful on the other hand if it did, especially with wheat
at 4s. a bushel, instead of .£4, as it was in the days of the
early settlers. Whether it would pay under a system of
farming more in conformity with English views is another
matter altogether. I always steadily maintained, and still
maintain that it would do so, and as my views were strenuously
supported by the small number of good farmers, and left
uncontradicted by the large number of bad ones, I am led
to think that I was not altogether wrong in my opinion.
As regards sheep farming and the pastoral interests of
the Colony generally, when I left it, they were all in a state
of most undoubted prosperity, and the face of a squatter
was beaming and pleasant to behold. Moreover, the fine
woolled Saxon merino sheep of certain Tasmanian breeders
were celebrated throughout Australia and New Zealand.
Not long before I left, a single Tasmanian ram had been sold
at Melbourne for a thousand guineas, giving a modern version,
and in a more profitable form, of the ancient fable of the
golden fleece. It is true, that since I left the price of wool
has gone down again, and I have no doubt that my friends


the squatters’ faces have lengthened in proportion. But I
am no believer in the permanent depression of Australian
sheep farming. Wool will rise again, as it has done before,
and in the meanwhile much might be done by the owners of
Tasmanian sheep runs towards the improvement of their
runs by the drainage of large tracts of marshy and undrained
pasture land, which are now little better than nests of disease.
Much also might be done by the Tasmanian Government in
giving assistance and encouragement to works of this kind,
and especially in utilising the great water power of the
country for some general system of irrigation. And if at
some future time the progress of invention shall develop a
process by which the carcases of sheep and oxen can be
transmitted to England in a frozen state, and thawed on
their arrival, the Australian sheep' farmers may not only be
our chief suppliers of wool, but may control our meat
markets also. So far, however, as Tasmania is concerned,
though much of her prosperity depends on wool, the pastoral
interest is on a far smaller scale than that of the neighbouring
Colonies. The total number of sheep in the Colony does not
exceed 1,400,000, whereas in Victoria a single firm has the
credit of shearing annually a million sheep, and of either
owning as freehold, or renting from the Government, a
territory of something like three million acres. Still, there
is more than one sheep farmer’s estate in Tasmania of which
I envied the owners the possession, and which, with its
partially cleared and shaded bush runs, and its broad and
well-watered meadows, dotted, at the great time of sheep
washing and shearing, with hundreds of fleecy specks, I
would fain have had Genie slaves of the ring and the lamp
to do my bidding, and transplant for me to some English
grazing county.
I am not likely to have many to-night amongst my audience
who are especially interested in the cultivation of Hops, for
although the walls of this room have echoed before now to


vigorous denunciations from eloquent County Members of
the iniquities of the Malt-Tax, Essex is, as we all know, not
a hop-growing county. But in mentioning the chief products
of Tasmania, it is impossible to pass over her hop grounds,
which are a very important item of growth and export, and
which would, doubtless, be far more so were it not for the
prohibitory duties levied by the Victorian Government on all
articles of Tasmanian produce. Should the Australasian
Colonies ever join in a Customs’ Union, I have no doubt
that the hop grounds of Tasmania will increase and multiply
exceedingly, as there are many portions of the unreclaimed
lands of the Colony reported to be admirably adapted for
hop cultivation.
If, however, I were asked in what way the best future chance
of Tasmania’s rising to individual greatness, and holding her
own, and more than her own, with larger and wealthier
neighbours, I should unhesitatingly reply, in the future
development of her mineral resources. With reference to
gold mining, I do not think that any great extent of alluvial
digging will ever be discovered, or that the rushes of bygone
days to the gold fields of Ballarat and Bendigo will ever be
repeated in any part of Tasmania. But I do expect that
Quartz mining will, ere long, become a far more prominent
branch of mining industry than it has hitherto been, and I
confess I cannot quite understand why a larger amount of
capital has not been invested in it. The individual yield of
solid gold to each ton of quartz rock crushed out has, as far
as it goes, been in some cases unusually large. During the
last six months a Company at a place called Nine Mile
Springs, in the North of the Colony, which I visited a few
years ago, and found deserted by all save a few knowing
Chinamen, has crushed out 3,133 ounces of gold, valued at
i;i2,745, from 1,790 tons of quartz, being at the very large
rate of loz. 15dwts. of gold to each ton of quartz. Many
other good yields have been reported from the same place


during the same period, and especially one of 1,470 ounces of
gold, valued at .£6,060, from only 516 tons of quartz, giving
the extraordinary average of near 2oz. 17dwts. per ton. I
think that such returns as these, though they are but experi-
ments on a very small scale compared to the operations of
the Quartz Companies of Ballarat or the Thames Gold Fields
of New Zealand, yet justify me in anticipating great things
in time to come from the Gold Fields of Tasmania. For the
rest, the history of past abortive attempts to establish gold-
mining in Tasmania, may be tracked as elsewhere by Settle-
ments that have one day blossomed to the dignity of a town-
ship, to vanish the next like the baseless fabric of a vision.
Amongst the number of these “airy nothings” to which
attempt was made to give “a local habitation and a name,”
are two spots which still figure in the published list of
Tasmanian townships, as “Lyndhurst” and “Du Cane.”
Whether “Du Cane” ever got beyond a miner’s tent or two,
a few holes in the ground, and the usual amount of mud and
slush which is the inevitable accompaniment of alluvial gold
digging, I do not know, for after I had issued the proclama-
tion declaring it a township I never heard of it again.
Of “Lyndhurst” I did hear again. Firstly, that its nomen-
clature was regarded by the miners as being intended, not as
a mark of respect to the dead Lord Chancellor, but as a
compliment to Mr. Hurst, their living gold field Commissioner.
Secondly, that it was bidding fair to be one of the most
flourishing towns in the Colony, for it had risen already to
the dignity of two public-houses and one policeman, who
found his office to be by no means a sinecure.
But gold and silver are after all but relative expressions of
value, while such minerals as coal, iron, and tin ores are
actual value in themselves. With respect to coal, though
none has as yet been found to compete with the Newcastle
Collieries of New South Wales, there is abundance of coal,
both anthracite and bituminous, in several parts of the


Colony. lam myself a believer in valuable coal fields being
yet discovered, and in the meanwhile about the value of the
iron and tin ore found in parts of the Colony there can be no
doubt whatever. Since I left, the works of a Tasmanian
Charcoal Iron Company, with English skill and capital at its
back, were not long since formally inaugurated by my suc-
cessor, and the question whether iron can be profitably manu-
factured in the Colony will soon be solved. But the
discoveries of tin ore at Mount Bischoff, in the North West,
and George’s Bay on the East Coast are, to my mind, of far
greater value than those of ironstone, and as regards the
abundance of the ore and its excellent quality there appears
to be but one opinion in the Colony. At all events, the value
of all property in the neighbourhood of the mines would seem
to be rising wonderfully, for a friend wrote to me by last mail
that a little bush pot-house on the East Coast where I had
gone some years ago to get some quiet duck shooting, had
sold for T 1,500, while far round the solitary lagoons where
the wild-fowl then swarmed, now spreads a noisy and
thriving diggers’ Settlement. If mining enterprise should
thus develop itself, it is impossible to say what a revolution
it may not effect in the fortunes of Tasmania. With the
influx of a large mining population manufactures also will be
summoned into life, the tall chimney of the factory will spread
over the land, the demand for the produce of the soil will
soon outstrip the supply, and there will be a speedy end to
the despondency and listlessness of the Tasmanian farmer.
That such a picture of future progress and prosperity may be
destined to realisation is my hearty wish, but much must in
the first instance depend on the energy and enterprise of
Tasmanians themselves, and the encouragement offered by
the Government to the investment of capital in developing
the resources of the country, I speak more particularly of
the formation of roads and tramways, and the construction
of bridges over rivers, not as a concession to the clamour of


some electoral district, the yote of whose Member may be
needed to keep a Ministry in office, hut on some uniform
system of improving the means of communication throughout
the entire Colony, and especially of opening up those districts
where its mineral treasures are known to exist.
I do not know how far these somewhat practical details
may he interesting to the audience I have the honour to
address, hut it appears to me that to give a lecture upon one
of our Australian Colonies without making a few direct re-
marks on the subject of emigration would be rather like the
play of Hamlet with the part of Hamlet left out. Now in
speaking of emigration I always start with this one broad
principle, that all who are happy and contented at home, let
their position in life be what it may, had better remain at
home. But as we all know, unfortunately all are not happy
and contented, our great centres of population periodically
become overcrowded, and our labour markets glutted, while
the spirit of adventure, the desire for elbowroom, the hope
of achieving fortune and independence, all furnish their
plentiful recruits to the ranks of those who join in the annual
exodus from our shores. For what classes of emigrants, I
may be asked, do you consider Tasmania specially adapted ?
Well, I certainly in the first instance consider that the strong,
ablebodied, industrious, honest, and sober agricultural labourer
cannot fail to succeed. He will have no difficulty in getting
employment, and his weekly wages will average from 11s. to
13s. in money, with a cottage and firing, and weekly rations
of food. These I see quoted in the paper of “ information to
intending emigrants ” to which I have already referred, at from
10 to 12 lbs. of meat, 14 lbs. of wheaten flour, 2 lbs. of sugar,
J lb. of tea, and he is generally allowed a bit of good ground
for his vegetable garden. But to earn those wages he must
be thoroughly ablebodied and industrious, and he must be
strictly frugal, honest and sober. If such a man as this will
not get above himself, as so many are apt to do, and look


upon service as a degradation, if he will be content to work
as a labourer for a few years, and save money, be may make
a judicious investment in a small purchase of land, and
become a farmer on his own account. Besides this class,
there is always a good demand for domestic servants, both
male and female, and I think I have said enough already to
show that if a man with sufficient capital at his back, and with
sufficient discretion to avoid the tempting offers made by
jobbers and speculators of every description, chooses either
to purchase or take a share in a sheep run, or farm good land,
and farm it well, in an agricultural district, there is no reason
why he should not prosper. Those for whom there is no
special demand are mechanics, clerks, book-keepers, dress-
makers and needlewomen, shopmen and shppwomen, and I
fancy that all these classes, expecting to find openings in
their special vocations, would be doomed to disappointment.
So also will he be infallibly doomed to disappointment who,
too lazy and too extravagant to succeed in England, sails
for Australia under the idea that fortunes are to be made
there by a sort of legerdemain. Such an one will be lucky in-
deed if, ere his last shilling be spent, he can return to England
to execrate his fortune, and abuse the place, the people, and
everything else connected with colonisation. But there is
one class especially for whom I consider that Tasmania
offers attractions such as are scarcely to be found in any
other portion of the British Empire. I speak of those who,
possessed of fixed but limited incomes, find each year a greater
difficulty in maintaining that position in English Society
which their birth and education lead them to seek. Ido not
address myself to those to whom the life and noise and
excitement of our huge and overgrown Metropolis are as the
very breath of their nostrils, and who would rather have a
dinner of herbs within the sound of Bow Bells, than a feast
on a stalled ox beneath an Antipodean sky. I speak more
to those, and there are many, whom the force of their


■circumstances compels to vegetate in our smaller towns or
country villages, and I do not hesitate to say that in my
opinion in either Hobart Town or Launceston, or in the
country districts, they will find their means go further in
securing the necessaries and comforts of life than in Great
Britain. Nor do I hesitate to say that they can enjoy at
the same time as full a share of social advantages, without
the harassing struggles to make both ends meet, so con-
stantly felt in the mother country. lam quite sure of this,
that the average amount of social gaiety to he found in
Hobart Town is equal to that of most English county towns
and their neighbourhoods, now that a London season is
regarded as an absolute necessity by many to whom less than
half a century ago a visit to the metropolis would have been
the event of a lifetime. If pater familias cannot exist
without his club and his whist he can have both these
institutions in Hobart Town. There are balls at Government
House and elsewhere, summer picnics, garden parties, and
lawn tennis for his wife and daughters, there is boating and
cricket and football in plenty for his sons. There is also for
his sons a system of education of which a young country like
Tasmania may be justly proud, a system which gives any
youth of intellectual capacity above the average, the chance
of rising, by means of Exhibitions, from a common Ele-
mentary School to a Grammar School, and subsequently
offers for his competition a Scholarship [of T2OO a-year,
tenable for four years, at an English University, where the
whole field of intellectual cultivation in all its varied branches
lies open to his selection. Even should he not succeed in
gaining this highest prize, there are Universities at Sydney
and Melbourne, with their affiliated Colleges, with their
Lecture-Eooms, and Professors of high eminence, where an
excellent education can be got; nor is the student by any
means rigorously bound down to the "oldj classical and
mathematical grooves, for which many of us yet retain such


a holy reverence. And last, not least, ladies and gentlemen,
both parents and children may be sure of this, that they will
live, and move, and have then* being in a country which, for
health of climate and beauty of scenery combined, stands
perhaps without rival in the world.
As for the climate, I do not hesitate myself to pronounce
it to be as near perfection for English constitutions as we can
hope to find on the face of this globe. Everything in
Tasmania, it has been well said, is more English than is
England herself; and her climate, I should say, has all the
good features of that of old England, with little or none of
its undeniably bad ones. Now and then, perhaps, in summer,
the hot North wind would visit us from the neighbouring
Continent, and the air would be laden at the same time with
the heat and smoke of neighbouring bush fires. But whereas
on the Australian Continent these hot winds would endure
for days and nights together and the inhabitants of Melbourne
or Adelaide would gladly if they could, take off their flesh
and sit in their bones, in Tasmania the nights were almost
always cool, and the hot wind was pretty certain to be
routed with ignominy on the afternoon of the second day,
by the Southerly sea breeze fresh from the Antarctic ice-
fields. But it was during the latter part of summer and
greater portion of autumn that we found the climate to be at
its best. Day after day would then succeed each other of
cloudless sky and balmy breezes till one began to think of
the Poet Laureate’s description of the vale for which “mythic
Uther’s son” took his departure in the barge with the weeping
queens, and left Sir Bedivere “ revolving many memories ”
by the water’s edge—
“ The island valley of Avilion,
Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow,
Nor ever wind blows loudly, but it lies
Deep meadowed, happy, fair with orchard lawns,
And bowery hollows crowned with summer sea.”
In the winter, it is true that the wind often blows loudly


enough, with a full accompaniment of rain or hail, while
there is a tradition that snowballing once went on for three
days in the streets of Hobart Town. In my time, though,
during winters Mount Wellington behind Hobart Town wore
its snow crest, and the lower hills were occasionally coated.
I never knew snow lie in our gardens and grounds, and in
fact the Tasmanian winter has often been compared to that
of the South of France. In this climate all English fruits
grow with fivefold and tenfold English plenty, all English
vegetables are most abundant, while some English garden
flowers as almost as weeds for commonness. I have seen
the scarlet geranium growing wild in many a hedge near
Hobart Town, while in our garden a large bed of it was so
massively brilliant in colour, as to be almost a landmark to
sailing ships miles away down the harbour. As for the
fruits, the bad compliment with which Horace tells that the
Calabrian host pressed his pears upon his guest, telling him
to take all he could home to his children, for the pigs would
eat on the morrow all he left behind him, would have been
strictly true as regards the superabundance of our peaches
and apricots. Our standard greengage trees were bowed down
with fruit, while the bare recollection of the mulberries and
strawberries is enough to make one’s mouth water. We in
England too, are given to be sentimental about “ the merry
month of May,” and the charms of going a-maying where
thorn trees and hedges are to be found. But the dweller
amid the richest pastures, and stiffest ‘ oxers and bullfinches
of Leicestershire and Northamptonshire would open his eyes
wide indeed at the thorn fences which abound in the North
of Tasmania. I remember one particular fence there by the
roadside nearly two miles in length, and some forty feet in
height, in which an elephant could hardly have found a _weak
or negociable spot, and which when I saw it in spring was,
as indeed were all its neighbours, one unbroken mass of white
May blossom from end to end. So it is with the English


gorse, and so it is with the sweetbriar, which has spread
itself over the country till it threatens to become as great a
nuisance as the thistle.
As for the scenery, it is in some features very English, and
in some very un-English. It is very English indeed in many
parts of the settled districts, English looking fields, English
looking homesteads and cottages, English looking villages,
and public-houses. As I journeyed upon the highroad between
Hobart Town and Launceston, and met, as I often did, the
day coach full inside and out, or the evening mail with its
scarlet coated driver and guard, my fancy would go hack to
the coaching days of my youth, when hot water cans, railway
wrappers, and other signs of England’s degeneracy were un-
known, and one’s schoolboy legs braved the winter’s frost and
snow, dangling in mid-air over the coach’s side. Yet even so
flocks of gaudy-coloured parrots flashing across the road, or
settling on the telegraph wires, would remind you that this
was not exactly England; while nearer to the bush the sight
of a swarm of white cockatoos following the plough would
tend still further to dispel the illusion. But if the settled
districts had these English features, on the other hand
nothing can be more un-English than the “ever never green”
foliage of the eucalyptus, the semitropical luxuriance of the
tree fern gullies, and the dense and impenetrable sassafras
and myrtle scrub of the unreclaimed forest. And it is this
blended mixture of English and Antipodean that to my mind
constitutes the chief charm of Tasmanian scenery. There is
nothing in Tasmania to compare in grandeur with the Alpine
regions of the Southern, or in wonder with the hot lakes and
springs of the Northern islands of New Zealand. But there
is a combination of lake and river and coast and forest scenery
equal, as a rule, to any which is to be found in the United
Kingdom, and in individual bits far surpassing it. I do not
think, for instance, that any English city stands on such a
site as that of Hobart Town, fronted as it is by its magni-


ficent harbour, backed by the dense forest range and grand
uprearing basaltic crest of Mount Wellington ; and yet, with
an unlimited extent of country inland, on which in days to
come its present 20,000 inhabitants may treble and quadruple
themselves in number, and carry the city along the banks
and valley of the Derwent. I should be very ungrateful
indeed if I were not also to say that I do not believe that any
Colony has provided its Governor with a better Government
House, and a prettier garden and grounds, sloping gently
down to the broad estuary of the Derwent, with a view
which would rival the far-famed beauty of Sidney Harbour,
were its shores only lined, like those of Sidney, with villas
and gardens, and the harbour filled with the same amount of
shipping ever on the move. Once only did I see the harbour
given a fair chance of looking its best in this respect, and
that was when six English men-of-war entered it in full sail
before a stiff southerly breeze, and the Flying Squadron of
1869 anchored within a stone’s throw of Government House.
Would, too, that I could do justice to the beauty and
grandeur of the twenty miles of road leading from Hobart
Town to the Huon river, winding as it does around the very
base of Mount Wellington, amid gigantic gum-trees and tree
fern gullies on the one side, and on the other giving glimpses
of the distant Pacific, and the land-locked harbours of Bruni
Island and D’Entrecasteux Channel. It is close to this road
that there grows the largest known tree in the Colony, of
which Mr. Trollope says that it is the biggest tree he ever
saw, that he took the dimensions, and subsequently lost the
note. All I remember is, that it was reputed to measure
sixty feet in circumference at fifteen feet from the ground,
while its reputed height was considerably over 800 feet.
Mr. Trollope also specially enumerates, among the wonders
of Tasmania, the caves of Chudleigh in the North, and gives
a most amusing account of an expedition which he made
there in my company. I quite agree in his opinion that no


caves he has ever seen are equal to those of Chudleigh in
bigness, blackness, water, dirt, and the enforced necessity
of crawling, creeping, wading, and knocking one’s head about
at every turn. I confess that I was very glad when I
reached the mouth of those caves once more, and it would
have taken a good deal to make me ever visit them again.
I remember that whenever we were at our deepest in the
black and ice cold water that flows perpetually through
them, our guide would always insist on our putting out
our candles, in order that we might admire the glow-worms
on the roof. When our candles were extinguished, the
glow-worms, as a rule, obstinately refused to vouchsafe us
even the faintest twinkle, and the darkness was as a dark-
ness that might be felt. I had a colder shudder than even
that which the water gave me, as I thought that the guide
might drop our one box of lucifers into the Acheron around
us, and condemn us to wander till we laid down and died in
these labyrinthine tunnels of endless night. I remember
also that when we turned to go back, I suggested to Mr.
Trollope that it would be as well to let us all precede him
through a crevice in which he had as near as possible stuck
fast in coming, “ Because,” said I, “ifwe go first, and you
stick after us, we can leave you to die in peace and quietness;
but if you go first, and stick before us, we shall have to
remove you piecemeal to let ourselves through.” I need
hardly say that a shot could hardly issue from a gun with
greater celerity than the distinguished author of “Barchester
Towers” managed to vanish through that hole. Another
Expedition which has fixed itself in my memory is one
which I made to Lake St. Clair in the interior. Ido not
think that any lake scenery in the United Kingdom, certainly
none that I have ever seen, is grander than that of this lake,
and I believe that no Governor is considered to have properly
done his duty by the Colony who does not visit Lake St.
Clair. In fact, the Tasmanians, an infinitesimally small


proportion of whom by the way have ever seen it themselves,
say of it as the Spanish proverb says of Granada, that he
who has not seen it has seen nothing. I made my pilgrimage
there in company with my Puisne Judge, and a very pleasant
one it was. But I think we both wished in our inmost hearts
that this queen of lakes had been a little more accessible and
had not involved the necessity of being a dweller in tents
upon its hanks, where the hungry leeches were given to
dispute with us the right of occupation.
It is in Lake St. Clair that the River Derwent has its rise,
which is navigable for a small daily passenger steamer from
Hobart Town for some twenty-five miles to New Norfolk,
which I have already mentioned as being the chief town of
the principal hop-growing district. The Derwent is fed on
its way by various tributaries, one of which bears the classic
name of the Styx. Standing one day upon the banks of this
Stygian stream I remarked to my companion that its original
christener must have had a classical turn. “ I don’t think,
Sir,” was the answer, “that he knew very much about
Homer and Virgil, for he always spelt the name s-t-i-c-k-s,
and said that he so named the river from the quantity of
brushwood with which its mouth was blocked in flood time.”
Whether Mount Olympus and Mount Ida that rose so
majestically over Lake St. Clair, and the rivers Rubicon,
Scamander, and Meander, which flow in other parts of the
Colony can assign such practical matter-of-fact reasons for
their nomenclature lam unable to say. The scenery of the
Derwent is all more or less beautiful, and a drive which will
live in my recollection, is that from New Norfolk along the
banks of the river to the Salmon Ponds of the Tasmanian
Acclimatisation Society. The Derwent here presents that
happy alternation of deep and still pool, with brawling and
swirling rapid, which causes the eye of the experienced
salmon fisher to dilate, and his heart to throb when he
beholds it, and with such rivers as Tasmanians possess, it is


not surprising that they should have made such efforts to
acclimatise the king of fish as well as the trout in their waters.
Long before I left the trout were abounding in the Derwent
and its tributaries, and many a good day’s sport had been
had with the fly and the grasshopper. Trout of six, seven,
and eight pounds were not unfrequently taken, and I can
emphatically say that the finest trout in condition and
appearance, as well as in flavour, with which I have yet
become acquainted, was a magnificent fellow of 161bs. that
the speaker of my House of Commons (Sir Robert Officer),
caught in a net in the river opposite his own house at New
Norfolk, and brought post haste to Government House. As
regards the acclimatisation of the Salmon, I well remember
the day more than seven years ago, when the Speaker
aforesaid hurried up to Government House in a high state of
excitement to announce the capture of a veritable salmon
smolt in the Derwent. Fired by his enthusiasm, I jumped
into his carriage and we drove to the Museum of the Royal
Society, where we found a large crowd of excited citizens,
elbowing and jostling each other for a sight of a small glass
bottle on a table, in which was a tiny specimen of the finny
tribe, which reminded me of nothing so much as Leech’s
portrait of the “Celebrated minnow caught by Mr. Briggs,
the exact size of life.” That same afternoon, as the Hobart
Town Mercury reports, “ the great intelligence was formally
communicated by Ministers to both Houses, amid loud and
prolonged cheering,” and at a Parliamentary banquet given
the same evening by the Premier to the Upper House, the
precious treasure was placed on the table, and formed the
theme of general admiration and comment. And really the
minute specimen was worth the excitement, for it was as the
first ray of daylight thrown on the solution of one of the
most important experiments ever made in acclimatisation.
It is true that the smolt when subsequently sent to England
was repudiated by a great authority on such matters, Dr.


Gunther, who pronounced it to he neither fish, flesh, fowl,
nor good red herring. It is true also that as years went on,
and no second capture was made, the heart grew sick with
hope deferred, and when I left the problem could hardly
have been said to have approached much nearer to solution.
But since I have left the veritable salmon has been caught
in sufficient numbers to establish its existence as an undoubted
fact, and before many years have gone by I see no reason
why her salmon fisheries also should not be added to the
valuable list of Tasmania’s resources.
Such is the very imperfect sketch which I have endea-
voured to give you this evening of “ Tasmania—Past and
Present.” If it should ever be heard of or read by Tasmanians
themselves, I dare say they will think it but a very hazy out-
line indeed of their history and their country, and will say
that there are many features in both to which I might have
given more prominence. If so, I trust they will pardon my
sins of omission, and believe that I undertook this sketch
with a sincere wish to do justice to a country which is reserved,
as I hope, to add a permanent and flourishing race to the
great family of nations—a country of which, besides the
manifold attractions of its soil and climate, I can testify also
to the unswerving loyalty and many sterling qualities of its
inhabitants, among whom I would fain believe that I have
still friends by whom lam not altogether forgotten. Despite
the all-powerful love of mother country, and deep longing
for home, it was with a full heart and a moistened eye that
I waved a last farewell from the deck of the departing steamer
to the many thousands assembled to wish me God-speed, and
beheld one familiar scene after another vanish, in all human
probability, for ever from my gaze. If the six years of my
Governorship passed peacefully and happily away, with
scarcely a passing breeze to disturb the pervading calm, I
must award full credit to the good sound sense and strong
love of law and order inherent in the people. As I said last


year, my simple secret of governing was by doing my best
never to take unnecessary offence, to tender advice when I
thought it right, but not to be hurt if my advice was not
always taken, and never to interfere unless my interference
seemed to be imperatively demanded. For the rest, the
events which serve as distinguished landmarks of my reign
are easily enumerated. The death of the last male Aboriginal,
the transfer of Port Arthur to the Colonial Government, and
the withdrawal of the last Imperial company of soldiers, may
be said to have put the coping stone to the history of the past.
The opening of the first railway and the construction of
another, the direct connexion of the Colony by submarine
telegraph with Australia and England, may be said to have
commenced the story of the future. What, the next step in
its future may be, wbo can venture to predict ? but there is
one step in the future, not merely of Tasmania, but of all the
Australian Colonies, which I earnestly hope that I may live
to see. I alluded at the commencement of my remarks to
the present absurdity of speaking of an Australian Budget;
but I heartily wish that the hour may be at hand when all
the Australian Colonies will agree to the adoption of one
uniform tariff, and to establish complete Free Trade, if not
with all the world, at least as between Colony and Colony.
So far as Tasmania individually is concerned, the day
when inter-Colonial free trade is adopted, will indeed be one
to be marked with a white stone, and to be welcomed with
feasting and rejoicing throughout the Colony. For to my
mind the one great cause of all her depression has been the
simple fact that the entrance to her nearest and most legiti-
mate markets has been for years resolutely closed to her.
Under the mistaken idea of artificially bolstering up native
industry, Victoria has raised a prohibitory barrier against her
fruit, jams, timber, in fact against every article in the growth
or manufacture of which Tasmania has the undoubted superi-
ority over her neighbours. And as one bad example is sure


to find imitators, a general system of retaliation goes on of
each Colony against its neighbour, each closing its markets
to that which its neighbour most wants to sell. But it must
not be thought that it is in the interests of Tasmania alone
that I advocate Intercolonial Free Trade, and that which is
its natural sequel—the Federation of all the Australian
Colonies into a single Dominion. On the contrary, that
which will benefit one will benefit all, and the larger and
more populous the individual Colony, the greater will be its
individual benefit. There are, moreover, great questions
looming in no distant future, on which some common principle
of united action on the part of these Colonies will be a
positive necessity. There is the question of some united
system of defence, the question of general immigration, of
the exploration and settlement of neighbouring territory, of
mail services, of ocean telegraphs. Above all, in the im-
mediate future there is a question of the means of internal
communication. At the present time nearly every Australian
Colony of the group has adopted a different railway guage,
and the main object of each Colony’s railway system has
been to draw traffic to its own capital, and to cut it off from
that of its neighbour, no matter how much more convenient
to a large portion of its own territory the market of that
neighbour may be. It is thus that Melbourne, Sydney, and
Adelaide are as yet unconnected by railway, and the principal
passenger traffic between them is still by sea. Let those
many thousands of pleasure seekers who annually throng
from England to the Continent, and to the great bulk of
whom the two hours “streak of silver sea” ’twixt Dover and
Calais is fraught with unspeakable anguish and miseries,
think how few of them would care even for the sake of the
delights of Paris, the castled crags and vineyards of the
Rhine, or the mountains and lakes of Switzerland, to brave a
stormy ocean passage of three days and nights. Yet this
is what locomotion between Australian capitals virtually
means at the present moment.


One word in conclusion as regards the future of the re-
lations between our Colonies and ourselves. I see that my
friend, Sir Hercules Robinson, the Governor of New South
Wales, in a speech reported in the Times a few days since,
estimates that at the close of the present century the popu-
lation of the Australian Continent will be over five millions,
and that in the year 1960 it will be thirty-one and a quarter
millions, which is just the population of the United Kingdom
at the last census. The question, I think, naturally arises,
is it possible that so great an Empire as this will he content
to be bound by ever so slight and slender a tie to the mother
country, and that it will not one day make a demand for
independence that we shall be unable to resist. My answer
to that question would he, that if such ,a demand should
be seriously and deliberately made, England would never
dream of resisting it, nor would the policy of George Grenville,
Charles Townsend, and Lord North ever be repeated by
English Statesmen of the present age. But my answer
would further be, that its ever being made will depend
very much upon our own line of action towards our Colonies.
If we choose to be constantly informing our Colonies that
we look upon the day of separation as being sooner or
later inevitable ; that their individual independence and
freedom is incompatible with the co-existence of a parental
tie; and that the object of our policy must be to train
them to independence, and then, with our parental bless-
ing, turn them loose upon the world to follow the bent
of their own inclinations, then we must not he surprised if
our Colonies one day take us at our word, and cut themselves
adrift. But if, on the other hand, we try to keep alive the
idea that it is possible for children not merely to have their
full measure of independence, but to grow stronger, richer,
and more intelligent with the parental tie unbroken than
they would were it severed, that it is not necessary to cease
to be British citizens in order to fulfil the duties of free and


civilized and self-governing men, then I think it is impossible
to say how long the present union may not last unbroken.
But when we look back upon the past Century, and recall
how often the expectation and prophecies of even the clearest
sighted statesmen have been signally falsified, bold is he
who would venture to predict what may or may not be our
relations with our Colonies in a hundred years time. All I
venture to say is, as regards the present, let us do our best
on our side to strengthen a union, any violent rupture of
which would be disastrous alike to parent and children, and
would render any statesman whose policy aimed at it a
certain mark for the grievous indignation of the English
people. God forbid, say I, that English statesmen should
ever come to think, with a few self-styled philosophers or
hot-brained professors, that so long as we can shuffle off our
surplus population anywhere, anyhow, it is all one to English
interests —that it matters nothing whether Englishmen
establish themselves on British or foreign soil, whether they
and their posterity remain friends and kinsmen, or become
enemies and aliens to us and to our children. lam a firm
believer myself in what some may think the old-fashioned
doctrine that “ Trade follows the flag,” but whether the trade
follows the flag or not, of this I am sure, that let that flag be
carried to the uttermost bounds of the earth, loyalty and
national sentiment will never desert it. Whether as customers
for our manufactures and merchandise, whether as outlets
for our surplus population, or whether as healthful stimulants
to enterprise and energy, I maintain that our colonies are of
vital importance to the mother country, and immeasurably
overpay the cost and the perils which are the noble conditions
of a great and world-wide empire.
I will conclude with the touching and eloquent words of
farewell, that the brilliant author of the Caxtons has put into
the mouth of the homeward bound hero of his tale—
« Adieu, thou beautiful land I Canaan of the exiles, and


“ Ararat to many a shattered ark! Fair cradle of a race for
“ whom the unbounded heritage of a future, that no sage can
“ conjecture, no prophet divine, lies afar in the golden
“ promise-light of Time! destined, perchance, from the sins
“ and sorrows of a civilization struggling with its own
“ elements of decay, to renew the youth of the world, and
“ transmit the great soul of England through the cycles of
“ Infinite Change.”


TASMANIA.
INFORMATION FOE INTENDING EMIGRANTS,
Issued by the Board of Immigration, Hobart Town, 1875.
Tasmania is an island at the southern extremity of the Australian
Continent between 40° and 44° South Latitude, and 144° and 149°
East Longitude. It is divided from the Colony of Victoria by Bass’s
Straits, 120 miles wide. The surface is diversified by ranges of hills
and valleys, with occasionally large plains; and it is probably the
most healthy of all the British Colonies, for it is never too hot in
summer nor too cold in winter for out-door occupations to be carried
on.
The rain fall, on an average, is a little more than 22 inches ; but
there are not more than 40 days on which out-door work cannot be
done.
Telegraphic communication has been established between Hobart
Town and Launceston, and connecting all the principal Towns and
Villages in the Island.
There is also an electric cable between Tasmania and Victoria, —
from whence land-lines extend to New South Wales, Queensland, and
South Australia; and a line from Adelaide (in South Australia)
extending across to Port Darwin connects the colony with England.
Regular postal communication exists throughout the colony, the
postage on town letters being Id.; on country letters, 2d.; to the
other colonies, 3d.; and to Great Britain, 6d.
There is no postage whatever on newspapers either in the Colony
or to any of the Australian Colonies or Great Britain.
There is a four-weekly mail service with Great Britain, via Galle,
and mails for the Australasian Colonies are despatched by every
steamer leaving Hobart Town and Launceston.
The post-office money-order system is in force.
D 2


A powerful passenger steamer plies twice a month between Sydney,
the capital city of New South Wales, and Hobart Town; and one
twice a month between Melbourne, the capital city of Victoria, and
Hobart Town; and two eight times a month between Launceston
and Melbourne.
The Island contains 15J million acres of land, and the islands
connected .with it contain 1J million acres: 3,905,485 acres have
been sold or granted to settlers by the Crown; leaving the Crown
land property at about 12,000,000 acres, of which one and a half
million acres are leased by settlers for sheep-runs or other purposes.
There is a railway in course of construction to connect the two
ports of Hobart Town and Launceston, and railway communication
has for some time been established between Launceston and
Deloraine. This line passes for 45 miles through some of the best
agricultural lands of the colony.
The lowest upset price of Crown land fit for agriculture is fixed by
Act of Parliament at £1 an acre, and the lowest upset price of
pastoral lands at a sum equal to 12 years’ rental, but not less than
ss. an acre.
Any person may select for purchase, by private contract with the
Government, one lot of agricultural land not exceeding 320 acres, at
£1 an acre, on the following terms, as exemplified to the extent
of 100 acres:—
£ s. d.
100 acres at 20s 100 0 0
Add one-third for Credit 33 6 8
£133 6 8
£ s. d.
Cash at time of purchase .... 368
First year 5 0 0
Second year 5 0 0
Third and following
years, up to 14 years 10 0 0 a-year.
And so on in proportion for any greater or smaller area than 100 acres.
Credit is allowed on all purchases above £l5.
When 500 acres shall have been sold in not less than 10 lots
adjoining or close to each other, the Governor-in-Council is em-
powered to raise a sum not exceeding half of such purchase-money
for the purpose of constructing a road or roads in the vicinity of the
After paying the expenses of the Lands and Works Department,
one-fourth of the Land Revenue and Licence Fees are set apart for
the construction of roads and bridges by the various Road Trustees.


By the Acts of Parliament, 81 Yict. No. 26, and 38 Yict. No. 16,
the Board of Immigration in Tasmania are empowered to appoint
agents in England for the purpose of selecting emigrants, and
arranging for their conveyance to Tasmania. These agents have
also power to issue warrants for land on the following terms :
The agents shall issue to each approved emigrant who has not
previously resided in the colony, and who pays the full cost of his
family’s passage out, a Warrant, which will entitle the holder to receive
from the Immigration Agent in Tasmania a Land Order to the value of
£lB for each member of the family above 15 years of age, and £9
for each member above 12 months and under 15 years old; —and
these Land Orders will be received by the Government as payment
for any Crown lands that the emigrant may buy after his arrival.
The Acts also empower the Immigration Board to permit any
person who has paid his own and family’s passage-money as cabin
or intermediate passengers to demand, within a year after his arrival
in the Colony, a land Certificate entitling him to select 30 acres of
land for himself, 20 for his wife, if he has one, and 10 for each
child.
And for these lands a grant will issue after five years’ residence;
hut the order will not be forfeited by the death of the emigrant, or
his absence, if his family remain in the Colony.
Licences are granted to cut timber on Crown lands.
Licences to dig in search of gold are also issued.
Mineral Leases are issued for working lodes and deposits of coal,
iron, tin, &o. Of the latter metals considerable shipments of pig iron
and ingots of tin have been made to Yictoria and the United Kingdom.
The prospects of successfully working the iron and tin mines, and
also the extensive coal-fields known to exist in various parts of the
Colony, are very encouraging.
Licences for pastoral lands are issued at rates having regard to
the class of the land and the number of the sheep and cattle which
can be fed thereon, the rent being calculated on the carrying capacity
of the land, at the rate of from 4 d. to B d. per annum for each
sheep, or 2s. to 4s. a-head for cattle.
The Board of Immigration issue bounty tickets to persons residing
in the Colony desirous of introducing their relations or friends.
The prices of the tickets being, for a “ family ticket,” to introduce a
man and his wife, and all their children under twelve years of age,
£l5 ; for a single man, £lO ; and for a single female, £5.
Each single person over twelve years of age at the time of em-
barkation must have a separate ticket.


Vessels are constantly leaving London and Liverpool for Mel-
bourne, the agents for which accept these tickets and provide a free
passage for the holders, the balance of the passage money being
paid by the Board, and the emigrants are landed at Hobart Town or
Launceston free of expense to themselves.
Two daily and several other newspapers are published in Hobart
Town, and four in Launceston.
The population of Tasmania is 104,217, of whom 55,117 are males,
and 49,059 females. The death-rate of 1874 was 16 per I,ooo'
of the population. The black aboriginal population is reduced to
one, a woman about 70 years of age. The number of houses at the
date of the last Census in February, 1870, was 20,364.
By the same Census it appears that 316 churches and chapels
have been erected in various parts of the colony, and the religious
wants of the population are provided for by a large body of earnest
ministers of all denominations.
“ Few islands in the world can compare with Tasmania for salu-
brity. The temperature is so genial, and the air so pure, that the
diseases which in England add so much to the general death-rate
have here a minimum of intensity.
“No part of the world is perhaps more favourable to infant life
than Tasmania. About nine out of every ten children survive the
first year of life, and the mortality from that age up to about four-
teen years old decreases at a wonderful rate. The deaths in 1,000
children between 3 and 14 years old only average about 5 per 1,000
annually.”— Dr. E, 8. Hall, F. of Statist, and Epid. Socty.
In addition to four principal grammar schools there are numerous
private establishments, as well as 150 government schools under the
Board of Education, having over 11,000 scholars on the rolls. Several
Scholarships are maintained by the colony, the best being two annual
Tasmanian Scholarships of the value of £2OO per annum each, pro-
vided by the Government, and tenable at a British University for
four years.
There are in addition thirty-two exhibitions from the public
schools under the Board of Education to either of the four superior
schools above mentioned, and tenable for four years.
The system of education in Tasmania is such that the son of the
poorest person, if the boy possesses talent, may progress step by
step, aided by the Exhibitions and Scholarships provided by the
Government, till he obtains the means of securing an University
education in the mother country.
Working Men’s Clubs, Odd Fellows and Good Templars’ Societies


Temperance Societies, Bible Societies, Freemasons’ |Lodges, Agri-
cultural and Pastoral Associations, Gardeners’ Societies, City
Mission, Hospitals for the Sick and for the Insane, Benevolent
Societies, an Asylum for Orphans, Asylums for the Destitute Boys’
Home, Female Industrial School Reformatory, &c., &c., have been
established, and are in active operation
PRACTICAL HINTS TO EMIGRANTS.
Tasmania is a colony wherein the small capitalist can find ready
and remunerative return for his investments, and the steady farm
labourer and the industrious domestic servant can get comfortable
places with good wages.
To these three classes the information herein contained is alone
intended to apply.
First, then, the Small Capitalist is reckoned to be a man having
three or four hundred pounds in hand, after paying his family’s
passage-money to Tasmania, and who wishes to become a farmer on
his own account. The most secure and expeditious way of bringing
out money is by an order on one of the banks here, which can be
readily obtained at the head offices in London. The person should
first of ail call upon the Agents for Tasmania in London, who will
give him information as to how he should act. These Agents are
The Emigrant and Colonists’ Aid Corporation (Limited), 3, Queen
Square, Westminster.
On landing in Tasmania, and taking lodgings according to his
means, the emigrant should at once call on the Immigration Agent
at Hobart Town, who will give him advice, and refer him to the
Surveyor-General for information as to the land regulations,—the
extent and locality of available land, —the prices and regulations of
sale, —and the name and residence of the surveyor of the district in
which the emigrant may decide to settle. If this should be in
Northern Tasmania, he can apply to the Launceston Immigration
Agent, or to the Deputy-Commissioner of Crown Lands, who has in
his possession all charts, &c., of the Northern Counties. He is
advised to place a certain sum in one of the Savings Banks as a
stand-by, for which he will receive 4 per cent, interest.
Emigrants are advised not to encumber themselves before sailing
with large agricultural implements. These can be obtained in the
colony better adapted to the rough lands on which they are to be


used. Seeds of all sorts are cheaper than in England, and more
likely to be pure and genuine than those sent out to the colony,
which are almost always damaged or adulterated.
From forty to fifty shillings will suffice to clear from underwood
and grass an acre of good selected land, and to ring or bark the big
trees; reserving to a future day the task of cutting them down or
burning.
The average crop from rich newly cultivated land is 25 bushels of
wheat, 25 of barley, 26 of oats, potatoes 3 to 10 tons. These,
however, have been very largely exceeded in good seasons and good
situations, viz., 50 bushels wheat, 60 barley, 100 bushels oats, 15 tons
potatoes, 37 tons carrots, 70 tons of mangolds. Individual specimens
of mangolds 126 lbs. weight, turnips 90 lbs., carrots 18 lbs., potatoes
5 lbs., and pumpkins of 120 lbs., have been exhibited in Hobart Town.
If the farmer is a worker, his crop ought to be ready for market soon
after his second instalment is due. A sufficient cottage can be
erected in the bush for about £5O; and while hie wife managed the
household cookery and the children, the father and the boys could
use their bill-hooks according to size, and then burn off at night the
rubbish collected by day. Of course all have to work. The richest
settlers in Tasmania, who have made their thousands, have not been
idlers. Many a rich settler knows how to drive and hold a plough,
and has done it for years; many a rich settler’s wife knows how to
cook a dinner for the farming men, and has done it for years ; and
such knowledge, once acquired, is always ready for occasion.
Upon the head of tillage, it is a man’s own fault, if, in an average
of seasons, he be not abundantly repaid for whatever he does in
cultivating the earth. For all sorts of grain that are usual in Great
Britain—such as wheat, barley, oats, rye, and for various kinds of
pulse—both the soil and climate are wonderfully well adapted; and,
where proper tillage has been attended to, the returns have always
proved satisfactory. Where the land has been properly worked and
rotation of crops attended to—the ground cleared of stumps and
other obstructions—the growing crops preserved by a fence; where,
in fact, industry and care have been manifested, the returns may be
safely set down as equal to those derived per acre from the fair
average land of the Mother Country. Not however, in quantity only,
but in quality, is the grain of Tasmania all that a farmer need desire.
Few samples of wheat yield less than from sixty-two to sixty-four
pounds per bushel—the average standard of sixty pounds, at which
it is purchased by the public, being invariably found in favour of the
grower; and when it comes to the meal tub it is found to be rather


above the best wheat of English growth in the comparative quantity
of bread produced from the same quantity of flour.
Certain soils in this colony are peculiarly favourable to the culture
of the potatoe, and this esculent occupies a considerable amount of
attention at the hands of some agriculturists.
Mangel wurzel and turnips are cultivated in nearly every part of
the colony, and are found to answer extremely well.
The climate of Tasmania is peculiarly adapted for fruit growing,
and there is a very large export trade in green fruits, apples especially,
amounting in the twelve months ending 30th April, 1875, to 145,948
bushels. Among the fruits grown in the innumerable orchards and
gardens, the produce of which forms the main support of many
industrious families, may be mentioned apples, pears, plums, peaches,
apricots, strawberries, raspberries, walnuts, gooseberries, currants,
cherries, &c., &c.
The small fruits are extensively converted into jams and jellies, of
which last season’s export exceeded 1200 tons from Hobart Town.
All kinds of vegetables are grown with success, and find a ready
sale in the towns.
The next class to which advice is tendered is that of the Agri-
cultural or Farm Labourer.
A steady man can obtain from 10s. to 15s. a week wages, with quarters
or a cottage, firing, water, and the following weekly rations of food,
which vary on different farms, but are fully as follows: —10 to 12 lbs.
of meat, 14 lbs. of flour, 2 lbs. of sugar, \ lb. of tea, and he is generally
allowed a bit of good ground for his vegetable garden. He has only
to show an interest in his master’s service, and be sober and honest,
and his labours will be duly appreciated. He has visiting clergymen,
if not close to a church; he has public schools in every district,
open to his children at about 6 d. per week; and medical men
practising throughout the colony—these latter, however, do not
flourish in the healthy interior. His hours of labour are not more
than sixty a week at the furthest; and during shearing time or harvest
there is always remunerative employment for his children down to
9 or 10 years of age, especially in the Hop-growing Districts and
during the Hop-picking season. There is also a good demand for
boys of 12 to 14, who have gained a slight knowledge of farming
and milking.
The third and last class is the Household Servant, whose labours
are the same here as in England, but whose wages and advantages
are much greater. A respectable female servant can get from £2O
to £3O a year according to her abilities, and good cooks and laun-


dresses are much wanted; wages are usually paid monthly; the
alternate Sunday afternoon out is commonly allowed, with occasional
holidays; and, if well behaved and proper in her conduct, she enjoys
almost a certainty of getting a respectable man for a husband.
A good sober man servant in a household receives high wages, if
he is inclined to make himself generally useful.
But one thing is necessary to all emigrants on their arrival in
Tasmania, and that is, to avoid loitering about the public-houses
with their attractions. The colonial ale is excellent in its quality
and reasonable in price.
The emigrant who has a due regard to the interests of his family
will avail himself of that great colonial Life Assurance Company,
the Australian Mutual Provident Society, which has upwards of
20,000 members in the Colonies, and an income of £360,000 a year,
with £1,500,000 invested in Government and other securities ; or
in the branch of the Liverpool, London, and Globe Company, both
of which have large numbers of insurers in- Tasmania. The
Directors and Agents of these Companies and other Provident
Societies are well known ; and, for a few shillings a month, a father
of a family may make provision to protect his wife and children
from want when he shall be no longer able to do so.
The classes of the population more especially required in
Tasmania at present are :
1. Men with capital to invest.
2. Agricultural labourers, or persons accustomed to field labour or
dairy farming, and miners.
3. Domestic servants, either male or female.
There are plenty of clerks, book-keepers, dressmakers, and needle-
women, shopmen and shopwomen.
Life and property are as secure as in Great Britain.
All our native trees and shrubs are evergreen, and the smaller
shrubs are mostly aromatic, and bear beautiful and variously-
coloured flowers. “ The English-looking cottages, snug farmhouses,
large mansions surrounded by cultivated fields, the neat villages,
and prominently placed churches, make the scenery very English,
and altogether point to Tasmania as the Britain of the South.”—
Sir Paul de Strzelecki, K.G.M.G.
LONDON BANKERS FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF
TASMANIA.
The Consolidated Bank, 52, Threadneedle-street, London ; the
Bank of New South Wales, 64, Old Broad-street, London.


BANK OF VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
Hobart Town and Launceston.
Established 1823.
Paid-up Capital £185,000. Reserve Fund £20,000. £5O Shares.
Last selling price, £53. Last Dividend, 6 per cent.
London Agents —London and Westminster Bank, 41, Lothbury, E.C.
BANK OF AUSTRALASIA.
Incorporated 1835.
4, Threadneedle-street, London, with branches in Hobart Town
and Launceston.
Paid-up Capital, £1,200,000. Guarantee Fund, £210,610.
£4O Shares. Last selling price, £7O. Last Dividend, 12 per cent.
COMMERCIAL BANK.
Hobart Town and Launceston,
Established 1829.
Paid-up Capital, £115,000. Reserve Fund, £23,000.
£lOO Shares. Last selling price, £l4O. Last Dividend, 8 per cent.
London Agents— Bank of New South Wales, Old Broad Street,
London ; Union Bank of London, 2, Princes-street, Mansion House,
E.C. ; the City Bank, Threadneedle-street; the Bank of London •
the Bank of South Australia, Old Broad-street, E.C. ; the Bank of
Victoria, 3, Threadneedle-street, E.C. ; the National Bank of
Australasia, 149, Leadenhall-street, E.C. ; the National Bank of
New Zealand, 34, Clement’s-lane ; the Mercantile Bank of Sydney,
30, Great St. Helen’s, E.C.
UNION BANK OF AUSTRALIA.
Established 1838.
1, Bank Buildings, Lothbury, London, with branches in Hobart
Town and Launceston.
Paid-up Capital, £1,250,000. Reserve, £400,000,
£25 Shares. Last selling price, £64. Last Dividend, 16 per cent.


BANK OF TASMANIA, LAUNCESTON.
Capital, £200,000, in 4,000 Shares of £5O each. Last selling price,
£56. Last Dividend 8 per cent.
London Agents— English, Scottish, and Australian Chartered
Bank, 73, Cornhill, London.
IMMIGRATION AGENTS.
The Immigrant and Colonists’Aid Corporation (Limited), C. Stuart
Bailey, Esq., Secretary, 3, Queen Square, Westminster ; to whom
all applications for “ Land order Warrants,” as well as general
information about the Colony, should be made.
GENERAL AGENTS FOR GOVERNMENT BUSINESS.
Messrs. Julyan and Sargeaunt, sa, Spring Gardens, London.
AGENTS FOR MESSRS. MONEY, WIGRAM & SONS’ LINE
OF STEAMERS.
Messrs. Allport and Morgan, 7, Leadenhall-street, London,
AGENTS FOR “BLACK BALL” & “EAGLE” LINE OF
PACKETS, AND THE “LIVERPOOL AND AUSTRALIAN
NAVIGATION COMPANY.”
Gibbs, Bright, and Company, James-street, Liverpool; Thomas
Irving and Company, 17, Gracechurch-street, London.
PUBLIC COMPANIES, Ac.
a
s
S
'3
P 4
43
(Sr^J
O
ri .
CO S DO
<D p <D
d a cS
Description.
Tasmanian Steam Navigation
Company
Hobart Town Gas Company
Launceston Gas Company
Tasmanian Fire and Life Insurance
Hobart and Launceston Marine
Assurance
Derwent and Tamar Fire, Life,
and Marine
Cornwall Fire and Marine In-
surance
per cent.
7
per share
2 1. 10s.
21. 10s.
10s.
£ s. d.
16 0 0
25 0 0
13 0 0
27 0 0
40 0 0
26 10 0
10 0 0
1
29
4 1.
13
8
15
40
50
20
10
18
10
£
100
100
10
20
10
£
a
ai
03


RATES OF DISCOUNT AT THE BANKS IN HOBART TOWN
AND LAUNCESTON.
Per annum.
On bills not exceeding 95 days to run 7 per cent.
Ditto, not exceeding 125 days ditto 8 „
Ditto, exceeding 125 days ditto 9 „
RATES OF INTEREST ALLOWED BY THE BANKS ON
MONEY DEPOSITED FOR FIXED TERMS.
Per annum.
Fixed for 3 months 3 per cent.
Ditto, 6 ditto 4 ~
Ditto, 12 ditto 5 ~
EXCHANGE ON LONDON.
Bills purchased, 60 days J per cent, discount.
Bank drafts sold, 60 days 1 per cent, premium.
SAYINGS BANKS.
HOBART TOWN.
Depositors 6089
Amount deposited on 31st December, 1874 £189,850 12 9
LAUNCESTON.
Depositors 4184
Amount deposited on 31st December, 1874 £77,599 6 1


ARTICLES.
1872.
1873.
1874.
£
33,574
2391
£
30,485
2428
£
22,123
6956
Butter and Cheese
5059
9594
98,281
6311
120,027
Fruit—Preserved and Green
78,725
Gold
16,055
46,141
15,309
62,979
17,811
69,292
Grain —Wheat
Oats
41,813
68,607
43,455
Barley
2837
3588
3041
Hides —Skins and Leather
40,273
34,514
30,275
39,144
7782
41,015
16,621
42,284
18,469
Live Stock—Horses
Sheep
15,500
15,547
20,875
Oatmeal
3000
5146
6339
Oil—Sperm
47,575,.
47,715
23,145
Black
—
505
365
Timber
46,014
63,246
75,422
Vegetables
14,023
15,380
314,068
12,294
Wool
434,133
350,713
RETURN OF THE VALUES OF THE PRINCIPAL ARTICLES
OF HOME PRODUCE EXPORTED FROM TASMANIA DUR-
ING 1872, 1873, AND 1874.
PRINTED AT THE “ESSEX STANDARD” OFFICE, COLCHESTER.








