

J


I
\ ■ , ■ t tli .» ' k - j|-H


\V\ When Pat took Teddy to Fairyland,
M He never had seen such sights so grand, M'
Fine Castles of Gold and Pixie Kings, *
And quaint little Fairies with butterfly wings!
Benny and Hoppy and Emma Emu
v jjfsm And Teddy’s old friends all went along, too,
jj%d( if W Johnny the Kooka and Kanga the Roo t'k'\ J
P High in the sky the “Golden Swan” flew. W
They played with the gnomes till all dancing ceased,
I 1 Then hurried along to the Fairy Queen’s feast,
l|VKx J> Teddy was pleased when a wee little Elf r
I \W'7y brought a large Pot of Jam — All For !
A What happened when Teddy slid down the Rainbow?
l read through and then y<»u wi^
\ -4-0


was enjoying himself! Swinging in a hammock
that his little friend Pretty Pat had made for him, he was turning
over the pages of a Fairy Book which he had borrowed from her. It had
beautiful pictures of wonderful Castles, and right on the Very Front Cover
was the Fairy Queen in a long dress, holding a wand.
As he swung slowly backwards arid forwards he began to feel drowsy,
and then he heard a strange Buzzing Noise. He listened.
“It’s those Bees, again,” he thought, “or perhaps it’s Benny Bunny up
to Funny Tricks. I wish he’d go away and annoy Somebody Else.”
But the buzzing noise got louder and louder, and Teddy could not
make it out at all. Then his eyes grew round with surprise when, up in
the sky, he saw an aeroplane shaped like a beautiful Golden Swan! It
circled around, getting nearer and nearer, and presently landed on the
ground right in front of him! Out stepped the Fairy Queen herself, and
Teddy was even more surprised to find that the Fairy Queen was his little
friend Pretty Pat! He jumped out of his hammock quickly.
“Gracious, Pat,” he cried, “you Do look pretty! And what a wonderful
dress, and what’s that thing on your Head, and what’s that in your
Hand?”
Pat laughed. “You DO ask a lot of questions Teddy,” she replied,
“the thing on my head is a Crown, and the thing in my hand is a Wand.”
“But what’s it all about, and what are they All For?” asked Teddy.
“Perhaps I’d better explain,” said Pat, “it’s this way. The real Fairy
Queen has to go a Long Journey, and she asked me to take her place while
Page 2


she is away. Somebody has to look after all her Little People. It’s a
wonderful place, Teddy; there are hundreds of Fairies, and Castles, and
all sorts of Nice Things.”
“Is there any JAM, Pat?” Teddy asked Very Quickly.
“Plenty,” replied Pat, “and all Different Kinds.”
“Did you remember to Bring Some, Pat?” asked Teddy anxiously.
“No, Teddy,” she replied, “I have thought of something Far Better.
You can come with me and visit Fairyland, for a Whole Day.”
Teddy clapped his hands in excitement. “Oh, Pat,” he cried, “that will
be Wonderfull” Then he looked Very Sad. “I can’t go, Pat,” he said,
“Benny Bunny is coming over to play
he comes, he’ll think I’ve got Lost or
Over the Place and Everything, and
with me, and if I’m not here when
Something and start running All
go and get Lost Himself.”
“Benny can come, too, then,” said
Pat, “but there won’t be room on the
first trip. I’ll take you First, and come back and get Benny.”
Teddy was delighted. “I’ll go and lock up my house, Pat. Won’t be
long.”
Soon he was back, but was looking very sad AGAIN.
What’s the matter, now, Teddy,” asked Pat, “have you lost the key?”
“No, it’s not that, Pat,” said Teddy, taking out his handkerchief, “It’s
Hoppy the Hare I’m thinking of. And Emma Emu and Kanga the Roo.
And what about poor old old Tony Tortoise. He never has Any fun, only
Grubs.”
“Well, well,” said Pat, “they can come. Now jump into the ‘Golden
Swan’ and we will be in Fairyland in just a few minutes. Hold on tight,
Teddy.”
Before very long Teddy could
see the Castles shining all Blue and
Gold in the sun. “Hooray!” he cried,
“Hooray!”
Pat brought the aeroplane down,
and asked Teddy to get out and wait
awhile.
“I’ll have to hurry back and
bring the others a few at a time,
Teddy,” she said, “now don’t get into
Any Mischief.”
“I wish I’d thought to bring some
Jam,” said Teddy sadly, “I’m Very
Hungry!”
“All right, Teddy,” said Pat,
“Just Watch.”
She picked up a stone and tapped
it with her wand. At once it turned
into a large Pot of Teddy’s favourite
Jam!


his ear, “Not Exactly.”
“How do you mean ‘NOT EX- (3-^'3^.'•
ACTLY’,” asked the Fat man, “Either if
You are or You Are NOT. Don’t you / ■ \
“You can see he’s not a Fairy,” /s
said the Thin man, “he’s all over ''
“Pardon me,” said Teddy, “it’s /Kp //
NOT fluff. Pm just all over Fur— / /
that’s all.”
Pat then climbed into the “Golden Swan” and was soon high up in
the air. Teddy hopped round with excitement, and when he had waved to
Pat, sat down on a large mushroom to eat his Jam. Just then he saw a
strange sight! Two men were sitting on a load of Pumpkins, and driving
a Funny Cart. One man was tall and thin with very Long Whiskers, which
were pulled up over a high hat and tied with a spotted bow. The other
man had a bright coloured coat, and a very Round face and large Round
eyes. His body was Round and his hat was Round and all the pumpkins
were Round. But he had No Whiskers. The cart was drawn by a strange-
looking animal with a head like an Elephant and a body like a Duck.
Teddy had never seen anything so queer in All His Life. He was
gazing at it in surprise when the little Fat man who was driving called
out, “Whoa, Eleduck!” The animal stopped right in front of Teddy, and
the Fat man smiled and said:
“Excuse me are you a Fairy?”
Well,” replied Teddy, scratching
Page 4


»A
“Fluff-Fur-Feathers! It’s all the
same,” said the Thin man crossly, “in
fact, there’s not a Bit of Difference.”
“Indeed there is,” said Teddy,
“but I’m not a Fairy, although my
Friend is. She’s the Fairy Queen, and
I was just eating my Jam and wait-
ing for her.”
“Ho!” said the Fat man.
“Ha!” said the Thin man.
“Quack!” said the Eleduck.
“She will soon be here with
Benny Bunny and all my Other
Friends,” said Teddy, “then we’ll go
in those gates.”
“Then well wait, too,” said the Fat man, “we’ve heard about Fairy-
land. Been travelling for Years now we’re here. Just have to Get In.
“Pardon me,” said Teddy politely, “but what is your Name?”
“I’m TUBBY—Round like a Tub, see?” the Fat man replied.
“Oh,” said Teddy, “I have a Little Red Tub that I have my bath in, but
I don’t think you would fit in you’re too Fat.”
“I never have a bath,” said the Fat man, “I roll in the dewy grass,
then sit in the warm sun and dry myself.”
“He couldn’t do that,” said the Thin man, pointing a long, finger at
Teddy, “he’d get his fluff all wet.”
“Fur, please,” said Teddy.
“Fur-Fluff-Feathers —it’s all the
same,” said the Thin man crossly.
“Excuse me for asking,” said
Teddy, “but what is YOUR name,
please?”
“His name is Ebenezer Jonathan,”
said the Fat man, “but that’s too long
to remember. Too hard to say. We
call him ‘Skinanbone’.”
“Gracious!” said Teddy, “why?”
“Well,” Explained the Fat man,
“he’s got no meat on him. Not One
Bit. All Skin and Bone, Understand?”
“I see,” said Teddy, “That’s a
Nice Name.”
“It’s Not,” said the Thin man,
“but it’s better than ‘Tubby.’ I’d
rather be thin than round like a big
water-melon.”


“What are all the Pumpkins
for?” asked Teddy, “you’ve got Such
A Lot!”
“They’re for our Meals,” replied
Tubby, “every day we eat a Large
pumpkin. That is, on week Days. But
we never eat a Large pumpkin on
Sundays.”
“Oh,” said Teddy, “and please
what do you eat on ?”
“A Small pumpkin,” replied
Tubby.
“Don’t you Ever get tired of
Eating Pumpkins?” asked Teddy.
“Not a Bit,” replied Tubby, “they
make you Strong. You
He climbed down from the cart, and quickly jumped up and down
three times. Then he turned completely Head Over Heels!
“Gracious!” cried Teddy, “that is Very Clever! Can YOU do that,
Ebenezer Jonathan?”
“It’s Quite Simple,” said the Thin man, “and as you do me the honour
of calling me by my real name, I will proceed to show you!”
He, too, got down, and Teddy was surprised to see how tall he was!
The Thin man hopped up and down three times, then jumped up in the
air so high that his whiskers Came Undone and got all Tangled Up in
his Long Legs.
He fell on his head with a Big BUMP!
“HO, HO!” laughed Tubby.
“Quack, Quack!” said the Eleduck.
“Oh, my!” cried Teddy, “are you
Hart?”
“Not a Bit,” said Skinanbone, “I’ll
have a slice of Pumpkin, cut off my
whiskers and Try Again. Give me a
Knife, Tubby, I’ll show you a Thing
or Two!”
Tubby handed him a large knife,
and he was just about to cut off his
Whiskers when Teddy gave a loud
shout.
“Here they come!” he cried,
pointing to the sky, “here’s the Fairy
Queen and some of my Best Friends!”
Soon the Golden Swan landed,
and Pretty Pat got out, followed by
Page 6


Benny Bunny, Emma Emu and Tony the Tortoise.
“Pat,” said Teddy, “allow me to introduce you. This little Fat man is
‘Tubby,’ and the Long Thin man is ‘Skinanbone’.”
“‘Ebenezer Jonathan,’ if you please!” said the Thin man.
“How do you do?” asked Pat politely, “I am pleased to meet you.
These are Teddy’s friends: Benny, Emma and Tony.”
“Fluff, Fur and Feathers,” said Skinanbone, “just as I told you!”
“Not ME,” said Tony, “I have a Hard Shell. It keeps the rain out. If
it didn’t, I’d Get Wet.”
“Couldn’t you use an Umbrella?” asked Skinanbone.
“I never thought of Thatl” said Tony, “I must Think it Over.”
“Pat,” said Teddy, “do you think these gentlemen could go into Fairy-
land? They’ve come such a Long Way. Living on Pumpkins, too.”
“I think that can be managed,” replied Pat, “but first I have to bring
Hoppy the Hare, Kanga the Roo and Johnny Kookaburra. I won’t be long.”
She got into the Golden Swan, and was soon out of sight. Tubby was
very excited, but Skinanbone went and sat down by himself and Started
to Think. After a while, he got up and said: “I have made a Decision.
A Most Important One!”
“Ho!” said Tubby. “Indeed!” said Teddy, “what are you going To Do?”
“I’m NOT,” said Skinanbone.
“Not what ?” asked Teddy in surprise.
“Going to Cut Off My Whiskers.” He climbed back in the cart. “I
wouldn’t Dream of doing such a thing,” he said crossly, “it was Cruel to
ask me.”
“/ didn’t ask you to,” said Teddy, “did You, Tubby?”
“Certainly NOT,” replied the Fat man.


“Who DID, then?” asked Skinanbone. Then he glared at Benny. “Was
it YOU?”
“No,” replied Benny, “it all happened before I got here. But don’t
cut off your whiskers, please, Jonathan. I think you would look Very
Odd without them.”
“Thank you, Benny,” said the Thin man, gratefully, “I will take your
Advice. You appear to be the only Sensible One Here.”
Just then Teddy cried out: “Here they come! Here they come!” and
the “Golden Swan” after circling round, landed most gracefully. Out
jumped Kanga the Roo, Hoppy the Hare and Johnny Kookaburra.
“Tubby,” said Teddy, politely, “please meet my friends: Kanga,
Hoppy and Johnny.
Page 8
“Pleased to meet you,” said the Fat
man most politely, raising his hat.
The Thin man glared. “Ha!” he
said crossly, “More Fur, Fluff, and
Feathers.... What did I tell you!”
“Please don’t take any notice of
him,” said Tubby, “may we go into
Fairyland with all the others?”
“Certainly,” replied Pat, “but your
Tall friend must get down from the
cart to get through the small gate.”
“I decline,” said Skinanbone.” “I
refuse.”
“Why?” asked Teddy in surprise.
“Someone might Steal My Pump-
kins,” replied the Thin man.
“/ wouldn’t,” said Teddy, “I don’t
like them.”


“Never mind,’’ said Pat, “let
us see what we can do.”
She waved her Magic Wand
and then tapped the cart.
All of a sudden Eleduck,
Tubby, Skinanbone, Pumpkins
and All were even smaller than
Teddy himself. Teddy’s eyes
nearly popped out with sur-
prise!
“Excuse me!” yelled Tubby.
“Hey!” howled Skinanbone.
“Quack, Quack!” cried Ele-
duck.
Teddy stood gazing at the
very strange sight, and at last
said:
“Poor Skinanbone was Very Tall, but now he’s gone and got All Small,
I hope he isn’t feeling ill—Good Gracious! Tubby’s Smaller 811111'”
“Everything will be all right,” said Pat, “they’ll be their proper size
again as soon as we get through the gates. Come on now all of you.”
In a few minutes they arrived at the gates of the grounds where stood
the Fairy Castle. Pretty Pat tapped three times, and the gates slowly
opened. Teddy gazed with delight at the beautiful castle, gleaming like
gold in the sun. All at once a great number of pixies, gnomes and funny
little elves joined hands and began to dance around him.


Teddy was delighted and clapped his hands with joy. He had never
been more pleased in all his life! “I think I’ll make up a little Song,” he
said. Presently he began to sing:
“You are all Very Nice, in fact, you’re GRAND
My tiny wee friends of Fairyland,
Please keep on dancing while Kanga the Roo
And Hoppy and Benny all join in, too.’
When they were tired of dancing, Pretty Pat called them all together.
“I must hurry along now, and give orders for the Fairy Feast. Of
course, you will all be invited, but while we are getting ready, there are
plenty of things to amuse you. And, Teddy, remember that Advice.”
“What Advice, Pat?” asked Teddy, thoughtfully.
“Don’t go and get into Any Mischief,” replied Pat.
“Very well, Pat,” said Teddy, and started off with his friends to look
for Something to Do.
“We’ll wait here,” said Skinanbone, crossly, “/’m not going wandering
about —I’m Hungry. Come on, Tubby, let’s Cut Up a Pumpkin.”
Suddenly Teddy pointed up to the sky. “Hey, Benny!” he cried, “look
at the Beautiful Rainbow!” And sure enough, there was the most Won-
derful Rainbow they had ever seen! One end came down in the next field
into a bed of flowers, but the Other End was out of sight right over the
hill.
“If we could climb up to the middle we could all slide down,” said
Teddy. “Have you got a Ladder, Benny?” he asked.
Benny felt in all his Pockets. “I’m sorry, Teddy,” he said, “/ haven’t
got one. How about you, Hoppy? Have you a Ladder?”
Page 10


$MT
Hoppy was feeling through his
pockets when a little Dwarf hap-
pened to pass.
• “Ladder?” he asked, “who
wants a Ladder?”
“We did,” they all said together,
“we want to climb on the Rainbow.”
“We’ll soon make a ladder,” said
the little man. “I’ll show you How.”
They followed him to the foot
of the Rainbow, when he started to
pick large flowers with strong
stalks. Then be began to twist and
wind them together, showing the
others how to do it. Soon a long
ladder made of flowers and stalks
lay on the ground.
Teddy. He picked up one end and tried
“Now we’re All Ready,” cried
to throw it over the Rainbow. After several tries he gave it up and sat
on the ground, saying sadly:
“We’ll have to go without our Slide
I can’t fix the Ladder, I’ve Tried and TRIED.”
“Ha, Ha, Ha!” laughed Johnny Kookaburra.
“It’s nothing to laugh at, Johnny,” |aid Teddy crossly, “look how Sad
Benny is, and poor old Hoppy, too.” f
But Johnny just laughed “Ha, Ha, Ha!” and picking up one end of
the ladder, flew straight to the
middle of the Rainbow. He looped
J■/ one end round a few times and then
|Va| flew back to his admiring friends.
Teddy was delighted! “I’m sorry I
dS was cross with you, Johnny,” he
Jj said, “you are really Very Clever.
\ / Did you think of that All By
V Yourself?”
Johnny was pleased, as he was
very fond of Teddy. “It’s quite
Strong,” he said.
Teddy, Benny and Hoppy
quickly climbed the ladder, and
with a shout of Joy, Teddy slid
right down. With excited squeaks
Benny and Hoppy followed, land-
ing in a bed of soft green moss and


wildflowers. After sliding down two or three times, Teddy said:
“Benny, let’s slide down the Other Sidel ”
Benny rubbed his nose. “I don’t think we’d better, Teddy,” he replied,
“how do we know what’s at the Other End over the big hill might be
Thistles, or Spikes, or Goodness Knows What.”
“Nonsense, Benny,” said Teddy, a Beautiful Rainbow just wouldn’t
have such Nasty Things anywhere near it. How about you, Hoppy?”
Hoppy looked serious, too. “/ don’t like Thistles or Spikes, either,” he
said, “especially for Falling Into.”
“I’ll tell you what ,” said Teddy, “I’ll go First. When you hear me call
out ‘Coo-ee’ you’ll know it’s All Right. Then you can follow me.”
“Very well, Teddy,” said Benny, doubtfully, “but I think it’s Very
Risky.”
“I’ll be all right,” replied Teddy, and off he went up the ladder. He
sat on the middle of the Rainbow waving to Benny and Hoppy, then he
called out: “Off We Go!” and quickly slid down, presently disappearing
out of sight over the hill. Benny and Hoppy stood listening.
“Did you Hear Anything, Hoppy?” asked Benny anxiously.
“Well, I thought I heard Something ,” replied Hoppy, “but it wasn’t
‘Coo-ee’.”
As a matter of fact, poor Teddy didn’t have Enough Breath to call
‘Coo-ee’ or Anything Else! He had been so busy sliding down the Rain-
bow that he didn’t notice that it ended in a Large Pond until, with a
Splash, he fell PLOP into the water! A group of pixies laughed and
Laughed as poor Teddy, Very Wet and Very Unhappy, climbed out of
the water just as Benny and Hoppy came scampering up.
“Now, Teddy,” said Benny, “look what you’ve Gone and Done! We
told you.”
Page 12


“Benny,” said Teddy, crossly, “I
remember exactly that you said there
might he Thistles and Spikes and
Goodness Knows What. But you
didn’t say One Word about Water.
Now, did you, Benny?”
“Well,” said Benny, rubbing his
nose, “now I come to think of it, I
didn’t.”
“Then it’s all Your Fault,” said
Teddy, “just look how Wet I am.”
Although they had laughed at
Teddy, the little Pixies were Really
Sorry. They rubbed him all over with
soft dry moss, then quickly sewing
large leaves together with strands from a spider’s web, soon made a
pretty coat which they put on him so he would not catch cold.
Then they hurried back, where they found Pat asking Kanga the
Roo and Emma Emu where on earth Teddy had gone. When Teddy came
up looking So Very Sorry For Himself, Pat didn’t scold him for Getting
Into Mischief.
“Teddy,” she said, “the Fairy Feast is all ready. Sit in the sun and,
when you are Quite Dry, you may all come along and join in the fun.
I must hurry back now and be ready for you. See that you are Quite Dry.”
In a little while they all set out for the Fairy Castle, A little gnome
with a Big Sword stood guard at the door and glared at Teddy.
“What’s your name and what do You want?” he asked crossly.
Teddy was a bit scared of the Big Sword. “I’m Teddy,” he said,
“and these are all My Friends. We have been invited to the Feast by
your Queen.”
“Ho,” said the gnome, “there’s a
strange lot of people in Fairyland these-
days! Do you know a funny little man,
and a tall Thin man, always carrying
Pumpkins?”
“Gracious!” cried Teddy, “that would
be Tubby and Skinanhone. I forgot all
about them. Do you know where they are?”
“They’ve gone inside —Pumpkins and
All,” said the gnome. “Now I’ll open the
door. What’s your name, again?”
“Teddy,” was the reply, “and this chap
with the Long Whiskers is Benny, and the
one with the Long Legs is Hoppv, and the
Long Tail belongs to Kanga the Roo.”
The little man put down his sword and,
opening the door, called out loudly:


“Your Majesty the Fairy Queen, there are a lot of queer folk here
want to Come In. One of them calls himself ‘Teddy,’ and the others all
have Long Legs, Long Whiskers, or Long Tails. And there are a Few
With Beaks.”
“They are my friends, let them in at once, Please,” said the Queen.
“Ho,” said the gnome to Teddy, “in you go—the Whole Bang Lot of
You.”
Teddy was in Such A Hurry to get in that he fell over right on to his
nose. When he got up, his eyes nearly popped out of his head!
At the top of a long table, on which were more Nice Things than Teddy
had seen in all his life, sat the Fairy Queen. She beckoned to Teddy.
“You can sit in this chair right next to me, Teddy,” she said, “and
there is a Whole Pot of Jam all for yourself.”
Soon Teddy was seated next to Pat, and Benny and Hoppy squealed
with excitement as they scrambled for chairs. Then came Kanga, Emma,
Johnny Kookaburra, Tubby, Skinanhone and Eleduck. Poor Tony was last!
“That’s the worst of being a Tortoise,” he said, “I’m So Slow. Cakes
and Things are All Very Well,” he thought, “but I do hope they have
some Grubs.”
When all were seated, the Fairy Queen gave a little speech, and then
they all set to, and the Good Things began to disappear with astonishing
rapidity, which means: “Very Very Quickly.” When they had all eaten
as much as they could, and had watched the Fairies dance, Pat told them
to go outside and play until she was ready to take them back home in
the “Golden Swan.” “And be careful, Teddy,” she said, “and don’t Get
Into Any Mischief.”
When they got outside, Teddy saw something on top of a high
flag-pole.
“Look, Benny,” he said excitedly, “there’s a Pot of Jam Up There!”
Benny looked up. “That’s not Jam, Teddy,” he said, “that’s what they
call an ‘Ornament.’ Isn’t that an Ornament, Hoppy?” he asked.
“Nonsense, Benny,” said Teddy, “it’s a Pot of Jam, although I don’t
Page 14


went
»oi very Anxious as
nut they heard Teddy singing /A
. ouiig: -
“I’m really not scared, though they think I am,
I’ll climb and climb till I Get That Jam!” -v /
But he was such a little fellow. He got tired and \ I
an to slip. He clung on tightly, but the pole wobbled A-A y
the wind, and he slipped still further. He kept on f
jping, Slipping, SLIPPING then BUMP! / -r
• • • • • V) /~
Poor Teddy didn’t remember any more. When he \r
ime to his senses, he was sitting on a tree stump, with A=
bandage tied round his head. His little friend Pat was
iolding a spoon with some Jam on it. He couldn’t Make ■
X Out!
“I’m very sorry, Pat,” he said, “I shouldn’t have -
climbed the pole. Benny and Hoppy and Kanga told me 11 > /
Not To.” , A i
“What pole, Teddy?” asked Pat. “Whatever are you L- / f
talking about?” | iTV “
“The pole with the Jam on it, in Fairyland,” replied v M !l
Teddy. A
“I think your fall must have upset you. Just keep / 4
quiet, and you will soon be all right,” said Pat. “I think | 11
you must have been reading the Fairy Book and had | 1 ~ .1 J|||lA
funny dreams.” 111■: «Jf
Teddy was amazed! “Aren’t you the Fairy Queen?” 1
he asked, “and what about the Feast, and the Pixies and J&a IVW
know how it Got There. I’m going to climb up after it.”
Teddy’s friends tried hard to persuade him Not To.
“It’s NOT Jam,” said Benny.
“It’s Far Too High,” said Hoppy.
“You Might Fall,” said Kanga.
“You’ve had enough Jam, Teddy,” said Emma.
“It’s Too Wobbly,” said Johnny Kookaburra.
“Let him go,” said Tony, “Teddy can climb Very
Well. Besides, if it’s not Jam, it might easily be a Tin
of Grubs.”
So off Teddy went, and began to climb. He went
higher and Higher, and his friends got Very Anxious as
the pole began to Wobble, but they heard Teddy singing
this little song:
But he was such a little fellow. He got tired and
began to slip. He clung on tightly, but the pole wobbled
in the wind, and he slipped still further. He kept on
slipping, Slipping, SLIPPING then BUMP!
Poor Teddy didn’t remember any more. When he
came to his senses, he was sitting on a tree stump, with
a bandage tied round his head. His little friend Pat was
holding a spoon with some Jam on it. He couldn’t Make
It Out!
talking about?”
“I think your fall must have upset you. Just keep
quiet, and you will soon be all right,” said Pat. “I think
you must have been reading the Fairy Book and had
funny dreams.”


When you were the Splendid Fairy Queen, JIB
But then there came that Awful Bump,
my head go thump, Thump, THUMP!
Pat laughed. “Poor Teddy,” she
when your hammock broke and you
on your head. I bathed it with cold
up. You will soon be Quite Well.”
“Well, well, well,” said Teddy,
.AW
/)
said, “I was bringing you some Jam,
came down with a terrible bump right
water from the billabong and tied it
“so I must have Dreamed it all! Are
you Quite Sure, Pat, you didn’t take us all to Fairyland in the Golden
Swan?”
“Quite sure, Teddy,” replied Pat, “but after you’ve had a rest and your
head is quite clear, you may tell me all about it. Just sit here quietly, and
later on, I’ll try and fix up your hammock again; it must have broken
somehow, and tipped you out.”
Poor Teddy Couldn’t Just Believe that he had dreamed all about
Fairyland, and everything he had seen there. “I’ll ask Benny and Hoppy
when I see them. I wonder if I did dream it all?” he thought.
But Pat said that he Had, so that was the end of it! He sat very quietly
thinking, then he said to his little friend:
Page 16


Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
Ramsay, Ware Publishing Pty. Ltd., 117 King St., Melbourne.
Sole Wholesale Distributors: Gordon and Gotch A/asia Ltd.
