

\-‘. : '•Hr®* 5 **








TELEGRAPH DICK


By the same Author
MCGLUSKY THE TRAIL BLAZER
mcglusky’s GREAT ADVENTURE
PRESIDENT MCGLUSKY
THE ADVENTURES OF SIGNOR
MCGLUSKY
GINGER AND "MCGLUSKY
MCGLUSKY THE GOLD SEEKER
MCGLUSKY THE PEACE MAKER
MCGLUSKY
MCGLUSKY THE REFORMER
MCGLUSKY THE FILIBUSTER
SNOWEY AND MCGLUSKY
MCGLUSKY, M.P.
MCGLUSKY THE SEAL POACHER
MCGLUSKY ABROAD
THE MOCKING CHEVALIER
THE LONG LONE TRAIL
RORY O’MOORE
THE OLD GREY GODS
THE FALCON’S EYRIE
THE QUEEN OF HEARTS
ANGEL JIM
MAID MOLLY
THE WATCHER ON THE TOWER
A LINDSAY O’ THE DALE
MAROZIA
BLACK PRINCE PETER
BARNEY o’HEA: TRAPPER
GINGER AND JOAN
THE GREAT WHITE WOLF
MOON OF THE DEVIL’S OWN
WOLF PACKS OF THE NORTH
RATTLING SPURS
BUD STORM OUTLAW
OKEN TRAILS
DRISCOLL KING OF SCOUTS
MCTAVISH THE GREAT
MY LIFE OF ADVENTURE
Wright & Brown, Ltd.,
4 Farringdon Avenue, London, E.C.4


Telegraph Dick
By
A. G. Hales
Author of the famous McCLUSKT BOOKS
Wright & Brown, Ltd,
4 Farringdon Avenue ,
London , E.C. 4


MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY PURNELL AND SONS, LTD.
PAULTON (SOMERSET) AND LONDON


Poly -i
2 1 MAR 1938
DEDICATION
THIS book is dedicated to “ The Boys of the
Empire" with the author's kindest wishes. The
boys of to-day will be masters of the Empire to-
morrow. Bovs now living in cities, in way back
townships, in coastal villages unknown and un-
heard of, you have a rough hewn path to tread.
May you tread it boldly and successfully. I want
to stand well with you. You are only acorns
now, but by-and-by you will be oaks. God speed
you all.
Tours most cordially,
A. G. HALES.




CONTENTS
I. Dick Traps a Thief . . . n
11. Sim Strikes Trouble—The First
Adventure . . . . .33
111. Sim’s First Elephant Hunt . . 55
IV. The Boys’ First Bivouac . . 76
V. The Dangers of Feather-farming—
Dick Sticks to his Pal . .97
VI. The Black Trouble Brewing . . 116
VII. The First Taste of War . . 138
VIII. The Ivory Treasure Store . . 160
IX. The Great Ivory Treasure . . 179
X. Dick Gets into Disgrace . . 198
XI. The Return of Sim Slack . . 216
XII. How Dick Proved his Chieftainship 232




TELEGRAPH DICK


*


CHAPTER I
DICK TRAPS A THIEF
It was a scorching hot day in July thirty years ago,
and the people, as they streamed along the Strand
and Fleet Street, were showing pretty plainly that
they felt it severely. There was not a breath of air
blowing, and the mass of humanity, wedged close
together, were panting like cattle in drought time.
A cab came rattling along Fetter Lane, and turned
sharply towards the Law Courts, so sharply that the
horse crossed its legs and came down with a smash.
An elderly man, who was sitting in the cab, was pitched
head-first into the road, and lay where he fell. Instantly
a crowd gathered round the fallen man, and one of
the spectators, a flashily-dressed fellow, put his arms
under the injured person, and began to try to lift
him up. He seemed very clumsy in his attempts, even
though the hurt man was lying face downwards.
“Why don’t you pick the poor chap up if you’re
going to, mister?” cried one in the crowd.
“I’m feeling if his heart is beating, ain’t I?” cried
the flashily-dressed one angrily.
“Feelin’ if his watch’s tickin’, more like,” shrilled
the thin voice of a newsboy from the gutter.
The crowd laughed.
“Here, let me see if I can’t lift him,” put in a burly
drayman. “You’re a poor sort of a chap, you are,”


he added, as he gave the over-dressed person a gentle
shove, which sent him away from the body of the victim
of the accident.
“Don’t push ’im too ’ard,” jeered the newsboy;
“you’ll break ’im, mister; ’e’s plate glass, that’s wot
5 *
e is.
Once more the idlers laughed, for no one seemed
to like the gaily-attired personage. He had the
appearance of being one of those gentry who make a
living in crowds —out of other folks’ pockets; and a
London crowd seems to know that sort by instinct,
just as a Siberian sheep dog knows a wolf on
sight.
“You’re only a common lot of cads,” the fellow
cried, with a lofty wave of his right arm. “I’m sure
I don’t want to bother about this stranger.” And he
hailed a passing cab, and stepped in, just as a police
officer came up to see what was wrong.
At the moment the accident had happened, Dick
Sangster, or “Telegraph Dick,” as he was known
amongst his chums, had arrived at the corner of
Fetter Lane. He had in his pouch a telegram addressed
to a very famous barrister, who was eagerly expecting
that identical message, which he was destined not to
get for a long time after it was due; a fact which had
an important bearing upon this story. For Master
Dick, who was not faultless like so many heroes, stopped
to look with the rest of the crowd, and he had a pretty
keen suspicion that the over-dressed person had taken
something from the breast-pocket of the injured
person as he stooped over him, pretending to lift him
from the ground. Telegraph Dick knew how quick
and clever at such work an expert pickpocket could be,


and he knew also that it was a dangerous matter for
a boy in the Government service to prefer a false charge
against a person, no matter how grave his suspicions
might be. So he did not dare to say anything; but
when he saw the fellow hire a cab and clear out so
rapidly, he felt certain that something was wrong. He
had longed all his life for an adventure, and here was
what looked like one slipping away right under his
nose.
At that moment his eyes fell upon another cab
crawling along, looking for a fare, and a thought
flashed into his mind. Why not follow the suspected
thief, and see where he lived? In a moment he had
leapt into the cab.
“Follow that cab in front —look lively!” he shouted
to the driver: and the cabby, thinking that the tele-
graph boy had a message to deliver to someone who
was in the other vehicle, promptly dropped the whip
on his horse, and started in pursuit.
Down the Strand rattled the first cab, containing
the flashily-apparelled personage, and Telegraph
Dick’s cabby followed. The first cab turned the
corner of Wellington Street, and sped quickly across
Waterloo Bridge; and Telegraph Dick followed.
As soon as the bridge was crossed, the gaudy one
jumped out of his cab, and walked briskly off, and
Dick, slipping a shilling—the only one he had in the
world —into the cabby’s hand, hurried along after
him. The fellow turned sharply to the right when he
reached York Road, and made his way past the
entrance to Waterloo Station, and on until he reached
Kennington Road, where he turned into one of the
many lodging houses, and disappeared.


Telegraph Dick sauntered past, and made sure of
the number, which he jotted down in his pocket-
book; and then he suddenly bethought himself of his
message, long since due at the Law Courts.
“I expect I’ll get into a fine row over this,” he
muttered; and off he sped as hard as his legs could
carry him, dodging and ducking through the con-
gested traffic as only a London boy can.
When he got to the Law Courts the great barrister
snatched the telegram from him, and opened it hastily.
One swift glance he gave at the contents, and then he
glared at Dick.
“How is it I have not had this sooner?” he
demanded.
Dick stammered out an excuse of some kind, but
he could not deceive the man who had had a lifetime
of experience in reading faces.
“So,” he said coldly, “you have been loitering on
the way, and watching some street scene, and you
have lost me a case —a case, boy, that meant more to
me than you could earn in ten years.”
“I’m sorry, sir. I—l ” began Dick.
“Oh, you are sorry, are you?” snapped the angry
barrister, “Well, I think you’ll be more sorry still
before you are much older, for I mean to get you
dismissed from the service, you idle, worthless young
scoundrel.”
He waved his hand, and poor Dick slunk off; for
no one knew better than he that he had been guilty
of a very grave fault. He went back to his office with
a heavy heart, for he knew that if he were dismissed
from the service his step-father would make home a
very unpleasant place indeed for him.


He was the only son of his mother, who, as a widow,
had married a man with a boy of Dick’s own age,
and this boy was the bane of Dick’s life. He was one
of those wonderfully good boys who never did anything
wrong. He was a model of tidiness; his hair was never
rough or tumbled; his collar never soiled; his ti&
eternally just where it ought to be; his boots never
seemed to get muddy in winter or dusty in summer.
He had never fought with any other boy in his life,
had never been late at school or at work. One of
those boys, in fact, who seem to be too good for this
wicked world, yet never seem to do much good for
anyone else in it, in spite of all their virtues.
His name was Stanley, and he was eternally held
up to poor, wayward, warm-hearted, impulsive,
careless Dick as a model, until Dick loathed the
name and face and virtues of his step-brother as he
loathed nothing else in life. Once, when he was a
small boy, he had got up in the night to feel Stanley’s
shoulders with his fingers, and being caught in the
act by his step-father, he had confessed that he had
been feeling if Stanley had wings. He said he had
been told so often that his step-brother was an angel,
that if he hadn’t got wings he ought to have; for
which he had been soundly cuffed by his mother’s
husband, who accused him of insolence. Ever since
he had had a step-father the boy had been in perpetual
trouble. When he was silent in the house, he was
accused of being surly, and was recommended to be
nice and cheerful like dear Stanley. If he whistled or
sang, he was told that he was coarse and ill-bred, and
advised to take Stanley as a model. And his stainless
step-brother used to look at him sorrowfully and sigh,


and ask him why it was he could not conduct himself
like a Christian.
Yet, outside his own home, nearly everyone liked
Dick, and had a cheery word for him.
When Dick was passing Fetter Lane he saw a
police constable on duty, and stopped to ask him if
the gentleman who had been thrown out of the cab
had been badly hurt.
“No,” replied the officer; “he seemed all right by
the time we got him to his hotel, except that he had
a splitting headache.”
“Where is he staying?” asked the boy.
The officer laughed.
“Why,” he replied, “you could not be more
inquisitive if you were a newspaper reporter. The
gentleman is staying at the Hotel Cecil; he is the
famous big game hunter and explorer, M. Le Vine.”
Dick thanked the kindly guardian of the peace,
and went upon his way.
It was not very long before he found that the
barrister had made no idle threat when he said he
would bring about his dismissal from the telegraph
service. Dick was carpeted for idling; and it being
a grave matter over which he had loitered, and as
he had been an hour late in the delivery of his message,
he was dismissed, and had to go home and tell his
people what had happened to him. His step-father
reproached him most bitterly, calling him a useless
ne’er-do-well; his mother scolded early and late, and
Stanley, the irreproachable youth, quoted passages of
Scripture in his hearing, all bearing upon the fate of
slothful and unruly persons.
One morning it struck Dick that, as he was out of


work, he might just as well call at the Hotel Cecil
and ask M. Le Vine if he had been robbed of anything
on the day he was thrown out of his cab. He was not
shy about calling there, because he had been there
scores of times before in his uniform with telegrams.
The great hunter granted him an interview at once.
He was a brisk personage, with a curt, commanding
mode of address.
“Well, my lad, what is it?”
“You were thrown out of a cab at the corner of
Fetter Lane and Fleet Street recently, sir, I believe,”
said Dick.
The hunter smiled a little grimly.
“Yes, boy; I’ve risked a thousand dangers in foreign
lands to come home and be nearly killed by a con-
founded cab horse.”
“Did you lose anything that day, sir?”
“Hello!” cried the hunter, a pleased look spreading
all over his face. “So you found my pocket-book,
did you, lad —eh?”
“No, sir; I did not find it, but I know where the
man lives who stole it.”
“Stole it, eh?”
“Yes. You were insensible, and a pickpocket
robbed you.”
“If that is so, why didn’t you inform the police?”
Then Dick told his story, omitting nothing. The
traveller listened patiently.
“So!” he said at last. “Can you take me to the
house where the fellow is staying, and point him out
to me?”
“Yes, sir; I can. But won’t you call at Scotland
Yard, and tell the detectives about it?”


“No; I won’t,” snapped the hunter. “Firstly, I
don’t want to be mixed up in a police court case;
secondly, there are certain papers in that pocket-
book which that scamp has read by now, and I don’t
want their contents talked about. They contain a
secret which is not mine; so I must get the papers
myself. I have been waiting, expecting someone to
turn up with the pocket-book ever since I found that
I had lost the run of it. I would pay a fair price to
have it back in my hands quietly, without any fuss or
publicity. Wait here, my lad; I sha’n’t be long.”
He soon reappeared, ready for a walk; and Dick
fancied that he could make out the shape of a revolver
resting in his jacket pocket.
As soon as he got into the Strand, he signalled a cab.
“Now, boy, tell the cabby where to drive to,” he
said in his brisk, alert fashion.
As they drove along he chatted to Dick, just as
pleasantly as if he had been merely an ordinary
person, instead of being a man with a world-wide
fame. But, then, most of the men who have done
things arc like that; it is your empty bubble that
floats high.
Arrived at the house, the hunter signalled to the
cabman to wait, and was striding across the pavement
towards the gate, when the front door opened and the
very man they were in search of came out, dressed
in a suit so loud you could almost hear it talk. The
fellow had a large cigar in his mouth, and was button-
ing up his gloves as he stood upon the threshold. Dick
whispered quickly that this was the identical personage
they were in search of, and M. Le Vine promptly
stepped up to him, and said abruptly:


“Good-day. Good-day. Going out, eh?”
The fellow stared.
“You’ve got pretty cool cheek for a stranger,” he
retorted.
“Cool,” laughed Le Vine. “You are right; I’m a
regular iceberg in the matter of cheek when it suits
me.”
“Do you happen to know that you are address-
ing your conversation to a gentleman?” he asked
haughtily.
M. Le Vine smiled into his face.
“A gentleman of the road, eh? Oh, yes, my dear
fellow; I know a lot about you. But this is scarcely
the time or place to talk about one’s knowledge, is
it? Better come back with me to the house, and here
what I have to say.”
“I’ll see you in Hades first,” was the hot retort.
“I’m going about my business, and you can do the
same.”
“Oh, as you please; but as you won’t listen to
reason, you pocket-picking scoundrel, why, I’ll have
to take other steps. Dick!”
“Yes, sir.”
“Call a constable.”
“Right, sir.” And with a couple of quick springs
Master Dick was half-way to the gate.
“I suppose you must have your own way,” snarled
the rascal. “Call the boy back.”
M. Le Vine called sharply to Dick, and that young
fellow came promptly back.
“This gentleman has changed his mind, boy. We
are going inside for a little rest; he seems to have
caught a chill.”


“Too much cool cheek about, eh?” grinned Master
Richard, looking up into the surly face of the rascal.
The man swore a vile oath, and went into the
house, followed by the hunter and the boy.
“Now,” he said, “I don’t know who you are or
what you want.”
“I want the pocket-book you stole from me when
I lay insensible in Fleet Street, you rascally footpad;
that’s all I want.”
“I never saw you or your pocket-book in my life.
You must be mad,” was the impudent reply.
“You robbed me at the corner of Fetter Lane and
Fleet Street last Monday.”
“That’s a lie. I was in Dublin last Monday, and
can prove it.”
“I can prove you were not,” cried Dick, “and so
can the carter who took this gentleman from you
whilst you were fumbling at his breast pocket.”
“Come, come, my fine fellow, don’t waste more
time and words. You are in a tight corner. Give
me my pocket-book.” M. Le Vine spoke testily, for
he was not by any means a slow-tempered man.
“If a thing is worth having it is worth paying for,
mister,” jeered the scamp impudently.
The words were hardly out of his mouth ere M. Le
Vine had sprung upon him, and taking him by the
collar, shook him until his teeth fairly rattled in his
head. Wrenching himself free, the pick-pocket snatched
up a heavy vase, and was about to bring it down with
all his force on the head of the hunter, when Telegraph
Dick, dashing in under his guard, clasped him round
the legs, just below the knees, and with a big heave
pitched him squarely upon his back; and before he


could rise the boy was upon him, and had him by the
throat.
“Very smartly done, lad,” cried the delighted
hunter, as he stood over the prostrate thief. “By
George, you’ve got the makings of a man in you if
ever a boy had.”
In the end the rascal owned up, and gave M. Le
Vine back his pocket-book, with all his letters and
papers intact. On the way back to the “Cecil”
M. Le Vine told Dick how he himself had left London
when only sixteen years of age to tempt fortune in
Africa. He told of his early struggles there as a farmer’s
lad, as a miner, and of his life as a trader, hunter, and
prospector; and Dick felt his blood tingling in his
veins, for he was an adventurer born, the spirit of
daring and romance was in every fibre of his being.
Arriving at the “Cecil,” the hunter gave Dick a
ten-pound note.
“Five,” he said, with a laugh, “for your wit in
tracking that bounder down so cleverly, and five for
the way you stopped him from cracking my skull with
that heavy vase.”
As Telegraph Dick walked home that evening he
was the proudest boy in England. A great man,
one who had hunted in the untrodden wilderness
and fought wild beasts and savage men for half a
lifetime, had praised him, and told him that he had
the makings of a man in him; and, more than that,
the great man had given him a ten-pound note, more
money than poor Dick had ever hoped to handle at
one time. Over and over again he crumpled the
crisp note in his hand, as it rested securely in his
breeches pocket. So proud and pleased was he that


he whistled and sang aloud as he walked, and people
passing him turned and looked after the boy with a
smile.
Dick was not a particularly handsome boy at any
time, but just a rugged, everyday sort of chap, like
those one meets at every turn in a great city. But
on this occasion, although he did not seem to know
it, he looked a little worse than usual. He had some-
thing very like a black eye, and his jacket was torn at
the lapel. The thief had done these things when
Telegraph Dick was kneeling on his chest. One
constable, standing at the corner of Fleet Street and
New Bridge Street, said to his mate, as he caught
sight of the boy coming along with his head in the air,
whistling like a blackbird:
“Look at Telegraph Dick. I’ll bet the young
beggar has been having a turn up with someone, and
he has won.”
“Got a black eye and torn jacket,” replied his
chum with a grin. “Good job for him he’s not in
uniform.”
He shook a reproving finger at the lad as he passed,
but Dick, in the fullness of his heart, only threw him a
merry wink with his coloured eye, and passed on,
smiling like a nigger with a ’possum pie in front of
him. He was thinking of the surprise he had in store
for those at home; he knew that the ten-pound note
would be very welcome, for money was not plentiful
in that household, and he meant to put it in his
mother’s hands as a peace offering; and he thought
to himself that they would all be proud of him when
he told them how cleverly and pluckily he had
earned it.


In this frame of mind he arrived home, and knocked
at the door, which was opened by the immaculate
Stanley, the pet lamb of the flock. Dick was so full of
good humour that he was just running over with the
milk of human kindness.
“Hello, Stan,” he cried cheerily. “Hasn’t it been
a ripping day?”
But the spotless one drew away from him, and,
looking at the eye that was in mourning, said:
“Richard, you look low, positively low, and you
talk as you look. No well-bred person talks such
slang.”
Dick looked his step-brother in the face for a
moment.
“Slang,” he said; “I didn’t know I used any.”
“You said it had been a ‘ripping day.’ I should
have said, ‘What a beautiful day it has been.’”
Dick grinned.
“Oh, all right, Stan, beautiful day—eh?”
“You’ve got a black eye, and you’ve torn your
jacket. I wonder if you expect my father to work
all his life to keep you in clothes to spoil.”
Dick flushed up angrily, and walked to his room.
“What is it, my dear lad?” said the father, as
Stanley returned to the dining-room with a grieved
and outraged look upon his sleek countenance.
The very perfect boy threw a tone of disgust into
his voice, as he answered:
“Oh, don’t ask me; wait until you see Richard.
I—l really think he has been drinking; he looks so
utterly disreputable.”
At that moment Master Dick himself appeared,
and, going over to his step-father, he said:


“I’m glad I’ve found you at home, sir. I have
brought something for you.”
As he spoke he drew the ten-pound note from his
pocket.
With a shout of rage the step-father sprang to
his feet, and pushed the lad violently backwards.
“You young blackguard,” he stormed, “to come
inside my house like this! You are a ruffian. But,
thank God, you are no son of mine.” Then, turning
to his wife, he cried: “Look at your son, Maria, and
look at mine.”
Maria did look, and began to cry and scold in the
same breath.
Dick certainly did not look very nice, with his
flushed and angry face, his black eye, torn coat, and
clenched fists. But Stanley looked a real model boy,
as he stood there with a self-righteous smirk upon
his insipid countenance.
“Why don’t you let me speak, and explain?”
asked Dick, his lips twitching; for his heart was very
sore at such a home-coming after all his gay
hopes.
“Explain,” cried the head of the house. “Your
face, your clothes are explanation enough, you young
ruffian.”
“I’m not a ruffian, sir; I got pulled about a bit
helping a gentleman who had been robbed.”
“It is sinful to lie, Richard,” cooed Stanley. “Any-
one can see you’ve been brawling.”
Dick gave the pure one a look that sent him scuttling
over to his father’s side, for if there was one thing in
this world that Telegraph Dick prided himself upon
it was his truthfulness; whilst he knew, by bitter


experience, that when it suited his book Master
Stanley could, and would, lie like a cheap-jack.
He drew out the ten-pound note once more, and
laid it in his mother’s lap.
“There,” he said, “that is what the gentleman
gave me for saving his property.”
“Oh, Dick,” cried his mother, with a note of joy
in her voice; for she was not a bad mother, only a
weak one, one of those women who will do almost
anything to gain peace and quietness. “See,” she
cried, holding up the money in front of her husband’s
eyes, “Look at Dick’s present —a real ten-pound
note, father.”
Instead of sharing the mother’s joy, the step-father,
who could not, and would not, believe any good thing
of Dick, stepped forward, and, snatching up the note,
exclaimed:
“Where did you get this? Did you come by it
honestly?”
“I never stole a farthing or a farthing’s worth in
my life,” cried Dick, now white with rage. “How
dare you say such a thing to me?”
111 impound this,” answered the step-father,
until I have made proper inquiries, and if you are
a thief I’ll turn you into the street.”
Something began to sing in Dick’s head; in after
life he knew the signal well, and called it his “brain
singing for battle.”
Now, tell me the name of the person you say
gave you this, and tell me when and why he gave it.”
“I won’t,” retorted Dick sullenly. “I won’t tell
you a word. If you like to think I stole it you are
welcome to think so; I don’t care what you think—


now. I came home to tell you everything, and I
was as happy as a sandboy, but you have treated me
shamefully.”
“There, Maria,” sneered the step-father, “there
now; isn’t that as good as a confession of guilt?”
“Why don’t you say where you stole the money
from, Richard?” sneered Stanley.
This was too much for poor hot-headed Dick.
Stanley had pushed out his face as he uttered the
taunt, and his nose at that moment looked to Dick’s
excited imagination as if it had been made to be hit,
and he hit it, with the straight, hard, left-handed
drive from the shoulder that is so hard to avoid; and
the next instant, with a howl of dismay, the flow’er of the
flock was sprawling on the carpet at his father’s feet.
Snatching the money up from the table, Dick
turned upon his heel, and, picking up his hat, marched
out of the house, his heart fairly bursting with pain
and disappointment. For two or three hotirs he
tramped about, scarcely knowing how to contain
himself. He had always loved the water, and this
night he turned instinctively towards the great river,
running so swiftly on its endless errand.
At last he was weary and hungry, for he had had
no tea. He found himself on Westminster Bridge
looking up into the face of Big Ben. He was going to
make his way to one of the cheap coffee-shops to get
something to eat, when he remembered that the only
money he had was a ten-pound note, and he was
shrewd enough to know that if he presented that he
might be put to some annoyance, for boys of his age
do not often carry Bank of England notes to that
amount about with them at night.


“It’s jolly funny,” he muttered; “I’m richer than
I ever was in my life, and yet I can’t get a feed. I’ve
been called a thief once to-night; I won’t risk it again.”
At this juncture he thought of his one dear pal,
a messenger boy, named Sim Slack.
“I’ll go and see if I can find Sim,” he muttered;
“he is sure to have fourpence, or if he hasn’t he can
get it from one of his mates.”
So off he trudged, and as he knew where to find
his pal, he soon hunted him up. Sim Slack was a
little round fellow, with a face like a pudding, and a
pair of big, soft blue eyes that the other chaps called
“goggles.” He looked a soft sort of a boy until you
knew him, and then you came to the conclusion that
it was you who were soft for ever thinking that of
Sim. As soon as he caught sight of Dick he jumped
up and ran to him, and cried:
“She’s been an’ done it, Dick; she’s been an’
done it!”
“Has she?” retorted Dick testily. “Well, tell her
to undo it.”
He thought his chum was chaffing, for Sim was a
born jester.
“Undo it!” he almost screamed, as he threw him-
self into a tragic attitude. “That’s what she can’t do,
Telegraph Dick; but she has undone me, that’s what
she’s done.”
The little fellow looked so comical as he stood there
in the lamplight, for all the world like a living dumpling,
that Dick had to laugh in spite of his sore heart.
“Well, who is she, and what has she done?”
“My mother,” gasped Sim, “that’s who she is,
and she’s been an’ married the barber.”


Dick whistled. He had known of his friend’s fears
on that score for a long time past, and had helped
him to make war on the barber, because of his
antipathy to all step-fathers.
“What do you think of’er? ” asked Sim pathetically.
“I’ve been true to ’er all these years, an’ now she
leaves me on the door-mat.”
“When did she do it?” queried Dick.
“This morning. She went off to a register office
with the barber, and when I come home for my tea,
there was the barber sittin’ in my armchair —the
chair that had been my father’s.”
“What did you do?”
“I remembered ’ow ’Enery Irvin’ used ter speak
on the stage; so I droo myself up, Dick, like this,
an’ I put one hand in my shirt-front, like this, an’
I said, in a haughty way: ‘Arise! That chair is fer
the ’ead of the ’ouse.’”
“Did he arise?”
“’E did,” replied Sim emphatically. “’E arose
quicker than lighted gun-cotton, an’ ’e said: ‘Look
here, you walkin’ rice-puddin’, I’m the ’ead of this
’ouse now.’ A cold chill run down my spine, Dick,
an’ I said; ‘You —you haven’t married my mother,
have you?’ ‘No,’ he said in his nasty sardonic way;
‘l’ve married the ’ouse ’an furniture, an’ ’er winkle
stall; she’s married me.”
“That was a nasty one, Sim.”
“Yes, Dick; it were one of the nastiest. So I said:
‘This ’ouse can’t hold both of us.’ ‘lt ain’t goin’ to,’
’e said; and then he opened the door, an’ kicked
me into the alley.”
“That was an attack on your dignity, Sim.”


“Oh, was it?” retorted Sim. “If ever you get the
toe of a barber’s boot where I got it, you won’t be
thinking about dignity, not for half an hour, anyway.”
By this time Sim’s knock-off hour had arrived,
and the two boys went off to get something to eat,
and, during the process of the meal, Dick told Sim
concerning his own troubles.
That night they slept in one of the County Council
lodging-houses. The next day Sim went off to work
as usual, and Dick took his ten-pound note to the
bank, and changed it. Then he started out with the
intention of looking for a job of some sort, for he had
fully made up his mind that for the future he would
battle for himself, and be dependent upon no one.
In the course of the afternoon he found himself
standing in front of the little barber’s shop which
was run by Sim’s mother’s husband; the shutters were
up, and the door closed. This excited the boy’s
curiosity, and, running against a telegraph boy whom
he had known when he was in the service, he learnt
that the barber and his bride had gone on a honey-
moon tour to Southend.
“How long are they going to be away?”
Four days. They’ll be back by Saturday, and the
barber will reopen and commence business as usual.”
“Oh,” said Dick, “will he?”
At knock-off time he met Sim Slack as agreed, and
told him what he had learned. For quite a long time
the little round boy sat munching his supper in silence;
then all at once his pudding face lit up with a diabolical
grin. He buttoned up the front of his neat blue tunic,
and set his pill-box jauntily over one ear, and fanned
himself with his handkerchief.


“You seem to be precious pleased with yourself,”
quoth Dick.
“I am,” was the laconic retort.
“What’s it all about?”
“Dick, that barber kicked me in the ”
“Dignity,” suggested Dick smartly.
“Yes; an’ he married my ’ome, an’ the furniture,
an’ the whelk-stall.”
“Yes. Well?”
“Well, Telegraph Dick, did you ever know anyone
who meddled with a London messenger boy who got
much the best of it in the end?”
“Can’t say I ever did, Sim.”
“Neither did I. And this barber is goin’ to feel
my vengeance.” He spluttered the words out so
fiercely, rolling his big, prominent eyes so tragically,
that Dick, who knew him and his funny ways, was
fairly convulsed.
Outside his liking for Dick, Sim only had one
absorbing passion, and that was the theatre. He could
spout passages from most of the popular plays; and it
was one of the funniest sights in the world to see him
“act a part.” But best of all things he loved the part
of the wronged man who scoured the world in search
of revenge.
“What are you going to do to the barber? Not
burn his shop down, I hope,” grinned Dick.
“Fool!” hissed the round boy. “Fool! to burn his
shop down would be to get myself two years in gaol.”
“More likely seven, Sim,” corrected his friend.
“Two or seven, it don’t matter; I’m not goin’ to
get any. And yet revenge for the loss of the whelk-
stall is ready to my hand.”


“What is your plan?”
Sim drew a large sheet of paper from the pocket
of his tunic, and wrote rapidly, but legibly, upon it,
in large, bold letters:
THIS SHOP IS CLOSED FOR A TIME, OWING
TO SMALL-POX IN THE FAMILY.
“There,” he said, flourishing it in front of the face
of his friend. “There is the vengeance of the home-
less boy.”
* .. a ■* • /—1 • r\ • •
“What are you going to do with that rot, Sim?”
‘Tm going to paste it on the front of the barber’s
shop, and all his old customers will see it, and they
will fly the spot; and when the barber comes back
from his honeymoon he will find his occupation gone.”
“He’ll soon prove this to be a rotten yarn, Sim.”
“Will he, Dick? If he says nothing about it, the
people will keep away; if he goes around talking about
it, declaring it is false, no one will believe him. The
more he talks, the more harm he will do himself.”
The next morning a gaping crowd stood in front of
that little hair-cutting emporium, and the news soon
spread from mouth to mouth that small-pox had closed
the shop. When the barber returned from his honey-
moon and found all his customers gone, he was the
maddest man to be found in London. All that Saturday
not a soul came near the place, and, on Monday and
Tuesday, it was like a cemetery; not a soul ventured
near except the two boys, who prowled around enjoy-
ing their vengeance.
The sight of their grinning faces drove the hair artist
nearly frantic, and, on the following Wednesday, he
went to the police station and laid a complaint against


them both, for having destroyed his business. A
friendly officer gave Telegraph Dick a very broad
hint that there was trouble in the air. “You’ll get six
months each if it’s proved against you,” the officer had
remarked on parting. So Dick and Sim held a council
of war, and the result was that the next morning found
the pair of them at the London docks, seeking employ-
ment on an outward-bound vessel.
Their luck was in, for they both got berths on a
steamer bound for Durban, in South Africa —Dick as
steward, Sim Slack as deck boy. And long before the
vengeful barber could get upon their tracks, they were
on board the good ship Mozambique , heading for the
great Dark Continent, where danger, adventure, ivory,
gold, diamonds, hunting, and many other things lay
awaiting them.


CHAPTER II
SIM STRIKES TROUBLE —THE FIRST ADVENTURE
Life aboard ship was not all skittles and beer, as both
Telegraph Dick and Master Sim Slack soon found
out. The first morning at sea, Sim woke up feeling
that life was a burden, for things inside him seemed
to be at war.
“What’s up, Sim?” asked Dick, who saw by his
chum’s white face and rolling eyes that something
was wrong.
“Nothing up so far,” gasped poor Sim; “but I’m
afraid there soon will be.”
He was standing on the deck with a mop in his hand,
in the chill, grey dawn; and the ship was pitching
horribly, for the wind was fresh, and the big rollers
made a plaything of the “Ocean Greyhound.” The
motion did not seem to incommode Dick, who appeared
as if he had been born with sea legs.
Suddenly Sim dropped the mop, and staggered to
the side; and, resting his arms upon the rail, paid
tribute to Neptune, whilst the third mate and the deck
hands made merry at his expense.
At last he turned round, and so woebegone did he
look that the third mate, who was a brutal sort of a
fellow, pitched a swab at him, crying: “Come on out
o’ that, my young London cock. You’re not fit for
the sea; you’re only fit to be a messenger boy.”
c 33


This taunt woke Sim’s pluck in a moment. He let
go the rail, and though his head was reeling and
swimming, and splitting with the pain the nausea
brings, he made his way with unsteady steps, like a
drunken man, back towards his work. And, as he
went, there came into his mind the lines of a song he
had learnt when he read Stevenson’s famous novel,
“Treasure Island”; and just to show the mate that
a London messenger boy is game, he sang in as good
a voice as he could raise:
‘Fifteen men on a dead man’s chest—
Yo-ho-ho! and a bottle of rum.”
Then he picked up his mop, and began to swab
decks; but it was not many minutes before he was once
more hanging over the side, and his heaving shoulders
told plainly enough that he was not stinting his tribute
to the God of the Ocean, Yet each time he faced
round, and went at his work again, with his dolorous
ditty quavering through his blue lips.
The mate bullied him unmercifully; but one of the
sailors, a big, rough chap, cheered poor Sim up
wonderfully, for he growled in the boy’s ear:
“Don’t mind what that lubber says, you’re a game
little cock, you are; and that’s more than I’d say for
him. I’ve seen him turn as white in the gills as you
are this minute, many a time, and you’ll sec him do it,
too, if we happen to run into dirty weather.”
After a while Sim got his sea legs, and was the life
of the ship. He was one of those boys who carried a
smile with him wherever he went, and he knew how to
invent more ways of getting even with an enemy than
a fox ever knew. From the outset it was war between


him and the third mate, and though he often felt the
sharpest end of that bully’s heavy sea boot, it is doubtful
if the man had much the best of things in the end.
It was one of the rules of the ship that none of the
crew should have any live stock on board; no dogs,
cats, birds, fowls, or things of that kind. But the
third officer, who had a mania for fowls, managed to
get over that rule. He carried three hens on every
voyage: two laying hens, and one “broody” hen. He
used to give one fresh egg to the skipper and one to
the first mate, and explained that he only kept the
fowls in their coop for’ard as a hobby. But he was a
pretty deep sort of a fellow, this sea bully, because he
used to chum up to passengers who were wealthy, and
talk about his “hobby,” and cadge sittings of rare and
valuable eggs from them. In this way he had made
a lot of money during his career at sea, for he had
brought to England specimens of rare fowls from
almost every part of the world. And, by the same
simple method, had taken rare birds from this country
to the ends of the earth. It was all profit to him. He
used to make himself pleasant to rich folk on board, and
get costly eggs for nothing; the food for his fowls cost
him nothing, as he used scraps from the table; and he
invariably made one of the ship’s boys clean the coops
and look after the birds.
On this particular trip he had, under a brood hen,
a hatching of eggs of great value—a present from a
sporting lord, who had been a passenger on the last
voyage, and it fell to Sim Slack’s lot to have to attend
to the fowls. Sim did not mind this bit of extra work
at all, for he loved live things; but he did mind the
eternal kicking, cuffing, and bullying that came his


way. One morning the officer found fault with Sim
concerning the coop in which the brood hen was sitting,
and, after laying a rope’s end over his shoulders, said:
“Look here, you young swine, that clutch of chickens
will be worth twenty pounds to me in Durban. If
there is an egg broken I’ll break every bone in your
infernal carcase.” Then, by way of impressing care-
fulness on the boy’s mind, he hoisted him a yard and a
half on the toe of his sea boot. And Sim went away
to compare notes with Telegraph Dick.
The ship was lying off the island of Las Palmas at
the time, and the third officer had, with characteristic
meanness, refused to let Sim go ashore, even for an
hour, to see the sights of this strange land. When
Telegraph Dick heard Sim’s latest story of the mate’s
kicking powers, he grinned.
“Look here, Sim, old chap,” he cried, “we’ll have
to get even with that chap.”
“Yes,” agreed Sim, “He’s kicked me so often and
so hard, I think I’ve grown an inch since we left
London, Dick.”
“Forced growth,” chuckled Dick. “The second
steward tried that with me this morning, but he won’t
kick anyone again for a week or two.”
“Why not, Dick?”
“The poor man had a nasty accident soon after
the kicking.”
“How?” queried Sim.
“Act of Providence,” grinned Dick. “He was
standing in the galley way in his thin slippers when
I came along with a teapot, full of scalding tea, and I
slipped on a piece of potato peel, and the scalding tea
went straight as a shot into his slippers and socks.


I never heard such language in my life; worse than the
boatswain’s parrot, Sim. The doctor dressed the foot,
and he’s in his bunk now, and will be for a week. I
heard him ask one of the stewards to get him something
to read. So I slipped away, and borrowed ‘Pilgrim’s
Progress ’ from the carpenter, who is religious, and when
I took the book to him, he just sat up in his bunk
and talked like a cabby who’s been bilked by his fare
in a fog. And one of the passengers, who has a family
aboard, heard him, and reported him to the skipper,
and I think he’ll get paid off at the Cape. Can’t
you have an accident of some kind or other when your
officer is around?”
“It’s no use spilling scalding water on his sea boots;
it wouldn’t penetrate,” sighed Sim. Then all at once
a smile, like a sunbeam, shot across his round face.
“What is it?” queried Dick, who knew that signal
well.
“Dick,” whispered Sim, “have you got any friend
in the cook’s galley?”
“Oh, yes. Why, you don’t want to cook the third
mate, do you?”
“You wait and see,” giggled Sim; and he fled
along the alleyway as hard as his fat legs would take
him.
In about ten minutes he was back again, and the
front of his shirt had a suspicious bulge. Carefully
he thrust his hand inside his garment, and drew forth
an e gg> which he placed in Dick’s palm.
I ve got thirteen of ’em, Dick; the whole blessed
hatching,” he gurgled, “And I want you to get ’em
boiled hard, hard as a pillar-box in Fleet Street,
Dick.”


“I don’t think I’d like to eat ’em myself,” quoth
Dick; “but everyone to his taste. If you want ’em
boiled hard, why, I’ll get it done in a jiffy.”
“Who’s going to eat ’em?” scoffed Sim. “When
they’re as hard as bullets, I’m going to put ’em back
under the hen. The third mate won’t find out until
we get to Africa, or pretty near, and then he’s got to
prove I did it. It’ll be worth half-a-crown a minute
to watch him every day, standing in front of that hen,
waiting for his chickens to hatch. And when we get
ashore we’ll tell some newspaper chap the whole story,
and the mate will have a nice time.”
There was a suspicious twinkle in the eye of the cook
as he took the eggs from Telegraph Dick.
“Where did you get these eggs from? ” he demanded.
Dick tried to look like an angel, and answered:
“Oh, my aunt, who keeps a poultry farm at Las
Palmas, sent them aboard for me, cook.”
The cook sniffed, picked up one of the eggs, and
examined it.
“Nice judge of eggs your aunt must be,” he re-
marked; “there’s a chicken in every blessed one of
them,”
“Is there?” was the innocent query. “Oh, that’s
just like my dear aunt. She always said that chickens
were no good unless you ate them very young.”
“Did that precious aunt of yours tell you to slip on a
bit of potato peel this morning, and drop a quart
of boiling water in the steward’s shoe?” grinned the
cook.
“No. She said I was to heap coals of fire on the
head of anyone that kicked me.”
“Why didn’t you obey your aunt?”


“Perhaps I will, the next time I’m kicked for
nothing.”
The cook grunted.
“Nice sort of boy you are. Why don’t you try
to rub along quietly like that good-tempered little
pal of yours? He’d be an angel if he wasn’t so
fat.”
“I’m trying to grow up Just like him,” was Dick’s
reply, as he cast his eyes down so that the cook should
not see the fun that was dancing in them.
At that moment Sim put his head into the cook’s
galley.
“Hurry up with those eggs, Dick,” he gasped; “the
third mate has Just gone for’ard, and if he feels under
the hen and misses the eggs, I’m going over the side,
and I’ll swim to Las Palmas.”
“Sharks ’ll get you if you do.”
“Don’t care for sharks.”
“You don’t know what a shark can do when he
tries, young man,” said the cook.
No, I don t, retorted Sim; “but I know what the
third mate can do when he tries, and if I’ve got to go
up higher than Nelson s monument, I’m going up in a
flying machine, not on the toe of a sea boot.”
The cook handed the boiled eggs to Dick.
(i Take em away, you young imp of evil,” he growled;
“and if your aunt sends any more eggs abroad, don’t
you bring ’em to my galley, that’s all. And look here,
tell the little fat chap to get the chief engineer to make
him a pair of trousers out of scrap iron; for if the third
mate finds out about this whilst he’s on the ship, he’ll
leather the life out of him. Those eggs were worth
a pot of money, and the ‘ Third ’ loves money more than


he loves his own soul. He’s the meanest man that ever
trod a ship’s plank.”
So Dick went for’ard, and found his pal hard at
work holy-stoning the deck; and as he worked he sung
the lines Stevenson has made immortal:
“Fifteen men on a dead man’s chest—
Yo-ho-ho! and a bottle of rum.”
The “Third” was standing in front of the hen-
coop, whistling softly to himself, and quite satisfied;
for he was taking the eggs one by one from under the
brood hen, and shaking them gently to see if they were
addled.
“Please, sir,” said Master Dick, with his most
insinuating manner, “do you mind telling me why
you do that?”
The “Third,” who was in such a good temper that
he could almost have written a poem, said:
“Yes. I shake the eggs to see if any are rotten.
If they are, the stuff inside wobbles about; if they are
all right, the insides don’t shake.”
“Do yours shake, sir?” queried Dick.
“Not one of ’em, boy; not one of ’em. There’s a
chick in every blessed egg, and every egg is worth a
couple of pounds. This is a sitting from a pair of
prize white Wyandottes; I’ll just have people tumbling
over one another to buy ’em in South Africa.”
Something like a smothered laugh broke from the
lips of Sim Slack, and the “Third” wheeled round and
glared at him; but Sim began to cough, and kept on
coughing until his face was crimson.
All the way out to Cape Town the feud between the
two boys and the “Third” was kept up. He was a


bully who gave no quarter to any poor lad who came
under his sway; but on their part they did their best to
keep him from dying of ennui. Perhaps, if they had been
going to remain upon the ship for any length of time,
they would not have dared to play the pranks they did,
but as they had only shipped for the voyage out, they
had little fear of the tyrant. Every time he gave Sim
the rope’s end that worthy went to Dick, and the pair
of them would put their heads together and plan a
surprise for their enemy; for they had sworn a pact that
whoso harmed the one should find the pair amongst
his enemies.
One day the mate had been more than usually
brutal, and that evening a little round boy crept into
the “Third’s” cabin, and rapidly gathering up a set
of oilskins and a pair of sea boots, he pushed them
quickly through the port-hole, and let them drop into
the sea. Then he went to his own bunk, and slept like
a cherub. There was some dirty weather the next day,
and the “Third” went below to put on his oilskins, and
when he found that his things had disappeared, his
language was like a rainbow, it was of so many colours.
Being of a very suspicious nature, he accused one of the
firemen of haying stolen the things, and the fo’c’s’le
was turned inside out in a search for them, which roused
the fury of all the firemen, who from that day onward
did their level best to make life a burden for the
“Third.” On another occasion, when something had
gone wrong between the skipper and the “Third,”
the latter got rid of his spleen by thrashing Sim until
every bone in his fat body ached. The next day the
mate s meerschaum pipe, a present from an Austrian
grandee, fell off the rack where it had been placed


for safety, and got broken into a thousand fragments.
When questioned concerning it, Sim swore by all the
lights o’ London that he had not touched the treasured
pipe, which saying was perfectly true. But Telegraph
Dick could not have said the same without perjuring
himself.
“Who could ha’ done it? Tell me that,” roared
the officer, who was just about black in the face with
ra S e -
“I dunno, sir,” answered Sim. “Unless,” he added
as an afterthought —“unless it might ha’ been the
boatswain’s parrot.” Which caused everybody on
board, from the captain to the cook, to grin audibly—
all except the “Third.”
It was not so very long after this that the mate caught
Sim talking to a passenger, and as this was an offence
against ship’s regulations, he very faithfully and freely
administered the rope’s end. Sim took his gruel like
a Spartan, and vowed within himself to get even for
the cruel licking; and once again Telegraph Dick came
to his aid. Whilst the “Third” was on duty Master
Dick abstracted the officer’s best suit of clothes, dark
navy blue, from his sea chest, and carried them for’ard,
where they were received with unholy glee by all
hands. Both boys knew that that suit would not be
needed until the “Third” went ashore in Africa, and
they had planned to improve it for him in a manner no
tailor could have dreamed of. First of all, they took
the trousers and turned them inside out; then Sim drew
a pot of hot tar towards him, and laid on the brush
most lovingly, all down one side of the legs of the
trousers and up the other he ran the strong, black,
gummy liquid.


“I ’ave ’card,” said one grinning fireman, “that tar
prevents fever.”
“Yes,” replied Sim seriously; “and the dear old
‘Third’ won’t catch any fever so long as he wears this
pair of pants. It’s his precious health we are thinking
of, ain’t we, Dick? ”
Dick nodded.
“Of course it’s his health we want to preserve. I’d
give a bit to see his face when he puts his bare leg into
these pants; it’ll take a month or two for him to get the
tar off; he’ll be as black as a crow.”
“Well, he’s made me black with rope’s end,” re-
flected Sim; “so it’s fair, ain’t it?”
After they had decorated the coat and pants to their
own satisfaction, the pair of imps folded the suit nicely,
and put the things back in the sea chest; and not even
a flicker of suspicion came from the officer.
Just before the ship reached Cape Town, the “Third ”
began to grow uneasy about his hatching of eggs, for
the chicks were due. The firemen and crew, who had
somehow got hold of the secret, used to creep to the
deck to watch the bold mariner. He would take an
egg from under a hen, and hold it to his ear, and listen
with all his might; then he would hold the egg up to
the light, and try and look through it; and, at last,
put the egg back under the hen with a puzzled expres-
sion, whilst all the hands would make pantomimic
gestures behind his back, and double themselves up
with laughter of a silent kind, just as if they had cramps
inside through eating green fruit.
One day he called Sim to him. He was holding an
egg in his hand at the time.
Come here, you little swab,” he commanded; and


when Sim got to him he said; “Here, you; hold this
egg to your ear, and tell me if you can hear anything.”
Sim did as he was bidden. For a minute a vacant
expression had full possession of his face, then suddenly
he beamed from ear to ear like a baby looking at a bath.
“What’s up with you? ” demanded the mate. “What
yer making faces at, eh?” His voice was full of
suppressed excitement.
Again that heavenly smile swept over Sim’s round
face; and the firemen and others, who knew he was
acting a part, were in raptures with him. Holding the
egg between his forefinger and thumb in a gingerly
fashion, he drew the mate’s head down to a level with
his own shoulder.
“Hear it?” he whispered. “Hear it now, sir?
Cheep, cheep, cheep”—he made a funny noise with
his lips, for Sim had the power of bird calls given to
him by Providence.
The mate started.
“I can hear it,” he cried; “hear it as plain as a
whistle. That’s a good ’un, anyhow”; and he placed
it back under the hen, and drew forth another egg,
which he held to his ear; and Sim, standing close in
under his elbow, made the same funny noises without
moving his lips.
“Cheep, cheep, cheep.”
“Good as gold,” cried the mate exultantly; “good
as gold, boy, and worth a bit o’ gold, both on ’em.
This went on until the whole hatching was carefully
examined, and then Sim went about his work amidst
the hands singing eternally:
“Fifteen men on a dead man’s chest —
Yo-ho-ho! and a bottle of rum.”


And the tale was told with wild and boisterous mirth
by one gang of firemen to the other, as they shovelled
the coal into the greedy maw of the furnaces. Soon it
spread all over the ship. Passengers and crew, officers
and men all knew the story of the third mate’s fooling.
\et no man undeceived him, for he was pretty generally
disliked, both fore and aft. As he went about his duties,
he was conscious of a strange feeling of hilarity, and
soon he began to hear from all quarters little noises
that sounded like “Cheep, cheep, cheep,” but he could
make nothing of it.
During the night Dick and Sim collected half a
dozen of the eggs and chipped them with their pocket-
knives, and when the “Third” went up to examine
them, half the ship was gazing at him, even the skipper,
who was on the “bridge,” had a grin on his face that
his beard would not hide.
Cheep, cheep, cheep,” broke out from all parts of
the ship; and then came a frantic burst of laughter,
and the mate knew that he had been made the butt
of the whole ship by someone. Picking up a knife, he
pulled off some of the shell from an egg, and lo! the
egg was hard-boiled. He glared around him, and then
dashed the egg on to the deck in a fury of rage; and,
as he did so, the ship rang like a farmyard with fowl
cries.
“Chuch, chuck, chuck! Cock-a-doodle-doo!
Lffieep, cheep, cheep,” and so forth.
He turned out egg after egg, all hard-boiled; and the
shipjustnngmg with mirth. Snatching a rope’s end,
he looted around for Sim, but the fat boy did not wait.
1a Wi cry of Cock-a-doodle-doo,” he sprang on
to the rigging, and made his way, with fleet feet, right


up to the masthead, where he perched himself, crowing
like a mad rooster. As for Dick, as soon as he saw
Sim’s flight, he ducked down below, and very discreetly
kept out of sight and reach of the frantic officer until
he heard the welcome cry of “ Land, ho! And there,
towering high up into the blue of heaven, rose Table
Mountain, in all its majesty and splendour. Table
Mountain, rough and rugged at the base, with its
summit covered in a mighty mantle of fleecy white
clouds, which the Afrikanders call “The Table
Cloth.” . ,
Sim had a splendid view of it from his exalted posi-
tion, as the steamer swept majestically nearer and
nearer to the shore. He was, however, getting pretty
tired of his perch when the skipper hailed him from the
bridge, and told him to “Shin down, and look lively.
The boy obeyed promptly, for under the eye of the
skipper he knew he was safe from the rage of the
mate.
Just as he reached the deck he heard the order that
was rattled down to the engine-room through the
speaking-tube:
“Half-speed ahead!”
Like some great wingless bird, the steamer swept
towards her anchorage, scarcely making a ripple
upon the smooth surface of the bay. The day was hot,
and the water had that peculiar greasy appearance
that is not uncommon near the shores of hot countries.
Most of the passengers were leaning over the sides,
looking at the greasy blue water that shifted and
simmered in the glare of the sun. Dick and Sim
were in the waist of the ship, on the starboard
side.


“Jolly hot,” remarked Dick. “Africa may be all
right, but it does know how to be hot here.”
“I’d like to go over the side and have a swim,”
was Sim’s reply, as he mopped his forehead with
a towel. “Fat chaps feel the heat more than thin
ones.”
“You’ll only be a grease spot if you go on melting
like this, Sim,” chuckled Dick, “You’re as red in the
face now as a boiled lobster.”
“I’ll have a dip in the briny to-night when we drop
anchor, and the passengers have gone ashore,” was
Sim’s reply. “Why, Dick, I’m just running away in
big drops, like a bag of lard, and I feel on fire.”
“Have a dip in the briny, will you, fatty?” put in
the cook, who happened to overhear Sim’s remark.
“Well, you may if you like; but, if you take my advice,
you won’t.”
“Why not?”
“Well, I’ve travelled between Australia and Liver-
pool, vid South Africa, for thirty years,” was the cook’s
answer, “and I never yet saw a greasy sea like this
without seeing sharks around the ship as soon as the
screw stops revolving.”
“Sharks!” chorussed both boys.
\es, sharks; and pretty big ones in these latitudes,
though they are bigger on the Australian coast.”
Arc they man-eaters about here?” demanded
Dick.
“Yes; and boy-eaters, too, for that matter. I’ll
bet we won’t have dropped anchor an hour before you
see one, and possibly two or three, swimming lazily
around the ship. They come to pick up what we throw
overboard; they are the scavengers of the harbours, just


as the vultures, or asvogels, are the scavengers of the
up-country towns and farms. If the skipper would let
us bend a line, and throw it overboard, we’d have some
fun.”
“Look, look!” shouted Dick, for at that instant a
school of porpoises came dashing along in royal style,
driving a great pack of flying fish in front of them.
The shoal of fish made for the side of the ship, and
would have dived under her waist, but the revolving
screw scared them, and they wheeled, just like a flock
of wild pigeons with hawks on the wing in pursuit.
But the army of porpoises was ready for them; for,
whilst the centre contingent was driving the flying
fish straight ahead, their flankers had overlapped the
school of smaller victims, and were ready for them as
they wheeled. It was just like a perfectly planned
cavalry movement; the retreat was cut off by the
flankers, and the helpless victims leapt wildly into the
air and tried to skim away on their feeble wings; but
they could not rise high in their flight, and the big
jaws opened and gathered them in. Others wheeled
once more towards the now drifting steamer, and in
their terror leapt high out of the water; one or two
even fell in the alleyway at the feet of the two boys,
who hastened to secure these weird trophies of the
deep that had come to them so unexpectedly. They
were busily engaged in this exciting pastime when a
cry rang out, sharp and piercing.
“Child overboard! Child overboard!”
It is a fearful cry to hear at any time, even for men
with seasoned nerves, but doubly so for boys who have
not known the perils of the deep.
For just a couple of seconds Dick and Sim stood


and looked at each other; then they leapt to the side
and clambered up on the rail, and there they saw a
little curly-headed child bobbing up and down in the
water, his light, fluffy clothing carrying him high in
the embrace of the oily sea. Both boys knew to whom
that child belonged: it was the five-year-old son of a
steerage passenger, the wife of a miner, who was going
out to join her husband at Johannesburg. Some of the
passengers tossed lifebelts into the sea; others shouted
frantically; whilst the skipper on the bridge, cool and
alert, had yelled an order to the crew to lower a boat.
Telegraph Dick saw the feebly-waving little hands,
saw the little white face and the horror in the wide-
open eyes, and then, with a whoop, the gallant London
lad sprang from the rail into the ocean. Many a
time both he and Sim had breasted the sweep of the
current in old Father Thames for the mere fun of the
thing, many a summer’s night they had bathed in
forbidden places; and now the art of swimming learnt
in the shadow of old London was to stand them in
good stead out near the shores of the great sub-
continent, and a human life was to be saved by their
skill and prowess.
As Dick dived from the rail, a great cheer went up
from passengers and crew, for all realised the gallantry
of the deed.
“Brave boy! Good boy!” shouted the cook, waving
his big carving knife in his hand like a sabre.
Bravo, Dicky! Three cheers for Telegraph Dick! ”
yelled Sim, almost overbalancing himself in his excite-
ment, as he saw his chum cleaving his way with long,
strong, over-arm strokes through the swell of the
ocean.


As Dick struck out, he saw the boat with the well-
trained crew in their places dropping down towards
the water, the tackle running smoothly and swiftly
without a hitch; he saw the white, eager, excited faces
of the passengers staring over the bulwarks, and then
his gallant boyish heart almost ceased to beat, for he
saw something else also; something that cut the water
like a vast knife, and made a little beady ripple on the
surface. It was the dorsal fin of a shark, the grim,
gaunt wolf of the wilderness of waters. The folk on
the ship saw the monster at the same moment that
Telegraph Dick caught sight of it, and a shout of horror
and dismay rang out on the heavy, heat-laden air.
Sim saw the vast fish shooting forward like some giant
spear hurled by the hand of a sea demon; and his
instinct told him that the boat would be too late to
save the child or his bold comrade.
For the space of ten seconds he gazed down like a
creature fascinated upon the dirty, greyish-chocolate
coloured back of the destroyer; he saw the quick move-
ment of the driving fins, the strong swirl of the terrible
tail, the little, cruel, piggish eyes, the whitish line of the
belly; and then it was borne in upon him that if Dick
and the five-year-old baby were to be saved, he must
be the saviour. The cook was standing by his side,
holding in his hand the long knife with which he
dissected the joints that came to him in the galley.
Sim’s eyes fell upon the blue steel, and, reaching out
his hand, he plucked it from the cook’s grasp, placed
it between his teeth, and plunged headlong into the
waves. He had always been a good swimmer, but a
bad diver. A hundred times Dick had laughed at him
because when he dived he nearly always struck the


water flat, instead of cleaving it with hands and arms
outstretched. He hit the water this time more like
a big pancake falling from a height than like a good
diver, and made a terrific splash and noise; and it was
well for the child that it was so, for the noise gave the
monster a terrific fright.
Sim had fallen just between the shark and its
prey, and the splashes from his plunge had scarcely
fallen back to the ocean when Dick’s desperate strokes
brought him to the child’s side.
The passengers saw what had happened, and they
fairly rent the air with a cheer that went echoing
far away amidst the shipping, and on up the rocky
heights of Table Mountain; a cheer full-blooded and
strong, that spoke for the invincible bravery of the
British messenger boy. The skipper was leaning as far
over the vessel’s side as he could get, and now he
shouted to the men in the boat:
Give way, lads; give way! Now then, row, men;
row for your lives! All together, there! Pull, pull
like tigers! ” And the sailors did pull; they put all the
might of their bodies into each stroke, until the stout
oars bent like willow wisps beneath the strain, and the
ship’s boat, built more for strength than speed, fairly
leapt like a living thing in the stern race with death.
The prowler of the deep had shot away in fear when
Sim s body hit the water with a resounding crash, but
being either very hungry, or else a man-eater, the
creature turned from its original object, and made a
dash in Sim’s direction.
“Splash the water, boy; splash, splash!” yelled the
captain, who knew the peril of the moment.
Sim heard the command in a dim sort of way, as


though the voice had come’to him from a far country,
or in a dream of the night. But the accents were the
accents of command; he struck the water with the flat
of his hand, but the living spear rushed on.
Then Sim Slack, the messenger boy, trained and
bred in old London City, did a splendid thing. For a
second of time those who watched from the ship saw
him tread water; they saw him take the knife from his
mouth; saw his body shoot up out of the water until
the two arms were clear of the waves; then he launched
himself forward to meet that grim peril, his right arm
went upwards, and then came down swiftly and
strongly, and the blade was buried to the very haft in
the tough hide of the vast marauder. He had struck
with all his might to save his pal; struck for love of a
countryman and a comrade; struck as the lads of
England have struck many a time and oft in the history
of the little island; struck as bold and shrewd a blow
as ever knight or baron struck on tented field; this little
fat boy, who only a few weeks before had been scurry-
ing hot foot with messages through the traffic and
turmoil of London, little dreaming as he dodged the
’buses and the vans that he was so soon to prove that
he had a hero’s heart inside that rotund body of his.
When he had dealt his stroke, the monster had leapt
high out of the water, wrenching the knife from his
hand, leaving him helpless. But sharks are as cowardly
as they are cruel, as all men who have sailed much
in tropic seas well know. They will seldom risk a
second wound if the first one is shrewdly and strongly
struck. In another moment the ship’s boat was along-
side the boy, a great hairy arm shot over the thwarts
and grasped him by the slack of his shirt, and hauled


him aboard; and the next moment the oars were again
at work, grating in the rowlocks as the strong men
rushed the boat through the water towards Telegraph
Dick and the half-drowned child.
As a sailor bent over to lift the old-time telegraph
boy aboard, he gasped out:
“Here, take the kid; I’m nearly beat.”
Oh, what a cheer went up as the dripping heroes
made their way up the gangway! There stood the
hard-faced, stern-lipped skipper, waiting to receive
them himself. He did not say many words. Just
this:
“Boys, Fm proud of you. Thank God, the old land
can breed lads of your mettle!”
Oh, how the women fussed, and the men petted and
praised! All were glad except the bullying third mate.
But the boys paid scanty heed to him as they divided
the purse of sovereigns which the passengers sub-
scribed.
As soon as the ship dropped her anchor at her berth,
the skipper told the third mate that he wanted him
to go ashore on ship’s business, and that worthy went
below to make himself look his best, for he was a bit
of a dandy in his way. Suddenly, a wild hurricane of
words came from his cabin,
said the chief engineer, who was a
Scot. “ A’m wonnerin’ what’s the matter wi’ the
third mate. He’s awful mad, and he’s bletherin’ like
a coo wi’ the cantrips.”
He went along and looked into the “Third’s” cabin,
and found that officer holding a pair of dark blue
serge pants up to the light, whilst he foamed at the
mouth with rage. He had thrust one of his legs into


the leg of his pants, and quickly withdrawn it again,
covered with tar to the hip.
“Mon,” laughed the Scot, “a’m thinkin’ ye no did
weel to use so much rope’s end on the laddie ye ca’
Sim; it’s the dirty end o’ the bargain ye ha’ gotten
yersel’ for sartin.”


CHAPTER 111
sim’s first elephant hunt
From Cape Town round the coast to Durban is not
a very far cry, and the pair of London lads did not
find time hang very heavily upon their hands. The
“deevel’s” imps, the Scotch engineer called them,
on account of the tricks played upon their enemies on
the voyage out. On arrival at Durban they applied
for their discharge, and obtained it; and they left the
ship with the good wishes of everyone, except the
third mate and one of the stewards, ringing in their
ears. One dear old lady, with wrinkled face and snow-
white hair, who was a first-class passenger in search of
health, made both Dick and Sim a present of a daintily-
bound bible; on the fly-leaf of each book she had
written the young owner’s name, and underneath she
had inscribed the following words, “Search the
Scriptures, for in them ye have eternal life.” She was
a fine old English gentlewoman of the old school, and
the lads never forgot the kindly words of advice
uttered just as they were stepping ashore:
Be careful with whom you associate, dear boys ”
she said, “and don’t let anyone ever tempt you into
anything that will make your countrymen or country-
.^ US t f ° r y ° U ’ 1 know you are brave,” she
added, for I saw you in the water at Table Bay, and
I was and I am proud of you.” She shook hands with


them, and patted them both on the head ere she left
them; and they both felt all the better for her cheery,
helpful words.
That night, as they sat in the little room they had
engaged ashore, Dick opened his bible, and as he was
turning over the leaves he came across an English
five-pound note. He gave a joyous cry, and Sim,
glancing over his shoulder, saw the find. He picked
up his bible, and found a similar gift. The motherly
gentlewoman had taken this unostentatious way of
proving her admiration of their gallantry when they
saved the miner’s son from the jaws of the shark.
Durban was full of interest to the two young adven-
turers. There, for the first time in their young lives,
they saw big, brawny, black men, wearing strange
head-dresses of feathers and horns, who pulled rick-
shaws. These rickshaws were for all the world like
big perambulators with hoods, and the youngsters
spent sixpence apiece in the luxury of a ride round
Durban.
“I’d like to take one of these rickshaws and a nigger
back to London with me,” shouted Dick, as he lolled
back under his hood like a Pasha. “Wouldn’t the
cabbies stare at me if I travelled down the Strand like
this, eh? I think the Government ought to fix all the
telegraph boys up like this.”
“Nice chance a poor boy ’d have of getting a job
if they did, Dick,” laughed Sim. “All the chaps who
have rich fathers would get the billets then.”
Dick scratched his head.
“Never thought of that, Sim. But, by Jingo,
you’re right.”
After they had looked at the sights of Durban,


they started out to try to find work, for they had
no intention of squandering the money they had;
for if London had taught them nothing else, it had
taught them the value of ready cash. They found
out very soon that it is no easy matter for a white
man or a white boy who has not a trade at his fingers’
ends to get a job in a land where black labour is
plentiful.
For three days they searched high and low with-
out any luck, and, on the fourth day, they determined
to tramp out into the country a bit and try their
luck on a farm or on a fruit-growing plantation. But
their efforts were abortive, and a bit footsore and down
at heart, they were tramping back to Durban in the
starlight, when suddenly a couple of niggers sprang
out of some bushes by the roadside, and, with threaten-
ing gestures, demanded their money.
It was a ticklish position for a pair of youngsters
like them, for they were unarmed except for their
sailors’ clasp-knives, which would have been of small
service against the knobkerries of the Kaffirs. But
they had been bred in the wrong part of the world
to part with their money without a struggle.
As Dick backed away from the black rascal who
was pressing in upon him, his heel struck upon some-
thing hard, and, stooping swiftly, he picked up a lump
of rock, about the size of a cricket ball; and seeing
that the footpad who was assailing his chum really
meant mischief, he swung his arm and hurled the
jagged rock, with great force, fair at the fellow’s head;
and the missile, flying true, the Kaffir was stretched
senseless in the road. The next second poor, game
Dick received a blow from a knobkerrie that made


him think all the bells of London town were ringing
and jangling in his ears. Then he dropped face
forward on the road, and the Kaffir pounced upon him.
With a wild yell, Sim Slack gathered his little round
body up into a kind of heap, and flung himself like a
tornado upon the black ruffian. Clutching the Kaffir
round the neck, Sim, frantic with rage and grief at the
fall of his chum, fixed his teeth in the Kaffir’s ear —a
mode of attack which the black son of Ham did not
understand at all, for he gave vent to a howl that rang
out upon the still night air. Then he commenced to
pound Sim to jelly; but the ex-messenger boy hung on
with hands and teeth like a bull pup to a bone.
At that moment, Captain Douglas, of the Hussars,
and his servant, Danny Develin, were cantering
homewards towards the captain’s bungalow, and,
hearing the sounds of strife, they put spurs to their
horses and soon arrived upon the scene. Had they
been a minute later, this story would never have been
written; for the Kaffir had poor Sim by the throat,
and would soon have settled his little affair, for he
was a big, strong man.
Hearing the sound of galloping hoofs, the Kaffir
leapt to his feet, and made a bound towards the
hedge at the roadside. But he was too late; for Danny
Develin charged right down upon him, and, swinging
his heavy riding-whip as if it had been a cavalry sabre,
he brought it down with such force on the footpad’s
skull that the fellow dropped as if shot. The captain
leapt out of his saddle, and ran to the ruffian’s side,
and made him a prisoner; whilst Danny Develin,
quickly dismounting, soon joined his master.
Sim Slack was pretty nearly choked; but, after a little


careful handling, he was able to tell the officer all
that had happened. When he had finished his recital,
the captain smiled in his face, and said kindly:
“Well, well, little man, you came to Africa to look
for adventure, and upon my soul you can’t say you
are not getting a fair handful to start with.”
A carriage came rumbling slowly along the road,
and the captain hailed it; and when the coachman
pulled up it was found that it contained a well-to-do
ostrich farmer and his wife, to whom the officer told
what had happened.
“Put the wounded boy and his chum into the
carriage with us,” said the gentleman heartily, “and
I 11 take them into Durban, and get medical advice
at once.”
“That’s good of you, Thompson; and it’s the best
thing that can be done. My man, Develin, and I will
look after this precious pair of beauties until you send
a posse of police out to take them in. We’ll make an
example of them, by Jove; for this highway robbery
business must be put down with a strong hand.”
So it came about that Telegraph Dick went back
to Durban with his head resting on the shoulder of a
countryman; for Mr. Thompson was an Englishman
who was destined to prove a good friend to him in
the days that followed.
It was found, when the doctor saw Dick, that he
had received such a nasty wound from the knob-
kerrie that he would have to go into hospital for a
time, and there he remained for three long months.
The medical man who examined him said that the
club must have caught him a glancing blow, or else
it would have crushed his skull like an eggshell. Sim


pleaded very hard to be allowed to remain and nurse
his chum; and, in the course of the conversation that
followed, the head surgeon was so taken with the
boy’s idea of adventure that he offered to find Sim a
job as handy boy in the hospital until his pal was
convalescent.
“And,” said he, “if you keep your eyes open,
Master Sim, you will learn a lot in such a hospital
as this that will prove helpful to you in your romantic
career. You will see wounds washed and dressed,
broken limbs set and attended to, fevers nursed, and
complaints of all kinds healed; and, if you are sharp,
you will pick up more in a few months than most
outsiders learn in a lifetime. So you will be killing
two birds with one stone: you will be near your chum
whilst he is ill, and you will be adding to your store
of knowledge. And knowledge is more precious than
rubies, boy.”
So it came to pass that the strange influence which
some call luck, others call fate, and others name
chance, guided Sim’s feet into a channel that was to
bring him much wisdom. He was a smart boy, his
London training as a messenger had made him
observant, and he made use of his many opportunities.
He worked hard, early and late, in the hospital wards;
now helping a nurse bandage a wound, anon standing
by to aid a surgeon in a minor operation, by holding
bandages, instruments, or basins. Or he would
drift off into the kitchen to watch the cooks making
broths, soups, and other foodstuffs for sick folk. He
became so handy in a month or two that he was the
pet of the staff, and his funny, humorous ways and
speeches added to his popularity.


Dick, lying on his sick bed, used to see Sim flitting
about the ward, and the sight of his chum did him no
end of good. Danny Develin, the soldier servant of
Captain Douglas, used to call at the hospital every
chance he got; for the soldier had taken a great liking
to both boys. He was a hard-faced chap of about
thirty, who had seen a lot of service, and Sim was never
tired of looking at the splendidly-developed figure of
the soldier as he moved from point to point amidst the
civilians. Danny Develin was an athlete as well as a
soldier, a great runner, good boxer and wrestler, a fair
shot with a rifle, and such a horseman and trainer of
horses as few armies in the world possess.
One day he had been sitting with Dick for a long
time, talking about his campaigns, and Dick, with all
a boy’s natural inquisitiveness, asked him how it
happened that after so much service he was still a
private.
The soldier laid his brown, sinewy hand upon the
white, wasted palm of the ex-telegraph boy, and said,
sadly:
My own fault, Dick; my own fault. I had my
stripes once, boy, but I lost ’em.”
“How?” queried Dick.
Danny Develin crooked his arm, and made a gesture
as of a man drinking.
Got a bit o’ dry dust in the bottom o’ my neck
somehow, Dick, an’ it just gets drier an’ drier until
must drink or crack. An’ when I drink, why,
I m seven different kinds of a fool in seven seconds.
I chucked away the ripe fruit o’ ten years o’ hard
service one day, all through the old gag.”
“What gag?” asked Dick.


“‘Come-’n-’ave-another,’” replied Danny, with a
world of pathos in his voice. “That there ‘Come-
’n-’ave-another ’ has busted up many a fine soldier,
an’ sailor, too.”
“I’ve known a lot of civilians,” answered Dick,
with a wan smile, “who have tumbled through that
same ‘Come-’n-’ave-another.’ What’s the best cure
for it, Danny?”
“Don’t ’ave the first one,” replied Danny promptly.
“It’s the only safe cure I know. I got into the way o’
drinking when I was a lad, an’ then this dry dust
settled in my neck, an’ it got like a bit o’ Egypt in
midsummer; it cracks and cakes, an’ calls out for a
drink night an’ day until it gets it, an’ then Private
Danny Develin is an unresponsible white savage. I’ve
done things when the drink’s on me, Dick, that make
me go lookin’ down the muzzle of my pistol when
I’m sober. I’m never going back to old England,
Dick, because I can’t face my folk there. My dad
was a soldier; he’s on the retired list now, on a sergeant-
major’s pension, an’ I know just how the old man
would look at me if I turned up Private D. Develin
with those cursed black marks against my name. He
wouldn’t say much, Dick; he’d just look at me, an’—
well, I’ve ridden into more than one death trap in my
time with my regiment, an’ I’d rather ride into the
hottest hole a soldier can go into a thousand times
than I’d face the old man’s eye now.”
Dick reached up from his pillows, and touched with
loving fingers the medals on the Hussar’s breast,
touched them one by one until he came to the plain
little cross, the Victoria Cross, which none but the
dauntless wear.


“If I wore that,” he said, “I’d face anything.”
Danny Develin blushed under his tan.
“My dad wears one also. I’m proud of the cross,
boy; proud of it. But it makes it all the harder to
go home. You see, somehow I feel that I have dis-
graced the Victoria Cross by not climbing higher.
I’m going to quit the service, Dick, and if I can win
a place for myself, then I’ll go home to old England
an’ show them what I have done,” and, with a
kindly smile, the brave fellow moved away; for he
knew, though Dick did not, that one of his mad
acts whilst under the influence of drink had closed
the door of promotion in the army for him for
ever.
It was rather rotten for poor old Dick lying in
his bed in the hospital, but it was full of lessons for
him. He learnt that a man can show a lot of pluck
by bearing patiently what comes to him.
One day Sim told him that a farmer from the Port
Elizabeth district had been brought in, suffering from
a broken collar-bone.
“He’s a Dutchman,” said Sim, “and an awful
good sort of fellow. He just sat and smoked his big
calabash pipe whilst the surgeon set the bone. He
wanted to go straight off, but the surgeon told him
to lie in for a few days as he may develop other
symptoms. You sec, Dick,” added Sim, “his Cape
cart turned over on top of him, his horses bolted,
and his Hottentot driver lost his head. He’s a great
big chap, and the surgeon told the head nurse that
he may develop symptoms of internal injuries. His
name is Van Schloss.”
“I hope the poor beggar is not badly hurt,” was


Dick’s answer; and then Sim went off to attend to
his duties.
Van Schloss was a fine fellow, and Sim had to look
after him. He owned several farms in the thick scrub
that lies off Port Elizabeth, where he raised crops of
cereals and bred ostriches for feathers. He was, in
fact, one of the most important “feather merchants”
in Africa, and his daily talks with Sim fired the
cx-messenger boy’s blood with a desire to try that
kind of life. He was far more badly hurt than he
would admit at first —a fact which the experienced
eye of the head surgeon had noted. And he and the
two boys soon struck up a firm friendship; for by this
time Dick was able to prowl about the wards by the
aid of a stick. Danny Develin also came in for a
share of his attention, for the big Dutchman liked to
yarn to the Hussar concerning his exploits in other
lands.
One afternoon Van Schloss made a startling proposal
to Dick.
“Come mit me,” he said, “to my farm. I haf
no poys of my own; I haf no vrow now, an’ no liddle
poys to play aroun’ mine house. Vat, you not come,
eh?”
“I can’t come without Sim Slack,” said Dick.
The farmer considered for a moment, and then
said:—
“Veil, I likes dot Sim Slack most as mooch as I
likes you; he is a liddle fat poy, but he haf a lot of
plook. So dot is all right. You an’ Sim Slack, de
fat von, will coom mit me, an’ vork for me, an’ I
show yow’s som vun mit de ostriches, an’ de bucks,
an’ de elephants. Somdimes ve vill vork hard, verey


hard; and som udder dimes ve vill play, jes’ like ve
vos child’n again. Vat you say to dot, Dick, eh?
Ve shoot de bock, an’ de elephants, an’ de vild birds,
an’ ve break in de horses, an’ ve haf a goot time
mit you an’ me, leetle Dick, and dat fat poy, Sim
Slack.”
"Why not give Danny Develin a job, too, sir?”
queried Dick.
"Vot goot is er soldjer to me?” asked the Dutch-
man, with a whimsical smile. "I haf not got a var
on my farm.”
"No,” pleaded Dick; "but you have colts you
want broken in, horses you want tamed, and others
you want matched for the market; and Danny Develin
can do all that kind of work, and do it well; he is
used to it.”
Veil, veil,” smiled the big Dutchman, between
whiffs of his pipe, "I takes dot soldjer man mit me
also. Now you ron avay like er goot liddle poy an’
haf some more sleep.”
After that Dick mended very rapidly, and when
the Dutchman went off with his arm in a sling, he
left his address, and he also left the money at the
shipping office for three tickets to Port Elizabeth, so
that Dick, and Sim, and Danny Develin might follow
him when they were ready.
One evening, when Dick was nearly convalescent,
Danny Develin and Sim found him poring over a
sheet of notepaper.
What s up, boy?” asked the soldier, cheerily,
for he was in high good spirits. He had his discharge
in his pocket, and felt that a new career was opening
out in front of him with those two fresh young lives.


It was quite a long time before Telegraph Dick
made reply. Then he said, in rather an ashamed sort
of a voice:
“Look here, it’s like this: whilst I was on my back
in there, I thought out a code of honour, which I
thought might help to carry us round the world,
Sim, and I called it “The London Boys’ Code of
Honour”; and I thought if we all signed it and lived
up to the code, we might not make so many mistakes
after all. It’s a kind of a chart to steer us by, as sailors
say.”
“Let’s hear it, Dick,” cried Sim. And Danny
Develin lit his little short clay pipe, and leaned back
on the grass.
“Aye, boy, Dick; let’s hear it,” he muttered between
whiffs of smoke. “I wish I’d had a chart of some sort
to steer by when I was your age, but I hadn’t.”
So, after much pressing, Telegraph Dick read
aloud:
“THE LONDON BOYS’ CODE OF HONOUR.
1. —We won’t lie.
2. —We won’t steal,
2. —We won’t shirk any decent hard work.
4. — We won’t go back on a pal.
5. —We won’t drink any intoxicating liquors.
6. —We won’t refuse to help any countryman in extremity.
7. —We won’t use bad language.
8. —We won’t fight if we can help it.
9. —We won’t give in whilst we can stand, if we’re forced
to fight.
10 . —We won’t meddle with other folks’ business.
“We swear this by the lights o’ London, that never
go out.”


‘‘There,” said Dick, ‘‘l thought if we signed that,
and kept a copy pasted in our hats, Sim, it might
help us. What do you think?”
“I think it’s ripping; a jolly fine code of honour.
And I’ll sign on now, and paste my copy in my hat,”
was Sim’s whole-hearted rejoinder; and he drew the
sheet of paper towards him and signed, then passed
it on to Danny Develin.
But the soldier shook his head.
“I’ll try and live up to the code,” he said, “but
I won’t sign just yet, boys. You see, number five is
a sunk rock for me. I don’t want to drink now, but
perhaps, when the bit o’ dry dust begins to crack
in my neck, I might break my pledge, and then
you’d have no sort of respect for me. No, no, boys;
you have a clean life behind you, and a clean life
ahead, so you can sign and keep your pledge, but
it’s different with me.”
So for the sake of his past sins, and for fear of the
future, poor Danny Develin kept his name off “The
London Boys’ Code of Honour.”
In the fullness of time Dick’s strength came back
to him, slowly at first, but later it came with a rush,
like the incoming tide on the Cornish coast; and then
the three adventurers went aboard ship, and sailed
for Port Elizabeth. It was only a four days’ journey,
and as their ship ran into harbour, the adventurers
saw a typical South African town nestling on the low
sandy coast.
I hope we’ll have some real adventures here,”
cried Sim.
Dick, remembering his broken head, replied that,
as far as he was concerned, he thought the Durban


episode had been real enough for all practical
purposes.
“Oh, I don’t mean that-sort of thing,” was Sim’s
reply. “I mean adventures with elephants. Mr.
Van Schloss told me there were plenty in his neigh-
bourhood, and that they do a terrible lot of damage
to his plantations in the dry season.”
“We’ll get all the elephant hunting we want where
we are going,” volunteered Danny Develin. “I’ve
never been this way before, but I know a couple of
officers who were here last summer, and they found
it such dangerous sport that they were glad to get
away with their lives, and I don’t think they will ever
come here again. Only the boldest hunters try for
elephants in these thick reed forests.”
On shore they found a nigger waiting for them,
with a Gape cart for the two boys, and a saddle-hack
for Danny Develin. Mr. Van Schloss had been un-
able to meet them, as he was very busy amongst his
ostriches.
Before starting, they determined to have a look
round the town, and were delighted with the life of
the place. They saw the niggers, male and female,
idling about in the sun with gaily-coloured handker-
chiefs bound around their heads. The boys had read
a good deal about the ill-treatment of these people
by white men, but they soon realised that they should
not believe all the yarns they read in newspapers on
such matters. The blacks were fat, merry, and frolic-
some, and seemed to be having a real good time.
Hearing a bell clanging, they went to a spot where a
crowd of white folk had gathered, and found that the
feather market was in full swing. It was a very curious


sight to the two London lads to see bunches of ostrich
feathers held up and auctioned by a dapper-looking
fellow, who had a flow of language like a running
river. Sometimes he spoke in English, sometimes
Dutch, and every now and again when addressing a
nigger he would fly off into Kaffir language, and his
tongue seemed never to get tired. Big, burly farmer
men, in rough grey clothes, grouped themselves
around the auctioneer, every now and again interrupt-
ing him to point out some special excellence in the
feathers offered for sale. There were buyers there in
that little town who supplied London, St. Petersburg,
Paris, and all the other great centres of fashion with
the ostrich feathers of which ladies are so fond.
After they were satisfied with sight-seeing, the
boys jumped into the Cape cart, Danny Develin
sprang on to the back of his horse, and, with a wild
whoop from the nigger driver, they were off towards
the Van Schloss homestead. The drive was fine, for
though the day was hot, there was a nice breeze
blowing from the sea which cooled their blood and
made the clear air seem like wine. The four horses in
the Cape cart were good and fast, and the nigger,
who was a good driver and a rollicking blade, sent
them along at a splendid pace, yelling funny things
at them, either in praise or condemnation. Now he
would shout to the offside leader, a bony, iron-grey
mare, called Susan:
“Hi, dar, yo’ Susan; yo’ born tired, eh? Make
yo ’own mudder shamed ob yo’. Swing dem ar long
legs a bit faster; yo’ make me blush, yah!”
A bit later he would scream out to the bay in the
near lead:


“Get down to yo’ work dar, Pompey. Yo’ fadder
wuz a gennelman; yo’ disgrace to de fambly, loafin’
like dar ar; earn yo’ oats, yo’ lazy hatrack ob a horse.
Yah, yah!” And then the long whip would whistle
through the air, and both Pompey and Susan would
catch it hot.
At intervals the noise of the horses’ hoofs would
startle some wild animal that would go racing off,
half-scared out of its wits, and at such times Sim
Slack was almost frenzied with excitement, and the
delighted nigger would cry:
“Yo like sport, sah, eh, sah? Yo’ like sport. My
golly, dis de place fer game,”
Then he would proceed to tell of his own deeds
as a hunter, and mighty bold fellow he was, too,
according to his own account; for, single-handed, he
had slain lions and elephants, and nothing breathed
that could affright him.
The boys, however, were to have proof of his
courage ere they were much older, and, as is so often
the case with boasters, he did not pan out too well
in the hour of peril.
After a few hours they outspanned, and gave the
horses a spell and a feed, and had a meal themselves;
and they had just got the horses in again when they
heard a terrific clatter, and, looking along the road,
they saw coming from the direction in which they had
to go, a Cape cart drawn by four fairly frantic horses.
A white man was driving them, and he was standing
up and yelling like a mad monkey. Right behind the
flying cart came a monstrous elephant, with his trunk
in the air, trumpeting like a fury. As soon as the
nigger driver saw the awful danger that was approach-


ing, he forgot that he was a hunter that feared no
mortal foe, but he remembered most distinctly that
he was a very fine runner, and he made good use of
his abilities by darting full speed into the scrub; and,
as nothing else could be done, Danny Develin called
to the two boys, and they all followed the nigger’s
example, until they came to a very tall, stout tree,
up which they shinned as fast as their legs would
take them. From this place of vantage they watched
the terrible hunt, for that was what it was. The
elephant was hunting the man, and it was very
evident that the furious brute would allow nothing
to turn it from its path. They learned later that
the man in the Cape cart had spied the elephant feed-
ing, and had sent a bullet from his rifle into the old
tusker. The aim of the hunter had been bad, how-
ever, for he had missed a vital spot and only succeeded
in enraging the great brute, which at once turned and
charged upon him. His horses had seen the danger,
and sped away down the track at their topmost speed;
for a horse knows by instinct when an elephant is
bent on mischief. The hunter’s black servant had
leapt out of the cart, and trusted to his legs and know-
ledge of the bush to save his life, and it was he
who later described the incidents that led to the
catastrophe.
Dick, Sim, and Danny watched the race for life.
They could see the horses flying with necks out-
stretched, muzzles thrust forward, ears laid back,
manes and tails streaming in the wind. They saw
the man holding the reins in one hand, the whip
m the other, flogging his team like a maniac.
“He’s lost his nerve completely,” said Danny


Develin, a note of contempt in his voice. “If the
fool only had the sense to drop the reins and pick
up his rifle he might save his life even now; the
elephant is so close to him that he couldn’t miss,
even in that rocking cart. Anyhow, he’d have a
chance to die fighting; he’s going to die like a hunted
pariah dog now.”
“If I wuz in dat ar ole cart wiff er rifle I’d shoot
dat elefon in de eye, suah, boss,” said the nigger,
who had found his courage again now that he was
perched up a high tree out of danger.
Dick laughed at the boaster.
“I think you do most of your shooting with your
mouth,” he said. “I’d be more afraid of that than
your gun.”
“Look, look, boss; de elefon’s got ’m,” screeched
the nigger, pointing with trembling finger at the scene
in the road.
And it was only too true. The tusker had caught
up to the Cape cart; with one swing of his trunk he
tore the hood and the back portion of the woodwork
away, as if it had been brown paper. A moment later
he crashed right into the cart, and knocked it off its
wheels, and the pole threw the horses to the ground.
Out of the debris the man rose, and made a frantic
effort to run. It was vain. The gigantic beast picked
him up, as the wind picks up a dry leaf, and the next
second he was dashed to earth, a crumpled-up mass.
Then the maddened monarch of the woods commenced
to trample the man, the cart, and the horses into the
very dust of the road. It was a gruesome and an
appalling sight, and the watchers on the tree grew
white as they witnessed it.


“I don’t think I feel quite so eager to go hunting
elephants as I did, Sim,” murmured Dick.
“I —I —l’d like to try it in an airship first,” was
Sim’s answer.
And Danny Develin, the brave Hussar, who had
faced death dauntlessly many a time, shivered, and
said that, for his part, he never wanted to see one again
outside of a Zoo.
But the nigger was frothing at the mouth in his
ardour to kill elephants.
“Well,” said little fat Sim, looking at him very hard,
“if you want to do such a lot of killing there’s a nice
big one down there in the road. Get down and kill
him.” And as he spoke he gave the black braggart
a push that sent him flying off the limb into a prickly
pear bush below; and both boys chuckled as they
noted the monkey-like speed with which the boaster
climbed into a neighbouring tree, where he sat
for a long time, tenderly picking prickles out of
himself.
The lot of them had to remain upon their perch for
several hours; for the tusker remained on guard by the
wreck he had made; and Denny told the boys that the
brute had such sharp ears that he would probably
hear their footsteps in the jungle if they attempted to
regain the road.
“In which event he would most certainly charge
down upon them, and trample them to death in the
humour he is in now,” added Danny. “He’d go
through a regiment of cavalry, for those old tuskers
don’t know what fear means.”
So they waited until the grim sentry took himself off,
and then, very warily, they made their way to the


spot where they had left their outfit, only to find
everything gone.
“Dey stampeded, boss, when elefon passed,” cried
the nigger. “Dey gone home to Boss Van Schloss,
By-an’-by, he come down an’ look fer us; he know what
de matter.”
So the party waited in patience for awhile, and then
Telegraph Dick said:
“Look here, let’s go and look at the dead man.
We can bury him.”
The nigger’s teeth rattled in his head.
“Doan yo’ go do dat ar, young boss,” he whispered
hoarsely. “If dat ole elefon see yo’, he bury yo’, suah.”
“You’re a plucky hunter, you are,” jeered Sim.
“Why, you haven’t enough pluck to open a whelk
with a knife.”
It was, indeed, a terrible wreck that they gazed
upon! Everything was smashed to pieces, except the
dead man’s magazine rifle, out of which one cartridge
had been fired.
Presently they covered the mangled remains up,
and then they moved back towards camp. But
Sim, with the rifle, lagged behind, trying to fancy
himself the rear-guard of a beaten army. All at once
he heard a sound that made his heart bounce like a
football. Looking in the direction from whence the
sound came, he saw the vast frame of the destroying
tusker, and the cruel, malignant eyes were fixed on
his face.
“Oh!” gasped poor Sim. “I wish I was on top of a
’bus in Tottenham Court Road, or —or in the ‘Two-
penny Tube’!” But he wasn’t, and his fat legs shook
under him.


Then he half-turned to bolt, but he remembered
Danny Develin’s words: “Better to die fighting than
to be hunted to death like a pariah dog.” So, shaking
with mortal fear, he dropped on one knee, and, very
unsteadily, raised the rifle to his shoulder.


CHAPTER IV
FIRST BIVOUAC
It was a moment fraught with terror for the gallant
little London messenger lad, kneeling there on the
edge of the African jungle, with a rifle in his hands
—concerning the use of which he did not know a great
deal —and right in front of him an old-man elephant,
savage with the wound it had received at the hands of
the man who now lay a battered corpse upon the
track. Well might the lad wish himself in the “Two-
penny Tube,” or in any other safe place, at such a
moment, for such a position as he was in was critical
enough to try the nerve of a veteran hunter.
Whilst he had worked at the hospital, Danny Develin
had often picked up a rifle and explained it to Sim;
but such knowledge was indeed a poor preparation
for such an encounter. The heavy weapon swayed
about in the boy’s grasp like a fishing-rod in a stiff
gale, and little Sim made a gallant effort to pull
himself together that he might at least put up a fight
worthy of the boys of old London before his end came.
That his end was not far off he felt assured, and for the
life of him he could not help thinking of the battered
remains of the man lying a little distance off on the
track; and the memory of that awful sight made his
flesh creep. Would the glaring monster pick him up
in his trunk and hurl him against the adjacent trees.


or would it thrust him through the body with its big
yellow tusks? At the thought of those tusks, so long,
so yellow, so terrible, something of Sim’s whimsical
nature came back to him, and he muttered:
“I—l don’t want any ivory this trip. I—I —I want
a return ticket home to Tooting.”
Then another thought rushed into his mind, and he
remembered the boastful words of the darky driver
who had said, when sitting on the bough of the tree,
“If I was dat ar man wiff de rifle, I’d shoot dat ole
elefon in de eye, suah.”
The brute was only a few yards away; it turned its
mighty head a bit sideways, as if it could hear some
sound afar off, and was listening. Sim saw the little
pig-like eye as plainly as if it had been the bright bold
face of “ Big Ben” gleaming out towards the Thames.
He made a supreme effort, and the long rifle barrel
lay firm and still in his boyish grasp; his eye flashed
along the barrel boldly and unflinchingly, and then
his chubby forefinger tightened upon the trigger, and
the next moment the report of the rifle rang out on the
air, waking the echoes far and near.
The lord of the jungle did not make a sound; there
was no shrill trumpet cry, no scream of rage, no wild
onward rush of trampling feet, no crashing and break-
ing of riven branches to mark the path of the avenging
charge. All was still, deathly still, for a moment after
the rifle’s report had ripped the air, Sim felt the world
go round with him, his fingers loosed their grip upon
the weapon, and he shrank down, like a rabbit hiding
from hounds, behind a tussock of grass. There he
crouched in deadly terror, whilst the sweat ran off him
like rain off a roof.


Then a wondrous thing occurred; the elephant, the
grand old tusker, and lord of the forest and plain,
lurched heavily forward; its colossal knees bent under
its massive body, its tusks diving deeply into the red,
hard-baked earth, and then it remained motionless
like some vast grey granite carving around which the
jungle had grown; and Sim, the messenger boy, whose
feet had scarce yet ceased to echo along the pavements
of London, knew that he had done what many a
mighty hunter in his prime would have given a small
fortune to have done. He knew that his aim had been
true, knew that he, a boy, had killed the lordly
champion of the wilds; and still he crouched there,
wet with sweat and shaking as if an ague had him in
its grip.
I, who chronicle this story, might tell you that he
never lost his nerve, that he did not know fear. Ah!
but that would not be a true tale, and most of these
things I am chronicling are true, and it serves no good
purpose to put words into a boy’s mouth that are false,
or sentiments into his heart that Nature has not
endorsed. Sim is a real boy, an everyday kind of boy,
not a paper hero. So he crouched there in the gather-
ing gloom, and felt weak and sickly; and he did not
hear the shouts of Telegraph Dick, nor the strong, clear
voice of Danny Develin, as his two friends shouted
to him to know why he had fired the rifle. Dick and
the soldier were with the nigger when the ominous
crack of the rifle reached their ears.
“What’s the meaning of this?” queried Danny
Develin. “Is young Sim having a lark?”
“I think he must be; he’s a terror for tricks,”
answered Telegraph Dick,


“Me fink it am de elefon,” gasped the nigger;
and with a hop, skip, and a jump he was off the
track and into the jungle in search of a tree.
“Come back at once, you wretched cur,” stormed
Dick.
A voice replied far up a tree:
“I’se up a tree watchin’ an’ prayin’ fer de young
fat boss. If de ole elefon get him, he snuff him
up his trunk like er nigger sniff up er spoonful ob
snuff”
“Come out of that tree,” shouted Danny Develin.
“It am mighty healthy up in er tree when elefons
come lookin’ fer people,” whined the nigger.
“Come and help us make a search,” demanded
Dick. “You know the ways of the jungle.”
“I know the ways of elefons, too, boss, an’ I doan
want to go lookin’ fer none. I ain’t lost no elefons
ter-day, young boss.”
Seeing that there was no help to be obtained from
the nigger, Dick and Danny Develin started off at a
run to try and fathom the mystery of the rifle shot.
They had not a great distance to go, and both were
fleet of foot. When they came to the spot where little
Sim was crouched behind his tussock of grass, they
had a shock; for at the first glance it looked as if the
boy had been injured. Then their eyes fell upon the
carcase of the elephant, and they stood petrified with
sheer wonder.
A moment later Dick had dashed to the side of his
chum, and had hold of his hands. Then, unable
to contain himself, he cheered like a madman. Danny
Develin marched over, and, slapping Sim on the back,
cried:


“Good boy, good boy! Why, you’ve got the heart
of a lion.”
“Have I?” retorted Sim, with his old, comical
smile. “Then don’t you ever be scared of lions, Danny,
for I’m half-dead with blue funk. I feel as empty inside
as a second-hand shoe trunk.”
“You didn’t funk until you pulled the trigger, any-
how,” shouted Dick. “Got him plum in the eye,
Sim. Do you know what I’d like to do with this bit
o’ game, Sim?”
“Cut it up, and sell it for cat’s meat, eh, Dick? My
word, it’d feed all the cats in England for a week.”
“Not me,” quoth Dick, who was just glowing with
pride at his friend’s prowess. “I’d like to have it
stuffed, and send it to the British Museum, and put a
label on it: ‘Shot by Sim Slack, a London messenger
boy.’”
“We’ll cut his tusks out as soon as we can get hold
of a saw and an axe,” put in Danny Develin. “My
eyes! but they are beauties, those tusks!” And down
Danny went on his knees, and began spanning the
two great ivory tusks with his hands. “From the tip
of my thumb to the tip of my little finger is just ten
inches,” he said, without looking up; “and I make
these tusks out to be four feet three inches long from
the point to the root, and in the middle they are thirteen
inches in circumference. So you can count on a good
thing out of your first day’s hunt, Sim.”
“Well, Danny, whatever it brings we’ll divide it
into three parts. Share alike’s our motto, you know;
and it might just as easily have been you as me that
did the shooting,” cried Sim, getting mixed in his
grammar.


At this juncture the nigger driver, who had heard the
cheering, came on tiptoe through the jungle, and when
he saw what had happened his eyes nearly bulged out
of his head, and his mouth extended until it looked as
if he could have whispered down his own back.
“Who shot dat ar elefon?” he asked.
“I did,” said Sim, with a ring of very natural pride
in his voice.
“Wiff er gun?” asked the coon, still gaping with
wonder.
“Yes,” cried Sim. “Did you think I shot him with a
seidlitz powder?”
At this the darky began to chant the boy’s praises
to the trees, and the skies, and all the surrounding
earth, calling him the “little fat boss, with the face
of a melon and the heart of a warrior chief,” with
many more elegant names.
The darky meant to be complimentary, but Sim did
not like his face compared to melons.
“The chaps who used to hang about Holborn used
to call me ‘putty face,’ don’t you remember, Dick?”
Dick nodded.
“Yes, they did,” he said. “But I’d like to see one
of ’em who’d do what you’ve done to-day, Sim.”
“I didn’t like English boys calling me ‘putty face,’
and I don’t like a nigger saying I look like a melon.
I’ll teach him something.”
Just then the coon came prancing up to Sim, his
head back, his eyes nearly closed, his mouth wide open,
and his hands and legs going like Catherine wheels.
He was doing a native dance in the little man’s honour,
and chanting his praises as loudly as he could bawl.
Sim grinned, and stooping quickly, picked up a nice


soft clod of dirt that the elephant’s tusks had displaced.
With a deft movement, he popped it straight into the
yawning cavern that the darky called “his mouf,”
and then, with a not too gentle thrust of the heel of
his hand, he sent it well home.
“There, you black bounder,” he shouted; “if my
face looks like a melon, yours looks like a mud heap
in the dark.”
The darky was exasperated; but, as they only laughed
at his wrath, he soon regained his good humour, and,
obeying Danny Develin’s order, he set about making a
camp fire, for it was evident that the little party of
adventurers would have to camp where they were that
night, or a good portion of it, at any rate.
As soon as the camp fire was a glowing reality, the
nigger produced some mealies in the pod from a small
sack he had strapped across his shoulders. These he
placed in the fire to roast, for no one knows how to
cook mealies like an African nigger.
“You watch does, boss,” he cried to Danny Develin,
“an’ I soon get yo’ sumfin ter eat.”
Then he set to work on the carcase of the elephant
with a knife, and it was a long time before he was on
his haunches, toasting elephant steak for supper.
The Hussar knew that business, too, quite as well
as the coon, for he had roughed it in too many cam-
paigns to be a novice round a bivouac fire. He showed
the two boys how to cut a wand from a tree, and how
to peel the bark off. Then he adjusted the elephant
steak on the two little natural forks at the end of
each wand, and, squatting upon his heels, began to
brown his meat for supper. Sim and Dick followed
suit, and it was not long before their spirits were just


bubbling like boiling water, for it was glorious fun to
them both. There they were, in the great unknown
land, with the untamed jungle all around them, the
camp fire blazing joyously at their feet, the scent of
supper permeating the night air with the odour the
hunter loves, the wind was singing a lullaby through
the trees, and far away they could hear the jackals
howling to one another, as if they already scented the
dead elephant and meant to come along later and
demand their share of the spoils of the chase. Over-
head the moon was shining, a great yellow moon,
splashed here and there with crimson, a sure and
certain sign of a hot to-morrow.
“This beats the Strand all to fits,” cried Sim, with
an exultant yap in his voice.
“I dunno so much about that,” retorted Danny
Develin, with a yearning note in his voice. “I’d
give a bit to be able to loaf from Ludgate Circus, down
Fleet Street, along the Strand, and away past St.
George’s barracks to Piccadilly Circus to-night, to hear
the little news kids calling out the latest editions, to
see the fine show in the small tobacconists’ windows,
with the fancy pipes and the high-toned cigarette
packages and things, and to hear the cabs slugging
along and the ’buses rolling an’ jolting and rumbling.
I’d give a lot to see it all once more, Sim; the noise and
the bustle of hurrying feet, the jokes an’ the laughter;
to see the swells going into the theatres an’ the cafes,
an’ to watch the beggars loafing at the streets corners,
an’ flower girls, an’ the chaps who sell matches and
pennyworths of nonsense, an’ the fellows from the
country looking like fish out o’ water. Oh! dash it all,
don’t talk about London to-night; for it makes me ache


all over, and the bit o’ dry dirt gets into the bottom o’
my neck, an’ I want to go away an’ pawn my soul
for a pint or two o’ bitter beer.”
“Come now, Danny, none o’ that,” whispered Dick,
nestling up to the Hussar, “We won’t say any more
about London to-night if it makes you feel bad; but
this is all new to Sim an’ me, the camping out an’ all
that, an’ we can’t help talking like two fools, can we,
Sim?”
“I expect it’s me that’s talking like a fool, lad,” was
Danny’s rather sad retort. “But come on, boys; fall
to it. The grub is cooked to a turn, and there’s worse
things in this world than broiled elephant’s steak and
mealies cooked in the ashes.”
So they fell to it, like good trenchermen, for the
fresh air and the excitement had made them all
hungry, and for a good while nothing was heard but
the working of their teeth. And a right royal supper
they made; and when it was over, and Danny and
the nigger had got their pipes going, then the boys
lay on their backs, with an elephant’s leg for a pillow,
and watched the stars come out. And to them all the
world seemed just about perfect.
After a while Danny Develin told them stories of
his soldier life: told how he had ridden over the deserts
of Egypt with his troop to do battle with Dervish hosts,
and made their hearts ache with envy as he spoke of
a bay mare he once rode, named Chiquita; and Dick
vowed that if ever the luck came his way to own enough
money, he would buy just such another dainty equine
lady, and train her until she was as clever as Chiquita.
Danny smiled at the boy.
“Well, Dick,” said he, “you get the horse, and I


promise you I’ll teach you how to ride her and train
her. I’ll teach you all I learnt in the Hussars, and all
that the Arabs and the Afghans and the Sikhs taught
me, and you shall know the joy that comes to a man
when he throws his leg over a perfect horse, perfectly
trained, and knows that she is his and no other man’s.”
After awhile, silence—the delicious silence of the
way-back camp —fell upon them, and they were
napping. Sim was trying to figure out in his head how
much money the splendid pair of tusks would bring
in the ivory market, when, out of the bowels of the
night, there came a wild, weird, wailing sound, not a
howl, not a bark, not a cough, not a laugh, but a
mixture of all those sounds with a maniac’s scream
thrown in to aid the demoniac chorus. Right up to
their feet the two boys sprang, as if lifted by gun
cotton; and this time Dick seized the rifle, and sprang
a pace or two to the front, ready for any danger that
might come his way.
“It’s er pack ob laughin’ dogs; wild dogs ob de
jungle, bass. Dey can smell de dead elefon, an’ dey
hab called roun’ in dis yer permiscuous fashion. It’s
er little way dey hab got, boss.”
“Oh, is it?” laughed Dick. “Well, I’ll show ’em
a little way that I’ve got. It’s a way we had in the
telegraph service, and we called it, ‘Taking care of
our own.’”
As he said the last word, Telegraph Dick raised the
rifle and let fly at a long, lean animal that stood for a
moment where a moonbeam fell; and a howl of pain
told that the aim was true, though it had been a snap-
shot. Then there fell upon their ears such a chorus
of sound as might have waked the dead. There was


a yelp and a ‘‘Ha —ha—ha”; a howl, and a “He —he
—ho —ho —how-e-e-e-e-e ”; winding up with the snap-
ping of jaws that sounded like the breaking of many
bottles.
“Sounds like a Bank holiday crowd gone mad,”
protested Sim. “Give ’em another shot, Dick.” And
Telegraph Dick took his pal’s advice and sent another
bit of lead on a journey out into the night; and once
more the infernal din burst forth.
The boys took turn and turn about with the rifle,
and they made the cartridges fairly fly, until the dead
man’s bandolier was pretty nearly empty. Danny
Develin, who had not forgotten his own joy when he
first went hunting, sat and smoked and smiled, and
told them they were using enough ammunition to
make a pretty decent battle; but they stood his good-
natured chaff, and blazed away every time they saw
what the nigger called a “laughing dog.”
The nigger got it into his silly pate that because the
Hussar could chaff the boys with impunity he could do
the same, but after he had indulged in his nigger wit
for a time, Sim, getting behind him with a piece of
stout rope about a yard long, suddenly yelled out —
“Jump, nigger; jump! Here’s a snake —a puff-
adder!”
At the name puff-adder the coon gave a leap into
the air as if he meant to try flying for a change; for
there is nothing on earth that a black man dreads as
much as this horrible reptile, whose bite is always
fatal.
As the nigger touched earth again, Sim, who was
twisting the yard of rope about with a stick until it
wriggled like a snake in the shadows flung by the


trees, suddenly gave a heave, and sent the rope fair
on to the darky’s shoulders; and at the same time Dick,
who was in the secret, pricked the coon lightly with
his knife. At this the boastful darky flopped down on
his hands and knees and buried his face in the dirt,
howling most dismally, for he thought his last hour
had surely arrived, until Danny Develin, grinning all
over his face, told him to get up, and not make an ass
of himself.
“Nebber get up no moah, boss,” whined the coon.
“Dis yer darky am goin’ ter die befoah sun up.”
“Rats,” jeered the Hussar. “Look, here’s your
blessed puff-adder.” And at the word he laid the rope
over the black’s naked shoulders, and when the coon
saw how nicely he had been fooled by a bit of a boy,
he looked very sheepish indeed.
“I thought nothing could scare you, you black
boaster,” chuckled Dick. “Why, you nearly died o’
funk, and you were not hurt at all.”
The nigger pushed out his thick lips,
“Yo’ call dat fun, eh, young boss?” he asked.
“Yo’ scare de wits out ob er nigger wiff er puff-adder,
an’ yo’ laugh. My word, boss, if puff-adder climb up
yo back yo’ begin to think ob de ’appy lan’ pretty
quick.”
So the night passed. There was not much sleep for
anyone, for the “laughing dogs” made too much noise
for slumber to be seriously thought of by anyone. The
dawn broke rather cold, and soon afterwards Mr. Van
Schloss came along with a party of neighbours whom
he had hurriedly collected for the purpose. He had
been away from home when his runaway team had
turned up with their harness all tangled up, and the


Cape cart badly shattered, but as soon as he arrived
and heard the news, he guessed just what had happened.
Whereupon, he had formed a rescue party, little expect-
ing to find Dan and the boys fit and well.
“Why,” he cried, when he saw them by the bivouac
fire, “I tole my goot frens dot I expec’ my leedle poys
would all be smashed up mit de elephant’s drunk, an
now I find dot does leedle poys haf smash up dot old
tusker. Dot vas goot; more as very goot. lam much
please,” and he took the hands of the two little
Londoners in his own great brown hands that looked
like saddle flaps, and shook them until the water came
into their eyes.
“Tink of dose shmall liddle poys dot coom mit
er gun an’ kill elephants. Dey vos make great, large
hunters, py-an’-py, in some more dimes. I haf fall
in lofe mit dem. De schmall fat von,” he explained
to his admiring friends, “is called Shim, an’ de pigger
one vas Tick; so now you know vat names to told ’em
py.” And all his friends smiled, and shook hands
with the boys, and made much of them in their kindly,
good-humoured fashion; for they were fine fellows,
big and brown and burly. Everyone had a saddle
hack, all were dressed in grey tweed, and each had a
rifle slung over his shoulders, and everyone of them
smoked a big bent pipe, made from small melons that
grow in the clefts of the rocks on the koppies.
The first thing the newly-arrived party did after
viewing the body of the elephant, was to go along the
track and bury the man who had been killed.
“He vas er goot chap, but er pad hunter,” Van
Schloss remarked, as the grave was filled in. “I tole
him some udder dimes not to fire at der elephants,


because he vos git his head lost ven drooples coomes,
an’ blenty of dimes drooples coomes ven you don’t
kill de beast mit de first shot.”
“What is the best thing to do when you don’t drop
him first shot?” demanded Dick.
“Yust keep as cool as er duck-pond in vinter, an’
ploomp in von more shot, an’ von more as after dot;
an’ keep on doing dot till somedinks dold you dot
elephant vos put out of business.”
After the funeral, the farmers marched stolidly back,
and set to work to cut out the tusks from the grey
granite head. And a hard job they found it, for the
animal had been well stricken in years. Various
offers were made to the youngsters for their trophy,
and Van Schloss, acting as their friend, disposed of
the ivory for the fair market value, which was duly
handed over to Sim Slack, who promptly divided it
into three equal parts, and handed Dick and Danny
Develin their quotas.
Then they all made their way homewards, and that
afternoon the London adventurers found themselves
safely landed upon one of the biggest and most import-
ant feather-farms in the world. Van Schloss, however,
had another farm or breeding establishment close by,
where he raised horses for the African markets. He
was a man of mixed blood; his father had been Dutch,
his mother French, and he had been born and raised
in Africa. In many things he was as simple as a child,
but in other matters he was a hard man to get ahead
of. Possibly no man living could have taught him any-
thing concerning feather-farming, and, of a certainty,
no one, not even a Yorkshire horse-coper, could have
bested him in a deal over horses.


Dick and Sim were very soon at home on the feather-
farm, and the coloured man who had been with them
when they had the adventure on the track told such
a string of glowing stories about the pair of them,
that all the coloured folk were inclined to look upon
them with wonder.
Danny Develin went to work on the adjacent farm
to break in horses, and he got a commission from
both boys to look out for a likely young colt or filly
that might suit them, for both lads had money enough
by this time to purchase a horse, saddle, and bridle
apiece, and they were ambitious to own something
really good that they could do just as they liked with.
Fate seemed very good to both the Londoners in
regard to adventures, for scarcely had they settled
down to work ere they were offered a chance to show
their mettle. It came about this way. Not far from
Van Schloss’ feather-farm there was a range of hills,
or, as the Colonials call them, koppies, and in those
koppies there were many bands of apes, which at
odd times and seasons used to come out of their hilly
fastnesses and do a lot of mischief amongst the settlers’
plantations. They would strip the orchards bare of a
whole season’s fruit in a single night; at other times,
these mischievous imps would make a raid upon the
mealie fields, and woe to the crop they got amongst
for a few hours. At times they would attack even
grown-up people in open daylight, but this did not
happen very often. When, however, it did occur, the
farmers used to send a call round from homestead to
homestead, and a shooting party would be convened
to thin them down a bit.
Less than a week after their arrival at Van Schloss’


homestead the two lads were sent upon an errand on
horseback to the house of Widow Gale, whose farm
nestled close to one of the spurs of the range known as
Feathertail Spur. It was glorious fun for Sim and
Dick, neither of whom could ride a little bit. The
horses were quiet and well-broken, and, though Sim
was bumped off three or four times during the first
half-mile, no damage was done. Dick was a natural
rider; of course, he could not stay in the saddle, but
he was built for the business; and Danny Develin,
who was watching this first effort, declared that within
six months he would make a sound rider out of the old
telegraph boy. When Sim’s horse began to gallop,
the little, fat chap went up in the air quite a long
way. His feet lost the stirrups; then he went out of the
saddle, and sat nearly on the nag’s tail. The horse
lowered its head and nearly stopped; it was so
thoroughly astounded at the unusual antics of its
rider, and, when that happened, poor old Sim Slack
went flying forward until he was nearly sitting on the
Neddy’s ears.
Dick screamed with merriment.
“Wish I had you at the Hippodrome, Sim,” he
yelled; “you’d get a big salary as a funny man on
horseback.”
“Would I?” retorted Sim from his place on a
branch of spear grass, on which he had fallen broad-
side. “Well, I’m a funny man off a horse at present.
You go ahead, Dick, and catch my nag for me.”
So Dick bounced off, and very nearly came to grief
himself.
Just as they got close to Widow Gale’s farm, they
were walking their horses gingerly, because Sim


said he had rubbed more skin off himself than would
grow on again in a week, when down the side of a
koppie came a couple of little girls; one had fair hair,
the other had brown, and they were racing for dear
life, each clasping the hand of the other. They did
not scream as they ran; yet no one who saw their
white, drawn faces would have doubted for a moment
that the terror of death was upon them. For a moment
Telegraph Dick and Sim Slack sat on their horses
amazed.
“Niggers are chasing ’em, I think,” whispered Sim.
“More likely wild dogs,” answered Dick. “No;
apes! By Jingo, look!”
And he pointed at something that looked for all the
world like a little hairy, misshapen man that was
bounding down the side of the koppie in pursuit of the
little lassies.
Out of the saddle the two young adventurers leapt,
and Dick, being by far the better runner, went straight
away to the front, with Sim’s fat legs pegging along
behind in good shape. The lassies saw Telegraph Dick,
and swerved from the course they were pursuing.
Dick drew his clasp-knife as he ran, and just managed
to dash in between pursuer and pursued.
Without a moment’s hesitation, the vicious little
man of the mountains made a bound at Dick’s body,
clutching fiercely at his throat. Telegraph Dick shot
out the hand that held the knife with all his force,
and felt it go pretty well home in the hairy body.
But the next instant he was knocked clean off his
feet, and went rolling over and over with the ape on
top of him. The beast had short, powerful forearms,
a broad, deep chest, strong, wiry hind legs, and a


set of teeth that no one would want to come in contact
with unless armour-plated. The first thing the ape
did was to grab hold of Dick’s hair and begin pulling
it out by the roots in handfuls. Sim said, afterwards
it was just as if the bandy-legged little beggar was
pulling weeds in a garden.
Dick struck out fiercely with his knife; but though
he could wound the creature, he could not kill or
disable it. So fast did the two combatants turn over
and over that Sim Slack could not get a chance to
help. He had picked up a big flat stone, and was
waiting to get a chance to use it, hopping from side
to side like a rat in a cask.
“Give him one, Sim,” shouted Dick, who was
half-mad with pain.
“All right, Dick,” yelled Sim; “keep ycr hair on,
old chap.”
“I haven’t got much left,” gasped Dick. “Ugh!”
he yelled, as the ape took away another handful.
“Hit him, Sim! He thinks my head’s a cocoanut,
and he’s after the milk.”
Sim could stand it no longer. He raised the big
stone and let it go with all his might. It missed the
ape and took his pal fair in the middle of the stomach.
Dick gave a gasp; the knife fell from his hand, his
knees drew up, and he lay still. Sim thought he had
killed the pal he loved, and that made him as much
a wild beast as the ape. Flinging himself upon the
creature, he fought with hands, teeth, and boots;
and, whilst his strength and wind lasted, he had none
the worst of the conflict. But it was not for long, for
the strength of the ape is enormous, out of all pro-
portion, indeed, to its size and formation.


All at once the creature caught Sim by the back
hair, and Sim gasped:
“Ugh—ouch —ho! Fight fair, you —bally German! ”
Dick, by this time, had partly recovered, and he
set to work upon the common enemy. But he was
knocked flat by a blow in the face that seemed to
loosen all his teeth; and then the hairy demon put
in a lot of fine work of an athletic kind upon Sim. As
the boy said, afterwards, “He was pluckin’ me like
a Christmas turkey,” when help came in the person
of a tall, gaunt, grizzled old man, who knocked the
frenzied creature upon the head with a swinging blow
from an axe.
“Are you badly hurt, boy?” queried the old man,
bending his blue eyes on Dick.
“Hurt!” grunted the Londoner. “I sha’n’t be able
to part my hair for ten years. How are you, Sim?”
“I’m worse,” gasped Sim. “I sha’n’t have any
hair to part until I’m grown up.”
The old man chuckled in great glee.
“London bred, I’ll swear,” he said. “I haven’t
heard the Cockney tongue for half a lifetime, but I’d
know it anywhere.”
This man turned out to be the working manager
of Widow Gale’s farm, and was known for miles
around by the title of “Old Industry,” on account of
his devotion to his mistress. He had been a great
rover and adventurer in his day, but fortune having
frowned upon him, he had sought work from the
widow; and, in spite of the fact that when he had
arrived at the farm he was in rags and tatters, Mrs.
Gale had taken him in and had treated him well,
and he had repaid the kindness a thousandfold by


looking carefully after her interests in and out of
season.
The two little lassies whom the lads had rescued
in such timely fashion were orphans, who had been
left penniless and homeless in one of the native raids,
and the widow, being childless herself, had taken them
in and had been a mother to them, for she was a good
soul.
The welcome that Mrs. Gale gave the two boys
when “Old Industry” brought them to the house
was of the warmest. She bathed their wounds with
healing oils, for the teeth and claws of an ape are,
at certain seasons of the year, very poisonous, so much
so that small scratches will fester and become ugly
and painful. At first, the two little lassies were shy
with the boys, but after awhile they became more
confident, and told how they had caused the wrath of
the savage creature to turn on them. It appeared
that the elder child, the one with the fair hair, who
was named Mira, had come across a baby ape on the
slope of the koppie. She had picked it up, and called
to Olive to come and see her prize, when the little
captive had bitten her on the thumb. With a scream
she had thrown it from her, and it had gone headlong
down a ravine. This proceeding had been noted by
a large male, some distance up the koppie, who,
barking like a dog, had rushed down to attack them.
“You had a narrow squeak that time, my pretties,”
said “Old Industry”; “you had, my dears; for’if
these little Englishmen had not come to your aid when
they did, that old-man ape would have maimed or
killed the pair of you, and I hope you won’t do
anything like that again. You ought never to go


near the koppies without Donald; if he’d been there,
you’d have seen a fight, boys.”
“Who’s Donald?” asked Telegraph Dick, with a
jealous note in his voice, for he had heard the fair-
haired Mira say something that sounded like “Dear,
dear, old Donald.”
“Who’s Donald, eh?” chuckled “Old Industry.”
“Plain to hear you are strangers in these parts. Why,
this is Donald.” He gave vent to a piercing whistle,
and hardly had the echo died away ere a monster
staghound came bounding through the doorway, and
stood glaring at the two strangers.


CHAPTER V
THE DANGERS OF FEATHER-FARMING DICK STICKS TO
HIS PAL
The big staghound that came bounding into the
room at the call of “Old Industry” was a splendid
specimen of one of the most gallant breeds of the
canine race that the world possesses. Big, handsome,
rugged, and courageous, the long, lean limbs spoke
both for power and speed; the long, close-gripped
jaws indexed force, combined with just a touch of
savagery; the full brown eyes, lying back under the
bony battlements of the arched brows, were a guarantee
for honesty, fidelity, intelligence, and determination.
“He looks a gentleman, that dog of yours,” was
Danny Develin s remark to “Old Industry”; “a real
gentleman and a sportsman, not a shoddy make-
believe like many a man Tve seen carrying a well-
filled purse.”
“You’re a good judge,” was the old man’s laconic
reply. “Scotland is the only place in the world
where the perfect staghound is bred, and this fellow
came from the best kennel in all the Land o’ Cakes.
He could pull down a full-grown stag, or a full-armed
warrior, and not take long about it either. If he
had been round when that ape attacked the children
he would have torn him to tatters in three minutes—
wouldn’t you, Donald?”


The splendid hound sidled up to the old man’s
side when his name was mentioned, as if he knew
what had been said in his praise; and, resting his
lean jowl on the man’s knee, looked up with trusting
eyes into his face.
“We’ve done a bit of hunting and a bit of fighting
together in our time, old Donald and me,” continued
the old man, “and I hope we’ll do a bit more yet.”
“I’d just like to have a dog like that,” broke in
Telegraph Dick, who had been unable to take his
eyes off the noble creature from the moment it had
sprung into the room. “Give me a good horse, a good
rifle, and a dog like that, and I wouldn’t change
places with the King of England.”
“Old Industry” laughed aloud.
“Boy,” he cried, “what more do you want in this
world? Do you want to own the earth? You may go
many years, and own many horses, before you have
one that is really good; and you may use many rifles
before you find one that seems to fit into your shoulder
as if it had grown there, one that answers to the touch
of your finger like your own nerves. I’ve got such a
rifle; but I had fifty before this one came my way,
and I always knew that there was something lacking
in the others, though I could not have told you just
what it was. And it’s the same with a dog. You may
have a hundred; you may breed ’em yourself, train
’em yourself, bring ’em up under your own eye, and
yet never feel that touch o’ kinship which tells you
that you have the animal your nature has been
crying out for. When you are lucky enough to get a
perfect dog, boy, don’t do as so many folks do, and
spoil it. Treat it as a chum; treat it as if it were human;


for such a dog is better worth having as a pal than
ninety men out of every hundred you’ll meet with in
this life. And I know both men and dogs pretty well.”
He stood up as he ceased speaking, and Donald,
the hound, ranged himself by his master’s side; and
a fine pair they made. Let me describe “Old Industry,”
for he will figure largely in this story. He was the
man who rode along through the ranks of the Basutos
to carry the news of the great rising to the English
folk, when the Basutos had sworn to wipe out every
man, woman, and child in South Africa who spoke
the English tongue. It was he who outwitted the
cleverest scouts and spies the Basutos possessed. He
had fought, and hunted, and traded all over Africa,
and of him the heroic General Brabant once said:
“He’s the boldest man that ever fooled a foe.” Look
at him. six feet seven in his stockings, and yet so narrow
and spare that his chums used to swear that he could
move in the sunlight without casting a shadow. His
arms were thin, like the withered arms of a sun-dried
corpse, and yet so sinewy that he could hurl a boulder
of granite farther than any man, black or white, in all
Africa. His body was short and flat, but his neck
and his legs were abnormally long. His hands and
his feet were large and flat; his face was the face of a
woman, so beautiful in its chiselling, every feature
seemed as if it might have been cut out of a piece of
marble; and his complexion was dead white; neither
wind nor rain, sun nor storm had been able to tan
his skin, and not a hair grew on his face below his
eyebrows. The hair of his head was snow-white, and
it fell in a peculiar wave right down to his collar.
Yet, m spite of his snow-white hair, he was still


possessed of remarkable strength, and few living men
could have beaten him in a day’s march, either on
foot or in the saddle. He was a Devonshire man, and
had left England in his boyhood to seek fortune and
adventure, as so many of his countrymen have done
and are doing to this day. He was very fond of Widow
Gale, and of the brown-haired child, Olive, but of all
things living he loved best the little maid, Mira, the
golden-haired, blue-eyed, rose-lipped Mira, And it
was because Dick and Sim had saved those two
children from harm that his heart warmed to the boys,
for, as a rule, “Old Industry” did not make friends
quickly.
Poor Dick was a little bit abashed when the old
adventurer had finished his speech, and he showed
his feelings in his face.
“You’ve put your foot in it, Dicky,” chirruped
Sim in his chum’s ear. “I’m glad I didn’t say I
wanted all the good things of the earth.”
Telegraph Dick felt hurt, and, getting up from his
seat, he moved towards the door, going stiffly and
sorely, for his wounds, though not dangerous, were
painful.
Something in the boy’s face touched the heart of
“Old Industry,” and he rose and followed Dick
outside.
“Come with me, boy,” was all he said; and Tele-
graph Dick limped along in his wake, for it was one
of “Old Industry’s” peculiarities that he could not
walk slowly unless the need to do so was most
urgent.
He took the boy to an outhouse, where he was
greeted by a deep, challenging bark.


“Down, my lafd; down,” he shouted. “Keep
behind me, boy.”
Dick did as he was bidden, and from this safe place
he saw a staghound slut with three fine pups.
My lady is a beauty in her way. I imported her
from Scotland myself; but she is not, and never could
be, as good a dog as old Donald.”
“Isn’t she game?” queried Dick.
Game! scoffed 1 Old Industry.” “She’s as game
as gun-cotton; but she has a demon’s temper when
she is roused, and if she once takes a dislike to anyone
or anything, that man or creature is not safe where
she is. So I have to keep her on the chain.”
He ceased speaking, and picked up one of the
pups, and held it close to the boy’s face.
“What do you think of that for a dog?” he
asked.
Dick felt his heart thrill with envy as he looked at
the pup, for, boy as he was, he had a natural instinct
in such matters, and he knew that he was gazing at a
treasure.
4< After he had gazed for quite a long, long time,
“Old Industry” asked him roughly why he was silent.
Because I haven’t got a dictionary with me,”
quoth Dick, enviously.
.“A dictionary! What do you want with a dic-
tionary?”
“I’d want a dictionary to help me say all I feel
about this pup.”
A short laugh broke from “Old Industry.”
\ou’re right, boy; and even then you wouldn’t
say all that could be said about it. It’s a son of old
Donald, and has more of his points than its mother’s.”


He thrust the pup into Dick’s hands.
“There, boy, take it, and guard it, and train it
to love you until it is big enough to help you. As you
train the pup so will the dog be. I’m thinkin’ you’ll
live many years, and travel many miles, before you
see its match.”
Telegraph Dick opened his eyes wider than he had
ever done in all his life, for he was shrewd enough to
know that the present he had received was worth a
lot of money.
“For me —to keep?” he gasped.
“Yes, my lad; to keep and to train. I’ll keep an
eye on you whilst you’re in these parts, and as you
handle your dog, so I’ll know what sort of a fist you
are going to make of your life. Don’t be soft with the
pup one day, and hard the next; but be just always,
just and kind. Win the pup’s respect, and you’re sure
of the grown dog’s love.”
“But why—why?” stammered Dick. “What do
you give it to me for? Half the farmers about here
would give you your own price for this pup.”
“I wouldn’t let half the farmers about here own
a dog o’ mine,” was the grim reply. “It’s yours;
take it, and good luck go with you both.”
Dick cuddled the big, hairy young thing up to his
bosom, and the pup thrust its black muzzle into his
face and made a whimpering noise.
“There,” cried “Old Industry,” “there; the pup
knows you’re his master. I gave it to you, boy, because
of the way you tackled the ape on the side of the koppie
when it nearly had our little Mira. I was going to
train it for my own use, and there wasn’t money
enough in the feather market in Port Elizabeth to


have bought it from me. Run now, or maybe I’ll
repent and take it back.”
“But,” cried Dick, “I didn’t do any more than my
chum Sim did when the ape was after the little girls.”
“Maybe you did, and maybe you didn’t; but I
have my own feelings like my lady here, and the pup
is for you, boy Dick. So now hobble off; it’s getting
bedtime.”
Dick did not hobble; sore as he was, he walked
swiftly, with the big hairy pup in his arms, towards
the house. And, as he walked, he said many foolish,
boyish things to his new ally; for he had itched all
his life to own a dog, a real good dog that he could
depend upon to help him fight for his life if occasion
offered. And now one had come to him as if it had
dropped from the very clouds; not a miserable mongrel,
but one of a princely breed, whose forbears had hunted
for nobles and kings in the Highlands of Scotland in
days of old.
As soon as Sim saw Dick’s prize he was full of joy.
“It’s your dog, Dick,” said the little fat chap, “and
as we are to be together always, why, what’s it matter
which of us it belongs to? What are you goin? to
call it, eh?” 5
Dick said he did not know, and Sim slyly suggested
that the dog should be christened “Stanley,” after
the heavenly half-brother he had left at home in
England.
“Not if I know it,” grinned Dick. “I’ve had about
all the ‘Stanley’ I want in this world. Let’s call him
London.”
"Better call him Dublin,” chuckled Sim in glee,
because he s going to spend his life with two of us.”


So they rattled on as they lay in bed, suggesting
first one name, then another, until sleep came to them.
But in the morning they were at it again, for they felt
that the christening of such a dog was a most important
matter.
It was the fair-haired Mira who settled it eventually.
“I had a dog once,” she said to Dick; “he was a
bob-tailed English sheepdog, and he was very brave.
The night the Kaffirs killed my mother and father
and burnt our house down my dog saved my life. He
sprang at the throat of the Kaffir who was about to
attack me with an assegai, and pulled the Kaffir down,
and fought with him until he killed him. But he got
an assegai in his body whilst he was doing it, and he
died.”
There were tears in the blue eyes of the lassie as she
spoke, and Dick felt that he would have liked to have
been there that night to help the bold English sheep-
dog in the defence of one so pretty.
“What did you call your dog?” he asked.
“We called him ‘Loyal,’” replied the little lass,
“because he was so faithful.”
“Loyal,” cried Dick, exultantly. “Why, what a
ripping name! I’ll call my dog Loyal, and 111 bet he
will be loyal, too. Look at his eyes; he looks into your
face, and never turns his eyes away for a moment, just
as if he meant to know what you are thinking about
as well as what you are saying.”
And from that moment the gift of “Old Industry”
was never known by any other name than Loyal to his
master and to those white men who came in contact
with him; but the natives, not the Kaffirs only, but the
warlike Zulus and Basutos and Swazis, had another


name for him. But that is looking ahead of my present
story.
A day or two later Van Schloss drove across in his
beautiful cedar Gape cart, the sides of which were
polished and the hood lined with Japanese silk. He
came to take the boys home, for he missed them, and
he felt that after the handling they had got from the
ape they would not care to ride home on horseback.
But the boys would not agree to this; they said they
had come in the saddle, and they would go in the
saddle, and in spite of the kind-hearted Dutchman’s
persuasions, they insisted upon riding their horses
back.
Now, as soon as Sim got into the saddle something
scared his horse, so that it started off at a canter, and,
suddenly swerving, deposited the fat one in a nice
sandy spot. He fell in a sitting position, and was not
hurt, though the wind was shaken out of him. Van
Schloss ran up to him, crying:
I just dold dot poy vat vill happen mit him. Haf
yo’ knocked dose prains of yours out, liddle Shim?
Haf yo’ knocked dose prains out, dell me dot, eh?”
Sim pulled such a comical face that everyone had to
laugh except Van Schloss.
I haven t knocked my brains out, sir,” he gasped,
as soon as he could speak. “I—l—l don’t sit on ’em,
sir, as a rule.”
At that Danny Develin laughed until the tears ran
down his cheeks, but he stopped his mirth suddenly,
and a look of black anger rushed into his face. The
Kaffir who had gone in pursuit of Sim’s runaway
horse had caught it, and was belabouring it cruelly
with a shambock.


“You black hound,” muttered the ex-Hussar;
and, running forward, he tore the heavy shambock
from the Kaffir’s hand and laid it about his bare
shoulders with such good will that the Kaffir fled,
howling, towards the house. Danny caught the
scared animal, and, with rare tact and judgment, soon
gentled it in such a manner that the fear left its eyes,
and the wild trembling departed from its limbs. Then
he sprang upon its back, and rode it up to where the
group of white folk were standing. Dismounting, he
handed the reins to Sim.
“There, sonny,” he said, “mount him now; you’ll
find him all right. It’s these infernal niggers who
spoil nine out of ten of the horses in Africa; they
don’t know when to punish and when to praise, and I
hate a brute who hits a horse every time he gets an
excuse of any sort for doing so.”
“Dot is yust right,” affirmed Van Schloss, pulling
away at his big calabash pipe. “I lofe dot man dot
do lofe his horse. lam more as glad yo’ come to work
mit me, Danny Develin; yo’ teach dose niggers dot
de vip is for de punishment, not for de vengeance
dot is so? Yen de niggers vip dose horses for noddings,
den yo’ vip de niggers for somedings. I makes dot de
law for yo’ to vork mit, an’ I makes yo’ de overseer of
de horse-farm. Yo’ can always dold er horse dat er
Kaffir breaks in,” he added, for the benefit of the two
boys. “Von dey, ven day is in er goot temper, dey
vill play mit er colt, and de next day, ven dey is in er
pad humour, dey vill ponish der colt for playing. Dot
is verra pad pisness for der colt. It makes der colt say
mit himself, ‘Dose mens are all fools.’ ”
“That’s as sure as sin,” supplemented Danny. “No


white man can ever trust a saddle hack that a nigger
has broken; and you must never forget that, for a coon
has no more judgment than a goat in front of a looking-
glass.”
A little later all the farewells were said, and the lucky
London lads knew that they could count on a few more
real friends.
“Who do you like best at Feather-tail Spur home-
stead?” asked Danny Develin, en route for home.
“I like little Olive; she’s such a little kitten. She’s
as full of fun as a pickle is of vinegar,” chirruped
Sim.
“She’s a pretty little mite, and no mistake,” was the
ex-Hussar’s reply. “Who do you fancy most, Dick?”
“Well,” replied Telegraph Dick, “I like little Olive,
she’s all smiles and fun; but I think I like Mira better,
she’s so quaint and old-fashioned. And I like ‘Old
Industry’ fine; he’s a real good sort, though he has
got a sharp edge to his tongue.”
“I know who Danny Develin fancies,” chuckled
Sim; “a chap with a glass-eye could see that.”
“Oh, could he, you little dumpling?” chaffed the
ex-soldier; “could he?”
“Yes,” chortled Sim. “Why, Danny, you were
saying things to Widow Gale with your eyes all the
time you were at the house.”
Dot vas so, shouted Van Schloss, with a mighty
laugh. “Danny vas sayin’, ‘Meet me mit yourself
alone by de stharlight ’ mit his eyes to de vidder, an’
he look so sad as er wet fowl on der fence, an’ he sigh
mit his chest. Somedimes, some odder day, Danny
vill stole dot vidder voman, an’ be boss at dot
varm.”


“No such luck,” laughed the ex-Hussar, cheerily.
“She’s one of the richest women in these parts, and
I’m as poor as an Italian organ grinder’s monkey.”
“She’s a jolly nice woman, anyhow, and if I was
a man I’d make eyes at her myself,” put in Sim;
whereat the big Dutchman laughed most uproar-
iously.
Certainly little fat Sim, perched upon his veldt
horse, did look a rather comical figure to enter the
lists to woo wealthy widows.
So they passed the time in friendly chat all the way
home. Once there, things went on very merrily.
Danny attended to his horses, and the lads worked
amongst the ostriches. There was plenty to do, and
they had to be up very early, and into the saddle;
they had to ride around paddock after paddock to see
that all was well, and report what they saw to Van
Schloss. Some of the Kaffirs were good servants;
others were lazy and cruel. One day Sim, going his
rounds, noticed a Kaffir cruelly ill-treating a young
cock ostrich Riding over to the scamp he called out:
“Hi, there! What are you knocking that bird about
for?”
The Kaffir, who was a vicious, ill-conditioned
fellow, muttered something about the young cock
having kicked him.
“You had better tell that yarn to boss Van Schloss,”
the boy said severely.
“Better you mind your own business,” the Kaffir
retorted insolently; “p’raps you sorry you don’t.”
“Oh, is that how you mean to scare me, eh? Well,
we’ll see.” And as soon as he got home he told Van
Schloss all that had occurred.


“Dot nigger vas goot for noddinks but make some
droubbles. I haf dold him to trek oot some odder
dimes; now I see vat der shambock vill make mit him.”
He took his big shambock from a nail in the wall,
and went across to the Kaffir kraal. As soon as the
fellow saw his master advancing towards him, sham-
bock in hand, he knew that the boy had told of his
misdeeds. He fawned upon Van Schloss, and vowed
that it was all a mistake.
“It vas mine mistake dot I lets you sthay mit my
niggers in mine kraal,” was the Dutchman’s grim
reply. “Now, I makes no odder mistook,” and he
laid the terrible raw-hide about the Kaffir’s shoulders
in a manner that proved that he knew the way to
handle the dreaded instrument he held. “There,”
he said at last, “dot is for maiming my bird, and
for threatening the young boss. Py-an’-py, if some-
dings happen dot young boss, den I knows who haf
done it, an’ den I comes to look for you mit my rifle,
an den yo vas more as goot as er dead man. You
knows dat, eh?”
The Kaffir slunk away, but in his heart he vowed to
get even with Sim Slack.
Now, in a little enclosure off one of the largest
breeding paddocks, Van Schloss kept a cock bird of
enormous value. It belonged to a strain that produced
birds that grew the very finest feathers in Africa, and
that means the best in the world. Of all the many
fine birds he owned, Van Schloss was most proud of
this one; it was by far the biggest and handsomest
ostrich in the whole of Port Elizabeth district, and this,
added to the extraordinary quality of its feathers, and
the fact that it was of a breed that transmitted its


good qualities to its progeny, made it even as the
apple of his eye to the Dutch farmer. Now this
majestic creature had faults of temper that made it a
most dangerous creature for a stranger to approach.
It had maimed many other birds, had fractured the
ribs of a famous horse, and had killed one or two dogs,
and had almost stamped the life out of a Kaffir;
but with Van Schloss it was strangely gentle and docile.
Whenever a notable person came to the district Van
Schloss would be sure to invite him to come and see
his great cock ostrich, for he was just as proud of it
as an Englishman is of a fine racing stallion or a prize
Clydesdale. Many a time Van Schloss had said to the
two boys:
“Don’t you go mit yourselves into dot pird’s place
of pizness, else he vill kick you out of Africa. He is
more as savage as a pull togs mit his temper lost.”
One day Sim grinned at the oft-repeated warning.
“Kick me out of Africa, will he? Pretty big kick,
eh?”
“He kick you outer der vorld, an’ dat is out of
Africa, ain’t it, eh?”
So Master Sim, who was no fool, made up his mind
to keep a healthy distance away from this particular
bird; but the Kaffir whom he had caused to be flogged
had quite other views on the subject.
Just after dawn one morning Sim was riding across
the big paddock that adjoined the preserve where the
prize cock was supposed to be locked up, when he
was surprised to see a noble-looking ostrich right in
front of him.
“That’s the biggest bird I’ve ever seen,” reflected
the ex-London laddie. “I expect it’s a new one Van


Schloss has bought. I wonder he did not say any-
thing to me about it, though. But,” reflected Master
Sim, “perhaps he meant to see if I looked after my
business properly. He won’t think much of me if I
can’t tell him that I have noticed a new cock bird in
this run.”
So touching his nag with his heels, he rode at a
canter towards the kingly creature that was standing
at gaze watching him; its long neck in the air to the
full limit of its length, its bold, defiant head poised
with infinite grace. It seemed to rest all its great
weight on one leg, whilst the other was flung forward
like that of a sprint runner preparing to toe the mark.
All at once, just as if the bird had been set in motion
by electricity, it leapt from where it stood, and came
down towards him like a feathered avalanche. Then,
but not until then, Sim realised that this was no new
bird, but the dangerous cock ostrich against which he
had so often been warned. Sim was only a boy, and
the sight of that fury bearing down upon him caused
him to lose his nerve. He did just the very worst thing
he could have done; for, wheeling his horse, he tried
to race away for the house gate. As well might he
have ridden from the wind, for had he been mounted
upon a Derby winner he would have stood a small
chance of escaping. He heard the scrape, scrape of the
horny toes in the hard, gravelly soil, and he leant as
lar over his horse’s neck as he could get, and plied
is whip freely. Suddenly something shot past him,
with a noise like wind whirling leaves along a gully in
mid-winter, and the next instant something struck
him upon the knee with such violence that involun-
tan ye uttered a yell of pain. It was the cock ostrich


that, in passing, had struck him with one of its wings;
and the blow was like the blow of a flail.
On sped the giant of the plains for a short distance,
and then it wheeled and came down upon him from
the other side; and once again it brought a wing into
play, and once more poor Sim got a blow that made him
think of Jessop hitting a boundary at Lord’s. Spinning
round again, the cock came across the horse’s quarter,
and cuffed the creature, so that it lashed out with both
heels involuntarily, and, in doing so, nearly bucked
Sim over its head. With a strange harsh cry, the cock
bird shot around the horse in a circle, cutting up the
dust in a big cloud with wings and feet, until Sim found
himself riding in the centre of what seemed to him to
be a dust storm. Every now and again the ostrich
closed in and gave either the boy or the horse a savage
blow with its wings, until the horse was half-mad with
terror, and Sim was almost fainting with pain.
Every moment the great bird was growing more
and more vicious and dangerous. Twice it kicked
the horse in the ribs, and once it nearly took the
boy out of the saddle with a side kick that made him
ache all over. This was the last straw. Sim’s temper
was at boiling pitch. Leaning out of the saddle as
the enemy came darting in upon him, he cut with
his shambock at the long, slender neck ; for he had
heard many times that this was the ostrich’s most
vulnerable point. The raw hide, stiff and strong,
landed midway between the body and the head; the
long swan-like neck bent to the blow, and the bird,
big as it was, fairly staggered; and, for a moment,
Sim thought that victory lay with him. But he was
mistaken in this matter, as older heads than his had


been before him. The cock bird gave vent to a sound
that was not unlike the cough of a lion, and, sweeping
past Sim and his steed as if they were standing still,
lashed out a kind of swinging luck, much after the
fashion of a cow maddened by March flies. The blow
fell upon the near fore-leg of the horse, just below
the knee, breaking the bone as though it had been
glass, and bringing the poor brute down with a crash.
Sim shot out of the saddle, and went skidding along
on his hands and knees a yard or two in front of his
fallen steed; and then the cock bird had a word to
say to the one-time messenger boy.
Few men in the world possessed a cooler head in
time of peril than this youngster, and he remembered,
even as he hit the ground, that experienced folk had
told him that practically the only chance a man had
with an enraged ostrich was to lie still and sham
to be dead. Sim did this. He doubled his fat little
carcase up as nearly like a ball as possible, and
remained very quiet. But the cock seemed to know
that he was playing “’possum,” as the niggers say,
for he came prancing up, and gave poor Sim a for-
ward kick, right on that portion of his anatomy that
generally invites a kick when a father is dealing with
a saucy son. Sim went over and over like a football
going down hill; and as he went the savage bird clipped
him first with one wing, then with the other, and
ended up with another lift from its leg that made
Sim think his hips would be driven up to his head,
and that he would be able to button his breeches
on to his shirt collar if he got much more of the same
sort. He did his level best not to squirm or yell out;
but it is mighty hard to sham you’re a corpse when


you are being knocked about like a gipsy’s goat in a
green-grocer’s garden. He set his teeth, and did his
level best not to give his ruse away; but, at last a
kick took him on the ribs with such force that he had
to utter a gasping cry, and that just made his enemy
mad.
With neck outstretched, wings spread as if going
to try to fly, and its big beak wide open, the cock
came on to the attack once more; and Sim Slack
would have been trampled to death had not help
come to him in the very nick of time.
Telegraph Dick had finished his rounds, and was
on his way to report to Van Schloss, when he saw the
struggle from afar. He did not stay to argue about
it, but, giving a yell to his master, whom he could see
in the distance, riding with Danny Develin, he galloped
at full speed to rescue Sim. There had never been much
talk of affection between the two young adventurers,
yet each knew that the other would fight for him to
the last gasp, if need be. Dick did not know what
he was going to do when he got to the scene of the
fight; all he knew was that his chum was there, and
in peril, and his place was by his side. So he rode
like a thing possessed.
Van Schloss and Danny Develin had heard the
warning yell, and they rode at racing pace towards
the scene. Van Schloss, in spite of his great weight,
was a fine horseman; and he rode a horse that he
had bred himself for the purpose of carrying his enor-
mous bulk at speed.
As soon as the ostrich saw Dick advancing at a
gallop it left Sim, who was now lying insensible by
his crippled steed, and made a rush to meet the new


foe. With a savage shout, Telegraph Dick charged
straight to meet the oncoming fury, and he meant,
if possible, to ride it down, and knock it silly by the
force of the impact. But at the critical moment his
mount swerved, and he very nearly found himself
on the veldt; but he clutched the mane as he was
falling, and managed to save himself. But all his
weight had gone on one foot, and the stirrup leather
broke under the strain. Quick as a flash, he drew it
up, and with the leather in his hand, with the iron
stirrup at the end, he was armed. The feathered bandit
made a dash at him, and Telegraph Dick, swinging the
stirrup round his head, dealt the savage a blow that
sent it sidling off, only, however, to come back again
with such a demoniac rush that Dick had not time to
aim his stroke. He hit out pluckily, but wildly, and
missed; and the next instant he was whirling out of
the saddle on to the ground.


CHAPTER VI
THE BLACK TROUBLE BREWING
Telegraph Dick received a nasty fall from his horse
which left him stunned for the moment, which was a
very good thing for him, for had he risen to his feet
the cock ostrich would most certainly have kicked him
with such fury as to have rendered him lifeless. As
it was, the London lad came in for very rough usage,
for the great bird seemed literally beside itself with
rage, but owing to one of the laws of nature ostriches
cannot kick with full force at any object close
to the ground: they have to get a swing on the
leg to put power into a kick, and in doing this
they miss the object they aim at, if it is close to the
earth.
So it happened that Telegraph Dick had the good
luck to miss the terrible kicks aimed at him. If he
had lifted his head at that moment his skull would
have been stove in like an eggshell; but he lay still,
to all intents and purposes dead as a doormat, face
downwards, upon the veldt. Every now and again
the bird, finding that it could not get in a kick with
sufficient force, would jump clean on top of the boy,
and its big, horny feet left bruises that he did not get
rid of for many a long day. Once it struck him upon
the neck with its beak, making a wound that might
have been caused by a blunt chisel. It was the pain


of this stroke that seemed to recall the lad to conscious-
ness. He lifted his head, and the bird instantly sprang
a foot off the ground to deal one of its terrific
kicks.
It was then that Van Schloss’s big boar-hound
came upon the scene. This fine creature had been
out with Van Schloss and Danny Develin; in fact,
it was seldom that anyone ever saw the Dutch farmer
without the Danish dog, for they were much attached
to each other.
As soon as the big hound realised that Van Schloss
was riding to the rescue of the boy, the dull-witted,
but wonderfully bold brute, had dashed off ahead
of the horse and had plunged into the contest.
Springing upon the cock bird, it seized one of the
wings in its jaws and made a frantic effort to hurl
the ostrich off its legs; but, in spite of its immense
size and strength, the great Dane could not accom-
plish this purpose.
The cock was ready to fight to a finish, and with a
sudden spring it darted off, dragging the hound
with it; then it suddenly whirled away from the
straight line and gave its wings a heave, and the
hound went up in the air as if he had been shot out
of a naval gun, turning over and over in its flight, as
a clown does in a circus ring. When the dog struck
the earth again the wind was a bit shaken out of him,
but not an atom of his pluck.
Both Sim and Dick had struggled to their feet
and had joined forces, but they could do little. Dick
had hold of his stirrup leather with the iron attached,
and, gripping it tightly, he made up his mind to do
his best to give the cock something to think about


if he came to renew the attack. Sim had nothing but
his riding whip of raw hide, which would not have
been of very much use to him. The cock came their
way prancing high, lifting its feet in the air like a
Highland piper full of overproof rum. And again the
boar-hound charged to the rescue.
“Good dog! hi! at him! good dog!” yelled
Sim.
The ostrich accepted the challenge to battle, and
tried to sidle away so as to get a back, or side kick,
at the dog. But the Dane had not been reared on an
an ostrich farm for nothing; he knew well enough
that his only chance lay in a frontal attack, so he
declined to be lured into a pursuit which would end
in a kick that would put him out of business. With
his tail arched, his back hair up on end, he stopped
short with a deep growl and waited, for his instinct
told him that the pretended retreat was only a lure
to bring about his undoing.
The cock, strutting off with its great head half
turned, saw that the stratagem had failed, and
springing round, came back like the wind. The dog
was on the alert, and crouching low, with eyes that
seemed to have turned red with rage, picked the
right moment, and sprang fair at the cock’s long curved
neck. His big jaws were wide open, every fang showing;
if he could get one grip on the neck of his enemy he
would break it as he had often broken the shank bone
of a jackal. But this was no jackal that he had to do
batde with.
The cock twisted its neck out of danger with
marvellous rapidity, and the dog only got a mouthful
of feathers off the breast, and blow upon the skull


with one of the wings that must have made him see
a dozen ostriches. But the kick aimed at him was not
quick enough; the hound dodged that and waited for
another rush by the cock.
Not long had the good animal to wait. This time
he was more successful in his spring, and he tore away
a huge mouthful of skin and flesh and feathers. But
that was the end, for no hound living could successfully
do battle with such a rival, for a full-grown cock has
been known to beat off a leopard, and to successfully
defy even a lion upon occasions. So swiftly did the
end come that neither of the boys could quite tell how
it happened. They saw the hound crouch for a spring,
saw him launch heavily in the air, saw the cock wheel,
and then there came a terrific thud, a wild howl of
agony, and the hound was down with its ribs all stove
in. No horse could have kicked harder, or with more
speed. With a strange cry of triumph the conqueror
made a leap towards the dying hound, when
on the scene galloped Danny Develin and Van
Schloss.
True to his training, the ex-Hussar put spurs to
his horse and dashed past the cock, giving a back-
handed stroke at the head with a light club he had
with him as he passed; and so true did the stroke fall
that Van Schloss, as he heard the sound on the horny
skull, cried out:
Ach! dot haf kilt mine pest bird! ”
And it looked like it, until Van Schloss, jumping
down from his saddle, caught hold of the champion’s
head.
He soon saw that it had only been stunned, and
yelled to Danny Develin; “Hurry up mit some help,


so ve may tie him up and leads him pack mit his own
paddock.”
Soon the two men had the cock ostrich so trussed
up that he could do no harm.
Then Van Schloss knelt down and took the dying
hound’s head in his lap, and poured water from his
flask down the parched throat. But in a few minutes
the game brute, with one long-drawn howl of agony,
gave up the ghost.
Then Van Schloss rose, and his wrath was terrible
to see, for he had been intensely attached to the
splendid brute.
He put his big hand, which shook with emotion,
upon Sim’s shoulder, and drew the boy to him; and
Dick, looking into his face, knew that he meant to
avenge his dog.
“Told me all about it, liddle Shim,” he said, his
deep voice coming low and hard from his broad chest.
“Told me how dose tings happen. How did you got
into dose drubbles mit de prize cock? How did he
come out in dis paddock? He could not jump
over dose barbed wire fence. Did you open dose
S ates? ” .. ...
“No,” said Sim, “I did not. I was riding in
this paddock when he saw me and came at me.
Some one must have unlocked the gate and let him
out.”
“Just so, liddle Shim; it vas done so as you might
be killed. It vas not von accident. Now ve vill go
and put the bird back, he is not to blame; he does
not know somedinks petter, he haf got no sense mit
his head.”
So together they went to the paddock, the two men


leading the captive, and the two boys crawling along
very painfully
“How do you feel, Sim?” asked Dick.
“Feel as if I’d been in a free fight all the way from
the Bank to How do you feel, Dicky?”
“Don’t know,” said Dick; “never felt like this
before; but I think I feel just like Van Schloss
looks.”
“My word, Dicky, don’t he look savage? I never
thought he could look like that. He’s going to make
some trouble for someone.”
“He seems to think one of the niggers had a hand
in it,” was Dick’s comment; “and if he proves it, I
would not be that nigger for all the feathers in Africa.
He told me the other day that the Kaffir that Danny
Develin punished for cruelty to horses, and the other
fellow that he himself punished for trying to maim
the young ostrich, were a pair of dangerous fellows,
who were known to be trying to form a gang to take
to the bush and live by robbery,” said Sim. “Wonder
what he is doing now?”
Van Schloss had set the cock bird free in its own
enclosure and was carefully examining the padlock
on the gate. The boys watched him breathlessly. He
ga\ e the padlock to Danny Develin, who in turn
scrutinised it with care.
“You makes anydings of dot?” asked the big
Dutchman.
It s been scratched all round the keyhole, and
the scratches are all quite fresh; looks as if it had
been having rough usage,” was the answer of the ex-
Hussar.
“Dot is just what it haf had,” replied Van Schloss.


“Dot lock vas not obened mit er key; it haf been forced
mit er bit of fencing wire; just like der lock on my store-
room was forced; an’ now I know who haf done it.
It is dot cross-eyed Kaffir an’ his mate mit der klub
foot.”
“How do you arrive at that conclusion?” asked
Danny Develin.
“I arrives mit dot opinion mit mine eyes; look
dere, an’ dere, an’ dere!” exclaimed the farmer,
excitedly, pointing to tracks near the gate. “Dot
cross-eyed Kaffir haf got der longest foots in Africa;
dere you see his dracks, an’ dot odder one he haf
got er klub foot, an’ dere his dracks too. Dey see
liddle Shim come mit himself alone, an’ dey open
de gate an’ let oot de cock, an’ dey haf no time to
cover up dose dracks, an’ I shwear by my viskers I
will make some droubles mit dem. Dey haf shpoil
my best bird for dis season, dey haf kill mine dog
dot lofe me more as mooch as er schild, an’ dey haf
nearly killed liddle Shim an’ his pal Dick. Py my
viskers I makes dem some droubles so soon as I get
mine rifle. Come avay home mit me now, and as ve
go I told you some odder tings yo not know.”
A few moments later the good-natured farmer had
Sim snugly on his knee, and his big horse paced off
soberly enough, for it was not the first time he had
carried a double burden, and one a wounded man, for
Van Schloss was always amongst the first in the fighting
line when white man battled with black, no matter
whether the whites were Dutch or British, because
he held that a white man should side with a white
man against a black, no matter what the quarrel
might be about.


Dick was perched behind Danny Develin, and
as they all rode homewards together Van Schloss
said:
“Dose niggers are shly, very shly, but dey do get
tricked somedimes mit de Africander. You know dot
old man mit de face like er voman’s an’ a pody like
some fencing vire twisted round er sthick ”
“You mean ‘Old Industry’?” queried Danny
Develin.
“Dot is so. ‘Ole Industry,’ he haf been vatching
mit von eye shut —som beoples vatch mit two eyes
open, an’ den dose niggers do noddings. ‘Ole
Industry,’ he knows dot, so he shpy mit one eye, an’
he coom to me an’ he say: ‘Van Schloss, yo’ keep yo’
rifle nice an’ handy; py an’ py the Kaffirs make
droubles; dey vill burn, an’ murder, an’ loot, an’
womens vill pray for death pefore it come, an liddle
children, dey vill not be shpared!’ An’ I say, ‘How
do you know dot?’ An’ he shmile, an’ ven he shmile,
py my viskers, you feel ’shamed dot you ask him how
he know. Ven he leave mine house, he ride mit hot
shpeed from one home to another, an’ leave his
warning; an’ den dot strange ole man he go back mit
his vork, an’ de Kaffirs do not dream he haf smelled
out their plans.”
“Why don’t the farmers rise up and put an end to
the danger before it gets to a head?” asked Danny
Develin.
Van Schloss shook his big head dolefully.
“How dot may be managed can you deld me,
Danny? The nigger is protected py der laws; we haf
no proof dot he mean murder an’ loot. If we meddle
mit him, den he cry out, an’ der droubles fall on us.


No; ve must wait, mine goot friend. An’ when dose
plack togs bite, den we brotect our homes, all of us
Dutchmen and Britons; an’ py my viskers, Danny, I
vipe oot somedings dot is heavy on my heart. The
murder of mine vrow an’ mine liddle poy, dot vould
pe, if he haf live, more as big as liddle Shim, who is
now riding on my knee.”
He was silent for a while, heavy with the memory
of the wife and boy who lay buried in the orchard
under the peach tree. By and by he spoke:
“’Braps you see some fightin’ more as soon, liddle
Shim, real fightin’ mit rifles an’ assegais, an’ you see
men killed, an’ der veldt all on fire, an’ yo’ hear der
vrows squeal an’ cry, an’ der niggers yell their war-
whoop, yo’ vill not be schared, eh, yo’ liddle poy?
Yo’ say to yourself dose dimes dat pig Dutchman,
Van Schloss, an’ dot fine schap Danny Develin, dey
fight for me an’ my pal Dicky, eh? Yo’ say dot
alright, eh?”
“I’ll punch his head if he does,” stormed Dick,
hotly.
“Blessed if I’ll say anything like it,” cried Sim.
Van Schloss looked from one to the other in amaze-
ment, but a smile curved the lips of the ex-Hussar
under his brown moustache.
“If there’s going to be any fighting, sir,” put in
Dick, “why, Sim an’ me are going to do our share of
it. We won’t be as good as men; but we can stand
sentry night or day, our eyes and ears are as good
as anyone’s; and we’ll fight as long as we can pull a
trigger to defend your home.”
A slow, glad smile started at the corners of the
Dutchman’s mouth, and spread all over his rugged


face. Reaching out a hand, he touched Danny Develin
on the shoulder; and when the ex-Hussar gazed at
him, he winked a slow, solemn wink, and said:
“Dot does me goot in all my pones, Danny. Py
my viskers, I schust lofes to hear dose liddle poys
—vat you call dot, Danny, eh? Chips of der old
salt vater, eh?”
“No, no,” laughed the ex-Hussar “chips of the
old block, you mean.”
Yes; dot is vot I mean. It is der same thing, eh?”
Just the same, only a bit different,” grinned
Danny.
They got home at last, and, standing on the step
of the house, they saw one of Widow Gale’s niggers.
He went directly to Van Schloss, and said:
Boss, I was told to give you this at once.”
As he spoke he handed Van Schloss a parcel of
ostrich feathers. The farmer took the parcel, and
told the man to go to the kitchen and get some food.
And when he was gone, and Danny Develin was
looking after the horses, the farmer went into the
house, and said to the two boys:
Keep er goot guard on the doors, liddle schaps,
and dold me if any of my niggers are coming. Gif
me goot warning, for I do not vant any of dem to
see me mit my plans.”
A low whistle broke from Master Dick’s lips.
. ou ear there may be spies even in the house,
sir.”
I know dot for shure; an’, my liddle poy, I knowed
dot dere are shpies in every farmhouse for many
leagues round us. Now, yo’ vatch, an’ I vill do der
rest.”


Van Schloss took each feather, and examined it
carefully, as if estimating its value. But at last he
gave a grunt of satisfaction, and, drawing his knife,
he slit the quill, and, to the wonder of the boys,
drew forth a thin roll of paper. A message from the
astute old nigger fighter, “Old Industry”!
Beckoning the lads to him, he was about to
read the missive to them when Dick whispered
hurriedly:
“Look out, sir.”
The farmer tucked the letter away in his breeches
pocket, and went on examining the feathers, grumb-
ling all the time about their quality. Into the room
hobbled an old woman, as black as the coat of a black
cat. She shot a swift, subtle glance at Von Schloss,
and then demanded if she was to feed the saucy
nigger from Gale’s farm.
“Yes; of course,” was the reply. “Didn’t I send
him to the kitchen to be fed?”
“Dat nigger ar too sassy,” grumbled the crone.
“Do him er lot ob good to send him about his busi-
ness, boss, an’ let him wait fer his food until he got
home.”
But Van Schloss stood firm, and at last the bel-
dame hobbled out again.
“She don’t get mooch news, dot dimes,” chuckled
the Dutchman, gleefully.
“Was she a spy?” queried Dick.
“Yust dot, an’ noddings else. Now, fiddle schaps,
listen von minute, an’ I read dot letter dot ‘Ole
Industry’ send to me, hidden inside dot fedder. Py
my viskers, dot ‘Ole Industry’ makes not mooch
mishtakes.”


THE BLACK TROUBLE BREWING 127
The message in the letter ran as follows:
“The Kaffirs are going to rise the night the moon is
at its full. I will warn all the others. Get ready, or your
place will be burnt over your head, and every white
person will be butchered! Get ready; but make no sign.”
“When will the moon be at the full?” demanded
Dick.
“Yust ten days from dis von. Den, liddle poys you
shall see some vild vork.”
“Perhaps ‘Old Industry’ has made a mistake,”
ventured Sim.
“Dot man don’t make dose mishtakes; he haf
think verra hard mit his head pefore he shpokes.
Now it is all right, an’, liddle poys, I haf got to let
you learn to shoot goot mit er rifle.”
Won t the Kaffirs think you suspect something
if they know you are teaching us how to shoot?”
demanded Dick.
Van Schloss patted the boy on the head.
Not if I say I am going to shoot springbok, an’
take you an’ Danny Develin mit me. I haf go hunting
at this time of year, effery year since first I come
dis vay. Ve vill go an’ shoot der springbok, little
schaps; but first I find oot vat does two Kaffirs are
doin’ dot let mine prize ostrich oot dis mornin’, and
kill mine dog, an’ hunt mine friends. You liddle schaps
haf a rest, I haf some vords mit dose niggers.”
He took his shambock from a nail on the wall and
strode forth; but Danny Develin met him near the
cattle kraal, and told him that the two Kaffirs had
fled.
“They have given out that they are off to seek work


in Kimberley, but I know that is not true; for, if it
had been a fact, the niggers would have said that
they had gone to Durban. I think they have just
taken to the jungle during the daytime, and at night
they will creep back to the Kaffir kraals; they mean
more mischief, those two,” concluded Develin.
“You yust yumps to der truth as er frog yumps
to der vaterhole,” was Van Schloss’ answer. “Now,
ve vill go mit a hunting bardy after springbok, an’
we gif dose two plucky liddle schaps a carbine each,
and ve tort ’em how to shoot. I vill haf liddle Shim;
you vill haf Dick. An’ in von veek ve make dem
pretty goot mit der carbine.”
So it was arranged, and the very next day the
two lads were in the seventh heaven of delight; for,
though sore and stiff, and a bit battered about by the
adventure with the ostrich, they were yet able to
ride out in a Cape cart. And each had a hunter’s
bandolier slung across his shoulders, and each had a
carbine clasped in his hands; very proud and very
important they were on that memorable day.
Van Schloss and Danny Develin were in the saddle,
and both of them carried rifles of the latest and best
pattern; for they knew that an inferior weapon might
mean the loss of a life in the struggle that both felt
certain was coming.
There was a beautifully grassed piece of veldt-
land belonging to Van Schloss, about an hour and
a half’s drive from the homestead, and there they
knew they would find plenty of sport. The Kaffir
servants who were with them could have had no
suspicion of the real puprose of the hunt. All that
they saw was a couple of skilled shots teaching a


pair of boys how to shoot buck; and that was a thing
that happened every time a grown man and a white
boy went out together.
First of all the men taught the lads how to load
and clear their weapons swiftly and methodically.
The London lads, like most of their kind, were sharp-
witted and deft of fingers, and they soon learnt that
part of the game. Then they were taught how to
sight for a given distance then came the lesson in
steady balance; and, lastly, the pulling of the trigger.
Such a small matter, that last item, until it was tried,
as Danny Develin remarked to Dick. Yet it is
responsible for nearly all the bad shots.
“Look here, Dick,” cried the ex-Hussar, who was
a good shot. “Now, boy, cock your eye along that
barrel,” Dick did as he was bidden. “Have you
got in a dead line with the mimosa bush, six hundred
yards away?”
“As straight as death,” whispered Dick.
“That so?” smiled the ex-soldier. “Well, let her
rip, and we’ll see.”
Dick pulled the trigger, and Danny stood watching
with his keen, hard eyes for a sign.
Missed, Dick! Massed by a Jolly long way. I
saw the bullet kick up a little spout of dust nearly a
hundred yards the other side of the mimosa bush.
Your bullet flew too high, laddie.”
“How was that?” cried Dick, a ring of keen dis-
appointment in his voice. “I had my eye on the
mimosa bush, and both rifle sights were as true as
could be, Danny.”
“That’s the art of pulling a trigger, Dick. It sounds
silly, don’t it? yet it means an awful Jot. Now, see


here; this is how a trigger should be pulled. Curl
your finger across the trigger, and don’t pull at all ;
just press steadily and regularly until the spring works.
No pull, boy; but a mere contraction of the muscles
of your finger. When you pull, you jerk the muzzle
of your weapon, and that jerk means a good
deal when your bullet has to travel best part of a
mile.”
So the lesson went on hour after hour, until the
boys had learnt a lot. Then, so that the niggers should
not get suspicious, the men commenced in earnest to
look for springbok.
It was Telegraph Dick who got the first bit of
real sport. He was creeping along with his weapon
handy, when he came to a sluit, which is a kind of
watercourse made by flood water after heavy rain,
when in the middle of a nice green patch about four
times the size of a billiard table, he beheld a couple
of beauties feeding. He saw the perfectly-modelled
forms, the slender limbs, the graceful heads, and
the bucks’ slender horns. He noted how white they
were under their hides, and how prettily mottled
their flanks were; and then, with his heart going
chug, chug in his chest, he got down upon his knees,
and took a keen, steady aim at the buck. He sighted
for a spot a handsbreadth back from the shoulder,
and midway in height between the line of the back
and the line of the belly; and, when he had got his
sight, he remembered Danny Develin’s advice —
“Don’t pull, boy; but press firmly and steadily.”
He did as his mentor had told him; his carbine snapped
out a wicked note of anger, barking as steel only can
bark; and the next instant he saw the beautiful


THE BLACK TROUBLE BREWING 13 1
creature away on the green patch of veldt grass
give a frenzied bound, its two forelegs doubled
up under it as if it meant to dash away. But
its day for careering fleetly over the veldt was
done; it came down upon its knees, gave one
convulsive twitch to its hind-quarters, and then
turned over upon its flank as dead as Oliver
Cromwell.
Dick had shot his first springbok.
Its mate had dashed off like the wind at the crack
of the carbine; but, missing its mate, it stopped
about fifty yards away, and turned round with wonder
in its eyes. It was then that Van Schloss said to
Sim:
“Now, liddle schap, shoot dot springbok.”
Sim raised his carbine, and let fly, the bullet cutting
up a little puff of dust close alongside the pretty
creature’s body.
“Missed him; but a pretty goot shot,” cried the
farmer heartily. “Dis is der vay, see.” He lifted
his rifle to his shoulder swiftly, and yet without hurry
or flurry.
The doe was speeding away for dear life, moving
with quaint bucking jumps that make springbok so
hard to hit on the move. Van Schloss laid his cheek
softly against the breech of his weapon, and touched
the trigger.
Missed, shouted Sim. “Missed him altogether.”
But Van Schloss only smiled.
The doe raced on for a dozen yards or so, and then
dropped as if half the world had fallen upon her*
for the farmer’s bullet had traversed her body and
she was soon out of her anguish.


Dick marched towards the first fruits of his carb-
bine with all the dignity he could command. He
wanted to run with Sim, and gloat over that fatal
shot of his; but he did not want to appear too boyish
in the presence of Van Schloss and Danny Develin,
because very soon he would be shooting at foes who
would be seeking his life, and he wanted them to look
upon him as something approaching a man.
“Good shot, Dicky,” shouted Sim, who was brim-
ming over with excitement.
“Good enough, old chap.”
“Bravo, Dick,” said Danny Develin. “Got him
in the right place. Neat shot for a boy; jolly
neat.”
Van Schloss nodded his big head as he pulled at
his calabash pipe. He was studying Dick, noting the
rough, strong hands, the well-set head, the keen eyes
and firm mouth, and the lithe yet strong figure.
He called to Dick; —
“Come here, liddle Dicky poy; come here, until
I dold you somedings.”
Dick went to his master, wondering what on earth
he was going to hear from the kindly giant. He
knew that Van Schloss liked him, and yet in some
subtle fashion he was aware that the Dutchman liked
Sim the better of the twain.
“Liddle Dicky poy, I vas haf mine eye on you
ven you makes dot shot. You vas mit yourself alone,
an’ haf no mans to dold you vat vay you must shoot.
I eat you mit mine eyes dose times, Dicky, an’ I see
yo’ make dot shot. It was goot; some men live a
lifetime mit er rifle in dere hands, an’ dey neffer
make good marksmen; some odder fellows dey comes


erlong an’ pick up er rifle, an’ der sphirit of der shoot
gets inter dem, an’ dey kill effery dimes dey touch
er drigger. ‘Old Industry’ he vas like dot, an’
poy Dicky, somedimes, py-an’-py, pefore you haf any
hair on your face yo’ vill be dot vay too. Yo’ are
born mit it, Dicky; you are —vat I shall say?—you
are a son of a gun, Dicky,”
At this quaint description of himself Master Dick
went down on the grass and fairly howled with
laughter, and Sim joined him, and no amount of
explaining would make it clear to the Dutchman why
the boys laughed.
After that they went on with their shooting. Buck
were very plentiful, so that both boys had good
practice, and every moment they gained confidence.
When Danny Develin had heard Van Schloss tell
Telegraph Dick that he had the marksman’s gift, he
had been a bit surprised; but as the day wore on
the fact was borne in upon him that the farmer was
right. He noticed how Dick instinctively allowed for
the wind when shooting, also how keen the youngster
was in judging distance.
“He has the eye and the judgment, and the nerve
will come with practice, whispered the ex-Hussar.
“He’ll do big things some day.” But he did not
praise the boy extravagantly for fear he should spoil
him.
Sim was doing well for a youngster. He watched
Van Schloss, and copied him in all things, and the
farmer was pleased with him on the whole, though,
as the day drew to a close, Sim made a bad break.
He had seen something moving in the near distance,
close to a clump of mimosa bushes, and, stealing


away by himself, he came in sight of a noble-looking
bird, which looked as big as a young ostrich. Sim
crept on and on, his heart thumping with excitement.
He saw the glossy plumage and the long, bright legs,
and he noted the swan-like neck and bright pads on
the cheeks; and, lying flat upon his stomach, he
had sent a bullet with unerring accuracy plump into
the bird’s carcass.
When he saw it fall kicking and struggling, and
knew that his aim had been true, the little fat chap
gaVe a yell that would not have disgraced a Kaffir
warrior; and, trailing his carbine, started off at as
fast a run as his fat legs would let him go. The rest
hurried to the spot to find Master Sim standing
with one foot upon his quarry, his chin in the air,
and his hands resting upon the muzzle of his
carbine.
“Alone I did it,” was written in capital letters all
over his facial expression.
“What do you think of him, Dick? Ain’t he a
beauty?” cried the one-time messenger boy. “I saw
one just like him in the Zoo before we left London.
Dropped him first shot—three hundred yards.”
Sim was rattling away at a great pace, when Van
Schloss stopped him.
“You haf done some great harms, fiddle Shim,”
he said. “Dot vas not goot pizness.”
“What’s wrong with it?” demanded the boy.
“It’s a secretary bird, Sim,” explained Danny
Develin, “and it’s not lawful to kill them.”
“Why not? Whose secretary was he, anyhow?
What’d he want knocking about on the veldt if he
didn’t want to get shot?”


Sim was fairly exploding, for he had been awfully
proud of his shot, and Danny Develin had to tell him
that the secretary bird is prized more than any other
creature by the farmer, because of the way it kills and
eats snakes.
“Do you know, Sim,” added Danny, “that if it
was not for the secretary bird poisonous reptiles
would be so plentiful that life would not be worth
living in these parts, and that in order to protect
these useful creatures the Government has fixed a
penalty of ten pounds to be paid by anyone who kills
a secretary bird?”
On hearing this, poor Sim was much distressed,
for the boy wanted to win the esteem of his master.
“I can’t bring the bird back to life, sir,” he said,
“but I’ll take good care not to be so jolly quick on
the trigger again. I’ll not shoot any more without
knowing.”
From that day onward the boys were allowed out
hunting. They were warned never to go too far from
the homestead, and they were bidden, in most im-
pressive language, never to stray many yards from
their ponies.
So it came to pass that for many days they lived
m a boy’s paradise. They got up at dawn, saddled
their ponies, and rode off with their bandoliers full
of cartridges. Their carbines they carried slung over
their shoulders, their hunting knives were sheathed
in their belts, and all the world was full of splendid
joy to them, in spite of the fact that the black trouble
loomed up on the horizon of their lives.
They shot all kinds of things; deer of all sorts and
vultures, even hares and wild turkeys did not escape


them, for they were out for rifle practice, and they
got it.
One evening they got a treat which sent them just
crazy with hunter’s joy. A herd of wildebeest came
galloping along in a line that seemed endless. It is a
peculiarity of these strange creatures that they never
gallop two abreast, but always one behind the other,
the horns of one touching the tail of the creature in
front of it. They are for all the world like miniature
buffalo, and, when wounded, will turn and charge a
hunter with great ferocity. In size they are about as
big as a very large donkey. When galloping they carry
their heads low down and their necks arched, and a
herd of them makes an imposing spectacle.
As the herd swept past the two boys, they were
only two hundred yards away, and made a river of
horns and tails, as Sim said in his quaint way. Getting
down upon their knees, the London lads lifted their
carbines with hands that trembled slightly from
eagerness; and then they sighted their weapons, each
boy picking his own wildebeest.
Sim fired first, but Dick’s carbine bit on the ear almost
at the same moment; it was like an echo. Quick as
thought, they shot the bolts back, and then jammed
them home again, and began pegging away again
at the moving targets; and, when the herd had passed,
nine fine animals were lying on the veldt. Satisfied
with their day’s work, they refilled the magazines of
their weapons, and, getting to saddle, made home-
wards. They were laughing and playing tricks upon
each other, as boys will, when suddenly Dick’s quick
eye caught sight of a black form crouching amidst
some heavy veldt grass.


“What’s up now, Dicky?” whispered Sim, catching
sight of his chum’s face.
“Niggers,” was all Dick said, but the word sounded
ominous upon his lips.
“There’s another crouching amongst those mimosa.
I see two more in the grass a bit to the right,” whispered
Sim.
“They’re as thick as flies,” muttered Dick, “and
they’ve all got assegais and knobkerries.”


CHAPTER VII
THE FIRST TASTE OF WAR
As the two boys sat in their saddles, and watched
the niggers in the grass and amidst the shrubbery
that dotted the veldt, they were well aware that the
niggers were watching them.
“They’ve come out to catch us, Dick,” muttered
Sim.
“Not much doubt about that,” was Telegraph
Dick’s answer. “I’ve been watching that black
bounder in the tuft of grass by that clump of mimosa
bushes away on the left, and I’ll swear it’s the chap
that let the cock ostrich loose on us; and, matey, I’ve
a jolly good mind to send a bullet at him. We owe
him one for what he has done.”
“Think we owe him two,” chuckled Sim; “one
for what he has done, and one for what the
black bounder is trying to do. They are up to
some special kind of mischief now, Dick; look
how they are spreading out at both ends of their
line.”
“I know what they are up to: they mean to out-
flank us, and cut off our retreat. Danny Develin has
told me many a time that that is their favourite
method. They let you see their centre, so as to hold
your attention, whilst their wings creep through the
grass on their bellies. I expect we had better be


moving, Sim, for there may be plenty of their flankers
going through the grass where we cannot see them,
and it would be just rotten to let them outwit us.
We don’t know much about the veldt yet, but on
general principles a London chap ought to be as sharp
as any blessed nigger.”
“I’d like just one shot at ’em before we go, for
luck,” whispered Sim. “They are sneaking there in
the grass with assegais and knobkerries to kill us,
who have never done ’em any harm. Why shouldn’t
we give ’em one to go on with?”
“Well, we’ll give ’em one each, and then we’ll
ride for it. You take that beggar away there by the
anthill; I’ll take the one peeping out of the mimosa
trees.”
“Right you are, Dicky. Shall we dismount?”
said Sim.
“No,” came the sharp answer; “fire from the
saddle; it’s a lot safer. If they yell out and charge
when we fire, they may stampede our horses if we
are out of the saddle, and we’d have a nice time
then.”
“If our horses were only properly trained we could
trust ’em; that grey mare of Danny Develin’s will
stand like a rock, no matter what happens.”
“Yes; Danny began to train her for this kind of
work the very first day he got her.”
“Danny’s a wonder with horses.”
“Can you see your nigger plainly now?”
“Yes.”
I can see my chap, too. Get your carbine ready,
and shoot quick as you can sight; they won’t wait for
us to take aim. Are you ready?”


“Yes. But this blessed horse keeps shifting; first
one hoof, then another.”
“My beggar is shifting his skin as if he wanted to
slip out of the saddle. Never mind, we’ll do our
best. Are you quite ready, Sim?”
Sim murmured that he was.
“Now then, let ’em have it,” came the crisp com-
mand from the born leader; and at the word both
carbines went up to the boyish shoulders, and both
weapons spoke at once.
Sim’s horse stood quite still until the trigger was
pulled, and he got his man fair and square through
the heart, Dick’s mount shifted just as he flung up
his carbine, and his aim went wide; for he had fired
at the woolly head of the evil-faced Kaffir, and only
managed to snap his collar-bone.
As soon as the weapons rang out, however, Sim’s
horse plunged madly, reared up, and pawed the
air, and then bucked like a thing possessed, and the
boy went flying headlong out of the saddle. Poor
Sim hit the ground with his skull, and lay as still as
if his last hour had come. His horse dashed off at a
mad gallop, and Dick’s brute, seeing its companion
flying off with tail in air, made a snap at the bit,
and cleared likewise. Vainly Telegraph Dick put all
his might into his arms, and pulled and sawed at the
horse’s mouth. The creature had made up its mind
to bolt, and bolt it did.
The shouts and yells of the Kaffirs as they rushed
forward to make sure of Sim Slack only added to
the terror of the horses. They had their heads turned
for home, and they travelled like a pair of mad things.
And Dick, as he was carried away to safety, even in


spite of himself, had the bitter grief of hearing the
yells of triumph that the Kaffirs uttered as they closed
in on the unconscious boy.
Finding that he could not stop the charger’s frantic
flight, Dick swung round in the saddle, and took a
last look at the scene; and the sight that met his gaze
was terrifying enough to shake his very soul. He saw
his dearly-loved chum held high in the arms of a brawny
Kaffir, whilst a mob of black savages danced around
him, brandishing their assegais. He saw the sunlight
flash upon the cruel steel; saw the white teeth in the
middle of the black faces; and then he turned his head
away, and a great sob broke from his lips, for well
he knew that his chance of ever seeing gallant little
Sim again was small indeed. The tears ran down his
face like rain, for he loved the London lad who had
shared his joys and sorrows, his dangers and privations,
ever since they had left the old grey city together to
seek for fame and fortune.
His horse began to slacken its pace, and would
willingly have eased off from a furious gallop to a
more gentle canter; but now Dick’s soul was filled
with nothing but the wild lust of vengeance. He
could not save little Sim, but, if he lived, he would
avenge him, and he dried the salt tears upon his
cheeks, and set his teeth hard, and he rode his
horse as men ride in the “Grand National” in Old
England.
On and on he went until the brute swayed and
staggered under him like a drunken thing. But he
had no pity. Plying the whip, he sped on until the
animal pitched forward upon its knees, just outside
the outer gate that led to the homestead paddock


Dick got a nasty fall when the exhausted brute went
headlong to earth; but, picking himself up in an
instant, and clutching his carbine tightly in his right
hand, he started off at a run for the house. He did
not even give a look at the fallen steed; did not tarry
to loosen the girths or slip off the bridle; but dashed
away at his best pace to tell his sorrowful news to
those of his own colour to whom the tale would
be bad hearing indeed, for Sim had a trick of making
folk love him.
Van Schloss was standing upon his verandah
smoking his eternal calabash pipe, and as soon as
his eyes fell upon the running figure, he knew that
trouble had fallen upon the boys. For just a second
he shaded his keen eyes with his hand, then he muttered:
“Dere is only von of dem, an’ it is Deck. Vere is
dot leedle Shim?”
Then he wheeled, and sprang with a quick bound
into the house, and took his rifle and bandolier from
the wall. A moment later he was at the back door
Grasping a Kaffir by the shoulder, he said:
“Mine horse; fly. If you are slow mit it I send
a bullet after you to help you” : and at that the black
man sped off to the stables as hard as his legs would
carry him, for there was that in the farmer s eye which
spoke more fiercely than his tongue.
To another nigger Van Schloss said:
“Go you, and bring the boss Danny Develin to me.
Go; and let the wind lie in your feet, or my rifle shall
talk to you”; and that nigger went, and tarried
not over his leave-taking, for the farmer’s fingers
were playing with the trigger of his rifle.
His horse was brought to the door.


“Now,” said he, “saddle me the blue road colt —
the one that the Boss Danny Develin has been breaking
in—and move as if death was behind you; for I have
it in my mind to give some of your carcases to the
vultures this day, for I know you all for a treacherous
lot of dogs that would gladly bite the hand that
feeds you;” and that Kaffir sped away to do his
bidding as an arrow speeds from a bowstring. And
the word went round the farm that the “Boss” had
blood in his eyes, and no nigger let his shadow
fall where the gaze of the angry man could fall
upon it.
A minute or two later Dick came running to
the house. He did not stand upon ceremony, but,
catching his breath with a quick gulp, he blurted
out:
“The niggers are up, and Sim is dead, or in their
hands, a prisoner.”
If he is in dere hands, said Van Schloss solemnly,
“den my leedle poy is dead. Dey never spare.”
A dry sob broke from Telegraph Dick.
“Then he is dead, Van Schloss,” he cried. “I
saw one of them holding him in his arms, whilst a
mob danced round him with assegais in their hands.”
Two big tears slowly trickled down the Dutchman's
face.
“Dot poor leedle schap is more as goot as dead,
Deck. Now, py my viskers, I vill fill der land mit
mourning an’ tears; I vill make some black womans
vidders pefore der sun goes down; for, Deck, I lofe
dot schmall schap, Shim, like I lofe mine own son
dot dose black scuts killed so long time ago.”
Here s Danny Develin,” cried Dick.


The ex-Hussar leapt out of his saddle, and came
striding into the room, his heels ringing upon the
floor, for in his excitement he went back instinctively
to his soldier’s life and ways.
“What is it?” he asked curtly, looking from Dick
to the farmer.
“Der black cloud haf burst, Danny. Yes; and
Sim is a prisoner.”
“Lord help little Sim,” burst from the ex-soldier’s
lips, and he added, as with an after-thought: “Lord
help the nigger that has a hand in this day’s
work.”
“Der vultures shall grow fat,” growled Van Schloss.
“Come now; we waste much goot times.”
“We can’t go and leave the house to take care of
itself, Van Schloss; that would be madness. We
must not play into their hands. I’m just as keen to
avenge our little laddie as you are, but I don’t mean
to throw a chance away. It’s a million to one they
have butchered the boy long before this; we must
make the homestead secure before we start,” said
Danny Develin, his old discipline coming back to
him as if by instinct.
“If we wait for that, the niggers will all escape,”
stormed Dick.
“Easy, my lad; easy,” remarked the soldier kindly.
“The longest way round is the quickest way home
sometimes. We must make this place secure before
we leave it. We’ll soon get upon the tracks of the
gang we want.”
“Danny Develin is in der right, Deck. Now I
calls in dose white men dot vork mit me.”
He went outside, and soon had all the whites on


the farm around him, to whom he explained that the
blacks were up, and dangerous. He gave each man
and woman a rifle with orders to look after themselves
whilst he was away.
They were a stolid set of folk; they knew their
danger, but did not fear it when once good rifles
lay in their hands. The thing they feared was the
sudden rising, without warning, when they might
be butchered in their beds.
Very placidly they went about making all the
necessary preparations for a siege. The women hauled
water from the dam, and carried it to the house, so
that they might have plenty to drink in the event
of a mob surrounding the homestead and cutting
off their supplies. Whilst the women were at this
work, the men rounded up all the Kaffirs, male
and female, and, after disarming the men, drove the
mob to the house to hear the will of Van Schloss. The
big farmer did not long keep them in suspense. In
a few stern sentences he told them that he knew of
the intended revolt, and of the trap set for the two
boys that day.
I am going to give you justice,” he said, frowning
at them from under his bushy eyebrows; “the justice
of the rifle. You have planned to give me and mine
the law of the assegai, not in fair fight like men and
warriors, but whilst we slept. You are jackals, and
I drive you forth from my home, you and your wives
and your children. Go; and go quickly, old and young,
man and woman; for, as my soul liveth, I will turn
my rifle upon any black skin that I see until this
matter is set right. You would not have given me or
mine fair warning; you would have stabbed in the


dark as you did long ago when you butchered my
wife and child. Go now; for an hour hence it will
be death to any man I meet/’
“Let the women and the children stay in your
kraals, boss,” cried an old man.
“Aye,” added the farmer in a bitter voice; “that
is what I did long ago, and your women fired the
grass, so that the smoke hid the advance of the men
from my rifle. I have learned my lesson. Your
women and children shall not sleep in my kraals,
eat my food, and drink from my wells, whilst the
men murder and plunder. Once more: go forth, or
I will turn my rifle upon you; and when you come
to the camp where the men are who have murdered
the boy, tell them that, though they hide in holes
in the ground like vermin, yet will I and my friends
smell them out, and none shall be spared; no, not
one.”
He pointed grimly with his long bony hand, and
the natives, knowing that the time of talking had
passed, fled with all speed; for they knew by past
experience how ruthless those slow, easy farmer-
folk could be when once their sluggish blood was
roused.
As soon as the last man had disappeared, Van
Schloss said to Dick and Danny Develin:
“Now ve can go about the vork ve have to do.”
With a quick, eager spring Danny Develin was in
the saddle, and Dick, as he followed suit, noticed
that the ex-Hussar had buckled on his old sword.
“Where do we go first?” queried Dick.
“To the farm of Widow Gale.”
“That’s a long way from where they killed poor


Sim,” cried Telegraph Dick, passionately. “It seems
to me as if you were all afraid of these niggers.”
Van Schloss wagged his big head kindly.
“Dot makes you more as angry as er bull, Deck.
But, first, I must warn does beeples, else braps dose
leedle girls gets killed mit der assegai, while dey
schleep ter-night. You doan want dot, boy Deck.”
“No,” said poor Dick, sheepishly; “I don’t want
that.”
“Dere is anodder reason why we goes mit dot
farm. ‘Ole Industry’ is our general, our command-
ant in war time; he haf most wisdom mit his head.
He vill giff dose orders, and ve vill do yust as he told
me. He haf forgot more about de way we fight
mit dose niggers dan all de odder farmers effer
knows.”
“One good man to command, Dicky, lad,” cried
Danny Develin, “and the rest to obey. That’s the
way of it, or else it will be a big muddle from start
to finish.”
Old Industry’ isn’t always right,” growled the
boy. He said the blacks would not rise until the
full of the moon, and it wants two days and nights
to that yet.”
No living man can make quite sure of the plans
of niggers, Dicky,” cried Danny Develin, soothingly.
Keep a tight hold on yourself, lad; the man we
are going to is just the fellow to give you justice, the
living justice of the veldt.”
So they rode onward, and Telegraph Dick, thinking
of his dear little chum, began to cry softly to himself;
and the men dared not look at him, because of the
lumps in their own throats.


Danny Develin, old and hardened campaigner as
he was, could not quite keep his eyes dry as he heard
the boy’s deep-drawn sobs, and he was heartily glad
when the widow’s homestead hove in sight.
“Old Industry” came out to greet them, and in
a few minutes he was in possession of the bad news.
When he knew the facts, he walked up and down for
fully three minutes, thinking hard, his long, ungainly
body bent almost double, his beautiful, womanish
face set as hard as oak.
“He seems to want to do a lot of thinking,” grumbled
Dick, whose very bones were aching for action.
“Yust vat ve vants him to do,” commented Van
Schloss.
“Better think now than in the middle of the
trouble, boy Dick,” was all Danny said.
“Old Industry” turned at last, and his eyes were
dancing in his head; they were full of devilment and
recklessness, and Dick never forgot the difference
they made to his appearance. The boy always after-
wards spoke of the old man’s eyes as the watchfires
of his face. They were blazing now like watchfires
of war.
“The niggers mean mischief all over this part of
the country, and it will need a coalition of all forces
to put them down. My first duty is to warn every
farmer, near and far, of this latest move; they must
all be warned before nightfall. Then we will give
the villains the justice of the rifle; we will demand
an eye for an eye.”
“How will you warn all the farmers before night-
fall?” demanded Dick. “You couldn’t do it unless
you were connected by telegraph.”


“I have my own telegraph, boy. Gome, and I
will show you.”
He led the way to a great cage in which were about
a hundred carrier pigeons, and each pigeon had one
wing dyed red.
“There is my telegraph line and operators,” said
the old man. “Each of those birds belongs to a differ-
ent farmer. I got them, and dyed a wing red, which
is a sign of immediate danger, arranged between me
and the white folk. It is a close secret, and no black
man is aware of it.”
He undid the cage, and, taking out a bird, tossed
it into the air. The bird rose like a lark, circled round
and round for a few seconds, and then sped off due
east.
“Ha!” cried the old man, “that is a pigeon bred
by Van Koetze. He carries a good rifle, and will be
on the warpath with his five sons in short order.”
He let another fly, and it went south. “Farmer
Humphries and his son Ben will ride far and
fast before sundown,” remarked the old scout,
and he will bring many a stern fighter with
him.”
He kept on flinging the red-winged messengers of
war into the air until the cage was empty.
There, he cried at last, “that work is done,
and well done. Our feathered scouts will spread the
tidings far and near before we are many hours
older, and we shall have these demons in a cleft
stick.”
That s a ripping plan,” was Dick’s enthusiastic
comment. I did not know that you had any system
like that. I thought you would have to send outriders


galloping from farm to farm. How long have you
been arranging this scheme, sir?”
“I started it five years ago, boy. I got every farmer
to breed a few carrier pigeons, and a month back
I sent to each farm and got a cock bird that was
mating, because I knew that a mating bird would
fret for home. I knew trouble was coming, and I told
the farmers that I would only loose the birds when
their rifles were needed urgently. They will know
what the red-winged messengers mean, and they will
ride with speed. We shall have a commando of good
riflemen here in a few hours. In the meantime,
I will leave Van Schloss to guard my folk, and
you and I and Danny Develin will ride to the spot
where the little boy’s body is, and we will give
it decent burial; and I will see by the signs which
way the blacks have gone, and what their numbers
are.”
“You think there is no hope that little Sim may
be alive?” queried Dick, his lips twitching and his
voice hoarse with pain.
“Hope, boy! I tell you the Kaffirs never spare a
life except to torture. Pray that your little London
chum be dead, for death is best. Now get to saddle,
action is the best tonic for grief.”
So Dick, with a sad and aching heart, swung his
leg across the blue-roan colt that Danny Develin
had trained. The Dutchman had given it to him,
saying:
“Take it, an’ keep it, Deck. I had meant it as
er present for dot leedle Shim, but he not vant it
now, so you yust keep it. It is er goot colt, a thorough-
bred by Fryingpan, out of Blue Bonnet; an’ Danny


Develin haf train it more as goot as der pest. It can
gallop an’ yump an’ shtand fire, an’ come ven you
vistle.”
Dick had sobbed out his thanks, and made up
his mind to love the blue-roan steed for the sake of
the boy who was to have ridden it.
Danny Develin, who had fought in so many battles,
and seen so many comrades he had loved fall dead
in the ranks, knew that the best thing he could do
under the circumstances was to divert the boy’s
thoughts from his loss at any price. So, calling the
lad, he questioned him sharply concerning the number
of niggers he had seen bearing arms.
It s no time to think of the dead,” he cried roughly;
‘‘we have to think of the living—that’s a fighting
man s maxim all the world over. So set your teeth
and play the man, and don’t disgrace old London
town, Dick, my boy, in the eyes of the Afrikanders.”
Dick winced as though he had been struck with
a shambock; but the words, harsh as they were, did
him good. He braced himself against his sorrow,
and rode on, keeping a sharp eye on every object
he passed.
At last he came to the spot where the horse had
thrown Sim, but there was nobody there.
‘‘You stand sentry, Dick,” muttered “Old In-
dustry”; “Danny Develin and I will look at the
tracks.”
Suiting the action to the speaker’s word, the scout
and the ex-Hussar jumped to the ground; whilst Dick
sat like a statue, his reins gathered up in his left hand,
his carbine in his right, the butt resting upon his
thigh.


Whilst the two men examined the ground with
keen and practised eyes, Telegraph Dick swept the
surrounding country with eyes that hate had made
doubly watchful.
“Look out,” he called in an eager whisper;
“there is something moving in the grass away to the
left.”
In an instant the two men fronted in the direction
indicated, their rifles ready for instant use. They
saw the grass moving every now and again, but they
could see no foe.
“Remain where you are, and stand ready to shoot
on sight,” whispered “Old Industry.”
Then he dropped upon his belly amidst the
grass, and began to worm himself away from his
friends, parting the grass so deftly that not a rustle,
not a motion was made to betray that he was
moving.
Dick, from the saddle, marked this sinuous progress
with amazement. It was his first lesson in the art
of savage war, and one that he never forgot. After
a while he lost sight of the old warlock, and, strain
his eyes as he might, he could detect no movement
which might indicate the whereabouts of the leader
of the whites.
“Do you see anything, Dick?” whispered Danny
Develin.
“I can see a sort of rustling in the grass at the same
spot that I saw it before,” was the reply, in the same
low tone.
“If it’s the niggers, Dick, they must be watching
us.”
“Well, Danny, we’ll watch them; they can’t get


near us without being seen. What do you think they
have done with Sim?”
They haven’t killed him—not here, any way,
Dick; there’s no blood on the ground, and no
body.”
Just then they heard a low call from the grass
behind them, and looking round, Dick saw the face
of “Old Industry” peering at him from between the
leaves of a mimosa bush.
How the deuce did you get there without me seeing
you?” was the boy’s startled ejaculation.
“Old Industry” straightened himself up, and came
quietly from his hiding-place.
“I came to give you a lesson in veldtcraft, Dick.
If I had been a savage, I could have sprung upon
your horse behind you, and driven an assegai into
your heart without you even knowing how it was
done. You must learn to watch as wild beasts watch
if you are going to be a success as a veldtsman. One
mistake may mean your life —your own or another’s.”
Dick hung his head in shame at the words, for
he knew that no living thing, neither man nor beast,
would have got behind the old warlock if he had been
on sentry duty.
“What do you make of the movement in the grass
ahead of us?” demanded Danny Develin, in order to
cover the boy’s confusion.
.‘‘lt’ 8 vultures feeding on the dead body of the
nigger that the boy Sim shot just before his horse
bucked him on to the veldt.”
“No sign of the boy?”
“None whatever. The Kaffirs have taken him
oil with them; they have got an educated nigger


with them —one of those infernal sham black mission-
aries from America, and he may be directing their
movements. Those educated niggers have immense
influence over the savages; influence which they
mostly turn to evil account.”
“How do you know there is an educated coon
there?” queried Danny.
“Because I made it part of my business to examine
the tracks of every so-called black missionary in the
district months ago, until I knew them by heart.
Every man living makes a different track with bare
feet, and I can swear to this rascal amongst ten thous-
and. His presence may make it harder for us to handle
these outlaws. You see, a man can learn in time to
know how a savage will act under any given set of
circumstances, because a savage has animal instincts
which guide him more or less on a beaten track; but
an educated descendant of savages is a different
matter altogether. He feels as savages feel, but he
reasons as only an educated savage reasons, which
is different from the white man’s way of thinking, and
different from the wild black man’s way of deducing
things. But I’m mighty glad that I know he is here;
it will explain much that otherwise might have puzzled
me. The band who were here numbered about sixty,
and you were lucky to escape with your life, boy Dick.
We will follow their tracks, and see where they have
made their headquarters. I feel certain of this:
that they will attack some farm either to-night or
to-morrow night if they are let alone, and women
and children will be done to death. So we will get on
this trail, and find out their strength.”
Without more words, the three adventurers put


their horses to the tripple, and followed the signs
on the veldt. After riding in silence for about an
hour, “Old Industry” suddenly spoke.
“More niggers,” was all he said.
Vaulting to earth he handed his reins to Telegraph
Dick, and carefully examined some fresh tracks that
joined issue from the south with the trail he had
been following.
After a while he came back, and said:
About fifty fighting men joined the original band
here.”
How can you tell they were fighting men?” was
Dick’s astonished query.
Because there were no women, children, or
cattle, not even a dog, with them; they were all
full-grown men. I could tell that by the size of each
footprint, and by the length of each stride. I could
tell they had marched swiftly, because the toes had
been dug into the soil; men who march slowly on a
pleasure trip do not do that—they let the feet fall
flatly and softly. I knew they were armed, because
here and there a blade of grass or the leaves of a
shrub were cut cleanly, and it takes a keen blade to
do that when the grass is as light as it is here. You
can rest assured that our enemies are foregathering in
a hurry,”
They rode on for a couple of miles, and Danny
Develin cried out that there were more tracks coming
m to the main body from his side, and on investigation
“Old Industry” declared that at least another hundred
men had joined the rebels.
“It’s going to be a serious rising,” commented
the veteran; we must follow them a bit further,


though I am pretty sure they have their main camp
in the dense jungle that lies right ahead of us.”
So, moving with infinite care and skill, the little
party pushed warily on; but, in spite of all their
craft, they were very nearly ambushed.
They had crossed a rather deep donga, which
the veteran examined as far as he could see.
“A nasty place that, if the enemy got behind us,”
remarked Danny Develin.
“We must keep our eyes all over our bodies,” was
his leader’s response; “it won’t do to let them get us,
comrade.”
So, with even greater caution than before, they
moved in the wake of the impi. All at once a low,
bitter word broke from the lips of “Old Industry.”
“What is it?” cried both his comrades in one
breath.
“The grass in front of us is alive with armed
enemies! ”
Danny stood in his stirrups, and he could catch
the sparkle of the setting sun on steel in a long line
right across their track. A whistle crept from between
his lips.
“Trapped,” he muttered a second later; “trapped
like jackals.”
“Old Industry” took a look over his shoulder.
“The niggers have taken us in front and rear,”
he said; “the donga we just passed is alive with
them, and it’s any odds they are on our flanks as
well.”
“Let us swing round, and ride through ’em,”
cried Danny Develin, laying his hand upon his sword
hilt.


“The bold course is the better course at such a
time, I think. An ounce of mother wit is worth a
ton of steel in a tight corner,” rapped out the veteran.
“See, the wind is blowing hard, right in our faces.
When we charge for the donga it will be blowing at
our backs.”
“What the deuce has the wind got to do with it?”
was Danny Develin’s impetuous cry.
“Take out your pipe, man, and when you light it,
scatter a whole box of lighted matches in the dry
grass. I will do the same, and so must boy Dick.
We can pretend we are looking for tracks whilst we
do it. The wind will pick the flames up, and carry
them through this dry grass faster than a horse can
gallop. We can ride behind the flames on to the donga,
and be right on top of the brutes in the donga before
they drop to our game; and then we must fight our
way through their lines. If I fall, ride at your best
pace to the widow’s farm, and tell the farmers who
will have assembled there what you have learned to-day,
and bid them select a leader and attack the Kaffirs
at once, and crush the rebellion before it grows big
enough to crush them. Now get to your work: fire
the grass as if by accident.”
The order was scarcely out of the veteran’s lips
ere it was put into execution. The dry grass caught
fire as if by magic, for the heat of the sun had made
it light and brittle. The wind picked the flames up,
and tossed them to and fro like great blood-red
billows, and the smoke from the undergrowth rose
m clouds that made an impenetrable wall. The
horsemen sat still, waiting and watching.
The black warriors in the donga did not know


what to make of it, but crouched down waiting for
the fiery storm to leap over them. The others, in
front and on the flanks, seemed to think it was an
accident, for they made no sign.
“Old Industry” watched the course of events until
he saw that the critical moment had arrived.
“Now, boys,” he shouted; “ride for your lives”;
and the next instant the three of them were dashing
down upon the donga in the wake of the flames.
The roar of the fiery element deadened the sound
of their horses’ hoofs; the smoke hid them from
view. Danny had his cavalry sword in his strong
right hand; his eyes were full of the fury of the charge;
he was braced to the saddle like a piece of living
steel. “Old Industry,” with his rifle grasped by the
barrel, was on the other flank. Telegraph Dick was in
the middle. Forward they went like a whirlwind.
Suddenly it seemed to Dick that the donga leaped
to meet them. A sea of black faces, a long row of
gleaming steel, a wild yell of hate and surprise, and
then he was conscious of seeing Danny Develin
standing in his stirrups, hewing and thrusting with
his terrible blade, whilst the veteran smote with
the butt of his rifle at any skull that came within his
reach.
Just before they had charged the foe, Danny had
bidden the boy sling his carbine over his shoulder,
and had thrust a revolver into his hand, knowing that
his boyish arm would be too weak to do much execution
in a melee. And now Telegraph Dick, keeping his
head level, steered the blue-roan colt with fearless
hand, whilst he sent lead into the centre of each black
chest that barred his way.


The warriors were game. They leapt at the bridles,
they sprang at the shoulders or the croup of the horses,
they struck and they stabbed with their assegais,
regardless of death; and amidst the whirl and rush
and riot of clanking blows, Danny Develin’s voice
rang clear and high in the war cry of the old Hussars.


CHAPTER VIII
THE IVORY TREASURE STORE
It was a mad moment for the London boy. The yells
of the savages, the deep-throated cheers that ever and
anon broke from the lips of the white men, the clash
of steel, the snorting of the horses, the roar of the
flames spreading away to right and left, the grey mist
of the smoke, and the sense of immediate danger
which always makes brave men drunken for the time
being! Dick went drunken with the lust of battle;
he let his left hand mingle with the reins and the
horse’s mane, for he had not yet reached that stage
in horsemanship when a man has implicit confidence
in himself and his steed; he leant far over the neck
of the bonny blue-roan, and, holding his revolver
firmly clasped in his right hand, he shot with unerring
accuracy at that short range at every foe that pressed
in upon him.
Danny Develin was mighty at that moment; all
the lion was awake in his soul. Holding his perfectly
trained horse together with superb skill, he whirled
his blade aloft until it looked like a living thing as
it sparkled in the sunshine. The warriors clutched
his bridle-rein; they clung to his stirrups, they grasped
his legs, and thrust and stabbed with all the fury of
their race; but the man who had once been the pride
of his regiment was glorious to behold when circled


round with foes. Now standing high in his stirrups,
he put the weight of his lithe body into a stroke until
the blue steel fairly hissed through the air as it fell
like a flash of flame upon the black skull of some
woolly warrior, cleaving through bone and brain
as the mower’s scythe cleaves through growing grain.
Anon he screwed himself half round in the saddle to
parry, with deft skill, the thrust of a foeman, for he
was no mere hewer and hacker, this bold Briton,
whose only fault was the “little bit o’ dry dust in his
throat.”
Again, he would let his sword-arm dart forward
in the deadly thrust, straight at the throat of one
who was clinging to his bridle and bearing his good
steed back to its haunches. Oh, those lightning-like
thrusts! Deadly was the sweep of the blue blade,
deadly the down stroke; but the thrust that came
over or under the foeman’s guard was like the cobra’s
stroke when the tiger springs at the coil in the
jungle.
The warriors of Africa are bold in battle; they
have fighting blood in every vein; but the white-
faced man in the saddle had something more than
this to boast —something that stood to him in that
critical hour, something that surged up in his heart
and made music in his ears like the wild war notes
of Scottish bagpipes. He had the pride of race to
back him, the pride of a breed that have fought
against odds, and won, ever since the seas girdled his
far-off island home. It was a great heritage, a glorious
heritage; it has made such as he stand under the flag,
and round the guns, until they died, or triumphed,
the wide world over! And Danny Develin forgot his


thirst, and fought, glorying in the odds against him,
and the song of the sword sang in his blood.
Once it would have been all over with him if it
had not been for Telegraph Dick. A warrior had
grasped the ex-Hussar’s bridle-rein in a grip of iron,
and had sunk upon his knee to bear the good steed
back; and ere Danny Develin could shoot forward
his point, another had rushed to his knee, and was
thrusting upwards with long-handled assegai. Deftly
he turned the steel that would have gone upwards
through his lungs, but at that moment another came,
with a yell and a bound, and leapt like a wolf right
on to the horse’s quarter, and, gripping the ex-Hussar
by the neck with his left hand, drew back his right to
thrust the white man through the back.
Telegraph Dick saw the peril, saw the fiendish grin
on the face of the savage, and fired right into the
middle of it, sending the white teeth right down the
black throat. The big black hand on the ex-Hussar’s
collar relaxed its grip as if by magic; the woolly head
went back until it struck the root of the horse’s out-
flung tail, and the dead warrior, slain in hot fight by
a boy, toppled headlong to the ground.
Then Danny Develin’s body lurched forward, his
right hand glued to his sword-hilt, moving on a level
with his hip. His point took the warrior who was
clinging to his bridle-rein just where the neck and
chest bones meet. The black hands left the reins, the
big eyes rolled skywards, and the half-maddened steed
plunged on.
“Close up,” shouted Develin; and with deft touch
of hand on bridle, and spur on flank, he sent his horse
alongside Telegraph Dick’s blue-roan.


“Old Industry,” who had been smashing away
all the time with rifle butt, heard the stern order
ring out above the noise of battle, and, knowing that
he who called was a veteran in such matters, obeyed
on the instant, and pressed in upon Dick. And then
the three of them —the old white-faced man, the
beardless boy, and the soldier in his prime—rushed
on, bridle to bridle and knee to knee; and before the
splendour of this unbeatable pluck the savage foe
gave back, and before his brain had ceased to whirl,
before he could fairly see, Dick found himself gallop-
ing over the undulating veldt on the safety side of
the terrible donga. Spears whizzed around the ears
of the dauntless three, knobkerries fell in the grass
to right and left of them; but little they cared for
that parting volley, they who had ridden so boldly
and fought so well. They knew that they had acquitted
themselves like men, and that the fame of their doings
would travel far.
As soon as they were at a safe distance from the
foe, “Old Industry” called a halt, and the three
dismounted. The old scout had a couple of nasty
wounds, one on the forepart of his left arm, and the
other in the left thigh. Danny Develin had a gash
in his head, caused by an assegai that had been
hurled at him; whilst Telegraph Dick had a nasty
gash extending from just above his boot to the knee.
This was very painful, but the boy was proud of it;
he felt that if ever he went back to London he would
have some honourable scars to show to his pals. The
thought of his London pals brought little Sim again
into his mind, and he pretty nearly broke down
under the thought, for he had no doubt concerning


the little fellow’s fate now that he had sampled the
quality of the band who had taken him a prisoner.
It did not take the two veterans long to dress either
their own wounds or Dick’s, for they knew their
business; but, when they came to examine their
horses, it was a different matter, and it was then
that Danny Develin used what he called his “campaign
language.”
In their fury the savages had not spared the steeds.
“Old Industry’s” horse was found to be so badly
wounded that it would be useless for many a long
month, if, indeed, it would ever carry a man again.
So the scout took off saddle and bridle, and let the
creature go free, and, though strong language was
not common with him, he swore softly as he noticed
how the poor brute reeled as it hobbled away to
quench its thirst at an adjacent donga.
As for Danny Develin, he swore as he stitched
up a couple of ugly wounds in his horse’s chest, for
Danny loved a horse with a big-hearted love. Dick’s
blue-roan had got one or two very nasty cuts, and
the boy, who was new to such sights, was amazed
to note the courage with which the splendid animals
bore the rough-and-ready surgery of the ex-Hussar.
Danny had produced a packing-needle from a
small case he always carried, and a few lengths of
catgut made from the sinews of deer, and with this
he drew the gaping wounds together, not tightly
enough to cause the skin to burst when the animals
should be called upon to move, yet sufficiently tight
to keep the dust from getting into the gashes. All
the time he was working at the wounds he talked,
whilst “Old Industry,” rifle in hand, stood on sentry.


Dick lay on the grass, and tried to look as if a
big slash in his leg was nothing to him. There are
some who try to make the public believe that only
gentlefolk know how to bear wounds with stoicism,
but the doctrine they preach is not a true one, for
youngsters like our hero can, and do, bear pain and
wounds as well and as bravely as knights or nobles do.
As Danny stitched and bathed the ugly, bleeding
gashes in the animals, he gave Dick many useful
hints.
“Always leave the bottom end of a cut a little
bit open, to carry off the suppuration,” was one of
the lessons he inculcated. “If you don’t, Dick, the
healing won’t be sound, and though the surface may
close up, and the scar look right, it may break out
into a running wound at any time. Slow healing is
sure mending in man or beast.”
Dick stored those things up in his mind for future
use, and determined that from that day onward he
would never travel without a stout needle and a few
lengths of catgut.
When all was ready, Telegraph Dick was hoisted
on to the blue-roan; “Old Industry” took his own
saddle and bridle on his back; Danny Develin slung
his bridle over his arm, and the march homewards
commenced. Dick volunteered to walk turn about
with the veterans, but they only smiled at him.
Sit tight,” said Danny, with a kindly nod, “and
keep your eyes open for any farmers. We may run
into some of them at any moment now, for they will
be rallying to the homestead of Widow Gale as vultures
rally to a battlefield. They are sure to have spare
horses with them, for your veldtsman never goes to


war with only one mount. You use your eyes, boy
Dick; we’ll use our legs, they will serve us this once,
even if we have been knocked about a bit.”
There was nothing else for it but to do as he was
bidden. So Telegraph Dick sat in the saddle, and
kept a sharp look-out for friends and foes. His patience
was rewarded at last, for his eyes fell upon a little knot
of horsemen, and he quickly conveyed the welcome
news to his friends.
“Old Industry” at once fired his rifle into the air
to attract the attention of the wayfarers, who proved
to be five men of one family, named Lindsay, who
were, according to all accounts, as clannish as were
their forbears in the old days of Scottish history. It
was a common saying in the countryside, “Offend
one Lindsay, and you have to reckon with the whole
gang, from greybeard to growing boy.” As soon as
they heard the tale the old scout had to tell, they
provided from their equipment a couple of spare
horses, and expressed themselves as being deter-
mined not to return to their own farms until they
had taught the niggers that it was dangerous to take
up arms against the white folk.
The little party had not gone very far ere they
saw another group of horsemen riding as the crow
flies for Widow Gale’s farm, and, before they got to
their journey’s end, they were five-and-thirty strong.
They found quite a big gathering at the homestead
when they got there, and during the night others
arrived and joined the laager. Some of them who
lived in particularly dangerous spots brought their
wives and children with them, fearing to leave them
to the tender mercies of faithless servants.


In the early dawn Dick was aroused by the bustle
of many moving feet, and at once arose from his
blanket, in which he had slept on the veldt under the
stars with the other men and boys. The kindly
widow had wanted Dick to come into the farm and
sleep in a feather bed, on account of his wound, but
the boy, who was eager to show that, young as he was,
he could play the man, had declined the offer.
“I can sleep as my comrades sleep,” he had said
proudly, and just a trifle roughly. “What is good
enough for them is good enough for me,” and Danny
Develin had patted him on the back with a smile.
Before he had got to sleep he had had the satis-
faction of hearing one of the stern Lindsays say to
a Dutch farmer, who was sharing an adjacent bivouac:
“Yon wee bit laddie frae Lunnon toon is na a bad
fechter, ye ken. He’ll mak a braw mon the noo.”
And Dick felt his cheeks glow with pride, for such
words from one of the grim Scots was praise indeed.
When the boy tried to move his wounded leg at
first, the pain almost turned him sick, and he was
glad to stagger up against a waggon and hang on to
the wheel; for it is one thing to smile at a wound
whilst it is fresh, and another matter altogether to
try to do so after you have slept on it. As he stood
there, dizzy with the pain, the fair-haired Mira came
to him, for the child was ever an early riser, and this
morning especially there was no lying abed for any-
one in the widow’s house; the claims of hospitality
were too great for that.
As soon as she saw how it was with poor Dick,
she gave him her shoulder to lean upon, and in pretty
little authoritative ways made the boy sit down on


the grass. Then she ran to the nearest waggon, where
a Dutch family had outspanned, and told an old
woman of the boy’s plight. The dame was the wife
and mother of men who had fought against many of
the black nations, and she herself had pulled a trigger
more than once in defence of her home and children.
She was quickly upon her feet, and had a potful of
hot water and a sponge ready for use in short order.
And little Mira, her fair hair fluttering round her
cheeks, went with the dame, and carried a big bowl
in her little hands. Dick was clutching the grass with
both hands, whilst his leg throbbed savagely. He
was trying to look as if he were only sitting there
admiring the scenery, and the shrewd old dame at
once fell in with his humour, and treated him as if
he were a man of many battles, she had too much
tact and sense to behave towards him as if he were
a forlorn boy out on the warpath for the first time.
The bandages had grown stiff, and clung to the wound.
“Ach, dose men, dose men; dey vill nevah take
care of dose wounds. Py-an’-py dot leg gets blood
poison, an’ der doctor come mit er saw an’ cut it off,
eh? You takes more care, eh? Why you not call me
pefore, eh? You men do der fightin’, an’ we women
do der nursin’, eh?”
So she chatted as she sponged the stiffened bandages
with warm water, and drew them off very deftly, and
very gently; for no fingers are so gentle as the fingers
of the old when they are nursing the young.
After a while the dame gave the sponge to fair-haired,
blue-eyed Mira, and told her to keep the warm
water constantly trickling on the wound, whilst she
went to her laager for healing ointments and clean


bandages. She was a good while over this task, but
Dick did not seem to think so, for it was good to
be nursed by one so pretty and so sympathetic.
Mira had heard of the way the boy had carried
himself in the fight with the warriors in the donga
from Develin and from “Old Industry,” and, like
every other dainty lassie, she loved the laddie none
the less for his boldness. She had wept with her
sister Olive over the loss of poor little Sim Slack,
and both the maids vowed that if they ever found
his grave they would go to it and lay garlands of
wild flowers upon it, in loving memory of a brave
boy.
The dame was a skilled nurse, and when she had
dressed the wound with ointments made by herself
from an old-world prescription, the boy was astounded
to find that not only could he stand without much
pain, but he could even limp along without very
much suffering.
“Ve soon haf dot leedle schmall poy goot as veil,”
she said, with her motherly smile to “Old Industry.”
‘Yust one leedle veek, den dot hurt vill be more as
goot as close up.”
“Yes, yes,” said the old scout; “you’ll put him on
his legs again in a week, mother.”
“Ain’t you going to fight the niggers for a week,
sir?” demanded Dick.
“Fight ’em? Yes; we are going after them at
sundown to-day; our scouts are out looking after
’em now, boy.”
The boy’s brows came together in an ugly, angry
frown.
“Then what’s the use of talking rot about me


staying here to be nursed for a week? I’m going with
the commando when it goes; I’ve got to avenge my
chum,”
“But you are wounded, boy.”
“So are you, sir,” cried Dick; “so is Danny Develin,
Are you both going to stay away from the fight on
that account?”
“No, boy; but we are both of us seasoned men,
used to wounds and to this climate. You are a fresh
boy, not yet salted to the veldt. A day’s ride or a
day’s march in the blazing sun would throw you into
a fever, and you would die. I am in command here,
and I bid you stay and nurse your hurts.”
“Stay in laager with the women whilst there is
fighting to be done?” growled Dick.
“Obey orders,” was the harsh rejoinder.
Dick said not another word, but, with sullen face,
hobbled off.
“Dot vas er goot leedle mans. You shpoke mit
him too cross,” said the dame.
“He’s a good boy; the best boy I have ever met,”
replied “Old Industry,” “And it is because I like
him so much that I spoke as I did; for a boy is like
a young colt, you must discipline him if you want to
make him perfect.”
Mira, of the golden hair, ran after Dick, and caught
hold of his hand. She knew that his heart was very
sore, so she did not chatter as some girls might have
done. She just walked along beside him, and the
touch of her fingers did him good.
It was wrong of the boy to sulk, but all that day he
just sat in the shade of the koppies, and did not say
a word to anyone, except when Mira came to bathe


and dress his wound. Then he was grateful, for he
knew that she would have helped him if she could.
Danny Develin came over to him, and tried to cheer
him up, but Dick turned upon him so fiercely in his
anger that the ex-Hussar was glad to go and let him
fight it out alone with his temper.
When the evening came, and the commando, a
hundred and ninety strong, rode out on to the veldt
with the old scout at their head, Telegraph Dick
turned over on his face and dug his toes into the ground,
and cried like a girl, in very wrath. Here was the
very thing his soul had yearned for: a battle about
to take place, and he was to be out of it. Others
might go and avenge his English chum, but he was
to stay at home in laager with the old men and the
women and children. All the women and children
stood on the veldt, waving their hands in farewell
to the men of the commando; all except Mira. She
was sitting by the side of the disconsolate boy, whom
she had made her champion. Suddenly she began to
sing, and the sound of her voice was like witchcraft
in the wounded lad’s ears. Never had he heard such
a voice, it was sweet and full of weird melody, and
it soothed him, as the sound of the wind through the
trees will at times soothe a man who is troubled to
the verge of despair. She had drawn her feet in under
her, so that she could clasp her interlocked hands
around her knees; her eyes were fixed upon vacancy,
and she rocked her slight little body to and fro as she
sang, just as a pine tree sways to the rhythm of the
breeze. Telegraph Dick watched the maid as she
sang, and a new feeling came over him. He lost the
spirit of sulkiness that had had possession of him, and


something of the man awoke in his nature. He had
played a man’s part in danger; now he felt his heart
stir as it had never stirred before. He had loved little
Sim, but not with this kind of love. He would have
laughed aloud if anyone had attempted to put his
feelings into words; for, though he did not know it
himself, he was standing just then on the brink of a river,
which every boy and man that breathes has to cross
some day or other —the river of love that has flowed
onward through the world ever since Adam and Eve
met in the Garden of Eden. And for him a new chapter
of life was opened. He reached out his hand, and
touched her gently. She turned her face to him with
a smile.
“Who taught you to sing like that?” the boy asked.
She shook her head.
“No one taught me,” she replied: “I just sing.”
“It’s wonderful,” he replied. “I’ve heard people
sing at all the ‘halls’ in London, but they did not
sing as you do. You seem to make me hear things:
the rush of wind amidst the growing grass, and the
ripple of running water, and a thousand other things
that I can’t explain. You make me feel as if I wanted
to be a better and braver chap, Mira,” he added
shyly.
A glad look came into the pretty face.
“I think you’re a very brave chap now, Dick,”
she whispered; and she slipped her little hand into
his and let it lie there.
And so the two young folks sat, hand in hand;
whilst in the laager at their feet, and in the farm-
house, the women and children were busy, preparing
biltong, which is sun-dried meat, for the men who


were away on commandos. Mira explained to the
London boy that the farmer forces of South Africa
have learned from many wars with the natives that
if they hope to win campaigns against the natives
they must be able to travel swiftly, and to travel
swiftly they must travel lightly, and men cannot do
that and encumber themselves with commissariat
waggons, as do nearly all European armies; there-
fore they live upon biltong to a very great extent when
they take the field in war time, each man carrying
his own supply in his saddle bag; biltong being so
light, and so nutritious, that an ordinary saddle bag
will carry a week’s supply for a full-grown man.
When cut into slices, and steamed in boiling water,
it makes splendid soup; or, on a pinch, when properly
cured, it can be eaten raw, and will keep a fighting
man on his feet far better than any other food. She
was a wise little soul in many things, and she told
Telegraph Dick how she had heard “Old Industry”
say often that the natives themselves had taught this
lesson to the farmers and white scouts, just as the
North American Indians, or wild red men, had taught
the trappers and hunters of America the use of pem-
mican in the days of the terrible border wars; and it
was not until the trappers and hunters practically
made the soldiers of America use pemmican, which
is biltong under another name, that success came to
them.
Telegraph Dick listened to all this with interest,
for he knew that some day he too would be a scout
and a leader of men; and he had the good sense to
know that this little lassie who had been reared amongst
adventurers, could give him much useful information.


So they sat and talked until Widow Gale came out
in search of them, and when this wise woman saw
the expression on the boy’s face she smiled behind
her hand, for she knew that the golden-haired girl
had done more for the boy than all the wisdom of
the old folk could have accomplished.
The tea at the farm that evening was a thing that
Dick would remember as long as he lived. All the
women and girls made much of him, partly on account
of all they had heard about his bravery, and partly
because they knew he was grieving for the loss of his
merry little comrade.
But it was Mira who refilled his cup with steaming
tea; Mira who heaped the cream thickly upon his
bread and butter, and, when the meal was over, it
was Mira who brought him his cushion, so that he
could sit amongst the old men in the candle light
and busy himself cleaning and oiling their trusty
weapons.
The sentries were posted all round the place, and
the greatest possible care was observed lest a large
impi of the enemy should circle round the camp and
rush them during the night.
What fine old men those farmers were! Some
were English, some Scotch, some Irish; others were
Dutch or French, or mixtures of those nations; and
all were sound fighting men, a trifle too old to take
the saddle, or to march far afoot, but terrible old
fellows when they stood in laager with their rifles in
their horny hands to defend their dear ones; and
right well the black warriors knew it. They talked,
as they sat about cleaning their guns, of old-time
wars, of stern justice dealt with unsparing hand to


tribes that had stained their hands with innocent
blood; of wild night rides, with wife or child, or infirm
parent on the saddle in front of them, when they
had to flee far and fast to escape butchering. It was
thus that Telegraph Dick learned, from the lips of
real actors in life tragedies, of years of patient toil
flung away in a day and a night, when homes were
burnt to the ground, crops swept away, water dams
that had taken season after season to construct broken
down and trampled flat; droves of selected cattle
speared in very wantoness; herds of horses hamstrung
and poleaxed in savage wastefulness and lust of blood;
and little children tossed from spear point to spear
point. It made his British blood boil as he listened
to old voices that shook with wrath as the tales were
told anew.
Now and again a veteran would take the boy’s
carbine from his hands and show him some trick
with it —a trick to ward a blow from battle-axe, or
assegai, or knobkerry. Another would show him
how to make a lightning snap-shot at some moving
figure, using his weapon from either shoulder. Yet
again, one of them would drop down upon the floor,
and teach him how to wriggle from one point to another
without making more disturbance than a snake
makes when it moves. They were full of the lore of
the wilderness, and they gave him of their best, and
gave ungrudgingly, for they looked upon him as one
of themselves; though they did not know then, that
in the years that were then unborn, he was to be
the mightiest of them all; that his name was to ring
throughout the land, and make warriors’ impis
quake —this plain-faced boy who had played in the


alleys off Fetter Lane, and bathed in the waters of
old Father Thames.
How carefully he cleaned and oiled his carbine
that night, whilst his wounded leg rested upon a
pillow placed upon a stool by Mira! And the grey-
beards watched him and smiled, and nodded to one
another; for it was a joy to them to see one so young
who treated his weapon as if it were a lady.
Before it came to the time when the blankets were
to be laid down for the night, the old dame who
had dressed Dick’s wound earlier in the day came to
him again and, with Mira’s help, the wound was
sponged once more, and, anointed and cleansed,
sweet bandages put on. Then a very old man, with
a Scotch accent, rose and said, “The hour of repose
is drawing upon us. Our sons are away fighting the
foes of our race; let us go out and stand under
the stars, and speak a little while with Him who
guards and guides us in our pilgrimage through
life.”
Then all who were in the farm-house, and all
those who were in the laager with the waggons drawn
around them to form a rampart against the rush of
a foe, both men and women and children, gathered
in a mass in front of the widow’s home. The men
laid down their broad-brimmed hats, and leant each
upon his rifle. The women stood with bowed heads,
and hands clasped in front of them, whilst the patri-
archal Scot lifted up his voice and preached a short,
simple sermon, full of rugged, homely eloquence.
Then came the dear old hymn, “Abide with me, fast
falls the eventide”; and Dick, holding his carbine
in one hand, and Mira’s soft palm in the other, lifted


up his boyish voice as he had done many a time in
Old England.
He heard the lass’s voice gush out from between her
lips, and the witchery of that wonderful voice made
his blood tingle in every vein.
The sky above was so densely blue that it looked
almost dead black; the stars that shone down upon
the worshippers were like the eyes of God, so pure,
so white, so glorious. Here and there, from amidst
the shadows cast by the waggons, the flaming red eye
of a camp fire glowed. The hymn was hushed; the
patriarch lifted up his long, bony hand, the women
and children fell upon their knees, the men bent their
bodies lower and lower; when out of the bowels of
the night, breaking the stillness like an eagle’s scream,
came the reverberating ring of a rifle.
It was a sentry speaking at his post, speaking in
the bitter tones of savage border war. There was
a deathlike pause, which lasted while the human
heart could beat a dozen times. Then crack-crack-
crack, like stockmen’s whips on the hills in the season
of rounding-up cattle, came the rifle’s warning again.
No need for words to tell the children of the veldt
that the treacherous foe was on them. The women
sprang to their feet and clasped their children to them,
thinking first, as women always do, of the helpless
ones they loved.
“To the laager! to the laager! Tarry for nothing!”
rang out the Scottish voice of the preacher; and
Dick fancied then that the voice had lost its weak-
ness, that the note of age had fled; for the splendour
of the Scottish blood was roused by the deadly peril
of the moment. There was hurrying of feet, but no


noise, no screaming, for old and young knew that
death was riding on the night wind. They could
hear the rhythmic thud of the bare feet of the impi
rushing like wolves to the slaughter. The starlight
kissed the steel points of the assegais, and flitted like
fireflies from point to point. Then, as the women and
some of the men darted under the waggon wheels
to take up cover, Dick saw the old Scotch preacher,
rifle in hand, step out with a dozen others to check
the first rush of the foe, to check it and die. He heard
the rifles rip and tear in the silence, volley followed
volley with such amazing speed that it seemed as if
no mortal men were behind those rifles.


CHAPTER IX
THE GREAT IVORY TREASURE
Have you ever heard the mad rush of wild cattle
in the dark? If not, it will be hard to make you
understand the sound made by the oncoming impi.
The thud, thud of bare feet on the veldt; the click
of steel on hard, dry leather, as shield and assegai
meet; the nameless hum made by the deep breathing
of the flying legion, and the swish of feet through
grass. Telegraph Dick heard it then for the first
time in his life: the charge of a black brigade. He heard
the rifles talking as the veterans outside the kraal
stood boldly up to offer themselves as a sacrifice to
break the rush on the waggons and give the defenders
time to make their position sure. He had often won-
dered how he would act in such a time of peril.
Many a time, when in London amidst the thronging
traffic, he had asked himself if he would play a man’s
part like a man in the moment of danger, and he
had always hoped that he would not disgrace his
breeding.
He did not disgrace the boys of old London in that
moment. He pushed little Mira and dark-eyed Olive
in under a waggon, and, dropping on one knee in
front of them, he pushed his carbine through the
spokes of the wheel, and aiming right into the thickest
part of the impi, he made the lead fly. Widow Gale


had come to his waggon, and she, with swift fingers,
loaded another rifle, and held it ready for Dick, so
that not a moment might be wasted. As soon as one
“klip” was empty, Telegraph Dick dropped the empty
weapon and snatched the loaded one from the widow’s
hands, and sent death, hot-winged and relentless, at
the foe; and all the others in that beleaguered laager
did the same.
Still the enemy pressed on. They rent the air with
shout and yell; their plumes tossed to and fro in the
starlight; their well-oiled bodies shone grimly. And
the defenders set their teeth and did all that bold men
might in such an hour. Right well they knew that
no quarter would be given if once the black foe got
inside the laager in full force; right well they knew
that every woman, old and grey or young and fair,
and every child and prattling babe, would be slaught-
ered when they themselves were assigned to death.
And the knowledge made vikings of them all.
The foe pressed on. Dick felt the barrel of carbine
and rifle grow hot as live coal in his left palm, so
swiftly did he shoot. Then he saw the bold widow
hand a newly-filled weapon to Mira ere she sank
to the ground on her face, an assegai buried in her
breast. Olive knelt by the wounded woman, sobbing
bitterly; but blue-eyed Mira, with white face and
resolute mouth, knelt at Dick’s side and jammed
the cartridges home in the rifle; and he knew how brave
she was, but he had no time for words.
Spears were hurtling through the air, big black
forms were on one knee stabbing at him and the girl
from between the spokes of the wheels. One fellow
thrust his head and shoulders through, and the big


staghound Donald took him by the nape of the neck
and destroyed him.
Dick fired right into the very teeth of the assailants.
They reached out big, black hands to try and tear
the rifle from his grasp; sharp, shrill screams rang
out upon the night air, as women and children were
done to death under adjoining waggons; and Dick,
fighting as men of his race can fight in tight corners,
felt his throat choking with the awful dryness that all
men know who have ever been in a deadly scrimmage
against hopeless odds. The sweat ran down his face
and into his eyes, making them smart and burn.
\ et he kept his brain cool at a time when many veterans
let their tempers run riot.
The Kaffir warriors had not the dauntless courage
and reckless determination of Zulus, or nothing could
have stopped them. As it was, some of the bolder
spirits sprang on to the waggon wheels, and swarmed
over the canvas tops, and leapt down into the laager,
when they were met by men who swung axes—
big, heavy, American axes. Every blow that fell
crushed a man out of existence, and the blows were
many.
At last the impi changed its tactics. Those who
were in the rear picked up armfulls of dry grass, which
they lit, and with these blazing masses in their arms
they came on, leaping and howling like demons.
Their object was to set fire to the waggons, and ring
the bold white men in a circle of flame, which
would soon lick up their life blood and destroy
them.
Dick saw through this manoevure as quickly as
anyone else, but was powerless to prevent it; all he


could do was to send shot after shot into the body
of some black ruffian distant but a few paces from
him.
Little Olive was praying aloud, with her pretty
hands clasped in front of her; Mira was filling the
magazine of a carbine with cartridges; when all at
once, above the wailing of the wind, above the yelling
of the impi, above the crash of rifles, there came the
sound of galloping hoofs. Mira was the first to realise
the full meaning of the sound.
“The commando, Dick; the commando has come
back. Oh, Dick; we are saved!”
An instant later and the impi that had come
out to butcher and to burn, to rob, murder, and
pillage, was fighting for dear life with grim, resolute
men.
Dick, looking through the spokes of his waggon
wheel, caught the gleam of steel; caught, too, the
stern ringing words of command. He saw that these
rescuers were not farm folk: they were all dressed in
khaki, and they kept in regular order; and every man,
standing in his stirrups, struck as his neighbour struck;
and Telegraph Dick, who had seen thousands of
soldiers in his time in England, knew that these were
disciplined troops.
“Soldiers!” he shouted. “Mira, these are regulars;
it’s not the commando come back.”
The little lass looked out on the fight from over
his shoulder for an instant; then she called in his
ear:
“Dick, Dick, it’s the Cape Mounted Rifles; they
must have come down from heaven to save us.”
Dick did not dispute this assertion; he was too


busy watching the battle, for his ammunition had
nearly run out, and he was too wise to use his last
cartridge, when he might want a shot or two for a
sudden emergency. Besides, he was fairly glutted
with killing, and his shoulder and cheek were nearly
numbed with the recoil or “kick” of the weapons
he had used so long and so well in defence of the
widow and the two fair maids.
So he watched, with wide-opened eyes, the move-
ments of that famous body of men, who have no
superiors as fighters the wide world over. Neither
France, Germany, Japan, nor any other country,
could produce anything to equal in splendour of
courage and skill the bold riders the London lad
looked at.
He saw with amazement how perfectly they sat
their great war steeds in the press of the battle; saw
how coolly they parried a stroke or evaded a stabbing
assegai hurled with all the force and speed of a warrior’s
arm.
They were only a detachment, fifty men strong,
yet they drove their war horses into that black mass
of armed men with as much confidence as if they had
been charging through sheep on the veldt.
Every now and again a horse would go down,
hamstrung by a savage kneeling for the purpose.
The instant a horse fell, Dick noticed how the bold
riders to right and left of the fallen trooper would
hurl themselves forward to save the man who had
gone down; no matter how fierce the fray might be
in the spot, no matter if the odds were twenty or
forty to one, the lion-hearted troopers clung together
like knights of old, and risked their lives for one


another with a splendid chivalry that made the boy’s
blood glow with pride, for well he knew that, like
himself, they carried British blood in every vein, and
he was proud of them.
He saw the black host gather together for one last,
frantic effort; he saw them hurl themselves upon
the Cape Mounted Riffes as storm waves are hurled
on our Cornish coast when the wild winds hold high
revel.
So fierce was the onset, so determined the rush,
as the black host charged, shield touching shield,
shoulder braced to shoulder, knee brushing knee,
that had the horsemen been other than they were,
had they been Prussian uhlans or Japanese lancers,
they would never have withstood the shock. But
they were the Cape Mounted Rifles, and they breasted
the human storm right royally, though many a saddle
was emptied then, and many a gallant career cut
short. They had fought in many a bitter fight against
odds, and had ridden in many a border foray, and
danger was to them as the breath of life in their
nostrils.
Chargers were rearing and plunging; some were
screaming as only a stricken horse can scream with a
spear-point in its vitals; others were neighing wildly,
throwing the foam and the spume to right and left.
Men were sitting tight in their saddles, smiling in all
the mad, wild riot of clanging blows. Now one let
go of the bridle rein, and clutched at the air with
fingers closing and unclosing like the claws of an eagle
in anguish, down to his thigh rang his weapon, dropping
from his nerveless right hand; eyes that had flashed
in proud defiance a moment before stared wildly


now that the keen steel had pierced through breast-
bone and back; lips that a second agone were smiling
at danger, or sneering at death in the starlight, were
parted in the last gasp for breath; feet that had been
braced to the stirrups, like pillars of power, slipped
idly from the irons, and flapped on the steaming
flanks that would never feel their pressure again. Then
the lurch from the saddle, the heavy fall over the
good steed’s shoulders, and then the hacking and
stabbing of the untamed foe.
So the battle wore on, till- the steady temper and
discipline of the Cape Mounted Rifles cowed the wild
heat of the tribesmen, and they rolled back like
angry waves that have spent their fury on granite
cliffs.
Then, ere they could form again, ere they could
find that cohesion without which armed men, however
brave, are only a mob, an order ripped along the
quivering line of horsemen, a bugle note rang high
and clear above the tumult and the storm of battle,
the gallant bugle boy standing in his stirrups to put
his lungs and life into the blast. And thus closing
up, so that stirrup clashed on stirrup, knee pressed
knee, bridle jingled against bridle, the British band
rushed on; on, as wind sweeps along a highland glen;
on, as a torrent rushes from its mountain home,
carrying rock and tree, shingle and soil in its wild
career.
They did not cheer or storm, they did not rave
and yell; but in silent might, like lions leaping on
their prey, they went onward to the foe; on, through
the first broken line; on, to the core of the impi;
and onward still until they drove right through.


Then one wild cheer that told of work well and
boldly done. And once again the bugle’s note ripped
through the sentient air. Every horse was wheeled,
and back through the red lane they had made rode
the gallants of the Cape Mounted Rifles; and as they
rode they left long lines of men’s bodies, lying face
upwards to the blue-black skies, as a grim testimony
to their might.
Where did they breed them, these men of the
Cape Mounted Rifles? Go and ask in English cities
and villages; go and cry the question on Irish heath
and on Scottish heather. Ask in wild colonial cattle
camps, in Canadian lumber forests; ask on Welsh
hills, and on African plains, and all will answer,
“We bred those gallants of the Cape Mounted Rifles,
for they are an Empire’s product, the wild, young
blades who ’listed for adventure, for the love of a
dangerous life.”
The fight was over; the red field was won. Women,
grey-haired, white-faced, and wan, tottered from
the laager to thank the men who had ridden, as none
but our race can ride, to save them from a fearful
fate; mothers, with half-naked babies in their arms,
pressed up to shake the soldiers’ hands; young lassies,
looking shyly from under drooping lashes, whispered
tearful thanks in sobbing voices; whilst the long-
limbed, sun-baked soldiers stood by their horses,
holding the bridles, and smoking their short, wooden
pipes, saying in between puffs of smoke that they had
done nothing, really nothing, except what soldiers
should do in defence of fair women.
Telegraph Dick was not amongst the crowd who
thronged to give the soldiers greeting; for, as soon


as the fighting was over, a feeling of deadly faintness
had come over him, his wound had commenced to
throb frantically, a buzzing noise swarmed in his
ears, and a mist dimmed his eyes. Olive was attending
to Widow Gale, who lay moaning upon the ground;
but Mira saw the boyish head droop forward, and
it was her soft arm that caught him as he slid
to earth. Laying the boy’s head tenderly upon the
flap of a saddle, she sped away to find water,
and, as soon as she obtained it, she made her way
back to her hero. And there were many others
busy upon similar work under the laager waggons,
for the black men had not been idle during the con-
flict. Many a man, and woman too, lay cold and
still in death, and many more were moaning in
agony.
At last the captain of the Gape Mounted Rifles,
having breathed his men, set to work to attend to
the wounded. Nearly all of his own men who had
been dismounted in the fray were past all help;
nothing was left but to give them soldiers’ graves
on the battlefield where they had fallen so nobly.
As for those who had been hurt, but had kept the
saddle, their comrades, with rough, but kindly, skill,
attended to them.
The captain was a man just in the glory of life:
a fair-faced warrior, tall and strong —a Norfolk man,
who had left “Merrie England” in his boyhood to
seek lame and fortune at the rifle’s point. He went
from waggon to waggon, and had a kindly word
for all. But when he came to the spot where Telegraph
Dick lay, and noticed the number of dead warriors
lying close to the waggon wheels, he smiled grimly.


“How many men held this waggon when the impi
rushed to close quarters?” he asked. And when
they told him that a widow woman and two little
girls and a bit of a boy had held the spot, he would
not believe them.
Down on his knees he went, and crawled in to
see for himself; and old Donald, the staghound,
knowing him for a stranger, and taking him for
an enemy, promptly sprang upon him, and bowled
him over, and gave him such a shaking before he
could be pulled off as the soldier would not forget in a
lifetime.
A hasty-tempered trooper was for shooting the
splendid hound, but the captain cried out:
“Let up, man; let up! The dog is on guard, and
only did its duty, though he has jolly near torn my
shoulder off.”
Skilful hands soon attended to the needs of Widow
Gale, and Telegraph Dick was carried out into the
moonlight, where the faintness soon passed away
from him.
Then the soldiers of the Cape Mounted Rifles,
the splendid wild riders and fighters of Africa, who
are the very pick of our breed, clustered round the
London boy, and gazed at him admiringly, whilst
the golden-haired Mira told of his deeds.
“We loaded the rifles for him,” she cried, exultantly,
“and he shot the enemy as they came; and every
time he touched the trigger, we saw a man go down.
He saved us; it was awful, it was horrible, but boy Dick
never got flurried.”
The captain of the Cape Mounted Rifles turned when
the tale was told, and looked at the grim evidence


that lay close by to confirm the girl’s words; then
he turned to his men with a grim laugh playing under
his reddish moustache, and said:
“He’s a lion’s whelp, boys; a lion’s whelp —a son
of grey old London town. I’d like to see the land
that could match ’em in a time like this,” He bent
down, and shook the boy by the hand. “Good luck,
comrade,” was all he said; then, turning upon his
heel, moved away to give orders for the burying of
the dead.
Quickly the horses were off-saddled, and picketed.
Sentries were posted; then the long, shallow graves
were dug. The splendid dead of the Gape Mounted
Rifles were laid upon their backs in all their war
gear; their hands were solemnly folded across their
broad chests; the glorious moon shone down in all
her splendour upon the still, stern faces of the slain.
The solemn service for the dead was chanted in
rhythmic tones above the fallen; whilst the comrades
who had laughed and jested, ridden and fought,
bivouacked and sung with them many a time stood
in line about the grave, leaning upon their rifles.
The chaplain uttered the awe-inspiring words, “Ashes
to ashes, dust to dust,” the veldt soil was slowly and
solemnly filled in upon the bodies of the brave, whose
blood was yet moist upon the grass of Africa; then
an order swept along the sorrowing line, full-throated,
deep, and thrilling; rifles went up, and the last salute
was fired—a soldier’s farewell to soldiers. Then the
little band fell away, and marched to their bivouacs;
and stillness fell once more upon the farm of Widow
Gale.


The next day the troop moved off to join the
commando in suppressing the revolt; but Telegraph
Dick knew nothing of it, for he was tossing in the grip
of a fever. And when he came to himself again, the
fighting was all over and done with; the commando
and the Gape Mounted Rifles were scouring the
country, disarming all the men in the different kraals.
They had dashed boldly into the jungle, and had
routed out the main force of the enemy, and they had
obtained evidence that it had been the intention of
the blacks to burn every farm, and butcher every
white person, male or female, old or young, that
might fall into their power. They had meant to make
a clean sweep of the whites in their district, and so
set the whole of Africa in a blaze, to the utter undoing
of all Europeans in the vast sub-continent; for that
has been the black man’s dream from time to time ever
since the white man fronted the black and wrested
with him for mastery and possession.
By the time the work of disarmament was com-
plete, Telegraph Dick was able to get about again,
though he was very feeble, and he joined in the
welcome that was accorded to the commando and
to the Cape Mounted Rifles. He went straight
to Danny Develin, and asked in a faltering voice if
anything had been heard of Sim Slack, or if his
body had been found and had been given decent
burial.
“We haven’t found your little chum, but we have
heard something,” said the ex-Hussar, “There’s a
little old Hottentot, badly wounded, who is a prisoner,
and he told Van Schloss that Sim is alive. I don’t
know if the old bag of parchment is lying; I wouldn’t


give much for his word myself, but he swears boy Sim
was spared by order of the Ethiopian scamp who
posed as a missionary; and it may be so. But,” he
added, putting his strong hand on the lad’s thin
shoulder, “I wouldn’t build on it if I were you, Dick.
The old Hottentot bears an awful character; the
farmers have nicknamed him the ‘father of lies,’
because they say that no man has ever known him to
tell the truth to a white man when a lie would
serve. And he has been known in these parts
longer than anyone can remember, for he is very
old.”
“Where is that man now?” demanded Dick.
“I’ll see him, and I’ll try and get the truth out of
him.”
So Danny Develin led the way to the spot where
the prisoners were in laager. There he found Van
Schloss smoking his eternal calabash pipe, for, night
or day, he never left the prisoners.
The big Dutch farmer held out his great saddle-
flap of a hand with a smile of welcome.
“Veil, leedle poy Deck,” he cried; “dot vas great
goot news der droopers tell me, how you vas shtand
up like er man in der fight.”
Dick smiled at the kindly greeting, and at the
words of praise.
“Tell me, Van Schloss,” he answered, in his blunt,
direct manner, “where is the Hottentot prisoner
who says my chum Sim is alive?”
A black frown swept over the kindly face of the
farmer.
“Yust in dere,” he said, nodding his head to a
rude tent; “yust in dere, leedle Deck. But you


doan must believe dot Hottentot; he haf more ways
to tell er lie dan er son of Satan. I haf know dot
Hottentot, leedle Deck; he was mit dose men dot
take leedle poy Shim a brisoner. I watch him
all night, an’ all days too, an’ if he dry to run
away I shtop him mit dis.” He patted his rifle as he
spoke.
“Old Industry” and the captain of the Cape
Mounted Rifles came up, and joined in the talk.
“I’m afraid, comrade,” said the captain, “that
your little pal has gone under. You’re a brave little
beggar, I know; so cheer up. We are going to try
that Hottentot scoundrel for a long list of crimes,
as soon as he is well enough to stand on his legs, and
if he is proven guilty of one crime out of every fifty
that is laid at his door, he will swing as high as cord
will carry him.”
“I’d like to see him,” reiterated Dick, stubbornly.
So they took the boy to see the prisoner who was
known as “the father of lies.” He was an old man;
so old that he ought to have been decrepit and bed-
ridden, only that his wondrous vitality gave him
the agility that belongs to youth. He was yellow as a
sovereign, with little snow-white curls all over his
enormous head —it was the head of a Bismarck. His
eyes were almost as small as peas, but they gleamed
amidst the yellow skin like diamonds in a dust heap.
When he saw Van Schloss he spat upon the ground,
as a sign of undying hate, and when “Old Industry”
stood over him he foamed at the mouth like a mad
dog.
Danny Develin, who had entered with the others,
laughed at the Hottentot’s rage, and then went on


humming a verse that he seemed to be singing eternally,
either when fighting or resting:
“Oh, the wild career of that bold buccaneer
Was settled by a pirate gay,
Who flayed his hide at the turn of the tide
On the shores of Honolulu bay.”
Dick recoiled when first he saw the prisoner, for
the fellow had not the face of a man; it was the face
of a devil. The Hottentot saw the repugnance in the
boy’s face, and a ghastly smile crept over his counten-
ance. He beckoned with his crooked forefinger,
and Dick, suppressing his dislike, went to his side.
Danny Develin left off humming his endless ditty,
and stepped swiftly to the side of the “father of
lies.”
“Look here, old man,” he said, in his sharp, incisive
voice; “I am a soldier, not a farmer,”
“I know, koos (chief),” answered the Hottentot;
“I know all about you. I have no hate for you,
nor for the boy here, but those men,”—indicating
“Old Industry” and Van Schloss—“l hate them,
and I would give my life to harm them.”
“Well now, listen,” continued Danny Develin.
“I have heard much that is bad, nothing that is good
concerning you, and if you do this boy any injury
I will see that you die a death that will make all
the black men in Africa hide their heads in fear—
a death that I learnt in the hills of Afghanistan from
a race who know how to torture.”
“How can I harm the boy? I am old and wounded.”
“You may have a bit of poisoned bone hidden
about you somewhere, or you may have poison in


that long, crooked nail on your little finger. I have
known of such things. If it be so, save your devilment
for someone else; don’t use it on this boy. That is
all I have to say.”
“You are a man, koos; I will not harm the boy.
I have a message for him.”
“A message,” cried Dick. “Who is it from?”
“From your friend who is a prisoner; the one you
call Sim.”
“Give it me, then, that I may know you are not
lying.”
The Hottentot smiled his cunning smile.
“A bargain, young koos,” he said slowly; “we
must make a bargain first.”
“Do not call me young koos ; I am not a chief,
nor the son of a chief.”
“I know what you do not know,” cried the old
man, lifting himself upon one elbow; ‘‘that is why
I call you young koos. You will five to be a chief
a great chief. Already men who are old in war speak
of you behind your back with respect, and you are
not yet tall enough to look down your own rifle.
Oh, I know, for I am the last of the Hottentot
witch doctors, and the hidden things are known to
me.”
“You have the head of an old man, and the tongue
of a child,” retorted Dick. “What is the bargain
you want?”
“A life for a life, koos. You must save my life if
you would save the life of the fat one you love, the
one who came from over the sea, from the greatest
kraal in all the world, with you.”
“How am I to tell you are not a liar?”


“By this word which the fat one sent to you by
me as a proof. ‘Tell Dick/ he said, ‘that I’m all
right, and we will eat strawberries in Leather Lane
together, in spite of all.’”
At that saying a great shout of laughter broke
from Telegraph Dick, for he knew the Hottentot had
not lied; for in the old days he and Sim had made a
practice every year of going to Leather Lane, that
runs off the Holborn road, to buy strawberries from
the coster’s barrows, and many a good old feast they
had had there, for strawberries were their favourite
fruit.
“What’s up, Dicky? ” asked Danny Develin, wheeling
round.
“Sim’s alive, Danny.”
The soldier shook his head.
“So that old liar says,” he muttered.
“He’s proved it,” said Dick; “proved it up to
the hilt. Now, old man, what else?”
“Young koos, I want a promise. Will you save
my life, for, if I die, the fat one dies too?”
“How can I?” said Dick. “You are to be tried
by a court-martial.”
“Promise to save me, and I will tell you some-
thing of your friend. His life is in the hollow of your
hand.”
Telegraph Dick thought for a moment of the chum
he loved, and his mind was quickly made up. He
would save Sim from butchery, no matter what the
cost might be.
“I’ll save your life, or give my own for it, if you
save my chum,” he said.
Good, koos; I am satisfied. I know a chief when


I see one —I, who have seen so many live and die.
Now listen, for my words are true, though the white
men call me the ‘father of lies.’ Long ago I was a
chief, but my people have nearly all been slain by
black foes and by white. We were a little race, small
of body, but we had sense in our heads, which many
big men have not. Many years ago, before your
father or mother were born, young koos, a thing
happened. We had a treasure in our tribe a treasure
that we had collected for many, many years. It was
of ivory, a great pile; so great that a hundred waggons
would not carry the half of it. We meant to buy
from a king a country full of big mountains, that lies
close to the yellow river that is never dry. We meant
to make it so secure that no enemy could come and
turn us out, and there we meant to build up our nation
again, until it became a great people. But we never
had the chance to do it, for we were harried on the
one hand by the big black men, and on the other
by the whites. So we buried that treasure in the cleft
of a mountain, and we covered it deep with soil, and
we planted trees on the spot; and it is there to this
day. All who know of the spot are dead, excepting
me only. I should have been killed many times, but
they who held me prisoner tried to get the secret of
the mighty ivory treasure from me, and spared my
life hoping that I would tell. The Kaffir dogs, with
whom I have been of late, want me to tell them. They
will not slay your friend, the fat one, whilst I live,
for I have forbidden it. The Ethiopian, the man with
the black man’s skin and the white man’s learning,
he wants my secret, and he will protect the fat one
until he learns that I am amongst the dead. So


save my life, young koos, and I will save the fat one’s;
and perhaps, ere I die, I may whisper in your ear a
secret that has caused enough blood to run to swim one
of your great ships that come for trade into Port
Elizabeth.”


CHAPTER X
DICK GETS INTO DISGRACE
As soon as Dick had got through with his conver-
sation with the “Father of Lies,” he went and told
all he had heard to Danny Develin.
“You seem to be pretty certain the ugly little
beggar has told you the truth,” was Danny’s comment.
“I am certain Sim is alive, if that is what you
mean,” retorted Dick. “When Sim and I made our
plans we fixed on a message to be sent if ever one was
in danger or difficulty. We made an arrangement
to say, ‘We’ll eat strawberries again in Leather Lane,’
so that the one who received the message would be
sure it was genuine.”
“Pretty good plan that, Dick, and very simple;
a lot easier than a code. Now what do you intend
to do? The Hottentot has not one chance in a million
of being acquitted when he is court-martialled, and
he is certain to be hanged, as an example to the rest.
You see, the beggar has given a lot of trouble for many
years, and the farmers won’t hear of his life being
spared. The beggar deserves death; he had had a
hand in most of the rebellions that have taken place
in these parts, and his cunning has always saved him
so far. But I wouldn’t give a box of bees for his
chance this time; he’ll hang, Dick.”


“He sha’n’t,” growled the boy, stubbornly. “If
he hangs, my chum is sure to be killed.”
“Yes; but very few of the farmers hereabout know
little Sim, and they hate this demon, because it is
said that he planned many of the risings that led to
the murder of their dear ones.”
“Killing him won’t bring their loved ones back to
life, will it?” retorted Dick.
“No; it won’t. But vengeance is a sweet morsel to
a man, my boy.”
“I’ll save him for Sim’s sake, and they must wait
until they catch him again for their vengeance. I’ll
go and talk to them; they must listen to me.”
Danny put a restraining hand upon the boy’s
shoulder.
“I’m an old soldier,” he said, “and I want to
tell you something, because you are a chum, and Sim
is a chum of mine. If you want to save this old
bounder’s life, don’t say a word about it to the farmers
or to the men of the Cape Mounted Rifles; if you do,
you can say good-bye at once to all chance of carrying
out your plans. They won’t spare this chap to please
you or anyone else, and if they suspect you of attempt-
ing a rescue, they will watch the Hottentot so closely
that he’ll not get away. They are sharp chaps in
their own way, these farmers, and the men of the Cape
Mounted Rifles are like a lot of blessed weasels.”
“What must I do, Danny, to save my chum?”
“Wait until the prisoner is well enough to get
about a bit, and then trust to luck. Take the first
chance that offers, and get the beggar away, if you
can.”
“Will you help me, Danny?”


“No, Dick; I can’t.”
“For Sim’s sake, Danny?”
“I’d go into the most dangerous part of that jungle,
and risk my life, boy, against twenty men, to help our
little chum, but I can’t do this thing; I’m a soldier.”
“Yes; you’re a soldier, and you forget how little
Sim used to sit up all night with you when you were
fighting the devil of drink. You forget how he would
sit by the side of your bunk, and sing, and talk hour
after hour, so that you might have a chance to get
away from the craving that was tormenting you.
Sim never went back on you when you went on the
spree in Durban and everyone was laughing at you
and calling you a ne’er-do-well soldier. He stuck
to you; followed you about like a dog, and nursed
you when you were getting over it.”
“He’s a good little man, and he stuck to me, when
even the Kaffirs laughed at me on account of my
cursed thirst. Look here, boy Dick, 111 help you
for Sim’s sake, but I’ll never hold my head up again
as a soldier.”
He marched off, and it seemed to the boy that he
did not carry himself with the old swing and pride
that used to mark his walk. Dick was sorry for Danny
Develin, but he hardened his heart, thinking always
of the little fat lad he loved so dearly.
So the time sped by, until the day fixed for the
court-martial had almost arrived; and Dick looked
so haggard and worn that Danny Develin s heart
fairly ached for him.
“Have you hit upon any kind of a plan yet?”
he whispered, as he sat by the youngster’s side at
noon of the day before the trial.


Telegraph Dick shook his head dismally
“Can’t think of one at all that will act.”
Then, before the words were fairly out of his mouth,
an inspiration came to him; his eyes opened wide,
and he looked straight into the ex-Hussar’s face.
“What is it, Dick?” said Danny Develin. “Has
a plan come to you?”
“Yes. You remember telling me how the Afghan
horse thief rescued his chief from the British lines
when you were serving on the Afghan frontier?”
“Yes, Dick; I remember. And I remember that
we tried the horse thief for it, and shot him. That
plan won’t do, boy.”
“It will have to do, Danny; there is no other
way.”
“The farmers will shoot you, Dick, when they
find out.”
Telegraph Dick was white as death to the very lips.
“I know,” he said; “but Sim would give his life
for me any day. I’ll give mine for him.”
“You shan’t do it, Dick; I won’t let you. I’ll tell
the others, and prevent you.”
Dick rose, and looked long and steadily at the
ex-Hussar,
“Danny Develin,” said he, “I have told you my
plans in confidence, as comrade to comrade; now go
and betray me if you like, and, if you do, I’ll saddle
my horse, and go and look for Sim by myself. I
know I’ll be killed, and Sim will be killed, and you
will be a traitor —the worst kind of traitor, for you will
have betrayed a boy who trusted you.”
“Well, then, let me do the job. Let me set the
infernal nigger free.”


“You couldn’t, Danny; you’re too big. You just
wait about for the Hottentot, and get him out of the
camp somehow when I set him free, and and, Danny,
tell Sim when you see him that I was true to my
chum.”
With a growl like that of a mastiff in pain, the soldier
sprang up, and wrung Dick’s hand, and then strode
off like a man half demented.
That night Telegraph Dick went to the officer of
the guard, and asked for a permit to see the prisoners,
which was freely granted him. When he arrived at
the tent where the prisoners lay it was nearly dark,
and a couple of young farmers, who were on guard,
were chatting together concerning a love affair in
which they were both interested. Telegraph Dick
had small doubt that he would be able to fool them
and he was congratulating himself upon his good luck
when his eyes fell upon the figure of Van Schloss.
Dick gave a start on observing this sinister figure,
for he knew that there was not a sharper pair of eyes
in all Africa than Van Schloss possessed. But the
boy’s brain was working rapidly at this crisis. Walking
boldly up to the farmer, he said:
“Danny Develin wants to see you at once, sir.
“Why he doan coom an’ see me, den?” was the
placid answer.
“He wants you to look at your bay horse; there
is something wrong with it. I’m going to look for
the ‘vet.’ of the Cape Mounted Rifles.”
“Somedings wrong mit mine horse? Mit der
insides of him, or mit der outsides of him, Dick?”
“Inside,” replied Dick, shortly, as he moved away
in the darkness.


Van Schloss slung his rifle over his arm, and
went off growling, for the horse was a favourite of
his.
A moment later Dick was at the tent, and had
shown his pass to the guard. Inside he found the
prisoner, with his hands bound, fixed to a stake
driven strongly in the ground. He was huddled up
in his blankets.
“I have come to save your life, so that you can
save my chum,” whispered Dick.
“Good, young koos; I knew you wouldn’t fail.”
Dick cut the raw hide thongs with a swift stroke
of his hunting knife, and began to throw off his
clothes.
“Put those on,” he said, sternly. “You must
walk past the sentries, and a friend of mine will
meet you, and help you away into the koppies, where
you must look out for yourself.”
“It is a good plan, young koos, and I will bring
back the friend you love.”
“Get into those clothes, for farmer Van Schloss
will soon be back, and he does not love you,”
The “Father of Lies” had been dressing himself
with speed before he heard the farmer’s name, but
now he fairly hurled himself into his clothing.
“I know that man,” he said; “he has the cunning
of a snake. I do not want to meet him, koos.”
“If you do, you will die.”
“It may be so, young koos, or it may be that he
will die. I am old, but I am not feeble, and I know
much. Now, koos, I go. Farewell! You shall have
the friend of your heart, and you shall have, some
day, the secret of the ivory treasure.”


“Go!” said Dick, bitterly. “I would not have
saved your life for all the ivory in Africa, only for
love of my friend. Tell him that Telegraph Dick was
true through thick and thin.”
“He shall be told, koos. Now I go.”
Walking rather clumsily in his European clothing,
the Hottentot stepped boldly out of the tent; whilst
Dick huddled himself up in the ill-smelling blankets,
covering his head so that when the guards looked in
they might not see that it was a white lad and not a
Hottentot they had as prisoner.
The “Father of Lies” had not moved many
yards from the tent ere a hand fell upon his arm,
and the voice of Danny Develin whispered in his
“Come this way,” he said, “and do not open your
mouth.”
Walking with long, swift strides, the soldier took
the Hottentot straight to the stable of Widow Gale.
“Go in,” he commanded curtly.
The “Father of Lies” drew back with a snarl of
rage, but Danny Develin put a revolver point against
the side of his woolly head.
“Try to escape, and I shoot,” was all he said;
and the Hottentot obeyed, but his eyes glowed in his
head like the eyes of a cat.
In one of the inner stalls there was a trap-door,
covering a cellar, and by this door stood little Mira.
“Open the door, lassie,” said Danny; and the girl
obeyed.
A rough ladder was fastened to the side of the
cellar, and Danny motioned the Hottentot to go
down. He did so, jabbering wildly in an under-


tone; and Danny knew that he was being well cursed
in a language he did not understand.
“Now,” said the soldier, “put your hands behind
your back, and face away from me. If you try any
tricks I’ll kill you as I’d kill a snake.”
“Snakes can kill when they get a chance,” was
the bitter answer.
“I know that as well as you do. So keep your
mouth shut, and do as you are told,” snapped
Develin.
The fellow knew by the tone of the voice that he
must not attempt any nonsense. So,_ clasping his
wrinkled hands behind his back, he permitted himself
to be securely fastened; and he soon knew that the
soldier was no novice in the art of tying folk up.
When Develin had his prisoner secured, he lit his
pipe, and looked at him.
The Hottentot said:
“The young koos set me free; why do you, who
are his friend, make me a prisoner again?”
“I thought you’d want to know that,” was the dry
response. “Well, I’ll tell you. Firstly, because to-
morrow morning, when the farmers find out that you
have got away from them, they may sentence the
young koos to death for helping you. In that case,
rather than see the boy killed, I will hand you back
to the farmers, and say that you had never been far.
I’ll tell them that this was only a trick to make you
tell where the boy Sim is kept a prisoner. Do you
understand, eh?”
The “Father of Lies” nodded his head.
“That is a good plan,” he said. “But they will
not kill the young koos, do not fear.”


“I don’t see how the deuce you can tell that,” said
Develin.
“I know many things that you, with your white
skin, could never learn.”
“Very likely you do. I’ve met your sort in many
parts of the world,” was the soldier s reply. You ve
got a dark skin, and you may have dark knowledge.
I don’t know, and I don’t care. But I do know this:
I am not going to let a boy who is dear to me be
done to death for the likes of an old bag of bones
like you.”
“Will you let me go free if the young koos is not
harmed?” asked the “Father of Lies.
“Oh, dear, no,” was the nonchalant retort. “Look
here: the young koos is very brave, but he is too
young and inexperienced to know how to make a
good bargain with an old snake like you, said E)anny.
5 “You want the secret of the ivory treasure in return
for my life, do you?” sneered the prisoner.
“Ivory ducks’ house,” was the contemptuous retort.
“Do you take me for a child that I should believe
every fable that a nigger likes to hatch? I don’t think
you have enough ivory to make a nose ring for a bull
calf.”
“What, then, is the bargain you wish to make?”
“I want the boy Sim in exchange for you.”
“But if the Kaffirs will not give him up until I
am free?”
“You will never be free until they do, unless some
of the farmers find you here, and set you free with
a bullet. All that you have to do is to remain quiet
until it is known what is to happen to the boy; after
that, you must send messages to the Kaffirs, and


get them to send Sim in to me. I will release you
the hour I get the boy, but not a moment sooner.”
With that the Hottentot had to be content.
The next day there was terrible trouble in the
camp, for shortly after the dawn the guards discovered
the loss of their prisoner, and the substitution of
Telegraph Dick. Loud cries of “Treachery! treachery!
Shoot the young traitor!” rang through the camp, for
the farmers were wildly excited over the loss of a
prisoner so deeply hated and feared as the “Father of
Lies.”
It was a new experience for Telegraph Dick to find
himself cursed, hustled, and stormed at by white men,
and one that he would never forget whilst life was in
him. The men were nearly mad with rage; they
brandished their rifles, and stormed and swore like
buccaneers. But the London lad held his head up,
and looked steadily in front of him, for he knew
that the crime he had committed had been done out
of love for a chum, and not for any selfish reason.
Perhaps, if Dick had had no staunch comrades in
that camp, the worst might have happened to him
there and then, for there was one young farmer who
rightly or wrongly blamed the “Father of Lies” for
the murder of his mother and sister the year before.
This young man was so incensed that, after taunting
Telegraph Dick, and calling him all the vile names
he could lay his tongue to, he spat in the boy’s face,
and then, half-mad with baulked vengeance, clubbed
his rifle and made a rush at the boy. But as he came
forward, a well-knit figure dashed into the thick of
the crowd, and the next instant the farmer was reeling
backwards from a blow that came like a bullet, so


straight and unerring was it as it flew from the shoulder.
It was Danny Develin to the rescue, and his fighting
blood was on the boil. Anyone could tell that by the
way his eyes were blazing.
“Stand back, you curs,” he shouted; “stand back,
and let the boy have a fair trial. You would worry
him to his death now, like jackals, but when the
nigger impi came to butcher your old men and your
women and children, this boy did more than any
man to save them. He is weak now from the wounds
he won defending those you love, and you sha’n’t
trample him into the dirt like a dog. No; by thunder,
you sha’n’t whilst a soldier of England can fight for
him!”
This rude, bitter eloquence of Danny Develin, and
his utterly reckless and defiant bearing, had its effect
on the glowering veldtsmen, for they had all seen the
wild Hussar ride in the thick of the fighting a little
time previously, and they knew that he feared nothing
—neither death, nor danger, nor odds, nor any
mortal thing; and the splendid grandeur of his courage
was his safeguard, for it was a passport to their hearts.
So they held back for a few precious moments,
whilst Dick and his staunch champion stood side by
side; but the truce was not for long. The young
farmer, whose face Develin’s fist had so badly dis-
figured, began to rave like a wild Dervish. He called
to his friends to remember their murdered dead;
called to them to revenge their losses.
“He sold himself,” he screamed; “sold himself to
the ‘Father of Lies’ for the ivory treasure secret!”
Steadily Dick’s voice rang out:
“You lie; I did not!”


But the evil seed was sown; the idea that Dick
had loosed the Hottentot in order to gain the ivory
caught on, and ran through the minds of the excited
men like fire through dry cotton.
“Down with the young imp! Hang him! Shoot
him!” The hoarse voices made the air heavy with
hate.
At that instant there came the steady tramp of feet,
and a body of the Cape Mounted Rifles swung into
view, with the tall captain at their head.
“Halt!”
The voice cut the air as a scythe cuts corn.
“Present! ”
The Cape Mounted Rifles sent their carbines to
their shoulders like one man, and every barrel pointed
full at the clustering mob that surrounded Telegraph
Dick and Danny Develin.
“Got you, you brutes!” cried Danny. “You
would have butchered a boy; now turn round, and
try your hands at fighting them” He waved his hand
towards the beautifully disciplined line of soldiers,
a sparkle of national pride in his eyes.
The captain of the Cape Mounted Rifles came
swinging forward, his spurred heels ringing as his
feet at times touched stony soil.
“If you men mean murder, I tell you plainly that
I won’t have it. If you touch that boy, I give orders
to fire into the thick of you. In two minutes the rest
of my men will be here with the guns.”
The captain wasn’t an orator; he jerked his sentences
out as a man jerks empty cartridge cases out of a
magazine; but he meant every word he uttered and
he looked as if he meant it. His men watched his


every movement, and their fingers never left their
triggers.
“Develin,” continued the captain.
“Yes, sir.”
“Bring that boy to my lines.”
“Yes, sir. Come, Dick.”
The pair moved straight forward; the farmers fell
back, glaring fiercely.
“Fall in,” said the captain, as Dick and Danny
reached his men. “I don’t know what the deuce all
this is about, but I saw your work, boy, in the laager
when the impi charged, and, whatever else you are.
I’ll swear you’re no coward, or traitor either. March! ”
So they marched to a spot where the guns were,
and there poor boy Dick had to stand his trial.
Simply and plainly the boy told his story, keeping
Danny Develin’s name out of it all the time.
“I did aid the prisoner to escape, sir; it was the
only way to save my chum’s life. If the Hottentot
had died by our hands to-day—and he would have
died, had he been here—then my little chum would
have been tortured to death.”
A look of blank perplexity settled upon the captain’s
face. The soldiers who acted as guards fidgeted
nervously with their weapons, for they knew the boy
was in a cleft stick; for he was, on his own confession,
guilty of treachery, and treachery under martial law
spells death. But he looked such a gallant little
criminal, with his wounds not yet half healed, as he
turned appealing glances first one way, then the
other. There came a solemn hush, a stillness of such
intensity that the whirr of a vagrant insect seemed to
hurt the strained ears. Then a voice almost screamed:


“Shoot the young dog; shoot him! It is the
law.”
The soldiers of the Cape Mounted Rifles looked
the contempt they dared not utter in the presence of
an officer at the farmer Danny Develin had struck
in the mouth.
“The law for the guilty is death,” said the captain,
sternly. But, he added, and his voice took on a
more pitiful note, “the prisoner is so young, and he
has proved himself so brave.”
“The law! the law!” screamed the same voice.
“Td like to give him law; the law of the bayonet,”
muttered one soldier to another. “He’s just thirsty
for the little man’s blood.”
He didn t spill much of his own in the fighting,”
was his comrade’s reply. “I saw the skunk when the
muss was on.”
Danny Develin said nothing, but he edged nearer
to the prisoner, and fixed his eyes on the face of the
fellow who was so clamorous for death; and there was
that in his look which might have chilled the blood
of a more resolute man than the farmer.
It was Van Schloss who caused the next diversion.
The kindly Dutchman had been watching the trial
with eyes and ears. Now he rose, and addressed the
court on behalf of “dot leedle schmall poy Deck.”
He spoke directly to the court, but his words were
meant for the ears of the angry farmer. He told,
with pathetic dignity, of his own bitter losses at the
hands of the natives; told how he had buried his own
wife and children whom the blacks had cruelly done
to death. Then he went on to tell how he had met the
two London boys, who had come out in search of


adventure, and how they had worked themselves into
his heart. He was so simple, so pathetic as he spoke
of his barren home, his childless hearth, and of his
love for the two little strangers who had come to
him from the unknown, that many eyes were damp
with tears before he concluded his address.
Then “ Old Industry ” rose up in his place, and spoke.
He told of Dick’s courage.
“He is young,” said the veteran, but he has the
heart of a lion. I have seen many men, and many
wars, but I do not know of many who in point of
bravery could show this boy how to bear himself
in the hour of danger. But he is young; his head is hot.
He has committed a great crime: he has set free one
who should have died by our hands this day. But,’
he added, “he did it for love of one who was precious
to him.” Then, holding his rifle aloft, he slapped the
stock with his open palm, and cried; “If this boy’s
life is spared, I will lay aside my peaceful work, and
I will never be sundered from this rifle until justice
has been done on the body of the Hottentot whom
we know as the ‘Father of Lies.’ Summer and winter,
hot or cold, night or day, I will never cease until I
have hunted him down for his crimes. You know me;
my words are not blown away by my breath as wind
blows corn husks in the season of shelling. I have
fought for you, suffered for you, bled for you, watched
for you whilst you and yours slept in comfort. I
have never asked any fee or reward at your hands.
Now” —he paused, with rifle held high above his head
—“give me this boy’s life.”
The captain of the Cape Mounted Rifles was swift
to see that the moment most propitious for Dick


had arrived. The speech of Van Schloss had melted
all hearts; the stern, grim rhetoric of “Old Industry”
had gripped them all. He spoke:
“Prisoner, I think, owing to your youth, and to
your want of knowledge of the habits and customs
of this country, that justice will be met by the sentence
I am about to pass upon you. Your life is forfeit;
but the court will spare you in the hope that the
lesson of this day may teach you that every individual
must curb his own private feelings for the good of
the many. You have done a great wrong, in order
that good may come of it. Had you been a man,
you should have died for your sins. The sentence of
the court is that you shall be stripped of your arms
and drummed out of the laager.”
As the sentence, so full of shame and degrada-
tion, fell upon Dick’s ears, his lips twitched, the hot
tears rushed to his eyes; he reached out his arms
appealingly towards the soldiers of the guard, as
if asking them mutely for a friendly bullet. Then
a species of madness came upon him, and he snatched
wildly at Danny Develin’s revolver. But at that a
taunting, mocking laugh rang out from the lips of the
young farmer who had shouted for his death, and
the laugh made a man of Telegraph Dick; it pulled
him together as nothing else could have done. He
held his head up, and Danny whispered in his ear:
“You have saved Sim’s life, Dick; some day we’ll
make this all up.”
It was a bitter hour that followed. The boy was
publicly degraded before the Cape Mounted Rifles
and the crowd of farmers, and then drummed out
of the lines, and his heart in that horrible moment


nearly broke. He would rather have had the firing
party, and the open grave on the lone veldt.
As he stumbled off alone, with the jeers of the
children —the very children he had helped to save
from the impi—buzzing in his ears, he felt like a
homeless dog. He did not know what to do, or where
to go. A mist was in front of his eyes, a frantic pain
at his heart. Was this, then, to be the end of all his
glorious dreams of fame and adventure? Was this the
story that was to go back to be told in the ears of
the boys of old London? His head and his heart were
both bursting with shame and pain, for he was alone,
shunned, an outcast, a pariah.
Suddenly he caught the sound of running feet.
He did not turn his head, but blundered on hope-
lessly. He heard the sound of quick, panting breath,
a little, warm hand was thrust into his, and the voice
of golden-haired, blue-eyed Mira sang in his ears.
“Oh, Dick; brave Dick! You—you here.” And,
before he knew what had happened, her arms were
about his neck, and she was kissing him in front
of all—in front of the soldiers, of the jeering children,
in front of the farmers; and at sight of the girl s
brave loyalty to the forlorn boy the soldiers, the
fighting men, the braves of the Cape Mounted Rifles,
took off their slouch hats and cheered. And even the
stern captain, who had wounds enough and scars
enough to make a Chinese puzzle look simple, smiled
under his moustache, and said:
“God bless ’em; they’re a ripping fine pair.”
Meanwhile, Danny Develin, with the light of
battle in his eyes, had sought out the young farmer
who had been so persistent in crying for Telegraph


Dick’s death, and Danny sought to provoke a quarrel
by saying things to the man’s face concerning his
father, and his grandfather, and his great grand-
father, and all his family unto many and remote
generations. But the man would not meet his eye,
and the soldiers of the Cape Mounted Rifles, who
knew Danny Develin very well, said one to the other
that therein the young farmer displayed much wisdom.


CHAPTER XI
THE RETURN OF SIM SLACK
When Telegraph Dick realised that the fair-haired
little lassie, Mira, meant to stick to him in spite of
his disgrace, his heart went out to her, and he vowed
to himself that if ever a day should come when she
needed his aid, he would not be found wanting.
“Where are you going, Dicky?” whispered the girl.
“You can’t wander away like this. You have no
weapons, no food, no horse, no money.”
“I don’t know, Mira, and I don’t care. I am
ashamed, and pretty nearly broken-hearted.”
“Nonsense, Dicky,” she whispered, clinging to his
hand. “The farmers are just blind with rage because
they hate the Hottentot who is called the ‘Father of
Lies.’ He is a horrid, ugly, wicked little old man,
and I don’t wonder the farmers hate him.”
“I had to help him to save my chum, Mira.”
“I know, Dicky, and I love you for it,” cried the
girl, “and Widow Gale told me to tell you that she
loves you for what you have done, and she thinks
you are a hero; and as long as she lives and has a
home you are to look upon it as your own. She says
she wishes you were her own son; she’d be proud
of you.”
“I’m jolly glad someone is proud of me,” murmured
the lad; “I don’t feel very proud of myself. Why,


Mira, I’ve just been drummed out of laager. Think
of the shame of it.”
“Think of the fiddlesticks,” retorted his level-
headed little girl chum. “Why, I have heard ‘Old
Industry’ say that once he wandered about Africa
for three whole years, and not a white man, hunter,
farmer, or trader, would break bread with him,
because they thought he was a renegade in the pay
of the Basutos. But he lived all that down, and there
is no white man in all Africa now who would not feel
proud to call him friend.”
“He has turned against me,” growled Dick.
Don t judge that man by appearances,” retorted
the lass. “He was too wise to offend all the farmers
to-day, but I know he believes in you.”
a _. H< A S got a funny wa y of showing it, if he does.
Danny Develin, he has gone back on me,
Mira. ’
“Oh, Dick! don’t say that. When I ran out of
the laager, Danny Develin was walking amongst
the farmers with his spurs clicking together at every
step and he was singing your praises and saying
msultmg things about all the farmers and their sons
and offering to fight any man who had a bad word
for you. He made more enemies for himself in ten
minutes than he will unmake in a lifetime.”
The pan- had reached the koppies by this time,
an .<w lCk tUmed a dlSmal face t0 his little comforter
We must say good-bye here, Mira. You must go
back to the farm, and I’ll hang around here and live
as best I can until I hear that my chum Sim is rescued,
°f Ar d ’ ” Rd thCn 111 JUSt trek off t0 some oth er part


“If you go far into these dark koppies without a
rifle, Dick, you will be killed by some wandering
Kaffirs before you are many hours older.”
“What am I to do, then? The whites have driven
me away like a dog, and I won t crawl back to them
to be jeered at. I’d die first.”
“I don’t want you to, Dick. I want you to live,
and make a name for yourself. There is a cave half-
way up this koppie. The apes used to live in it until
‘ Old Industry ’ cleared them out with a hunting party.
You go there, and wait until I send Danny De\elin
to you with food and a rifle. Now, good-bye, Dicky,
for the present.”
She tip-toed and kissed the London lad on the
cheek, and sped away as fast as her feet would carry
her. And somehow it seemed to the boy that the world
grew suddenly brighter, because of this little cham-
pion who clung to him when disgrace sat so heavily
upon him. He looked back for a good while at the
fluttering figure speeding across the veldt; then he
cast a long, lingering look towards the spot where
the heroes of the Cape Mounted Rifles were bivouacked;
and then, wheeling, he commenced to trudge up the
steep slope of the koppie in search of the lonely cave
which until quite recently had been the lair of wild
beasts.
It was a dismal quest for one so young, but, though
he did not know it, fate was shaping him for the great
part he had to play in the destiny of the white races
in Africa. He was learning one of life’s bitter lessons,
and learning it very young; and it was well for him
that inside his boyish breast the heart of a lion lay
slumbering.


He toiled upwards, until at last he found the place
he sought: a big cave in the side of the koppie with
a small entrance facing the steepest side of the rocky
height. He went in boldly, though his heart was
fluttering with excitement. Lighting a match, he
pulled together a handful of dry grass and leaves, and
started a small fire. This gave him some light, and
looking round, he discovered a lot of dry boughs
strewn about the floor of the cave. Collecting a nice
lot of these, he made a fire that illuminated the
cavern, and gave him a chance to examine his fortress.
There was only one entrance, and he was glad of
this, for no foe could creep upon him from behind.
Then he went to the mouth of the cave and looked
out. Night had fallen, and he could plainly see the
camp fires of the commando and the soldiers. He could
also see the lights burning in the windows of Widow
Gale’s farmhouse; and a great loneliness and longing
fell upon him.
After a while he went inside again, and busied
himself filling up the mouth of the cave with loose
rocks, so that no foe could rush him suddenly. Then
he picked out from the dry boughs lying about a
handy-looking club, and with this in his hands he felt
a bit safer. He tried it, and found that he could
swing it easily in the wide cavern, and he made up
his mind that if an enemy did pounce upon him in
the night, he would fight for his life as the apprentice
boys of old London used to fight in the days of long
ago.
Having tested his primitive weapon, he sat down
by his camp-fire, determined to wait and watch all
night. But he had been so long without sleep, and


the day’s events had been so trying, that, in spite of
his resolves, his head drooped forward upon his chest,
and at last the brave boy slept the deep sleep of
exhaustion and grief. .
He did not hear a sound when the top rock of his
rough rampart was drawn carefully away; he did not
move when a long, hairy arm came gliding stealthily
through the hole thus made. A moment later another
stone, and then another, was lifted down; and then
into the cavern came a face that was perhaps the most
awful that ever met the eye of man. It was a vast
head, with strange hair falling all round it hair
that might have been human, or it might have formed
part of a lion’s mane. It was black as night, and
matted and tangled, and full of grass ends and thorns
and leaves. Two eyes, set very wide apart, glared
through this mass, as if they belonged to some prowler
of the tiger tribe; eyes that could see better by night
than by day. Above the eyes lay a low, bony brow,
lined and seamed and wrinkled, and below lay a big,
flat nose, with nostrils that closed and expanded at
will. Then came the great gaping mouth, full of
fierce-looking yellow teeth. It was not a human face,
neither was it the face of an ape.
Many a time Dick had shuddered as Van Schloss
had told him of a strange creature that roamed the
hilly regions. The natives called it the Devil of
the Koppies,” and they feared it as they feared no
living thing. The boldest warrior would shiver over
his fire at night when the news passed around that
this horrible thing was in the district where his kraal


was located. Sturdy farmers, armed to the teeth,
would only venture out at night in couples when its
tracks had been seen. Because of its devilish cunning
and courage, all kinds of traps had been set for it;
but without avail, for it seemed to possess the cunning
of a wild beast and the reasoning powers of a man.
It was this thing that now glared into the cave
at slumbering Dick. After a long gaze, which must
have taken in every detail of the cave and its occupant,
the “thing” began again to remove more rocks with
such nice judgment that not a slip was made, not a
pebble fell to warn or waken the sleeper.
At last the gap was big enough for the “thing’s”
purpose, and, with noiseless movements, it stepped
through the hole and stood in the cave, a terrible
creature, with evil written large all over it.
At that moment a dry stick broke in the fire, and
fell from the top of the pile on to Dick’s arm, causing
him to leap to his feet with a cry of alarm; and the
first thing his eyes fell upon was that awful presence
glaring at him in the firelight. A great wave of horror
swept over the boy. The deep shadows of the cave
where the firelight did not reach, the awful stillness
of the night; and there, in the centre of a ruddy
glow of light, that “thing,” with murder in its glaring
eyes, and cruelty in its every motion. Small wonder
that the London lad felt for a moment as if he had
gone mad; small wonder that the sweat gushed out
of him at every pore, and his hair rose on end.
The “thing” made a gliding motion towards him,
indescribable in its swiftness and silence. That motion
saved Dick from going stark, staring mad where he
stood, for it roused his fighting blood as a blow in


the face from a man would have roused him. Clutching
his club in both hands, he sprang forward to give
battle to the death, uttering a yell as he did so that
rang far out on the night air.
In size and weight, activity and experience, the
boy was no match for the “thing.” But he had a
quality that no foe can afford to discount; he had
a fund of reckless courage that nothing could daunt.
So swift had been his spring, so swift his first bold
stroke with the club, that the ghoulish enemy had
not time to avoid or parry, and the club fell with weight
and force on the left arm of the devilish figure; and
a yell of pain that was partly human, partly beastlike,
was let loose on the night.
Two men were toiling up the koppie’s side in the
darkness, and just behind them trotted a great stag-
hound. The men were Danny Develin and “Old
Industry.” When the first shout rang out on the night,
the men had paused, and the dog had barked a short,
sharp bark of warning.
“What’s that?” gasped Danny Develin; but before
the old hunter could make reply, the other yell cut
through the darkness, and the staghound, with one
fierce bay, dashed between the two men, almost
knocking them from their legs, and disappeared into
the night.
“Follow as fast as you can,” shouted “Old Industry”;
“the boy is being done to death.” And away he sped
in the wake of the great hound, Donald.
Danny Develin on the flat was as fleet of foot as
a young buck, and he was in superb condition; but
on the side of a steep koppie, amidst slippery rocks
and loose boulders, he was no match for the long-


limbed veteran. Besides, the trail was all unknown
to him, whilst it was familiar to the hunter. But
love lent wings to his feet; he rushed on, and fell;
rose, and rushed on again, and fell; and scrambled,
and cut and bruised himself at every fall. But Donald,
the hound, whose forbears had been bred in the
Highlands of Scotland, neither fell nor floundered,
but went like a cyclone on his errand of salvation,
leaping one chasm, bounding over boulders, jaws
wide apart, with foam flakes dripping over the wrinkled
skin that lipped his great gleaming teeth. A friend
to be proud of, a foe to be feared even by a lion at
bay.
In the cave the unequal fight went on. Dick made
gallant efforts to repeat his first blow, but the “thing”
avoided him with a craft and ease that was almost
superhuman. When he smashed at its head it ducked,
and avoided the blow; when he smote at its body it
sprang back with the craft of a boxer and the speed
of an acrobat. Do what he would, Dick could not
land a telling blow on any vulnerable point, and the
“thing” shifted from place to place, and allowed him
to expend his strength and wind. He knew that the
thing” was fighting him on the principle of exhaus-
tion; knew that as soon as his strength failed the
creature would be in upon him, with those long, bony
fingers at his throat. He could read its plans in its
eyes, and yet he fought on, attacking like a bull
terrier, because his own good sense told him that
attack was his only chance, because he might land a
blow that would cripple his enemy. He had sense
enough to see that, if he tried to fight upon the defen-
sive, his enemy’s superior speed and activity would


allow it to dash in at close quarters, so that he could
not use his club, and then he knew that the “thing,”
with its mighty chest and great, hairy arms and massive
neck, would soon crush and choke the life out of him.
Many a night, when in old London, he had gone to
“Wonderland” to watch the professional boxers at
work; and there he had often seen a light-weight
battling against just such odds as he had to face;
only at “Wonderland” the boxers fought for a
money prize; he was fighting for his life, and he
knew it.
He was all grit and pluck, not for a moment did his
fine courage run out; but he felt the strain. His
head began to sing, his eyes grew fixed, and a film
came over them; his chest seemed so tight that his
lungs would scarcely work, and his arms grew heavy
and slow. The “thing,” watching him closely, saw
all these signs, and understood them. And a flash of
triumph shot into its gleaming eyes. With a grunt
it sprang forward, just as Dick was about to swing
his club again. Dick had just time to notice the crouch
and the leap, and as “it” came he thrust the club
straight out from his hips as a boxer shoots his left
hand for the “mark,” that dangerous spot just above
the belt.
Dick’s aim was true, and the “thing,” getting the
point of the club full in the wind, staggered back
from the thrust with a half-growl, half-yelp that was
gruesome. Swift to see his temporary advantage, Dick
brought the club down on the “thing’s” skull with
such force that the creature was beaten to its knees;
and then Dick rained blows upon it, like winter’s rain
falling upon a castle roof.


The “thing” might kill him in the end, but, whilst
there was life in him, the boy meant to let his enemy
know that there was a fight in the vicinity.
Suddenly, the creature, with infinite cunning,
dropped upon all-fours, the club missed its mark,
Dick staggered, and the next moment he was seized
in a grasp like the grip of a storm. He was lifted high
in the air, and whirled round like a toy, and the
next instant he was hurled onto the rocky floor with
a violence that made him fairly bounce up again.
Then the “thing” was upon him, worrying him in
its blind fury like a dog. The sands of his life were
running rapidly out, when through the cave-mouth
sprang the figure of a boy, armed with an assegai,
a little, round, fat boy, with a white skin. With a
shout that reached Dick’s numbed brain, even through
the storm of sound that was ringing in his ears, the
fat one” dashed hot-foot into the fray, and sent his
steel well home, clean through the hairy shoulder
that was nearest to him.
The “thing” gave its body a terrific wrench and
snapped the haft of the assegai as if it had been a mere
reed, before Sim Slack—for the rescuer was Sim
Slack—could withdraw the steel; then “it” grasped
the boy by both ankles, and lifted him high over his
head, and whirled him round, so as to get an impetus
that would crush his head like an eggshell against the
rocky sides of the cavern. So fast was he whirled round
that it seemed to Sim that he was on a merry-go-
round that had bolted. Then all at once, he was
dropped, and, with his wonderful luck, fell upon
that part of himself that used to take up so much room
in the trams at home. He saw a long, lean, hairy
p


body that gnashed its teeth, and ripped, and tore
with incredible fury at the “thing,” and, with a howl
of delight, he shouted:
“Good old Donald; have at him, Donald”; and
the staghound did its best.
But the “thing” was more than a match, even with
a broken assegai sticking through its shoulder, for any
dog that was ever littered. Fighting, gritting, foaming
at the mouth, it won its way to its feet, with Donald
held high by the hind legs, just as Sim had been a
few minutes before.
Sim’s wits were not situated in the part of his body
he had fallen upon; he had always been noted for his
ingenuity. Throwing himself forward, he clasped the
creature round the legs, and, giving a big wrench,
brought “it” down upon the rocky floor. And then
he and Donald did their very best to make the pro-
ceedings of an interesting nature to the “thing.” But,
even then, it would have ended badly for the boy and
the mighty hound had not fresh help arrived.
“Old Industry” burst in upon the scene with
his rifle in his hand. He had known, as soon as he heard
the yell as he climbed the mountain side, what manner
of enemy had attacked Telegraph Dick in the cave.
Lifting his rifle, he tried to cover the “thing,” but dared
not fire for fear of killing either the hound or the boy.
Tossing his rifle away, he drew his hunting knife,
and sprang forward; but the “thing” saw him, and,
realising that the odds were increasing at too great
a rate, let go of hound and boy, and, diving under
his arm, shot like a thunderbolt towards the entrance
of the cave, where Danny Develin had just arrived,
breathless and spent. With one fierce sweep of its


hairy arm the “thing” knocked the ex-Hussar head-
long down the slope of the koppie, and with some-
thing that sounded midway between a laugh and a
scream, disappeared in the bowels of the night.
“Old Industry” knew too much of the habits of
this awesome creature to attempt to follow; he just
strode to the entrance of the cave, listened for a
moment until a sound of crackling bushes far away
met his ears, and then he sent a chance bullet out
in search of the devilish thing. A scream of unearthly
laughter answered his shot, and he knew that he had
missed. The dog Donald would have darted off in
pursuit, but “Old Industry” called him back.
You re no match for it, good dog; no match at
all. So let it go this time”; and the well-trained
beast, with every hair on end, stood still, growling
defiance.
“Old Industry” called to Develin, and got a reply
that assured him that the ex-soldier was not so very
badly damaged. Then he turned to the boys. Sim
Slack was kneeling with Dick’s head in his lap, for
the plucky boy was far spent.
Not killed, Dick, eh?” demanded the hunter,
with a grim smile.
“Not quite,” gasped Dick. “It takes a bit to kill a
London kid, even if he is not good enough to stay in
your blessed African laagers.”
The old hunter understood human nature far too
well to take any notice of the bitter portion of the
boys speech. He passed that by, simply saying:
§j a d to see you are no worse than you are,
boy. You may indeed count yourself one of the lucky
ones in this world. Few men could have met that


creature in single-handed fight, and lived to boast
of it. Why, boy, when this is known, every farmhouse
will ring with wonder, and every black kraal will
know your name, from Cape Town to the Zambesi,
for this creature with which you have fought has
travelled far and near, and is well known, and wherever
it has gone it has left dread and hate behind it.
“I don’t care what they say about me in the farm-
houses,” snapped Dick.
“Why not?” queried Sim, his voice vibrating with
astonishment.
“Because I’ve been shamed by farmers and drummed
out of a white man’s laager, Sim. I’m through with
farmhouses; I’m going to make the veldt and the
koppies and the jungle my home, and live in the
open air, if I have to live and hunt and work alone.
“You won’t have to do that,” cried a voice from
the shadow; and, raising himself upon his elbow,
Dick saw the honest face of Danny Develin. “I’m
coming with you, Dick, wherever you go, and I’m
going to share just whatever luck you have, be it
good or bad.”
“And so am I, Dicky,” whispered Sim.
“Tell me how you got here, you fat one,” whispered
Dick, catching hold of his pal’s hand in a caressing
clasp.
“It’s jolly funny, Dick. I’ve not been so very far
from here all the time. I’ve been a prisoner, and
I’ve been walked off my legs like a tram horse by the
Kaffirs. After the licking the farmers and the Cape
Mounted Rifles gave ’em, they split up into little
bands, and dodged about. They would have killed
me fast enough, but they wanted to save the life of


an old chap you had prisoner, called the ‘Father of
Lies,’ who has the secret of a great ivory treasure
which they want. To-day word reached them that,
if I was set free to-night, his life would be spared.
So they brought me to the foot of this koppie on the
side farthest away from Widow Gale’s farmhouse,
and told me to tramp on until I found this cave;
and I was to wait here until a white man came for
5 *
me.
Why, Sim,” cried Dick, “you must have been
tramping up one side of these koppies whilst I was
toiling up the other.”
“I expect I was,” grinned Sim. “But I was so jolly
tired, having been on the move for days, that I just
sat down under some bushes, and went to sleep;
and then, when I woke, I marched on, and came to
the cave, and saw that ugly beggar of a creature
knocking you about. So I ran my assegai into him,
and you know all the rest that followed.”
“Good enough, you plucky little beggar,” was
Dick s comment. Now, who was the white man
who had to meet you here, I wonder?”
Me, said Danny Develin; “I was to meet Sim,
and if he was O.K. I was to let the Hottentot wizard
loose. On my way up I met ‘Old Industry,’ and
he persisted in coming; and as I couldn’t shake him
off, I marched in his company.”
“If I catch sight of the ‘Father of Lies’ I’ll send
a bit of lead through him at once,” remarked the old
hunter. “I’ve passed my word to do that, and I
must keep it.”
“If that is so, you had better clear out,” growled
Danny Develin, “for I have passed my word to the


Hottentot that, if the boy Sim was in this cave when
I got to it, I’d set him free, and give him a fair start
and a fighting chance for his life; and my word is
as dear to me as yours is to you, Mr. Hunter. The
Hottentot may be the ‘Father of Lies,’ but he has kept
his contract with me, and I’m going to keep mine with
him; it’s a way we had in the old Hussars.”
“Very well; I will do my errand, and get on my
path again,” was “Old Industry’s” crisp rejoinder.
“Dick, I have a message for you.”
“What is it, sir?”
“Listen. Here is your money which was left at
the farm of Widow Gale —he handed Dick a little
leather bag—“and here is a rifle, if you will accept
it, from me. It is about up to your weight; it is a
sporting Mauser, and there is not a truer weapon
in all the world. I have tried it myself, and can
vouch for it.”
A glad cry broke from Dick, for he knew that
he had not lost his place in the heart of the stern
old hunter and fighting man.
“And here is a hunting knife from Van Schloss.
It was made in Amsterdam to his order, and is a
beauty, though a bit heavy for a boy s hand. But
you will grow to it in time, for you have the makings
of a strong man in you.”
Again Dick’s thanks were poured out incoherently.
“There is another matter. Widow Gale says that,
if you will come to the farm to-morrow morning,
you are to have the dabble grey colt, the son of the
blood horse she imported from England. The colt is
the handsomest and the fastest animal in this part
of the world. Will you come to the farm for it, Dick?


“No,” said the boy, stubbornly, “I have been
hunted away from white men’s homes in shame; if
I am to go back to them I’ll go back only in honour.
I am grateful for your gifts. I’d like the colt more
than anything else in this world, but I won’t go to
the farm for it.”
“I’ll go for it, Dicky,” cried Sim; “and I’ll get
my own horse and carbine, and say good-bye to Olive
and the widow for you,”
“To Olive,” laughed Danny Develin. “Why,
Sim, it is Mira he wants to say farewell to, and I
don’t think he’ll let you do that for him.”


CHAPTER XII
HOW DICK PROVED HIS CHIEFTAINSHIP
“Old Industry” left the cave in the hill, and went
with long, swift strides down the side of the koppie.
When he reached the farm of Widow Gale he told
her that Sim had turned up, safe and sound, but
Dick would not set foot again in a farm, not even
to receive a gift at her hands.
“He’s a fine little man,” murmured the widow,
“and I think he has been harshly treated by the
farmers. They should have remembered that he is
very young, with all the faults that youth and in-
experience bring. If I were well enough to go to
him, I would go, and bid him good-bye and God-
speed. I hope that his dear little chum will come
and see me.”
“He is coming to see you, and so is Danny Develin,”
was the grim old hunter’s reply.
At the mention of the ex-Hussar’s name a blush
spread over the pale face of Widow Gale, which
brought a smile to the lips of the hunter. He mur-
mured to himself: “It seems to me that Danny Develin
has made a place for himself in the heart of the hand-
some widow, and she won’t want ‘Old Industry to
look after her farm and the two children much longer.”
He told her then how the two boys and the dog


DICK PROVES HIS CHIEFTAINSHIP 233
Donald had combated the unknown “thing” in the
cave.
At the mention of that name the cheeks of the
widow grew ashen white.
“Is that vile creature in our neighbourhood again?”
she asked in tremulous accents. “If so, then every
mother should guard her children closely, for there
is no limit to its wickedness or to its cunning.”
“lam going to ride over to the farm of Van Schloss,
and get him to organise a hunting party at once,
and we will either capture it or drive it away. Don’t
be afraid, Widow Gale; sooner or later a bullet
must reach the ‘thing,’ whatever it is.”
“Don’t leave my house with little Mira and Olive
in it whilst that creature is prowling about,” cried
the widow. “You know what it has done in the
past. Have you forgotten the Eickstein homestead,
and the awful deeds the ‘thing’ did there four years
ago?”
“I have not forgotten, nor shall I ever forget. I
would not leave you now, only that I know that Danny
Develin, with the two boys, all well armed, will not
be far away during my absence. Develin is too fond
of everyone in this house, Widow Gale, to allow any
danger to overshadow it. So you can rest in peace.”
At this speech the widow blushed once more, and
the hunter chuckled as he saw the wave of colour
sweep over her cheeks and brow.
Five minutes later the hunter was saddling his
horse, and it was not long before the inmates of the
farm heard him ride quietly away.
Shortly afterwards, Danny Develin and Sim put
in an appearance, and the widow and the two girls


loaded the London messenger boy with congratula-
tions upon his marvellous escape from captivity and
death. . ,
“I’d have been killed,” said the staunch little man,
“if it had not been for good old Dick.”
“Why don’t you go outside and call him in?
demanded Mira, hotly. “It’s a shame to leave him
out there; that ‘thing’ may attack him again.”
“I’m sorry for the ‘thing’ if it does, grinned Sim.
“Old Dick has a rifle and a hunting knife now, and
he is as wideawake as a cat. But he won t cross a
farmhouse threshold until the public insult offeied to
him has been publicly withdrawn. These blessed
farmers,” he added proudly, “will want the London
telegraph boy before he wants them.
Whilst Sim was telling his adventures, Danny
Develin slipped out to the hiding-place of the “Father
of Lies.” Quickly removing the fastenings to the
cellar door, he called out:
“Come out of that, you yellow scorpion, and don’t
waste any time about it, for if Old Industry comes
back before you quit he’ll do his best to make an angel
of you,”
The old Hottentot scrambled out of his hiding-
place with remarkable celerity.
“So,” he remarked, with a leer that did not improve
his hideous face; “so the boy Sim has returned safe
and unhurt?”
“How do you know that?” demanded the ex-
Hussar.
“If I told you how I knew you would say I lied.”
“I expect I should, because I knew you as a past-
master at that game.”


“I have met some white men in my time who
knew how to lie, too,” grinned the Hottentot. “But
for all that, I am not lying myself this time. I know
the boy has come back safe.”
“You mean that you possess the secret of mental
telegraphy, is that it?” queried Danny Develin.
“That is what you white men call it, but we black
men have had this secret for ages. It came to Africa
from Egypt long before you whites had ever heard
of anything of the sort. You have your secrets; we
have ours. Many a time I should have been taken
prisoner, or been slain, only for the power I possess.
I can send a thought message far or near, and receive
a thought message from certain people; for there are
thought waves in the air, just as there are sound
and sight waves. When a rifle cracks a mile away,
what brings the sound to you?”
“I’m blessed if I quite know,” said Danny. “I
only know that I hear it.”
“A horse knows as much as that,” sneered the
Hottentot. “You do not know what carries your
sight, and you do not know what carries your thought.
Am I free now?”
“Not quite. I want you to come with me to the
boy who saved your life.”
“The boy you call Dick?”
“Yes.”
“He was disgraced, and driven out by fools. He
will be a great koos some day; a great koos, I will
gladly see him, and serve him.”
“Don’t fill his mind with any more rubbish about
that vast ivory treasure; for you know you only
invented that to fool the Kaffirs and make them


follow you in your infernal wickedness,” sneered
Develin.
The Hottentot looked the ex-Hussar up and down
with a cold, contemptuous gaze.
“You are a fool,” he said slowly; “you have the
heart of a lion, and the head of a sheep.
“If you were not old enough to be my grand-dad,
I’d kick you as high as Table Mountain, you sandy
nigger,” stormed Danny. “Now, just shut your nasty
mouth, and come along. Right face! march! and
don’t make more noise than a serpent going over a
sandbank, or you may regret it.
So the ill-assorted pair made their way to the spot
at the foot of the koppie where Dick was standing on
guard. When he heard their footsteps he challenged
abruptly, and brought his rifle up ready to throw it to
his shoulder and shoot on the instant. But Danny
Develin’s cheery voice reassured him.
“Friends, Dicky,” he cried. “Or,” he added, “one
friend and one bag of yellow sin that is not worth
having as a friend, or I’m much mistaken.
Dick lowered his rifle, and allowed the pair to
advance
“Young koos,” said the Hottentot, “you have
dealt by me as no white man ever did in all my long
life; you trusted me, and saved me. Koos, lam
grateful. Send your servant away, and I will tell
you a thing that will make your heart glad, though
it is heavy now.”
“He is not my servant; he is my friend,” answered
Dick, shortly.
“Young koos, your name shall fill Africa yet, and
this other one is a nobody. He will never be a chief.


Send him away, and I will sing a song in your ears
that many men have given their lives in the hope
of hearing.”
“Stand back out of earshot, please, Danny,”
commanded Dick; “this man has something to say
to me.”
The note in the boy’s voice caught Danny Develin’s
ear, and he smiled as he prepared to obey.
“I’ll go,” he said, curtly, “But look here, you
yellow streak of unmitigated sin, I shall be just out
of earshot, but I won’t take my rifle off you even
if you stand here for an hour, and at the first sign of
treachery I will send lead enough into you to sink a
ship of war.”
“Go, sheep’s head! Fire when there is need,”
retorted the Hottentot; and Danny, bristling like a
bulldog, went off a few paces with all his old cavalry
swagger.
“Be brief, and do not tell me any old wives’ tales,”
ordered Dick.
“I shall not waste your time, nor my own, koos;
for there comes one after me very shortly who will
hunt me until he kills me, or I kill him, and I must
be far from here before he gets on my trail.”
“You mean ‘Old Industry?”’ asked Dick.
“Yes; the man with the woman’s face and the
untiring body. He will hunt me as no other man
can hunt. Oh, he! but it will be a great hunt; the
hunt of the old men. Perhaps he will win in the
end, for he knows many things; perhaps I may win,
for I have the craft of all the tribes in Africa at my
finger ends. It will live in the hearts of men, this
hunt of the two old warlocks, and children who are


not now born shall sing songs about it around the
camp fires.”
“You are wasting your time talking; he will be here
soon, and I do not want the black men to say one to
the other that I could not keep faith, or pay a debt.
I want you to get safe away, that your friends may
know that I have only one tongue, which has no
fork in it.”
“That is known already, young koos. Many eyes
have been upon you when you knew it not. You
are marked by the warriors as one whose rifle and
tongue are straight. Now bend low, and hear the last
word, for it concerns the ivory that the sheep’s head
yonder spoke of.”
He began to speak rapidly, in a thick, husky voice,
the sound of which came to the ears of Danny Develin
like the droning of bees on a mid-summer’s day.
For fully half an hour he talked, and Dick did not
interrupt him once.”
“You have the place in your mind, now, young
koos; you can find it, is that not so?”
“Yes,” said Dick; “I’ll find it right enough. First
of all, I have to go through Zululand, to get the
white man’s skull which has a chart traced upon it
in red ink. I will get that from Bumpo, the son of
Saga, the dealer in oxen. This I will keep, in case
my memory plays me false. Then I shall trek on to
the land of the tribe of noseless men, the big, ugly
men who eat human beings; and, if I get through
them alive, I will find the seven hills, with an old
kraal built on the top of each. The kraals, you say,
are only ruins now, but the ruins will do for a guide,
and from there I shall go to the spot you have spoken


of, and there, you say, I shall find ivory hidden beneath
growing trees.”
“Yes, koos. So much ivory that when it is yours
you will be greater and richer than any of those
who hunt for gold and diamonds; you will have
treasure untold. You will shed much blood, the
blood of bad men who rob and kill the poor and
weak; you will know much danger and much toil
before you win your way to that spot, koos. But you
must let nothing turn you back. When it comes to
a war between you and the men of the noseless tribe,
then strike and spare not, for they are all evil, there
is no good thing in them. Destroy them root and
branch; make no compact with them, for they will
not keep faith. Always remember this thing: that
when they seem most peaceful, then are they most
to be dreaded. You will find, when you have crossed
the great mountains that are all yellow like the sand
on the seashore, and have pushed in beyond the
great white plains where nothing is to be seen but
white salt, so white that on a summer’s day when
the sun is shining upon it men often go blind from
the glare; when you have done these things you will
find the race of noseless men, blacker than any Zulu,
bigger than any Basuto, with splendid figures and
handsome heads, but with faces like demons. They
have the oil of a bulb they dig out of the ground, and
this makes their bodies shine like polished ebony.
They wear pure white linen garments, like the petti-
coats of white women. These garments reach from
the hip to the knee, and they wear nothing else.
In their ears they carry thick rings of gold; they
carry a heavy ring of gold in the middle of the under-


lip, which bears it backwards and downwards, causing
their beautiful white teeth to gleam like the teeth
of a snarling tiger. Their heads are covered with
short, black hair, that does not curl as that of other
African races does, but ripples like the feathers of an
ostrich. Across the centre of their heads, coming
down the cheeks, and passing under the chin, they
have a band of silver, nearly an inch thick and two
inches wide; they carry a short sword and a shield.
The shields are made of copper. Their king has a
bodyguard of Amazons, who carry shields and spears.
The spears have a point of ivory two feet long, and
when the sun shines upon this ivory it gleams like
snow, for it is polished as nothing else is in all this
world.”
“You say that this tribe, or nation, eat human
flesh?” asked Dick.
“Yes; they eat men and women and children
whom they take in battle or in raids on villages;
these they keep for high feast days. They say that
eating human begins makes them invincible in battle.
The men of this race are bad, but the women are
without pity and without fear. You will have to go
to this country if you want the ivory that is buried.
They did not inhabit the spot when I hid my treasure;
they have since drifted there. Now, koos, I go; and
you must tell ‘Old Industry’ from me that I know of
his boast to rest not until he has slain or captured me.
Tell him I accept his challenge. It shall be my last
hunt, and he will not find it easy to get me in any
of his snares; maybe I shall get him tangled in some
of mine. Say to him from me, koos, that I ask for no
more mercy than I will show to him, and he knows


well how much that will be. Good-bye, koos; the
dawn will soon be here; and I go to start the hunt of
the old men, when wit will be put against wit, and
long experience against garnered knowledge. It will
be a good hunt, koos —a good hunt, whoever gathers
the spoils.”
With a wave of his hand he slipped away and
melted into the shadows; and so he passes out of
this story, to reappear in another from the diary of
Sim Slack.
Shortly after the day had broken, quite a little
crowd were gathered at the foot of the koppie near
the farm. There were “Old Industry” and Mira
and Olive, with Sim and Danny Develin, and in their
midst stood our hero Dick.
“We start a hunt to-day for the Thing,’” said
“Old Industry,” “for there will be no peace in these
parts until we kill it, or drive it far away. You three,
who have dwelt with us for a little time, are going
away to seek your fortunes; I hope that you will
succeed. I feel certain this is not the last that I shall
see of you, Dick. Here is Widow Gale’s present: as
fine a colt as ever trod the veldt. He comes from
English thoroughbred stock, and a handsomer or a
better-made piece of horseflesh I have never set my
old eyes upon. Widow Gale told me to say, Dick,
that it is a present in memory of the gallant fight you
fought in her defence against the Kaffir impi.”
The tears sprang to the boy’s eyes as he heard those
stirring words—tears of joy and pride.
“Here, Sim,” cried the old hunter; “here is Van
Schloss s gift to you. It is the blue roan colt you
admired so much. Van Schloss is riding far and


fast to get a party of hunters together, or he would
have been here to say farewell. He said to me: ‘Tell
dose leedle schmall chaps dot one year from dis day
I vill spread er feast mit mine own hands for dem,
and dey must not disappoint me, for I lofe dose
poys.’ ”
“Tell him,” cried Sim, “that I’ll come back and
sit at his feast a year from to-day.”
“And I,” said Dick, “will come, if by that time
I have cleared my name. Tell him that; he will
understand.”
“Good-bye, boys,” cried “Old Industry,” holding
out his big, bony hand.
“Good-bye,” they said, as they shook it heartily.
Then Master Sim took a kiss from Olive, and said
it was far nicer than all the strawberries he had ever
had in Leather Lane in old London. But Dick, who
seemed to have suddenly turned from a boy into
a young man, only shook pretty Mira’s hand, and
told her that, hunting or fighting, marching or camp-
ing, he would never forget her.
“I will come back and see you some day, when
I have cleared my name. Don’t forget me, little
Goldenhead.”
“I shall never forget you, Dick,” she answered;
and somehow he knew she never would.
The lad leapt to the saddle, and whistled to the
famous staghound pup which ‘ Old Industry had
given him when they had first met. The pup ran
to Mira, and put his muzzle into her hand, and,
after getting the expected caress, gambolled off to
the side of the bonny dapple-grey, and looked up,
awaiting orders.


“Now for the big trek,” cried Dick. “God bless
you all! Forward, boys; trot.”
When they had ridden a long way, Sim and Danny
Develin turned in their saddles, and looked back;
they saw the two girls, one on each side of the old
hunter, waving their hands in fond farewell. But
Dick would not turn his head.
“Look round, just once, Dicky,” pleaded Sim.
“No,” answered his pal; “I am never going to
look back in this world, Sim, When once I start
in to do a thing I’m going to do it, or go under trying
to do it; looking back only weakens a man.”
A moment later a curve in the trail hid them from
view, and it was many a long day before they were
destined to look upon those sweet faces again.
Dick rode well in front on the beautiful grey, for
he was tacitly acknowledged leader of the little band.
Why didn t you stay behind, and marry Widow
Gale, Danny?” queried Sim. “She’s a jolly fine
woman, and she s rich. I wish you’d married her
Danny.”
“Why, Sim?”
“Well, you see, it would have been fine for me
and Dick to know that there was a man and his
wife who would have a homely welcome for us in
health or sickness, poverty or riches. You’d never
close your door on me or Dick, no matter what the
world might say of us?”
The ex-Hussar told Sim that “he might bet his
life on that. But,” he added, “I don’t think Widow
Gale would have married me, Sim, if I had asked
her.”
“Why not?” demanded Sim.


“Well,” said poor Danny, holding down his head*
“you know that little bit of Egypt I have got in my
throat, Sim?”
“You mean your thirst for beer, Danny?”
“Thirst for pretty near any kind of liquid that will
help a man to make a mortal fool of himself,” was
the dejected rejoinder. “Well, I was going to ask
the widow to marry me, for I don’t mind owning
that I fell in love with her as soon as I saw her.”
“Yes,” said Sim, “you always did say you liked
the plump ones best.”
“I’ll plump you on the veldt if you don’t have a
care,” snapped the ex-Hussar. “Well, Sim, the very
night I was going to propose to her my thirst came
on, and I made a beast of myself. No one knew it
but the widow and ‘Old Industry.’ But I was as
full of whisky as a mule is of mischief, and I lost my
chance. I know she despises me, boy, and quite
right that she should.”
“Does she?” grinned Sim. “Well, Danny, I’ll
tell you something; I was talking to her a few minutes
before you came away, and she did nothing else except
ask questions about you; and she made me promise
to write to her, and tell her how you were and what
you were doing. And she made me swear a lot of
solemn oaths that if ever you wanted anything I’d
write at once and let her know.”
“Did she, Sim? Why, you little fat boy, you’re an
angel in disguise.”
“I know I am,” grinned Sim. “So I told her there
was only one thing in this world that you were pining
for.”
“‘What’s that?’ said she.


“‘A lock of your hair, ma’am. I’ve heard him say
that in his sleep a hundred times.’”
“You young imp, you ought to be flayed alive,”
shouted Danny.
“Hold on a bit,” said Sim. “She said she wouldn’t
give any man a lock of her hair; and I told her that
life without it would not be much use to you. Then
she said:
“‘Well, Sim, you mayTcut a little tress, and give
it to him after he has left, if you think it will make
him happy.’
“So, Danny, I drew out my hunting-knife, and
cut this from the back.” As he spoke Sim held up
what might easily have been mistaken for the scalp
lock of a Sioux warrior.
“You cut that from the head of Widow Gale?”
stormed Danny.
“Yes,” said Sim, sweetly. “Didn’t I get enough?
What are you swearing for?”
“Enough?” growled the ex-Hussar. “Do you
think a man wants enough of his sweetheart’s hair
to stuff a mattress? You young bounder. Here, give
it to me”; and, with a sheepish air, he took the love-
lock, and stuffed it tenderly in an inside pocket of his
tunic.
They were riding through a rough defile, with
craggy heights on either side of them, at the time,
and just as Master Sim was about to give vent to
some merry quip at the expense of his good-tempered
comrade, a boulder, big enough to have smashed
an ox-waggon, came crashing down from the heights
above. The grey colt, not yet properly trained to
sudden shocks, reared and plunged, and Dick had


hard work to keep his seat in the saddle. The mass
of rock just missed the grey beauty. Then came a
shower of smaller rocks, bounding and bouncing
from ledge to ledge. Any one of them was big enough
to have killed either horse or rider.
The three adventurers put spurs to the flanks of
their mounts, and dashed along the ravine at full
tilt; and as they did so they heard loud shrieks of
almost fiendish laughter from the heights above them,
and, turning in their saddles, they saw the horrible
face of the “thing” amidst the rocks.
In the twinkling of an eye they unslung their rifles,
and sent a volley at it, but it had fled behind some
big boulders before the bullets could take effect.
They sat still, and waited to get another shot; but the
“thing” was watching them from its place of vantage,
and every now and again a discordant laugh broke
upon their ears.
“Come on,” said Dick; “we can do no good here.
The ‘thing’ is too cunning to let us pot it in this
manner.”
“Td give a lot to know just what it is,” remarked
Danny Develin as they rode slowly forward,
“Would you?” answered Dick. “Well, Danny,
I’ll tell you: it is one of the old cannibal noseless
tribe that the old Hottentot was telling me about
last night. I recognised it as soon as I saw it just
now from his description. You know all the Kaffir
women swear that the ‘ thing ’ eats the children it
steals, and I believe they are right. This creature
has probably followed the old Hottentot, whom we
call the ‘Father of Lies,’ for some purpose, possibly
for revenge for some deed done by him.”


They rode on until they came to a spot where the
trees grew all the way down the slope of the mountain,
right to the side of the bridle track they were on.
Dick spoke sharply and clearly to his comrades:
“I’m going to jump from the saddle in a moment,
and I’m going to lie in wait for this enemy, whether
it be man or beast or devil, and I’ll shoot it as it comes
towards me.”
“We’ll try it together, Dicky,” put in Danny
Develin.
“No,” was the decisive reply; “you ride on just
as you are doing now. The ‘thing’ will be listening
to the hoof-beats of our horses, and if it detects any
difference it will become suspicious. I want to do
this thing off my own bat, boys, to show the farmers
that the boy they disgraced and drummed out of
their laager was a better hunter than any of them.
I’ll fire three shots in quick succession if I want you.”
As he uttered the last words, Dick snatched at an
overhanging bough, and, kicking his feet from the
stirrups, swung himself softly to the ground, whilst
the horses trotted on.
He was all alone now, except for the pup, and
his heart beat wildly, for surely it was a dread task
to attempt single-handed what so many parties of
good, stout-hearted men had failed to do in the past.
Crawling upon all fours he took up a position from
whence he thought he could detect any advancing
foe, and, taking the pup by the collar, he lay still
and waited and watched for the uncanny thing. In
the stillness he could hear the hoof strokes of the
horses going farther and farther away from him, and
he began to wonder if, after all, the “thing” had


not pursued his party when he felt the pup squirm all
over. Then a whimper broke from the young hound.
Dick strained his eyes and his ears, but he could see
nothing, hear nothing.
All at once a dry twig snapped behind him. He did
not look round, did not rise up, for he had the gift
of intuition, the gift which all great adventurers,
hunters, fighters, and voyagers have. He knew,
though he could not have told how he knew, that
danger was coming on him from behind. Grasping
his rifle, like a flash he whirled himself over and
over, from one shoulder to the other, down the hill.
And, as he did so, a mighty lump of rock crashed
down on the very spot where a second before he had
lain. Had he been a moment slower he must have
been crushed to death; had he even stayed to turn
his head when the warning twig broke, he would
have been crushed to a jelly. He faced round now,
and sprang to his feet boldly enough, for there stood
his foe, a great ebony-black mass of bone and muscle,
with gaping mouth and noseless face, looking every
inch a man-slayer and a man-eater. With fiendish
cunning it had found out that Dick was lying in wait
for it, and had circled round behind him, and had
doomed him to death from behind.
Dick raised his rifle with an unshaking hand,
and touched the trigger. The monster gave a yell,
half scream, half war whoop, and toppled headlong
to the earth, biting and clawing at the grass and leaves
and pebbles —a savage to the last.
Then Dick fired three times in rapid succession
into the air, and stood looking down upon the deed
he had done.


So Danny Develin and Sim Slack found him; and
Sim, in his boyish love and enthusiasm, cried to
Dick:
“The Hottentot called you ‘koos,’ young koos,
and, by the lights o’ London, Telegraph Dick, you
are a chief.”
Then the fat one marched around the dead body
of the monstrous thing, chanting:
‘The wild career of that bold buccaneer
Was settled by a pirate gay,
Who tanned his hide at the turn of the tide
On the shores of Honolulu Bay.”
“We’ll carry the body into the pass,” said Dick;
and the three of them did it with great labour.
Then Dick pinned this note amidst the woolly
hair;
“To the Farmers, Hunters, and Veldtsmen:
“Here is your enemy; I have sent it to sleep. Your
homes are safe now. Take this body as a gift from the
boy you drove out of your laager like a pariah£dog.”
Then he wheeled andjmarched to his horse,Jand
got to saddle, riding off with a pair of bold hearts
behind him, to go in search of the great ivory treasure
hoard.
THE END




3/6 NET SERIES
Clear Print. Best Paper. Cloth Binding. 4-Colour Jackets.
Famous McClusky Books
By the World-renowned War Correspondent
A. G. HALES
McGlusky the Trail Blazer
McGlusky’s Great Adven-
ture
President McGlusky
The Adventures of Signor
McGlusky
Ginger and McGlusky
McGlusky the Gold Seeker
McGlusky the Peace Maker
McGlusky
McGlusky the Reformer
McGlusky the Filibuster
Snowey and McGlusky
McGlusky, M.P.
McGlusky the Seal Poacher
McGlusky Abroad
The Mocking Chevalier
The Long Lone Trail
Rory O’Moore
The Old Grey Gods
The Falcon’s Eyrie
The Queen of Hearts
Angel Jim
Maid Molly
The Watcher on the Tower
A Lindsay o’ the Dale
Marozia
Black Prince Peter
The Viking Strain
Barney O’Hea : Trapper
Ginger and Joan
The Great White Wolf
Moon of the Devil’s Own
Wolf Packs of the North
Rattling Spurs
Bud Storm, Outlaw
Driscoll, King of Scouts
Broken Trails
McTavish the Great
Telegraph Dick
My Life of Adventure
Obtainable at all Libraries and Booksellers
WRIGHT & BROWN, LTD.
4, Farringdon Avenue, London, E.C 4


3/6 NET SERIES
Clear Print. Best Paper. Cloth Binding. 4-Colour Jackets
Thrilling Western Romances
GARY MARSHALL
RUNAWAY HORSES
FLAMING SIX-GUNS
THE SCARLET ACE
THE SHERIFF’S DAUGHTER
THE RED SPIDER OF QUARTZ GULCH
THE SAGA OF SUNNY JIM
THE GALLANT OUTLAW
THE WATCHERS OF GOLD GULCH
RANGELAND GOLD
ONE FIGHTIN’ COWBOY
BLOOD OF THE SOTONE
THE FIGHTING TENDERFOOT
POWDER SMOKE
RAGING RIVER
BORDER BLOOD
THE OUTLAW CHIEF
ROUGH RANGES
NESTERS OF CHUCK VALLEY
Obtainable at all Libraries and Booksellers.
WRIGHT & BROWN, LTD.
4 Farringdon Avenue, London, E.C.4


3/6 NET SERIES
Clear Print. Best Paper. Cloth Binding. 4-Colour Jackets.
Stirring Western Novels
RAYMOND A. BERRY
DUSTY RIVERS
THE ROAD TO CALICO CREEK
SMOKY WATERS
CODE OF THE YUCCA
Obtainable at all Libraries and Booksellers.
WRIGHT & BROWN, LTD.
4 Farringdon Avenue, London, E.C.4


3/6 net SERIES
Clear Print. Best Paper. Cloth Binding. 4-Colour Jackets
Thrilling Air Mystery Stories
PHILLIP CONDE
VULTURES OF THE SKY
THE PHANTOM PILOT
DEATH FROM THE AIR
MURDER IN THE COCKPIT
THE GHOST PLANE
THE CORPSE IN THE CLOUDS
THE DEVIL HAS WINGS
Obtainable at all Libraries and Booksellers.
WRIGHT & BROWN, LTD.
4 Farringdon Avenue, London, E.C.4










(t v ®^i)
$3 3^
W A U
3 1508 02240354 2


- SafeSOw-*' : * —?•-!;' ; -’• ?r;.‘.r3B=s- ; 1 -«-' £?j u3*«r!£«•/£ r - ;f!i;;£ wii;H3Sj» ;: i
: ’'' v, s&t»"
. ' -:: -
