

TEMPTATION
HOW TO CONQUER IT
the Rev.
LIONEL B. FLETCHER
( Copyright)
(.Fourth Impression )
(60 th Thousand)
„ . UNITED SOCIETY FOR
CHRISTIAN LITERATURE
LUTTERWORTH PRESS
London and redhill


3 1508
00415778


TEMPTATION
AND HOW TO CONQUER IT
THERE is a great deal in the New Testa-
ment about temptation, and every
Christian at some time or other is puzzled by
the assaults of evil suggestions or wicked
desires or unholy thoughts. In fact, the
faith of many has been undermined because
of temptation, for so many people imagine
that because they are tempted, therefore they
have not been cleansed from sin and cannot
be children of God.
This is a great mistake, for temptation is
the most prevalent thing in life, and no
normal person escapes its approach. We are
distinctly told in the New Testament that
even our blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ was tempted, in all points, exactly as
we are, and this at once proves that tempta-
tion is not sin : “For we have not an high
priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities ; but was in all
points tempted like as we are, yet without
sin ” (Heb. iv. 15).


But because it is prevalent, and because
no one escapes, and because the holiest must
endure its assaults against their souls, the
Lord Jesus said to His disciples before He
went to die on the Cross “ Watch and
pray that ye enter not into temptation ”
(Matt. xxvi. 41).
EVERYONE IS TEMPTED
Then Jesus taught them to pray and say,
“ Lead us not into temptation.” He did not
teach them to pray that they might not be
tempted, but that petition in the Lord’s
prayer is a request to the Almighty Father to
preserve us from partaking of the sin which
temptation suggests. He knew that they
would be tempted, but He also knew that the
loving Father would carry them through,
more than conquerors, if they would pray to
Him in their hour of need.
Thomas a Kempis, whose little book, The
Imitation of Christ, has been read and loved
by some of the greatest saints, says : “ There
is no order so Holy, no place so secret where
there be no temptations.” He found that
temptation came to him in the Monastery as
fiercely as to any man out in the world. And
so have all those who tried to escape by


entering some Holy Order, or by going out
to a foreign field to work for Christ, or by
moving their place of residence. Be sure of
this —temptation is within you, as well as
without you, and while you live you must
fight for your soul, and resist the approach of
evil to your life. But there is great comfort
in the thought that it is not because you are
more evil than your fellows that you have
evil temptations. We are clearly told ;
“ There hath no temptation taken you but
such as is common to man : but God is
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted
above that ye are able ; but will with
the temptation also make a way to escape,
that ye may be able to bear it ” (i Cor. x.
13)- . ,
That promise gave me the victory more
times than I could number in the early days
of my Christian life. It is so clear, so very
decided, that it caused me to look for the way
of escape. It reminded me that I had no
excuse for yielding to the invitation to commit
sin, for it said quite plainly, “ Who will not
suffer you to be tempted above that ye are
able ; but will with the temptation also make
a way to escape.” I knew, therefore, that
if I sinned it was entirely my own fault, and I


also knew that I need not sin, for there was a
way to escape.
TEMPTATION IS DECEITFUL
Temptation is also deceitful. Remember :
all temptation comes from the father of lies,
and he has been a liar from the beginning.
We are told in God’s word : “ And the great
dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called
the Devil and Satan, which deceiveth the
whole world ” (Rev. xii. 9).
In your temptations, you will often have the
suggestion given to you that you will escape
disgrace or detection or punishment. The
first temptation recorded in the Bible shows
how the serpent said unto the woman : “ Ye
shall not surely die ; for God doth know that
in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall
be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing
good and evil ” (Gen. iii. 4,5).
The same deceit is in all temptations.
With the first recorded temptation, there is
the implication that God knew very well that
it would be a splendid thing for the man and
woman to eat of the forbidden fruit, and that
He also knew that no harm would come of it.
It really implies that God had lied to them
about it. There has never been a better


description of temptation given to us than
this story in Genesis.
A lad in an office is tempted to take some
money. Most probably at first it is a very
small amount, or a stamp, and he is assured
in his inner self by the tempter that it is quite
all right. The temptation suggests that his
employer makes a lot of money and pays him
miserable wages, that he has a perfect right
to what he can take, and it will never be
missed, that he will be able to get something
he very much wants, and that his Sunday
school teacher, who says such an action is sin
and will hurt his life and ruin his character,
simply does not know what he is talking about.
The best thing he can do is to act for himself,
and enjoy himself, and he will soon find out
that he can get money more easily than by
working hard for it.
Or it is perhaps a girl in business, whose
parents have warned her against having any-
thing to do with gambling, which will be
presented to her in the form of a raffle, or in
the purchase of a sweep ticket or a lottery
ticket. Most, if not all, of the other girls
and clerks buy tickets, and she is faced by the
dreadful feeling of being alone and singular
and conspicuous. She will be the butt of


everyone, and her life will be unbearable.
And then comes the suggestion : “ Do not be
silly. Your parents are old-fashioned, and
things have changed since their day. Even
some churches have raffles, and other forms
of gambling, and some Christians buy tickets.
Your people do not understand, or, if they do,
they know quite well that there is no harm in
it, but they do not want you to have a good
time. You just act for yourself. You are
quite old enough to choose, and you will then
feel independent and become quite a woman
of the world, and you will be very glad later
on that you launched out for yourself.”
And so it is in many other temptations.
When the first taste of alcoholic liquor is
suggested ; or when the awful hint that it
would be untold pleasure to indulge in some
impure act, is presented to the mind, then
comes the lie : “ You shall not surely die.”
The suggestion is, that you are being kept
back from something that will add consider-
able pleasure to your life, and that ail the
warnings and advice of your friends and of
the Bible are nonsense. But every man or
woman who has been tempted and ruined was
first of all led astray by the deceitfulness of
temptation. None of them would have


yielded if they had realised the ruin that
would follow.
OUR WEAK POINTS
Temptation attacks our weak points, and
we all have some weak spot. It may be a
hasty temper, or a touchy disposition, or a
very sensitive nature. Possibly it is a sensual
disposition, or a disposition to lie, or cheat, or
harbour unclean thoughts; or it may be
vanity, with a love of display and admiration,
or probably it is something else altogether.
But when we are honest with ourselves, we
know what our weakness is, and Satan is
ever watching for an opportunity to attack
us in the weak spot, or at the time of weak-
ness*
With our blessed Lord, who had no weak
spot in His perfect life, Satan waited until He
had fasted in the wilderness for forty days and
forty nights. The whole of those days had
been a time of tension and meditation and
communion with His Father, and naturally
the body was weakened by lack of food ;
reaction after spiritual strain would be
experienced ; and it was then that the
tempter imagined he had found his oppor-
tunity. And he began with a sneer ; “If


Thou be the Son of God. . . But Jesus
rebuked and defeated him.
Be careful, therefore, for if Satan cannot
win a victory when he attacks you in a weak
spot, he will try and find you unprepared in a
moment when your body and mind are
weakened by labour, or excitement, or sorrow,
or even by joy—for reaction sets in after all
emotional periods, and we are liable to be off
our guard and to fall.
TEMPTATION IS PERSISTENT
Temptation is persistent, and we shall
never know freedom from its assaults until
we pass into the glorious presence of the
King of Kings, so always be prepared. When
we have had a period of victory, we are some-
times apt to grow careless and forget to watch,
but Satan is ever on the watch for his oppor-
tunity.
“ Every day passed without temptation,
brings us a day nearer to temptation,” said
that holy man, Thomas a Kempis, and all
experienced Christians will tell you the same
thing.
I heard a boy bragging to a group of chums
one day of how he had caught and thrashed
another boy. What struck me was his state-


ment: “He thought I had become tired of
waiting to catch him. But I hadn’t. I waited
until I saw him all by himself, and then I
caught him and dealt with him.”
So Satan waits to catch us alone —when we
have neglected our time of prayer and com-
munion with God, and we are becoming
satisfied that we can get on quite well without
asking for the constant presence of the Holy
Spirit in our lives ; or when we have grown
slack in Church attendance, or have filled in
the night on which we used to go to the
Christian Endeavour Society, or the Church
prayer meeting, with some amusement, or
some other engagement. But he waits to
some purpose, for many people have been
cast into despair as a result of his unexpected
assault, just when they thought they were
safe. They were walking alone, instead of
with Christ, and so disaster followed.
There are two passages of Scripture which
give us a picture of sin waiting to pounce upon
us which are very graphic. The first is this :
“Be sober: be vigilant, because your
adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh
about seeking whom he may devour” (i Pet.
v. 8), and the second passage is : “ They
have now compassed us in our steps ; they


have set their eyes bowing down to the earth :
like as a lion that is greedy of his prey, and
as it were a young lion lurking in secret places 5 ’
(Ps. xvii. ii, 12).
The first is a picture of the devil, and the
second is a picture of the wicked who are
agents of the devil, but the idea is exactly the
same as that which is set out in Gen. iv. 7
(R.V.), where God is warning Cain against
the temptations which are coming to his life,
and He said to him : “ Sin coucheth at the
door.”
Temptation creeps upon us, like a lion
creeping through the long grass waiting for
his opportunity to spring upon the poor
creature when it is off its guard ; or like a
lion couching at the door of a house, waiting
for someone to come outside, when he will
spring upon him and tear him in pieces.
Be sure of this, that no one can safely
become lax in spirituality, for Satan never
grows weary of watching for an opportunity
of leading us into sin. And sometimes when
we have conquered some ugly sin—drink,
uncleanness of mind or action —he cunningly
leads us into those subtle temptations which
lead to spiritual sins, which so few people
realise are sins at all.


I had a letter from a young man some time
ago, assuring me that he had found holiness.
He wished me to rejoice with him, because
now he had utterly conquered certain sins
which before had caused him terrible agony
of mind. He had passed through a mighty
experience—so he told me —and he was sure
that I would rejoice with him. Of course, I
did rejoice, but at the same time I was very
much saddened, because I realised from the
remaining parts of his letter that subtle
temptations had caused him to fall into new
sins, for the whole of the remaining sheets of
his letter were filled with bitter and un-
Christly criticism of the Ministers and
Churches and Christians of his town.
Because he now felt that he was living on a
very high spiritual plane he concluded that
he had a right to break the commandment of
Christ who said : “ Judge not.”
This illustration is given as a warning, to
show how in conquering one sin, or one class
of sins, we may have the lion creeping through
the grass, bowing down to the earth so that
we may not see him, ready to spring upon us,
though we may even think we are walking the
new path of holiness, and we never dreamed
that he would find us on that path. But


mark this —he will find us whatever path we
tread, and if he cannot tempt us any longer
with fleshly lusts, he will creep upon us with
Pharisaic pride, and persuade us to plaster
some objectionable name on some other
Christian and boldly denounce someone
as a heretic on some hearsay evidence,
or undo someone’s influence by pass-
ing on stories about his beliefs or lack
of beliefs.
A SERIOUS WARNING
Our gravest danger is that we think we can
conquer temptation once and for all in some
new religious experience, whereas the fact is,
each new, rich, glorious religious experience
is to fit us to be more watchful, more thorough,
more Christly, and help us to fling our-
selves into the work of God with greater
courage and effectiveness. It is never for our
ease, or for the indulgence of our desire for
spiritual ecstasy, or to give us the right to
judge and condemn other professing
Christians —no matter how widely we may
differ from their point of view. One victory
should only warn you to watch more closely
for the slinking lion creeping through the
grass from another direction. He will always


be somewhere about —always—and you may
be sure that some of his deadliest temptations
will come to you in the guise of pious ideas,
and great religious indignations against some-
one who is working for Christ.
The devil is never more objectionable than
when he is speaking in pious language. He
quoted scripture to Christ, and he will quote
it to you. He filled the mouths of the scribes
and pharisees with theological questions in
attempting to trip Christ —see to it that he
does not do the same to you. A man may be
the agent of the devil as much when he is
quoting scripture as when he is trying to lead
someone else into gross evil.
So be careful, for temptation is persistent,
and when you think you are free from it be
more careful than ever, for the very feeling of
security is a temptation to grow slothful and
lax. Remember, you will have to fight evil
all your life, in one form or another, and there
is something stimulating in the conflict which
will enrich your whole life.
ON THE WATCH
Just before His death Jesus said to His
disciples : “ Watch and pray that ye enter
not into temptation ” (Matt. xxvi. 41),


Christ saves us not only from sins we have
committed, but from sms in the future. Not
only does He empower us spiritually, but He
shows us the source of power, so that we may
renew our spiritual supplies for the conflict
day by day. He does not carry us all the
time, but He shows us how we may become
co-workers with Him, and He sends us into
the thick of the fight armed with spiritual
weapons.
He watched and prayed during His earthly
life, and when He went into the garden of
Gethsemane to pray, He took three of His
disciples with Him, and He said, “ Tarry ye
here and watch with Me.” But while He
prayed, they went to sleep, and when He
awoke them He said : “ Watch and pray, that
ye enter not into temptation ; the spirit indeed
is willing, but the flesh is weak.”
The forces of evil were massing their final
attack upon His pure life, but the friends
whom He had asked to help Him, and to
watch, failed Him at the time when He
needed them most. And we shall fail Him
also if we do not take warning from their
example and follow Christ’s urgent and
loving advice.
We must watch everything that has to do


with our daily lives, for if we are to serve
Christ faithfully no part of our lives must
bring reproach on His name. It is not
enough that we go to Church —we must live
every day for Christ, and in our work and
play, and at home as well, show forth a
Christly example. Therefore, the intimate
things of life must be under His control.
At sea, the great ships, as well as the small
ones, have a man on the lookout. Sometimes
he is in the crow’s nest (as it is called) away
high up on the foremast, and sometimes he is
on the forecastle head —the elevated part of
the deck in the fore part of the ship. Some-
times there are two men on the lookout, as
well as the officers who are on duty. They
are there to watch, and, if they did not watch,
most probably the ship would never reach
port. They watch for drifting wreckage, or
for other vessels, or for land ; in fact, they
watch for anything which might prove to be
dangerous to their ship. If anything un-
usual is seen, it is at once reported to the
officer on duty, and then it is his obligation
to see that no harm comes to the vessel and
those on board. During the day observations
are made, so that the officers controlling the
ship may know exactly where they are and


what progress they are making. The tem-
perature of the water in which the ship is
sailing is discovered, and all other things,
such as the currents, and the danger of fogs,
the position of the barometer, and the
direction of the wind, are all made a note of
and studied in a scientific manner. The
officers in charge of the ship are always on
the watch, day and night, that no unforeseen
occurrence may endanger the ship and its
passengers and crew.
Jesus said “ Watch ” ! And we must be
on the watch always. We must watch our
words, our thoughts, our surroundings, our
companionships, our habits, and everything
else which affects our lives, lest in some way
we shall make shipwreck of our lives, instead
of doing the will of God and carrying out His
great purpose in all things.
OUR WORDS
Many who profess to serve Christ, and who
would never be defeated by a temptation to
commit gross sin, imagine that they are doing
well, because they have conquered the sins
of the flesh. Yet many of them sin grievously
by word of mouth. The Psalmist prayed :
“ Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth ;


keep the door of my lips ” (Ps. cxli. 3). He
not only watched his words, but he cried unto
God to set before his mouth a watch which
was Divine, so that by God’s help he might
never yield to the temptation to pass on evil
tales about someone else, or to say cruel
things to hurt someone else, or to allow
unclean speech to proceed out of his mouth,
and so defile the mind of another.
There are many passages in God’s Word
which show us how easy it is for us to sin by
word of mouth, and we are also shown that
evil-speaking is a deadly sin. For example,
we are told : “If any man among you seem to
be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but
deceiveth his own heart, this man’s religion
is vain ” (James i. 26).
If you have my book of scripture passages
arranged for daily devotional use, The Golden
Highway, turn up the readings set for May 9
and August 13, and you will have before you
many passages from the Bible telling you how
“ Death and life are in the power of the
tongue ” (Prov. xviii. 21).
OUR THOUGHTS
Our thoughts must be watched, also, for
we are told about ourselves : “As he


thinketh in his heart, so is he ” (Prov. xxiii. 7).
We are no better than the pictures we allow
to take a permanent place in our minds. We
cannot help evil thoughts coming to us, but
they are a temptation which must be banished
by God’s help, for the moment we encourage
them and take pleasure in them we are guilty
of sin. Jesus, speaking to some people who
were silently watching Him healing a poor
man, said, “ Wherefore think ye evil in your
hearts ? ” They had said nothing, but they
were evil in their thoughts, and that is sin.
There is a very searching statement made
by Jesus in the sermon on the mount:
“ Blessed are the pure in heart: for they
shall see God ” (Matt. v. 8). This really
means that those are blessed who, by God’s
help, keep the inner thoughts and desires pure
and holy.
OUR SURROUNDINGS
Our surroundings have a great deal to do
with our temptations, and we must, as
Christians, see to it that we do not run our-
selves into unnecessary danger. If we pray
to God not to allow us to be led into tempta-
tion, then we certainly must not lead ourselves
into temptation, but must set our minds on
avoiding all that would harm us.


A man who wishes to avoid the perils of
strong drink has no right to be a frequenter
of public house bars, even though he may not
intend to drink alcoholic liquor. Thousands
who are drunkards to-day began like that,
until they became accustomed to their
surroundings and gradually took strong drink
themselves.
A young man or woman who wishes to
remain pure should shun the public dance
hall, and should avoid the habits of speech
and association with members of the opposite
sex which break down the spiritual reserve,
and lead to a familiarity which is the first step
to sinful relationship. lam not saying one
word against a healthy and jolly friendship
between the sexes, for I believe that is a fine
and wholesome thing. But when “jolly”
turns into “ folly,” and when a wholesome
relationship turns into an unwholesome
flirtation, with something far more dangerous
looming up in the form of evil suggestions in
the mind of one or both, then the surround-
ings of your life are dangerous, and already
sin is appearing and disaster is not far off.
There need be no argument about what is
right and what is wrong in certain pleasures.
Only one question is necessary, and it is this :


“ Does this form of pleasure bring sin into
certain lives ? Does it lead to impurity ?
Does it cause the ruin of some lives ? ” If it
does, then no Christian ought to touch it, for
we must set our faces against everything
which hurts our fellow-creatures, and we
must strive to protect those who are weaker
than ourselves. You may be strong, but your
friend may be weak, or your neighbour
may have a twist morally, unknown to
himself or herself, which must be guarded
against.
Then remember, it is a fact beyond dispute
that public dances and other forms of amuse-
ment in which the sexes are thrown together
in heated rooms and emotional relationship,
and where drink is or can be introduced, are
the hunting grounds of evil people who seek
to ruin the lives of others for their own base
gratification. No Christian who wishes to
retain a high standard of spirituality, or who
wishes to be used of our Lord, should fre-
quent such places. It is certainly true that
many very fine people have confessed that for
them strict purity is impossible in such
surroundings. That should be quite suffi-
cient to convince any sincere Christian
without any further debate on the subject.


OUR FRIENDSHIPS
Companionships and friendships have a
great deal to do with the formation of
character, so we must be watchful here, as
our friends leave an impress on our personali-
ties which can never be altered. Although it
is not possible for us always to phoose a
companion or a friend who will be ideal in
every way, it is within our power to draw
away from cultivating a friendship which will
injure our lives or impoverish our characters.
God’s Word has many fine things to say
about friends and friendship, as it has about
every other important matter connected with
life. For example, it says : “ Ointment and
perfume rejoice the heart: so doth the
sweetness of a man’s friend by hearty counsel.
Thine own friend, and thy father’s friend,
forsake not ” (Prov. xxvii. 9, 10). But God’s
Word also says : “ Know ye not that the
friendship of the world is enmity with God ?
Whosoever therefore would be a friend of the
world maketh himself an enemy of God ”
(James iv. 4) (R.V.).
Then we are strictly warned : “ Be ye not
unequally yoked together with unbelievers ;
for what fellowship hath righteousness with


unrighteousness ? and what communion hath
light with darkness ? And what concord hath
Christ with Belial ? or what part hath he that
believeth with an infidel ? And what agree-
ment hath the temple of God with idols ? for
ye are the temple of the living God ; as God
hath said, I will dwell in them, and walk in
them ; and I will be their God and they shall
be my people. Wherefore come out from
among them, and be ye separate, saith the
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I
will receive you, and will be a Father unto
you, and ye shall be my sons and my daughters
saith the Lord Almighty ” (2 Cor. vi. 14-18).
THE BEST SAFEGUARDS
One of the best safeguards for the young
Christian is to join a Christian Endeavour
society, or some other Christian society of a
truly spiritual nature, and get into close
friendship with those forming such a society.
Then you will most probably find one good
friend such as you need. When the question
of marriage comes before you, you must pray
that you will never marry one who is out of
harmony with your religious ideas and ideals.
Far better to remain unmarried than to
lose your love for Christ, or to live a most


unhappy life, and perhaps have children
who will be brought up without any love for
God.
In these very lax days you cannot afford to
be lax, but must strive after a closer walk with
God every day, that you may triumph and
be found faithful in everything. Therefore,
watch your friendships, and if you cannot win
your friend for Christ, or if you find your
friend is having a harmful influence on you,
then end that friendship, no matter what it
costs, for Jesus said : “If thy right eye
causeth thee to stumble, pluck it out, and cast
it from thee : for it is profitable for thee that
one of thy members perish, and not thy whole
body be cast into hell. And if thy right hand
causeth thee to stumble, cut it off, and cast it
from thee : for it is profitable for thee that
one of thy members should perish, and not
thy whole body go into hell ” (Matt. v. 29, 30)
(R.V.).
Even if your friend seems as necessary to
your happiness as your eye or your right hand,
it is far better to suffer the agony of separation
from that friend now, than suffer the eternal
agony of being separated from God. It was
Jesus who said that, and you will find the
statement repeated in the same Gospel later


on, showing how important it is that we should
heed the warning.
And then watch in every way possible.
1 he Rev. Thomas Cook, when he was alive,
speaking to the thousands of young people
throughout the world whom he had brought
to Christ, said : “ Adopt this rule —if I
cannot do a thing and ask God to bless it,
then I won’t do it at all. You must never
make the practice of other Christians your
standard. Whatever you have a doubt about,
it is wrong for you to do. Give your soul,
always, the benefit of the doubt.”
THE VALUE OF PRAYER
Finally, remember that Jesus tells us to
pray. “ Watch and pray that ye enter not
into temptation.”
I have already written a booklet on prayer,
so that I shall not deal at any length with that
subject here, but I would urge you to make
prayer the habit of your life. It is to your
spiritual life what breathing is to your
physical life. You must have air for the
body, and you must have spiritual air for the
soul, and so you must pray.
Always begin and end the day with God,
but during the day learn by constant practice


to speak to God about everything. Walking
down the street, working in your garden,
bending over your lesson book, about the
household duties, planning for some excursion,
facing some difficulty, experiencing some
pleasure —bring God into it all by intercourse
such as you would have with a friend.
I knew a fine saint who loved his garden,
and he would pray something like this, when
he was turning the earth over with a spade
and picking out the weeds : “ Lord put Thy
spade of love into my heart; keep it soft and
pliable ; take out every weed so that Thy
flowers may bloom in my life, and I may show
forth Thy beauty and fragrance to others.”
He told me that every flower, and every
plot of grass, and every shrub in his garden,
had given him food for thought and prayer—
and I know that his garden was always in his
sermons, making them very beautiful.
I knew a very Godly man, who told me
that if ever he was summoned into the front
room to meet a visitor, he would just say
within himself: “ Lord let this interview be
for Thy glory,” or in some other very simple
but natural way he would ask for guidance
and blessing, so that all the interviews in his
busy life became times of spiritual oppor-


gives you vigour to go out and live a radiant
Christian life, and it gives you power to defeat
temptation.
Do not only ask for things when you pray —
for there are many things that you will ask
for that God will not give you, for He knows
that you are not ready to receive them, or
they would do you positive harm. But when
you pray, make it a time for telling God of
your joys, and of your desire to please Him
more, and of your triumphs, as well as of your
failures. Thank him for a happy picnic, or
for a happy day with some poor soul whom
you have visited and cheered on the way of
life, or for the beauty of a holiday or anything
else that you have cause to thank Him for.
If you think that things are wrong in your
Church, do not talk about it in a bitter spirit,
but lay it before God and ask Him to grant
that His gracious spirit may come and inspire
and transform, and then set about endeavour-
ing to do some of the transformation yourself
by a very gracious and self-sacrificing help-
fulness.
But pray about your weaknesses —your
sins—your temptations. Lay them before
God without reserve. Do not become morbid
about them, but drag them into the daylight


2 8 TEMPTATION
tunity, and God blessed him, and used him
in a remarkable way.
I had a friend who was a physician, and he
told me that he never went out to visit a
patient without lifting his heart for wisdom
and power to heal, and he said that he made
it the habit of his life to seek guidance for
every case that came into his consulting room.
In my ministry the people used to tell me
that they loved him to call, for he always left
a spiritual as well as a physical blessing behind
him.
Pray about everything, although you must
not expect God to do for you what you ought
to do for yourself, but you may rightfully
expect Him to give you power to do your very
best. Do not think of prayer as something
just to get you out of difficulties, or some-
thing to make a task easy, or something to
save you from using your faculties and so
encouraging yourself in laziness of mind or
body. Air, pure and good, breathed into the
lungs with deep inhalations produces rich
red blood, and wdll help physical health as
much as good food. It does not make you
lazy, but it makes you more vigorous, and
helps work to be a delight. So it is with true
prayer. It adds health to your soul, and


and hide nothing. If you know that you
have a mean nature, or an unforgiving spirit,
or a touchy disposition, or a jealous tempera-
ment, or an unclean mind, or a dishonest
kink, never lie to yourself, and never excuse
yourself, but be frankly and thoroughly
honest, and lay it all at God’s feet, and claim
His promise of help.
Do not go on thinking and brooding over
these things, but leave the burden at the foot
of the cross of Christ, and rise in radiant faith
to face the battle of the day, saying to your-
self : “ Christ has promised, and I believe
His word.” Then fill your life with good
thoughts and kind deeds and unselfish
attentions to others during the day, and you
will discover how prayer changes things.
“ Watch as if on that alone
Hung the issue of the day :
Pray that help may be sent down :
‘ Watch and Pray
Then, having watched against the approach
of all forms of evil, and having committed
your life to God in constant prayer, you may
confidently face every temptation to sin, and
say NO ! —a thousand times NO ! Then by


Divine power, you shall win the victory, and
every victory will make the next victory more
certain.
“ Ask the Saviour to help you,
Comfort, strengthen, and keep you ;
He is willing to aid you,
He will carry you through.”
Always believe God’s promises, for they are
sure, and here are three to remember and
cherish :
“ Blessed is the man that endureth tempta-
tion : for when he is tried, he shall receive
the crown of life, which the Lord hath
promised to them that love Him.” —James i.
12.
“ The Lord knoweth how to deliver the
godly out of temptation.” —2 Pet. ii. 9.
“For in that He Himself hath suffered
being tempted, He is able also to succour
them that are tempted.”—Heb. ii. 18.
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
THE WHITEFRIARS PRESS LTD., LONDON AND TONBRIDGE


H&.
By the Same Author
EFFECTIVE EVANGELISM
Second Edition, Fourth Impression
The book for every minister who hungers to
be his own evangelist.
“ Worth a cartload of lectures on preach-
ing.”—Expository Times.
MIGHTY MOMENTS
70 th Thousand
“ Preachers, Sunday-school teachers, Bible-
class leaders and open-air workers will find
fresh stimulus to consecrated service in these
pages.” —English Churchman.
THE GOLDEN HIGHWAY
20 th Thousand
Scripture Passages arranged
for Daily Devotional Use
“ The readings are admirably chosen, and
their arrangement ... is carefully planned.”
The Life of Faith.
STEP BY STEP
23 2>rd Thousand
REFINING FIRES
60 th Thousand
Booklets for the help of those who have just
set out on the Christian Life.
