

iiiiiiiiiiiiSimrimiiimiiiiiiiiiiiitiiiiimniiiiiiiiniiiiuiiiiuiiiiniii
dampest tossed IPoor;
or The Ocean of Life.
Hiiimiiiiiiiiiiimmiiiiiiiimiiiiiimiiimimmiimiimiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiii!iiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
Air: Your’re Born, but your’re not buried yet.
To-day whilst out walking through this great city,
My steps chanced to stray by the homes of the poor,
And many L saw well deserving of pity,
Who hunger and hardships were forced to endure.
Men 1 beheld who once held high ] ositions,
Crushed by misfortune they fell in the strife,
Outcasts to-day without hopes or ambition —
Poor stranded wrecks on the Ocean of Life.
CHORUS.
'Tis hard, bitter fighting to buffet the billows,
Great waves of sadness and sorrows are rife ;
Many frail barques are tossed by the tempest,
Then stranded and wrecked on the Ocean of Life.
I next saw a cripple stand propped up by crutches,
Needing assisting I plainly could see, —
Then placing a coin in the hat that he clutches,
I asked and he told me his sad history.
In the great Stockton coal mines he toiled for existance
To keep a bright home for his children and wife;
In that awful explosion he was crippled for ever,
And now he’s a wreck on the Ocean of Life. ’Tis hard, etc.
ill
■|3|
I
|-4|
II
iS
m
=§=
,
ill
I|l
ij
ii
£«=
i’l
= €=
P^l
1 next saw a woman—a sad faced poor creature —
The dark seal of sorrow stamped plain on her brow;
Grim povert}'’s tale you could trace on each feature—
Her past had been happy—Ah! look at her now.
She told me her husband had lost his employment
Through joining the ranks when the great strike was rife,
And but for the neighbours who kindly assist them,
Perchance they would starve on the Ocean of Life. ’Tis hard, etc,
I next saw' a soldier—with cold he was shivering—
A gallant old hero w'hose deeds where forgot,
With the cold biting blasts his pale lips were quivering;
With the famous Six Hundred he fought on the spot —
Who won for his country both glory and fame—
He was first in the van when danger was rife,
Now r he’s helpless and feeble —Oh! England, what shame!
You have left him to starve on the Ocean of Life. ’Tis hard, etc.
PRICE
ONE PENNY.
iiwiiMiiimmimiiiiiimimiiimmiliiiiimiiiniiiiiiiiiHiiwiiiminiiiiiininmiimiiiijM
'=?W r


