

Ten Years of Progress in the Motion Picture
Industry of Australian.






Ten Years of Progress in the motion picture
Industry of Australia.
SYDNEY, 1921.


W.A. Gibson, O.B.E.
General Manager, Australasian
Films, Ltd.
One of the three Managing Direc-
tors of Union Theatres, Ltd.
Managing Director of Amalga-
mated Pictures, Ltd.
Managing Director of Co-operative
Film Exchange, Ltd.
Director of J. C. Williamson’s
Films.
Director of Northcote Theatre
Company, Ltd.
Director of Moonee Ponds Theatre
Company, Ltd.
Director of Geelong Theatre Com-
pany, Ltd.
Director of North Melbourne
Theatre Company, Ltd.
Director of Richmond Theatre
Company, Ltd.
Director Committee of Expansion,
Union Theatres, Ltd., and Elec-
tric Theatres, Ltd.


Stuart F. Doyle
General Manager Union Theatres,
Ltd.
One of the three Managing Direc-
tors Union Theatres, Ltd.
Director of Australasian Films,
Ltd.
Director of the Greater J. D.
Williams Amusement Company,
Ltd.
Director and Chairman Committee
of Expansion, Union Theatres,
Ltd., and Electric Theatres, Ltd.


Edwin Geach
One of the three Managing Direc-
tors of Union Theatres, Ltd
Director of Australasian Films,
Ltd. . .
Director of Wests, Ltd.


Capital.
Union Theatres, Ltd. (Parent Company)
... 300,000
Australasian Films, Ltd. (Parent Company)
.... 300,000
The General Film Co. of Australia, Ltd.
... 250,000
The Greater J. D. Williams Amusement Co., Ltd.
.... 200,000
Spencer’s Pictures, Ltd.
... 120,000
West’s, Ltd
100,000
Amalgamated Pictures, Ltd.
.... 100,000
Australasian Films (East), Ltd.
50,000
Waddington’s Theatres, Ltd
.... 200,000
Marrickville Buildings, Ltd
20,000
Southern Cross Theatre Co., Ltd.
16 000
Northcote Theatre Co., Ltd.
50 000
Moonee Ponds Theatre Co., Ltd.
50 000
Geelong Theatre Co., Ltd.
5o!ooo
North Melbourne Theatre Co., Ltd.
25 000
Richmond Theatre Co., Ltd.
25 000
Electric Theatres Proprietary, Ltd
.... 200^000
J. C. Williamson’s Films
50,000
Co-operative Film Exchange, Ltd
20,000 '
Total
£2,126,000
Companies concerned in the activities of Union Theatres
Ltd., and Australasian Films Ltd., in Australia.


F W.Thring
Managing Director of Elec-
tric Theatres Proprietary,
Ltd.
Managing Director of J. C.
Williamson’s Films.
Director of Union Theatres,
Ltd.
Director of Australasian
Films, Ltd.
Director of Waddington’s
Theatres, Ltd.
Director Committee of Ex-
pansion, Electric Thea-
tres, Ltd., and Union
Theatres, Ltd.


A Record of Progress in the Motion Picture
Industry of Australia.
11 MEMORY is perhaps the most fickle of all the human endowments!
Pursuing the eternal rainbow of life’s insatiate ambitions, the hustling
Australian never pauses to bridge the gulf of time. Everything, except his
immediate or ultimate goal, is relegated to the limbo of forgotten things.
All around him—rubbing shoulders at all hours of the day and night— are
gigantic structures, veritable monuments to man’s endeavour, which, in his
teens or early manhood, were as yet unborn. But their very assertiveness,
their positive omnipresence, render them transparent before his gaze.
And standing out majestically in this gallery of gossamer-like monuments
of Commerce is the Motion Picture—the “League-of-Nations” entertainment
that speaks all languages from Kamskatka to Timbucktoo; that carries its
message of enlightenment and good cheer to the city magnate in the
palatial million dollar theatre, and also to the swaggie humping “Matilda”
in the travelling tent show, back o’ Bourke.


TOP
Executive Office of General
Manager, Union Theatres. Ltd.
Stuart F. Doyle
Head Office, Sydney.
LEFT
Union Theatres
Screen Advertising Dept,
Head Office, Sydney.
RIGHT
Executive Office of Manager,
Union Theatres
National Publicity Dept.
Head Office, Sydney.


Less than a decade ago, when the limelight jet projected a toy image
to the unbounded joy of the Continent’s opticians, Australians sat back and
marvelled—another wonder of the world! Yet to-day, when over eight
hundred shrines to the magic shadow shapes flaunt their flame of progress
on high, nobody is moved to marvel! Nobody cares. The Motion Picture has
entered into their daily lives, has been absorbed into the general social
cosmos. What better proof of this, than the declaration of the land’s most
eminent judges ‘a necessary commodity?”
The public has lost its perspective, but not its enthusiasm.
Its light of learning—its introduction into the foremost scholastic institu-
tions; its power to mould public opinion; its benign influence over the poor
and oppressed, burns with a lambent flame.
Early History.
Wrapped up in the prosaic exterior of the Australian Motion Picture
business lies a romance that makes some of the fictional plots pale into insig-
nificance. About fourteen years ago the screen here was used only to project


AUSTRALASIAN FILMS Ltd
& UNION THEATRES Ltd.
HEADQUARTERS , SYDNEY
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF SECRETARY
AUSTRALASIAN FILMS Ltd.
& UNION THEATRES L td.
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF MR. EDWIN GEACH,
ONE OF THE MANAGING DIRECTORS OF
UNION THEATRES LIMITED


lantern slides upon, and when the organisations known as Spencer s Theatre-
scope Company, West Pictures, and Amalgamated Pictures, Ltd., blazed the
trail the cities resounded with the voice of the scoffer, who predicted a death
sudden and soon. The same old scratched subjects ran for weeks cowboys,
Indians, scenics and topicals none measuring more than a couple of hundred
feet, and the sceptics maintained their dismal croak. But the loyal band of
followers remained steadfast and true, and occasional seasons developed into
presentations at short, regular intervals, until the new experiment in the realm
of entertainment justified the dedication of leading theatres to the public’s
homage of animated photography.
Merging of Interests.
When these pioneers of the screen became firmly established, the con-
tinuous show loomed over the horizon, and with magical celerity the Greater
J. D. Williams Amusement Company was directing a chain of “round the
clock” theatres.


The Principal Departmental Heads, Union Theatres Ltd., Head Office, Sydney.


All this time the construction of the projectors—those old beater contrap-
tions with 500 ft. spool boxes—was revolutionised, the General Film Company
of America and the big English and Continental organisations laid the
foundations upon which the present-day pretentious photoplay rests, and the
houses specially designed for screen entertainment had their mushroom birth.
It was then that the great merger of West’s, Ltd., Spencer’s Pictures,
Ltd., Amalgamated Pictures, Ltd., and the Greater J. D. Williams Amuse-
ment Company was effected, and which to-day are represented by Union
Theatres, Ltd., and Australasian Films, Ltd., the two great National institutions
which, with their association with the J. C. Williamson interests, represent a
capital, including theatre buildings, of over £3,000,000.
I
And ten years ago the Australian pioneer of the screen was looking for
a purchaser with a couple of hundred sovereigns!
Union Theatres’ Growth.
Starting out with 29 theatres—certainly the biggest and best in the
Commonwealth—on January 6th, 1913, Union Theatres, Ltd,, to-day proudly




hangs its sign—the chain of co-operative endeavour encircling the map of the
sunny island continent, whose Anzac sons wrote its name in letters of gold—
over a circuit comprising more than 80 city suburban and country houses.
These cinema temples are universally regarded as the ones that set the
standard amongst Australia’s total number. The others are of 1 esser import-
ance, and include many which open their doors only once or twice a week.
What greater evidence of the paramount importance of Union Theatres could
there be than the proven fact that their capital investment represents more
than half the total shown in the public records.
When the four pioneer concerns amalgamated, theatres affording in-
ferior accommodation for a comparatively few people were regarded as the
greatest structural achievements of the time, yet to-day, after a lapse of
only seven years, many of these houses are numbered amongst the obsolete,
and are rapidly giving place to palatial halls of pleasure, constructed on
lines similar to those pre-eminent palaces of luxury on the Great White Way,
New York.


SOME OF THE DIRECTORS,
MANAGERS AND DAY STAFF,
UNION THEATRES LTD. SYDNEY.
DAY STAFF, UNION THEATRES,)
MELBOURNE, VICTORIA


Australia’s Big New Theatres.
Shortly after old man Time turns over the calendar to usher in 1921,
ihe foundation stones of three million dollar Union theatres will be declared
“well and truly” laid, and with this planting of yet another milestone on the
long road of Motion Picture Progress, there will open up a vista of enduring
accomplishment, and still further advancement, such as will lift the work
of film propagation out of the turmoil of speculative “battledore and shuttle-
cock,” and give it its well earned place among the honoured and accredited
commercial institutions of the land.
These three de luxe theatres will rear their majestic facades above George
Street, Sydney; Bourke Street, Melbourne; and on the site now occupied by
Melrose Theatre, Perth, the last named venture being carried out in con-
junction with Mr. T. M. Coombe, one of the principal Theatrical and Motion
Picture entrepreneurs of Western Australia.
The primary move will be the erection on a scale hitherto unheard of
in Australia, of the house in George Street, Sydney. Afterwards will follow


Union Theatres All-Australian Circuit,
Covering the Six States
of th e Common wealth
ONE OF UNION THEATRES
ACHIEVEMENTS IN
SUMPTUOUS PRESENTATION
FAMOUS CHAPLIN
MOVING SIGN
Crystal Palace, Sydney
Proprietors, Union Theatres, Ltd.


winter nights, all controlled within the box itself, while iced water, fans
and all other cooling appliances known to civilisation will be on hand during
the hot weather.
At the back of the circle will be found the Directors and the executive
offices. The immense floor of the main auditorium is designed to hold 2,500
people on the same luxurious lines of comfort as the balcony.
A notable characteristic of the house will be the entire absence of posts
or columns in this enormous building through the application of the most
modern cantilever system.
One of the main features of the entertainment it is proposed to provide
in the theatres de luxe will be the orchestra, which will consist of 40 musicians
as well as a highly paid organist to play the Grand Organ, which will be
installed at a cost of £lO,OOO.
Spirit of Co-operation.
During the past year a remarkable spirit of co-operation has been en-
gendered among the outside exhibitors and Union Theatres, Ltd., and in


MARBLE VESTIBULE,
King's Cross Theatre
KING'S CROS S THEATRE,
DARLINCHURST, SYDNEY.
Proprietoys, Union Theatres Ltd.
The Picturesque Foyer,
King's Cross Theatre.


its train has come a sincere realisation of the all-important call for better
things, with the result that the curtain has been rung down for ever on the
old haphazard methods of the tent show, and in their place has appeared a
combination of eager and enthusiastic managers united in a whole-hearted
attempt to place their charge on a plane befitting its public importance. It
is generally realised that single and disjointed efforts keep the picture mil-
lenium in the dim and distant future, and that everyone’s goal must be to
consolidate the whole of Australia represented by modern up-to-date houses,
capital involved in accordance with relative importance of city, town or
suburb, and the presentation of an entertainment in keeping with the most
advanced systems in vogue in the United States and Great Britain.
Some idea of the progressive spirit and efficient manner in which Union
Theatres organisation handles its business can be gleaned from the fact that
every theatre over the whole circuit is making money, and it must be taken
into consideration the fact that a number of the theatres that have fallen into
their hands by reasons of various amalgamations have been non-paying pro-
positions, but with the characteristic energy of this firm every theatre that has


COLISEUM THEATRE
NORTH SYDNEY.
PROPRIETORS, UNION THEATRES LTD.
STRA ND THEATRE
WAGGA, N.S.W.
PROPRIETORS UNION THEATRES LTD.


been taken over, its policy has been so changed and such a new atmosphere
created that losing houses have become paying ones and houses earning small
incomes have become highly lucrative.
The organisation of Union Theatres keeps one goal before it all the time,
that is the placing of every theatre in which they are concerned upon the
highest plane as a money earner and as a medium for advancing the already
high prestige of the Company.
The Union De Luxe organisation is made up of a series of circuit mem-
bers that is exhibitors who have seen the wisdom of placing their theatres
under the protection of Union Theatres, Ltd. They are men who are co-
operating with the main body to bring a battery of brains and organisation
to bear upon the business so that its position in the world of commerce will
be unassailable.
The Managing Directors.
Behind the gigantic machine of organisation that has brought about
this rapid evolution are the guiding hands of the managing directors, Messrs.


SYDNEY TOWN HALL
Where Union Theatres
attractions of National
importance are presented
EMPRESS THEATRE
SYDNEY
Proprietoys, Union Theatres Ltd.
GLOBE De Luxe, THEATRE, SYDNEY
Proprietoys, Union Theatres, Ltd.


W. A. Gibson, Edwin Geach, Stuart F. Doyle, and F. W. Thring. The dynamic
energy concentrated in these men represents a unanimity of ceaseless en-
deavour to consolidate the position of the organisation and continue the
policy of giving the business absolute security and still greater public and
official recognition by co-operation with the whole of the exhibitors of Aus-
tralia.
The interpretation of the Company’s policy is entrusted to these captains
of Cinematography. Their peculiar coincidence of opinion enables the pro-
secution of vigorous and never flagging team work, without which the won-
derful record of accomplishment during the past twelve months would have
been a matter of impossibility.
W. A. Gibson, O.B.E.
In addition to his position as one of the Managing Directors of Union
Theatres, Ltd., Mr. W. A. Gibson, 0.8. E., as General Manager of Aus-
tralasian Films, Ltd., has control of the all important him buying and hiring




side of the firm’s gigantic film operations. A man of remarkable foresight
and business acumen, he has looked far ahead in regard to the staple neces-
sity of the organisation film and has planned a programme of features
for years to come that will guarantee the pre-eminence of the theatres for
which he is catering. As one of Australia’s real pioneers in screen exploita-
tion, Mr. Gibson has had 1 5 years’ experience in directing the destinies of
the Company, which gives him a real supremacy in his particular domain.
The wonderful distributing organisation which he has built up since he took
control of the film interests has been a revelation to the trade, and a lasting
testimony to the ability and organising genius of this power amongst Aus-
tralia’s film men.
Stuart F. Doyle.
All the multifarious and important executive work of the General
Manager of Union Theatres, Ltd., falls upon the shoulders of Stuart F.
Doyle, and his many years’ experience in legal and commercial circles, to-
gether with ten years’ service in the Moving Picture Industry admirably fits


STRAND THEATRE
NEWCASTLE. N.S.W
Proprietoys Union Theatres Ltd.
THE GREAT SOUTHERN THEATRE
WAGGA N.S.W.
Proprietoys Union Theatres, Ltd.
THE GREAT SOUTHERN THEATRE
WAGGA N.S.W.
Proprietoys Union Theatres Ltd
SOUTHERN CROSS THEATRE
NEUTRAL BAY N.S.W
Proprietoys Union Theatres Ltd.


him for the personal control of the dozens of departments and eighty
theatres of such an immense concern. Mr. Doyle s management of the
exhibiting and theatre interests of the Company ensures that every vital
detail necessary for the exploiting of the Company’s great circuit will be
maintained, as well as the carrying out of the Company’s bold policy of
expansion throughout Australia. A great organiser, and a man of foresight
and enduring energy, he supplies the driving force for welding the Com-
pany’s operations into one smooth running whole, combining the knack of
getting the most out of the Company’s two thousand workers with humani-
tarian methods.
Edwin Geach.
Not only does Edwin GeacK stand out as a giant in the Motion Picture
world, but he can also point to an enviable career in the realm of the legiti-
mate. The long and intimate association with the production and direction
of innumerable stage successes is an invaluable asset to an organisation which
is forever striving to give its attractions the best possible presentation in re-


UNION THEATRE BILLIARD
SAL OON, NEWCASTLE, N.S.W.
UNION de Luxe THEATRE
CROYDON, N.S.W.
UNION de Luxe THEATRE
ASHFIELD, N.S.W.


spect both to theatrical lighting and mechanical embellishments. As a Di-
rector of Wests, Ltd., he has been one of the pioneers of the industry almost
since its inception, and his years of experience in both pictures and the le-
gitimate ably fit him for the high position he holds in helping to guide the
future of this great industry.
F. W. Thring,
Mr. F. W Thring, the latest Director to join the Company, brings with
him the interests of Electric Theatres Proprietary, Ltd., and its subsidiary
companies. A man of great influence in the Motion Picture Industry,
and of broad outlook, his experience will be felt in shaping the destinies
of the combined companies in their future activities. Electric Theatres
Pty. Ltd., in conjunction with Union Theatres, Ltd., are building a big
circuit of Million Dollar Theatres throughout Australia, and Union Theatres’
expansion will be largely coupled with Mr. Thring’ s name.


Design of Australia's
New Circuit of
Million Dollar theatres,
Capacity 3000 to 4000.
cost £200,000 each.
Building in Sydney,
Melbourne, Adelaide,
Brisbane & Perth.
For luxury of
appointments and
advanced method or
entertainment, these
theatres will place
Australia in the
forefront of Motion
Picture & Theatrical
endeavour thuoughout
the world.


New Methods of Presentation.
Having successfully inaugurated a policy for bigger and better things
the directors of Union Theatres, Ltd., are ever striving to give the Motion Pic-
ture the real material prestige, the newest of the art merits. Their aim is not
only to improve the standard of the productions, but also the method of
presentation and the theatres in which they are showing. Now that the law
has decreed that the photoplay is a necessary commodity, the directors re-
gard themselves as the direct trustees of the public, whose interests will
always be paramount in working out the destiny of this new form of enter-
tainment.
Music has come to be regarded as part of the Motion Picture itself, for
without its softening influence the silent drama would be like a beautiful flower
bereft of its perfume. In no way has music been neglected by the directors
of Union Theatres, Ltd. In fact, they have been right in the forefront. The
very best of the operatic and concert artists that adorn the profession fulfil
engagements from time to time in the biggest houses under the firm s control.


Casino Theatre. Rozelle;
Union Theatres Circuit.
Theatre, Balmain,
Union Theatres Circuit
Amusu Theatre, Balmain
Union Theatres Circuit.
Theatre, Balmain
Union Theatres Circuit
Mr. Ed. L. Betts,
PROPRIETOR


The introduction into the shrines of the photo drama of the State Conserva-
torium Orchestra of 90 performers under the baton of M. Henri Verbrugghen,
was one of their biggest steps in this respect. It was a move that enabled
their patrons to hear the very best of music rendered by one of the finest
orchestras in the world at a cheap rate.
Surprising Figures.
The film industry in Australia is truly in an enviable position. Few
people are aware that there are no less than 808 theatres entirely devoted
to Motion Pictures in the Commonwealth. Of this number New South Wales
own 303, Victoria 199, Queensland 143, South Australia 66, Western Aus-
tralia 61, and Tasmania 36. New South Wales’s quota is divided up into 18
houses in the city proper, 96 in the suburbs, and 189 in the country. It is
estimated that the average number of people who weekly attend these
theatres is well over the million mark.


MADELL’S LEICHHARDT ENTERPRIZES UNION THEATRES CIRCUIT.
DAVID MADELL
STRAND THEATRE LEICHHARDT
PROPRIETORS, MESSRS. MADELL
R.W.(Bob) MADELL
The Strand de Luxe,
Leichhardt, in Course of
erection, When finished will
be the most luxurious in
the district.
B.A. (Bert) MADELL


Marshalled figures of the industry are surprising:
Capital approximately £6,000,000
Persons employed estimated 11,000
Annual wages estimated £2,000,000
The amount expended annually by the combined picture theatres of
Australia on electricity is £30,000; in advertising £120,000, while the quantity
of tickets used for admission purposes would fill a dozen railway trucks.
This furnishes indeed a striking commentary on the progressive spirit
of Australia.
The Future of the Industry.
A rosy future for the new art is at last showing over an horizon which
for years has been shrouded in the clouds of petty strife, undermining of
work already accomplished, vain attempts at ideals and the thousand and
one difficulties that are sure to confront the pioneers of a new industry. Al-


J.H. HAMILTON,
PROPRIETOR.
STRAND THEATRE, ORANGE
Union Theatres Circuit
EMPIR THEATRE, ORANGE
Union Theatres Circuit.


ready the Motion Picture is the National Amusement its future cannot be
anything but bright. Ultimately it will be as much a part of the people’s
daily lives as their meals.
The Motion Picture stands out as a haven of placid contentment in the
days of high prices. In it can the man of moderate means find ade-
quate relaxation from the day’s toil. Its message to the public is always
one of good cheer while its educational value is without question. From
a financial standpoint no industry is on a firmer basis as the foregoing figures
set out. It is the aim of Union Theatres, Ltd., to establish the industry as a
commercial one, the same as banking, insurance or other great institutions.
Australian Picture Producing.
Despite the advances made in the presentation of Motion Pictures in
Australia, the production side, up till quite recently, has been singularly neg-
lected, chiefly because of the fact that the market here has not been ade-
quate to meet the demands of production. But Union Theatres, Ltd., and


CAMPSIE THEATRE
PROPRIETORS, COOKE & DOBSON
UNION THEATRES CIRCUIT
STAR COURT THEATRE
LIS MORE
UNION THEATRES CIRCUIT
STRAND THEATRE
FORBES
DIRECTION, UNION THEATRES L td.
STRAND CARDENS
FORBES,
DIRECTION, UNION THEATRES LTD
PRINCESS THEATRE
SYDNEY
PROPRIETORS, UNION THEATRES Ltd
OLYMPIC THEATRE
FORBES
UNION THEATRES CIRCUIT


Australasian Films, Ltd., coupling their organisation with that of Mr. F. W.
Thring, of J. C. Williamson Films, intend to locally produce films in a big
way, not with the object of making money, but with the idea of encourag-
ing Australian talent and industry.
Union Theatres, Ltd., and Australasian Films, Ltd., already have a fine
studio and laboratory in their organisation, a studio said to be the finest
in the Southern Hemisphere. Its situation at Rushcutter’s Bay, Sydney, close to
the harbour, is an ideal one for making pictures, while from a standpoint
of plant available nothing is left to be desired.
The lot is used by most of the outside local producers for the making
of interiors for their pictures, while a news gazette emanates weekly from its
developing and printing rooms.
Financial Stability.
1 here was a time when Motion Pictures were considered by financiers
as appertaining to the “Wild Cat.” So they withheld their interests. But


ELITE THEATRE. RADCLIFFE
Proprietor F H Harris
UNION THEATRES CIRCUIT
KOGCARAH PICTURE PALACE
KOGCARAH, N.S.W
Proprietor A Goode
UNION THEATRES CIRCUIT
CRNULLA THEA TRE, CRONULLA N.S.W
Proprietor F W Rose
UNION THEATRES CIRCIT
EMPIPE THEATRE
BANKSTOWN N.S.W
Proprietor Mayos UNION THEATRES CIRCIT
IMPERIAL THEATRE-
ROCKDALE NSW
Proprietor J Dolrymple
UNION THEATRES CIRCIT


in later years they saw that the Motion Picture had come to stay, and to-day
the greater portion of the large financial men of the community have big
interests in controlling companies.
The pre-eminent position of Union Theatres, Ltd., and Australasian
Films, Ltd., in the world of cinematography throughout the southern hemi-
sphere is most strikingly exemplified in their palatial headquarters in Sydney,
the city that has come to be regarded as the commercial capital of the Com-
monwealth. This great nerve centre of commercial organisation is located
in the Film House, an imposing eight-storey architectural feature, situated
in Pitt Street at the very heart of the city’s amusement and commercial ac-
tivities. Through its doorways there is daily passing a continuous stream
of the Commonwealth’s Motion Picture identities embarking on new enter-
prises in conjunction with these leaders of Motion Picture thought, formulat-
ing new contracts for film supply, or carrying out their regular co-operative
plans in conjunction with the various departmental heads of the organisation.


Managers of Theatres, Union Theatres Ltd., N.S.W.


Headquarters at the Film House.
The whole of the vast building, which has a floor space of ten acres, is
given over to the administrative, executive and departmental heads of the
two firms. On the first floor there are the main board room, the luxurious
suites of the directors of management, their secretarial staffs and stenograph-
ers. while through the remaining floors accommodation is provided for the
General Manager of Union Theatres, Ltd., and staff, the Assistant General
Manager of Australasian Films, Ltd., the Secretary of the two parent com-
panies, the Treasurer, Accountancy and Auditing Staffs, Service Department.
Expansion Department, Union Theatres Circuit Department, Organising Mana-
gers’ Department, Presentation and Exploiting Department, Screen Adver-
tising Department, Employment Department, Clearance Department, Music
Library, Publicity Department, Film Exchanges, Cinemachinery and Theatre
Supplies Department, Offices of the Organisation Controlling the East, Poster
Department, Slide Department, Consulting Chemist and Scientific Research
Department, Despatch Department and Packing Room, while one special floor
is given over to two private projection theatres.




A Whirlwind of Energy.
An excursion through the Film House comes as a veritable eye-opener
to anyone not familiar with the hustle and bustle of this dynamic organisation.
The carefree individual who calmly watches a photoplay across the silver-
sheet never stops to think of the constantly keyed-up volatile army of special-
ists perenially striving to perfect the art of shadow shapes. But let him
pass within the portals of the Film House and witness this bee-hive of amuse-
ment providers and his placidity of outlook will receive a rude shock. The
coldly indifferent and blase attitude affected by the old-time houses of com-
merce finds no place in the ranks of this up-to-the-minute motion picture
team. The administrative and executive heads will be observed issuing
their messages of instruction by telegram, letter and ’phone in the precious
moments snatched between an ever-flowing stream of callers, while above
the click of the numerous typewriters will be heard the rattle of the calculating
machines, and still louder will come the noise of the purring projectors.


Lounge.
MAJESTIC THEATRE
Foyer,
MAJECTIC THEATRE
MAJESTIC THEATRE
MAJESTIC THEATRE
MELBOURNE VIC.
Propnetors, Union Theatres, Ltd.
BRITANNIA THEATRE
MELBOURNE, VIC.
Propnetors, Union Theatres, Ltd.
MELBA THEATRE
MELBOURNE, VIC.
Propnetors, Union Theatres Ltd.


Besides, there is the racket of the film exchanges, the packers and shippers,
and the testing of generators and mechanisms. Also may be seen row upon
row of clerks attending to card-indexes and letter-files, book-keepers main-
taining a record of their companies’ operations, accountants co-ordinating
the results of business in the six States of the Commonwealth, and sitting in
a place apart the private staff which maintains a perennial audit.
Profit Sharing Plan.
A human illustration of the soul of business is furnished by the deci-
sion of the Directors of Union Theatres, Ltd., and Australasian Films, Ltd.,
to inaugurate a profit-sharing plan among the departmental heads and
managers. Broadly, the idea is to distribute on an actuarial basis portion
of the balance left standing to the credit of the profit account after provision
has been made for the payment of the annual dividend. On the basis of
the past years’ results the staff should receive a handsome bonus.
The directors believe that the creation of this incentive will bring about




excellent team work among the executive heads and result in immeasurably
greater profits, because everyone will have a definite interest in the company
and use his every endeavour to give of his best in order that his own alloca-
tion of profit will be the greatest possible. Under the scheme there will be
no place for drones, as they will automatically disappear in the struggle of
supremacy.
Control of Immense Interests.
The immense chess-board of exhibiting interests represented by Union
Theatres, Ltd., has its controlling force in the Film House, whence radiates
all managerial directions concerning presentation, publicity, exploitation and
house-management. It is here that intense psychological study is brought
to bear on the compilation of programmes with their added attractions of
musical and vocal interludes and special orchestral accompaniments. Some
idea of the gigantic nature of the leaders task may be gauged when it is
mentioned that they and their staff mould the destinies of over 80 of their


STATE CONSERVATORIUM ORCHESTRA
90 Performers.
Appearing at Cross Theatre, Sydney
& other Union Theatres Circuit Houses
MOONEE PONDS THEATRE
MOON EX PONDS
Direction, Union Theatres Ltd.
EMPRESS THEATRE
PRAHRAN
Direction, Union Theatres Ltd.


ovn theatres in the Commonwealth, as well as innumerable members of the
circuit who have seen the wisdom of placing their theatres under the pro-
tecting arm of the parent firm. They are men who are co-operating with
the main body with the object of bringing a battery of brains and organising
power to bear upon the business.
The staff of Union Theatres, numbering over 2000, is easily the greatest
numerically employed by any firm providing public entertainment in the
Southern Hemisphere. At headquarters there are employed 1 3 managers
of departments, 20 auditors, 6 accountants, 12 book-keepers, 60 clerks, 25
stenographers, while throughout the circuit of theatres the weekly payroll
includes 90 managers 300 musicians, 200 cleaners, 200 ticket-sellers, and
so on right through the whole classification of the staff.
Auditing.
In almost every commercial enterprise it is necessary only to call in spe-
cialised accountants at the end of each financial period for the purpose of
conducting a certified audit, but the ramifications of this organisation are so


GEELONG THEATRE
GEELONG, VIC.
ST KILDA THEATRE
ST KILDA, VIC,
DIRECTION UNION THEATRES LTD
NORTHCOTE THEATRE
NORTHCOTE VIE
DIRECTION
UNION THEATRES LTD
SOLWAY THEATRE
MELBOURNE VIC
DIRECTION UNION THEATRES LTD
ELSTERNWICk THEATRE
ELSTERNWICK VIC
DIRECTION UNION THEATRES LTD


far-reaching that it is necessary to perpetually maintain an auditing staff
numbering over 20 members. By means of a carefully planned scheme of
returns and the general use of loose-leaf ledgers it is possible for this staff
to keep a perennial check on the companies affairs, and to strike a balance
whenever required. They work in the strictest privacy, and are not allowed
to associate with any of the other employees.
National Publicity.
From the creative colony which moulds and controls the national public-
ity of Union Theatres, Ltd., and Australasian Films, Ltd., emanates all the
advertising matter and press stories of the whole of the firm s activities
throughout Australia. On its staff are ad-planners, publicity writers, black
and white artists, pictorial poster designers, art-ticket writers, and sections
dealing with blocks and photographs. In respect of its absolutely self-con-
tained character this department is unique in Australia. Much of the credit
in respect of the wonderful strides made by cinematography is due to the


St. Georges Theatre,
Yarraville, Vic.
Newmarket Theatre.
Newmarket, ViC.
Lyric Theatre.
Lyric, Vic.
Globe Theatre,
Richmond, Vic.


broad, far-sighted policy it has always vigorously prosecuted, and to the fact
that by its freedom from the guile so generally associated with similar centres
of endeavour it has been able to formulate the present boundless good-will
of the Australian. Through its effective co-operation with the Press it has
educated the movie mind and continues still to lead the people along the
path of progress.
Expansion and New Enterprises.
The Expansion Department was constituted to deal with all matters
coming under the headings of financial development and flotation, in the
interests of the various exhibitors who are co-operating with the Company.
Men with intensive training in law and company formation are engaged in
laying business foundations for all the firm’s co-operative ventures and new
theatres.
The work of assisting in bringing the businesses of new circuit members
into line with the general standard is conducted under the aegis of the Or-


NATIONAL THEATRE
RICHMOND, VIC.
ROYAL THEATRE
WINDSOR, VIC
IMPERIAL THEATRE
NORTH MELBOURNE, VIC.
CRYSTAL PALACE THEATRE
CAULFIELD, VIC.
BROADWA Y THEATRE
ELWOOD, VIC.
PALACE THEATRE
NORTH FITZROY, VIC.


ganising Manager s Department. Here the weaker theatres and enterprises
taken over are remodelled and re-organised and given the revivifying in-
fluence necessary to conform to the other houses of the great chain.
Following in sequence comes the Circuit Department, which carries on
with the co-operation of the members the latest additions to the organisation.
In a specially furnished suite of offices experts work in conjunction with the
individual owners, who have the free use of all the lavish and comprehensive
appointments.
In order that its circuit members should have every assistance in regard
to both presentation and exploitation there is an additional section working
in constant co-operation with the circuit members. Its staff is enabled to
take fullest advantage of any of the campaigns carried out in connection with
the great city houses.
Screen Advertising.
The screen advertising department has been reorganised to such good
purpose that no longer is it necessary to employ agents. In their stead is


Melbourne Theatre Managers.
W.LYALL
Electrician in Chief,
Union Theatre Melboume.
J.C.LANGLEY,
Moonee Ponds.
A.H.DAWES,
Majestic.
S. CREWE S,
Empire, Prahran
H.B. CLOUGH,
Ma nager, Melbourne Theatres.
R.M. LEISH
Northcote
H.G. HODGES,
Geelong
E.C, BRYER
Solway, Fitzroy
J. WEST,
St. Kilda.
J.RUEL,
Manager, Britannia & Melba


a considerable waiting list which includes some of the biggest commercial
houses in Australia. This happy state of affairs is due entirely to the altered
method of presentation, under which the advertiser is guaranteed a proper
presentation of his advertisement amongst a limited number of slides. So
rapidly is the circuit extending that before long a merchant will be able to
sign a contract to have his particular line proclaimed in every square mile
of the 3,000,000 represented by Australia. During the last twelve months
a complete metamorphosis has taken place in the business world s attitude
toward screen advertising, and what was once regarded with opprobium
is now looked upon as the greatest of all selling mediums, when properly
catered for on business lines, as is done by Union Theatres, Ltd.
Employment and Service.
So great is the appeal made to those seeking employment by the attrac-
tive nature of the firm’s work that it has been found necessary to organise
a special department to deal with staff engagements. Here a constant line


WEST'S OLYMPIC THEATRE
BRISBANE
PRINCESS THEATRE
SOUTH BRISBANE
PAVILION THEATRE
BRISBANE
STRAND THEATRE
BRISBANE
MAJESTIC THEATRE
BRISBANE
MELBA THEATRE
VALLEY, BRISBANE


of callers daily effect registration for the particular class of work they desire,
and each morning a committee sits in judgment on the qualifications of the
applicants to sift the grain from the chaff.
The Service Department is charged with the responsibility of creating
all kinds of presentation aids to houses owned and directly controlled by or
associated with Union Theatres, Ltd., together with the production of Stage
Prologues, and Musical Interludes and the engagement of orchestral com-
binations and eminent artists. It has been due to the efforts of this depart-
ment that the slogan, “The Union Theatre Way," has gained such a wealth
of meaning to the patron of the motion picture. They furnish just that some-
thing that places the entertainment “such worlds away.”
Works Department and Manufacturing.
A department that goes on silently and unseen, but which nevertheless
contributes in very large measure to Union Theatres' unassailable prestige
is the Works Department, dealing with the manufacture of illuminated theatre




signs, accessories, electrical devices, and mechanical stage sets, as well as main-
taining the Company’s whole electrical and mechanical equipment. A large
staff of skilled mechanics and men well versed in the electrical business is
employed, and their efforts enable the firm to dispense altogether with out-
side aid. The inventive genius and mechanical skill of the chief of staff
have been responsible for some of the most brilliant motion picture signs and
illumination schemes not only in the country of origin, but anywhere in the
world.
Education of Managers.
So important is the education of managers and members of the technical
staff that steps have been taken to make ample provision for all future re-
quirements. Under the tutelage of acknowledged specialists classes of as-
pirants are always undergoing specialised training in order that the right
men might be on hand whenever it is necessary to fill vacancies.




Australasian Films Ltd.
Towering above all others in the realm of film hiring in the Common-
wealth is the nation-wide organisation known as Australasian Films. Ltd.
On its renting list over 75 per cent, of the exhibitors of the continent are to
be found. By reason of the national influence of the great Union Theatres
Circuit, which it supplies, and the enormous advertising power thereby cre-
ated, it has become the greatest of all factors in the business of film renting.
With such unexampled backing at its command the firm has been able to
successfully compete in the foreign distributing centres, and besides control-
ling the principal productions of the world’s greatest studios, it is easily the
biggest independent buyer in the world on the open market of New York and
London. The administrative headquarters are located in Sydney, and from
there radiates the vast network of film purchase and supply for the Common-
wealth. The head office is in constant communication with the buying forces
in America, Great Britain and the Continent, and by means of a special system




of psychological study is able to keep the overseas managers constantly ad-
vised as to the changing likes and dislikes of the Australian public.
Picture Producers and Artists.
In addition to controlling the entire output of the Associated Producers
Inc., Australasian Films, Ltd., release productions by the following makers:
J. Stuart Blackton, Leonce Perrett, Pathe Freres, Edgar Lewis, Jesse D. Hamp-
ton, Ben J. B. Hampton, R. Brunton, Vitagraph Corp., Equity Features, Syd-
ney Garrett, Brockliss Corp., Charles Chaplin, Chester, Carter de Haven,
Parsons, Capital, Robertson-Cole, Pathe-Rolin, Mermaid Comedies, Christie,
Hepworth Fftr. Co., Stoll Film Co., Eminent British Authors, Broadwest, Ideal
Films, Walturdaw Comedies, London Film Co., Master Films, Ltd., Samuel-
son Film Co., Eclipse, Film D’Art, Itala, Cines, Pasquali, etc.
Artists represented by this immense programme of features are: Clara
Kimball Young, Geraldine Farrar, Norma Talmadge, Constance Talmadge,


Western Australian Theatre Managers


Anita Stewart, Louise Glaum, Blanch Sweet, Sylvia Breamer, Mae Murray,
Fannie Ward, Virginia Pearson, June Caprice, Dolores Cassinalli, Gaby Deslys,
Margarita Fischer, Corinne Griffith, Alice Joyce, Gladys Leslie, Mary Miles
Minter, Baby Marie Osborne, Edith Storey, Florence Vidor, Peggy Hyland,
Violet Hopson. Alma Taylor, Zasu Pitts, Mary Boland, Billie Rhodes, Fay
Tincher, Nell Shipman, Marjorie Daw, Colleen Moore, Edith Johnson, Marion
Fairfax, Marie Doro, Bessie Love, Charles Chaplin, Harold Lloyd, Larry Se-
mon, Hobart Bosworth, House Peters, Lloyd Hughes, George Beban, Frank
Keenan, William Desmond, Warren Kerrigan, Irving Cummings, Sessue Hay-
akawa, Mitchell Lewis, E. K. Lincoln, Montague Love, Creighton Hale, Harr> r
Morey, Herbert Rawlinson, William Russell, Barney Sherry, H. B. Walthall,
H. B. Warner, Earle Williams, Antonio Moreno, William Duncan, Warner
Oland, Wesley Barry, Carter De Haven, Snooky the Humanzee, Harry Grib-
bon, Bobby Vernon, Lloyd Hamilton, Snub Pollard, Ben Turpin, Mack Swain,
Sambo the Piccaninny Barney Sherry, Pat O’Malley, and many others.


ADELAIDE & TASMANIAN THEATRES


Distribution of Film.
With the arrival of each steamer from the United States and England
regular shipments of the latest films are received, and so far-seeing are the
Company’s buying plans that almost in every instance the subjects are being
privately reviewed in Australia before they have received their premiere
exhibitions in the country of their creation.
After being dealt with by the censors the films first of all pass through
the hands of the Clearance Department, where they are graded into their
various classes irrespective of their cost and their importance in other lands.
The immensity of the area of country which has to be looked after from
this centre is probably greater than that represented by any of the similar
amusement fields in the world. Some slight idea of the enormous ramifica-
tions of this department may be gathered from mention of the fact that over
100,000 feet of new film is released weekly throughout six States, aggre-
gating over three million square miles, and with a length of more than 3,000


Form of interior
decoration adopted
by Union Theatres Ltd.


miles. This labyrinth of moving programmes working through several hun-
dred theatres is set out in a specially designed topographical chart, which
is in personal charge of the directing head. In addition to supplying the
weekly programme requirements of Union Theatres, Ltd., in consultation
with that firm’s experts, the Clearance force is called upon to attend to the
releasing wants of fhe Exchanges operating throughout each State.
Immense Area Covered.
Film distribution throughout New South Wales is carried out from the
central Exchange located in Sydney, and covers an area of 310.372 square
miles. There is a potential hiring list of 303 Exhibitors. In addition to its
State activities, this Exchange transacts business with the Islands of the
Pacific, Fiji. Samoa. New Hebrides, Norfolk and Lord Howe, as well as the
Northern Territory of Australia, To look after the area covered by the
Northern Rivers of New South Wales, a subsidiary Exchange has been


Departmental Heads, Australasian Films Ltd., Sydney


established at Lismore in consequence of transportation difficulties.
An area of 87,844 square miles is represented by the hiring potentiali-
ties of the Victorian Exchange, which operates from the State capital, Mel-
bourne. The total number of theatres showing regularly and intermittently
in this State is 1 99.
The third largest State in respect of area, South Australia, is catered for
by the Company’s Exchange in Adelaide. The number of theatres, 66,
operating within this State’s borders, is spread over an area of 380,070
square miles.
In the State of limitless distances. West Australia, Australasian Films,'
renting is conducted in conjunction with the well-known photographic sup-
plies’ organisation, the Optical Supplies Company. The number of Exhibi-
tors available for hiring business in this State is 61, the smallest in the Con-
tinent, notwithstanding the fact that West Australia covers practically one-
third of the Commonwealth. The staff here is confronted with great diffi-
culties in respect of transportation of film, in many cases the journey from
Exchange to Theatre occupying over a month, during which time the pro-


Executiv offce o f
Assistant General.
Manager, Australasian
Films Ltd., head.
office., Sydney.
Showrooms Sales
Dept., Australasian-
Films Ltd., Sydney.
Right
Booking and
Correspondence
Clerks, Film
Australasian Films
Ltd., Sydney.


gramme has in turn to be carried by Steamer, Train and Camel Team.
In Queensland the firm’s hiring policy is prosecuted from the Exchange
established in Brisbane. The vast area of 670,509 square miles represented
by this tropical State gives the local management considerable difficulty in
grappling with the problem of transportation, due greatly to the majority
of Exhibitors (who number 143) having to be supplied by Steamer, which
is the only means of transportation, while inland connections are often dis-
organised own to tropical monsoonal disturbances
The wants of the Tasmanian theatre proprietors are looked after by
the Hobart Exchange. This little Island State is dependent upon Steamer
communication with the mainland for its supply, which in times of rough
weather at sea is in a state of jeopardy. Tasmania lags behind the rest of
the States in respect of the number of theatres constructed, having only 36
to its credit. This is due in a great measure to the fact that the Island,
measuring 26,215 square miles, depends mostly upon its primary products
and mineral wealth and takes very little part in the commercial activities of
the Commonwealth.


HEAD OFFICE, FILM
DISTRISUTING DEP T.,
AUSTRALASIAN FILMS Ltd.
LEFT
FILM COATING
PLANT AT WORK,
FILMS, Ltd.
RIGHT
FILM EXAMINING DEPT.,
AUSTRALASIAN FILM, Ltd.,
SYDNEY


Co-operative Film Exchange, in which Union Theatres, Ltd., and Aus-
tralasian Films, Ltd., have a large interest, is the distributing house for the
famous Metro productions throughout the Commonwealth. These fine at-
tractions are therefore given a regular exhibition in the Company s theatres.
J. C. Williamson Films, with its branches in every State, handles the
celebrated Goldwyn and Screenart productions, as well as the Eminent Au-
thors’ pictures. Union Theatres accord these makes a national screening.
Although there is a total of 808 theatres on the Public Records for
the whole of the Commonwealth of Australia, yet there are only 38 continuous
shows being conducted, while only 1 52 theatres open their doors for six nights
a week and over 500 open a maximum of two nights, these theatres being
situated in towns of under one thousand population, and possessing a seating
capacity ranging from 300 to 500.
In consequence of the great distances that have to be covered during
the exhibiting life of a film, the average period occupied to completely cover
the field is from eighteen months to two years.




The Sales Department.
The machinery and accessories section of the Company s operations is
styled The Modern Needs Cinemachinery Sales Service, and by reason of
its exclusive distributing rights, notable among which are The Precision Com-
pany’s Simplex type S. Projector, Martin Rotaries, Phoenix Cine Converters,
National, Speer and British Kinarko Carbons, The Duplex Machine Com-
pany, The Gaphoscope Junior, The Universal Motor Company, The New
Austral Projector (of Australian manufacture), and with a host of English
and Continental lines, the department is enabled to live up to its designation
of Modern Needs Machinery plus Service. Associated with this section are
several of the oldest projectionists in the country, equipped with mobile
emergency outfits to help both Urban and Provincial Exhibitors in case of
breakdown. From supplying at the outset the sum total of Union Theatres
needs, from seating plans to pass-out checks, the department handles prob-
ably more than 75 per cent, of the balance of the trade throughout the six
States of the Commonwealth.


INTERSTATE FILM EXCHANGE MANAGERS


The Modern Needs projection engineer has solved many Antipodean
projection problems in a country where tremendous auditoriums and vast
areas of gold fibre screens are flooded with faultlessly projected pictures
on a scale admittedly not attempted in other countries, it being generally
recognised that in Australia the policy is to present a lifelike image to the
most distant patron in theatres with capacities exceeding 3000. Only those
who have seen this section’s General Sales Catalogue of 266 pages, embody-
ing over 400 cuts, will realise its ramification and its unique position to ren-
der efficient service to its 800 odd Exhibitors throughout the several States.
The Organisation for the East.
The company formed to deal with the organisation’s extensive interests
throughout the Orient is known as Australasian Films (East), Ltd. Since
the reconstruction of this side of the firm’s operations rapid strides have been
made as regards both hiring and theatre control, until now the new company
stands out as the most important factor over this enormous territory. There




are distributing exchanges at Singapore, Sourabaya, Batavia (Java), and
branch agents at Bombay, Rangoon, Shanghai, Yokohama and Manilla. The
principal theatres—headed by the Olympia are at Sourabaya, while nego-
tiations are also completed for a chain of houses throughout the Dutch East
Indies.
The undertaking is in charge of one of the Directors of Australasian
Films. Ltd., Mr. Frank McDonald, with headquarters at Sydney, but in addi-
tion there is a general manager in control of the whole territory, who con-
stantly tours throughout the length and breadth of the East with annual visits
to America to consummate important contracts. Besides, there are local
managers at Sourabaya, Singapore and elsewhere.
The Studio, Rushcutters Bay.
Easily the finest studio and laboratory in the Southern Hemisphere are
those owned by Australasian Films, Ltd. The situation at Rushcutters Bay,
on the shores of Sydney Harbour, is an ideal one for the making of motion


SALES & PRINTING DEP., AST-
RALASIAN FILMS Ltd., BRISBANE
GENERAL OFFICE, AUSTRALASIAN
FILMS Ltd., BRISBANE.
EXCHANGE STAFF, AUSTRAL-
ASIAN FILMS Ltd., BRISBANE
AUSTRALASIAN FILMS Ltd.IT?
BRISBANE BRANCH


pictures, while from the standpoint of plant and appliances it is well in line
with similar institutions in California.
Modelled on the lines of the most successful American ventures the
studio is equal to any demands and can be utilised for every known method
of animated photoplay. Its property rooms, paint frame, scene dock, me-
chanists’ workrooms and wardrobe are all that is to be desired, while the ven-
tilating system (to which special attention has been paid on account of cli-
matic conditions) and entrance and exits are modern to a degree. The
dressing rooms built right alongside the “shooting” area are able to cope
with the requirements of the biggest casts.
In the developing, printing, drying, assembling and titling sections only
up-to-the-minute appliances are in use, a special feature being the twin Bell-
Howell printers. The weekly capacity of the plant is 130,000 feet of posi-
tive copies. In the production of the firm’s weekly gazette special methods
of speedy production are adopted quite apart from the ordinary system of
working.


R.L. C. ROWE, MAN ACER
COLDWYN FILM EXCHANGE, SYDNEY
THE COLDWYN FILM EXCHANGE
SYDNEY
GENERAL STAF, ADELAIDE EXCHANGE.
AUSTRALASIAN FILMS Ltd.
STAFF, HOBART, EXCHANGE
AUSTRALASIAN FILMS L TD .


Film Coating Process.
An interesting adjunct to the studio is Australia s own special invention
for coating film and thereby prolonging its life. The formula for obtaining
this wonderful result was perfected by the firm s consulting chemist after
many years’ diligent research, while the plant employed is also the outcome
of that official’s inventive genius. Film treated by this process has under-
gone the severest of tests in respect both of climate and hard usage, and in
every instance has completely vindicated its inventor’s claims.
Posters, Publicity, Representatives.
Another vital link in the hiring organisation is the Poster Department,
which attends to the lithographic wants of the great army of Exhibitors.
Hundreds of tons of “paper” reach this floor annually, and just as quickly
as it arrives is rushed off throughout the Continent. Besides posters, a large


Film Exchange Staff.
Interior- Film
Exchange, Perth
Australasian Film
Exchange Building, Perth


stock of portraits of artists and “stills” of the various productions is carried.
While no profit is earned by this branch of the business in fact, it shows
a loss the directors see to it that its high state of efficiency is always main-
tained in view of the immense service furnished to national publicity.
Although geographically its customers are scattered over an immense
area, yet Autralasian Films’ customers are in constant personal touch through
the medium of the great staff of representatives employed. At regular in-
tervals every customer from the big city or suburban Exhibitor to the “far-
thest out” showmen right throughout the length and breadth of the Com-
monwealth receives a call and has his every requirement attended to. May
be he wants a feature allocated, his standing order for posters re-arranged,
or some part of his projector renewed. In these cases the human element
of an intimate talk leaves the Exhibitor satisfied that although he may be
far removed by distance he is still close to the heart of things when the re-
presentative gets busy.


Australasian Films Ltd.
Lismore, N.S.W. Branch
Exchange.
J.C. Williamson's Films
Sydney Exchange
View of Exchange,
Australasian Films,
Lismore, N.S.W.


To-morrow.
Jn retrospect, the history of Australia, s newest Public Service, with its
meteoric growth and insidious, irrepressible introduction into the nation s
being, unfolds like a tale of old-time romance; but, fanciful as this now proven
record would have seemed ten years ago, what would the reader think if it
were possible to peer down the long corridor of the future?
We are now at the parting of the ways. The foundation is laid and will
endure, but the great monumental superstructure is only starting to take
shape. In this moulding of a nation’s entertainment and instruction the
directors of Union Theatres, Ltd., maintain their place as front rank pioneers,
whose life’s work is to uplift and ennoble the art of the Silent Drama.
On the threshold of a bounteous future they stand with feelings ol
absolute equanimity, begotten of the broad-sighted, public-spirited policy that
is theirs to pursue.




Wholly Set Up and Printed in Australia
by Deaton & Spencer, Douglass Street
(off Liverpool Street), Sydney.






