

Go to SHIER LAW’S for Gents’, Youths’,
and Boys’, Clothing.
Ten Months’
I luii ifiumsid
\ \... Holiday, I
I { * **' : ••• • i
> ! DC
h
<
u
cc
o
z
0
z
1
h
3
O
*
CO
Q
Z
H
H
lZ
h
D
O
cljeing JSTotes of cl Trip to
JEnglcLThd, tlce CPclvls
TJjzKi'bitioTL, etc
M. H. MADGE
ts* The entire proceeds of the sale of this book will be
devoted to the Building Fund of Gilbert Street Lecture Hall.
CO
h
QC
Z
CO
CO
H
<
Z
To be had of the Booksellers.
CO
QC
3
O
z
X
CO
111
CC
D
CO
<
UJ
S
o
h
ui
Q
<
s
h
D
(0
glMaul*:
CAREY & PAGE, PUBLISHERS, WAYMOUTH ST.


LIMITED.
National Mutual Life Association of Australasia,
ESTABLISHED, AUGUST. 1869.
4,062 Policies have been issued. Assuring over!
A MILLION AND A QUARTER STERLING.
PROFITS EXCEEDING
THIRTEEN THOUSAND POUNDS
Have been divided amongst the Members, representing
Reversionary Bonuses of upwards of
TWENTY EIGHT THOUSAND POUNDS.
The Next Division of Profits
Will take place as at 30th September, 1880, and all Policies
issued on or before
30th SEPTEMBER, 1879,
Will participate therein.
OFFICE FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA:
st., _a.id;b:lj^i;d:e3.
Resident Secretary, JOHN C. MINNS.


TEN MONTHS' HOLIDAY
.A-HSTID
HOW IT WAS SPENT
guUlaule:
CAREY & PAGE, PRINTERS, WAYMOUTH STREET.


C. H. MANNING’S
]PE® f OfiSAPSIO Ml Mil
AND GALLERY OF FINE ARTS,
years.
Under the Distinguished and ky special appoint-
Patronage of ment to
H.R.H. THE DUKE OF EDINBURGH,H. E. SIR W. F. D. JERVOiS
and the Governors of the Province for the last twenty
EVERY DESCRIPTION OF PORTRAITURE- Oil, Water Colour,
Mezzotint, or any of the various processes- executed in the best
and most improved Style.
N.B.—Recently awarded the highest Prize BRONZE
MEDAL for OIL PAINTINGS; also, highest and ONLY
AWARD for ordinary PHOTOGRAPHS at the INDUSTRIAL
EXHIBITION, Adelaide.
KING WILLIAM STREET, ADELAIDE.


/42>2>SS
j^IoTE.
The notes of a trip from Adelaide to Europe via the Cape of Good
Hope, St. Helena, and back, including a brief visit to Paris, and to
the Isle of Man, which are contained in these pages, were originally
commenced at the earnest solicitation of friends of the Methodis
Journal , and a portion of them appeared in that publication.
On my return to Adelaide many persons, both in the city and
country districts, who had read the letters as they appeared, strongly
urged their re-arrangement, so that they might be published in book
form. Without assuming any claim to literary ability, and after full
consideration of the question, I resolved to comply with this request,
earnestly hoping that what is here written may prove interesting, and
even in some degree instructive.
Being connected with a comparatively small church in the city, the
work of which is greatly retarded by the entire absence of schoolroom
accommodation, the idea has pressed itself upon my mind, that the
publication and sale of this book will help in raising funds towards
liquidating the cost of a suitable schoolroom or lecture hall. My
design, therefore, is to assist this object by devoting thereto the
entire proceeds of the sale of this book.
Hoping that all who take an interest in the welfare of the young
will also do their best to assist in its circulation, and thus help forward
an undertaking which, with divine favour, may be a blessing to many
thousands.
M. H. MADGE.
13-I^-11
; Wm M
n>> ' Si)
m m


J"eN yVIoNTHs’ j'ioLIDAY, Bj C,
FROM ADELAIDE TO THE GAPE.
In commencing my notes it is fitting to remind the reader that a
voyage in a sailing vessel is generally not so exciting or eventful as
one by the mail steamer, which would present something worth writ-
ing about daily. We left Port Adelaide on March 20th, 1878, our good
ship, the Torrens, being towed past the lighthouse, and then, the wind
being fair, we made sail. We glided on smoothly during the night at
about eight knots per hour. Next morning our passengers mustered
well for breakfast, at which time we had the Althorpes on our right,
and Kangaroo Island well in view. During the day we arranged
our luggage, rendering our cabin as comfortable as possible, and
made friends with some of the passengers. The ship rolled dreadfully
during the following night, causing anything but a pleasant sensation.
Thus u rocked in the cradle of the deep,” we were cheated of our
breakfast, being fit for nothing but lying about in a most miserable
condition. 23rd—Fair wind, and a good day for sailors (only), but
very bad for us !
24th, Sunday.—l know of one gentleman passenger who was unable
to leave the berth all day. Our Captain read the Church Service, and
the Rev. W. Wilson preached an excellent sermon from the 23rd
Psalm, to an attentive few in the saloon—myself and Mrs. M, several
times wishing ourselves with our friends at Draper Memorial Church.
25th to 29th.—Nothing important to note. Being very seasick the whole
time, I received constant attentions from a better sailor than myself.
30th—Fine day, with fair wind ; going at ten knots during the morn-
ing. Passed Bald Island, and Many-peaked Mountain during the
afternoon, and saw the King George’s Sound light at 7.30 p.m.
Wind increased, and going at 14 knots at 10.30 p.m. A pig and some


poultry were killed to satisfy our increased appetites, which are
regaled thus each day : —Breakfast 8.30, lunch 12.30, dinner 4 30,
tea 8 p.m.; and biscuits are on the saloon table for the hungry ones
at 10 o’clock, before retiring for the night. 31st, Sunday.—Very fine
day, wind light and fair. Land seen on the starboard bow (the
Leu win). I took meals in the saloon with the rest, being much better.
Services at 11 a.m. and 8 p.m. Spent a pleasant day. Passed a sail
at 7.30 p.m., too dark to recognise. Closed the day with singing,
Miss Angel kindly leading with the piano and her voice.
April 1,2, 3. —Sailing in the Indian Ocean, going but slowly, th
wind being very light; all seemingly enjoying themselves. Days spent
in reading, writing, quoits, etc.; evenings in singing and various
games. 4th.—Very calm. The monotony was broken by the Cap-
tain’s gig being lowered, and several of the passengers enjoying them-
selves by rowing round our fine vessel. sth.—Showery during the
morning. Great preparations were made during the day for the
opening concert of the season, which took place in the evening. It was
a very brilliant and successful affair, the programme consisting of
songs, recitations, and a scene. Altogether it would have done credit
to many performers on shore. 6th.—Ship rolling very much ; wind
light. At breakfast time we heard the sad news that one of the pas-
sengers, Mr. Mcßae, an invalid (consumptive) had died during the
night. The burial took place at 12 o’clock, the body being committed
to the deep with due solemnity. The Rev. W. Wilson conducted the
service in the presence of the whole ship’s company and all the pas-
sengers. The occurrence cast quite a gloom over all. This was
somewhat relieved by the excitement of catching a shark, every one
being anxious to see the sea monster, which was 10 feet 6 inches long.
The day was also signalised by the first appearance of the Skylight, a
very excellent paper, produced by several passengers for the amuse-
ment and gratification of all on board. I regret that I cannot send
you a copy, as it would take too long “to strike off” with a pen !
7th, Sunday.—A pleasant day, spent as described last week. Bth
and 9th.—Nothing important. 10th and 11th. —Somewhat rough,
with strong wind, making as much as 13 or 14 knots per hour. Large
numbers of flying fish sporting about in all directions. 12th.—Wind
fair. A little boy in the second cabin accidentally broke his arm to-
day. He is now under the care of Dr. James, and we hope doing
well. In the evening we were entertained wth a “ Christy Minstrels”
concert, by the ship’s company and some of the passengers. It proved
to be a great success, and gave every satisfaction. 13th. —The second
issue of the Skylight appeared at an early hour ; a very good paper,
which was much appreciated.
14th.—Services as usual; heavy rain fell during the afternoon, pro-
viding water to re-fill the tanks. 18th. —Raining incessantly, making
things very miserable. However, some of the passengers amused
themselves by throwing buckets of water over each other, and rolling
about the wet decks in a most ridiculous manner. 19th (Good
Friday).—Service was conducted by the Captain, and a short but
appropriate sermon preached by the Rev W. Wilson.
20th.—Fine day, fair wind, sailing fast. For various reasons
the Skylight did not appear, which had the effect of bringing
out a paper extraordinary, the Deadlight , of sarcastic turn,
roughly cutting up the editors of the older contemporary, and
making things lively during the afternoon. I succeeded in making


arrangements for the Sunday meals to be as follows Breakfast, 8.30 ;
dinner, 1 o’clock ; and tea, at 6 p m., thus giving the steward, cook,
and servants, a little more rest on the Sabbath.
21st (Easter Sunday),—The services were conducted at 10.30 a.m.
and 7 p.m. The new arrangements for meals were much appreciated
by the servants, and gave some of them the privilege of attending the
service. 22nd.—Fine day, with fair light wind. During the day
arrangements were made for a concert and dramatic performance,
which took place in the evening. The first part consisted of instru-
mental music, songs, and recitations, and the second part of “ Bora-
bastes Furioso,” which was presented in first-class style, much to the
amusement of the audience. 23rd.—Wind light. Great excitement
prevailed for some time, as we sighted a ship which on nearing we
spoke, and found her to be the Waterlily, from Macassar, bound for
Amsterdam, 37 days out. The evening was spent on the poop, many
of the passengers sitting in a group singing ; others doing the usual
promenading. 24th.—Bough and stormy weather. We encountered
several squalls ; one at about 12 o’clock, blew to ribbons five of the
sails, it having come on so suddenly as not to give time to take them
in. 25th.—Still rolling and pitching, making it very difficult to keep
things in general where they ought to be. The deck was all astir for
some time, as we watched the graceful swimming and gambols of a
fine whale about 40 feet long, as it played about our ship. 26th.—
Morning pleasant, the rolling having ceased. During the day I got
Dr. James’ permission to have the little boy with his broken arm on
the poop. He had laid so long in his berth that this change proved
to be a day of great pleasure to him. 27th—Fine day, wind light and
fair. The only matters of interest to-day were first, the issue of the
Skylight ; then in about two hours out came the Deadlight, with its
usual cutting up of its contemporary, causing considerable amuse-
ment.
28th, Sunday.—Beautifully fine and calm. Two services conducted
as usual, and a class for Bible reading in the afternoon ; quite a
Christian feast day. 29th.—Fine day, fair wind ; making over 10
knots. One of the passengers pleased the young people very much by
making and flying a kite for several hours. Spent a very pleasant
time on deck, taking part for the first time in a game of quoits, a
pastime much indulged. These quoits are skilfully wrought in rope
by the sailors. 30th.—Sailing before a strong fair wind. Having
neglected sooner to note that a Literary Society was formed in the
early part of the voyage, I now do so. They hold their meetings
twice each week, the first for the reading of Shakespeare’s works, the
other for debates, essays, etc. To-day they had a debate on the
desirability of dividing the Australian colonies from mother England.
Numerous arguments were advanced on both sides, but when the vote
was taken it was found that the great majority were in favour of
sustaining the present relations.
May Ist. —Saw several butterflies flitting about, although we are
now 110 miles from land 2nd. —Weather fine, almost calm ; sighted
three ships ; spoke the nearest by signal, the Abance, of St. John’s.
Being now where fish are plentiful, many passengers had lines out,
but to no purpose, until about 3 o’clock a shark swam by, which was
soon caught by the captain. Shark catching is always very exciting
on board. In the evening every one was much amused by several
acting a charade—a mock trial for breach of promise of marriage.


It was well performed. 3rd.—The day was calm and pleasa-nt.
Several of the passengers manned the captain’s gig, and enjoyed a
pull while one who is very fond of shooting brought down several
Cape hens, “ Mother Carey’s Chickens/’ and mollyhawks, these
birds being very plentiful. After dark we sighted a vessel, to which
we drew so near that we gave them three lusty cheers, to which
they replied ; but we were not near enough to get their name. It
is a very pleasant sight to see a vessel with its lamps and port-
hole lights shining ; it is always cheering to know that we have
company near us. 4th, —Very rough and stormy, and as the
Captain feared a much worse gale, boards were nailed around the
sky-lights on the poop, to prevent them being broken ; but happily
the storm soon abated without doing any damage. We are now in
sight of land—Bird Island and lighthouse. May sth.—Sunday,
the usual services were much enjoyed as we sailed slowly onward
before a light fair wind. May 6th.—Every prospect of reaching Cape
Town within 48 hours. We passed four ships, and spoke the
Eliane, bound for London. Great amusement during the afternoon
by an auction sale, held in the saloon; some of our passengers had
seemingly run short of cash, and therefore offered for sale miscellaneous
articles of wearing apparel, guns, jewelery, &c., &c., to raise the
needful for a good spree at Cape Town. At 4 p.m. the steamship
Melrose passed us, bound for the Cape, and promised to report us
there. 7th.—Contrary winds, and heavy squalls, driving us far out
of our course, destroying our chance of making the Cape for several
days. May Bth. —A lively time of it, as our ship rolled and pitched
tremendously; smashing glass and crockery, and cheating us of
our soup at dinner. 9th’—Came within sight of several magnificent
mountain peaks, viz., Danger Point, Cape Madge, and Cape Hanglip,
the whole presenting quite a romantic scene for the pencil of an artist,
with Table Mountain in the distance. May 10th.—The day was spent
in admiring the bold rugged scenery surrounding False Bay, and
Simon’s Bay ; and after sunset looking at the light on Bobbin Island
and Cape Point. The evening was pleasantly enjoyed with the acting
of a charade, divided into three parts, and well performed, the word
being “Insect.”


A WEEK AT GAPE TOWN.
May 11th.—We were aroused this morning with cries of “ Cape
Town in sight,” and were soon on deck to enjoy the first view of the
city in which we hoped to enjoy a few pleasant days ; but as the sea
was rough, we had to remain on board until Sunday morning,
when we larded in time for Divine Service, and found our way to
Wesley C hapel in Church-street, where we heard an excellent sermon
from the Rev. G. M. Slade, second minister in the Cape Town Circuit.
He kindly pressed us to dine with him at the Mission House,
the residence of the General Superintendent, the Rev. Samuel
Hardey, formerly of Western Australia, We were warmly
welcomed by Mrs. Hardey and family, and met there also
Kev. I'hos, Hoper, of Wyi burg. After dinner, I strolled out with
Mr. Hardey, jun., who was going to meet his brother return-
ing from the frontier, where he had been fighting in his country’s
service against the rebellious Kaffirs He belonged to the volunteer
artillery, and had been away four months. The British forces it is
hoped will succeed in crushing the native rising, and in teaching the
E-affirs a lesson which will be of lasting servicn to them. Many of the
warriors, with their wives and children, have been taken prisoners,
and hired out to the settlers us der certain arrange ments, and will be
henceforth engaged in useful occupations On the arrival of the
steamer with the returning voluntetrs, there was considerable excite-
ment, a large concourse of people being assembled to welcome them
back to friends and home. A procession was formed, headed by the
military band playing lively music. 1 hen followed the returned men,
next a large company of the Cape Town artillery, and these were
backed up by over 1,000 civilians, who marched from the docks
through the principal streets of the town, to the castle, where the
brave men were suitably addressed by the commanding officers, and
dismissed, with orders to appear in full uniformat the Town Hall at
11 a m. next day, to receive an address of congratulation from the
Mayor on behalf of the citizens. I then returned with the two Messrs.
Hardey to the Mission House, where my good wife had been awaiting
my return. After tea we left in search of hotel accommodation, and
also to find out a gentleman upon whom I had been requested to call
by one of our Adelaide friends. On being successful we at once
found ourselves amongst friends, and enjoyed their generous hospi-
tality and social intercourse very pleasantly for three successive nights ;
spending our days in sight-seeing.
On the Monday morning we visited the fruit, vegetable, and fish
markets. We found them well supplied, and some of the articles very
cheap. Oranges were Is. 6d to 2s Cd per 100 ; guavas 3d. per doz. ;
pears Id. to 2d. per lb. ; bananas 2s. to 3s. per doz. Vegetables were
dear, potatoes being 20s. per cwt. Leaving the market we proceeded
to the “ Town House,” and had an interview with his Worship the


Mayor, Mr. Phillips, and afterwards witnessed the presentation of the
address before referred to in the presence of the members of the
Council, and a number of the citizens. The hall is not large, and
is unworthy of a rising place like Cape Town, indeed not equal in any
way to even our Exchange Room in Adelaide.
We then made our way to the railway station, one of the best
buildings in the city. There we met many of our fellow-passengers,
and proceeded in company to Wynburg, passing on our route some
very charming residences of the merchants and gents of the Cape.
The scenery was picturesque and lovely, diversified with grand avenues
of stately 'oaks and exquisitely laid out gardens, green and pleasant.
It was a most delightful ride. On reaching Wynburg our company
proceeded in several two-wheeled two-horse pole carts, this kind of con-
veyance being in general use here. We visited Constantia, renowned
for its wine. It is a very beautiful place. The road to it is even
and smooth, and skirted with silvery trees and sugar-bush. Here are
many majestic oaks, stately pines, and charming shrubs. The gardens
are laid out with taste, and cultivated with care and skill. Many of
the houses are large, with extensive cellarage. The vineyards are
numerous and fruitful, and the quality of the wine is said to be good.
On this point I offer no opinion, but those of our party who were not
abstainers were invited to taste the wine for themselves, and
leave their autographs in the visitors’ book. Altogether Constantia
is well worth a visit from every visitor to Table Bay. On our return
we remained two hours at Wynburg to visit the Rev. T. Roper, with
whom we took tea in true Dutch fashion. He accompanied us around
the village, and took us through some magnificent oak avenues, and
then to the railway station. We reached Cape Town at 8 p.m., and
after seeing the city by moonlight, and finding it most orderly and
quiet, made our way to our friend’s residence, to talk over the
adventures of the day, and dilate upon the beauties of South Aus-
tralia, until it was time to retire for the night.
My desultory notes would become tedious were I to attempt to
sketch each day’s work in detail I will therefore refer to the most
important and interesting objects seen during our stay here. We
visited the Museum, and found it very superior in its architectural
appearance, as well as its contents, to our poor attempt in the same
line in Adelaide. But as we are now in Africa, the home of the lion,
the elephant, the rhinoceros, hippopotamus, giraffe, etc,, perhaps it
might naturally be expected to surpass us. We found splendid speci-
mens of the animals mentioned, as well as many others, and a very
large collection of rare and beautiful birds. There are also here skele-
tons of immensely long snakes, curious and uncommon fishes, and in
fact almost every variety of skeleton from man to the tiny insect.
The Library we found to be a fine commodious and well-finished hall,
filled with books of all sorts, and on every conceivable subject. Near
the entrance in a small room is Sir George Grey’s collection, said to
be worth over £15,000. There is also a life-size portrait of our most
gracious Queen, and in a glass case, under lock and key, is the
“ Life of the Prince Consort,” presented by Her Majesty, and
containing her autograph. We next visited the Botanic Gardena,
but of these I cannot speak very highly, for they sink into
utter insignificance when compared with our own much-admired
and charming gardens on North Terrace. Fortunately 1 hail with me
many views of our gardens, and felt a pride in exhibiting them to our


Cape Town friends : and I did my best to assure them of their
surpassing loveliness. Leading to this place is a noble avenue of
majestic oaks, the fashionable promenade, and the favourite u lovers’
walk.” Curiosity led me to seek an opportunity of visiting the
Parliament Houses ; a luxury, by the way, which the Cape Government
does not possess, its meetings being held in a crammed and mean-
looking rented building, which I think must be injurious to the health
of the members, as they certainly have not half the room enjoyed by
our senators, notwithstanding our anxiety to provide greater accom-
modation for our representatives. On Wednesday evening I forwarded
to the Mayor and Council a letter begging their acceptance of a copy
of “ Boothby’s Statistical Work on South Australia,” and the
Standing Orders, by-laws, rules, and regulations of our Adelaide City
Council, which they kindly accepted, sending me a letter of thanks
and a copy of their Corporation Acts.
I had an interview with Mr. Smithers, the G.W.C.T., and fore-
most worker in the temperance cause here. At his invitation we
became his guests for two days, and spent our time very pleasantly,
enjoying each evening a rare musical treat. For the information of
my teetotal friends, I must mention that the Templars have taken a
fine suite of rooms in the Mutual Hall, and have established a
Temperance Cafe, which promises to succeed well. To my Adelaide
friends I say, “Go and do likewise.” I visited also a very extensive
baking establishment —Attwill & Co.—where there is in operation the
most perfect breadmaking machine I ever saw. The sponge is set and
the dough made easily and expeditiously, without any handwork what-
ever. The biscuit machinery, too, is of the most complete character ;
altogether using ten tons of flour daily. Our newly made friends are
working hard in the interest of Methodism. They are building a new
church that will cost when completed £15,000. They are now
getting up a bazaar for the purchase of a new organ, and it gave us
pleasure to buy from them for this object a basket of lasting native
flowers, and thus securing a note on the new instrument.
As our ship did not leave at the appointed time, we had the pleasure
of accepting an invitation from the Rev. G. M. Slade, to visit
Mowbray, a pretty and interesting suburb, where we attended divine
service in their neat Wesleyan chapel, after which we talked about
Adelaide and Adelaide friends until bedtime. Next morning Mr.
Slade accompanied us to the station, wishing us a pleasant and speedy
voyage home.
I must not conclude these rough notes respecting Cape Town withou
recording my grateful thanks for all the kind and generous attentions
received from numerous friends, who not only did all in their
power to make our visit enjoyable and pleasant, but gave us most
cordial invitations to visit them again should Providence ever direct
our steps that way.


TWO DAYS AT ST. HELENA,
Leaving Cape Town on May 18th, we steered away for St. Helena,
nothing very important transpiring during our twelve days sail. We
had our share of foul winds until we reached the region of the South-
east trades, when we went speedily and cheerily forward. We had our
open air concerts by the crew on the quarter deck, and select enter-
tainments in the saloon by the cabin passengers. On Thursday even-
ing, May 30, we were delighted with our first view of St. Helena, so
long the prison-home of the first and greatest Napoleon. The island,
which is about lOi miles long and 62 wide, rises to a great height,
Diana’s Peak being not less than 2,700 feet above the sea level. It is
situated in the midst of the South Atlantic Ocean, distant twelve
hundred miles from the nearest land of the African Continent. As we
approached it seemed to rise in solitary grandeur, naked and barren,
without any sign of human habitation or cultivation, but as we rounded
the island, the illusion was quickly dispelled, and our eyes were gra.ti-
fied with a sight of James Town, the capital, of hills covered with
trees and shrubs of the most refreshing verdure. The Torrens came
to an anchor half a mile from shore, but at too late an hour for us to
land, and moreover the Health Officer had not yet visited us to give
us a clean bill of health. Very early next morning we were sur-
rounded by a fleet of small boats, rowed by men of every colour, from
white to the deepest black. Many of the boats contained women
looking out for the washing of the passengers’ linen. After the Health
Officer’s visit the deck was soon crowded with anxious retailers of
various products of the town, the principal trade being done in brace-
lets, necklets, and crosses, made from the seeds of the acacia, into
various and strange patterns ; also the tusks of the sperm whale, and
photographic views of interesting places on the island. It was amusing
to observe how rapidly prices, originaliy much too high, dropped as
the result of keen competition. We found photos abundant and reason-
able in price. After breakfast came a rush for the shore, in spite of the
heavy showers that continued to fall with relentless severity. Of course
the greatest attraction to most visitors to St. Helena is the tomb of the
Emperor, 3| miles from the town, and Longwood House, miles
further on, where the conqueror of Ausierlitz and Jena spent in exile
the last years of his eventful career. Truly it was not an inviting day
ashore, for it had rained the whole of the previous night, and constant
showers continued to descend. No sooner were we ashore than we
were surrounded by a mob of urchins, all anxious to act as guides or
porters, and after making a selection some of our party set off on foot,
others on horseback. In consequence of the rugged character of the
road, the steepness of the hills, and the difficulties of locomotion, —
very few wheeled vehicles are to be had, and in such weather a trap to
carry four would require at least three horses, with an outrider and
attendant on each horse. Having joined those on foot, we left the


little straggling city, which is snugly ensconced in a narrow valley,
and proceeded by a miserably muddy road, which soon tired out the
ladies, and which told heavily even upon strong men. Happily this
did not last long, and we soon entered on a pretty well-made road,
cut out of the hill side, the lower edge having a retaining wall about
three feet high ; and ascending this zigzag road for a mile or two, we
saw below us a charmingly situated villa, with a fine view of a tiny
waterfall on the opposite side of the valley. This is the Briars, the
first residence of the Emperor, until Longwood House was got ready
for him. The hill sides above it are covered with the aloe, prickly
pears, geraniums of different kinds, intermingled with shrubs of much
grace and beauty, whilst higher up we came upon several sorts of the
acacia tribe, and pines and other trees were growing with real tropical
luxuriance. There were numerous ferns and flowers, and even the
English bramble bush was not absent. Many delightful views of the
anchorage and the shipping are obtained as the traveller wends his
weary step up the steep ascent. Finally, after about two and a-half
miles of this hard toiling, during which many of the ladies, and a few
of the gentlemen too, met with some dirty falls into the mud, the top
of the range was gained. Here we were glad to pause for breath, and
endeavoured to get rid of the mud which clung so tenaciously to us,
when down came the rain in true tropical fashion, leaving nothing
for it but to plunge forward ; and after keeping steadily at it for
another mile, our guides pointed to a gate leading to the Traveller’s
Rest, where we found a country-looking hotel hidden among the
trees, and were glad to sit down to rest and indulge in lunch. After
an hour’s rest we started again, and had not proceeded far when our
attention was directed to a little village and some cypress trees
surrounding the Tomb of Napoleon ; and across a steep valley,
perhaps three quarters of a mile distant, is Longwood House, but to
reach which two miles of greasy mud must be traversed. The ladies
determined under these circumstances to be satisfied with a visit to
the tomb, and the distant view of Longwood. The gentlemen, too,
out of sheer politeness, made up their minds to keep them company,
excepting two or three of the most enthusiastic. We passed on to the
tomb of the Emperor, through a small paddock surrounded with a
privet hedge, and containing the enclosure where once reposed all
that was mortal of the once famous French warrior. It is surrounded
with a neat iron railing, inside of which is a border of scarlet gera-
niums, and several handsome Norfolk Island pines, willows, and other
trees. The place is beautifully situated, and is well kept by Serjeant-
Major Morillion, late of the French army. At the head of the valley
is a little village, with a neat church, a parsonage, a school, and a very
tidy inn, where the tired traveller can refresh the inner man at a very
reasonable charge. Those who so desired left the ladies here with their
escort, and marched off to Longwood House, which is situated on a
plain perhaps half a mile long, and half that in width, but quite an
extensive one as plains go on this island. The house is now the pro-
perty of the Bonaparte family, and is maintained by them. Most of
the furniture was sent to France, but the paper on the walls and the
paintings remain just as they were when the illustrious captive died.
Between the two windows in the Emperor’s sitting-room is a neat
wooden railing, inside of which is a handsome bust of the great Napo-
leon. Within the railed space stood the bed upon which he died.
Passing through the drawing, dining, and bed-rooms, you enter the


billiard-room, where a book is kept for the autographs of all visitors.
Having purchased his c.d.v., and a view of the house, we retraced
our steps down the slippery paths which are here called roads, and
reached James Town about 5 p.m., wet, weary, and almost foot-sore
with the quantity of mud which had found its way into our boots, yet
pleased to have seen so much under such unfavourable circumstances.
After contending with several vendors of curiosities, and making one
or two purchases, chatting a little with some Good Templars, etc., we
proceeded on board, heartily glad to have an opportunity of changing
our clothing, and anxious to retire to rest after the fatigues of the
day ; and to prepare for another ramble on the morrow.
June Ist opened with brighter prospects as regards weather, and
the early tokens were not belied. At the breakfast table we learn
that 4 p. m. is the latest time allowed us ashore, and as soon as
possible we set off, determined to do the town and Ladder Hill Fort,
etc. This fort is situated on a hill on the western side of James Town
valley, and is approached by a steep ladder of 665 steps, named
“Jacob’s Ladder.” Access to it is also obtained by a zigzag road,
but it is traversed principally by donkeys, bringing down
loads of firewood and green feed, and taking back produce for the
settlers on the hill. As it is impossible to convey loads up and down
these hills on carts or drays, donkeys have to be used for the con-
veyance of all the goods. The ascent of the ladder was difficult and
tiring, and took some of us 20 and others 30 minutes to accomplish ;
and when we reached the top there was considerable puffing. The
view from the summit over the anchorage is very fine ; so also are
some of the landscapes. The military barracks, the forts, and the
signal-station, seem all in perfect order. After regaining breath and
resting our limbs a little, we went back, some by way of the ladder,
and others by the zigzag path, which is very much the longest,
although far less fatiguing. When again at the bottom of the ladder
we find ourselves in a small square, bounded on the south by the
Cathedral of the English Established Church. On the east
east side are the Post-Office and Custom-House, and to the north
the wall through which access from the sea is obtained to the town
by means of a gateway. Proceeding up the town, we find it to
consist principally of one main street, in which are houses and shops
of all sorts, and of various architecture ; a few of the buildings have an
imposing appearance, but the greater part wear unmistakeable
signs of poverty and neglect. I doubt if a single house
could be found in the town without a broken window ; even
the Club-house requires the attention of the glaziers
and painters. We visited the market, which is also partly in ruins,
from the effects of a disastrous flood which occurred on the 14th of
last April. On that occasion a waterspout burst over the island, and
did great damage to the town, carrying away several houses and
ruining many others, besides tearing up the metal on the streets, and
bursting a large drain built beneath the town to carry away the
immense quantities of water which occasionally come sweeping down
from the hills. Two persons lost their lives during this flood. The
market is neatly built, but very small ; yet the produce of the island
is mostly sold there. The oranges we found to be very inferior,
although their appearance was good. Bananas, guavas, grandillas,
blackberries, and Cape gooseberries, seemed to be of excellent quality.
New potatoes were dear, viz., 20s. percwt. ; so also was cabbage, but


pumpkins plentiful and cheap. Leaving the market and proceeding
up the town, we came to the Botanic Gardens, where many of us for
the first time saw the date and the cocoanut palm growing in luxu-
riance and beauty. I cannot, however, say much in praise of the
flowers. The Governor resides in a small house at the head of this
garden. Plantation-House, the official residence of former Gover-
nors, is not used by the present one, as the salary afforded him is not
sufficient to maintain an extensive establishment. Governor Janiseh,
who is also Acting Chief Justice, has a salary only of £9OO per
annum. Still further on we came to the Hospital, a fine three-storied
building, and then to the residence and gardens of Lady Boss, the
widow of a former governor. Here can be purchased the choicest
curiosities of the place, and I would advise future visitors to resist all
importunities to purchase until they have seen this collection. As an
additional inducement, let me inform them that all the profits made
by Lady Ross on the sale of these things are devoted to the extinction
of a debt on a church, the cost of which this lady undertook to defray
by this and other means. There is a Baptist chapel and a Romish
church in the town, but other denominations are not represented.
There is also a Library and a Mechanics’ Institute, situated in a
pretty garden, containing a monument of neat design. The town
has also a Savings Bank and a flourishing Good Templars’ Lodge,
with which, I was glad to hear, many of the military, both officers and
privates, are connected. There is also a Young Men’s Christian
Association, and a society for relieving the distressed poor. The
population has been gradually decreasing for some years, and does not
now number 5,000 in all. The extensive use on board ship of
preserved fresh meats in these days, and the condenser, which
enables a ship’s crew to have an ample supply of sweet fresh water at
all times on the most lengthy voyage, has seriously interfered with the
trade of St. Helena ; and compared with 30 or 40 years ago, few ships
call at the island now. We found the inhabitants an exceedingly
well-behaved, civil, and obliging people, and though composed almost
of all races and colours, the English language is the only one spoken.
The island was first peopled by the Portuguese, but it has long enough
been under British rule for our Saxon tongue to drive out all others.
The chief food of the population is rice and albicore (a fish which
abounds round the coast), making living cheap, a thing absolutely neces-
sary when we consider that a labourer can earn only from 2s. to 2s. fid.
per day, and it requires a man and wife to work hard if a large family
is to be maintained and reared. Wheat and Indian corn are grown to
a small extent, but flax seems to be the most thriving industry. It
grows luxuriously, and the machinery necessary for its dressing has
been imported. Sheep and cattle are kept, and, as I have already
mentioned, donkeys are used as beasts of burden to a considerable
extent. Water is good and abundant, and the climate is very equable,
a strong “ South-east trade” continually blowing.
The Island is guarded by about 100 men of the 88th Foot, and 30
men of the Royal Artillery, every available soldier having been
drafted off to the Kaffir war in Cape Colony. There are no railways,
and the only telegraphic communication is with Longwood House,
High Knoll, and Ladder Hill Signal Stations. There are spots of
exquisite loveliness in St. Helena, and a week or two might be spenc
here by the tourist with pleasure and satisfaction. Living is not
expensive, and, judging from the appearance of many of the inhabi-


tants, neither their drapers’ nor shoemakers’ bills are likely to be
heavy, as I did not see a well-dressed lady during our visit. Many of
the labouring class discard boots altogether. Constant communication
with England is kept up by the large and powerful steamships trading
to and from the Cape.
By 5 o’clock p.m. all our company were on board, and at 10
the anchor was weighed, and with a fair wind and every sail set, we
were again on our course for old England, thoroughly pleased with
our two days’ visit to this gem of the South Atlantic, and all of us
longing and hoping for a speedy and safe run to the shores of our
native land.
FEOM ST. HELENA TO LONDON DOCKS.
After leaving St. Helena we had a week or two of most delightful
weather, but no event of much importance transpired during our run
before the South-east trades. We sighted Ascension, and approached
in hopes of getting news respecting the war, and were delighted to
learn that there was every reason to hope that peace would be main-
tained between England and Russia. The appearance of the little
island was charming, with its rugged coast, lofty hills, and zigzag
paths, fort, and signal station. The anchorage was occupied by some
of Her Majesty’s ships of war as we passed, and the whole scene was
delightful and beautiful. On the morning of Whit Monday we crossed
the equator, and had a little bit of the ceremony so common in by-
gone days, but not much practised now. I allude to a visit from old
Father Neptune, who made his appearance on the forecastle, accom-
panied by his wife, doctor, officers, and secretary, all dressed in the
most grotesque and fantastical costumes. After sending their visiting
cards to the captain, they were invited to view the ship. They then
enquired whether there were any “green horns” on board ; and in
reply, seven or eight presented themselves and were duly “ shaved ”
and ducked ; but nothing “nasty” was used in the operation, nor
was there any violence to complain about. All was done in good
temper, and “ the ceremony ” passed off very pleasantly.
From this time until we entered the Channel we had our share of
light winds and calms, which greatly retarded our progress, and made
our voyage a protracted one. At the Chops of the Channel we found
ourselves surrounded by an innumerable number of ships, of all sorts
and sizes, and it required the utmost vigilance on the part of our
careful and experienced commander to keep out of danger, for at
times a dense fog covered us, and the fog-horn had to be sounded at
frequent intervals. But kept by a gracious and wise Providence, no
harm befell us ; and presently the shores of dear Old England appeared


in sight. As we sailed up the Channel land was frequently seen, and I
shall not soon forget the magnificent appearance of Hastings as we
passed up the Straits of Dover. It was brilliantly illuminated with
gas, and on this clear night it was a most beautiful sight. On the
following day, Sunday, July 14th, as we sat at dinner a shout was
raised, “ A tug boat near,” and at once there was a rush for the ieck.
A few minutes sufficed to arrange terms with the captain, and soon
we were being towed towards the Thames in fine style. Of course
there was intense excitement on board, and though we duly retired to
bed there was not much sleep for any of us ; and next morning we
were early astir, and found the saloon and every cabin all excitement
and bustle, everyone being busy packing up, preparatory to landing.
We remained on deck until the Torrens reached the dock, determined
to see all we could. Truly it was a scene of marvelous interest to me,
who had never before gazed on such masses of buildings and such
forests of shipping ; but amid it all, and stronger, I trust, than every
other feeling, was a sense of gratitude to God who had so graciously
watched over us on the mighty deep, and had brought us in safety to
this wonderful City of London.
OLD ENGLAND.
When the good ship Torrens was safely berthed in London Docks,
we had to get our luggage passed by the Customs ; but that was not a
work of difficulty, for whether by looking into our Australian faces
they saw honesty depicted there, or not, they took our word as to the
contents of our boxes. Having paid the dock fees and the porters,
who were very numerous, and who were anxious to lay hold of our
luggage whether asked to do so or not, we took a cab to
Aldgate-street station of the underground railway, and in a few
minutes more found ourselves at St. Pancras, the London terminus of
the Midland Railway Company. This noble building is said to be
the finest railway station in the world ; and truly it is a magnificent
pile. What the cost of it was 1 have not heard, but it must have
been enormous. From St. Pancras we were about to travel to Derby
to see our esteemed relatives, Mr. and Mrs Corlett. Having seen
our luggage safely deposited in the van, and as 8.30 drew near, by
direction of an official of the Bail way Company w© took our seats in a
carriage. Imagine our annoyance when we found he had put us into
the wrong portion of the train,'which would have'taken us
to some other place, and while we were waiting our
luggage was taken on without us! lat once complained to the
foreman of the station, who did his best to rectify matters by sending
telegrams to Derby respecting our boxes. He expressed his regret for
the blundering of the porter, and at once returned our ticket money.
We therefore secured sleeping accomim dation near the station. Tie
weather being beautifully fine, and the evening long, we strolled about
until late, and came to the conclusion that the early closing


movement was sadly needed here. In this neighbour-
hood are found the three great terminal stations of the London and
North Western, the Midland and the Great Northern Railway
Companies, and as a consequene, hotels of all kinds, restaurants, cook
shops, and places of that class abound, and seemed to be well
Early next morning we left the great city, and were soon speeding
along at a tremendous rate by an express train. The journey was
quite exhilarating after so long a voyage, and the country through
which we passed was exceedingly lovely. It was one of the prettiest
rides I ever enjoyed. We passed in rapid succession numerous towns
and villages of Bedfordshire, stately mansions of the nobility, care-
fully cultivated farms, the neat cottages of the artisan, noble parks,
and trim gardens. The small green fields, with cattle and sheep
quietly grazing therein, were most interesting tome, after so long a
time spent in Australia ; and the large umbrageous trees dotting the
country all over made the journey intensely enjoyable. After leaving
the town of Bedford, we crossed the river Ouse in its serpentine course
seven times in eight miles. In a field of peas I noticed a flock of
crows quietly feeding to their hearts’ content, and reminding me of the
nursery rhyme :
“ His name is Jimmy Robinson, as everybody knows, }}
For they stuck him up in a barley-field, to frighten away the crows.
He seemed needed in this field this morning. Many were the fields
of corn just vellowing, and numerous, too, were the hay gatherers,
male and female, that we passed, busily raking and stacking the
abundant crops of sweet smelling hay. The Midland line runs
through some extensive towns in Luton, Bedford, Market Ham,
St. Alban’s, Leicester, etc., before it reaches Derby. There we arrived
after a run of about four hours, and were met with a cordial greeting
and a hearty welcome by my brother-in-law, Mr. Corlett, who is
favourably known and esteemed in and around Adelaide by many
friends of Methodism.
My luggage had been looked after by the railway officials, and
with ourselves was soon conveyed to our destination.
The next three days were spent quietly enjoying the society of our
friends, and reading with the greatest avidity the numerous letters
and newspapers from Adelaide which awaited us, with thankful hearts
to the great Giver of all good for His boundless mercy to us and ours.
Of course Mr. C had many kind and earnest enquiries to make
respecting old friends and fellow workers in Australia. He remem-
bers with much affection his associates in Sabbath school work at
Gilbert-street, not forgetting also many old friends at Pirie-street, of
whom he speaks in the highest terms of brotherly love.


AN EXCURSION TO LONDON.
August 20.—1 accompanied my friend to London. The firm with
which he is connected employs a large number of hands, and
every summer they have an excursion to some place of interest.
I may remark that most of the leading firms here give their work
people a treat of this kind during the season, and the cheap rate
at which the railways convey them was to me quite astonishing.
On this occasion, for instance, on guaranteeing 300 persons, they
undertook to convey them to London and back, a distance of 127 miles
each way, for the small fare of 4s. for the day, or 6s. if the time is
extended to a week. This, it will be seen, is not one farthing per
mile ! The morning was brilliantly fine, the company pleasant, and
the rate of the running 32 miles per hour. We reached the great
Metropolis at 8.30, and set ourselves at once to see its numerous
wonders. We visited some friends also, that I had known in
Adelaide ; and as Mr. C had a cordial invitation to dine
with an old and venerated Pastor, the Rev. Wm. Butters,
we found our way about two o’clock to Upper Tulse Hill,
where he resides, surrounded by his pleasing and accomplished
family. We were delighted to find him so well and so happy.
He is looking very much thinner than when with us at Pirie-street,
but he is no worse for that. His hair is beautifully white, and his
long flowing beard gives him quite a patriarchal appearance. He is
not allowed to preach now, or at least he does so very seldom, for he
has to be extremely careful, or he would have a relapse of
his old illness. They gave us a very cordial welcome, and insisted
upon our remaining with them until Monday. On the Sunday even-
ing we had quite a concert ; Mr. Butters’ children sing nicely,
and we had the new Wesleyan Tune Book in requisition, and sang
many sweet hymns. Mr. Butters made many enquiries respect-
ing old friends in Adelaide, and seems very much attached to
numbers of them.
We spent Saturday evening at the Royal Polytechnic Institution,
and enjoyed a rich treat. Here instruction and amusement are
happily combined. The music is good, and the dissolving views
inimitable. We had a lecture on health, from Professor Pepper, in
which he demonstrated very clearly the importance of pure air, pure
food, and pure water. Then a lecture on the Kaffir war, with numer-
our illustrations through the magic lantern ; and lastly, we had
“the Siege of Troy,” in which ihe pictures were marvellously
life like, and the recitations and singing of the very highest order.
Amongst the most interesting objects was the diving bell, in which
the public are allowed to go under water for a fee of sixpence ; also
several experiments, showing how a sunken ship can be raised to the
surface again by means of air tanks, etc.


After breakfast next morning we made our way again into the city,
and as soon as the doors of Dr. Parker’s immense Temple on Holborn
Viaduct opened, we procured the best seat we could. There was a
very large audience, quite filling every pew downstairs, and apparently
there were not many places vacant in the galleries. The Doctor is a
little stiffish built man, with a powerful but pleasant voice. His
manner is pompous in the extreme, and gives a stranger the idea that
he thinks highly of himself. The sermon was strikingly original, and
though there were some common-place remarks, there were also
passages of rare eloquence and power, and now and again sentences
of wonderful beauty. I wish I could give a specimen or
two, but not being a shorthand writer I cannot now recall them to
mind ; however, the text was:—“Ye have said it is
vain to serve the Lord.” At the close of the service, he informed
us that he should preach there again in the evening, and that would
be the last service held in the Temple until the 29 th September, as he
was about to go for his holiday, and in the meantime the church
would be painted and decorated. He lectured the congregation in
plain and pungent terms respecting the smallness of their contribu-
tions, and told them that at least £2,000 must be raised by the time
he returned home ; and alluding to the paltry sums put into the
boxes by some of them, he remarked in closing, with a grave face and
in something like a grunt, “ some of you would be surprised if you
only knew how small a way threepence goes towards cleaning and
decorating a church like this, and perfectly astounded if you knew
how little of such work can be done for four pence.”
After dinner we found our way along the Thames embankment
to Westminster Abbey, and waited for the opening of the doors at
2 o’clock, when there was a tremendous rush. The crowd was
immense, and soon packed the grand old Abbey in every part. I
suppose that the fact of Dean Stanley being announced to preach on
behalf of some hospital accounted for the large number present at
this service. The Abbey is a magnificent place, so grand in its
architecture as to make a kind of awe creep over one as they step in-
side its old walls. What an association of feelings came stealing on my
mind this afternoon. As I sat and gazed on the lofty arches high over
head with the clustering columns, beautiful statuary, richly stained
windows, and heard in the far distance the strains of majestic music,
I thought of the solemn transactions which history records as having
taken place on the very spot where I now sat. Many parts of this
ancient edifice were built in the time of Edward the Confessor, more
than 800 years ago. W hat stupendous events have been unfolded here
from time to time during that long period ! How vast, too, are its
proportions, and yet how perfectly audible and clear is Dean Stanley’s
voice heard even at a remote distance. Still, I cannot say that I
enjoyed the service, which was choral. The anthem, however, was
splendidly rendered, and especially the tenor solo it contained. The
Dean is an old thin man, with an intellectual face, but the sermon
(which was all read), did not strike me as displaying any great
eloquence or ability. The language was choice and clear, but there
was nothing brought out of the text, except a few every day thoughts
upon maternal affection. His text was “ When Jesus therefore saw
his mother, and the disciple standing by whom he loved ; he saith
unto his mother, Woman behold thy son. Then saith ho to the dis-
ciple, behold thy mother.”


In the evening we went to Liverpool Road Chapel, Islington, and
heard a real Methodist sermon, full of power and warmth, from Rev.
John Bond. His subject was the gift of tongues, as recorded in Acts
ii. 3. It did us good to listen to it, and we came away as much
pleased as with either of the sermons heard in the earlier part of the
day. It was very sad to find the public houses, shops, etc,, open in
such numbers on the Lord’s day, and the number of drunken men to
be seen in the streets and crowded into the licensed dens of iniquity
was perfectly appalling.
On Monday morning we wended our way through busy thorough-
fares to Victoria Chambers, and called upon Sir A. Blyth, who kindly
received us ; and also upon Mr. C. H. Goode, who is well known in
Adelaide. The remainder of the day we spent in seeing the South
Kensington Museum, the Albert Memorial, the Albert Hall, Hyde
Park, and many other places of interest ; so extensive however, and
wonderfully rich in objects of interest is the South Kensington
Museum, that I could merely glance at it and promise myself to
devote a long time to a closer inspection of its magnificent treasures
when I come up again. The Hall is a splendid building, perfectly
circular, and capable of holding 15,000 people. The Albert Memorial
is rich in carving, there are so many figures of illustrious men,
that it really requires a whole day devoted to a study of it, and whilst
we were there so great was the heat that we were glad to get away
under cover. I will, however, note a few particulars that may perhaps
give a faint idea of the majestic grandeur of this national memorial.
In the foundations alone are used no less than 120,000 cubic feet of
concrete. Many of the blocks of granite used weigh from 15 to 17£
tons each. The total length of steps is 11,879 ft., or equal to 2j- miles ;
number of steps, 1,803. Then reaching the pavement of the platform
we find a surface of 23,803 square feet, in the centre of which is a
colossal statue of His Royal Highness the Prince Consort, beneath a
magnificent shrine or tabernacle, supported by columns of polished
granite, consisting of 56 stones, measuring 791 feet, the whole being
raised on a podium or continuous pedestal, surrounded by sculptures
representing historical groups of the most eminent artists in painting,
sculpture, architecture, poetry, and music, the figures being six feet
high. The whole terminates in a cross 180 feet above the surrounding
ground, and is really grand beyond description. We reached Derby
again at midnight, wearied with a hard day’s work.
24th. —Had the pleasure of welcoming my old friend Mr. E. Alcock to
Derby, to spend a day or two with us. Had a pleasant walk in the
afternoon through the principal streets, and visited the Town Hall
and public baths.


MANCHESTER AND BELLEVUE DARDENS.
Thursday, July 25.—Mr. A. and myself left for a day’s excur-
sion to Manchester. Our route lay through one of the most lovely
districts in England. The railway traverses the peak of Derbyshire,
and is one continual ascent for thirty-five miles from Derby. The scenery
is exceedingly varied ; for the first ten or fifteen miles we run up a
valley of wonderful beauty, with open pasture lands on either side,
dotted all over with fields of corn ripening for the harvest, and
at every mile or two there are mansions, surrounded with trees of
splendid foliage. Towns of some considerable size, as Duffield and
Belper, etc., are soon passed, and gradually we come to steep hills and
long, dark tunnels, from which we emerge for a moment to pass
into others of the same kind. Now the scenery is truly grand and
romantic as we pass Matlock, Rowsley, and Bakewell all places
celebrated for their beauty of situation, and for their health-giving
climate. My pen cannot describe even faintly the charms of the
country through which we passed before reaching Manchester, the
second city in England, and find ourselves wending our way with
the vast crowd of human beings along Piccadilly. We pause to
admire the huge warehouses, the splendid shops, and the noble
Infirmary, and most of all to gaze upon the monuments which have
been erected here at enormous cost, to commemorate the illustrious
men who have made Manchester what it now is. But a feeling of
sorrow rises in one’s breast when he sees these magnificent specimens
of the sculptor’s chisel so begrimed with smoke as to make it hard to
say whether they were marble or bronze. The foul, everlasting smoke
blackens in a few years the finest statues and the most elaborate and
costly buildings. What a pity it seems that with all the inventions
and improvements of the present day, some means cannot be devised
for consuming the smoke and preserving fresh and clean these costly
and beautiful figures. Even the new Town flail, one of the finest
municipal buildings in England, and the Exchange likewise,
are fast losing their external beauty by this abominable
smoking process. We had not time to make an inspection of
many of the noble buildings of the wonderful city,
but made up our minds to return here shortly, and see
more of them. We got into the Free Trade Hall, a very noble
building, capable of seating about 10,000 persons. We then started for
Bellevue Gardens, where we found much to interest us amongst its
rare Zoological treasures. There is a wonderful collection of monkeys,
and we stayed some time watching the curious performances of these
funny fellows. The wild beasts —lions, tigers, etc.,—claimed a
share of attention, and we were struck with the sagacity displayed by
the elephants in taking pence and dropping them into a box, thus
causing a bell to ring ; but when biscuits, or buns, etc., were given,
they knew well enough how to deal with them, putting them out of


sight quicker than any child would lollies or grapes. Here are
birds, too, of beautiful plumage, many of them natives of our own
sunny hemisphere. Here also is an immense hall, in which large num-
bers of persons were dancing to the strains of a fine band. Then we
wandered through the extensive and well-tended Gardens, stopping
to watch the graceful climbing of the bears, and to witness their ablu-
tions, which they seemed to enjoy amazingly. We found much to amuse
and interest us everywhere. There is a very fine lake upon which
steam-boats and rowing-boats ply for hire. We chartered the
steamer, and explored the shores of the lake, etc., and for this privilege
had to pay the enormous sum of one penny each. And now it was
nearly dark, for it was getting close to 10*o’clock p.m., and the fireworks,
for which these Gardens are renowned, were about to commence. This
year the piece is the “Siege of Plevna,” and it is given every week-
night from Whit Monday to Michaelmas Day. Great preparations
had been made in the shape of artificial mountains, batteries, earth-
works, cannon, figures of Turkish soldiers, and all the other para-
phernalia of war, so that really this in the daylight is a most
beautiful work. First of all a gun was fired, then a shower of the
most beautiful rockets I ever beheld, and these again were followed in
rapid succession by a number of others in all directions, which shot
up to a marvellous height, and burst in stars of the most brilliant and
varied hues. Then the siege commenced in earnest, with volleys of
artillery, intermingled with the sharp crack of the rifle, and the whole
was soon a scene of the most devastating fire. Inside the walls were
seen numbers of horses, and the soldiers were bravely trying to defend
the place and to subdue the flames, but in vain, for soon the whole
place is one immense mass of fire, and the Turks are frantically jumping
through the flames endeavouring to escape. Altogether it was a
wonderfully well-executed thing, and the “tableaux” which brought
thb whole to a close seemed to be a complete “ .Niagara” of living
fire. We got back to Derby before 1 a.ra.
DEEBY.
July 26th. —Derby has a fine open market place, and a spacious and
elegant Market Ball, with extensive galleries all round. On market
days this hall is an interesting sight, every stall being occupied by
sellers of every conceivable article, from papers of pins and needles to
costly articles of jewellery. Butchers, confectioners, pork-sellers,
basket-makers, provision dealers, florists, and green-grocers, all are
found here, with other dealers too numerous to particularise. We
took some trouble to get prices of various articles here, and for the
information of our Adelaide friends append the same. Many of them
when reading these lines will be cougratulating themselves on having
escaped to Australia. Mutton is from lOd. to Is. per lb. ; beef, lOd.
to 14d. ; lamb, Is. to Is. 3d. Potatoes, Id. per lb. ; plums, 4d. to 6d.
per lb. ; grapes, Is. to 3s. do. Cucumbers that we buy at 2d. are here
at least three times that price. Bread, butter, cheese, and bacon,


are about the same price as in Adelaide, but then it must be borne in
mind that the hard working labourer has to toil here 54 hours per
week for 18s. to 21s. ; and only this morning I heard of a young man
intending to take to himself a wife, and he earning only 16s. per week.
I reckon it will take him some time to make much headway in life,
although a very respectable young fellow, connected with our Sunday-
school here. In the evening Mr. A. and myself addressed an open-
air meeting in the market-place, and urged upon a large assemblage
the benefits of total abstinence. Our platform was a four-wheeled
trolly, and the chair was taken by Mr. William Hall, a veteran
teetotaller, and a prominent politician in Derby. At the close of the
meeting I was waited upon by two persons anxious for advice respect-
ing South Australia. They are about to go out, and I was glad to
give them all the information I could.
BIRMINGHAM.
Started next day for Birmingham, and spent a few hours there
sight-seeing. We visited the Town Hall, a very large but rather
dingy-looking building. Internally it has anything but a cheerful
appearance, the painting and decorations being so dark and heavy ; it
contains a very fine organ. Here also the smoke from the rpf,ny
factories does its blackening work on the exterior of all the fine build-
ings. This large and important manufacturing town possesses a few
broad streets, but none equal to our King William-street. Many of
the thoroughfares are very narrow indeed, but there are some very
large and excellent shops, prominent among which are the jewellery
establishments, which are exceedingly handsome and showy, with
their glittering contents The Corporation have hitherto had their
offices scattered in various parts of the town, but they are about to
concentrate them under one roof, and for this purpose have erected a
really magnificent pile of buildings, of elaborate and expensive architec-
ture. It is a great ornament to the town, and rivals even Manchester
itself. We had an interview with and a very hearty reception from
Brother Joseph Malins, G.W.C.T., who requested us to speak at
some meetings, but I made no engagements. We visited one of the
Birmingham Cocoa Rooms, and enjoyed the good things provided by
the friends of temperance as a substitute for intoxicating drinks.
These establishments are managed by a company in the interests of
total abstinence, and are an inestimable benefit where they are properly
managed, as they appear to be here. Our stay in Birmingham was
not long, and on Saturday evening we reached Redditch, the birth-
place of my friend and travelling companion. Here I was introduced
to his sister and neices, etc., and spent a happy time with them until
Tuesday morning. While strolling about on Saturday evening I was
amused watching the sales in the open air by Cheap Jacks, and the


low figures at which some things were sold, and bidding la. for a China
tea-pot and sugar basin, got the two for my bid !On the
Sunday we spent the early part of the day at Headless Cross, about
two miles from the town, with some exceedingly pleasant Wesleyan
friends, and attending Divine service, returning to Redditch for the
evening service.
Monday morning I inspected the town and its neighbourhood,
and greatly admired the numerous gardens, kept so clean and
neat, giving evidence of the industry and taste of the cotta-
gers who possess them. The care bestowed on these beautiful garden
plots convinced me that their owners or tenants were not frequenters
of the beer house, Redditch is famous as the chief seat of the needle
manufacture, and it was our pleasing lot to inspect the extensive
factories of Mr. Milward, one of the largest manufacturers here. Hun-
dreds of hands are employed, although a very great deal is done by
machinery. Before being ready for the market each needle has to
pass through many hands, and it is most interesting to witness the
dexterity with which they are handled. It would require more space
than I can spare in this letter for me to give you an outline of the
process of making needles ; but I was delighted with all I saw, and
purchased several lots of needles in ornamental cases as a souvenir
of my visit.
On Tuesday morning we took leave of our friends, and before
leaving the town called upon the superintending minister, the Rev.
Wm. Barber. With him we had a pleasant chat about local affairs,
and also respecting Cape Town, where he was employed in
mission work for many years ; and as I had so lately been there, I
was enabled to give him some information respecting friends there.
We then proceeded to the fishing-tackle factory of Mr. S. Alcock, a
cousin of my friend’s, and saw the whole manufacture of hooks from
thorough material to the finishing stroke, when they are ready for
the line of the deep-sea fisherman, or the rod of the novice. The art
of making these delicate and beautiful hooks is most interesting,
requiring great skill and dexterity in their manipulation. We dined
with our new friends, who were very pleasant and sociable, and gave us
a pressing invitation to visit them again. We then sought the aid of
the iron horse, and sped along by way of Birmingham to Derby.
July 31st.—Again at Manchester. On the move in good time, and
taking the morning express, we travelled at a very high rate of speed,
too fast indeed to enjoy the magnificent scenery of this most picturesque
route. The cornfields were mostly full of busy reapers, and in some the
golden grain was being carted away to the stack. Providence has been
very bountiful here this season, and the crops generally are most abun-
dant. In a few places the gleaners were busily gathering up the stray
ers and tying them up in bundles. These gleaners were mostly old
women and young children. I suppose these gleanings are intended to
help the poor families in the severe winter, when they find it hard
enough to eke out a bare existence. In our adopted country there is
no need for anything of this sort, and this should call for gratitude
from us, who are so highly favoured.
We arrived at Manchester at 10 a.m., and set ourselves to see
more of the city. We dined at a temperance restaurant, and for the
information of my Adelaide friends I give a few prices :—Soup, 6d. ;
plate of beef, Is. ; potatoes, Id.; bread, Id. ; peas, 2d. ; pie, 3d. ; and
cup of tea, 3d. Total, 2s. 4d. —for a dinner which would cost Is. 3d.


in Jackman’s. After dinner took train to Bolton, and by appoint-
ment met Mr. Cunliffe, Editor of the Bolton Guardian, who kindly
acted as our guide to various places of interest. We visited the large
cotton mills of Mr, Barlow—a gentleman well known to the President
of the South Australia Conference and others in Adelaide, but had
not the pleasure of meeting Mr. Barlow, as he was away at the Brad-
ford Wesleyan Conference. We were kindly received by his son,
who instructed a young man to show us through the establishment.
We were greatly delighted to witness the rapidity with which the
rough cotton is dressed and converted into textures of the finest
quality, and into the most durable fabrics. Amongst the many
articles which arrested our attention there was one of special interest.
It was the weaving of a large and handsomely-designed counterpane
for Her Majesty the Queen, with the royal arms of England in the
centre, and a border of most exquisite pattern and beautiful work-
manship.
On leaving this establishment we visited Bolton Park, enjoying
greatly the pleasure of walking through such neatly and exquisitely
laid out grounds, richly ornamented with natures beauties (flowers),
also statuary, and fountains. After that we passed an old Wesleyan
chapel in which Mr. Wesley preached in his day, and it is reported
that on one occasion referring to the singing here, he said that he
never expected to hear sweeter music until he joined the heavenly
choir. Then making our way to our friend’s house we enjoyed a
pleasant hour tea drinking, etc. The evening was pleasantly spent
listening to, and taking part in advocating Total Abstinence as an
almost certain path to happiness and financial saccess.
August Ist.—Leaving Bolton we proceeded by an early train to
Manchester. Met many Rechabite friends, and had a formal but
enthusiastic reception at a Board meeting of the High Court of the
Order, and were then requested to take seats with them during, the
transaction of business, and dined with them. During the afternoon
we had a look at the Assize Courts, one of the finest buildings out of
London. The architecture is very imposing and grand, and the
carving is splendidly executed. We then sought admission to the
Gaol, but the gaoler not seeming satisfied by our looks that we were
gaol birds, and not possessing a magistrate’s order, or being accom-
panied by the man in blue, we had to remain outside. Our next call
was at the Home of the Shoeblack Brigade. Here they enjoy much
of parental care from the kind and efficient master and mistress of the
institution. Each boy has his day’s earnings credited to him during
each week, and then a small amount is deducted for board, lodging,
and clothing, and the remainder is allowed to accumulate towards
giving him a trade, or starting him in life. We next visited the New
Exchange, and on entering we were much struck with the grandeur
and beauty of the architecture. It is lighted from three domes of
beautiful design, and in the centre ®ne is found the Scripture text—
“A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, and loving
favour than silver and gold.”


A FEW HOURS AT SOUTHPORT.
After tea we started for Southport, one of the most fashionable
and salubrious watering places in the kingdom. It is the resort of
the wealthy merchants of Liverpool, Manchester, and the neighbour-
ing towns. Many of them have built palatial residences here, and
have vied with each other in erecting noble and princely villas. Its
climate is said to be peculiarly mild and equable in winter, and many
invalids flock here on that account. It possesses a fine sea beach,
a magnificent pier, and lovely winter gardens. The Annual Agri-
cultural Show was held the day after our arrival, and gave us an
opportunity of inspecting the stock, etc. I much admired the horses
exhibited here. The hunters and the carriage horses were splendid
animals. The capabilities of the former were tested over water-leaps
and hurdles. The style in which they leaped, and the riding
of the ladies and gentlemen, was very fine, and was highly
attractive. The heavy horses too, were grand fellows. There was
a large amount of machinery also exhibited, both useful and
ornamental. The flowers and fruit etc., do not call for special
remark, for in these things our own show far surpasses all that can be
seen in Old England. Returning to Manchester in time to address
an open air temperance meeting at 7 p.m., we had the pleasure of
talking for a short time to several hundreds of the populace of this
great city, after which we hastened off to a great meeting at the prin-
cipal Methodist Free Church, in connection with their Annual Confer-
ence, held this year in Manchester. It was highly gratifying to find
that this body keep this great and vital question to the fore, and we
listened with pleasure and delight to several of their ablest preachers,
who have tested the principles for 30 or 40 years. The crowning
address, however, was from Miss Ireland, on the duty of Christians
in regard to the temperance movement. It melted every heart, and
moved us all to fresh zeal and labour.


A VISIT TO OHATSWORTH,
August 3.—We were moving early, for having an invitation from
the “ Salford Liberal Association ” to join them in an excursion to
Chatsworth, the renowned “Palace of the Peak,” which lay in our
road home to Derby. We travelled to Rowsloy by the Midland Rail-
way, and there took the 'bus, or rather ’busses, which regularly
meet the trains to convey, at a cost of one shilling each, the
excursionists who visit Chatsworth. The road is exceedingly
picturesque and lovely, shaded by majestic trees, and by the side of
the fresh flowing stream which courses along over the rocky bed. On
reaching the massive bronze and gold entrance gates, we were met by
some of the hall servants, in very handsome livery. It would occupy
too much space in my short and random notes for me to attempt to
give a description of this celebrated place. It is one of the seats of
his Grace, the Duke of Devonshire, and is as unrivalled for the
beauty of its situation and surroundings as it is for the rich and
costly treasures of art which it contains. The history of Chatsworth,
and the Cavendish family, who built it, is a most interesting one, and
many an important event in English history has been transacted here.
The family has for ages been noted for great literary attainments, for
their pure taste for the beautiful and chaste, and the result of all this
is the Chatsworth of to-day. Much is due, too, so far at least, as the
grounds are concerned, to the able superintendence of the late Sir
Joseph Paxton. In his time it is said the gardens underwent an
entire revision, and so great were the alterations made by this genius
of great mind and fertile imagination, that we are told the place is
altogether transformed. We were conducted through the grand
entrance hall up the massive oak staircase leading to the picture
gallery. The pictures here are really magnificent, and number about
eight hundred in all. Several were painted by Yerrio, the subject
being the history of Julius Ca3sar. These adorn the entrance hall,
but the picture gallery itself contains the finest gems from the pencil
and brush of Claude Lorraine, Corregio, Raphael, Rubens, Titian,
Carracci, and other great masters. The library, too, is a really
magnificent apartment, so chaste and elegant in its design, so richly
adorned in the rarest carving, and possessing one of the most valuable
libraries. We passed through the state rooms, containing furniture
of untold value, and the most exquisite carvings by Gibbons, and
Samuel Watson, a native of this neighbourhood. Here is the bed
on which George the Second died, and the coronation chairs of
George the Third and Queen Charlotte. Here also are the magnificent
chairs in which King William the Fourth and Queen Adelaide were
crowned. These precious relics have all devolved upon the Dukes of
Devonshire, in virtue of their office as Lord Chamberlain. I was
much struck not only with the splendid paintings on the walls, but
also upon the ceilings of the various rooms through which we were


conducted. These rooms also contain various articles in marble,
jasper, etc., of immense value and rare beauty. We were also con-
ducted through the sculpture gallery, said to be quite unique as a
private collection. The entrance into it makes one feel as if he were
entering the palace of royalty, so numerous and grand are the works
of art. Here are found many of the choicest figures from the chisel
of the greatest and most famous sculptors, wrought in the finest
marble. There are also vazes of immense size, beauty, and value.
There is one vase twenty feet in circumference, and another 12ft.
There are marble tables of exquisite workmanship. One of these
contains 10,000 pieces, and is valued at £2,000. There are columns
of the finest and most beautiful marbles of various colours, —but my
pen is not able to give an adequate idea of this most enchanting
gallery ; so I leave the interior and pass to the outside, to visit the
gardens. We passed through the orangery, a very lofty building
filled with orange trees, camellias, rhododendrons, and other choice
plants. And here too are found in various positions, groups of statuary
of wonderful beauty. We passed next into the flower gardens and
the kitchen gardens. We saw the beautiful cascades, went through
the Oriental gardens, and the great conservatory —the beautiful
structure famous as the parent of the Crystal Palace of Hyde Park
in 1851. In this conservatory are found all the rarest exotics, as
bananas, date palms, cinnamon, cassia, and many others seldom seen
out of the tropics. Many trees of historical interest are growing at
Chatsworth, some planted by the Emperor Nicholas of Russia, and
some by Russian Princess. Her Majesty Queen Victoria planted an
oak, which has now attained stately dimensions. Others have been
planted by Prince Albert and the Prince of Wales, etc. I must not
forget to mention the famous weeping willow which stands near the
entrance to the Alpine Garden. It is made of copper throughout,
but in the shape of a willow ; and by turning a tap concealed some-
where, water issues with force from each leaf, and also from the
grounds around. Some of us got a smart shower and were glad to
escape from under its branches. I have given you but a poor and
feeble conception of this grand mansion, and will close by quoting the
following paragraph from the sketch of the place which 1 have read
since my visit. The writer of a lengthy sketch closes as follows
“These constitute only a few of the principal features of this
splendid palatial residence, which with its hanging woods, lofty
terraces, rocky precipices, magnificent waterworks, and exquisite
flower gardens, situated in the midst of so much natural
beauty, present as a whole charms which cannot be surpassed by any
residence in Europe.” But it was time to leave, and so casting a mere
glance at the many other objects of interest all around us, and pluck-
ing a few leaves from the oak planted by Queen Victoria, we made our
way back through the magnificent park like grounds where were
browsing a herd of sleek handsome deer, which greatly added to the
charm of the surrounding scenes.
On Sunday attended Greenhall Chapel, one of six or seven Wes-
leyan chapels in this town (Derby.) There is a very well-trained choir
here, and their singing was excellent. We had a capital sermon
from the Rev. James Hind, on John iv. 13, 14. In the evening we
went to the Drill Hall, the largest in Derby, where the Primitive
Methodists were holding their Sunday School Anniversary
Services. The place was packed full, for the music was


a great attraction. There was a choir of over 200, and in
addition to the splendid organ of the hall there was a large number
of wind and stringed instruments, and the music was very fine indeed.
The Rev. Wm. Cutts, the Missionary Secretary, was the preacher.
During the sermon there wai a severe thunderstorm, and the rain
descended with such force upon the iron roof of the building as to
drown the preacher’s voice completely, and he had to give way to the
choir, who performed an anthem, until the storm had spent itself. The
lightning was terribly vivid, and peals of thunder followed with start-
ling effect.
TO PARIS ; AND THE “ EXPOSITION.”
August 5. —Mr. Corlett and myself left [for London, en
route for Paris. We had a pleasant run, and greatly enjoyed the
beautiful day. Sight-seeing at the great aquarium at Westminster
occupied us several hours. It is a wonderful place, and it was very
interesting to watch the movements of the denizens of the deep.
Here are some rare and curious fish, but the seals greatly attracted my
attention, they being almost as docile as a dog. There were
some astonishing performances in gymnastics, by a female
who jumps from a height of 97 feet, and finishes up her
work by being fired from a huge gun into which she had crept!
1 cannot give you any idea of the various and wonderful attrac-
tions of this place, which has now become about the most popular
place of amusement in London. We next examined Cleopatra’s
Needle now being erected on the Thames embankment. The rate of
progress seemed exceedingly slow and tedious, but when we consider
its enormous weight this must not be wondered at. We were surprised
to find the edges so much chipped and broken, but after its recent
adventures in the Bay of Biscay it is matter for congratulation that it
is here at all. We dined at London Bridge Station, and at 8 p.m.
took our departure for Newhaven. As it was bank holiday there
were multitudes going along with us, and on arrival at INewhaven
we quite filled two steamers. We had a smooth passage across the
channel, and fortunate for us it was so, for the cabin was so crowded
that we had to lie on deck all night. The passage to Dieppe is about
70 miles, and occupied our boat six hours. W e reached the pier at
Dieppe at 7 in the morning, and were all ushered into an immense
upper room where a plentiful breakfast awaited us at a charge of two
francs a head, or Is. Bd. in English money. We had not much time
to explore Dieppe, but it seemed a quaint old town, with some claim
to importance as a port, for there were a great many vessels in its
spacious harbour, and some of them of large size. The dress of the
people, the conveyances, and a hundred other things, told us we were
in a foreign country, although so near home. The train ran right up


the quay, and we entered the carriages from the street, and saw no
station of any kind. We left about 9 o’clock, and our rate of travel-
mg was slow. We enjoyed amazingly our trip this morning. The
weather was lovely, and a sweet refreshing breeze came sweeping in
at the open windows. The country was surpassingly charming, and
far exceeds anything to be seen in England for sweet and quiet beauty.
The orchards were numerous, and full of fruit, the gardens teemed
with bright, gay flowers. The fields were filled with men and women
gathering in the golden corn, and now and again we came within sight
of a lovely village, nestling in some well-shaded valley, and presenting
a very picturesque appearance. The rivers too were numerous and
broad ; the churches with their slender and graceful spires, and clean
appearance, were all different to those in England, and delighted us
very much. Especially were we pleased with the ancient City of
Rouen, through which we passed, and here we had an opportunity of
purchasing plums and apricots at a reasonable rate ; they found it
easy work to dispose of their stores. It was amusing td see how
careful they were to get the money from the Englishmen before part-
ing with the fruit. The dress of these French peasants is simple, but
1 should think comfortable and cheap. Nearly all the men we saw
wore loose trousers, and a kind of blouse of the same material, the
whole costing I suppose only a few francs. We found them exceed-
ingly polite ; and during our stay in France we saw only one person
the worse for drink. The neighbourhood of Rouen is certainly the
most charming place I have seen in Europe so far. The Cathedral is
a very fine and beautiful building, and when one thinks of the fearful
effects of a bombardment upon so pretty a city, we can hardly wonder
that Rouen so easily fell into the hands of the victorious Germans in
1870. It ga?e its conquerors very little trouble upon that occasion.
A French army was drawn up in front of the city for its protection,
but before the General in command could arrange his forces and com-
plete the entrenchments, a division of Manteuffel’s army fell with
such violence upon them on December 4th, that they were obliged
to fall back, and leave to its fate the famous old Norman city that
had borne in by-gone ages so many sieges. But lam not writing a
history of the war, and must confine myself to the simple task of
jotting down notes of my journey.
We reached Paris about 2 p.m,, and were at once driven to our
hotel. On cur way we passed many grand and noble buildings.
Here we found lunch awaiting us, and after a capital meal, etc., we
entered the “Exposition Umverselle” to spend the remainder of the
day. We soon found that it would require many and many a day to
see this wonderful place. The extent of it is so enormous, and the
exhibibits from all countries are on such a gigantic scale as to make
one feel how utterly useless it is to attempt to explore it in the short
time we could spare to it. We lost no time, however, but resolved to
find at once the British section, see what we could of it, and devote
Friday and Saturday to the other portions. Sweden deserves
special mention for her display of oil paintings and statuary. 1 think
that the latter was hardly surpassed by any of the larger and more
important European nations. In musical instruments also she
stands high. There were organs and pianofortes of rare tone and
beauty. These seemed to be attracting very great attention. We had
no difficulty in finding the South Australian Court, and were
gratified with the arrangement of the whole place. We, as acolony, have


every reason to be proud of the position we occupy in this exhibition, and
I really don’t know how the things could by any possibility be arranged
with more taste and judgment. We were not fortunate enough to
find either of the commissioners there, but we received every attention
from the gentleman in charge. We spent a considerable time with
him, and were delighted to hear that the court was attracting an
unusual amount of attention. The wheat and flour, and the splendid
fruit, seemed to be objects of intense interest to the thousands con-
stantly passing through. It being now 6 p.m. we hastened to refresh
the inner man.
Again leaving our lodgings as soon as dinner was over to see a
little of the gay and beautiful city, we made our way to the
“Place de la Concorde,” the most imposing spot in Paris,
and were delighted with the charming scene before us. All
along the gardens of the Tuileries scores of brilliant lamps were
burning, and in front of the “ Corps Legislatif ” were four lamps lit
up with electric light, which had a splendid effect. On the other side
of the square the “ Champs Elysees ” was literary one blaze of light.
Among the graceful and stately trees were hundreds of lamps, and
when all lit up the effect was wonderfully pleasing. We had not gone
far when our attention was directed to a crowd of people assembled
among the trees, and we soon found that an open air concert was going
on, so paying one franc a piece we took a chair and sat down to hear a
few French songs. Of course we did not understand a word of the
language, but still we very much enjoyed most of them, and one part
of the programme was an imitation of the songs of the nightingale,
blackbird, chaffinch, etc., by an English actor. Also the crowing of
the cock, cackling of hens, barking of the dogs, from the mastiff to
the tiny parlour pet. We had a fine opportunity here of seeing one of
the peculiar phases of Parisian life.
Next morning one of Cook’s elegant and roomy conveyances with
four fine horses called for us, and took up our party for an excursion
in the city.
I cannot attempt to enumerate all the places of interest we visited,
but I must name a few of them. We saw the Column Vendome, the
gardens of the Tuileries, Institute of France, statue of Henry IV.,
the Palace of Justice, where a halt was made and we were conducted
over the building. We also visited here the celebrated Chapelle of
Saint Louis. This is one of the most wonderful sights in Paris, and
is the finest specimen of the art of the middle ages to be found any-
where. It was erected in 1242, to receive the supposed fragments of
the Crown of Thorns, the true Cross, and the garment of the Saviour,
as well as the spear with which His side was pierced, which are said to
have been purchased by St. Louis from the King of Jerusalem for the
sum of two million francs. It is the most beautiful gem of Gothic
Architecture in Paris. The stained windows and the magnificent
pictures, and the rich and costly gilding, are all truly wonderful, and
we were charmed with the whole place. Certainly in the matter of
stained glass windows the artists of six hundred years ago are not
surpassed by those of modern times. Entering our carriages again
we next stopped at the “ Louvre.” This magnificent building is
devoted to the fine arts, and to see the -whole of the palace and
museum would occupy several days. Here are many of the master-
pieces of the greatest Frenchmen. The paintings on the ceilings are
very splendid and of immense dimensions, whilst the walls every-


where are adorned with rare and precious ones. The marble figures
which stand in the centres of the rooms, the staircases and corridors
are marvellously executed. The communists set fire to the Louvre in
May, 1871, and a great many valuable and rare pictures, books and
M. S.S., were destroyed, and the whole palace had a narrow escape from
total destruction. As to the extensive and valuable library and the
unrivalled museum, our visit was far too hurried for us
to see much of them. The amount of carving on the
outside is very wonderful. We visited the “Palais Royal;”
this place suffered terribly in the insurrection of 1871, and
much of it was destroyed. Our next halt was for luncheon. Again
taking our places we were driven through the Place du Carrousel and
Triumphal Arch, and alighted at the celebrated carpet manufactory
of the Gobelins. This is a State establishment, and all the rare and
beautiful carpets made in it are for the numerous palaces and
churches, etc. Some of those we saw in course of construction were
marked for the Pantheon, Louvre, etc. Some of the productions of
this manufactory take ten years to finish, and are worth 150,000 francs
or more. One we saw in the “ Exposition ” must be worth an
enormous sum. It resembles a very rich and beautiful oil painting,
so perfect are the colours and so fine the texture. We next saw the
Observatory, statue of Marshal Ney, the magnificent fountains and
gardens of the Luxembourg, and then went through the Pantheon a
grand and noble church which cost thirty million francs. It resem-
bles somewhat St. Paul’s in London, but is not so large. The dome is
281 feet to the top. The columns supporting the front of the edifice
are very grand and the carving upon the outside by David d’Augers
represents France in the act of distributing garlands to her sons.
Many of the most renowned warriors and statesmen of France lie
buried here, and all underneath the church is one vast sepulchre, for
the catacombs extend completely under this part of the city. Here and
upon most of the great public buildings of Paris I was quite amazed to
see the vast amount of rich and gorgeous gilding used in the decorations.
Here too the paintings on the walls and ceilings are exceedingly
beautiful. There are three altars in the church, and they are fitted up
in the most costly manner, and the appearance is wonderfully fine.
Our next stay was at the “ Jardin des Plantes.” The gardens are
splendidly laid out, and the zoological department most attractive.
Entering our carriages again, we visited the Orleans Railway
Station, a very handsome structure, and after a pleasant drive, we
entered the stately cathedral of Notre Dame. This, taken altogether,
is, without doubt, the finest church in Paris. The Madeleine and the
Pantheon, grand and gorgeous though they be, are inferior in size and
in the character of their architecture, to this magnificent structure,
which holds 21,000 persons. We were struck as we entered the doors
with the crowd of poor and infirm beggars standing with boxes asking
alms. The interior of Notre Dame is so magnificent, and its entire
fitting up so costly, that I cannot attempt to describe it. It contains
relics of old saints and of the Redeemer. Here also are shown the
coronation relics, etc., of Napoleon 1., the bloody garments of the last
three successive Archbishops of Paris—Afire, Sibour, and Darboy,
who were all murdered. The exterior, which appears to me to be
rather too heavy, has two lofty towers, in one of which hangs a bell
seventeen tons in weight; but these square towers, with their massive
architecture, appear to me to be deficient in grace and beauty. After


a drive round the Opera, a most elaborate and costly structure, we
were driven home to our hotel for dinner. I must, however, say a
word about the Opera, for it is really one of the most wonderful sights
in Paris. We did not see the inside, but were told that it was
altogether unrivalled in this city of beauty for its extreme loveliness.
It is said to be fitted up in so grand and sumptuous a manner that any
description of it falls far short of the reality. It was fourteen years in
building, and cost upwards of sixty million francs. Not only splendid
figures in marble, but bronze, too, has been largely used here in deco-
rations, We spent the evening in seeing the beauties of Paris, as we
wended our way to one of the places of popular amusement. The
Hippodrome—This building, I should think, would accommodate
from 10,000 to 12,000 persons, and it is only fair to say that even at
the entrance there is not the least pushing or crushing, the politeness
of the French people being such as to present no inconvenience even
in the largest gatherings. 1 shall not attempt to describe the perform-
ance, it being perfect of its kind, but I wish to note the provision made
here for ventilation. While the programme is being carried out, one
cannot help noticing how pure and cool the atmosphere is, notwith-
standing the large assemblage ; and looking up we see the roof has
been noiselessly and entirely removed, it being so constructed as to be
easily shunted back in two parts, from the centre. Would this not
be a good plan to adopt for large public buildings in Adelaide ?
Next morning, August sth, our conveyance called for us. The day
being very fine and sunny, and as we were going to see Versailles, we
took special care to secure front seats on the top of the caariage,
wishing to get a full view of the lovely Bois de Boulogne, with its
splendid grassy sward and avenues of fine shady trees. We
had to mind our hats sometimes when sweeping along
under their wide spreading branches. The scenery is most
picturesque and enchanting, with its splendid trees, gay flowers,
placid lakes, and graceful cascades. Then we pass the Parisian race-
course of “ Longchamps,” and see at no very great distance the
famous stronghold, “ Mont Yalerien,” which acted so prominent a
part in the siege of Paris seven or eight years ago. Shortly
we reach “St. Cloud,” perhaps the most popular and enchantt
ing suburb of the French capital. The drive has been charming.
Here we alight, and following our conductor we soon arrive at
the ruins of the Palace our guide then pointed out to us the
chief objects of interest in the capital, which we were now overlooking.
The Palace itself is in ruins, having been destroyed by the shells fired
from Mont Yalerien, in order to dislodge the Germans, who had taken
possession of it. The town itself was utterly destroyed by the Ger-
mans in 1871, but now it is rebuilt, with very few exceptions.
The beautiful church, however, escaped the general ruin. The history
of the Palace would occupy too much time to relate in these notes,
but I may say that it was a favourite residence of both the Napoleons,
and in it Queen Victoria lodged when she visited Paris in 1855. The
view of Paris and of the surrounding country from this elevated spot
is exceedingly charming and lovely, and we could not have
seen it under more favorable circumstances, as the day was perfectly
clear, and lit up by the brilliant sunshine, the aspect was enchanting.
Just outside St. Cloud, as we were wending our way up the hill, our
guide pointed out to us a very noteworthy object. It was an unex-
ploded shell which had buried itself firmly in the keystone over the


front door of a beautiful villa. The stone was shivered into frag-
ments, but as the shell did not burst, the house itself escaped, and
now the deadly instrument of destruction is pointed out to travellers
as a most curious object. The remainder of the drive to Versailles
was equally charming. Arriving at our destination, we were
first conducted through the Palace of the Trianons, where there
are some splendid rooms, furnished in themost sumptuous
manner. Here are some magnificent bedsteads, upon which
died several of the Kings and Queens of France. Here also we
saw the room in which took place the trial of Marshall Bazaine. The
paintings and statues are very fine, and there are some exquisite
marble tables here of rare and beautiful workmanship. Then we
visited the room where are preserved with great care the five State
Carriages of France. These are superb in every respect, and the cost
of building them must have been enormous. We had the history of
each carriage related by our conductor. Some of them have been
used only two or three times, and when one learns that a million and
a quarter francs were lavished by Napoleon 111. upon a coach
used only on the occasion of the baptism of his son, we can
hardly wonder that the people of France protested against his
extravagance. These carriages look almost like one mass of
gold, and the upholstering is all done in the most costly
and rare materials. Entering our carriages again we drove back for
luncheon, and were then conducted to the Palace of Versailles, a
place of which one writer says—“ Were Paris blotted from the face
of the earth, leaving nothing behind it but the Palace of Versailles,
the journey to this fairy-like structure would alone well repay the
visitor.” Standing on the spot where King William of Prussia
was proclaimed Emperor of Germany, in the midst of his victorious
generals and army, on the 18th of January, 1871, one could not help
thinking the place was well calculated to give impressiveness and
grandeur to that remarkable event. All around stand gigantic
figures of the warriors of France, who have left their mark upon
the history of their country, and at the upper end of the court is
a noble statue of Louis XIV. on horseback, cast from cannon
captured from the enemy in his campaigns on the “ Rhine.”
Forming ourselves into a circle, we listened with much interest to
our excellent Conductor as he gave us an outline of the history of the
palace, and called our attention to the various objects of special in-
terest which we were to look for in our ramble through the galleries
and the grounds. The walls are covered with beautiful oil paint-
ings ; I don’t think the Louvre itself can surpass it in the extent and
value of its works of art. The Museum, too, is altogether unparal-
leled, of course in a flying visit like ours nothing but the merest
glance can be be bestowed upon them. We were particularly struck
with the battle paintings, chiefly from the brush of Louis David.
These magnificent pictures represent the celebrated engagements and
victories of the French army. The statuary too, both in the palace
and the park, is exceedingly beautiful. Especially is this the case
with respect to two, that of Louis XIV and the first Napoleon. The
former is considered one of the finest figures in France,
but I was more pleased with the latter. It represents the famous
warrior as he appeared the night before his death in his prison home
in St. Helena. He is seated in his chair, and the image of death
seems resting unmistakeably on that wonderful face. My attention


was arrested too, by one of the superb paintings where the French
have captured a large number of prisoners ; among them is a splendid
Highlander, in his well-known kilt, a tall majestic fellow ; the look of
rage and defiance on his countenance is inimitable, and the painter has
depicted it in a powerful manner. There are not many English
prisoners that I could see in these great pictures, nor have the French
many English trophies of war to boast about, and I hope they never
may.
After a long stay in the palace, we went through a portion of the
splendid park. The terraces, fountains, cascades, marble figures,
vazes, and a hundred other things, all delighted us exceedingly.
Everything that money and the finest taste could do, has been done
here, to render it the most lovely spot in Europe. lam not going to
give even an outline of its remarkable history, but I may mention
that Louis XIV. expended vast sums of money in building and
adorning the palace, and laying out and beautifying the park. So
enormous was the outlay, so extravagant his expenditure, that the
king, with his own hands destroyed all the documents relating to the
cost, so that it has never been found out what the actual outlay was.
Many momentous events in French history have transpired here, and
in the late siege operations it occupied a conspicuous place.
Leaving Versailles at about 5.30, we had a grand ride back to Paris
by a different road, through the village of Sevres. Here we drew up
for refreshments, and also saw the outside of the famous
porcelain manufactory. The ware from this place is so well known all
over the world that I need not refer to it, but I must say that the
display of all kinds of beautiful articles which they make in the
Exhibition, is most remarkable. It is one of the most beauti-
ful displays to be seen in that place, where there is so much of
beauty. Here also we saw the house where Prince Bismarck and
M, Jules Favre held their interview in 1871, which resulted in
the signing of an armistice. Our company enjoyed themselves
heartily on the return journey, by singing a number of the national
songs of old England, apparently to the astonishment and delight of
the villagers. Our excursions with Cook’s party ceased with this
journey. After dinner we had a long ramble cn the Boulevards.
The evening was an exceedingly charming one, clear and mild
enough to bring the Parisians outside of the numerous cafes and res-
taurants, and it was to us a novel sight to see the splendid way in which
these places were lighted and decorated. Outside of all of them, on
the principal Boulevards, chairs and tables are placed, and refreshments
served ; and seated here enjoying themselves, and engaging in earnest
conversation, were thousands of ladies and gentlemen, all dressed in
the highest style, making the scene an extremely gay and lively one.
They will sit talking for hours, and reading the newspapers, over
a glass of light wine, a bottle of lemonade, or a glass of coffee, for at
these places coffee is served in tall glasses. The trees along these
Boulevards, in some cases in double rows, are extremely pretty, and
when lit up, as the streets were to-night, it would be extremely
difficult to find a more gay and cheerful sight.
Next day, Friday, was a day of independent action. Starting after
breakfast, we first made for the “Place de la Concorde,” to make a
more minute examination. The fountains were in full play, and looked
exceedingly beautiful. In this magnificent square stands the Egyptian
Obelisk, given to France by Mehemet Ali, at the same time that he


presented Cleopatra ? s Needle to England. This pillar was erected in
its present situation in 1836, and is a most conspicuous object. It
may be interesting to some to state that the cost of transport to Paris,
and its elevation in its present position, amounted to two millions of
francs, and as the obelisk is 500,0001b5. in weight, the stone
of which it consists has cost four francs per pound. It is
a grand piece of reddish coloured granite, covered all over with
hieroglyphics, and standing upon a block of grey granite of an
enormous size, weighing, I believe, 110 tons. The whole thing, with
the beautiful fountains close by, is worth going to Paris to see, if there
were no other attractions. The eight statues placed around the
Square are on a noble scale, and in keeping with the rest of the
neighbourhood. They represent the eight principal cities of France,
Lyons, Bordeaux, Marseilles, Nantes, Brest, Rouen, Lille, and
Strasbourg. Beautiful as most of Paris is, this unquestionably is the
culminating point of all its loveliness. These monuments all around
us, are so noble, and so exquisitely chiselled, that many an hour might
be pleasantly devoted to their study. Next we visited some of the
principal thoroughfares, and then had a look at the famous church of
the Madeleine, where we sat down for a short time, looking at the
service going on, —looking I say, for I cannot say hearing, as never a
word was spoken, but richly arrayed priests were bowing, and waving
incense, and going through a lot of dumb show. The church is a
modern one, comparatively, for although begun in the reign of
Louis XY., it was not entirely completed until 1842. It has not
much of the appearance of a church outside. Like most of the great
public buildings of Paris, it is adorned with rich and splendid carving,
and has on the outside 52 columns to support it. It is approached
in front by a grand flight of steps, the whole width of the building,
and numbering twenty-eight in all. The magnificent bronzed doors
represent the Ten Commandments. We were attracted by the
elaborate and handsome vases, containing the holy water, into which
the passers-by reverently dipped their fingers, and crossed themselves.
The interior of the church was very gorgeous, being ornamented with
costly gilding, and oil paintings, representing chiefly Scripture scenes.
Many a hard battle of the barricades has been fought in this
neighbourhood, and the walls of many of the surrounding houses bear
traces of cannon balls and shells. Here the Communists, when hard
pressed in 1871, erected strong and formidable barricades across the
Rue Royale, and fought with so much determination and courage, and
so desperate was the fighting, that many houses were utterly destroyed.
At last the Versailles troops succeeded in capturing these strongholds,
and the remnant of the insurgents, numbering three hundred, fled
into the Madeleine for refuge, where they were pursued by their
maddened fellow-countrymen, and every one of them was bayonetted
on the spot, not a single life being spared ! Such are the horrors of
civil war.
After this we went to the railway station, and took tickets for a
journey around the city, for there are numerous trains during the
day completely going round Paris. I suppose this railway was
originally constructed for military purposes. However that may be,
it is now largely used by excursionists. A peculiarity of these
railway carriages is that there are seats on the outside, on the top of
the carriage, and in fine weather a ride here is very pleasant, if
you keep clear of the smoke. We saw the fortifications and many


other notable sights as we sped on our way, to the celebrated
burial-ground of “ Pe're La Chaise,” a most interesting and beautiful
cemetery. In these peaceful vaults rest many of the statesmen, orators,
authors, composers, and philosophers of this great country, and
here only twelve months ago was carried by his weeping fellow-
countrymen, one of the moat illustrious of them all, M. Thiers, the first
President of the Republic. We visited his tomb, and signed our
names in the book left there for the signatures of his
admirers. No one who has not seen Pe're La Chaise can form any
conception of the place. It covers 212 acres of land, and its
elevation is considerable. Nature has done much to make the place
beautiful, but art has done still more. It contains monuments of
wonderful construction. There are grand and costly Mausoleums,
with expensive bronze or richly adorned iron doors. Most of them
had also windows filled with stained glass, through which the sun
was sending a stream of colours variegated as the rainbow, through
which we looked, and in numbers of them saw tall tapers burning
upon the marble slabs, and in some of them were fine oil portraits,
or photographs of the deceased. All around us, too, were handsome
granite obelisks and elegant Sicilian marble crosses. It is said that there
are twenty thousand monuments in this wonderful place. Many of the
tombs were literally heaped over with garlands of immortelles, and
especially was this the case with a few of what I suppose I may call
the idols of these Parisians, as Ledru Rollin, Raspail, Rossini, and
Thiers. Of course we had not time to see much of the place, but we
were determined to find the grave of the last named before leaving
this city of the dead. Next taking a seat on the top of the bus, we
passed the famous prison of La Roquette, where the most hardened
and notorious criminals of Paris are confined previous to being
brought to the guillotine, which stands just opposite the gate. This place,
too, has a terrible history, but into that I must not enter at present,
but one of the latest tragedies of the prison must not be overloooked.
Here it was that the Communists committed one of the most brutal
and diabolical outrages perpetrated during their short reign of terror.
On May 24, 1871, the Archbishop of Paris and five priests who had
been secured here as hostages, were conducted to the outer court of
the prison, where they were all brutally shot by one of the insurgents,
and their bodies cast like dead dogs into a hole at “ Pere La Chaise.”
Two days after, thirty-seven others were murdered in cold blood, and
on the next day again seventy gendarmes were slaughtered by the
convicts, who had been liberated purposely for the foul deed. Such
recitals as these make us prize our privileges as Englishmen and
Protestants. Another short ride brought us to the “Place
de la Bastille,” where formerly stood the prison so long a terrors
to the French people, and a reproach to their nation. A splendid
column, 164 feet in height, stands now where the prison once stood,
and on the top is a figure emblematical of liberty. It is an exceedingly
fine piece of work, and a most conspicuous object from nearly all parts
of the city. From this spot we had a long ride on top of one of the
numerous tram cars with which Paris is plentifully supplied, right
away to the “ Hotel des Invalides.” This building is one of the
largest, and most famous of all the public buildings of the French
capital, and to me, who had so recently visited Napoleon’s tomb, in the
Island of St. Helena, it had a special interest. Its richly gilded dome, is
sure to attract the stranger on his first entrance into Paris, as it stand s


high and prominent, and the immense mass of gilding shines most
conspicuously. The Hotel des Invalides covers sixteen acres of ground,
and is constructed to accommodate five thousand invalided soldiers.
It stands facing the magnificent “ Esplanade des Invalides,” and was
built by Louis XIV., to secure a comfortable home in which his
veterans might spend their days when compelled by age or wounds
to leave the army. In front of the buildings there are beautiful
gardens, in which were comfortably lounging on the numerous seats
scores of the heroes of the Crimea, whilst others were limping about
on crutches and wooden legs, or wheeling themselves about in invalid
chairs. In these gardens are placed a number of cannon. * .This battery
are trophy guns, and are fired on great occasions only. Some of them
are Austrian, some Prussian, and some were taken at Sebastopol.
There are others from China and Algiers, etc., but no English that we
saw. TVe went through a large portion of the building, the “ Cour
d’ Honneur,” the picture galleries, officers’ quarters, and the Chapel, a
splendidly decorated place, with a rich and showy altar. Here are
suspended from the roof a great number of flags of various nations,
which from time to time have fallen into the hands of the French
army, and amongst them we saw one, and only one, of
The flag that braved a thousand years
The battle and the breeze.”
Most conspicuous amongst these trophies so highly prized by a
warlike nation like the French, is the banner that once waved on the
Malakoff tower. The pillars are inscribed with the names of famous
generals who have been interred here.
After this we saw the tomb of the Emperor, for after all that is the
chief object of interest in the “Invalides.” I wish I could de-
scribe it to my readers, but I cannot; words fail to i give even a faint
description of it. Upon entering we find beneath our feet a floor of
choice and costly marble, and over head a magnificent dome of vast
dimensions. Its height is 340 feet, and this dome is decorated
with exceedingly rich and splendid paintings. All around us in this
vast apartment are statues in the purest marble, and paintings
of priceless value. The gilding, too, is gorgeous in the extreme.
Going forward some paces we come to a marble circular balus-
trade of rare workmanship, and about three feet high. It
is massive and elegant in appearance, and parhaps seventy feet
in diameter. This railing surrounds a hollow or depression in the
floor, which does not appear very deep, but in reality it is twenty
feet. This is paved with various coloured marble to represent the
mariner’s compass, and in the centre stands the sarcophagus, a piece
of the finest red porphyry the world has ever produced, and which
has a most imposing and beautiful appearance. On the pavement
round about it are inscribed the names of some of Napoleon’s most
celebrated victories. Standing around, as if supporting the wall in
this hollow, are twelve immense female figures in white marble,
richly robed, symbolizing also the Emperor’s greatest battles. These
statues are exceedingly fine, and they seem to be gazing in grief over
the tomb of the dead soldier. All that I have been trying faintly
to sketch is immediately underneath the dome, which is filled with
stained glass, and a very great deal lighter than the dome of St. Paul’s ;
and the brilliant sunlight streaming through this glass on the rich
gilding seemed to shed upon the|scene a flood of glory such as I had


never before beheld. There was a grandeur about the whole
place which made it altogether unparalleled.
After a lengthy stay we had to hurry off to see another of the
famous sights of Paris, namely the “Arc de Triomphe.” This
structure is the noblest thing of its kind in France, and probably in
the world. It is 157 feet broad, 72 feet thick, and 162 high, and is
visible from all parts of Paris. It cost upwards of ten million francs,
and was commenced in 1806, but was not completed until after the
overthrow of Napoleon at Waterloo. It was built to commem-
orate the triumphs of the French arms, and is covered all over with
splendid representations of the most important events in the
Emperor’s warlike career. But not only his victories are inscribed
here in stone, but the names also of his generals, to the number
of nearly four hundred. From the summit there is a grand view of the
city and its environs, and the splendid Boulevards can be seen to the
best advantage from this spot. The victorious armies of Germany passed
through the Arch in entering Paris in 1871. Wonderful as it may appear
the Communists succeeded in raising heavy artillery to the top of the
building, on the 20th of May, 1871, and from thence bombarded with
terrible effect, the strong citadel of “ Mont Valerien.” The structure
itself,- however, did not suffer much damage from the siege operations,
although the marks of rifle bullets are numerous. We closed up the
day with a trip up the Seine, on one of the river steamers, and greatly
enjoyed it.
Next morningfwe were early in the “Exposition Universelle,” and
spent the entire day there, but to see much of this grand place, we
wanted a week or more. However, we made the most of our time,
and got through a large portion of the splendid grounds, with their
beautiful cascades and fountains. Spent some considerable time in
bargaining with a number of Algerian Arabs for a few curiosities. We
found them a queer lot, keen and sharp enough in their dealings.
They asked us double the amount that we gave them eventually, but I
am afraid they succeeded in cheating us after all. We went through
a portion of the French Department, which of course is by far
the largest of the whole. The show here was really wonderful. The
machinery of all kinds was exquisite, and some of their engines were
ponderous, and beautifully finished. They have machines for
everything, and we should have liked to spend days in seeing
them at work. The American Department, too, is truly re-
markable, and for curious little machines of ingenious and fine
construction, rival even the French. Their display of carriages, fire-
arms, and indeed almost everything, was simply perfection itself.
Great Britain and her Colonies are not behind. They may well
feel proud regarding the place they occupy here, but I must not
attempt to enumerate any of them ; volumes would be required for the
purpose, and my time is too fully occupied just now to attempt the
task. We were exceedingly surprised and pleased with the display
made by the Northern nations of Europe—Russia, Denmark, Norway,
and Sweden. As might be expected, Italy and France make a
magnificent display of Fine Arts. We could have spent a day very
pleasantly amongst their valuable and beautiful sculpture. The
English paintings, too, were very fine, and constantly surrounded by
admiring groups. The much admired “Derby Day” was there,
alongside of another of Frith’s marvellous productions, “ The Railway
Station.” I noticed a great number of Frenchmen standing in front


of this wonderful picture, and they seemed to be pointing out to each
other, the special features of it. Great Britain, too, sends some
magnificent sculpture.
1 am exceedingly sorry that I cannot give a better description of this
wonderful place, but neither time nor ability permit it. After making
a few purchases we came away, and got thoroughly drenched in
reaching our hotel.
After dinner we bade good-bye to our new-made friends in Paris,
and started back for Dieppe at 9 p.m. This journey being made in
the dark, I cannot, of course, say much about it, but it was very
pleasantly performed in company with a number of exceedingly
interesting and intelligent Scotchmen. On reaching the Alexandra,
steamer, we found she was not to sail before 7 o’clock, so we secured
berths, and had five hours sleep before starting.
Our passage across the Channel was a trying one for most of us.
The wind was strong, and from the South West, causing a nasty cross
sea. I was soon sick enough, and continued so until we reached
Newhaven, at 1 o’clock. Here we parted for a while, Mr. C to
return to Derby, whilst I went on to Southampton in search of
relatives I had left there twenty-five years ago.


SOUTHAMPTON, MALVERN, AND
REDDITCH.
On arrival in this my native town I wended my way at once to the
central Wesleyan Chapel, feeling it to be a fitting thing to spend an
hour in worship, in the place I last attended before leaving the shores
of my native land for the Southern world. After the service, I stood
face to face with my uncle, and questioned him as to his name, and
whether he had any relatives in Australia, and particularly as to a
nephew whose initials were M. H. M. All this was satisfactorily
settled, and then I had to accompany my aunt and himself home,
visiting, however, several cousins, etc., before retiring for the night.
Next morning I began my peregrinations early, being anxious to see
what changes had been effected during my absence of a quarter of a
century. There were not so many alterations as I expected. Most of
the objects were quite familiar to me, and not a few of them called up
to my recollection, incidents in the past which had been all but
forgotten. Presently my attention was arrested by the words
il Town Clerk’s Office,” and as I have rather a liking for municipal
matters, I entered and had an interview with the Town Clerk and the
Mayor. His Worship, and the civic authorities were just about to re-
ceive a Royal visit,and in common with the townspeople generally, were
making immense preparations for this august event. The Prince and
Princess of Wales were coming to-day to lay the foundation-stone of
the New Church of St. Mary’s, and the Mayor very kindly presented
me with a ticket for the platform on which their Royal Highnesses were
to be received. I had thus a splendid opportunity of witnessing the
whole ceremony. The proceedings were all gone through in the most
satisfactory manner, everything was admirably arranged. I was
struck by the fine military and soldierly bearing of the local volunteers.
They were vastly superior to any of the soldiers we saw in
Paris. Being quite close to the Prince and Princess, I considered
myself in luck’s way, as I may have no other chance of seeing any
of the Royal family. The whole affair was very successfully managed,
including a handsome display of bunting and floral decorations.
Then spent a pleasant evening visiting, and relating my Australian
experiences to my relatives.
Next morning was again devoted to an exploring expedition. I
visited the new parts of the town, and admired the improvements in
the way of parks and recreation grounds, called the Abboretum, or
Brunswick Park. These being easily accessible from all parts of the
town, will prove an inestimable and perpetual blessing to the in-
habitants of this important and flourishing seaport. These grounds,


in my boyhood’s days, were but a wild, unkempt, open place ; they are
now neatly laid out, the general effect being pleasing to the eye. In
addition to the well-kept paths, and neatly mown grass, there are
avenues of elm, chestnut, and other trees, providing a pleasant shade,
and lending beauty to the scene ; the whole being surrounded by a
neat iron fence. The citizens have further beautfied these grounds
by erecting suitable statuary to the memory of Mr. Alderman Andrews,
who was several times elected mayor ; also a nine-foot statue in
Sicilian marble of Dr. Isaac Watts. This is standing on a grand pedes-
tal, with bas-reliefs illutrative of the life and labors of the sacred lyrist.
Southampton, in consequence of its natural situation, its fine roomy
and deep docks, and its safe anchorage, is fast becoming one of the
first ports in England. These docks are capable of receiving vessels
of the heaviest tonnage at all tides, and are surrounded with quays
measuring thousands of feet. Cargoes are landed here expeditiously by
means of powerful cranes and other machinery, worked by steam
power, and as the London and South Western Railway run their trains
alongside, passengers and goods can be conveyed to London within
three hours. The large steamers of the P. and O. Company
find here ample accommodation, and the place is frequented also by
many other magnificent steamships, etc.
In the afternoon I left for London, being anxious to visit the House
of Commons before the close of the session.
August 14. Up in good time, and visiting the wonderful sights in
this very wonderful city. The streets in the centre of the city are so
numerous, crooked, and complicated, that a stranger finds it no
easy task to find his way about without a guide. At London Bridge I
tcok the river steam-boat for Westminster, passing on my way
Cleopatra’s Needle, and admiring the splendid Thames Embankment,
a work which has transformed the dirty muddy river bank into a
grand and noble promenade, with wide carriage way, and beautiful
footpaths. Those who knew this part of the great metropolis twenty
years ago, can scarcely imagine what a stupendous improvement has
been made by this embankment. On arrival at Westminster pier I
went at once to the offices of the Agent-General for South Australia,
who had kindly promised to procure for me a ticket or order for the
gallery of the House of Commons. This was my second interview
with Sir Arthur, whose genial and pleasant disposition makes one feel
so much at ease. I could not avoid asking myself whether it was
possible amongst all the public men of our colony, to select any one so
well qualified in every respect for the post he fills. 1 think there can
be no question as to his being the right man in the right place. I
found him easily accessible, polite, and affable, and ready to give me
every information.
Having obtained an order of admission to the British House of
Commons, I at once proceeded thither, hoping to hear some important
debate. In this I w r as altogether disappointed, as next day the
Parliament was to be prorogued, and as the session had been unusually
prolonged, a great many of the members were off to their shooting
lodges, etc. They find the cares of State so harassing that they are
glad to feel their labours ended and their play hours beginning. So
at this sitting very few members were in the Chamber, and none of
the leaders of parties. Professor Fawcett was the principal speaker.
He rose to call attention to another phase of the never-ending Eastern


question, and wanted some information respecting the treaty of
Berlin. The only member of the Government present was the Under-
secretary for Foreign Affairs, and he answered the questions in so few
words that really his reply could not be called a speech. Several
other members joined in the conversation, but the whole thing was
dull and pointless, and my visit to this most august assembly
might be pronounced a complete failure. I left London with a late
train, and reached Derby in the small hours of the morning, weary
with myjourney, but glad to find my friends there pretty well. Spent
he next three days, August 15, 16, and 17, quietly with Mr.
and Mrs. 0 -, taking occasional drives to places adjacent to
Derby, many of them spots of great beauty and interest.
r> August 18. —Left Derby again for another tour, meeting
Mr. Alcock at the fashionable and charming town of Malvern. We
attended the District meeting of the 1.0.G.T., and afterwards
visited the celebrated St. Ann’s Wells, there taking part in a
large open-air meeting, held on the romantic hill side amidst the
most exquisite scenery. Our Chairman was Mr. Derrington, a
worthy brother of our esteemed friend Mr. E. H. Derrington, so well
and favourably known in religious and temperance work at Moonta.
Afterwards, in company with many representatives and friends of the
cause, we enjoyed the good things provided at their public tea,
finishing up a most enjoyable day with a first rate temperance
meeting.
Tuesday, August 20.—Spent the morning exploring and admiring
Malvern and its surroundings, and came to the conclusion, that for
natural loveliness it surpasses description. This town, in appearance
possesses all the charm of a highly fashionable suburb. Its streets
are principally hilly, in some parts very steep indeed, and are
certainly kept very clean. The residences are mostly neat and
attractive villas, many, however, being of a costly style of architecture,
with neat and choicely laid out garden grounds, the whole being
flanked by a ridge of the most romantic and picturesque hills to be seen
in England. It is the favorite resort of persons whose health has been
impaired by close attention to business in many of the densely crowded
cities, and the much patronised hydropathic establishments found here
are a great boon to all who visit them. There is, it is said, but a
step from the sublime to the ridiculous, and in our perambulations
this morning we met with what would be a funny sight in Adelaide.
Fancy a neat phaeton drawn by a rough coated neddy, and com-
fortably seated in it an old lady, the driver having no seat but the
edge of the dashboard. Not a very comfortable position certainly,
and forgetting the old time-honoured song, “If I had a donkey
that would not go,” etc., he belaboured the poor brute with a whip
to get him along at all. In the afternoon we left for Hanly
Castle, near Upton-on-Severn, to enjoy a few days’ rural life at
a nice farm house, with exceedingly pleasant and hospitable people,
relatives of the well-known and respected Barlow & Sons, of Bundle-
street. We anticipated a kindly welcome, but the reception was far
in excess of anything we dreamed of. We enjoyed ourselves heartily
in the fields witnessing the harvest operations and gathering black
berries, which grow here in profusion. The wheat grown here was
very inferior to ours. It is more like the wheat we use for feeding
poultry. I was not surprised to hear that ohr wheat is regarded
as the finest that comes into England. The crop, however,
is heavy here, if the quality be poorer.


Next day we proceeded in company with the daughters of our host
Wells, to attend the opening service of the new Wesleyan
Chapel in that place. The sermon was preached by the Rev. Dr. Rigg,
President of the Conference, with whom we had an interview. We
spent Thursday and Friday here also, and 1 may mention that in
conversations with several working men in the neighbourhood as to
the rate of wages, etc., I was informed that but few of them get 3s.
per day, and many little over 25., and one intelligent man em-
ployed as a manager over the manufacture of vinegar, receives the
munificent wages of 14s. per week. I have no doubt he would
get £3 a week with us in South Australia.
Saturday, we left for Redditch, where together with Mrs. M
we had the pleasure of enjoying the hospitality of Mr. Samuel
Alcock. This gentleman has a large and most complete fishing
tackle factory, and manufactures hooks, rods, artificial bait, lines,
floats, etc., of every conceivable size and variety, some of them
suitable only for the brawny-handed, weather-beaten fisherman,
others exquisitely finished, and fitted for the jewelled hand of the
prince or peer, or the fair lady who may take delight in this sport.
Mr. Alcock has obtained the Gold Medal prize for his grand and
complete display of exhibits at the Exhibition of Paris.
Sunday we attended the central Wesleyan Chapel, and heard two
very excellent sermons from the Rev. J. A. B. Harry, collections
being made for the organ fund. In the afternoon Mr. A and
myself visited the Sabbath School, and of course had to say a few
words to the scholars, who were most attentive. Like ourselves
at Gilbert-street, they are sadly in want of improved school
accommodation, and by the way I may remark here that I trust our
friends at the Draper Memorial are by this time proceeding to
supply that desideratum.
Monday, August 26. —A glorious summer day, reminding one of a
clear and lovely Australian day in March, for the tinge of autumn is
impressed on all around us. We attended a tea meeting in connection
with the laying of foundation-stones for the enlargement of school
premises at Headless Cross, near Redditch. About seven hundred
persons took tea on the lawn of a beautiful garden under the clear
bright canopy of heaven, after which there was a general move to the
scene of action, where no less than five foundation atones were laid by
as many persons, and Mr. A. and myself, two Australians, participated
in that honour. So our friends at Gilbert-street will see that we
have made a start in the building line. The friends then crowded
into the schoolroom and chapel, which by the way are connected by
large folding doors, and will by this means accommodate a thousand
persons. The whole of the proceedings passed off most successfully,
and there is every prospect of raising the whole cost during this year.


A FEW DAYS IN LONDON.
August 28.—We proceeded on a tour of inspection, and after
traversing many streets, strolled down that wonderful thoroughfare,
Cheapside, with its splendid shops and busy throngs of pedestrians so
crowding the footpaths as to make it difficult to get along, whilst over
its paved carriageway there was one continual stream of
busses, tram-cars, and cabs, mingled here and there with the princely
equipage of some rich city magnate. On we move, passing the Post-
Office in St. Martin’s le Grand, the Bank of England, the Royal
Exchange, and other notable buildings. On the beautifully sculptured
front of the latter is inscribed the well-known sentence of holy writ, too
apt to be forgotten within as well as without its walls, “ The earth is the
Lord’s, and the fullness threof.” The passing crowds are thus ever
reminded of Him who with fatherly care provides so bountifully for
His creatures. Arriving at London Bridge, we took the boat for
Westminster Pier, and on arrival there visited the famous old
Abbey, of which I have already written. I cannot help wishing,
however, that mine was the pen of the ready writer, so that
I might recall some of the grand and famous memories of this
the noblest of all England’s ecclesiastical structures ; but not
being master of that magic gift, I am compelled to be silent. I know
too, that many of my readers have had a splendid opportunity of
hearing the Bev. Chas. Clark discourse in eloquent and dramatic
language on the history of the Abbey. I must not forget to say that
we saw and admired the recently-erected Wesley Monument. Then
taking my companions to 368“ the Westminster Aquarium, we
spent” a most enjoyable evening, and returned to our hotel thoroughly
tired out.
Next morning we were out early, and went fjrst to the famous
Smithfield Meat and Poultry Market, where we saw the largest and
finest display of meat that our eyes ever rested upon at one time, and
for quality it certainly could not be surpassed. The salesmen are not
as with us disposing of their own stock, but are merely selling on com-
mission, their allowance being per cent, on all sales effected. X
may be permitted to say that the prices ruled high when compared
with prices in South Australia ; legs of mutton lid. to Is. per lb. ;
shoulders, 9d. to lid. ; beef, lid. to 14d, Still continuing our
perambulations, we found that the steep Holborn Hill which was
formerly so trying to horses has disappeared, and the new
Holborn viaduct, with its fine level broad streets and mag-
nificent buildings has taken its place. To mention the numerous
improvements here is beyond my power: Many of them are vast in
their proportions and grand in their architecture, but the new Holborn


Viaduct Hotel is so palatial in every respect that it deserves special
mention. It is almost unrivalled amongst the beautiful, costly, and
grand structures of this wonderful city. On we moved towards the
west, and make a halt at the Baker-street Bazaar. Here a few hours
could be pleasantly spent viewing the endless variety of articles
useful or ornamental, modern or antique, displayed for sale. When
we had made a few purchases as souvenirs of our visit, we ascend the
stairs leading to the world-famed waxwork exhibition of Madame
Tousaud, where we saw in almost life-like reality full sized figures of
two hundred and twenty-two of the most prominent characters of
modern history. These have been so frequently described that I
shall not attempt to do so again. The place is altogether unique, and
well worthy of a visit and a minute inspection. Some of these
figures, though artificial, may be said to live and move, so much
do they resemble human beings in their movements. It is really
difficult to fancy sometimes that they are artificial, and I can scarcely
wonder that the Shah of Persia begged John Wesley’s pardon when he
touched him !
Next day we paid a visit to the British Museum, and were greatly
delighted with what we saw there. It is one of the noblest insti-
tutions of our Empire ; so full of interest, of beauty, and instruction,
that it cannot be described by a mere visitor, and I shall not spend
many lines upon the attempt. Its numerous and splendid galleries
teem with objects of the deepest interest to every learner in every
branch of science. The rarest and most precious gems of all kinds of
natural history are found here, and they have been brought from all
parts of the world to enrich its treasures. After spending considerable
time here we proceeded to Crouch Hill, a very pretty suburb, and
spent a happy evening at the residence of Mr. James Martin, formerly
of Adelaide, and well known in connection with the establishment of
D. and W. Murray. Here we had the pleasure also of meeting and
conversing with our esteemed fellow colonist, Mr. David Murray, on
South Australian topics, etc.
Saturday, August 31st. We proceeded by the underground rail-
way to Westminster, for the purpose of visiting the new Houses of
Parliament, This magnificent structure stands on the site of an ancient
palace, built in the time of Edward the Confessor. The present building
was designed by and erected under the supervision of the eminent
architect, Sir Charles Barry. It was begun in 1836, and on the
15th of April, 1847, the House of Peers was used for
the first time, and at the commencement of the Session of 1852
the first official occupation of the new House of Commons
took place, and the public portions were opened for their des-
tined use, and this splendid palace at once removed the reproach so
long and frequently cast on us by foreigners, that London, the largest,
wealthiest, and most populous city in the world, had no building for
the meeting of its Senate of originality, beauty, and magnificence, such
as adorned the other great capitals of Europe. I wish 1 had the
power to describe to many who have never been in England the archi-
tectural features of this wonderful palace. The area occupied by the
building is about eight acres, and some idea may be formed of the
extent and intricacy of its plan seeing that it contains five hundred
rooms of all kinds, with official residences for eighteen officers of the
two Houses, including the Speaker, Seargeant-at-Arms, Librarians,
Ushers, and various other officials. There is also the chapel in St.


Stephen’s crypt for the use of the residents in the building. The
most important facade is the river front, which is 940 feet in length,
of which the projecting wings at the extremities are each 120 feet,
leaving between them a fine paved terrace 700 feet long and 33
feet wide overlooking the Thames; and here let me observe
that it is most interesting to stand on this spot and watch the
numerous river steamers pass up and down the stream in endless
numbers, and in quick succession, all crowded with passengers, some
on business, some on pleasure, going to the numerous places of popu-
lar resort along the banks of this grand old historic river; this mode
of travelling being so cheap, convenient, and so easy withal, is adopted
by vast numbers of excursionists. The seven splendid buildings of
uniform architecture on the opposite bank of the river are
as many separate wards of St. Thomas’ Hospital, the whole
completing a grand and noble institution where the
necessities of the suffering and the unfortunate are carefully
attended to. Let us take another view of the palace, and
now we stand in front of the Victoria Tower, the most elevated part of
this great structure being considerably higher than the clock tower
which is 316 feet in height, the whole being finished with a beautiful
lantern spire. The clock dial is 23 feet 6 inches in diameter, being,
it is said, the largest in the world. The weight of the hour bell is
about 14 tons, and the united weight of the quarter bells is nearly
9 tons. The whole building is ventilated by a shaft or outlet running up
through the central tower. This grand and beautiful Tower,
so elaborate and gorgeous in its architectural adornments, is the largest
and loftiest in the world, being 75 feet square and 336 feet high to the
top of the pinnacles, and over 400 feet to the top of the flagstaff, where
a royal standard of immense dimensions floats when the Sovereign of
the vast empire whose legislature meets here, is within its walls.
But let us proceed to the interior of the buildings, having first
obtained an order of admission from the Lord Chamberlain. As we
pass in we see to the left the royal staircase of grey granite leading to
the Norman porch. The exquisitely beautiful carved and gilded
ceiling here attracts our attention, and so does the paving, which is of
choice Irish and Devonshire marbles. We next enter the Queen’s
robing-room, of which a great deal might be written, but we look
eastward where upon a dais is a chair of state, beneath a canopy of
carved oak, enriched in the soffit with the rose, thistle, and
shamrock, The most striking features of this room are the fresco
paintings, representing Hospitality, Religion, Mercy, Generosity, and
Courtesy. The doors are most elaborate, and the floors are inlaid
with various choice woods. Passing quickly through the Peers’
entrance we enter the royal gallery, a magnificent appartment 110 feet
by 45 feet and 45 feet high. To this gallery the public are admitted
to view the royal procession when the monarch opens or
prorogues Parliament. Here amongst the most noteable paintings
is the meeting of Wellington and Blucher after their victory at
Waterloo, and the death of Nelson, ilmblazoned shields with the
arms of the kings of England and Scotland run below the splendid
stained glass windows. In the niches of the door ways and windows
are placed the gilded statues of the English kings and queens, as
follows: —Henry V. and Elizabeth, Alfred and William 1., William
111. and Anne, Richard I. and Edward 111. The Princes’ Chamber
serves as an ante-room to the House of Lords, where the Sovereign


is received by the chief of the nobility. The House of Lords is said
to be the finest specimen of Gothic architecture in Europe. The
Chamber is 90 feet long, 45 feet wide, and the same in height. Its
great size and loftiness, its finely proportioned windows, with the
gilded and canopied niches between them, all combine to give it a truly
grand and beautiful effect. The Chamber may be said to be divided
into three parts, the centre constituting the floor of the house,
wherein are the woolsack, clerks’ table, etc., and on either side are
the seats for the Peers in rows. The southern end is the part in
which the throne is placed, and is also for the accommodation of
distinguished foreigners, whilst the northern end has the bar for its
boundary, and is for the use of the Commons when attending upon
Her Majesty or her Royal Commissioners, and here also Counsel
stand during judicial investigations. But we pass on quickly, and
must omit any description of the beautifully painted windows, the
gilding statuary, paintings, carpets, and curtains, only remarking in
passing that all these are in harmony with the magnificence of the
place, and are all exquisitely beautiful. We then examined leisurely
the lobby, libraries, robing-room, corridor, central hall, and other
objects of interest, until we reach the House of Commons,
which is arranged in a somewhat similar manner to the
Chamber of the Peers, but is fifteen feet shorter, being
made as small as possible for the purpose of hearing the members.
Where so many gentlemen are met together, and so much latitude is
allowed for conversation, few men would have any chance of being
heard were they not arranged in small compass. This Chamber is not
so gorgeously decorated as the upper one, but is still very fine. The
prevailing colour is rich oak beautifully relieved by the embellished
panels and the emblazoned coats of arms arranged along the gallery
front. A double row of seats runs along each side for° the use of
members only, and at the end there is a considerable space for those
who are fortunate enough to obtain Speaker’s orders, and behind this
are the seats for those gaining admission by means of orders from
members. There is a specific space assigned for the use of the ladies,
but very few attend, as they are only there as it were by courtesy, it
being still considered by a majority of the legislators unwise to admit
them to equal rights so far as Parliament is concerned. There are, how-
ever, commodious retiring rooms provided for the fair politicians, who in
this at least, have not been neglected. Ample provision has been
made for the refreshment of members, there being two spacious and
handsome rooms set apart fur that purpose. Leaving without remark
the commodious and beautiful libraries, we enter St. fStephen’s Hall,
which occupies the site of the old St. Stephen’s Chapel, which was
founded by King Stephen, as the Chapel Royal of the Palace, and was
almost wholly rebuilt by Edward 11. about 1330, in the rich archi-
tecture of that period. This hall, so memorable in 5 nglish history,
has been chosen as the most appropriate place for the statues of some
of the best, wisest, and most famous statesmen of former days.
England delights to do honour to the patriotism and public
virtues of the noblest of her sons, and here may be seen the figures of
Selden, Hampden, Lord Falkland, Lord Clarendon, Lord Somers,
Sir Robert Walpole, Chatham, Burke, Fox, Pitt, Grattan, Lord
Mansfield, and others. Underneath this, is St. Stephen’s Crypt, of
whose interesting ancient history much might be written, but space
forbids, so we pass on to Westminster Hall, a place of surpassing


historic interest. It was re-built in the reign of Richard 11., about
1398, and was finished about the close of his eventful reign,
and by a strange fatality, the first great event occurring
within its walls was the deposing of the King himself.
From the year 1224 up to the present time the great Law
Courts of England have been here established, and not only have
some of the most memorable state trials taken place here, but it
witnessed also the installation of Oliver Cromwell as Lord Protector,
and afewyears later,—with shame be it written—the barbarous exposure
of his head on a pole, with those of his noble associates, Ireton
and Bradshaw, The last state occasion on which this hall was used
was for the coronation feast of George IV. Along this hall are placed
also numerous statues of celebrated Englishmen, famous for their
learning, abilities, and virtues. This hall is lighted by a very hand-
some stained glass window, representing the arms of the various
sovereigns from the time of the conquest.
We visited next the South Kensington Museum, where we spent
several hours, lost in wonder and admiration at the ever-new and
never-ending objects of interest and curiosity which everywhere
surrounded us. I have previously said something about this mag-
nificent institution, and will only add that the picture gallery alone
presents a never endirag source of attraction ; in this department one
is immediately attracted by the large collection of cartoons or pictures
by the celebrated artist Raphael. Prominently noticeable in this col-
lection are the pictures representing the following Bible subjects :
Christ’s charge to Peter, the healing of the lame man, the death of
Ananias, Paul preaching at Athens, the miraculous draught of fishes,
Elymas the sorcerer struck blind, and many others too numerous to
particularise in these brief notes. I can only repeat, that
to see the place thoroughly one would require several
days, for every room teems with beauty, instruction, and
profit to the student. Its magnitude and wealth surpassed all the
conceptions I had formed of it during my first visit. Leaving it, we
again inspected the Albert Memorial, and Hall, and spent the evening
very pleasauly and profitably at the Polytechnic in Regent-street.
Sunday, September I.—After breakfast we set off in good time for
the celebrated Tabernacle in Newington, hoping to hear the famous
pastor whose name is so familiar all the world over, and whose praise
is in all the churches. Fortunately we were not disappointed, for Mr.
Spurgeon who had been laid aside for some weeks, was well enough
to occupy the pulpit this morning, and gave us a grand but simple
discourse. Mr. Spurgeon seems to study preaching plain and simple
gospel truth, and to have but one aim—that of saving souls. Although
we were quite early the spacious and beautiful building with its two
roomy galleries, extensive orchestra, and commodious platform was
completely crowded, and double rows of seats were placed down each
aisle, and these too were immediately filled, so that there seemed
hardly standing room for another person. The whole service and
surroundings were such as I never before listened to or witnessed.
The singing was the most harmonious blending of sweet sounds
that ever greeted my ears. There was no instrumental accompaniment
whatever, but a grand roll of vocal music only. I thought of the
singing of the new song in the upper temple, and felt inspired in a
strange way by the entire service, and I still think that if one service


out of heaven is calculated more than another to elevate the soul and
to improve the heart, it is this service at the Tabernacle as conducted
by this great, good, and blessed man. Long may he be spared to
wield an influence in London such as no other preaeher of modern
times has done. In the evening we attended the mother church of
Methodism, City Road, and heard a very excellent sermon from the
second minister of the circuit, the Rev. Thomas Champness. The
singing here too was congregational, there being no organ.
A precentor starts the tune, and the singing was admir-
able. After the service the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper was
administered, and a most impressive and hallowed season we found it
to be. On leaving this old sanctuary with a resolve to visit it again
on the morrow, I wended my way to the Central Temperance Hall in
Bishopsgate-street, where temperance sermons are regularly preached
every Sunday, with a view to reclaim the drunkard and teach him the
way of salvation. At the close of these services they hold temperance
meetings appropriate to Sunday, and a well-trained choir of sweet
voices sing the beautifully attractive and inspiring hymns of Moody
and Sankey’s well-known collection. Here again I met Mr. Alcock,
who was addressing the audience, and his speech seemed to give much
satisfaction. After singing another hymn I was called upon for an
address, and for the first time on a Sabbath evening I had the pleasure
of saying a few words to help forward this noble and all important
cause. Much praise is due to the self-denying and philanthropic men,
who sustain this and kindred missions, for the drinking customs of
this land are blighting the happiness of thousands of homes, ruining
the bodies and souls of untold numbers of men and women, and are a
sad blot on the escutcheon of this our fatherland. There is no deny-
ing that the drink traffic is England’s greatest, foulest curse, filling her
prisons with criminals and her unions with paupers.
Next day we found our way back to City Road, where we had an
interview with the preacher of last night. The ministers’ residences
are on either side of the chapel, one being 47 and the other 49 City
Road. Mr. Champness courteously showed us some relics of the
esteemed and venerated founder of our beloved Methodism. His
writing table, a serviceable although old fashioned piece of furniture,
also the large teapot used on the breakfast table on Sunday
mornings when the preachers met together to take breakfast with Mr.
Wesley as was the custom in those days. On each side of the teapot
in good readable type is the grace before meat. We were then shown
into the room where the venerable man of God died, and in which
were uttered the memorable words, “thebest of all is, God is with
us.” Then entering the Chapel, we examined with profound interest
the many monuments of the honoured and saintly dead. My atten-
tion was particularly arrested by the tablets inside the communion, on
which were inscribed the names of John and Charles Wesley, John
Fletcher, Joseph Benson, Dr. Coke, and Adam Clarke. Behind the
Chapel, surrounded by the tombs of the mighty dead, stands the
Wesley monument, and in the Bunhill Fields Cemetery, directly
across the road, is that of Wesley’s mother, and not far away that of
the immortal dreamer, John Bunyan. After thoroughly examining
all the notable things at City Road, we again went on our rambles in
the city. We visited a very large warehouse, with floor above floor, a
great many stories high, and were politely shown round the extensive
rooms and heavily stocked departments, where some hundreds of


salesmen are employed. We afterwards descended by the hydraulic
lift, this being the first time we were so unceremoniously lowered in a
public place.
Our next move was by train to the renowned gardens at Kew. This
great centre of botanical attraction we were anxious to see, because in
our travels so far we had not seen anything in this line so fascinating
as our own beautiful and charming Gardens on North Terrace.
Kew is a really magnificent spot, where time, wealth and science have
done much to make it a veritable paradise. It is a splendid park,
with stately and umbrageous trees, and nicely sheltered, well kept
walks. The Central Palm House is a thing of beauty, filled with
magnificent and rare plants—rare, be it remembered, in this climate,
but not so with us. But having seen Kew, I would just say to my
friends in Adelaide—that as a pleasant place of resort near the city,
where they may spend their leisure hours in the enjoyment of the
beautiful in nature, witnessing the charming harmonious blending of
colour, the playing of neatly designed fountains, etc., etc., that they
have in our Botanic Gardens a place of unsurpassed loveliness and
beauty. Pardon this digression; I did not intend writing
about things so near home, but my patriotism leads me astray.
We returned to our lodgings tired out, but greatly pleased with our
day’s pleasure
SOUTHAMPTON.
Leaving London on September 3rd, we proceeded to Southampton, to
spend a few days in my native town, visiting relatives, walking in the
Arboretum, and driving into the pleasant suburbs, including an inter-
esting trip over the floating bridge to the ruins of Netley Abbey.
This bridge is quite a unique thing of its kind, and a convenient way
of crossing the water ; not only pedestrians, but vehicles of all classes
cross at the same time. To-day first comes a hearse, then two
mourning coaches, then a donkey cart, then a lady’s carriage with
liveried servants, and so on, all being conveyed safely and steadily
across by the aid of the steam engine which works the machinery, and
in this way draws to and fro its miscellaneous freights. On landing
we took a trap and enjoyed a very pretty drive to and from the
Abbey. This ruin of antiquity can be approached by several different
routes, each presenting many objects of interest. The rich
variety of landscape, elegant villa residences, sweet rural cottages,
lofty trees, and fertile meadows on the one side, with a splendid view
of the sea, dotted all over with vessels of all kinds, from the tiny boat
and the yacht, to the stately ocean going steamer of the P. and 0.
Company, made up a scene of wonderful interest and beauty. On reach-
ing the entrance gate we paid a small fee, which is the perquisite of the
attendant who keeps the place in order. Then we pass into the


Abbey Church, once a splendid edifice, but now a ruin. Long ago
by the ravages of time the roof, the windows and the greater
part of the transept were removed. We pass from one part to
another in rapid succession Cloisters, Chapel-houae, Lady’s
Chapel, etc., each in turn presenting features of special interest
to the admirer of ancient ecclesiastical structures. Within the
compass of these decaying walls, a fine effect is produced by
numbers of oak and ash trees growing luxuriantly, many of
them well mantled with ivy, providing an, enjoyable shade.
Many a picnic takes place on this spot, and to the inhabitants of this
pleasant and salubrious town, it is the chief place of resort for
pleasure parties, and I can imagine few places better fitted by nature
for the purpose.
On the following day we enjoyed a carriage drive from the upper
end of the town. Leaving the principal street above Bar gate, we pass
up through the once beautiful avenue which consisted of about half a
mile of magnificent elm trees almost meeting over head, making it a
most pleasant drive or promenade where I have enjoyed myself many
a time during my boyhood, but unfortunately many of them have
been swept away by the ravages of disease. This main road will,
however, again become an interesting drive, it having been planted
for nearly three miles with promising young limes, at Corporation
expense. The fine estate bordering on this avenue, where the Sunday
school children, on their annual gala days, used to enjoy themselves
through the generosity of its owner, has now been divided into uni-
form building blocks, and many neat and elegantly designed villa
residences add additional charm and interest to the scene.
On emerging from this we turn to the left, and enjoy a
ride through the Public Park, or Common, as it is generally called,
which comprehends within its limits almost every variety of park and
forest scenery, and brings under view the Cemetery, the Water
Works, the Race Course, and a fine carriage drive, taking a circuit of
the grounds. Our next move was by train to Lymington, a very fashion-
able yachting place on the west bank of the Beaulieu river. Here we
spent an exceedingly happy and enjoyable time with my father’s
brother and his estimable wife. Mr. , having retired
from business, had ample time and leisure to pilot us about
to the various attractions of the locality. The scenery is
pretty and somewhat romantic. Here we saw some of the
earth works or mounds, thrown up probably by the Normans, where
they could take shelter whilst guarding the Solent. We had a lovely
view of those rocky points, the Needles, also the Isle of Wight, they
being clearly visible from here. During our walks we passed the residence
of Mrs. Orton, wife of the “ claimant,” and also a fine residence near
by,which its former owner has entirely lost through his infatuated
belief in the identity of Sir Roger. Taking a last farewell of our friends
we returned by train to Southampton, there spending Sunday. In
the evening 1 attended service at the Philharmonic Rooms, and was
delighted to hear an excellent discourse from Mr. Earle, the evangelistic
preacher so well and favourably known at the Grote-street Chapel in
Adelaide. At the close of the service I had an interview with Mr.
and Mrs. Earle, who desired me to convey their affectionate and kindly
greetings to their relatives and many friends in the fair city of Ade-
laide. On Monday morning we took a long and last farewell of this
my native town.


BATH.
Our next visit was to the far famed city of Bath, where we arrived
on Monday, September 9th, and remained four days. It is
a city of rare beauty, and was once a favourite resort of royalty.
Under the reign of our present gracious and beloved Queen, however,
Balmoral and Osborne have presented attractions which have quite
cast Bath into the background. It is an ancient city and for many
ages has been famous for its medicinal waters. Tradition would have
us believe that far back in the shadowy past, one Baldred who was
heir to the British throne became afflicted with leprosy, and in conse-
quence had to wander as a vagabond through the land, and that at
last he obtained the post of swine herd a few miles from Bath. As ill
luck would have it the pigs in his charge also caught the foul disease
by coming in contact with the hapless prince. Dreading the dis-
pleasure of his employer, he removed with his swine to the valleys
where the hot springs had formed a wide morass. Into this the pigs
plunged to the astonishment of their keeper, and in a very short time
were completely cured from their disorder. Seeing this the royal
swine herd reasoned with himself, if the pigs are cured why should I
not try the same means, and acting on this idea he plunged into the
quagmire, and in a short time his leprosy too left him. In time he
ascended the throne, and mindful of his wonderful cure, his royal
breast overflowing with gratitude, he built a splendid city on the spot
where he had derived so much benefit, and fitted up the city with
baths, etc., so that others might receive blessings from the use of the
waters. Such tradition for ages the inhabitants believed to be true.
Bath at present is a quiet fashionable place filled with retired gentry
of small means, and is very unlike its former appearance, when in the
days of the Georges and Beau Nash it claimed supremacy as the
“queen of watering places.” It is a very sweet and charming spot,
with its grand crescents and terraces, its streets of palace-like
residences, built as they are tier upon tier, towering one above another
on the sides of the beautiful hills, each commanding a beautiful view
of the city beneath and the sweet panorama on the other side. One
of the most lovely sights obtainable is to drive to Beechen Cliff “ and
view the landscape o’er,” or after dark to gaze upon the city, when lit
up with its thousand lights. It is then a splendid sight, the hill sides
all round being visible, you can clearly define the principal streets,
and in many parts even the buildings are shown to great advantage.
But I must not leave Bath without referring briefly to the Royal
Victoria Park, which although comparatively small is unusually well
kept and is patronised by fashionable people very largely. On enter-
ing it our attention was arrested by a beautiful obelisk, erected by the
inhabitants of this city in honour of the Princess Victoria on


the attainment of her majority, May 24, 1837. On either
side of the column is placed a Russian cannon, a trophy from
Sabastopol. Also small pyramids formed of cannon balls
taken in the Crimean war, and presented to Bath by Her Majesty’s
Government. We also visited the Royal pump room, where we saw
the water bubbling up from the hot springs beneath. This room is
adorned with choice statuary and other works of art, and in the centre
is a beautiful fountain belching forth its tepid, medicinal waters,
whilst many persons are standing around, or sitting near, drinking the
waters, and others are carrying away this health-restoring liquid
in covered vessels to the invalids who are too unwell to attend
personally. The evenings were fully employed attending and
addressing meetings on the temperance question. The scenery
around this fine city is in keeping with it. The suburbs
consist of splendid villas, noble public institutions, beautiful gardens
and numerous other attractions. Nor must I forget to mention
one or two of the ecclesiastical edifices. Pre-eminent among
these is the grand old Abbey Church, which has been called
the lantern of England, it being so beautifully lighted with chastely
designed windows filled with stained glass of light colours. A vast
amount of money has lately been spent in thoroughly renovating this
grand and handsome church, and now it has few equals in the west of
England. The New Kingswood College too, deserves a passing note.
It is prettily situated on the hill side, and commands a magnificent
view. The building itself is a noble one, and it strikes me, no
situation could have been chosen with greater judgement or more
likely to conduce to the health of the students. This institution takes
high rank amongst the better class of educational establishments of
the kingdom, and judged by results every Wesleyan must feel proud
of it.
Bath is very well provided with benevolent institutions, where un-
fortunate suffering ones may seek relief with a certainity of receiving
kind and skilful medical treatment, there being no less than seven
hospitals here. Provision is also made for the aged and the poor in
the well managed Alms Houses, Female Homes, Soup Kitchens, etc.
The Corporation here have a noble Guild Hall, situated in High-street.
The lower portions are used as police offices, court rooms, and offices
for the Corporation officials. The Grand Hall, or Banqueting Room, is
approached by a grand staircase, decorated with full length portraits
of some of their past parliamentary representatives ; this large room
itself is handsomely painted and decorated, and in the panels around
are hung portraits representing Royalty, Members of Parliament who
have represented Bath, also several past Mayors of this important
city.


DERBY.
Thursday, September 12.—0 n leaving Bath we proceeded by tram,
passing hurriedly through the city of Gloucester and the elegant and
fashionable town of Cheltenham ; also, Worcester, and other towns
of minor importance. Time would not permit of our making any
lengthy stay, or careful inspection of these important places. The
journey, however, on this bright September day was a pleasant and
enjoyable one, passing in quick succession the many objects of interest
as we sped on our way to Hanly Castle, there to spend a few days,
rusticating on a well appointed farm, and enjoying the company of
hospitable friends before referred to, with whom we greatly enjoyed
many rambles in the fields, gathering nuts, etc., and inhaling the pure
country air. But even rusticating in this way cannot long continue,
so here we are again at Derby, for a quiet day or two.
The town of Derby is a very ancient one, and was famous in other days
for its silk manufactures, but there is not much trade of that kind now.
The Midland Railway Company has been the making of Derby. That
great and powerful body has its head quarters here, employing many
hundreds of clerks, and no less than from four to five thousand
artizans and labourers. The workshops, offices, and stations here are
on a gigantic scale, and cover I suppose altogether some hundreds of
acres. I was amazed to see the men turn out from work, and
wondered when the dense mass of black-faced smiths, fitters, and
strikers would finish passing. The firm with which my brother-
in-law is connected is an old and eminent one here. Rowe & Son s
works are most complete and extensive. The quantity of English
and Foreign timber cut up, sold, and manufactured here is prodigious.
I was much interested to see the ease and facility with which
they lift the enormous oak and elm trees, and the rapidity with
which they are planked, either with their six feet circular saws,
or the horizontal saws which will cut through a four-feet
tree twenty feet long, in a few minutes. altogether there are
some thirty circular saws employed, besides band saws, vertical frames,
turner’s lathes, key and treenail presses, and all kind of the most
approved machinery for the manufacture of wood goods. Both the
principals of the firm are Aldermen of their native borough.
Sunday, August 19th—Attended London-road Chapel, Derby, an
exceedingly comfortable and elegant sanctuary, which is well
attended by a large and intelligent congregation. We heard a
beautiful discourse from the Superintendent of the Circuit,
the Rev. Thos. Kent, on “He shall choose our inheritance for
us.” Ic the evening went to Greenhill Chapel, to listen to the
farewell sermon of the Rev. James Hind. It was also the
Sunday-school anniversary. The chapel was packed full, and
hundreds going away unable to gain admission. I forced my


way in somehow, and enjoyed the sermon thoroughly, notwith-
standing the heat of the place. The singing was exceedingly
sweet and lovely, and Mr. Hind gave us an eloquent and touching
sermon. The girls of the school occupied a temporary gallery under
the pulpit, and were all dressed in white, with neatly trimmed hair
and without bonnets. At the close of the service the congregation
crowded the approaches to have a last shake of the hand with their
loved and honoured pastor, who seems to have secured the affections
of his people in a most unusual degree.
Mrs. M and myself, in company with Mr. Corlett,
next had a run over to the potteries at Stoke-on-Trent. The
scenery along the route, until the pottery district is reached,
was very charming. But on this line the most interesting
object is Tutbury castle, close to the town of that name.
We passed close to the ruins of this ancient castle and most picturesque
it looks as seen from the railway. It stands on a hill of considerable
eminence, surrounded by grand old trees. Here it was that Mary,
Queen of Scots, suffered a long imprisonment in 1585 and 1586 at the
hands of Queen Elizabeth. The history of this famous stronghold is
an eventful one, but I must not dwell upon it here. A run of little
over an hour brought us to Stoke. We had the pleasure of going
through extensive manufactories, and saw the whole process of making
china, from the mixing of the clay to the burnishing of the gold on
the finest articles. It is surprising what a great number of hands
each piece has to go through, and still more astonishing to witness the
expeditious manner in which each person performs his or her work.
Women and girls are largely employed in this manufacture.
Sunday, September 22. —Still in Derby. At London-road chapel in
the morning we had a neat discourse from the Rev. W. H. Shaw,
the junior minister. At night we heard with pleasure the second
minister, Rev. Henry Jefford. In the afternoon at the urgent request
of Mr. Bradley, the excellent superintendent of London-road Sunday
school, I gave an address to the scholars. This is the largest and
most important Sabbath school in Derby, containing I am told nearly
fourteen hundred scholars. The large room, which contained the
elder boys and girls—or rather young men and women—was quite full,
about six hundred were present. It was a fine sight. A large pro-
portion of both sexes would be from 18 to 25 years of age.


NOTTINGHAM.
Monday.—We visited Nottingham, one of the finest and cleanest
towns in the Midland counties. Tram cars have only been running
here for three days, showing that we are not altogether behind the age,
even in Adelaide. It is an ancient borough, and has played a very
conspicuous part in English history, but into this subject it is not my
province to enter. We went there chiefly to see the Old Castle which
is an object of intense interest. It stands in a very elevated position,
being built upon a bold precipitous rock, and the position must have
been one of great strength ; the ancient Britons who built it displayed
sound judgment in choosing a spot so impregnable. It is reported to
have been a favourite residence of the Norman kings, chiefly I
suppose from its proximity to the celebrated forests, which afforded
ample scope for their hunting propensities. Most of them seem to
have had a passion for the chase. In later times too, we find frequent
mention of it, in the days of the Stuarts especially. In the parliamen-
tary wars in the days of Charles I. it figured as a place of the utmost
importance, and it suffered considerable damage in those times, and it
was to a great extent demolished. Since that time it has passed from
one owner to another, and was partially restored by the Duke of
Buckingham, who once owned it. Some few months ago it was
opened by His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales as a museum.
When we saw it, the interior presented a scene of wonderful beauty.
Here are collected some of the finest gems of art that the country
possesses. The nobility of this and the neighbouring counties have
lent for this exhibition some of their rarest and most valuable pictures,
and the place is replete with attractions. Visitors from all parts
resort to the Nottingham Castle Museum, and there are few spots in
the kingdom where a more pleasant day can be spent. It is said to
be the best Museum of art, science, and industry, outside London.
Nottingham possesses what is claimed to be the largest market-place
in England, comprising an open area of about five acres ; also some very
handsome buildings, such as the Post Office, School of Art, the High
School, and several Insurance Offices. The shops in the principal
streets are exceedingly fine, and there are some noble factories here.
This town is the chief seat of the lace trade. We were
astonished at seeing the large number of women and girls
wending their way from these factories. Their dress was somewhat
peculiar, almost all of them here, —as also in Bradford —wearing plaid
shawls over their heads instead of bonnets or hats. Many of the churches
are large and beautiful, and the Nonconformists have every reason to be
proud of some of their splendid chapels, one of which we entered; viz.,
Wesley chapel, in Broad-street. This is a noble structure, of the
Grecian style of architecture. Internally it is very comfortably and
neatly arranged, and will seat 3,000 hearers; the whole property is
very complete, including school rooms, class rooms, etc.


TRIP TO THE ISLE OF MAN.
Wednesday, September 25th.—Left Derby for a flying visit to the
Isle of Man. The morning was wet, and on arriving in Liverpool it
was literally flooded, but notwithstanding that we had a walk through
a few of the principal streets, as Lord-street, Bold-street, etc. Some
of the shops are exceedingly fine, indeed they surpass in size and
elegance any I saw in London. Some of the leading drapers make a
magnificent display of rich and costly goods. Their plate glass
windows are of extraordinary dimensions. The watchmakers and
jewellers, cabinet makers, hatters, milliners, and other tradesmen, seem
to try to outdo each other in the splendour of their shops, and to attract
customers, they attach small balloons to fine cords, and let them fly
high up above the house-tops. We had not time to visit the Museum,
Free Library, and other public institutions of this great town, but
paid a short visit to the renowned St. George’s Hall, one of the
grandest public buildings of which England can boast. The archi-
tecture of this fine building is exceedingly pleasing. Its massive
parapet is supported by a number of noble columns with
enriched caps, and the entrance is reached by a flight of the
finest steps I ever saw. Outside stands several magnifi-
cent statues, one being a splendid equestrian statue of Queen
Victoria, and another, that of {{ Albert the Good.” I was unable to
examine these as fully as I should like, as the rain was coming down so
heavily that we were glad to get under shelter. The interior of the
hall is very imposing. A large quantity of the most beautiful granite
has been used here, and I have seen no columns anywhere to compare
with these for elegance. The ceiling with its rich and elaborate
ornamentation, and its mass of gilding, is worthy of the place, and all
round the sides stand marble figures of the most famous men of
Liverpool. Amongst these may be named Huskisson, Sir William
Brown, Archdeacon Brooks, the late Earl of Derby, and the Right
Hon. W. E. Gladstone. This hall possesses one of the finest organs
in the kingdom, and is altogether well worth the inspection of
all visitors to Liverpool.
We then made our way to the landing stage. Here all the coasting and
river steamers draw up to land or embark their passengers, and from
early morning to late in the night it is a scene of the greatest bustle
and activity. The stage itself is a stupendous work. It rises and
falls with the tide, and is built upon a vast number of iron cells; these
being filled with air support the huge platform or stage, and upon
this thousands of people may stand without even knowing that they
are afloat. The cost of this stage must have been enormous, and I
am told that two former ones have been destroyed by fire. There are
a number of flights of steps leading from the stage to the quay, these
fall and rise too with the platform. They are covered over with neat


ornamental roofs, and numerous houses of elegant design are built on
the stage itself; there are refreshment rooms police offices, superinten-
dent’s office, and others. It was late in the season for us to expect a
crowded boat. The Isle of Man of late years has become an exceed-
ingly popular watering place. The steamers engaged in the trade are
magnificent vessels, large, swift, comfortable, and elegant. We crossed
in the Tynwald, and although there was a considerable swell, the wind
being strong and ahead, our boat was so steady that we hardly felt
the motion. When fairly out at sea the north wind was so piercingly
cold that I was glad to take a seat as close to the funnel as I could
safely do. It certainly was the sharpest wind I have felt since I left
my native shores 25 years ago; what it must be in the depth of winter
I can only imagine with horror. We reached Douglas at dusk.
Here an enormous amount of money has been expended in the erec-
tion of a magnificent pier and a promenade. Douglas in a word has be-
come an important and fashionable town, and in summer it is the re-
sort of countless numbers of pleasure seekers. On our arrival we
changed boats, getting into the Mona Isle. We were soon on our way to
Ramsey, where we arrived about 9 p.m., and met with a cordial recep-
tion from Mr. W. H. Tear, a relative of my companion. The Isle of Man
is about 35 miles long and 12 miles wide in its broadest part. It is
exceedingly hilly, and some of the glens and waterfalls are very
romantic and beautiful. Of course my stay was not sufficiently pro-
longed for me to learn much about its history and its constitution,
nor yet for me to see many of its most charming scenes. It has a
Governor of its own and a miniature Parliament, consisting of an
Upper Houso called the Council composed of the Governor, Bishop,
Deemsters or Judges ; and the House of Keys elected by the people.
The morning after our arrival, we engaged a comfortable car for the
purpose of visiting Peel, about sixteen miles away, and a very delight-
ful trip it turned out to be. In company with Mr. C , and two
of his sisters, we left Ramsey about 10 a.m. and reached Peel at 1 p.m.
The journey was very pleasant and some fine and charming scenery
was passed. At one place in a little scattered village where everything
was so quiet as to make one think it was deserted, a little white house
was pointed out to me as the birthplace of our friend, Mr. W. Kelly,
now of Cudlee Creek, an old colonist, a Wesleyan, and an earnest
teetotaler. We crossed the harbour at Peel on foot as the tide was
out, planks being laid down to enable passengers to cross without
the trouble of a long journey round by the bridge. The castle is a
most interesting old ruin. Space forbids my giving any lengthy des-
cription of it here. The readers of Sir Walter Scott’s enchanting
“Peveril of the Peak,” will know more about the old castle than I
could tell them. The ancient castle was built on a small island de-
tached from the main land, but within a stone’s throw of Peel
harbour. When in its pride many centuries ago it must have been a
place of immense strength. Now it is in ruins, and is visited by
thousands of excursionists every summer.
I must not fail to mention that the view from the parapet walls of
the castle was really splendid. Standing at Fenella’s Town, looking
inland, we saw the bold rocks of Contrary Head, the town of Peel,
the lofty hills dotted all over with farm houses. Seaward could be
seen stretching out into the water the promontory of Jurby Point.
Away in front, some 22 miles distant, could be clearly seen the Mull
of Galloway, and to the left with the aid of a field glass 1 traced


distinctly the Irish Coast, probably the only glimpse of the Emerald
Isle I shall ever obtain. Greatly pleased with our visit to the famous
castle we retraced our steps to the Mansion House of Bailaquane,
where we were most hospitably entertained, and then we had an ex-
ceedingly pleasant drive back to Ramsey. Next day was spent in
seeing that town and its neighbourhood. We admired the splendid
new pier and promenade lately erected. Then we ascended Albert
Mount, from whence a grand view is obtained of the northern portion
of the island. On this mount is erected a granite tower of neat design
on the spot where the late Prince Consort stood to view the surround-
ing country in 1847. The prospect from this tower was exceedingly
lovely, although the day was not so clear as we could have wished.
We descended by way of Ballure Glen, a very picturesque and
romantic valley filled with tall luxuriant trees, sweet flowers, and
heaps of blackberries. Then a drive to the Killa along a pretty road,
visiting friends, enjoying the good things so lavishly provided for us ;
singing and playing and talking about our absent friends brought to
a close a happy day. We then went to our berths on the steamer
Mona Isle, lay down comfortably as the boat was leaving the harbour
at 1 a.m., went soundly to sleep, and awoke as we were going up the
Mersey after an eight hours’ trip on a sea smooth as a mill pond. On
nearing the landing stage before referred to, we had to wait nearly
an hour before our turn came to get alongside the stage to disembark,
notwithstanding the extensive accommodation here provided. It
seemed almost impossible to prevent collisions, the river being so
densely crowded with ships. Immediately on landing we took train
for Manchester, spent a pleasant day, visiting friends, enjoyed the
evening at the Free Trade Hall, witnessing a representation of Uncle
Tom’s Cabin, and finally reached Derby at midnight.
BIRMINGHAM MANUFACTORIES.
Monday, September 30th.—Started in good time for Birmingham,
there spending a few hours sight seeing, etc. Towards evening we
proceeded to Headless Cross, near Redditch, where Mr. A- and
myself had been invited to address a temperance meeting in connection
with the Wesleyan Band of Hope. We had a goodly number of
hearers, including about 200 children, who rendered good service with
their sweet voices and lively music. At the close we had the satis-
faction of seeing several of our audience sign the pledge. On the fol-
lowing day we returned to Birmingham, and by previous appointment
met Mr. Herrington, who in the most kindly manner, took us with
him to his pleasant home at Acock’s Green, some four miles out.
Here we were introduced to his excellent wife and intelligent family ;
also to Mr. and Mrs. Herrington, sen., all of whom sent kind and
loving greetings to their relations in Port Adelaide. During the even-
ing we attended, in company with the president, Mr. H , the


inaugural concert of the ensuing session of the Acock’s Green Mutual
Improvement Society. This concert was certainly of a high class,
including an excellent and practical address from the President, a pro-
logue of superior order by one of its members, and some choice music,
interspersed with recitations and speeches, your humble scribbler
having to take part as a visitor from South Australia. Before leaving
this great centre of manufactures, we visited the glass works
of Stone & Co., and were shown the whole process, begin-
ing with a look at the raw material. This consists of sand
from the coast of France, red lead, and potash, carefully dried
and mixed in proper proportions. It is then melted in furnaces of
intense heat uutil it has quite the apperance of molten metal. It is
then ready for manipulation, and the workmen having pieces of iron
tubing like gas pines about six feet long, on the end of which they take
from the furnace a small portion of the melted material, which is then
placed into a mould aud hollowed by applying the mouth to the end
of the tube and blowing with the requisite force. In this way for in-
stance a glass jug is formed, minus the handle, and rim, or foot, to
complete which another portion of the metal is easily added, and
formed into the shape required by hand labour while the material
is in a pliable condition. Every article in glass passes through a
large number of hands before it is ready for the market. The
whole process of its manufacture is very simple, but the finer sorts
such as cut glass, require in finishing a good deal of skilled labour.
The pin manufactory of W. Avery & Co., presents an interesting
sight to any person wishing to see how such articles of utility are so
cheaply made. Here we saw about twenty machines at work in a
comparatively small room, each machine being not more than two feet
six inches, by one foot six inches, and composed chiefly of cog wheels.
Ten of these are erected on a long bench on either side, and close by each
is placed a coil of wire which has already been drawn to the proper
guage. The end of this wire is placed in the machine at one end, and
in its passage through it is cut into the proper lengths, a solid head
formed by three regular strokes, and the points nicely finished,
and.the pins thrown into a receptacle at the rate of 200 a minute, so
that each machine produces 12,000 pins per hour, or let us say for the
twenty machines the stupendous number of 2,000,000 a day- Then
when we remember that this is but one of a great many similar estab-
lishments, we may well marvel what becomes of all the pins ? After
this they are taken into another room and thrown into the sticking
machine, which has a receptacle very similar to the receiver of a coffee
mill, from which they find their way point downwards into a groove
ready for sticking into the papers for sale. This operation also is per-
formed by the machine, which sticks the pins and folds the papers in
an incredibly short time, turning them out at the rate of many
thousands an hour. We were amazed and delighted with our visit,
and I recommend my friends who may be visiting England on no
account to fail to see a pin factory.
We had the privilege too of inspecting the famous steel pen manu-
factory of the world renowned Joseph Gillott. Here we found between
four and five hundred persons at work in a well appointed establish-
ment, the greater number being women and girls. On entering, under
the guidance of an intelligent young woman, we passed through a
commodious office to the room where the steel is rapidly cut into
various shapes, which is then passed on, and the point is split and the


little hole punched which we see in the upper sides of all pens.
From this they pass to other machines until they are completely
fashioned and ready for tempering, bronzing, etc., etc. I was
informed that each pen had to pass through the hands of twenty per-
sons before being ready for sale. This includes the counting and
packing. Pen holders too are made here in endless variety, and it is
a somewhat novel sight to see a turner’s shop where all the “work-
men ” are young women and girls, with the solitary exception of the
tool-sharpener. They seem to work on cheerfully, and turn out vast
numbers of holders. Pieces of cedar about four feet long, four inches
wide, and half inch thick, are passed into the machine, and when
drawn out are found to be fluted on one side. They are then passed
through again, and come out in strips the proper size. After this
they go through another machine, where they are sandpapered ready
for varnishing. Pen boxes of various sizes and all sorts of fancy
designs are also made here. This noted establishment is constantly
being visited by travellers like ourselves eager to gain information,
and see the process of manufacture.
Being anxious to see something of the method of making jewellery,
we visited the manufactory of Robinson & McKewan, Hockley Hill,
and were permitted to go through several rooms, seeing first the sheets
of metal from which many ornamental articles for ladies’ and
gentlemen’s wear, are made, such as brooches, eardrops, lockets, etc.
Machinery is used for cutting out the various patterns required, but
when considering the price at which some articles are sold it is
surprising what an amount of the work is done by hand labour. The
forming into patterns, and the grinding of coloured glass is quite a
delicate operation. The latter is broken into small pieces, and fixed
to a pencil with cement, it is then ground into any shape required,
after which it is soldered on the frame-work, forming any design that
may be required. It is also interesting to see the process of burnishing,
polishing, and plating by which these articles are made so attractive.
We had the pleasure of looking through the Papier Mache, Pearl,
and Japan Works of Messrs. McCallum & Hodson, seeing the process
of manufacture of trays, boxes, portfolios, etc., etc. On entering we
were shown large quantities of paper, much like coarse blotting paper.
This is used as follows:—A shape or block similar to the article
required—say a large tea tray—is brought out and covered with a
sheet of paper, and then another and another is added until the proper
thickness is obtained, every sheet or layer being well saturated with
paste put on with a large brush, each layer being well rubbed down
with a plasterer’s trowel to prevent any air being left between them,
as that would cause a flaw. The corners are then formed by tearing
the many thickness of paper in such a way as to form a key or over-
lapping joint, which is again well rubbed down, thus giving increased
strength at the corners. They are then placed in a drying room
heated to the proper degree, and when perfectly dry they are soaked in
oil, and then again dried, now presenting the appearance of stout
leather. Whilst the material is in this condition it can be worked
into any desired shape. Any shape required is cut with a very fine
saw, so making the moat handsome head and foot boards for bed-
steads, brackets, and all kinds of articles; some of the designs are
elegant and handsome. All this work has then to be jap-
anned. This japan has to be of best quality, and is laid on in as
many as sixteen coats, and between each coat the article has to be put


into the drying room as before. The mother-of-pearl, used
in ornamentation, is laid on the surface of the article with
a kind of cement, and then the whole surface brought up
to that level with repeated coats of varnish; this gives it
the appearance of inlaying. The whole is then rubbed down with
pumice stone, until a fair face is obtained, when it is polished by
rubbing with the heel of the hand, using rotten stone in the process,
until it is brought up to the high state of finish that articles of this
class usually present. Just a word about the artistic designs which
are often seen on these goods. They are all executed by hand. All
that is necessary is to give the artist any particular design you wish,
either the representation of a landscape, a photograph, a flower, or
any drawing you like, and he at once reproduces it on the article.
The gilding, too, is done by hand, and great skill and care has to be
used in this operation ; then the whole is beautifully polished and is
ready for sale.
The above is a mere outline of the most interesting objects we saw
in Birmingham, and to describe them as I should like would require
more time than I have to spare just now,
Monday, October 7th.—Arrived in Derby in the afternoon, having
come specially to preside at the annual missionary meeting at London-
road Chapel. The sermons had been preached the previous day by
the Eev. Joseph Nettleton, formerly of Fiji, and well known, I
suppose, in some Australian towns. The result of the meeting was
most satisfactory. The attendance was the largest they ever had at a
missionary anniversary, and the collections nearly ten pounds in ad-
vance of the previous year. I told them a little about South
Australian Methodism, its commencement and its growth. The
Sunday School children filled the galleries, and sang four or five
suitable hymns very beautifully. The great feature of the evening,
however, was Mr. Nettleton’s address ; it was an exceedingly interest-
ing one, and listened to with delight. Mr. Alcock occupied a seat on
the platform, and seconded a resolution in a few well chosen words.
We had the pleasure, after the meeting, of taking supper with Mr.
Nettleton and the Ministers of the Circuit, at the house of one of the
leading friends at London-road, and spent a happy time talking chiefly
about the advantages and pleasures to be enjoyed by those who have
chosen to make sunny Australia their home.


LEICESTER, AND AN ORATION BY
J. B. GOUGH.
Next morning we were again on the move, our destination being
Leicester, and our object to hear a temperance oration from the world
renowned J. B. Gough. As we had some hours to spare we devoted
them to an inspection of this fine town. Leicester is considerably
larger and more populous than Derby, and has been long famous for
its hosiery. This is still perhaps its chief trade, but the manufacture
of boots and shoes too has become here one of great importance. Its
population is a little over 95,000, so coming within 6,000 of
Nottingham. We happened to find out the spot where the great
annual fair was about to be held, and where extensive and noisy
preparations were going on. I am glad that this relic of the
old times, has never been allowed to follow us to Australia,
bringing together as it evidently does in these English
tow r ns the worst and most disreputable characters. We were glad
to find here as in many other of the places we visited a very nice
“ coffee palace.” These establishments I am convinced are supplying
a want which was long felt. Mostly they are commodious, cheerful,
and well conducted houses, with large coffee and dining rooms,
separate apartments for ladies, also bagatelle and reading rooms. In
the large centres of population such as Liverpool, Glasgow, Manches-
ter, etc., they have already performed noble service in the cause of
temperance. Here the working man may obtain a large cup
of tea, coffee, or cocoa, for a penny, with bread and butter, buns, or
sandwiches, equally cheap, thus supplying their necessities without
entering the public house to obtain those intoxicating drinks which
are ruining the bodies and souls of untold numbers of our country-
men, blighting the prospects of the most promising, and crowding our
prisons and lunatic ayslums. I hope that the success of these British
Workman Public Houses may exceed the expectations of even the
most sanguine amongst us. In the evening we found our way to the
centre of attraction, the Leicester Temperance Hall, a fine building
seating over 2,000 persons. We were honoured with seats on the
platform, as representatives of the South Australian Temperance
Society, thus giving us a splendid opportunity of seeing and hearing
this unrivalled advocate of teetotalism. I must try to give a mere
outline of his oration :
Mr. Gough first thanked his friends for the cordial
greeting they had given him. It was yery pleasant
to know that they were remembered by those they
loved, esteemed, and respected in their absence. He came
to speak to them on the same old theme—the hackneyed


theme—Temperance ; and the whole range of argument to them waa
very limited, because he did not expect to give them a literary enter-
tainment, or an intellectual feast. He could not speak scientifically,
because he was no scientist, and he could not speak to them as a
theologian, because he was no biblical scholar \ but he took a common
sense view of the subject, and such ground as could not be taken away
from him. The curse was drunkenness, the cause of it was drink,
and the remedy waa total abstinence. There, they had it all in a
nutshell, and if they could persuade the people to abstain from the
use of intoxicating liquor as a beverage, the evils of drunkenness
would be rolled back from the land for ever. Then some said if total
abstinence was their principle they should not call themselves a tem-
perance society, they were teetotallers. What was temperance ?
There could be many definitions, but their definition was simply this:
—Temperance was a lawful gratification of a natural appetite. They
denied that the appetite for intoxicating liquors was a natural one,
except in those rare cases of hereditary appetite from a drunken
ancestor. If a man never drank beer, he would never want beer ;
the want was produced by the use of it. After showing that it was
the duty of moderate drinkers to abstain, if by so doing they could
save weaker brethren, Mr. Gough touched upon the question of
moderate drinking. are told, he said, that total abstainers infer
that men cannot drink without becoming drunkards. lam not dunce
enough—l was going to say lam not wicked enough—to stand here
and say that the moderate drinker is worse than the drunkard. It is
folly for men to make such a statement. There are thousands of good
men who do drink moderately. Now my father could be a moderate
drinker, but his son could no more be a moderate drinker than you
could blow up a powder magazine moderately, or fire off a gun
gradually. Then you say, I am a weak-minded man. Very well!
If I am so weak-minded that I cannot drink moderately, thank God
lam strong enough to let it alone. I want to say a word to moderate
drinkers ; you are the hardest cases in the world to move to total
abstinence. Apparently you have lost nothing, and the gloss of your
respectability is not dimmed, and you never can be brought to believe
that the little drop you drink does you any harm. Therefore, if we
get you to total abstinence it must be in the large-hearted spirit of self-
denying benevolence, by doing it for the sake of others, which is the
grandest motive that can prompt a man to do it. The lecturer
then, in touching and eloquent language, held up the Saviour as the
highest example of self-denial the world has ever seen. His manner
of doing it was simply inimitable. “But if you will
drink, I cannot hinder you.” Beware how you tell a young
man that. You set him a good example. There are men
who cannot follow it. A gentleman once told me that was
“all bosh.” Very well. I remember once seeing in the city of
New York a very beautiful spire to a new church, and just about ten
feet from the ball a plank was pushed out with ropes over the ends of
the plank. The plank was let down, and the ropes were fastened
inside of the window. There was a platform perhaps five or six feet
from this little window, and 150 feet from the roadway. I saw a man
get out of that window and stand upon that little platform. Gould
you do it ? How many of you could do it 1 You say you are weak-
minded. Well, keep off the plank, that’s all. If you can stand there,
stand there if you will; but if you tell me that it is a good example


to follow, and induce me to try it, and I fall,—what then ! The
speaker then proceeded to urge total abstinence with the most im-
passioned eloquence ; and in contrasting the effect of drink upon
different constitutions, he drew a parallel of two different classes of
men, the phlegmatic and buoyant, introducing several most amusing
and appropriate anecdotes. He drew vigorous and telling pictures of
the ruin drink had brought upon men of mighty intellect, and minis-
ters of the Gospel. These were told with indescribable effect, and
with so much pathos and tenderness as to melt the hearts of his
audience. He described his own life, and the tremendous struggle
he had to dispossess himself of the demon of drunkenness, and what an
unspeakable blessing sympathy was to those undergoing such struggles.
He concluded a magnificent address by saying that if the evil of
drunkenness was what he had described, let them fight it out of the
social circle, out of the public house ; fight it out everywhere. He
was one of those who believed in moral suasion, and in legal enact-
ments. He believed in utter and entire prohibition, and he believed
it would yet be demanded by the people. He believed in
prohibition, utter annihilation. “Ah, but,” it was said,
“itis a Utopian scheme.” What was ? It was God’s work;
and if it was God’s work, it was a good work. And what were
they but agents, what were they but workers ? Et will give
the result, and He would give it in His own good time. Never mind
what opposed, the wrong was not always to be on the throne whilst
the right stood on the scaffold, but they would change places yet, and
the right will reign. This was illustrated very appropriately and
beautifully by the case of America and its “ domestic institution,”
slavery. When one of the senators telegraphed to Abraham Lincoln,
begging him to pause when he was about to issue his famous proclama-
tion abolishing slavery for ever in the States, pointing out the
tremendous consequences of such a step, the reply telegraphed back
was, “ Mr. , stand still and see the salvation of God.” Their
hope was in God, and if they stood united to Him by a bond of living
faith, acting as His willing agents, they occupied the most exalted
positions men could occupy in this world. Then let them stand
shoulder to shoulder, let their motto be “Excelsior” and
“ Victory,” hoping that there was a better time coming by-and-
bye; and praying in humble, reverent, triumphant faith, “God
speed the right.”
This splendid oration, of which the above is but the merest out-
line, was listened to with breathless attention ; and at its close
elicited, as it deserved, round after round of enthusiastic applause.


SHEFFIELD AND LEEDS.
Wednesday, October 9th.—Found us on our way to that great
smoky Yorkshire town —Sheffield. On our arrival we were driven
to the residence of Mr. Green, P.H.C.R., of the Order of Rechabites,
whose guest we were during our three days’ stay here, and more
generous hospitality we could not have received. Mr. Green has an
extensive File Manufactory. He also kindly conducted us through
several other interesting manufacturing establishments, and a few
notes on what we saw will not be altogether out of place here.
Beginning with our visit to the File Making Works, let me say that
good files are made from the best cast steel, and rasps from what is
called blister steel. This material is rolled by heavy machine rollers,
to the proper width and thickness ; cut to the lengths required, then
beaten into shape under the heavy and well directed strokes of a steam
hammer ;it is then annealed in ovens, thus softening the steel, which
is then ground to a smooth face, and handed to the cutter, who, in
the primitive method of using hammer and chisel, cuts the teeth as
required. File cutting can be done by machinery, but they are
not considered so good as those cut by hand work. After this they are
hardened or tempered, then packed ready for sale. The steel used
has to be carefully purified ; this is done at a separate establishment,
where the metal is melted in fire-clay pots, the whole when lifted
from the furnace presents an almost transparent appearance, and so
great is the heat that the man engaged at this work has to be
carefully protected by means of wet bagging fastened around him.
On his emptying one of these pots I ventured to ask him if he would
not re-fill it, and he coolly replied “ Yes, Sir, when it is a little
warm the vessel at the time being almost transparent with heat.
We very much enjojed a visit to the establishment of Stuart and
Smith, Stove, Grate, and Fender Manufacturers. Here may be seen
some of the most elegant and costly grates ever made. One, a fac-
simile of one made for the Sultan of Turkey, cost £I,OOO. Here also
were several ordered and constructed for her Majesty the Queen, and
others for several noblemen. Their value was almost fabulous,
many of them were plated with silver and ornamented with
gold. The castings were exceedingly fine and clean, and were
finished off in the most beautiful manner. Many of them having
Minton tile hearths of chaste and rare designs ; and fenders and
fireirons of the most elaborate construction. We were next taken to
the Cutlery establishment of Mr. W. T. Stainforth, where we saw the
whole process of making knives of almost every variety and price.
Each knife passes through at least twenty pair of hands before it is
completed, and we saw one through all its stages, a neat pocket knife,


and aa a final touch it was neatly folded up and presented to your
humble scribbler. It is not necessary for me to go through all the
details, but watching the forgers, stampers, drillers, grinders,
burnishers, finishers, etc., was to us most interesting.
Our next visit was to the Kilham Rolling Mills, where large masses
of iron are manipulated in an extraordinary manner. Armour plates for
the great modern ironclads of European navies, twenty tons in weight,
and from ten to fourteen inches in thickness are rolled into shape
with comparative ease, under the ponderous and powerful steam
rollers, and moved about from one place to another by
the aid of travelling cranes, as if they were mere toys. Here
also is made the Bessemer steel now used so largely for railway
metals. For this the pig iron is melted over a huge furnace,
and run in a liquid state into a large cauldron, during which
time a strong current of wind from the blast machine is entering the
bottom, and up through fire-clay perforated tubes with such force as
to blow out all dross and carbon, until the metal is sufficiently
purified. It is then run into ingots of about twelve cwt. each, and
quickly conveyed on low hand waggons to the rollers, through which
it is passed from one to another in rapid succession until it is
the exact size and shape of rails. It is then taken to the two
circular saws, set at the proper distance and thus cut to the correct
length for railway purposes. Wire drawing is also a branch of the
trade of this establishment, and we saw one ingot or billet of iron
three feet long and about four inches square passed through several
rollers, being thus drawn and wound into a coil of wire four hundred
and twenty feet long, in less than three minutes, ready for fencing
purposes in Australia.
Our next visit was to Leeds, on Friday, October 9th. We
strolled through the fine Market-hall where there was an endless
variety of merchandise offered for sale. Here seeing the name
of Broadbent on a shop whose owner’s face reminded me of an old
friend at the Draper Memorial, curiosity led me to ask him if he had
relatives in Adelaide, but his reply was in the negative. A gentleman
standing by asked us some questions respecting Australia, and finding
that we were Wesleyans he offered to guide us in seeing some of the
principal buildings of Leeds. I need not refer to these in detail, but
must not overlook our visit to Brunswick Church, the foremost of
our churches in this stronghold of Methodism. The interior is very
fine, the pews exceedingly commodious and comfortable, and the
organ the largest and handsomest I have ever seen in any eccle-
siastical building. We were also pleased with a brief visit to the
perambulator manufactory of Sympson & Fawcett. Here every style
of perambulator is made, many being really handsome miniature
carriages. We remained guests with, and greatly enjoyed the com-
pany of Mr. and Mrs. Fawcett until Saturday morning. A pleasant
drive around the suburbs and past the public parks finished our pere-
grinations here. The Corporation of Leeds are doing a great work,
in purchasing and pulling down old tenements of all kinds, along entire
streets and lanes, widening the thoroughfares, and reselling the remain-
ing land, in many cases without loss to the revenues of the town,
indeed in some instances making a profit. Wonderful improvements
are thus made, and the health of the inhabitants greatly benefited,
and public convenience promoted,


BRADFORD.
Saturday October 12, we arrived in Bradford, another large
and wealthy town of 146,000 inhabitants, famous like Leeds for
its woollen manufactures ; and like it also, a noted town for Method-
ism, having no less than seven circuits, and nineteen ministers in full
work. On arrival by the 11 o’clock train we were met by a deputation
of Rechabite workers, who gave us a hearty welcome and kindly
piloted us about to see the “ sights ”of the town. Foremost among
these is undoubtedly the new Town Hall. It is a magnificent
building, most elaborate in its architecture and beautiful in ap-
pearance. It is decorated with a large number of statues in stone,
and the carving which abounds upon it is very rich and chaste. It
has a lofty and elegant tower with a fine clock which can be heard for
miles around, and eight times each day the fine toned bells pour forth
their sweet music, playing popular and well-known airs to cheer and
sooth the dwellers within range of their notes. Here also the Cor-
poration has availed itself of the clauses of the “Artizans’ Dwelling
Act,” pulling down whole streets and alleys, converting dirty and foul
lanes into splendid streets, well paved and lighted, lined on either side
with splendid shops and costly and elaborate warehouses, towering in
some cases to a height of eight stories. Bradford also possesses two
grand Market-halls which will bear comparison with the finest in the
kingdom. In these halls there are shops or stalls where merchan-
dise of every conceivable sort is sold.
Our next visit was to the Moravian Settlement at Fulneck, whither
we journeyed partly by rail and partly on foot. The walk was a very
delightful one, the day being fine and the country lanes sweet and
pleasant. Although autumn is fast tinging the leaves with yellow ; and
there are unmistakable signs of the approach of winter. At the
Settlement we found an old fashioned church, with homes on the one
side for the sisters and on the other for the brothers. There are also
separate schools for boys and girls, who receive here a first class
education, and are carefully trained for either a professional or com-
mercial career. So abundant and varied are the autumn flowers there
that the gardens present quite a lovely scene of natural beauty.
On our return to Bradford we were conducted to the oldest
Temperance Hall in England, where we had been invited to take
tea with a large number of temperance workers, after which we
had the pleasure of listening to an address or essay on the best
modes of conducting Bands of Hope, and the causes which
tend to their want of success. The chair was taken by Mr.
Phillips, the District Treasurer, and the paper read by Mr.
Z. Catlow, Secretary of the District. It was full of sound
common sense, and abounded with practical hints to Band of Hope
workers, and very ably dealt with the causes that militate against that


progress we all so much long for and desire. A spirited and interest-
ing discussion followed in which many of the leading friends of the
cause in Bradford, Manchester, Bolton, etc., took part. My friend
and myself also were requested to join in it. We were then taken
away to another meeting where we again advocated in our humble
way the great cause of total abstinence. On leaving the hall we
enjoyed a ramble along some of the principal and busiest streets.
The brilliantly illuminated shops and the crowds of people passing
along the thoroughfares made our walk an interesting one ; and added
to this was the fact that most of those around us were conversing in a
broad Yorkshire dialect. The vast majority of the women and girls
in Bradford as in other great manufacturing towns wear no bonnets,
but have their heads and shoulders covered with coloured plaid
shawls. Most of them have a healthy and comfortable appearance,
their faces ruddy, and their spirits buoyant and happy. We found
the Market-hall filled with people who were making purchases of
every description at the numerous and well-stocked stalls ; for here
may be obtained not only the necessaries of life, but also its luxuries.
Being now thoroughly wearied with a hard day’s work we repaired
to our comfortable quarters at the Waverley Temperance Hotel.
Next day, Sunday, we attended divine service in the morning at
Eastbrook Wesleyan Church, one of the noble sanctuaries belonging
to our church in this great Methodist centre. We had the pleasure
of hearing the junior minister of the circuit, the Eev. Joseph H.
Hopkins, deliver a most masterly discourse on the choice of Moses
as found in Hebrews xi. 24. I cannot say that I have heard any-
where in England a more able or eloquent sermon ; and if the
preacher’s health is continued I believe a great and useful career is
before him.
We attended and addressed the Congregational Sunday School at
Spring Fields in the afternoon, and then rambled through the
beautiful recreation grounds where the Band of Hope gala is annually
held. On these occasions more than twenty thousand people—old and
young—are accustomed to meet here and enjoy themselves. These
galas have become a recognised institution in Bradford. The Corpora-
tion grant the use of the Park, and in return, the temperance friends
have shown their appreciation of this kindness by presenting at
different times, handsomely Sculptured figures emblematical of the
Seasons—Spring, Summer, and Autumn, as well as some chaste and
elegant fountains. Our guide, Mr. Phillips, entertained us at tea,
after which we attended divine worship at Zion Church—Baptist—a
very commodious and beautifully decorated sanctuary. The interior
is very fine, and so it ought to be, for it cost £l6 per sitting.
Monday, under the friendly guidance of Mr. Fawcett, we
proceeded to the far famed Saltaire. This beautiful village
was built and carried to its present state of perfection by the late Sir
Titus Salt, who was the son of parents in a humble position, but who
through his intelligent industry and business tact, attained to a fore-
most rank among the merchant princes of England, and he has left
behind him a good name which will not soon die. The houses at
Saltaire are neat, and of uniform design, and are let to the work-
people at low rents, and kept in order for their benefit. A large
number of hands are employed here in the extensive Alpaca Mills,
which have proved so prolific a source of wealth to its spirited founder.
Sir Titus was a philanthropist, and set a noble example to his brother


manufacturers, in the provision he made for his people. No public
house or dram shops exist in this place, thus the most fruitful source
of misery, disease, and crime is prohibited, and their place is supplied
by comfortable, well conducted coffee rooms, reading rooms, libraries,
and museums. Ample provision is made for the aged and infirm in
the pretty and neat alms houses founded and endowed by the large-
hearted munificence of the founder. Then there are parks and
recreation grounds, through which runs a beautiful stream of water
with its banks gently sloped for the convenience of bathers. Those
also who enjoy boating have every appliance at hand for their
pleasure. Almost all Christian denominations have here churches
and chapels, some of them being structures of singular archi-
tectural beauty. Nothing that could conduce to the comfort
and welfare of his employes has been overlooked; but our
stay was too limited, and so also is my time to give anything like a
full description of the Model Village of Saltaire. I must not, however,
forget to say that a beautiful marble monument of the founder has
been erected by his admirers and friends, in the square facing the new
Town Hall.
Referring to what I have already stated respecting the prohibition
of the sale of intoxicating drinks in Soltaire, I may mention that Sir
Titus took care to stipulate that no licensed houses for the sale of
these ruinous things should ever be allowed to exist. lam thankful,
too, to be able to tell your readers that many of the largo landed
proprietors of this country are doing a great deal in the same way.
For instance, T. W. Evans, Esq., the liberal M.P. for South Derby-
shire has closed several of the public houses in the villages where he
is the principal owner, and in all the others, I am told, he compels the
landlords to keep their houses closed all day on Sunday. In fact, they
have only six-day licences. Lord Soarsdale, another large landhowner
has done away with nearly all the licensed houses on his estate,
and consents to no licence for Sunday opening. These are but a few
instances out of many.
In the evening, by arrangement, I attended a public Rechabite and
temperance meeting, and had the honour of receiving the following
address of welcome, etc. My friend Mr. Alcock also received a similar
address on the occasion of his previous visit here.
BRADFORD DISTRICT. No. 20.
Independent Order op Rechabites, Salford Unity.
At a meeting of the Executive Committee of the District, and other friends of the
Temperance cause, held at the Temperance Hall, Bradford, Yorkshire, on
October 14th, 1878, it was unanimously resolved ;
That this meeting most cordially welcomes Brother M. H. Madge, from Adelaide,
Australia, on his visit to England, and is glad to hear that he is a brother and
fellow worker in the good cause of Rechabitisra, and of Temperance in that colony,
and prays that God’s blessing may be upon him, and that great success may attend
his efforts ; and on his return, requests that he will kindly convey the cordial and
fraternal greeting of this meeting to our brother Rechabites, and other friends who
are also labouring in the cause of temperance in that colony.
Moved by Mr. E. Field, Hon. Sec. to the Bradford Band of Hope Union.
Seconded by Mr. R. Fawcett.
Supported by Mr. E. Sharp.
Signed on behalf of the meeting
Joseph Bains, D.C.R. Isaac Phillips, D.T.
Ralph Fawcett, D.D.R. Zechariah Callow, D.S.
Joseph Farnish, P.D.C.R.
Thomas Cunliff, Robert Sunter,
High Chief Ruler. Corresponding Secretary.


These addresses have been since then beautifully written on parch-
ment, and forwarded to us in Adelaide, together with a joint address
from the High Court of the Order of Rechabites, presented to us in
Manchester. This document is finished in an exceedingly artistic
and attractive style, and now adorns the District Office.
The evening passed off very pleasantly, as we listened to some excel-
lent speeches, and we shall ever cherish kindly remembrances of our
friends at Bradford.
Our next move was by way of Manchester, to the pretty, quiet, but
fashionable suburb of Eccles, here spending a short time with Mr.
R. J. and Mrs. Corlett. We greatly enjoyed the company of our new
friends, and sat for hours conversing about Australia, its people, its
productions, and other kindred subjects. Eccles is one of the many
attractive suburbs near the great cotton goods manufacturing centre,
and to which trains run at short intervals, thus giving the manu-
facturers and merchants every facility to reside a short distance from
this smoke-begrimed city, respecting which I have previously remarked.
On the following morning—Wednesday—we proceeded by an early
train to Liverpool, to fulfil a promise made to our respected towns-
man, Mr. P. Marchant, photographer, of Way mouth-street, and
there spent a few hours with his relatives, giving them all the inform-
ation we could respecting Adelaide, and their distant friends. We
again visited St. George’s Hall, and spent some time admiring its very
fine interior. Liverpool is sometimes spoken of as “ Little London
it certainly has many attractions, some fine streets, and many noble
public and private buildings, but in general interest it is far inferior
to the great metropolis.
On our return journey to Manchester we got into quite a warm dis-
cussion on total abstinence with some commercial gentlemen who were
evidently fond of the glass. I hope our conversation may lead to
some practical good. One of them told me he was convinced we were
right, and that he would try to lead a new life in this particular. On
arrival in Manchester we were met by a deputation, and conducted to
the Temperance Hall, some of our fellow travellers from Liverpool
following, that they might hear something more on this great subject.
I am glad to say we had an excellent meeting, the attendance being
very large, and some of the addresses able and convincing. Before
leaving the hall one of the audience came forward to me and expressed
his surprise at some of the things he had heard about Australia, and
he wished to know, if in that far off land, all the people spoke the
English language, and if it was really true that we lived in such fine
houses as those we had described. Thus demonstrating the fact
that the people of England require to be better informed respecting
our beautiful colony.


AGAIN AT DERBY, MANCHESTER, ETC.
October 17. —We returned early to Derby, as it was impossible for
us to prolong our stay, our time in England being now very limited.
This evening Derby was completely enveloped in the densest fog I
ever saw. 3 We could not see a foot away from us, and it made
locomotion of every kind dangerous. All through the night the fog
signals on the Midland Railway could be heard exploding.
The next evening was very pleasantly spent at the elegant villa of
Mr. William Holbrook, who had kindly invited us to spend a few
hours with him. Mr. H. evidently takes great interest in Australian
matters generally, and has considerable knowledge of the climate,
products, and political economy, of what is called by many the new
Southern lands. I found in conversation that he has a number of
relatives in South Australia, the wife of Dr. Davies, of North
Adelaide, being his aunt, another aunt residing at Stockport, and a
third at Happy Valley, to all of whom he and his send loving
greetings.
Saturday morning a friend called for me to conduct me to the ex-
tensive printing and book-binding works of Messrs. Bemrose & Son?.
The head of this firm, Henry H. Bemrose, is this year Mayor of
Derby, and is in point of ability as a public speaker, the most able
man his native town possesses, and very proud his townsmen are
of him. He is a teetotaller, and is an able advocate of the Permissive
Bill. This firm employs over three hundred hands in all its depart-
ments, and does all the printing for the Midland Railway Company,
whose gigantic workshops and head offices are close by. They also do
a very extensive mercantile and educational business. The first room
I visited was the letterpress department, where every variety of
modern appliances in machinery for job printing is employed.
Some of these machines were printing in two or three colours at the
same time. Passing from this room, I went to the lithographic de-
partment. Here all kinds of work was in progress ; printing railway
maps in columns, bill heads, business labels, show cards in colours.
This firm turns out some very fine coloured lithographic work. The
workmen were very kind and attentive, and showed me very care-
fully the process of transferring from the copper-plate engraving
to the stone. I then passed into the stereotype room. In this
particular department I was very much interested, and Mr. Harrison,
at the head of the room, spared no pains to show me all the various
stages of the process employed. First, I saw the papier-mache made
by a French process, which is pressed on the type, and receives a very
clear and well defined impression. This is then very carefully dried
while upon the type, over a gas stove, small blankets being put over it
to absorb the moisture. When firm and set it is quite ready to receive


the metal. It is placed in a frame or mould which is very nicely
graduated, and fixed by screws, etc., to receive the proper thickness
of metal. The metal which consists of lead, antimony, etc., is care-
fully poured on to the papier-mache matrix, and soon sets. We saw
two or three well defined impressions taken. These were then placed
upon the finishing machine, where a small circular saw,
which resolves with great rapidity, cuts and trims the edges.
It is next planed square, and is then fit for the printing press.
This process saves a large amount in the wear and tear of type, and is
an inexpensive way of keeping ‘ { standing matter.”
I then proceeded to the book-binding department, and was
much interested by the art of marbling edges and covers of books.
The colours are put on the surface of a quantity of liquid gum
which is contained in an oblong trough. These colours are combed
and arranged in an infinite variety of forms. The edges
of books, etc., are then carefully dipped, and the colours
in the various marble patterns are thus transferred to the paper.
I was also shown the stitching and numbering of order books, etc.,
which was done with great mechanical dexterity and accuracy.
The art of gilding and lettering on books was also described and
skilfully shown by Mr. Barlow. There are other interesting depart-
ments, as the engravers’ and artists’ rooms, but time would not allow
of my visiting them. Messrs. Bemrose and Sons turn out highly
finished letter-press and engravings, etc.; and I came away very much
interested and profited by my visit.
October 20 being the Sabbath was spent quietly in Derby. In the
morning I attended All Saints’ Church, a magnificent building, where
the gospel is preached in its purity and power by the Rev. Sholto
Campbell Douglas, a truly evangelical earnest man who is labouring
with unwearied zeal for the salvation of the people of his parish. Mr.
Douglas is a man of wealth, and comes from one of the noble families
of Scotland. He is exceedingly popular in Derby with all but the
high church and Ritualist party. In the evening I went to King-
street Wesleyan church. This is the largest and most beautiful of
our Derby churches. We heard an eloquent sermon on prayer from
the Rev. Thomas Greenbury, formerly a popular Primitive Methodist
minister, but now the travelling agent of the Hull Sailors’ Orphanage.
He is a noble-looking man and a preacher of ability.
Monday, October 21st. —The whole day was so wet and uncom-
fortable as to entirely preclude the possibility of enjoying any outside
exercise or pleasure. The Rev. Henry and Mrs. Jefford called
to take a farewell cup of tea with us ; and at 6.30 p.m. we took train
for Manchester. On arrival there we took another train to Eccles
where we were again cordially welcomed by Mr. Corlett and his kind
and excellent wife.
Next day was again wet. We spent it in seeing all we could in the
city, but the incessant rain made it very miserable work. We were
thankful to get under cover, and enjoy the company of Mr. C— ,
sister, and neice, with whom we took tea. In the evening, we
started for the annual meeting of the United Kingdom Temperance
Alliance, one of the most important events of the year in this popu-
lous city. It has long been a popular gathering, and has always
drawn together a vast audience, but this year wet as it was the
number of people was so great that the noble Free Trade Hall
was crowded, and a second meeting had to be held for the overflowing


congregation in the hall of the Young Men’s Christian Association
hard by. This also was quite filled. I was presented with a platform
ticket as the representative of the South Australian abstainers, and thus
enjoyed a comfortable seat close to the various speakers. The chair
at the Free Trade Hall meeting was occupied by Professor Smyth,
the liberal M.P. for Londonderry County. This is the gentleman
who introduced into Parliament the Irish Sunday Closing Act, which
after many failures has now happily passed into law, and is already
acting most beneficially in the sister isle. The Chairman made an
able speech, and was followed by many well-known advocates of the
Permission Bill, such as Sir Wilfrid Lawson, its great originator, who
spoke with all his accustomed eloquence and humour. Sis Wilfrid is
an inimitable speaker, he is so racy and at the same time so gentle-
manly and polished. He can say cutting things, but even his keenest
cuts are refined and free from the slightest approach to coarseness.
His humour is irresistible and perfectly natural, and few men living
have so great a power over a meeting. Even his opponents admire
his speeches and listen to them with delight. Then we had Cardinal
Manning, an old friend of this great cause, who spoke with great
eloquence in its support, and he was followed by many other men of
note. I am sorry that my time just now is so fully occupied pre-
paring for my return voyage that I cannot give you even an outline
of the various speeches delivered. I was much struck with some
remarks which fell from the Hon. Ex-Governor Hingley, of the State
of Maine, a gentleman well entitled to be an authority on this
question. They were to this effect :—“ Since I have been in this
great country of yours, I have been asked is the Maine Liquor Law in
the states a failure or a success P I reply, a decided success. Then lam
met by this objection : flow can you call it a success when gentlemen
from England who have visited your State tell us on their return
that they had purchased liquor there. Let me ask you, are your laws
which deal with thieves and madmen failures because there are thieves
and madmen still ? 1 am sure your reply will be ‘ no.’ Now then,
bear in mind that there are no signboards with us indicating where
liquor may be purchased. How then did these gentlemen obtain it ?
Let me tell you. To obtain that drink they must first have procured
the services of trusty guides, who have been well paid by some one
to do this secret work. Then they must have entered by some sly
manner, gone through a dark passage, down into a cellar probably,
with a dark lantern. They must then have opened a sly cupboard
and therefrom taken by stealth the liquor which these so-called
gentlemen drank in secret, and as stealthily paid for. Now I
put it to you—does that prove our Maine Law a failure—l say no,
no more than does the fact that forgeries are committed in your city
prove that your laws are in themselves a failure. But I will tell you
what it has done even on the admission of the drink sellers them-
selves. It has reduced the expenditure on this abominable stuff to
one eighth of what it formerly was and so he went on to show that
the law had been an infinite blessing to the State. I cannot stay to
refer to the speeches of Messrs. Barran, M.P.,and Sullivan, M.P.,
and a host of other speakers. After the meeting I had the pleasure
of shaking hands with Sir Wilfrid Lawson, the chairman, and
others. We then returned to Derby by the mail train, getting home
about half-past one o’clock, and retired to rest for the last time in the
house of our dear friends and relatives here.


Next morning, after a painful farewell we started for London, and
saw our luggage put safely on board the ship in which we had come to
England. Having now decided to return in the Torrens, it was pleasant
to meet Captain Angel and other friends, who were to be fellow passen-
gers onthis our return voyage, among whom were Captain and Mrs.
Bickers, and Mr., Mrs., and Miss English, old colonists who like our-
selves were returning to the home of oura doption. We next had a run
to Blackheath, and there spent a pleasant evening conversing with the
Rev. John Mack, brother of our old pastor at the Draper Memorial
Church, the Rev. Hans Mack. Our new friend was exceedingly
pleased to have this opportunity of talking face to face with one who
had so lately seen his brother from whom he had been parted for many
years. And I think nothing would please him better than an ap-
pointment in this sunny clime, where he would have the privilege of
meeting that brother again. When leaving on the following morning
Mr. Mack accompanied us on board, whither we proceeded to see that
our cabin, our boxes, etc., had been properly arranged before leaving
the docks, as we intend to join our vessel at Plymouth.
The comparatively few remaining hours spent in London were
fully occupied in visiting relatives and friends, and wishing them a
long, and in most cases a last farewell. During these perambulations
we called upon the Eev. James and Mrs. Bickford and spent a plea-
sant hour with them, after which we pioceeded to Highbury, there
spending the evening, also the night, at the residence of old fellow
colonists, Mr. and Mrs. R. Ford, formerly of Carrington-street, who
have still a strong regard for Adelaide and many residing there.
PLYMOUTH: ITS DOOKYAEDS, ETC.
On Saturday morning we started for a long railway journey of 250
miles, arriving at Plymouth about 4.30. Here we were kindly met at
the station by Mr. J. Holland, a brother of Mr. Councillor Holland, of
Adelaide, from whom we met with kind attention that we can never
forget. We stayed at the Plymouth Temperance Hotel, and found
it no exception to those of other places where we had stayed, and
where we found combined, cleanliness, civility, and moderate charges.
I can strongly recommend these establishments to my friends who
may be contemplating a visit to the dear old country. On Sunday
we attended divine service at the parish church. This was the day
set apart for collections on behalf of the Hospital. Our intention
was to attend elsewhere, but when* passing this church we were at-
tracted by the strains of martial music, and immediately there came
in view the band of the volunteers in full uniform, and we ascertained
that they were to attend here, and also that the Mayor and Corpora-
tion with many of the leading inhabitants would be present. Partly


therefore out of curiosity we entered with the rest. The interior of
this fine church presents many attractive features. Its finely pro-
portioned aisles, its chaste and richly carved ceilings, its noble
columns, its splendid stained glass windows, and its roomy and
comfortable sittings, all combine to give it an appearance of beauty
and comfort. The service was purely evangelical. The sermon by
the Rev. Dr. Wilkinson, was founded on St. John’s account of the
anointing of the Saviour’s feet with the precious ointment, dwelling
particularly on the words, “ she hath done what she could.” It was
delivered extemporaneously and with force and eloquence. The entire
service was of such a character as to call forth the highest feelings of
Christian charity, and I hope the collection was worthy of the occasion,
and that the benefit to the noble institution in whose interest the
service was held would receive some material advantage from it. In
the afternoon we found out some relatives of mine living in the
suburbs, and in the evening attended the Wesleyan Church and listened
to a very earnest discourse from the Rev. Mr. Stuart, whom I pre-
viously met in the railway train. This young man is labouring with
much zeal and acceptance in the cause of religion and temperance,
and is undoubtedly doing a good work.
The greater part of the next day, after I had written a number of
letters, was fully occupied in seeing Plymouth. My kind friend, Mr.
Holland, having called upon me to say he would act as our guide, we
started on a tour of inspection through the thoroughfares of this town.
Plymouth has certainly little to boast of in the way of fine broad
streets, for with few exceptions, they are narrow, hilly, and irregular,
with narrow, and somewhat rough footpaths, and bear unmistakeable
traces of antiquity, but it is only fair to add that many improvements
have been effected of late years, and that others are now being made,
foremost of which should be named the New Law Courts, Guild Hall,
and Corporation offices. These are built on a magnificent scale. The
design is elaborate and chaste. There is a great deal of sculpture and
ornamental work, but convenience has not been overlooked. The build-
ing consists of two parts, each alike in design and proportions, but
separated by a private carriage road, 120 feet wide. On one side are
the Assize Courts, with all their halls, offices, etc., most conveniently
arranged, and beautifully finished and furnished. This structure has
a grand and massive tower 225 feet high, near to the top of which I
ascended to have a bird’s-eye view of the surrounding country. Many
neighbouring towns are clearly seen from this altitude, and on a
bright, uncloudy day, the prospect must be truly grand. The other
division of the building contains all the>equisite Corporation offices,
Council chamber, Mayor’s parlour, Chamber of Commerce, and
numerous other necessary rooms. The whole plan of this fine public
building is alike creditable to the town to which it belongs, and to
the architect who designed it. I have not seen any buildings in
England during my short visit, that appeared to me better adapted
for their purpose. In a courtyard attached is found a statue of the
Mayor who presided over the municipal affairs of the town while these
costly offices were being erected, and close by is a flagstaff of an
enormous height. I passed many other nice buildings on my way
down to the quay, but of these I had not time to take much notice.
On reaching the harbour we found hundreds of fine fishing smacks,
and boats of various sizes, and almost as many boatmen seeking
employment. I was saluted with, “ Do you want a boat Sir ?” “ What


ship are you going ini?” “ Shall I come and tell you when she arrives ?”
These, and many similar questions were eagerly asked, as we made
our way along the wharf. Presently we arrived at the Emigration
Depot, and here my feelings as a colonist prompted me to enter, that
I might see what class of accommodation was provided for the people,
who have to reside here previous to embarking on board ship for their
long voyage. "W ell, having minutely inspected it, lam very glad to
bear my testimony to the efficient manner in which the place is conducted,
The matron is intelligent, obliging, and firm, and seems to possess in
a large degree, the power of good management. I was shown through
the living and sleeping rooms, and found them exceedingly clean and
well ventilated. There is one alteration which I should consider
desirable, and therefore venture to suggest, that the authorities should
provide a little more privacy for the married people, and separate
yards for the sexes. I think the present intermingling of young men
and women not the best arrangement, as it must have a tendency to
blunt the finer feelings. They meet in separate rooms for meals, etc.,
but they all meet in one yard. As soon as the bell had rung, and all
were assembled for tea, 1 visited first, the single men, then the single
women, and afterwards the married people’s departments, and spoke
for about a quarter of an hour in each case to them as to the prospects
before them in the far off country, to which they were about to take
their departure, and assured them that if they wished to succeed
they must leave behind them all bad habits ; and gave them such
other advice as I thought fitting for their circumstances. They re-
ceived my counsels very attentively, and gave me a hearty cheer upon
leaving. The evening was spent at the Temperance Hall, listening
to a somewhat lively entertainment, carried out by a peculiarly
erratic, but doubtless a useful man, who a few years ago was a clown,
but through the grace of God was converted, and now being a teeto-
taller, is engaged in trying to do good by holding meetings of this
character every weeknight, and on the Sabbath preaching the
unsearchable riches of Christ. He is ably assisted in his work by a
clever daughter, and they sustain the attention of their audiences
unflaggingly.
Tuesday we visited Devenport, and other environs of Plymouth,
under the kindly guidance of Mr. H— , but respecting which I
have nothing special to note. The outing was an exceedingly
pleasant one from a perspective point of view. So pleasantly are the
many neat and pretty cottage homes snugly sheltered by the many
umbrageous trees, diversified by the well-kept flower garden plots in
front, and at the rear is the neatly kept kitchen garden ; also a thing
of beauty and utility. As we proceed, however, our attention is
arrested by a large number of handsomely built residences of costly
architecture ; these are the princely homes of gentry and leading men
of Plymouth and Devonport. Having reached the latter town we
walk through the principal street —Fore-street. Here are found the
best shops and other places of business, also the Post Office, the
Banks, and largest hotels. This, the principal thoroughfare, streatches
across the town from the fortifications to the entrance to the dockyard,
which I regret time did not permit me to visit. My friendly guide, however,
informed me that all attempts at a verbal diacription of this large and
complicated government establishment must prove a failure, as none
but those who have visited and gone through its many departments
can form the slightest conception of its vast extensiveness and its


powerful machinery. Although from the reason mentioned I was
unable to view the interesting interior of this great establishment,
I will now for the information of those of my readers who may
never have the opportunity of visiting such a place, insert a brief
description as found in the “ Visitors’ GuideJßook, ”£and read by me
on my homeward voyage :
Our first visit shall be to the Royal William Victualling Yard,
situated at Devil’s Point, and including a vast and splendid range
of buildings, erected in 1835. The approach is along the neck or
isthmus which connects the point with the mainland, and admission
to the interior is obtained through a large and handsome entrance
gateway, surmounted by a colossal statue of the ‘‘sailor king,”
William IV, This is about 14 feet high, and sculptured out of
Portland stone.
The interior consists of large quadrangular edifices, separated by open
courts. A glance at these courts, as a modern writer observes, is
sufficient to show at once that the whole has been hewn out of a solid
rock, and this indeed forms one of the conspicuous features of the
place. Devil’s Point was a bold peninsula promontory of rock ; and to
obtain a level area large enough for the intended establishment, a
vast excavation was necessary, and the works for this purpose were
commenced in 1826. The pavement of the open courts, therefore,
consists of the rocky bed itself, hewn down to the required level.
The buildings also are constructed of stone ; so that, if any Govern-
ment establishment in England is likely to defy the chances of time,
it is the Royal Victualling Yard. Nothing short of a convulsion of
nature could wholly obliterate the traces of “ what once had been.”
No doubt the work was immense. It coat about a million and a half
sterling. Upwards of fifteen acres of surface were brought into
requisition, some being recovered from Neptune by sea-walls and
embankments, the rest being hewn from the solid rock. The quantity
of rock removed exceeded three hundred and fifty thousand tons.
Observe that the establishment, taken in the aggregate, has three
fronts : the principal faces are Mount Wise and Stonehouse Pool, and
consists of a massive centre and two colossal advanced wings, four
stories high, and surmounted by a clock tower; the centres of the
wings are further advanced, and are each furnished with a tall aspiring
shaft. It is probable that the architectural character of this huge
pile may be neither classical nor accurate, but it is certain that the
effect is really imposing.
Large as was the outlay on this great establishment, it may be con-
ceded that the money was laid out highly to John Bull’s advantage,
and that the Victualling Yard is a model of exact and careful arrange-
ment. The principal departments are the cooperage, the stores, the
slaughter-houses (where eighty head of cattle can be “ dispatched ” at
one time), the vegetable stores, the weighing-house, the beef-
house, the quays (where Her Majecty’s ships can be supplied
with fresh water at the rate of four tons per minute), and the bakery.
The actual machinery employed consists of a corn-mill, which can
grind thousand bushels of corn in two hours, with twenty-four
pairs of mill-stones, worked by a couple of steam-engines; twelve
ovens in the bakery, an oat-meal-mill, and two wheat-drying mills.
The number of persons employed is about 140—or was, before Mr.
Childers commenced his Herculean labour of cleansing the Augean
stables of our national establishments.


The Dockyard. This is situated in Devonport, the entrance being at
the bottom of Fore-street. Its first stone was laid in 1690, and the first
yard completed in 1693. In 1728 it was enlarged by of 50
acres ; in 1765 by a further increase of acres ; a few years later
4\ acres were taken in near Mutton Cove ; and of late years extensive
steam-yards and basins have been established at Keyham—that is, to
the north of the dockyard proper, which covers about 71 acres.
On the land side it is bounded by a lofty wall, which has only a
single entrance. Passing into the interior, the visitor sees before him
a wide open court, with buildings on each side. On the right is the
residence of the Inspector of the Dockyard Police ; next, we come to
the Chapel, which has its chaplain and organist, and other function-
aries, and internal arrangements to accommodate the resident dock-
yard officers, while the free seats are open to all indiscriminately ;
close at hand, too, are the Guard-house, Pay-Office, and the Surgery.
To understand the industrial arrangements of the yard, we must
first know what work is done there. “To build ships, then; to
build boats of all sizes ; to fashion masts and yards and bowsprits for
the ships ; to spin and twist ropes ; to cut and sew sails ;to forge
anchors and other heavy specimens of metal ; and to fit together all
the various portions of a ship these are the labours of the dock-
yard.” About 3,000 men and boys are employed in these labours, at
an annual expense of £150,000.
The most important feature in the yard, says Thorne, is the
assemblage of docks and slips, in which the ships are built and
repaired. There are six building-slips for vessels of various dimen-
sions ; and five docks for fitting and repairing vessels—three for first
rates, and two for second-rates. The building-slips are covered with
immense roofs of sheet iron, copper, or zinc, and beneath these roofs
the huge fabrics of the ships rest in shelter, until they are dismissed
from the shipwrights’ hands.
The longest buildings in the dockyard—as they are indeed the
longest in any manufacturing establishments—are the Rope-houses.
There are two of these buildings, each 1,200 feet in length—one of
them being built of stone, fire-proof. The most important of the
operations here conducted is the manufacture of cables, of which the
first-class are 100 fathoms in length by 25 inches in circumference.
But the days of these monster hempen cables are nearly over ; chain
cables of wrought iron are used more and more extensively every
year, and the Bopery is handed over to the makers of smaller kinds
of ropes. .
The Mast-house and Basins are also objects of interest to the in-
telligent visitor, but obviously they do not require any particular des-
cription. The Rigging-house is a huge pile, three stories high, and
nearly 500 feet in length. In the Engineers' Department many
curious operations are carried on ; iron being generally treated as if
it were as ductile as putty, and cut, planed, punched, drilled, turned,
and levelled in the moat extraordinary manner. A hundred different
machines are kept in constant motion by engines of great power, and
the variety of work they accomplish puzzles the uninitiated, who may
well fancy themselves transported in a dream to the forges of the
Cyclops, and exposed to the blasts of the under world. }
But the Anchor Smithery is, if we may so speak, the “ lion of the
Dockyard, and one useful lesson it is sure to impress on the mind o
the visitor —the power of Mind over Matter, the wonderful influence


exercised by man on substances and materials apparently of a kind
to defy all his efforts. A railway-train sweeping along at the rate of
forty miles an hour, or a steam-vessel ploughing the waves in defiance
of wind and tide, is an object well calculated to fill the spectator’s
imagination with the idea of power ; but perhaps that idea is still more
vividly suggested by the sight of a Nasmyth’s steam-hammer at work.
And this not only conveys the idea of power, but of gentleness ; of
power under control and due restraint, so that it becomes a blessing
and a gain, instead of an injury and a loss.
The largest anchors now made weigh about tons, and are valued
at nearly £3,000. Twenty-five thousand anchors are generally kept in
stock.
After seeing all this maze of mechanical works, the visitor, before he
goes further, may resort to the ivyshaded rock called the King's Hill
(because its preservation is duo to a fancy of George the Third’s),
where, in a “ picturesque pavilion,” he may realize the poetical idea
of Lucretius, and observe all the din and action around and about him
while sitting apart in bleat tranquility !
To the north of the Dockyard, and entered from Queen Street is
the Gun Wharf , where the guns are stored belonging to ships of
war not in commission. There is something grimly interesting in
these long ranges of heavy ordnance, and in the vast pyramids of
cannon-balls piled up between them. The Armoury contains an
immense collection of small arms, arranged in the usual fanciful
devices.
The Steam Docks, the most extensive in the kingdom, are situated
at Keyham Point, Morice Town, and were commenced in 1844, to
provide for the equipment and repair of war steamers. The works were
planned by the late Sir Charles Barry, on a truly Brobdignagian
scale, and though not completed, have already cost, we believe,
upwards of one million and a quarter sterling. The basins occupy
about eight acres each; are connected with each other, and yet
provided with separate entrances ; and measure 26 feet in depth.
Here are also dry-docks, foundries, factories, store-houses, boat-
houses, rigging houses, and other adjuncts, whose number is beino-
annually increased. &
The Powder Magazines and Powder Works are situated at Bull
Point, some distance above the Dockyard, and yet, perhaps in too
close a proximity to it. The magazines will hold, it is said’ 40 000
barrels of gunpowder.
On Wednesday Mrs. M. teok a journey to St. Austell, Cornwall
in fulfilment of a promise made before leaving Adelaide, whilst I was
also engaged in visiting relatives at Mutly, near Plymouth
Mutly I found to be a pleasant little suburban spot, containing
excellent private residences, some fine churches, a noble
structure used as a Ladies’ High Class College; also a Blind Asylum.
1 had the pleasure of visiting the last-named institution and was
delighted with what I saw and heard. Here the blind are taught many
usefu! industries, such as making baskets, cane and rush-seated
chairs, brushes, and a variety of other things. The manager informed
me that many of them earned as much as would maintain them
Thursday morning, October 31st. The Torrens not yet arrived.
Two days after time. The wind has been against her. We spent
the morning in making purchases, the last probably we shall make in
England. Presently came the news that our ship was in the Sound,


and immediately afterwards a messenger arrived from Capt. Angel to
say we must be on board at 2.30. Then the hurry began in earnest.
Letters had to be written, packing to complete, friends to part with,
cab to hire, boat to engage, and so on. But all difficulties were
eventually overcome, and we were soon again afloat. My friend Mr.
H. came on board with us, and assisted to get additional luggage into
our cabin, and helped us in every way possible.
Plymouth Sound, where our good ship now lies at anchor, is a noble
harbour, sheltered from the wind on the north, east, and west
aides, and is exceedingly picturesque, with Mount Batan
on the east, and on the west the bold and richly wooded
Mount Edgecombe. The mouth is terminated by the historic Hoe of
Plymouth. This Hoe is a pleasant grassy ascent, extending from
what is called Millbay to the citadel, fronting the waters of the Sound.
In places it is planted with shrubs, and other parts are laid out as
walks and drives, and is used as the public park or promenade of
Plymouth. On the land side there are a large number of well-built
and handsome modern houses. Towards the east there stands what
is called the Trinity Obelisk, which serves as a landmark for vessels
entering the Sound. The citadel referred to was built in 1670. The
seaward frontage is strengthened by stout batteries and other defences
erected on the rocks, mounting altogether about one hundred and
twenty guns. The Hoe is traditionally celebrated as the scene of the
battle between Corinacus, a kinsman of Brutus of Troy, and
Gogmagog, a British giant. Here too Sir Frances Drake was playing
at bowls with other sea captains when the news came of the approach
of the Armada.
We have just enjoyed our tea at the old familiar saloon table, and
now I am finishing these rough notes for the Methodist Journal,
You will get no more until I arrive at home, sweet home.
Friday, November Ist.—Having remained on board for the night,
we hear at the breakfast table in the morning that our ship is not
likely to sail for at least several hours. We then immediately
proceeded on shore, and calling at the shipping office found
that we were free to wander at will until 3 p.m. We
therefore spent the intervening period strolling through the
town, which at the time was in a great state of bustle
and excitement; cabs flying hither and thither, conveying voters,
under the direction of those who take an interest in the local
municipal elections. Here party spirit runs very high, and the cry is
who shall gain the victory, the Liberals or the Conservatives.
Flaming placards and other devices are employed to excite the interest
of the electors. I have never seen greater excitement exhibited at
the entrance of any polling place, or police officers more busily
engaged in preventing angry and violent contentions from degen-
erating into open strife, except on the occasion of the contest between
Mr. Forster and Mr. Fisher, many years ago in Adelaide, and before
our Ballot Act was passed. After taking our last English dinner
we took cab and visited for a last farewell, Mrs. and Mr. M., my
father’s cousin, at Mutley. From thence we were driven hurriedly
to the wharf, there meeting our captain and his good lady with other
friends who were going on board. We joined their company, and were
soon again on the deck of the noble ship Torrens.


THE OUTWARD VOYAGE.
We had not been on board long before orders were given to weigh
the anchor. This being the final signal for the last leave-taking, the
usual parting scenes took place, and many friends of passengers
descended the accommodation ladder and took their places in the
boats awaiting them, which soon put off, placing a watery distance
between us and them—it may be for ever. The steam tug then gave
her a pull round, pointing her bow in the right direction, and the
wind being fair we ran on in first-class style, passing Eddystono
Lighthouse at about 6 p.m., and finally lost sight of land at 11 p.m.
We are starting with every prospect of a speedy, safe, and happy
voyage. May our best and brightest anticipations be fully realized.
We have thoroughly enjoyed this visit to our native land, and
now to old England, old friends, and the new ones we have
made in our journeyings, we say farewell. Our good ship
has undergone a thorough overhauling, and although she had a
very rough passage, with heavy head winds in her course down the
channel, with seas constantly dashing over the bow and bulwarks, we
hear that she has behaved admirably. We therefore under the
careful and skillful management of our old captain expect to have a
successful trip. lam glad to note that our chief and second officers
are total abstainers, and that to all appearance we are surrouuded by
a fine lot of fellow passengers and a good crew. It is not my inten-
tion to note each day in order on this our outward voyage, as in
all probability on many days nothing of sufficient interest will occur
to call for special note.
November 2nd.—Still making splendid headway ; but several of us
sadly troubled with the inevitable u Oh my.” While however lying
on my back for reasons not necessary to mention, the following extra
stanza to the tune and song of the Bay of Biscay came stealing o’er
my mind :
Our ship quite taut and trusty,
Our captain true and brave,
Our mates and sailors hearty.
We go bounding o’er the waves ;
And thus we speed along
With a joke, a laugh and a song,
Bounding away quickly all day
Over the Bay of Biscay, oh.
By Sunday night we had safely crossed that much-dreaded part of
the trip.
During the next few days the winds were very variable, and the main
deck frequently covered with water as our Vessel, laden with a large and
valuable cargo ploughed her way through the surging waves.
Saturday, November 9.—Morning fine. At 8.30 an owl was


hovering over ns although land is now more than 300 miles distant.
Quoits were the amusement on deck during the afternoon. Sighted
seven ships during the day, speaking by signal one only, namely, the
Spectra.
10, 11, 12, and 13.—" Rough and squally weather continued ; to-day
the rain came down in torrents.
On the 16th we encountered a violent storm ; the thunder being
the loudest I think I ever heard. We passed a ship in the distance
with her mizen-top-mast broken and the sail carried away.
17th, Sunday.—Service on the poop under the awning ; the morn-
ing being delightfully fine, and the attendance good.
18th and 19th.—Winds light and fair ; making but little headway.
Some of our passengers seem to be getting hot headed, so barbering
became the order of the day. Passed homeward bound ship, the John
Ritson, from Java to Falmouth; but unfortunately no chance to send
letters to friends afar as we passed each other so quickly. The evening
was pleasantly passed witnessing the opening concert and entertain-
ment of the season.
The next few days are suitably described by the following quotation
from a well-known nautical song ;
“ Gaily goes the ship when the wind blows fair.”
The weather however now has become very hot and sultry.
24th, Sunday,—Still very hot, and during part of the day we were
quite becalmed, which encouraged several passengers and seamen to
take a dip in the briny. Service was conducted on the poop at 10.30,
our captain reading Canon Farrar’s sermon on 11 Intemperance, the
national sin of England,” as preached by him recently at Westminster
Abbey. Much good I think would follow the preaching of such
sermons by the ministers of this colony. During the afternoon we
experienced light squalls and heavy rains.
25th. —Heavy tropical rains fell. Caught and put in tank over 200
gallons of water within an hour.
26th.—One of the sheep died during the night. This morning
a small shark was caught. 27th. —About 8.30 a.m. the barque
Belle of Avon, bound from London to Melbourne, was within speaking
distance of us. Several questions were asked and answered ; we
then parted company with three hearty cheers, and soon left her far
behind, as we do in fact all vessels we fall in with. Later on in
the day we had the company of several sharks ; two were soon caught,
causing considerable excitement. From the backbone of one a very
attractive walking-stick was made, which no doubt will be prized as a
curiosity.
28th.—Sailing along cheerily, accompanied by a large number of
flying fish ; a large aloicore was caught weighing 15 lbs. During our
usual evening promenade Mr. Neptune and his retinue came aft with
a trumpet blast, his attendants carrying lanterns, and after presenting
bis card and obtaining an interview with the captain he announced
bis intention of visiting our ship to-morrow to shave and baptize any
greenhorns who may be onboard. 29th.—During the past night we have
passed from the northern to the southern or what is
commonly called “crossed the line the ,day proved to be a very
pleasant one, with favourable wind. During the afternoon Mr. and
Mrs. Neptune and suite came aft with great pomp and ceremony.
Bespecting their dress or costume I cannot stay to give


particulars, suffice to say if it was not grand it was grotesque.
On Neptune mounting the main hatch his Clerk read the
following oration :—Ladies and gentlemen I have much
pleasure in paying you a visit from my watery home, and am also
deeply obliged for the kind way in which you have received me. I am
also glad to see the bronzed faces and tarry hands of my elder
children. You will observe that I have brought an efficient staff,
including my barber, barber’s clerk, policemen, mermaids, etc., all of
whom will be glad to drink your health. Also I must say a few
words on behalf of Amphitrite, my loving spouse, who would have
been on board with me last evening, only yesterday being her washing
day she was engaged hanging her clothes on the line, and the rest of
my family were slacking away the line for the Torrens to pass over.
But my friends, time flies even with my jolly crew, so with your per-
mission I will read out the names of the children I am now going to
have baptized. (Here follow 15 names). After all that could be got
hold of had been lathered, shaved, and ducked, Neptune said, I now
dub these knights of the southern cross. The whole concluded with
the National Anthem and many cheers.
November 30.—Sighted the islands of the Fernando Naronah
group, distant 20 miles on our port side. At noon we were passing
between them and the American coast, about 150 miles off.
During the next ten days the weather was extremely variable, some
portion being fine and very enjoyable, at other times we had to
contend with boisterous and contrary winds, causing oar ship to pitch
and roll dreadfully ; often shipping large quantities of water, which
on one or two occasions found its way into the saloon, to our great
discomfort.
December 11th and 12th. —Extremely cold but more calm. Several
whales, and also a large number of albatross and molly hawks, were
seen sporting about our ship.
13th.—Heavy rains during the morning ; the afternoon, how-
ever, turned out very pleasant, and was spent playing quoits, etc.
During the evening all were amused by a thoroughly well rendered
minstrel entertainment. Many of the conundrums and jokes were
good and quite original.
16th.— 82 miles from Gough’s Island at noon. This island was first
seen by Captain Gough in 1731, hence its name. This evening was
one of the most beautiful starlight evenings I ever beheld ; and
shining forth among the rest was the welcome Southern Cross, which
was now seen for the first time by several of our fellow passengers.
We now pass on to the 20th, the intervening days being cold, damp,
and uncomfortable. Even this day was so wet and overcast that our
captain could not make the usual observations of the sun.
December 21st.—During the past night some of the sailors got at
the grog, aud certainly took too much, one having to be put in irons
for his violent conduct. This is the old evil which lies at the root of
nearly all maritime difficulties and disasters. Why not charter vessels
without it 1 Ours would have been much better without it; as it was
it proved too strong a temptation for some, notwithstanding
the example and restraining influence exerted by those who were
abstainers. I had many a strong argument with those who take it,
and lam bound to say because they like it, rather than because they
think it does them any good. Oh, how 1 wish the customs of society,
were free from exerting such a disastrous influence on the young who


are just entering upon the active duties and responsibilities of life.
I would humbly say to any who may read this, stay and think what
your example is doing as regards this important matter. The
next two days our good ship pitched and rolled so as to set a-creaking
every thing creakable on board, and made it difficult to keep our feet
during the day, or sleep much at night, and especially difficult to
keep the eatables, drinkables, etc., on the tables, sometimes cheating
us of our soup, and in a most unceremonious way placing in the lap
of a lady or gentleman a whole joint or roast fowl, or it may be more
than one’s share of pudding or pie.
24th.—Weather fine but wind unfavourable. Great preparations
are being made for the festivities of the season. All, including the
second cabin passengers, were invited by the captain to spend a
pleasant Christmas eve in the saloon. Accordingly at 9 p.m. nearly
all met, when cake, biscuits, and hot punch was served out, ad libitum ,
to those who wished to partake thereof. Toasts were honored,,
speeches made, and songs sung up to 12 o’clock, then the company
dispersed with vociferous cheering, shaking of hands, and wishing
every one present and absent the compliments of the season.
Christmas Day was by no means forgotten on board our noble ship,
for before the passengers mustered for breakfast, the saloon had been
gaily and handsomely decorated with artificial wreaths, and with
festoons of gold and silver leafed holly, thickly studded with bright red
holly berries, also rose and geranium leaves and flowers, together with
suitable mottoes, giving the whole place a charming and festive-like
appearance. In the midst of such surroundings, the morning was
spent in cheerful, seasonable greetings until abont 11 a.m., when a short
appropriate service was conducted. The finishing touch had
apparently been given, when, on being summoned by the
usual dinner bell, our eyes met quite a scene of beauty, in
the tasteful and elegant style in which the dining table had been ar-
ranged and decorated ; but not so, as in a few minutes was evident by
the grand and sumptuous dinner that was placed before us. It was quite
worthy the name of a banquet, a full description 1 cannot here give ;
suffice it to say, that before us was placed almost every delicacy of the
season, gaily decorated with artificial flowers, bon-bons, etc., each
person was provided with a button-hole bouquet; but to all this must be
added the graceful and charming appearance of the ladies, dressed in gay
and rich attire ; with the gentlemen also full dress was the order
of the day. Altogether the surroundings and the good feeling of this
little floating world will not be soon forgotten.
I next refer to the 28th, a pleasant day with a fair amount of sun-
shine. At noon we celebrated the anniversary of our much loved
South Australia, by firing off the ship’s cannon, and several rifles,
also by hearty and prolonged cheering. This compliment was
suitably acknowledged on behalf of the old colonists on board. Two
cold and uninteresting days now bring us to the last day of 1878. This
evening we were entertained by an original pantomime performance.
The programme was a creditable one and well carried out. Several
original pieces burlesqueing Australian bush life, and the difficulties
encountered by new chums, were well rendered ; the chorus of one,
which I think is somewhat exaggerated, runs as follows :
“ Australia! South Australia ! where the mosquito keep you waking half the
night,
Australia! South Australia! place where the bung-eye fly damages your
sight.'*


After the close of the entertainment there was a general muster on
the poop, there to await the close of the year, and to usher in the com-
mencement of 1879, by the booming of the ship’s cannon, the firing of
rifles, and many rounds of cheers, followed by the universal
wishing each other a happy new year, after which we immediately retired
to get what sleep we could till the breakfast bell informed us that it
was time to begin duty for 1879. This proved to be a very pleasant
and enjoyable day. During the next six days we experienced some of
the roughest weather of our voyage, having to contend with frequent,
and somewhat lasting gales, the ship often running under reefed top-
sails only, and shipping large quantities of water, as she gracefully
sped her way over the white crested waves. The whole surrounding
scene, when on deck for a short time, was awfully grand, as we
watched the mountain-like waves rolling up behind us, as she sped
before the wind at the rate of nearly 300 miles a day. The weather is
extremely cold, being now in latitude 46° south : so rough was it on
Sunday that the Captain could not leave the deck to conduct the usual
service.
Considerable variation in the weather from the 7th to the 13th.
During that time we have made some good running, the most being
315 knots in the nautical day. Several sails have been carried away,
but no serious damage done. We have had the company of several
large shoals of porpoises, hundreds being in sight at one time. It is
pleasing to watch the marvellous rapidity with which they swim,
and the height they sometimes bound out of the water.
14th and 15th.—Weather fine and wind fair. Everyone in good
spirits, with the anticipation of soon setting foot again on terra Jlrma ,
packing of boxes, etc., being the order of the day.
16th and 17th. —Nothing important, all being on the tip-toe of ex-
pectation. Several sweepstakes were got up by some of the passengers
on the chances of the time of sighting land, dropping the anchor, and
hour of setting foot on land, etc., etc.
Saturday, January 18th. Sailing along at over 12 knots an hour.
All excitement to catch a first sight of the long-wished-for land. On
we sped, sailing up to 16 knots with the yards braced sharp up, making
for Cape Willoughby, which we sighted at 3 p.m., and our signal flag
hoisted at 3.30. The general excitement greatly increased as we speedily
passed the various points of Kangaroo Island, and sailed gaily in
through Backstairs Passage, with Cape Jervis to the right. The
main land with its bold rugged hill scenery was to many a welcome
and charming sight, although at this season of the year it is shorn of
nature’s green carpet. On we sailed, until about 8.30, when we
sighted the light on the Glenelg Jetty, and shortly afterwards
discerned the numerous gaslights burning so brightly in our fair
city. The anchor was now dropped, and as no boat, as far as
we could see, was coming off to us, our captain fired several
rockets, and burnt a strong signal light to attract attention
on shore; we however had to wait for some time, it being
after 11 o’clock before Jagoe’s boat arrived with the necessary
Custom House officers, etc. Shortly afterwards another boat came
alongside with a few friends of passengers, including my son, who had
been on the look-out for some time. Many and anxious were the
enquiries made respecting friends in Adelaide, whom many of our
fellow passengers had not seen for twelve months ; thus was spent
an hour of great excitement and intensified interest, but as it was


altogether too late to reach Adelaide by train there was no
other course open but to seek a few hours’ repose in the berths
which do service for bedsteads for travellers over the briny deep.
But strange to say sleep seemed long in coming to our relief, as we
greatly missed the rocking of this cradle of the deep, which was now
lying still at anchor.
On the Sabbath morn of January 19th, many of the passengers were
astir betimes, especially those who were returning to their long left
homes, and the bosom of their friends in this bright sunny clime. We
took an early farewell of those remaining on board, and entering a small
steam-launch waiting to convey persons on shore, steered away for the
Semaphore Jetty, and almost immediately took train for Adelaide.
Over the meeting, on arrival at home, I must allow the veil to be
drawn, as it would be trenching into the secrets of what goes to make
up a happy homo to do other than leave this part to your imagina-
tions. Let me thank you for patiently reading these rough notes, hoping
that all imperfections and defects will be generously overlooked, as
the writer makes no pretensions of ability for literary work, and
whose only reason for agreeing to this publication has already been
set forth in the prefatory page. But I feel sure my readers will pardon
my again referring to the object to which the funds arising from the
sale of this book are dedicated (vide pink slip herewith) ; and I will
only add, if this feeble attempt will in any wise assist to open another
door where the young persons of this city may receive those moral,
intellectual, and religious instructions, which are calculated to make
them better citizens, and happier people here, and direct them to an
eternal happiness hereafter, I shall be fully satisfied.
411SMI111 SAT,
WATCHMAKER & JEWELLER,
68, King William JStf^eet,
TWO DOORS NORTH OF COMMERCIAL BANK.


TOILET NECESSARIES.
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,
FOB THE HAIB
USE BARRY’S TRICOPHEROUS.
It renews, Invigorates and Beanlißea the Hair, making it Thick,
Soft, and and Glossy.
Is. Gd. PER BOTTLE.
FOB THE TEETH
USE BARRY’S MARFILINA.
It is a most Fragrant Dentifrice ; highly recommended.
IS. 613. PEE BOTTLE.
FOB THE COMPLEXION
USE BARRY’S PEARL CREAM,
It has wonderful effects in imparting to the countenance a fresh and
clear appearance, removing freckles, pimples, roughness, and every
blemish. 2s. 6d. PER BOTTLE.
FOB OBEY HAIB
lil 1411FS 1411 im
The only safe Dye to be found. It contains nothing injurious,
and is most certain in effect. ss. PER BOTTLE.
STANDARD MEDICINES.
BARRY’S PAIN RELIEF.
For use Externally or Internally,
Cures the most excruciating pain, and allays Inflammation in from
05* TO FIFTEEN MINUTES.
It is Purely Vegetable.
SOLD IN BOTTLES at Is. Gd. EACH.
REUTER’S LIFE SYRUP
Is a Medicine that was discovered by old Nurse Bertrand, who had
been occupied in sickrooms and with the care of sick people for over
fifty ymm.
Cure# the worst Cases of Constipation, Indigestion, and all diseases
that affect the stomach and bowels. 6s. PER BOTTLE.
SOLD EVERYWHERE.
Import Agents for Australia ; P. FALK & CO., Adelaide.


AUSTRALIA FELIH
INSURANCE COMPANY, LIMITED.
fIRE AND MARINE INSURANCE AND FIDELITY GUARANTEE-.
Incorporated under “ The Companies Statute, 1864.”
REGISTERED CAPITAL
SUBSCRIBED CAPITAL
£200,000
£lOO,OOO.
PRINCIPAL OFFICES:
99, Collins Street West Melbourne.
Adelaide Hrauch panto's Iluiltitmjs,
WA YMOUTH STREET.
QTT A TT?.~lvr AIST OIB 1 DIBECTOES ;
HON JOHN CARR.
s
J. W. PARSONS.
OLDEST PLUMBING , PAINTING,
AND
PAPERHANGING ESTABLISHMENT
IN ADELAIDE,
LEIGH STREET
(Originally S. R. Hall’s).
Paints, Oils, Brushes, Paperhangings, and Colours of
all sorts, Wholesale and Retail.
Hot, Cold, and Shower Baths, Pumps, &c., made and
fitted to order.
Mixed Paints in all Colours, Wholesale and Retail.
FRASER St HUGHES,


mw wm i n®..
MERCHANTS,
and (Etommtisisiott Agents,
SANTO BUILDINGS,
WAYMOUTH STREET, ADELAIDE
AKD AT
LIPSON STREET, PORT ADELAIDE.
GEORGE MILLER & SON,
Corn and Hay
Merchants,
Waymouth Street, Adelaide,
AND AT
6oobfooob JStcam Clraff UfaUs,
G. M. & S. gives Highest Price for Wheat, Barley, Oats, & Wheaten Hay .
FARMERS’ STORES SUPPLIED AT LOWEST RATES.
DAVID TWEEDIE
LICENSED LAND BROKER.
MONEY to Lend at lowest current rates of interest.
LAND Purchased at Government and other Sales.
SELECTIONS taken up and purchases completed.
TRANSFERS, Mortgages, Leases, and all other Real
Property Act business executed.
12, CURRIE STREET, ADELAIDE.


Methodist Jourwat
Is Published and Delivered in the City
EVERY FRIDAY,
and reaches Country subscribers on Saturday.
An Interesting Paper for Families.
Deals with all religious and social matters.
Terms 10s. 6d. per year, or 3s. per qr.
in advance.
AG-EIsTTS W A.ISra?E3D.
“METHODIST JOURNAL” OFFICE,
Santo’s Buildings, Waymouth Street.
ALFRED ODGERS, Sec.
james mmium parr,
AUCTIONEER,
Valuer, Commission and Estate Agent,
COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS,
CURRIE STREET
C. S. SCOTT,
WW@Limi m ® miM L iiTCKiR,
WRIGHT STREET, ADELAIDE.
C. S. S. will have great pleasure in receiving your order to wait
upon you daily at your residence, and supply you with prime joints,
©to., at very moderate charges.


.A.. HOLDEIT <Sc CO.,
MER CHANTS,
WHOLESALE SADDLERS, COACH AND SADDLERS’ IRONMONGERS,
WHIP MANUFACTURERS,
General Importers of English and American Merchandise, Weighing
Machines, Wind Pumps, Rope, Leather, etc., etc.,
G-IRIEIIST’IPIBXjXj ST., .ADIEXj^A-XIDIE]
Next the Sturt Hotel.
Sole Agents for Messrs. Rabone Brothers
and Co., Iron Merchants, Birmingham.
Australasian teme range and general mutual
LIFE ASSURANCE SOCIETY, LIMITED.
Adelaide Branch Office— Waymouth-street.
Chairman —J. Toon, Esq., E. S. and A. C. Bank.
The leading features of this Society are of the United King-
dom Temperance and General Provident Institution, accepting all
classes of the community at equable rates. Policies unchallengable
except in cases of fraud. Policies remain in force if death occurs
during the thirty days of grace. Policies not forfeited as long as
there remains any surrender value. Policies that may lapse may be
renewed within twelve months. Profits are divided every five years ;
each policy holder participates, and has a voice in the management of
the Society.
C. A. P. JONES,
General Agent for S. A.
Wi. HORGAIF & €O.,
importers,
WHOLESALE GROCERS
AND
PROVISION MERCHANTS,
CERRIE-ST., ADELAIDE;
DIVETT-STREET, PORT ADELAIDE.


J. D. HILL,
IMPORTER op rerun: wools
AND FANCY GOODS,
JS T o. 1, ItTJNDLJ3 STREET, ADELAIDE.
ESTABLISHED 1852.
WHYTE, COUNSEL!, & Co.,
MERCHANTS,
AND WHOLESALE GROCERS,
CURRIE STREET, ADELAIDE.
WILLIAM PADDOCK,
CENTRAL CHAMBERS. WAYMOUTH ST.. ADELAIDE.
LICENSED LAND BROKER,
LAND AND ESTATE AGENT.
money to lend.
ALU BUSINESS UNDER REAL PROPERTY ACT
TRANSACTED.


H
O
X
CO
Eh
I Q
I z
w
3
Eh
O
£h
O
O
co
o
o
03
H. TRJSVASKIS, Propriet
2, BINDLEY SIRE
Opposite the Exchange Hotel, and next the Corner of
All Kinds of Boots Made to Order. Repair
• A.
|nrtrails i
PER DOZEN. 7s. 6d
AT
P. J. MARCHiMI,
WAYMOUTH STREF
THE “NEW ESU ¥
freeman greet, S L IVL 1 L
(TWO DOOBS FROM WAl‘
w m:. w~’ aystation)>
Plinill, SASfITTiE, m
AID SIS W'TSTREET,
Wholesale and Retail Dealer in Oils, Pi
Window Glass, etc. Hot, Cold, and Shower B;
uAIDE.


J HARFORD’S
tßtp@mriF
I Z IB IMI IE HDJY L
- * -NFECTIONERY,
TrrmrA' REMARKS—“ Well worthy.”
WHY.
THE TRADE
AND WH assortment of Confectionery in
, of the purest material, and
CURRIE , r , . ,
is; also, a very large variety
donery Imported direct from
’'IATSILb LS JL-Tonses.
CENTRAL CHAMBEh.
LICENSED -_^IR,IBOIR/ID,
LAND AND
EXPORT CONFECTIONER,
money 1( j Victoria Square,
ALL BUSINESS AUSTRALIA.
TRAI


BROWNE’S PODOPHYLLINE
gllilifl PiWiiai.
The newest, nicest, and most effectual
remedy known for Bilious attacks, and
all Liver complaints.
TRY THEM.
Sold only by—
FAMILY CHEMIST
(opposite Glenelg Railway Station),
KING WILLIAM STREET,
SOUTH ADELAIDE.


J. C. & GK B. HADDY,
CABINET MAKERS,
UNDERTAKERS, AND UPHOLSTERERS,
ST. VINCENT STREET,
IPOIR/T
TURNERY ALWAYS ON HAND.
Orders from the Outports Promptly Attended To.
SP. 1. MIII3IS § Go.,
WHOLESALE DRUGGISTS,
CLARENCE PLACE,
KING WILLIAM STREET, ADELAIDE.
PORT ADELAIDE.
(ESTABLISHED 1845.)
WILLIAM HOLLAND,
Wholesale and Retail
MOT & SEOS MAIIEE.
KING WILLIAM STREET, SOUTH.
COLONIAL and ENGLISH BOOTS and SHOES of every
Description Always on Hand.
All Orders Punctually Attended to.


PORT ADELAIDE AGENCY.
Lipson Street, opposite the Union Bank,
near the Railway Station.
The undersigned attends to the entering at Customs,
and forwarding or shipping of goods arriving at Port
Adelaide, and to General Commission Agency; also, to
the negotiation of Loans on Freehold Security, and
the preparation and registration of Titles, Mortgages,
or Leases under the Real Property Act.
GEO. W. SMITH,
Adelaide Marine and Fire Assurance Company.
CUNNINGHAM’S.
DEPARTMENTS :
Earthenware, China, Glassware, Ornamental
Glassware, Furnishing Ironmongery, Silver
Plated Ware, Lamps and Chandeliers, Table
and Pocket Cutlery, Looking Glasses, Brush-
ware, Perfumery, Combs, Cabinet Ware, Gold,
Silver, and Jet Jewellery, Clocks, Watches,
Glass Shades , Confection Glasses, Basketware,
Perambulators, Cricket Materials, Archery,
Stationery, Albums, Portmanteaus, Travelling
Bags, Dressing Bags and Cases, Berlin Wool,
Sundries, Pipes, Purses, Pocket Books, &c.
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL.
CUNNINGHAM’S, ADELAIDE
C. PITT,
SEEDSMAN, NURSERYMAN,
MARKET GARDENER,
39, KING WILLIAM STREET, ADELAIDE, and
FELIXSTOW.


COUGH IB Xj I XXIIR,.
Thousands testify to its being the Safest and most Reliable Cough
Mixture ever introduced to the Public.
Sold by all Chemiats>nd Storekeepers in the Town and Country, at
2s. a Bottle.


WHOLESALE OH LY,
ON
S.. S. -A L HP XU 3E. Rt S T
These Teas and
Coffees are guaran-
teed to he of the Best
Value, and so blended
as to form a thorough -
ly reliable article of
uniform quality.
ASK FOR AND BESUR 5 YOU GET
iH 11 a n fry,
SURPASSES^ AR^/ ALL OTHER
TO BE HAD OF ALL STOREKEEPERS THROUGHOUT THE COLONY
Householders are
invited to buy Teas
and Coffees of this
brand only, so as to
insure an article
ALWAYS GOOD
ALIKE.
OI^XJ
B - HOUSE LANE.
ADELAIDE.


GALATEA AUCTION MART.
NILE STREET, PORT ADELAIDE.
OZEiJLS. HAINS,
AUCTIONEER AND VALUATOR.
All Commissions carefully attended to with Dispatch.
Punctuality is the Life of Trade
No allowance made after leaving the Mart.
COTTON & OPIE,
LICENSED LAND BROKERS,
* T A TkTTTA A TATl'k T'C'm * rRP \ /"^TT'XTPnCJ
LAND AND ESTATE AGENTS,
QUEEN’S CHAMBERS, ADELAIDE.
MONEY to be LENT on Freehold Securities at Lowest Rates
obtainable.
Government Land Sales and other Sales attended and Selections
taken up, and all other commissions in connection with Government
Offices executed.
Mortgages, Leases, Transfers, etc., etc., prepared.
Land Orders Purchased from Immigrants.
GRASSHOPPER TEA WAREHOUSE,
107, BUNDLE-STREET, 107,
ADELAIDE
C. EVERETT & CO.,
WHOLESALE and RETAIL GROCERS.
J. W. GRASBY,
PROVISION lIIMHAHT,
And Family Grocer,
ANGAS-STREET, Opposite Chancery
Lane and Old Colonist Inn.


JTOSSPB BESTOW®©®,
King Willliam Street South,
Corner of Gilbert Street.
MANUFACTURER OF WROUGHT IRON
FIRE & BURGLAR PROOF SAFES,
IRON DOORS AND FRAMES, for Strong Rooms,
Deed Chests, Cash Boxes, Ovens, & Portable Coppers.
G-ETSTEH-A-Xi lIR/OnST 'WOEKEE.
W. D. ALLOTT,
CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST
IMPORTER OF
DRUGS, HOMEOPATHIC PATENT MEDICINES
PERFUMERY, &o.
Agent for the “A 1” Cod Liver Oil. Warranted pure.
134 RUNDLE ST., ADELAIDE 134.
Stations and Stores Supplied on Liberal Terms.
O. L. KLISSER,
Tailor, Woollen Draper,
MB GENERAL ©iWllTfißi,
74, RUNDLE STREET,
ADELAIDE.
RIDING HABITS MADE TO ORDER, FIT GUARANTEED.


FLEMING, BOUOAUT, & ASHTON,
SOLICITORS, STCL
WAYMOUTH STREET,
ADELAIDE.
E>. W. MELVm,
AUCTIONEER,
Real Estate, Insurance, Share, and Genera
Commission Agent,
VALUATOR, &C ~
ADELAIDE CENTRAL AUCTION MART,
<57, KING WILLIAM STREET,
OPPOSITE WHITE’S ROOMS.
Sales of Land, Farm Stock, Furniture, Merchandise, &c., conducted
in any part of South Australia.
MISCELLANEOUS SALES EVERY SATURDAY AT 11.
GEO. V. DOOJ.ETTE.
Court anil Clerical Tailor, Hatter, and General Outfitter,
iO S3S& W IhMkM mSST,
A.EELA.IIDE.
By Appointment to H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh , and His
Excellency the Governor.


T. W. MITCHELL,
DRAPER AND MERCER,
65, RUNDLE-STREET,
ADiUM®!.
T. ENGLISH,
Albion Chambers,
WAYMOUTH STREET, ADELAIDE.
H. C. RICHARDSON,
ARCHITEOT,
STURT-STHEET.
J. M C KIRDY,
SEEDSMAN and FLORIST,
16, RUNDLE-STREET,
ADELAIDE.


PAD MAN &
Furnishing and General Ironmongers, etc.,
Wholesale and Retail.
Cutlery, Platedware, Bruslrware, Bedsteads and
Fittings, Grates, Mantelpieces, etc.
Paints, Oils, Colours, etc., etc. Importers and
Manufacturers of Ploughs, Harrows, Scarifiers, etc., etc.
Plough Shares and Fittings of all kinds.
padman & co
Opposite S. A. Railway Station, North Terrace
1141 SUES § ®@ e ,
HOUSE, LAND, AND LOAN AGENTS,
VICTORIA SQUARE, ADELAIDE.
LIPSON STREET, PORT ADELAIDE.
Agents for
Mitcham Park, Murray Park, Magill, and numerous
other properties in Adelaide, Suburbs, Port Adelaide, ?
Semaphore, etc .
W. C. BUTE & CO.,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL IROMONC
IMPORTERS OF NER,
Earthenware, China, Glassware,
FANCY GOODS, AND SEWING MACF
OF ALL THE BEST MAKEBS. LI IB T .
Dealers in Colonial and Imported Fu een Jomt3 ’
Bedsteads, Bedding, &c,,
ntlemen, at
47 & 49, RUNDLE-ST., ADEL.


DUNCAN & F RASE R,
CARRIAGE BUILDERS,
FRANKLIN-ST., ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Manufacturers of
Railway Carriages, Tramcars, and Buggies
English, American, and Colonial Styles .
GOLD MEDAL presented by H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh;
also 15 First Prizes awarded by Royal Agricultural Society ; Silver
Medal for Tramcars, February, 1879.
ADELAIDE FOUNDRY,
Victoria st. and North Terrace, Adelaide.
A. JONES & SONS,
(Kngtnms, Jrmt and ipss Jfaundcra,
SMITHS AND BOILER MAKERS.
Engines, Boilers, Mill and Mining Machinery, Windmills,
Double-action Pumps, Improved Woolpresses, Sheep Troughing,
Whip-wheel Kibbles, etc., etc., on hand or made to order? ’
By Appointment to His Excellency. By Appointment to
H.K.H. tbe Duke of Edinburgh, and past Colonial
Governors for 2-1 Years.
Til OS. BARLOW & SONS,
CARRIAOE BUILDERS,
RUNDLE STREET, ADELAIDE.
NO BRANCH ESTABLISHMENT.
Elegant and First-class Carriages and Vehicles on sale
at their Repository.


S. MAYFIELD & SONS,
Wholesale and Retail
'GABBNiinnARiRS.
Carpets, Floorcloths, Bedsteads, Bedding, and
GENERAL FURNISHING WAREHOUSEMEN,
89 to 93, RUXDEE-STREET, ADELAIDE,
Where the LARGEST AND CHOICEST STOCK in South
Australia can be selected from.
Carpet and Furnishing Department
Stock of
Brussels
Tapestry
Kidderminster and other Carpets
Druggets
Felt Squares
Hearth Rugs
Venetian Blinds
Floorcloths and Mattings, 3-4, 4-4,
5-4, 6-4, bordered, for Halls.
contains a choice and extensive
Room Cloths, 12,14,16. and 18 feet
wide, without seam
Cocoa Mats
Wool Border do.
Wool Mats, all sizes and colours
Carpet and Yelyet-pile Hassocks
Blankets
Counterpanes
Sheetings
Also, Reps, Plain and Fancy, Damask, do., do., Table Cloths, &c., &c.
A. large and well assorted stock of Air Beds and Pillows always an hand,
imparted direct from the principal Manufacturers in England and the
Continent of Europe.
Licensed Appraisers. Valuations Effected in any Part of the Colony.
E. & W. HACKETT,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL SEEDSMEN,
(
73, Bundle Street, Adelaide,
Offer for sale—
Vegetable, Agricultural, Flower, and Tree Seeds,
Flowering Plants, Roots, and Bulbs.
Manures, including Sulphate of Ammonia, Potash
Bone Dust, Guano, etc.
Syringes, Fumigators, Tobacco, Ropes, etc.


J. W. DAVIS,
WAICH & OMK BASIS,
Gold and Silversmith, Jeweller, Optician, dc„
jpIuNDLE JStREET, y^LDELAIDE,
AND AT PORT AUGUSTA.
A LARGE STOCK OF ENGLISH AND GENEVA GOLD AND SILVER
WATCHES, JEWELLERY, PLATE, &c.
THE LATEST NOVELTIES, AND MOST ELEGANT DESIGNS, BT
EVERY EUROPEAN MAIL.
Repairs Neatly and Promptly Executed.
A Guarantee given with all Watches Sold or Repaired .
Country Orders Executed with Dispatch. Goods on Approbation sent to all
parts of the Colony.
teci m pwot; mi,
80s. will Purchase the Ist Prize
Washing Mac .
10s., a Good Wringer.
70s. a Lathe, Circular and Scroll
Saw, complete.
20s. to 155., Splendid New Hanging
Meat Safe, all Wire.
12s. 6d. a Good Sausage Machine.
£3O to £3stvill Furnish a small
House throughout.
A. O. CHAMBERS,
THE “ PIVOT,” No. 1, ADELAIDE.


muo
Q-lb (
Patronized by Her Majesty’s Government , Public Works, Bank of
South Australia, etc., etc.
ALF R ED DAY,
MANUFACTURING
w&TCHMAEiE &m mwmmßi
126, Handle Street, Adelaide,
Has on Sale—
ENGLISH-MADE LEVER WATCHES,
By Rotherhams, London ; Alfred Day, Adelaide; Clarke, London;
Thos. Russell & Son, London ; G. Denison, London ; Croft & Co., London.
AMERICAN WATCHES.
From Elgin Watch Company Waltham Watch Company.
FRENCH AND GENEVA WATCHES,
ENGLISH, FRENCH, AND AMERICAN CLOCKS;
A Large Variety. Warranty given with each.
Colonial and Imported Jewellery.
SPECTACLES from One Shilling the Pair.
Orders by Post Promptly Executed.
S. IABSHALL & SONS,
Sole Agents for the Famous
SMITH AMERICAN ORGANS.
Easiest terms of payment, 12, 18, or 24 monthly
payments.
NEWEST STYLES. LOWEST PRICES.
Catalogues on Application .


IF YOU ARE FURNISHING
Be sure you give
W. & T. RHODES
A CALL BEFORE BUYING,
As they have
HOUSEHOLD REQUISITES
OF ALL KINDS AT THE
MOST MODERATE PRICES.
W. & T. RHODES,
Nos. 7 and 1078, Rnndle-street.
GORDON, GREEN, & CO.
(SUCCESSORS TO C. W. PRIEST),
HOUSE, LAND, AND ESTATE AGENTS,
Flinders-street, Adelaide,
(OPPOSITE STOW CHURCH).
\.B. LOAXS XEttOTIATED. TRUST FETDS I\\ESTEI>*
LA.ISTO SALES ATTENDED.
Transfers , Mortgages, Teases , and all business under Heal
Property Act Transacted.
ADELAIDE SCHOOL OF PHOTOGRAPHY,
51, RUNDLE-STREET.
OIL PAINTINGS OF SUPERIOR FINISH
Taken from either Carte de Visite or Life.
ILTSPECTIOLL IHST"VITE3D.
SOLOMON, Proprietor.


R. N. GAULT & CO.,
Having imported heavily of Goods in the Depressed Home Markets,
have now supplemented these by purchases in Melbourne and here
at unprecedented LOW PRlCES,'which leave a heavy loss to the
Importers ; the ready Sale these goods meet with confirms the test of
their worth. Special attention is invited to the following goods aa
being the best value they have ever offered :
White & Grey Calicoes, Sheetings, Flannels,
Comprising Fine, Medium, and Heavy Imitations.
Real Welsh and Castlemaine.
ALL WOOL SLAiICETi
AT EXCEEDINGLY LOW PRICES.
ft urn
VERY CHEAP, ALSO,
Ladies’ Costumes, Dress Materials, Winceys, Millinery,
LASERS’ TOSHES, TOlllSUlfi.
MENS’ AND YOUTHS’ CLOTHING,
INCLUDING
Trousers , Trousers and Vests, Overcoats r
Ulsters, Waterproof Clothing, Hats 9 Caps 9 &e.
E. U. GAULT & CO.,
QRftPERS &
14, RUNDLE STREET.
AGENTS FOR
Jgf ilcoz & §ibbs’ (Automatic Sewing (Machines.
