

ONE shilling,
_




TEN YEARS’ PRACTICE
CHARLES lIRLEIDIBILIL,
M.R.C.S., &c„
COLLINS STREET
IN AUSTRALIA.
01Ce (/&o w-£ne ;
PUBLISHED FOR THE AUTHOR BY
A. H. MASSINA & CO., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
Howey Street
(Between Collins and Little Collins Streets).




PREFACE
If anyone is led to expect, from the title of this
book, that they will find a handy guide to the
treatment of diseases known to be within the range
of those branches of medicine to which I have
devoted myself, they will be doomed to disappoint-
ment.
I have chosen the title merely as an indication of
the authority by which I write.
The observations of the individual passing through
the few brief years of life must necessarily be very
incomplete, and human observation itself has a
variation as wide as exists between the marvellous
work of Darwin and the budding instincts of a
newly-born infant.
Objects perfectly familiar to each of us may still
be more closely examined, and found to contain
features undreamed of. Dozens of people, accus-
tomed almost daily to walk down Collins-street, will
be unable to exactly indicate the position of the
pillar post-boxes, and among these very people may
be found close observers in other fields ; but, never-
theless, it is by the sum of these varied observations
that the mass of human knowledge is arrived at.
He who makes observations will naturally form
conclusions from the same, and though both may be
wrong, yet, if he fancy his conclusions would be of
any value to his fellow-man, he is right to offer
them.
30 If


CHAPTER I.
HEALTH
CHAPTER 11.
CLIMATE AND CLOTHES ..
CHAPTER HI.
FOOD..
CHAPTER IV.
DRINK
CHAPTER V.
EXERCISE
CHAPTER VI.
PATIENT AND DOCTOR
CONTENTS.


TEN YEARS’ PRACTICE IN AUSTRALIA
“The first consideration is health.” Dear me,
how often the medical man hears this, especially at
the commencement or during the course of his
treatment. Presently, when health is restored, it is
not pressed so much—to him. But among all it
is a common enough statement, often followed by
another, viz.—that the best gift in life is health.
For myself, I cannot agree with this. After careful
consideration, indeed lam sure it is not. I place the
gifts this way: “Good spirits,” out and away first;
“Health,” second; and “Wealth,” a bad third. Of
course it may be immediately objected that good
spirits are largely dependent upon good health,
which may be conceded at once; at the same time
there is no doubt of its independent existence. I
have seen, as most people must, and as all medical
men undoubtedly have, striking examples of this. I
could record many, but an instance still fresh in
my mind, though it occurred years since, was that
of a poor young fellow lying in an up-country
hospital in a hopeless state. A most pathetic case.
He was not more than eighteen or nineteen years of
age, had had some slight quarrel with his parents,


who lived on the Atlantic coast of the United
States—New England, I think—and had run away
to sea, and had finally found himself in Melbourne.
He was ashamed to write home to ask for
assistance, for his people, although not by any
means poverty-stricken, were badly off, so he
determined to look for work, and found it with a
contractor at that time engaged in railway construc-
tion. Somehow or other he fell from a bridge and
fractured his spine, and there he lay with absolutely
nothing to look forward to but death. His lower
limbs paralysed, his friends unable to come to him,
in a strange country, and with only new friends
around him, yet that lad was as bright and cheer-
ful as a cricket.
It is hardly necessary to draw the picture of the
opposite condition. It is too utterly common. By
far the greater mass of people who are wanting in
good spirits have health and general surroundings
with which there is very little reason to grumble.
To a certain extent, perhaps to a large extent, this
cheerful habit can be acquired ; but, in my opinion,
it is none the less a gift, in the usual acceptation
of the term.
However all this may be, there can be no two
opinions of the value of health and of the import-
ance of keeping it unimpaired. But it is just this
latter item that is so difficult to get people to
regard from a common sense point of view. Some
are so careful that they not only make themselves
uncomfortable, but bore other people around them,


and render themselves positively more prone to the
very evil they dread; while others, enjoying for
the most part robust constitutions, believe that the
way to avoid sickness is not to think about it, and
do just as they feel disposed, taking no heed of
warnings, and never recognising a loss until it
has taken such a form as will probably leave an
impairment never to be quite amended.
Often, however, these careless ones have an
altruistic instinct which causes them to be anxious
enough to preserve the health of those they love,
and in their case would regard health as altogether
the most important thing in life. It seems to me,
therefore, well that every person should take a calm
view of the act of living, somewhat in this way, a
way that was suggested to me by the teaching of
Sir James Paget (then Mr. Paget) exactly thirty
years ago, and at that time the medical student
was not troubled much about Microbes or Bacteri-
ology :
That health was an exact balance of waste and
repair; that health and disease are incompatible;
that anything disturbing this balance immediately
allows of a receptive condition as to disease ; that
everything living must die, and that most of us
contain the elements of our ultimate destruction
when we are born. It will be well to remember
this last point particularly, because, if any man
knew that he did not possess such elements, com-
monly known as tendencies, there is no doubt that
he could play many tricks with himself that would


be fatal to less fortunate persons, and this will
explain what often seems to puzzle people very
much, namely—that some have attained to a great
age who have most undoubtedly lived in any way
rather than by rule. Professor Humphry, of Cam-
bridge, made a collective enquiry into longevit}q
which gave most interesting results, where he men-
tions several cases of habitual drunkards who lived
to be over a century, though the mass of those who
lived until eighty, or upwards, had been absolutely
temperate. Obviously, then, it seems to me that it
is wiser to regard oneself as having tendencies, and
to guard against such known causes of attack as
excess in any direction. Shakespear, who knew
most things, evidently had this in mind when he
wrote, in “ Love’s Labour Lost ”:
Fat paunches have lean pates, and dainty bits
Make rich the ribs, but bankrupt quite the wits.
One of the first conditions of modern life seems to
be the necessity of remembering that one has a
duplex system, and that, to ensure the best results,
it is imperative to keep in exercise both body and
mind. It would, indeed, appear as if the very fact
of possessing mind brought this responsibility.
So far as the animal is concerned, nature has
fairly well arranged that he shall keep his body
employed, but the moment he has discovered the
higher gift of mind he is apt to forget, in his
soaring ambitions, the very title deeds by which he
holds his property. Thus the earliest pages of
human history are filled with the fell results of


excesses of appetites—indeed, it is probable that
even now we are but in the dawn of intelligent
culture of this double state. I think this is a fair
assumption, seeing that from such means as have
been left at our disposal there does not seem to be
the slightest evidence of the decadence of the human
body when—mark the point—the environs have been
favourable.
It would not be well to run away with the com-
forting idea that no deterioration has taken place
as the result of carelessly lived lives; our city
slums, hospitals, refuges, and sickly ones in far
higher spheres, give the lie to this. But, given
healthy stock, suitable surroundings, and the neces-
sary self-denial, it will be found that the records of
the present age will at least compare with any
reliable records of past ages. Even Macaulay’s
schoolboy knows that the indulgent luxury of later
Rome led to its destruction, and that the world-
wide diffusion of our race has resulted from our less
indulgent northern habits, kept up to-day, as Max
O’Rell has noted, by our love of athletic sports,
beginning in the school ground, and, shall I say,
finishing, as a climax, in cur soldiers carrying in
their hill campaigns among the precipitous Hima-
layan passes their' golf-sticks. Well may a thrill of
pride run through the Anglo-Saxon race at the
thought that their countrymen to-day, not satisfied
with fighting nature and man in their most savage
moods, must needs take with them the means of
contest, friendly albeit amongst themselves. So


long as these things are so, it is a complete answer
to the question sometimes asked as to the decay of
England’s power.
In a recently published book by Dr. Welldon,
“Empire and Education,” he alludes to this subject
thus: “It is not long since I was at Harrow,
looking on at a football match, and a lady said to
me, ‘ What do you think of this, Mr. Welldon ?’
I said, £ lt is to this that we owe the British
Empire The latent power of the
English race is not in the few men whose names
are familiar as household words; it is in the far
greater number of men, who, if they were called
upon to face an emergency, would face it success-
fully, that the strength of England consists.’ ”
In these days of microbes and germs, antiseptics
and antitoxins, life would seem a burden almost
too great to bear. One requires to be vaccinated
and inoculated for innumerable diseases, and that
not once, but repeatedly at intervals during life.
One is told that the daily milk should be boiled or
Pasteurized. The water should be boiled and
filtered; fruit, vegetables, and other things entering
the house from without should be immediately dis-
infected, and a host of other advice is given, and,
it must be admitted, on most scientific grounds, till
the distracted parent may well wonder whether a
move to the top of Mount Everest, or a sterilized
and hermetically sealed Utopia, would afford the only
secure shelter. Yet, although the value of scientific
precaution can in no way be despised, it has not


escaped the notice of unscientific observers that
before this era people did contrive to live, and that
with all these precautions the span of life has not
become largely increased. The weak have ever
fallen, the robust live on, both being subject to
the same dangers.
It is true that where the microbic hosts bear
down in irresistible force and numbers, as is some-
times the case in typhoid, even the young and
healthy do fall, but it is not true that they are
more apt, or, indeed, so apt, to fall as their
weaker brethren. Moreover, there is every reason
to believe that some people possess idiosyncracies
which render them peculiarly liable to the attack
of certain microbes, such, for instance, as those
which give rise to the disease I have mentioned.
But, in the main, it will be found that whatever
the infection may be, the danger .is chiefly to those
wanting in vitality, either inherently or as the
result of some faulty methods of living.
Again, in the intellectual arena, it has now
become almost an impossibility for anyone to
achieve any prominent success in politics or in
the professions without a powerful, or, at least, a
good physique, and that this has been more fully
realised during the latter quarter of this century
is evidenced by the great care with which leading
men everywhere are increasingly occupying themselves
with out-door exercises. A cavalcade may be seen
any morning galloping in Hyde Park, before
breakfast, composed of the most intellectual men


in London; and again, where facilities offer, the
same men will be found holding their own on
the tennis ground, golf link, or high Alps.
But we cannot all do these feats of brain or
muscle; these must remain to the few, and, for
the most part, the race must be carried on by
those engaged in less exacting positions, and with
them lies the responsibility of preserving with care
a strain from which these giants must be selected.
I hold it, therefore, incumbent upon every man
and woman to keep what vital forces they may
possess unimpaired, and to improve them if possible.
One need only to touch lightly on the nature of
legacies; we all know that the Georgian period
has handed down to the last two generations
other things besides accumulations of wealth. It
should be ours to eliminate these and to restore
any loss simply by observing ordinary precautions,
and by allowing natural conditions fair play, and
this, it must be remembered, applies to all classes
of the community. One is always inclined to say
with Philip of Faulconbridge in King John :
Well, while I am a beggar I will rail,
And say there is no sin but to be rich ;
And, being rich, my virtue then shall be
To say—There is no vice but beggary.
There is another point of general importance
about health which one might term the religious.
The whole duty of man seems to be bound up with
it. It always seems to me quite easy to regard the
Almighty with feelings of adoration. Most people


find no sort of difficulty in worshipping even a
fellow-man if only he has sufficient possessions,
often, too, in the purest fashion, and without hope
of reward. But when it comes to loving your
neighbour as yourself, it is a big order, and well-
nigh impossible to the dyspeptic. A man’s imme-
diate surroundings are interested to the last degree
in his health, and he himself is at any time in the
greatest danger of misjudgment if he has lived
carelessly the day before. Naturally, the higher his
gifts, the more sensitive they are to deterioration ;
but the smooth answer that turneth away wrath is
often wanting from an overloaded liver.
Of course, I am aware that these are the merest
platitudes, things that everbody has heard scores of
times, and the same criticism will probably hold
good in much I have to say further on. But that
is just the point. One has such a plentiful lack of
remembering. Everybody knows exactly when they
should add to or remove clothing, but, none the less,
it is often extremely useful to remind those we care
for to put on an overcoat or make a change of
clothing.
It must be carefully noticed that I am not writing
for those who are ill, but for those who are well,
that they may avoid becoming ill, so that I
would again draw attention to the axiom—“ Health,
a balance of waste and repair.”
How best to preserve this balance is the matter
I want to deal with in the following chapters.
Elimination for the waste, food for the repair.


Surrounding conditions in relation to these func-
tions, these are practically mechanical; but there is
one big thief of vital energy which disturbs this
balance in a manner not easy of popular explana-
tion, but which is well known and much dreaded,
and yet not to be resisted by definite physical
laws. This fell enemy is worry. “Man is born to
trouble, as the sparks fly upwards,” but the trouble
of mental worry seems to increase with the advance
of modern civilisation. Years ago, when the race
for wealth was less hot—fewer entries and more
time—business worries, as understood now, were
unknown. The merchant lived in the same house
in which his goods were stored; once or twice a
year his ships came home, or he made his journey;,
his wants were comparatively few, his lines were
more defined, and the modern parody—
Early to bed and early to rise,
Will double your health, your wealth, and your size,
was more true then than it is to-day.
Now the average commercial man lives away from
his business, and when he is at home lives en grand
seigneur “as far as he can," but even while there his
brain is often in the city. Telegrams may disturb
him even at a late hour. The morning’s paper or post
may bring him worries on or before his return to the
office. Distance does not protect him in his
holiday; he is never off the wire. He needs to be
ever on the alert. Combinations and complications,
undreamed of a generation ago, disturb or may
disturb all his calculations. This mode of life has


brought the desire for different stimulations to
distract the overwrought brain. few
people enjoy a quiet domestic home as understood
by their fathers ; the hurry of business has invaded
even private life. Late hours, the almost unavoidable
excitement in some form or other, utter want of
real rest, all join to make the mad dance to an
early decadence. No one can estimate the loss
involved by the last few years of depression, but it
is probably well within the mark if one says that
the half of the trouble has yet to be paid for in the
“ Loss of Health ” involving the generation now
rising.
Then, as life advances, another and a different
form of danger arises. The man whose success has
been attained at the cost of extreme tension over a
long period of years is tempted, partly through a feeling
of exhaustion, but more often, perhaps, from a desire
to reap some of the fruits of his toil, which he
already begins to realise are passing away from his
grasp by reason of his failing vitality, to take what
is called his “ otium cum dignitate .” He suddenly
takes the weight off the safety valve. He removes
the cork from his bottle of life. The internal
pressure was already lowering; now rapidly it
diminishes, escapes, and his exhaustion takes no
long time before it is complete. Carefully and with
great judgment should such a man have lessened
his work to suit his altering fires, and no man is to
be pitied less than the man who is said to die in
harness. These are considerations well worth


thinking over. The importance of watching this
inexorable balance becomes apparent when one con-
siders that not only is one doomed to lose health
and perish, but that the battalions of our enemies,
although invisible to unassisted eyesight, are never-
theless as surely all around us and awaiting their
opportunity as the carrion crows which surround the
dying lamb, so familiar to most of us in that realistic
picture in our National Gallery, “ Anguish.” The
only escape, temporary though it be, consists in
preserving that vital force which alone saves us
from instant and certain attack.
Be not righteous over much; neither make thyself over wise:
why shouldest thou destroy thyself ?
Be not over much wicked, neither be thou foolish; why
shouldest thou die before thy time ?
■ —Ecclesiastes, chap, vii., 16 and 17.


CUimRTE fIHD CIiOTHES.
Searching for a definition of the word “ climate,”
which, for a long time, has conveyed more to my
mind than is usually understood by that word, I
find Webster gives it this way:—Climate, from
Gk. tcXi/xa, slope, the supposed slope of the
earth from the equator towards the pole, hence a
region or zone of the earth. i. (Anc. Geogr.) One
of the thirty regions or zones of the earth parallel
to the equator, corresponding to the successive
increase of a quarter of an hour in the length of
the midsummer day. 2. The condition of a place
in relation to the various phenomena of the atmos-
phere, as temperature, moisture, etc., especially as
they affect animal life or man. “ I mean those
qualities of the air and * climate ’ which are sup-
posed to work insensibly on the temper by altering
the tone and habit of the body.”— Hume.
I like this last definition best ; “ various pheno-
mena” is good, and very suggestive. Temperature
and moisture are not enough ; there must be other
differences, though perhaps very imperfectly under-
stood. Take, for instance, the effect of wind. It
is, of course, well known that antipolar winds cause
a fall in the barometer —or, in other words, when, in
Europe, the wind is in the south, and in Australia
when in the north, there is less atmospheric
pressure, and the glass is said to fall. It is


impossible to resist the idea that this must play
some part in the conditions of life—indeed, we
observe that it does; but exactly how or why is
unknown, and this apart from atmospheric aquosity.
I remember many years ago attending an old bed-
ridden woman, whose room was so situated that it
was impossible to “ see ” the direction of the wind.
Great care had been taken of her and the tempera-
ture, the hydrometric state of the room air being
kept as nearly as possible in a stable condition. Yet
that old lady knew exactly when the wind was in
the east, and did not fail to mention it. I have
seen many other instances of this, chiefly with
northerly winds as regards Victoria. That these
effects are produced by electrical changes are highly
probable, and medical men are perfectly familiar
with the extraordinary depression some patients
suffer during atmospheric electrical disturbances,
death often taking place during a thunderstorm.
Then, again, when one considers the incessant
and rapid chemical action that is going on, evolving
and extracting gases, it seems certain that not only
the vegetable life, but even the inorganic compo-
sitions of the soil play some part in differentiating
the climate of one place from another, and these
local conditions may again be changed by some
cosmic disturbance in a distant part of the globe.
It was clearly demonstrated that the meteoric dust
ejected from Krakatoa was held in suspension for
years, and there is evidence that it made the entire
circuit of the world many times. It has even been


suggested that this was the cause of the epidemic
wave of influenza that appeared in nearly all parts
of the globe during the corresponding time. But,
admitting all these things, happily it has been the
result of experience that the human can, with
proper care, acclimatise himself to most of these
different surroundings. It is, however, of some
comfort to know from the Australian Year Book
that, after upwards of fifty years’ occupation, the
following may be written:—“From its geographical
position Victoria enjoys a climate more suitable to
the European constitution than any other colony
upon the continent of Australia. In the thirty-five
years ended with 1893 the maximum temperature
in the shade was m-zdeg. Fahr,, viz., on the 14th
January, 1862 ; the minimum in the shade was
zydeg. F., viz., on the 21st July, 1869; and the
mean was 57-4 F. Upon the average, on four days
during the year the thermometer rises above icodeg.
in the shade ; and generally on about three nights
during the year it falls below freezing point. The
maximum temperature in the sun ever recorded
{i.e., since 1857) was F., viz., on the 4th
January, 1862. The mean atmospheric pressure,
noted at an observatory 91 feet above the sea level,
was, in the thirty years ended with 1893, 2 9‘94
inches; the average number of days on which rain
fell was 131, and the average yearly rainfall was
25-58 inches.” So that, measured in this way, those
who live in Victoria may congratulate themselves on
possessing a climate probably second to none in the


world. At the same time, the southern portion, at
any rate, suffers from such rapid changes that it is
also, if I may use the expression, one of the most
catarrhal. On the one hand, fifty years’ experience
has failed to discover any disease peculiar to the
country; and, on the other hand, the same experience
has shown that most of those catarrhal complaints
found in more rigorous climates abound. The
bright skies and warm sunshine tempt the inhabitant
to disregard precautions which are forced on other
peoples less fortunately situated, chiefly, perhaps, in
the matter of clothing.
“The History of Clothes” has yet to
The theories of evolution point to the 'hirsute
appendages of the skin, or hairy coat, slight though
they now are, as being the remains of a far-off time
when man was clothed like the anthropoid ape.
The earliest historical reference to clothes probably
in existence deals with the first garments devised
by man as being of an exceedingly light character,
both as to size and quality. Those who believe
that the human race spread itself out from tropical,
or, at least, sub-tropical, regions will find it hard to
explain how, on the one hand, the Esquimaux has
clothed himself with skins, worn fur inside, while
the inhabitants of Terra del Fuego, with a climate
equally cold, remain completely naked. I say the
history of these things has yet to be written; but
it is a perfectly familiar fact, so far as these Aus-
tralasian lands are concerned, that the adoption of
clothes by the aboriginal has been generally and


rapidly followed disease and death. The wearing
of clothes demands an attention as to change,
cleanliness, and dryness, which, being neglected,
results in destructive processes, and this fact should
cause people to reflect on the matter.
If anyone is not aware of the physiological fact
that moisture is constantly going out from the skin
of our bodies, let them on some cold day, while in
a warm room, open the hand and bring the palm
side close to the window-glass without actual con-
tact, and they will at once see, condensed on the
glass, an amount of moisture that will probably
surprise them. Under ordinary circumstances people
do not go about with wet clothes; yet it is, after
all, merely a matter of degree. Seeing that these
things are so, it is not a very new statement to
make that woollen garments should be worn next
to the skin for all those reasons which are well
understood. Yet what does one find ? In a country
whose principal staple is wool —a country which has
a climate demanding, more than most, the wearing
of woollen clothes, it is so arranged that woollen
goods are burdened with such high duties that
cheap imitations, chiefly of cotton, fill the market,
and only the richest or the wisest (always few)
purchase the real article. Yet, with commendable
zeal, it is desired to extend the use of wool else-
where by endeavouring to introduce it to the
Japanese. Another temptation resulting from the
climate causes people of all sorts —but I refer more
particularly to men at or beyond middle age—to go
through the whole or the best part of the winter


without overcoats. I have frequently remonstrated
with such, and been told that an overcoat had never
been worn, or worn only on journeys. It is not
easy always to trace the history of a chill; but no
one who knows anything at all is ignorant of the
often fatal results, and this is one of the many ways
by which premature death may be unnecessarily
caused.
Then, again, as to the part of the body which
most needs protection, people will, apparently, not
recognise the perfectly well-known fact that it is the
extremities, chiefly the feet and shins, which are
most susceptible to chill, I have often felt posi-
tively miserable in seeing ladies emerge from the
theatre or concert heated, and evidently partly
aware of their danger, with their head and shoulders
carefully and closely wrapped up, and then deli-
berately get on to the front of the dummy of a
tram, and face the wind for miles, with feet and
lower limbs exposed to the searching blast. It is
so odd that they cannot see that the head and
throat are just the least vulnerable parts, probably
because they are usually unprotected by custom.
Few people go about habitually with these parts
wrapped, and fewer still dream of protecting them
at night, though they retire to an unwarmed bed-
room during winter from a warm sitting-room and
find no harm result.
Now that I am on this subject, I really think the
Tramway Company should provide a wind-proof
shield in front of the dummy as is done for the car
itself; the position must always remain draughty,
but I am sure thousands of chills would be avoided
in the course of the year by this simple expedient.
As it is, I think railway rugs should form part of


the impedimenta of theatre parties, where it is
intended to travel by tram, even on warm evenings.
I suppose it is rather too much to ask for thicker
and warmer feet gear for the ladies, and yet here
again standing in passages near a heated ball-room
is fraught with the greatest danger under the
present mode. However, I am on dangerous ground
myself here, and I merely venture on the mildest
hint. No treatise touching on clothes, written by a
medical man, would be complete without a cut at
the corset. Yet I would fain put in a good word
for it. No sane person can doubt that this article
of dress, when laced too tightly, must be injurious;
but apart from its primary object, which, by the
way, I am taking for granted is to assist nature,
and so add to the shapeliness both of the figure
and the superadded garments, I am sure that it
serves a useful function in protecting the lower part
of the back, which, in this especially rheumatic
climate, is liable to take on lumber pains for
reasons I do not now propose to discuss ; and for
the same reason where such pains exist, as they
more frequently do in the case of men, I strongly
recommend the wearing of a woven band of
woollen, such as can be procured under the name
of a cholera belt.
Nothing can be more beautiful or suitable during
the warm season than the white dresses of various
light materials in vogue among our ladies, but when
I see them I always wonder how many more of
them—l mean the ladies, not the dresses—are to be
martyred by burning before manufacturers are com-
pelled—by the demand for the article—to supply
these fabrics made uninflammable. This can easily
be done by preparations of alum, but it is not!


Ten years ago, at the “ Colinderies,” a lady dressed
in such a costume was walking along in a fairly
crowded part of the exhibition grounds, when some
careless smoker threw down an unextinguished wax
vesta. Her dress swept over the burning match,
and, in less time than it takes me to write this,
she received such injuries that she died before the
next day. This case impressed me very much at
the time, and coming first into my mind I record it,
but most readers will recollect others; indeed, the
accident is far from uncommon, only that single
deaths are soon forgotten. However, there was
another horrible affair in the North of England,
which some may recollect, at what was called a
Cotton-wool ball, where, in the same way, a
number of children were burnt.
Another result of this climate has been to cause a
carelessness in the construction and ventilation of
some rooms. I have been quite surprised at the
number of bedrooms in good houses, and good
rooms in themselves otherwise, without a chimney.
Not enough attention, in my opinion, is given to the
surroundings of the room in which, as far as rooms
are concerned, we spend the greater portion of our
lives. The bedroom is occupied for six, eight, or
even nine hours continuously, and during that time
the room-air remains more fixed than that in a
living room occupied for the same time, as of a
necessity in that room the door is often constantly, and
in any case occasionally, open, and there is no aperture,
not even the window, unless it be a French window,
that allows of so large a space for diffusion of air
as the door; whereas in the case of the sleeping
apartment the door is almost always closed during
the hours of occupation. Then, again, often for fear


of draught, and, perhaps, oftener from the fear of
burglars, even the window is closed, so that, if there
be no chimney, the air is practically stationary; even
with a chimney the air is usually, towards morning,
close and oppressive, more noticeably so, of course,
to one entering from fresh outside air. In the
morning the window is thrown open, and matters
soon right themselves, but the occupant is not very
unfrequently struggling through a headache to find
an appetite for breakfast.
Of course you know all about it; you know quite
well that all through the night the oxygen of that
fixed room-air has been changing into carbonic acid
gas; you know very well that that heavy gas will
gravitate to the lower levels of the room, and
presently impregnate the air from the bottom of the
room upward. Yet it never occurred to you that if
you had had a small screw fixed into the sash-
board, to allow the window to be opened from the
bottom, two or even one inch, you would have
been quite safe from burglars, and the heavy gas
would have leaked out to that level.
Or, perhaps, you know nothing of the kind. You
hold different views entirely; because there are
different views. A great authority on Hygiene,
Edmund Parkes, has the following on this matter:—
“ By some it has been argued that it is better that
the foul air should pass off below the level of the
person, so that the products of respiration may be
drawn down below the mouth, and be replaced by
descending pure air. But the resistance to be over-
come in drawing down the hot air of respiration is
so great that there is a considerable waste of
power, and the obstacle to the discharge is some-
times sufficient, if the extracting force be at all
lessened, to reverse the movement, and the fresh


air forces its way in through pipes intended for
discharge. This plan, in fact, must be considered a
mistake. In case of vapours or gases, the proper
place of discharge is above; but heavy powders,
arising in certain arts or trades, which, from their
weight, rapidly fall, are best drawn out from below.”
In the first place, it is not quite obvious how
these powders are to be drawn out, except by a
current of air, and, as the different gases composing
the air are subject to the same law of specific
gravity as are fluids, obviously the heavy carbonic
acid gas will, if it exist, be the first to escape low
down, and be the means of conveying heavier matter.
But, apart from that, is it not reasonable that, in
a room not otherwise heated, the respiration of a
person will soon diffuse its heat to the other gases
with which it mixes, and so losing any undue
expansion it may at first possess, resume its relative
specific gravity ?
But, after all, a grain of fact is worth a pound
of theory, and I have been able so repeatedly to
give relief in the manner I have described that I
have the audacity to advocate the method I men-
tion in the face of this authority. Naturally, if the
window be opened in the same way at the top, as
well as at the bottom, you have more change of
air, and, unless it be too cold or draughty, is, no
doubt, better still; but something like this does
occur in raising the lower sash, as a space will
remain between the sashes. Where a room is
superheated by a number of people and gaslight,
it becomes most necessary to have a current of air
entering low and escaping high, as in Tobin’s
method. There is a certain well-known assembly
hall in Melbourne which is desperately in need of
this. I have often been in it when full, and never


left it without a headache, though, as a fact, head-
ache from this form of poison does not always
occur at once, but will come on hours afterwards,
and thus mislead people as to its origin. On com-
paring notes with quite a number of my friends, I
find in every case the same experience of that
particular hall, though all had not noticed it until
I drew their attention to the fact. The last time I
was there, and I mean, if possible, to make it the
last, I particularly noticed that all the windows,
and there are several on each side, were well open
at the top, yet that heated carbonic acid did not
find an exit.
There is in Victoria, as, indeed, everywhere, too
much tendency to define the seasons by Act of
Parliament; indeed, in the last year of grace this
was actually done, at least as an act of government,
when the edict went forth that no fires were to be
used in the Government offices before the ist of
June, and as some unusually early cold weather set in,
the gross folly of this was severely felt by those
unable to protect themselves. I am credibly
informed that the heads of some of the departments
obtained firing, but whether at their own expense
or not I cannot say. Anyhow, such is the climate
that for a great part of the year it is prudent to
keep the fire laid, and to put a match to it when
needed, the guide being personal sensation, not the
almanac. I unhesitatingly give it as my opinion
that the recognised prevalence of infantile catarrhal
condition, leading on to the postmasal growths so
very, very commonly seen in children, is in a large
measure due to what happens the first thing in the
morning in a general way. The mornings are, more
often than not, very chilly, though often bright and
attractive. The children are nearly always up and


about before the parents, though I have heard some
parents deny this ; and then, though they are never
left to the care of the servants —I know this,
because so many parents have told me so—original
sin comes in, and though they have been told
repeatedly about how to dress themselves, they con-
form to the rules, if continually lectured, by putting
on every stitch of clothing “except” their shoes
and stockings. In the case of little girls, they will
sometimes put on their stockings; they then pro-
ceed to run about the rooms and passages, and
very likely into the open back or front. One of the
oddest things to me is that on this and some
other like points, in the case of children, there is
a school which believes and preaches that all this
fuss is just the reverse of good, that children
should be brought up hardy and accustomed to
exposure, and instance the hardihood of those
thus treated. These folk can have no idea of the
enormous mortality in infant life among those who,
from poverty or other causes, do not take care of
these things. One may concede, if you like, that
it gives more immediate operation to the law of
the survival of the fittest; but that is not exactly
what most parents want—at least, one would hope
not. Since man, for various conveniences, chiefly
safety, assumed a tribal organisation, until a period
that may be called yesterday, he was accustomed
to live out his life for generation after generation
on a very limited portion of the earth. A par-
ticular tribe may have become restless, or for other
reasons, connected for the most part with food,
may have moved from time to time, or individual
members, fired with the desire for adventure,
plunder, or what you will, have undoubtedly spread
themselves over the greater part of the globe.


Even to-day it is easy to find families in all the
old countries, as well as in some of the new, who
have been content, like their father and grand-
father, to go no further afield than, perhaps, to a
few adjoining villages, or who are content at most
with an occasional visit to the metropolis.
In the generation immediately preceding this it
was no established custom to make the annual
change of air, far less to seek health by travel and
residence away from home. It was during the
present century that the late Lord Brougham,
following the advice of his physicians, set the
example of avoiding the trying English winter by
spending those months at Cannes, in the south of
France. The advantage of this move became so
obvious that in a few years, and ever since, the
whole of the Riviera, and much of the Italian coast,
has become the recognised winter resort for the rest
of Europe.
Following that, again, health has been sought for
invalids in all the most favoured parts of the earth,
and the number of those who travel commercially
on the ocean is probably nearly approached by
those who travel in search of strength and life. But
to the many these prolonged absentations from their
business or avocations are impossible, and it has
therefore become an established custom that a
change shall be made to the seaside or the country
for a few weeks in each year. It is probable that
the chief advantage of this holiday will arise more
from change of scene and surroundings than from
any actual difference in the air, and such is the
Mark Tapley ’’-like disposition happily possessed
by some, that the very discomforts are regarded as
having some hygienic value. I have often heard
those who are bad sailors rejoice in a short sea


passage, on the principle that they always find it
do them so much good —after. Nevertheless, the
majority will be inclined to think the other way,
and seek change associated with as much pleasure
and comfort as can be compressed into the limited
time, and thus undoubtedly often do to some extent
spoil its advantages. Men commonly smoke far too
much on a holiday, and children often eat too
much; not that I think, after all, that it hurts
them in any way seriously, and I do not think any
holiday is a holiday to the young without some little
excess in the commissariat department.
But, after all, it has become a fair matter for
consideration how the best may be got out of the
annual holiday. The paterfamilias being, as a rule,
more particularly occupied in the busy hum of life,
has frequently a prejudice in favour of a secluded
spot whereto he retire himself, but, unless he
goes by himself, this often means little change to
his wife, who will very likely be still expected to
cumber herself with the cares of housekeeping, or,
in any case, will not find that change most con-
genial to her, and which she might have found in
the hotel of a fashionable resort. At the seaside
the children may tumble over cliffs or drown them-
selves in the water; in the country they may get
lost in the bush or be bitten by snakes. Mid-
summer’s heat will be less oppresive when sur-
rounded by home comforts; nor is it, except for
school purposes, the most suitable time of year in
which to get the fullest enjoyment from a change.
The whole position seems to be fraught with
difficulties which will necessarily have to be settled
by every one for themselves ; but the wholesale
exodus, at a particular time, to a few overcrowded
resorts is, I think, a mistake, and does not seem to


me to be an obvious necessity. Children might be
sent to the sea, or elsewhere, in parties, suitably
controlled, or to friends, and the grown ups take
their holiday in February or March, or go further
afield once every two or three years. So long as
children are kept constantly in the open air during
their holidays, I do not think it matters much
where they go. With adults this is different; the
temptations to live out of doors are most essential,
but their change of surroundings and freedom from
annoyances are, if possible, still more important,
and thus it happens that the annual holiday does
not always result in the advantages expected from
it, so far as the heads of families are concerned.
I have often wondered why those who live in the
country and those who live in the town do not
more frequently exchange houses for short periods;
perhaps if an agency existed for such a purpose
something might be done in this direction.
A story is told of a certain Australian family
returning home after a trip round the world. As it
was ekpected to sight land the following morning,
the younger members, fired by a commendable love
of country, rose early, and were rewarded as soon
as they reached the deck by seeing, not so very far
off, a long stretch of Australian shore. Long and
lovingly they gazed on the scene, and presently the
glorious orb of day rose over the land. “ Hurrah,”
shouted the youngest, “ there’s our sun, too.”
And a very special interest Australia has in her
sun. The coast-line of Victoria—as, indeed, an
immense proportion of the Australian coast gene-
rally—is heavily wooded, and, for natural reasons,
has also a humid atmosphere. These conditions in
a semi-tropical country would almost certainly have
given rise to malarial ague and other miasmas but


for the extraordinary provision which has so
arranged that the leaves of the trees composing
these forests are set in such a manner that the
sunlight falls strongly on the ground and destroys,
by rapid decomposition, such material as would
otherwise have provided nidus for germ life. The
value of sunlight in dwelling-rooms has been insisted
on by nearly all modern authorities on matters of
health, perhaps more by Sir W. B. Richardson
than by anyone. In Mr. Candler’s book, “ The
Prevention of Consumption,” there is an especially
valuable chapter on Light, from which I cull the
following :—“ It is seen to be no longer empirical
to flood the bedroom with solar radiation, for there
is a definite object in using this two-edged weapon;
it is wielded against the existing bacillus vegetation
and against its soil as well; and, by destroying
both, the continuance of a bacillary malaria in the
room is impossible.” Yet houses continue to be
constructed with no proper facilities for the entrance
of sunlight. There are doors and windows enough
to satisfy the most fastidious; in fact, many houses
are so constructed as to be unsatisfactorily draughty
in winter, as if, indeed, there were nothing but
summer to arrange for. Yet too often are they
entirely surrounded by a deep, shady verandah—
pleasant enough to lounge under in hot weather,
but entirely cutting off from the rooms all direct
sunrays. There should be no verandah, except on
the westerly aspect, where, as the sun sinks, he
may peep under the eaves; or, if it is desired to
shade in other sides of the house, a little ingenuity
will easily provide a shelter of a movable nature,
which may be rolled up, as are verandah blinds. It
would be quite simple to do this with Willesden
cloth.


FOOD.
Probably the very first irresistible impulse which
marks the advent of vitality is the desire for food.
In the earlier period of man’s history this instinct
was more directly noticeable than it is in the present
complex condition of society, yet the movements of
the first nomads or wandering tribes were not more
entirely due to this primal necessity than was the
emigration which has peopled this southern land
during this current century. It is no longer necessary
or, indeed, convenient that every man should sow and
reap, tend flocks, or hunt for game, but it is
none the less true that he must have food, and
must, unless he has inherited the accumulations of
labour, work in some way or other to procure it.
The difficulties of this labour vary enormousl} r in
different parts of the earth; but although one has
heard of happy isles where the climate and
vegetable products are so exceedingly convenient
that man will not work because he needs no
clothing, and has but to stretch out his hands to
obtain nourishing fruits; yet, notwithstanding the
many requirements of this modern age of luxury,
it may be doubted whether there is any country
in the world where all classes of food are so
abundantly and easily procurable as in Victoria.
It would almost seem as if the very prodigality
of nature had caused man to mar this good gift,
as he does so many others, for in few countries
is he so careless in his preparation and consumption
of them Well might he apply to himself the
words in Proverbs xxx., viii,:—
Remove from me vanity and lies ; give me neither poverty nor
riches; feed me with food convenient for me.


It is just this “convenient food” with which I wish
to concern myself.
I do not propose to go into dietetics and the
splitting up of foods into decimals of water, pro-
teids, fats, carbo-hydrates, and salts. I do not
propose to diet my readers as I should my patients.
That is the province of those who have studied the
individual who needs such care. A diet suitable for
a gouty man would mean starvation and death to
the tuberculous subject. I am dealing only in
generalities as relating to the ordinarily healthy
person.
It seems to me fairly certain that at some time in
the future, possibl}' before so very, very many
generations are past, posterity will look back upon
us, so far as our meat-eating propensities are con-
cerned, as being little removed from cannibals.
When the history of the world is written up to
that date, it will record that cannibalism existed
up till the 20th and possibly the 21st century, and
while I dwell upon this subject I always recall an
incident with the whole details of which I am
familiar, and which shows how extremely thin the
veneer of civilisation is—in fact, in some natures
capable of being stripped off in a few hours, and
leaving exposed the savage animal.
Back in the Bo’s a certain Australian gentleman
purchased in England a small yacht, the Mignonette,
33 tons. I knew her well, and her skipper, who,
with a small crew, including a boy, left South-
ampton one lovely morning bound for the Antipodes.
She got well out of the English Channel, and had
made a good southing, when her slight scantlings
began to strain under a rather churny sea, and
eventually her top-sides gave way suddenly, and,
with no time to obtain provisions, the crew had to


take to the boat—a little dingey. Well, one does
not want to dwell on the horrors of the situation
of the castaways in the Southern Atlantic, who for
nearly a fortnight drifted about before being picked
up. Who really did the deed is not materially
important; anyhow, the boy was killed and partly
eaten, the skipper at least being an accessory after
the event. I have no doubt most of my readers
will remember the story. Well, that skipper was
as quiet and well-conducted a man as it is possible
to imagine. Those who knew him, boy and man,
for upwards of thirty years in his little Essex
village, all spoke as to his exceptionally gentle and
kindly disposition. It is rather gruesome, perhaps,
to tell this story while discussing matters of diet,
and of course there is, except so far as the animal
nature of man is concerned, no connection whatever.
Nevertheless, I confess I never meet a mob of
cattle or sheep being driven to market without
feeling a bit ashamed of myself. Obviously, how-
ever, the millennium has not yet come, and the lion
does not lay down with the lamb, or, at least, it
has been said, if he does the lamb is inside. More-
over, we in Victoria represent one of the largest
butchering interests in the world; therefore I would
confine myself to the suggestion that we eat less
flesh meat, that which we do eat being more care-
fully selected and more daintily prepared. Depend
upon it, the better preparation of flesh food
will bring about a lessened consumption. In
countries where cooking has attained to a high
art, a much smaller proportion of flesh is eaten than
in countries where meat is set on in large joints.
In the first place, then, it may be well for me
to explain what I have in my mind while I am
writing these words, which I intend as warnings.


People too readily mix up in their minds animal
food with flesh food; many even who call themselves
vegetarians, as has been pointed out by Sir Henry
Thompson, take considerable animal food in the
shape of milk, butter, cheese, and even eggs; but
it is with the large consumption of flesh food that
I find fault.
There does not seem to be any evidence that
flesh food is necessary to the perfect development
of man. Many nations live without it, and among
them some whose prowess and physical development
are second to none. The Eskimo and Lapp live
almost entirely on animal and flesh food, yet he is
in no way comparable as a man with the magnificent
Sikh, who touches no flesh.
It is a curious fact that the Japanese wrestlers
train entirely on rice, and are said to possess
extraordinary muscular power. But whatever views
may be held, it is universally admitted that there
is less need of flesh meat in tropical or semi-
tropical countries than in temperate or cold climates.
Nobody doubts it at all—most people know it; at
least, I do not remember anyone who seriously
opposed the views I am advocating. But, all the
same, what do you find ?
The average consumption of meat in the United
Kingdom was, for the years 1891-93 nglb. per
head, while for the same period in Victoria it was
2761 b. per head. Of course, I am well aware of the
greater average poverty of the people of the United
Kingdom and of the larger adult proportion of the
Victorian population; but after making all allowances,
it will not put things anything like on an equality,
whereas it should be, for climatic reasons, much
less. It must be remembered that I have taken,
for purposes of comparison, the country that, so far


as the Old World is concerned, out and away
heads the list in the consumption of meat.
Apart from the danger, whatever that may
amount to, it is not a pleasant idea that of eating
diseased animals; yet there can be no doubt at all
that we do not, with the exception of the Jewish
portion of the community, take any precautions
likely to be in the least useful. How is that ?
It would be really a good thing if the whole of
the old Mosaic law as relating to hygiene were
studied and followed. There is far more in it than
most people imagine who have not carefully looked
into the matter, and the most recent science,
after all, has but come back to it. By the way,
quite lately the treatment of disease by music
has been suggested and carried into effect, but in
i. Sam. xvi., 23, this will be found as a recognised
principle.
However, you are going to have your meat.
Very well; but why must one have it in the form
of a brutal joint, which will possibly have to serve
under varying conditions for many meals, or more
likely be wasted ?
There will be two objections—the first, that the
lord and master prefers a joint, and hates what he
calls kickshaws. Yet the same gentleman will be
found eagerly embracing any opportunity of sampling
the products of a newly opened Cafe Anglais, and
if he found the same dishes at home he might growl,
because that is his nature, but it would probably be
with his mouth full; and he would boast outside of
his French dishes to his club friends. As a matter
of fact there will be no trouble in that direction.
I am not proposing so much an elaborate cuisine or
viands of the Pate de fois gras type, but merely, if it
be preferred, the simplest dishes perfectly prepared.


Some time ago there was a humorous article in the
Argus. I regret that I have lost the run of the
date, but I remember a particular passage apposite
to this subject. A young married woman was
exchanging confidences with a married friend, and,
telling how happy she was, said—“ I wonder what
I had better do to retain my husband’s love ?”
Upon which her friend replied—“ Feed the brute.”
And the advice was, no doubt, excellent.
I have come to regard the expression plain food,
which people are so fond of using, as a fad, or more
usually a cover for incapacity or carelessness.
The second objection is by far the most formidable
Trouble and Time. Well, there is no denying
that. The French have an excellent proverb—
“ You cannot make omelettes without breaking
eggs ” —and you are not going to prepare a Bouillon
Pvintemps an Bceuf a la mode, and an omelette or
vol-au-vent, in the same laissez faire manner as you can
stuff offhand into a gas stove a tin dish with a joint
in it surrounded by potatoes, and an apple pie on
the tray below, an hour or two before they are
wanted, with an occasional look to see if anything
is burning. No, there is nothing for it but to
appeal to the ladies. I feel very diffident in
approaching this subject, and at having to ask more
from those who already do so much for us; yet
there is no way out of it. I fancy even now I can
hear some of them say—“ I know what the wretch
wants; more work, more slavery for the already
overburdened wife.” In fact, I had better com-
mence by a confession of faith.
I believe immensely in the new woman. In fact,
I believe in her as much as I do in the old, for
whom I have the most profound admiration and
devotion ; and in all the flood of literature that has


startled the world of late on this subject, I feel I
owe an unusual debt of gratitude to one of the new
women who wrote this:—“ No woman who is a
woman wants to be anything but a woman. When
one considers the vast number of women who, for
various reasons, do not marry, and who praise-
worthily desire to lead useful and independent lives,
it seems to be a most despicable thing for anyone
to place obstacles in the path of such reasonable
aspirations. But under no circumstances can they
emancipate themselves from the necessity of doing
their duty in that state of life which they have
deliberately selected for themselves. Therefore, if
they consent to marry, they immediately undertake
the responsibilities which custom and convenience
have decided shall be the wife’s share ; and neglect
of duty is as wrong in the wife as in the husband.
This duty will include the preparation of food for
the household, whether it be by her own hands or
merely by superintending others paid to relieve her
of this work. But how in the world can she do
the one or the other, or in what manner is she
likely to do it, unless she be instructed ? The
chances are that she will have spent some hours a
day, over a period of years, in acquiring the art of
playing the piano, which, unless she has musical
talent, will be either entirely given up and lost
when she becomes engaged with the business of
life, or remain in the form of a horrible infliction
on her unfortunate surroundings. If this be so of
the lady, what about the domestic ? She, poor girl,
usually starts very early in life as a nurse-girl, and
has probably at that time a very high opinion of
the mysteries of the kitchen. As time goes on she
is being disillusionised, and presently arguing that
her position as nurse or housemaid is not equal in


advantage to that of cook, she decides to ‘go
cookand there you have the whole position.”
Why should not culinary art be taught in various
suitable forms, and regarded as the absolutely
necessary part of the curriculum in every girl’s
education from the State school to high-cass private
establishments. Women do things and throw them-
selves into ideas so thoroughly that I am convinced
that, if only this plan caught on, a revolution would
occur in no time, to the immense advantage of the
whole community, in health and 'happiness. If,
then, less meat were consumed, and that which is
used more tastily prepared, how much more
tempting it would be to delicate people, how much
pleasanter for the robust! Once I never could
make out why one only had nice things for “ com-
pany.” I can now!
The food question up country is often very
difficult; vegetables are gradually being more used,
but in many districts still quite insufficiently ; only
the eternal meat is plentiful. Not nearly enough
attention is paid to poultry, and especially eggs,
which form such wonderful food, and are capable
of such a variety of treatment. I am not going to
give a few pages of recipes, though it might be
easily done by scissors and paste. Plenty of
delightful cookery books are published; probably
every household at the start possesses one, but it
is soon put away with the almanac and Family
Bible, to be consulted only on particular occasions.
At the same time, if anyone really does want a
treasure in that way, let me recommend a recently
published work, “ National Viands a la Mode,”*
wherein will be found many charming preparations.
* By a M. de Salis. Longman, Green and Co., London.


Again, in this country one should have a profusion
of olives and olive oil, instead of which—well, you
don’t. Though they form a most valuable adjunct,
both in themselves and in cookery, it is really
difficult to find olive oil here that is not what the
French call “ranee.”
There is a want of flavour, too, in the dishes, or
too much. Voltaire said that the English had a
hundred religions, and only one sauce. He did not
name it, but had he lived here he would have said
Worcester sauce. Neither is this want of finish
confined to small houses. At a certain establishment
in Melbourne, where the chef would not feel flattered
at any exception being taken, I once sat at table
with several others, among whom were a couple
of travelling Englishmen. The conversation turned
on the food, and especially on a dish of new
potatoes, and lovely looking tubers they were. All
agreed that they looked magnificent, but lacked the
flavour of potatoes in the old country, until I
suggested that in England new potatoes were new
potatoes, and rarely cost less than twopence a pound,
and had they been cooked there they would have
been boiled with a handful of fresh mint, and
before being served would have been shaken round
a porringer with a piece of fresh butter. Therein
lay the whole difference. Now, though fish is not
a strong point in the Australian menu, still there
are many excellent fish to be found, and there is
also plenty of good and marvellously cheap white
wine. Yet I have never seen a flounder stewed in
white wine served—a dish that would be inexpen-
sive and very desirable. And one might go on
suggesting little dishes ad infinitum , and then some
good souls would say—What he wants to do is to
make us a nation of gourmets, devoting ourselves


to good living. Well, gourmets if you like, so far
as that term implies being judges of and capable
of appreciating refined meals. There can be no
harm in that; on the contrary, all the more likely
to avoid the big rock of the “ gourmand.” That is
the evil from which most people in degree suffer:
Eating coarsely, and too much. This is what Sir
Henry Thompson says in an article on diet:—
“ I have for some years past been compelled, by
facts which are constantly coming before me, to
accept the conclusion that more mischief in the
form of actual disease, of impaired vigour, and of
shortness of life accrues to civilised man, so far as
I have observed in our own country and throughout
Western and Central Europe, from erroneous habits
in eating than from the habitual use of alcoholic
drink, considerable as I know that to be.”
The fact of the matter is that people are exceed-
ingly thoughtless in the matter of eating. The man
who is occupied all day in the city, with little or no
muscular exertion, expects to be able to eat as much
as a boundary rider who has been in the saddle
during the same time. The thing is unreasonable,
but, unfortunately, after a few efforts of warning from
his digestive organs, in the shape of bilious attacks,
etc., nature gives way and proceeds to pack away
the superfluous alimentation in the form of fat, and
the ingenuity with which she can do this is
surprising; but it is done at the cost of the
degeneration of other tissues, and the fatty deposits
will often be found to invade every organ in the
body.
The man of advancing years expects to vie with
hearty youth, and, if he fails, fancies matters are not
right, and resorts to stimulation of various kinds.
As he gets older still, and his digestive organs


become more and more feeble, his dearest friends
ply him with concentrated forms of food, which
hastens the final revolt of an overloaded system.
One should earn one’s food by physical exertion
if possible, and the amount of food taken should be
largely regulated by the amount of muscular effort
undergone; in fact, it really would not be a bad
thing for some of us if a kind friend acted occa-
sionally as I once saw an English skipper do. It
was in the little village of Fecamp, in Normandy. I
was in a yacht alongside the quay next to a small
English trading schooner, and about breakfast time
one morning we heard high words and scuffling,
and I jumped up on deck just in time to see the
skipper give a parting kick to a French wharf
labourer, and then shout after him, “ You no travallee,
you no mungee.”
A certain amount of food must, of course, be
taken under any circumstances, but, unless there is
great activity of body, the amount needed is far
smaller than most people would imagine. The result
is that, as I have said, the majority of people
overeat, hence the pressing necessity of elimination
by increased exercise.
Age also, as well as surroundings, plays a part,
and has to be taken into consideration. During the
first year of life growth is so intense!}' rapid and
important that animal food in its most concentrated
form is imperative. When teeth have arrived the diet
may gradually become more varied. Then comes a
period of active, vigorous life, which may, under
favourable circumstances, last until forty, and then
—have a care. It is all very well for Shakespear
to talk about the stage, of the justice “with fair
round belly, with good capon lined,” being succeeded
by that of the “ lean and slippered pantaloon,” but


only too often he gets no further. The “ lean and
slippered ” old people who arrive hale and well
into the eighties will be found, on enquiry, to have
been, and to be, small eaters. This was known
hundreds of years ago, and I take the liberty to
quote, in extenso, from Sir Henry Thompson on this
point, in the following interesting passage: —
“ The writings of Luigi Cornaro, who was born
“of noble family in Venice soon after the middle of
“ the fifteenth century, and was contemporary for 70
“years with Titian, wrote his first essay on the sub-
“ject of regimen and diet for the aged when 83
“ years of age, producing three others during the sub-
“ sequent twelve years. His object was to show that,
“ with increasing age and diminishing powers, a cor-
“ responding decrease in the quantity of food must
“be taken in order to preserve health. He died in
“ Padua ‘ without any agony, sitting in an elbow
“ chair, being above an hundred years old.’ Thus he
“writes: There are old lovers of feeding who say
“ that it is necessary they should eat and drink a
“great deal to keep up their natural heat, which is
“ constantly diminishing as they advance in years;
“ and that it is, therefore, their duty to eat heartily,
“ and of such things as please their palate, be they
“ hot, cold, or temperate; and that were they to
“lead a sober life, it would be a short one. To
“ this I answer that our kind mother nature, in order
“ that old men may live still to a greater age, has
“ contrived matters so that they should be able to
“subsist on little, as I do, for large quantities of
“food cannot be digested by old and feeble stomachs.
“ "R \7 almavQ patina littlp thp Qtnmarh nnt
By always eating little, the stomach not
“ being much burdened, need not wait long to have
“an appetite. It is for this reason that dry bread
“ relishes so well with me; and I know from experi-


“ ence, and can with truth affirm, I find such sweet-
“ ness in it that I should be afraid of sinning against
“ temperance were it not for my being convinced
“of the absolute necessity of eating of it, and that
“we cannot make use of a more natural food. And
“ thou, kind parent nature, who actest so lovingly
“ by thy aged offspring, in order to prolong his days,
“ hast contrived matters so in his favour that he can
“ live upon very little ; and, in order to add to the
“ favour, and to do him still greater service, hast made
“ him sensible that, as in his youth he used to eat
“twice a day, when he arrives at old age he ought
“ to divide that food, of which he was accustomed
“ before to make but two meals, into four, because,
“thus divided, it will be more easily digested; and,
“ as in his youth he made but two collations in the
“ day, he should in his old age make four, provided,
“ however, he lessens the quantity as his years
“increase. And this is what I do, agreeably to my
“ own experience, and, therefore, my spirits, not
“ oppressed by much food, but barely kept up, are
“ always brisk, especially after eating, so that I am
“ obliged then to sing a song, and afterwards to
“write. Nor do I ever find myself the worse for
“ writing immediately after meals, nor is my under-
“ standing ever clearer, nor am I apt to be drowsy,
“the food I take being in too small a quantity
“to send up any fumes to the brain. Oh, how
“ advantageous it is to an old man to eat but
“ little! Accordingly, I, who know it, eat but
“just enough to keep body and soul together.”
All subsequent experience has shown the wisdom
of this, and but few people will object in the abstract
to the little couplet:—
For one that dies for want of bread
A thousand perish overfed.


Yet it is often most difficult for the medical man
to carry this principle to its logical conclusion.
Not so very long ago I had, after instilling all
these precepts into a sixteen stone man, and obtaining
a reduction of two stone in weight, the satisfaction
of hearing that I was ruining his constitution, and
it had been necessary for him to take a tonic and
increased nourishment. Not only does the patient
himself become anxious as he loses superfluous flesh,
but his friends buzz round him and tell him he is
not looking up to the mark, and object to his
shadow ever growing less ! ! !
There is one point I would like to make before
leaving this subject. For some reason or other,
probably climatic, it seems to me that fermentation,
even internally, takes place here with far greater
rapidity than I had noticed at home, and there can
be no doubt that a vast number of trifling incon-
veniences, such as heartburn and so-called indigestion,
often seen in people otherwise quite strong and
healthy, are attributable to this cause, so that I do
think, as far as possible, though there are, of course,
other offenders, one should be very careful about
butter and bread. Butter, if absolutely pure and
fresh, is unobjectionable, but should the slightest
decomposition take place, giving it a taste towards
rancidity, it becomes most injurious, owing to the
formation of butyric acid. This should be especi-
ally guarded against in using butter for the pur-
poses of cookery, and, indeed, it can always be
changed with advantage in the making of pastry,
using dripping instead. Pastry so made will be
harmless to the most delicate digestion.
Bread, I fancy, will be more and more used of
the variety known as “ aerated.” This, like scones,
etc., made with self-raising flours, owes its lightness


and quality to carbonic acid gas set free from soda,
and must, in my opinion, be far more desirable than
yeast bread, which, except in regard to the crust
or toast, is always liable to re-ferment, and,
undoubtedly, does do so. I have frequently seen
patients who experienced a weight on the chest
after eating ordinary bread, this being entirely due
to gas set free by the process of fermentation.
Finally, why does not some enterprising spirit take
up the proper distribution of fruit ? Every year one
hears of apples and fruits of all kinds wasting on
the trees, not paying even for the picking, and, at the
same time, hundreds of families would be delighted
to take a reasonable quantity weekly. It is true that
occasionally one sees something about a case or
half-case of fruit that may be obtained, but it means
writing, the possibility of waste or pilfering, and,
in fact, the whole thing is so much more suggestive
of trouble than attraction that it falls through*
What is wanted is a proper distribution in carts
with trays, so that people can see and be tempted
to buy what they want. Fruit ought to be in
large consumption here, and, if it were, the butcher’s
bill would be smaller both in Collins-street East as
well as locally.


Although drink may be regarded in some measure
as a food, its other functions are so far more
important that it may always be considered as a
thing apart.
The constitution of our bodies is so immensely
dependent upon fluids, in the proportion of 4 to 3of
solid material, that it becomes necessary to repair the
loss of this very unstable component at an average
rate of six pints per day of 24 hours; but as a
great portion, of this supply is obtained from other
foods, it does not by any means become a necessity
to consume that quantity in the form of drink.
That is, theoretically. But it is well to consider
what this considerable change of fluids in the body
signifies, and how it affects various conditions.
Water, then—for, after all, nearly everything we
drink is water, though it may be more or less
adulterated—may be regarded as the medium by
which the canal system of our physical frame is
enabled to convey other nutrient materials throughout
its various ramifications, and, as a return freight, to
carry away waste products, which otherwise would
cumber and poison the tissues. This, of course, is
a very elementary way of putting it, but it will be
sufficient for the explanation of what I have to say
later. Anyhow, it is at once obvious that for such
purpose nothing can be more suitable than water.
Water is the one great solvent with which we are
most familiar. As it leaves the clouds in its purest
form it becomes impregnated with an increasing
amount of impurity as it falls through the air,
literally washing the atmosphere, to the great advan-


tage of both the atmosphere and the earth upon
which it falls in the shape of rain. Then, as it
pursues its course down mountain sides to brooks
and rivers, or percolates through permeable soils
into the bowels of the earth, it gathers up here
and there earth salts and what not, so that, except
at the moment of distillation, it is never chemically
pure, and will vary in its composition according
to the conditions I have mentioned; but, happily,
for the most part these impurities are not only
harmless, but probably beneficial, and certainly agree-
able, for it will be found that distilled water has a
mawkish, unpleasant taste. So long as the impurities
are inorganic, not organic, no great harm will
result, which reminds me of a temperance lecturer
who once missed his mark in this way. He flashed
on the screen, by means of his lantern, a highly-
magnified film of water, and, to the amazement of
the audience, they saw horrid-looking creatures of a
nondescript order, apparently something between
tigers and crayfish, fighting and devouring each
other. “Now,” said the lecturer, “to show you
the baleful effect of spirit, I will put but one drop
of brandy into the slide,” which he did; and,
behold! the beasts were still and dead ! Then was
heard an old woman at the back, who took up her
parable, and said—“ Mercy on us! Never again
will I touch a drop of water without a dash of
something in it.”
The solvent action of water has in recent times
been made much use of in the treatment of those
diseases which appear to be chiefly or entirely due
to overloaded systems. It has become an estab-
lished custom now, after a long series of gaieties
during the London season, to repair to some of the
German or French spas to undergo what is known


as the “ cure,” which, after all, consists of a very
reduced diet, regular habits, and a thorough wash
out. But I do not think I can do better than
quote Lauder Brunton on this subject. In his
Cavendish lecture on “ Elimination,” he says:—
“. . . In visiting all these watering-places one
“ is struck by the diversity of the constituents of all
“ those world-famed springs and the constancy of
“one ingredient—namely, water. In watching the
“ patients one sees that people who at home never
“ touch a drop of water, pure and simple, from
“ year’s end to year’s end, taking it only in the
“ form of wine, beer, tea, or coffee, will, at the
“ spring, drink tumbler after tumbler of water, con-
“ taining common salt with minute traces of other
“ things—as at Wiesbaden or Baden-Baden—or the
“ same constituent with rather more lime-salts at
“ Homburg, sulphate of soda and carbonate of soda
“ at Carlsbad or Marienbad, or sulphuretted hydro-
“ gen—as at Aix-les-bains, Harrogate, or Strath-
“ peffer. I do not mean to say that the saline or
“ gaseous ingredient of these springs are without
“ effect upon the organism—far from it; but, at the
“ same time, I feel quite convinced that very many
“ people would never require to go to watering-
“ places if they would drink more water at home.
“Water is the most universal solvent in the
“ world. It is not only useful to wash out our
“ closets and flush our drains ; it has a similar effect
“in our bodies, and tends to wash away the waste
“ products from the cells of which our organs are
“ composed, to clear out the uric acid, urea, and
“ phosphates through our kidneys, and thus prevent
“ renal or vesical calculi, and also to wash out our
“liver, and prevent gall stones, while it helps to
“keep the bowels in action. The liver especially


“is an organ which suffers much from want of
“ water, and I never see a gall stone without asking
“ the patient, ‘ How much water do you drink ? ’
“ Almost invariably the answer is, * I hardly ever
“ touch water; I am not a thirsty personand on
“ one occasion a lady called for a particular tea-
“ cup, which held little more than a thimbleful, in
“ order to show me how much she drank. On
“ reckoning how much water she took in the twenty-
“ four hours, it came, as nearly as I could calculate
“to sixteen fluid ounces. What wonder, then, that
“ she had a gall stone. The poor liver had not a
“ chance to make decentl}' fluid bile, and, naturally,
“ there was a deposit. By making such people
“ drink a big tumbler of water, and especially hot
“ water, every morning, with or without some
“ Carlsbad salts added to it, and, if necessary,
“ repeating the hot water once or twice more in
“ the day, the renewed formation of gall stones
“ may frequently be averted, and symptoms of
“ biliary colic, to say nothing of so-called bilious-
“ ness, may be prevented for many years, or
“ perhaps entirely. . . . The process of washing
“ out is not only useful in biliary calculus, it is
“of the utmost value in preventing renal gravel
“ and calculi.” As, however, in considering the
matter of drink, I am more concerned with that
form which is usually consumed for pleasure,
whatever its other effect may be, I shall pass on to
tea. This hot infusion has met with an increasing
favour, till, from being a rare and expensive luxury,
it has become an enormous commercial interest,
and is looked upon as a prime necessity even by
the majority of those who control the Custom
Houses, and is admitted nearly free. That it may
be used in excess, and that certain conditions may


contra-indicate its use, I will, of course, at once
concede ; but when one remembers the place it fills
in supplying, not only a large quantity of much
needed fluid, but that the making of it necessitates
the boiling of the water, which will free it from
living organisms, and that this latter is especially
important in a country where hydatids and vegetable
spores are, unfortunately, onl}’ too commonly met
with, I cannot think that the denouncement it
receives, very largely from members of my own
profession, is wise, or, indeed, correct. So far as
my own personal experience goes, I have never yet
found it necessary, in my opinion, to recommend its
disuse. It is the one universal teetotal drink that
has held its ground. Zoedone, hop beers, and many
other drinks have all been tried, and have failed to
secure any large measure of success. I have
nothing whatever to say against this most excellent
infusion. The water, the heat, and the gentle
stimulation all combine to make it the one innocent
social drink that it is. I do not know why it is,
nor have I ever been able to find the smallest
explanation for it, and there is, so far as I know,
no analogy in animal life, yet the fact remains
that whenever people congregate in small or large
numbers it becomes a necessity to take fluids.
Anyhow, it is so. Mr. Samuel Small records that
in Chicago he saw a marching body of working
men, 18,000 strong, carrying a banner inscribed,
“ Our children cry for bread,” and they marched
straight to a picnic ground and drank 1400 kegs of
beer. That the drink question is one of supreme
importance must be known to all who watch what
is going on in the world around them. Taking, as
example, Victoria, which more immediately interests
us, we find that, after deducting nearly all the


children, an immense proportion of women, and
some smaller number of men who drink nothing but
water, tea, coffee, and such, there remains the fact
that the enormous sum of is spent on
intoxicating liquors—a sum nearly equal to the
value of the whole of the meat and breadstuffs
consumed by the entire population, which amounts
to These figures apply to the year
1892. Lest any remarks I may make upon this be
regarded as egotistical, I will just give an extract
bearing upon the subject from Sir Henry Thomp-
son’s article on Diet in the “ Nineteenth Century,”
May, 1885: —
“ Enough, and more than enough, has been uttered
“ concerning the prejudicial effects on the body of
“habitually using alcoholic beverages. It is rare
“ now to find anyone well acquainted with human
“ physiology, and capable of observing and appreciat-
“ ing the ordinary wants and usages of life around
“ him, who does not believe that, with few excep-
“ tions, men and women are healthier and stronger,
“ physically, intellectually, and morally, without such
“ drinks than with them.”
Nevertheless, though they may, and I believe will,
be healthier and stronger, they will not be merrier;
and as people will always allow themselves a certain
amount of luxury, and some may be like a certain
gentleman who would not drink water because
the doctor told him he had an iron constitution,
and was, consequently, afraid of rusting. As a
medical man, and a man of the world, one desires
to limit the quantity, and assist in the choice of
the least harmful beverage. There remain, practi-
cally, three —spirits, beer, and wine. Now, I unhesi-
tatingly attack the first of these. There cannot, to
my mind, be the shadow of excuse for healthy


men and women in this glorious climate to con-
sume, other than medicinally, what are known as
strong waters. How it came about, or who exactly
is to blame for it, I do not know, though I could
make some shrewd guesses, but if there is one
drink which is more than another typical of Aus-
tralia it is whisky. Mind, though I pick out whisky
for especial attack, my remarks apply to all spirits.
I have found it necessary to point this out, for
not so very long since I had a patient who, if
you had pricked him, would have run whisky any-
where, and who, after a long lecture from me upon
the subject, returned some days later very proud of
himself. “Not a drop of whisky, doctor.” “That’s
good,” said I. “No,” said he, “not a drop; I
have drunk nothing since I saw you last but dry
gin.” Parks sums up his remarks on spirits in these
words :
“ Spirits are, for the most part, merely flavoured
“ alcohol, and do not contain the ingredients which
“ give dietetic value to wine and beer. They are
“ also more dangerous, because it is so easy to take
“ them undiluted, and thus to increase the chance
“of damaging the structures, and nutrition of the
“ albuminous structures with which they come first
“in contact. There is every reason, therefore, to
“discourage the use of spirits, and to let beer and
“ wines, with moderate alcoholic power, take their
“ place.”
Whisky maj'- be said to have become a fashion,
as the result of the great destruction of the “Fin
Boiso,” in the Charente district of France, by the
phylloxera about twenty years ago. Up to that
time, as a drink, it was usually associated with the
Scotch or Irish nations. For some reason or other
Irish whisky never made the headway of the Scotch,


but neither of them were commonly seen on English
tables. I perfectly well remember when a certain
house—the Scotch Stores, Beak-street, London —
made a specialty of this drink, and hardly anywhere
else was it to be found, at any rate of the same
excellence. Brandy, such as one could obtain
readily twenty-five or thirty years ago, suddenly fell
off, and became so shamelessly adulterated with
potato spirit that, in a few years, it dropped to a
low place in the list of spirits consumed. On these
grounds, no doubt, apart from its own seductive
merit, and the introduction of their national drink
all over the world by the hardy Scotch pioneers,
the medical profession strongly recommended it as
a safer spirit than the raw Hamburg production,
slightly flavoured with real cognac, and sold every-
where as brandy. The demand, so far as the world
was concerned, for this new-fashioned beverage
assumed such sudden and enormous proportions that
the small stocks then in hand soon became ex-
hausted, and the matter was so ventilated in the
wine trade in London that they were actually
agitating ten years ago to get an Act of Parlia-
ment passed prohibiting the sale of spirits less than
one year old. Whether this Act was passed or not
subsequently I do not know.
I feel more free to make my strictures upon
whisky in Victoria than I might elsewhere, because
I happen to know, by direct information, that every-
body here consumes nothing but the very best; and
I have been astonished at the number of people
who have some quite special opportunity of obtaining
their supply of the “real Mackay,” which, it goes
without saying, cannot be open to all. But it
cannot fail to interest them to know what other
people suffer and have to put up with. Well?


then, they should know that there is in Dublin a
large firm which manufactures a colourless viscous
fluid known as prune wine, which has the peculiar
property of eating up, or, rather, covering, the
coarser oils, such as fusel, which exists in imper-
fectly distilled, and especially in new spirit. All
new spirit contains this, but, being a volatile oil, it
gradually takes itself off with age “ under suitable
conditions ” —that is, when in cask ; but as this
process goes on there becomes also a considerable
loss of bulk, which is known as ullage, and it is
this that makes, and must make, old spirit a very
expensive article. If new spirit containing these
highly dangerous products be put in bottle, they
do not lose them even if they be kept for a
hundred years. That is a point people will do
well to consider, for spirits, unlike wines, do not
mature in bottle. Now, when I tell you that this
prune wine I speak of serves no other purpose or
object than that of covering the deleterious
materials found in newly-distilled spirit, and that
the firm I allude to has an annual turn over
calculated at over perhaps you can put
two and two together. Anyhow, I have seen spirit
taken straight from the still and treated with
prune wine, flavoured, coloured, and reduced with
distilled water in a few minutes, so that the
palate of the best judge in Melbourne would find
it difficult to detect anything wrong, or would
doubt its being a fine old blend of isdeg. under
proof. This, of course, for others, but what for
ourselves ? Well, we have undoubtedly pure
matured whisky, but still hundreds, and I dare-
say one might add another cipher, of people, other-
wise perfect models in their mode of living, daily
consume a tumbler full of strong alcohol. I


remember once saying that as a personal remark
to a dear old minister. He nearly jumped out of
his chair at the time, but he afterwards acknow-
ledged that he had a whisky and water for lunch,
two for dinner, and one—sometimes two —as a
nightcap, which he came to see amounted pretty
much to what I said. If, then, Dr. Dickenson’s
assertion, that “ Alcohol is the very genius of
degeneration,” is true, and there is no doubt that
it is, what must be going on when one considers
the custom, only too prevalent in polite society,
and carried to an alarming extent in the trans-
action of business, of constant nipping? I have
remonstrated over and over again with patients
who have assured me they could not conduct
their business without it. I have suggested all
sorts of expedients, such as their taking wine or
drinks other than spirit, and I recollect a fine
strapping young fellow who seemed greatly taken
with my arguments. “ But,” said he, “ you see
it’s a bit peculiar in my business. I am a cattle
dealer, and if I were to drink soft stuff the men
I did business with would think I was trying to
get ahead of them. . . .” Is it not indeed
deplorable ? Is it not against all reason and
common sense ? Mind, in all this I am not in
any way referring to habits of inebriation ; that I
regard as a disease, and I have already said I
am writing about the ordinarily healthy person.
Beer I do not hold very strong views about, so
far as my personal observations have acquainted me.
There is, among the majority of people who will read
this, no great excess. It certainly seems to me that
our climate is not very suitable for the consumption
of malt liquors, and that an}' indiscretion will be
visited pretty quickly with a nemesis in the form of


acid fermentation, more generally resulting in rheu-
matism. The lighter ales, and especially the lager
beers, must, I think, be best, and, if accompanied
by a considerable amount of exercise in warm weather,
cannot, I fancy, be very harmful. But, on the whole,
I have a feeling of indifference about the matter,
which is born of a belief that it has not a very
marked importance. The real interest of the drink
question, to my mind, in this country, centres itself
in wine—always, of course, remembering what has
been said about water.
Australia should be distinctly a wine country, and
will, I doubt not, play a very important part in wine
producing; but a good deal will have to be done
first, and that, like charity, must begin at home.
It has been noticed by many, notably by M.
Paul Blouet (Max O’Rell), that while we are trying
to find a market in Europe for our wines, we do
not drink them ourselves. I have noticed a distinct
lessening of the prejudice against Australian wines
here during the past ten years, but even to-day one
finds much to overcome. People will readily admit
the excellence of some of the wines, but complain,
and justly so, of the difficulty of obtaining a regular
supply of any particular wine they may have fancied ;
indeed, under existing circumstances, it is, unfortu-
nately, only too true that numbers who would be
consumers have been kept from the use of them by
this great difficulty. Over and over again I have
been told of some wine recommended, or one dis-
covered accidentally, lost or found wanting by a
“ repeat ” order.
Now, having some acquaintance with the wine
trade, I am aware how extremely sensitive the public
is towards any change, however slight, in the matter
of the wine to which they have become accustomed,


often being adversely prejudiced by a slight change
in its very get up. Indeed, I knew of a case once
where a gentleman had been supplied annually with
a hogshead of claret, bottled expressly for him.
The wine was shipped by Calvet, who, next to
Nathaniel Johnston, is the largest shipper in
Bordeaux. The wine was a good, sound, ordinary
Medoc, and sold by number, as these wines
always are. It was bottled and delivered to him
(about 25 dozen), year after year, with a green seal,
but, on the occasion referred to, had, by some mis-
take of the cellarman’s, been sent out sealed brown.
A few days afterwards the gentleman wrote to say
that the wine was not the same as usual, that he
had tried several bottles lest he should have made
any mistake, but had found it distinctly inferior to
that which he had previously had, and begged that
it might be sent for, and, if the old wine could not
be supplied, he would not have any. The position
was a serious one for the firm, and, on considering
what was to be done, the cellar book disclosed the
alteration of seal, and it was surmised that that
might be the trouble. It was a desperate risk, but
it was decided to send for the wine, a letter being
written at the same time expressing regret at the
mistake, which would be at once rectified. The wine
was brought back, and, without being taken into the
cellars, the seals were removed and the bottles
redipped green and returned. In due course a letter
was received from the gentleman, saying that he
found the wine excellent, and was perfectly satisfied.
Now, when merchants have to do with clients like
this, how in the world can a large trade be done in
Australian wine when you can hardly get two casks
alike ? As a matter of fact few people have any
idea of the immense trouble and skill which is


expended by large Bordeaux houses to select, blend,
and classify the wines they send out, and which are
always uniform, or varying only in some slight
quality with the year’s vintage. As a matter of fact
very little Australian wine, as Australian wine, is
drunk at home. The beautiful white wines we
produce do not go into large consumption, inasmuch
as white wine is not greatly in demand except during
occasional hot summers. The red wines are very
chiefly bought owing to their being very rich in
colouring matter, and are used for bringing up light
French wines, etc. We must, if we desire to
establish a regular trade, commence by consuming
them ourselves, and so causing a proper classification.
Of course, all this is well understood, and will come
about, but it will help matters immensely if people
will take the trouble to select each supply, and give
expression to their opinions and wants. In this way
they can always find a sound wine suitable for their
purposes, and by their consumption will create a
demand and competition which will produce excel-
lence. The one mistake that people of our nation-
ality always make with regard to the drinking
of wine is that they do not add a little water each
time they take a glass. Those who have travelled
must have noticed that in all wine countries this is
the universal custom, nor is it accidental. If any-
one will make the experiment, and try a glass of
good colonial wine before and after the addition of
water, not necessarily in large proportions, say, a
tablespoonful in three parts of a tumbler, they will
notice the difference immediately; the tartrates, which
give roughness to the palate, are largely absorbed,
and the wine is smoother; there is a loss of what
the French call the gout de terve, so common in our
wines, and the bouquet is distinctly improved. This


addition of water makes all the difference in the
world to the gouty subject, and lessens in a marked
degree the tendency there otherwise is to the forma-
tion of acidity.
Thus, if the custom of drinking spirits was changed
in favour of wine, immense profit would result to
the consumer, directly and indirectly. Directly, by
improved health and prolonged life, less temptation
to excess, and little or no danger of acquiring
intemperate habits. Indirectly, by advancing the
interests of what should be one of the chief staple
industries of this country, which could not fail to
rapidly affect the welfare of the whole community.
As bearing upon my immediately preceding remarks,
it may not be uninteresting to some of my readers
if I give them an extract from the Lancet of 20th
July, 1895, under the heading of
A GROWING DEMAND FOR LIGHTER
WINES.
“ An interesting return of statistics, giving, degree
by degree, the strength of wines imported into this
country (England) during the year 1894 has recently
been printed in response to an order of the House of
Commons. From the point of view of the evils of
alcoholic drinking it is especially interesting, since the
figures show pretty conclusively that the demand of
the people is steadily increasing for lighter alcoholic
beverages; and it is a fact, on which we think the
nation may well congratulate itself, that the supply
of wines of a lighter and more wholesome character
is sufficiently met as to present no obstacle to this
healthy movement. Taking the total wine imported
in cask, it will be found that 7,503,044 gallons were
imported of a strength not exceeding 30 degrees;
while, of a strength exceeding '3O degress, up to 42


degrees and beyond, 4,596,283 gallons were imported
into the country. Spain sends to our shores the
largest quantity of wine (3,748,974 gallons), but it is
stronger than the generality of French wines.
Thus the strength of the highest proportion supplied
(677,753 gallons) was 28 degrees (n degrees more
than the bulk of French wines). France stands next
in regard to the total quantity imported; but the
largest proportion of the importation (855,634 gallons)
consisted of wine of 17 degrees’ strength only, the
supply of wine of greater strength than 30 degrees
being quite insignificant, till it falls to absolutely ‘ nil ’
after 38 degrees. Portugal supplies almost as much
wine as France, but here, again, the bulk of it is
stronger even than Spanish wines. Thus the highest
figure representing gallons imported occurs in the 35
degrees’ strength column. Coming to our Australasian
colonies, whose supply in regard to quantity stands
next, it is again satisfactory to find that the largest
number of gallons imported stands at 24 degrees’
strength. These results will surely convey a crumb
of comfort even to our strictly abstemious friends ; but
if, as M. Daudet is said recently to have stated, the
ravages of the phylloxera, and the consequent fabri-
cation of alcoholic liquors, which to a large extent
replaced the supply of light and wholesome wines, are
leading to a distinct increase of crime in France, then
we may with some justification regard these figures
as sure and certain evidence of moral progress.”
SMOKING.
Tobacco is the common name of the plant nicotiana,
belonging to the monopetalous genus. The name
tobacco was used b}' the Caribs for the pipe with
which they smoked, but was transferred by the
Spaniards to the herb itself. The genus nicotiana


contains about 40 species, most of them yielding
tobacco for smoking.
The habit of smoking appears to have been
introduced into England during the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and we are all acquainted with the story
of Sir Walter Raleigh and his servant. “ There is
an herb,” says Descartes, “ which is called by the
inhabitants * Uppowoc ’ in the West Indies. It hath
divers names, according to the several places and
countries where it groweth and is used. The
Spaniards generally call it tobacco. The leaves
thereof, being dried and brought into powder, they
use to take the fume or smoke thereof, by sucking
it through pipes made of clay, into their stomachs
and heads, from whence it purgeth superfluous
fleames and other gross humours, and openeth all the
pores and passages of the body from obstructions, but
also (if any be so that they have not been of too long
continuence) in short time breaketh them ; whereby
their bodies are notably preserved in health.”
It is not my purpose to write a treatise on this
subject, but as I have been bold enough, perhaps
imprudent enough, to give my opinion, resulting
from my own observations, on other subjects, it
may not be altogether useless to extend it to this
matter also. I often think it is rather a curious
thing that I find in my practice so little local
injury from the habit of smoking in moderation.
The heat and the irritation of fumes might certainly
have been expected to play a larger part than it
does in producing or aggravating conditions which
cause disease or annoyance in the upper air
passages; but, so far as I am aware, with the
single exception of what is known as “ smokers’
patch ” —the name given to an altered condition of
the epithelium of the tongue andj lining of the


cheeks—it appears to have little or no effect. Even
this is due, probably, more to the heat and ordinary
products of combustion rather than to any special
property in the tobacco.
From what is understood of the nature of malig-
nant disease, any continued irritation, especially in
mucous or glandular tissue, has always a possible
chance of so altering and interfering with the vital
processes of that part as to predispose to adventi-
tious growth. For this reason the smoker who
neglects the slightest warning and continues to
smoke, notwithstanding the fact that he has a sore
tongue, lip, or cheek, does so at his peril; but
there seems to be no reason to doubt that attention
to such warning will soon re-establish the healthy
action of the affected part. H. T. Butlin, who is,
perhaps, the greatest English authority on the sub-
ject, has, in his “ Diseases of the Tongue,” the
following:—“The question of the liability of smokers
“ to carcinoma of the tongue is one to which atten-
“ tion has been especially directed of late years, and
“it deserves a little more space than has been
“ accorded to it. There is no evidence with which
“ I am acquainted which will prove that carcinoma
“is really much more common among adult males
“who smoke than among adult males who do not
“ smoke; yet I think it is not improbable that
“ smoking does, to a certain extent, predispose to the
“ disease. If smoking causes sores or plaques, or
“ chronic superficial glossitis, it predisposes the
“ individual tongue in which these conditions are
“ produced to carcinoma ; but if smoking produces
“no appreciable effect upon the tongue, it cannot
“ be said to predispose to carcinoma.”
All other effects of smoking, even to considerable
excess, seem to be evanescent, and to depart as


soon as the habit is given up or relaxed. For
various reasons people may be unable to smoke, or
it ma} r be at least unwise to do so. But after all
these years, during which tobacco has not wanted
for active enemies, no very serious charge has
remained unanswered, nor, with, perhaps, the single
exception of a certain disease of the optic nerve in
which tobacco has been used in great excess, has
any specific disease been proved to be due to it.
On the credit side, I think many will admit that it
has social and soothing qualities of a high order,
and I am of opinion that, so far from it having a
tendency to lead to drink, in many instances that
I have personally observed it has apparently taken
the place of that form of stimulation. It is true
that inebriates often, perhaps oftener than not, do
smoke, but they are not smokers in the sense of
an} r keen appreciation of the weed. There can be
no doubt, also, that it has certain disinfecting pro-
perties, though, perhaps, not of such power as is
commonly ascribed to it. That it interferes with
insect life is known to all gardeners, and I once saw
a capital example of the preventive action with
regard to moths. In a house surrounded largely
by shrubberies the curtains of the rooms on the
ground floor were of green serge, and were simply
riddled with the ravages of moths, with the single
exception of those in the study, in which a good
deal of tobacco was consumed.


EXERCISE.
The word “exercise” is derived from ex, out,
and arcere, to shut up or enclose—that is, to put
into use something otherwise inactive. Now, it is a
little curious that one of the problems that scientific
men of past ages set themselves to solve was how to
produce perpetual motion, and I think it was a
singular example of the perversity of man, seeing
that to the greater mass of human beings the ideal
of happiness is rest. The theologian and the poet
constantly dazzle before the eyes of the weary, way-
worn, earthly traveller this great hope, the hope
for which most people hunger. Yet, so far as
human observation has been able to discover, there
is no condition of absolute rest to be found. Whether
the astronomer turns his telescope to celestial bodies,
or the physiologist his microscope to his ultimate
atom, everywhere is found activity, relative though
it may be. Mr. Crookes, in his address to the
British Association in 1886, said:—“lt is equally
impossible to conceive of matter without energy, as
of energy without matter; from one point of view
the two are convertible terms.” Lauder Brunton
says :—“ The cell not long since regarded as a
strictureless mass of proteid matter is now con-
sidered to have a reticular structure, and instead of
reproduction being a simple process of division, it
is known to be accompanied by a complicated series
of movements within the cell, to which the name
of ‘ karyokinosis ’ is given.” Thus it would appear
that nature demands action and movement from
every living structure, and when this ceases, from
whatever cause, it means death to that particular


structure, though the activity is taken up in other
forms and for other purposes.
Though in the abstract everyone will agree as to
the advantages of exercise, they may, and will, differ
as to the mode in which it should be taken. But
I think, in the main, only two ideas are before
them—namely, either the value of exercise as an
appetite producer, with a consequent increase of
nutrition, or the value of it as tending to the
development and enlargement of the muscular tissues,
sometimes at the expense of the fatty tissues, which
is regarded as evidences of health. Comparatively
few people understand exercise from its physio-
logical aspect. From a medical man’s standpoint
people are singularly inconsistent in the matter of
health. Infection from without they can readily
grasp. They shun the houses or companionship of
those suffering from comparatively innocuous diseases
as they would shun the plague. But the infection
from within is out of their line of vision. It is the
old story of the whited sepulchre. When all that
has been said about health, food, and drink has
been considered, it will be found that our great
enemy, our devouring foe, is within us, and always
at work, ready to take advantage of any weakness
we may present, and, apart from external accident,
will eventually destroy us. The way in which these
fatal hosts act has slowly been discovered by the
untiring labours of that band of devoted scientists
who receive but scant acknowledgment for the services
they render to mankind. Lauder Brunton, in his
“ Introduction to Modern Therapeutics,” has the
following:—“For a good while the microbes were
“ looked upon as directly causing disease by affecting
“ the tissues of the patient ; but now, since chemical
“ investigation has been applied to the processes of


“ disease and the products of putrifaction and fermen-
“ tation, we are beginning to look upon many of the
“ symptoms which occur in consequence of the
“ action of microbes as being due not to their direct
“ action upon the tissues, but to their indirect action
“ in forming poisons ; to regard, in fact, the symptoms
“ they produce as bearing a similar relation to the
“ microbes as the symptoms of intoxication do to
“ the yeast plant. Yeast does not produce intoxica-
“ tion; it is the alcoholic products of its action
“ upon saccharine fluids which make a man drunk.
“ Similarly, the symptoms in cases of infective disease
“ are probably due to poisons produced by microbes
“ rather than to the microbes themselves.
“ Sometimes, instead of completely overmastering
“ and destroying the organism into which they enter,
“ the microbes appear to make only a local settle-
“ ment, where they interfere with the growth of the
“ cells of the part attacked, and may lead to their
“ destruction, or may possibly induce them to take
“on a new manner of growth, and thus lead to the
“ formation of local tumours or local mischief of
“other kinds.”
After food has been taken into the stomach the
process of digestion, largely through chemical action,
takes place. The food is broken up into various
divisions, and, by an elaborate process, such material
is selected as may be required for the various tissues,
and is conveyed to them much on the principle of
water in an irrigation colony. Some tissues may
be greedy and take too much, but, in any case,
what they do take goes to repair the constant loss
from wear and tear. This wear and tear has to
be provided for. The best known waste products
of our tissues are carbonic acid and uric acid.


The greater part of the carbonic acid is discharged
through the lungs; the uric acid, by a slower
process, through other channels; but the latter
product, together with certain other detritus, has a
tendency to linger and to deposit itself unless moved
on through the active churning of muscular tissues,
which will explain the immediate and immense
relief experienced in rheumatic joints by massage—
a word that has been coined from the Greek,
jud<To-«r, to knead—the removal of this irritating
deposit being actually mechanical, and so it is
largely with all the waste products. This mechanical
elimination is brought about in two ways—first,
by the local contractions of muscular fibres, which,
as it were, pushes the material into the water
way; and then by strong, healthy heart action,
which drives along the blood and flushes the sewers.
This muscular action is very beautiful, and deserves
a moment’s explanation to those who may be
unacquainted with physiological processes. When a
muscle is in full contraction, as, say, for instance,,
when a man asks you to feel his biceps, it appears
and feels rigid, and as if the whole of the muscular
tissue were acting in unison, but, on closer examina-
tion, it will be found that this muscle is composed
of innumerable fibres or bands, and that these
fibres are not all acting at the same time, but are
alternately contracting and relaxing, so that, while
some are in a state of contractility, others are
having a period of rest, and though the whole
muscle is shortened, there is going on a kneading
action, which is nature’s massage. Now, this
muscular action is more vigorous in youth, and
gradually loses force and frequency as age comes
on. Perhaps the most immediately noticeable loss
is that of the ciliary muscle, causing a loss of the


power of accommodation to a large number of
people at or about forty years of age, so that they
have then to wear their “first glasses.” This, of
course, will partly explain why one should consume
less food as one becomes older. But as there is
what I call a “plateau of , life ” —that is, a time
when one ceases as an animal to improve, but need
not immediately or, at any rate, quickly show signs
of decadence, and though the next move must be
downwards, yet it is largely in our own hands to
decide how long we shall remain upon this highland
of vigour.
To accomplish the lengthening of this lease it is
as necessary as it is at an earlier period of life, if
an altitude of physical excellence is to be achieved,
to take such physical exercise as will stimulate
every muscle in the body, including, especially, that
great hollow r muscle by whose perfect contractility
we alone can live—the heart—into healthy and
regular action.
Now, it has been demonstrated that it is possible
to produce actual growth of muscular tissue in a
man of seventy years of age, so that few need
despair. There is every reason to believe that even a
weak, imperfectly muscular heart may, with judicious
exercise, become greatly strengthened, and the
whole vital energy of a drooping individual be so
excited that the improved condition of mind and
body will be almost past belief. Attention to these
matters has become far more necessary since the
altered conditions of man no longer make it always
true that “in the sweat of his face shall he eat
bread.” Since the status of women has been
steadily raised they are more and more relieved
of the harder physical tasks which, perhaps, after
all, advantaged their bodily health; if men are


more and more often compelled to toil at the desk
rather than at the plough, so the woman is tempted,
from various causes, to lounge more, and to be con-
veyed from place to place rather than to walk, and
until these latter years there has been no facilities
or encouragement for her to engage in out-door
games. It has been slowly recognised that there are
reasons which make it even more necessary to the
health of women that they should accustom them-
selves to active exercise than to men. It is also
being more and more understood that to the man
of middle age and past, if he does not intend to
become prematurely old, he must, to some extent,
resume his youthful exercises. Neither he nor the
lady can compete in the cricket or football field,
but the lawn tennis, golf, and more recently the
bicycle, have placed suitable forms of exercise within
their reach. The inestimable value of these things
are beyond all calculations, but there still remains
a considerable proportion of people for whom these
sports are not convenient, and it is to them that I
would point out that, from many aspects, walking is
the most satisfactory exercise that can be indulged
in. Man is essentially a walking animal. Walking
is the one natural and universal movement that
is open to everyone of fairly good health.
Horse exercise is, of course, admirable, but must
remain the luxury of the few, and even to those
may degenerate into little more than an animated
sedan chair. Exercise, such as I have indicated, to
be really useful, must be accompanied by skin action.
To saunter a short distance and sit down is but
to take the air. Owing to pressure of business the
necessary exercise often means self-denial and a good
deal of determination. Take the cases of two men
closely engaged during the week in business, and


finding themselves at the Saturday noonday with a
thirty-six hours’ holiday in front of them. The one
man, deciding to pleasure himself by spending his
Saturday night at the theatre, realising that he must
take an early dinner, proceeds to make a heavy
lunch, and thinking he had better not take it out
of himself too much during the afternoon, he strolls
into the football field or racecourse, takes his early
dinner, goes to the theatre, and then, as it is Saturday
night, thinks he will have a few oysters and a bottle
of stout. There is no hurry in the morning, so he
lies abed till all hours; then, as Sunda}' is a day
of irregular meals, smokes and eats far too much;
lounges, so as not to unfit himself for work next
day, and arrives at his office on Monday morning
little the better for his rest. The other man, after a
light lunch, takes a long walk or rides, cycles, or plays
lawn tennis or golf, arrives at his dinner with a well-
earned appetite, feels agreeably tired, and, after a
short evening, retires early to a real good night’s
rest; awakes fresh and fit for anything ; spends his
Sunday in a reasonable way, and returns to his work
infinitely the better for his thirty-six hours’ spell off.
Some attempts have been to classify the
various exercises in order of merit, but it has always
seemed to me that the great point to be arrived at
is convenience and attraction and suitability. The
difficulty I have found in getting people to take
necessary exercise has arisen in this way. They
have no tennis ground, or friends who have, at all
handy. They don’t think golf could be arranged
regularly—too far off; can’t afford to keep a horse ;
think bicycling is horrid ; dislike walking ; don’t think
they care for chopping wood; might get a Swedish
gymnastic apparatus, but they don’t, and, if they do,
get tired of it in a month. Well, there is a big


selection of things to do nowadays, and I really
think people must choose for themselves, nor in the
main does it matter much what they do, so long
as they do something.
In the case of numbers ol young men who lead
closely confined lives, I do think the bicycle is a
great boon, especially to those who are able to use
it going to and from their offices, utilising the
little spare time they have to perfection.
There still remain, however, some people who,
from a variety of reasons, cannot take sufficient
exercise to cause skin action. There are, again,
others who during the short winter days and bad
weather will, perhaps, lessen or give up for a time
the exercises that at other times unloaded them.
To such I would earnestly advise periodic Turkish
baths. It must have been noticed by nearly every-
body that the earl} 7 spring is a very trying time —
in other words, it is a time of year during which
people are very prone to become unwell, if not
exactly ill. I attribute this, until someone shall
suggest to me a better explanation, entirely to the
fact that, during the preceding winter months, there
has been less elimination of waste products, and
consequently less vigorous vitality, at a time when
all else in nature is in budding activity, and germ
life is most likely to find a suitable nidus.
The Turkish bath is really exercise without effort;
the shampooing supplies the want by the effort of
the shampooer.
I have frequently alluded to skin action, but it
is possible that there may be some who have an
imperfect conception of the importance of this
structure and its function. Everyone knows how
damp breath is, and can understand what a con-
siderable amount of water must pass off in this


way, but they may not know that though the
difficulty of exactly estimating the amount excreted
ordinarity through the skin is very great, yet
physiologists agree in putting it at not less than
twice the amount passed off through the lungs.
That this water does not pass off as pure water
must also be well known. Those who have had
Turkish baths have, doubtless, sometimes been
astonished at the amount of solid matter thus
excreted; but when it is considered that, at a
rough estimate, the whole integument probably
possesses not fewer than from 2,250,000 to
2,500,000 of tubules, they can realise that the
glands the} r serve must possess a very great
aggregate secreting power. The advantage of
keeping this minute but important function in
order can best be judged by the knowledge that if
the skin be entirely covered by an impenetrable
varnish—an experiment that, I regret to say, has
been tried—the - temperature of the body rapidly
falls, and death takes place. For this reason
bathings and ablutions are very valuable; but there
are points about even bathing that are not
sufficiently considered. The immersion of the body
in cold water, or water at all below the temperature
of the body, has a powerful, stimulating effect,
which is produced largely by the sudden contraction
of and consequent emptying of the small blood
vessels near the surface, causing an immediate
tension in the whole circulatory system. This gives
rise to a pleasurable feeling, causing people often to
sing in the exuberance of their joy, and in the
young and vigorous this is followed by a rapid
return, known as the after-glow. When this does
not take place the result is always harmful, and
may be most serious. Thus sea bathing is not


suitable for feeble circulations, or, if indulged in,
care should be taken not to remain in the water
for any length of time. Some otherwise strong
people seem unable to stand this abstraction of
heat, which is really, at times, very severe. I
remember, some years ago, walking with a medical
friend at Sorrento, and meeting a mutual acquaint-
ance, who had just been bathing, and looked a bit
blue. We popped a thermometer into his mouth,
and were both astonished to find that his tempera-
ture was only gydeg. F. The subject was a young,
athletic man of twenty-one ; had he been delicate or
elderly matters might really have been very serious.
As it was, a brisk walk soon set things right.
Being exceedingly fond of swimming myself, I
have always taken a great interest in the casualties
reported from time to time, and I am convinced, in
my own mind, that deaths from drowning attributed
to cramp are always due either to heart failure or
apoplexy.
In the case of elderly people I believe this to be
a very great danger, and I doubt whether any man
past forty is safe in remaining more than fifteen
minutes in water at 6odeg. F. and under, and then
only if the atmosphere be some degrees warmer.
Bathing in the sea during the winter I have no
sympathy with whatever, and I am certain much
harm is done by it, though, of course, isolated
instances may be found to the contrary, or
apparently so, as in other forms of excess which may
seemingly be indulged in with impunity. But, except
for the extremely vigorous, it may be regarded as an
act of folly.
I felt certain of the correctness of my views when
talking, as I have often done, on the subject, but
I could not until lately give special instances. Now


I can. I know personally of two lives lost through
this. The one died of double pneumonia one week
after the chill, the other on the spot, both within
the last two years. Cold showers in the bath-room
are often not without danger, but this is greatly
lessened by the fact that the air is considerably
warmer than the water, and is still, and the shock
is usually not very prolonged. Vigorous rubbing in
any case, of course, helps the reaction. The worst
feature of the business is that there will be no
warning. It is a case of “Bis peccare in hello non
licet." As an exercise swimming in water of a
reasonable temperature must stand very high. It
brings into action most of the muscles, every move-
ment having of a necessity to overcome sensible
resistance, though the pressure is never excessive,
and the comparatively slow action with this resist-
ance makes it perfect for the gentle development of
muscular tissue. So that, with its many other
advantages, sea-bathing during the warm months is
naturally regarded very favourably by the majority of
people. At the same time, bathing too soon after
a meal is distinctly bad, and many would be all the
better for deferring their swim until an hour or two
after breakfast. The loss of heat is distinctly lower-
ing, and some will find it leaves a feeling of languor
during the after-day. In any case a glass of milk,
or a cup of warm tea or coffee, with a biscuit,
would be an advantage before the early morning
dip, especially so if no brisk exercise has been taken
first —which reminds me that the old fallacy occa-
sionally exists still of waiting to cool before entering
the water. There is no time so safe to bathe as
when heated by exertion, and at such times to delay
until cool is not merely to lose a great pleasure, but
absolutely to court danger.


It may be as well to mention, though this is now
pretty well known, that in any form of bathing where
the head is plunged beneath the surface of the water
it is most necessary to plug the ears with wool.
Man not being an amphibious animal, there is no
provision to keep water out of these cavities, and
by reason of the form and direction of the little
tubes leading to the auditory apparatus, water,
having once entered in, is apt to lodge, and so be
extremely difficult to get rid of, often setting up an
irritation which is frequently followed by inflamma-
tion, and no end of trouble as a consequence.
Every bath-room should be furnished with a suitable
pouch containing wool, and a pledget of the same
should be kept in the pocket of the bathing jacket
when going to the sea.
REST.
Although all activity, as pointed out above, is
comparative, one must consider the lesson taught by
the muscular fibres, which, even when the muscle
is in active service, gives periods of rest to
individual fibres. It is true that civilisation, espe-
cially in respect to town life, makes it necessary to
urge muscular activity. Still, even here there must
be, as also with those whose avocations or pleasures
make this unnecessary, a careful consideration of rest.
The natural position of rest to man after physical
exertion is the horizontal, with the body and limbs
so extended as to relieve the heart from raising a
column of blood, and so allow of a .more even flow
of that fluid. The introduction of chairs, though
exceedingly convenient for many purposes, is apt
to put a greater burden on the heart than it would
have with physiological rest. Huxley estimates in
the case of a full-grown man, weighing 1541 b., that


each beat of the heart drives about 1500 grains of
blood, doing work during the twenty-four hours
amounting to 120 foot-tons. Exactly how he arrives
at this he does not show—l mean as to the
allowance he makes for resting and action; but,
bearing in mind the beat at isoogrs., let anyone
make the experiment for themselves of taking the
pulse lying down, then sitting up, and then standing
up, and reverse the order to correct. So as to
verify my statement I have just done this, the sub-
ject being a healthy young man, with this result
per minute :—Prone, 61 ; sitting in chair, 69 ; stand-
ing up, 80. Now, I do not think an average dwell-
ing-house is sufficiently provided with lounges. I
have seen rooms with divans all round, and yet so
tastefully arranged that it in no way interfered with
the ordinary purpose for which the room was designed,
and had an air of luxury which of itself was artistic,
and, though uncommon, was far from ugly; and it
has always struck me since as an admirable idea
for a dining-room or study, cupboards and book-
shelves being conveniently formed under the divans.
When one has taken considerable exercise, one can
in no other way so completely rest the body as by
full extension of the limbs, yet the facilities for doing
so are rare, and custom ordinarily forbids it except
in a sanctum. This seems to me wrong. But the
great rest, the real restorative, is sleep. Sleep has
been defined as “a natural and healthy, but tem-
poral and periodical, suspension of the functions of
the hemispheres of the cerebrum, or, in other words,
of the intellectual powersbut it is more than this.
Shakespeare, in Macbeth, ii., 2, puts it better:
Innocent sleep,
Sleep that knits up the ravell’d sleave of care,
The death of each day’s life, sore labour’s bath.
Balm of hurt minds, great nature’s second course,
Chief nourisher in life’s feast.


The origin of the word “ sleep ” seems to be
obscure, and all that authorities can say about it is
that the word seems to be allied to words which signify
“to rest,” “to relax.” And this is interesting, as it
is not at all impossible that shrewd observers in the
long past may have noticed this great feature in the
act of sleeping. For not only do the muscles relax,
but the relaxation is so great in other tissues, espe-
cially of the blood vessels, that there is a distinct
enlargement, and a practical illustration of this
be found in the fact that a well-fitting pair of boots
could hardly be put on when first awaking from a
night’s sleep. The whole of the circulatory and
respiratory apparatus becomes less energetic, and the
resisting vitality is at a low ebb. It is for this reason
that it is so important to sleep in healthy surround- 1
ings, the general relaxation causing a marked liability
to take cold or other infection.
There are two principal theories to explain sleep*
The first is that it depends upon anaemia of the
brain; the second, that it is due to an exhausted
condition of the brain cells.
It can easily be understood that a function so
immediately connected with the condition of the great
nerve centre, the brain, is easily disturbed by any
state of unhealth, so that I would remind my
readers again of the fact that any remarks I may
offer refer only to those in health.
It would seem, then, that whether it is the cause,
the chief cause, or only a coincident, the act of sleep
is always accompanied by what is called a bloodless
brain. Any such activity or irritation as tends to
prevent a lessened blood supply to this organ will
either entirely destroy or greatly interfere with
the act of sleep and its beneficial influences. Fried-
lander showed by experiments on animals under


the influence of hypnotics that the condition of
sleeping or waking was determined by position. If
the animal were held up by the legs so as to
increase the supply of blood to the head, it at once
awoke; but when held up by the ears, immediately
fell asleep. From these facts we should learn how
important it is to keep the body, especially the
extremities, warm, and leave the head cool; to
avoid any great excitement shortly before retiring,
and not to take an unnecessary meal the last thing.
It is, of course, a matter of common observation
that there is a tendency to sleep after a full meal,
and this is believed to be caused by the dilitation
of the gastric and intestinal vessels in the act of
digestion; but if food be taken when not required,
it acts in an entirely different way, and causes a
reflex irritation of the brain.
But evidence can be adduced on the other side to
show that the quantity of blood is only one factor
in the phenomenon of sleep. It would appear from
the researches of physiologists that the chemical
state of the brain cells plays an important part,
which Lauder Brunton, after an elaborate dis-
quisition on the subject, sums up this way :—“ It thus
seems that there is a sort of self-regulating
mechanism in the body, by which sleeping and
waking are made to alternate. During the waking
hours soporific products are formed, and these,
gradually accumulating, will by and by induce
sleep; while during sleep stimulating products are
formed which, after a certain number of hours, will
stimulate the brain to wakefulness.”
The following appears in the Lancet in July, 1891,
and is, I think, interesting enough to give in full:—
“ Lord Brougham once experimented on himself to
test how long he could do without sleep, and com-


menced on a Monday morning, went through his
professional duties, sat up through Monday night,
resumed his work on Tuesday, and got through the
day pretty well. At night, however, he felt sleepy
and tired, and to keep himself awake determined to
dictate to an amanuensis. He began walking about
the room, but on seating himself fell instantly
asleep. A similar experiment has recently been
reported from Detroit, where six men entered into
a competition to test their endurance of deprivation
from sleep for seven days, commencing at noon on
Monday, 30th March, 1891. Four of them dropped
out or off before Thursday, two continued till
Sunday; one of these, Townsend by name, a long-
distance walker, began to weaken at ten on Sunday
morning. He walked like a man asleep, and reeled
about on the floor. An hour later he complained
that the floor had all at once grown very steep,
and that he could not keep on climbing. He
stuck to his task, however, till midnight, when he
leaned against the wall for a moment’s rest. He
was so tired that he fell to the floor. The shock
roused him, and he begged the watchman to keep
him awake, but it could not be done. A few
minutes later he threw himself on the floor, and
instantly slept heavily. The last competitor, Cun-
ningham, was left alone with a twelve hours’ vigil
before him, which he occupied with walking, sing-
ing, dancing, and shouting. Many spectators
assembled to see the last hour pass. ‘ Why did you
stop the clock ?’ he shouted, as the minutes slowly
passed. At length it was over, and he was con-
ducted to the stage and introduced, but before the
introduction was over he was sound asleep. Cun-
ningham lost eight pounds and Townsend six in
the match. The men were allowed to sleep in


fifteen-minute naps at the conclusion of their
several vigils, and are said to have suffered no
permanent ill.”
Deprivation of sleep is an old Chinese punishment,
and it is evidently a severe one. In insanity pro-
longed vigilation is not an uncommon symptom.
It is interesting to compare this record of six days
with those other experiments which have been made
from time to time in the direction of starvation, where
men have gone forty days commonly, and one fifty.
It becomes quite evident which function has the most
important or, at any rate, rapid relation to vitality.
It is probable that cases of suicide, as the
result of trouble, are largely due to sleeplessness.
Records in all countries show that the proportion
of suicides during the long summer days are much
greater than they are during the short, dark winter
ones, when one might have reasonably supposed
that the depression of spirits would have been
more marked ; but it would appear that the vibra-
tions of light through the eyes act so directly as
an irritant to the brain that long continuance is
followed by disorganisation of the system. An
old saw gives it thus:—“ Six hours’ sleep for a
jnan, seven for a woman, and eight for a fool.”
Whether, since that formula was devised, our
environment has rendered an additional quantity of
sleep necessary, I do not know, but I think
experience shows that, as a rule, eight, or, at least,
seven hours’ sleep is absolutely required by those
in health, either man or woman. As a matter of
fact, I believe most people sleep both more and
less than they have any idea of. House surgeons,
nurses, and others who have occasion to visit
wards during the night often find patients asleep,
who, in the morning, declare and believe that they


have not closed their eyes; and, on the contrary,
many who retire early and rise not too early have
certainly been in bed a long time, but the actual
sleep will, on the average, not frequently exceed
eight hours. After great fatigues, especially in the
young, sleep may be much prolonged, and apparently
with advantage; blit to those at or past middle
age, prolonged sleep, even after fatigue, is not so
easily obtained, and, if it is, leaves an unrested
feeling, so that the recovery has, in any case,
usually to be made by more than one night’s rest.
There can be no doubt whatever that the plan
of Nature is to give her rest during the hours of
darkness, and it is easy to find physiological
reasons to show why sleep should be more restful
during these hours. It is, therefore, a mistake to
keep what are known as late hours, and this
truism is fairly well acted upon in the case of the
young ; but when self-indulgence forms other habits
it is often seriously neglected.


PATIENT DOCTOR.
It is related that iEsop, being asked by a student
what profession offered the greatest attraction, replied
that of the ph} ? sician, and, on being pressed for an
explanation, said: —“Once, when suffering from a
severe indisposition, I was sitting without the city
gate enjoying the sun. A number of people passed
by commiserating with me, and nearly everyone
suggested a remedy that would cure me. 1 ' Things
are in no way different to-day. Odd as it may
seem, the doctor often finds the friends more injurious
than the ailment to his patient, though most often
he can only guess at the cause of his difficulties.
Apart from the thousand and one recommendations,,
in a general way, that the} r have to offer, these
friends sometimes insist on a trial of a nostrum,
and, if the patient survives, will likely claim the
cure. I remember a case that had caused me much
attention and thought, and at last ir seemed that
I had fairly grappled with the difficulty* f° r there
was a difficulty. My patient got better and better,
and came one morning evidently well. I was very
pleased, and expatiated on the value of the drug I
had been using, when I noticed a hesitancy, which
I seized upon, and got this:—“ Well, you know,
doctor, I don’t feel quite sure which it was, your
medicine or the other my friend persuaded me te
take at the same time.” “ Good heavens !” I said,
“what was it?” “‘Strong’s Universal Cure!’”
There are few proverbs with which people hug
themselves more than the one that runs—“ Every
man is either a fool or a doctor by the time he is


forty,” never, of course, for one moment considering
it as a possible contingency that they might be the
fool.
Not to go back too far into the history of these
things, during the last and previous generations it
appeared to be among the expected accomplish-
ments of the good housewife that she should have
some knowledge of the compounding of simples. It
is now more common than not to find both sexes
prepared to discuss freely their views upon anti-
pyrin, ferruginous tabloids, cascara, and a host of
other drugs, mostly new, and to be familiar with
the use, still more dangerous, of the hypodermic
syringe.
The extraordinary favour with which people seize
upon new medicines and appliances is evidenced by
the frequency of their advertisement in all the
principal publications of general interest.
What makes this rather more singular is the
undoubted fact that, while the layman has become
increasingly fond of drugs, the medical profession
has steadily lessened their use of them. Whether
the familiarity with drugs leads to their being held
in contempt I cannot say, but unquestionably many
have found the vicarious administration of medicine
to be a costly and dangerous proceeding. Yet the
temptation to follow the advice of anyone before
applying to a duly qualified medical man seems to
be irresistible.
Perhaps the most frequent selection falls upon the
chemist. Now, the chemist makes no pretensions to
prescribe ; it is contrary to the laws and spirit
of his guild. He is engaged in a work that can
only be accomplished, with safety to the public, by
the closest attention to detail. He has to be
specially trained and pass searching examinations


before he is qualified for this. His hours are long
and tedious. His stock is costly and liable to dete-
riorate. His responsibilities are very great. Yet, for
all this, the public are too wont to declaim against
his moderate charges, as if, indeed, he merely weighed
out tea and sugar. As a matter of fact it always
seems to me that, taking all things into consideration,
he is probably one of the worst paid men in the
community. So that, having regard to the constant
and pressing temptation to which he is exposed in
this line, I really think he is almost always deserving
of great credit for his conduct in recommending the
advice of some medical man. But, after all, there is
a good deal of human nature about, and when a
customer comes in and puts an apparently simple
case before him, with the flattering confidence of one
who feels sure that as he is constantly observing the
treatment of doctors, he must have sufficient know-
ledge to enable him to deal with it, he is apt to be
weak, and, no doubt, in a large number of cases
is able to do what is required of him—if he goes
lucky !
But this is not always the case. Any individual
experience will almost necessarily be small, yet I
am personally aware of two fatal such prescribings
within these last ten years, and I therefore conclude
that there must be a good many. The first that
came under my notice occurred in this way; —
A young man had been out of sorts and ill for
some days, and had tried simple remedies without
any improvement. His mother went down to the
chemist in the usual way to get “ something ” for
her son. This something took the form of a drastic
purge. It afterwards appeared that the patient had
typhoid fever, and he died in great agony from
perforation of the bowels.


The second case was almost similar as to treat-
ment, but the disease was ulceration of the stomach
in a young woman, whose symptoms were chiefly
inability to keep food down and retching. A drastic
purge was given, haemorrhage and perforation followed
immediately, ending in death.
Now, it is presumable, though, of course, not
absolutely certain, that the careful examination of a
medical man would have disclosed the diseases,
which might certainly 'have run on to a fatal
ending, but would not have been accentuated by
local irritations. And these cases remind me that
medical men are not always as careful as they
should be in such matters. I do not think that
any medical man who is at all jealous of his
reputation is well advised to consult by letter. It
is impossible to do himself or his patient justice by
such methods.
Infinitely more astonishing is it that anyone
claiming to be a reasonable being should place his
most valuable possession in the hands of a person
who, neither by education nor training, can lay
claim to his confidence. Yet so it is. I
it would be a safe thing to say that no sane man,
being in the possession of a valuable chronometer
watch which needed repair, would place it in the
hands of a working blacksmith, and if he did, and
the watch received further damage, he would have
to go far before he could find any sympathy.
Yet at the end of this nineteenth century, which
boasts so many victories of knowledge over ignor-
ance, people of every degree may be found
standing agape, and drinking in the words which
emanate from the loud-voiced, self-assertive charlatan.
, Such is the advance of this civilised age that a
man, before he is able to present the Hall, Mark of


his acquirements in the shape of diplomas, and
earn his living by the practice of medicine, has, in
the first instance, to pass an examination in arts to
show that he is educated to a sufficient standard to
enable him to grasp the subjects which will be
required of him, and to which he proposes to
devote himself. He has then, for a period of never
less than four years, and usually much longer, to
study the works of such authors as are at the
time ‘regarded as the best exponents of each subject.
His subjects will embrace anatomy, physiology,
chemistry, botany, materia medica, medicine, and
surgery at the least. His knowledge on each of
these subjects will not merely be theoretical or
derived from books, but also eminently practical,
and accompanied by demonstrations from the best
available talent. Nor will his knowledge be taken
for granted, but after all this, and, indeed, from
time to time during his course, he will be required
to pass stringent examinations to satisfy those in
authority that he has acquired the necessary
information to fit him for the great school of
practice he is about to enter, and in which he will
find an endless field of research.
Yet, not long ago, a personal friend, and who,
on other subjects, was a very shrewd observer of
men, endeavoured to show that the gentleman we
know as the Chinese doctor would be possibly a
very fitting person to consult, on the ground that
the Chinese were a civilised people thousands of
years before the Briton was known even as a painted
savage. And even at this remote time the China-
man was acquainted with many arts only of late
re-discovered, and so on. Well, admitting the
truth of this, I explained to him that only recently
a commission had inquired into this very subject,


and although the use of certain drugs only very
newly in our possession, notably, menthol, was found
to be in use among them, yet the practice and
science of medicine was crude and ignorant to a
degree hardly conceivable, and that among the
educated classes; whereas those who do us the
honour to practise their art in our midst are
invariably of a very low order of education, and
whose stock-in-trade is a certain Oriental cunning,
which enables them to gauge the credulity of the
more recently civilised occidental.
As a matter of fact, it is evident that some rulers
away back in what are called the dark ages seem to
have recognised the necessity of protecting people
from this sort of gentry, for King Roger of Naples,
as early as 1140 a.d., promulgated the following
law : —“ Whoever from this time forth desires to
practise medicine must present himself before our
officials and judges, and be subject to their decision.
Anyone audacious enough to neglect this shall be
punished by imprisonment and confiscation of
goods. This decree has for its object the protection
of the subjects of our kingdom from the dangers
arising from the ignorance of practitioners.”
In these latter days charlatans flourish exceed-
ingly, and in New South Wales the state of affairs
became so bad that a select committee was
appointed by Parliament in 1887 to inquire into the
“ Law Respecting the Practice of Medicine and
Surgery.” The report containing the minutes of
evidence is about as pretty a piece of reading as
can well be found, and is contained in 105 folio
pages, but I shall content myself with giving a
few samples of the most respectable questions and
answers, which will serve to show what really
goes on.


A witness, E. H. T. 8., gave the following
evidence ;
Q. 962. —You were in Her Majesty’s navy, were
you not ?—Yes.
963. —In the Cura9oa ?—Yes.
964. —In what capacity?—As able seaman.
965. —When did you leave the ship?—ln iB6O.
969. —You were connected with a firm of men
who practised medicine in Melbourne named Jordan
and Beck. Were you not in their employ ?—I was
their assistant.
970. —In what capacity ?—As dispenser.
973. —You are frequently away from Sydney, are
you not ? —Yes; I have an estate in the country
which I have to visit. I am engaged in squatting;
I am a landed proprietor.
974. —You are a wealthy man, I believe ?—I am
worth five or six shillings.
975. —You are worth are you not ?—Yes,
and another added to it. I am not interested
in a Medical Bill, and I do” not care whether a
Medical Bill passes or not. I know such a measure
is required. I know that the law requires amend-
ment, but to banish about half a dozen unfortunate
men, fathers of large families, would be cruel in
the extreme. Why cannot the State say—“We will
register these half-dozen persons on a separate
register, and banish the rest?”
988. —At what school of medicine did you obtain
your special knowledge ?—The wide school of the
colonies.
989. —Then you obtained it from your practice?—
Decidedly.
990. —Therefore, when you commenced practice,
though you advertised yourself as a specialist, you
did not possess the knowledge of a specialist ? —I


have been associated with some of the most clever
surgeons of the day.
999. —You have an establishment in Liverpool-street
(Sydney) ?—Yes; I am letting the lease run out.
1000. —You have occupied it for some time?—For
some thirteen years.
1001. —During that time you have seen a large
number of patients there ? —I daresay I have seen
from 15,000 to 20,000.
J. C. L.:-
Q. 1307. —How long have you resided in Sydney?—
Close on eleven years.
1308. —What is your calling?—Well, at present I
am a publican.
1309. —But you are also practising medicine, are
you not ?—Only without fee at present; I used to.
1310. —When did you cease to practise medicine
for gain ?—When I bought the hotel.
1311. —When was that?—About four or five months
ago.
1312. —Then, up to that time, for the previous
eleven years you were practising medicine?—Yes.
i 36- —Were you doing a considerable practice
when you were practising medicine ?—Yes ; I was
doing about a year.
W. M. :
Q. 1369. —What are you ?—I am a homoeopathic
practitioner. I have been one for twenty-nine years.
Prior to that time I used to practise the veterinary
art. I never thought of living by this means when
I came out to the colony.
i 37°. —What other occupation have you followed
here?—None.
1371. —Were you not coachman to somebody?—
I looked after Mr. Saloman’s horse and dog cart,
and sometimes his store, for about nine months.


1409. —Have you said on any occasion that you
can detect cancer in the human system from an
examination of the blood from any portion of his
body ?—Yes.
1410. —That is, if a man has a cancer in his liver
you can discern from an examination of the blood
from his hand whether his liver is cancerous or not?
—Yes. I can tell from such an examination whether
the malady exists in his system.
1411. —It is a discovery of your own?—Yes. I
used to put a patient’s blood under the microscope.
1414. —Did Mr. Gordon, from whom you received
instructions at Maitland, follow any other profession
besides that of a homoeopathic practitioner?—Yes;
he was an allopathic practitioner, too. He was a
farmer when I first made his acquaintance.
1415, —Was he not a baker?—Yes; he learned
the trade from his eldest son.
1426. —You have retired from practice?—Compara-
tively so.
1427. —You have been very successful pecuniarily
in your practice ?—Yes.
1428. —You are now a wealthy man ?—I can live
without practising. I have been very successful in
practice. I have made every penny of mine by my
practice. I am comparatively a wealthy man.
N. P. A., after an answer apparently unsatisfac-
tory, was again asked:—
Q. 1487. —Is it an untrue statement ? —lf you like
to call it so, I suppose it is. It does not hurt me
if I had been here only six weeks. I have been
too successful to be frightened by anything of that
kind.
1488. —What other calling have you followed in
Sydney ?—At first I was on the survey for a few
months.


1489. —What position did you occupy?—l was first
man on a survey party. I had all the technical
work to do with regard to chaining and calcula-
tions. The surveyor put them down in his book
as I gave them to him.
1490. —Did you make the observations? —No. He
used the instrument. I did all the chaining.
1491. —You were chainman ?—Yes.
I think that will be enough for my purpose; any-
one requiring more can examine the Report. This
will show what can be done by even the uneducated,
given only absolute indifference as to consequences,
so long as the shekels are raked in.
x\nything more ludicrous than the evidence elicited
from the medical clairvoyants cannot well be con-
ceived ; however, they seem to gauge the intelligence
of that large number of people who subscribe very
handsomely towards their maintenance.
It would be well if people of a more thoughtful
nature than those chiefly concerned in these reports
would sometimes consider what it is that protects
them from being imposed upon by their regular
medical attendants. Certainly it is not that they
receive a large monetary reward, for, indeed, in no
other walk of life do we hear of men who, as a
matter of course, and without the smallest fuss, are
ready and willing to act in a manner that is dia-
metrically opposed to their pecuniary interests. The
medical profession, so far as it is at present con-
stituted, consists practically of three branches—The
family attendant, the consultant, and the specialist.
The functions of these three are not so clearly
defined as they might be, and are apt to be merged
into one another in a way that may, and often does,
puzzle both patient and doctor; but as the main bulk


of the profession is represented by the familj' atten-
dant, and as the other two are not so directly in
contact with the public as the general practitioner,
I propose almost entirely to confine my remarks to
his relationship with the patient. “When a man’s
a little bit poorly, makes a fuss, wants a nuss, and
sends for the doctor who makes him wuss.” But if
the doctor did not go, there would be still more
fuss.
The fact of the matter, happily, is that serious
illness is very much less common than trifling dis-
turbances, which often make people feel quite as
ill, or, perhaps, even more so, than would serious
disease. Nevertheless, it is necessary to ascertain
what is going on as early as possible, for all sorts
of reasons that will readily suggest themselves. It
thus follows that the most important function that
the doctor is called upon to perform, and the most
frequent, is diagnosis in early stages. I have known
doctor after doctor blamed for failing to discover
at first what became perfectly obvious when the con-
sultant or specialist was called-in several days later,
and the symptoms had become more declared, and
then reaped the laurels of the position.
Now let us see what chance the family attendant
has. He will have to piece the tiniest scraps of
evidence —of course, he soon arrives at the tem-
perature, pulse, and appearance—but what does he
know of the surrounding circumstances, habits of
his patient and of the family, tendencies, history of
parents, not only as to health, but also estate,
including failings and mental worries ? He may
ask questions, it is true; but can he rely upon the
answers? Knowledge derived from personal observa-
tion he has none; he is the third doctor the family
have called in during the past two years, and he


knows, if he has any experience at all, that it is
just the toss of a halfpenny as to whether there
is not a fourth in the house in the course of a
few days. All this will immensely tend to the
illumination of his difficulty, will it not ? As an
illustration, we will call these three doctors A, B,
and C. A attends the family recently arrived in
his neighbourhood—people not long married. For
a while things go on all right. He finds his
accounts paid, with, perhaps, some little dela)y but
still paid, and he begins to take an interest in the
family. But, as he has a large practice, his nights
are terribly broken into, his meals often extremely
irregular, and, strangely enough, he has also a
little trouble and anxiety of his very own, and
though, of course, it is very wrong, he finds he
must either take a holiday or risk a break down.
At last, yielding to the advice of his friends and
his own judgment, he takes a short change.
During his absence the family baby has a little
trouble with its teeth, and B is sent for. The
baby recovers. But as Bis a very nice-mannered
man, and seems to handle children better than A
—poor A only had the chance of handling it once
—it ultimately ends in his becoming the medical
attendant. However, his reign is very short, because
just at this time C arrives with a brand new plate,
and is said to be “very clever,” and had an enormous
practice somewhere else. It is not quite clear
why he should have left that very lucrative practice
to set up afresh in this fortunate district. Still, it is
so, and then, you know, he is related by marriage to
Mrs. , who is a leader of “ society,” and is
doing all she can for him; and the next time any-
thing is wanted C is sent for. Thus it goes on,
with infinite variety, of course, but all resulting in


change. Is this nature’s law of constant change ?
Illness is a terrifying thing in a family. Sympathy
intelligent, even sentimental sympathy, is expected,
and usually found, at the hands of the doctor;
his own business, everyone else’s comforts, even
his necessities, must yield to the occasion. No
other toilers in the industrial hive lead such
wearing lives as do medical men in general practice,
who are compelled to remain on duty perpetually,
night and day alike, and yet the meed of recognition
they receive is, indeed, scanty. This state of things
called forth remarks two thousand years ago. Read
this from Seneca: De Benefic. vi., 15, 16, and 17: —
“ People pay the doctor for his trouble ; for his kind-
(t ness they still remain in his debt. Thinkest thou
“ that thou owest the doctor and the teacher nothing
“ more than his fee? We think that great reverence
“ and love are due to both. We have received from
“ them priceless benefits—from the doctor health and
“ life, from the teacher the noble culture of the soul.
“ Both are our friends, and deserve our most sincere
“ thanks, not so much by their merchantable art as
“by their frank good-will.” And yet in these latter
days the following very serio-comic lines give a true
picture;—
THE SONG OF THE GENERAL PRACTITIONER.
Sung at the Annual Dinner of the Bolton and District
Medical Society, 4TH October, 1894.
He must not walk his rounds for fear his patients think him
poor,
And dearly do they love to see a carriage at their door;
And if his horse is fat, “ He must have little work to do !”
And if it’s lean the reason is, “He starves the poor old
screw.”
Should he call upon his patients every day when they are ill,
His motive plainly is " to make a great big doctor’s bill.”
If he visits them less frequently, thus less’ning their expense,
The chances are he’ll be accused of wilful negligence.


He must work all day and half the night, and never say he’s
tired,
For the public look upon him as a servant simply hired;
And should he take a holiday, he’ll find, when he comes back,
Some patients have resented it by giving him “the sack.”
Concerning money he must seem indifferent to be,
And folks will think he practises from pure philanthropy.
When we hear about him boasting of the guineas that he earns,
We wonder if they all appear in his income tax returns.
About his own afflictions he must never say a word ;
The notion of a doctor being ill is so absurd !
And when, perhaps from overwork, he’s laid upon the shelf,
His sympathising patients say, “Physician, heal thyself!”
Bolton. J. Johnson, M.D.
But enough ol this. It will be supposed that I
hold a brief for the medical profession, whereas it
is nothing of the kind. I wish, to the best of my
ability, to point out the state of things which should
exist between patient and doctor, and I do but raise
a corner of the curtain to show what only too com-
monly is the true condition. What I contend is
that too great caution cannot be taken in the selec-
tion of the family doctor ; but this selection having
been made, kindly relations should be fostered. It
will of a necessity sometimes be desirable to make
a change, but this should not occur except for the
most sufficient reasons. The training and natural
sympathies of those who really have a love for their
profession is of inestimable value to the patient.
He will not only regard it as a sacred duty to
devote such skill as he may be possessed of to his
patient’s care, but, should matters become more
serious or complex, he will read in the eyes of those
he understands when, if only to restore a wavering
confidence, it is necessary to call in further advice,
and he will, in doing this, not only fend off the
dangerous charlatan, but will select, in a way that
only a medical man can, the most suitable consultant.
The friends of the sick are often pestered to call


in this or that man, but it is not always the dog
that barks loudest that is the most useful, and
the qualifications of the consultant can be better
appreciated by fellow medical men than by laymen.
But to attain this result the sympathy must not
be all on one side, for human nature, from whatever
side }'Ou view it, is weak ; and if the medical pro-
fession is not to become a mere money-making
occupation, which would be deplorable to contem-
plate, its members must be enabled to feel that they
have other reward than falls to the share of the
trader, or they may gradually debase their art into
a trade.
It would be a little curious to know what money
equivalent a successful city man, considering the
question from a strictly commercial point of view,
would estimate the attendance on a dangerously
infectious case be worth, more especially if he
happened to be a family man with children—or how he
would average the value of a night’s rest, etc., etc.
Perhaps the most astonishing attitude that people
sometimes take toward their medical attendant is an
unreasonable and unreasoning hatred. It has been
said, with much truth, that the best doctor is he who
makes the fewest mistakes. Medicine is not an exact
science, nor is the treatment of disease of so simple
a nature that mistakes can always be avoided; indeed,
medical men may often be said to be lucky or unlucky.
Yet the patient or the patient’s friends will sometimes
resent a faux pas as if malicious and wilful injury had
been done. This is, no doubt, a survial of old fetish
days, and within even a few years medical men have
been killed in Spain, Italy, and Russia while pursuing
their calling during plagues.
The Anglo-Saxon race is more law-abiding, and
has a dislike almost morbid to physical violence,


yet it often behaves in a way that inflicts the most
cruel injury whilst preserving its self-respect. People
do not commonly shoot, brain, or burn their medical
men, but they will sometimes persecute them to
the last pitch of endurance, ruin a man’s reputation
and practice if possible, regardless of the suffering
they may inflict even on his family. I have known
such cases as I refer to, and though the consultant
and specialist is less vulnerable than the general
practitioner, he is not always free from the
annoyance of this peculiar trait. The late Dr.
Aubrey Bowen, than whom a more kind-hearted,
conscientious, and gentle man never existed, was
worried for years by a certain man, and with one
less substantial and possessed of less equanimity, it
might have produced the most serious results. As
it was, the annoyance was for a time almost unen-
durable. I, myself, have felt something of this from
a patient. This “lady,” having elected to follow a
line of treatment which I did not advise, and being
dissatisfied with the result thereof, not only subjected
me to personal abuse, but has never ceased to
spread malicious falsehoods concerning me.
I have often tried to think out what exact
purpose these kind of people serve. That they do
perform some function is probable, seeing that until
Darwin announced the fact to an astonished world,
no one suspected the inestimable value of earth
worms and moths.
It would be wrong, indeed, however, to suppose
that the picture of medical life is darkened to any
marked degree by these things. With a necessary
background of russets and browns, there is much
colour, and even a little humour, in its varied phases,
and the black spots I have alluded to do but act as
foils to the bright gleams that come in here and there.


Perhaps to no other avocation in life is there
given so much conscious pride in the feeling that
the labour is of love, the high esteem and grateful
acknowledgments, though they do not always even
shape themselves into words, is reward indeed.
To hardly anyone but the medical man belongs
the privilege of seeing the lives of their fellow-men
from the very best side of human nature. The
fortitude, self-denial, and real goodness that is
brought out by suffering, and amidst all this the
genuine appreciation of services rendered, the
lightening of all burdens by those earthty angels
called nurses, who come, like refreshing dew at the
end of a scorching day, to revive and comfort
faded and injured flowers all through the dark and
cheerless night, clustering in the morning to adorn
leaves and petals, reflecting the first beams
of returning light—diamonds, indeed—disappearing
presently, silently, imperceptibly, as the sun of
returning health asserts its power and warmth.
Such as these are always to be met with, cheering
on life’s work, bearing within them, contagious,
God’s best gift, good spirits, and are in themselves
God’s fairest gift to man.
A. H. Massiua & Co., Printers, Howey Street (between Collins and Little
Collins Streets), Melbourne.
