

Tenterfield


BACK TO TENTERFIELD WEEK COMMITTEE
Chairman:
THE MAYOR OF TENTERFIELD
.(Aid. F. P. Kiely)
Treasurer;
B. HERON
MR. A. T. BAILEY
MR. R. H. MACCOLL
Vice-Chairman:
THE SHIRE PRESIDENT
(Cr. F. K. Caldwell)
Secretary:
R. DRUMMOND.
MR. W. HAMILTON
MR. L. STEVENS
MR. G. M. KNEIPP


FOREWORD
Those who engage in historical research, often with only fragments of
information with which to build history, or a picture of conditions, in-
evitably have exasperating experiences. After having carefully built up
what seems to be a flawless case, often some scrap of information comes
to light which partly wrecks the edifice, and compels one to start afresh.
However, it is fascinating to delve and build the story of men and
districts.
Having been asked by the "Back to Tenterfield" Executive Committee
to prepare the material for a souvenir book covering the history and
development of Tenterfield, I desire to thank all who have assisted.
Recourse by the Tenterfield District Historical Society over the past
ten years, to the Mitchell Library, the Clarence River Historical Society,
and to innumerable other sources, has brought a wealth of information.
Much of the valuable historical information collected by the late Mr.
J. F. Thomas at considerable cost to himself of both effort and money,
came into the possession of the Historical Society after his death, and
has proved invaluable. It is regrettable that, owing to advancing years,
and other circumstances, Mr. Thomas was unable to use the material
and fulfil his ambition to write the history of Tenterfield. His know-
ledge and ability gave him supreme authority for such an undertaking.
The Proprietors, the Editor, and staff of the 'Tenterfield Star" have
been wonderfully helpful in typing, advice, and in every way possible.
To them and to all who have assisted I express my gratitude.
NORMAN CRAWFORD,
Hon, Secretary, Tenterfield District Historical Society, 1949


Tenterfield .
Tenterfield, situated on the Northern New England Tableland, 12
miles from the Queensland border at Wallangarra, is the centre of a
beautiful and prosperous district. Being located at an elevation of
3000 feet above sea level, nature has provided it with a climate unsur-
passed in the Commonwealth. Consequently, it is a great and grow-
ing health resort.
The rainfall is ample and regular, and droughts as experienced in
other parts of Australia are unknown.
Tenterfield has a wealth of interesting and romantic history.
The town is regarded as the birthplace of Australian Federation, for
in its School of Arts building on October 24th, 1889, Sir Henry Parkes
made his historic speech, which set in motion the movement which led
to the foundation of the Commonwealth of Australia.
Tenterfield has been the home, the birthplace, and the scene of action
of men and women who became not able figures in the political, busi-
ness, literary, military and other spheres of public life.
The first Premier of New South Wales under responsible government
in 1856, Sir Stuart Alexander Donaldson, owned Tenterfield Station and
was closely associated with early Tenterfield for many years. Sir Robert
Ramsay Mackenzie, the first Colon ial Treasurer in Queensland in 1859,
and who later, in 1867, became Premier of that Colony, previously had his
home here.


TENTERFIELD PROSPECTS
This beautifully situated mountain town and district faces a bright and prosperous future, provided the
citizens express in practical terms the necessary public spirit.
Considerable life and activity is shown in the spheres of sport and recreation, but an awakening is needed
in the more serious side of citizenship, especially amongst the generation whose responsibility is the future.
The handicap of narrow streets, with which the town was laid out, can, with a well-considered, long-range
developmental policy, be largely corrected. Many old disreputable buildings disfigure the town, and require
demolishing or reconstructing.
The Municipal Council has made a forward move in arranging to have the town planned by a competent
town planner.
Comparing Tenterfield of to-day with Tenterfield of 20 years ago, a remarkable change for the better is
apparent. New and improved ideas are showing in improvements on every side, and the parochial spirit is
rapidly departing.
An exhibition of the value of large industrial businesses, such as the two large meat works, and the rabbit
freezing factory, is shown in the increasing population.
With the construction of the Mingoola Dam and consequent development in the area benefited, Tenterfield
must also benefit.
With the conservation of water by dams in the small er district streams, much of our good lands can be irrigated,
resulting in sure and enlarged production. Messrs. Richards and Jacobsen, of The Mole district, have shown what
can be done by irrigation.
The fruitgrowing industry is an important one. Apples and pears, peaches, plums, cherries, grapes, and
other fruits do well, and there are great possibilities for development. Many thousands of cases of fruit are produced
yearly now, but this number can be increased as the growing population of Australia creates a demand.
The prospective creation of a New State, giving self-government to New England, gives also the prospect of
enormous development in industry and population in the area.
As a health resort, Tenterfield climate is unsurpassed, and the town is conveniently situated to the warm
areas to the east and west.
Scenery is one of the undeveloped assets of the district. By a little development in the way of making it
accessible, it could be sold to tourists and visitors, resulting in great gain to business, both directly and indirectly.
The views from the mountains surrounding Tenterfield are magnificent. A mountain near Bolivia towers
up to 5,100 feet, 100 feet higher than Ben Lomond.
There are waterfalls such as Boonoo Boonoo, the Basket falls, the Cataract falls, and others.
The great valleys of Timbarra, Steinbrook, and other centres, with their blue mountains like blue haze, and
wonderful outlook, are thrilling.
Long Gully, a few miles to the south of Drake, with its wealth and beauty of palm and fern, and jungle, is
worthy of a visit from any tourist.
A scheme of gradual development of these, and other beauty spots, consistently carried out, would pay
handsome dividends.
The Divine Power has provided these natural assets. But they do not develop themselves. Vision and service
on man’s part is needed. Given these the future of Tenterfield is bright.


WHO DISCOVERED TENTERFIELD ?
THE story of the first white discovery and settlement of Tenterfield is vague and uncertain. So
far there is no known record of any explorer having "discovered" Tenterfield.
Who was the first white man to gaze on Mt. Mackenzie, The Doctor's Nose, Dairy Mountain
and the surrounding mountains, and the virgin undulating country on which Tenterfield was later
built? That man, or those men, have left no authentic word to tell us. Other men who fol-
lowed them and knew have long since passed from these earthly scenes. Neither have they
left on record the desired information.
An extract from the Historical Sketch prepared by the
late Mr. J. F. Thomas may provide a clue. He wrote: —
“It has been said that Charles Tuckwood was the
first white man to arrive at Tenterfield, and that
he rode from Armidale, and camped on the creek opposite
the present homestead.
“This may be so, no doubt he was amongst the
earliest arrivals, but it would seem that he, as did James
and Joseph Cowell, came in the interests of S. A.
Donaldson or R. R. Mackenzie, and all three were after-
wards employed on the Station.”
CUNNINGHAM'S NEAR APPROACH
Of the well-known explorers, Allan Cunningham appears
to have approached nearest the site of Tenterfield. On his
return southward after the discovery of the Darling Downs in
1827, he apparently reached within about 15 miles of Tenter-
field. Being barred by the Donnybrook and adjacent
mountains, he turned westward, and then again southward,
crossing Tenterfield Creek (called by him Glen River) in the
vicinity of Mt. Pleasant Station. Continuing, he appears
to have crossed the Mole River in the vicinity of Mr. Edgar
Hynes’ property, and then followed down the south-eastern
bank of the Sovereign or Dumaresq River.
OGILVIE'S EXPEDITION
Another interesting journey of historic importance, which
approached Tenterfield even nearer was that of the Ogilvies.
Leaving the Hunter River in 1840, Frederick and Edward
D. S. Ogilvie journeyed overland on horseback to the Clarence
River from Southern New England via the rough Guy Fawkes
route known as “Craig’s Line.” They made their way up
the Clarence Valley discovering and taking up the country
which became Yulgilbar Station.
The Ogilvies determined to try and discover a better
route by which to take their stock to Yulgilbar. They there-
fore continued up the unexplored Clarence. This took them
to the then unknown Tabulam country and on through the
Clarence watershed to near Sandy Hills and from there to
Boorook then through the Boonoo Boonoo Mountains. Passing
to the south-east of Wallangarra and through Tarban,
they crossed the Mole River and went on to “Temiax”
Station near Manilla, which had been selected by their father,
William Ogilvie. The Ogilvies, when at Tarban, must
have been within eight or nine miles of Tenterfield.
Early the following year, 1841, they returned to
Yulgilbar via the Boonoo Boonoo route, taking their sheep with
them. The old Yulgilbar Station sheepbook is still in
existence, and the first entry in it is dated May Ist, 1841.
This shows that the droving feat had then been completed.
James Aitken, of Bushy Park, a Clarence River settler,
was another to take his stock down by that route in 1841.
DEEPWATER STATION
Archibald Windeyer and his brother Charles were the
original owners of Deepwater Station. This was taken up
for them early in 1839 by William Collins, who became
overseer or manager of the Station. Many of Collins’
descendants reside in Tenterfield district at present.
The northern border of Deepwater Station, being nearly
25 miles from the site of Tenterfield, makes it appear probable
that someone must have explored the virgin Tenterfield country
soon after the selection of Deepwater early in 1839.
GARDNER'S EVIDENCE
William Gardner, a cultured resident of Southern New
England for years in the early period of settlement, was the
author of a unique and remarkable collection of manuscript
writings and drawings, which are bound in two large volumes,
and are now housed in the Mitchell Library. Writing in the
early fifties of last century of New England he said that
settlement took place in upper New England:—
“From Armidale to Tenterfield, including Bundarra
country and Byron Plains between 1835 and 1840.”
Again referring to the settlement of Patrick Leslie at
Canning Downs near Warwick in 1840, he wrote: —
“At the time Mr. Leslie settled in Darling Downs,
the district of Moreton was still a penal settlement,
consequently no communication was opened up with the
Coast. The great northern line or road did not extend
beyond Tenterfield, consequently Cunningham’s track
continued to be followed for several years.”
From the foregoing, Gardner appears to infer that Tenter-
field was known and occupied by 1840. In fact he gives in a
list of stations, owners, and years of being taken up, the
following:—
“Furracabad (R. R. Mackenzie), 1839.
“Tenterfield (R. R. Mackenzie), 1840.”
THOMAS HEWITT
Another interesting journey undertaken in those early
years was that by Thomas Hewitt. In company with Walter
Hindmarsh, Great-grandfather of Lt.-Col. M. F. Bruxner,
M.L.A., Mr. Hewitt came to N.S.W. from Scotland in
1828, under engagement to the Australian Agricultural Coy.
at Port Stephens, and managed some of their stations.
In 1838 he selected Stonehenge Station near Glen Innes
for Archibald Boyd. At that time he had ventured
farther north than any other white settler in New England.
The only communication for supplies, and outlet for wool
was with the Hunter River, hundreds of miles by bad roads
to the south. The country to the east was extremely rough
and unknown. He determined to find a track to the North


Coast which Was then beginning to opeh dp.
In or about 1840 he set out, accompanied by William
Cowan and a black boy. The party travelled northwards to
Tenterfield, and from there blazed a trail via Sandy Hills
towards Tabulam, where it joined the trail made by the
Ogilvies. The journey was completed in three weeks.
The remarkable rock at the eastern end of the Boonoo
Boonoo Range was named Wellington’s Lookout by Hewitt.
The compass used by him is still in the possession of his
grandson, Mr. N. C. Hewitt, of Tweed Heads.
Soon afterwards a track, capable of being used by bullock
drays, was cleared. This followed the blazed line. There-
after, from early in 1842 almost the whole of the traffic to and
from Northern New England traversed the new road from
Tenterfield to Grafton.
Thomas Hewitt did not claim to be the first to visit
Tenterfield. That it was known, and probably occupied,
appears to be assumed.
WHO NAMED TENTERFIELD?
The question of the origin of the name of Tenterfield
has resulted in some difference of opinion, some claiming it
had previous names such as Templestoe Downs, and Templer-
field. The evidence is all in favour of S. A. Donaldson having
given it the name Tenterfield. In a letter dated 28th January,
1914, to George R. Nicholls, of “Llandilo”, St. George, the
then Archbishop of Brisbane, Most Rev. G. F. Donaldson,
a son of Sir S. A. Donaldson, stated:—•
“My father called his station in New England,
Tenterfield, after the name of the house of two maiden
aunts of his, who lived just outside Haddington, in
Scotland. I saw the house myself in August 1904.
It is a pleasant looking house, with a good garden.”
The fact that Donaldson named Tenterfield is an interest-
ing historical event, and has a significance in other ways in
connection with the first occupation of the station.
FIRST OCCUPIER OF TENTERFIELD
We have seen that the question as to who first saw Tenter-
field remains a mystery.
Next comes the question: Who was the first occupier of
Tenterfield? Here again the question is shrouded in un-
certainty.
Claims have been made that J. A. Templer, who about
the same period took up “Nanima,” Wellington, was the
pioneer.
There appears to have been a tradition amongst at least
some of the old residents in the district that Templer was
the first settler.
An article in an 1879 “Town and Country Journal” credits
Templer with having been the pioneer occupier of Tenterfield.
Mr. E. E. Darwell, of “Nenindie”, North Springwood,
in a letter in the Sydney Morning Herald of 4/9/’1927,
claimed:
“Mr. Templer took up country which he named
Templerfield, and stocked the same with sheep. Owing
to the blacks worrying his shepherds, he decided to sell
when a suitable opportunity came. Eventually Mr.
(Sir) R. R. Mackenzie bought the Station, some time
afterwards selling it to Mr. (Sir) S. A. Donaldson.
Then the change of name to Tenterfield, and the S.A.D.
brand came to light. lam certain of my facts, coming
as they do from conversations with members of the
Templer family, the last of which took place with the late
Mr. E. M. Templer in l9ii.”
While the foregoing evidence appears to give substantial
support to the claim made for Templer, on the other hand
there is no record in the Lands Department of any legal oc-
cupation of Tenterfield by him. If he did occupy this
area, he did not obtain any legal title to it.
It appears probable that Templer occupied a portion of
Tenterfield with his sheep about 1840, met trouble with the
blacks, and having secured other property at Wellington,
quickly sold his interests here to Mackenzie.
FIRST LOCAL OCCUPIER
Research made by the Lands Department, at the request
of the Tenterfield District Historical Society, has definitely
revealed that the first occupier of Tenterfield with a legal title
was R. R. Mackenzie.
The first official record of Tenterfield is as under:—•
“Licence to depasture stock No. 702. Date 22nd July.
Name: R. R. Mackenzie.
Residence: Tenterfield.
Situation: Tenterfield.
District: New England.
Period: From Ist July 1842 to 30th June 1843.
Amount: £10.”
DONALDSON'S CONNECTION
The first official mention of S. A. Donaldson’s con-
nection with Tenterfield is that he applied for the Licence of
this station on 28th September, 1844, and it was granted as
dating from Ist July, 1844, to 30th June, 1845.
It appears certain that R. R. Mackenzie and S. A. Donald-
son were partners or associated in some way in the holding
of Tenterfield, when it was held in Mackenzie’s name.
Donaldson seems to have had by far the larger financial
interest in the venture. It was he who named the Station,
and the name appeared in the Licence granted to Mackenzie
on Ist July, 1842.
The following is an extract from an original letter of
S. A. Donaldson to Messrs. Donaldson and Lambert, dated
Sydney 7th June, 1841:
“I shall shear 18,000 sheep, at the new station under
Robert Mackenzie, this year. I put down my shipment
at 150 bales. But as they will be heavy bales, and
well got up, the number may be smaller. The weight
however should be at least 36,000 to 40,000 lbs.”
We have here two very interesting and important facts
revealed.
First, that Donaldson was the chief partner, and possibly
sole owner, of the station. This was borne out later, in
1844, when Donaldson took the Station in his own name,
and Mackenzie became his Manager.
The second fact revealed is that at the date of the letter,
7th June, 1841, more than a year before the issue of a legal
title, the station was then well established, with 18,000 sheep,
and consequently must have been occupied for many months.
It seems safe to infer therefore, that Tenterfield was occupied
not later than 1840.
PRIMITIVE TENTERFIELD
When the first settlers appeared, over a century ago, the
whole district, with a few small areas excepted, was well
grassed, open eucalyptus forest. There was very little under-
growth, and the trees were considerably larger than the average
present-day tree, many of the latter being second growth.
An area of open grassed country to the north-east of the


*
The First White Child
?
It is claimed by some old settlers that the first (
white child born in Tenterfield was William Bailey, I
who was born in the old home at the south-west corner I
of Scott and Molesworth Streets. |
As registration of births was not then compulsory I
it is difficult now to confirm this. I
j
First Registered Birth |
After the registration of birth, death, and marriages |
became compulsory, the first birth registered was that I
of Herbert Merrell, born 26th August, 1856, registered |
Bth October, 1856. )
j
First Registered Death j
The first death registered was of Henry Kenny- |
Shepherd, died 17th April, 1856, at Undercliffe, cause *
unknown. |
i-i .-i —i in ■■■ —I —i ■■■ ■■■ ■■■ ■- ♦
present town, of about 1000 acres, was known as The Plain.
Another area of about 200 acres of similar country was
situated in the vicinity of the Golf Links, while another
open area of about 800 acres was spread over Barney Downs
Station.
The whole area teemed with native animals and birds, and
was a blackfellows’ paradise.
The creeks were not the shallow, silted streams of the
present day, but contained long and deep waterholes.
This virgin land of plenty was the summer home of the
aborigines from both east and west. Deeply did they resent
the invasion of the white man, with his flocks and herds, and
disturbance of their hunting grounds. Very grim at times
was their way of showing their resentment to the lonely
trespassing shepherds.
This was the scene on which the pioneers gazed, and
which was primitive Tenterfield over a century ago.
BRIEF STATION HISTORY
All the country surrounding Tenterfield Station was soon
taken up, the following stations being formed: Bolivia to the
south, Barney Downs to the east, Clifton and The Mole to
the west, and Ballandean, Boonoo Boonoo and Bookookoorara
to the north.
In the earlier years Tenterfield was a sheep station. The
sheep were shepherded in flocks of about 1000, and distributed
in suitable positions over the 100,000 acres of unfenced
station property. They were folded at night in yards
erected at each of these centres. Several of these were in or
adjacent to the present town area. Huts were erected at the
yards for the shepherd, and watchman or hutkeeper, who, at
least on lonely stations, relieved the shepherd at nights.
Blacks and dingoes menaced the sheep in those yeats.
Horses and some cattle were also reared, and the SAD
brand became known far and wide.
In 1848 Donaldson secured a Lease for a number of years,
in place, of the Annual.Licence. As the years passed, and
more settlers arrived and desired land of their own, a Gov-
ernment sale of 44 lots of country land from 42 to 84
acres at £1 per acre, was held in December, 1859.
When “free selection” came in, as may be imagined, large
areas of what had been station leasehold were quickly taken
up. This severely reduced both the original area and
carrying capacity of the Station. The Station itself secured
several thousands of acres of freehold. This was largely
added to by various means, until many thousands of acres
were secured to the Station, in addition to leased areas.
During the occupation of Walker Trustees, owing to the
prevalence of sickness the sheep were sold, and Tenterfield
became a successful cattle station. Finally, during their
possession, the Station was subdivided and sold for closer
settlement, on November 7th, 1907.
Those who held Tenterfield Station under legal title were
as follows:
R. R. Mackenzie.
S. A. Donaldson.
Riley and Cowper (in association with S. A. Donaldson).
W. B. Christian.
Bassett (who on Mr. Christian’s death wound up
the estate).
Walker Trustees (until subdivision).
Simpson and Readett.
A Close Shave
The following incident happened in Tenterfield when Mr.
Isaac Whereat kept a store at the comer of Rouse and High
Streets, which originally was the old Maryland Store. The
store was later destroyed by fire and the present buildings
erected, the old stone walls being used in the new buildings.
The floor originally was about on a level with High Street
where the present door exists. After the fire, the ground
was excavated, bringing the present floor nearly on a level
with the Rouse Street entrance.
A door led to High Street in Mr. Whereat’s time and there
were verandah posts on the edge of the footpath to which
horses were tied. Across the street was Cavanough’s chemist
shop, also with verandah posts facing High Street.
A shop assistant was demonstrating to a prospective
purchaser a second-hand .44 calibre repeating Winchester
rifle. Quite unknown to him, a cartridge had remained in
the magazine. Suddenly a loud explosion took place as the
rifle was pointed towards the High Street door. The bullet
grazed the ear of Mrs. Murphy, who kept a fruit shop in town
and who was then on the footpath and apparently about to
enter the shop. It then passed through the upper part of
the neck near the mane of a grey horse belonging to Mr. Tom
Murphy, which was tied to a post. Crossing the street the
bullet finally lodged in one of the verandah posts at the
chemist’s shop. _


EARLY HISTORY OF TENTERFIELD STATION
THE outstanding figure of Tenterfield for the first 20 years was S. A. Donaldson. He was born
in London on 10th December, 1812, had Scottish connections, and was educated privately.
In 1832 he was sent to the silver mines in Mexico for business training. Returning to England
in 1834 he migrated to Sydney to enter the employ of Dawes, Gore and Coy., rising later to be
head of the firm and transforming it into Donaldson & Co.
In addition to his business activities, which included
Tenterfield and Clifton Stations, he took an active part in
public and political life, attaining to many offices, including
that of first Premier of N.S.W. under responsible government
in 1856.
His public life was stormy, and included the fighting of a
duel in September, 1851, with Sir Thomas Mitchell, which
is historic as being the last duel fought in Australia. They
exchanged three shots each, one ball passing through Donald-
son’s hat, and another close to Mitchell’s throat. The seconds
then stopped the combat.
Donaldson usually visited Tenterfield once or twice a
year, generally travelling via the Clarence River. Many
memories of his comings and goings were common there.
One incident took place at Tom Mylne’s Eatonsville
Station, where Donaldson was staying one night. A parti-
cularly wild bullock had been yarded. He undertook for a
wager to deal with the bullock in Mexican Matador style.
Mylne put his money on the bullock. Next morning the
wild bullock was drafted into a yard by himself. Donaldson,
attired in a red shirt, and armed with a long sharpened pole,
entered the yard and slowly approached, fixing the animal
with a steady gaze as if to hypnotise him. The bullock
charged. Donaldson met him with the sharp pole, but
unfortunately the other end was against his stomach. When
the cloud of dust cleared, the bullock was seen making off,
with the red shirt on his horns, and Donaldson was lying in
the yard as if dead. It was some days before he was able
to resume his journey.
Donaldson bred fine cattle at Tenterfield, and was always
on the lookout to improve his stock. An amusing incident,
but not to Donaldson, is related by the Hon. A. Norton,
in his “Reminiscences of the Fifties”, in which he tells of
assisting in droving a mob of cattle from the Clarence via
Tenterfield to Victoria, in 1857. A young man named
Podmore was assisting. He was the son of an English
clergyman. On arrival in Australia, he was sent to
take charge of the Station store at Tenterfield. At one time
the station hands were busy, and the station being out of
meat, Podmore was left to get a fat animal from amongst
the dairy cattle, and kill it for meat. In the evening the
men asked him how he had fared. “Splendid,” he said, “I
got a fine fat cow.” And he had, for it turned out to be
Donaldson’s only imported Shorthorn cow!
In 1859 Donaldson returned to England, taking up re-
sidence there, and died on 11th January, 1867.
EARLY MANAGERS.
R. R. Mackenzie managed Tenterfield Station when it
was held in his name in the pioneering stage. He con-
tinued as manager when Donaldson took over the station,
living at the head station till 1848, and appears to have had
some financial interest in both Tenterfield and Clifton Sta-
tions at times.
About 1848, a tragic murder and suicide of employees
took place at the Homestead. This so unnerved Mrs. Mac-
kenzie that she refused to reside there. Mackenzie then
transfererd to Clifton, in which Donaldson was interested.
Dr. R. J. Traill, who had been managing Clifton, took
over at Tenterfield. He held the position until late in
1854, when he resigned to manage Collaroy Station at
Merriwa.
Frederick King then became manager and appears to have
been followed by John Ross about 1859.
SIR ROBERT RAMSAY MACKENZIE.
R. R. Mackenzie was the third son of Sir George Mac-
kenzie, of Coul, Scotland. He arrived in N.S.W. in
1826. He held Salisbury in Southern New England in
1837, and in 1839 took up Furracabad, Glen Innes, which
in turn passed to Major Innes, after whom the town was
named.
As has already been shown Mackenzie was in occupation
of Tenterfield about 1840 or 1841, and obtained a legal title
in 1842. He appears to have been drifting into financial
difficulties about that period, and his friend Donaldson
apparently came into the picture with considerable financial
assistance. A little later in 1846, he married Louisa
Alexandria, daughter of Richard Jones, M.L.A., of Sydney,
a wealthy gentleman.
Mackenzie was associated with Tenterfield and Clifton
Stations until 1854. On Ist March of that year Mackenzie
transferred all his interests in Clifton to Donaldson, including
15,275 sheep, Dr. Traill taking over the station on Donaldson’s
account.
Mt. Mackenzie, the highest mountain bordering Tenterfield
on die south-west, bears his name.
Mackenzie next settled in Queensland. In 1859 he
became Colonial Treasurer, and in 1867 Premier. In 1868
he succeeded to the Baronetry in Scodand, and died there
on September 19, 1873.
DR. ROLAND JOHN TRAILL.
Dr. R. J. Traill earned a reputation of being a very
conscientious and able station manager and was held in
high esteem.
He belonged to an old Shetland Island family, and was
the third son of Rev. James Traill, Scotland, being bom on
25th November, 1814. He is said to have had associations
with Haddington, where relatives, aunts, of S. A. Donaldson,
lived, the name of whose house, “Tenterfield”, was given to


this town by Donaldson. He studied medicine at Edinburgh
University, securing the M.R.C.S. and M.D. degrees.
He arrived at Sydney on the barque “Chatham” on 23rd
December, 1841, and was registered as a medical practitioner
in 1842. Dr. Traill practised for a short period at Grafton
and Tenterfield, but while there was ample work, and long
distances to travel, there was not a living in it. He was
interested in the land and stock, and about 1843 became
manager of Clifton Station, and later, in 1848, of Tenterfield
Station for Donaldson, where he rendered excellent service.
Dr. Traill was evidently the first doctor in Tenterfield,
and often rendered medical assistance, while holding the
position of Station Manager.
Dr. Traill, on February 8, 1851, married Elizabeth Hannah,
eldest daughter of Archibald Windeyer, of “Kinross”, Ray-
mond Terrace, and was a brother-in-law of Edward Irby, of
Bolivia Station. There were eight sons in the family.
Dr. Traill’s association with Tenterfield is commemorated
in the name of the bluff rocky mountain, to the west of the
town, “The Doctor’s Nose.”
The name is said to have originated as follows:
“One day whilst searching with some station hands
for some lost sheep, near the mountain, he was unable to
see them. One of the men remarked jocularly, ‘Why
Doctor, there they are under your very nose’.”
It is very, interesting to note, in a letter written by the
Doctor to Donaldson’s office in Sydney, dated 18/1/1854,
the following in relation to 220 missing sheep:—He has been
referring to remittances from the Station, and the George
Inn” owned by the Station and of which Richard Baker held
the licence. He wrote: —
“Baker, I know, has another remittance, but I have
him out looking for a lot of sheep that have been lost
for some days, and about which there appears to be some
mystery. As no trace whatever can be found of them, I
begin to suspect foul play.”
Dr. Traill resigned as manager in 1854 to become manager
of Collaroy Station, Merriwa. In 1861 he became a partner
in Collaroy and later purchased other stations near Cassilis.
He died at Collaroy Station on August 16, 1873.
PASTORAL TO FARMING
A correspondent of the "Town and Country Journal" of 30th August, 1879, writing of Tenter-
field, in the "middle ages" of last century, wrote: —
"The pastoral period appears to have been a happy one and prosperity attended the town and
district. The flocks and herds increased, and all went well with the squatter kings, who sup-
ported the embryo Tenterfield, and whose shearers and stockmen enlivened the neighbourhood
with their annual revelry, during the process of 'lambing down.' "
The Free Selector period commenced in 1862, when in
that year fifteen free selectors had the temerity to settle
down on the squatters’ runs; and during the following sixteen
years the selections increased to nearly 1000.
In three years, 1876-1878, the sum of £26,862 was sent
by the people to the Treasury, for the purchase of land in
the district.
The farmers, in their effort to grow wheat, maize, and
other crops, had much to contend with—distance from markets,
bad communications, and low price were a handicap, as were
the depredations of the native animals. Even as late as
1894, the Tenterfield Pastures Protection Board, paid, during
the month of June, for the scalps of noxious animals as fol-
lows:—
Scrub wallaby 8,980, rock wallaby 11,634, native
dogs 320, kangaroo rats and bandicoots 2,223. This
does not take into account the thousands of kangaroos
and wallaroos.
Wheat and such crops were harvested with reaping hooks
in the earlier years, but machinery was used in the latter
period.
FLOUR MILLS.
The new settlers worked hard, and lived economically,
their labours eventually resulting in large areas of wheat
being grown.
The earlier settlers ground their wheat for home use by
hand mills. As time went on the Irbys erected a flour
mill at Cottesbrook, which was run by water power.
Tenterfield Station in 1854-5 erected a steam-powered mill
across the creek to the east of the Homestead. In 1866 this
mill was purchased by E. O’Connell and G. Dawson for
£2,500. At a later period it came into the possession of
E. R. Whereat, and was eventually demolished.
Another mill, Geldart’s, was erected at Bryan’s Gap, later
removed to opposite the old Convent in Miles Street, and
finally destroyed by fire.
Another mill, Peberdy’s, was erected in Manners Street,
below Reid’s store. This came into the possession of the
Reid family. Owing to the cessation of wheat growing in
the district this mill finally closed. Part of the building
still remains, a relic of a departed industry.
Mr. Isaac Whereat in his reminiscences wrote: —
“The products of Tenterfield in the olden times
were chiefly wheat, wool, cattle and horses. In the year
1870 there were 44,000 bushels of wheat grown in the
district, and the price averaged from 6/- to 6/6 bushel,
and I remember flour being as high as £5 per bag. At
that time Tenterfield supplied Stanthorpe, Emmaville,
and Timbarra with flour.
“There were about 40,000 to 44,000 sheep shorn on
Tenterfield and Clifton Stations, and our fat cattle were
sent to the Maitland markets.
“Horses at that time were of very little value. One
could buy a good draught, or saddle hack, for £7. I
have known a mob of broken and unbroken horses sold
out of the pound yard at £1 per head.”


ADJOINING STATIONS
ALTHOUGH the history of Tenterfield Station is the history of the town in its earliest days, the
adjacent Stations made no small contribution to the development of the town and district.
CLIFTON STATION
Clifton Station was officially taken up by R. R. Mackenzie
in association with S. A. Donaldson, about 1844, when
Dr. R. J. Traill appears to have taken over the manage-
ment. Probably it had been occupied for some time prior
to that date.
A description of Clifton Station and some of its history
is given by a correspondent of the “Town and Country
Journal” in the issue of 5/7/1879 as follows:
“This Station, situated on Tenterfield Creek, is the
property of W. R. Lawson, and he has had possession for
the past 15 years. From the sketch I send you it will be
seen that it has large pretensions to beauty. The river,
on the bank of which grow some magnificent willows, winds
immediately in front, while in the background rise the high
magnificent range of mountains, which here are the boundary
between the two colonies. It was originally taken up 35
years ago, by Sir Robert Ramsay Mackenzie, from whom
it passed into the hands of Messrs. Cowper and Riley, being
bought by Mr. Lawson at auction. Although the country
around is somewhat rough, in places very much so, im-
mediately in the vicinity of the homestead, it is level, lightly
timbered and some very rich soil patches afford every
facility for growing produce for Station use.
“Clifton is essentially a sheep run, there being but 400
head of cattle to 12,000 sheep, and it was one of the very
few runs from which during the late drought they had not
to be travelled to any extent. To keep down the kangaroos,
which here are very numerous, Mr. Lawson has a splendid
pack of hounds and during the time when the river, swollen
and impassable by the late rains, prevented me from pro-
ceeding, I had the pleasure, as well as the boggy nature of the
soil would admit, of many an exciting chase. During the
couple of hours—even kangaroo hunting during wet, cold
weather, for longer than that, is rough work—we very seldom
failed to take less than five or six scalps.”
With reference to Mackenzie leaving Clifton, circum-
stances suggest that he was financially involved with Donald-
son. On Ist March, 1854, Dr. Traill, acting for Donaldson,
who was in England at the time, took over Clifton with all
stock and plant. Some time later, Cowper and Riley pur-
chased the Station. Donaldson continued to have a financial
interest in it, as he also had in Tenterfield Station, when
Cowper and Riley purchased it from him.
BOLIVIA STATION.
In the centenary number of the Glen Innes “Examiner”
of 12/10/1939, Miss Florence Irby, grand-daughter of Edward
Irby, wrote: to the late Edward Irby, Bolivia
was first taken up by Edward Hurry in 1840 or 1841. He
named it after Bolivia in South America.
“The aboriginal name for that part was Bilba, meaning
big bushes. Mr. Hurry had a few sheep on Bolivia then.
Mr. Donaldson’s sheep gave them the catarrh so to square
matters Mr. Donaldson purchased the whole concern in 1842,
using Bolivia for an out-station of Tenterfield, Mr. Mackenzie
being in charge of the outer.”
Mr. Irby and his brother Leonard arrived at Deepwater
Station in July 1842 passing through Tenterfield on the way
and naming “The Bluff” Mountain “St. Swithin’s Bluff” as
they passed it on that Saint’s day.”
Writing of that early period Mr. Edward Irby said:—■
“After a year or so sojourn at Deepwater (the colony
then being in a most depressed state with no apparent outlet
for surplus stock) I left Deepwater with the intention of
returning to England; but just at that time the boiling down
for the fat was thought of and a minimum price for surplus
stock could be fairly calculated.
“Being much taken with the rough, do-as-you-like life of
the bush, with a delightful climate on New England and
having a chance of purchasing that portion of Stuart A.
Donaldson’s pastoral property known as Bolivia, and which
adjoined my first bush home in Deepwater, and with my
Windeyer friends so close at hand, I arranged with Mr.
Donaldson’s manager, Mr. R. R. Mackenzie, for the purchase.
“I knew perfectly well that it was much inferior country
to Tenterfield and better adapted for cattle than sheep but
having no great money-making proclivities and more regard
for a healthy climate and grand homestead position and
proximity to friends, I purchased, giving £IOO for the run
and the improvements on it. At that time and for some
years, whilst guarding ourselves, our men and our stock from
the blacks, we paid only £lO a year licence.”
A letter written by Leonard Irby to his sister Carrie in
England and headed “Bolivia, Clarence River, N.S.W.” and
dated April 19th, 1844, reveals that he and his brother Edward
were then established at Bolivia and had apparently been there
for some time.
Edward Irby married Mary, second daughter of Archibald
Windeyer, of “Kinross,” Raymond Terrace, on August 3rd,
1850. She was a sister of Mrs. Traill. He held Bolivia
till 1891 and died at Tenterfield on July 27th, 1900, in his
80th year.
BARNEY DOWNS STATION
Barney Downs Station was taken up by Colonel Barney,
an ex-Indian officer, soon after the occupation of Tenterfield.
He held it for some years and then disposed of it to Brown
and Herring. The head Station was situated five or six
miles east of Tenterfield and the original road to the Clarence
is said to have passed on the southern side of the Station
homestead.
At June 30, 1847, the licence for Barney Downs Station
was held by Browne and Herring; Clifton Station by S. A.
Donaldson; and Bolivia Station by Edward Irby. The
licences probably covered the previous (approximately) six


months.
When these Stations were taken up as leased runs in the
year 1848 under the Waste Lands Act of 1846-47, they were
leased as follows (vide Gazette August 14th, 1848) : —Barney
Downs of 90,000 acres, Browne and Herring (per H. H.
Browne), grazing capacity 700 cattle and 7000 sheep; Clifton
Station of 70,000 acres, Alex. S. Donaldson, grazing capacity
18,000 sheep.
At the end of 1865 Barney Downs was held by D.
Dickson, the area of which had been reduced to 35,000 acres,
the annual rent then being £27/10/0. Clifton was still held
by S. A. Donaldson, the area being reduced to 58,680 acres,
with an annual rental of £35. Bolivia at the same period
was still held by E. Irby. The area was 49,680 acres, with
an annual rental of £25.
In 1879 Barney Downs had passed into the hands of
J. C. and J. W. Dickson. It comprised 33,000 acres, the
annual rent of which was £SO. The holders of Clifton were
J. B. Watt and W. O. Gilchrist. The area was 57,000
acres, and the rental £122/10/0 per annum. Bolivia was
held by E. Irby. It had an area of 51,700 acres, the rental
being £llO per annum.
Following the establishment of Pastoral Holdings under
the Crown Lands Act of 1884, Barney Downs Pastoral Hold-
ing runs, comprising Barney Downs and Frocester, came into
being. This holding contained 75,063 acres of leasehold
area, with an annual rent of £499/2/11, and a resumed area
under licence of 66,253 acres at a licence fee of £276/1/0,
the registered holders being Messrs. James Gordon and
Walter Dickson.
Clifton Pastoral Holding, comprising Clifton run, also
came into being at this time. This holding embraced a
leasehold area of 44,020 acres at an anual rent of £275/2/6,
and a resumed area of 37,010 acres under licence at an
annual fee of £154/4/2, the holders being the Hon. J. B.
Watt and William O. Gilchist.
Bolivia Pastoral Holding, as established, included Bolivia
run. There were 39,017 acres of leasehold area at an
annual rental of £325/2/10, and a resumed area of 32,222
acres under licence fee of £167/16/6 per annum. Mr.
Edward Irby was the holder.
No change of holders occurred up to 1890.
TENTERFIELD POST OFFICE
■pHE first Post Office and mail service in Tenterfield were established on Ist January, 1849.
The Post Office was situated in the Station Store, a convict-built brick building, across Tenter-
field Creek, from the northern end of Rouse Street, and nearly two miles from the present Post
Office.
Prior to this any well-known district man travelling to
or from the settlement was expected and willing to act in
the capacity of private mailman.
Simon McEachnie, the Station storekeeper, was the first
unofficial postmaster . He was succeeded by Mr. Deuchar,
and he again by Alfred Canning.
When the new township began to develop, the need for
a more centrally situated post office became urgent, and it
was removed to the township.
It is possible that the Post Office was first removed
to a building which once stood on the site of Mr. N. H. E.
Jennings’ office in Rouse Street, and that Alfred Canning,
who was also Registrar for a time, kept it there. Some old
residents, now dead, stated there had once been a Post
Office there.
The first “official” Postmaster was Eugene O’Connell, his
appointment dating from 11th December, 1858, and the
office was situated in his store in High Street, opposite the
public school.
When telegraphy was established in N.S.W., for a
considerable period it was kept separate from the Postal
Department. In Tenterfield the Telegraph Office was at
times housed in the same office as the Post Office, and at
others in a separate office.
In 1862 a Telegraph Office was set up in Tenterfield in
George Willson’s “Maryland Store” at the south-east comer
of the junction of Rouse and High Streets. It appears
probable that the Post Office was also removed there at that
time, but it is not certain.
When, about 1865, the new Telegraph Office was opened
at the south-west comer of Logan and Molesworth Streets,
the Post Office was at O’Connell’s Store, remaining there
till it was removed to the new Telegraph Office on Ist
August, 1869, with Mrs. E. J. Tucker, wife of the Telegraph
Master, Mr. A. Tucker, as Postmistress.
Owing to Mrs. Tucker’s illness, the Post Office was
again removed, on Ist May, 1872, to the Maryland Store
(later owned by C. A. Lee), where it remained for six months.
It was then returned to the Telegraph Office, where the
Telegraph Master, Mr. J. Quodling, combined the two offices
from Ist October, 1872. The offices were permanently com-
bined on Ist July, 1875.
On Bth September, 1875, R. H. Hipsley became Post and
Telegraph Master, and during his term, about 1881, the
offices were removed to the fine building at the intersection
of Rouse and Manners Street.
The old Telegraph Office at the comer of Logan and
Molesworth Streets was built as a repeating station for
messages between N.S.W. and Queensland, and housed both
a Queensland, and N.S.W. staff. The Queensland staff
never occupied the offices prepared for them in the new
Post Office.
The Telephone Exchange appears to have been installed
at Tenterfield towards the latter end of last century.
Recently commodious new buildings have been constructed
in connection with the Telephone Exchange, and the Post
Office has been undergoing extensive alterations.
Following are the Postmasters, and approximate date of
commencing service in Tenterfield, during the past 35-40
years: —
Messrs. Eldershaw 1908, Miller 1911, Davidson 1914,
A. J. Thorpe 1917, S. Coulton 1919, J. S. Hay 1922, T.
Stokes 1925, E. Cooper 1928, J. H. Dugan 1930, H. V.
Geeves 1939, A. J. Thompson, appointed 1944 and still
occupying the office.


THE MUNICIPALITY
THE gazettal of the incorporation of Tenterfield as a Municipality took place on 22nd November,
1 1871.
Following the discovery of gold in the district, the town had rapidly progressed in business places,
and numbers of residents.
But the so-called streets were in a deplorable condition. It was a common occurrence to see
a bullock dray bogged in Rouse Street, in which large gum and peppermint trees grew.
Manners Street had a deep gully, in places 10 feet wide, running down to the Creek.
A petition, signed by 129 of the more progressive citizens,
asked for incorporation. The first election was held at the
latter end of 1871 and the members of the first Council
elected were: —Messrs. Eugene O’Connell, Thomas Welbum,
J. G. Dickson, M. Curry, T. Peberdy, E. R. Whereat, C.
Pavel, C. Geldart and C. A. Lee. They first met at the
old Court House, when Mr. T. Welbum was elected Mayor,
defeating Mr. O’Connell by one vote.
For subsequent laxity in attendance, Aid. O’Connell was
refused leave to resign, was fined £25, and notified that his
seat had been declared vacant. Mr. J. H. Sommerlad was
elected in his place.
The first Town Clerk was M. O’Brien at a salary of £3O
a year.
The Municipality included an area of farm lands extend-
ing five or six miles outside the town area. This proved to
be a great burden, and was rectified on 9th November, 1910,
when the boundaries were reduced to their present position.
In 1879 the rateable land was valued at approximately
£lOO,OOO (the original area); revenue was £1230; area 42
square miles; 24 miles of streets and roads had been made;
office expenses and salaries were £ll7.
The first Council Chambers were in the brick building in
Rouse Street on the north side of the present “Tenterfield
Star” office, and now occupied by Mrs. V. Stewart as a cafe.
Subsequently, about 1885, a Council Chambers was erected
at the comer of Logan and Manners Street.
This building in turn was re-modelled in 1939, resulting
in the fine offices of the present day.
The passing of the years has brought many improvements.
Miles of streets have been surfaced with bitumen; many more
miles have been formed and gravelled; light and power are
provided by a Municipal electricity undertaking; sanitary and
garbage services operate; a splendid water supply has been
provided; and a sewerage system has passed the preliminary
stages.
Copy of Minutes of first Council Meeting
in Tenterfield.
MUNICIPAL DISTRICT, TENTERFIELD.
Thursday, 1 sth February, 1872.
The first meeting of the Municipal Council of Tenterfield
was held this day at the Court House, Tenterfield, for the
purpose of electing a Mayor. G. W. F. Addison presided
as Returning Officer. All the members of the Council were
present, viz., Aldermen O’Connell, Welbum, Dickson, Curry,
Peberdy, Whereat, Pavel, Geldart, Lee.
Proposed by Alderman Whereat seconded by Alderman
Geldart; That the proceedings of this meeting be held with
closed doors.
Proposed as an amendment by Alderman Peberdy,
seconded by Alderman O’Connell, that the proceedings be
held openly. The amendment was put when there appeared;
For the amendment 4 votes; against it 5 votes.
The Chairman declared the original motion carried, and
the room was cleared of all strangers.
It was proposed by Alderman Whereat and seconded by
Alderman Dickson: “That the election of Mayor be taken
by ballot.” Whereupon Alderman Dickson (probably an
error, and should be Peberdy) moved as an amendment,
seconded by Alderman O’Connell, “That the election be by
open ballot.” For the amendment 4 votes; against it, 5 votes.
The original motion was carried.
Proposed by Alderman Peberdy, seconded by Alderman
Curry: “That Alderman Eugene O’Connell be Mayor for
the Municipal District of Tenterfield”
“Proposed by Alderman Whereat, seconded by Alderman
Geldart, that Alderman Thomas Welbum be Mayor for the
Municipal District of Tenterfield.”
A ballot was then taken, after which the Returning Officer
announced the result: —
For Alderman Eugene O’Connell, 3 votes; for Alderman
Thomas Welbum, 4 votes.
The Returning Officer then declared that Alderman
Thomas Welbum was duly elected Mayor for the Municipal
District of Tenterfield.
Alderman Welbum returned thanks for his election. At
the request of the Returning Officer, Alderman Welbum then
came forward and made his declaration of office as Mayor.
The meeting then terminated.
NOTE ON MINUTES.
It will be noted that the copy of the minutes in the
Minute Book is not signed; also that there is an apparent
error in first recording that Alderman Dickson seconded a
motion, “That the election of Mayor be taken by ballot,”
and then going on to state that Alderman Dickson moved
an amendment, “That the election be by open ballot.”
On perusing the minutes of some weeks later, a complaint
is noted of the slow delivery of books ordered for the Council.
Evidently the minutes of the first few meetings were written
in a temporary book, and then copied into the minute
book when it arrived . All the minutes of succeeding meetings
were signed by the Mayor, but he either missed signing the
first minutes, or possibly they should have been signed by W.
Addison,- the Chairman.
BUSINESS AT SUCCEEDING MEETINGS.
At the second meeting of the Council, held on 20th
February, 1872, the salary of the Council Clerk was fixed
at £3O per annum, and it was decided to insert an advertise-
ment in the “Tenterfield Star” calling applications for the


—
First Selector at Tenterfield
The Lands Department stated in a letter to the
Historical Society: “The first selector under the
Crown Lands Act in the Tenterfield district was
Bernard Donaghey, of Tenterfield, who on 20th May,
1862, took up a Conditional Purchase 62/2655, an area
of 43 acres, Parish of Tenterfield, County of Clive.”
This is the property on the old coastal road about
three miles from Tenterfield on which Mr. Samuel
Chapman now resides. Mrs. Chapman is a grand-
daughter of Bernard Donaghey.
*
office. A Committee consisting of Aldermen Lee, Peberdy,
and O’Connell was appointed to secure a building for Council
Chambers, and arrange for furniture for same.
At the next meeting, held on February 26th, 1872, Mr.
M. O’Brien was selected as Council Clerk. His bondsmen
were Messrs. John Whitton and Joseph Miller.
“It was unanimously decided that Mr. Reid’s offer, of
making nine chairs, one armchair, and one large table, be ac-
cepted, for sixteen pounds, and that the chairs be made with
hair cloth seats.”
At a meeting held on 28th March, 1872, Messrs. E.
Juergens and R. W. Gill were appointed valuators, the re-
muneration having previously been fixed at £lO each.
On 15 th April of the same year Sgt. Thomas Goldrick
was appointed “Inspector of Nuisances” at £5 per year. A
complaint was made by the Sergeant at the low amount at a
later meeting.
LAST MEETING RECORDED IN FIRST
MINUTE BOOK.
The last meeting recorded in the First Minute Book was
held on 16th July, 1877. Those present were:—Aldermen
Thomas Peberdy (Mayor), Heiss, Merrell, Cavanagh,
O’Connell (evidently back in Council), E. R. Whereat, Styles,
and I. Whereat.
Correspondence included a letter from Aid. Comey, tender-
ing his resignation, and another from—
“B. A. Kemp, complaining of the flow of water, over his
verandah, from the streets during wet weather.”
Alderman E. R. Whereat gave notice that he would move
at next meeting: —
“That owing to the failure of the Poundkeeper to dis-
charge his duties, in consequence of his continued drunken-
ness, the Mayor be requested to call upon such officer to
show cause why he should not be dismissed from his office.”
TENTERFIELD MAYORS SINCE 1872
1872 Thomas Welbum 1900 William Reid
1873 Edward R. Whereat 1901 Thomas M. Walker
1874 Edward R. Whereat 1902 Thomas M. Walker
1875 Charles A. Lee 1903 Thomas M. Walker
1876 Erasmus Styles 1904 Thomas M. Walker
1877 Thomas Peberdy 1905 E. H. Juergens
1878 Thomas Peberdy 1906 E. H. Juergens
1879 E. R. Whereat 1907 Frederick Kneipp
1880 E. R. Whereat 1908 William Reid
1881 Erasmus Styles 1909 G. H. T. Mitchell
1882 David E. Corney 1910 W. F. Stewart
1883 H. F. Robinson 1911 E. H. Juergens
1884 H. F. Robinson 1912 G. H. T. Mitchell
1885 H. F. Robinson 1913 G. H. T. Mitchell
1886 Thomas A. Lewis 1914 W. F. Stewart
1887 Thomas A. Lewis 1915 F. Kneipp
1888 E. R. Whereat 1916 W. F. Stewart
1889 E. R. Whereat 1917 W. F. Stewart
1890 William Reid 1918 W. F. Stewart
1891 Willian Reid 1919 E. J. Petherick
1892 C. Burgess 1920 G. H. T. Mitchell
1893 C. Burgess 1921 F. Kneipp
1894 John Coxall 1922 F. Kneipp
1895 John H. Reid 1923 F. Kneipp
1896 John H. Reid 1924 F. Kneipp
1897 Mortimer Kelly 1925 F. Kneipp
1898 J. H. Reid 1926 S. Armstrong
1899 Emil H. Juergens 1927 S- Armstrong
1928 S. Armstrong 1937 E. J. Petherick
1929 R. Lance Walker for 1938 Harold Curry
3 months. (Administrator 1939 Harold Curry
H. C. Burns in charge 1940 Harold Curry
15th March, 1929 to 6th 1941 Harold Curry
July, 1929. A. D. Don- 1942 E. J. Petherick
nelly balance of year, 1943 E. J. Petherick
Mayor of new Council) 1944 E. J. Petherick
1930 A. D. Donnelly 1945 E. J. Petherick
1931 E. J. Petherick 1946 E. J. Petherick
1932 E. J. Petherick 1947 E. J. Petherick
1933 E. J. Petherick 1948 E. J. Petherick
1934 E. J. Petherick 1949 F. Patrick Kiely (pres-
-1935 E. J. Petherick ent Mayor).
1936 A. D. Donnelly
TENTERFIELD COUNCIL TO-DAY
MUNICIPAL COUNCIL 1949: Aldermen F. P. Kiely
(Mayor), G. M. Kneipp (Deputy Mayor), Dr. J. V. Cham-
pain, C. S. White, C. K. Nichols, M. Reid, J. P. Cooper.
C. D. Hollis.
OFFICE STAFF: E. A. Wallace (Town Clerk), R. S.
Brush (Health Officer), T. M. Landers (Deputy Town
Clerk), J. T. Hynes (clerk), Miss Wilma Moore (typiste
clerk).
ELECTRICITY STAFF: A. Hartnup, J. Philip, J.
Welbum, J. Thompson, H. Shaw.
LINESMEN; Gordon McLean, R. McKerihan.
ROADS: James Cubis, Cecil Cannon, R. McDonald,
Martin Kelly.
WATER SUPPLY: Cecil Cubis, E. Gunn.
Tenterfield in 1857
An old print describes Tenterfield as being chiefly a pas-
toral district. About 500 acres of land cultivated.
Magistrates: John Cowper, Ed. Irby, F. King, F. R.
Chester Master, Alex R. Riley, J. H. Ross. C.P.S. and Regis-
trar: Thomas Mountstephen Wright. Chief Constable, Bailiff
and Inspector of Slaughter Houses: William Gordon. Reg-
istrar of Births, etc: Alfred Canning. The Court met every
Friday fortnight and every two months as a Court of Requests,


EARLY PARLIAMENTARY REPRESENTATIVES
responsible government was granted to the Colony of New South Wales in 1856 and S. A.
Donaldson became the first Premier, Queensland was then included in New South Wales.
Tenterfield was included in the large Electorate of New England and Macleay which re-
turned two members. The first two members we re Messrs. Richard Hargrave and Thomas George
Rusden. The first Parliament was dissolved on 18th December, 1857.
For the second Parliament Messrs. Abram Orpen Moriarty
and William Tydd Taylor were elected, but the former soon
resigned and Mr. James Hart was elected in his place.
In 1859 the electorates were re-cast and Tenterfield was
then included in the Electoral District of Tenterfield, the
first Member being Mr. Randolph North. He was followed
in succession by Messrs. Robert Weston, Hugh Gordon, and
Alex Colin Fraser. The lastnamed was elected on 23rd
December, 1869, and continued Member till 3rd February,
1872. He was succeeded by Messrs. Robert Palmer Abbott,
John Dillon, and Augustus Ryan Fraser. Abbott was
Member for Tenterfield from 12th March. 1872, until 12th
October, 1877, holding the office of Secretary for Mines
during portion of 1874 and 1875.
SIR HENRY PARKES.
A. R. Fraser was succeeded by Sir Henry Parkes, who
was elected on 4th December, 1882, and continued Member
for Tenterfield until he resigned on 3rd November, 1884.
During this period he was Colonial Secretary.
Sir Henry had been defeated for East Sydney with the
dismal prospect of being left out in the cold, except some
safe consistency should open its doors to him. Mr. E. R.
Whereat had been nominated for Tenterfield and self-
sacrificingly stood down to allow Sir Henry Parkes to take
the safe seat. It was the custom of his political opponents
to refer to him as “The Member for Whereat.”
On Sir Henry’s election, the Tenterfield “Star” of
6/12/1882 in a leading article, had this to say: —
“The electors of Tenterfield may be congratulated on
having secured as their representative in the forthcoming
Parlimaent so able and distinguished a statesman as Sir
Henry Parkes, and the election on Monday last may
fairly be considered a great local victory. We viewed
Sir Henry Parkes’ defeat at East Sydney when it took
place, in the light of a great calamity, but it is an ill
wind that blows no one any good, his defeat being in
not a few respects a good thing for us. It has brought
Tenterfield into greater prominence than we otherwise
should have been brought, and with regard to the Clarence
and New England Railway, the return of Sir Henry
Parkes must necessarily make him a firm adherent to
the Tenterfield route, for it must be remembered that
when Mr. Whereat offered to retire in his favour, he
stipulated and rightly so, that the Premier should pledge
himself to sit as our Member. This Sir Henry
unmistakably did, his reply to Mr. Whereat being
positive, ‘I consent to be nominated for Tenterfield and
if elected, I will sit and not desert you afterwards’.”
Concerning Mr. Whereat, the article says:
“As regards the true patriotism of Mr. B- R. Whereat
in retiring in favour of Sir Henry Parkes, we cannot speak
too highly. His election was almost a certainty, there
being no announced opponent in the; field, and we do
not hesitate to say that if he had been chosen, he would
have shown himself worthy of the choice. But at the
last moment, when he heard of the Premier’s defeat, he
tendered his position to that gentleman. This is an
act which deserves to be remembered.”
It is rather interesting to note that on nomination day the
“Star” reported:—
“The proceedings were considerably enlivened by the
Tenterfield Brass Band, which appeared for the first time
in public.”
AN EARLY BOOST
Before leaving the early Representatives of Tenterfield, it
may be noted that they were quite as capable of boosting
themselves as the modem members. Tenterfield is said to
have been rather a “sleepy hollow” and unknown, until Mr.
R. Weston, M.P., took it in hand. This is vouched for
by that gentleman in an address delivered by him in Tenterfield
in June, 1861, when he told his constituents:—
“Since I was returned I have made Tenterfield known in
the Legislative Assembly. It had previously beep,
regarded as a township of one store and one public house.”
LATER STATE MEMBERS
When Sir Henry Parkes resigned he was succeeded by
Charles Alfred Lee, who was elected on 20th November, 1884.
Mr. Lee had an unbroken record till his retirement from
political life on 18th February, 1920, a period of over 35
years, during which he was a Cabinet Minister in the 18th.,
20th., 21st., and 22nd. Parliaments of N.S.W. During this
period he at various times was Minister for Justice and
Secretary for Public Works.
A reconstruction of electorates consequent on Federation
brought about the amalgamation of Tenterfield and Richmond
Electorates under the name of Tenterfield, which Mr. Lee
represented. Probably the most important work in which
Mr. Lee was associated in Ministerial capacity was the
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Scheme. His name is perpetuated
in the name Leeton given to one of the towns formed in the
settlement.
Under another Electoral Act Tenterfield was severed from
the Richmond and merged in the Electoral Districts of the
Northern Tableland, represented by Lieut. Col. Bruxner,
D. 5.0., and Messrs. D. H. Drummond and A. McLelland.
When the proportional system of voting was discontinued,
Tenterfield again became a single member electorate and
during the period up to the present has been represented by
Lieut. Col. Bruxner, D.S.O. A separate article deals with
his services,


Prior to the granting of responsible Government to N.S.W.
in 1856, one of the members of the Legislative Council which
then governed the colony, was Stuart Alexander Donaldson,
of Tenterfield Station. As has been previously mentioned,
he also was the first Premier under responsible Government.
A native of Tenterfield, who has attained to high and
responsible positions in N.S.W. is Hon. E. C. Sommerlad,
M.L.C., C.B.E. During the regime of the Stevens-Bruxner
coalition Government, he was appointed a member of the
Legislative Council, where he has rendered good service, and
holds his seat at the present time.
THE FEDERAL SPHERE.
In the Federal sphere of politics Tenterfield has always
been in the forefront. The town is regarded as the cradle
of Federation. It was in the local School of Arts, on 24th
October, 1889, that Sir Henry Parkes made the memorable
speech, which actively set in motion the agitation which
resulted in the establishment of the Federal Commonwealth.
When the question of Federation was submitted to the
people by referendum, Tenterfield voted in favour by a large
majority.
The town was also included in the list of sites for the
Federal Capital, although Canberra won that prize.
Federal Members of the House of Representatives who have
represented Tenterfield are as follows:
Sir Thomas T. Ewing 1901, W. Massey Greene 1910,
Roland Green 1922, H. L. Anthony 1937.
Under the latest electoral redistribution, Tenterfield is
included in the New England Federal Electorate.
BACKGROUND OF "THE SPEECH."
The most momentous and far-reaching event in the history
of Tenterfield was a speech made by Sir Henry Parkes, then
Premier of N.S.W., in the School of Arts on the evening of
October 24th, 1889.
A tablet commemorating the event is affixed to the porch
in Rouse Street leading into what was then the School of
Arts Hall, where Sir Henry spoke. This tablet was unveiled
on October 17th, 1946, by His Royal Highness the Duke
of Gloucester, then Governor-General of the Commonwealth.
Events had happened, including the German grab of a part
of New Guinea and New Britain, which cause thoughtful
Australians deep concern as to the defence of the continent.
Sir Henry Parkes, with a statesman’s vision, saw the position
and the answer to the danger, in a Federated Australia, with
a national parliament dealing with national questions, such as
defence.,
He journeyed to Queensland to consult with political
leaders there and returned to Sydney via Tenterfield, which
some years previously had kindly provided him with a seat
in Parliament. He determined to stay and make a
declaration of a policy for Australia there which he hoped
would arouse the self-governing colonies to their danger and to
a great opportunity. The speech did all he hoped for.
Sir Henry arrived at the railway station, where great
preparations had been made for his reception. The whole
town was expectant.
The business places closed and half the population
gathered at the station to meet him. Flags were flying and
the brass band took an active part in the welcome.
Sir Henry, who was accompanied by Mr. David Christie
Murray, the English novelist, was met on the platform by
Mr. C. A. Lee, M.L.A., Mr, E. R. Whereat, Mayor,
Aldermen W. Reid, W. Merrell, A. G. Weir, D. E. Comey
I. Whereat, J. Williams, C. Burgess, and A. B. Butler, also
many prominent citizens. A detachment of Mounted Infantry
under Lieut. Radford, acted as an escort.
The Mayor read an address of welcome, to which Sir
Henry replied, after which he was escorted to the town. In
the evening the Premier was entertained at a banquet in the
School of Arts, Upwards of 80 persons were present,
including a number of ladies. The Mayor presided, and
Messrs. J. B. Graham and J. H. Reid were vice-Chairmen.
Mr. Lee, M.L.A., and most of the prominent citizens were
present.
In that setting the words were spoken which lifted the
vision of Australian citizens from a narrow, jealous
parochial viewpoint to a broad Australian national
outlook.
David Christie Murray, the English novelist, who accom-
panied Sir Henry, has left a -:<--;k : nn little pen-picture of
him, as he appeared that night. He wrote: —
“The voice was a little veiled by fatigue and age. The
massive shoulders were a little bowed; but the huge
head, with its streaming wave of silver hair and beard
was held as erect as ever. The rough homely features
were as eloquent as the words he spoke; and the instinct
of a natural fighting man lit up the ancient warrior’s
eye.”
Space is not available to give Sir Henry’s speech. This
has been fully recorded and is available for any person
desiring to read it. One or two quotations must suffice:—
“The great question which they had to consider
was, whether the time had now arisen for the creation
on this Australian continent of an Australian Parliament.
In other words, to make himself as plain as possible,
Australia had now a population of three and a half
millions, and the American people numbered only between
three and four millions when they formed the great
Commonwealth of the United States. The numbers
were about the same and, surely what the Americans
had done by war, the Australians could bring about in
peace.
“Believing as he did, that it was essential to preserve
the integrity and security of these colonies, that the
whole of these forces should be amalgamated into one
great federal army —feeling this, and seeing no other
means of attaining the end, it seemed to him that the
time was close at hand when they ought to set about
creating this great national government for all Australia.”
The sympathetic audience loudly applauded the Premier,
as he developed his great vision of a united Commonwealth.
He also dwelt on the tragic mistake of the colonies adopting
different railway guages and pleaded for the adoption of a
united policy which would correct it. At an appropriate
time in his address Sir Henry quoted the lines of BruntOn
Stephens:—
“Not yet her day! How long? Not yet!
There comes her flush of violet,
And, heavenward faces all aflame
With sanguine imminence of mom,
Wait but the sun-kiss to proclaim
The day of the Dominion born.”


It is probable that few of those who took part in that
historic gathering and listened so intently to the thrilling
message of the great statesman grasped even faintly the
significance of what had taken place. But, as long as
Australia lasts as a free nation, the eyes of generation after
generation will turn their eyes and their thoughts to the scene
of that memorable pronouncement —the old School of Arts
Hall in the town of Tenterfield.
LI BUT.-COL. THE HON. MICHAEL FREDERICK
BRUXNER, D. 5.0., M.INST.T., M.L.A.
One of the outstanding figures in the life of Tenterfield
in this later period has been Michael Frederick Bruxner. An
outline of his life and activities is as follows:
Granted the title of Honourable in 1931.
Member of the Distinguished Service Order.
Chevalier of the Legion of Honour (France).
Member of the Institute of Transport.
Born at “Sandilands,” on the Clarence River, on March
25th, 1882, the son of Charles Augustus Bruxner, who
purchased “Sandilands” in 1879, and who bred Hereford
cattle and Clydesdale horses and was one of the pioneers of
the Tenterfield Chilled Meatworks. Mother, Sarah Elizabeth
Bruxner, the eldest daughter of Mr. Henry Barnes, of
Dyraaba.
Educated at home, St. Mark’s Crescent School, Darling
Point, 1892; The Armidale School, 1897; Captain of the
School, 1900. Studied Arts and Law at University of Sydney
and then returned to “Sandilands” and engaged in pastoral
pursuits.
Founded the firm of Bruxner and Cotton, Stock and
Station Agents, Tenterfield, in 1906, and was mainly
responsible for making Tenterfield a stock selling centre.
President of the Tenterfield Jockey Club. Trustee of the
Racecourse and active in all local public affairs.
Took over command of the Tenterfield half Squadron of
Light Horse from Major J. M. Reid in 1910 and won the
Prince of Wales Cup at Albury with the Tenterfield Troop,
representing New South Wales in 1912.
Volunteered for service with the A.I.F. in October, 1914,
and joined the 6th. A.L.H. as Lieutenant; second in command
of “C” Squadron. Sailed with 2nd. Aust. Contingent on
December 20th, 1914. Promoted Captain. Went to
Gallipoli in May, 1915, and was severely wounded on May
26th. After recovery returned to Gallipoli as acting Major
in command of “C” Squadron, and was evacuated ill just
prior to the final evacuation. Rejoined the Regiment at
Maadi and took part in all the subsequent campaigns in
Egypt, Palestine, Sinai, and Syria.
Promoted to Major, Second in Command of the 6th.
Regiment, and in command on several occasions. Seconded
to 2nd. Brigade Headquarters as acting Staff Captain and
then to Anzac Mounted Division Staff as deputy Assistant
Adjutant General, and finally transferred to the general list
and promoted to Lieutenant-Colonel and Assistant Adjutant
and Quartermaster General of the Anzac Mounted Division
under Major-General Sir E. W. C. Chaytor, K.C.M.G.,
D.S.O.
Awarded the D. 5.0., the Legion of Honour, and twice
mentioned in Despatches,
Returned home in July, 1919.
Contested the Northern Tableland Electorate as a member
of the Progressive Party and was elected a member of the
Legislative Assembly in March, 1920, in company with the
Hon. D. H. Drummond. Since then has contested the
Northern Tableland Electorate on two occasions, and the
Tenterfield Electorate on eight occasions, four times being
unopposed. Elected Leader of the Parliamentary Progressive
Party, which was ultimately the Country Party, and has
remained in that position ever since, with the exception of
three years during the Hon. E. A. Buttenshaw’s leadership.
Entered the Bavin Ministry in October, 1927, as Minister
for Local Government, which included the Main Roads
Administration. Remained in office until November, 1930,
and during that period, in conjunction with the late Mr.
H. H. Newell, Chairman of the then Main Roads Board,
carried out the re-classification of the whole of the roads of
N.S.W. and Main Roads organisation, together with the
Divisional Engineer’s set-up which exists to-day.
Helped to form the Stevens-Bruxner Government after the
dismissal of the second Lang Government by Sir Phillip
Game, and held office as Deputy Premier and Minister for
Transport and Local Government until after the elections in
May, 1932, and on the return of the Government continued
in office as Deputy Premier and Minister for Transport from
the 18th June, 1932, to the 16th May, 1941, which covered the
three Stevens-Bruxner Ministries and the Mair-Bruxner
Ministry.
He was acting Premier from 11th March to 2nd October,
1936, and was appointed as N.S.W. representative to the
Coronation of their present Majesties in 1937, and delegate
to the Empire Parliamentary Conference in London at the
same time.
At the outbreak of war Lieut. Colonel Bruxner organised
the National Emergency Services and was Minister in charge
thereof. He was also appointed Minister in charge of
emergency transport and emergency supplies.
On his return from World War I. Lieut. Colonel Bruxner
purchased “Roseneath” from the late Frank Golledge, after-
wards adding part of Mt. Hope portion of “Maidenhead,”
and there has carried on pastoral pursuits ever since, running
merino sheep, stud Hereford cattle (which were recently
dispersed) and stud Clydesdale horses.
In 1908 he married Miss Winifred Katherine Hay Caird,
who came to live at old St. Cuthbert’s in Molesworth Street.
It will be remembered that during the five years of her
husband’s absence on active service, Mrs. Bruxner was
president of the local branch of the Red Cross, which did
great work as always, and when the appeal was made for the
erection of the Memorial at the Gymnasium Hall, Mrs.
Bruxner was successful as the Soldiers’ Queen.
Lieut. Colonel and Mrs. Bruxner have two sons and one
daughter, all born in Tenterfield. The eldest, John Michael
Bruxner, LL.B., is practising at the Bar in Sydney. Helen
Elizabeth lives at home, and James Caird at “Roseneath.”
When Lieut. Colonel Bruxner entered the Bavin Ministry
in 1927 he was compelled to move his family to Sydney,
where he has resided ever since to be close to his Ministerial
and work.
The beautiful little park in Rouse Street was named
“Bruxner Park” in his honour,


Two pictures of High Street, looking east from intersection
of Rouse Street. Both were taken from almost identical
positions—the difference being that the one below was
taken in 1857, and the other in 1949.
The early snap depicts a bullock team owned by William
Bates, a pioneer associated with early Bolivia, and one of.
the early carriers on the Tablelands-Coast route. Mr.
Bates is near the front of the dray. Others in picture are.
Jimmy Longshanks (aborigine) near bullocks, and George
Wheatley, junr., at the back of the dray Mr. Wheatley’s
father owned the Horse and Jockey Hotel.
The 1949 picture shows the National Bank in the foreground
and the century-old Royal Hotel in the background.
Sir Henry Parkes, who made his
immortal speech at Tenterfield which
brought about Federation.
The Cradle of Federation
The School of Arts in which Sir Henry Parkes made his
speech. Under the second window from the right is a plaque
commemorating the speech. The plaque was unveiled by
H.R.H. the Duke of Gloucester in 1946. Steps are being
taken to have the famous building preserved for historical
purposes.


r ___
M^HiS
* 4
Century of Progress . .
One hundred years ago in the building on the right
Tenterfield’s first Post Office was opened. The building was
the old Tenterfield Station store, and the Post Office opened
on January 1, 1849. The Post Office was in the room at
the right, behind the Bank.
Below is a picture of Tenterfield Post Office as it is to-day.
Bruxner Park, one of the beauty spots of Tenterfield. Situated
in the heart of the town.
Tenterfield Station homestead, with its beautiful
gardens in the days of the Walkers.
Inset: Mr. W. H. Walker
«fr >«M W■ ■—* l«M ■■■ »> WW* "«■»> *■> *■»* —» «—»
| |
I Acknowledgment: Modem photographs I
| reproduced in this booklet have been supplied ?
! by the Harmony Photographic Studio, I
t Tenterfield. |
I »
4* .-i in ■— ■— i-i i— i-i ■— ■■" «—♦ —»


VIGNETTES
GEORGE JAMES McDONALD: Commissioner of
Crown Lands for New England District.
The settlement of the Northern Districts by pastoralists
induced the Government in 1839 to appoint a Crown Com-
missioner to introduce some law and order in the area. The
first Commissioner was G. J. McDonald, appointed May 21,
1839. His first official report was dated September 30, 1839.
His headquarters were established at Armidale. He visited
the stations, obtained an estimate of area, carrying capacity and
boundaries, on which the annual rental and stock tax would
be paid. The stock tax was to provide chiefly for a police
force under the control of the Commissioner. McDonald’s
district took in the Darling Downs at first.
CHRISTOPHER ROLLESTON: Appointed Lands
Commissioner in 1843 for Darling Downs. He married Miss
Kate Leslie, sister of Patrick and George Leslie, the pioneer
settlers of the Darling Downs. McDonald and Rolleston sat
together in deciding some land cases. Rolleston was at
times a member of the Bench at Tenterfield Court. Later
he became Auditor General of N.S.W.
THOMAS COWPER: Police Magistrate in Tenterfield
1862 and several years succeeding. Was a brother of Sir
Charles Cowper, who succeeded Sir S. A. Donaldson as
Premier of N.S.W. Was first President of the P.A.M.
Hospital. No relation to John Cowper, of Riley and Cowper,
of Clifton and Tenterfield Stations.
JOHN COWPER, J.P.: Brother-in-law of S. A. Donald-
son, who married his sister. With R. Riley he owned
Clifton and Tenterfield Stations for a period.
ALEXANDER RABY RILEY: Son of William Riley,
of Raby, near Liverpool. On his coming of age, S. A.
Donaldson, who was trustee of his father’s will, sold to him
and John Cowper, his brother-in-law, Clifton and Tenterfield
Stations. They were unable to meet their commitments, and
after some years the stations reverted to Donaldson. Name
appears as a Justice on the Bench at Tenterfield on November
5, 1855.
SOME OF THE PIONEERS
JOHN HENRY SOMMERLAD: Expert gardener. Ar-
rived in time of W. B. Christian’s Tenterfield, about 1860.
Later selected at Leech’s Gully. Founder of first Brass
Band in Tenterfield. Member of early Municipal Council
and Agricultural Society. Pioneer member of the Som-
merlad family. Died October 24, 1912, aged 84 years.
WILLIAM GOUDY: First Public School Teacher. He
previously taught a National School in Tenterfield. Died
April 2, 1869, aged 39 years. His widow and daughters
later kept a private school.
JAMES REID: Native of Scotland. Arrived Tenterfield
1854. A pioneer joiner and cabinet maker. Made furniture
for first Municipal Council. Father of J. H. and William
Reid, Mrs. Woodward, Mrs. J. Moffat, Mrs. J. Baldey and
Mrs. Cavanagh. Died February 3, 1888, aged 77 years.
JAMES NERIAH ROPER: Pioneer member of Roper
family. Named Fortitude Valley in Brisbane after the ship
“Fortitude” in which he came to Australia. Prominent in
gold mining in the district and in business. “Roper Gully”
at Boonoo Boonoo, named after him. Died January 29,
1903, aged 76 years. Father of J. H. and Whit Roper, Mrs.
H. E. Morton and Mrs. M. Fletcher.
THOMAS M. WALKER: Original member of the firm
of Roper and Walker. Prominent in business, public and
church life of Tenterfield. Mayor and alderman. Died
July 6, 1921, aged 69 years.
WILLIAM ROLPH: Pioneer member of the Rolph
family. Farmer at Glen Innes Road and Bungulla. Died
February 15, 1906, aged 76 years.
THOMAS L. RIVERS: Associated with Lady Jersey
mine, Drake. Later farmer at Tenterfield. Father of W.
H. Rivers. Died October 29, 1901.
WILLIAM HOLLEY: Pioneer of Tenterfield Holley
family. Early settler. Died May 25, 1890, aged 78 years.
JOHN WHITTON: Pioneer member of the Whitton
family. Well-known stockman on Tenterfield Station,
butcher and businessman. Died December 14, 1926, aged 93
years.
FREDERICK WYMAN: Associated with timber indus-
try. Great pit sawyer in early years. Died August 17, 1922,
aged 87 years. Numbers of descendants in district.
HON. CHARLES A. LEE: Born November 13, 1842.
Arrived Tenterfield 1869. Well-known businessman in
earlier years. Represented Tenterfield in N.S.W. Parliament
over 35 years, holding Ministerial rank. Father of Lieut.
Charles Lee, Walter, Norman, Fred, Mrs. Stewart and Mrs.
Carstairs. Lieut. Charles Lee saw service in South Africa,
Gallipoli, Egypt and Palestine. C. A. Lee died at the age
of 84 years. Leeton, in Murrumbidgee irrigation area, named
after him.
WILLIAM TAYLOR: Pioneer of the Taylor family, of
Barney Downs and Tenterfield. Farmer and carrier between
Coast and Tableland. Died August 25, 1882, aged 60 years.
ALEXANDER STEWART: Of Millera Station, Rocky
River. Father of Mesdames H. A. and G. A. Smith, J.
Mullens, G. K. Jeffrey, Bishop and Manchee. Well-known
public man in Tenterfield. Died April 11, 1923, aged 89 years.
JULIUS IMBERGER: Pioneer of Imberger family. Saw
mill owner. Died April 12, 1908, aged 65 years .
GEORGE BERNARD KOCH: Pioneer of Koch family.
Farmer, etc. Koch Mt. on eastern common named after
him. Died January 11, 1877, aged 65 years.
JOHN LEECH: Of Leech’s Gully, Tenterfield. Pioneer
member of Leech family. Farmer. Died August 17, 1886,
aged 82 years.
THOMAS PITKIN: Pioneer member of Pitkin family.
Farmer of Casino Road. Died November 20, 1880, aged
76 years.
WILLIAM LAIRD: Auctioneer and commission agent,
and Sgt. Major in Light Horse. Active in public affairs.
Died July 10, 1888, aged 37 years.
JAMES BUTLER: Pioneer of the Butler family of Black
Swamp. Father of John and Arthur. Died July 10, 1906,
aged 90 years,


JOHN W. SIMONS: C.P.S. Tenterfield, and public man.
Died April 20, 1882, aged 55 years.
ALFRED BENJAMIN BUTLER; Photographer. Father
of Edward, William and George and Mrs. Morris. Died
March 15, 1914, aged 65 years.
THOMAS WELBURN: Farmer of Groombridge Swamp.
First Mayor of Tenterfield. Pioneer of Welburn family.
HENRY BATES: Farmer, of Tenterfield and Bolivia.
First white child bom at Bolivia, son of William Bates, a
pioneer of the early “forties.” Father of the Bates family
of Tenterfield. Prominent public man. Died August 25,
1923, aged 77 years.
RICHARD S. MANSER: Early carrier and farmer and
grazier. Pioneer member of the Manser family. Died October
5, 1920, aged 90 years.
WILLIAM ADAMS: Farmer at Barney Downs. Father
of Mrs. Pat Finnerty, Mrs. John Curry and Mrs. Henry
Cooper. Died November 28, 1904, aged 72 years.
DR. BENJAMIN EARNSHAW MASON, M.D.: For
years a successful medical practitioner in Tenterfield. One of
the earliest in Tenterfield. Died March 9, 1869, aged 37 years.
CHARLES M. PAVEL: Well-known saddler, tanner and
soap maker. Pioneer of Pavel family. Killed by bull January
13,1906. -
JAMES MANGLESON: Very early sawmiller in Ten-
terfield. His son James jnr. also sawmiller. Died January
11, 1912, aged 68 years.
DANIEL SWEENEY: Pioneer farmer and grazier.
Father of John and Hugh Sweeney, of Steinbrook. Died
September 16, 1907, aged 71 years.
DANIEL MURPHY: Pioneer of Murphy family. Farmer
Groombridge Swamp, Bungulla, and carrier. Died April 10,
1900, aged 82 years.
JOHN BRANNAGAN: Farmer of Barney Downs.
Pioneer of the family. Died March 25, 1901, aged 72 years.
JAMES DWYER: Pioneer of the Dwyer family. Varied
occupations, including farming. Died July 19, 1914, aged 92
years.
PATRICK FINN: Pioneer of the Finn family. Soldier in
India. Police Constable, Tenterfield, later farmer. Died
June 21, 1872, aged 54 years.
WILLIAM BURKE: Pioneer of the family. Lived at
Steinbrook. Died August 2, 1916, aged 81 years.
JAMES GROGAN: In Police Force in Ireland. Came
out with other police in charge of party of convicts. On
arrival was stationed at Grafton. Leaving police he went
mining at Rocky River, and wife conducted boarding house.
Later lived in Tenterfield and Steinbrook farming. Pioneer of
the Tenterfield Grogans. Died October 10, 1889, aged 75
years.
ROBERT STEVENSON: Pioneer of Stevenson family.
Associated with Tenterfield Station and in public life of the
district. Died January 6, 1930 in 83rd year.
RICHARD DUNDAS WOOLNOUGH: Pioneer of
family in Tenterfield. Storekeeper at Station Store. Took
interest in public affairs. Died December 5, 1909, aged 52
years.
PETER JEFFREY, of Mingoola Station: Prominent in
Show and other public life. Died February 18, 1922, aged
81 years.
JAMES DRURY: Early settler of “The Scrub” and
sawmiller. Pioneer member of family. Died September 30,
1895.
ANDREW RODGERS: Pioneer farmer of Bryan’s Gap.
Father of Mrs. Donaghey. Died April 28, 1885, aged 55 years.
WILLIAM THOMAS HILL: Pioneer of family. Had
an adventurous life. Brickmaker in Tenterfield. Died July
21, 1913, aged 73 years.
GEORGE PETRIE: Pioneer of family: Died August 24,
1890, aged 78 years.
THOMAS CONNOLLY: Pioneer of Leech’s Gully
family. Died October 31, 1898, aged 60 years.
MICHAEL DONNELLY: Pioneer member of family.
Farmer of Bungulla and Bryan’s Gap. Died January 11,
1880, aged 66 years.
MORTIMER KELLY: Pioneer. Farmer, carrier and busi-
nessman. Died June 3, 1926, aged 94 years.
PATRICK KELLY: Brother of Mortimer. Pioneer farmer
and grazier. Died August 12, 1892, aged 56 years.
PATRICK MAHER: Pioneer. Died April 6, 1935, aged
99 years.
JOHN COXALL: From England. Selected “Home
Farm,” Bryan’s Gap. Father of the late Mrs. J. H. Reid,
Mrs. J. Pearson, Mrs. Hanna, Mrs. H. Kline, Mrs. J. Baldey,
and John Coxall jnr. Died March 1, 1882, aged 60 years.
GEORGE DEARDEN: Pioneer of the family. Constable
in charge of the gaol, and public man. Died October 20, 1910,
aged 84 years.
C. SWEETLAND: Second manager of the A.J.S. Bank in
Tenterfield, in 1862. He moved the motion at a public meeting
held on June 28, 1862, for the establishment of a hospital.
The A.J.S. Bank was then situated in the building in Naas
Street, below the hospital, now the residence of Mr. Luke.
Left Tenterfield 1866.
T. C. BINNEY: Licensee of the Post Office Hotel, origin-
ally standing on the site of the present Exchange Hotel, in
1862. Moved a motion to name the hospital, which was
later shortened.
PATRICK RITCHIE: Co-partner with Mr. Morrissey in
Tenterfield’s first newspaper, “The Chronicle.” Printing office
was located in a stone building at the rear of the old Com-
mercial Hotel.
GEORGE WILLSON: First secretary to the hospital.
Prominent business man. Storekeeper at old Maryland Store
(Stanley’s comer) and on opposite side of street (Arch
Miller’s) at the junction of Rouse and High Street. Built
and resided in “Montgomerie,” at the corner of Molesworth
and Bulwer Streets, until recently the home of Mr. C. Har-
rigan, and now of Mr. McNeill. A daughter married Rev.
H. Granville Smith, once Vicar of Tenterfield. Another
daughter married L. J. Trollope, manager of A.J.S. Bank in
latter part of 1866. Was on the Bench at the local trial
of the bank robbers. Wilson’s Downfall named as a result of
his carriage accident there.
LUMLEY JOHN TROLLOPE: Manager A.J.S. Bank
Tenterfield, 1866. Took active part in Hospital and
public life. Married daughter of George Willson.
GEORGE WHEATLEY: Early carrier Coast-Tableland.
Home then at Fairfield. Purchased allotments at first sale in
Tenterfield. Kept Horse and Jockey Hotel. Owned Boorook
and other stations in early years. Died December 29, 1863,
aged 43 years.
W. B. CHRISTIAN: Owner of Tenterfield Station after
Riley and Cowper. Father of Brig.-General S. E. Christian.
Encouraged hunting in English style on the station. Remem-
bered in connection with trespass cases against selectors. Died
1875. Succeeded at Tenterfield by Simpson and Readett,


TENTERFIELD CHRONOLOGY TO 1892
1827: Allan Cunningham discovered the Darling Downs,
and on his return southward passed about 15 miles
west of Tenterfield.
1839: Deepwater Station taken up for Archibald and Charles
Windeyer by William Collins.
1840: Tenterfield probably occupied, without legal title (by
J. A. Templar who dispoced quickly of his interest)
or by R. R. Mackenzie, in association with S. A.
Donaldson.
1840 or 1841: Bolivia Station taken up by E. Hurry.
1840 or 1841: Thomas Hewitt marked out a road from
Tenterfield to the Coast, and named Wellington’s
Lookout on the way.
1841, April 2nd: S. A. Donaldson wrote to his brother: “If
time and opportunity serve, I shall take a parting trip
with my friend Robert Mackenzie, to New England,
where I have valuable stock.”
1841, June 7th: S. A. Donaldson wrote: “I shall shear 18,000
sheep at the new station, under Robert Mackenzie this
year.”
1842: E. Hurry sold out Bolivia to Donaldson and
Mackenzie.
1842 (early part): Bullock dray road completed from
Tenterfield to Coast and being traversed.
1842, July Ist: First legal title for Tenterfield Station granted
in name of R. R. Mackenzie (name, “Tenterfield,”
given by Donaldson).
1842, July 12th: Irby Bros, called at Tenterfield Station on
way to Deepwater (travelled with Mackenzie’s drays
from Grafton), named “The Bluff.”
1843: Dr. R. J. Traill arrived from Grafton. Practised a
while, then became manager of Clifton.
1843: Christopher Rolleston appointed Crown Lands Com-
missioner for Darling Downs, then part of N.S.W.
1844 (early) : Irby Bros, purchased Bolivia Station.
1844, Ist July: Donaldson took over Tenterfield in his own
name, and Mackenzie became general manager.
1844: Clifton Station legally taken up by Donaldson and
Mackenzie. Dr. Traill manager.
1846: R. R. Mackenzie married daughter of Richard Jones.
1847, April 30th: Court established at Tenterfield by notice
in Government Gazette.
1847, November Ist: First Court held in Tenterfield, viz.,
Court of Requests.
1847, November 15th: First Court of Petty Sessions held.
1848: First Lease of Tenterfield Station and Clifton Station
granted to Donaldson (previously annual licence).
1848: Tindal, of Ramornie, exploring up Rocky River, called
at Barney Downs Station.
1848: Tragedy at Tenterfield Station. Murder and suicide
by employee. Led to Mackenzie transferring to
Clifton, and Dr. Traill to Tenterfield Station.
1849, January Ist: Post Office and Mail Service established.
1849, June 29th: First publican’s licence, for George Inn,
granted.
1849, October 2nd: Application by Sir Thomas Mitchell,
Surveyor-General, that a township be laid out at
Tenterfield.
1849, December sth:Assistant Surveyor Galloway directed to
carry out a feature survey of the village reserve as a
basis for a town design.
1851, June 18th: Design submitted to the Governor.
1851, June 3rd: Design approved.
1851, October 7th; Gazette notice declaring Tenterfield a
township.
1854: James Reid (father of the late J. H. and W. Reid)
arrived in Tenterfield.
1854: Mackenzie sold interests in Clifton to Donaldson, and
left the district.
1854, March 9th: First sale of town allotments in Tenterfield.
1854, April 19th: Over 39,000 sheep on Tenterfield Station.
1854-5: Erection of steam flour mill for station across Tenter-
field creek from homestead.
1854, October: Dr. Traill left Tenterfield to take over
management of Collaroy Station, and Frederick King
became manager of Tenterfield.
1854: J. H. Ross in occupation at Barney Downs; (2nd May,
1854, he was on the Bench).
1855, November sth: Alex R. Riley on Bench. Probably
denotes that Riley and Cowper had then taken over
Clifton.
1856, March 11th; Second publican’s licence granted to
Phillip Sullivan, for Tenterfield Hotel (now Com-
mercial) .
1857: John Ellis arrived in Tenterfield.
1857: About 500 acres cultivated at Tenterfield.
1858, January sth: A. R. Riley and John Cowper on Bench.
1858: Eugene O’Connell appointed first “official” Postmaster.
Post Office in store opposite school.
1858: Rev. G. C. Bode, Church of England Minister, con-
ducted his first burial service, and in 1859 his first
wedding in Tenterfield (not resident).
1858, July 24th: P. O’Sullivan, E. OConnell, James Leth-
bridge, and Patrick Curry, addressed a letter to Dr.
Traill enquiring about money collected for National
School.
1858: Gold discovered at Fairfield (Drake); 1859 at
Timbarra, Boonoo Boonoo, etc.
1859: A.J.S. Bank opened in Naas Street below present
P.A.M. Hospital (first bank); H. P. Abbott, manager.
1859, December: Country land sale at Tenterfield; 44 small
farms offered; also 11 surburban, and 60 town lots.
1859, December 26th: Boxing Day races held.
1860: “Christ Church” Church of England built.
1860: “Tenterfield Chronicle” issued by P. Ritchie and
Morrissey. First Tenterfield newspaper.
1860, August: Public meeting requested the Government that
the Grafton-Tenterfield road be made a main road.
1860, August: First sale of allotments in Drake. Sixteen
out of 40 sold.
1861, April: Public meeting favoured union with Queensland.
1861, April: Timbarra and Boonoo Boonoo gold fields boom


ing. Over 2,000 ounces of gold in one escort.
1861, June; Arrangements regarding telegraph line to be
erected from Armidale to Tenterfield. Jockey Club
formed in Tenterfield. Address by R. Meston, M.P.
1861, October:Public meeting to advocate building a bridge
over Tenterfield Creek. Land values said to be hi.di.
O
1861: £B,OOO placed on estimates for telegraph line from
Tenterfield to Grafton.
1861, December: R. Meston, M.P., resigned, and Hugh
Gordon elected in place.
1862: District Court established.
1862, February:Thomas Cowper appointed Police Magistrate
residing in Tenterfield.
Tenterfield lock-up raised in grade to being “a gaol
and house of correction.”
1862: M. Faviell’s tender for erection of telegraph line
Tenterfield-Grafton accepted, £4O per mile.
Telegraph Office opened, Maryland Store.
1862, March: Mr. Nunn, of Grafton, appointed Telegraph
Master.
1862, June 28th: Meeting decided to establish a hospital.
Thomas Cowper, Police Magistrate, first Chairman.
November 7th: Government granted site.
1862: P. Ritchie bought out Morrissey’s interest in the
“Chronicle.”
1863, March 9th: First auctioneer’s licence granted to Fred
Morgan.
1863, August: Roman Catholics decided to call tenders for
erection of a chapel.
1863, September: Public meeting called for the purpose of
establishing a Reading Room (established at Raper’s
tailor’s shop, corner High and Scott Streets).
1863, December: Foundation stone of P.A.M. Hospital laid
by R. R. C. Robertson.
1863: Extensive movement of cattle to southern districts.
1864: Agitation for railway from the Coast.
1864: W. R. Lawson purchased Clifton Station at auction.
1864: P. Ritchie removed “Chronicle” plant to Warwick,
leaving Tenterfield without a local newspaper.
1865: Rev. Arthur Rutledge, Methodist, stationed at Tenter-
field in charge of Tenterfield-Glen Innes Circuit. Held
services at Court House.
1865 (approximately): New Telegraph Office opened, at
comer Logan and Molesworth Streets.
1865, October 11th: P.A.M. Hospital officially opened.
1865: First Manners Street bridge completed by John Strauss.
1865 and 1866: Border between N.S.W. and Queensland,
about Wallangarra, being surveyed.
1865, August: Geo. Willson’s (second) Maryland Store
(Arch Miller’s present store) opened.
1865: Severe drought in Tenterfield.
1865, December: Plans received for Public School in High
Street.
1866, March: Contract let for building School. July:
Foundation stone laid. Opened later in year. Sixty
pupils.
1866, January: Meeting of R.C. parishioners held to arrange
welcome to Father Keoghan, first resident Priest.
1866: J. Buchanan, Police Magistrate, appointed in succession
to T. Cowper.
1866, April: Heavy losses of cattle from pleuro.
Tenterfield flour mill bought by E. O’Connell and
G. Dawson.
1866: Cost of telegram, Tenterfield-Sydney, 4/- per 10 words.
1866, July 11th: A.J.S. Bank attempted robbery.
1866, December: Dean Lynch laid foundation stone of R.C.
Church.
1867, January 11th: Sir S. A. Donaldson died at Clareton
Hall, Cumberland, England.
1867, May: Contract let for first Methodist Church. July:
Foundation stone laid. October 14th: Officially
opened.
1867, October: Public meeting requested Government to
establish a vehicular mail service between Tenterfield
and Glen Innes; unsuccessful. T. Pillar given contract
for packhorse mail for three years, at £250 a year.
1867: Thunderbolt in district.
1867, September: Public meeting to consider formation of
Municipality. Motion negatived.
1867, December: School Board appointed.
1868, July: Rev. C. J. Robinson, resident Church of England
Minister, took up residence in Tenterfield.
Thunderbolt abroad.
1869: C. A. Lee took up residence in Tenterfield.
1869 or ’7O: Slab and shingle School of Arts erected on
present site.
1868, April 2nd: William Goudy, First Public School teacher,
died.
1869, June: Meeting held to consider starting a newspaper.
“Tenterfield and Glen Innes Times” started by Henry
Tuck late in same year.
1869, September: Governor, Earl of Belmore, visited
Tenterfield.
1870: “Tenterfield Star” issued.
1870: 44,000 bushels wheat grown in Tenterfield district.
40,000 to 44,000 sheep shorn Tenterfield and Clifton
Stations.
Fat cattle in large numbers sent to Maitland sales.
1871: Rev. F. Davis, Church of England, appointed to
Tenterfield.
1871: A.J.S. Bank removed from Naas Street west to stone
building in High Street, now G. Woolnough’s shop.
1871, April: Public meeting decided to build a School of
Arts.
Public School enrolment 135.
1871, April: Another public meeting decided to petition
for a Municipality.
1871, June 6th: Incorporation as Municipality granted.
1872, February 15th: First Municipal Council met in the
Court House and elected T. Welburn Mayor.
1872: C. A. Lee became Postmaster for six months, at Mary-
land Store.
1872, March: Tin discovered at Vegetable Creek by Thomas
Carlean.
1873, May 23rd: Manchester United 1.0.0. F. opened.
1873, December: Bank of N.S.W. opened in brick cottage
adjoining Criterion Htoel on south side.
1874: Dr. Lang visited Tenterfield.
1875, August 4th; First football match played in Tenterfield.
1875, November 26th: Foundation stone of brick School of
Arts laid by Mrs. C. A. Lee.
1876, September 7th: First brick School of Arts opened.
1876, November 11th: First Show Society formed,


First White Woman in Tenterfield!
The first white woman to come to Tenterfield is I
said to have been Mrs. Simon McEachnie, whose husband $
was storekeeper at the Station store and also the first |
Postmaster, the Post Office being in the store and |
established there on January 1, 1849. 1
On the death of her husband Mrs. McEachnie |
married Eugene O’Connell. She was one of the old !
identities of Tenterfield. |
Others have claimed that Mrs. R. R. MacKenzie, of I
Tenterfield Station, was the first white woman in (
Tenterfield. The MacKenzies were married in 1846. |
1877, April sth and 6th: First Show held at School of Arts
and on open land at rear.
1877, November 7th: Masonic Lodge opened in Tenterfield.
1877-8: Walkers purchased Tenterfield Station.
1878, November sth: Grant of land by Government for a
showground.
1878: Very dry year.
1879: Severe storm damaged hospital.
1880: Tennis began in Tenterfield.
1880: 3.247 acres cultivated in district.
1880: Contract for additions to Hospital let to T. Clark for
£525.
1879 to 1881: Building new Post Office, Rouse and Manners
Streets.
1882, March 25th: M. F. Bruxner born at Sandilands Station.
1882, November: First Presbyterian Service in School of Arts
(Rev. T. S. Millar).
1883, July 22nd: Rev. T. S. Millar, first Presbyterian Minister
in Tenterfield Charge, inducted.
1884: Gables and porch additions to School of Arts, facing
Rouse Street, built.
1884, August 19th: Official opening of railway from
Armidale to Glen Innes, at Glen Innes.
1884: Presbyterian Church built.
1885-6: Upper Clarence Light Horse formed at Tabulam.
Ist January, 1886, first member sworn in.
1885: Infantry Rifle Corps enrolled; later became Rifle Club.
1886: Half Squadron of Upper Clarence Light Horse formed
in Tenterfield.
1886: Bequest of £5OO to P.A.M. Hospital from Estate T.
Walker.
1886, October 19th: Official opening of Railway to Tenterfield
by Governor Lord Carrington.
1886: John Corrin won first prize for wheat at Adelaide
Jubilee Show.
1887: Brick Public School erected.
1887, March 26th: Salvation Army opened up work in
Tenterfield.
1888, February 3rd: James Reid died.
1888: Border Caledonian Society formed.
1889: Additions to brick Public School, and brick teacher’s
residence erected.
1889, October 24th; Sir Henry Parkes made his famous
Federation Speech in School of Arts.
1891; A.J.S. Bank (now Rural) built in Rouse Street.
1892: Brick additions to Church of England.
1892: Record high jump at Tenterfield Show.
Crops in 1880
Wheat: 1674 acres; yield, 25,639 bushels; 275 tons hay.
Barley: 52 acres; yield 262 bushels; 31 tons hay.
Oats: 259 acres; yield 764 bushels; 317 tons hay.
Maize: 629 acres; yield 15,599 bushels.
Potatoes: 315 acres; yield 805 tons.
Sown grasses; 145 acres; vineyards yielding 220 gallons
wine and two tons grapes; gardens and orchards, 110 acres;
other crops, 57 acres.
Stock: Horses 3,157; cattle 46,302; sheep 86,820; pigs 1,282.
Murder of Shepherds
Murders by the blacks of a shepherd and a watchman
at Bolivia Station took place in the middle forties, as related
by Edward Irby in his diary and letters. One, named
Robinson, was missing one evening, his sheep having returned
without him. A wide search proved unsuccessful. Irby,
accompanied by young Windeyer of Deepwater, set out
again. Edward Irby wrote: —
“After taking a cup of tea, we rode out together. I
took him at once to the spot where the sheep had been
rushed. We then commenced searching the river
about that spot. After some time, we found the body
floating on the water about 100 yards from where the
sheep had been rushed. The poor fellow had five spear
wounds, four deep cuts from tomahawks on the temples,
and the back of his head beaten in with a waddy; he
had then been completely stripped and thrown into the
river.”
They determined to pursue the murderers. After the
burial of Robinson, a party of white men who had been
hastily gathered set out. After a long search, smoke was
seen rising about 12 miles away, towards which they rode.
Mr. Irby wrote: —-
“We suddenly observed a large spear on the ground,
with a fire-stick lying by it. The blacks had heard us
coming, and hidden themselves amongst the rocks. One,
in his hurry, dropped poor Robinson’s coat, so we knew
we were on the right tribe. If they had taken to their
heels they might all have got off safe. Instead of doing
so however, they got their fighting men together to attack
us, so we punished them severely, and proved our
superiority to them.”
The Commissioner, who lived over 100 miles away, was
notified of the murder, and of the punishment taken, and
stated that Mr. Irby had no alternative but to act as he
had done.
At Black Snake Creek a hutkeeper named Bonney was
murdered by the blacks in 1845. Windeyers had a station
there at that time. A punitive party found and attacked
the blacks, but a terrific hailstorm put an end to the battle.
When the blacks became used to the whites, they would
occasionally earn a little money by stripping sheets of bark
for the settlers, for which they were paid sixpence a sheet.
They cut a nick in a piece of wood for each sheet, and would
not accept payment in other coin than sixpence, one for each
nick or sheet.


SOME TENTERFIELD MEMORIES
THE names of many well-known identities of early Tenterfield are recalled in "Some Tenterfield
1 Memories," by "One Who Lived There, 1868-1883," published in "The Sydney Mail" of May
2, 1928.
The Station, nucleus of the township, belonged to Riley and
Cowper, Mr. Donaldson acting for a time as trustee and
manager. It was planted with English trees —oaks and elms,
with hawthorn hedges—and a medlar among the cherries,
plums and apples, which all thrived well in the congenial
New England climate.
The surrounding district was named by the pioneer squat-
ters who formed stations there. Thus Boorook, Bookookoorara
and Undercliffe were taken up by Marcus Speering, who
brought sheep overland from Illawarra to stock with.
Barney Downs was named from the owner, Colonel Barney.
Henry Nichol was at Ballandean; Marsh at Maryland; Irby
at Bolivia; and a Windeyer owned Deepwater. The Meston
Brothers had Millera and Rocky River, their father being a
member for New England in the first N.S.W. Parliament
which lasted only a year. Two of his children are still living
(1928) —Francis Meston, of Rivertree (the oldest member
of the Caledonian Society), and Cullen (now of Warwick).
Most of these men, gallant gentlemen for the most
part, lost their possessions.
My recollections date from about 1866. Then, only
Bolivia was in the possession of the original owners. J. G.
Dickson, a popular and stirring gentleman, was at Barney
Downs. He married Miss Eccleston, a relation of the
Christians, who were then at Tenterfield Station. The
Irbys were still at Bolivia, and the eldest daughter was the
young wife of E. P. Carr, manager of the A.J.S. Bank, and
Miss Irby had just returned from a visit to England. Boonoo
Boonoo (the aboriginal name for big rock or mountain),
originally part of Tenterfield Station, belonged to A. K.
Cullen, till he removed to Undercliffe. The Robertsons were
at Wellington Vale, and the Lawsons at Clifton. Visitors
there declared they risked their lives—if the family were
absent—owing to the savage breed of kangaroo dogs (with
a dash of bloodhound) which, they declared, bailed them up.
Barney Downs had a smart stockman who “went wrong”
and became Thunderbolt. His name was Fred Ward. The
story of his holding up a German Band and refunding the
£2O he took, is well known; but the mistake is always made
of mentioning Goonoo Goonoo, near Tam worth, as the
scene, whereas Boonoo Boonoo Gap, near Tenterfield, was
where this happened. The gentleman the bushrangers was
waiting for was A. K. Cullen, who rode to Undercliffe a day
sooner than was expected.
The principal store in Tenterfield was owned by Mr.
Willson; later by C. A. Lee, long-time member for New
England, and “The Father of the House” when he died.
Willson’s Downfall, comprising a police station and post
office, was called so from Mr. Willson’s buggy breaking down
at a gully there, on a journey from Maryland to Tenterfield.
The name is erroneously spelt with one “1” now, and per-
sistently attributed to a bushranger Wilson, but any reference
to official papers of the 70’s will prove I am right.
J. B. Graham, a nephew of Sir John Robertson, was Police
Magistrate later, and his new brick house, christened “Airlie”
at his request, by Miss Cullen, from the old Scottish ballad,
“The Bonnie Hoose o’ Airlie,” was always full of guests. It
was presided over by his accomplished mother—who, as Lava-
lette Robertson, had married Dr. Graham, at one time Gov-
ernment Doctor in convict days in Tasmania —and her mem-
ories of those times were full of interest. She always played
the dance music for the young people that she and her son and
daughter Maud loved to surround themselves with. The
eldest Irby son, Edward, had a young wife. W. Drummond,
the surveyor, and his pretty wife were amongst the keenest
dancers. The Misses Cullen, not long returned from Scotland,
were always there. N. Simmons, the solicitor, took part in
the little plays that were acted. He was succeeded by F.
Robinson, who was afterwards Mayor.
Another new house was built by C. A. Lee, and called
“Claremont” after his wife; they laid out a well kept garden.
A buttonhole of white heath was a certain clue to a call on
hospitable Mrs. Lee, just as a sprig of heliotrope showed one
had been at Tenterfield Station.
The Peberdys were well-known storekeepers, and the
Whereats had a flour mill. The balls were then held in a
large upper room at the principal hotel, kept by that well-
liked couple, Mr. and Mrs. Brown. Mr. Fraser was at the
Mole, a welcome visitor always. One of the most popular
men was R. Donaldson, the road superintendent. His good
natured face, smiling over the spirited horses he loved and
drove, was recognised by hundreds on the highways. But
those same spirited horses were eventually his undoing; beyond
control, they bolted down a lane, smashed the buggy, and
caused their owner to lose a leg. The Church of England
clergyman, Rev. T. J. Hyder, was a clever but temperamental
man, who used his pen with some brilliance in prose and
poetry.
VISIT OF EARL OF BELMORE
Tenterfield was honored in September, 1869, by a visit of
the Governor of N.S.W., the Earl of Belmore.
Mr. Isaac Whereat, in his reminiscences wrote:
“The whole town turned out to welcome him. About
300 horsemen rode out to The Bluff Rock to escort him in.
He was driven to Tenterfield by Mr. R. R. C. Robertson’s
four-in-hand by Mr. Robertson’s coachman, Hector.
This was the first four-in-hand ever seen in Tenterfield. On
arriving at Sullivan’s Hotel, the A.D.C. said His Excellency
would receive any deputations in an hour’s time.
The Governor was accompanied by Mr. R. R. C. Robert-
son, of Wellington Vale.
After luncheon an address of welcome was read by Mr.
J. B. Graham, C.P.S. (there being no Municipality). All
the school children were marshalled in front of the hotel,


and sang the National Anthem. The Governor, after thank-
ing the school children, addressed the Tenterfield people, thank-
ing them for their very warm welcome. He congratulated
them on the appearance of the country in general, and
said how much it reminded him of the old English climate.
Mr. Buchanan was P.M. at the time. He was afterwards
appointed Stipendiary Magistrate in Sycbey.”
JOHN ELLIS
One of Tenterfield’s oldest residents was John Ellis, better
known as ‘Old Sir John,” his uncle being Sir John Ellis, an
officer in the English Army. He came to the Colony in 1857.
He was made a J.P. in 1959. For many years he was on the
goldfields, and was very successful.
In 1864 he bought Tooloom Station, and started a store
on Timbarra goldfields, and placed Mr. D. Maher in charge.
In 1867, Mr. Maher bought him out.
He also had a store in Tenterfield, and when the Boorook
goldfields opened, he started a branch store there. He then
sold out Tooloom Station, and bought Bob Laird’s store
(where Andronico’s cafe now is, 1913). He afterwards re-
moved to the corner of High and Rouse Streets. He was
a great sportsman, and was for many years President of the
Tenterfield Jockey Club. He also was an active member of
the Masonic Lodge and the Oddfellows. He was beloved
by all classes of the community. He was a great churchman,
and gave very liberally to all charitable institutions.
He was very proud of his uncle’s sword and uniform.
He died in Tenterfield at the Criterion Hotel in 1893,
then kept by Mr. John Ellis, but no relation of his. He had
retired from business about twelve months before his death.
(Above life sketch by Isaac Whereat).
HOTELS
The first licensed hotel in Tenterfield was the “George
Inn,” a brick building which stood on the site of the
present Royal Hotel in High Street. The licence was
granted to Patrick Henderson on June 29, 1849. A few
years later, in 1852, the licence was transferred to Richard
Baker.
The second publican’s licence was granted to Phillip Sul-
livan for the “Tenterfield Hotel” in Rouse Street .
Sometime later it was burnt, and the new hotel
erected was named the “Commercial.”
The third hotel was the “Horse and Jockey,” situated in
Scott Street, to the south of the present Salvation Army
residence .
Hotels must have sprung up like mushrooms in the boom
years of gold and tin mining, and when the railway was
being built. All over the town sites of past hotels are pointed
out to those interested.
At present (1949) the following licensed hotels are in
operation:
“Royal,” in High Street; “Telegraph” in Manners Street;
and “Exchange,” “Commercial” and “Criterion,” in Rouse
Street.
In addition several guest houses cater for clients.
Squatters in the "Sixties"
(From the Reminiscences of the Late Isaac Whereat)
“The squatters in the Tenterfield district in the early
‘sixties’ were:
“Messrs. Riley and Cowper, managers of Tenterfield and
Clifton Stations for Sir S. A. Donaldson; Bolivia, owned by
Edward Irby; The Mole, by Dr. Fraser; Mingoola, by J.
Logan; Barney Downs, by James G. Dickson; Boonoo Boonoo,
by —. Cullen; Maryland, by M. H. Marsh, managed by —.
Greenup; Bookookoorara, by James Irvine McKenzie; Millera,
by Alex Stewart; Cheviot Hills, by Smith Bros.; Wellington
Vale, by R. R. C. Robertson; Deepwater by Arch Windeyer
and Co., and managed by —. Collins.
“Tenterfield Station was purchased from Sir Stuart
Alexander Donaldson by Christian Bros., who afterwards sold
to Simpson and Readett, who sold out to Miss Eadith
Walker.”
Mrs. D. M. Cameron, of “Kalanga,” Mathieson, a daughter
of the late W. H. Walker, of Tenterfield Station, writing
on 11th April, 1949, said:
“W. H. Walker and Thomas Walker, of ‘Yaralla,’ Concord,
bought Tenterfield Station from Simpson and Readett about
1877 or 1878. Later Thomas Walker acquired the property,
and his cousin, W. H. Walker, was his general manager.”
Miss Eadith Walker, referred to by Mr. I. Whereat, came
into possession of Tenterfield on her father’s death.
Tenterfield Station in the Walkers'
Time
Mrs. D. M. Cameron (Kate Walker) referring to her
father, the late W. H. Walker, wrote:
“He was one of the first, if not the first, to go in for
pasture improvement in New England, importing grass seed
from New Zealand and other places through Arthur Yates
& Co., about 1894 or 1895.
“Stud stock were imported from England, I think from
Windsor farm.
“Experiments were made in growing sugar beet, which
did very well, but the sugar cane was not able to compete
with cane grown by Kanaka labour.
“Meatworks were started, and were a success till the
wholesale butchers in Sydney settled the business—it should
have been a great boon to the cattle men in the North, as cattle
were sold at a very low price.
“Bumble bees were imported from New Zealand for the
red clover.
“In the days when we first went to the Station, sheep were
washed by hand, and shepherds were used.
“The wet seasons caused so much foot-rot and other diseases,
W. H. Walker concluded that the country was sheep-sick,
and decided to go in for cattle. The cattle were a great
success.
“The store and men’s huts, and the old portion of the
stables, were built by convicts. The store in the early
days was the only one, I believe, in the North for some years.
“Portion of the land near the town was set aside to be sold
in acre blocks. One of the conditions of sale was that
trees were to be planted, with the expectation that at some
future period, the town would be beautified. This area was
known as ‘Vineland’.”


MODERN ROBIN MOODS
IN 1866 an event took place which has lent much romance to Tenterfield's story and which is
■ always spoken of by the old hands with pride and relish, as something altogether unique.
This was the attempted robbery of the old Australian Joint Stock Bank, on the dark, cold rainy night of Wednesday,
11th July, 1866.
Sir Henry Parkes and his famous Federation Speech
is hard put to it to maintain first place in putting Tenterfield
on the map, when put up against this event.
The wires of the new telegraph line must have run hot
in telling the startling news to an open-eyed and open-eared
audience all over Australia.
THE SCENE AND ACTORS.
The scene was the old building off Naas Street, below
the P.A.M. Hospital, and now the residence of Mr. Luke.
This was Tenterfield’s first Bank. The manager at the
time was Mr. R. S. Martin, the accountant Mr. H. L.
Nathan, and the Bank’s messenger Mr. George Humphrey.
The main actors on the other side were half-a-dozen rather
misguided local residents, of non-British origin, and whose
names in this connection may be forgotten.
Evidently they were having a struggle to gain a living;
bushranging was the fashion at the time, and the temptation
to acquire a good sum of easy money proved too strong.
And so we find that Mr. Ben Chifley was not the only
one to make a raid on the Private Trading Banks. These
gentlemen led the way in this growing township many years
before Ben was even heard of.
As time passes these modern Robin Hoods of ours will
probably be sung and told of in legend like those of the
Old Country.
There certainly was a serious side to this episode, serious
chiefly to the would-be brigands. But there were so many
comical events and situations in connection with it, that it
seems always to have been regarded in the nature of a strange
and huge practical joke.
STRANGE AND COMICAL
In the first place the chief actors left so many obvious
clues around that he would have been a dull policeman who
could have any doubt as to whom he should look for.
Then, at least one of the gang had his gun repaired by a
local blacksmith, in preparation for the event, and when
making a hasty retreat left the gun at the Bank.
Again, during the evening, one of them purchased a
bottle of rum from Sullivan’s Hotel, presumably to assist
in the generation of courage. The rum was provided in a
claret bottle, with an unusual kind of cork. This bottle,
still half-full, was also left in the Bank yard.
The gang had also invited a number of others to join
in the adventure, which they firmly refused. As a conse-
quence, quite a number of people were in anticipation of
the event.
When the Bank officers were surprised and taken prisoner,
they and the messenger’s wife were placed in the pantry,
apparently a strong safe place, and an armed guard placed
outside the door.
But, as it happened, the wall adjoining the garden had
lost a wide board, and the space had been closed up by
pasting some hessian and paper across. Making an opening
through this, the manager and accountant squeezed through,
and hurried away to warn the police and townspeople.
A few minutes later, the masked men returned to the
pantry, opened the door and ordered the four prisoners to
come out, but only the messenger and his wife emerged.
When asked where the other two were, the broad smile which
crossed the messenger’s face nearly cost him his whiskers
from a shot fired by one of the men.
Realising that the game was up, the band hurried away,
the only booty obtained being two or three revolvers.
The police, having been warned, were in the meantime
warily approaching the Bank from one direction, while the
Police Magistrate, Mr. Buchanan, who also had been notified,
was approaching from another direction.
In the misty darkness each party mistook the other for
the robbers, and a small battle developed.
The police opened fire on the P.M. and he returned the
fire, until he was able to take refuge in the Bank kitchen.
THE FINAL COMEDY
The strangest and most comical situation of all took
place at the trial. The ringleader’s wife was evidently a
very conscientious woman, and did not approve of her
husband’s scheme for easy money.
She was put up as a Crown witness, and having taken
the oath to “Tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth”, proceeded faithfully to carry it out.
She told how the amateur plotters met at her home, and
discussed the proposal night after night; and of how one
of the party came unwillingly and had to be brought; and
how they prepared for the event with firearms and masks,
one of which was trimmed with a ’possum’s tail; and how
they held full-dress rehearsals; of how they agreed that if
any man drew out his doom was to be shot; of how, towards
the final night they, two by two, took turns at night to
watch the Bank; and she graphically described and told of
many other things.
Not many, one would think, have ever fulfilled their vow
to tell the truth more fully and conscientiously than this lady
did.
Just what the six prisoners thought can only be conjectured.
They evidently were not criminals in the accepted meaning
of the word, but ordinary simple-minded citizens led astray.
It was the old, old story, “The serpent beguiled me, and I
did eat.”
If ever there was a stranger and more comical Bank hold-
up, it has not yet been recorded. We can leave the story
there.


BUSHRANGERS
IN common with other country centres in N.S.W., the Tenterfield district had its share ot the anxiety
* and danger, consequent on the ravages of the bushranging fraternity.
In addition to lone robbers and minor groups, they had the anxiety of raids being made by the
Wilson gang and Thunderbolt.
The first hold-up in the district is said to have taken place
at The Springs, beyond Black Snake Creek, on the coast
road. The robber made his victim stand in the hollow side
of a standing tree, put some bushes up in front and then
fired several shots, slightly wounding him, before making off.
THE WILSON GANG
With regard to the Wilson and other gangs, they terrorised
the countryside for a period. Some extracts from the diary of
Edward Irby, of Bolivia Station, reveal this. On 19th
August, 1844, he wrote:
“Two policemen called. They were in search of bush-
rangers.
“9-4-1846: Three policemen came here last night; were
sent up to look after Wilson the bushranger. Rode out
with them this morning to show them the way to a hut
on Windeyer’s, some miles to the east of our Five-mile
Station. Saw two tracks at the head of the station.
“9-5-1846: Taylor and Marlow (of Deepwater Station)
stayed here. The latter told us that Baker had been
bailed up by twelve bushrangers and the Station com-
pletely cleared.
“12-5-1846: The blacks came from Windeyer’s station.
One of them said he had seen six men armed on the
station. Suppose them to be Wilson and his gang.
“17-5-1846: Arch. Windeyer (Deepwater Station) was
here for the night. Told us that four bushrangers had
robbed Gardiner’s Station.
“18-5-1846: Had a letter from Traill (mgr. Clifton)
to tell us that Wilson, the notorious bushranger, was shot.”
Reading these brief notes, one’s imagination can fill in
something of the anxiety of the early settlers, who were open
to the violence and depredations of the desperate outlaws,
and of their relief when they were captured or destroyed.
THUNDERBOLT
The years passed on, but seldom were the lonely country
roads safe from the danger of robbery. Station owners and
businessmen, in forwarding money or orders by post, took the
precaution of cutting them in two, and sending the parts
in different mails. The gold escorts were heavily guarded.
The Timbarra Gold Commissioner’s letters and reports
reveal the danger and losses suffered by the mails having
been robbed, as do the letters and reports of Dr. R. J. Traill,
manager of Tenterfield Station.
The bushranger most associated with Tenterfield in the
late sixties and 1870 was Fred Ward, known as “Thunderbolt.”
Prior to the lawless period of his life he had been for a time
a stockman on Barney Downs Station, a few miles to the
east of Tenterfield.
Many are the legends, handed down by early residents,
referring to this “Gentleman Outlaw.”
Many of the old residents had seen him, and many had
met him on the country roads and tracks. Numbers of the
shepherds in the lonely parts were very friendly to him, and
he also had friends in the town, with whom he at times
had meals, and who apparently assisted him with supplies.
It is stated that on one occasion when the nurses’ quarters
were being built at the P.A.M. Hospital, Thunderbolt ven-
tured into the town and was yarning with the builder. The
police had been told that he had been seen near the town,
and suddenly appeared through the trees, riding towards the
hospital.
“Here give me the hod. I’ll carry the bricks, and be one
of your men,” said the outlaw.
When the police arrived he was at the top of the scaf-
folding attending to his job.
The officers, on inquiry, were assured that a person answer-
ing the description given had been seen riding away an hour
previously. Saying that it would be useless then to follow
him, they returned to town.
Thunderbolt, when the way was clear, secured his horse,
which he had hidden in some thick scrub in Leis’ property
at the back of the hospital, and lost no time in making off.
THUNDERBOLT'S TREE
Between Bookookoorara and Wilson’s Downfall, on the
eastern side of the road, there is a building. Until a few
years ago this was occupied by Mr. Jack Dillon, a well-known
drover. The people residing there in Thunderbolt’s time had
ofter shown kindness to him. Somewhere he had found a
young fruit tree and brought it to them. It was planted, and
grew, and is flourishing still. The large pear tree, at the rear
of the house is the same tree, and is known as “Thunderbolt’s
Tree.”
THE GERMAN BAND
The Boonoo Boonoo mountains appear to have been
Thunderbolt’s favorite haunt. On one occasion he was there
awaiting Mr. Cullen, a station owner of Undercliffe, out that
way, who fortunately had returned home the previous day.
However, along came a travelling German band. They were
held up and all their money, about £2O, was taken. One
story says that at pistol point, Thunderbolt then compelled
them to play him a tune, after which he returned their money
and allowed them to go.
HART'S WINNINGS
Tenterfield races came on. An unobtrusive spectator keenly
noted who won the races. He noted that a man named Hart,
from Warwick, with “Minstrel” won the two main events,
amounting in prize money to £lO5. He also learned that
Hart would be returning to Maryland, on his way home, next
day. He also resolved what he would do about it. This was
in or about 1867.
Hart went to Mr. Carr, manager of the A.J.S. Bank, to
see what it would cost to have the money remitted to War-
wick, and was told it would cost 10/6. He objected and said


he would take the money with him. Mr. Carr warned that it
was not safe, as Thunderbolt was about, but he replied that he
was not afraid as he knew him personally. Hart was then
paid £lO5 in 21 £5 notes, and left on his return journey.
At a gully beyond Boonoo Boonoo, Hart was suddenly
confronted by the outlaw and his companion, and asked what
he had won at the races, and what he had done with the
money. Hart then replied that he had lodged the money
in the bank. Thunderbolt promptly levelled a revolver and
said he would stand no nonsense, whereupon Hart pulled
out his roll of notes. Thunderbolt asked if that was all the
money he had, and on being assured that it was, £5 was
handed back to Hart.
THUNDERBOLT'S LEAP
The story of Thunderbolt’s Leap is well-known in the dis-
trict. Following is an account of the incident extracted from
“The Land of the Beardies”:
“On one occasion the two outlaws (Thunderbolt and
Monkton) planned a raid on the town of Emmaville.
Coming to the Tenterfield Creek from the north, they
found it in flood. However, in attempting to swim their
horses across, they nearly met disaster. Two police were
awaiting for them on the other side, and, on perceiving
this they raced at full speed into the bush, with the
troopers in hot pursuit. In due course a steep and wide
declivity blocked the way, and as it was a case of stand
and fight, or take the leap for life, both horsemen leapt
into the gulf. Thunderbolt escaped unhurt, but Monkton
broke an ankle and his horse was killed. The police,
not caring to take the risk, the two bushrangers escaped.
Meanwhile, the spot was named ‘Thunderbolt’s Leap,’
by which it is recognised to this day. Needless to say
Emmaville was not raided.”
OTHER EXPLOITS
Other exploits of Thunderbolt near Tenterfield were the
holding up of Pillar, the mailman, near Bungulla, and of the
mailman Pat Wade, towards Deepwater, at Flaggy Creek. Pat
later kept an hotel in Armidale.
On another occasion Mr. J. N. Roper, father of the late
Mr. J. H. Roper, was managing a store at Bonshaw for Mr.
C. A. Lee, when Thunderbolt appeared and took all the
money from the till, and then had dinner with his victim.
He had two revolvers which he placed on the table before
him, and watched Mr. Roper carefully all the time. When
dinner was over and Thunderbolt was about to leave, Mr.
Roper said: “Look, you are putting me in a fix taking all the
change. When people come along with only notes or cheques
I won’t be able to do business with them.” He was asked if
he had any other change, and took 2/ out of his pocket and
said that was all he had on him and that he had “banked” the
rest of the money. The bushranger then gave him back a
handful of silver and took his departure.
He did not know that Mr. Roper had been warned that
Thunderbolt was about and had taken the precaution to
“bank” about £216 in an old boot, which he had hidden above
the door.
On May 25, 1870, Thunderbolt met his death near Uralla,
being fatally shot in an encounter with Constable B. Walker.
RELICS
Years after the death of Thunderbolt some interesting relics
and reminders of his presence and activity in the Tenterfield
district were found. One of the outlaw’s hide-outs was in the
rough Mole River country.
Mr. Thomas Welburn, son of the first Mayor, in some
reminiscences, given a few years ago, told of a strange find.
On one occasion he was traversing a very rough, steep gorge
on the upper Mole River, which was known as “Kelly’s
Gunyah.” In this vine-covered gorge he discovered a consid-
erable quantity of riding saddles, bridles and other gear,
rusted and perished by years of exposure. He believed this to
be one of Thunderbolt’s plants. Above this spot is a high
point giving a great view of the surrounding country, which,
no doubt, the outlaw used as a lookout. Another high point
exists in that district, which in early years was thick with rock
wallabies. When out shooting there one day Mr. Welburr
came across another lot of saddles and gear, evidently a
reserve depot.
Another old resident of Tenterfield, now passed on, who
was well acquainted with that country, gave some interesting
information. He stated that in the rough country adjacent
to Pye’s Creek, a glen containing up to 40 acres, was dis-
covered. The sides and top end were so rocky and steep
that a horse was unable to climb out. At the lower end the
sides drew in to a very narrow passage. Across this outlet a
panel or two of fence had been erected. He had no doubt this
glen was used by Thunderbolt for his horses. A long, strong
rope, such as was used in tying bales of wool on the bullock
drays, was also found at the Wallaby Rocks. It had a ring
at one end, and was apparently used by the bushranger
to tether his horse.
Tenterfield in 1877
A report of the district of Tenterfield in 1877 contains the
following:
“The town of Tenterfield is beautifully situated on the
head of the Dumaresq River.
“Population of township, 911. Population of district, 2349
—1386 males and 963 females.
“Tenterfield is supplied with a Post and Telegraph Office,
Money Order Office and Government Savings Bank.
“Mails leave Sydney every Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday
at 9.30 p.m.
“Magistrates: J. B. Graham, Police Magistrate; J. G.
Dickson, A. K. Cullen, J. Ellis, R. Lawson and A. Greenup.
“C.P.S. etc: John Simons.
“Court meets daily and Court of Requests first Monday in
month.
“Clergy; Church of England, Rev. F. Davis; R.C., Rev.
O’Callaghan; Wesleyan, Rev. W. H. Beale.
“Insurance: E. R. Whereat, agent for Liverpool, London
and Globe Ins. Coy.
“Hospital visiting surgeon: Dr. Rundle.
“Bank: Australian Joint Stock. Manager, E. P. Carr.
Post and Telegraph Master: J. Hipsley; Queensland Tele-
graph Master: J. D. Reeves.
“Coroner: C. A. Lee.
“Gaoler: Geo. Dearden. Matron: Mrs. Dearden.
“Newspapers: “Tenterfield Star,” published Friday; “In-
dependent,” issued twice a week.
“Storekeepers: T. Peberdy, E. O’Connell, C. A. Lee, Young,
Cavanagh, Billing and Walker.
“Principal hotels: W. T. Young’s “Grand”; Brown’s
“Tenterfield”; O’Connor’s “Horse and Jockey.”; Owen’s
“School of Arts”.”


THE RAILWAY
IN 1884 the Great Northern Railway had reached Glen Innes, the official opening taking place
" on August 19th that year. It was then continued northwards. As it approached Tenter-
field, accompanied by its bush pubs and host of navvies, the old town awoke to a new form of life,
a wild and uproarious kind. The line was completed to Tenterfield on Ist September, 1886. The
official opening took place on 19th October, 1886, a great day for Tenterfield. Erected across
the streets were great arches appropriately decorated. Flags flew everywhere and business places
decorated their premises.
Practically the whole population took part in viewing the
procession and in giving a welcome to the Governor, Lord
Carrington, who officially declared the line open. It is said
to have been one of the largest openings of N.S.W. railways.
Mr. Albert Fullerton Boyd, who then was a young fireman
stationed at Narrabri, was on October 6, 1886 transferred to
Tenterfield. He has written a description of some of the
happenings in connection with the opening. He arrived
at Glen Innes on October 7. Next day he assisted to run
a train northward, putting fettlers on their lengths and
arriving at Tenterfield, where the engine had to stand pilot
in case of any breakdown.
Referring to the Official Opening, Mr. Boyd said:
“Thousands of people came by special trains from
Sydney and other places to Glen Innes on the 18th. The
fare from Sydney was 15/- return for about 800 miles.
Many of the visitors did not come prepared for the New
England climate. A cold snap came on, with snow and
bitterly cold weather. Many could not find accommoda-
tion and had to sleep in carriages, station buildings or
wherever possible. Numbers returned by the mail train
next day without having seen the opening ceremonies at
Tenterfield for which they had travelled so far.
“On the morning of October 19 the special trains lined up
at Glen Innes, ten of them. I was firing in the leading
train. The other nine left at ten minute intervals. It
was a grand sight to look back coming up the Bluff moun-
tain. All arrived safely at Tenterfield about 10 o’clock,
and what a sight! Thousands of people enjoying the
scene. It was very beautiful. At 1 o’clock Lord Car-
rington proclaimed the opening in a very brief speech.
“They all enjoyed a glorious day’s outing. People visited
the orchards and went sight seeing, then next day back
to Sydney and home.”
Mr. Boyd further stated:
“While I was stationed there (Tenterfield) they were
building the extra 12 miles to Wallangarra. It was not
opened when I left Tenterfield.”
The coming of the railway proved to be the greatest factor
in the prosperity of the Tenterfield district.
WALLANGARRA CONNECTION
The line from Tenterfield to Wallangarra was completed on
June 16, 1888, thus making the first junction of the N.S.W.
and Queensland systems. The Queensland line had been
completed to Warwick in 1864. At a later period it was
continued to Stanthorpe.
When the N.S.W. line was approaching the border, the
Queensland line was pushed from Stanthorpe and was
completed to the border a little before the N.S.W. line.
Another celebration, inter-colonial on this occasion, took
place at the opening.
Prior to the coming of the railway that centre was known
as “Dog-trap” on account of a stone dingo trap which had
been built on that part of Tenterfield Station. The late Mr.
Harry Dutton stated that his father, the Hon. C. B. Dutton,
was the Minister for Lands and Railways in Queensland when
the railway to the border was constructed and that he gave
the name of “Wallangarra” to the border station. He said
the accent should be on the last syllable ’ra. The name means
“the meeting place of the tribes” in the language of the
aborigines who lived in the ranges at the headwaters of the
Dawson and Maranoa Rivers in Queensland.
Mr. Dutton also stated that the name “Cooradulla” given
by his father to the homestead portion of the old Barney
Downs Station means “Eaglehawk” in the same aboriginal
language.
It had at first been intended and planned that the junction
of the two railway systems and the rail transhipping station
should be at Tenterfield with the Queensland narrow guage
line reaching to this town. This would have been of great
value to Tenterfield. However, inter-colonial jealousy and
a parochial outlook on the part of N.S.W. authorities pre-
vented this, necessitating a new station and township being
built at the border.
Monkey Versus Dog
In the middle “seventies”, at the rear of the second
Maryland Store (now Arch Miller’s) a sideshow man had
a monkey in the yard. A local man named Fred Morgan
owned a dog, of which he had a high opinion as a fighter.
He wagered £2 that his dog could beat the monkey, which
challenge the monkey’s owner accepted.
The dog and monkey were loosed and the dog “sooled on.”
The monkey immediately grabbed a stick lying close by and
began playing a tune on the dog’s hide, driving him round
the yard. Finally he bolted across the street towards the
stone stables which stood at the rear of the old Commercial
Hotel with the monkey in hot pursuit.
An old blackfellow named “Bow Wow”, who was paralysed
in the lower part of his legs and who moved about on his
hands and knees, was camped in a room at the stone stables
and at the time was resting on his bed. Suddenly a dog
and monkey apparition appeared in the doorway and without
any “by your leave” darted under his bed in mortal conflict.
“Bow Wow” thought his last hour had come and that
the “Debil Debit” had come for his own. The speed with
which the maimed blackfellow vacated his camp amazed the
onlookers.


GOLD MINING
THE discovery of gold at Fairfield (now Drake) in the latter part of 1858, and of the Tableland,
McLeod's Creek, Millera and other fields to the east of Tenterfield, and of Boonoo Boonoo to
the north brought an inrush of thousands of prospectors, men of many nationalities.
Rich alluvial areas were discovered, and produced in the
succeeding years many thousands of ounces of gold. The
Police Gold Escort was a common sight, the first from these
fields to the Clarence taking place early in 1859. The Gold
Commissioner’s records show that at times over 2,500 ounces
were carried, in addition to hundreds of pounds in
money. The thousands of new population to be fed pro-
vided a home market for the district farmers for their produce,
for a time.
Though the very rich alluvial claims were soon Worked
out, payable gold was being obtained for many years by
those miners who continued on the fields.
TIN MINING
The tin mining period set in about 1872, and attained
its zenith in 1876, when upwards of £60,000 worth of tin
was sent from the district. The Tenterfield Lands Office
received for mineral leases, in about seven years, approximately
£lOO,OOO.
The chief tin mining fields to the south-west of Tenterfield
were at Vegetable Creek (now Emmaville), Tent Hill,
Torrington, Nine Mile (now Stannum), and adjacent areas.
To the north were the rich fields of Wilson’s Donfall, Wylie
Creek, Amosfield, Ruby Creek, the Sugarloaf, Quart Pot
Creek (now Stanthorpe), and Broadwater.
Tin was discovered at Vegetable Creek in March, 1872,
by Thomas Carlean. By the end of the following year 2572
tons of tin had been mined, being 75 per cent, pure tin.
More than 3,000 tons were obtained in some years. Up to
1940 £5,000,000 worth of tin had been mined in that district.
In the northern areas also, fabulous amounts of tin have
been secured since its first discovery, more than 1500 tons
being obtained one year.
The stimulating effect of the tin mining industry on busi-
ness, and markets for primary produce, was immense.
COMMUNICATIONS-ROADS
|N the earliest period of settlement in Tenterfield the only means of communication with the outside
world was by means of a rough track down New England, through Tamworth, across the
Liverpool Range and then down the Hunter Val ley, a long, bad road. The track ended at Tenter-
field in the North.
All supplies had to come that way and wool and station products go that way to market.
Riding horse, pack horse, and bullock dray were the means of transport.
As previously mentioned, Thomas Hewitt, manager of
Stonehenge Station, beyond Glen Innes, being a man of
energy and initiative, determined to find a route to the Clar-
ence River, then being opened up. With Archibald Boyd he
had previously explored the country to the east of Glen Innes
and found it too rough. With his brother-in-law, Mr. Cowan,
and a black boy, he came northward to Tenterfield, apparently
late in 1840, and found a trafficable route on the southern
side of the Cataract River and down the Sandy Range to
Sandy Hills and then to Tabulam, thence across the Rich-
mond Range to Busby’s Flat, Wyan and thence to Grafton.
The new road was quickly opened up sufficiently for bullock
drays to traverse.
The first teamsters to traverse the new road are said to have
been Noakes and Skinner, who took wool down from Deep-
water Station. Two other early teamsters were Newman and
Girard, whose names are perpetuated in Newman’s Pinch and
Girard State Forest. From the earlier part of 1842 this route
became the great artery of traffic from the North Coast to and
from Tenterfield and Northern New England.
Over 500 teams were engaged in carrying on this road just
prior to the railway connection.
Other roads were quickly opened from Tenterfield. One
led to Clifton and the Sovereign or Dumaresq River on the
west. Another led through Ballandean to the Darling Downs
and another through Boonoo Boonoo to Maryland.
At a later period the traffic to Grafton was diverted to the
nearer shipping port of Lawrence. It might be mentioned here
that Grafton was first known as “The Settlement,” then
“Woolport” when the wool began to go there, and Grafton
when the town was laid out. At a still later period when
the road was opened from Tabulam over the Richmond
Range to Casino, much, if not most of the traffic went that way.
On the arrival of the railway at Tenterfield the hundreds
of teamsters transferred elsewhere as practically all freight then
was carried by the railway.


[ First White Child at Bolivia I
i The first white child bom at Bolivia was the late |
I Henty Bates, of Woodlands, who was born at Bolivia I
| Station about 1844 or 1845. j
4* *—«■■ ■ ■« i-i i-i i-i in in ..I ... I-, .n ... 4.
THE LATE 'SEVENTIES DEPRESSION
AFTER the gold and tin mining booms had passed a depression and time of stagnation settled
■ down on Northern New England in the late seventies.
A visitor to the town of Tenterfield described the situation
as follows:
“In speaking to several storekeepers, they told me that as
regards trade, little or nothing was being done. One told
me that he really believed that many families were living
without tea and sugar, let alone luxuries and the selectors
again, manv of whom I went amongst, repeat the cry. Here
the nominal price of wheat is 5/- a bushel; but such a price
is only a name. There is no money and it is impossible to
sell. Even when they do sell produce to the storekeepers,
they told me that they have to take half the amount in goods,
and frequently the remainder in bills.
“Talking to an hotelkeeper, even a more doleful tale was
echoed. ‘Every second man you meet,’ he said, ‘is a pauper.
The town is full of strangers, some regular loafers, but many
of them looking for work which they cannot get and without
a sixpence to buy a meal.’
“ ‘How do the hotelkeepers get on then?’ I asked. “Well,
I’ll tell you, and it is simply this: They have all got farms and
are consuming their own produce. Brown, of the Commer-
cial, and Connor, of the Royal, both grow everything they
want. Young, of the Grand Hotel, is the same. Laird, of the
Golden Fleece, is going to give it up. I hear Young wants
to sell out: Geldart has been trying to do so for some time
past and that will give you an idea of what the place is like.’
“The number of inhabitants within the Municipality is
upwards of 2000. To show the state of the exchequer, two
men who walked overland from Brisbane and carried a port-
manteau, when they got here tried to sell it. It was a brand
new one and rather large. They first asked 10/-, dropped
down to 5/-, and eventually sold it for two loaves of bread
and a tin billy, the whole cost of which would be 2/3.
“Before leaving, a word must be said about bread and beef.
I really believe that at Tenterfield these articles are cheaper
than at any other place in the Colony. The former is 3|d for
25b. loaf, the latter l|d. a pound—prices which I am afraid,
without doing any material good to the customers, will do
harm to the seller.”
Again he wrote: “In two or three sleet storms, I turned out
of my road and took shelter in selectors’ huts, which for some
distance after leaving Tenterfield are rather numerous. Here
although I was always kindly welcomed, they seemed rather to
feel the poverty of their existence. With good land, strong
hearts and muscular hands, they were yet in every case poor.
Everywhere was the same cry: “We cannot sell our wheat, or
indeed any kind of crop.’
“Cold and wet as I was mvself, I could not help feeling
as I watched the deiected looks of those who sat over the
fires in their comfortless looking huts ‘ln what different paths
men’s lives are cast’.”
Birth of the Town
Tenterfield had been settled for nearly ten years, when
an application was made by Sir Thomas Mitchell, on 2nd
October, 1849, that a township should be laid out.
This was approved by the Government, and on sth
December, 1849, Assistant Surveyor Galloway was directed
to carry out a “feature survey” of the Village Reserve, as a
basis for a “Town Design.” The design was completed,
and approved on 3rd July, 1851, and the town gazetted on
7th October, 1851. Thus was the town born.
Friday, 7th October, 1949, will be the town’s 98th birthday.
The first sale of town lands was held on 9th March,
1854, when quite a number of lots were sold. Geo. Wheatley
led by purchasing Lot 1, Section 13, of 2 roods for £4/10/-.
This lot is historic as it was repurchased in 1864 by the
Government for a Telegraph Station. It is situated at
the corner of Molesworth and Logan Streets.
Bartholomew Ross bought No. 2 and 3, Ralf Reid, of
Maryland No. 2, and George Wheatley of Fairfield No. 5.
Lot No. 6, on which the George Inn stood and where the
Royal Hotel was later built, was bought by Dr. Traill for
S. A. Donaldson, also Nos. 10 and 11.
A comment by Dr. Traill, in his report to Donaldson’s
office in Sydney, is good reading.
“In bidding for the allotments that I considered
necessary to be bought for Stuart, namely the ground
on which the main building of the Inn is to be erected,
there was a dead set made against me by Wheatly,
and Ross the Maryland publican. They ran the
price up to £BO before it was knocked down. The
other two they did not bid against much, seeing, I
suppose, that I was determined to buy.”
Further on in his report he stated; —
“Of the 41 lots offered, 29 were bought, the sale
realising nearly £340, and the average price per acre
being between £l5 and £l6.
“We may expect opposition of all sorts now, public
house, store, etc., and it is already reported that Mr.
Simon McEachnie, who bought three lots, is to open a
store without delay.”
Amongst the purchasers are the names of many old pioneer
residents.
Dr. Traill was correct in his prophecy. It was not long
before McEachnie, who had previously been station store-
keeper, opened a store opposite the present school, and many
other buildings were erected, and businesses began in the new
township.


EDWARD REEVES WHEREAT
THERE stands at the Post Office corner on the intersection of Rouse and Manners Streets, a plain
monument. A little investigation reveals that it was erected by the residents of Tenterfield
and district to honour the memory of Edward Reeves Whereat. Some further research reveals that
he was a remarkable man, a man of boundless enthusiasm and initiative, a leading man in the dis-
trict in his day. He died in his prime at the age of 54 years and yet he left his mark on Tenter-
field as few others have done.
E. R. Whereat was born at Salisbury, England, in 1840,
and given a good education. He arrived in Tenterfield when
he was 21 years of age, in 1861, and for the next 33 years
made this town his home.
His first employment was as book-keeper at Geo. Will-
son’s store. Later he had charge of John Ellis’ store, then
accommodated in one of Mr. Roper’s cottages, south of Virtue’s
garage.
In 1864 he was instrumental in starting a reading room
in Tenterfield which developed into the School of Arts. To
this he donated 200 volumes and gave a room free for the
purpose. He was also a Trustee of the School of Arts.
He took a leading part in establishing the Hospital and was
associated with it as Secretary-President or Treasurer to the
end of his life.
He was a member of the School Board and was Chair-
man at his death.
With others he assisted in starting the Show Society, and
was President for a time and a trustee. He also took a leading
part in establishing the Municipality, was the second Mayor
and excepting for a few months when he took a trip home to
England, was an alderman till he died, and Mayor six times.
He assisted in starting the Masonic Order and was the first
Worshipful Master.
With Messrs Riley and Meston he took a leading part in
founding the Jockey Club and was President at his death.
He was made a Justice of the Peace in 1873 and was the
first Licensing Magistrate. He was a member of the Land
Board. He was nominated as Member of Parliament and
was certain of election but retired to allow Sir Henry Parkes
to regain his position in Parliament.
For a short period, with C. A. Lee, he was proprietor of
the “Tenterfield Star.” He carried on numerous avenues of
business, including keeping for a time The Horse and Jockey
Hotel.
He purchased the old Station steam flour mill in 1870
from E. O’Connell and successfully ran it. In 1884 he
entered the tannery business. Finding difficulty in disposing of
all his leather, with his brother Isaac, he started a boot fac-
tory, employing many hands and turning out a fine article.
In 1882 with C. A. Lee, he toured the Clarence, Richmond
and Tweed Rivers in the interests of rail connection with the
coast.
He was one of the prime movers in starting the first butter
factory and was Chairman of Directors at his death. He
was Returning Officer for the Electorate for a number of
years.
Every worthy object had a warm supporter in E. R.
Whereat.
He was married three times. His first wife was Miss
Wheatley; his second wife was a widow, Mrs. Sullivan, and
his third wife Miss Simons. He had 10 children, five girls
and five boys.
The illness which led to his death was caused by a car-
buncle on the back of his neck.
The business places in the town closed the day of his
funeral as an expression of sympathy with relatives and of
respect for the deceased.
The Blacks
Tenterfield district in its primitive state was inhabited
by numerous blacks, for it was a paradise of animals and
vegetable food. In the colder months the tribes would
migrate to warmer areas to the east or west.
The invasion by the early white settlers necessarily meant
disturbing the native hunting grounds, and contact, either
friendly or hostile, with the aboriginal owners of the country.
In these modem times, we are learning of their intricate tribal
laws and customs, which were as precious to them as
ours are to us. We see now that many of the cruel killings
of lonely shepherds, and terrible retribution meted out by
the whites were largely the result of misunderstanding. While
there were cruel inhuman acts at times, on both sides, unjust
by both white and black codes, the blacks believed they were
entitled to spear the cattle, and steal the sheep of the invaders.
Great camps of blacks were situated around Tenterfield,
a favoured spot being about the present dam, and Hawkins
Gully near Dairy Mt., where great corroborees were held.
The late Mr. Fred Brauer told of a fierce battle which
took place at Stony Creek between Queensland and local
tribes, in his boyhood and which he watched from a distance.
There were many casualties.
The Pioneers' Beds
The mattresses on the pioneers’ beds in early Tenterfield
were usually filled with straw or corn husks, according to
information supplied by one of the pioneers. Some had
feather beds. The feathers of fowls killed for the table or of
wild birds shot for the same purpose were carefully dried and
used for filling beds and pillows.
Some German pioneers kept flocks of geese and at the
end of winter or when the moulting season arrived the soft
feathers were plucked from the geese and sold or used for
beds. The same geese would thus give a supply of feathers
over a number of years as sheep do with their wool. In
some cases settlers were too poor to buy blankets and overcame
the difficulty by sleeping between two bed ticks filled with
feathers.


TENTERFIELD SHOW SOCIETY
THE following information is taken from an article dealing with the history of the Show Society
during its first 50 years, written by Mr. A. W. Percival and published in the "Tenterfield
Star" at the time of the Jubilee Show in February, 1927.
“We find in the first minute book that the first meeting
was held in the Commercial Hotel on the 11th November,
1876, over which the late E. R. Whereat presided, and that
after some discussion it was moved by the late William
Laird, seconded by the late J. FL Sommerlad, and carried
unanimously, that the meeting deemed it desirable to form a
Pastoral, Agricultural and Horticultural Society.
This was the beginning of a period of much activity,
culminating in a resolution at a later meeting that a Show
be held not later than Ist April, 1877. The membership
fee was fixed at 10/-. Many meetings were held and
sub-committees formed and we find the following names
mentioned: Messrs. J. B. Graham, Police Magistrate, E. R.
Whereat, N. J. Simmons (solicitor), J. W. Simons, C.P.S.,
Dickson (2), Fraser, Wilson, Purvis, Laird, Baldey, Walsh,
Peberdy, Gelling, J. H. Sommerlad, Carr, Coxal senr., Roper,
Irby, Whitton, O’Brien, Burgess, Lee, Bentley (of the
Tenterfield “Star”), J. Ellis, G. A. Walker, Geldart, Welbum,
Gaden, I. Whereat, Merton Smith, Addison, Rev. F. Davis,
and J. F. Porter (“Star” Editor).
OFFICERS AND FIRST SHOW.
The first Annual Meeting was held on January 2, 1877,
when the late Mr. Edw. Irby was elected the first President,
Messrs. E. R. Whereat and J. B. Graham vice-presidents, Mr.
E. Carr the first treasurer, and Mr. Wm. Laird the first
secretary. The Secretary’s remuneration to begin with and
for several years was £lO per year.
The Pioneer Show was fixed for April sth and 6th, 1877,
and was held in the old School of Arts building and adjoining
grounds.
In those days the railway on the Queensland side was over
100 miles distant and in N.S.W. more than double that
distance so that the first Show largely depended upon the
residents of the district.
As the names of pioneer Stewards may be of interest, we
give them in full;—
CATTLE: John Whitton, W. Smith, G. Wheatley, J.
Flynn.
HORSES: J. G. Dickson, J. G. Graham, T. S. Morgan,
John Curry.
SHEEP and WOOL: A. Telfer, E. A. Gaden, R. Lawson,
and M. Curry.
PIGS, POULTRY, RABBITS, GOATS, and DOGS:
J. Drury, C. I. Cavanough, J. J. Brown, and I. Whereat.
FARM PRODUCE: J. H. Sommerlad, E. R. Whereat,
J. Ellis, and I. Waugh.
FLOWERS, FRUIT, WINES, and MINERALS: N.
J. Simmons, C. A. Lee, and E. P. Carr.
COLONIAL GOODS and MISCELLANEOUS: L.
Krahe, W. Frost, M. Egan, T. Peberdy, and M. Merrell.
There was also a fair amount of jumping, in which a
roan horse owned by John Dwyer excelled. The great jump
of about 4ft. 6ins. of those days gradually increased until
1926 when Australia’s record high jump of 7ft. logins, was
established on our very excellent jumping ground. There
were no regulation hurdles for training purposes, so the roan
horse was trained over the yard fences in the vicinity. It
was no unusual thing in those days, to see the horse fly over
the fence where Mr. Paul Walters’ boot shop later stood, into
the street, gallop a few strides and over the fence on the
opposite side of the street.
On account of drought the 1878 Show was allowed to
lapse; but the committee resolved on a ploughing match,
which was held at O’Connor’s farm, Grafton Road, on May
22nd, when John Donnelly, Henry Donnelly, and Thomas
Cowan competed for a £lO purse, and John Donnelly won it.
John Larracy won £2, and John Kelly got a prize for the
straightest furrow.
ACQUIRING A SHOWGROUND.
A very important resolution was passed at a meeting held
on August 7th, 1877, viz.; “That the Secretary of the T. a mL
Department be communicated with in order to obtain a grant
of land suitable for a showground,” and, secondly, “That
the piece selected should be the present showground.”
On sth November, 1878, the notification of the grant for
the selected land for a showground was received.
At this meeting is noticed, mentioned for the first time,
the name of the late kY. H. W'alker, who in company
with others gave a donation intended for the fencing of
the cattle yards.
The first Trustees of the ground were Messrs. Graham,
Peberdy, Lee, and Whereat.
PROGRESS.
The Show of 1879 was held on the new ground and as
there were no fences, the gatekeepers stood on the Manners
Street bridge and collected the toll. It was in this year
that the work of fencing was undertaken and the tender of
Messrs. Murphy and Gibson at 12/- per rod was accepted,
the work to be completed by 20th February, 1880. The
old Pavilion was completed in the year 1882, J. Mangleson
being the successful tenderer, the contract price £216.
The year 1883 showed distinct advances all along the line.
Mr. W. H. Walker was elected President.
The gate was sold to Mr. R. Stevenson for £6l. It should
be noted that at the first Show the gate was sold for £4O.
At the 1883 Show an interesting sheep yarding trial was
given by Mr. Ben Kermode with his collies Tweedie and
Flora; and Mr. John Dwyer’s “Skewball’ nearly forfeited
the jumping honours he had held for so many years to Mr.
George Kermode’s famous “Chance,” then only a colt.
This was the first of the tussels for which our ground has
acquired a gradually increasing fame and it is pleasing to
note that an all-Australian record was put up in 1892, although
the height is not given.


In 1884 Mr. Dwyer’s 17-year-old “Skewball” again won
the jump against Mr. Kermode’s colt at a height of 4ft. 9ins.
for a prize of £l5.
The first permanent Show ring was erected in 1885.
It would appear that the Shows of 1886 and 1887 were
anything but successful, when Mr. W. H. Walker at this
time put in a plea that as the railway had come to Tenterfield,
there should be a determined effort made to arouse the people
from the apathy which had fallen upon them and to make
a progressive move. It was then that the Inter-colonial
Show was established and for very many years the Tenterfield
Show ranked as one of the best in the country.
The late Mr. A. M. White, of Bolivia Station, occupied
the position of President for some years with credit to
hilmself and benefit to the Society, and when the position
was handed over to Mr. C. W. Smith in 1909, the finances
were in a most healthy condition.
In 1914 Mr. W. Reid, who had been Treasurer for a period
of 25 years, was elected President, and his son, Mr. W. Alex
Reid, was placed in the position of Treasurer and has
continued in office up to the present time with much
distinction.
For a considerable time Mr. W. Reid had been urging
the need of a new Pavilion. After much hard work and
careful, persistent organising the foundation stone of the new
Pavilion was laid on 9th September, 1914, and the completed
building was officially opened upon the occasion of the
Show of 1915. Great credit is due to Mr. Reid for the
financial stability of the Society during his nine years
occupancy of the Presidential chair.
In the three succeeding years the guidance of the Society
was in the capable hands of Mr. C. W. Smith, Messrs. Purvis
Smith, and S. Armstrong.
NEW GRANDSTAND
At the latter end of 1924 the Grandstand was destroyed
by fire and there remained only nine weeks before the 1925
carnival. The very active President of that year, Mr. G.
Purvis Smith, gathered his committee together and within
two weeks it was decided that a new concrete structure should
be erected at a cost of £l7OO. The contractors, Messrs. G.
Kyburz and Sons, took up the work in earnest and be it to
their everlasting credit the magnificent Grandstand was erected
and almost completed within seven weeks from commence-
ment. The President and Committee were exceedingly proud
of the fact that the Stand was not only in use in such a short
period but that there remained only £4OO debt.
The first Patron, Mr. W. T. Cadell, of Deepwater, was a
loyal supporter of the Society. It was his practice to donate
from £5O to £lOO a year to the Society’s funds and a similar
sum to the P.A.M. Hospital. Mr. Cadell offered to become
security for £l,OOO at the bank to assist in financing the new
Grandstand. Mr. John Hynes, the second Patron, offered
to contribute £lOO if another £5OO was raised for the project
and this was accomplished. The President at the time of
the Jubilee Show in February, 1927, was Mr. Albert O.
Hynes. Amongst the stalwart supporters of the Society during
the first 50 years and not previously mentioned were: —Messrs.
R. D. Woolnough, Peter Wilkie, George Kennedy, John
Harker, F. Will Hoskin, R. G. White, and W. O’Shea.
At some period during its history the name of the Society
was changed to the “Pastoral, Agricultural and Mining
Society.”
The following comment is given in an article in the “Sydney
Mail” of May 2, 1928, on the old-time Shows:
“At the first Show this writer was at, about 1880, only two
lady riders appeared. One was Mrs. Cadell, of Deepwater,
mounted on a handsome horse. Her side saddle was almost
covered by a flowing skirt; she wore a tall hat with floating
veil and looked the picture of royal equestriennes. The other
lady rider had a full black skirt and red garibaldi, and rode a
piebald pony very well.
“Later, one saw over twenty ladies, all on side saddles with
short neat skirts, just showing the boot and silver spur, and
hard-hitter hats, gracefully handling their glossy hacks.
Fours-in-hand were tooled around the ring by Messrs. Walker,
Graham and Dickson. Mr. Jeffrey always had good horses
from Mingoola, and Mr. Cadell, of Deepwater, was a tower
of strength to both Tenterfield and Glen Innes Shows. The
young hunters that made their debut at Tenterfield Show
became famous in many cases in N.S.W.”
Camp Drafting at Shows originated at Tenterfield Show
in 1885. Mr. Clarence W. Smith, of Boorook Station and
Tenterfield, and the present Patron of the Society, is credited
with originating these competitions.
“Tenterfield has been the scene of some of the finest jumping
in Australia and on occasions has held, not only the Australian
record, but the world’s record.
The Australian record was broken in 1926, when Mrs. A.
A. Laidlaw’s “Lookout”, ridden by A. McPhee, jumped
7ft. lOJins.
In 1936 the world’s record was broken when C. H. Perry’s
“Lookout,” ridden by W. Marton, jumped Bft. 3-Jins.
The Society has also taken a leading part in staging the
North Coast and Tableland district exhibit at the Sydney and
Brisbane Shows, which on numerous occasions has secured
the coveted first position.
In 1946 the Society had the honor of entertaining the
Governor-General, His Royal Highness the Duke of
Gloucester, at a Rodeo.
Recent Presidents have been Messrs. J. C. Tanner, F. C.
Coogan, and the present President, Mr. E. J. Petherick.
Sydney to Tenterfield, 1876
In travelling from Sydney to Tenterfield in 1876, steamer
was taken from Sydney to Newcastle, fare 12/6, steerage 7/6.
The railway between these centres was not then built. Train
was taken from Newcastle at Honeysuckle Point and only
went as far as Murrurundi, costing £l/13/6 first class, and
£l/5/6 second class.
The journey was completed to Tenterfield in Cobb and
Coy’s, coaches, fare being £6/5/-.
1866 Cost of Telegrams and
Nearest Courts
In 1886 a telegram of ten words between Tenterfield and
Sydney cost 4/- and 3d for each additional word.
In that year also the nearest Circuit Court to Tenterfield was
held at Armidale, 120 miles away, and the nearest Court of
Quarter Sessions was at Singleton.


The Tenterfield Methodist
Church in 1865.
A view of Tenterfield Creek
which divides the town. The
picture shows the sweeping
willows lining the creek banks
and making ideal picnic grounds.
Despite many set-backs in the
early stages the sheep industry
is now firmly established in the
rich district to the west of
Tenterfield. The wool clip is
worth many thousands of pounds
annually.


Tenterfield Bowling Club in Molesworth Street. An additional
green is in process of construction on the eastern side. The
Club has a membership of over 100, and is one of the most
progressive bodies in the town.
The Court House, which celebrated its centenary in
1948. The Police Station is in the same building.
Tenterfield welcoming the
advent of the Railway in 1886.
Picture shows Aag-bedecked
street as His Excellency, the
Governor, Lord Carrington,
was escorted into the town for
the celebrations. Many of the
men who helped put the
Railway through later settled in
the district and contributed to
its development and prosperity.


TENTERFIELD CHURCHES
CHURCH OF ENGLAND
The Rev. S. Hungerford, from Armidale, is said to have
been the first to administer Church of England rites in
Tenterfield. This was from 1854 onwards to 1858. Previous
to this, in 1845, Rev. H. Tincombe was appointed to the
Parish of New England. Whether he ever visited Tenterfield,
present information available does not say. An interesting
letter dealing with his extensive Parish written in this century
by Mr. Hungerford is in the possession of the Historical
Society.
The first church, Christ Church, was built in 1860. The
contractors were Messrs. Erastus Styles and George Fagg.
The roof timbers were supplied by Fred Wyman.
Rev. George Charles Bode is said to have been the first
Minister of Christ Church. His ministry commenced in the
latter part of 1858, and he is said to have conducted the first
burial in Tenterfield, in 1858, and the first wedding in 1859,
presumably of his own ministry in the Parish, as Tenterfield
had been occupied about 18 years.
The first resident Minister was Rev. C. G. Robinson, M.A.,
who began his ministry in July, 1868. In April, 1871, he
was farewelled and presented with a purse of 92 sovereigns.
He was succeeded by Rev. F. Davis, M.A., who came
from Narrabri, and was the Minister at the time of the
establishment of the Municipality in 1871. A record of Mr.
Davis’ first visit, to Drake is as follows:
“The first Church of England Minister to visit Drake
goldfields was the Rev. F. Davis. He came to Drake to officiate
at the marriage of Mr. George Smith. When he arrived he found
two couples awaiting him. He also had the pleasant duty
of christening sixteen of the miners’ children, and two black
babies. Mr. Isaac Whereat stood godfather for six of them.
Mr. Davis held church service that night at Mrs. Bedwell’s
boardinghouse. The next day he was accompanied by Messrs.
Andrew Smith and I. Whereat, to visit all the miners at
the prospecting claim on the Perseverance Reef. They were
then on good gold, and the Minister was shown some very
fine specimens. He was given one with about half-an-ounce
of gold in it.
“That night a tea meeting was held in a tent outside Mrs.
Bedwell’s. After the tea meeting, the blacks gave a corroboree,
after which the blacks were given a gass of rum, 1/-, and a fig
of tobacco each.
“A Smith, E. Scott, and I. Whereat made a collection,
and next morning Mr. Davis went away £2O richer, and with
several gold specimens.
“He went home a short cut by Boonoo Boonoo. When he
arrived at the Boonoo Boonoo Hotel, he found six miners’
wives, with their children waiting to be christened. He
remained at Boonoo Boonoo that night, christened the
children, held church service at the hotel, and went on to
Tenterfield next morning.”
Succeeding Ministers, since the time of Mr. Davis, have
served the wide Tenterfield parish. The foundation stone
of a new Church was laid in 1893 by Archbishop Saumarez
Smith, and portion of the Church erected as an addition to the
original one. The new Church, however, was never
completed.
An entirely new Church has now been decided on. Most
of the necessary money has been raised, and plans and
preliminary steps have been completed. Rev. C. R. Rothero,
the present Vicar, is hopeful that the new Church, the erection
of which was hindered by the war, will soon be an accomplish-
ment.
The first Anglican Vicarage in Tenterfield is stated by old
residents to have been situated on the southern side of Clarence
Street, on the eastern side of the small creek, which crosses
the highway. Later, a Vicarage was erected near the Church
in Rouse Street. This in turn was demolished, and the
present commodious building erected.
Following are the names of Ministers who have served at
Tenterfield: 1868-70, Rev. C. G. Robinson, M.A.; 1871-79,
Rev. F. Davis, M.A.; 1879-83, Rev. T. Hyder; 1883-92, Rev.
F. H. Spooner; 1892-95, Rev. R. J. Moxon; 1895-1912, Rev.
H. Granville Smith; 1912-13, Rev. A. R. Pegler; 1913-25,
Rev. Canon B. W. Miller, Th.L.; 1925-38, Rev. Canon T.
May, Th.L.; 1938-45, Rev. W. E. West, Th. Schol; 1945,
Rev. C. R. Rothero, Th. Schol.
(Foundation old portion church 1857. New portion 1893).
ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH
In the pioneer years of Tenterfield the members of the
Roman Catholic Church were served by visiting Priests.
Amongst these were, it appears, Monsignor Lynch and Dean
O’Sullivan. Services were held in Sullivan’s hotel.
In August, 1863, it was decided to call tenders for the
erection of a church, “St. Mary’s”. Arrangements were
made in January, 1866, to welcome Father Keoghan, the
first resident Priest, and presumably he shortly afterwards
arrived. In December, 1866, the foundation stone of the
new church, the tender for which was £867, was laid by Dean
Lynch. Father O’Callaghan succeeded Father Keoghan.
Bishop P. J. O’Connor paid his first visit to Tenterfield in
1876, and the Church and Presbytery had then been completed
for some time. Since that period the following resident
Priests have served in Tenterfield: Father M. Keenan, Father
Kelly, Monsignor Corcoran, Father Ahem, Father J. T.
Clancy, and Father P. Hynes.
In 1881 a Convent and School were established in Miles
Street (the Old Convent).
During the term of Father Clancy, five acres of land were
purchased in Scott Street from the Hon. C. A. Lee. On
this was built a new Convent and School in 1914 for the
Sisters of St. Joseph. The old Church was also improved
and decorated during Father Clancy’s ministry.
During Father Hynes’ ministry a new Church, “Church
of Our Lady of Perpetual Succour,” was built and opened
on 11th August, 1940. The cost was approximately £9,000
and comparatively little of this amount remained as debt at
the time of opening.


SALVATION ARMY.
The Salvation Army began operations in Tenterfield on
March 26th, 1887, Captain Rundle being in charge. The
intense evangelistic services of succeeding officers continued
for many years. The musical services in the streets were a
feature of the town life, and the bright services had an
attraction for many. For a period support so declined that
it was decided to withdraw. After a few years the work
was revived under Captain Fletcher and Lieut. Thompson
and has continued to the present.
The brick Salvation Army barracks in Rouse Street and
Miles Street, built in the early years, are the scene of the
active service of the present officer, Capt. Mansell.
METHODIST CHURCH
In the year 1864 Rev. B. Chapman, of Armidale, visited
Tenterfield with a view to a Methodist Minister being
stationed here. In 1865, Rev. Arthur Rutledge (afterwards
Sir Arthur Rutledge, of Queensland) was appointed super-
intendent of the Tenterfield-Glen Innes Circuit. It extended
80 miles to Bonshaw on the West, and 60 miles to Glen
Innes. Services were held in the old Court House in Tenter-
field. The first quarterly meeting was held there on April
Bth, 1865. The Circuit Steward was Mr. John Sontar,
Society Steward, Mr. G. Dearden, and Poor Steward, Mr. H.
Witaker. Mr. Dearden was Class Leader, Mr. West,
organist, Mr. Sontar Superintendent, and Mr. Castle
Secretary of the Sunday School, with 45 scholars, nine
teachers, and Mrs. James Reid, Sunday School visitor.
A Church was erected, and officially opened on October
14th, 1867. The first marriage, that of Mr. and Mrs.
Kilminster, took place the day of the opening.
Ministers who have served at Tenterfield are: Revs. A.
Rutledge 1865, J. P. Manning 1868, K. A. Comer 1869,
Joseph Hopkins 1871, Robert Allen 1874, W. H. Beale 1876,
J. D. Hennessey 1877, B. J. Meek 1879, W. Dinning 1882,
J. G. Martin 1885, John Hulme 1888, W. McCallum 1891,
R. East 1894, B. Lane 1897, M. H. Parkinson 1900, J. Bryant
1903, E. E. Crosby 1904, Will. Wall 1907, J. W. Leadley
1910, E. E. Hynes 1913, J. Calvert 1917, R. H. Doust 1920,
P. L. Black 1923, J. Thompson 1925, J. W. Booth 1928,
W. H. Willey 1931, A. J. Skinner 1935, E. V. Newman,
8.A., D. 8., 8., L.T.T., 1938, H. G. Ingate 1942, and Rev.
J. A. Willson, 8.A., 1946.
The original Church was enlarged during the term of
Rev. J. D. Hennessey, and the Parsonage erected in 1898.
On 2nd October, 1928, the Church was destroyed by fire.
The new brick Church was opened on Ist February, 1930.
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH.
The Tenterfield Presbyterian Charge was established toward
the latter end of 1882. TJje first service was conducted in
November that year in the School of Arts by Rev. T. S.
Millar, his induction taking place on July 22, 1883.
The present Church in its original state was opened for
worship on November 2nd, 1884, by the Rev. A. Gardiner,
M.A., of Sydney.
Shortly after the Church opening Rev. E. J. Thomson
succeeded Rev. T. S. Millar.
The Manse was opened in 1912 by the then Mayoress,
Mrs. G. H. T. Mitchell.
The hall facing Manners Street was erected about 1941,
by voluntary labour, under the leadership of Mr. W. C.
Andrews, the Shire Engineer.
In addition to those mentioned the following Ministers
have served in Tenterfield commencing their ministry at the
times mentioned:
Rev. J. T. Thorburn 1893, Rev. Richard Dill Macky 1897,
Rev. Fred W. Gresham 1905, Rev. J. M. Stoops 1910, Rev.
G. Edwards 1912, Rev. A. J. Barrett 1920, Rev. W. F. Paul,
H. 1931, Rev. John Muir, H.M., 1932, Rev. C. G. D.
Krust, M.A., 1936, Rev. H. S. Rew 1940, Rev. C. T. Knibb
1944, Rev. R. H. Vickers 1948 (the present Minister).
SEVENTH DAY ADVENTIST CHURCH
Though the local activities of this Church have taken place
in comparatively recent years, the members have proved to be
active in the propagation of their faith. Over the years
they have been served by various Pastors, the two most recent
being Pastor Myers, and Pastor Stewart, the present Pastor.
For years members met for worship and fellowship in private
homes, and the Oddfellows’ Hall. Having in mind a Church
of their own, steps were taken towards that object, but World
War 11. intervening, it was decided to defer the project of
building. However, a suitable block on which to build
was secured in Bulwer Street, a plan of Church was selected,
and materials obtained from Sydney, Brisbane, Armidale,
and Drake, in addition to those secured locally. In fact,
a gift of a hymn board came from Greymouth in New
Zealand.
When world conditions moderated, building was begun.
The foundations were laid in June, 1947. Eventually the
handsome brick Church was completed. The official opening
took place on January 4th, 1948, the dedicating ceremony
being performed by Pastor Sibley.
Tenterfield Production in 1880
Number of holdings exceeding 1 acre; 326.
Land in cultivation: 3,247 acres.
Land enclosed: 21,239 acres.
Land unenclosed: 27,527 acres.
Total extent of holdings: 52,024 acres.
Early Solicitors
The first solicitor to practise in Tenterfield was Mr.
Castles. Next came Mr. Melvill, who was followed by
Messrs. N. J. Simmons, Campbell, H. Robertson, Dwyer,
Thompson, Street, J. F. Thomas, Readett and others (on
authority of I. Whereat).
Tenterfield Population, 1949
Population of Municipality 3690
Outside Municipality and within Police District .. 2383
Total population of Police District 6073
Tenterfield Licensing District includes Urbenville, Deep-
water and Torrington.
The Police District of Tenterfield reaches on the north to
Wylie Creek bridge, on the south to Bluff River bridge, on
the west to the Dumaresq River bridge, and on the east to
Black Snake Creek bridge.


CENTRALISATION CASUALTIES
UNTIL the centralisation octopus obtained a grip of country industries and squeezed the life out
of many of them, tanning was a thriving industry in Tenterfield.
PAVEL'S TANNERY
The first tannery was erected by the late Charles Pavel,
pioneer of the family. In 1861 he was established in business
as saddler and tanner. The site of the business was the
property at the south-east corner of High and Bulwer Streets,
the saddlery business being at the home near the comer and
the tannery near the gully. The first well sunk in Tenterfield
is claimed to have been sunk there by Mr. Pavel.
After his marriage Mr. Pavel built a saddlery shop in the
township and carried on that part of his business there.
This shop is now the remodelled produce store of Roper and
Walker.
About 1884 owing to the growth of the town it became
necessary to remove the tannery business to Stony Creek.
The site of the tannery and the home built there was a
little above the wall of the dam and on the north side of the
main creek. Associated with the tannery was a soapworks.
The site of these buildings is now covered by the water of the
town supply.
WHEREAT'S TANNERY AND BOOT FACTORY.
At a later period Mr. E. R. Whereat opened a tannery
near the flour mill, then owned by him, and situated across
the creek opposite the Tenterfield Station homestead. This
proved a profitable business, having a good market in Brisbane.
However, Queensland put on a heavy customs duty on leather
(this was in the ’eighties before Federation) and destroyed
the market.
Mr. Whereat then opened a boot factory in Scott Street in
the old Horse and Jockey Hotel, to turn his leather into the
finished article. Four or five hands were employed. The
business grew rapidly. This led Mr. Whereat to erect a
large boot factory in High Street, about opposite the School
residence. Mr. H. Kline was appointed manager and under
his capable management, the business grew until there were
about forty employees.
Eventually because of centralisation and poor communication
with the chief market on the North Coast, the business went
out.
TENTERFIELD CHILLED MEAT WORKS.
Mr. W. H. Walker and other cattle men were instrumental
in opening a meatworks in Tenterfield on the site of Tancred’s
present meat works. They were a success until destroyed by
the centralising policy and action of wholesale butchers in
Sydney.
CHEESE FACTORY.
Following the chilled meat works, a cheese factory began
operations on the same site. A particularly fine article was
produced named “Tenterfield” cheese. Eventually this
factory also was removed to the metropolitan area, still
retaining the name “Tenterfield” for its product but having
no connection with local production.
SOAP WORKS.
In addition to C. Pavel’s soap works, Messrs. Ewinis
Janityky & Ross, and others established factories, but none
now remains.
Though new meatworks have been established and are now
flourishing, one cannot but feel regret for flour mills, tanneries,
boot factory, chilled meat works, cheese factory, and soap
works, all fallen casualties to a fatal centralisation policy.
No wonder there is an outcry for a New State and local
self-government.
TENTERFIELD LIME MAKING
In the period before the railway connection, limestone
was burnt locally, for the production of lime for building,
and other purposes. The limestone was procured from
the extensive limestone deposits at Clifton.
On the high creek bank, at Hawkins’ Gully, near the
Steinbrook Road, are evidences still of shafts in the ground,
with outlets at the bottom near the creek level. The limestone
was carted to this spot to be burnt into lime.
A layer of wood was placed at the bottom of the shaft,
and over, that a layer of limestone. This was followed by
another layer of wood, and another of limestone, and so on
until the top was reached. A fire was then lit at the bottom,
and the draught carried the fire up through the shaft, burning
the limestone in the process.
Before Glen Innes was connected with rail, limestone
was carted from Clifton to that township for lime making.
Prolific Tenterfield
In the period about 1880 in the country district of Bryan’s
Gap, at Tenterfield, there were, in an area of about miles
square, over 250 children belonging to about 25 families.
Not less than a dozen of these families went into double
figures. In addition to one of 16, and one of 15, there were
two of 14, two of 13, and not less than five families of 12.
This is a record that will take some beating.
Prize Wheat
At the Adelaide Jubilee Exhibition held in 1866, John
Corrin, a farmer of Sunnyside, Tenterfield, entered an exhibit
of “Grey Satin” wheat, grown on his farm. The wheat
weighed 64Jlb. per bushel, and produced 30 bushels to the
acre. Mr. Corrin won first prize against competition from
all Australia.
(A daughter of the late Mr. Corrin is Mrs. Snow, wife of
Dr. C. C. Snow, of Inverell).
"Moombilleen"
On the authority of the late W. T. Cadell, of Deepwater,
the aboriginal name for Tenterfield is “Moombilleen,” mean-
ing “place of wild bees.”


PUBLIC SCHOOL
THE plans for the first Public School were received in Tenterfield in December, 1865, and the
* School erected the following year, 1866, on the present school ground in High Street.
The school contained two class rooms, with the Head Teacher's residence attached.
The school commenced with 60 pupils. In 1871 there were
135; in 1915, 315; and in 1949, 486 (162 infants, 197 prim-
ary and 127 secondary).
As time passed new buildings and classrooms were added.
The old part of the brick school was built in 1886-1887. In
1888-1889 further additions were made to the brick portion of
the school, and a new teacher’s residence built in brick. The
contractors were Messrs J. C. Springborg and John Saxby,
of Wallangarra. They were allowed the timber of the old
school and residence. Some of these wide boards may still
be seen in the residence of the late Mr. Saxby at Wallangarra.
Additional buildings have since been added, giving the
school the appearance of a scattered village. As the result
of long agitation, Queen’s Park has been secured as the site
of a new Primary and High School, and the first buildings
are shortly to be erected.
The first Headmaster was William Goudy. During the
previous two years he had taught a National School in an
old building in Rouse Street, on or about the site of Virtue’s
garage.
Unfortunately, Mr. Goudy, who was an excellent master,
died in 1869, at the age of 39 years. He is buried in the
local cemetery. He was succeeded by J. J. Walsh. An old
photograph of the first school, with the children and Mr.
Walsh grouped in front, is in existence.
Following him was Mr. Thompson, who stayed only a few
months, and was succeeded by Albert Studdy. An article
in the “Town and Country Journal” of August, 1879, states;
“Mr. Albert Studdy, the present Headmaster, took charge
in October, 1877. His assistant is Miss Cole, and his pupil
teacher Master Henry Peberdy. There were in 1867, 104
scholars. On the day of my arrival, July 29, 1879, there were
88 boys and 57 girls, or a total of 145 enrolled, and the large
attendance of 132. Of these 74 were Church of England,
29 Roman Catholics, and 51 Wesleyans. There is no de-
nominational school, and much peace and harmony reign in
religious matters.
“I spent some time in the public school. The children are
very fat, very healthy, and exceedingly clean and well be-
haved. I examined them in grammar and analysis, arith-
metic and local geography, and found them extremely pro-
ficient and quick and correct in replies. Geometry and Latin
are also taught and the teacher appears to delight in mak-
ing his pupils proficient in calligraphy.
“The following gentlemen constitute the local board:
Messrs C. A. Lee (Chairman), E. P. Carr (Hon. Secretary),
Wm. Young (Treasurer), Thomas Peberdv, Charles Cav-
anough, Julian F. Addison, Edward Irby and M. Merril. It
is a strong representative board, and they should be able to get
a handsome public school built.
“In the suburbs there are two public schools, also well
conducted—one at Bryan’s Gap, established mainly through
the energy of Mr. John Ellis, J.P., with Mr. Harvey as the
teacher, and the other at Six Mile, with Mr. Gregory teacher.”
The Tenterfield School has functioned under various
names —Public School, Superior Public School, and Rural
School, and at present Intermediate High School.
With improved roads and transport, many country child-
ren are now able to attend the town school, and secure the
benefits of a higher standard of education.
According to Departmental records the first Public
School at Tenterfield was opened in July, 1864. In
December of that year the enrolment was 103 and the average
attendance 77. Apparently the nearest other public schools
at the time were at Warwick (Queensland), Glen limes and
Grafton. '
The records covering this period are somewhat disconnected
but it appears that this first school was conducted at a private
house in Rouse Street, and the teacher was Mr. Goudy,
assisted by his daughter.
About the end of 1866 the school was transferred to a
wooden building. This was built of slabs with shingle roof,
erected by a builder named E. Styles. The site contained
two acres granted by the Government. The cost of the
building was borne partly by the residents and partly by the
Council of Education, which was the controlling body of
education at the time. The school then was surrounded by
thick scrub, and the site, which was the main portion of the
present site, unfenced.
Substantial additions were made to the school building
in 1884, 1886, 1888 and 1891. The old buildings were re-
moved in the lastnamed year.
The school site was enlarged by about half an acre in
1888 and a reservation of two acres 25 perches was granted
in 1912 for playground purposes.
In 1928 further additions were made for the accommo-
dation of manual training and home science classes, at a cost
of £2,883/12/6.
Teachers in charge of the school since 1883 have been:
Wm. Marshall, appointed 27/4/83.
Thomas Dent 1889; P. Pearson 1891; G. Steinbeck 1898;
Charles Palmer 1903; Peter Buchanan 1908; C. A. Blumer;
John Connor 1912; James Buxton 1917; D. Burgess 1922;
John Swan —; Charles Cash 1934; Henry Jacob 1940; L.
Mitchell 1947.
(The foregoing information was supplied by the N.S.W.
Education Department, July 21, 1949).
PRIVATE AND OTHER SCHOOLS.
In addition to the National School, which operated about
1865, just prior to the opening of die Public School, and
the Convent School, which began at the old Convent in
Miles Street, in 1881, and was transferred to the new Con-
vent in Scott Street, in 1914, a number of private schools
existed at various times.
Some old residents stated they attended a school at the
old Roman Catholic Church, prior to the opening of the


Convent School.
An old resident stated that prior to the opening of the
National School, a Mr. James conducted a night school in
town.
A Miss Styles is said to have kept a small school in the
old cottage above the old Convent in Miles Street, in which
the Lindemans now live.
Mr. William Reeves is claimed to have had a school, situ-
ated in Molesworth Street, in the vicinity of Mr. Crofton
Weaver’s home.
Mrs. Goudy and daughter are said to have kept a
private school after the death of Mr. Goudy, the first Public
School teacher, in 1869.
Others schools, including the following, are definitely known
to have existed:
Dr. Badham kept a school in Wood Street, now Mrs.
John Donoghue’s home.
Miss Alison Green, daughter of Bishop Green, conducted
a “Ladies’ High and Boarding School” in Rouse Street, on
the site of Virtue’s garage, and in the two storey building
adjacent. This school was in operation in 1889.
Miss Kemp, aunt of Misses Alice and Florrie Kemp, kept
a school in Molesworth Street not far from Mr. Harold
Curry’s home.
A well-known school was that of Mrs. Gray, situated back
from Molesworth Street, and at the rear of die Royal Hotel
property.
Miss Elizabeth D. Juergens kept a school at her home in
Clarence Street, across the lane from the Whitton home and
property. Miss Juergens previously taught in Mrs. Gray’s
school.
The original Church of England was the centre where
Mrs. J. Arbouin conducted a school in early years.
Mrs. O’Brien, after the death of her husband, who was
Sheriff’s Bailiff and Pound Keeper, opened a school in Bul-
wer Street, on or adjacent to the site of the Seventh Day
Adventist Church. Her pupils are said to have totalled up
to 45. This would be in the ‘seventies.”
Later Mrs. O’Brien married Mr. Caldwell, an officer in the
old Telegraph Office, and closed the school. Many of her
pupils are stated to have transferred to the Convent School,
opening about that time.
In addition to the foregoing, an old man kept a boys'
school in a slab and bark hut at Barney Downs and some of
the old residents, now passed on, attended when they were
boys.
COURT AND POLICE
DY a proclamation published in the Government Gazette on April 30, 1847, a Court of Petty
Sessions was established at Tenterfield. Richard Thomas Goulding was appointed C.P.S.
and John Tracey, Chief Constable.
The first Court held was a Court of Requests, on Monday,
November 1, 1847. The presiding magistrates were Edward
Irby, J.P., Bolivia Station, and Dr. R. J. Traill, J.P., Manager
of Clifton Station.
The only case, Nicol v. Herring, was a dispute over a
rifle between Nicol, of Ballandean Station, and Herring, of
Barney Downs. Nicol was awarded £6.
The first Court of Petty Sessions was held on Monday,
November 15, 1847. The presiding magistrates were
Messrs. C. Rolleston, J.P., Crown Lands Commissioner,
R. R. Mackenzie, J.P., of Tenterfield Station, and Edward
Irby, J.P., of Bolivia Station. The only case, in which a
man was charged with stealing a builder’s measure, was
dismissed.
At the next Court held on November 30, 1847, a man
charged with drunkenness was found guilty, and sentenced
to three months’ imprisonment in Sydney Gaol. This
meant a journey for the police officer, of nearly 500 miles,
much of it over very bad roads, to deliver his prisoner to
the gaol.
Amongst Justices of the Peace serving on the Tenterfield
Bench in early years were: Messrs. R. R. Mackenzie, E. Irby,
Dr. R. J. Traill, Christopher Rolleston, George H. Barney,
R. R. C. Robertson, James H. Ross, Frederick King, R. G.
Massie, W. Mackenzie, C. W. Marsh, A. R. Riley, John
Cowper and John Ross.
The first Police Magistrate was Thomas Cowper, who
was appointed in 1862. He was also first Chairman of
the P.A.M. Hospital Committee.
J. Buchanan succeeded Mr. Cowper as Police Magistrate
about 1866, and was later himself succeeded by Mr. Addison.
The first publican’s licence was granted to Patrick Hender-
son on June 29, 1849, for the “George Inn.” The low
building on the east side, and now part of the Royal Hotel
is said to be the old George Inn.
Early Clerks of Petty Sessions were R. K. Goulding, J.
Dunbar, and Thomas Mountstephen Wright, who held the
position for a lengthy period.
The names of the following police appear in early records:
1847: John Tracey; 1849: Robert Bourke, Thomas
Bourke, Edward Eveleigh and Clifford; 1850: H. Smith,
William Gordon; 1852: Andrew Borrows.
A District Court was established in Tenterfield at one
period, removed for a number of years, and established
again in recent years.
During the 102 years the Court has been in existence,
sessions were apparently held at Tenterfield Station, the
George Inn, the Police Office, the old wooden Court House,
and the present Court House.
The foundation stone of the present brick Court House
was laid in 1882 with full Masonic honours, James Brisbane
Graham being then resident Police Magistrate, and J. W.
Simons, C.P.S.
Recent occupants of the office of C.P.S. have been: A. D.
Donnelly, F. N. C. Beston, Geo. W. Pullen, and R. G. G.
Hewitt, the present officer.
The Police Staff in 1949 comprises: R. W. Veney, Ser-
geant 2/c and Officer in Charge; L. N. Reynolds, Senior
Constable; S. Long, Senior Constable; J. D. Syme, Constable;
D. C. Medhurst, Constable.


Reminiscences of Isaac Whereat
SOME EXTRACTS
The business people in Tenterfield in 1865-6 included
Phil Sullivan, Tenterfield Hotel; M. Curry, Golden Fleece
Hotel; John Simons, Royal Hotel; E. R. Whereat, Horse
and Jockey Hotel; Mrs. Baker, Court House Hotel.
George Willson, the then “King of Tenterfield,” had
“The Maryland Store,” comer Rouse and High Streets, also
a store in Rouse Street, where I. Whereat had his produce
store for many years.
The old Post and Telegraph Office was attached to the
Maryland Store until the new Telegraph Office was built,
where W. Whereat now lives (1913), and the Post Office
was removed to Mr. E. O’Connell’s store in High Street,
next Sullivan’s Hotel. Mr. E. O’Connell was the Post-
master, and we had a mail from Sydney twice a week, once
a week from Grafton via Lawrence, and once a week from
Bonshaw and Warwick. All the mails were carried by
packhorse, at that time about 2 cwt. a week all told.
Thomas Peberdy kept the “Free Trade Hall” Store in
Rouse Street, now kept by Mr. H. Humphrey. W. Young
had a store in Rouse Street, now kept by C. Lum Gar.
I. Whereat had a store in Scott Street next to the Horse
and Jockey Hotel. Attached to this store was the Registry
Office for births, deaths and marriages, also a Registrar for
Brands. E. R. Whereat was the Registrar.
At that time there were more marriages at the Registry
Office than at the churches.
The Church of England was the only Church built at
this time (Parson Bode). The R.C. Church held service
at Sullivan’s Hotel, and the Wesleyan Church was held
in the old wooden Court House. The first Wesleyan
Minister stationed here was Mr. Arthur Rutledge (now
Sir Arthur Rutledge).
Mr. Juergens also kept a store in Molesworth Street. He
was afterwards Council Clerk. Mr. Reid kept the chemist
shop, where Whit Roper’s store now is, and James Arbouin
had his auction mart there. Mr. John Ellis, better known
as “Sir John Ellis”, kept a store in one of Mr. Roper’s cottages
at the south end of Rouse Street, and managed by E. R.
Whereat, before he went into the Horse and Jockey
Hotel.
There were four blacksmith’s shops, conducted by Messrs.
M. Egan, William Bayliss, . Krahe (Charlie Krahe’s grand-
father) and one, .—Oberture.
Mr. D. E. Corney was a wheelwright, also Mr. E.
Kuskey. Old Bob Clay and Barker Ward each had a saw-
mill. I think the latter sold out to James Drury.
Old Mr. Cowper was the Police Magistrate and Mr.
Raper was C.P.S. He followed after Mr. Wright.
Mr. Goudy was the first Public School Master ap-
pointed here. The school was held in a house on the site
where Mr. J. R. Day’s house now stands (two storey house
next Virtue’s garage). That was about 1865. The first
public School was built on the present site in 1866. There
were about 60 scholars. E. Styles was the contractor and
the building was 45ft. x 25ft., of sawn slabs, and shingle roof.
There was a private school kept by Mrs. Arbouin.
The carpenters and joiners were Messrs. Styles and
Brown, W. Croft, J. Williams, Fry, James Reid and Stirling.
The next agitation was for a Municipality. At this time
Mountains and Heights in
Tenterfield District
(Tak#n from Military and Other Maps)
MT. MACKENZIE: 4217 feet, commemorates R. R.
Mackenzie.
THE DOCTOR’S NOSE: 3850 feet, commemorates Dr.
R. J. Traill.
DAIRY MOUNTAIN: 3841 feet, named after Tenterfield
Station dairy situated south side of mountain.
RED HILL: 3536 feet, north-east of Bluff Rock; red colored
rocks.
MT. IRBY: 3900 feet, north of Bluff River and south of
Bluff Rock; after Edward Irby, of Bolivia.
MT. KINGSTON: 3705 feet.
MT. LEEFIELD: 3421 feet, south of Leefield.
ROCK OF GIBRALTAR: 2880 feet, Mole River.
MT. DRURY: 2869 feet, south side Billarimba Road, named
after Drury family.
BLACK MT.; 3362 feet, between Billarimba Road and
Demon Creek.
DINGO MT.: 3124 feet, north-east of Black Swamp.
MT. BLOXSOME, 3615 feet, Timbarra Range.
SURFACE HILL; 3620 feet.
WELLINGTON’S ROCK: 2800 feet, north of Casino
Road, named by Thomas Hewitt, after Lord Wellington.
THE GAP: 3400 feet, New England Highway, between
London Bridge and Boonoo Boonoo.
MT. TIMBARA: 3816 feet, between Cataract River and
Basket Swamp.
BOONOO BOONOO MT.: 3562 feet, south of Boonoo
Boonoo, east of Highway.
BALD ROCK, 4190 feet, north-west Boonoo Boonoo on
Great Dividing Range.
RESURRECTION MT.: 3810 feet, south-west of Boonoo
Boonoo.
MT. PRENTICE, 3536 feet, south-west of Boonoo Boonoo
Falls.
MT. JONDOL, 4900 feet, east of Sandy Flat, on Great
Dividing Range.
MT. COOLAMANGEERA: 4900 feet, east of Sandy
Flat, on Great Dividing Range.
MT. CAPOOMPETA, 5100 feet, east of Bolivia, on
Great Dividing Range.
MT. BAJIMBA: 5000 feet, east of Bolivia, on Great
Dividing Range.
there were no roads or streets formed. There was great
opposition to the establishing of a Municipality. The first
public meeting was held in Sullivan’s Assembly Room.
However, the resolution was carried by a small majority. It
was six months before they could get sufficient signatures
to the requisition.
The first work the Council did was to lay out Rouse
and High Streets, and erect linemen posts at every corner.
At that time the Mayor and Improvement Committee had
to draw out plans and specifications of all the work.—These
reminiscences were written in 1913.


SCHOOL OF ARTS
THE Tenterfield School of Arts appears to have had its origin at a meeting called in September,
1863, for "The purpose of establishing a Reading Room in the town."
A committee of five was appointed to carry out the project.
Mr. Isaac Whereat in his reminiscences wrote: —
“The first School of Arts was started about 1863 or
1864. Mr. Geo. Willson was elected President, and Mr.
E. R. Whereat Honorary Secretary and Treasurer. It
was situated in a building occupied by Mr. Raper, a
tailor, at the comer of High and Scott Streets. (Mr.
C. A. Lee stated the library was in a verandah room in
the building on the comer opposite the present School
residence).
“It was afterwards removed to Rouse Street in one
of Mr. Merrell’s brick cottages. In 1869 or 1870 they
built the first School of Arts on the present site. It was
a slab building with shingle roof and looked like a big
barn. It was just a library and reading room, and to-day
(1913) is one of the finest buildings of its kind in the
Commonwealth.”
Evidently residents soon became dissatisfied with this slab
building, and took steps to erect a brick building, more in
keeping with their idea of progress. We will allow the
travelling correspondent of the old “Town and Country
Journal,” now extinct, to tell the tale, which he did in the
August, 1879, issue:—
“The first meeting was held on March 4th, 1871, when the
institution was organised and the committee appointed. Mr.
J. W. F. Addison, Police Magistrate, was the first President.
Great interest was manifested in the formation, and
subscriptions were collected, together with a bazaar to obtain
funds, and a considerable sum was realised towards the erection
of a building. For a long time, however, nothing further was
done and the interest in the matter lagged, when in 1875,
another and more earnest effort was made to carry out the
object. On 26th November in that year the foundation
stone was laid by Mrs. Lee, the wife of Mr. C. A. Lee, who
was Mayor and also President of the institution.
“It was opened publicly on 7th September, 1876, with great
eclat, the day being observed as a general holiday.
“The building is situated on the comer of Rouse and
Manners Streets, is built of brick and consists of two reading
rooms, lofty and well lighted, and a large hall capable of
holding 300 persons. There is a very commodious stage
and neat proscenium. There is also a handsome, powerful
piano. The hall is used for entertainments, public meetings,
etc.
“The library contains 500 volumes for circulation with a
reference library of 48 volumes, including some excellent
works, and the reading room is well supplied with newspapers
and periodicals. About 60 members are now on the roll.
“The total cost, including buildings, seats, piano and other
necessaries has been over £BOO, and it is now entirely free of
debt, which speaks well for the energy and good taste of this
thriving township. Mr. C. A. Lee is the President, an
office he has held for the past four years, and Mr. F. S. Gray
the Honorary Secretary.”
ADDITIONS.
The School of Arts became a wonderfully popular institution
and was largely the centre of the musical and social activities of
the town.
Over the entrance porch in Rouse Street is the date 1884.
This denotes the date when the three gables and the porch
fronting Rouse Street were built as additions to the original
building.
Mr. W. D. Comey, the present President, and who is now
in his 81st. year, assisted to build the gables in 1884.
"THE SPEECH"
On Thursday night, October 24th, 1889, in the School of
Arts Hall, now the reading room, an event of the utmost
national importance took place. Sir Henry Parkes, then
Premier of N.S.W., made a speech and enunciated a policy
which aroused all Australia and led to the formation of the
Commonwealth of Australia. That speech was the greatest
and most far-reaching in its effect in the whole history of
Australia. The exact spot where Sir Henry stood and spoke
from is known and may be pointed out to visitors.
Upon the wall of the main porch facing Rouse Street has
been erected a tablet commemorating the speech. So important
was the event that Royalty unveiled the tablet. This was
performed in the presence of a great gathering on 17th
October, 1946, by the Governor-General, His Royal Highness
the Duke of Gloucester.
A NEW HALL.
In 1902 it was decided to build a large hall in connection
with the School of Arts. Mrs. C. A. Lee, who had laid the
foundation stone of the original building 27 years previously,
was chosen to lay the foundation stone of the new building,
on 15th October, 1902. The hall was completed and opened
in 1903.
The elaborate front is a memorial to the Tenterfield soldiers
who lost their lives in the South African War. It has been
recorded that £4OO was raised at a bazaar held to raise funds
towards the erection of a new hall.
FREE FROM DEBT.
Keeping abreast of the times in catering for the social life
of the town, in 1913 the fine billiard room fronting Manners
Street was erected. This has proved a centre of much skill
and enjoyment to many and a source of profit to the
institution.
In recent years, as the result of the self-sacrificing work of
a number of enthusiasts, led in turn by Mr. and Mrs. G. W.
Hutton, Mr. C. C. Bergin, and Mr. W. D. Comey, the
School of Arts has been freed from all debt.
In concluding this sketch, a word of praise and appreciation
should not be forgotten for the perpetual treasurer, Mr. W.
A. Reid, and for the courteous, efficient and well-beloved
librarian, Miss Lai Curran. _


<|» ..I ,m> »■ ii-» ii-i i-i i-i —i i-i i-i i-i i— i— —i —. ——»— • i
t
| Birthplace of the Nation
I Tenterfield’s historical importance through its
association with the chain of events leading to Federa-
tion was first espoused by Mr. A. D. Donnelly, as
ex-Mayor of Tenterfield. Many years of persistent
work on his part resulted in the unveiling by His Royal
Highness The Duke of Gloucester, then Governor-
General of Australia, on 17th October, 1946, of a
tablet affixed to the School of Arts, the text of which
had been prepared by the Royal Australian Historical j
Society and reads;—
This tablet commemorates
that on 24th October, 1889,
SIR HENRY PARKES,
in this hall delivered his
“FAMOUS TENTERFIELD SPEECH”,
which set in motion the
Popular Movement resulting in
AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION,
Ist January, 1901.
In his official address His Royal Highness said: “I
congratulate Aid. Donnelly on his hard work, which has
now resulted in this Hall being recognised as the place
where Federation was conceived.”
For some time now, Mr. Donnelly has been
endeavoring to have the building preserved as a
“National Building” with a suitable setting to be
elaborated throughout the centuries, the first (and indis-
pensable) feature being a statue of Sir Henry Parkes.
It is hoped that the Commonwealth Government will
give substantial assistance, as undoubtedly, it should.
Centre of Community Life
(BY E. J. PETHERICK)
Looking back over the years, I remember how this
historic old building was the “hub” of all social meetings,
and although quite a number of balls, dances, etc., were
held in the Gymnasium (as it was called in those days),
still the School of Arts was the building in which con-
certs, plays, bazaars, etc., were held, firstly in what is
now the library and resting room, and afterwards, when
the Musical Society produced comic opera, musical
comedies, and plays, in the new hall, money for which
was largely from donations from the Tenterfield Musical
Society.
Mr. William Reid was the President and Treasurer for
many years, and he was the driving force in efforts to raise
money and provide a building the town could take pride in.
Every night the different sections of the School of Arts
would be crowded —there were no pictures, and local and
visiting artists were encouraged to run some entertainment,
and usually to crowded houses. We had some very fine
singers and the local orchestra of about forty performers was
one of the highlights of the town’s activities. The billiard
room was built and the addition made a splendid block.
Mr. Charlie Sexton became the lessee of the hall and the
first film was shown, not by Mr. Sexton if my
memory is correct, but by a visiting showman, who put on a
“Wild Western” and they were “wild” in those days, with
the showman in the wings with a long black stick, who pointed
out where we could expect a horseman to gallop and “shoot
up” the mail or “stick up” a town. Those were the days of
the great silent films with Mary Pickford, the Gish sisters,
Talmadge sisters, Theda Bara, Charlie Chaplin, Bill Hart,
Douglas Fairbanks, etc., all attracting the residents and making
it difficult to bring along the once faithful patron to local
efforts.
Big names in the theatrical world who played in the old
hall were Neville Stewart, idol of Australia and England,
Willoughby and Geach Company, D. B. O’Connor, with
Williamson’s comic operas and musical comedies, Phillip
Lytton, and many others. I must not forget Dan Barry,
who always addressed the people from the steps leading
into the hall and assured the residents he had “travelled the
world but had never seen so many beautiful women and girls,
and men so handsome, as those he found in the famous ‘city’
of Tenterfield.” The locals summed him up and said he was
“a doer.”
All this is to give just a little consideration to a modest
little building that has meant so much to Tenterfield and in
the Back-to-Tenterfield Week should not be forgotten for the
part it has played in the Birth of a Nation with Sir Henry
Parkes making his historic speech leading to Federation.
In the many notable people it has accommodated religion,
politics, art, music, and lectures have all had a place in this
building.
His Royal Highness the Duke of Gloucester remarked that
if this home of so many historical records were situated in any
part of England or America, it would attract tourists from all
Great Cattle Country
Tenterfield is recognised as being one of the chief cattle
trucking railway stations in the State. Great numbers of
cattle are trucked and sent south to various towns and districts.
These include both fats and stores.
The business at the local saleyards results in from 18,000
to 20,000 catde being sold each year by auction. This is in
addition to large numbers sold privately.
On June 3rd, 1949, a record price for a fat bullock sold at
Tenterfield yards was secured, when a five-year-old Hereford
bullock was sold for £45 by Harold Curry, on account of
Donnelly Brothers, of Bryans’ Gap. The dressed weight was
1264 lbs.
parts of the world.
Perhaps if some of the big people in Canberra can be
brought to Back-to-Tenterfield Week, they may do something
for the poor relation they see when they arrive here—fresh
from the grandeur of the Commonwealth mansions to the
humble home of Federation in Rouse and Manners Streets,
Tenterfield.
SCHOOL OF ARTS


P. A. M. HOSPITAL
THE Prince Albert Memorial Hospital of Tenter
1 June 28th, 1862.
The minutes of that meeting, presided over by Mr. Riley,
read: —
“Mr. C. Sweetland proposed, Mr. Arbouin seconded, ‘That
in the opinion of this meeting the time has arrived when it is
deemed necessary to establish a Benevolent Asylum in
Tenterfield in connection thereof a Hospital.’
“The motion was carried unanimously.
“Mr. T. C. Binney proposed, Mr. Mason seconded: ‘That
in accordance with the feelings of the inhabitants of the
district, and in order to testify their loyalty to and sympathy
with her Most Gracious Majesty, under her late distressing
bereavement, the institution shall be styled ‘The Prince
Consort’s Benevolent Asylum of Tenterfield.’ Carried by a
majority.
“Mr. Mason proposed, Mr. T. Cowper seconded: ‘That
His Excellency the Govemor-in-Chief be respectfully solicited
to become the Patron of the Institution.’ Carried unanimously.
“Mr. C. Sweetland proposed, Mr. P. Ritchie seconded:
‘That Thomas Cowper, Esq., be elected President of the
Institution.’ Carried unanimously.
“Mr. J. Arbouin proposed, Mr. E. R. Whereat seconded:
‘That Charles Sweetland, Esq., be requested to act as Treasurer,
and George Willson, Esq., as Secretary, to the Institution.’
Carried unanimously.
Mr. C. Sweetland proposed, Mr. Mason seconded: ‘That
a committee be appointed to collect subscriptions, and to carry
out the objects of the Institution, to consist of the President,
Treasurer, Secretary, and four members.’ Carried unanimously.
“Mr. C. Sweetland proposed, Mr. J. F. West seconded,
‘That a donation of five guineas shall entitle the giver to be
a life member and a subscription of one guinea per annum
to be a member of the Institution.’ Carried unanimously.
“E. R. Whereat, Under-Secretary.”
Conclusion of meeting.
¥ » ¥
At a meeting held on July 3, 1862, with Rev. Mr. McCarthy
presiding, a donation of £3O was received from R. R. C.
Robertson, Esq., of Wellington Vale Station.
At a meeting on July 24, 1862, the committee was increased
to 12, as follows: G. Fagg, P. Ritchie, P. Sullivan, J. Arbouin,
J. Mears, E. R. Whereat, W. Fraser, J. G. Brown, R. W. Gill,
J. Gillies, J. F. West, and E. Styles.
The name of the Institution was changed at a meeting
held on August 18, 1862, to “Prince Albert Memorial
Hospital” of Tenterfield, and it was decided that no future
meeting be empowered to alter the name.
Meanwhile subscriptions were being solicited, and the funds
were increasing, being lodged in the A.J.S. Bank, the only
bank then in operation locally.
At a meeting held on November 7, 1862, Mr. Cowper
informed the committee that he had received a letter from the
Secretary for Lands “appropriating a site for the proposed
hospital in Tenterfield.” Two sites were made available, and
field had its genesis in a public meeting held on
the present site chosen at a meeting held on December 11, 1862.
The following were elected Trustees: Messrs. Edward Irby,
Alexander R. Riley, and George Willson.
The Committee was in 1863 reduced to five, with the
officers. By May 31st, 1865, it had been increased to six,
which included Rev. Arthur Rutledge and Dr. Huntly.
Meanwhile in December, 1863, the foundation stone of the
Hospital was laid by Mr. R. R. C. Robertson.
On October 11th, 1865, the official opening of the P.A.M.
Hospital took place at the building, with a dinner at Mr.
Fagg’s Hotel in celebration, at a cost of 12/- a head. Mr. R.
R. C. Robertson officially declared the hospital open.
Mr. and Mrs. Henry Smith were appointed Warder and
Matron respectively, and held those positions for 12 years.
Dr. Mason appears to have been the first Doctor, with
Dr. Sheldon shortly afterwards joining him, both being
Honorary Doctors.
The first hospital of 1865 consisted of a four-roomed brick
building and v a two-roomed wooden cottage for the Warder
and Matron. At the time it was the only hospital between
Armidale and Warwick.
MANY CHANGES
As the years passed Doctors and Matrons and Warders
came and went in a seemingly endless procession, some lasting
weeks, some months, some years.
Repairs and additions were made as necessity demanded.
A severe storm on December 28th, 1879, damaged the
western wall.
On 3rd May, 1880, a contract was let to T. Clark for
additions to the hospital at a cost of £525.
A bequest of £SOO from the estate of the late Thomas
Walker was received in 1886.
An interesting record is noted in 1888, when we find M. R.
Kelly applying for permission to mine for gold and other
minerals in the Hospital paddock.
PRESIDENTS OF LAST CENTURY
Amongst those who served as Presidents of the Hospital
during last century are: Messrs. Thomas Cowper, G. W. F.
Addison, T. Peberdy, C. A. Lee, E. R. Whereat, W. H.
Walker, J. B. Graham, W. A. Steel, and C. B. Dutton. A
peculiarity of the minutes of those years is the omission of any
statement as to who was elected President in many cases.
NEW HOSPITAL
Eventually, after much preparation, in the way of securing
a Government grant, raising funds, and selecting plans,
arrangements were completed for the erection of a new
hospital.
On 9th October, 1906, the foundation stone was laid before
a great crowd, the Hon. C. A. Lee, M.L.A., performing the
ceremony. This was preceded by a fine procession through


the main street, in which several carriages drawn by fours-in-
hand took part. The first Matron, Mrs. Barry (previously
Mrs. H. Smith) was present.
The new Hospital was opened on 23rd October, 1907,
by the President, Mr. J. H. Reid.
On April 29th, 1924, a contract was let to A. M. Kyburz
and Son for £438, for additions to the Hospital.
The Braid Block was opened in July, 1937. It was built
as a Private and Intermediate Wards’ Block, but had to be
converted into a Maternity Unit when the Private Hospital
closed down in the early days of the war.
A new Maternity Unit to be known as the “Thomas
Walker Maternity Ward” will be erected when building
conditions are more suitable. The Braid Block will then
revert to its original use.
Presidents of the Hospital Committee and Board, who have
served since the beginning of this century include S. H. Dowe,
J. H. Reid, J. F. Thomas, Bentley, Forrest, E. H. Juergens,
Walter Warner, Woodward, G. H. T. Mitchell, E. W.
Whereat, P. J. Reid, G. W. Hutton, S. J. Hoskin, Dr. J.
Digby, G. H. Chambers, J. E. Brooks, and N. H. E.
Jennings, from 1935 to the present time.
TENTERFIELD BANKS
COMMONWEALTH BANK
Standing on the western side of Rouse Street is the fine
modem, typical style of buliding housing the latest bank to
commence operations in Tenterfield. After absorbing the
N.S.W. Government Savings Bank, the Commonwealth Bank
erected this building and has carried on business from
that centre. Mr. A. S. Tindal was the first manager and
has been succeeded by the present manager, Mr. W. Davies.
RURAL BANK
The Government Savings Bank of N.S.W. erected a
building in Rouse Street (now the barber’s shop of R. M.
Leech) and opened up business in April, 1915.
The Rural Bank was later attached to the Savings Bank
there. During the depression years and the political crisis
of that period the Savings Bank temporarily closed and
later was taken over by the Commonwealth Bank.
The scope of Rural Bank business was widened. The
fine building of the Australian Bank of Commerce (previously
A.J.S. Bank), being no longer required since its amalgamation
with the Bank of N.S.W., was acquired by the Rural Bank
and business opened up there in 1935, and has continued
to the present.
An interesting fact of which Tenterfield is justly proud is
that Mr. C. R. McKerihan, President of the Rural Bank
of N.S.W., is a native of Tenterfield.
BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES
The Bank of New South Wales opened in December,
1873, in Tenterfield in the small brick cottage (now renovated)
on the south side of the Criterion Hotel (then the Grant
Hotel). The first manager was Mr. C. C. Robinson and
the accountant, Mr. Travers.
Afterwards the Bank was removed to premises in Rouse
Street where the Border Furnishing Company’s shop now
stands.
At a later period it was removed to Reid and Company’s
buildings opposite the School of Arts Hall (Burton’s jewellery
shop now). Eventually, the new Bank was built on the
northern side of Bruxner Park, and the business transferred
there.
Recent managers have been Messrs. F. G. Johnstone, L. T.
W. Henderson, C. Q. A. Melville, C. E. Moore, and H. H.
Clarke, the present manager.
THE NATIONAL BANK OF AUSTRALASIA.
On 14th February, 1907, the Bank of North Queensland,
later becoming the Bank of Queensland, and later again as
the result of amalgamation the National Bank of Australasia
Ltd., opened a branch in Tenterfield. This was situated in
Rouse Street in the vicinity of Hop Sing’s shop. Mr. C. H.
Hindmarsh was the first manager and he held the position
for about 29jj- years.
It is interesting to note that the first account opened was
by Mr. E. J. Petherick, who has held the office of Mayor
a record number of times in Tenterfield.
At a later period, a property was acquired at the north-east
junction of Rouse and High Streets, in a portion of which
facing Rouse Street, business was carried on for many years.
In 1937 the old shops on the corner were demolished and
the present handsome two storeyed brick bank premises were
erected.
Mr. Ray G. Noble succeeded Mr. Hindmarsh as manager
on 30th June, 1936, and in turn was succeeded by the present
manager, Mr. Ralph N. Cook, on Ist March, 1947.
A.J.S. BANK
The pioneer bank in Tenterfield was the Australian Joint
Stock Bank, which commenced business in 1859, with Mr.
H. P. Abbott as manager. Succeeding early managers were
Messrs. C. S. Weetland, R. T. Martin, L. J. Trollope, F.
Adams, E. P. Carr, and R. S. Hill.
It was during Mr. Martin’s time, on Wednesday, 11th
July, 1866, that the attempted bank robbery took place st the
old bank building below the P.A.M. Hospital. Mr. Hill
was manager in 1871 and, though he still resided at the old
Bank, the business had been transferred to Charles Pavel’s
stone shop (now Geo. Woolnough’s) in High Street.
Mr. Carr was at Tenterfield in the early days of the Bank
and later returned as manager.
Later, in 1891, the fine building in Rouse Street was erected
(now the Rural Bank) and the business transferred there and
continued until the amalgamation with the Bank of New
South Wales took place.


DAIRYING INDUSTRY IN TENTERFIELD 1902-1948
A dairy produce factory in the Tenterfield district was established by Mr. Albert Sommerlad
about the year 1902, in a weatherboard building situated in Molesworth Street, the site of
the present Bowling Club.
The Tenterfield Co-operative Butter Factory Company
was formed in the year 1904, the Provisional Board comprising
Messrs. J. H. Reid, H. Bates, J. Arthur, G. B. Koch, T. M.
Walker, J. Hutchins, and J. Donnelly. The Secretary was
Mr. W. Hoskins. The Co-operative Company took over
from Mr. Sommerlad in 1905. Mr. N. J. East was the first
Manager and continued as Manager-Secretary until 1922.
Mr. C. S. Hawker was then appointed, and he was followed
by the present Manager-Secretary, Mr. C. H. Laing, in 1925.
About that time the “Company” was re-registered under
the Co-operation Community Credits and Settlements Act
and the title changed to the Tenterfield Co-operative Butter
Factory Society Limited. Further capital was subscribed
and a modern concrete building erected in Rouse Street North.
Most of the equipment had been moved to the new site when
the old building was burned to the ground. The new factory
was officially opened by the late C. E. D. Mears, General
Manager of the Producers’ Co-operative Distributing Society
Ltd. in November, 1926.
Owing to competition by the wool and cattle raising and
fruit growing industries the output of dairy produce has not
increased over the past 20 years, but the industry is nevertheless
a very important part of the commercial life of the district.
Under the capable management of the present Board of
Directors—Messrs. C. L. Rose (Chairman), F. C. Coogan
(Deputy Chairman), J. T. Weir, W. Helliwell, R. R.
Willcocks, V. H. Wild, and M. J. Arthur, the Manager-
Secretary, Mr. C. H. Laing, and Mr. Alex C. Inglis,
Accountant and Auditor —continuance of the present healthy
state of the Tenterfield Co-operative Butter Factory Society
Ltd. is assured and the interest of the dairying industry of the
district in safekeeping.
The industry acknowledges its debt to other past Directors,
particularly the late H. A. Smith and A. H. Taylor, also
to Messrs. R. H. Clark, George Manser, and W. G. Geyer.
At the time of E. R. Whereat’s death in 1894, an In Memoriam
article in a Tenterfield paper stated: “He was one of the
prime movers in starting the first butter factory, and was
Chairman of Directors at his death.”
The Tenterfield Cheese Company Proprietary Limited was
established about the year 1904 by Messrs. Purkis and Wilson
in premises previously used as a meatworks, on the site of the
now modern meatworks conducted by Messrs. Tancred Bros.
The Cheese Company continued operations until 1919
when the manufacture of cheese was abandoned. The
Company moved to Sydney where it continues to put up
processed cheese under the trade mark of “Tenterfield Cheese”
to the present day.
Central Freezing Works
Through the years several rabbit freezing works have
operated in Tenterfield. These have been consolidated into
the Central Freezing Works, in Railway Parade, controlled
by Coward Bros.
The works were opened in a small way in April, 1945,
in a building 38 x 26 feet. The business rapidly developed
and the factory space now takes in more than five times the
original area. This includes a garage to house, and for the
repair of the motor vehicles used. The proprietors have in
view an expansion programme, which includes service to outside
customers.
The average number of rabbits treated weekly in the chief
season of about six months, is about 7,000 pairs, and the
sum paid to trappers reaches from about £lOO in the off season
to £2OOO weekly in the winter.
About 20 men are employed when the rabbits are frozen
and marketed in their skins, and when they are skinned
employees range up to about 50. About 200 men are engaged
trapping. Practically all the rabbits are exported to England.
A sawmill on the premises provides all timber required for
cases, and building timber.
Tenterfield Ambulance
At a meeting held in the School of Arts on 22nd June,
1939, a provisional committee was formed. The Chairman
was Mr. E. J. Pgtherick, and Honorary Secretary, Mr. A. D.
Donnelly. Others present were Messrs. J. D. Hynes,
Dr. J. L. Digby, Arch Miller, W. J. Roberts.
A Branch Station was opened in September, 1939, by the
Lismore District Ambulance.
Tenterfield Branch Station Finance Commiteee was formed
on October 16, 1939. The first President and Chairman was
Mr. Arch Miller, Honorary Secretary, Station Officer B.
Eyles; Finance Committee, Messrs. Arch Miller, G. K. Jeffrey,
Andy Miller, G. H. Mitchell, J. W. Luke, R. S. Brush, W. J.
Roberts, A. D. Donnelly, E. J. Petherick, H. Clark, G. W.
Hutton, Mrs. J. L. Digby, and Mrs. A. D. Donnelly;
Treasurer, Mr. A. D. Donnelly; and Station Officer, Mr. B.
Eyles.
The Tenterfield branch became a self-governing Station in
April, 1942, with Mr. J. A. Haynes as Superintendent.
A branch was formed at Urbenville in August, 1945.
Mr. P. Schulz is at present acting Superintendent at
Tenterfield.


TENTERFIELD NEWSPAPERS
THE CHRONICLE AND THE STAR
Tenterfield is now served by one local paper, the “Tenterfield
Star.” For 20 years the “Star” was owned and edited by
Mr. A. W. Percival, who published his first issue on 18th
January, 1926, and his last on selling out to Northern News-
papers Pty. Ltd. on 24th December, 1945.
In the leading article of the “Star” prior to handing over
the ownership, Mr. Percival wrote of the paper—“ The
principles on which it was managed and the development of
the district during the preceding 20 years.”
Following is an extract: “The first newspaper was printed
in Tenterfield in 1860 by the late Patrick Ritchie, who was
the town’s pioneer journalist. His paper was called the
Tenterfield ‘Chronicle’ and a facsimile of an early issue hangs
in the ‘Star’ office to this day. The ‘Star’ was established
in 1870. Other papers came and went until the ‘Northern
Age,’ the ‘Courier,’ and the ‘Record,’ were incorporated with
the Tenterfield ‘Star.’ Such highly respected men as the
late Peter Hannay, the late J. F. Thomas, Mr. Gordon
Stevenson, and Mr. Gordon Madell, have in turn been its
publishers.”
Referring again to the “Chronicle”, the first newspaper, we
find that a Mr. Morrissey was at first associated with Mr. P.
Ritchie, but that soon afterwards he withdrew. In 1864
Mr. Ritchie shifted his printing plant to Warwick on the
Darling Downs, where he started the Warwick “Argus” and
Tenterfield “Chronicle”, but with apparently no great success,
although he was a Pressman of more than ordinary ability.
He was married before leaving Tenterfield to a Miss Bird.
"THE TIMES"
For about 15 years after the departure of Mr. Ritchie and
the “Chronicle,” Tenterfield appears to have been without a
newspaper. In June, 1869, at a public meeting it was resolved
to start a local newspaper, and before the end of the year,
the “Times” saw the light of day. The paper’s
full title was the “Tenterfield and Glen Innes Times,” printed
in Rouse Street by Henry Tuck. Mr. Geo. Foott, a lawyer of
Grafton, who had an agency in Tenterfield, and paid an
occasional visit when court work demanded it, riding on
horseback to and fro, attended to the legal part in starting
the “Times.”
In a letter to Mr. Tuck, written on 9/11/1869, Mr. Foott
made a suggestion as follows: “If you publish on Saturday
next would you be good enough to insert a short par
announcing my intended arrival to attend the general sessions,
and that parties so desiring may consult me at Laird’s Hotel
on and after Saturday morning.”
So far as is known the copy of the “Chronicle” issued on
October Bth, 1870, is the only one extant, and the paper did
not last long.
As previously mentioned the “Star” was begun in 1870.
Not only has it continued throughout the intervening years,
but like Joseph’s lean kine it has swallowed a number of its
contemporaries.
TENTERFIELD "INDEPENDENT"
This paper evidently began publication about the beginning
of November, 1874, as the issue of 17th March, 1875, is
marked Vol. I No. 36. It was published twice a week. The
publisher was R. Burgess, and the price 4d. per copy. As to
how long this paper lasted the writer has no information, but
a copy dated August 10th, 1881, suggests a vigorous existence
at that period. A few items from the copy of March 17,
1875, may be interesting.
One article stated that Messrs. Welbum, Petrie and Holley
had been served with Supreme Court Writs issued by Messrs.
Christian, of Tenterfield Station, for stock trespass.
The pungent criticism of one another offered by editors of
rival local papers is amusing reading. Here is one headed,
“The Tenterfield Star”;—“Admitting that we are not
altogether infallible and sometimes omit quoting an authority
for a paragraph or article yet we do not believe in the pot calling
the kettle black. We have no doubt the worthy editor of
the ‘Star’ labours under the self-laudation that the public
believe he wrote the whole of the last leading article. We
would divest their minds of this impression, as a portion of
the said article was written not less than 20 years ago in 1 a
paper contributed to a magazine. So much for our brilliant
contemporary.”
We give the editor credit, however, for the following notice,
which no doubt caused Mr. Laird to offer up the following
prayer: “From the ridicule and contempt of all such unchari-
table writers, Good Lord in future deliver me.”:—“With
great pleasure we have to announce that on Wednesday
last the lady of Mr. Alderman Laird presented the worthy
alderman with a son and heir. It is to be regretted that the
ancient custom of presenting a silver cradle on such an
auspicious occasion extends no further than to the mayoralty,
the chief of the corporation being alone entitled to the
courtesy. However, as it is presumable that Mr. L. may
enjoy the dignity next year it is far from being improbable
of his being yet the recipient of the corporate testimonial.”
Some of the local advertisers were: Solicitor, M. C. Melville;
tailor, Tom J. Richards; saddler, Charles Pavel; builders,
Messrs. Champion, Clark and John Hopwood; soap and candle
works, Western and Tyrrell; lime, Henry J. Brauer; agent, E.
O’Connell; auctioneers, R. Burgess & Co.; wine and spirit
merchant, W. Young; Royal Hotel, Sam Bambery; Mining
Exchange, J. J. Brown; Golden Fleece, Rouse Street, W. S.
Lockhart; The Cricketers’ Arms, Thos. S. Morgan; American
Eagle (late Horse and Jockey), Thos. O’Connor; Mountain
Dew Hotel, Bookookoorara, F. G. Taylor.
An auction sale is advertised by R. Burgess of the Miners’
Arms Hotel, Mole Tableland, together with butcher’s shop,
store, blacksmith’s shop, stock, furniture and goodwill.
Here is another advertisement:—
“£5 reward. Whereas some malicious and ill disposed person
or persons did on Saturday, March 7th, 1875, lay baits
on the public camping ground on Maryland and did maliciously


poison a black sow, my property, the above reward will be
paid on conviction of the guilty party.
“James J. Kingsford, Maryland.”
THE ."TENTERFIELD RECORD."
The first issue of this paper was published on January
16th, 1885. The price per copy was 6d. The publisher
was Fred S. Gray. Mr. Gray had for five years been part
proprietor and editor of the “Star,” which position he had
relinquished two years previously.
Mrs. F. S. Gray, evidently his wife, advertised her young
ladies’ boarding and day school, the course of study embracing
English, French, music, and elementary drawing. She
mentioned having been a resident of Tenterfield for 10 years,
and for some years previously of Warwick. Address of
school is given as Logan Street.
Amongst the advertisers are Robinson Sc Panton, solicitors;
C. I. Cavanough, Medical Hall; Dr. Geo. A. Boodle; A. B.
Butler, photographic studio; J. P. Stelter, photographic
studio; T. Peberty and Son, Free Trade Hall Store; Misses
McGuckin, ladies’ warehouse; Geo. Kennedy, land and com-
mission agents; Wm. Laird, auctioneer; T. H. Cavanagh,
auctioneer; Edw. W. Watson, accountant; I. Whereat,
auctioneer; E. Kuskey, G. A. W. Mathias, Louis Krahe, M.
Egan, and John Burlington, blacksmiths; I. Archibald, R. W.
Murphy, T. Kinch, bootmakers; Peter SC Ward and C. Jensen
(established 1887), watchmakers; P. Donoghue, cordial
maker; G. Manfridi and E. Tummel, tailors; Smith SC Furlong,
Joseph Schiffman and W. J. Judge, saddlers; Charles Riley’s
coaches between Tenterfield and Stanthorpe.
The old files of the “Record” like those of other papers
contain many interest items.
The issue of December 24, 1890, the past perused, carries
a large advertisement of a grand concert under the auspices of
the 1.0. G. Templars. The conductor was Mr. W. H. Doust;
honorary secretary, Mr. W. McKerihan; honorary treasurer,
Mr. H. N. Lacey.
Amongst the artists were Miss E. Heydon, Miss E. Krahe,
Miss Lilly Ellis, Miss Saunders, Miss Bardsley, and Miss
H. Dickson, Messrs. I. Collier, W. Derrick, F. Kneipp (whose
item was a euphoneum solo), Lacey, J. Crave, W. H. Doust,
McLeod, and Newberry. An instrumental trio was given
by Messrs. Idriess, Merrell, and Kneipp. (It may not be
generally known that lon Idriess, the famous Australian
author, is related to Mr. Claude Scott’s family, and that
he resided in Tenterfield when a small boy. Their home was
at or near the Butler flats, at the corner of Miles and Bulwer
Streets. Probably the gentleman who assisted in the trio
was lon’s father).
Another advertisement in the “Record” of December 24,
1890, was for the Border Caledonian Society’s Sports to be
held on New Year’s Day with an open air concert at night.
The President was R. W. Stuart, and the honorary joint
secretaries, Messrs. R. G. Robertson and Peter Hannay.
Eventually the “Record” was incorporated in the “Star.”
THE TENTERFIELD "ARGUS."
Vol. 1 No. 1 of this paper is dated Friday, August 17th,
1883. C. Burgess is the name given of the proprietor.
Price was 6d per copy. Following are a few items from the
first paper.
“More fencing improvements are going on at the Post
and Telegraph Offices. No word about a clock yet, nor is
there likely to be until the return of our ’Enery (Sir Henry
Parkes). A short time back Sir Henry instructed Messrs.
Bradley, Newton & Lamb to dispose of all his curios, etc.,
deposited in the museum. We presume he intends to settle
down in Tenterfield. We know of a good farm to be
rented cheap.” (Sir Henry Parkes was Member for
Tenterfield for a term) “A barn containing seven tons
of hay, the property of Mr. C. A. Lee, was destroyed by
fire on Monday afternoon last.” .... “Bushfires are raging
all around Tenterfield.” .... “It is rumored about town that
Mr. J. Pillar, of Stanthorpe, has purchased our con-
temporary, the ‘Star.’ We think Joe too innocent for this
place. Capital opening at New Guinea.” . . . “Vegetable
Creek is now known as Emmaville.” . . . “There is some talk
of Tenterfield being possessed of a second tannery before
long.”
Apparently the “Argus” ceased publication about November,
1883, and then made a fresh start on October 3rd, 1884.
The paper was issued to October 17th of that year, but
whether that was its last year, information available does not
reveal
An item in this issue reporting a meeting of the Municipal
Council and dealing with correspondence states: “From Mr.
Charles Moore asking for an advance of £lOO on his contract
for the erection of the Town Hall. Referred to the Finance
Committee.”
Another item is: “Miss Eliza McKerihan has been appointed
Work Mistress in Tenterfield Public School.”
"THE COURIER"
The Tenterfield “Courier”, with the late Mr. G. W. Bentley
as editor-proprietor, served Tenterfield faithfully and well over
a very long period. Mr. Bentley was an able newspaper man,
and in addition to fighting for the progress of the town and
district through the columns of the “Courier”, associated
himself actively with practically every local public organisation.
"THE NORTHERN AGE"
“The Northern Age” was established by Mr. G. C.
Stevenson, who subsequently incorporated “The Age,”
“Courier” and “Star”, under the title of the “Star.” Some
years later he sold the paper to Mr. Gordon Maddell.
Rifle Club
An Infantry Rifle Corps, enrolled in 1885 under Captain
Lee and Lieuts. Hill and Maitland, eventually gave place to
a Rifle Club.
Through the intervening years the Club, under quite a
number of Captains, has continued its training in marksman-
ship to large numbers of men.
The rifle range is convenient to the town, lying about a
mile to the east.
During the war years many of the members were on active
service, and found the value of the training received in the
Club.
The present Captain is Eric Clark.


12th LIGHT HORSE, TENTERFIELD
yO WRITE the history of Tenterfield from a military standpoint is a big and difficult task, and to
abbreviate this is equally difficult insofar as historical and interesting events must be omitted.
Actually the Australian Light Horse Troops in Tenterfield were part of the 12th A.L.H. Regi-
ment with headquarters at Armidale.
The 12th. Regiment had its birth at Tabulam, on the
eastern side of Tenterfield district, as had also the 11th. and
15th. Regiments.
The late Major C. H. E. Chauvel, father of Lieut.-General
Sir Harry Chauvel, G.C.M.G., K.C.8., was the instigator of
a military unit being formed at Tabulam. The initial steps
were taken in 1885, and the unit was completed in 1886, being
known as the Upper Clarence Light Horse.
Records show that the first two men to take the oath were
sworn in on Ist January, 1886. These were the late Major
Allan Chauvel, 0.8. E., and Mr. Clarence W. Smith, of
“Boorook,” now 88 years of age, and the only living member
of the original Upper Clarence Light Horse.
The Upper Clarence Light Horse went through various
change of name, and eventually became Mounted Rifles, and
finally the Australian Light Horse No. 1 Squadron was
transferred to Tenterfield, and was known as the Tenterfield
Mounted Rifles, and was the foundation of all mounted
rifle regiments in N.S.W.
Major J. F. Thomas, perhaps, played the greatest part in
keeping the unit alive in Tenterfield. The military hall,
now known as the Memorial Hall, owes its existence to the
untiring efforts of this energetic man.
The Tenterfield Half Squadron was responsible for giving
initial training to a large number of men, who, on active
service in three wars, showed themselves to be soldiers of
outstanding ability.
The Tenterfield Troops were not only men of ability as
soldiers, but were noted for their prowess in competitions and
sports. They had many victories to their credit, as may be
seen by an inspection at the Memorial Hall.
The most important of these wins was the Prince of Wales
Cup, the most coveted trophy competed for by the Light
Horse Regiment. It was won four times in all; once by a
Troop led by the late Major Moffat Reid, once by one led by
Lieut. Col.. M. F. Bruxner, D. 5.0., and twice by Troops led
by Lieut. G. Purvis-Smith.
The Hutton Shield and Foster Cup were other important
trophies to their credit.
On one occasion, at a tournament, they won three trophies,
and £4O out of a possible £5O.
Soon after the beginning of World War 11. the Light
Horse Regiments were disbanded, and the Tenterfield
Headquarters was taken over by the R.S. & A.I.L.A. This
is now the Memorial for the Boer War, and also for World
Wars I. and 11. It is a fine gesture on our citizens’ part to
have the Memorial in a place where a great military tradition
has existed for over 60 years.
Let us hope that the traditions of our Military Unit, and the
Memorial to our glorious dead, may ever be preserved and
remembered.
Tenterfield Branch of the Red Cross
Motto: Honor to God, Loyalty to the King, Faithful
Service to the Sick <tnd Wounded.
Tenterfield Branch of the Red Cross was formed
immediately after the outbreak of World War I. and has a
record of outstanding service of which to be proud. Its
district extended to Drake, taking in The Mole and Bolivia,
and large sums of money were gathered to help Headquarters
care for the sick soldiers.
In the early 1930’s the Branch went into recess and was
re-formed in 1939, on the outbreak of World War 11. Several
new branches were formed in the district. The town members
and country residents close to town threw themselves
wholeheartedly into Red Cross work, organising functions,
knitting woollen garments, sewing pyjamas, and all other
necessaries for Red Cross hospitals.
A band of enthusiasts opened a Red Cross tea room, which
proved a gold mine to the Branch funds, raising hundreds of
pounds each year.
The Military Hospital established at Stannum was regularly
visited twice weekly by a devoted group of members, under the
Anderson's Meatworks
Another large meatworks in operation in the Tenterfield
district is that of A. W. Anderson, situated at the border town
of Wallangarra, 12 miles from Tenterfield. This has been
in operation for about 15 years.
Up to 1200 cattle are slaughtered weekly. These works
employ a large staff, some of whom reside in Tenterfield,
which is their business centre.
leadership of the Honorary Secretary, Mrs. H. King, who
personally gave many hours daily to the arduous task of
distributing stores, clothing, etc., regularly forwarded from
Headquarters for the use of patients.
A Red Cross library has been established at the P.A.M.
Hospital by the donation of 200 books from Headquarters,
and is proving a great boon to the patients, who are very
appreciative of the service. A blood transfusion service
has also been organised.
Office-bearers are Mrs. A. D. Donnelly (President), Mrs.
H. King (Honorary Secretary), Mrs. R. E. Fowler
(Honorary Treasurer).


TENTERFIELD'S PATRIOTIC RECORD
ELD'S contribution to the national effort in three wars is unsurpassed, and in these
Back-to-Tenterfield celebrations we acknowledge our debt to the men and women who served
their country in her hours of need.
BOER WAR.
On the outbreak of the Boer War a Contingent of the
N.S.W. Mounted Rifles was enlisted in Tenterfield.
This Contingent arrived in Cape Colony seven weeks after
the declaration of war.
The Contingent served under Captain (“Bull”) Antill.
Horses were provided in the district and went overseas with
the men. The following year a Company of Bushmen was
also enlisted, and sailed under the command of Captain,
later Major, J. F. Thomas. There were no comforts funds or
similar organisations in those days, but Queen Victoria
presented every man who served in Cape Colony during 1899
with a cake of chocolate, known as the Queen’s Chocolate,
packed in an ornamental tin embossed with the Queen’s
profile. Each member of the Mounted Rifles received one.
Mr. Jack Kelly, who is the only member of the Contingent
now living in Tenterfield, still has the tin presented to him,
minus the chocolate, and exhibits it framed together with Boer
currency. There are still a few surviving members of the
Bushmen living in the town and district.
WORLD WAR I.
On the outbreak of World War 1., voluntary enlistment
commenced immediately for all branches of the Army. The
Tenterfield Light Horse, formerly Mounted Rifles, sent a
contingent which served in Gallipoli and the Middle East,
and all enlisted A.I.F. men up to early 1915 also fought in
this area. Later the Regiment went to Egypt and the Sinai
Desert and then to France. A steady flow of reinforcements
was maintained throughout the war.
Knitting became a popular pastime, almost a duty, for the
ladies, and the packing of parcels with comforts for the Troops
a thriving industry. Those left behind faithfully supported
their friends and relations in the field, and mail from the
front and from home was of the greatest importance.
There being no wireless those days War Bulletins were
anxiously awaited, and many long days of anxiety suffered
whilst awaiting the latest news from the War Zone, particularly
in 1917 when the Allies were in a precarious position.
The declaration of the Armistice created a record for the
destruction of kerosene tins as a release for the community’s
jubilation and rejoicing.
WORLD WAR 11.
As in World War 1., Tenterfield provided men for all the
Services —Army, Navy, and Air Force —who served in all the
theatres of war.
Enlistments for all branches of the women’s auxiliaries
were well supported by the women of Tenterfield.
The town was almost denuded of eligible men, and those
not fit for the Armed Forces filled the ranks of the Volunteer
Defence Corps, Civil Defence Corps, Commonwealth
Construction Corps, and various other departments for the
support of the Armed Forces, and the war effort generally.
Tenterfield became the centre of large encampments for the
training of recruits and the civil population formed groups
for the entertainment of the men stationed here or passing
through to camps. Strong support was given to the Comfort
Funds and all overseas branches of the various organisations
formed for the purpose of attending to the wants of the men
on active service. The war effort of the men and women of
Tenterfield over the years has been one that they can be very
proud of.
Flying in Tenterfield
The first aeroplane to land in Tenterfield is claimed to
have been Captain Percival’s Avro plane in 1919 which could
seat two passengers.
It came from Casino, under arrangement with Mr. Archie
Nelmes, who paid 60 guineas for the day. He charged three
guineas for a flight, and five guineas for a stunt flight, and
took £B5 in fares for the day.
The plane landed in Mr. E. J. Petherick’s paddock, two
miles out on the Casino Road, and proved a great attraction
to the crowds who gathered there.
Later, through the co-operation of the Municipal and
Shire Councils, an aerodrome was prepared about 2J miles
out adjoining the Wallangarra Road. This has chiefly
been used by the smaller planes, but occasionally by larger
planes. Amongst visitors was Sir Charles Kingsford Smith
with the Southern Cross.
The local Aero Club has been the means of training numbers
of young men, and some young women, in the art of flying.
A movement is on foot to obtain a larger aerodrome at
Sunnyside, capable of accommodating large, modern planes.
Masonic
Lodge Tenterfield was formed and opened on November
7tb, 1877, under charter from the Grand Lodge of Free and
Accepted Masons of England.
Lodge Tenterfield continued working on June 24th, 1885,
under charter from the Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted
Masons of N.S. Wales.
Tenterfield Royal Arch Chapter was inaugurated on
November 14th, 1914, under charter from the Supreme
Grand Chapter of Royal Arch Masons of New South Wales.
Present officers: W.M. Wor. Bro. R. Cafe; Treasurer,
Bro. A. W. Percival; Secretary; Wor. Bro. G- H- T. Mitchell,


THE TIMBER INDUSTRY
timber industry has always been an important one in Tenterfield. Before power sawmilling
came into operation, timber was either adzed into shape, or sawn in sawpits by skilled pit
sawyers. Numbers of these later became saw millers.
On the eastern slopes of the Great Dividing Range there
were, and still are, fine hardwood and softwood forests. In
addition to Tenterfield itself, The Scrub was an important
timber area, as were Mt. Speribo, Steinbrook, The Cataract
Valley, Timbarra, Boonoo Boonoo, and Sandy Hills.
Sawmills existed or still exist in all these centres. On the
western side are valuable cypress pine forests.
Amongst the names of men associated with early sawmilling
are Wyman, Meston, Clay, Ward, Drury, Woodward,
Mangleson, and Imberger.
In the early years J. Mangleson erected a sawmill to be
worked by water power, on the bank of the Cataract River.
Unfortunately before operations commenced, a flood came
down and took the mill in its stride.
Undaunted by this, Mr. Mangleson, who was very
ingenious, erected another mill towards the head of Swamp
Oak Creek, also to be worked by water power. A large
dam was constructed to provide a reserve of water, still known
as “Mangleson’s Dam.”
Later the Manglesons ran a sawmill in Pelham Street,
beyond the showground, and another at Mt. Speribo.
Mestons were advertising timber from their mill at Black
Snake Creek, in the “Star” in 1875.
The Drury and Imberger firm had mills at The Scrub,
Tenterfield, Sandy Hills, and Crooked Creek. Both this
firm and the Manglesons were advertising in the “Star” in
1888. There must have been keen rivalry between them,
judging by the advertisement of Drury and Imberger which
read:
“We challenge Swamp Oak in prices and quality.
Cash orders 12/- per 100 feet, delivered direct from
mill.”
Mangleson’s timber was advertised at 14/- per 100 feet.
Timber is said to have been sold at as low as 8/- per 100
feet.
Armstrong Bros. & Rand operate a large mill in Tent;rfield,
using electric power from the town supply. This mill was
purchased 33 vears ago from the Imbergers, who had operated
it for many years previously. This firm also has a mill at Mt.
Speribo, and another at Surface Hill, the latter not at present
being worked. About 50 employees are serving in connection
with the business.
Clark Bros, also operate a large mill, employing many men,
and supplying large orders.
Tancred's Meatworks
The site of the old meatworks and cheese factory on the
Wallangarra road has in recent years become the site of a
much larger meatworks.
On 12th August, 1940, building commenced of modern
abattoirs for Messrs. Tancred Bros. Pty. Ltd., and in January,
1941, production commenced.
The business rapidly increased, until at present, the average
number of stock treated each week is: 1000 head of grown
cattle, 1000 calves, and 400 pigs.
All available local stock are treated, and large drafts come
from Queensland.
A bacon factory was added to the works about five years
ago, and recently a rabbit freezing factory, capable of treating
many thousands of rabbits weekly, was also added.
About 150 employees are engaged, and the wages account
is between £l3OO and £l4OO weekly.
Electric power is obtained from the Municipal Power
House, but two diesel engine generators of 150 and 300 h.p.
are kept in reserve in case of need.
All the meat is sent to Sydney, and the offal is exported.
All blacksmithing, oxy-welding and other repairs are carried
out on the premises.
Large quantities of by-products are manufactured, including
meat meal, dried blood fertiliser, tallow, dripping, and lard.
The rise in the population by some hundreds in recent years
has largely resulted from employment given by this industry.
Manchester Unity Independent
Order of Oddfellows
The Loyal Star of the North Lodge No. 55, Tenterfield,
was opened on 23rd May, 1873, by Bro. C. H. Veness,
Prov. C.S., assisted by P.G. Bro. J. Carmichael and Richard
Buckley, V.G.
Fifteen candidates were initiated on the opening night,
including E. R. Whereat, Thomas Kemp, Andrew Weir,
and W. A. McKerihan.
The first Noble Grand appointed was P.G. Bro. J.
Carmichael, who came from Vegetable Creek each fortnight.
The first Financial Secretary appointed was J. FL Roper.
Bro. Andrew Weir was the first local Noble Grand. The
Lodge met in a room behind or in the Commercial Ffotel.
The Lodge Room in Logan Street was opened in 1883.
The present office-bearers are: N.G., Bro. L. Burton;
V.G., Bro. W. Marshall; E.S., P.G. Bro. G. Willis; F.S.,
P.G. Bro. R. B. Drummond.
Present Trustees: P.D.G.M. Bro. J. T. Grogan; P.G. Bro.
Andrew Miller; P.G. Bro. W. J. Roberts; Auditor, P.D.G.M.
Bro. W. A. Reid.


Rouse Street in 1870'r
A view of Rouse Street taken from intersection
of High Street in the 1870’s.
Boonoo Boonoo
Pool at top of
falls.
Rouse Street
looking south.
Pastoral scene
at Sunny side.
Cataract River on Casino Road near Tenterfield.
Tenter field Butter Factory.


Tanterfield Hospital Spans 84 Y ears
The original Tenterfield Hospital. The
picture was taken in 1865.
The picturesque entrance to the Prince Albert Memorial Hospital. The Hospital is one of
the most modern and well equipped in the country, and is in an ideal situation overlooking
the town. Its spacious, well-kept gardens and lawns are one of the town’s beauty spots.


TENTERFIELD SHIRE COUNCIL
,I |“HE SHIRE of Tenterfield, No. 20, was incorporated under the Local Government Act of 1906 and
the first meeting of the Provisional Council comprising Councillors Christie, Hynes, Cullen
and White, met at the Town Hall, Tenterfield on 13th June, 1906.
The area when incorporated was known as Koreelah Shire
and not Tenterfield Shire. However, the first election of
Councillors took place on 6th November, 1906, the successful
candidates being John Inglis and Clarence W. Smith for
A-Riding (unopposed), James Donnelly and John Hynes for
B-Riding, and Archibald M. White and Walter Humphrey
for C-Riding. Councillor A. M. White was elected the
first President, whilst Mr. T. W. Hewitson was appointed
Shire Clerk and subsequently Mr. Lindon Brown as Engineer.
Application was made at the meeting of Council on 13th
January, 1907, for the name of the Shire to be changed from
Koreelah to Tenterfield. The permission of the Minister
for Public Works being immediately given, the alteration
was gazetted on 13th February, 1906.
The only original member of the Council now surviving
is Mr. Clarence W. Smith, who is still hale and hearty.
The Shire as now constituted covers an area of 2,714 square
miles, representing 1,736,960 acres, and the population
disclosed by the 1947 Census was 4,484. The area is probably
the largest closely settled Shire in the State; many of the
Western Shires, though larger in area, have not the
density of population. The Tenterfield Shire covers the
area from Woodenbong, which is 88 miles north of Tenterfield,
to Deepwater, 30 miles south of Tenterfield, and from the
Clarence River at Tabulam, 47 miles east of Tenterfield, to
a point near Bonshaw, 46 miles west of Tenterfield.
There are 210 miles 15 chains of proclaimed State Highways
in the area, 36 miles 37 chains of Main Roads, 32 miles
32 chains of Developmental Roads and 2,173 miles 48 chains
of Shire Roads. There are 159 bridges of over twenty feet
in length and 2,610 culverts under twenty feet in length within
the area. The whole of the works are valued at over
£2,000,000, whilst the unimproved capital value of rateable
land in the Shire is £1,014,979.
The first President, Councillor A. M. White, occupied the
chair continuously from 1907 until his death in 1915. The
chair changed hands frequently from 1915 until 1949, the
names of J. Inglis, W. H. Smith, J. Donnelly, A. J. Crisp,
J. A. B. Dean and W. Humphrey appearing as Presidents for
various years. Councillor W. H. Smith, elected for 1930,
occupied the office of President until 1938, when Councillor
J. D. Hynes, a son of one of the original Councillors, was
elected. Councillor Hynes occupied the chair until his
resignation in February, 1945, the position then being held
by the late Councillor H. W. Tomkins, until December, 1945,
when Councillor F. K. Caldwell was elected President.
The office of President is still held by Councillor Caldwell,
the remainder of the Council now comprising Councillor V. L.
Cusack, Deputy President, who with Councillor Caldwell
represents C-Riding; Councillors A. E. Donovan and W. T.
Hardcastle, representing A-Riding; and Councillors N- C-
Manser and P. J. Rose, B-Riding.
The present general rate, which also covers loan repayments
for which special rates are usually levied, is 4|d in the £.
Rates levied’ in 1917 amounted to 2d in the £, and costs were
infinitely less then than to-day.
As a matter of interest there was a great discussion by
Council at its meeting on 4th August, 1911, when it decided
to raise the wages of quarrymen and to appoint a blacksmith
at 8/- per day.
Shire officers in 1949 are as follow: Shire Clerk, J. W.
Miles; A-grade Clerk, C. A. Marsden; B-grade Clerk, K. R.
Kent; Shire Engineer, F. L. Wood; Health Inspector, R. H.
Mac Coll.
Border Caledonian Society
This Society, consisting of Scotsmen and their descendants,
was founded in 1888. The Society provided a meeting
ground for Scots who had left their native land, and fostered
the bagpipe music so beloved and dear to the Highlander.
The Society also sought to foster Scottish national dancing
and games, and to preserve Scottish traditions.
One of the prime movers in founding the Society was Mr.
W. H. Walker, of Tenterfield Station, who was the first
President, ably backed by a number of other immigrant
Scotsmen, such as Messrs. A. G. Robertson, first Secretary,
and Peter Hannay, first Treasurer.
Through the intervening years, on New Year’s Day,
Tenterfield has seen the tartan worn and has heard the skirl
of the pipes awakening the partly dormant feelings of exiled
Scots and their descendants.
In 1915 Stuart Wilson was President, K. D. McKay
Treasurer, and G. C. Stevenson Secretary, with Alexander
Stewart Patron.
New Year’s Day, 1949, was a famous occasion of the
Society, for the Australian Pipe Band Championship contest
took place in connection with the Society’s Gathering that
day.
The Society has the distinction of being the only known
Society of its kind to have a lady patroness, in the person
of Mrs. H. Avery Smith, daughter of the former Patron,
Alexander Stewart.
Other officers are: Chieftain, E. J. Petherick; Vice-
Chieftain, G. H. T. Mitchell; Treasurer, W. A. Reid;
Honorary Secretary, R. H. Mac Coll; assistant Secretary, R.
B. Drummond; Honorary Chaplain, Rev. R. H. Vickers;
together with a long list of Vice-Presidents.


PASTURES PROTECTION BOARD
DRIOR to the Pastures Protection Act of 1902 coming into force, the work now carried on by the
* P.P. Board, or its equivalent, was performed by Stock Protection Boards.
Tenterfleld’s War Book, July 30, 1915, shows:
Pastures and Stock Protection Board: Eight Directors;
Chairmanship vacant; Stock Inspector, M. J. St. Clair; Rabbit
Inspector, W. Jordan; Secretary, F. W. Hoskin.
Information supplied by the Department of Agriculture
states: —
“Unfortunately when the records of the Stock Branch were
being removed about ten years ago from the old premises
to the present building, the records relating to the early history
of Pastures Protection Boards were apparently lost or mislaid,
as up to the present it has not been possible to locate such
records.
“Under the provisions of the Pastures Protection Act 1902,
Pastures Protection Districts, as they exist to-day, were
proclaimed by notification in the Government Gazette of 11th
February, 1903, and the distinguishing name of the Tenterfield
Pastures Protection District was notified in the Government
Gazette of 4th March, 1903.
“The records so far as the election of Directors and
Chairmen of the Tenterfield Board is concerned are available
from the year 1919 onwards.
“It is shown that James Donnelly was Chairman of the
Board in 1919, and he continued uninterruptedly to hold that
position until the date of his death on 26th May, 1936, when
Mr. Patrick James Donoghue was elected Chairman.
“Regarding the appointment of Secretaries, Stock Inspectors
and Rabbit Inspectors, the flies available disclose the following
information: —
“Secretaries: F. W. Hoskin, appointed 8/3/1905; J. Iddon,
date of appointment not known, but he resigned on 30/9/1919;
H. W. Burge, appointed 23/9/1919, resigned 13/8/1921;
E. W. Whereat, appointed 15/8/’2l, resigned March, 1922;
D. Q. Lonsdale, appointed 3/4/’22, resigned April, 1924;
R. B. Barnett, appointed 24/4/’24, resigned 24/4/’25; A. C.
Inglis, appointed 17/4/1925 (present Secretary).
“Stock Inspectors: Prior to 1918, Mr. J. St. Clair held the
position of Stock Inspector for both the Tenterfield and Glen
Innes Pastures Protection Districts, with headquarters at Glen
Innes. C. O. Furness was appointed separate Inspector for
the Tenterfield District as from 11th November, 1918. O. E.
E. Couch, appointed 1 /2/’24; G. A. Kennedy, appointed
2/9/’29; N. L. C. Jones, appointed 9/5/’3B.
“Rabbit Inspectors: W. Jordan, appointed 1/12/1913;
W. O’Brien, appointed 23/10/’23; L. J. Leis, appointed
12/10/’3l, services terminated 30/4/1932, reappointed
1/9/1936.”
The Chairman of the P.P. Board in 1949 is Mr. T. W.
Fagg, and the Stock Inspector is Mr. N. H. Litchfield.
Tenterfield Arts Council of Australia
This Society by the name of Arts Council has been in
existence for only two or three years. Prior to that date
a branch of C.E.M.A. (Council for Encouragement of Music
and the Arts) was formed on 7th March, 1946, but the name
was later changed to Arts Council of Australia, Tenterfield
Branch.
A great deal of cultural work has been done in the town
by the Council. Artists of outstanding merit are brought
from Sydney, and some very fine concerts have been given.
In addition, visits hav.e been arranged by Geoffrey Thomas,
English playwright, T. Trenthardt, with his poster exhibition,
and a number of others.
A local girl, Miss Nola Cubis, who has studied singing
under Raymond Beatty, will give a concert, under the auspices
of the Arts Council, at “Back-to-Tenterfleld Week” in October.
Office-bearers are as follow: President, Mrs. A. Donnelly;
deputy President, Mr. R. S. Brush; Honorary Secretary, Mrs.
N- Crawford; Honorary Treasurer, Miss Pat Waugh.
Mr. E. J. Petherick
One of the most prominent citizens in the public life of
Tenterfield in the modem period has been Edward John
Petherick. Although a native of Maryborough, Victoria,
most of his life has been spent in N.S.W.
For a period he practised his profession of dentistry in
Inverell and Emmaville. About 38 years ago he took up
residence in Tenterfield, since when he has taken an active
interest in all aspects of helpful service to the community,
his interests including the musical and artistic side of district
life.
Amongst the positions held has been that of Mayor for
the record number of 14 terms. He has also held the position
of President of the Show Society, and of the Parents ahd
Citizens’ Society, in addition to numerous other public offices.
His many years of sacrificing service are to be recognised in a
public way during the 1949 “Back-to-Tenterfield” celebra-
tions.


THE HISTORY OF SPORT IN TENTERFIELD
TENTERFIELD to-day is one of the best-equipped towns in the State so far as sports facilities are
concerned. It is appropriate, therefore, that space should be given in this publication to
the history of the various branches of sports in this centre.
TENNIS.
Tennis in Tenterfield appears to have originated about
1880. An article which appeared in the “Sydney Mail” of
2nd May, 1928, entitled, “Some Tenterfield Memories
1868-1883,” by “one who lived there,” has the following to
say in speaking of the period about 1880:
“Tennis was a new game then, and the first court was
roughly laid out, at the foot of the hill, below the cottage
where the solicitor, N. J. Simmons, lived. Mr. W. H.
Walker’s (manager of Tenterfield Station) exuberant vitality
showed in his enjoyment of the game. He would leap the
net and chase the flying ball with the same enjoyment that
he put into his version of the Scottish Reel and he danced
that with all the abandon (and the proper whoops) that
a true Scotsman does.” It was a sad loss when a stumbling
horse brought his full and busy life to a full stop.
In Molesworth Street immediately above the Soldiers’
Memorial Hall is an old home. Originally this was a
two-storey building and the home of Mrs. E. O’Connell.
This lady, formerly Mrs. Simon McEachie, wife of the first
Postmaster at the old station store and post office, is said
to have been the first white woman to live in and see
Tenterfield. Her second husband, E. O’Connell, kept a
store and the post office opposite the school in High Street,
while she kept another store at her home in Molesworth
Street.
This home later became the home of the lawyer, N. J.
Simmons, who at a later period removed to Lismore and
practised his profession there.
The tennis court referred to as being the first tennis court
in town must then have been on the land on which the
Memorial Hall now stands. Old tennis players confirm that
this was a very early court.
Another early court, the position of which may clearly be
seen, was situated on what is now Bruxner Park. The open
land adjoining the School of Arts, on the south side, was one
of the early courts also. Many players found recreation
there and many a match was fought out on that court.
Private and semi-private courts are scattered over the town
and district, but the public courts, which are most extensively
used, are situated in Queen’s Park. These have been in use
for many years.
Many fine tennis players have been developed in the
district and many trophies have been won, both locally and
further afield. It is an all-the-year-round game in the
beautiful Tenterfield climate.
BOWLS.
The Bowling Club in Tenterfield is quite a modern
institution, having been formed in 1932, largely through
the zeal and work of Mr. G. Filshie, the first Secretary.
The green, which is situated in Molesworth Street near
Tenterfield Creek, was at first rented from Mr. W. H.
McCotter, who had privately constructed it. During the
year 1941-42 the Club purchased the green and erected a
serviceable club-house.
From the commencement the game became popular and
the green is constantly in use on playing days by both resident
members and visiting players, who are always welcome.
The Championship Cup, The Stuart Cup (a handicap
trophy) and The Anzac Cup, are played for yearly and many
other competitions take place. Pennant and other inter-club
competitions are contested.
Following is a list of Presidents in the order in which they
served:—l932-1933, D. G. Stuart; 1934-1935, G. A. Smith;
1936, W. O. Hynes; 1937, W. H. Smith; 1938 to 1944,
E. A. Wallace; 1945 to 1947, P. J. Imberger; 1948, A. T.
Bailey.
Secretaries who have served are Messrs. G. H. Filshie,
F. N. C. Beston, Geo. Brooks, C. H. Bloch, C. Weaver, and
R. N. Cook.
Arrangements are at present under way for the construction
of a second green.
FOOTBALL.
The exciting game of football has had a fascination for
large sections of Tenterfield residents through succeeding
generations. Space does not permit to tell of the many
trophies won. Present-day followers may, however, be
interested in the story of the initial part of the first match
played in Tentehfield. This commenced on Wednesday,
4th August, 1875, and was concluded a month later. The
report is taken from a copy of the “Tenterfield Star” dated
6/8/1875, and published by Christopher Bentley. It reads:
“The opening match was played on the cricket ground
over the creek, on Wednesday afternoon last between the
members of the Tenterfield Club. Messrs. Kenny and
Stevens were chosen as captains, and after having picked their
sides, which on the whole were equal, play commenced. Mr.
Stevens having won the toss, took advantage of the downhill
ground and the strong wind from the west and selected
the eastern goal. About half-past two Mr. Kenny for his
side kicked the ball off and play then commenced in real
earnest. For two hours each side fought hard to secure
a goal. But all to no purpose, although the ball on several
occasions was very nearly between the two flags. The game
therefore resulted in a draw. The teams were as follow:
“Mr. Kenny’s side:—Kenny (captain), Carr, W. C.
Melville, Bentley, W. Smith, Laird, Jones, Cave, Ingram,
Carberry, Young.
Mr. Stevens’ side:—Stevens (captain), Robinson, Irby,
Flynn, Parsons, Quodling, A. H. Melville, Walker, Webster,
Augustein, Tindale.
“In the first Wednesday in next month, the game will be


resumed and which side happens to score a win, will be
presented with a small trophy in commemoration of the first
football match played in Tenterfield.”
During the 74 years which have passed since that first local
match, numbers of outstanding players have been developed,
such as Jim Curley, of 30 or 40 years ago, who went on to
international play and fame. Looking today at such mature
and rotund gentlemen as Ted Butler and A. D. Donnelly,
one can scarcely picture them having been brilliant footballers
taking part in important inter-district and international games.
Yet in their youth they were bright football stars. The same
could be said of Neville Butler, Ted’s son, whose young life
was tragically cut short in the recent war, in the service of his
country. To football enthusiasts the names of other
outstanding players will come to mind, and also of great
matches contested. At present two Clubs—“ Town” and
“Meatworks”—play the game and take part in a district
competition, which includes also Wallangarra and Stanthorpe
Clubs.
HORSE RACING.
The first known record of public horse racing in Tenterfield,
was of a meeting which took place on Boxing Day, 1859.
Five events were run off, and were: Publican’s Purse £35,
Ladies’ Purse £25, Hurdle Race £2O, Diggers’ Purse £lO,
and the Beaten Stakes.
During 1861, in June, a Jockey Club was formed, and a
motion carried asking the Government to provide a racecourse.
The leading spirits were Messrs. Sullivan, Morgan, Fraser,
Heydon, Morrissey, and George Willson, who was elected
President. Apparently the races of 1859 were organised
without a club.
The Tableland goldfield, situated about 16 or 18 miles
east of Tenterfield, had a racecourse, which at least provided
some hilarious entertainment for the miners. The course,
which can still be traced, was an open piece of country
surrounded by bush. There were rather sharp turns at places,
and at one of these was a deep bog hole. A race was
always set aside for the Chinese. As they knew little about
riding, much amusement was created by this event. At the
sharp turn mentioned, many of the horses failed to turn for
the clinging Chinese riders, with the result that they were
thrown into the muddy swamp. The onlookers had great fun
as the victims were dragged out by their pig tails.
Since the first meeting of 90 years ago, racing in Tenterfield
has sometimes been very popular, and at other periods has
had a struggle to carry on. The old racecourse was on the
Casino road; the present one is near Mt. McKenzie. In
May, 1948, the Tenterfield Diggers’ Race Club was formed,
with the object of raising funds for building Ex-Service-
men’s Club Rooms, taking over from the Old Jockey Club
their assets. So far four race meetings have been held,
showing a profit of £IOOO. The President of the Club is
Mr. Peter Kelly; Vice-Presidents, Messrs. P. J. Rose, W. Rock,
and C. S. White; Honorary Secretary, Mr. C. K. Nichols; and
Treasurer, Mr. D. Kearin.
Very early races at Tenterfield were held in the paddock
on the western side of the Glen Innes road, after crossing
Stony Creek.
Another racecourse used about 1855 was from near the
Willow Bridges to a finishing point near Mrs. P. J. Kelly’s
residence in Logan Street.
HOCKEY.
The Men’s Hockey Club was formed in 1929 and has
functioned fairly consistently up to the present. The war
naturally prevented much activity during that period.
The Men’s Hockey Club was at its zenith from 1930-1933.
As witness of this, a match was played in 1933 against a West
Australian representative team, resulting in a draw, each side
scoring two points.
The President for 1949 is G. M. Kneipp, Secretary Gordon
Kay, and Treasurer Audley Wood.
The Women’s Hockey Club was formed a little earlier
than the men’s. The President for 1949 is Miss Shirley
Curry, and Secretary, Mrs. Pat Weinert. In 1928 the Club
had a fine team, well trained. Playing in Country
Championship they tied for first place with Barmedman.
The same year they played against an English team. The
English girls won 6-1. When it is remembered that they beat
an all-Australian team 12-0, in a Test match, it reveals
something of the quality of the play of the local team. It is
claimed they put up a better record against the English team
than any other Australian team.
GOLF.
Old golfers appear a little hazy as to when the game
commenced in Tenterfield, but it appears probable that it was
played before this century.
They say golf was once played at the back and across
from the Public School.
Another early course commenced at the rear of Mr. Harold
Curry’s residence in Molesworth Street, across the small
creek, and continued over the hill and around “The Plain”
and back again.
Later golf links were prepared in Tenterfield Park to the
south-east of the town, which was the course for years.
About fifteen years ago a course was secured at the northern
end of the town. This has since been the local golfers’ mecca,
and competitions are constantly in operation.
CRICKET.
Cricket in Tenterfield appears to have begun in earnest
in the early “ ’eigthies”, though possibly the game was played
earlier.
The “Native Rose” Club was probably the first organised
club. A record of a match played by this club against
Tent Hill at Emmaville towards the end of 1884 is available.
Tent Hill won by 72 runs, scoring 198 in the two innings,
against 126 by “Native Rose.” The “Native Rose” team was:
T. H. Peberdy, N. Hughes, B. Baker, H. McKnight, Lilhcrap,
W. Reading, J. Schiffman, G. Peberdy, Collins, E. McKerihan,
and S. Woodward.
An old photograph of a “Native Rose” team of 1884 shows,
in addition to some of those mentioned above, T. A. Pryke,
Jas McKerihan, Emil Juergens, H. Matthews, and Jas Baldey.
IN THE NINETIES
Coming to the “ ’nineties” we find two Tenterfield teams
struggling manfully for victory, the Excelsiors and Orientals.
Most of the matches were played on Queen’s Park. Others
were played at the showground. Looking over the names
of teams one notices many of the Tenterfield residents of those
times are mentioned. Playing for Excelsiors in 1894 against
Orientals, W. Corney, who is still with us in 1949, scored 118


in the first innings. Charlie Krahe, of the (Orientals, had a
name high amongst cricketers then. In a match against a
Hunter River team, which included four international players,
Krahe made a score of 76.
IN LATER YEARS
Coming to a later period, about 30 years ago, Joe Cullip,
teacher, of Bungulla, was an outstanding bat. A series of
five matches was played against Richmond River teams on a
tour of that area. All matches were won by Tenterfield. In
these Cullip scored two centuries.
Two other fine cricketers early in this century were A. B.
Cummings, teller in the Bank of N.S.W., and W. J. Forrest,
C.P.S., who was a great bowler.
With the larger population of the present day it is possible
to form more clubs. Last season five town teams were in play.
CROQUET
The Tenterfield Croquet Club was founded on Tuesday,
13th December, 1932, at the Tenterfield School of Arts.
Prior to the preparation by Mr. W. H. McCotter of the
present lawn adjoining the bowling green and its opening on
24th February, 1934, play was carried on at the lawn at
“Stannum,” the home of Miss Reid, and at_the School of
Arts ground. Before the Club was formed, Mrs. A. Crisp
kindly allowed croquet players the use of her lawn.
Some of the foundation members of the Club are still
members and officials.
The present office-bearers are: Patroness, Mrs. R. H.
Phippard; President, Mrs. G. Dean; Honorary Secretary,
Mrs. N. Crawford; Honorary Treasurer, Mrs. L. Smith;
Captain, Mrs. A. J. Imberger; Vice-Captain, Mrs. R. Olley.
Tenterfield Boys' Club
In 1937 Mr. Wm. C. Andrews established the Presbyterian
Boys’ Club, with Mr. G. Woolnough as gymnastics instructor,
Mr. T. Rice as first-aid instructor, and Messrs. Wm. C.
Andrews and A. S. Tindal as lecturers.
The object in forming the Club was to keep young lads’
minds occupied and keep them off the streets.
Due to continued popularity it was found necessary to
expand some few years later, and the name was changed to
the Tenterfield Boys’ Club, which now has a membership of
just on 100 lads between the. ages of five and 16 years.
Membership is open to all and no fees are charged. Afl
instructors give their services voluntarily, and they include the
President (Mr. G. Woolnough) gymnastics, the Secretary
(Mr. A. Alvos), wrestling and tumbling; Mr. I. Gardner,
boxing; and Mr. E. Clark.
Finance is raised by a Ladies’ Auxiliary, which runs dances
and street stalls. Constable Long takes charge of the annual
ball.
The Club owns equipment valued at over £2OO, which
includes the boxing ring, punching balls and bag, boxing
gloves, rowing and weight lifting machines, wall weights,
Swedish box horse, ordinary vaulting horse, spring boards,
large and small parallel bars, Roman rings, dumbells, Indian
clubs, and nine tumbling mats.
Mrs. C. Hollis takes charge of the Ladies’ Auxiliary classes
and conducts folk dancing and deportment classes, etc.
Classes are held on Wednesday and Friday nights in Reid’s
buildings by courtesy of Messrs. Alex and Holmes Reid.
boy Scouts
The Boy Scout movement —the world’s largest Youth
Organisation—has been well represented in Tenterfield for
many years.
First Tenterfield Troop of Boy Scouts was formed on 20th
July, 1920, by Rev. R. H. Doust (Methodist Minister) and
Mr. H. F. Dadd, of the Railway Department.
Since the date mentioned the Troop has functioned
continuously, and many hundreds of boys have passed through
it. A number of men have been connected with the work
of the Troop as Scoutmasters over the years the Troop has
been in operation, and these include Messrs. N. H. Roper,
Avery Winterton, W. O’Shea and L. N. Holden. In later
years several of the original Scouts were able to carry on the
work.
The Troop first held meetings in' the Methodist Church
Vestry and later, when the present Fire Station was built,
the Scouts were given the use of the old Fire Station building
for their Club Room. This building was used for a number
of years until it had to be demolished to make room for the
erection of the present Municipal Council Chambers. The
Troop was then without a home and their Group Committee
decided that a suitable Club Room would have to be built.
A building site was granted to the Group in Martin Street,
and plans were laid for the erection of a Club Room. However,
the war intervened and in common with most other Troops
our Scouts had to carry on without the help of their Scouters
through the war years, and the building of their hall had to
be postponed.
With the close of hostilities the Scouters returning home
were greeted with a Scout Troop still going strong and being
helped along by a popular Scouter in the person of Padre
Guest, of the local Army camp.
An energetic and faithful Group Committee had arranged
to purchase a commodious building from the Army camp at
London Bridge, and this has been re-erected and is in use by
the Group as its headquarters. The work of rebuilding
the hall on its present site was carried out by Mr. J. P. Cooper,
who has been a keen supporter of Scouting for many years.
Mr. Cooper is to receive a Gold Thanks Badge from the
Boy Scouts’ Association. This is an award that is made only
in exceptional circumstances.
At present the Group consists of a Scout Troop under
Scouters Ron Jurd and Victor Johnston, and Senior Scout
Section, of which Scouters Jack Hay and Gordon Manning
are in charge.
There is also a Wolf Cub Pack under the capable care of
Cubmaster Bert Jurd, who is assisted by Lady Cubmasters
Ruth Rivers and Zell Reid. As there are a number on the
“waiting list” to join the Scout Troop it is expected a second
Troop will shortly be formed.
The Scouts are at present busily engaged in fencing and
beautifying the grounds surrounding their hall, and it is
expected that the building will be officially opened by the
Chief Commissioner in the near future.
When their plans are completed our Scouts will have one
of the best country Scout Club Rooms in the State, and it is
hoped that many more Tenterfield boys will be able to be
Scouts in the years to come, and so participate in the pleasures
and privileges of membership of the world-wide brotherhood
of Scouts.


Tenterfield Fire Brigade
The Tenterfield Fire Brigade was established in 1896. The
prime mover in the agitation was Mr. J. H. Reid, who was
then Mayor.
The first fire station was situated on Municipal Council
land in Logan Street, at the rear of the Council Chambers.
At a later period the building was used as a Scout Hall.
An underground tank was provided for the use of the Brigade
at the Station. Up to 900 feet of hose was in use to
pump water from the creek, there, of course, being no town
water supply in operation at that period.
In the early years the Brigade was financed by Government
subsidy. The first engine used was a manual engine with
hand pump, and was drawn by horses. At times when a
fire was near and urgent, the men of the Brigade would draw
the engine to the fire themselves instead of waiting for the
horses. Later a turbine engine was used for pumping.
The first Captain was D. William Corney, who was sent
to the Castlereagh Street, Sydney, Station for six weeks’
training prior to assuming office. Others who were associated
with him in the early years were Messrs. Gus Frankel, Bert
Dickson, John and Clarrie Cooper, Bert Romer, Albert
Young, Charles Wheeler, Leo Cairns, and Will Hockley.
Amongst the fires dealt with in Captain Corney’s time
were one next to the Exchange Hotel, two in the Old Arcade
north of the Bank of N.S.W., Nelmes’ fancy goods shop
(where Phippard’s new chemist shop is erected) and a
residence at the Police Station.
The Board of Fire Commissioners took over the Brigade
on 13th January, 1910, and it has since worked under the
Board’s control. The new Fire Station was erected on the
present site, at the corner of Logan and Manners Streets, in
1923, and a motor fire engine is now in use.
Brigade Captains who have served are: D. W. Corney,
who retired after 34 years’ service, and who received a long
service medal with two bars; George Willis, who was appointed
Captain on Ist March, 1929, and served 17 years up to the
time of his death; Arthur J. Bailey, the present Captain,
wh® was appointed on Ist April, 1946.
Tenterfield District Historical Society
At a public meeting held on 6th August, 1935, a motion
was carried that an Historical Society be formed. It was
decided that the name be “Tenterfield District Historical
Society.” Preliminary organisation was set on foot. However,
the Society held no further meetings and simply ceased to
function.
At a Chamber of Commerce meeting held on 13 th March,
1939, on the proposal of Messrs. N. Crawford and E. J.
Petherick, it was decided to request the officers elected at the
original meeting to call a meeting with the object of reviving
the Society. The request was acceded to and a meeting
held on 3rd April, 1939.
At the meeting a motion moved by Mr. N. Crawford
and seconded by Mr. Geo. Hutton, that the Society be
revived was carried. Mr. A. D. Donnelly, who had
previously shown considerable enthusiasm in historical matters,
was elected President, and Mr. N. Crawford Secretary. A
constitution was adopted and regular quarterly meetings held.
An effort was made to obtain and place on record all
available information as to the historical development of the
town and district; also to secure documents, papers, pictures,
photographs and curios of all kinds, to form the nucleus
of an historical collection.
Considerable enthusiasm has been shown by the small
body of active members during the more than ten years’ period
up to the present time. An immense amount of information
has been gathered and preserved which otherwise would largely
have been completely lost. This information will prove
of inestimable value to the present and future citizens of the
town and district.
The Society was responsible for the celebration of the
Centenary of White Settlement in Tenterfield, which took
place on Ist July, 1942, during the dark days of war; also
for celebrating various other centenaries of district events.
During the years the presidential office has been divided
between Messrs. A. D. Donnelly, the present officer, and
H. J. Clark, while the Secretarial office has been held
continuously by Mr. N. Crawford.
Other members who have rendered valuable service are
Messrs. E. J. Petherick, J. P. Cooper, Arch Miller, G. H. T.
Mitchell, A. S. Tindal, E. R. Martin, and A. J. Thompson.
Country Women's Association
of N.S.W. - Tenterfield Branch
Tenterfield Branch of the Country Women’s Association
was formed on 6th February, 1926, by Mrs. O. G. Studdy,
past State President, and a former resident of Tenterfield.
Officers elected were: President, Mrs. A. D. Donnelly;
joint Honorary Secretaries, Mrs. Len Smith and Miss Dorothy
Linton; Honorary Treasurer, Miss Elsie Roper.
Members’ first effort was to erect a rest room on the
Showground for the use of mothers and children attending
Shows and other gatherings and functions held throughout
the year.
A cottage in Moles worth Street was purchased in 1934,
and there many tired mothers with young children needing
a holiday, waiting mothers going to hospital, and country
school children attending the local school find a warm welcome
and “a home from home.” Several women’s organisations
hold their meetings there.
Thanks to courtesy of the Far West Children’s Health
Scheme, a baby health centre nurse visited this home for
several years, doing a splendid and giving unselfish service to
young mothers and their babies. We are waiting for an
appointment of a successor to Nurse A. Murray-Prior, who
lately resigned after giving unselfish and devoted service to this
splendid work
A patriotic fund established in the Branch enabled a gift
to be presented to every local soldier on his departure from
Tenterfield, and at regular intervals parcels were posted to
the various camps in which they were stationed.
A donation of £3O was made towards furnishings for the


Soldiers’ Club Rooms of Tenterfield Sub-branch of the
R.S L., and £5 to the Legion of Ex-Servicemen and Women.
All the patriotic functions organised during the war years
were loyally supported by the members, as was also the
Red Cross. The members faithfully carried out their pledge
of Honor to God, Loyalty to the King, Faithful Service to
the Country through Country Women for Country Women
by Country Women.
Office-bearers are: Mrs. A. D. Donnelly (President),
Miss F. Kemp (Honorary Secretary), and Mrs. H. J. Norris
(Honorary Treasurer).
Centenary of The Royal Hotel
Wednesday, 29th June, 1949, marked the centenary of
the granting of the first licence for a hotel in Tenterfield.
One hundred years ago from that date the Bench of
Magistrates at Tenterfield granted a licence for the George
Inn, a brick building erected on the site of the present Royal
Hotel. When a new building was later erected, the name
was changed to the Royal.
The George Inn was a plain unpretentious edifice, and
was the property of S. A. Donaldson, owner then of
Tenterfield Station. The land, however, was leasehold.
At the first sale of town allotments in Tenterfield on 9th
March, 1854, the land on which the George Inn stood was
put up to auction, and Dr. R. J. Traill, Station manager for
Donaldson, had to pay dearly for the land. Others desired
the site, and ran the price to £BO, a high price then.
Dr. Traill was rather incensed at this, and in a letter to
Donaldson’s firm (Donaldson was then on a trip to England)
wrote:
“In bidding for the allotments that I considered
necessary to be bought for Stuart, namely, the ground
on which the main building of the inn is to be erected,
there was a dead set made against me.
“Wheatley and Ross, the Maryland publican, ran
the price up to £BO before it was knocked down.
“The other two they did not bid against much,
seeing, I suppose, that I was determined to buy. They
were knocked down at £6/10/- and £5/8/-.”
The first licence was granted to Patrick Henderson, who
apparently was acting as manager for Donaldson, as the
ordering of supplies and banking of money passed through
the hands of the Station manager.
On 7th September, 1852, the licence was transferred to
Richard Baker.
The second licence was granted to Phillip Sullivan for the
Tenterfield Hotel, on 11th March, 1856. This hotel was
later burnt, and the new hotel built on the same site became
the Commercial Hotel.
The third licence was granted to William Fraser, on 20th
April, 1858, for the Horse and Jockey Hotel, situated in
Scott Street, to the south of the Salvation Army officers’
quarters.
Since the early years the Royal Hotel has been re-built and
more recently remodelled, and has passed through many hands
during the century.
PRINTED BY NORTHERN NEWSPAPERS PTY. ETD,
