

BRITISH ADMINISTRATION - GERMAN NEW GUINEA.
(government House,
‘Tfabaul, 26th December, 1914.
The Honorable,
The Minister of State for Defence,
Melbourne
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SURRENDER OF GERMAN NSW GUINEA.
Sir,
From a perusal of copies of the Australian Newspapers and private correspondence that have reached
me here, I notice that a good deal of hostile criticism has been levelled at the Terms and Conditions agreed
to between Dr. Haber, the Ex-German Governor, and myself, in connection with the surrender to me of
the troops, and the administration of the Colony of German New Guinea.
The main grounds of objection are, I understand, that the terms adopted are regarded as being
unduly favorable to the enemy.
I gathered also, that you had expressed yourself as not altogether satisfied, and as other Members of
the Government may possibly share your views, it has occurred to me, although I have received no official
intimation of the Government’s dissatisfaction, beyond a copy of a cablegram from the Secretary of State
for the Colonies, dated 18th November, in reply to an inquiry by the Commonwealth Government as to
whether it was competent for me to have granted conditions as to return of Ex-Governor and Civil Officials
to Germany, which seems to imply that the Commonwealth Government was not in accord with ray action,
and, strictly speaking, I suppose should take no official notice of newspaper reports, which may, or may not,
be correct, that I should frankly furnish you at once, to allay any misunderstanding, with the reasons which
actuated me in coming to the decisions arrived at.
According to my orders, the object of the Expedition was to seize all German Wireless Telegraph
Stations in the Pacific and to occupy German Territory as soon as possible, hoist the British flag, and
make suitable arrangements for temporary administration, but to make no formal proclamation of annexation.
No instructions were issued to me as to the terms to be insisted upon in the event of surrender, as I
presume the Government, having appointed me, had confidence in my ability to carry the mission through
to a successful issue, and, therefore, left me a free hand to deal with all the circumstances on the spot as
they arose, in the best interests of the Empire.
The varying events leading up to the surrender, including the military operations in the difficult
jungle country between Kabakaul and the Wireless Station at Bitapaka, and between Herbertshche and
Toma, the temporary seat of Government, have already been set forth in detail by me in various despatches.
I will now, therefore, simply confine myself to the terms of surrender, which I propose to deal with seriatim.
1. “ The name Deutsch New Guinea (German New Guinea) includes the whole of the German
Possessions in the Pacific Ocean lately administered from Rabaul by the said Acting
Governor, on behalf of the Imperial German Government, and the said Possessions are
hereafter referred to as the ‘ Colony’.”
I had considerable difficulty in enforcing this condition, as the Ex-Governor was of opinion that only
those portions of the territory which had then been successfully occupied by the forces under my command,
viz ; —the Island of New Britain, should be handed over ; however, I insisted, and he eventually agreed.
The surrender, therefore, comprised the Bismarck Archipelago, including Bougainville, Kaiser Wilhelmsland,
Tne Felew, Ladrone, Caroline and Marshall Islands, including Nauru.
2. “ All Military resistance to the said Military occupation of the Colony to cease forthwith.”
No. 1 condition having been agreed to, this one followed as a natural consequence.
8. “ The armed German and Native Force o now in the field are to be surrendered at Herbertshohe
on the 21st Day of September, 1914, at Ten (10) o’clock in the Forenoon. Military
honors will be granted.”
At the conference the Ex-Governor was attended, as Military Adviser, by Major Von Klewitz, an
Officer of the Imperial German Army, who organised the defences in New Guinea and occupied the position
of Commandant The latter was particularly persistent in advising the Ex-Governor that the surrender
should only be agreed to on “ Military Honors ” being conceded. To this lat first refused to subscribe ; the
matter was discussed for a long time, and eventually I decided to concede the point, as I would really be
giving nothing away that was of vital importance. It was merely a courtesy to an opponent who had fought
well, and moreover, is provided tor in tne •• Manual of Military Law,” Section 815 of Chapter XIV, The
Law T s and Usages of War, as follows :
“ The expression' ‘with Honors of War,’ which is sometimes used in Capitulations, is usually con-
strued to include the right to march with colors displayed, drums beating, bayonets fixed
and swords drawn.”
I am convinced that had this point not been conceded, the surrender would not have then taken
place, but hostilities would have been resumed, with possibly the loss of many more good Australian lives,
for it must be borne in mind that bush fighting is the most difficult of all. For us there was only the one
means of progress—along the road—the jungle on either side being absolutely impenetrable. The road was
mined and trenched, and under such circumstances a few men could quite easily seriously check the advance
of a large body of troops, and ah hough the result would ultimately have been successful, the cost would
have been great and lives needlessly sacrificed.


4. “ Upon the said Acting Governor giving his parole to take no further part, directly or indirectly,
in the present war, no obstacle will be placed in the way of his returning to Germany.
ISuch parole shall not prevent the said Acting Governor from tendering to the Imperial
Government at Berlin such advice as he may deem proper with regard to terras of peace.
The Ex-Governor was not a Soldier, and, as a matter of fact, has never had any Military Training.
He was purely an Official holding a very high Administrative position. According to the “Laws and Usages
of War ” he could not be regarded as a Prisoner of War, unless he were considered dangerous to the
interests of the occupant, when he might, according to the merits of the case, he removed, made a Prisoner
of War or expelled from the occupied territory (see Section 404, Chapter XIV, Manual of Military Law).
As, therefore, after I had assumed Administrative functions, there was nothing further for him to do
in the Colony, and it was possible his presence might in some way have hampered or militated against
successful or peaceful government, I determined to deport him to Australia, at the same time agreeing, if he
decided to give his parole, that no obstacle would be placed in the way ( f his returning to Germany.
It w r as explained to him, and he clearly understood, that while I would place no obstacle in his way,
no promise could be given that any facilities would be offered to him when he reached Australia, as the
actual date of his departure must be left to the discretion of the Commonwealth Government, and I further
clearly informed him such an opportunity wmuld probably not present itself until the conclusion of the war.
The proviso in the latter portion of the Clause was inserted at the Ex-Governor’s special request, as
he informed me he was one of “ The Secret Councillors of the Empire,” and would be expected to take
part in the deliberations as to terras of peace later or), and he wished it to be clearly laid down that he
would not be considered to be acting in a dishonorable way by doing so after having given his parole. To
this I saw no objection.
At the time of the conference he was extremely doubtful whether he would give such parole at all,
and thought it possible he might elect to remain in Australia to end of war. When I sent him to Sydney
I took his parole covering the period of the voyage only, leaving the subsequent dealings with him to be
arranged on his arrival in Australia.
I may here remark, that after his surrender, he gave me every possible assistance and information as
to troops, officials, money and other property belonging to the Government, which has proved of immense
value to me since.
5. “ Such of the Officers of the said Foices in the field as are Officers of the German Regular
Forces, will be treated as Prisoners of War in the usual manner. Such of the Officers of
the said German Forces as are not Officers of the German Regular Forces, but whose
usual occupation is Civil, on taking an oath of neutrality for the duration of the present
war, will be permitted to return to their homes an t ordinary avocations, except where such
avocations are Official, in which case the provisions of Paras. 10 and 11 hereoi will apply.”
With the Forces in the field were a number of men acting as Officers, who were not Regular Soldiers,
but had received military training in Germany in the ordinary way. They were Reservists who had come to
the Colony and invested their capital in establishing Cocoanut Plantations, and made their permanent
homes there, some of them being accompanied by their wives and families. Others were men employed in
various Stores and Mercantile Houses.
All these had been called out by the Ex-Governor for military service in defence of the Colony on
the outbreak of war.
Ever since I started on my mission I have kept steadily in view the fact that my Force was not a
filibustering expedition despatched to conquer these parts, levy an indemnity, do as much damage as possible
and move on, but with the object of occupying the Islands with Military Garrisons until the conclusion of
the war, when they would be retained as valuable British Possessions lor Colonising purposes.
Now the wealth of these Islands lies principally in the Cocoanut Plantations; many of these, indeed
most of them, are only in their infancy, and although very valuable now, such value will be enormously
increased during the next ten years, when the at present young Plantations come into full bearing.
The whole of the labor on the Plantations is perform: d by natives recruited from adjoining Islands,
as Planters rarely employ local boys. This course results in the presence of thousands of natives engaged
by Planters for a period of three years, w 7 hose only interest in the Island, which is not their home, is the
money they earn by their labor, and to get any result at all from their employment, their labor must be
constantly supervised and directed by white men.
When the war broke out the white Planters were called in to join the Defence Force, consequently
the native laborers on the plantations were left to themselves, and at once ceased work. To make matters
worse, food supplies ran short in consequence of trade steamers having stopped sailing, and in many cases
natives were almost starving, as they depended mostly upon rice. They then ran riot and commenced to
pillage and burn all before them, and il I treat women and children who were left without protection.
I therefore determined it would be more in the interests of the Umpire to at once take steps to
preserve from destruction the embryo wealth of what are to become, after the war, bright and valuable
possessions of the British Crown, and to protect the lives and honor of women and children, who were
in imminent danger of molestation by idle and semi-savage natives.
This protection I afforded by at once releasing all those Planters who took the oath of neutrality for
the duration of the war, but who, nevertheless, are required to regularly report themselves to the Officers
Commanding the nearest Garrisons.
The only other alternative open to me was to send them as Prisoners of War to Australia, to remain
in idleness at the expense of the Government, while their homes and properties were being destroyed.
Then again, if wrong-doing on the part of the recruited natives had not been checked, they would
certainly have been joined by the Kanakas, and such a general uprising would have taken place as would
have devastated the whole country and put the Colony back many years.
Every day I am receiving fresh evidence of the wisdom of my decision.
2


I will quote only one instance as an example Captain Wuchert, who was taken prisoner during the
action at Kabakaul, is the owner of a large Plantation at Pondo, on the West Coast, about 90 miles by rea
from Rabaul ; he took the oath of neutrality, was released, and returned at once to his Plantation, when he
found his indentured natives, some of whom were armed, in a state of rebellion and clamouring for food.
They had intimidated the women and wrought considerable damage to his property by tire, and before he
could quell the disturbance and restore his authority, he found it necessary to shoot two of the natives,
which circumstance he at once reported to me.
6- “ As the said Acting Governor gives his assurance that none of the White Non Commissioned
Officers and Men now in the field belong to the Regular Forces of the German Empire,
such White Non-Commissioned Officers and Men, upon taking the said oath of neutrality,
will be released and permitted to resume their ordinary avocations, except where such
avocations are Official, in which case the provisions of Paras. 10 and 11 hereof will apply.”
My remarks in connection with Para, 5 apply equally to this paragraph. The former deals with
Officers, and the latter N.C.Os. and Men.
7. “ As it is understood that the safety of the White population depends to an extent on the
existence of a Native Constabulary, that portion of the Armed Native Constabulary which
now forms part of the German Forces in the Field, if found satisfactory, will be transferred
to the Military Administration.”
This provision speaks for itself and needs no comment.
8. “ As the administration of the Colony during the Military Occupation will be conducted by the
British Military Commander, all moneys and properties of the late Administration are to be
handed over to the said Colonel Holmes, Brigadier Commanding.”
The wisdom of this provision is self-evident and calls for no remark. (Sec. 869, Chap. XIV, “Manual
of Military Law”).
9. “ During the said Military Occupation the local Laws and Customs will remain in force, so far
as is consistent with the Military situation.”
This is in accordance with Secs. 864 and 866, Chap. XIV, “ Manual of Military Law.”
10. “As it is intended that the administration shall be carried on under the control of British Officers,
subject to the succeeding paragraph, such only of the Civil Officers of the late German
Administration as it may be considered necessary to retain in an advisory capacity, will be
continued in their offices. Officials so retained will be required to take an oath of neutrality
and their former salaries will be continued Officials not so required, and those who refuse
to take the oath, will be deported to Australia, but will have no obstacle placed in the way
of their returning thence to Germany as soon as possible.”
It must be remembered that my instructions were not to annex territory, but to enter into Military
Occupation until end of war. Therefore, in accordance with 77 me hiaws and Usages of War,” (ghapVXlV)
“ Manual of Military Law, ') the Colony is still a German Possession, and the inhabitants remain subjects
of their Sovereign and continue to have patriotic duties to their Country, and the Civil and Penal Laws
and Customs continue valid It is further expressly laid down that important changes in existing Laws
should seldom be necessary, and should, as far as possible, be avoided (Sec. 866, Chap. XIV, “Manual of
Military Law ”).
Now the German Laws and Customs in this Colony are very complex and unique, particularly those
relating to the large native population. The rules and regulations in respect to Finance and Customs also
are different to anything I had been accustomed to in Australia, and moreover, all entries and records were,
of course, in the German language, and competent interpreters were not available. I therefore determined
to avail myself of the services of certain Officials in an advisory capacity for a period of three months, and
entered into agreements accordingly, promising to continue the payment of their former salaries.
In this matter I submit that I acted strictly in accordance with the “ Laws and Usages of War,” see
Secs. 898 - 404, Chap. XIV, “ Manual of Military Law ”
The period for which these Officials were engaged expired on 12th instant, and as my Officers have
obtained all the information they require to enable them to carry on, the services of the German Officials
have been dispensed with and they will be deported to Australia.
The retention of the services of the German Treasury Officials has proved of the utmost value in
unravelling the chaos in that Department, which could never have been accomplished satisfactorily by one
not conversant with its inner workings, and, further, enabled me to get possession of large sums of Govern-
ment moneys, which, on the transfer of the seat of Government from Rabaul to Toma, were distributed
amongst a number of Merchant firms here, and disposed of in other ways.
The Botanic Gardens, too, where many thousands of pounds had been expended, were saved by
retaining the Curator’s services.
The German Medical Officers I could not possibly have done without, particularly in connection with
the Native Hospitals, containing hundreds of patients suffering from diseases, I am assured, quite unknown
to the ordinary European Practitioner.
The same may be said of other Departments, and after four months’ experience, I am absolutely
convinced that my action in inserting this condition in the agreement was right and proper.
My remarks under the heading of Para, 4 in regard to no obstacle to Ex-Governor returning to
Germany, apply also to other Officials.
11. “ For the protection of the White Population against the Natives, the German Officials now
in charge of outlying portions of the Colony, will continue in their official capacities until
relieved by the Military Administration.”
The native question in these possessions is an ever present danger, and one which, if not firmly and
tactfully handled, may result in untold disaster.


Only the very fringe of the Islands, close to the coast, and then only here and there, has been settled
or occupied by Europeans, and although the Missionaries have done good work, as I explained before, the
laborers on the plantations are boys recruited from other Islands for three years, they are, therefore, con-
tinually changing, and on ai rival they are really in a semi savage state, while not far from the coast and away
from civilising influences, the Kanakas are still cannibals.
I therefore retained, as a matter of precaution, all German Officials in isolated places in office
until the Military occupation was complete.
There are none now serving. The pacification of the natives is complete, and they quite understand
the government of the country is in British hands, and never likely to be changed.
12. “ Any British subjects at present imprisoned or held in duress in the said Colony, are to be
released and returned to their homes and former positions forthwith. This does not apply
to such persons, if any, who may be serving a sentence imposed by a Criminal Court of
competent jurisdiction.”
This provision was inserted because I -knew that at feast two British residents were held as prisoners,
viz :—Mr. Jolly, British Consul, and Mr. Whiteman, a business man of Rabaul.
The latter, who was in New Britain, was released at once, and returned to Rabaul. Consul -Tolly
was at Kaiwieng in New Ireland, and was released by my force when the garrison was posted. He was
brought back to Rabaul and is now managing his plantation at Raulavat on the north-west coast of New
Britain.
ADDENDUM:
“ The contracting parties further agree that all Civil Officials, whether they take the oath of
neutrality or not, shall be entitled to receive at least their three months’ pay from Ist
October, 1914, out of the funds of the Colony, and also an advance on travelling expenses
for returning home, according to the Regulations in force under German rule
“ It is further agreed that they shall have proper facilities for arranging their personal affairs in
the Colony,”
“ The Governor promises that the amounts expended under this head will be refunded by the
German Imperial Government out of the Yearly Colonial Subsidy.”
“The Brigadier promises that proper care be taken in order to conduct women and children of
deported Officials to the place where their men are.”
“ All claims against the German Administration are to be paid for out of the funds of the Colony.”
“ It is expressly understood that the papers relating to the personal status of the Officials of the
Colony shall be handed over to a German Official designated by the Governor.”
According to the German Rules and Customs, which it was agreed should remain in force (Para. 9),
it was customary for all Officials to receive payment of their salaries three months in advance, and the next
payment would have fallen due on Ist October, 1914, a fortnight after the dare ot the Agreement of
Capitulation.
The-e Officials were to be deported to Australia, and some of them had wives and families here. It
was represented to me by the Ex Governor that nearly all of them were without means, and deporting them
in this condition would be throwing them on the charity of someone else He, therefore, asked that three
months’ pay and travelling expenses be advanced to them from the Administration funds by way of loan, on
his undertaking to refund the same at once from the balance ot me Imperial German Colonial Subsidy,
which he said was then due.
The full amount of subsidy voted for the year by the German Imperial Parliament for the Colony of
New Guinea, was, he said, as far as I can remember, 217,000 marks, but only 100,000 of this had, up to
that time, been remitted, and he was confident that, on arrival in Australia, he would have no difficulty in
obtaining the balance, I believe he said, through the medium of the American Consul-General, but in any
case he pledged himself to return the amount advanced at the earliest possible opportunity.
The request appeared to me to be reasonable, particularly as the transaction was not a gift, but merely
a loan to be returned at an early date, and the Administrative funds would not suffer. The funds ot the
Government ot the Commonwealth ot Australia were not pledged in any way.
Eight of the Officials who had been deported received payment in terms of the foregoing arrange-
ment, but I found on receipt of the complete list of the Officials, numbering 179, that the total amount
involved was so large, that if paid from the funds of the Colony, there would be insufficient left to meet the
ordinary expenses of the Administration. lat once informed the Ex-Governor that it was a matter of im-
possibility for me to grant the loan, and I was compelled to cease any further payments. He had an
interview with me and quite agreed with my contention, and promised to refund as early as possible what
had already been paid. •
I have no more to add ; the occasion arose and I had to act. I did what I considered best in the
interests of the Empire, and take full responsibility for my actions.
As far as the published adverse comments by private persons are concerned, they do not disturb me in
the least. They proceed mostly, I presume, from the “ stay-at-home, arm-chair critics,” thousands of miles
away, who we all know so a ell, who know nothing of the local conditions or the International Law on the
subject, and could themselves do everything so much better than the man on the spot; but, to be charitable,
some allowance must be made for ignorance of the difference between “ Annexation ” and Military
Occupation ” of an enemy’s country, and also that the minds of most people are now inflamed, perhaps
unduly so, by recent newspaper reports of atrocities by German troops in Belgium.
But I am concerned that you and the other Members of the Government should be fully seized of
all the circumstances, hence this communication.
WILLIAM HOLMES, Colonel,
ADMINISTRATOR.


Shipping Labour Bureau.
Telephone:
City 2702 (3 lines) 219 GEORGE STREET
aj&tiKisQ
(^Qsit&rcyC/ f
vv l ' x^J
/Xc to
a **' & ai f A^l
o4%*££w-t^,
fUi^‘


f [je^kc]
d^jitAUvL - 7


/ r r-HCt /uob'\
N /C •" / / ' tS\ 4^& Vt-
'l r UL'U> jZ ,
fo>c y '7\? je . /^n, <*t> >
