

cpp-
TERRITORIAL
SOUTHERN QUEENSLAND in 1859-60,
NORTHERN QUEENSLAND in 1884,
PRINTED AT THE OFFICE OF T. WILLMETT,
FLINDERS STREET.
SEPARATION.
SHOWING THE RELATIVE POSITION BETWEEN
NORTH AND SOUTH.




TERRITORIAL
SEPARATION.
SOUTHERN QUEENSLAND in 1859-60,
NORTHERN QUEENSLAND in 1884,
SHOWING THE RELATIVE POSITION BETWEEN
NORTH AND SOUTH.
ffiatombilh :
" PRINTED AT THE OFFICE OF T. WILLMETT, V
FLINDERS STREET.




3o fe rn
TO THE PUBLIC OF N. QUEENSLAND.
HE advocates for Territorial Separation in Queensland
desire to secure the co-operation of all the residents
north of Cape Palmerston.
The reasons for Separation are briefly as follows :
The enormous extent of the present colony renders it very
difficult to deal fairly with all parts.
That a seat of Giovernment situated at Brisbane is too remote,
and therefore most unfavorable to the progress and welfare of
this portion of Queensland, as experience has shown that rulers
resident in the extreme South, whose sympathies, interests, and
surroundings are essentially influenced by Southern proclivities,
cannot understand, and are, therefore, unable to assist and to
adequately provide the immediate as well as the growing require-
ments that the enterprising spirit and energies of the people of
the North demand. The progressive history of North Queens-
land, through the courage, enterprise, and spirited exertions of
its occupants, presents an illustration of energy without a paral-
lel in modern colonisation. The published statistics amply prove
this, and testify to the reasonable right herein claimed for a
separate Government which shall truly represent each and every #
interest, enterprise, and industrial pursuit of the colonists who
are devoting their energies and their lives to the establishment
of permanent homes for themselves and their little ones in this
far North.
The members of the Separation League maintain, as the
basis of their action, that a territorial division is desirable for
the general benefit, and their position is supported by the fact
that many public men in the South, whose interests are entirely
confined to that part of the colony, recognise the mutual benefit
that would accrue to both North and South by the erection of
Northern Queensland into a separate colony. Statistics have
been amply afforded in support of the claims of the Separation
League, many of which are reproduced here. It may
be mentioned that the adult male population of the North
bears a much greater proportion to the census of the
North than the adult male population of the South the
census of the South, and as adult males consume by far the


larger proportion of dutiable goods, notably spirits and tobacco,
the Northern contribution to Customs revenue is proportionable
larger per head. In the event of the object of the League being
obtained, the benefit of this proportion would he correspond-
ingly felt.
The objection is raised by many who otherwise are favorable
to the movement, that the cost of government would entail
additional taxation on the community. There is no substantial
ground for such apprehension. The immense resources of
Northern Queensland are abundantly adequate to meet any extra
cost that would thus be entailed, and the stimulus that would be
given to all industries by the new departure would place any
consideration of that character entirely in a secondary position.
It should also be borne in mind that in accepting our proportion
of the public debt, for which, the Colony is responsible, the
railways already built in the North would constitute a valuable
and continuously enlarging asset. Even at the present time our
lines are paying an interest in excess of the rate at which the
money for their construction was borrowed, and this source of
revenue must greatly improve, for as population increases traffic
will expand, and revenue will proportionably multiply.
Our actual mineral wealth is positively unknown, and in the
fulness of time will far exceed the wildest anticipations at
present entertained. Our resources are practically illimitable,
and the enterprising character of the population justifies our
claim for self-government, and, briefly, to summarise, quoting from
the Gulf of Carpentaria Times , “We are old enough, wealthy
enough, strong enough, and have ability enough to carry on the
government of a new colony successfully, and as we are a free and
independent people, why should we not have the right to do so?”
It is necessary in this agitation to sink all minor vexed ques-
tions and particularly political questions that only create dissen-
sion and jealousy. For as the new Parliament will be the choice
of the colonists, it is only reasonable to apprehend that all and
every industry, enterprise, trade, and calling will be fully and
fairly represented, and that the legislation that will ensue from
such a representation will help to develope the whole of the best
interests of the whole of this great people North of Cape
Palmerston, and that in the settling the burning questions of the
day the voice of the people will be truly and notably heard.
JOHN MARSHALL,
Secretary Northern Separation League.
Townsville, Dec. 10, 1884.


SOUTHERN QUEENSLAND IN 1859 AND 1860.
Compiled by T. Willmett from the Statistical Register of iB6O.
INCE the discovery of Australia by Captain Cook, and the
Qg) settlement of New South Wales, it has been found
necessary, from time to time, to subdivide (and re-sub-
divide) Australia into separate colonies as each portion became
populated, and its inhabitants petitioned for Separation and its
own Government. It is now about twenty-five years since
Separation was granted fo Queensland, since which North
Queensland has become populated to such an extent, and its
trade and commerce have grown into an importance which, in
the interest of the Northern colonist, it is considered that the
time has arrived when some steps should be taken to secure the
privileges given to Victoria in 1851 and to Queensland in 1859.
The reader, from the perusal of the following facts and
figures, will be able to judge from the comparison between the
years iB6O and 1883-4 if we have really reached the con-
dition required, and, after taking all the various comments into
consideration, if we are right in asking the Imperial Govern-
ment the boon which was so justly accorded to. others in past
years. ,
On the Ist of July, 1851, Victoria was declared a separate
colony from New South Wales. In the course of the same year
the agitation for Separation commenced in Moreton Bay, Bris-
bane, the first meeting being held on January Bth. There 'was
then no settlement north of Maryborough, then struggling for
existence, but there was still great disunion between the people
of the towns and of the interior, and the then Secretary of State
for the Colonies was ready to grant Separation if it were clogged
with the condition that the new colony would receive a certain
proportion of reforming convicts. In the contest against this
the late Dr. Lang rendered great help, but for some time the
obstinacy of Sir Wm. Denison, then Governor of New South
Wales, in sending the instructions to Earl Grey, impeded the
movement. At length the urgency of the case overpowered
every personal consideration, and all parties united in a cry for


Separation, in which Dr. Lang was a great aid, as he had before
been to the colony; in bringing a very superior class of immi-
grants here. The proclamation declaring Queensland a separate
colony appeared in the New South Wales Gazette on the ist da}
of December, 1859, and Governor Bowen landed in Brisbane on
the 10th of the same month, now twenty-five years ago. Suffice
it to say that, except on a portion of the coast, Northern
Queensland was then for purposes of settlement, unknown and
uninhabited ; but a subsequent Imperial Act provided for further
divisions of the vast territory into separate colonies, as their
populations became sufficiently large to govern themselves,
right being reserved to them to petition Her Majesty the Queen
for Separation into distinct colonies as they became ripe for it.
It is not my intention to traverse what has led up to the desire
on the part of the Northern people to agitate for Separation
from time to time, or to say anything on the subject of neglect
of any former Government, or to attribute any blame to the
present one. I take it for granted that the various changes
brought about during the last twenty-five years have been such
that it is only natural that we should think the time had come
when we would be called upon to ask for self Government, and
that the NORTH should be independent of the SOU IH.
What I now wish to ppint out is that the time has arrived when
we should petition Her Majesty the Queen for Separation, in
accordance with the Imperial Act made provided for t e
purpose, for which I refer my readers to Mr. Coote s remarks on
the subject in the appendix.
The position of Queensland the first year of Separation was
as follows : —The area of the colony, as at first proclaimed, was,
as estimated by Mr. A. C. Gregory, the veteran captain, and
then Surveyor’General, 560,000 square miles. Subsequently in
1861 a large area which had been left between the western
boundary of Queensland and the eastern boundary of South
Australia, containing 118,600 square miles, was added, and thus
the total area became 678, 600square miles. The approximate area
of occupied pastoral stations in 1861 was 195,000 square miles,
fully two-thirds of which were taken up after December, 1859.
The population of the district of Moreton Bay at the census of the
Ist March, 1856, was returned at 17,082, and considering that
there was little immigration in the following three or four years,
and none across the border, there could not have been more
than from twenty to twenty-one thousand souls in Moreton Bay
on the Ist of December, 1859. Even in 186 r the total number


of adult males was only 10,975 —not one-half of the adult males
in the northern portion of this colony at the census of April,
1881, nearly four years ago. Out of that population there were,
in iB6O, 4,790 electors, who returned twenty-six members to
Parliament. There were only tw r o municipalities—lpswich, with
rateable property of an annual value of 000, and Brisbane,
with property of an annual value of £ 47,251 ss. 6d. There
were only four ports of entry, namely, Brisbane, Maryborough,
Rockhampton and Port Curtis (Gladstone), and the imports and
exports were as follows :
IMPORTS. EXPORTS.
Brisbane .. .. .. iB 4
Maryborough .. .. .. 78456 107,296
Rockhampton .. .. .. 72,384 56,593
Port Curtis .. ~ .. 11,149 9,403
It must be borne in mind that the trade was principally with
Sydney. The sole exports were pastoral products only, which
amounted 3s. 3d., end all shipped to that capital,
and not direct with the United Kingdom. Out of the imports
named, / 56,730 is set down as coming direct from, while none of
the exports were shipped direct to, England, but sent via Sydney.
The total amount of the first year’s revenue was —from the Ist
December, 1859, to the 31st December, iB6O, £\ 78,589 Bs. 5d.,
and the disbursements for the same period, 18s, 2d.,
which left a balance in hand of £ 14,782 13s. 3d. to be carried
forward in favour of 1861. But here I observe that the then
Colonial Treasurer, the late Sir R. R. Mackenzie, estimated the
revenue for iB6O at or £ 160,600, and was very much charged
with making an extravagant one. The revenue for the month
of December, 1859, was / 6.475 17s, Bd., and the infant colony
on the Ist of January, iB6O, began with an overdraft at the
Union Bank of Australia of 13 12s. 11 d. Looking at all the
circumstances, and supposing the then Colonial Treasurer—an
experienced man —to be a little sanguine, I am justified in sup-
posing that the actual public income of the district of Moreton
Bay could not have yielded more than from to
£ 130,000. The total number of vessels entered in at all the
ports of the colony was 210, representing 45,736 tons.
The financial business was conducted by four banks, viz.,
Bank of New South Wales, Bank of Australasia, Union Bank of
Australia, and the Australian Joint Stock Bank, with an average
circulation ns. Bd. for the year.


The wealth of the colony wa« not represented by the agri-
cultural interest, which had, in iB6O, under cultivation, 3GS 1
acres, the product of which was consumed in the colony. The
exports, as I have said, were chiefly those of the pastoral
interest. The returns for live stock for iB6O were: horses,
23,504; cattle, 432,890 ; sheep, 3,166,802; pigs, 7,147-
quantity of gold set down among the exports is 4, 127 ounces,
valued at £'\, 576. This represented the mineral wealth of
Queensland in iB6O.
Sundry exports of merchandise were made to Sydney, to the
amount of £ 15,339 18s., which makes up the total
18s. 3d. It will thus be seen that the squatter was the principal
contributor to the exports, his product forming 93-53 °f th e
whole of the exports from the colony, and that the agriculturist
or miner did not then call for any particular attention. This
was the position of Queensland during the first year of its exis-
tence. At this stage I cannot do better than quote a portion
of the Registrar-General’s Report for iB6O, where, speaking of
the trade, he says :
To understand this statement thoroughly, it is necessary to look upon
money as merchandise, and to bear in mind that, as merchants always seek
to make a profit in all their transactions, they will, to the best of their abilities,
select such articles, as remittances, as are likely to return them the greatest
profit. Unless, therefore, money be in that position, it will not be remitted.
It must also be admitted, as a general rule, that merchants always do make-
profits, and that an occasional loss is the exception, and in no way affects the
general argument. Also, that one merchant’s gain is by no means necessarily,
or even usually, another merchant’s loss, and the result will be, as indeed is
found to be the case all over the world, that the country which is driving a
profitable trade with its neighbours, and in which, as a consequence, wealth
and capital are increasing, Mill always seem to export less than it imports.
Facts bear out this statement, and if an excess of exports over imports were
a loss, it would be a difficult matter to say from what fund the annual aggre-
gate amount of national losses could be made good.
To return to the trade of Queensland. Another cause has tended to
throw it into the hands of the Sydney merchants ; a cause removeable, indeed,
but which the Government of New- South Wales cared not to remove so long
as Queensland remained her dependency. I allude to the absence of a safe
commodious harbour for sea-going ships of large tonnage, and to the forced
necessity of an intermediate shipment of onr exports intended for the English
market. The three principal shipping ports of Queensland are situated on
three rivers, each of which, it is confidently believed, may, by the labours of
a moderately powerful steam dredge, be rendered accessible to ships drawing
tM-enty feet of water, and even should this prove not to be the case, the long
line of sea coast offers several natural harbours with every convenience that
ships require, though these, from the absence of roads, are at present
unavailable for shipping purposes.


That no attempt should ever have been made either to clear the rivers,
or, in failure of that scheme, to open communication with the pastoral country
and some of the natural harbours north of the 29th parallel, is perhaps hardly
to be regretted, as a more liberal policy on the part of New South Wales
would, in all probability, have indefinitely deferred the creation of the Colony
•of Queensland.
1 may add that the last paragraph, which is given as the
■opinion" then of Southern Queensland towards New South
Wales, somewhat expresses the position we find the North in to-
day. Such was the exact position of Queensland in 1859-1860,
ami the statistics for the latter year were considered very satis-
factory from every point of view, the then Registrar-General
being unanimously complimented on them. The pastoral in-
terest was the main stay of the colony, as it nearly provided all
the exports, as shown by the figures. Manufactories were only
represented by four steam saw-mills, two soap and candle manu-
factories —one turning out 5 tons of soap, and the other 5,000
lbs. of candles —the rest, except the boiling down establishments,
being too insignificant to mention. Agriculture was in its in-
fancy, although considered favourable in proportion to the
population.
As to mining, I cannot do better than repeat the Registrar-
General’s Report of iB6O on that industry :
The same may be said of mining, to which little attention has been paid,
beyond sinking a few shafts into one or two of the most accessible coal seams
for the supply principally of steam boats plying on the River Brisbane. The
colony is, however, well known to be possessed of great mineral wealth.
Coal is abundant near the surface, and in many instances close to water car-
riage. Rich iron and copper ores also exist, and in spite of the sudden failure
of the gold-fields near the town of Rockhampton, those persons best ac-
quainted with the geological formation of the country are confident in their
belief that rich deposits of gold will still be found.
Trade and commerce were considered good, and the imports
and exports fully up to the expectations of the Government.
The imports were equal to 26-44 P er head, and the exports to
18-66 per head. Financially, the revenue more than covered
the disbursements by £14,872 ios. 3d. Under this head, the
report goes on to say :
The financial transactions for iB6O must be considered very satisfactory;
the ordinary revenue has been more than sufficient to cover the ordinary ex-
penditure. The expenses of Government in a country of vast extent, and in
•which even within what are called the proclaimed districts, there is hardly an
average of one white inhabitant to every fifty square miles, must of necessity
be heavy in proportion to the population; bearing in mind, morebyer, that
the first year of self-government may be presumed to be an expensive one,
and that the New South Wales Government took good care that Queensland


should commence her career without one shilling in her chest, it musPbe
admitted to be a singular proof of prosperity and good government that the
colony should from the first have been in a position to provide liberally for
the ordinary services of the year, not only without incurring debt, but with a
sum on hand to the credit of the Consolidated Revenue.
The statement of revenue and expenditure is so clear as to require no
comment; the absence of statistical records takes away from me the power
of showing, by comparison with other of Her Majesty’s colonial dominions,
the prosperity with which Queensland has been blessed during the past year.
The following tables are little more than a record of things as they were on
31st December, iB6O, but they show unmistakeably that we are possessed of
all the elements of national wealth and greatness, and that assisted by a wise
and judicious legislation, our rich natural resourses have been so developed,
as even in one year to evince, in proportion to our population, a larger power
of consumption of British manufactures, than that, I believe, of any other
of Her Majesty’s colonial dominions ; a revenue more than equal to all the
ordinary requirements of Government; and a population small, but rapidly
increasing in numbers and wealth.
Such were the maiden statistical reports of the first month
and first year’s existence of Queensland when the bulk of its
population was settled in Moreton Bay and on the Darling
Downs, when Queensland was unknown north of Rockhampton,
and the now inhabited portion of Northern Queensland was a
country for explorers, without a white man in it.
Between the positions of Southern Queensland in iB6O and
Northern Queensland in 1884 there is no comparison, whether
we take the population, trade, commerce, the mining, agricul-
tural and pastoral interest, or the financial positions of the
former, and compare them with the figures which I will give to
show the position of Northern Queensland in the present year
of 1884, twenty-five years after Separation. After reading and
weighing them, consider if the supporters of the Separation
Movement are not justified in saying that the time has arrived
when we should petition for, and have, the privileges of self-
government extended to this once unknown portion of Her
Majesty’s dominions.
The salient points in favor of Separation are —That the popu-
lation warrants it; that the imports, exports, and amount of
trade are sufficient to raise the necessary revenue which justify
our action. From its geographical position the ports north of
Cape Palmerston are so favorably situated as to command the
trade via Torres Straits, being the shortest route for the English
and Eastern Mail Service. From the establishment of its
Parliament and Government in a central position, the services
of our best local men for the Legislature can be secured, without
cost to the country, and thus gain the pure independence of


Parliamentary representation. We would secure the sole control
of our revenue, loans, and expenditure, which would be confined
to narrower limits within the radius of the new colony. 1 hat
the expenses of self-government will be infinitely less than what
the present annual loss is supposed to amount to, by our
contributing to the support of a Government with its staff
situated over 1,000 miles away from the centre of the northern
part of the colony. That under a Separate Government its
resources in mineral, pastoral, and agriculture will be more
satisfactorily developed than it could otherwise be, while the
trade and commercial prosperity of the North will be better
secured. That the administration of justice would be facilitated,
and the jurisdiction spread and extended all over the North to
much better advantage. That the northern people would have
the control of its own legislation, which, for climatic reasons,
must always differ from-that of Southern Queensland, while the
inconvenience at present arising from the being at one
extreme end of the country would be removed. That in view of
the enormous mineral wealth of Northern Queensland we shall
have the opportunity of conserving our lands, and causing them
to produce a revenue that would materially have the effect of
reducing taxation on all necessary articles of consumption, so
as to reduce the cost of living to the workingman to a minimum.
Finally, we should have the making and administration of our
laws in our own way in a manner the best calculated to serve
the interest of all Northern Queenslanders.


NORTHERN QUEENSLAND IN 1884.
Compiled by T. Willmett from the Statistics of 1883.
O'
A T must be borne in mind that we are now dealing with Nor-
W them Queensland after a lapse of twenty-five years, which
we pass over without any comment or following its growth,
since it sprang into activity a few years after the foundation of
the colony.
Northern Queensland I assume to comprise all that portion of
Queensland lying to the north of Cape Palmerston, and on the
west to the one hundred and thirty-eighth degree of longitude,
and its area to be something under 220,000 square miles, with a
seaboard of about 1,600 miles. Its area is divided into six
Electorates, returning eight members, as follows : —1 Mackay,
1 Bowen, 1 Townsville, 2 Kennedy, 2 Cook, and 1 the Bourke
District. In these electorates there were registered on the
electoral rolls 12,080 electors for 1883, at the last General
Election. The total population of the North is computed at
between 55,000 and 60,000 souls ; a large portion settled on the
gold-fields, many of whom have become of the nature of a
manufacturing industry ; a large number on the sugar plantations,
in which some millions have been invested, and the balance
being employed on the numerous pastoral runs and in the coast
towns, the importance of which I shall hereafter attempt to give
you an idea. There are now five municipalities, namely, Mackay,
Bowen, Townsville, Charters Towers, and Cooktown, with rate-
able property valued at £2,600,000. Thus—annual value,
1 33>333 ! at a four P er cent, valuation of rental, £2,666,660 —at
the colonial value of money much more. The returns of the
Divisional Boards are not given so as to arrive at the Northern
proportion.
Electric Telegraph communication extends all over the North
from Mackay to Normanton.
The number of vessels which entered inwards at the principal
Northern port, Cleveland Bay, or in other words, Townsville, for


the nine months ending September 30th, 1884, gave an average
for the twelve months of 1,000 vessels, representing 410,000
tons. The Imports for the year ending 30th June, 1884, were
£1,382,284, and the Exports, £1,221,143: these were taken
from those actually passed through the Customs, and do not re-
present goods conveyed coastwise, which may be calculated at
one-third advance on the imports and somewhat under on the
exports.
There are now seven banks in the North, vi/., the Australian
Joint Stock, the Bank of Australasia, Bank of New South
Wales, Commercial Banking Company of Sydney, Queensland
National Bank, Union Bank of Australia, and the London
Chartered Bank.
The financial position of the North may be considered in
much better condition now than Queensland was in iB6O.
The returns show that the deposits in the Banks averaged
£2l Bs. pd., and the loans and discounts £29 is. 2d. per head of
the population. Taking the customers’ floating balances into
account, and the value of securities on which loans are granted,
this must be considered a favorable state of affairs. The con-
tribution per head of the population to the General Revenue of
the colony amounted to £8 18s. 6d. At a rough calculation the
North contributed about £600,000, a sum amounting to five
times the revenue of the colony in iB6O.
In the absence of specific financial Northern accounts, it is
almost a matter of impossibility to trace what proportion of tlie
revenue collected from the North has been returned to it in the
shape of expenditure without a careful analysis of the accounts,
which are not at present obtainable here. It is to be deeply
regretted that the method of adjustment of accounts recom-
mended in 1876 by a Royal Commission, and adopted until 1879,
by which the particulars of receipt and expenditure were ac-
curately recorded for each district, was abandoned. It has, how
ever, been asserted by good authorities, that a fair proportion of
the revenue has not, or is not being expended in the North. If
it were otherwise, the North would be in a much more pros-
perous condition than it is. There ought to be no objection on
the part of the Government to publish a statement of accounts,
showing the receipts and expenditure, say in the three divisions
of the colony—South, Central, and Northern Districts. We
may get two-thirds of its revenue by way of carrying on the
business of the Northern country, the balance being absorbed
South, but we do not have our fair proportion back of the £600,000


contributed. I believe that is generally admitted by all parties.
I now come to our proportion of the indebtedness on Loan—
that is, the portion of the Public Debt which can be rightfully
charged to us, and is connected with that injustice which we
suffer in paying interest on that which we derive no benefit from.
The Loan Account of the whole colony amounts to £16,150,850,
or at the rate of nearly £54 per head of the population, which
figures give the result that we are paying interest of the princi-
pal sum of £3,240,000. Whether that sum has been set aside
for expenditure on Loan Account I am hardly in a position to
state authoritatively. The following, however, represents some
of the sums voted :
Northern Railway .. .. .. .. £ 115,000
Mackay .. .. .. .. .. 90,000
Bowen .. .. .. .. .. 150,000
Cooktown .. .. .. .. .. 180,000
Herberton .. .. .. .. • .. 200,000
Proportion on Rolling Stock and extension of Surveys, say 50,000
j£i, 485,000
The sundry other items, comprising Electric Telegraphs, Har-
bors and Rivers, and Northern Ports, Loans to Local Bodies,
Public Buildings, Water Supply to Townsville, &c., Roads and
Bridges, including our proportion of one-fifth of miscellaneous
expenditure—say about £ 735,000 —these, added to the principal
sum on Railway account, bring up the total to / 2,22c,c00.
The reader will observe that we are paying interest on a sum
exceeding / 1,000,000 of the Loan more than the North has
had.
It will thus be observed that it was only in the last Loans
borrowed during the past few years that the North has had
any allotted to her, notwithstanding the fact that the pioneer
settler has had to bear his share of taxation on that account
since Northern settlement began.
At the end of 1883, there appears to have been the sum of
about /'86i,000 remaining as unexpended balances, a portion
of which will not now be expended as originally provided, and
will no doubt be absorbed in the South on other works not of
any benefit to the North. Now, it must be clear that Northerners
are burdened, not only with heavy taxation, but also on Loan
account, to a considerable extent above what they should be.
The present Loan Estimates disclose that we are about to
borrow a further sum of / 10,000,000, which will bring the total
of Loan indebtedness up to over/ 2b,000,000, and the question


arises, how far we are justified in becoming parties to such a
debt. Over £2,000,000 is allotted to various works in different
parts of the North, but what guarantee have we that that sum
will be actually expended in the districts to which it is allotted.
• For instance, the late Government on the occasion of the last
Loan set down £150,000 for railway works at Bowen, which has
never been carried out. Now £lOO,OOO is down in the next
Loan for similar purpose. What has become of the first sum, and
what may become of the second, it is hard to say. Separation
will at least enable us to get rid of a liability which does not
belong to us, and give us the sole control of our Loan monies,
while we shall have the satisfaction of retaining any unexpended
balances in the North, and be secure against their being absorbed
by the Southern districts, which are of no benefit to us.
Although the Colonial Treasurer’s Financial Statement for
iBB3-84shows the credit balances on Loan account as£ 1,938,768,
still we find in the face of this that they have been all absorbed,
and the next Loan anticipated bythe sum of £1,752,648 9s. gd., of
which only the sum of a little over £20,000 is set down for the
Northern Railway. The balance is entirely appropriated in
Southern works, principally railways.
The administration of justice is provided for by a Resident
Judge of the Supreme Court at Bowen, and by a District Court
Judge who resides at Brisbane. At all principal towns Stipend-
ary Magistrates are provided. At the chief ports the Sub-
Collector of Custom acts as Water-Police Magistrate. Still, -the
provision for the administration of justice is totally inadequate
to the actual requirements of the Northern people. Much loss
and expense is incurred in obtaining justice, from the simple
fact that the chief courts and members of the bar are all in
Brisbane, beyond our reach, while many have to abandon their
cases altogether for the want of means ; whereas the Law Courts
should be placed within the reach of the poorest and most
humble of the colonists. There is one gaol in the North, and
it is situated in Townsville, almost in the heart of the town.
A great many prisoners with the longer term of sentences
have to be sent to the South.
Under the head of Social Statistics we find that Schools of Arts
are established in many towns throughout the North, and being
popular institutions are, from local means, amply provided for.
The State School accommodation is limited, as the population in-
creases very fast, and from the fact that one fifth of the cost
must be provided by public subscription to form the nucleus of


a bind before the Educational Department will take the matter
up—the accommodation depending on the amount raised. As
to Grammar Schools, there are five in the South, and none in the
North ; one is about to be erected at Townsville.
The Vital Statistics show that though the climate of the North
is excessively hot during the summer months (about four), the
atmosphere is tempered by the cool trade winds which always
spring up as the day advances. The remaining eight months of
the year are delightful and pleasant, consequently the average
health of the population is good compared with other parts of
Australia, w here the climate is much colder and more bracing.
Northern Queensland is considered healthy, and the death rate
per i,oco does not exceed what it does in other parts of
Australia.
The Pastoral Interest is well represented. Out of the \vhole
area of the colony, viz., 668,224 square miles, as at present cal-
culated, 475.601 square miles are leased for runs in the unsettled
districts, and 11,126 square miles in the settled districts; and
for purposes of comparison we will assume that 175,000 square
miles are so occupied in the North, so that the squatters of the
North pay the annual rent of about /’Bo,ooo. The returns given
of the stock show that there are on the Northern portion the
following:—Horses, 62,069; Cattle, 1,351,211; Sheep, 3,688,142 ;
Pigs, 8,626. The Homesteads on the gold-fields, which show the
settlement of the mining population, number 185, with a total of
5,100 acres.
It will thus be seen that the North is well stocked as compared
with the South in iB6O. The land under cultivation in the
North also exceeds the return of former years, and what was
barren and uncultivated in iB6O now shows as under, taken from
the returns of the undermentioned Police districts :
TOTAL IX ACRES. TOTAL IX ACRES
Bowen .. .. 519 Brought forward .. 29835
Cairns .. .. 3042 Marathon .. .. 11
Cardwell .. .. 5210 Maytown .. .. 222
Charters Towers ... 179 Normanton .. .. 14
Cook ~ .. 445 Port Douglas .. 932
Georgetown.. .. 2 Ravenswood .. 27
Hughenden .. .. 21 Thornborough . . 455
Mackay .. .. 20,417 Townsville .. .. 4385
Forward .. 29,835 Total .. 35,881
The returns for the Sugar manufacturers are far from complete,
as they only give up to December, 1883, and do not represent


are : —
Coach and Waggon
16
Boiling Downs ..
3
Gas Works
i
Patent Slips
r
Carriage
i
Shipbuilders
• • 3
Waterworks
.. 2
Soap and Candle
5
Brick Yards
21
Ice Works
I
Breweries
2
Iron and Tin Works
4
the yield for 1884. The returns give the following results :
SUGAR MANFT.
Johnstone ..
River Herbert
Mackay
Cairns
Burdekin
Bowen
But since the returns for 1883 the mills on the Johnstone and
Herbert Rivers have been very much increased.
The manufactories in the
Tobacco
North
Foundries .. .. 2
Account Book Manufact. 1
Under the head of Mining we find the true mineral wealth of
the North, which contributes so much to the prosperity of* the
whole colony, and which gives Queensland a name in the
Southern colonies, also in commercial circles in England. The
returns up to the end of last } r ear show that there are sixty-five
crushing machines worked by steam power, driving 611 head of
stampers, against seventeen crushing machines with 262 head of
stampers working in the South. On the Northern fields there
were issued in 1883, 4041 miners’ rights and 109 business
licenses, against 2432 and 22 respectively in the South. The
number of Mining Companies registered in Charters Towers,
Cape River, Hodgkinson. Palmer, and Ravenswood is forty-six,
with a subscribed capital of / 549,495, while the Southern fields
have 124 companies, with a subscribed capital of £ ’568,183.
i he extent of the alluvial and quartz ground worked upon, with
the number of reefs are —The North, 830 reefs, and the extent
of auriferous country, 5,325 square miles, while that of the
Central and Southern divisions are 178 reefs and about 150
square miles. The quantity of gold returned from the Nor-


Gympie
Other smaller fields, in which are included Cloncurrv and
ozs.
64,818
Normanby
14,849
them gold-fields, from auriferous quartz, in the year 1883,
was :
ozs.
Palmer .. ~ .. .. .. .. 24,098
Ravenswood .. ~ .. .. .. 13,000
Charters Towers, Cape River .. .. .. 69,555
Hodgkinson and Mulgrave .. .. .. .. 7,505
Etheridge and Woolgar .. .. .. .. 18,967
Total for Northern Fields, 133,116 ozs. los. per oz.,
From the Southern Goldfields, the official return which I quote
gives—
Total for Southern Fields, 79,667 ozs., @£3 10s. per oz., 10s.
The quantity of stone crushed for 1883 was :
TONS.
Northern Fields .. .. .. ~ .. 75,446
Southern ~ .. .. .. .. .. 58,968
The whole returning an average of 1 oz. 5 dwts. 15 grs. to the ton.
The other mines consist of 5 copper mines, 192 tin claims,.
36 galena mines, anckq antimony mines. The total value of the
products under this head for 1883 was the Southern
returns being and coal, The only stone
quarries in the North are at Townsville, their number being
five, quarrying 1250 tons of stone, valued at/'gso, but the real
value of the granite and marble strata, which are abundant, will,
as population increases, be demonstrated.
The reader will be able to draw his own conclusions from the
comparative position of Queensland in 1859-60, and Northern
Queensland in 1884. In doing so, it will be as well to consider
Darvall’s Report—
That Queensland was at the time of Separation and is still the most
extensive of the British Colonies. It possesses an area nearly double the size
of Canada, and, if compared with European States, is one-half larger than
England, Ireland, Scotland, Wales, France, and Spain, all added together ;
it is, in fact, nearly equal in area to one-fifth of the area of the whole of
Europe and its dependencies.
Pastoral occupations have spread all over the North, and the
ports in the Gulf of Carpentaria are now open as Ports of Entry.
The squatter, miner, commercial man, tradesman, mechanic,
and all classes are now inhabiting that portion of the territory-


which was once unknown, and in exploring which some of our
best men have lost their lives. From Point Danger, South of
Moreton Bay, to Cape York, it is 1,550 miles, and from Cape
York to the 138th degree of longitude, it is 700 miles, yet this
vast colony has its Capital at the extreme Southern border, a
distance 0f'1,600 miles from some of its inhabitants.
Western Australia, which for some time has been a Crown
Colony, is now petitioning for responsible Government, the
inhabitants feeling sure that they can legislate for themselves
without the intervention of the Crown. Their population at the
end of 18S3 was 31,703; revenue, 31,719; expenditure,
with a public debt of £ 611,000 ; the imports being
£ 516,847, and exports, £ 477,010. They have a railway open
of 115 miles, and 68 miles in course of construction. Here is a
Colony with only half of our population and without the half of
our resourses seeking self-government, and does not question
the expense that the change will bring about.
It will be remembered that the British-India Mail Service Con-
tract was fought out by the Mcllwraith Ministry, and had it not
been for their persistent conduct on that occasion, the North would
have been thrown back fully twenty years. The same thing may
be fought over again, perhaps on the next occasion to our loss.
Every now and then a new departure is being made with some
of our principal Acts, and we have no guarantee that the I orres
Straits Mail Service will be continued ; a majority in Parliament
may at any time reverse the order of the direct Mail and
arrange with the Orient or P. and O. Company to work it from
the South, making Brisbane the terminus, thus depriving the
Northern portion of the colony of the shorter route, and cut our
trade off by that route. This is only one of the worst of evils
we have to guard against; we cannot be too cautious in pro-
tecting our interests against the possibility of unforeseen events.
They may arise at any moment, and, inadequately as the North
is now represented in Parliament, what is to prevent any Govern-
ment from entering into such a contract that would have the
■effect of destroying every interest in the North ?
Geographically, the Northern Mail Service suits every port
North of Cape Palmerston better than any other, and it is well
known that the Service is not looked upon with the same favour
in the Southern Capital as it is in Northern Queensland.
Whatever may be the opinion of the Northern people on the
subject, the foregoing figures will tend to show our position at
the present time. Whether we are ripe for Separation or not, a


careful comparison of the population, imports, exports, revenue,
and expenditure, and the requirements of the pastoral, agricul-
tural, mining, commercial, and general interest in iB6O and
1884, should determine that question.
We must bear in mind that, without blaming either the past or
present Governments for what would appear neglect, the
colony has been growing so rapidly as to get beyond their
control, and that they are pledging our credit virtually without
our sanction, as we are now inadequately represented in Parlia-
ment ; coupled with this is the enormous distance we are from
the Capital, and how difficult is the administration of justice as
at present arranged.
The whole grounds of the present agitation arose through
the capital of this large colony being placed at the extreme
southern boundary, which is now causing sericus inconvenience
to Northern residents, and the want of adequate Parliamentary
representation, while we cannot ignore the fact that loans
are being forced upon us, for which we are to pay more
than our just portion of the interest, while we do not parti-
cipate in a just proportionate share of the principal sum
borrowed. Reviewing the past ten years carefully, and tak-
ing the statistics into consideration, they afford ample
evidence that a change is necessary for the general and future
prosperity of Northern Queensland. Our faith and reliance
have been supported by the provision specially made by an
Imperial Act of Parliament, which provided for further Separa-
tion, and for division of the great Continent of Australia as it
became populated, and a sufficient number of resident house-
holders petitioned Her Majesty the Queen for Self-Government.
We suppoit that petition by statistical returns, showing the
grounds on which Separation will be beneficial to us. In doing
this we are only asking the fulfilment of a promise held out and
sanctioned by Imperial law. The question is not 0,.e on which we
have to rely on the present Brisbane Government, as to whether
they will permit a division of the colony, but one that will call for
the adjustment by the Home Government in an equitable manner.
If our claim for Separation be a fair and reasonable one, sup-
ported by a truthful statement of facts, borne out by a loyal
petition to Her Majesty, and accompanied by full particulars of
our position as to population, extent of territory, imports,
exports, trade, and means of providing ample revenue for the
administration of proper Government, we have no reason to fear
failure.


Presuming that the Imperial Government receives our petition
with favor, and there is no reason to think but that Separation
will be granted in two years, or say by the commencement of
1887, we shall then be in a position equal to some of the other
Colonies, with a population of about 80,000 persons, and an
accumulative trade of ,£3,800,000 per annum; Importing goods
to the value of 2,000,000; and exporting gold, copper, tin,
silver, wool, tallow, hides, cedar, sugar, molasses, rum, &c.,
to the value of ,£1,800,000 yearly. This would give a revenue
of 20,000, or nearly five times the amount raised by Queens-
land in iB6O. This amount should provide an ample sum for
expenditure in every department, including interest say on a
loan of ,£4,000,000. With such a prospect before us, why should
we hesitate to view our future prospects in any other but a
favorable light ? We have only to look and take into considera-
tion the manner in tvhich our young people are growing up
around us. There is not a department in the Government Civil
Service but preference is given to a Southern man for any ap-
pointment or promotion in the North. There is no hope or
inducement ever held out for a Northern man, unless he is
fortunate enough to have a staunch and influential friend at
head quarters. These, and many other privileges, would be
secured among ourselves by self-government. As a part of
Federal Australia, we should enjoy all the benefits that have led
to the prosperity now enjoyed by the Canadian people. To
ensure this we must be firm and unanimous in our petiddn to
Her Majesty the Queen. The Colonial office will no doubt
remove any existing difficulty, and pave the way to the strength-
ening of the Colonial Empire.
In urging the consideration of the foregoing upon the general
public, I would point out that there cannot be any particular
interest to serve in any one industry more than another, or to
the advantage or detriment of one district more than another.
The ultimate result must be good for all throughout the North, as
all over the colonies and at home the Franchise places the power
in the hands of the working man, who, after a six months’ resi-
dence, has a vote, and is placed on the Electoral Roll. The Elec-
toral Rolls for the North will no doubt number 15,000 names.
With that number how are we represented ? It will here be noted
that we are restricted to eight members, containing 12,080
electors, to more than one-third of the territory. How can we
be considered to be fairly represented, when in the extreme


South there are sixteen electoral districts, with 12,056 electors
returning sixteen members, or double the number returned by
the North ? Again, there are four Southern electoral districts,
containing 5,821 electors, returning two each or eight mem-
bers, while the Kennedy with 2,785 and Townsville with 2,934,
or a total of 5719, have the right of returning only three
members. These figures illustrate how unequal is the distribu-
tion of the Electoral districts.
It will be seen at a glance that the South has the majority of
members and preponderance of voting power at all times,
which they are likely to continue retaining, and which we are
powerless to adjust so long as the South have the authority in
their hands. It was the fact that all these various drawbacks
would continue to handicap us and our industries to such an
extent that our future progress must be retarded for years to
come, the serious results of which were looming in the dis-
tance, that compelled several to ask the question, what is the
best thing to do under the circumstances? The instinct com-
mon to all British subjects should answer that question. The
perusal of all the Northern newspapers of the day points out
that in the absence of an entire reform by a Redistribution Bill,
extension of power to local police courts, with better provision
for the administration of justice, the formation of Harbour Trust
for all the principal ports, and changing the seat of Govern-
ment to a more central position, there is only one alternative,
and that is TERRITORIAL SEPARATION. You will see
that, as there is no chance of the FIRST, consequently there is
no choice for vou but. the SECOND.


SEPARATION MOVEMENT OF 1878,
The following appeared in the Townsville Weekly Herald, on Saturday,
November 22nd, 1884, and contains many salient points in favor of Separation :
(jjr&'v ATHER more than six years ago, the people of Bowen commenced
an agitation for the separation of North Queensland. The follow-
ing statement of the facts which they advanced as a basis on which
to frame a Separation petition, will doubtless be found interesting
just now: —
That previous to the Act of Separation, passed in the Parliament of
New South Wales in 1859, a considerable amount of excitement and dis-
affection was generated among the inhabitants residing at some distance to
the North of Sydney, inconsequence of flagrant monopoly in the appro-
priation of the public revenues in favor of Sydney and its suburbs, and so
far prejudicial to the intei’ests of the complainants of that time, as to stig-
matise the financial dealings of that Government as a series of deliberate and
arbitrary confiscations of those portions of the public funds which had been
derived from the resources of the Northern districts of that colony.
That after repeated failures, arising from minority in representation,
the inhabitants of the Northern districts of New South Wales at length
succeeded in procuring Separation, by which they were enabled to form a
Government of their own, and lay the foundation of that which is now
known as the colony of Queensland.
That previous to the Act of Separation that portion of the colony upon
which Brisbane now stands, had been the head quarters of a separate and
distinct penal settlement, and the exigencies of the Government officials and
prisoners created a trade which resulted in opening up the Brisbane River
as a port of entry, and eventually, after the removal of the convicts, in the
foundation of the present city as the accepted capital city of the colony.
That the Government officials, and men in power, at the time when the
Government of Queensland received its first foundation, had during their
period of office, under the Grown of England, acquired, some by- free grant
for long service, and others by purchase, at a low valuation, large areas of
freehold landed property, all of which said estates were laid out and selected
in the Southern parts of Queensland, some occupying the site upon which
Brisbane now stands, and the others as close to that position' as could
possibly be obtained.
That at the time of the first formation of the Queensland Legislative
Assembly, the members elected consisted of the holders of the land alluded
to, and as a natural consequence, the leading efforts of that Legislature
were directed towards enhancing the value of their own properties by in-
vesting the public funds in the general improvement of the district in which
they were situated, and such has remained the practice up to the present
time. v
That from the first foundation of the colony of Queensland a consider-
able period had elapsed before this monopoly in the appropriation of the


public revenues began to be felt by the gradual advance of settlement in a
northerly direction, but when manifested in its operations resulted in a
demand for Separation by Rockhampton at a very early period of our
history.
That colonisation in a northerly direction*had continued to be very slow
until the opening out of the Northern goldfields, which afforded inducement
for the advance of Victorian and new Zealand miners in that direction.
That the opening out of those goldfields laid the foundation of a colony
in the Northern territory, essentially distinct in its elements and consisting
of men long accustomed to the laws of New Zealand and Victoria, and
which, being in every respect far in advance of the legislation of Queensland,
the inhabitants of the Northern territory have now determined upon
appealing to the Crown of England for power to form a separate government,
with a view to assimilating the rights and privileges of their Corporations to
those of Great Britain, New Zealand, and Victoria, whereby a fair distribu-
tion of the public revenues will, by affording employment to the disappointed
miner, place him in a position to renew his efforts in prospecting, and thus
assist in developing the mineral resources of the country, and by the free
circulation of its revenue become the means of inducing capitalists to
approach and speculate upon the prospects of a country well known to
possess a vast amount of mineral treasure, but who, under existing laws,
are disparaged and deterred from enterprise.
That notwithstanding the enormous increase of general revenue which
the opening out of our Northern goldfields, and the consequent opening of
new ports, and the foundation of new seaport towns, has secured to the
Colonial Treasury, the Brisbane Government has persisted in a most
deliberate and determined confiscation of those public monies, without the
least regard for the exigencies of the people,-or for the wants and require-
ments of the localities in which these public revenues have been produced.
That the Northern Territory of Queensland contains a vast extent of
most valuable mineral resources, which, under the control of a fair and
impartial legislation, would open up a field for the profitable employment of
many thousands of inhabitants, but which, under existing rule, must for
ever remain undeveloped and useless to the world.
That while the members of the present Government, representing
Southern interests and consisting, as they do, of the proprietors of soil in the
Southern districts, must, as a matter of necessity, continue to be returned to
Parliament by Southern franchise, the Northern territory could never be
able, without territorial Separation, to carry such measures as are now felt
to be indispensable for the development of their own resources, ob for the
general prosperity of their community, inasmuch as their representative
influence is, and must necessarily remain, under existing circumstances, not
only a minority, but simply a party without a particle of power in the
present Parliament, because although an Electoral Bill may be introduced
immediately which would bestow upon Northern interests a complete balance
of power, and no other would be efficacious, it would be thrown out by the
overwhelming majority at present representing Southern interests.
That a territory suddenly colonised by the discovery of new goldfields,
and having comparatively insignificant representation in Parliament, has no
power to establish a fair representation in that Parliament so long as the
interests of the men in office are antagonistic to those seeking new electoral
rights ; or, in fact, seeking for any measures for the amelioration of their
condition, and that consequently the inhabitants of the Northern territory


of Queensland have no other legitimate means of acquiring the rights to be
hereinafter particularised, and which have been obstinately refused by the
Brisbane Government, than by an appeal to the Crown under which the
colony holds its constitution.
That the inhabitants of the Northern territory of Queensland are not
governed by laws in any way similar to those enjoyed by the inhabitants of
Great Britain and Ireland, notwithstanding that, as British subjects, they
are entitled to be ruled in such a manner as will afford them the same
privileges, as for example the town lands in Great Britain and Ireland have,
throughout time immemorial, been transferred by Charter from the Crown
to the corporations of the respective townships, and all public docks and
wharves in seaport towns have been likewise universally recognised, by right
of old Saxon usage as the property of the corporations, for the sole and
exclusive benefit of the town to which they belong ; and this right to such
emoluments so required by usage was confirmed by Magna Charta in the
reign of King John in the year 1216 ; and whereas no attempt has ever been
made by a British Parliament to deprive the British subjects of those emolu-
ments, it is submitted that the conduct of the Brisbane Government in ignoring
the administration of justice in England, although laid down for our special
guidance, is subversive of constitutional law, and entitles the inhabitants of
the Northern territory to the right of appeal to the Crown direct for Terri-
torial Separation from a Government under which their vested interests in
the colony are going to ruin, and under which the present inhabitants can
never peaceably exist.
That in consequence of long-continued public clamour against the abuses
of power persevered in by the Brisbane Government, a tour through the
Northern territory was undertaken by the present Ministry in the latter end
of 1877, who were received by deputations, which, in too many instances,
consisted in part of men disposed to propitiate the Ministry for personal
motives, and also in part of others who appeared to be totally ignorant of
what were really the rights of the people whom they were professing to
represent; thus, in one instance, a deputation asked for a transfer *if the
wharves to the Corporation, and were as peremptorily refused as though
the wharves in question were really the private property of the Minister
making that refusal, instead of the inherent right of the Corporation en-
deavoring to establish their claim, and with the exception of a railway from
Cooktown to the Palmer goldfield promised to the inhabitants of that district,
and which may be commenced at a time when its construction will be a useless
waste of public money, there was really nothing conceded to the people upon
that occasion, notwithstanding that their grievances were fully represented.
That with reference to said proposed railway, it is submitted that
during the four years preceding—i.e., from the opening of the Palmer
goldfields, the road from Cooktown to that district was never really in a fit
state for traffic, and at times, through the entire absence of bridges, where
bridges should have been immediately erected upon the first discovery of
goldfields, the teams loaded with the requirements of the miners were
detained for months upon that road before they could reach their destination,
resulting in many instances in a serious amount of mortality arising from
the want of mere necessaries of life, and that as late as last year the teams
loaded at Cooktown for Thornborough in the month of February did not,
owing solely to the absence of bridges, arrive at their destination until the
month of June following, being a period of five months occupied in a
journey of 140 miles.


That among the many urgent demands by Northern interests for the
appropriation of their general revenue, a claim was presented to the Brisbane
Government in the course of last year for the ercetion of a bridge across
the Burdekin River, as indespensable for the opening out of the country and
the advancement of commercial interests ; and that, after considerable
agitation, the Government consented to raise the amount required for the
erection of such bridge by means of a public loan for the amount, bearing
interest at the rate of four per cent, per annum.
That the necessity for incumbering the Northern territory might he
easily understood if the Treasury were in a bankrupt state, but whereas the
reverse is the case, and that in reality a very large amount of surplus
revenue is lying idle in the Brisbane Treasury, no other motive can be as-
signed for such unwarranted proceedings than that the present Government,
foreseeing that the separation of the Northern territory is becoming every
day more inevitable, are merely making provisions to meet that contingency
by the illegal retention of the surplus revenue now due to the Northern
territory, and which they positively refuse to refund to the rightful owners,
and which ought to he in the hands of the Corporations of the Northern
territory for circulation at a time when the requirements of the people render
their possession not merely desirable, but an imperative necessity.
That in the year an effort was made by the Northern territory to
obtain Separation by means of a petition to the Crown, but in consequence
of no resolution having been previously brought before our Legislative
Assembly, the Home authorities declined to entertain the petition.
That the Customs’ revenue collected at the port of Brisbane, while
represented as the actual revenue of that place, and upon which Brisbane
has been for many years, and is still receiving its proportion of the general
revenue, yet was not, nor is it now, the actual Customs’ revenue of Brisbane,
inasmuch as the greater p'ortion of the goods which paid and produced that
Customs’ revenue, surreptitiously placed to the credit of Brisbane, was
consumed by the inhabitants in the Northern territory, and hence those
goods, being consumed in the Northern territory, were paid for by their
consumers ; and that, as the purchase included payment of duty, the Customs’
revenue produced by the consumption of said goods did not belong to the
credit of Brisbane, but to that of the place in which, by consumption, said
revenue was really produced; and hence it is averred that by this system
the interests of Brisbane have been and are still being aggrandised at the
expense of our Northern territory.
That during the number of years elapsed since the first opening of the
Northern goldfields the amount of Northern revenue monopolised by
Brisbane in the manner hereinbefore explained must necessarily be enormous
in the extreme, inasmuch as, although a few of the merchants in the
Northern territory imported direct from Sydney, yet in every seaport town
there were and are to be found extensive business establishments which are
merely branches of Brisbane firms, and it is the practice of such firms
always to pay the duty in Brisbane upon the goods which they forward to
their branch establishments in the Northern territory, and with the know-
ledge that such a system of misappropriation has been deliberately carried
on for a number of years, it cannot be expected that the inhabitants of the
Northern territory can have any confidence whatever in a continuance of
such a system of legislation.
That the discovery of new goldfields has had, as it must ever have, the
effect of forming new townships, both inland and seaport, which, if allowed


to advance as in a free country, the prospects of the Northern Territory of
Queensland would by very different to what they are; but instead of ad-
vancing with an encouraging hand to commercial and mining interests in the
formation of those townships upon whose prosperity the lives of many
hundreds of people are depending, the Government of Brisbane has adopted
a course which, in itself arbitrary and tyrannical, is calculated to cripple
the man of business, paralyse the energy of the miner, and completely an-
nihilate the very enterprise which, in its free exercise, would be conducive to
prosperity among a hard-working and struggling population, and with a
view to illustrating this line of conduct on the part of the Government,
a reference is submitted to a land sale which took place in the town of
Cairns in the early part of the month of February, 1877 : —thus, the opening
out of the Hodgkinson goldfield rendering the discovery of a more convenient
seaport than that of Cooktown desirable, the port of Cairns was selected as a
place likely to be the most suitable for the purpose. The first settlement
commenced with calico tents in the month of October, 1876 ; wooden
buildings commenced to be erected in the end of November, 1876, and in the
early part of February following, being a period of a little over two
months, from the first surveyed formation of the streets and selection of
allotments, the whole of .that struggling township was deliberately forced
into public auction, and the allotments held by striving, enterprising, and
useful members of society, were relentlessly sold to the highest bidder by the
Brisbane Government.
That at a distance of seventeen miles from the town of Cairns, a rough
track was cut by the Government over the coast range, which as a means of
establishing permanent traffic to the Hodgkinson proved a complete failure,
and hence the necessity for a better route resulted in the opening of Port
Douglas, which, being favorable to mining interests, leaves the township of
Cairns without any prospect of a fair return for investment in building, and
without the smallest particle of landed interest in exchange for the money
paid for the purchase of allotments, or rather invested from the hands of
struggling enterprise, at the very time when, as yet the success o| the
Hodgkinson as a goldfield remained undecided, and when the actual pre-
tensions of Cairns as a suitable site for the port required was a mere matter
of experiment, and it is submitted that the sacrifice of Northern interests
exemplified in the foregoing statement must necessarily establish a con-
viction that Northern interests have really no claim to consideration in the
estimation of the Brisbane Government, especially when its conduct with
respect to said foregoing land sale is laid side by side with the fact that
there were townships then in existence in the Southern districts which had
been settled upon many years before Cairns was thought of, and which were
in a prosperous state, without any interference upon the part of said Govern-
ment or any indication up to a recent period, as to allotments in said latter
townships, being as yet set up for public auction.
That while town lands in Queensland have been disposed of by public
auction, and the proceeds lodged in the Brisbane Treasury, such has not been
the practice in Great Britain and Ireland, wherein the corporations become
the proprietors by Crown grant of the ground, and grant leases to the occu-
pants of allotments in their city and towns for ninety-nine years renewable
for ever, at a rent equal to five per cent, upon the estimated value of such
ground, and the corporations being the recipients of those rents are in pos-
session of an important item towards a local revenue to be invested in the
erection of public buildings and the general improvement of their towns.


That the wharves in Great Britain and Ireland are recognised by
Parliament as the undisputed property of the corporations of the respective
towns to which they belong, and by means of the fees produced by wharfage,
another important item is added to the income of the corporation.
That all hotelkeepers’ and publicans’ licenses are in New Zealand and
Victoria the property of the Corporations.
That in the colony of Victoria it has always been the practice of Muni-
cipal Shire Councils and Road Boards to make out an estimate of the local
revenue to be derived from ground rent, wharfage, licenses, fines, fees from
Town Commons, and town rates, and for every pound so raised, the Shire
Council or Road Board receives an additional pound from the Colonial
Treasury, out of the general revenue.
That by supplementing the local revenues in the manner described, the
Corporations are enabled to increase the value of their town property by the
increase of population, secured by the employment of labour, and the free
and unrestrained circulation of the public monies.
Note. —There are, of course, many more items of importance, which
might be introduced either in the petition or, as suggested by some of our
friends here, be embodied with some of the foregoing grievances, and pub-
lished in the form of a pamphlet to accompany the petition when on its way
round for signatures. For instance, the large amount of surplus revenue now
due to the Northern territory, and lying idle in the Colonial Treasury at the
very time when its circulation would rescue colonial interests fron impending
ruin, establishes ground for complaint which the heme Government cannot
possibly refuse to entertain, and in addition to the amount, presumed to be
about £600,000 now due, but which will be definitely ascertained by the
return of receipts and expenditure in the Northern territory, now in pre-
paration, it must be manifest that a very large amount must necessarily
remain suppressed, on account of the undue appropriation of revenue to the
credit of Brisbane, on account of goods paying duty there, which were
consumed in the Northern territory.
The inhabitants of Bowen district wish to propose that the petition
should ask for a Royal Commissioner to select a site for the future capital of
the Northern territory in the same manner as adopted for the centralisation
of government in New Zealand, and that, as in that case, the gentlemen
selected should be the speakers of the Legislative Assemblies of distant
colonies, and would therefore suggest those of Victoria, New Zealand, and
Tasmania, and by allowing or suggesting such a course with respect to what
otherwise might stand in the way of unanimity, as a bone of contention, it
is to be hoped that the promoters of a movement for territorial Separation,
no matter where the initiation may take place, may be exonerated from any
other motive than the attainment of mere territorial Separation itself as a
means of saving their territory from the ruin which it is evidently the end
and aim of the Brisbane Government to accomplish.
It is further submitted for consideration that the letters patent granting
the Separation of Queensland from New South Wales contemplated a
further division of this colony, to commence at Cape Palmerstone, whenever
the condition and circumstances of the colony require it, and as the condition
renders the change imperative, and the surplus revenue establishes our ability
to go alone, there can be very little difficulty in coming to a conclusion as to
the success of a petition at the present time to the Crown of England, and
the fact that our present Premier, Mr. Douglas, is in favor of Separation, will
not escape the attention of the Governor when transmitting the petition to
Her Majesty.


APPENDIX.
Remarks made by Mr. IFm. Coote (Author of the “ History of Queensland") at a
Meeting of the Committee, held at Townsville, on the 14 th of November, 1884.
N’/T C'OOTE, who was greeted with continued applause on rising,
, I I said that many years ago he heard a leader of the Opposition say
th® Premier of England that he was indebted to him for giving
certain information, hut that his manner of giving it was imper-
tinent. He hoped that the residents of the North would not think him
impertinent in coming up here to give what information he could, and
assist the Separation movement to the best of his ability. He had
intended to come on to 'Townsville from Brisbane, but he had been
asked by Mr. Black to call at Mackay. He acceded to the request, and
while there a public meeting had been held. At that meeting there was
no party nor class feeling. It was presided over by the Mayor, who
was a staunch adherent of the Liberal party. Planters, business men,
and working men all joined in the cry for Separation. He was natur-
ally much pleased to notice this, and if it had not been the case lie
would not have taken the part he was now taking in connection with the
movement. The people of Mackay were very earnest in this matter.
Townsville had to complain of want of help two years ago, but they would
not in future have to make such a complaint of Mackay. There was more
reason to fear that like most recent proselytes, they would be more zealous
than discreet. The Mackay people had, however, started in a workmanlike
manner, appointing a thoroughly representative committee, and subscribing
funds liberally. On the general question of Separation he would simply say
that the people of North Queensland desired it, no doubt, because thev
wanted to follow what was a maxim with English speaking people, and
govern themselves. He had, in order to show the method of procedure,
drawn up a rough draft of a petition to Her Majesty, portions of which he
would read them, making comments as he went. Mr. Archer had taken a
petition home about sixteen years ago, but it was necessary that such peti-
tions should reach the throne through the Governor, as Her Majesty’s
representative in the colony. Colonial Parliaments had nothing to do with
the matter at all. They had no power to deal with such petitions. That
had all been settled in 1860 and 1861. He would, of course, not trouble the
meeting with the opening portions of the petition. The first important
clauses, showing that the Crown had power to create new colonies, and that
provision was made for the adjustment of public debts, were as follows s—-
“That on the first day of December, 1859, the colony of Queensland was
separated by Royal letters patent from the colony of New South Wales, of
which up to that date it had formed a part. That the Western boundary
of the new colony was at that time fixed 151st degree of East longitude
leaving the territory included between that line and the 138th degree
which was the eastern boundary of the colony of South Australia,


unannexed and practically without government, while the principal Northern
rivers and harbors on the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria were unavailable
for the new colony. That feeling the inconvenience likely to arise under
such circumstances, the Parliament of Queensland did, in 1860, apply to
your Majesty to permit that ‘ the Western boundary of Queensland shall he
declared to extend at least so far as to include the Gulf of Carpentaria; in
other words, that the Western boundary of that colony and the Eastern
boundary of South Australia should be coincident, and such extension was
recommended by the then Governor, Sir George Ferguson Bowen. That
your Majesty’s Government did not at once see tit to grant the extension
applied for, hut some difficulties having arisen as to the adjustment of the
public debt and monetary affairs between Queensland and New South
Wales, and as to certain constitutional points was not now necessary to be
specified, an Imperial statute dealing with the whole, and being chapter
forty-four of the statutes passed in Session holden in the twenty-fourth and
twenty-fifth years of your Majesty’s happy reign, received your Majesty’s
Royal assent. That by such statute power was given to your Majesty to
create a new colony or colonies upon the petition of the inhabitant house-
holders of any of the territories lying North of 30th degree of south latitude ;
and while provision was made for the adjustment of any debt incurred by
the parent colony previous to such creation, the restriction previously
existing that the constitution of a new colony should be as nearly as possible
assimilated to that of New South Wales was abolished That in the year
1861, and in consequence of a renewed application on that behalf, the Wes-
tern' boundary of Queensland was removed to the 138th degree of East
longitude, and that in the despatch announcing such extension, the then
Secretary of State for the Colonies, the Duke of Newcastle, expressly stated
and enforced the power of your Majesty’s Government to deal with the dis-
tricts not yet settled, as the wishes and convenience of the future settlers
may hereafter require. That no portion of the colony of Queensland beyond
the 22nd degree of south latitude was at that time settled, although efforts
were making towards the occupation for pastoral pursuits of some portion
of that country. That the population of that portion of the colony lying
south of the 22nd degree of south latitude is now three times the number of
the whole population of Queensland on the first day of December, 1859 ;
that its trade in the year 1883 was, exclusive of goods received coastwise and
from Brisbane, twice that of the entire colony in the year 1859 ; that the
revenue derived from it is more than three times the receipts of the whole
colony in the year named; and that from the vast minex-al and industrial
resources which every year’s growing settlement discloses, and the advantage
which its seaboard offers to a trade with the Indian Empire, and with China
and Japan, there is abundant reason for believing that the present population
trade and revenue will, within the next five years, he more than doubled.
That in the legislature of Queensland your petitioners are, and have reason
to believe may look to be for a long time to come most inadequately repre-
sented, and that in consequence of this, while in administration they have
not an equitable proportion of the public expenditure, in legislation they
suffer by loans which, from want of information, or from prejudice in the
framers as to the real nature and requirements of the Northern portion of
the colony, injure their industries, depress their trade, and thereby inflict
on them grievous injustice. At the present time not one member of the
Government resides in the North, or has any more than a casual or secondary
knowledge of its natural or industrial requirements. That these evils are


aggravated by the distance between the principal towns of the North and
the seat of Government, at present very nigh to the Southern boundary of
the colony. In every matter of official or public concern requiring personal
explanation, great loss of time and expense is entailed on the residents of the
North. In all cases of litigation, wherein reference to the Supreme Court
in its appellate jurisdiction is desirable, the costs become so large as often-
times to defer suitors from seeking the redress to which they are entitled.
Thus administrative evils are protracted, and the administration of justice is
impeded, and sometimes becomes impossible. That upon all these matters
some petitioners have fully informed your Secretary of State for the Colonies
and furnished that Minister with verified statistics and documents from
official sources as proof of their representations. That your petitioners are
confident that the justice and regard to public obligation which has dis-
tinguished the Imperial Government during your Majesty’s reign will be
extended to them. Resting on the promises implied by the Act of Parlia-
ment cited, and impressed in the words of your Majesty’s Minister, they have
laid the foundation for a future colony, superior, even if created at once,
to many which enjoy the blessing of your Majesty’s protection, second to
none in magnitude and variety of its resources, yet but slightly developed,
your Majesty’s humble petitioners pray for self-government in order that
they may fully employ those resources, not merely to their own benefit, but
to the increase and prosperity of the trade and commerce of the United
Kingdom, and of that great Empire over which your Majesty so wisely
reigns. In what your petitioners crave leave to look at as the j ust fulfilment,
of an obligation they recognise a further step towards that consolidation of
the interests and affinities between the Empire and its dependencies, which
your petitioners conceive most tend to the welfare and happiness of your
Majesty’s subjects throughout your dominions.” With reference to the
adjustment of the public debt, ample provision has been made. The Govern-
ment of the parent colony and that of the new colony would each appoint an
arbitrator, and the Imperial Government would appoint an umpire. It was
a mere question of accounts. He had heard of a species of log-rolling by
the Southern Government, by giving the railways here and there. If the
Government refused a railway on account of this movement, it would be an
attempt at intimidation, but if they got the railway they would have to pay
for it. When the Act of Parliament referred to in the petition he had read
was passed, the Duke of Newcastle, then Secretary of State for the Colonies,
had expressly stated the method of dealing- with a new colony. If Northern
residents really wished for Separations they only need show that they were
able to govern themselves. At that time there was no settlement south of
Cape Manifold, now the population to the north of that point was three
times as great as was that of Queensland to the south of it in 1859. That
was a fact and an important one. The Separation of Queensland was cele-
brated on the 1 Oth of December, but the new colony was really proclaimed
on the first, the tenth being Only the day on which Sir George Bowen landed.
He had said in reference to the trade with Europe and the East that it would
probably double in the next five years. His hearers, he knew, were as fully
convinced of that as he was. All these figures he was certain of having
gone through them very carefully. Coming to what he might term the
sentimental portion of their reasons, there was the fact that they were most
inadequately represented in the Legislature. Of the fifty-five members of
the Assembly, how many were Northern representatives ? About six against
forty-nine Southern representatives. The consequence is an inequitable


Ur* I LS
Bl6 r LiO
fIZA.3S 32
/Y 00/sy
partition of the expenditure and legislation which, from pure ignorance of
Northern requirements, indicted the grossest injustice. No member of the
present Government resided in the North, or knew anything of it, except
what could be gained from brief visits at long intervals. He himself had
no idea of the real truth about Northern Queensland, its riches and its cli-
mate, until he visited it. These evils under which they suffered were aggra-
vated by their distance from the seat of Government. Look at the loss of
time and the expense entailed in cases of appeal in the Supreme Court. He
knew an appeal case in which, in order to recover £BOO, a Northern suitor
had to expend £6OO in costs. His hearers knew of these evils, and had
suffered from them. They had but to appeal to the Queen and she was
under an obligation to grant them Separation. He could point out numbers
of British colonies with less population and far less resources than the new
colony would have. He conceived that it was better to separate at once
to prevent discontent and ill-feeling between the North and the South. Look
at the quarrels between Port Philp and Sydney, between Moreton Bay and
Sydney. It would be better for the happiness and prosperity of everyone
that they should understand that Northerners intended to govern themselves.
They could not in a petition dictate the boundaries of a new colony, but they
would, in their letter to the Secretary of State for the Colonies, fully inform
him on all particulars. He believed that one gentleman who hold an im-
portant position in the Colonial Office, Sir R. G. W. Herbert, once Premier of
Queensland, would prove their friend. He would recognise the injustice
they were suffering, and would give them every assistance. He looked on Sir
E. Herbert’s aid as certain. He would like to make a suggestion as to how
to proceed in order to attain that object. They wanted a basis of co-
operation between the Northern towns. The best method, he thought,
would be for every town to have its own Committee, and to provide for its
own expenditure, and to have a central office, with a Secretary. At that
office a scheme could be prepared to which the local committees could fur-
nish from their Municipal and Divisional records statistics as to the value of
property in each district. Everything should be done through the one cen-
tral office, from which information as to the progress,made could be sent to
each local office. It was very necessary to provide facts and figures, and to
be careful that they were correct. If that was done he looked on Separation
ascertain. This movement was not a party one, nor a class one. He looked
on Sir Thomas Mcllwraith as a very able man, and Mr. Griffith was—Pre-
mier. But what the North wanted was to provide its own statesmen to
wovem itself. Nothing raised a community more than self-respect, and
taking the management of its own affairs in hand would give a wonderful
impetus to the prosperity of the North. They wanted to provide facts in
order to impress on the Imperial Government the justice of their claims, for
the men with whom they had to deal would not be moved by empty rhetoric
or sentiment. Then they could go to Earl Rosebery and other home resi-
dents who had influence, and would support their claims when put before
the Imperial Government temperately and practically, and urge the fulfil-
ment of the promise which had been made by Her Majesty in the Imperial
statute recently referred to by him.
WILLMKTT, TYP., TOWNSVILLE.


1508
02236034


