





FOR PRIVATE USE ONLY.]
[?]
TESTIMONY
IN BEHALF OF
MR. AUGUSTE BENJAMIN SACKYILLE WEST,
A CANDIDATE FOE HOLY ORDERS.


NATIONAL LIBRARY
OF AUSTRALIA
CANBERRA
This Book
was presented to
the Library
inted
ej
by Mrs. A.I. Mapk-Brom
of Spri ng fi eld, Goulburn


Me. Auguste Benjamin Sackvllle West, son of the late Colonel
West of the 3rd Eegiment of Guards, was bom in France, where
he resided for nearly seventeen years. "It is attested that during
all that time his conduct was irreproachable.” (See appendix A.)
Towards the close of 1870, Colonel West and his family re-
moved to England, and settled at Folkstone. Here Me. A. B. S.
West " always bore a good character; was always so steady and
a great favourite ; ” his friends " entertaining the highest opinion of
him for truth and honor; ” and " describing him as a person of
most agreeable manners and decided piety.” (See appendix B.)
On the 17th of October, 1872, Colonel West died at the age of
eighty-three. In early life, he had distinguished himself in the
Peninsular War, as well as at Waterloo; and was selected, after
the battle of Talavera, to take charge of the despatches to England.
He was wounded at Bayonne, and at Waterloo ; and in consequence
retired from the service, by leave, at an early age. He died at
Folkstone, a genuine Christian. It will be observed in the annexed
correspondence that Mr. West’s friends and relatives in England
are devoted Christians, and that they regard him in the same light.
In December, 1872, the son, A. B. S. West, left for Australia
as a midshipman. After two voyages he decided to remain in New
South Wales; and on the 4th of May, 1874 he settled down at
Murrurundi as a candidate for Holy Orders. In this parish, where
ho resided under the roof of the Eev. James Boss for a year and
eight months " his conduct was ever in consonance with his position
as a candidate for Holy Orders.” "He had a very good influence
over the young people of the town with whom he came in contact.”
On his departure he was presented with an address and a gold watch.
On the Ist of January, 1876, he was placed as a reader in
another parish. While labouring diligently here as a candidate
for Orders, ho was regarded as " a very gentlemanly and well con-
ducted young man ; ” " very energetic in the discharge of his
duties ; ” and "at all times conducting himself as a gentleman.”
But it was his painful duty to bear true testimony against the evil
conduct of someone. This brought upon him much obloquy and
misrepresentation from adherents of the person alluded to. But
the testimony is abundant that Mr. West " came out of all these trials


irreproachably.” Indeed as a proof " strong and public as possible
of his freedom from all blame " in the above matter, the Bishop
placed him under a third clergyman as a candidate for Holy Orders
in another parish.
On the 6th of July, 1876, he arrived at his new sphere of labor,
,in Newcastle. He " assisted most usefully in taking entirely the
-Sunday evening service at Stockton; ” " was the means of inducing
many to attend the church services; ” *' was very popular as a
preacher there; ” " very successful in his parish duties ; ’’ " much
respected, and did much good; ” was " much esteemed by the
sailors at the port; ” and gave promise of becoming a *' zealous
and orthodox and sincere minister of Christ, in the opinion of a
large section of the community to whom Mr. West had endeared
himself; ” as " a devoted and intelligent labourer in the work of the
ministry.”
On his departure from this parish on the. 2nd October, 1877,
the parishioners of St. Paul’s Church, Stockton, presented to him
an address "as a token of the estimation of his worth.” If the
address which, was " highly got,up by one of the Newcastle artists
with gilt frame,’’ " could have the names, the whole of
Stockton would have signed it; ” for he " was always found doing
good to any,one in need. They wished the address ” which was " ex-
hibited in one of the windows at North Shore for a week,” to be a
proof to him of " the esteem in which he was held, and ever will
be ” with the people of Stockton.. He also received ” a pocket-com-
pass and an opera-glass-as the most appropriate things ” which
some friends at Stockton " could give him before he" left Newcastle.”-
Abundant testimony -has also been bome to the Christian char-
acter and worth of Mr.-West by clergymen of high standing in the
Diocese in which he laboured and elsewhere, as will be evident from
the following passages, which may be seen at length in the annexed
appendix.- One writes that "he has acted always as a perfect gentle-
man and honoufable man, in all his conduct while in this Diocese.
I believe him to be an earnest Christian;” Another that "he shows
a remarkable fitness for the work of the church. In all that he had
to endure he behaved in my opinion, admirably.” - Another that
"he is, lam safe to say, a gentleman and a Christian.” Another
that he ” may be safely recommended to any Bishop as a candidate
|for Orders. He seemed to me earnest and truthful, with a good
deal of capacity for work.” Another "I saw Mr. West several
times and we were all pleased with him; and we thought him a
bright young Christian.” And on his resignation he received a
written message from the highest authority in the Diocese, that to
any inquiries which might be made respecting him ” the reply would
be favourable.” '
By the laity of the Diocese a similar estimate is given of Mr.
West’s character.. In one place they speak of "the-excellent ex


ample which he left them of devotion, faith, and constancy—estim-
able qualities, which will surround his memory with, permanent
affection and respect.” In another, "he was never known to do
anything unworthy of a gentleman nr of hia_ ninth." In another;
"at all times he conducted himself as a gentleman.”. In another,
" for plain practical good; he is eminently qualified to earn respect
as a clergyman. In his parish duties he has been very successful
indeed.” 4 From another, source "my favourable opinion of his.
fitness for the sacred calling increased with our intimacy,” From
another "he has fulfilled the duties of his office faithfully and
earnestly to his Great Master,” From another, " while belaboured
amongst us he conducted himself as a gentleman and a Christian.”
From another, " I have always known him as a God-fearing
Christian young gentleman; and the patient charitable spirit in
which he has borne troubles has made one take a deep interest in
him.” From. another, "I am sure he has a desire to preach the
true Gospel, and to win. souls to Christ, and will work hard for
this end.” (See appendix C.)
*^JsS£i ts&.
iMii
*r^f£s^
t»4.j<uwr


APPENDIX.
The following extracts, &c., are selected from numerous original
documents of similar import. They will be found in all respects
to verify the preceding quotations.
A.—TESTIMONY FROM FRANCES
Official document from the Mayor of Amiens.
The Mayor of the town of Amiens certifies from information obtained that
Colonel West and his family have resided both in Amiens and in Dury for twenty
years; that they left the town only on the Gth October, 1870, at the approach of
the German army, to settle down at Folkstone; that his son Auguste, bom at
Amiens on the 31st December, 1853, was brought up in France, and only left for
England with his family at the date abovementioned ; that since such time he
has not sojourned in France; and that, during all the time he resided in Amiens,
his conduct was irreproachable.
B.—THE TESTIMONY OF RELATIVES AND FRIENDS
IN ENGLAND:
1. From an aged Christian, a sister of the late Colonel West.
2Gth June, 1872.
I return the Tract you lent me, having read it with much interest, and
earnest prayer that everyone who does read it may receive in heart and life,
giving faith, the truth that " the Blood of Christ cleanscth from all siu.”
I trust, my dear Auguste, that you have hearkened unto the command and
loving invite to give your young heart to Him who so loved you as to give His
precious blood for you. May His Holy Spirit be your guide and counsellor
throughout life. And how is your dear papa ? Has he read your little Tract ?
If not, ask him to do so with my love. Your affectionate Aunt.
From the same.
20th August, 1874.
The contents of your letter filled my heart with thankful praise to our Hea,
venly Father for His watchful care of yon in keeping your soul cleaving to Him
who by His grace has enabled you to receive Him as your all in all. How gra-
ciously has He watched over you and raised friends for you 1 How has He
granted you to taste and to realise the truth of His tender promise—that He
would be a Father of the fatherless. How can we all, who love you, dear
Auguste, be sufficiently grateful to your kind and excellent friend, Mr. Boss,
May God guide and direct you in your future course, and grant you the desire
of your heart to serve Him as a Minister of the Gospel. If this bo His will
concerning you, dear Auguste, we may be sure He will. My sight is failing. I
may be unable to write: but it will be from failing power in your old Aunt,
wjio ever bears you in her heart. ■
From the same,
12th September, 1876.
I have thought much of you and felt much for you in your change; and
not without prayer, earnest prayer, that the loving eye of our Saviour, which so
watched over you, and His tender hand which hath so led you and held you up
in trials and difficulties, and the. Holy Spirit which filled your heart with love to
Jesus as your All in All, may continue unceasingly to watch over and keep
you from being led astray'. I hear that your kind friend, Mr. S., has weekly
meetings for Scripture reading, at which your cousin G. has sometimes assisted,
jk precious change has taken place in the soul of this your deaf cousin, His


■whole heart seems filled with love to the Lord, and an earnest desire to be en-
gaged in His servicce. Oh 1 dear Auguste, let this be a fresh encouragement to
wrestle in prayer with our Lord for all our dear ones. To our triune Jehovah,
our Father, Saviour, and Sanctifier I commend you.
Your ever loving Aunt.
2. From another sister of the late Colonel West.
16th October, 1874.
I hoar so many here speaking with warmth and affection of you. I want
much to live here. ' If it were not for my son having his duties elsewhere, I
think I should join your dear dear mamma.
Ever your affectionate Aunt.
3. From a son of the former.
September, 1874.
We are talking of importing the old lady my mother and your aunt. So wo
shall be all relations together. Mr. S. holds you in fond remembrance. I desire
much to go into the ministry, and come out to Australia. You may therefore
have your cousin who loves you, suddenly embracing you some day.
From the same.
15th October, 1874.
I find among your friends, whoso name is " legion,” that I need never fear
being without an interesting topic of conversation—Auguste West 1 I also find
an advantage as well as pleasure in having a cousin so well loved, and one who is
so kind and good; for those who love you like me, because we have the same
blood in us. And it takes little to make them love me also. Your sister is as
unselfish as ever and a true West. You may rest assured the Lord is with you,
and will guide you as to what you should do.
4. From the daughters of the late Colonel West.
July 25,1873.
God be praised for giving you such men for messmates. I am,sure that your
example must be good to the unfortunate creatures who are around you. I shall
pray for them; I know you do. Never mind the men, dear, they cannot taka
your faith from you, and their behaviour will tend to your strength. I wish I
had your mental courage. Everyone loves you here. Goi spares us; and the
blessings he has sent us are innumerable. I went to the cemetery on Waterloo
day and gave a laurel crown to our dear brave. God will soften the hearts of
your people if we ask Him ; and I shall begin to-day. We feel and understand
all you say about trust ; and we have a great proof of God’s love and mercy in
our own home. See how He cares for us. See how all turns out for the best.
I know that you are in God’s hands. I know that the friends whom He has sent
yon are Christians. It is such a comfort. lam so happy to know that there is
a Hand to govern all things. You are the best brother in the world. Tell all
your friends that I love them and pray for them.
I pray every night for all your Christian friends. lam sure that God hears
me; for He gives me everything I ask. Ah, my dear sweet boy, we love you better
than anything in this world !
From the same.
September 23,1874.
Believe that it is our greatest wish to be with you; and that if you miss us,
we miss you still more. We pray for you every day, and meet with you there, I
know 1 I admire the trust which has been granted you. Be always our simple
Gussy. All say your love secret is your modesty and simplicity. Just consider
how kind God is to us; how He is helping us in every way. When I remember
Mr. S.’s and Lady H.’s kindness when papa died, I feel that we were cared for;
7


and so it is now. We can no longer repine at yonr being sent away from us: it
has clearly all worked for a good end. I am so glad to know that you are working
earnestly and well. You will owe a debt of love and gratitude to your Australian
friends. I shall pray that you pay it properly. I love Jesus and all who love
Him,
I sent you a letter from Lady S. and Miss 0. for Lady Eobinson, and some
others have sent you letters. Have you received them f I sent them to the
Post-office. Arthur wrote to me; he says all the brothers have signed the
papers. Every sect here prayed in public for you: and I need not say how we
pray in private. Look to our Master for guidance always 1 Mamma knows that
so long as you look to our Saviour, you are safe.
From the same.
December 27,1874
Mr. S. is your friend. He says he feels certain that our Lord and Master has
taken hold of you for a great purpose. Depend upon it, ha is in too close com-
munion with our Lord to be at all displeased with you, for wishing to devote all
your time, energies, and life in His service. Your calling is a great one! and
you must indeed be happy 1
Your sister M.’s illness only came from your being sent away. But we trust
in a dear Good Father to unite us again.
From the same.
"January 13,1875.
Mr. S. is very happy; he looked very pleased with your letter; and he gave
it to us to read. It is a real Gussy letter, natural and true. And what a blessing
and comfort it is to us here to know you are kept in the right path. We pray
for you very much, and so do many friends. I am sure the dear Ms. never fail
to do it. General F. is Governor of Guernsey. His dear wife says you are to
come and take the French Chapel there. She is very fond of you. Lady B.
inquires after you every now and then. Colonel M. calls you his son ; in fact all
these people have spoiled you, and are ready to do it again a V occasion.
From the same.
March, 1875.
Every one loves you and inquires after you. If I were not sure that you are
such a trusting and happy Christian, I could sit down and sob for you. You are
so far from home ; at least we are so far from each other. I say give me an
earnest happy Christian in the ministry of the Church; one who can speak
properly of his own experience of our Master’s love; and not a worldly scientific
lecturer 1 I have prayed earnestly that you should be led in your path for life I
Aunt Charlotte has written to you; keep her letter. . She is almost quite blind.
What a sweet old Christian she is ; every one loves and esteems her. Your sister
M. loves you too much! You are half herself! All the people here remember
you and like you. Mamma says she is more satisfied and happier to call you her
boy, and to have all these poor people pray for you, than to be the mother of the
greatest swell in England!
From the same.
November 3,1875.
You are a child in many things. I love you to be simple in faith and speech.
Charles has come home a General!
From the same.
3rd February, 1878.
t We are pleased to hear that you have and did not change
papa’s pet names. Do you remember how^youTTsecT to cry when we called you
Beniamin ? »
/l CJwi


5. From a relative o{ Mr. West by marriage.
September 2, 1875.
I remember seeing you at Dr. F.’s tbe night before you left for Australia;
and little thought then that your dear sister would be my sister-in-law. I feel I
have gained a dear sister. May God bless you in the ministry you have chosen.
6. From Colonel B , a relative of the late Colonel West,
9th July, 1877.
My dear young friend, —Tour dear mother was so kind as to show me your
last letter to her. From the interest which I feel in the family lam prompted to
write you these few lines as a young Christian in the hope that by the blessing
of God they may prove of some use in encouraging your perseverance in your
Christian course. You speak of many trials. These are the lot of all who have
a mind to " live godly in Christ Jesus.” Our great adversary and his agents are
ncuer idle in seeking to destroy But blessed be God ! "Greater is He who is
in us, than he (the devil) who is in the world.” "In everything by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving make known your requests unto God.” Itmust
be a great trial to you to be so far off from your dear mother. But my dear
young friend you are engaged in the Lord’s work, and you may be sure that He
will make up to you for the absence of your dear mother, and all your earthly
connexions. Look to Him continually, and He will make all your wants His care.
I hope I will not fail to remember you and your family in my prayers. God is
blessing them: for He has proclaimed Himself a " Father of the fatherless, and
a Husband of the widow,” and all who trust in Him. If you trust in the Lord
you need not fear what men can do unto you. lam now an old man and I have
passed through many trials since I first knew the Lord. But He has never left
me, and never forsaken me, for His name is " faithful and true.” God bless and
keep you in all your ways.
7. From a friend of the late Colonel West
March 19, 1874.
I hear from Mrs. and Miss West that you take interest in, and have been
so kind to, my young friend 9 Augustus West, for which he is most grateful.
My father, late Sir A. C. Governor of Stirling Castle, and we
knew Colonel West of the Guards; and at Folkstone the Wests have many
kind friends, who watch the progress of the young man. Being a stranger to you
I hope you will not think this a liberty, my writing; but I take so much interest
in the family. lam sure you will be pleased to hear that Augustus West
has always been so steady, and a great favourite with all he has left in England.
I got a letter of introduction to Sir Hercules Eobinson, but some way it was lost
by the post.
From the same.
21st July, 1874.
My dear Young Friend, —I am very sony the letter I gave your sister for
Lady Eobinson never reached you. This day I called on Lady S. to ask for
another letter.
8. From a Gentleman of Downing College, Cambridge, who is M.A. and F.E.Q.S.,
and F.E.A.S.
April 1, 1876.
I have great pleasure in bearing testimony to the high character of Mr. A.
West, who is reading for Holy Orders. He is the son of the late Col. West
of the Guards, who was at the battle of Waterloo, and served through the whole
of the Peninsular war. The family has been known here for some years to
many verf esteemed friends of mine. Mr. A. West is a gentleman of whom I en-
tertain the highest opinion both for truth and honour. I shall be very pleased
to hear of Mr. West’s future success in life.
9


9. From Mr. S., a very warm friend of the family.
, February 22, 1875.
My dear Boy,—Jesus is your wisdom, your everything ! Trust Him. You
are quite safe in His hands. As I told you a thousand times : Jesus will do all
for us and in us ; go forward and rejoice in Him and don’t be afraid. •* »
I hope, dear Auguste, the Lord may allow us to meet some day here below; but
if not, it will be hereafter with our Lord! Good-by dear Auguste,
Yours ever affectionate in Christ.
From the same.
March 19, 1876.
I have thought often of you, and prayed to the Lord often and often for you.
One thing I have known all along, that if God really did convert you here, he
would put you through trial I My dear friend, it is one thing to talk of trusting
Jesus, and leaving everything with Him ; and another thing to trust Him really.
And the Lord has put you through trouble and perplexity; and is still keeping
you in suspense as to your future ; and therefore I feel confident you are His be-
loved sheep; and that He is teaching you and disciplining you as He does all his
own real sheep ! I have often asked Jesus to keep Auguste ; and He answers the
prayer He puts into our hearts and mouths. But how does He keep you and me?
In His own way ! By perplexing us, by troubling our fleshly peace, in order that
we may know Him, and the power of His resurrection, and the fellowship of His
sufferings ! I have written to the Bishop about you ; and in order to vouch for
my respectability I got my cousin, Lord Belmore, who was formerly Governor of
New South Wales, to write a letter to the Bishop to say that I was a respect-
able person and his relative. I see your sister M. every day. I w 7 ent and sat with
your mother the other day. Perhaps the Lord may send her out to you some
day. In the meantime, dear Auguste, don’t be afraid of the way the Lord leads
you. Ho will bring you victorious through it all. None of your old friends
forget you.
From the same.
June 27, 1876.
Your mother has sent me your letter which I was very glad to get as it showed
me that the Lord was keeping you and holding you. I hope that you have long
received my letters, which I sent you in March. I had a long talk with your
mother and Marie to-day about you. They seemed much pleased with your
letter. Ah my boy, we have often talked about "walking with God,” and you
are experiencing now what it is. How the poor wretched sinful flesh rebels,
does it not ? Never fear, brother in Christ, the Lord Will hold you through it
all; and bring you safely home to Himself! We are told to endure hardness
as good soldiers of Jesus Christ. If they called Him Beelzebub, how much
more will they abuse those of His own household ! If you want to be hated be a
Christian indeed , not a nominal one, but a Christ-made, a Christ-kept Christian.
I give you a verse "he who will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer perse-
cution,” and " I know whom I have believed and am persuaded that he will keep
that which I have committed to him against that day.” Adieu, Cher frere en
Jesus Christ votre ami en lui.
From the same.
My dear friend, —I was so glad to hear from you. The Lord has indeed been
dealing wonderfully with you. Yes IHe brings His own in a way they know not.
You have suffered much, dear Auguste, but it is all well! You have no need to
try and clear yourself with me about 1 am quite sure that the Lord held
you in the matter. You know, don’t you, how fond of you I am. I have always
felt that the Lord was holding you; I knew He had much to teach you, and has
much to show you. He had to humble you to give you confidence in Him; and
10


show you your own weakness, and also He had to show you Himself. Good-by,
my dearest brother, you may always count on my love in Christ.
Your ever affectionate.
From the same.
June 3, 1877.
I am writing by this post to say that I can gather from what you have told me
and from the letter in the newspaper that you are very much maligned,
and that your character is suffering from the slander of ’s friends.
In the meantime look up. Jesus is great and loving and strong. Ho will open
out some plain way for you. The Lord bless you.
Your ever affectionate.
10. From a Christian friend.
sth July, 1877.
I doubt not you will gladly listen to me respecting the case of a young,gentle-
man named Auguste West. His father was a Colonel in the Guards and com-
manded a battalion at Waterloo (at the ago of twenty-five). For many years be-
fore his death he lived in France. But the Franco-German war drove him back,
and he settled at Folkstone and eventually died there. A friend of mine, a resi-
dent, was asked to visit him, and was tho means of loading him to see himself a
sinner, and of directing him to the Lord Jesus: and his son, the subject of my
letter, was also led to Him. After his father’s death, he was sent to Australia.
His cousin who is a sound Churchman tells mo that A. W. is anxious to enter the
ministry of the Church of England. And my friend at Folkstone describes him
as a person of most agreeable manners, of decided piety, and of much power in
speaking for the truth as it is in Jesus.
From the same.
7th December, 1877.
I was truly glad to receive your kind letter of 24th September. I have often
prayed for Mr. West of late, that he might be graciously guided and protected,
and now that yourself and the Bishop have taken him up, I feel a strong call for
prayer for his guidance and support in the arduous work he is to enter. It is a
great pleasure to mo to hope and trust that ho may be a blessing in the land
where my dear son wore out his life —and where one of his later desires was to
enter the ministry.
C.—THE TESTIMONY OF CLERGYMEN AND
OTHERS IN NEW SOETH WALES.
1. From the Incumbent and Churchwardens.
St. Paul’s, Murrurundi.
We the undersigned, Incumbent and Churchwardens of St. Paul’s, Murru-
rundi, have much pleasure in testifying to Mr. West’s zeal on behalf of the
Church while in this parish as a candidate for Holy Orders. He interested him-
self in the choir, Sunday School, and in fact everything connected with the
Church where his assistance was available. His conduct was, we believe, ever in
consonance with his position as a candidate for Holy Orders'.
(From tho Murrurundi Times.)
2. Testimonial _to Mb. West.
Few who have resided in Murrurundi have so won upon all classes in the com-
munity, and left behind them so deep and general a feeling of regret, as Mr. A.
B. S. West has done after an intercourse of eighteen months amongst us. As a
gentleman of good birth and as a Christian occupying a conspicuous position, he


has endeavoured to walk without blame, while preserving an attitude of dignity
and courtesy towards all. To his generous and sensitive spirit there were many
grievances in social life which called for strenuous endeavours to redress, and
amongst these the drinking customs of society appeared to him pre-eminent. To
the lessening of the evil and especially its prevention where possible, he used the
greatest energy, and during his stay here effected good results. Having suc-
ceeded in organising a Good Templars’ Lodge, he was its leading spirit, as its
subsequent retrogression has too plainly shown, and all his public and private
influence was used to deepen the sensibilities of the community upon this ques-
tion; Unhappily for the permanence of the impression thus created, Mr. West
was called to leave the district for that of , to continue his preparation
for Holy Orders. After his departure the Good Templars prepared an address and
testimonial, the latter being liberally augmented by appreciative friends not con-
nected with the lodge, and after the required amount had been subscribed a very
elegant and superior gold watch was obtained and presented to Mr. West together
with the address. The watch bore the following inscription on the dome;—" Pre-
sented to A. B. S. West Esq., by the Good Templars and other friends, on his
leaving Murrurundi, January Ist, 1876,” and on the shield outside were engraved
the initials "A.B. S. W.” Appended is a copy of the address, with the reply
received from Mr. West on Wednesday last:—
Address.
Murrurundi, May 30th, 1876.
To A. B. S. West Esq.
Dear Sir and Brother, —
We who have had the privilege of being associated with you in your efforts for
the promotion of temperance and the establishment of a Good Templars’ Lodge
in Murrurundi, desire to testify our extreme regret at your departure from this
district.
In the midst of painful emotions inseparable from this occasion, it affords a
solace to reflect upon the excellent example you have left for us to emulate —an
example of devotion, faith, and constancy in every philanthropic work, of active
sympathy with need in every form, of charity and forbearance under every cir-
cumstance of life. Best assured, dear brother, that these estimable qualities
have not been exercised in vain. Vital with the potency of sacred influence,
their effect in others will be a stimulus to similar developments of character,
while they will surround your memory with permanent affection and respect.
Your acceptance of the accompanying testimonial will fulfil our concluding
demands upon your kindness. Though intrinsically its value may be small, yet
as the expression of the sentiments entertained towards you, not only by our-
selves, but by the members of the church and the community in connection with
which you have labored, whose names are appended hereto, we trust it will be
graciously received.
That the richest benediction of the Divine Master to whose sacred service your
life has been devoted may attend you in your public and private undertakings, pros-
pering all your efforts for the advancement of godliness and temperance, and at last
providing for you an eternity of joy, is our earnest, constant, and united prayer.
Farewell I
Here follow a large number of signatures comprising those of all the leading
residents in Murrurundi.
Mr. West’s Eeplt.
June, sth, 1876.
My dear Brethren and Friends, —
I have received the address and testimonial you have been pleased to present
to me, but I cannot find expression for the feelings which they have excited in
my mind. As permanent mementoes of my residence in Murrurundi they will
be invaluable, though the recollection of that period is already engraven on my
memory. If I have been permitted to advance in any way the sacred cause of
12


religion and temperance, I am deeply grateful; and my association with the
Lodge of Good Templars in Murrurundi has always been a source of deepest pleasure.
With every desire for the welfare of tho many friends with whom I have spout
eighteen months so pleasantly, and wishing the cause of temperance in Murru-
rundi increased success,
I remain, Sc o,
A. B. S. West.
3.—From a clergyman, No. 1.
Nov. 14, 1877.
I have much pleasure in stating what I know of Mr. West. As far as I have
been able to judge, he has acted always as a perfect gentleman and honourable
man in all his conduct while in this diocese. I believe him also to be an earnest
Christian. Whilst at Murrurundi he had a very good influence over the young
people of the town with whom he came in contact. He was very constant in
visiting the sick, and also very successful in influencing for good persons in the
hospital. I believe that at heart ho is a thoroughly earnest man.
4.—From a clergyman, No. 2. •
August 2,1876.
My Dear Mrs. West, —I think it may give you pleasure to have a line from me
about your son. lam afraid his letters to his relatives for the last six months
have been such as to cause them much anxiety about him. But you will be glad
to know that though he has had to endure some very painful trials he has come
out of them all quite irreproachably. Indeed he has made us all think all the
more highly of him for the way. in which ho has passed through a most painful
ordeal.
I need not and cannot tell you more than this; but I am most thank-
ful to be able to say that your son, in all he had to endure in the way of grief and
shame at wrongdoing, and in all that he had t0d0,,,, 4 ,,
has behaved in my opinion admirably.
He has now been, placed by the Bishop with me* and he resides with me in
my parsonage, and though ho has only been here yet a month, I can truly say
that both I and Mrs. have learnt to love him as a son ; and I shall have
the greatest pride and pleasure in training him for the work of the Church, for
which I think he shows a remarkable fitness.
By the last mail you will have already received a letter from him which I have
no doubt will have relieved your anxiety about him ; but I thought I would also
send you a line by this mail to make assurance doubly sure. With regard to him,
I often think of that text, " Whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth
every son whom He receiveth.” He seems already to have passed him through some
very severe trials, as if He were purifying and fitting him for some very good and
honourable work by and by. I pray that it may bo so, and I shall do all X can
that he may become all that you and the Church of God would wish him to be.
From the same.
May 14th, 1877.
The Bishop has* not at any time said to me positively that he intended
to ordain Mr. West in September; but only that he thought it probable,
and that much would depend upon himself whether, that is when ex-
amined, he was found sufficiently prepared. Something also may depend upon
whether he thinks he has any parish where he could place him when ordained.
For instance, I should like him to remain here at least till such time as he could
have a parish of his own; but then I am not sure this parish would make up a
stipend sufficient for him when ordained. As a Deacon he would have a right
to expect £l5O. Perhaps by the end of the year I might be able to arrange this
for him, so that he could remain here ; but I have never asked him whether he
himself would like this arrangement.
13


I shall always be glad to have any suggestion from you about him, because I
know you take a real interest in him, and you may believe that I do so also.
5. From a clergyman, No. 3.
20th Nov., 1877.
With regard to Mr. West, I may perhaps he allowed to know more of him
than anyone else in these parts, and I must say plainly that I never once found
him anything short of straightforward and truthful. He was with mo eighteen or
more months.
From the same.
August 24th, 1877.
Mr. West has been really doing the work of a clergyman in Newcastle, having
virtually solo charge of Stockton, and Canon Selwyn has stated to me that he is
invaluable to him. * * * Mr. West, I have occasion to know, is very popular
at Stockton as a preacher and visiting representative of the clergymen. He,
from his long residence in France, has what may seem to some a peculiar
mannerism, but is I am safe to say a gentleman and a Christian.
6. From a clergyman, No. 4.
24th Oct., 1877.
Having some little knowledge of Mr. West, and knowing that ho seemed rather
misunderstood at times, I was glad to hear of him, and in kind terms, so unex-
pectedly. The person to whom I refer was an officer on board the vessel
Mr. West was in. I had occasion to visit him a few months back, when he ex-
pressed great admiration for Mr. West, saying he had gone through much
ainoitg the ship’s company for conscience sake; and by his zeal and his consist-
ency had excited the aversion of some young men, against whom my informant
often defended him. He seemed to have renewed his acquaintance with him
again at Newcastle more recently. He said Mr. West was much esteemed by
the sailors at that port.
7. From a clergyman, No. 5.
Oct. 4, 1877.
From all I have seen of Mr. West I think he may bo safely recommended
to any Bishop as a candidate for Orders or for catechist’s work. He seemed to
me earnest and thoughtful, with a good deal of capacity for work. I have heard
him very highly spoken of by certain ex-parishioners of mine now resident in
Stockton, whom I consider well qualified to form an opinion, inasmuch as they
are personally earnest and devoted persons and are active churchworkers. I
believe that when he has passed the usual time of probation—which his foreign
education makes the more necessary in his case—he gives promise of being a
devoted and intelligent labourer in the work of the ministry.
8. From a clergyman, No. C.
10th Nov., 1877.
My acquaintance with Mr. West commenced when he came to see me after
service, and speak of the sermon he had just heard. I saw him several times and
we were all pleased with him ; and we thought him a bright young Christian,
quite simple in some things, very shrewd and sensible in others. His French
education had rendered him unable at times to express himself very well in
English. Upon his return to the colony we saw him often for a few weeks.
9. From a correspondent, No. 1.
Singleton, Nov. 8, 1877.
From what I saw of Mr. West I considered him to be a very gentlemanly and
well-conducted young man.
14


10. From a correspondent, No. 2.
Singleton, 12th Nov., 1877.
In answer to your note requesting information respecting Mr. A. B. S. West,
I beg to inform you that during the time Mr. West was in Singleton ho was very
energetic in church and school matters.
11. From a correspondent, No. 3.
Singleton, 14th Nov., 1877.
During Mr. West’s residence here ho was, I believe, attentive and energetic in
the discharge of his duties.
12. From a correspondent, No. 4.
Nov. 20, 1876.
My Dear West, —I never knew you to do anything unworthy of a gentleman
or of your cloth.
You were no doubt placed in a very trying position at from
no fault of yours, and had a hard and disagreeable game to play. If, how-
ever, you have the approval of your own conscience, you are young enough to live
down the trumpery tattle of a wicked world. You no doubt sought and obtained
sound advice from Mr. Boss in your difficulties. He is indeed your friend.
13. From a correspondent, No. 5.
Nov. 24th, 1877.
You request my opinion of Mr. West who at one time resided at
I certainly know Mr. West, who at times visited my house, and all I can say of
him is that at all times he conducted himself as a gentleman.
14. From a published official document of the Diocese of Newcastle.
For the first six months of the year the incumbent was assisted by the Eev.
J. J. Grime. * * * For the second six months Mr. A. S. West has resided
with the incumbent as a candidate for Orders, assisting most usefully in giving
instruction in the Church and Public Schools, and taking entirely the Sunday
evening service at Stockton. The congregation there has largely increased, and
the offertories are more than double what they were last year. He visits also
regularly the hospital and shipping, and has been the means of inducing many
to attend Church services.
15. From a correspondeht, No. 6.
Newcastle, sth Oct., 1877.
My Lord, —I have known Mr. West for the last four years. For plain practical
good he is eminently qualified to earn respect as a clergyman. For the last some
fourteen months ho has had charge of a little cfiureh at North Shore, Newcastle, fre-
quented by seafaring people and others, mostly of the humbler class. J have on
several Sundays gone to hear him preach, and his sermons have been suitable
and appropriate, plain and practical, delivered with a clear voice and in an earnest
and forcible manner. I heard his farewell sermon on Sunday last and was much
pleased with it. Mr. West has been much in France ; but ho has almost entirely
lost his French accent in the pulpit. In what I may call his parish duties, visit-
ing the sick, calling on his congregation, and so forth, Mr. West has been very
successful indeed. His kindly and familiar ways have been very taking at North
Shore, and he has been the means of drawing many to Church who would not
otherwise have gone. He is much respected; has made himself well acquainted
with the people, their ways, and their wants; and by kindly advice and a word
in season has done much good.
As a stranger to your Lordship I may add that I am a graduate of the
University of Aberdeen.
15


16. From the late Mayor of Newcastle, No. 7.
Newcastle, 12th Nov., 1877.
My Lord, —I have been favoured with your note of the Bth, asking my
opinion of Mr. 'West as a candidate for Holy Orders.
I have known Mr. West only during his sojourn in Newcastle, I think about
eighteen mouths ; but during that time I saw a good deal of him. My favourable
opinion of his fitness for the sacred calling ho aspired to, increased with our inti-
maey. I shall be extremely disappointed if, admitted to Holy Orders, should he
not be a zealous, orthodox, and sincere minister of Christ. Expressing myself
thus, I feel assured that I echo the sentiments of a large section of the parishioners
here, to whom Mr. West has endeared himself.
17. From a correspondent, No. 8.
Stockton, Newcastle,
10th Nov., 1877.
I am in receipt of yours of the 6th, asking my candid opinion of Mr. A. B. S.
West. I have the pleasure to tell you that I have never seen anything wrong in
the gentleman; in fact he was getting quite in favour with the inhabitants of
this place, which you will see in a few days by an address they are present-
ing him with.
18. From a correspondent, No. 9.
Stockton, Nov. 12,1877.
In answer to a note referring to Mr. West, a testimonial, which will arrive
shortly, will show the estimation in which he was held by the people of Stockton.
19. From a correspondent, No. 10.
Newcastle, Jl3th Nov., 1877.
1 am duly in receipt of your letter requesting my opinion of Mr. West’s
character, which I will give with all Christian truthfulness. We have known Mr.
West more intimately perhaps than any family in Newcastle. I think he has
good Christian principles at heart. His manners are gentlemanly. lam sure
he has a desire to preach’the true gospel and to win souls to Christ, and will
work hard for this end.
From a correspondent, No. 11.
My opinions are the same as No. 10. Newcastle, 13th Nov., 1877.
20. From a correspondent, No. 12.
I feel that lam taking a great liberty in addressing you; but I hope you will
forgive me when I tell you that I cannot help feeling anxious about my young
friend Mr. West. I have most perfect confidence in him, and I know him
better than,many. His nature seems to be so inoffensive. . I have always
known him as a God-fearing Christian young gentleman, and the patient,
charitable spiritin which he has borne his troubles hasmado me take a deep interest
in him. I hope his trusting spirit is not giving way under too much pressure.
From the Newcastle papers.
21. Testimonial to Me. A. B. S. West.
Few of those who have ministered in St. Paul’s Church at Stockton have so won
the good opinions of the community in so short a period, and have left behind
them so deep a feeling of regret, as Mr. West, late assistant to the Bev. Canon
Selwyn. Whilst residing in our midst Mr. West gained many friends by his
general urbanity and Christian-like conduct. The energy he displayed in the
16


cause of Christ was the means of adding in no small degree to the success of the
church for which he labored. After his departure some of his friends held a
meeting with a view of making a presentation to him, and it was ultimately de-
cided upon that the testimonial should take the form of an address, illuminated
andframed. The work was entrusted to Mr. E. Buxton, who succeeded in producing
an address which was admired by all who had the opportunity of inspecting such
a work of art. The address, of which a copy is annexed, was sent on to Gonl-
bum to Mr. West, and is as follows, with the reply thereto:—
[Addeess.]
Presented on behalf of the parishioners of St. Paul’s Church, Stockton,
diocese of Newcastle, to A. Benjamin Sackville West, on the eve of his departure
to Goulbum, as a token of the estimation of his worth and in consideration of
his having fulfilled the duties of his office faithfully and earnestly to his Great
Master, and in the hope that he may be long spared to exercise his spirit of use-
fulness at the scenes of his future labors.
[Eepi/i.]
To the Parishioners of St. Paul’s, Stockton.
Dear Friends, —I have received with most grateful feelings your kind expres-
sion of appreciation of my honest endeavours to discharge the duties devolving
upon me while connected with St. Paul’s, Stockton.
My intercourse with you will ever he to me pleasant to recall, and I trust we
shall all be able to say when we meet before Christ our Judge, that we have not
been the worse but the better for having known each other.
Accept my heartfelt thanks for the beautiful address you have sent me. It
will always be a memento of Stockton which I shall prize very much. With
kind wishes for you all,
: I am, yours affectionately,
A. B. S. West.
22. From a correspondent, No. 13.
Stockton, November 16,1877.
• I send you a copy of the address that is to he sent to Mr, West this day. It
is highly got up by one of the Newcastle artists with gilt frame. I have added
my name, and N and H-- ■■ to the copy I send you. If the address that
is sent to Mr. West could have contained names, I am sure the whole of Stock-
ton would have signed it. The Bishop of Goulbum has sent several letters to
Stockton asking their candid opinion of Mr. West, and they returned favorable
answers. I was not aware he had one enemy in Newcastle, as I always found
him doing good to anyone in need of help.
23. From a correspondent, No. 14.
Stockton, November 17, 1877.
I have this day forwarded the address presented to you by the parishioners of
St, Paul’s, Stockton ; which I hope will come safe to hand. It will testify that
while labouring amongst us you conducted yourself as a gentleman, and a
Christian, But I think there must be some undermining work going on some-
where ;as Mr. had a letter asking some particulars about you. So. Mr.
showed me the letter, and wished me to send a copy of the address which I did,
and also mostly all the signatures of Stockton attached to it. So you can see
the esteem in which you are held with us still—and ever will be. It is as the old
song says— ,f absence makes the heart grow fonder.”
24. From a correspondent, No. 15.
_ Newcastle, November 22,1877.
# ? a *if ri i n • was ear th y° u had found the glasses and compass
useful, they being the most appropriate things we could give you before you left


Newcastle. Tour address has been finished and exhibited in one of the windows
at North'Shore for a week, so as to let the people residing there see it.
- 25. From a correspondent, No. 16.
If this be not intruding, I would like to say that I was only too glad to
give my naine to the testimonial to Mr. West, and show that I did esteem him.
What I have seen of Mr. W. has been a hard-working persevering man, and
gentlemanly in every respect. I can truly say I wish him well.
26. From the Lord Bishop of Newcastle.
27th April, 1877.
Mr. West is going on very nicely, and his friends should be well satisfied with
his present position.
27. From Mr. West.
Christ Church, Newcastle, Sept. 17,1877.
My Lord, —I beg to inform you that I have this day forwarded my resignation
to the Bishop of Newcastle, and that my arrangements with -Canon Selwyn will
allow of my leaving this Diocese at the end of this month, after which date I shall
be prepared to leave f6r the Diocese of Goulbum if your Lordship can kindly
find employment for m& at any time that you may appoint. ■.
A. B. S. West.
28. From the Lord Bishop of Newcastle.
September’2oth, 1877.
Would you inform Mr. West that I mate no objection to his proposed resig-
nation, and will reply favorably to any inquiries which the Bishop of Goulbum
may make of me respecting him.
To the Rev. Canon Selwya.
Printed by W. R. Riley, Herald Steam Printing Works, Aubam-street, Gonlbnm.
18




