

. ■ * M
• ■ . . .
0 R PRIVATE CIRCULATION ONLY.
. ; ‘f O j
TESTIMONIALS J * J
. \
. Marmaduke Rose,
M. 8., CM.,
PAN O PAT H I ST,
CONSULTING PHYSICIAN AND SURGEON.
Graduate, with Honours, EoiNByRGH University ;
University Resident Surgeon, Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, to Professor
Spence, Surgeon to the Queen ;
Formerly Demonstrator of Anatomy and Acting Lecturer on Systematic
Anatomy at Royal College of Surgeons, Edinburgh ;
ing Lecturer on Dental Anatomy, Physiology, Surgery, Pathology, &c.
TO SOME OF THE PRINCIPAL EDINBURGH DENTISTS, AT DeNTAI*
Hospital and School of Dentistry, Edinburgh
Acting Surgeon and Physician to Royal 'Surrey County Hospital,
England;
Private Tutor for the Medical, Surgical, and Dental Diplomas of
Universities and Colleges, London, Edinburgh,
and Glasgow, &c.
5 QUEEN STREET, MELBOURNE.
of Consultation - - - i to 2 p.m.
„ „ - 6.30 to 7.30 P.M.,
Or by Letter. Telphone 785.
Sands £' McDou»all Limited, Printers , Melbourne.




FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION ONLY.
TESTIMONIALS
J. Marmaduke Rose,
M. 8., C.M.,
PAN O PAT HIST,
CONSULTING PHYSICIAN AND SURGEON.
Graduate, with Honours, Edinburgh University;
First University Resident Surgeon, Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, to Professor
Spence, Surgeon to the Queen ;
Formerly Demonstrator of Anatomy and Acting Lecturer on Systematic
Anatomy at Royal College of Surgeons, Edinburgh ;
Acting Lecturer on Dental Anatomy, Physiology, Surgery, Pathology, &c.,
to some of the Principal F.dinburgh Dentists, at Dental
Hospital and School of Dentistry, Edinburgh ;
Acting Surgeon and Physician to Royal Surrey County Hospital,
England;
Private Tutor for the Medical, Surgical, and Dental Diplomas of
Universities and Cglleges, London, Edinburgh,
and Glasgow, &c.
375 QUEEN STREET, MELBOURNE
Hours of Consultation - - - i to 2 p.m.
6.30 to 7.30 P.M.,
Or by Letter. Telphone 785.




PREFACE.
Dr. J. Marmaduke Rose, who is the founder of a new
system of treatment, which he.has designated “Panopathy,”
has discovered several methods of treating successfully
the different diseases which afflict the human system. He
was led to these discoveries by the unsatisfactory state
of medical science, both when lecturing to the medical
students, and in hospital and private practice. According
to the old system there was so much uncertainty, and, as
a rule, in some of the chronic and more severe diseases,
such as cancer and other tumors, bleeding from the lungs,
asthma, consumption, gangrene, hydatids, fatty, weak and
irregular hearts, gout, rheumatics, sciatica, diabetes, liver
and stomach troubles, acute croup, diphtheria, and many
nerve and skin diseases, apparently no certain cure,
but frequently either lingering misery or death ; that to
visit such cases was a source of torture to any sensitive
medical man.
To see the strong and beautiful child cut off in a few
hours, and to be almost helpless to save, was terrible. Not
only so, but questions being continually asked by the
inquiring students, of whom he taught over a thousand,
still more revealed how widely defective was the old
system of treatment, and, in many instances, how irrational
and injurious.


PREFACE.
Numbers of cases that were operated on under the old
system may be, and are cured under the new without
operation.
Cases which, under the old system, resulted in a long
illness, are now speedily cured, instead of leaving the
system weak and life but a misery.
Of course, there are some cases so destroyed by
irrational drugging, long neglect, and absolute destruction
of organs, that they can only be relieved.
Diseases of children are treated quite differently to
the old system, and diseases of women, a frequent source
of misery and premature age, are cured without much
expense.
The secret diseases of young men are especially a
prolific source of income to designing practitioners, fre-
quently ruining them in body and mind; these are
rapidly cured by the new system.
This little pamphlet is printed in response to numerous
requests from grateful patients who have been cured, and
who are anxious to encourage and benefit their fellow
sufferers.


IN D E
From James Spence, Esq., F.R.C.S.E., F.R.S.E., Surgeon-in-
Ordinary to 11. M. the Queen for Scotland ; Professor of Surgery,
Edinburgh University; Senior Surgeon, Edinburgh Royal
Infirmary; Consulting Surgeon, Royal Dispensary, Royal
Hospital for Sick Children, Leith Hospital, and Edinburgh
Dental Dispensary, etc. ... ... ... ... ••• I
From Douglas Maclagan, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.E., Professor
of Medical Jurisprudence and Clinical Medicine, University of
Edinburgh; Physician to Royal Infirmary; Surgeon-General,
Queen’s Body Guard for Scotland, etc. ... ... ... 2
From Alex. Crum Brown, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.E., F.R.S.E.,
F.R.S.L., Professor of Chemistry, Edinburgh University, etc.... 3
From William Turner, Esq., M.B. Lon., F.R.C.S.E.,
M. R.C.S.E., F. R.S. Edin., F.R.S. Eng., Professor of Anatomy,
Edinburgh University and Royal Scottish Academy ; late Dean
of the Medical Faculty, Edinburgh University ; Examiner in
Anatomy, London University; and Lecturer on Anatomy and
Physiology, Royal College of Surgeons, England ... ... 4
From Alex. R. Simpson, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.E., F.R.S. E.,
Professor of Midwifery and Diseases of Women and Children,
Edinburgh University ; Physician, Royal Infirmary, and Royal
Maternity, and Simpson Memorial Hospitals, etc. ... ... 5
From T. Grainger Stewart, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.E.,
F. R. S. E,, Professor of Practice of Physic, Edinburgh University;
Physician to Royal Infirmary, etc. ... ... ... ... 6
From Thomas Annandai.e, Esq., F.R.C.S.E., M.R.C.S. Eng.,
F.R.S.E., Regius Professor of Clinical Surgery, Edinburgh
University; Surgeon, Edinburgh, Royal Infirmary ... ... 7
From Thomas Richard Fraser, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.E.,
F'.R.S.L. et E. ; Dean of the Medical F’aculty, and Professor
of Materia Medicaand Clinical Medicine, Edinburgh University;
Corresponding Member, Therapeutic Society, Paris; Corres-
ponding Member, Acad. Nat. Soc., Philadelphia ; Examiner on
Public Health, University of London ... ... ... 8
From David J. Hamilton, Esq., M. 8., L.R.C.P.E., F.R.C.S.E.,
Acting-Professor of Pathology, Edinburgh University; Patholo-
gist, Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, etc. ... ... ... 9
A ' The above Nine Professors are also Examiners in the University of Edinburgh.


X. From Patrick Heron Watson, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S.E.,
F.R.S.E., Ex-President of Royal College of Surgeons, Edin-
burgh ; Lecturer on Systematic Surgery, Examiner, Royal
College of Surgeons, Edinburgh ; and Examiner in Surgery in
University of St. Andrews and Royal College of Physicians,
Edinburgh; Surgeon, Royal Infirmary, Chalmers Hospital,
Eye Infirmary, etc. ... ... ... ... ... 10
XI. From P. D. Handyside, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S.E., F.R.S.E.,
Lecturer on Anatomy, and Examiner R.C.S.E.; late Senior
Surgeon, Royal Infirmary; and Senior President, Royal Medical
Society, etc. ... ... ... ... ... ... n
XII. From Alexander Keiller, Esq., M.D., F.R.C. P.E., F.R.S.E.,
etc., Fellow, Obstetric Society, Edinburgh ; Honourable Fellow,
Obstetric Society, London ; Consulting Physician for Diseases
of Women, Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh ; Consulting Obstetric
Physician, Royal Dispensary; Examinerin Midwifery, Edinburgh
University; Physician, Royal Maternity Hospital ; Lecturer on
Midwifery and Diseases of Women and Children, Surgeons’ Hall,
Edinburgh, etc. ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
XIII. From Joseph Bell, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S.E., F.R.S.E.,
Lecturer on Clinical Surgery, and Examiner, R.C.S.E. ; Sec.
and Treasurer, R.C.S.E.; late President of the Royal Medical
and Medical Chir. Societies, Edinburgh ; Surgeon to the Royal
Infirmary, Edinburgh, and to the Edinburgh Eye Infirmary, etc. 13
XIV. From John Duncan, Esq., M.A., M.D., F.R.C.S.E., F.R.S.E.,
Lecturer on Surgery, and Examiner, R.C.S.E.; Surgeon to the
Edinburgh Royal Infirmary ; late President of Royal Medical
Society, etc ... 14
XV. From John Chiene, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S.E., F.R.S.E.,
Lecturer on Surgery, Edinburgh School of Medicine; Surgeon
Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh; Examiner, Unversity of Edin-
burgh; Surgeon, Edinburgh Ear Dispensary, etc. ... ... 15
XVI. From Argyll Robertson, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S.E., F.R.S.E.,
Ophthalmic Surgeon, Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, and to Royal
Hospital for Sick Children ; Examiner, R.C.S.E.; Lecturer on
Eye Diseases, to the Edinburgh Medical School; Surgeon to the
Edinburgh Blind Asylum, and Edinburgh Eye Dispensary, etc. 16
XVII. From John Wyllie, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.E., M.R.C.S. Eng.,
Secretary to the Royal College of Physicians, Edinburgh;
Lecturer on Practice of Medicine, School of Medicine, Edin-
burgh; Assistant Physician, Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, etc.... 17
XVIII. From Stevenson Macadam, Esq., Ph.D., F.R.S.E., Lecturer
on Chemistry ; Secretary to the School of Medicine; Analytical
Chemist, Examiner, and Secretary to the Royal College of
Surgeons, Edinburgh, etc. ... ... ... ... 18
XIX. From J. Symington,Esq., M. 8., C.M., F.R.C.S.E., Lecturer
on Anatomy, School of Medicine, Edinburgh, etc. ... ... 19
XX. From Francis Walter Moinet, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.E.,
F.R.S.E., Lecturer on Materia Medica and Therapeutics,
Surgeons’ Hall, Edinburgh ; Physician, Royal Dispensary, etc.... 20


INDEX.
XXI. From A. G. Miller, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S.E., Lecturer on i
Surgery, and Senior Assistant-Surgeon, Edinburgh Royal
Infirmary, etc. ... ... ... ... ... ... 21
XXII. From Alexander James, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.E., Lecturer
on Institutes of Medicine, and Clinical Medical Tutor, Edin-
burgh School of Medicine, etc. ... ... ... ... 22
XXIII. From J. Murdoch Brown, Esq., M. 8., C.M., F.R.C.P.E.,
Clinical Medicine Tutor, University of Edinburgh, etc. ... 23
XXIV. From David Berry Hart, Esq., M.D., F.R.C. P.E.,
Assistant to the Professor of Midwifery, University of Edinburgh;
Syme Surgical Fellow; Secretary to the Edinburgh Obstetric
Society ; late President, Royal Medical Society, Edinburgh, etc. 24
XXV. From J. M. Cotterill, Esq., M. 8., F.R.C.S.E., Clinical
Tutor of Surgery in the University of Edinburgh ... ... 25
XXVI. From John Bishop, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S.E., Assistant
Surgeon, Royal Infirmary, etc. ... ... ... ... 26
XXVII. From Petek Hume Maclaren, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S. Edin.
et Lond., Surgeon, Convalescent Hospital; Assistant Surgeon,
Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh ... ... ... ... 27
XXVIII. From William Taylor, Esq., M.D., Senior Assistant to
Professor of Surgery, Edinburgh University ; Fellow of Obstetric
Society, etc. ... ... ... ... ... ... 28
XXIX. From Daniel John Cunningham, Esq., M.D., F.R.S.E.,
etc., Senior Demonstrator of Anatomy, Edinburgh University;
Professor of Physiology, Royal Veterinary College, Edinburgh... 29
XXX. From John B. Haycraft, Esq., M. 8., B.Sc., F.R.S.E.,
etc., Senior Demonstrator of Physiology, Edinburgh University,
etc. ... ... ... ... ... ... 3°
XXXI. From James Allan Gray, Esq., M.A., M.D., M.R.C.P.E.,
Assistant to Professor of Medical Jurisprudence, Edinburgh
University ; Surgeon to Leith Hospital, etc. ... ... 31
XXXII. From R. J. Blair Cunynghame, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S.E.,
F.R.S.E., Examiner, Royal College of Surgeons, Edinburgh;
Physician to Royal Hospital for Sick Childreu ; Surgeon, Ear
Dispensary, etc.... ... ... ... ... ... 3 2
XXXIII. From William Husband, Esq., M.A., M.D., F.R.C.S.E.,
Physician, Royal Public Dispensary; Superintendent, Central
Vaccine Institution for Scotland .. ... ... ... 33
XXXIV. From John Lowe, Esq., F.R.C.S.E., Superintendent,
Edinburgh Medical Missionary Society’s Training Institution,
etc. ... ... ... ... ••• 34
XXXV. From Charles H. Fasson, Esq., Deputy Surgeon-General;
Superintendent, Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh ... ... 35
XXXVI. From T. M. Butler, Esq., M.R.C.S. Eng., Honorable
Medical Officer, Royal Surrey County Hospital, etc.... ... 36


XXXVII. From Charles J. Sells, Esq., L.R.C.P. Lon., M.R.C.S.
Eng., Medical Officer, Royal Surrey County Hospital; Surgeon,
Abbots Hospital, Guildford, etc. ... ... ... ... 37
XXXVIII. From Henry S. Taylor, Esq., F.R.C.S. Eng., Consulting
Surgeon, Royal Surrey County Hospital, etc. ... ... 38
XXXIX. From Rev. D. Macmillan, M.A., M. 8., C.M., Edinburgh 39
XL. From John Smith, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S.E., F.R.S.E.,
Surgeon-Dentist to the Queen in Scotland ; Examiner, Royal
College of Surgeons, Edinburgh ; Dental Surgeon, Royal
Infirmary, etc. ... ... ... ... ... ... 40
XLI. From William Bowman Macleod, Esq., L.D.S.R.C.S.E.,
Dean of the Dental Faculty, and Lecturer on Mechanical
Dentistry, and Surgeon-Dentist to Edinburgh Dental Hospital
and School ... ... ... ... ... ... 41
XLH. From Andrew Wilson, Esq., L.D.S.R.C.S.E., Lecturer
on Dental Anatomy aud Physiology, and Surgeon-Dentist to
Edinburgh Dental Hospital and School; Examiner for Diploma
of L.D.S.R.C.S.E. ... ... ... ... ... 42
XLIII. From Charles Matthew,Esq., L.D.S.R.C.S.E., Lecturer;
Surgeon-Dentist to Edinburgh Dental Hospital and School ... 43
XLIV. From G. W. Watson, Esq., L.D.S.R.C.S.E., Lecturer on
Dental Surgery and Pathology, and Surgeon-Dentist to Edin-
burgh Dental Hospital and School... ... ... ... 44
XLV. From Alexander Cormack, Esq., L.D.S.R.C.S.E.,
Dental Surgeon to Edinburgh Dental Hospital and School of
Dentistry ... ... ... ... ... ... 45
XLVI. From Malcolm Macgregor, Esq., L.D.S.R.C.S.E.,
Surgeon-Dentist to Edinburgh Dental Hospital and School ... 46
XLVH. From L. Salloncki Platt, Esq., L.D.S.R.C.S.E., Stirling 47
XLVIII. Testimonial from the Medical Students of the Royal
College of Surgeons, Edinburgh ... ... ... ... 48
XLIX. From Rev. John Cairns, D.D., Professor of Divinity and
Principal of United Presbyterian College for Scotland, etc. ... 49
L. Falling of Bowel, and Bleeding therefrom ... ... 5°
LI. Enlarged and Stiff Joints ... ... ... ... 51
LH. Decayed Bone in Toe—Formation of New Toe ... ... 52
LIH. Success of Operation ... ... . ... ... 53
LIV. Diseased Bone in Ankle ... ... ... ... 54
LV. General Nerve Debility ... ... ... ... 55
LVI. Cancer of Nose ... ... ... ... ... 56
LVII. Piles (Hemorrhoids) ... ... ... ... ... 57
LVIII. Stone in Bladder (cured in fourteen days),.. ... ... 58


LX. Bad Leg ... ... ... ... .. ... 60
LXI. General Treatment ... ... • ... ... ... 61
LXII. Nervous Debility ... ... ... ... ... 62
LXIII. Consumption... ... ... ... ... ... 63
LXIV. Knee Joint Disease and Swelling of Thigh ... ... 64
LXV. Watery Blood (Anaemia) ... ... ... ... 65
LXVL Severe and Protracted Disease of Knee Joint ... ... 66
LXVII. Congestion at Base of Brain .. ... ... ... 67
LXVIII. Hydatids of Lung ... ... ... ... ... 68
LXIX. Consumption,.. ... ... ... ... ..69
LXX. Spine and Skin Disease, Dropsy, Asthma, Removal of
Tonsils, Construction of Throat, Mortification and Amputation
of Limbs ... ... ... ... ... 70-71
LXXI. Chronic Inflammation of Bladder ... ... ... 72
LXXII. Severe Blood Poisoning ; Extensive Disease of Leg, Knee,
and Thigh ... ... ... ... ... ... 73
LXXIII. Stone in the Bladder (weighing JJlb.) ... ... ... 74
LXXIV. Tumor in Cheek ... ... ... ... •••75
LXXV. Diphtheria ... ... .. ••• •■• ... 76
LXXVI. Typhoid Fever with Severe Haemorrhage ... ... 77
LXXVII. Crushed Foot ... ... ... ... ... 78
LXXVIII. Brain Fever, Pleurisy, Inflammation of Bowels ... ... 79
LXXIX. Haemorrhage from the Lungs ... ... ... 80-81
LXXX. Internal Haemorrhage, Dropsy, Anaemia ... ... ... 82
LXXXI. Bronchitis, Congestion, Gangrene of the Lungs ... ... 83
LXXXII. Consumption... ... ... ... ... 84-85
LXXXIII. Pleurisy, Inflammation of the Stomach, Diarrhoea... ... 86
LXXXIV. Gangrene of the Lungs ... ... . ... 87
LXXXV. Consumption ... ... ... ••• ••• 88




TESTIMONIALS.
From James Spence, Esq., F.R.C.S.E., F.R.S.E., Surgeon-in-
Ordinary to Her Majesty the Queen for Scotland; Professor of
Surgery, Edinburgh University; Senior Surgeon, Edinburgh
Royal Infirmary; Consulting Surgeon to Royal Dispensary,
Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Leith Hospital, and Edin-
burgh Dental Dispensary, &c.
University of Edinburgh,
Bth March, 1881.
I have very great pleasure in bearing my testimony in favour
of Mr. Marmaduke Rose, M.B. and C.M. Edin.
Mr. Rose was a most diligent student of his profession, and a
most successful one. He long acted as Demonstrator of Anatomy
to my late friend, Dr. Handyside, who, I know, held him in great
esteem. He was a pupil of my surgical classes, and subsequently
acted as my Assistant in the class of Operative Surgery, and also
assisted in teaching the Bandaging Class. From what I saw of
Mr. Rose’s work, and the thorough knowledge he possessed of
surgery, he was, on my recommendation, appointed as Resident
Surgeon to my wards in the Royal Infirmary, and discharged the
important duties of that office to my most entire satisfaction, until
recently, when the state of his health laid him aside. I have thus
had many opportunities of judging of Mr. Rose’s abilities and
attainments, and I have a very high opinion of both. Whilst, as
regards his earnestness in his work, and his general bearing, the
more I have seen of him the more he has gained my esteem and
confidence, and I feel satisfied, that, in whatever position he may
be placed, he will gain the esteem of all with whom he is
connected.
JAMES SPENCE, F.R.S.E., F.R.C.S.E.,
Surgeon-in-Ordinary to the Queen in Scotland;
Professor of Surgery, Edinburgh University ;
Senior Surgeon, Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, &c. , &c


From Douglas Maclagan, Esq.. M.D., F.R.C.P.E., Professor of
Medical Jurisprudence and Clinical Medicine , University of
Edinburgh; Physician to Royal Infirmary; Surgeon-General. ,
Qiceeiis Body Guardfor Scotland , arc.
University of Edinburgh,
Bth March, 1881.
I have very great pleasure in bearing testimony to the high
professional acquirements of Mr. J. Marmaduke Rose, M.B. and
C.M. of this University.
Mr, Rose is known to me as having been a most diligent and
earnest student in my class of Medical Jurisprudence and Public
Health, as well as in the class of Clinical Medicine, and indeed, I
may add, in all his other classes, as was manifested by the
appearances which he made at his examinations, which resulted in
his taking his degree with honours.
Mr. Rose has enjoyed, and duly availed himself of, the ample
opportunities which his Medical School affords of adding practical
knowledge to his large scientific attainments. From my knowledge
of him I am enabled to state my conviction that wherever he may
enter on the work of his profession he will show himself to be an
erudite and efficient medical man.
DOUGLAS MACLAGAN.


From Alex. Crum Brown, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.E., F.R.S.E.,
F.R S.L., Professor of Chemistry , Edinburgh University , <Fc.
University of Edinburgh,
iBth March, 1881.
I have known Mr. J. Marmaduke Rose since 1876, when
he was a student in my class of Chemistry. He was a very
diligent and successful student, obtaining very high marks in the
written examinations, and, in conversation on scientific subjects,
showing an unusual penetration and real understanding of the
subject. From the reports of his examinations in other classes,
and also of the degree examinations, as well as from what I have
heard from my colleagues, I know that he was equally successful
in acquiring a sound and thoroughly scientific knowledge of the
other branches of a medical education. He graduated with
honours, as Bachelor of Medicine and Master of Surgery, last
year. From all that I have seen of Mr. Rose, I have formed a
very high opinion of his character, of his ability, of his attainments,
and of fitness to occupy a high place in his profession.
ALEX. CRUM BROWN,
Professor of Chemistry.


from William Turner, Esq., M.B. London, F.R.C.S.E.,
M.R.C.S.E., F.R.S. Edin., F.R.S. Eng., Professor of Anatomy,
Edinburgh University and Royal Scottish Academy; late Dean
of the Medical Faculty , Edinburgh University; Examiner in
Anatomy, Londo?t University; and Lecturer on Anatomy and
Physiology, Royal College of Surgeons, England.
University of Edinburgh.
igth March, 1881.
The Rev. J. Marmaduke Rose, M.B. and C.M., was a
member of my class during the winter session 1875-76. I have
reason to think highly of his abilities and power of work. He has
enjoyed excellent opportunities of becoming acquainted with his
profession of medicine, in both its scientific and practical aspects,
and I believe him to be well qualified to discharge the duties of a
medical or surgical appointment.
WM. TURNER, M. 8., F.R.S.,
Professor of Anatomy.


From Alex. R. Simpson, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.E., F.R.S.E.,
Professor of Midwifery and Diseases of Women and Children,
Edinburgh University; Physician, Royal Infirmary, and
Royal Maternity, and Simpson Memorial Hospitals, &*c.
52 Queen Street,
Edinburgh, 24th February, 1881.
I have great pleasure in testifying to the eminent ability
displayed by the Rev. Marmaduke Rose, M. 8., as a student of
medicine in the University of Edinburgh. He was one of the
most intelligent and industrious students in my own department,
and worked with much zeal and success alike in the Systematic
and Practical Classes and in the Maternity and Infirmary Wards.
In other departments he must have studied with equal
devotion, for at his graduation examinations he stood among the
most distinguished men of his year.
I ought to add that his attractive personal character won him
here many friends, and that his influence among his fellow-
students was in every way healthful.
ALEX, R. SIMPSON.


From T. Grainger Stewart, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.E., F.R.S.E.,
Professor of Practice of Physic , Edinburgh University;
Physician to Royal Infirmary, <Uc.
University of Edinburgh,
25th February, 1881.
I have much pleasure in certifying that Mr. Marmaduke
Rose, M.B. and C.M., is well known to me; that he is one
of the most distinguished of the recent graduates of this
University, and was, throughout his whole course of study, among
the most diligent and able of the students; that he has, since his
graduation, acted as House Surgeon in the Royal Infirmary; and,
before that time, as Demonstrator of Anatomy at the Surgeons’
Hall. His character, ability, and attainments alike satisfy me
that, wherever he may ultimately settle, he will take a foremost
place in the profession.
T. GRAINGER STEWART, M.D.,
Professor of the Practice of Physic.


From Thomas Annandale, Esq., F.R.C.S.E, M.R.C.S. Eng.,
F.R.S.E.; Regius Professor of Clinical Surgery , Edinburgh
University ; Surgeo?i, Edinburgh Royal Infirmary.
34 Charlotte Square,
Edinburgh, 28th February, 1881.
Mr. Marmaduke Rose, M. 8., is known to me as a most
earnest and successful student, and distinguished graduate of this
University. Having had constant opportunities of observing his
work and progress, I testify with the greatest confidence to his
abilities and excellent practical knowledge of his profession. I
consider him to be a well-educated and highly-qualified practitioner
of medicine.
THOMAS ANNANDALE.


From Thomas Richard Fraser, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.E.,
F.R.S.L. et E., Dean of the Medical Faculty, and Professor of
Materia Medica and Clinical Medicine, Edinburgh University;
Corresponding Member, Therapeutic Society, Paris; Cor-
responding Member, Acad. Nat. Soc., Philadelphia ; Examiner
on Public Health, University of London.
University of Edinburgh,
12th March, 1881.
While the Rev. J. Marmaduke Rose, M.B. and C.M., studied
medicine in Edinburgh, I had ample opportunity to observe his
great industry and to form a high opinion of his ability.
He was a distinguished student, and graduated with honours.
His excellent qualifications led to his being appointed Demon-
strator of Anatomy to the late Dr. Handyside, and Resident
Surgeon in the wards of Professor Spence, in the Royal Infirmary.
I have the greatest pleasure in stating that he is thoroughly
qualified to undertake the duties of a medical practitioner, and
that I believe that his personal characteristics will gain for him the
cordial esteem of everyone with whom he may be brought into
contact.
THOMAS R. FRASER, M.D., F R.S., F.R.C.P.E.
Professor of Materia Medica and of Clinical-
Medicine, and Dean of the Medical Faculty,
in the University of Edinbw gh.


From David James Hamilton, Esq., M. 8., L.R.C.P.E.,
F.R.C.S.E. ; Acting Professor of Pathology , Edinburgh
University ; Pathologist , Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh , arc.
13 Granville Terrace, Merchiston,
Edinburgh, 16th March, 1881
It gives me much pleasure to testify that Dr. Marmaduke
Rose has been, throughout his student career in Edinburgh, a
most distinguished alumnus of our University.
Since graduating, he has exceptional opportunities of
being initiated into the practice of his profession by holding the
distinguished position of House Surgeon to Professor Spence, in
the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary.
Having also been Demonstrator of Anatomy with Dr. Handy-
side in the College of Surgeons, he has thereby laid a sound
foundation for future achievements in medicine and surgery, and
would be well qualified to teach to others what he so well taught
to students of this school.
D. J. HAMILTON, M. 8., F.R.C.S.E., L.R.C.P.E.,
Demonstrator of Pathology , Edinburgh University ;
Pathologist to the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary;
and at presmt
Lecturer on Pathology, Edinburgh University.


From Patrick Heron Watson, Esq.,M.D., F.R.C.5.E.,F.R.5.E.,
Ex-President of Royal College of Surgeons, Edinburgh; Lecturer
on Systeniaiic Surgery, and Examiner, Royal College of
Surgeons, Edinburgh ; and Examiner in Surgery in Unive7-sity
of St. Andrews, and Royal College of Physicians, Edinburgh;
Surgeon, Royal Infirmary, Chalmers Hospital, Eye Infirmary,
&*c.
16 Charlotte Square,
Edinburgh.
I know Dr. Marmadukf. Rose to be a most highly-educated
practitioner, who has enjoyed opportunities of a most unusual kind
in perfecting himself in everything best calculated to form a
reliable surgeon.
He occupied, in the School of Medicine connected with the
College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, the important and responsible
post of Demonstrator of Anatomy; and, under the superintendence
of Dr. Handyside, taught anatomy with success and ability.
Dr. Rose has more recently been the Resident Surgeon in
the Royal Infirmary, under Professor Spence, and has thus become
familiar with the care of a large number of surgical cases of the
most varied and interesting nature.
He has thus matured his knowledge and judgment, and, at a
comparatively early age, become familiar with everything in
connection with surgery calculated to make him a most trustworthy
practitioner and a reliable teacher of his art.
I may, perhaps, further be permitted to say that Dr. Rose
possesses in himself those qualities of a personal kind which will
secure for him confidence and esteem wherever he may settle in
professional life.
PATRICK HERON WATSON,


From P. D. Handyside, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S.E., F.R.S.E.,
Lecturer on Anatomy , and Examiner R.C.S.E. ; late Senior
Surgeon , Royal Infirmary; and Senior President , Royal
Medical Society , &"c.
Edinburgh School of Medicine,
29th November, 1880.
Mr. J. Marmaduke Rose, M. 8., C.M., while a student of
medicine, pursued his studies in Anatomy under my super-
intendence. Fie acted subsequently as Demonstrator in my rooms
for a period upwards of two years, during the latter of which he
delivered, in my stead, seventeen lectures on Systematic Anatomy.
I entertain a high opinion of Mr. Rose’s abilities, and of his
distinguished success as a teacher. His marked general accomplish-
ments, his gentlemanly demeanour, and invariable maintenance of
the loftiest standard of moral conduct, single out Mr. Rose, in my
opinion, for a very honourable career as a professional brother.
P. D. HANDYSIDE, M.D., &c.


From Alexander Keiller, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.E., F.R.S.E.,
&c., Ex-President of Royal College of Physicians, England;
Fellow Obstetric Society, Edinburgh ; Honorable Fellow,
Obstetric Society, London; Consulting Physician for Diseases
of Women, Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh; Consulting Obstetric
Physician, Royal Dispensary; Examiner in Midwifery, Edin-
burgh University; Physician, Royal Maternity Hospital;
Lecturer on Midwifery and Diseases of Women and Children,
Surgeon’s Hall, Edinburgh, &-r.
21 Queen Street,
Edinburgh, 22nd March, 1881.
Having enjoyed ample opportunity of estimating the qualifica-
tions of Dr. Marmaduke Rose, it affords me great pleasure to
state that I have been led to entertain the highest opinion of his
character and professional acquirements. Dr. Rose was first
known to me when acting as the Demonstrator of Anatomy to my
colleague, the late Dr. Handyside, at the Medical School,
Surgeons’ Hall, where Dr. Rose was much esteemed. Sub-
sequently, as one of his examiners at the University, where he
passed with distinction and graduated with honours, I had
occasion to observe his successful merits, and, during his valuable
hospital experience, I know, from my friend Professor Spence,
that his duties as House Surgeon were admirably performed.
From his wisely considered and thoroughly practical training,
I believe Dr. Rose unusually well qualified to practice his
profession, and feel assured that he will at all times be found to
discharge ably and faithfully every duty he may be induced to
undertake.
ALEX. KEILLER, M.D., F.R.S.E.,
Ex-President R C.P.E.


From Joseph Bell, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S.E., F.R.S.E., Ledurer
on Clinical Surgery, and Examiner, E.C.S.E.; Secretary and
Treasurer, R.C.S.E.; Late President of the Royal Medical
and Medical Chir. Societies, Edinburgh; Surgeon to the
Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, and to the Edinburgh Eye
Infirmary, &>c.
20 Melville Street,
Edinburgh, 24th February, 1881.
Mr. Marmaduke Rose is well known to me, not only as a
most diligent student, dresser, and clerk, but also as a skilled
and enthusiastic teacher of anatomy, a most efficient, hardworking,
and zealous house surgeon, and a most competent and valuable
assistant at operations. I have seen much of his work is nearly
all the above capacities; and know him also to be a gentleman of
unblemished character and conduct, well fitted for the practice of
his profession in any sphere.
JOSEPH BELL.


From John Duncan, Esq., M.A., M.D., F.R.C.S.E., F.R.S.E.,
Lecturer on Surgery , and Examiner R.C.S.E.; Surgeon to
the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary; late President of Royal
Medical Society , Snc.
8 Ainsi.ie Place,
2nd March, 1881.
I have much pleasure in stating that Ur. Rose has been
known to me for some time as a distinguished student of this
school. He has graduated with honours, and has discharged
with ability and success the duties of Demonstrator of Anatomy
and of Resident Surgeon in the Infirmary. I believe him to be
well qualified for his work in the profession.
JOHN DUNCAN, M.A., F.R.C.S.E., &c.,
Surgeon to the Royal Infirmary ,
Lecturer on Surgery.


From John Chiene, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S.E., F.R.S.E., Lecturer
on Surgery, Edinburgh School of Medicine; Surgeon , Royal
Infirmary, Edinburgh ; Examiner, University of Edinburgh ;
Surgeon, Edinburgh Ear Dispensary, arc.
21 Ainslie Place, Edinburgh.
2nd March, )88i.
Dear Mr. Rose, —From personal knowledge of the training
you have had, both as Demonstrator in the late Dr. Handyside’s
rooms, and as House Surgeon in Professor Spence’s wards, I feel
confidence in stating that you have availed yourself of these
excellent opportunities, and have gained such a knowledge of
anatomy and practical surgery that will best fit you for surgical
practice.
I most heartily wish you success in your profession. You
deserve to succeed. —Yours truly,
JOHN CHIENE.


From. Argyll Robertson, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S.E., F.R.S.E.,
Ophthalmic Surgeon, Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, and io
Royal Hospital for Sick Children; Examiner R.C.S.E. ;
Lecturer on Eye Diseases to the Edinburgh Medical School;
Surgeon to the Edinburgh Blind Asylum, and Edinburgh Eye
Dispensary, &c. s
18 Charlotte Square, Edinburgh.
r2th March, 1881.
I have much pleasure in expressing the high opinion I enter-
tain of the professional qualifications of Mr. Marmaduke Rose,
M. 8., CM.
He availed himself, during his career as a student here, of the
opportunities of practical instruction, and manifested much interest
in the study of eye diseases. As Demonstrator of Anatomy, he
has shown himself proficient in that important groundwork of
surgery, and recently, as a Resident Surgeon in the Royal
Infimary, has had most excellent practical training in the treatment
of surgical affections.
Having graduated with honours, he lakes a high position
among the students of his year.
I have every confidence in recommending Mr. Rose as
entitled to the trust of his patients, and the respect of his pro-
fessional brethren, wherever he may settle in practice.
D. ARGYLL ROBERTSON.


XVII.
From John Wyllie, Esq., M.D., F.R.CP.E., M.R.C.S. Eng.,
Secretary to the Royal College of Physicians , Edinburgh;
Lecturer on Practice of Medicine , School of Medicine , Edin-
burgh; Assistant Physician , Royal Infirmary , Edinburgh ,
cw.
9 Howe Street,
Edinburgh, nth March, 1881.
I have much pleasure in stating that I have known Dr.
Marmaduke Rose for some years. He was' formerly Demon-
strator of Anatomy in the Medical School, under Dr. Handyside;
and he has, during the last six months, been House Surgeon in
the Royal Infirmary, under Professor Spence. The very fact of
his having held these two appointments, implies that Dr. Rose
possesses an exceptionally accurate knowledge of anatomy, and
has received an exceptionally good training in practical surgery.
From all that I have seen and heard of Dr. Rose, I understand
that he has discharged his duties in the Medical School and
Infirmary in a most creditable manner. He has the reputation
of being a man of ability; and, I think, there is every promise
that he has before him a successful and useful career, whatever
department of the profession he may devote himself to.
JOHN WYLLIE, M.D., F.R.CP.E.,
Senior Assistant Physician to the Royal Infirmary;
Lecturer on the Practice of Medicine in the Extra-
Mural School, &=c.


XVIII.
From Stevenson Macadam, Esq., Ph.D., F.R.S.E., Lecturer on
Chemistry; Secretary to the School of Medicmc; Analytical
Chemist , Examiner , and Secretary to the Royal College of
Surgeons , Edinbutgh , cs-v.
School of Medicine,
Edinburgh, 26th February, 1881.
I have much pleasure in certifying that Dr. Marmaduke
Rose is personally known to me as a successful student of
medicine, and one who has devoted much special attention to the
important departments of Anatomy and Surgery. For two years
he acted as Demonstrator of Anatomy at the School of Medicine,
Surgeons’ Hall, under my colleague, the late Dr. P. D. Handyside;
and I know that he was highly esteemed by Dr. Handyside and
respected by all the students. I have no doubt he will continue
to devote himself to the science of medicine, and that he will
prove himself an able and successful medical practitioner or
professor of medicine and surgery.
STEVENSON MACADAM, Ph.D., F.R.SE, &c.,
Lecturer on Chejnistry, and Secretary to the
School of Medicine.


From J. Symington, Esq., M. 8., C.M., F.R.C.S.E., Lecturer on
Anatomy, School of Medicine, Edinburgh, &°c.
It has been my privilege to know Dr. Marmaduke-Rose as a
student, Demonstrator of Anatomy, and House Surgeon. In all
of these capacities he distinguished himself by his unflagging
industry and great natural abilities. While a student, Dr. Rose
was extensively engaged in teaching, and yet, in spite of these
interruptions to his regular studies, he graduated with honours in
the Edinburgh University.
His thorough honesty of purpose, agreeable manners, and
gentlemanly conduct made him a universal favourite with his
fellow-students, pupils and colleagues.
J. SYMINGTON, M. 8., F R.C.S.E.,
Lecturer on Anatomy, School of Medicine, Edinburgh.


Prom Francis Walter Moinet, Esq., M.U., F.R.C. P.E.,
F.R.S.E., Lecturer on Materia Mciiica and Therapeutics-
Surgeons’ Hall , Edinburgh ; Physician , Royal Dispensary , erv.
13 Alva Street,
Edinburgh, 28th February, 1881.
Dr. Rose has distinguished himself both as a student and
graduate of our University, and has enjoyed unusual opportunities
of acquiring a thorough knowledge of his profession. As a
Demonstrator of Anatomy to the late Dr. Handyside, his services
were much appreciated by the students. His skill in teaching,
and his power of imparting knowledge to his students, rendering
him a valuable assistant to Dr. Handyside. Since then, as House
Surgeon to Professor Spence, he has had great scope for acquiring
practical knowledge, and is thus well equipped to practise his
profession with credit to himself and to the profession of which
he is a member.
FRANCIS W. MOINET, M.D.,
Lecturer oji Materia Medica, Surgeons’ LLall ,
Edinburgh,


From A. G. Miller, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S.E., Lecturer on
Surgery; and Senior Assistant-Surgeon, Edinburgh Royal
Infirmary, &*c.
ii Walker Street,
Edinburgh, 26th February, 1881.
I have much pleasure in testifying to the eminent professional
qualifications and attainments of Mr. J. Marmaduke Rose. He
has been Demonstrator of Anatomy at the Royal College of
Surgeons; and, more recently, has held the important post of
Resident Surgeon to Professor Spence, in the Royal Infirmary.
These appointments have given Mr. Rose exceptional opportu-
nities for acquiring a thorough and practical knowledge of surgery.
Mr. Rose is known to me as a gentleman of high Christian
character, and as one who exerts a great influence for good
wherever he is ; and I am certain that, in any position to which
he may be appointed, he will discharge the duties of the office
most efficiently and conscientiously.
A. G. MILLER, M.D., F.R.C.S.E.,
Senior Assistant Surgeon , Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh.


XXII.
From Alexander James, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.E.. Lecturer on
Institutes of Medicine; and Clinical Medical Tutor , Edinburgh
School of Medicine, ore.
11 Alf.yn Place,
Edinburgh, 26th Fehruaiy, iBBt.
I have much pleasure in stating that I knew Dr. Marmaduke
Rose intimately during the period in which he was engaged in
the study of medicine in Edinburgh, and that I have formed the
very highest opinion alike of his character and professional
qualifications. After a diligent student career, he graduated
with honours ; and, as Demonstrator of Anatomy in the Edin-
burgh Medical School, and as House Surgeon in the Royal
Infirmary, he has gained the respect and regard of all with whom
he has come in contact. I can conscientiously recommend him
for any duty which he may desire to undertake.
ALEXANDER JAMES,


XXIII.
From J. Murdoch Brown, Esq., M. 8., C.M., F.R.C.P.E.,
Clinical Medicine Tutor , University of Editiburgh, &*c.
2 Coates Place,
Edinburgh, sth March, 1881.
Dear Dr. Rose, —It gives me much pleasure to express the
high opinion I hold of your professional qualifications and
personal worth. It is more than two years since we came into
intimate contact at the bedside; and, since then, I have had
many opportunities of observing how earnestly you pursued your
studies, and how carefully you discharged your duties. Your
appointment as Demonstrator of Anatomy in the College of
Surgeons, and as Resident Surgeon in the Royal Infirmary, show
how you have been appreciated by your teachers. lam certain
that wherever you may practise your profession, your patients
will always look with confidence to your treatment, and your
neighbours with satisfaction to your presence.
I am, yours sincerely,
J. MURDOCH BROWN, M. 8., F.R.C.P.E.,
( Clinical Medicine Tutor ,
University of Edinburgh, 6rc.
Marmaduke Rose, Esq.,
Royal Infirmary.


XXIV.
From David Berry Hart, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.E, Assistant
to the Professor of Midwifery, University of Edinburgh ; Syme
Surgical Fellow ; Secretary to the Edinburgh Obstetric Society;
late President, Royal Medical Society, Edinburgh, arc.
65 Frederick Street,
Edinburgh, 25th February, 1881.
Mr. J. Marmaduke Rose, M. 8., C.M., is known to me
personally as a graduate in medicine of the University of
Edinburgh, with abilities of the highest order. Dr. Rose was not
only a brilliant student, but also a highly acceptable anatomical
demonstrator. He has thus laid well the best foundation for
future success any medical man can. In the department of
Midwifery and Diseases of Women his knowledge is thorough
and accurate, and not merely theoretical, but practical as well.
I feel confident, therefore, that Dr. Rose’s accurate and
extensive knowledge of his profession, great ability as a teacher,
and high moral character, will give him a position in the first rank
of medical men.
DAVID HART, M.D., F.R.C.P.E.,
Assistant to the Professor of Midwifery, University
of Edinburgh ;
Secretary to the Editiburgh Obstetric Society, arc.


From J. M. Cotterill, Esq., M. 8., F.R.C.S.E., Clinical Tutor
of Surgery in the University of Edinburgh.
24 Melville Street,
Edinburgh, Ist March, 1881.
It gives me very great pleasure to express the very high
opinion I possess of the character and professional abilities of
Dr. Marmaduke Rose.
During his years of study at Edinburgh University he was
well known to me as a conscientious and earnest worker, and the
high position he attained in his professional examinations attests
to the thoroughness and success of his method of study.
But it is in connection with the most practical part of his
work that I am able to speak most highly, as Dr. Rose not only
was a regular and hard-working member of my tutorial
classes in the Royal Infirmary, but also was one of my students
at the Royal Dispensary, where I had ample opportunities of
judging of his capabilities. I can truly say that I have never had
so satisfactory a worker with me. With a thorough theoretical
knowledge of medicine and surgery, he combined a power of
practical application, a regularity and interest in his work, a
sympathy with his patients, which it is seldom one’s privilege to
experience. lam convinced that he will do honour to himself,
and give satisfaction to those around him, in any position to which
he may be called.
J. M. COTTERILL, M. 8., F.R.C.S.E.,
Clinical Tutor of Surgery in the Edinburgh University.


XXVI.
From John Bishop, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S.E., Assistant Surgeon,
Royal Infirmary , &*c.
i 2 Walker Street,
Edinburgh, 28th February, 1881.
I testify with pleasure to the zeal, intelligence, and remarkable
kindliness with which Mr. Marmaduke Rose discharged his
duties as clerk and dresser in the Royal Infirmary.
I believe that he will discharge, with conscientious care, any
duties which he may undertake; and that he will secure the
affection of his patients and the esteem of his professional
brethren.
JOHN BISHOP.


XXVII.
From Peter Hume Maclaren, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S. Edin. et
Lend., Surgeon, Convalescent Hospital; Assistant Surgeon,
Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh.
i Drumsheugh Gardens,
Edinburgh, 12th March, 1881.
During the autumn of 1880, when I had charge of Professor
Spence’s wards in the Royal Infirmary, Dr. M. Rose became
House Surgeon, and I can conscientiously say that I never saw
the duties of that office discharged with more intelligence, zeal,
and tact in all its varied relations to patients, students, and
nurses.
His high professional attainments, matured judgment, and
courteous demeanour, made a most favourable impression on all
with whom he came in contact, and will, I am sure, in any
position Dr. Rose may hereafter occupy, ensure his unqualified
success.
P. H. MACLAREN, M.D., F.R.C.S.E.,
Assistant Surgeon, Edinburgh Royal Infirmary.


XXVIII.
From William Taylor, Esq., M.D., Senior Assistant to Professor
of Surgery, Edinburgh University ; Fellow of Obstetric Society,
arc.
67 York Place,
Edinburgh, 28th February, 1881.
During the past few years I have had every opportunity of
observing the career of Mr. Marmaduke Rose, and I have been
led to form a very high opinion of him.
He is possessed of great energy, perseverance, and ability,
which, guided in a right direction, have placed him high in the
honour list of his University, and superior to most of his
compeers, as regards practical knowledge and grasp of his pro-
fession in its various departments.
He has met with great acceptance as a demonstrator and
lecturer.
It is impossible to associate with Dr. Rose without feeling
that he is imbued with the highest spirit of his calling, and that
his life, apart from this, is formed upon a high ideal.
WILLIAM TAYLOR, M.D.,
Senior Assistant to the Professor of Surgery,
Edinburgh University.


XXIX.
From Daniel John Cunningham, Esq., M.D., F.R.S.E., &c.;
Senior Demonstrator of Anatomy , Edinburgh University ;
Professor of Physiology , Royal Veterinary College, Edinburgh.
University of Edinburgh,
Bth March, xBBi.
It gives me much pleasure to add my testimony to the high
professional attainments of Dr. M. Rose. I have known him
intimately for several years, and have noticed the thorough manner
in which he pursued his studies. The success which has attended
his efforts in this direction is proved by the fact that, when he
graduated, he obtained a place in the honours list.
For some time Dr. Rose acted as Demonstrator of Anatomy
at the Royal College of Surgeons, and, more recently, he has held
the post of House Surgeon in Professor Spence’s wards of the
Royal Infirmary. He has, therefore, enjoyed exceptionally good
opportunities for perfecting himself in these very important
branches of his profession. His knowledge of Anatomy I know
to be both wide and accurate.
D. J. CUNNINGHAM.


From John B. Haycraft, Esq., M. 8., B.Sc., F.R.S.E., &c.,
Senior Demonstrator of Physiology , University of Edinburgh ,
&e.
Physiological Laboratory,
(Univ., Edin.)
March, 1881.
I have known Dr. Rose for some time, and it is with great
pleasure that I bear testimony to his scientific attainments, and to
his unfailing courtesy of manner. He is known as a distinguished
student of medicine, having graduated with high honours, which
is the privilege of but few in this University. I have not myself
heard Dr. Rose lecture on Anatomy, but report speaks most
favourably of both his lectures and demonstrations. He is a clear
and precise speaker, and has, what is all-important, energy and
enthusiasm. With these qualities, he will, lam sure, take a high
position in any school of medicine to which he may attach
himself.
JOHN BERRY HAYCRAFT, M. 8., B.Sc., F.R.S.E.,
Sen. Dem. Phys., Univ., Edin.


XXXI.
From James Allan Gray, Esq., M.A., M.D., M.R.C.P.E.,
Assistant to Professor of Medical Jurisprude7ice,Edin.; Surgeon
to Leith Hospital , &*c.
32 Madeira Street,
Leith, 10th March, 1881.
It gives me very great pleasure to express the high opinion I
entertain of the personal character and professional attainments
of Mr. Marmaduke Rose, M.B. and C.M.
Mr. Rose brought with him, to the study of medicine, a mind
matured by experience, and cultured by a prolonged course of
previous professional training. He applied himself with diligence
to the task he had thus set himself to perform, and the success
which has rewarded his efforts has already shown itself in his
obtaining honours at the examination for his degree at Edinburgh
University in August last, and in his being selected, by Professor
Spence, as the Resident Surgeon to the chair of Surgery Wards in
the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh.
Mr. Rose has been known to me personally during the greater
part of his medical curriculum, more especially during the time he
was a student in the class of Medical Jurisprudence at Edinburgh
University, and again while he acted as Demonstrator of Anatomy
at the Royal College of Surgeons, Edinburgh. My more intimate
acquaintance with Mr. Rose at these times has only confirmed
the very favourable opinion I had otherwise formed of him.
Mr. Rose is a gentleman of clear insight and broad views, an
observant student, and an able teacher ; possessed of a knowledge
of the healing art in all its varied branches —Theoretical and
practical; and being thus fully qualified for the work of his
profession, whether in hospital or private practice, Mr. Rose will
be found a thoroughly competent and trustworthy medical man,
and a valuable addition to the medical staff of any institution.
J. ALLAN GRAY, M.A., M.D., M.R.C.P.E.


XXXII.
From R. J. Blair Gunynghame, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S.E.,
F.R.S.E., Examiner, Royal College of Surgeons, Edinburgh;
Physician to Royal Hospital for Sick Children; Surgeon, Ear
Dispensary, (Pc.
6 Walker Street,
2nd March, 1881.
Mr. Marmaduke Rose, M. 8., C.M., is well known to me.
While he was a student I first became acquainted with him, and
was soon struck by his energy, assiduity, and studious habits. To
such an extent did he carry his desire of work that at last, for the
sake of his health, I had to curtail his hours of study.
Mr. Rose graduated with honours, and has filled several of the
best appointments held by our young graduates.
For over two years he acted as Demonstrator to Dr. Handy-
side, Extra Academical Lecturer on Anatomy, and so perfected
himself in this study, paving the way in the best manner possible,
for perhaps the more professional subject of Surgery. This
branch he has also fortunately been able to cultivate to a greater
extent than falls to the good lot of most young practitioners, by
being appointed House Surgeon to Professor Spence, in our great
Infirmary, which post he at present fills.
In my opinion, Mr. Rose leaves this with his mind pro-
fessionally well equipped and well able to practise his profession
to the advantage of those who may place themselves under his
care.
R. J. BLAIR CUNYNGHAME, M.D.,
F.R.C.S.E., F.R.S.E.,
Physician, Royal Hospital for Sick Children, <Pc.


XXXIII.
From William Husband, Esq., M.A., M.D., F.R.C.S.E.,
Physician, Royal Public Dispensary; Superintendent, Central
Vaccine Institution for Scotland.
28 Clarence Street,
Edinburgh, 15th March, 1881.
The Rev. Marmaduke Rose attended my vaccination course
at the Royal Dispensary, in the autumn of 1879.
He took a thorough interest in the work of the class, finding
time, in the midst of the most important studies, to do it full
justice. Mr. Rose does not need any expression of opinion from
me as to his qualifications for entering with acceptance and
success on the active duties of his profession. He has the
highest testimonials from others, who, knowing him better than I
do, are more capable of judging; but I have much pleasure in
having an opportunity of adding my cordial testimony in his
favour.
WM, HUSBAND, M.D., F.R.C.S.E.


XXXIV.
From John Lowe, Esq., F.R.C.S.E., Superintendent, Edinburgh
Medical Missionary Society’s Training Institution, &c.
Mission House, 56 George Square,
25th February, 1881.
I have known Dr. Marmaduke Rose while he prosecuted his
studies at this University, while Demonstrator of Anatomy in the
Extra-mural Medical School, and as Resident Surgeon under
Professor Spence, in the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary; and it
gives me much pleasure to bear my testimony to his high moral
character, his well-merited success, his ability and professional
accomplishments, and to the high estimation in which he is held
by all with whom he has been associated.
The students of our Society, who have from time to time been
his pupils, have often expressed to me their indebtedness to him,
and their appreciation of his clear and effective teaching.
Dr. Rose carries with him the best wishes of many well-known
practitioners in this city, and of all his former pupils.
JOHN LOWE, F.R.C.S.E.,
Supt. Edinburgh Medical Missionary Society’s
Training Institution.


XXXV.
from Charles H. Fasson, Esq., DepiUy Surgeon-General;
Superintendent , Royal Infirmary , Edinburgh.
Royal Infirmary,
Edinburgh, 18th March, 1881.
The Rev. Marmaduke Rose, M.B. and C.M., held, for some
months, the appointment of Resident Surgeon in the Royal Edin-
burgh Infirmary, and I have great pleasure in bearing testimony
to the very able and efficient manner in which he conducted the
administrative duties of that most responsible position.
With his high professional attainments, his kindness of dis-
position, his courteous and gentlemanly bearing, his solicitude
and care for those committed to his charge, I know no one more
eminently qualified to practise, with success and distinction, the
profession he has adopted, than Dr. Marmaduke Rose.
C. H. FASSON,
Deputy Surgeon-General ,
Superintendent R.E.I


XXXVI.
From T. M. Butler, Esq., M.R.C.S. Eng., Honorable Medical
Officer, Royal Surrey County Hospital, &>c.
Guildford,
Bth February, 1881.
I have unusual pleasure in adding my testimony to the very
high abilities and professional attainments of Dr. Marmadukf.
Rose. He performed the duties of acting House Surgeon to the
Royal Surrey County Hospital, for one month in last year, with
great efficiency and zeal. He was always at work, and took the
greatest interest in the cases—both medical and surgical. He
was very shrewd in diagnosis, and practical in carrying out the
treatment of disease, most kind to the patients, and courteous in
his manners.
I wish him every success, and feel satisfied he will be much
valued wherever his services are in request.
T. M. BUTLER,
Senior Honorary Surgeon , Royal
Surrey County Hospital.


XXXVII.
From Charles J. Sells, Esq., L.R.C.P. Lond., M.R.C.S. Eng.,
Medical Officer, Royal Surrey County Hospital; Surgeon
Abbots Hospital, Guildford, &c.
Guildford, 6th February, 1881.
I had the pleasure of making the acquaintance of Dr.
Marmaduke Rose during the time he was filling the post of
House Surgeon at the Royal Surrey County Hospital.
I formed a very high opinion of both his medical and surgical
skill, and can recommend him most favourably to any public
institution requiring the services of a gentleman accomplished in
his profession, and most persevering in his duties to those under
his charge.
CHARLES J. SELLS, L.R.C.P. Lond., M.R.C.S.,
Med. Officer, Royal Surrey County Hospital.


XXXVIII.
From Henry S. Taylor, Esq., F.R.C.S. Eng., Consulting
Surgeon, Royal Surrey Countv Hospital, <W.
Guildford, sth February, 1881.
From opportunities I have had of seeing Dr. Marmaduke
Rose, while he was acting House Surgeon at the Surrey County
Hospital, I have formed a very high opinion of his professional
character, and I consider him well qualified for the post of
Medical Officer.
HENRY S. TAYLOR, F.R.C.S.,
Consulting Surgeon , Royal Surrey County Hospital.


XXXIX,
From Rev. D. Macmillan, M.A., M. 8., C.M., E'Hnhurgh.
Edinburgh, 12 Chalmers Crescent,
12th March, 1881.
I have much pleasure in bearing testimony to the superior
talents, indefatigable industry, and high moral worth of the
Rev. J. Marmaduke Rose, M.B , C.M.
He distinguished himself highly in passing through his various
medical classes in this city, and secured for himself the warm
approbation of his instructors and fellow students.
His experience as Demonstrator of Anatomy for several years
in the Royal College of Surgeons, under the late Ur. Handyside,
and as Resident Surgeon in the Royal Infirmary, for a session,
under Professor Spence, guarantee his thorough acquaintance
with the department of Surgery; and I am aware that his
knowledge of Medicine is equally sound.
Altogether, I have no hesitation in stating that, in my opinion,
few leave our medical schools so well equipped for the general
practice of the healing art as Dr. Rose, and that he will prove a
valuable member of society wherever his lot may be cast.
His accurate acquaintance with the several subjects embraced
in a course of Surgery and Medicine, and his aptitude to
communicate knowledge, suggest him as a fit person to occupy a
chair in one of our colonial medical colleges. The propriety of
this suggestion is attested by the fact that hundreds of students in
Medicine and Surgery who obtained diplomas—some at our
Scottish Universities, and some at the University of London—
acknowledge their deep obligation to Dr. Rose for valuable
assistance given by him, as their private tutor, in the prose-
cution of their professional studies.
Dr. Rose leaves this country with the highest esteem and best
wishes of all who have had the pleasure of his acquaintance.
D. MACMILLAN, M.A., M. 8., C.M.


From John Smith, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S.E., F.R.S.E., Surgeon-
Dentist to the Queen in Scotland; Examiner, Royal College of
Surgeons, Edinburgh ; Dental Surgeon, Royal Infirmary, cr’c.
ii Wemyss Place, Edinburgh,
28th February, 1881.
Marmaduke Rose, Esq.
My Dear Sir, —I have great pleasure in adding my testimony
to your abilities and acquirements, both as a practitioner and
teacher of Medicine and Surgery.
I can do so from ascertaining, in the course of examinations,
the knowledge you have imparted, under peculiarly difficult
circumstances, to some of those candidates admitted sine curricula
to the dental examination of the Royal College of Surgeons of
Edinburgh, and who acquitted themselves in the general subjects
of that examination —altogether apart from special ones —with
much credit.
I am also aware of the experience you have enjoyed during
the responsible positions held by you in the Royal Infirmary here,
of which others, however, will be able to speak with more
precision and greater influence than I can, and wishing you every
success. I am, yours very truly,
J. SMITH, M.D., F.R.C.S. Ed.


From William Bowman Macleod, Esq., L.D.S.R.C.S.E.,
Dean of the Dental Faculty, and Lecturer on Mechanical
De7itistry , and Surgeon-Dentist to Edinburgh De7ital Hospital
and School.
“ Verona,” 43 George Square,
Edinburgh, nth August, 1880.
Having been under the tuition of the Rev. J. Marmaduke
Rose, M. 8., for a period of three months, as well as having the
pleasure of his acquaintance for a much longer period, I have
had many opportunities of estimating his private character and
professional abilities ; I have, therefore, great pleasure in bearing
testimony to his promptitude in fulfilling business obligations, his
thoroughness in knowledge acquirement, and his aptitude in
application thereof—qualities which eminently fit him for pro-
fessional practice.
W. BOWMAN MACLEOD, L.D.S. Ed.


XLII.
From Andrew Wilson, Esq., L.D.S.R.C.S.E., Lecturer on
Dental Anatomy and Physiology , and Surgeon-Dentist to
Edinburgh Dental Hospital and School; Examiner for
Diploma of L.D.S.R. C.S. E.
21 Young Street,
Charlotte Square,
Edinburgh, 3rd August, 1880.
Rev. Marmaduke Rose,
M. 8., C.M., Ed.
Dear Sir, — Having had, while preparing, along with a few
professional friends, for the medical portion of the L.D.S. exami-
nation of the Royal College of Surgeons, Edinburgh, the very
great, I might almost say inestimable, advantage of doing so
under your supervision, I gladly give my testimony, not only
to the great extent of medical knowledge you always had at
command, but also to the great power you had of impressing
upon us the more important points in the several subjects
included in that examination.
These, coupled with your uniformly courteous and thoroughly
gentlemanly bearing, qualify you to fill, in a most creditable
manner, any professional appointment, whether as medical officer
or lecturer. With best wishes for your professional success,
believe me, dear Sir, yours respectfully,
ANDREW WILSON, L.D.S. Ed.,
Lecturer on Dental Anatomy and Physiology.


XLIII.
From Charles Matthew, Esq., L.D.S.R.C.S.E., Lecturer;
Surgeon-Dentist to Edinburgh Dental Hospital and School.
59 Queen Street,
Edinburgh, August, 1880.
Having for some time been under the able tuition of Mr.
Rose, it affords me very much pleasure to state that I considered
myself fortunate in being brought into contact with him. I
formed the highest opinion of his acquaintance with those
subjects, the knowledge of which is necessary to the physician and
surgeon. His distinction as a student of Anatomy, Physiology,
&c., along with the conscientiousness, amiability, and assiduity,
which secured his success as a teacher of those subjects, mark
him, I believe, as a man eminently calculated to fill, with credit,
any post for which he is applying.
CHARLES MATTHEW, L.D.S. Ed.


XLIV.
From G. W. Watson, Esq., L.D.S.R.C.S.E., Lecturer on Dental
Surgery and Pathology , and Surgeon-Dentist to Edinburgh
Dental Hospital and School.
Edin, 4 Stafford Street,
30th July, 1880.
I have great pleasure in stating the very high opinion I
entertain of Dr. J. M. Rose, who has been known to me some
time as a highly distinguished anatomist and student of Medicine
and Surgery, as well as a very successful medical tutor; while his
gentlemanly bearing, manly, sincere, and frank manners, have
made him many friends and well-wishers. Altogether his career
has been such as will, m every way, qualify him to fill any post
with honour and credit.
GEO. W. WATSON, L.D.S. Ed.,
Lecturer on Dental Surgery and Pathology , Edin.
Dental Hasp, and School , ore.


From Alexander Cormack, L.D.S.R.C.S.L , Dental Surgeon to
Edinburgh Dental Hospital and School of Dentistry.
i George Square,
Edinburgh, 3rd August, 1880.
I have much pleasure in testifying to Dr. Marmaduke Rose’s
capabilities as a physician and teacher, in which latter capacity I
have had better means of judging ; and in it he possesses, in an
eminent degree, that power of putting difficult subjects in such a
light as to bring it within the reach of the most ordinary intellect.
I can also testify to his capabilities for hard work.
In my intercourse with him, I have been always impressed by
his intelligence and earnestness of purpose, and, have no doubt,
through life, he will obtain the success that I am sure he deserves.
ALEX. CORMACK, L.D.S.R.C.S.,
Surgeon to the Dental Hospital of Edinburgh.


XLVI.
From Malcolm Macgregor, Esq., L.D.S.R.C.S.E., Surgeon
Dentist to Edinburgh Dental Hospital and School.
20 Queen Street,
Edinburgh, 3rd August, 1880.
Dear Dr. Rose, — I have great pleasure in bearing testimony
to the very great benefit we derived from your tuition, while
preparing us for our L.D.S. degree. Your thorough knowledge
of the different subjects to be got up, and the able manner in
imparting them to us, was beyond all praise.
I remain, yours truly,
MALCOLM MACGREGOR, L.D.S.


XLVII.
From Leon. Salloncki Platt, Esq., Stirling.
Stirling, 3rd August, 1880.
Dr. Marmaduke Rose.
Dear Sir, —It affords me very great pleasure to be able to
say how highly I appreciate your character as a friend and a
teacher, and during the time I enjoyed the privilege of being
under your tuition, for my examination at the Royal College of
Surgeons, at Edinburgh, I was much impressed by the manner
in which you communicated to me a quiet enthusiasm for honest
and thorough study. Your anxiety and care for my success, lam
sure, was almost equal to my own ; and we were both awarded
for our work by coming off at the testing time with “ flying
colours.”
I am much pleased to hear of the very distinguished manner
in which you acquitted yourself recently at your final examination.
Such a result I well anticipated, knowing, as I do, from my inter-
course with you,. the extent and exactness of your knowledge.
You have my best wishes for your success in life, and I shall
always remain your grateful pupil and friend.
LEON. SALLONCKI PLATT.


TESTIMONIAL.
ROYAL COLLEGE OF SURGEONS,
EDINBURGH.
Session 1878-79.
This Address, accompanied with a Gold Watch, was presented
to Marmaduke Rose, Esq., by the Medical Students,
21st March, 1879.
In requesting your acceptance of this small memento, we
desire to thank you for your kindness toward , us, and to express
our high appreciation of your abilities both as an Anatomist and
as an Eloquent Lecturer, while, at the same time, we regret that
you have resolved to discontinue as Demonstrator at the close of
this Session; but we wish you, in the future, that measure of
success, either as a Lecturer or Practitioner, which your genial
manner, extensive knowledge, and high attainments in the
Medical Profession so fully merit.
(Signed by over eighty.)
R. Logan, M.D., L.R.C.S. et P.P.C.
J. F. Wylie Clarke, M.A., L.R.C.S. et P.E.
George Hurst, 8.A., M. 8., CM.
Lawrence Ithel Ruck, B.A.
L. W. Pegler, M. 8., C.M.
W. Bowman Macleod, L.D.S.R.C.S.E.
Malcolm Macgregor, L.D.S.R.C.S.E.
Charles Matthew, L.D.S.R.C.S.E.
Andrew Wilson, L.D.S.R.C.S.E.
George M. Watson, L.D.S.R.C.S.E.
&c. &c. &c.
Also Signed by thefollowing Lecturers :—
P. D. llandyside, M.D., F.R.C.S.E., F.R.S.E.,
Lecturer on Anatomy, &c.
Alexander James, M. 8., C.M., F.R.C.P.E.,
Lecturer on Institutes of Medicine, &c., Src.


XLIX.
From Rev. John Cairns, D.D., Professor of Divinity and
Principal of United Presbyterian College for Scotland , &c.
10 Spence Street,
Edinburgh, 26th February, 1881.
Since I came to Edinburgh, more than four years ago, I have
had a great deal of intercourse with Mr. J. M. Rose, now Resident
Surgeon to Professor Spence, and have been led to form a very
favourable opinion of his character and abilities. I have chiefly
met him in connection with temperance organizations. In this he
has shown a zeal and an energy, as well as an administrative
ability, beyond all praise, and has commended himself universally
to the friends of that cause in the city. I cannot, of course,
speak from professional knowledge of his medical qualifications,
which others will attest; but, from his high principle, I have no
doubt that in any public office he would be a valuable servant,
and would seek the moral and religious welfare of those under his
care with the same earnestness which he has here displayed.
JOHN CAIRNS, D.U.,
United Presbyterian Theological College.


Falling of Bowel and Bleeding Therefrom.
Queensberry Street.
Hotham. 6th April. 1883.
Dr. J. Marmadttke Rose.
Dear Sir, —I had suffered almost incessantly for over five
years with prolapsus and bleeding, at times in alarming quantities,
losing in a day over half a pint of blood, in severe attacks often
more.
I consulted, and was attended by thirteen medical gentlemen,
and I spent over
With life almost drained out, I saw you in July, 1882, and in
one month I felt so much better, it resembled the waking from
some horrid dream. I now have better health than I have known
for seven years past.
I visited you four times, and my present state of health is a
wonder, and often elicits remarks from all who know me.
Wishing you God’s blessing,
I remain, yours ever gratefully,
THOS. E. M,


Enlarged and Stiff Joints —Result of Rheumatics.
Lothian Street,
Hotham, 31st October, 1883.
Dr. J. M. Rose.
Dear Sir, —I have much pleasure in testifying to the
wonderful cure you performed on me.
Before you came I had five doctors, and none of them did me
the least good. One of them, Dr. , told me that I would be
a misery to myself, and a burden to my friends, as long as I lived,
and that I would be better dead. I was getting worse every day,
and got so bad before you came that, if I were put upon my legs
with crutches, I could not stand.
I was just fifteen months ill when you first visited me, and
when you told me you would guarantee me a cure, if I would do
as you told me, I did not think it possible, for I had tried almost
every known remedy, and burnt myself with some of them, so that
marks remain to this day.
After about a week of your treatment I felt a great improve-
ment, and continuing on with the same, in ten weeks I walked
without crutches very comfortably, and have since improved so
wonderfully that I will soon be able to attend to business as
before.
H. J. NASH.
F.S.—The above patient completely recovered.


Decayed Bone in Great Toe. Formation of New Toe.
Trunan Street,
Prahran, 10th January, 1884.
Dr. Rose.
Dear Sir, —I desire to bear my grateful testimony to your
kindness and surgical skill in the treatment and complete cure of
my daughter’s toe.
In June, 1882, my daughter, a girl of seventeen, complained
of pain and swelling in the great toe of her right foot. In July,
I consulted a local surgeon, who treated it for six months without
the least sign of improvement.
I then consulted a Melbourne surgeon, and the toe got worse.
The local surgeon then said the only thing was to cauterize it,
which he did, and for five months he was in constant attendance.
During that time my daughter was unable to put her foot to the
ground, and was suffering great pain. The doctor told me the
bone was decayed; I began to look upon the case as hopeless.
How thankful lam that I then heard of you. When you saw
it, you said you had never seen such a toe. You removed the
diseased bone, and formed a new toe, and in seven weeks, from
the day of the operation, my daughter was able to put on her
ordinary boot and walk quite well, without any pain or trace of
lameness; she rapidly regained her health, and has continued
well.
I desire thus most sincerely to thank you for what, under
God’s blessing, you have been able, by your surgical skill, to do
for my child.
I remain; dear Sir,
Yours most gratefully,
ELIZABETH DAVIS


Prahran,
October, 1883.
Dr. Rose,
Dear Sir,—l desire to thank you most sincerely for your
very great kindness to my friend Miss Davis. Mrs. Davis and
her daughter are delighted at the success of the operation so
kindly performed by you, and do not know how to express their
deep gratitude for your sympathy, help, and kindness. Again
thanking you very earnestly for your readiness to help the
fatherless and the widow.
I remain,
Dear Sir,
Yours very truly,
JOHN J. MACKENZIE,


Diseased Bone in Ankle.
nth September, 1884.
Dr. Rose.
Dear Sir, —I feel under an obligation to you for the success-
ful operation you performed, on the 4th February, 1883, on my
child, by removing the decayed bone from the centre of the
ankle. iVloreover, I have to admit that the physicians of our
district considered it an hopeless case unless the foot was taken
off.
But I am most happy to congratulate you on your ability, for
I am happy to state that the child is getting healthy and strong.
Trusting you will accept these few words as a testimony,
I remain,
Yours, &c.,
H. ELY HARCOURT.


General Nerve Debility.
Australian House, King Street,
Newtown, Sydney, N.S.W.
Dr. Rose,
I do not feel like leaving Australia without stating that, so
long as life and memory last, I shall never cease to be grateful for
the benefit derived from your treatment.
When I came to you I was dying of weariness ; I felt that I
had lost youth and hope, and the desire to live any longer under
the same conditions; I had come to regard the grave as a desirable
place; but now, thanks to your treatment, life has again become a
pleasant thing.
I shall not be in Melbourne to see, but I hope to hear, that
you remain a steadfast member of that class of doctors, possessing
both conscience and ability, in which case you will reach an
eminence which none can surpass, and but few, indeed, attain.
That you may not only do this, but be both happy and blessed,
is the sincere wish of
L. HALEY.


Cancer of the Nose.
Longford, Tasmania,
19th January, 1885.
Dr. Rose.
Dear Sir, — I dare say you will think I have forgotten my
promise to write re Mrs. Cotter’s face; lam now glad to state
it is quite well and healed up thoroughly. She has had plenty of
visitors to see her since she returned. The first question asked by
most of them was, “ What doctor did it?” You may be sure it
has not done your reputation any harm. Thanking you for past
kindness to Mrs. Cotter,
I remain,
Your obedient Servant,
CHARLES COTTER.


Piles (Haemorrhoids).
55 Non Street,
Port Melbourne, June, 1885.
Dr. J. M. Rose.
Dear Sir, — I beg to express my heartfelt gratitude to you for
your successful treatment of my case. I was suffering from piles,
and first visited you on the Bth December, 1884, when you
informed me that my case was a desperate one.
I have been under your care for twenty-eight weeks, during
which time I have gone under seven distinct operations ; when I
think of this I am surprised that I am still alive. How-
ever, I am happy to state that I am thoroughly cured, and
am now able to follow my occupation, viz., that of a boiler-
maker’s assistant, being now in excellent health. I beg to testify
to your professional skill and kind and gentle treatment through-
out the whole time, and shall ever gratefully remember you for
curing me so successfully, and can confidently recommend you to
anyone suffering from the same complaint.
Believe me to be,
Yours sincerely,
THOMAS GEORGE STEPHENS.


LVIII.
Stone in Bladder (Cured in Fourteen Days).
Independent Order of Oddfellows, Manchester Unity,
(Loyal Abbotsford Lodge, No. 6025),
Waipawa, Hawkes Bay,
New Zealand, December, 1885
To Dr. J. M. Rose,
37 Latrobe Street West, Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —At a summoned meeting of the above Lodge, held
on the 19th December, 1885, the following resolution was passed
unanimously, viz.:—
“ Resolved, that this Lodge record a special vote of thanks to
Dr. J. M. Rose, residing at 37 Latrobe Street West, Melbourne,
for his great attention, care, and successful operation on Bro. John
C. Ross, a member of this Lodge, who was under medical attend-
ance at Waipawa, Hastings, and in Napier Hospital, and received
no benefit from them, but we are happy to state is now cured by
your successful treatment.”
In accordance with the aforesaid resolution, we hereby
sincerely thank you, on behalf of the above Lodge, numbering
184 members, and
Remain yours respectfully,
M. FITZGERALD, Chairman of Lodge.
MARTIN COLLETT, Chairman of Trustees,
WM. BROWN, Secretary.


Tumor in Shoulder (Cured in a Week).
West Alberton,
Gippsland South, February, 1886.
To Dr. J. Marmaduke Rose.
Dear Sir, —I take this opportunity of acknowledging the
very great care and attention you bestowed on my daughter,
Christina Ross, who suffered from Tumor in the Shoulder about
ten months back.
I am glad to say that the operation you performed, and
general treatment of the case, proved thoroughly successful. In
proof of which her health is better than she ever enjoyed before,
and it is due to you to give this gratifying information, for both
myself and wife feel very much indebted to you for these
favourable results.
I remain,
Yours respectfully,
JAMES ROSS.


Bad Leg.
no Commercial Road,
Prahran, August, 1886.
To Dr. J. M. Rose.
Dear Sir, —It is now two years since I was under your treat-
ment of a very bad leg. From that time I have not experienced
the slightest symptoms of it troubling me again.
Having visited two Collins Street doctors for many months,
who afforded me no relief whatever, and you healed me in five
weeks. The cure has been an eminently successful and
permanent one.
It will afford me great pleasure to recommend any one to you
requiring medical aid.
I am, Doctor,
Yours very truly,
ALFRED R. TODD.


Ladies’ College,
Launceston, Tasmania,
November, 1886.
Dear Dr. Rose, — I do not know how to thank you sufficiently
for your genuine kindness to me and my family. Were I to
express all I feel in the matter, we should need a new vocabulary
and skill to use it; you will, however, thoroughly understand that
I feel the deepest gratitude and the fullest confidence. You have
many friends; those this side of the Strait whom I have seen who
have consulted you, are high in their praises and unshaken in their
confidence.
I am, my dear Sir,
Yours sincerely,
Rev. SPENCER WILLIAMS.


Nervous Debility.
Melbourne,
January, 1887.
My Dear Doctor, —I thank you very much indeed for your
kind letter. lam not given to flattery, Doctor, but I must tell
you that I have never met a medical gentleman yet who fully
understood my case as you do.
Yours faithfully,
JOHN REID,
Reid Bros. & Russell, Iron Merchants,
27 Elizabeth Street North, Melbourne.


LXIII.
Consumption.
Burwood, May, 1887.
Dr. J. M. Rose.
My Dear Sir, —Having in September, 1885, suffered from
Fog Fever, for the following year I suffered from severe colds,
one on another, and in October, rBB6, applied to my Lodge
Doctor for treatment, and was told by him that I was in
Consumption; two other doctors also told me the same.
I then had a racking heavy cough, heavy sweats, and there
was a great diminution in weight, as much as 22lbs. in three
weeks.
Being recommended to come to you, I did so, with the result
that, after paying you seven visits, from December, 1886, to
February, 1887, I am quite well again. The cough and sweats
have entirely left me, my weight has returned, and lam again able
to do my work, that of a market gardener, as well as ever.
I send this spontaneously, and if you ever require to make use
of this letter do so.
I remain,
Yours, &c.
JOHN LEON.


LXIV.
Knee-Joint Disease and Swelling of Thigh.
34 Cromwell Road,
Hawksburn, 26th April, 1888.
Dear Dr. Rose, — I fear I inadequately expressed my thanks
to you yesterday for your skilful treatment of my knee, and of
your kind and courteous manner to me while under your care;
but, knowing your sympathetic nature, I rest assured that you will
feel the gratitude I am, in words, unable fully to express.
If reference to my case can benefit you at any time, pray do
not hesitate to make use of it.
With kind regards,
Sincerely yours,
MARY A. CARTER.
P.S.—This lady was suffering for two years from effusion of
the knee-joint, and had been under surgical treatment in England
by the leading doctors; the case was looked upon as hopeless.


Watery Blood (Anaemia).
Boorboorban,
Via Deniliquin,
' June, 1888.
Dr. Rose,
Dear Sir, —I have to thank you for your kind attention to my
daughter; under your treatment she has perfectly recovered, and
is as well as ever she was.
Yours faithfully,
S. PORTER.


LXVI.
Severe and Protracted Disease of Knee Joint.
Sassafras,
New South Wales, August, 1888,
Dr. Rose.
Dear Sir, —This comes with many thanks and great pleasure
to you for your kindness to our little boy, who is improving
splendidly. He is able to walk about. His knee is not exactly
stiff, he can bend it a little, and it is but a trifle larger than| the
other.
We weighed him after you left and he was only 251b5., and
when he had taken your medicine he was slbs. heavier.
I remain,
Yours, &c.,
E. HIGGINS.
P.S. —This case was only seen once, and had been ill for
months.


LXVII.
Congestion at Base of Brain.
Danoenong, December, 1888.
My Dear Dr. Rose, —I am afraid I have been very remiss
in not sending an expression of my gratitude to you before.
However, will you please accept it now ; I am very much better,
lam happy to say. You are the only medical man who rightly
understands my case and its necessary treatment.
I am greatly indebted to you for your kindness.
With kind regards,
I am, sincerely yours.
Rev. J. NALL.


LXVIII.
Hydatids of Lung.
Racecourse Road,
Newmarket, November, 1889.
Dr. Rose, Latrobe Street West, Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —I have very great pleasure in testifying to your
skill and great ability and attention in performing an operation;
the success of which you took two quarts of fluid from my side,
which has been the means of completely curing and restoring me
to my usual health, free from pain.
Previous to this I had been under two other doctors, who did
me no good.
I remain,
Yours truly,
MINNIE MALCOLM.


LXIX.
Consumption.
Lennox Street, Hawthorn
(late of Bourke Street East),
January, 1890.
Dr. Rose has been my medical adviser during the last four
years. I have consulted many other physicians during that
period, but have found none so capable of correct diagnosis, nor
so apt in prescribing means of relief. The Doctor has also been
remarkably prompt and attentive.
My case is one of Fibroid Phthisis, accompanied with a great
amount of nervous debility. I selected Dr. Rose as a medical
man from seeing him on a jmblic platform some time before
needing his services. I regard him as a most efficient Doctor all
round, and more particularly in the diseases of the sympathetic
system of nerves.
I can conscientiously recommend sufferers from these lingering
complaints to consult him.
Yours, &c.,
JOSEPH FRAZER,
Phrenologist.


Spine and Skin Disease, Dropsy, Asthma, Removal of
Tonsils, Constriction of Throat, Mortification of
Both Arms and One Leg, Amputation of Both Arms
and One Leg.
Melbourne, 27th February, 1890.
Dear Dr. Rose, —In August, 1883, I came to you suffering
from a complication of diseases, which had baffled most of the
leading medical men of Melbourne. I had consulted no less than
sixteen doctors, seven of whom told me at that time I could not
live more than two weeks, unless I had my right arm amputated
at the shoulder. I was suffering intense agony with an eruption
on the arm, leaving holes the size of a pea in many parts; also,
with severe pain at the back of my head, indigestion, general
debility, enlarged tonsils, vomipng, and shortness of breath.
When you saw me, you at once told me the cause of the trouble
was in the spine, and gave me very little hopes of a cure, as the
disease had such a firm hold of my system. I had been ill for over
eight years, but, after persevering for some months with your treat-
ment, my arm healed, and I was able to leave off the sling, which
I had worn continually for five years, and use the arm a little;
my health also improving, after the removal of my tonsils, till
1887, when, owing to severe strain on my nerves, I was again
taken ill. My arm broke out again, mortification set in, and I
was compelled to have it amputated below the elbow, and not at
the shoulder, as I had been told by other doctors. The operation
was a great success, the arm healing perfectly.
About six weeks afterwards the disease showed itself in the
left leg, which also began to mortify, and that, too, had to be


amputated in December, 1887, and though not six months between
the two operations, it was again a great success, the wound heal-
ing splendidly in ten days, and pain almost gone. Again, six
weeks afterwards, I was taken with shortness of breath and dropsy,
with great weakness, my life being despaired of, but, owing to
your great care and attention, I again recovered, doing fairly well
until February, 1889, when the left arm was attacked with the
same complaint, the disease increasing so rapidly that Dr. ,
who has taken a great interest in my case, calling, could see
plainly the hand mortifying during the short time he was with me.
It, too, had to be amputated, on the seventh day, below the
elbow, doing very well for some time, when the elbow became
affected, and was operated on with a splendid result, healing
perfectly. Though these four operations have been performed by
you between July, 1887, and November, 1889, and notwithstand-
ing the many difficulties you had to fight against, viz., Shortness
of Breath, Asthma, Dropsy, and Stricture of the Throat, owing to
which I could only take nourishment through a tube for many
months, and in very small quantities. I am in a better state of
health than I have been for many years, and I am perfectly cured
of Dropsy, Asthma, and Skin Disease, which fact is a marvel to
all who know me.
Thanking you most sincerely for all you have done for me,
and trusting you will be spared for very many years to labour
amongst the sick and the suffering with as good results as in the
past,
Your ever grateful patient and friend,
HANNAH R. HIGGENS.


LXXI.
Chronic Inflammation of Bladder.
Fair View Farm,
Dingee, Victoria,
June, 1890.
Dr. J. M. Rose, Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —Having been a sufferer from Chronic Inflammation
of the Bladder for over twelve months, I was under one of the
leading doctors of Sandhurst for six months, but, instead of
deriving any benefit from his treatment, I was rapidly becoming
worse, and I had almost despaired of ever again enjoying health,
when a friend persuaded me to place myself under your care. I
did so, but only with the hope that you might relieve me for a
time from the pain that I was suffering, but I did not dare to
hope that you would be able to cure me, but, under God’s mercy
and your skill, I am thankful to say that, after being under treat-
ment for four months, l am now restored to health.
I am, gratefully yours,
Mrs. W. C.


LXXII.
Severe Blood Poisoning—Extensive Disease of Leg,
Knee and Thigh.
525 Latrobe Street West,
Melbourne, July, 1890.
Dr. J. m. Rose.
Dear Sir, —Allow me to convey to you my sincerest and
most grateful thanks for having cured me of Blood Poisoning in
my leg. Having had a medical man attending me for the last
three months, and doing me no good, he advised my removal to
the hospital, as it was a bad case. I was advised by a friend to
seek your skill, which I am happy to say has resulted in a
complete and perfect cure.
Trusting that every success may attend your great and
wonderful treatment,
Yours sincerely,
Mrs. CIVILL.


LXXIII.
Stone in the Bladder, weighing J^lb.
83 Parker Street,
Williamstown, July, 1890.
Dear Dr. Rose, —I had been suffering for many years, and
consulted several doctors ; none of them could give me any relief
or any satisfaction as to the complaint or its cause.
About the end of March, 1887, I came to you; after
examining me, you at once told me that I was suffering from
stone in the bladder, and should have it removed as soon as
possible, to which I readily consented, as I was in great pain and
getting weaker every day. The operation was performed by you
on 22nd April, 1887.
The stone, which was very large and most difficult to remove,
weighed 4 ozs., and measured 5 in. by 6 in. in circumference.
Though I was 69 years of age at the time, the operation was
a great success, the wound healing very quickly, so that I was
able to go out for a walk on the 19th day after the operation,
getting stronger every day, and I have enjoyed the best of health
ever since, having increased in weight from 11 st. to 12 st. 4 lbs.
in a very short time.
WILLIAM SCOTT,
Shipwright.


LXXIV.
Tumor of Cheek.
Essendon, Victoria,
August, 1890.
For several years I had been afflicted with a small Tumor in
the Cheek, which considerably impaired my appearance, and
latterly had caused me much suffering.
Owing to the increasing growth of the Tumor I was
necessitated to obtain surgical assistance in order to have it
removed. As the operation was a difficult and painful one, for a
long time I was unwilling to run the risk of permanent disfigure-
ment in case of failure, but, owing to continuous pain and the
urgent entreaties of my relatives, I consented to undergo the
operation.
My friends had been recommended to Dr. J. M. Rose, of
Latrobe Street, Melbourne, and accordingly I was taken there. I
cannot speak too highly of the kindness and skill of that gentle-
man during the time I was under his care.
He successfully removed the Tumor from my face, and, in a
short time I was enabled to go out and visit my friends. It is
only by exercising a keen scrutiny that one could detect the
mark.
I am deeply grateful to Dr. Rose, and will never forget his
rare skill, gentle treatment, and unvarying kindness.
S. A. F.


LXXV.
Diphtheria.
Lawry Street,
Northcote, October, 1890.
I wish to state that at the beginning of this month my
daughter, aged sixteen years, was taken with a very severe attack
of Diphtheria. Having very great confidence in Dr. Rose, I
called him in, and, much to my astonishment, in four days she
was pronounced out of danger, which, I believe, was solely due to
his method of treatment and assiduous care.
SARAH DAVIES.


LXXVI.
Typhoid Fever with severe Haemorrhage.
Brunswick Road, Brunswick,
November, 1890.
Dr. Rose, Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —It is with great pleasure that I tender to you my
sincere thanks for the great success in your treatment of my case
of Typhoid Fever and severe Haemorrhage ; also for the interest
and energy you disposed upon my lengthened illness, which
proved that I could not have been in better professional care.
Yours thankfully,
JOHN E. LAUGHTON.


LXXVII.
Crushed Foot.
222 Franklin Street,
West Melbourne,
December, 1890.
To Dr. Rose.
Dear Sir, —I met with an accident in the year 1883, at the
City Brewery, having had my foot crushed between the hydraulic
lift and an iron girder. I was taken home, and doctors sent for •
there were two who came, but upon seeing the case would not
undertake it, but strongly advised my friends to take me to the
hospital as my foot would have to be amputated.
Then Dr. Rose was called in; he examined the foot, and
undertook to save it; and I may thank his skill for having my foot
this day.
Believe me,
Yours respectfully,
JOHN EASTON


LXXVIII.
Brain Fever, Pleurisy, and Inflammation of the Bowels.
Howard Street, North Melbourne,
December, 1890.
Dr. J. M. Rose.
Sir, —I feel it my duty to thank you most heartily for your
kind attendance on me during my illness with fevers of different
kinds, viz., Brain Fever, Pleurisy, and Inflammation of the Bowels.
I must say through your wonderful skill and treatment I have
recovered, and once more able to go to work again.
Please accept this testimony, and believe me to be,
Your humble servant,
JAMES McALERY.


LXXIX.
Hemorrhage from the Lungs.
Carlton,
March, 1891.
To Dr. J. M. Rose.
Dear Sir, —Having suffered for the last fifteen months from
Chest and Lung disease, during the above period I consulted
several leading doctors, and spent an enormous sum of money,
and received no benefit from any of them. I was persuaded to
try a well-known herbalist of East Melbourne, and he promised to
cure me for the sum of which I paid to him, but received no
cure. The week I discontinued his medicine I was really as bad
as ever.
Having heard a great deal of praise with reference to your
treatment, I resolved to give you a trial. You informed me that
I was in a very bad state, but held out from the very first that you
would cure me.
Three days after I had consulted you, I had a most dangerous
attack of Hsemorrhage from the Lungs, from which attack I lost
over two quarts of blood; but you still informed my friends,
although I was apparently on my death bed, that you could cure
me, and, to their great surprise, you did, and in the course of a
few weeks you had me about again.
I then returned to business again too soon (against your
advice), and the consequence was I strained myself lifting, which


brought the Haemorrhage on again, and I lost a quantity of blood;
and again, with your wonderful and kind treatment, I am about
again.
I should strongly advise any person suffering from chest or
other diseases to consult Dr. Rose. They would be surprised at
his wonderful treatment.
For further proof of my terrible case, I shall be glad for any
person to call and see me. I cannot say too much in praise of
Dr. Rose for saving me from an early grave.
I hope you will publish this letter, and by so doing I sincerely
hope those suffering from consumptive complaints will notice ray
case, and give you a fair trial, and receive the same benefit as I
have from your kind treatment.
I am, Sir,
Yours obediently,
GEORGE TOOHEY.


LXXX.
Internal Hemorrhage, Dropsy, and Anemia.
Hawthorn, 23rd May, 1891.
Dr. Rose.
Dear Sir, —It gives me great pleasure to testify to your skill
in my case, which was a severe one.
I was for four months the victim of medical ignorance; the
doctor consulted did not know what was the matter, and came to
the conclusion I could only last a short time, as Dropsy had set in,
and had a firm hold on the vital parts.
You were called in on the 17th May, 1883, in consultation; on
the 19th May, my case was put into your hands, and on the 21st
of the same month you could honestly say I was better; in six
weeks the Dropsy had disappeared, and I was able to walk about
as I had not done for months. Eight years have passed, and
I am thankful to say I am strong and well and have had no return
of the complaint, thanks to your skilful treatment.
Yours respectfully,
E. A. T.


LXXXI.
Bronchitis, Congestion, Gangrene of Lungs.
Hawthorn, 23rd May, 1891.
Dr Rose.
Dear Sir, — It gives me great pleasure to add my humble
testimony to your superior skill and ability in chest diseases.
I found you especially so in my case, which was a very severe and
complicated lung disease, viz., Bronchitis, and Congestion followed
by Gangrene, also at the same time weakness of heart and brain
with great debility.
Your skilful treatment removed all, and I am thankful I can
say for the last five years I have enjoyed good health. I was not
a young man, being between 60 and 70 years of age. I have
travelled across the sea since, and have had no return of the old
disease.
Yours respectfully,
JOSEPH TOUGH.


LXXXII.
Consumption.
Melbourne, ist June, 1891.
Dear Dr. Rose, —Hoping to benefit my fellow sufferers,
I take this opportunity of stating my case and your treatment
of it. Eight years ago I was taken very unwell, the symptoms
being a bad cough, with a great deal of phlegm, great weakness
and shortness of breath ; being a professor of music, I was often
called upon to go out at night, which made my complaint worse.
At the end of two years, Haemorrhage of the Lungs commenced,
and all the other bad symptoms of the chest became more
pronounced. I had to leave off playing my instruments, and
everything else that caused the least exertion.
For five years my disease gradually gained ground, till I
became extremely weak with almost continual haemorrhage, and
breathing so bad that I could only walk a few steps without
getting out of breath ; I also felt very ill night and day, with
extreme lowness of spirits. During this time I had consulted
fifteen of the first Melbourne doctors, and, astonishing to say, all
these great men were as powerless as children to do me the
slightest good; on the other hand, they had skilfully conducted me
to this pit of misery and despair.
Just at this time, when at my worst, and without a ray of hope,
a friend of mine was taken very ill with the worst form of
Consumption ; he consulted two doctors who gave him up as
hopeless; he then consulted Dr. Rose, and in two months’ time
he was at work in his garden as well as ever. This wonderful
cure greatly astonished my friend and myself. I lost no time in


consulting Dr. Rose also; his opinion of the nature of my
complaint, as well as the treatment of it, was exactly opposite to
that of all the other doctors; he said that, of course, after being
crammed with the wrong medicines, and otherwise badly treated
for so many years, it would take a considerable time to get the
upper hand of it, but, that if I faithfully attended to his instructions
and treatment, I should eventually get cured.
I have done so for twelve months, with the result that I can
walk about well without getting out of breath, can do an exercise
with dumb bells, four pounds weight, forty times a day, can take
my coat off and dig for an hour at a time in the garden, can play
my violin and violoncello, and teach as many pupils as will do me
the favour to come to me. The haemorrhage has ceased, the
cough very little, I have a good appetite, can sleep well, and am
in fact cured of the disease. lam still under the doctor’s care,
as he says I still require building up. With these solid proofs, and
many others of Dr. Rose’s wonderful skill, I am forced to the
conclusion that he is, to say the least, by far the greatest doctor
in Australia. Hoping you will make this as public as possible.
Your most grateful patient,
SYDNEY HART.


LXXXIII.
Pleurisy, Inflammation of Stomach, Diarrhcea.
Prospect Hill,
Camberwell, ist June, 1891.
Dr. J. M. Rose.
Dear Sir, —I have much pleasure in giving my testimony to
your rare skill, ability, and marked success as a medical man, in
apparently hopeless cases.
Twice during the past six years you have, by God’s help,
brought me back from the very brink of death.
My first hard struggle with death arose from a severe attack of
Pleurisy and Inflammation of the Lungs. My second, just about a
year ago, was a still more terrible one, owing to the complication
of diseases. I then had, viz.:—Pleurisy, Inflammation of the
Stomach, Diarrhoea, Catarrh of the Stomach, with such extreme
Indigestion, that I was only able to take one teaspoonful of liquid
nourishment at a time; and, along with all this, an utter nerve
weakness ; yet out of all this you were enabled to bring me.
Now, I am hale and hearty, although I am within a year of
threescore.
Yours sincerely,
D. H.


LXXXIV.
Gangrene of the Lungs.
Hawthorn,
2nd June, 1891.
Dr. Rose.
Dear Sir, — I wish to bestow my most grateful thanks to you
for the great and wonderful cure you have wrought in me.
Before having you to attend me I was treated by two doctors
of high standing (at least considered so) for seven weeks, during
which time I was still getting weaker. I lost 14 lbs. weight in
that short time, and then I was given up as incurable, but as
soon as I was brought under your treatment I found I was
getting stronger each day, and in the short space of three weeks I
was able to take my walks abroad, and feel now as strong as ever.
I was, before my lungs were affected, in fact, in perfect health.
Kindly make use of this in any way you think best, so that
others may participate.
Yours truly,
J. M. F. SMITH.


LXXXV.
( CONSUMPTION.
Auburn,
2nd June, 1891.
Dr. Rose.
Dear Sir, —-In October, 1890, I was taken with a very bad
cold, which turned to Influenza and several other complaints,
followed lastly by Disease of the Lungs and severe night sweats.
For eight weeks I was attended by three doctors, two of
whom said I was in Consumption and could not live but a few
days. My husband was persuaded by a friend to send for
Dr. Rose, which, I am thankful to say, he did. In a week I
was taken out on to the verandah, and in a month from the
Doctor’s first visit I was taken to the country for a change. I
am now able to do my household work, and am in better spirits
than I have been for years.
I cannot speak too highly of him for his kindness and
sympathetic manner.
Yours sincerely,
MARY PARSONS.
