

Texts
in the
Languages of the Bismarck Archipelago
and ]Hea-Pommepn).
Edited with literal Translations and Notes
SIDNEY H. RAY,
Member of the Anthropological Institute.
aus „Zeitschrift fiir afrikanische und occanische jSprachen, 1. Jahrgang, 4. (left/




Neu-Lauenburg.
Neu-Pommern.
I. The Paternoster.
1. The Paternostex-.
2. The Decalogue.
2. The Decalogue.
3. Catechism.
3. A Lesson.
4. Parable of the Sower (Mark IV, 3 — 9).
4. The House on a rock (Matt. VII, 24 — 27).
5. The Feeding of the Four Thousand (Mark VIII,
5. Nicodemus (Jno. Ill, 1—8).
1—9).
6. Story of Jonah (Ch. I).
6. The Parable of the Tares (Matt. XIII, 24 —30).
7. Philip (Acts VIII, 5— 12).
7. Psalm 95.
8. Parable of the Sower (Mark IV, 3 —9),
8. The House on a rock (Matt. VII, 24 —27).
9. Feeding of the Four Thousand (Mark VIII
9. Nicodemus (John III, 1 —8).
1-9).
Texts
in the
Languages of the Bismarck Archipelago
(Neu-Lauenburg - and Neu-Pommern).
Edited with literal Translations and Notes
SIDNEY H. RAY.
Member of the Anthropological Institute.
10. The Parable of the Tares (Matt. XIII, 24 —-30),
Introduction.
The whole of these extracts are from the Works of the Missionaries of the
Australian Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society, and represent the languages
in common use in the Gazelle-Peninsula of Neu-Pommern and in the Islands of
the Neu-Lauenburg Gruppe.
The Neu-Lauenburg (Duke of York Island) extracts, specially represent the
language of the island of that name. The Language here given as that of


New Britain (New Fommern) is generally understood, according to Rev. R. H. Rickard
in his Dictionary, throughout the Gazelle-Peninsula, though it is not the colloquial
dialect of all tiie people, and is chiefly used for trading purposes. The principal
dialectical variations are between Kabakada and Raluana, marked by a difference
in Pronunciation. Other changes are found in the dialects of Kininiqunan, Matupit
Nodup, and Kabaga. The language is also spoken or known on some of the
Islands of the Neu-Lauenburg Gruppe. The Makada people, who are emigrants
from Nodup, speak the New Britain dialect although they understand the Duke
of York Island speech. In Kerawarra and Mioko, the language is a mixture of
Duke of York and New Britain. In Lauru on the Central South Coast of Neu-
Mecklenburg the Language is very like that of Neu-Pommern.
Bibliography
of the
Languages of Neu-Lauenburg and Neu-Pommern.
I. Verzeichniss von 477 Wortern gesammelt wahrend des Aufenthaltes S. M. S. Gazelle in Neu-
Gninea, Neu-Hannover, Neu-Irlaud, Neu-Britannien und Brisbane (Queensland). Von H. Strauch.
Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic. Band VIII. Berlin, 1876.
(Contains a vocabulary of the dialect of Blanche Bay, Neu-Pommern.)
2. Na buk na wawera ma a kum kelekele. Sydney, 1879.
(.Spellings, Readings, Catechism and Hymns in the Language of Duke of
York Island. 25 pp. B°.)
3, A buk na waratovo ta ra tinata Niu Britania. Sydney, 1879.
(Spellings and Lessons in the New Britain Language. 8 pp. B°.)
4. A weupua auakak Mareko i a timui. Sydney, 1882.
(Gospel of S. Mark in Duke of York Island Language.)
5. A dictionary of the Duke of York Language, New Britain Group by the Revds. G. Brown
and B. Danks also a Grammar of the same and an introduction by Rev. G. Brown. F. R, G. S.
Sydney, 1882. 4 0 .
(Grammar LXX pp. Introduction to Dictionary. VI. pp. Dictionary. 328 pp.
This work was not printed, but some copies of the original MS were made by
Hektograph.)
6, Wanderings in a wild country or three years among the Cannibals of New Britain by Wilfred
Powell. London, 1883.
(Contains Vocabularies of Duke of York Island (Kininiqunan) and New Britain.)
7. A tinata Niu Britania, Viti, Samoa, Tukyok ma Britania. Kabakada. June 1885.
(A vocabulary of the Languages of New Britain, Fiji, Samoa, Duke of York
Island and English, followed by the Pronouns, Numerals, Commandments,
Sripture Extracts and Hymns. Printed in New Britain. 16 pp. B°.)
8. Arip na waratuluai. Kabakada. July 1885.
(Nearly the same Scripture extracts as the preceding, but without the voca
bularies and hymns.)
9, Tai to Jesu Karisito kada Luluai. A tinira tai to Jesu Karisito. Tai to Jona.
(History of Jesus Christ. Questions about Jesus Christ. Story of Jonah and
Scripture extracts. Printed at Kabakada, November 1885.)


io. The Melanesian Languages by R. H. Codrington DD. Oxford, 1885.
(Contains Vocabulary and Grammar of Duke of York Island Language.)
11. A umana papait kai ra umana apositolo. Brisbane, 1886.
(Acts of the apostles in the New Britain Language.)
12. A comparison of the Dialects of East and West Polynesian, Malay, Malagasy and Australian, by
Rev. George Pratt. Procedings of the Royal Society of New South Wales, 1886.
(Contains a vocabulary of Duke of York Island Language.)
13. A wewapua avakak Mataio i a timutai. Ihe Gospel according to St. Matthew with portions of
the Gospels of St. Luke and St. John with some of the shorter Psalms. Sydney, 1886.
14. A Dictionary of the New Britain Dialect and English and of English and New Britain, also a
Grammar, by Rev. R. H. Rickard. 1889. 4
(Hektograph. pp. XII and 482.)
15. Untersuchungen iiber 24 Sprachen aus dem Schutzgebiet der Neuguinea-Compagnie. Von
Hugo Zoller. Dr. A. Petermann’s Mittheilungen. 36 Band. 1890. V.
(Contains Vocabularies of Ralum and Talili-Bai, Neu-Pommern, and of Neu-
Lauenburg and Kerawarra.)
16. Die Jdbim-Sprache der Finschhafener Gegend (N.O. Neu-Guinea, Kaiser Wilhelmsland). Von
Dr. O. Schellong, durchgesehen von Dr. 11. Schnorr von Carolsfeld. Leipzig, 1890.
(Contains Vocabularies of Meoko, Neu-Lauenburg Gruppe, and of Ralum and
Port Weber in Neu-Pommern.)
17. Note on the People and Languages of New Ireland and the Admiralty Islands by Sidney.
H. Ray, Journal of the Anthropological Institute XXL 1891.
(Contains Vocabularies of Raluana and West New Britain and Duke of York.)
18. Deutsch-Neu-Guinea und meine Ersteigung des Finisterre-Gebirges. Von Hugo Zoller.
Stuttgart, 1891. B°.
(Contains Vocabularies of Kerawarra, Neu-Lauenburg, Ralum and Talili-Bai.)
19. A Buk tabu kalamana ure to Jesu Karisito kada Luluai ma kada Fena-walaun bula. Ihe New
Testament printed in the New Britain Language by the New South Wales Auxiliary to the
British and Foreign Bible Society for the Australasian Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society
Paramatta, 1892. B°.
(Contains only Four Gospels and Acts.)
20. The Languages of the New Hebrides by Sidney H. Ray. Proceedings of Royal Society of New
South Wales, 1893.
(Contains Vocabularies of Duke of York Island and New Britain Languages.)
21. A Comparative Vocabulary of the Dialects of British New Guinea by Sidney H. Ray with
preface by Dr. R. N. Cust, London. Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. Northumber)
land Avenue W. C. 1895.
(Contains a vocabulary of the Raluana dialect.)
I. Language of Neu-Lauenburg
(Duke of York Island)
Alphabet.
Vowels: a, e, i, o, u. Diphthongs: ai, ao, au, ci, iu, ou, oi. Consonants:
b, d, g, k, k, 1, m, n, p r, t, w.
The Vowels and Diphthongs are sounded as in Italian. The Consonants
(except g and k ) are sounded as in English; g is nasal as English ng in sing,
k is sounded as English g in go.


i. The Paternoster.
From: Na Buk naWawera ma a kum Kelekele. Sydney, 1879 (i. e. The Book of Teaching
and Hymns) by Rev. G. Brown.
Tamameat 1 ) ui tana 2 ) ura 3 ) maua. In 4 ) ururuni ai am. Un 5 ) na&a&on
Our father thou abidest in-the sky shall be-respected name thy. Do thou rule
ui a 6) tara ura bual rap. In pet na kurei 7 ) a num wetula i bual rap na
thou mankind in place every it-shall do properly thy command in place every the
tudu 8 ) ra maua lenkuma diat pet na kurei 7 ) a 6) num kum 9 ) wetula ura maua.
under the sky like they do properly thy commands in the sky.
Un tabara meat a 6) utna meat anani welara tau 10 ) meat tiba na bug. Un
Do thou feed us food we eat measured out-to us every day. Do thou
wamananai meat a ma&irameat pikoina lenku meat wamananai 11 ) diat pikoina
cause to understand us our conduct not-good as we cause to understand them not-good
.a ma/iradiat koromeat. Koniku benbeni meat ura utna diat walualam meat
their conduct to-us. Do not lead us into things they tempt us
uni 12 ). Un walaun meat kora utna 13 ) pikoina. Kuma a num ku a naXa^on
to them. Do-thou save us from things not-good. Because thine only rule
ma wetula ma ururuni e l 4) pai rap e pai rap, Amene.
and command and respect not finishing not finishing.
Notes: The Paternoster given in the Gospel of 8. Matthew, of much later date than this
Reading book is different to the one here given. *) Meat is suffixed pronoun ‘our’. 3 ) Tana =
lit. to be at, or in a place. 3 ) Ura = u ra; u preposition, about, concerning, for, to, towards, on,
in, of; ra is the article. In use u may be compared to the Florida etc. ta. 4 ) In = lit. it shall;
i the verbal particle, n the future sign. 6 ) uis the verbal particle, n sign of future. 6 ) a is an
article or preposition used with possessives. It is so used in many Melanesian languages and is
unexplained. 7 ) Nakurai in Diet, of Rev. G. Brown. 8 ) Tudu is a noun, the under part, and takes
the article. 9 ) Kum is the sign of the plural. Bugoto. Isabel Is komi, 10 ) Tau is given in the
Rev. G. Brown’s Dictionary as “a particle, arrived at, on”. n ) Wa is the causative prefix, the
common va, vaka. 12 ) Uni is a particle of common use at the end of a sentence. It may be
translated, at it, to it, thereupon. Cf. u ra. 13 ) Utna is properly food. 14 ) The particle e is not
explained.
2. The Decalogue.
(From the same as foregoing.)
Koniku ui pami nara matag 1 ) a num Nara raugana, iau ku.
Do not thou make god before-me thy God another-one, I only.
Koniku ui pami a num tabataba
i 2) torki 3 ); er 4 ) ra lig i 2) lenku a
cut; or a thing like
na tudu 6 ) ra maua, er lenku a lig
the under ' sky or like thing
Do not thou make thy carved-figure
lig i 2) tana ura maua, er lenku a lig e
thing in in sky, or like thing
una tai e na tudu ra wanua. Koniku tutudug 6 ) uni, koniku ui taram uni
in-the sea the under the laud. Do not kneel to them, do not thou obey to them.


Kuma iau Jeova mini Nara 7 ) na Todaru 8 ) ririgai iau, iau balui koromdiat a kum
Because I thy God the Chief jealous I, I repay to them
nat a ma&iradiat pikoina a Tamadiat i pam tuk ura nuna tuludi ma nuna
children their conduct not good their father make end to its third and its
watdi a taun-tara 9 ) diat pet akakai korom iau, ma iau marimari diat ano mara
fourth generation they do evil to me, and I love them ten hundred
a taun-tara 9 ) diat nemi iau ma taramlu ura nug kum wetula.
generation they desire me and obey to my commands.
Koniku ui watugi biaku ai ana Jeova na num Nara kuma Jeova
Do not thou pronounce purposeless name of-him thy God because
pin 10 ) walili ra i watugi biaku ai ana
not spare one he pronounces purposeless name his.
* IV
Un kadopi a bug Sabate un watabunabulu u ) uni. E nomdi na bug
Do thou remember day Sabbath do-thou make sacred to-it six day
ui papam uni ma pami a num pinapam 12 ) rap; ma nuna limadi ma ruadi
thou work thereon and do thy work all; and its fifth and second
na bug a Sabate kuma a nun Jeova num Todaru, koniku ui papam uni,
day Sabbath that of thy Chief, do not thou work thereon,
ui, er na tumlik 13 ) muana er na tumlik tebuan, na num wetula muana er na
thou, or child male or child
num wetula tebuan, a num kum pika
thy servant female animals
kuma e nomdi na bug Jeova i pamani a
because six day " made
lig rap diat tana uni ma i go ura
things all they are-in therein and rest in
i watabu nabulu a bug Sabate
he make sacred day Sabbath.
female, thy servant male or
er na waira i tana ura num taman,
stranger abides in thy enclosure,
maua ma ra tudu ra maua, na tai ma
sky and under sky, sea and
nuna limadi ma ruadi na bug, kuma
its fifth and second day, sothat
Un ururuni diara a Tamam na Nam kuma iokana uni num
Do thou respect them-two thy father thy mother that long thereupon thy
lalaun ura bual Jeova na num Todarui tari tarn 14 ).
life in place thy Chief give to thee.
Koniku urn tuptup te.
Do not kill causelessly any one.
VII.
Koniku pet na tinauru.
Do not do adultery.
VIII
Koniku walog.
Do not steal.
5


Koniku lokloki te.
Do not slander any one.
Koniku ui nemi pikoina na ruma a nun te, koniku ui nemi pikoina
Do not thou desire not-good house of any one, do not thou desire not-good
na tebuan a nun te, er nuna wetula muana er nuna wetula tebuan, er nuna
wife of any one, or his servant male or his servant female, or his
povi ls ) er nuna as a l6 ), er ta utna a nuna,
ox or his ass, or any thing his.
Notes: *) Mata, eye or face with suffixed pronoun -g, my face. 2 ) iis verbal particle
it is, that is. 3 ) torki is given in the Dictionary as toki, to cut or lance, to cut out a spear point.
4 ) er is not in the diet. 5 ) tudu is a noun, the under side. 6 ) tutudug a verb from tudu.
7 ) Nara is the word adopted for God. 8 ) Todaru (in the Diet. Tadaru) is a chief. 9 ) taun-
tara = lit. a crop of men, tau being the same as the common tau a season, a year. 10 ) pi n for
pa in; pa, not; in, the verbal particle in the future. ll ) wa is the causative prefix, tabu the common
word for prohibition; tabunabulu = much desired, said of a house forbidden to (bul) youths
(Diet). 12 ) pinapam, a noun from papam, to work, formed by infix in. 13 ) tumlik, a diminutive,
lik = little. Not in Diet. 14 ) The preposition ta takes the pronominal suffixes as in Florida etc.
15 ) povi = Latin bovis, ox. 16 ) as a = English ass.
3. A Buk na Wetiri.
(Book of Questions.)
A Wawera I.
(Lesson I.)
foregoing.)
(From the same
Ura Nara.
Concerning God.
I. O oi i tara ui?
Who he made thee?
Nara i kunaga na te i tari iau.
God he there-above person made me.
2. O oi Nara?
Who God?
A niono ku Nara pate a nuna kabina 1 ) pate a nuna Galina.
Spirit only God not his many not his ending.
3. Auai ai a bual Nara i tan uni?
What name place God he abides at-it?
Nara i tana ura rakrakan bual rap.
God abides in all places all.
4. Nara i pam laratai 2 ) a lig rap i ligna pami?
God he does equal things all he desires to do?
Yu; a lig rap i ligna pami i pam &a£atai.
Yes; things all he desires to do he does immediately.


5. Nara i nunurei urutna?
God he knows all things?
Yu, Nara i nunuei a lig rap dat 3 ) kanapi ura baladaU) i logoroi bulug a
Yes, God he knows things all we think in onr heart he hears also
nundat piripiri rap ma boboi bulug a ma&iridat dat peti
our speaking all and looks also our conduct we do.
6. Nara i na/fca&on dat rap?
God he rules us all?
Yu, ta bug dat tuktau ura bug A-alina 5 ) Nara i nakakon a rap
Yes, the day we calls to day last God he rules our conduct all
ma lig rap dat paminoi i auakak duk i pikoina duk.
and things all we do it good perhaps it not good perhaps.
7. Nara i marimari ui?
God he loves thee?
Yu, Nara i marimari dat ma lig rap i toka pami
Yes, God he loves us and things all he continaally does.
8. Aua na kum 6 ) lig rap Nara i pami?
What things all God he does?
Nara i pami a lig rap ma utna rap ma tara bulug a kum 6 ) tara rap,
God he makes things all and food all and creates also men all.
A Wawera 11. (Lesson II.)
Ura tara mara&am a kum tara,
Concerning making for first time men.
I. Nara i pam lelawai a tara?
God he made how men?
I pami na panina a nura tara mufamuh ura pia ku.
He made the body of, men formerly in earth only.
2. I pami bulug a niono ura pia?
He made also spirit in earth?
Pate, Nara i toka ipi ura gigirono na maupial a lalaun i lalaun
No, God he continuously breathed in nostril the yawn life he lives
mara&am uni.
for first time at it.
3. Lelawai ku ma 7 ) Nara i pami a tara?
Why indeed God make .men?
Nara i pami a tara kuma i nemi diat
God made men because wish them
nunurai ia ma nemi ia ma diat ki
know him and desire him and they sit
ugai ma ia ma &aia ku e pai rap e pai rap.
together with him and rejoice indeed not finish not finish.
4. Nara i purki 8 ) awai diara a muAana 9 ) muana ma tebuan?
God he placed where them two first male and female?
I purki 8 ) tai diara ura taman 10 ) auakak ai ana Parataiso,
he them two in enclosure good name of it Paradise.


5- I pami a tara i len oi?
he made mankind he like whom?
I pami a tara i len ia ku 11 ).
he made man he like himself.
6. I pami a tara i len ia ku lelawai?
he made man he like himself why?
I pam diara diara len ia ku
made them two they two like himself
mananaina ma welweliana ma lalaun
wisdom and desire and life
indeed.
Notes: *) Kabin in the Diet. = a lot. 2 ) laratai = to be able to do like; pam larapai,
to make like in shape or quality; and so in a sense, to be able to do, to make. The sentence
means, “he does according to his wishes”. 3 ) Dat is the inclusive pronoun, we and you. 4 ) baladat
is lit. our bellies. 8 ) kalina is also a noun, ending, 6 ) kum is the plur. sign. 7 ) ma is an
expletive. 8 ) purki is not in Diet, pukai is to land from a boat or ship, hence, probably, “to be
placed in”. 9 ) mu&ana first, in front. Malay muka. 10 ) taman is the enclosure in which the
house stands, hence a garden. ir ) ia ku, lit. he only.
4. The Parable of the Sower: Mark IV. 3 —9.
From: A Weupua auakak Mareko i a timui. The Gospel according to S. Mark, trans-
lated into language of Duke of York Island, New Britain Group. Sydney, 1882.
3. Muat logoroi; Boboi, ra muana lamira saito 1 ), i wan i lamirai saito 1 ).
You hear; Look, a man sprinkling seed, he goes he sprinkles seed.
4. Ma ba i lamira wanwan 2 ), ra magan saito i puka ura papara akapi, ma
and when he sprinkles goes some seed it falls on x side path, and
diat a kum pika rowo 3 ) diat rowo uni, ma diat ani.
they animals flying they fly to it, and they eat.
5. Ra magan i puka u ra bual na watwat, i kinalik a pia i tana i ai; ma
some it falls on place stones, it little earth it is on on it; and
i taua kakdi, kuma a pia i kinalik.
it grows quick, because ground it little.
6. Ma ba mafe i rok 4 ) pat ma ragi 5 ), i marag uni; kuma pa ta akarina.
and when sun it rises here and scorches, it dries up at it; because not any it's root.
7. Ra magan bulug i puka u ra bual na diwai e ) t&laklakono, ma diwai
some also it fell on place plant thorny, and plant
tillaklakono diat taua na te 7 ), ma wi-dokoi 8 ), ma i pai ua.
thorny they grew above, and choked, and it not fruit.
8. Ra magan bulug i puka balara auakak na pia, i Aubul, ma taua akit,
some also it fell in good ground, it sprouted, and grew exceedingly,
ma ua, ra magan i ua ta tula noina, ra magan ta nom na noina, ma
and fruit, some it fruited to three ten, some to six ten, and
ra magan ta mara.
some to hundred.


g. Ma i piri tan diat bulug, Ba te i tara taligana, i ka 9 ) i walogoro uni.
and he said to them also, if any man his ear, worthy hears to it.
Notes: *) saito, an introduced word for corn Greek aito?. 2 ) wan to go; reduplication
expresses continual going. 3 ) pika is the generic name for any animal; rowo to fly (Mola rowo),
hence pika rowo, flying animal, bird. Cf. Tangoa. Espiritu Santo nazi-abuabu, bird, nazi-
ki-tas, animal of sea, fish; Nengone. ia-dede, bird, which show the same construction. 4 ) rok
lit. to jump up. 5 ) ragi to dry up, to wither as a leaf. 6 ) diwai, a tree, wood. 7 ) te, a noun
the upper part, top. 8 ) wi, to entwine, coil round; dokoi dead. 9 ) ka (hard g) = useful, be-
coming, worthy.
5. The Feeding of the four thousand: Mark VIII. I—91 —9
(From the same as foregoing.)
Ura bug kuma, ba magoro balet diat a kum tara, ma diat kapan utna
in day that, when many again they men, and they were-without food
kai, ia watai koromi diat a nuna kum tara wawera, ma piri tan diat,
also, he called to them his men learning, and said to them.
lau marimari diat a kum tara, kuma diat tana ugai ma iau tula bug, ma
I pity them men, because they abide together with me three days, and
pa ta andiat utna na winagan
not for them thing food.
minolo 2 ) ku ura nundiat taman diat
hunger indeed to their enclosure they
Ba ag 1 ) tula-uai diat diat wan a
If Ishall send away them they go
magan diat kai diat wan tak’ u ra
some they also they come from at
malumalum u ra akapi; ma ta
faint on the road; and
welwelik.
long distance.
Ma nuna kum tara wawera diat piri tana, 1 e i rakani taka wai
and his men learning they said to him, Any one he take-hold of from where
a utna na winagan i tabara diat a kum tara uni ura bil kumi?
thing food he feed them men thereon in bush this?
Ma i tiri diat, Teadi a Aenk) na falaoa 4 ) ta muat? Diat piri, Limadi
and he asked them, How many pudding of flour to you? Ihey say, hive
ma ruadi.
and two.
Ma i tula diat a kum tara diat ki na pia: ma i rakani a limadi ma
and he commanded them men they sit ground: and he took five and
ruadi akm na falaoa, i karik pa, ma bik 6 ) weranai, ma tari tandiat a
two pudding flour, he thanked, and breaks separate, and gave to them
kum tara wawera, diat palau 6 ) diat uni; ma diat palau 6 ) diat a kum tara.
men learning, they divided them for it; and they divided them men.
Ma i kinalik ma 7 ) ku a ian tandiat: ma ba i karik pa, i wetula
and it a little indeed fish for them: and when he thanked he command
din 8 ) palau diat a tara uni. Ma diat wagan ma diat mauru:
they shall divide them men for it. And they eat and they full of food
9


8. Ma diat tom ugai 9 ), limadi ma ruadi
and they picked up, five and two
utna diat an kapotai.
things they eat unfinished.
aka i wategpi u ra mutamuta na
basket it filled up with crumbs
9. Ma diat watna no mara duk diat:
and they four ten hundred possibly they:
Notes: *) ag is verbal particle, first person singular future. 2 ) minolo, noun from molo
to be hungry, by infix in. s ) kem is a native pudding made of pa (Arum esculentum) and tamap,
a kind of nut. It is also used for a cake of tobacco. 4 ) falaoa is English, flour. 5 ) bik =to
snap in two. 6 ) palau, applies only to the persons, not the things. 7 ) ma is expletive. 8 ) din
is impersonal and future. 9 ) tom is unexplained, ugai = together; in the Diet, tom ugai, to
pick up. In New Britain tam = to assort.
6. The Parable of the tares. Matt. XIII. 24 —30.
From: A wewapua avakak Mataio i a timutai. The Gospel according to St. Matthew
with portions of the Gospels of St. Luke and St. John with some ofthe Shorter Psalms.
Sydney, 1886.
wapua diat uni, lena, A matanitu 2 )
made clear them thereon, thus, kingdom
24. Ra bulug a pirapira welwelara 1 ) i
again description resembling he
ko ra maua diara welara ma ta
from heaven they two like
muana ba i lamira a kokoina padi s )
man when he scatters good maize
u ra nuna pinapam:
in his plantation;
25. ba diat inep a kum tara, a nuna yabara i wan pat ma i lamira a
when they slept men, his enemy he comes here and he scattered
taratara 4 ) padi na liwan 5 ) ta ra kokoina padi, ma i wan talili.
maize among to good maize, and he goes back again.
26. Ba i kuburu pat a padi, ma
when it grew up maize, and
ua, a taratara padi kai i pua
it fruited,
also it appeared
mara^am.
for the first time.
27. A kum wetula a nu ra petpalig 6 )
diat wan korom i ma diat piri tana,
they come to him and they say to him,
servants of house holder
Tadaru, pa u lamirai duk a kokoina padi u ra num pinapam? Taka
Chief, not thou scatter probably good maize in thy plantation? From
wai duk a taratara padi?
where perhaps?
28. I piri ta diat, A yabara i a 7) peta a lig kum? A kum wetula diat tiri
he said to them, enemy he has done thing this? servants they ask
lena, U nemi duk ba miat a wan, miat a X;at-a-rapuai, ba pate?
thus, thou wish probably if we go, we pull up completely, if not?


29. I akanaubat diat lena, Koniku mun 8 ); kaduk ba muat &atua a kum tara-
forbad them thus, Do not yet; lest when you pull up
tara padi, muat a &at ugai mai 9 ) a kum kokoina padi.
you pull at same time with it good maize.
30. Madekua diara ba diara taua ugai in tuk ura kalag na rotkutu 10 )!
Leave alone them two if they two grow together to the end of moon of reaping
kura 11 ) ura pupukai 12 ) na rotkotu ag piri ta diat a kum tenarotkotu 13 )
then time reaping I will say to them reapers
time reaping I will say to them reapers
lena, Muat a rakan ugai mun a taratara padi, muat dopakutai u ),
thus, you take hold of together first you b ind
muat tun 15 ) a rapuai: muat rakan ugai bulug a kum kokoina padi,
you burn completely: you take hold of together also good maize,
u ra nug ruma na utna.
in my house of food.
Notes: *) pira =to say; welara, to liken; pirapira welwelara, a parable. 2 ) matanitu
is introduced from Fiji, matanitu. 3 ) padi is an introduced word. 4 ) taratara is not in the Diet,
taratara padi is here used for tares. 5 ) In the Diet, liwan is a noun, the waist, hence the middle,
hence, among. 6 ) pet-palig is a person of influence, a respectable person. 7 ) a is sign of the
past tense. 8 ) mun = first, hence, directly; implying not now, but a little later, do it. 9 ) mai may
be mai a, unripe. 10 ) rot is to cut by drawing to one’s self, kutu to cut off. lr ) kura = soon,
at another time. 12 ) pupukai = a portion of time. 13 ) te na rotkotu, persons of reaping, like
Efate tea bifai, Nguna. tea kotoviana (koto, to cut) reaper. Epi tomu na vagadrian, men
of fishing. 14 ) doi, to close as by tying, pakutai, to make a bundle of. 15 ) tun is the common
tunu, to put on the fire, to roast.
7. A kelekele 95. Song 95.
(From the same as foregoing.)
I, Muat in 1 ) dat a kelekele korom Jeova: Dat a lo^at 2 ) korom a nudat
You come here we
sing to we shout to our
kabinalalaun 3 ).
salvation.
2. Dat a wan na ra matana ma ra pira-walauai 4 ), Dat a kelekele korom i.
We go his face with praise, We sing to him.
3. Kuma Jeova a gala na Kalou 5 ), ma ra gala na Tadaru ia u diat a
Because great God, and great Chief he among them
kum Kalou.
gods.
4. A kum balana-mala 6 ) i ra rakrakan wanua i tana ura limana; A dekdek
deep places of all land it abides in his hand: strength
i ra kum tagai a nuna ut.
of the hills his also.
5. A tai a nuna ut, ia ku i pami; I pam a wanua kai ma ra limana.
sea his also, he indeed he made it; he made land also with his-hand.


6. Muat in 1 ) dat a lotu 7 ), dat a tutudug: Dat a ki-but-keke 8 ) na ra matan 9 )
You come here, we worship, we bow-down: We kneel before
Jeova, ia ba i tara dat
he that he made us.
7. A nudat Kalou ia; a kum tara ira nuna bual dat, ma ra kum sipi 10 ) ira
our God he; people of his place we, and sheep of
limana. Kumari muat a walogoro i igana.
his hand. Now you hear it his voice
8. Koniku muat pet a p&tp&tuan a balamuat 11 ), Lenkuma u ra bug na
Do-not you make strong your hearts, like in the day of
wegagara, Lenkuma kai u ra bug na walwalam u ra bil.
quarrelling, like also in day temptation in bush, wilderness.
9. Ba a numuat tara mu/fcamu&a diat walam iau uni, Diat pet tama iau,
When your men formerly they tempted me therein, They made trial me,
ma diat bobo liklik a nug pinapam.
and they saw continuously my work.
10. Wat na no tinoan i tapunuk uni a balag u ra ma&iradiat a tauntara 12 )
four ten year it grieved me at it
kuma, ma iau piri lena, A kum tara
ray heart at their conduct generation
kumi diat rara u ra baladiat, ma pa
this they goastray in their heart, and not
that, and I said thus, men
diat nunurai utbai a ma&irag 13 ).
they know yet my way.
if. Ma iau welim&n u ) ta diat ura nug
And I sware to them in my
k&mk&miak, lena, pa diat a ruk u ra
anger, thus, not they enter in
nug manmanatug.
my rest.
Notes: in is a contraction for urin or ura in. 2 ) lokat is a prolonged shout as at a
festival. 3 ) .Not in the Diet. 4 ) lit. saying-praise. 5 ) Introduced from Fiji. Used in the Fiji Scriptures
for God, lit. a god, a falling star. 6 ) Cf. bala belly; bala na waga, harbour, the root notion
being ‘a hollow’. 7 ) An introduced word from Fiji. 8 ) lit. ki, sit, but-keke, knees. 9 ) matan
= his face. 10 ) English sheep. u ) lit. your bellies. 12 ) lit. crop of men. 13 ) lit. my conduct.
14 ) we liman, to imprecate curses on one’self if speaking falsely.
8. The House on a Rock. Matt. VII. 24 —27.
(From the same as foregoing.)
24. Ia ba i walogoro a nug pirapira kumi, ma i taram uni, kura diara 2 ) welara
He that hears my speakings and obeys to it, there they like
ma ra tena-manana, ba i pamta a nuna ruma u ra wat kini 1 ): A kum
with wise person, that placed his house on stone:
bata i puka, a lomon kai i kala tau uni, ma ra dadaip i tapala, ma i
rains fell, flood also flowed on to it, and wind loosened it, and
um a ruma kuma; ma pai taripu: kuma i turn tau u ra wat kini 1 ).
struck house that; and not fall: that stood up on rock.


kumi ma pa i taram uni, kura diara 2 )
26. Ja kai ba i walogoro a nug pirapira
He also that hears my sayings
welara ma ra loglog, ba i pamta a
and not obeys to it, there they
nuna ruma u ra woyo: a kum bata
his house on sand: rains
like with fool, that placed
i puka ma ra lomon i kala tau uni, a dadaip kai i tapala, ma i um a
fell and flood flowed on to it, wind also loosened it, and struck
ruma kuma; ma i taripu ma ut 3 ): galapi a nuna taripu.
house that; and fell and finished; great its fall.
Notes; *) kini is given in the Dictionary as meaning “thwart of a canoe, here it probably
means the foundation or support of the house”. a ) diara means they two, used of a small number
of persons. 3 ) ut is a sign of past time or an adverb meaning formerly, here it is used as a verb,
“become a thing of the past”.
9. Nikodemus. John 111. I—B1 —8
(From the same of preceding.)
I. Ra pa diat a kum te Faresaio, a yana Nikodimo, a tadaru anu ra Judaia
One of them number of the his name chief of them
2. I wan korom Jesu u ra marum, ma i piri tana, Rabai, miat nunurai lena,
came to ■ in the night, and said to him, We understand thus,
a Tena-wawera kon Nara ui: kuma pa ta muana in pam larapa a
Teacher from him God thou: because not any man shall do like
kum lig na wakilag u pampami, ba Nara pa i waraut 1 ) i.
things signifying thou doest, if God not with him.
3. Jesu i wapuata 2 ) i uni lena, A ligtatuna 3 ), a ligtatuna 3 ) iau piri tarn, Ba te,
explained thus, true, true I say to thee, If any,
pa di butapa r balet, i £ana bobo a matanitu anu ra Kalou.
not they be born again, cannot see kingdom of God.
4. Nikodimo i tiri uni lena, Lelawai duk a takana? In ruk balet duk u
ask to him thus, How possible old? Shall enter again possibly in
ra balan nana, ma din butapa i balet?
the belly of mother, and shall be be born again?
5. Jesu i piri tana, A ligtatuna 3 ) a ligtatuna 3 ) iau piri tarn, Ba te, pa di
said to him, true true I say to thee, If any, not they
butapa i u ra polo ma ra Niono, i &ana ruk u ra matanitu a nu ra Kalou
are born of the water and the Spirit, cannot enter in kingdom of God
6. A lig kuma di butapai ko ra karaonogidi 4 ), a kamonogidi 4 ) ku ia; ma ra
thing that is born from flesh, flesh indeed it; and
lig di butapai ko ra Niono, a niono ku ia.
thing is born from spirit, spirit indeed it.
7. Koniku kakaian uni ba iau piri tarn, A matakina binabuta i&a ku
Do not be startled at it that I say to thee, new birth useful indeed
korom muat.
to us.


8. A dadaip i wan ura bual ia ut i nemi, ma ui kai u toka walogoroi
wind goes to place formerly desired, and thou also thou eoutinuest hear
ku a nuna wuwu, ma pa u nunura a bual i wan tak uni, ma ra bual
indeed its sound, and not thou know place comes from at it, and place
bulug i wan tuk uni: len ia kuma kai ia ba di buta iko ra Niono
other goes to at it: like it there also it if any be born of spirit.
Notes: x ) waraut is an adjective, mixed up with, especially of persons mixed together,
warauti, to help. 2 ) wapuata is not in the Diet, but is probably the same as wapua-nai, to
make clear. 3 ) ligtatuna, lig, thing, tuna, true. 4 ) kamonogidi is not in the Diet.
11. Language of Neu-Pommern
(New Britain).
Alphabet.
Vowels; a, e, i, o, u. Diphthongs; ai, an, in, oi. Consonants: b, d, g, k,
1, m, n, p, q, r, s, t, v, w, y.
The Vowels and Diphthongs have the Italian sounds. At Blanche Bay and
on the South East coast, b and d are pronounced as in English bit, did, but on
the North Coast they are pronounced as mb in number and nd in under. In
some words k has the sound of g in the English go, and is then written k.
The g sounds as ng in English sing. The q has the sound of English g in go
at Raluana, but at Matupit and Kabakada, q sounds as English nk or ng in ink
or mangle; v and w are nearly the same and are often interchanged. Y has
the sound of the English y in yes. S is found only in introduced words.
i. The Paternoster.
From: A Buk Tabu kalamana ure To lesu Karisito. Parramatta, 1892
i. e. Book Holy New of Jesus Christ.
Tama vevet a 1) rama 2 ) ra 3 ) balana-bakut 4 ) boina 5 ) ba c ) da 7 ) ru ra 3 )
Father our up heaven good that respect
up heaven good that respect
iagim 8 ). Boina ba na 9 ) wut 10 ) kaum 11 ) matanitu 12 ). Boina ba da toratorom 13 )
thy-name. Good that come thy kingdom. Good that
tarn 14 ) ra pia waraqop 15 ) dia toratorom tarn 14 ) a rama 2 ) ra balana-bakut, A
to thee earth like they obey to thee up heaven.
up heaven.
bug qori 16 ) u na 9 ) tabari avet ma 17 ) aveve 18 ) nian 19 ), Una re 20 ) vue kaveve u )
day to-day thou give us our food. Thou take away our


nilala 21 ) waraqop ave tara re 20 ) vue kadiat dia q& 22 ) la-pa 23 ) ta 14 ) vevet. Koko
debts like we give clear away from us they have debts to us. Let not
da 7 ) beni avet ta 14 ) ra warilam 24 ), u na 9 ) walauni 25 ) avet kan ra tena 26 )-kaina.
lead us to temptation, thou save us from evil one.
Notes: 7 ) A is the article, a or the. 2 ) lit. up there. 3 ) ra is a euphonic form of the
article. 4 ) This word is literally, bala, belly, na, of, bakut, cloud. 5 ) The root is bo. Cf. New
Hebrides mbo etc., in a is an adjective termination. 6 ) ba is a conditional particle, if, so that, let
be. 7 ) An abbreviation of diat they, used impersonally like French on. 8 ) m is suffixed pronoun,
thy. 9 ) Sign of Future tense. 10 ) Wut is to go or come quickly, wutwut, to run. u ) ka is the
possessive used with common things. 12 ) A Fijian word, introduced. 13 ) An abbreviation of torom,
to obey. u ) Preposition with suffixed pronoun. 15 ) Reciprocal of waqop, to be like, or equal to.
Prefix war a = var of Bank’s Islands. 16 ) Qori is also an adverb, now, soon. 17 ) In Rev.
R, H. Rickard’s M. S. ma is an exlamation, Just so! 18 ) When food is possessed a is used instead
of ka, 19 ) The noun from an, to eat. 20 ) Re meaus to clear away, as a house or fence. 21 ) Noun
from la, to obtain on credit. 22 ) Sign of past tense. 23 ) Pa is a directive from, la-pa obtain on
credit from. 24 ) Warilam reciprocal of ilam, to recognise, make out. 25 ) Causative of laun,
to live. 26 ) Tena is a noun te, one, with prep na of. Cf. Neu-Lauenburg. Parable of Tares, note 13.
2. The Decalogue.
From: A tinata Niu Britania, Viti, Samoa, Tukyok ma Britania. i. e. Language New
Britain, Fiji, Samoa, Duke of York and English, by Rev. B. Banks, 1885.
In dialect of Kabakada.
Arip na waratuluai l ).
Tqn the messages.
Kaliak u tarom 2 ) tai tika na Kalou bula, iau kakika
Do not thou serve to one God also, I only.
God also, I only.
Kaliak u ka 3 ) tadav u kaum tika na tabalara 4 ), ba ra malalari 5 ) tika na
Do not thou carve to thee your one idol, or likeness one
maqit u c ) rama ra balanabakut, ba waraqop tika na maqit ra rakrakan-a-qunan 7 )
thing up heaven, or like one thing earth
ba waraqop tika na maqit ta ra ta lamana 8 ): kali 9 ) uwa timtibum 10 ) tadav
or like any thing sea: do not thou kneel to
diat, kali u tarom ta diat: ba iau Jeova kaum Kalou, iau a Kalou a
them, do not thou obey to them: because I thy God, I God
tena-kukure, iau bali ra magamagan 11 ) a kaina kadiat a lavuru £ua 12 ) tadav na
jealous person, I repay custom bad their old to
tu 20 ) i diat ta ra utul na ivat na tauntare 13 ) pa dia ru iau, ma iau mari
child of them to three four generation not they respect me, and I pity
diat a vinum a maramara na tauntare dia ru iau ma tarom ta &augu waratuluai!
them ten hundreds of generations they respect me and obey to my message!


Kali u watag ra ye Jeova £aum Kalou, ba Jeova pa
Do not thou pronounce carelessly name thy God, because not
dira waramaram ma tikai ba i u ) watag wakk ra yagina.
them agree-with with one that pronounce carelessly his-name.
U na 15 ) &odop ra bug-tabu 16 ), ma u na 16 ) ru ia. A laptikai na
Thou shalt remember sabbath, and thou shalt respect it. Six
and thou shalt respect it. Six
bug u na 15 ) papalum 17 ), ma pait wapara kaum papalum: a wawalavurua 18 )
day thou shalt work, and do finish thy work: seventh
and do finish thy work: seventh
na bug a bug-tabu 16 ) nam Jeova &aum Luluai; Kali u papalum 17 ) taun 19 )
day sabbath that of
thy chief: Do not thou work upon
ia, u, ba na turn 20 ) na ra tutana, ba na turn 20 ) na ra wawina, ba faum tultul 21 )
it, thou, or thy-child male, or child female, or thy servant
male, or child female, or thy servant
na ra tutana, ba &aum tultul na ra wawina, ba &aum wawaque 22 ), ba ra wawaira
male, or thy servant
female, or thy animal, or stranger
i l4 ) ti k\ ra kubam: ba ta laptikai na bug Jeova i l4 ) qa 23 ) waki 24 ) tana ra
sits thy-house: for
six days placed it
balanabakut ma ra rakrakan-a-qunan 7 ), na ta ma ra maqit para i l4 ) ti ki 26 )
heaven and
earth, sea and things all abides
tana, ma i l4 ) qa gopapa 26 ) ta ra wawalavurua 18 ) na bug: ia na Jeova wadoane
in it, and rested seventh day: blessed
tana ra bug-tabu, ma i l4 ) qa 23 ) watabu ia.
sabbath, and
hallowed
U na ru tamam ma nam: upi na lolovina kaum nilaun 27 ) ta ra
Thou shalt fear thy father and thy mother: so that long thy life
qunan na Jeova kaum Kalou i tar ia tain
place thy God give to thee
Kaliak u doka tikai.
Do not thou kill any one.
VII.
Kaliak u po.
Do not thou adultery.
VIII.
Kaliak u log.
Do not thou steal.
Kaliak u vaogopa tikai.
Do not thou lie-about any one.


Kaliak i puruai ra balam-upi 28 ) ra pal kai tikai, kaliak i puruai ra
Do not be-confused covet house of any, do not be-confused
covet house of any, do not be-confused
balam-upi ra wawina kai tikai, ba kana tultul na ra tutana, ba kana tultul na
covet woman of any, or his servant male, or his servant
ra wawina, ba kana karavau 29 ), ba kana asa 30 ), ba tika na maqit kai tikai
female, or his ox,
or his ass, or any thing of any one.
Notes; J ) Waratuluai, wara, reciprocal; tul, to send, tuluai, to send away, tultul a
messenger. 2 ) tarom, toromin Diet. 3 ) ka, to grate, scrape or scratch. 4 ) tab alar a Ral.
kabataba. 5 ) malalari, shadow. 6 ) u, preposition, to or towards a place. 7 ) rakrakan, all,
qunan, a place. 8 ) lamana, the deep sea, as in New Guinea rama, Banks Is. lama. 9 ) kali, an
abbreviation of kaliak. 10 ) wa, lie, timtibum, face downwards. u ) magamagan, reduplication
of magana, custom or character. 12 ) kua, grey headed. 13 ) taun-tare, crop of men, as in Neu-
Lauenburg. 14 ) i, verbal particle, 3rd. pers. singular. 15 ) na, sign of future. 16 ) bug, day, tabu,
holy. 17 ) pap alum, work, a plantation, noun from palurn. 18 ) seventh with reduplication of the
causative prefix. 19 ) taun, to press on, be on. 20 ) not in Diet. 21 ) literally a messenger. 22 ) noun
from waque, to feed an animal, hence to keep it. 23 ) qa, sign of past tense. 24 ) waki, made
sit. 25 ) ki, sit. 26 ) go, rest, papa, for a little time. 27 ) nilaun, noun from laun. 28 ) balam,
thy heart (or belly), upi, for, in need of. balam-upi, to set one’s heart upon a thing. 29 ) a word
introduced from Fiji. so ) English ass.
3. A. Waratovo: A. Lesson.
From: A Buk na Waratovo ta ra Tinata Niu Britania. i. e. Book of Lessons in the Language
New Britain: in the Raluana dialect.
Boina da minana muka ta ra lotu. Dawe dat walubane a tinata 1 ) kai ra
Good we understand well about worship. Why we forget word of
Kalou. Da ti doan, Jesu i mari dat boko, A tulugiana Tabu i waminana 2 )
God. We fortunate pities us still. His spirit holy informs
dat. Tuka boko 3 ) a Kalou na kure dat. Dia go tukum kadia papalum
us. Soon still God will rule us. They rest forever from their work.
Diat dia tara mat dia lua ka dat da murumuru. 4 ) Pa i wavuon kadat
They they give death they' first only we shall go after. From longtime our
nilaun ta qo ra qunan. Pa da nukure ra bug dat a wirua tana. Boina da
life this place. We shall know day we die Good we
nuknuk ra tinata 1 ) kai ra Kalou. Ba da waratovo ta ra bugbug para dat a
think word of God. Because we learn every day all we
minana. Kada kunukul 5 ) i kipa 6 ) dat ta ra balanabakut,
understand. our treasure waits us heaven.
Notes: x ) tinata, noun from tata, to speak. 2 ) wa, causative, minana, understand.
3 ) tuka boko, by and bye. 4 ) The sense of this sentence is difficult to make out. 5 ) noun from
kul, to buy. 6 ) kipa, sits for.


4. The House on a Rock (Matthew VII. 24 —27).
(From the same as the preceding.)
Jesu Karisito i tara tatike dari;
gave said like this:
24. Ba tikai i walogore 1 ) qo kauqu lavuru 2 ) tinata ma i tarom tana dira waraqop
If any hear these my sayings and do it they are like
ma tika na tena-kabinana i qa pait pal ta ra wat; a bata i qa tora
with one wise person built his house rock: rain saturate
taun ia, ma ra lowon i qa lologa taun.ia, ma pa i tarip, ba i turn ta ra wat.
upon it, and stream flowed out upon it, and not fell because stood rock.
Ba tikai i walogore 1 ) qo kauqu lavuru 2 ) tinata, ma pa i tarom tana, dira
If any hear these my words, and not do it, they
waraqop ma tika ra tatana papaua i qa pait kana pal tara veo; ma ra bata
like with one speak foolish built his house sand; and rain
i qa tora taun ira, ma ra lowon i qa lologa taun ia, ma ra übara i qa
saturated on them, and stream poured upon it, and wind
vuvu taun ia, ma i qa tarip; ma i gala k&na tinarip. 3 )
blew upon it, and fell; and great its fall.
Notes: x ) Logo in this word is the common longo, rongo, to hear. 2 ) lavuru is the
sign of the plural. 3 ) tinarip is the noun from tarip.
5. Ta Ra Kalamana kinakava. To loane 111. I—B.1 —8.
(From: Arip na Waratuluai. i. e. Ten Commandments; Kabakada. July 1885.)
i. Tika na tutana ta diat a Varesaio a yagina to 1 ) Nikotimo, a luluai bula
One man of them his nome, chief also
kadiat a Judaia
of them
2. i qa wana tadav to >) Jesu ra martim ma i tatike dari, Rabi, ave nukure ba
came to night and said thus, we understand that
u a tena-waratovo 2 ) kai ra Kalou; ba pata tika na tutana na pait qo ra
thou teacher of: because not any man does
lavuru wakilag u papait ia ba pa dira ki warurug ma ra Kalou
tests thou doest it if not they sit together with God.
3. Jesu a tatike tadav ia, i tuna, i tuna qo iau tatike tadav u, Ba pa di
said to him, true this I say to you, If not they
kava wakalamane 3 ) ra tare, di ma-qiraqire 4 ) ra matanitu kai ra Kalou.
be born newly men, they cannot-see kingdom of God.
4. To 1 ) Nikotimo i tatike dari, Dawe ra lavuru kua 6 ) diat a ruk muru ra balai
said thus, How old they enter back belly-of
naidiat ma da &ava mule?
their-mother and they born again?


5- To Jesu i tatike dari, Qo i tuna muka ba pa di kava ra tare ta ra tava
said thus, This true indeed if not they be born men water
ma ra Tulugiana di mama-ru& 4 ) na matanitu kai ra Kalou.
and spirit they cannot enter kingdom of God.
6. la na ra tare di qa kava, a tulugie ka nam.
It will men they born, spirit only that.
7. Kali u kaian ta qo iau warave 7 ) u tana dari, I takado 6 ) ka ba da kava
Do not thou wonder I tell thee about-it thus, right only if shall born
mule awat.
again you.
8. A übara i ti vu tadav ra qunan i qa wana karn ia, ma ra qunan bula
wind blows to place goes from it, and place also
ba na wana tana dira waraqop ma tikai na ra Tulugiana i qa kava
that shall go to it they like with one shall spirit born.
Notes: x ) To is a particle prefixed to names of men, ya to names of females. 2 ) tovo, to
teach, waratovo, with reciprocal prefix, teaching one another, a lesson, tena-waratovo, a teacher,
one skilled in lessons. 3 ) wakalamane, adverb from kalamana, new. 4 ) ma, reduplicated mama,
a negative prefix meaning cannot, could not. 8 ) kua, grey headed, lavuru kua, old people.
6 ) takado, straight. 7 ) warave, or war a we, reciprocal of we, to tell.
6. Tai to Jona: I na kurena
(From: Tai to Jesu Karisito Kada Luluai: i. e. About Jesus Christ our Leader. Tai
to Jona, About Jonah. Kabakada, 1885. Apparently in the Matupit dialect.)
I. Jeova i qa tatike tadav to Jona na tu i to Amiti dari;
said to son of thus:
2. U na tut, u na wan Ninive, a gala na pia-na-pal 2 ) nam, u na bor 1 )
Thou shalt rise, thou shalt go
great city that, thou shalt scold
ia, ta qo i tara tadav iau kadia magamagana kaina.
it, because give to me their character bad.
3. Ma to Jona i tut upi na takap 3 ) Tasis karn Jeova. I qa wana ba Jopa,
arose for run-away from went down
ma iqa qire tanam 4 ) tika na parau 5 ) i to na wan 6 ) Tasis: i tokom ia,
and saw there one ship about to go hired it,
ma i koa 7 ) ta diat ba na varait 8 ) ma diat u Tasis karn Jeova
and went with them that should accompany with them from
4. Ma Jeova iqa watutpa ra gala na vuvn uta 9 ) ta ra ta, i ururug muka
made rise great wind great in the sea, swelled exceedingly
ra ta, ma i gala rabane 10 ) ra parau 5 ).
sea, and great dashed about ship.
5. Ma ra lavuru tena-ta dia buruburut, ma dia qa vura 11 ) papait 12 ) tadav
sailors they feared, and they began invoke to
kadia lavuru Kalou, ma di vue ra tabarikik na ta karn ra parau, upi ta
their gods, and they cast goods from ship, for


wabanabanapa 13 ) ia. To Jona iqa wana ba ta ra bala na parau, ma i
make light it. went down in belly of ship, and
vuavua 14 ) ma iqa diop.
lay down and slept.
Ma ra luluai na parau iqa wana tadav ia ma iqa biti l 0), U dave 16 ), a
And chief of ship went 10 him and said, Thou what,
lup-nidiop? 17 ) U na 18 ) tut, una papait 12 ) tadav kaum Kalou, ba na
sleeper? Thou rise, Thou invoke to thy God, if will
kodop dat ma kaliak 19 ) dat a virua 20 ).
remember us and stop us dying.
Ma dia vura 11 ) tata dari, Uti dat a ailailama ma dat a nukure ba i tup
And they began speak thus, here we recognize and we know if afflict
dat tai ia qo ra maqit kaina. Ma dia qa ailailam, ma di qa ailailam
us through who this thing bad. And they recognized, and they recognized
otpa 21 ) to Jona
completely
Ma dia qa tatike tadav ia, Una warave avet, I tup dat tai ia qo ra
And they said to him, You tell us, afflict us through who this
maqit kaina. U madaka ta ra ava? U qa wana ma ve? Avuna 22 )ava
thing bad. Thou skilful in what? Thou come from where? Position what
kaum qunan? Ba ia diat kaum tare?
thy place? Who they thy people?
Ma i qa tatike tadav diat: Jau a Ebraio; iau ru Jeova a Kalou i ra
And said to them: I Hebrew; I worship God
balanabakut, ia na iqa waki ra ta ma ra qunaqunan 23 ) bula
heaven, he placed sea and earth also.
Ma ra tare dia buruburut muka, ma dia tatike, Dave uqa pait qo? Ba
And men they feared greatly, and they said, Why thou done this ? Because
dia nukure i qa takap karn ra Kalou, ta qo i qa warave diat.
they knew fled from God, because told them,
Ma dia tiria, s Ava avet a pait ia tam, upi na malila ra ta ta tadavi
And they ask him, What we do it to thee, for calm sea to
avet? (Ta qo atai qa tara ug u rama, ma i ururug muka.)
us? Because sea swelled to up, and swelled greatly.
Ma i tatike tadav diat, Awat u vue iau na ta: ma na malila tadavi
And said to them, You throw me sea: and will (be) calm to
awat: ta qo iau nukure i tupi awat karn iau ka qo ra gala na vuvu.
you: because I know afflict you from me only this great wind.
Ma ra tare dia qa ogoro muka ba diat a walua waur 24 ) ia ra veo; ma
And men they toiled hard that they row reach it sand; and
pata ta qo i ug u rama muka ra ta ma i ururug bula.
not because swelled to up greatly sea and swelled also.
Ma dia qa tagi tadav Jeova dari, Ave arig u Jeova, ave arig u, kaliak
And they cried to thus, We entreat thee We entreat thee, do not
avet a viniruana 25 ) ta qo u Jeova uqa pait nam u maige.
us kill because thou thou did that thou desired,
20


15. Ma di qa vue to Jona na ta, ma ra ta i qa malila muka naqam
And they cast
sea, and sea calm very for-first-time.
16. Ma ra tare diat burutue Jeova: ma di qomoqomo 20 ) pire Jeova, ma dia
And men they feared and they sacrificed to and they
qa kubu 27 ) tatara tana bula.
vowed gifts to him also.
17. Ma Jeova iqa malmalpa 28 ) ta gala muka ra ien, ba na konome to Jona
prepared great very fish, that shall swallow
Ma to Jona i qa ki ra balai ra ien a utul a bug na keake 29 ), ma utul
And stayed belly of
a bug na marum 29 ) bula.
fish three days of daylight, and three
nights of darkness also.
Notes: 7 ) bor, to shout at, scold harshly. 2 ) pia-na-pal, place of houses. 3 ) takap for
Ral. lop, to flee, run away. 4 ) ta, at, nam, that. 5 ) parau, apparently a Malay word. 6 ) wan,
to, almost, na, shall, wan, go, about to go, just starting. 7 ) koa, to climb over, to mount on a
ship, 8 ) varait for Ral. waraqur. 9 ) uta for Ral. ta, an intensive pardcle. 10 ) rabane is not
in Diet, but rap a, means to take by force. u ) vura for Ral. tavuna, commencing. 12 ) pap ait,
to make an incantation, tena papait, a wizard. ,s ) wabanabanapa is not in the Diet. 14 ) vuavua,
reduplication of vua, Raluana wa, to lie down. 15 ) biti, to express an opinion. 16 ) U dave?
You what? What are you doing? 17 ) lup, a word synonymous with tena, perhaps from lupa,
to open like a door, lup-nidiop, a swallower of sleep, nidi op, noun from diop, to sleep. 18 ) na,
future used as imperative. 19 ) the same as the prohibitive used with verbs. 20 ) virua for Ral.
wirua. 21 ) otpa is not in the Dictionary. 22 ) vuna, beginning, hence the root, base or origin,
and thus family or tribe. 23 ) qunaqunan, mainland. 24 j waur, bring to land, wa, causative,
ur, shore, the common word uta. 25 ) viniruana noun from virua. 26 ) qomoqomo, to sacri-
fice to an evil spirit kaiya, for the protection of voyagers. 27 ) kubu, to tie a knot. An agreement
or appointment is remembered by means of a knotted string. 28 ) mal, to do or treat well, pa, a
directive. 29 ) bug na keake, day of daylight, bug na marum, day of darkness.
7. Philip. Acts VIII. 5 —12
(From: A umana papait kai ra umana Apositolo. Brisbane, 1886. i. e. The works of
the Apostles.)
5. Ma to Vilipo i wan u ra ta ra pia-na-pal Samaria, ma i warawai tai
went to
and preached about
Karisito ta diat.
to them.
6. Ma ra lavuru kor-na-tarai ba dia
walogore ra tinata to Vilipo i warawarawe,
And crowds when they
heard word preached,
ma dia qire ra umana 1 ) wakilag i papait ia, dia vura torom tana,
and they saw signs did it, they began serve to it.
7. Ta qo ra umana 1 ) tabaran dia irop ma dia tagi mat, kan mogoro diat dia
Because evil spirit they descend and they cried greatly, lest many they
purupuruan me; ma mogoro na tarai dia matmat 2 ) ra paka i diat, ma diat
perplexed with it; and many men
body of them, and they
bula dia kekebau 3 ), di walaqarapa 4 ) diat.
also they lame, they cured them.


8. Ma i mag ra ququ ta nam ra pia-na-pal
And much rejoicing in that
9. Ma tika na tutana, a yagina to Simon, amana yat i aqaqara 0 ) ta ra
And one
man, his name formerly himself used sorcery in
pia-na-pal nam, ma i qa wakawakaian ra tarai Samaria, ma i biti 6 ) ba ia
city that, and
frightened people and thought that he
ra gala muka;
important really;
10. Ma ra tarai wakuku ma ra umana luluai 8 ) bula, diat para, dia vura walogore,
And people carelessly and chiefs also, they all, they began hear,
ma dia tatike, A tutana qo ia ra dekdek kai ra Kalou nam di watag ia
and they said, man this he strong of God that they call him
ra Gala.
great.
11. Ma dia walogore beaka papa amana yat i wakawakaian diat ma kana
And they heard because
formerly himself frightened them with his
lavuru papait.
incantations.
kana waratovo ta ra lavuru bona maqit
his preaching about good thing
12. Ba dia tara kapupi to Vilipo ma
And they believed and
good thing
ure ra matanitu kai ra Kalou,
concerning kingdom of God,
ra waraden 10 ) bula dia bapataiso.
ma ta ra yag i Jesu Karisito, a tarai ma
and about name of men and
men and
women also they baptised.
Notes: *) Sign of the plural. 2 ) makmak in Diet. 3 ) kekebau, from keke, leg, bau,
dried up as a nut without kernel or a banana with no inside. 4 j walaqarap, causative from
laqara, convalescent. 5 ) aqaqara, to bewitch by pricking a person’s footprint with the barbed
bone of a fish. 6 ) biti, to express an opinion. 7 ) noun from lua, to lead. ®) papa, a little time
ago. 9 ) preposition ka before a noun. 10 ) used only in the plur. Ral. waden. A similar word
is tare, men. The singular nouns are tutana, man, wawina, woman.
8. Parable of the Sower. (Mark IV. 3 —9.)
From: A Buk tabu kalamana ure to Jesu Karisito kada tena-walaun bula. Paramatta, 1892. (The
Book holy new of Jesus Christ our Leader and our Saviour also.)
3. Awat a walogore; a tena-winaoma x ) i
wan oai 3 ) upi na waoma; 1 )
went out shall plant;
hear; planter
4. ba i waoma 1 ) wanawana, ta umana wit dia bura ta ra papara ga, 3 ) ma
when planted seed, some they fell on side way, and
ra umana beo dia pukai tana, dia an vue.
birds they alighted on it, they eat away,
5. Ta ra umana dia bura ta ra pia na wat, ma pa i mag kadia pia; ma
Some they fell on ground of stone, and not much their earth; and
dia qol vuavue, taqo pa i mag kadia pia;
they shot up quickly, because not much their ground


6. ba ra keake i tara wan arikai 4 ) dia makuk; ma taqo pa ta okor i diat,
when sun came forth they withered; and because not root of them,
dia marag a kakit. 5 )
they shrivelled altogether.
7. Ta ra umana bula dia bura na livuan 6 ) ta ra kait, 7 ) ma ra kait 7 ) i
Some also they fell midst of thorn, and thorn
tavua 8 ) ma i arug 9 ) bat 10 ) diat, ma pa dia vue.
flourished and choked them, and not they fruit.
8. Ma ta ra umana muka dia bura ta ra bona pia, ma dia vue, dia
And some indeed they fell on good ground, and they fruited, they
tavua, 8 ) ma dia gala wanawan; dia vue ta umana a ututul 11 ) a vinun, ta
grew, and they great went; they fruited some three ten
ra umana a laplaptikai 11 ) na vinun, ma ta ra umana a maramara. 12 )
some six ten, and some hundreds.
9. Ma i tatike, la ba ra taligana upi na walawalogor me, 13 ) boina ba na
And, said He that his ear so that shall hear with it, good that
walogore.
hears.
Notes; *) winaoma, noun from the causative verb waoraa, to make an oma or plantation.
Oma is the common Oceanic word uma. 2 ) oai, a directive, out and away. 3 ) ga, the place where
one goes, pala-ga, the path. 4 ) arikai, from verb arik, to split, hence to open and come forth.
s ) kakit, a reduplication of verb akit, to exceed, here used as an intensive adverb. 6 ) livua-na,
his waist. 7 ) Cf. Malay etc. words for’hook’. 8 ) tavua, to grow luxuriantly. 9 ) arug, to stunt the
growth of, as a large tree does a smaller one. 10 ) bat, a terminal implying obstruction or pre-
vention. u ) distributive numerals are formed by the reduplication of the simple forms. 12 ) redu-
plication of mar a. 13 ) me for ma i, with it.
g. Feeding of the Four Thousand. (Mark VIII. 1 —9.)
(From the same as the preceding.)
I. Ta ra e nam, a tare dia kor mat, ma pa ta maqit diat a an ia: i oro-pa
at the time that, men they crowd very, and not any thing they eat it: called-to
kana tare na waratovo, ma i tatike ta diat,
his disciples, and said to them,
2. lau mari qo ra tare, taqo dia tara ki-pa 1 ) ra utul a bug piraqu, ma pa
I pity now men, because they sit-with three day with me, and not
adia ta maqit;
their food any thing;
3. ba ina tulue diat ta ra kubakuba 2 ) i diat ma ra mulmulum, diat a
If I shall send away them to dwellings of them and hungry, • they
matmat wanawana naganaga 3 ) taqo ta umana dia tara 4 ) wut ati ma
faint going on the way; because some they rum here from
ro welik.
there a long distance.


4- Kana tare na waratovo dia tatike tana, Mama ave ra qem°) ati ra pui ba
His disciples they say to him, From where bread here bush that
dS tabara wamaur-pa qo ra tare me?
anyone feed make live these men with it?
5. I tiri diat, Aivia ra qem 5 ) awa 6 ) vug ia? Dia tatike, A lavurua.
answered them, How many loaves you put it, 5 They say seven.
6. Ma i waratuluai ba ra kor na tare diat aki ra pia; ma i waturu 7 ) ra
And ordered that crowd of men they sit ground: and held up
lavurua na qem, 5 ) i pite-warapa 8 ) tana, i tabik ia, ma i tul tari ia te kana
seven loaves, blessed to it, broke it, and sent give it to his
tare na waratovo diat a vug ia pire
disciples they put it to
7, Dia kap ra paupau en ik bula,
They took few fish little also,
upi da vug ia bula pire diat.
so that they put it also to them.
8. Dia ian ma dia maur, ma dia
They ate and they satisfied, and and
ta ra lavurua na rat.
in seven basket.
diat; ma dia vug kapi 9 ia pire ra tare.
them; and they put take it to men.
ma i lotu-pa 10 ) tana, ma i tul tari ia
and blessed to it, and sent give it
wagan ra taqiqina dia tara an walili ia,
put in its crumbs they ate remains it,
ate remains it,
9. A iwat na vinun na maramara diat, ma i tulue diat.
four ten hundreds they and sent away them.
Notes: J ) ki-pa, to wait for, stay with, ki, to sit. 2 ) kuba-na, his dwelling place, his
mat to sleep on, his canoe to sit in. 3 ) naganaga is a reduplication of nag a, na, the, ga, path
An exception in which both article and noun are reduplicated. 4 ) tara, sign of the perfect tense,
5 ) qem is anative pudding made of grated taro mixed with the expressed milk of the coconut. 6 ) aw a
abbreviation of awat. 7 ) wa, causative, turu, stand, waturu, make stand. 8 ) pite-warapa is
given in the Diet, as noun of pile, to move the hands about as in a dance. 9 ) kapi, a particle of
completion, perhaps the same as the verb kapi, to take or bring; vug kapi, to take and place.
M ) lotupa, transitive from introduced word lotu, worship.
10. The Parable of the Tares. (Matt. XIII. 24—30.)
(From the same as the preceding.)
24. Tikai bula ra tinata walawalara 1 ) i
One also word comparison
ma rama ra balana-bakut dira
from up there heaven they
qa tovo diat me, i tatike, A matanitu
taught them with it, said, kingdom
waradada 2 ) ma ra tutana iqa waome kana
like with man planted his
pia ma ra wit 3 ) i tuna;
ground with wheat true;
25. ba ra tare dia diop kana ebara i wut ma i waome ra kaina wit na
when men slept his enemy came and planted bad wheat
livuan 4 ) ta ra wit i tuna, ma i wana mule.
among wheat true, and went away.
24


Summary
of Grammar.
Neu-Lauenburg:
Neu-Pommern:
i. Articles; a, ra, na, ta.
a, ra, na, ta.
2. Nouns:
Plural: (i) kum, kaba, ain, awin.
, (1) umana, lavuru, bara, para,
(2) by reduplication.
(2) by reduplication.
(3) by suffix ta.
Prefix to names of males; to,
to.
» » » » females: ne,
ya.
26. Ba i tara maplna ma i vue 5 ),
When gave leaf and came out,
di qire ilam 6 ) ra kaina wit.
they see know bad wheat.
27. Ma ra umana tultul ke nina 7 ) kana
And servants of this of
ra oma 8 ) dia wut, ma dia tatike tana,
plantation they came, and they say to him,
tuna ta kaum pia laka 9 )? Mama ave
true thy ground From where
Luluai, pa u qa oe ra wit i
Chief, not thou sowed wheat
qo ra kaina wit?
this bad wheat?
28. I tatike ta diat, A ebara iqa pait qo. Ma ra umana tultul dia tiri ia,
said to them, enemy did this. And servants they ask him,
U maige laka ba avet a rubat wapara vue?
Thou wish that we root up finish away?
29. I tatike, Fata, kan awat a rubat wartime 10 ) me ra wit i tuna
He said, No, lest you root up together with it wheat true.
30. Nuru vue dira para ka 11 ) boko upi ra nidodoko 12 ); ta ra kilala 13 ) na nidodoko
Trust away they two all yet for reaping; season reaping
ina tatike ta ra umana tena-nidodoko, Awat a warurue walue 14 ) ra kaina wit,
I will say to reapers, You gather first bad wheat,
awat a win 15 ) ia upi da 16 ) tun 17 ) ia, ma awat a warurue ra wit i tuna ta kauqu
you tie it for burn it, and you gather wheat true to my
pal na vuvuvug 18 ).
house of storing.
Notes: *) walawalara, a measure or comparison, from walara, a measure. 2 ) waradada,
reciprocal of da, to be like. 3 ) wit, English wheat. 4 ) livuan, its middle, livua-na, his waist.
5 ) vue, to throw away. 6 ) qire ilam, to' see and recognise, to know by sight. 7 ) nina, this or
that to which reference has abready been made. 8 ) oma is the common Oceanic word uma. 9 ) laka,
sign of the interrogative. 10 ) warurug, together, rue to unite. n ) ka, only, a very commo
expletive. 12 ) noun from doko, to kill; to cut corn is to kill it. 13 ) kilala, monsoon. 14 ) wa,
causative, lua first. 15 ) win, to tie in a bundle. 16 ) da impersonal pronoun. 17 ) tun, the common
Oceanic word tunu, to roast, cook or burn. 18 ) noun of vug to place, house of placing, store.


Neu-Lauenburg:
Neu-Pommern;
Nouns are formed from verbs;
I. By infix in or nu.
i. By infix in, or un.
2. By reduplication of first syllable.
3. By prefix ni.
2. By reduplication of whole or part.
3. By prefix ni.
4. By prefix we.
4. By prefix war a.
5. By suffix warapa.
5. By prefix tena, to indicate the
agent.
6. By prefix tena, or lup to indicate
the agent.
3. Verbs:
1. Transitive terminations tau, taun,
i, tai, pai.
. 2. Causative prefix wa (pam, pet).
3. Reciprocal » we.
4. Tense signs:
Present (none).
Past a.
Future g, n (added to pro-
noun), na.
5. Mood;
Imperative: Same as Future.
Infinitive: a.
1. Transitive terminations ane, e, pa-i,
papa.
2. Causative prefix wa.
3. Reciprocal » wara,
4. Tense signs:
Present ti
Past tia, tar&, qa, qa ti, qa tara.
Future ina, na, a.
5. Mood:
Imperative: Same as future.
Personal-Pronouns.
New Lauenburg
Singular 1. iau, ag, 2. u, ui. 3. i, ia.
Dual 1. (inch) dara. 1. (excl.) mira. 2. muri. 3. diara
Trial 1. (inch) datul. I. (excl.) mitul. 2. mutul. 3. ditul.
Plural 1. (inch) dat. 1. (excl.) miat. 2. muat. 3. diat.
Indefinite di = German man, French on.
Neu-Pommern:
Singular 1. iau, ina. 2. u
Dual r. inch dora. 1
Trial 1. inch data!. 1
f da,
Plural I. inch { , I
I dat.
Indefinite di.
3. i, ia.
f mira, f muru,
excl. ( 2. ! 3. dira.
lamira. (amuru.
f mital, f mutal,
excl. I . J , 2. ! J , 3. ditah
lamital. lamutal.
( ave, f awa, f dia.
excl. { 2. { j 3.1 ,
[avet. [ awat. Idiat.
The forms ag and ina are Future tense. A prefixed, or t suffixed indicates
the objective case.
26


Possessive Pronouns
I. Suffixed to nouns.
New Lauenburg:
Singular i. -g, -ig. 2. -m. 3. -na
Dual, Trial and Plural have the personal pronoun suffixed
Neu-Pommern:
Singular 1. -qu. 2. -m. 3. -na.
Dual, Trial and Plural have the ordinary Pronoun suffixed.
Interrogative Pronouns.
Neu-Lauenburg. Neu-Pommern.
Who? o oi? o oi dat? ia? to ia? ya ia?
What? aua? ava?
Possessive Pronouns,
Neu-
Lauenburg,
Ne u Pommern.
mine
( nug
Singular 1. 'a mag
I a gag
( kauqu
aqu
I aqu
| kaum
1 am
f kana
(anh
f kadora
1 adora
f kami ra
1 amira
f kamuru
1 amuru
f kadira
I adira
f kadatal
1 adatal
| kamital
I, amital
f kam utal
I amutal
f kadital
1 adital
my drink
my food to eat
thy f
fa num
“’la mam
thy food or drink
his
f a nuna
tana
his food or drink
ours (yours and mine)
our food or drink
ours (his and mine)
our food or drink
f a nudara
Dual I. (incl.) | a dara
f numiat
1. (excl.)
la mamira
yours (2)
fa numuru
2
la mamuru
your food or drink
theirs (2)
f a nudiara
1 a diara
their food or drink
ours (3)
f a nudatul
Trial 1. (incl.) ! .
la datul
our food or drink
( a numitul
1. (excl.)
I a mam it ul
ours (3)
our food or drink
yours (3)
f a numutul
| a mamutul
your food or drink
fa nuditu 1
i a ditul
theirs (3)
their food or drink


fa nudat f kada, kadat ours
Plur. i. (incl.) | I , ,
la dat lada, adat our
our food or drink
[a numiat fkaveve, kavevet ours
i. (excl.) m j at 1 aveve, avevet our food or drink
("a numuat fkawawa, kawawat yours
la muat I awawa, awavvat your food or drink
[a nudiat
la dial
f kadia, kadiat
ladia, adiat
theirs
their food or drink
Numerals
Neu-Pommern.
Neu-Lauenburg.
Cardinals. Ordinals. Cardinals. Ordinals. 1 )
ra. a mukana. I. tikai. tikai.
ruadi, nidi. 2. a urua, evut. wavevutuna.
tuldi, 3. a utul. wavautuluna.
watdi. 4. a iwat. wavaivatina.
limadi. 5. a ilima. wawailimana.
nomdi, limadi ma ra. Same l a Ptikai. wawalaptikina.
limadi ma ruadi. 7. lavurua. wawalavuruana.
as '
limadi ma tuldi, ru watdi. ■ 8. lavutul. wawalavutuluna.
limadi ma watdi. , o. lavuwat. wawalavuwatina.
nals.
no, noina. j lavulima
noina ma ra. 10. arip wawaripuna.
noina ma ruadi. ( vinun
ru noina. \ arip ] ma
11. { > . wawaripuna ma tikai
a mara. I a vinun J tikai.
f arip 1 ma . .
12. ; . wawaripuna maiunt,
I a vinun J arua.
f a ur arip.
20. ! . wawauraripuna
I a ura a vinun.
Distributives.
1. tikatikai, ]
ra pakan.
raurawm. J
2. ruruadi, 1
ruapakan.
ruruwm. J
3. tultuldi, ]
, , . tul a pakan.
tultulawin. J
100. a mara.
1000. arip na maramara.
2000. a tutana ot.
Multiplicative.
wawatikai.
Distributive.
1. tikatikai.
2. ievevut.
3. iututul.
4. ivevat.
w^avevut.
tvavautul.
wavevat.
5. ililima. wawailima.
6. laplaptikai. wawalaptikai.
*) These are doubtful and are not used by the natives. The common expressions are:
luaina, first; livuana, the middle one; muruna, the following, or last.
28


Neu-Lauenburg;
4. watwatdi. wat na pakan.
5. limlimadi. lima na pakan.
6. nomnomdi. nom na pakan.
7. limlimadi ma ruadi.
8. » » tuldi.
9. » » watdi.
10. nonoina.
How many? te a di? te a win?
How often? te a pakan?
Neu-Pommern.
7. lavlavurua. wawalavurua.
8. lavlavutul. wawalavutul.
9. lavlavuwat. wawalavuwat.
10. iararip. wavarip.
How many? aivia?
How often? aiviavia ra pakan?
29


