

JUDO
(JIU-JITSU)




TEXT BOOK OF JUDO


The Author


TEXT BOOK OF JUDO
(JIU-JITSU)
VOL. I
By DR. A. J. ROSS
3rd DAN.
Official Handbook of The Australian Council of Judo.


Registered at the G.P.0., Sydney,
fur transmission by post as a book
JV holly set up and printed in Australia by
The Bridge Printery Ply. Ltd., 117 Reservoir Street, Sydney


FOREWORD
29th November, 1949.
Brisbane,
Queensland.
It is with pleasure that I comply with a request from the
Members of the Judo Club to write a brief foreword to their
interesting; useful and comprehensive publication. ■ ' ' ,
As a soldier of two wars and also as one responsible for the
training of thousands of trainees between the wars, I can speak
with first-hand knowledge of the necessity of teaching recruits to
be able to look after themselves in all circumstances.
In both the recent world conflicts, hand-to-hand combat was
frequent, particularly in Gallipoli and France, 1914-18, and New
Guinea of more recent date.
A knowledge of some of the holds, trips, feints, pairies, etc., may
often be the means of saving one’s own life and that of others,
whether that knowledge comes from unarmed combat, bayonet
training or* Judo.
Dr. A. J. Ross, who was one of my war-time Medical Officers, is
a doughty exponent of the latter and, in the training camps of
Queensland, he gave demonstration exercises to many thousands
of soldiers who undoubtedly found great value in them, under
more dramatic circumstances than on the parade ground.
In civil life it falls to the lot of most men, and some women, to
be involved in a struggle with either thugs, quarrelsome drunks,
bullies, stand-over men or robbers and it is then that one is
thankful for the knowledge to be able to get out of brawls un-
scathed and to the detriment of the attacker.
Judo is a healthy sport which attracts healthy athletes and I
wish Dr. Ross and the members of his Club all the success possible
in their endeavours.
(Signed) J. CRAVEN,
Brigadier (Rtd.).
United Service Club,
Brisbane. ’
Brigadier J r Craven, D.C.M., E.D., • r , .


INTRODUCTION
York Street,
Hamilton,
23/2/49.
As Secretary of the Brisbane Judo Club, and a Councilloi of the
Australian Council of Judo, I feel that I can speak officially on
the value of this Text Book of Judo.
Such a publication has been a long-felt want, and I can say that
in my opinion, and that of the members of the Club, it is by far
the most useful book on Judo ever written.
In these pages, the novice is initiated into Judo, each step being
clearly and admirably written. The fundamentals of the Art have
not been overlooked, as is the case in many other books.
The advanced student is also catered for. He or she will find
many hints and tricks never before published, perhaps because
they are the singular style of an acknowledged master of the Art.
A very praiseworthy feature of this book is that the author has
refrained from introducing a chapter on Atemi.
This is an indication of the adherence by the author to the
straight and narrow path of Judo ethics, which demand that, owing
to its extremely dangerous nature, Atemi is taught only to high-
graded Judoka under a vow never to teach this branch of Judo
to persons under certain ranking.
Unfortunately some writers, for mercenary reasons, have broken
their vows by illustrating and describing Atemi in their works.
Dr. Ross, like the illustrious Professor Kano, selected the best
from the various Ryu of Judo and, although he denies it, it is the
opinion of the Brisbane Judo Club that he has established a
definite “Ross Ryu.”
The author learned Judo the hard way. He studied at the Kono
School, Tokio. After having won the coveted Black Belt in under
two years, a truly phenomenal performance in those days, he barn-
stormed Japan, meeting Judoka of every grade and firmly estab-
lishing the fact that Europeans are in every way as good at Judo
as the Japanese.
After this tour, accompanied by other Judoka, he accepted an
offer by a theatrical company to bring Judo before the people.
Dr. Ross has taught Judo to thousands of people in all parts of
the world. During the war, with the rank of Captain, he was
advisor to the Commonwealth Government on unarmed defence.


The author is one of the few writers who have a lifelong prac-
tical, as well as theoretical, knowledge of the Art. This fact alone
is the guarantee of the value of this book. Each trick has been
proved by many years of practice and contests. Contests against
boxer, wrestler and Judoka.
As one who has seen Dr. Ross in action I can state with every
confidence that he is truly a master of the art.
During a contest he does not seem in the least exerted, moving
only those few inches necessary to throw the opponent.
He has been Hon. Chief Instructor at the Brisbane Judo Club
since its inception in 1928, and Hon. Chief Examiner in theory and
practice for the Australian Council of Judo since its inaugural
meeting also in 1928, freely giving his valuable time and hard-
earned knowledge in the interests of Judo.
The author is acknowledged as Australia s leading exponent of
the Art and as one of the world’s best. Nothing that he says, shows
or writes can be treated lightly; he is in actual fact the Voice of
Authority. Members of the Brisbane Judo Club, knowing his
ability to apply his deep knowledge to the matter in hand, have
many times invited those who doubt the efficacy of Judo to try
conclusions with “I he Doc,’ as they affectionately icfei to the
author.
This has always been an OPEN challenge; no specific person
has necessarily been invited and certainly none has been barred!
“The Doc” himself, we know, has always been only too ready, and
there have been open challenges published in newspapers on
numerous occasions over many years; these have made it clear that
at any time and at any place Dr. Ross would accept any challenger,
irrespective of size, age, weight, ability or profession. I herefore,
it is with pride that I submit this portrait of a master to the reading
public.
S. H. BONGERS.


PUBLISHERS’ NOTE
There can be little doubt that Dr. Ross is one of the leading
and amongst the most competent authorities on Jiu-Jitsu in the
world today. In the first place, he learnt the art in its country
of origin—Japan, and even there is considered an expert.
The Japanese, to whom Jiu-Jitsu is more than a sport, measure
proficiency in certain categories—signified by various coloured belts,
of which black is the highest. Dr. Ross is a black belt man.
He went to Japan with his parents, at the tender age of nine,
and at fourteen began to take an interest in Jiu-Jitsu, or, as it is
more generally known in that country, Judo.
While still in his teens he enrolled at the Kono school at
Kyobashi Ku, Tokio, and was presented with his diploma, U jun
Shodan,” in record time. Recently he was presented with the
Diploma of 3rd Dan by the Australian Council of Judo.
When he returned to Australia he taught Judo in every State,
and in 1928 founded the Brisbane Judo Club. He was its chief,
unpaid instructor from its inception.
There was a time many years ago when Dr. Ross campaigned
actively to popularise Judo and increase public understanding of
its value. He even went so far as to accept a contract from a
theatrical firm to tour on circuit, giving stage demonstrations and
challenging all and sundry to meet him in combat.
The open challenge specified that he would use only Judo throws
and holds, but his opponents could use any method at all—even
biting, scratching, gouging and kicking were not barred. Dr. Ross
further guaranteed not to injure an opponent, so long as the
opponent signified defeat by the usual sign.
That the author is really sincere the reader will discover in
the very early pages of this book, because he goes so far as to say
that a great deal of absolute rubbish has been written about Judo,
and he even sweepingly denies that Judo is the all-conquering
system some people claim.
What he sets out to do primarily is to describe a system of Judo,
the sport, the game and the method of training, and, secondarily,
to offer a simplified method of cultivating a defence against the
hooligan rough-neck who so often seeks to take advantage of a
person less lavishly equipped for natural ways of fighting.
The reader should realise, before he turns to Chapter I, that this
first volume is designed to give the complete novice an insight into
Judo’s fundamental principles; later—if he chooses—he may take
his studies further and move deeper into the ma/e of kime-no-kata,
or purely self-defence methods.
But without the essential background that this first volume
supplies, the novice would find Volume Two (to be published
later) setting him tasks quite beyond his ability to perform without
grave danger to life and limb.


CONTENTS
Page
Chapter i.—THE MENTAL APPROACH TO JUDO n
Chapter 2.—THE FIRST STEPS 13
Chapter 3.—EQUIPMENT REQUIRED 15
Chapter 4.—THE ART OF FALLING 17
Chapter S.—THE SIDE BREAKFALL 19
Chapter 6.—THE BACKWARD FALL 21
Chapter y.-THE FORWARD ROLL : 23
Chapter B.—THE FORWARD FALL 25
Chapter 9.—THE FORWARD “DIVE INTO SPACE” 26
Chapter io.—A FINAL WORD 26
Chapter 11.—THE FUNDAMENTAL NATURAL POSITION .... 27
Chapter 12.—THE STOMACH THROW 29
Chapter 13.—COUNTER TO THE STOMACH THROW 30
Chapter 14.—THROWS 31
Chapter 15. —HIP THROW 33
Chapter 16.—SWEEPING LOINS THROW 35
Chapter 17.— THE CROSS HOCK 36
Chapter 18.—THE STRAIGHT LEG TRIP 37
Chapter 19.—THE SHOULDER THROW 38
Chapter 20.—THE “LAPEL” SHOULDER THROW 39
Chapter 21.—THE SIDE SCISSORS THROW 41
Chapter 22. —SHOULDER WHEEL 43
Chapter 23. —THE BACK RICK 44
Chapter 24.—THE INSIDE BACK RICK 45
Chapter 25.—INSIDE THIGH THROW 46
Chapter 26.—THE ANKLE ROLL 47
Chapter 27. —GROUNDWORK 48
Chapter 28.—THE ETHICS OF GROUNDWORK 49
Chapter 29.—THE POSITIONS OF THE ATTACKER 50
Chapter 30.—THE DEFENSIVE POSITIONS 53
Chapter 31. —A LEG LOCK 55
Chapter 32. —AN ARM LOCK 58
Chapter 33.—THE CROSS STRANGLE 57
Chapter 34.—THE BAR STRANGLE 59
Chapter 35.—THE BACK STRANGLE 61
Chapter 36.—THE STANDING NECK LOCK 62
Chapter 37.—THE NECK LOCK 63
Chapter 38. —SELF-DEFENCE •••• 64
Chapter 39.—THE BACK STRANGLE IN SELF-DEFENCE .... 65
Chapter 40.—WRIST BREAKAWAYS 66
Chapter 41.—“ DON’T ARGUE” 67
Chapter 42.—“ COME-ALONG” 68
Chapter 43.—THE MISSED “COME-ALONG” 69
Chapter 44.—COUNTER TO A STRANGLE 70
Chapter 45.—COUNTER TO A STRAIGHT FRONT STRANGLE 71
Chapter 46.—CHOPS AND THEIR USES 71




CHAPTER 1
THE MENTAL APPROACH TO JUDO
LET it be understood, at the very outset, that this is NOT an
exhaustive treatise on Judo. Such a work would require far
more leisure time than I can find, and certainly it would h
a book many times the size of this publication, so that the cost o
publication would place it beyond the reach of the average person.
My object is to place that average person in possession of a
knowledge sufficient to give him a proper basis for understanding
Judo methods and their application to self-defence. Progressive
steps to greater proficiency will then be simple, and for those
persons requiring a more advanced course I propose to write a
second volume. .
I am confronted with many difficulties, and propose to take
readers into my confidence in this respect.
The average person endeavouring to learn Judo from a book,
without the aid of a competent instructor, soon gives up in despair.
Yet the number of books on the subject is legion, and they still
continue to appear!
The gullible pay for “Judo in 10 Easy Lessons,” only to discover
when tested that the assailant has not had the “10 Easy Lessons,
and is working on methods that do not coincide with the proposed
defence counters.
Illustrating this point very simply; I once saw a very soundly-
versed boxing instructor slide his own right hand to the right side
of his jaw, and call his student to left-hook him; the student threw
a right cross that knocked out the instructor. ff
The moral of this little story, applied to the “10 Easy Lessons,
is that you have got to be ready for. anything and everything.
I do not claim for Judo that it is the be-all, and end-all of self-
defence, that it is the perfect system or that it is infallible.
So much depends upon the individual. His presence of mind,
the element of surprise, the luck of the moment, etc.
But I will say, again and again, that a knowledge of Judo can
never be a burden.
If a thorough working knowledge of the art does nothing else
for the learner, it is worth the time and patience for the degree o
self-control and confidence it inspires in the exponent.
I have known many cases in which nervous, timid men and
women seem to have been re-born through Judo, transformed into
calm, confident individuals, better fitted by far for the normal
everyday problems, as well as for the unprovoked, unexpected
assault.
Shall we now decide on a simple definition of the art?


You will see it written variously as "Ju-Jitsu,” “Ju-Jutsu,” "jiu-
jutsu,” "Jiu-Jitsu” and "Judo.”
It does not matter which you prefer as they are practically all the
same. I shall stick to the term “Judo”; because that is the easiest
for our stubborn British tongue, which notoriously makes heavy
weather of foreign phrases, be they French, Italian, Russian or
Japanese.
Much that has been written about Judo is arrant nonsense.
Literary theorists have made extravagant claims, and have them-
selves failed miserably when put to a practical test.
But going to the other extreme (as one must in any logical
argument) I should dearly love to "demonstrate” on some of those
knowing critics who dismiss all Judo theories as being so much
bunk.


CHAPTER 2
THE FIRST STEPS
LEARNING from cold print something that requires great
activity in a physical sense is never simple. And I regret to
say that almost every book on Judo that I have read has
contained glaring errors and omissions of some very important
principles, but whereas it is not claimed that these lessons cover
more than a small portion of the whole wide field of Judo, at least
they do cover the essential and basic work necessary for steps to
greater proficiency.
Even a wide knowledge of Judo does not, ipso facto, render the
exponent invulnerable to injury. He will not inevitably overcome
every opponent, but this much is certain, he will start the scrap
with the odds very much in his favour.
Judo is practised in two forms. In the gymnasium work-outs,
and in competitive bouts, certain rules are followed which allow
the participants to go through the forms of lethal and disabling
blows and other tricks, without their actual performance. That is
to say, one gets the opportunity of timing, placing and countering
these methods, without the grave risk that would otherwise be a
natural consequence.
But in what we might term “Street Juijitsu,” to make a clear
distinction, there are naturally no rules.
Any tricks may be used which will speedily cripple or disable
the opponent. As in the unarmed defence system used in the forces,
the essential point is always a protective measure which will put
the attacker out of action quickly.
I propose, within the narrow compass of this small volume, to
place readers in possession of a few essential approaches and
counters, which will in themselves constitute a very reasonable
form of self-defence.
Each of these tricks has proved effective through years of practice.
If one trick fails (perhaps because it was not applied quickly
enough, or maybe for a variety of reasons), the skilful Judoka will
swiftly try another, according to the opportunity, or “opening,”
presenting itself.
There is only one way to acquire this ability. Complete a success-
ful and conclusive trick, learn to recognise in a flash the opening
for it, then go on to acquire another.
Constant practice with a partner is required, also practice and
patience.
There is no royal road to proficiency, but the ultimate improve-
ment is worth the time and trouble.
Never forget that in serious combat Judo knows no “fouls." Why?
because the “thing” that attacks (with or without a better weapon)


is not bothered by humanitarian considerations, and is not con-
cerned by the degree or nature of possible injury to you. It MIGHT
be a fight to the death. (Sydney, at least, has its thugs who, in
moments of violence, are nothing more than animals.)
In a moment we shall be discussing the practical side of Judo.
Firstly, I would like to emphasise one or two simple points that
should always be kept very much in mind.
Precision comes first; speed can be developed later. Practise a
movement until it becomes instinctive.
Physical deficiencies are not an insuperable handicap in Judo,
and on the other hand if you are blessed with greater weight or
muscular strength than the average, do not be misled by the initial
success they will bring you, otherwise as surely as day follows
night, having fallen into the habit of relying on your strength, you
will lack technique, and opposed to those of inferior physique but
of greater skill, you will as likely as not find it is too late to unlearn
the bad habit of relying on strength.
Don’t let enthusiasm tempt you into new tricks until you have
completely mastered the tricks you have been practising.
During practice the employment of violent physical strength is
to be avoided, as its use will eventually cause the pupil to almost
solely rely on his strength, rather than on his skill, and is likely to
slow down his speed,' ruin his balance and position, therefore
hampering him in his efforts to cultivate the power to anticipate
an attack. .
Indeed it is the author’s opinion that even in Inter-Dojo (the
area in which Judo is practised, school, club gymnasium, etc.)
combat, and especially in grading contests, the referee should
penalise the contestant who obviously relies on his superior strength
and employs reckless force rather than skill.


CHAPTER 3
EQUIPMENT REQUIRED
PRACTICE CAN BE CARRIED OUT MORE COMFORTABLY IF THE
FOLLOWING “EQUIPMENT” IS PROVIDED
Judo Mats
These are made of tightly-packed rice straw, and covered with
a special smooth matting. When they are unprocurable, the
rubber wrestling mats are a fairly good substitute. Alternatively,
mats may be made from tightly-packed bed mattresses sewn to-
gether. An old carpet can then be spread over the whole, and a
canvas stretched over the carpet.
Whatever kind of mats are used, they should be hard enough to
prevent feet from forming a hollow whenever a step is made, then
the feet should be able to slide over the surface, as they could on
a hard polished wooden floor.
In the absence of suitable mats, a good lawn may be used for
an occasional short practice, although it might prove somewhat
“dead” on which to learn break-falls. Furthermore, frequent heavy
falling is inseparable from the degree of Randori (free practice)
necessary to achieve even a modicum of skill, and is likely eventu-
ally to produce generalised muscular bruising and jarring.
Before each throw, therefore, the anticipation of a highly-
unpleasant jar of the body and fear of being further bruised would
undoubtedly hamper progress.
On the other hand, a skilled pair of Judoka can for short periods
work and fall on the hardest surface without injury or even
discomfort.
Dress
Any clothes made of very strong material will suffice, but any-
thing short of heavy, specially-reinforced duck is likely to be torn
into shreds before long.
Whether an opponent is nude, partly nude or fully dressed, the
exponent of unarmed combat should possess a sufficient repertoire-
to meet the situation; but it is a fact that the vast majority of
attackers are fully clothed, and consequently advantage is taken
of that fact. Many of the throws are devised so as to use the outer
clothing to effect holds and leverages. At the same time it should
be clearly understood that any throw shown in this book can be
carried out against an unclothed person by modifying the grip on
the opponent.


The coat sleeves should be very loose and reach two or three
inches below the elbows. There should be no buttons, buckles or
other “bumps.” „ . , .
The trousers should be strong and loose fitting, and secured to
the waist by wide and strong tapes, rather than with the ordinary
belt. The legs should be wide and extend well below the knee, but
not to the ankle. . . ,
A belt of heavy white duck, long enough to encircle the waist
once or, better still, twice, tied in front by a reef knot, is usually
worn by the beginner. (Other grades usually wear belts of similar
material, but of different colours, according to their ranking.)


CHAPTER 4
THE ART OF FALLING
The art of falling, popularly known as “Breakfalling,” is the
commencement of all Judo training. Indeed, it is the basis of all
Judo training, for without some method of absorbing shocks, one
would be unable to take the fast and heavy falls of Judo.
These “breakfalls” absorb most of the impact of the falling body,
the beat of the arm, in the “side,” “back”, and “front” breakfalls
having a spring-like effect, dampening the impact. In the “forward
roll,” the momentum of falling is not stopped by any one portion
of the body. The momentum is used to guide the body in a com-
plete circle, bringing one again to the standing position. How
different it would be if we extended our arms as the untrained
person would!
In order to learn Judo you must study and practise constantly
from the first lesson. You must be prepared to execute your throws
quickly, without fear of hurting your opponent, to be thrown at
least twenty times, one after the other, by your opponent as he
learns to execute his throws. This is only possible if you master
the breakfalls.
With constant practice you will become more confident of your
ability to withstand hard falls, and consequently your Judo will
improve. That is to say, when you go on the mat with an opponent,
your mind will not be obsessed with wondering whether your
opponent will throw you or not. You will see openings that you
would previously have missed through preoccupation with falling.
I recommend that each breakfall be practised at least five times
on each side before commencing each practice session.


THE SIDE BREAKFALL
Fig. 1
(left)
Fig. 2
(right)
Fig. 3
Fig. 4


CHAPTER 5
THE SIDE BREAKFALL
The “Side Breakfall” is perhaps the most important of all the
“breakfalls.” It certainly comes into use far more often than the
others. For this reason it should be mastered as soon as possible.
It is, in reality, similar to the “back breakfall” which you should
by now be able to execute readily.
Squat on your left heel, have your right leg thrown out in front
of you, now throw your weight towards your right side, slapping
your arm a fraction of a second before your body reaches the
ground (Figs. 1 and 2). Try this ten times, then transfer to the
standing position.
Lift your right leg off the ground, throw it loosely in front of
and across the other as if you were kicking a football placed in
front of your left foot (Fig. 3). Imagine that with the inner aspect
of your right foot you have to kick the football placed as described
towards your left-hand corner.
Now lower your body to the position shown in Fig, 4. From
here proceed as before.
This is a most important “breakfall.” Practise it at least twenty
times, then transfer to your other side.


THE BACKWARD FALL
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Fig. 3


CHAPTER 6
THE BACKWARD FALL
An easy way to learn this is to lie on your back on the mat.
Now draw up your legs and bend each arm to about the shape
of a boomerang.
With fingers close together and with open palms, simultaneously
beat the mat with both arms. The stroke commences with both
hands touching above the chest, after which the arms are swung
outwards and downwards. The action could be compared with the
beat of a bird’s wing. This action, which is so hard to describe,
is the basis of the side and back breakfalls, and I cannot over-
emphasise the need for constant practice.
Whilst this is being done, the chin should be kept close to the
chest. In other words, keep the back of the head off the ground.
You will possibly find that this tapping is producing a jerk or
jar in your head. This is because you are tapping with your hands
or elbows only. You must tap with the whole lower arm, from
elbow to palm.
Practise this until both arms synchronise in their beat, and the
jerk in your head disappears.
From here stand upright, then lower your body until you are
squatting on your heels (Fig. 1); now roll onto your back (Fig. 2)
-you must not “sit down” and then fall onto your back; this is
liable to severely injure the coxcyx practised quickly. You
must roll smoothly onto your back; that is, roll immediately from
your heels to your buttocks and then on to your back, simul-
taneously beating the mat with both arms, as you have just learnt.
The beat of the arms should come a fraction of a second before
your back touches the mat.
If you are not timing the beat correctly, all the wind in your
body will be knocked out; a little practice, plus the experience of
beating a little sooner or a little later will give you the exact timing,
and you will soon be ready for the “back breakfall.
Now stand upright and, making sure that your chin is tightly
pressed to your chest, throw yourself to the ground by throwing
your legs from under you and diving backwards, slapping with
your arms just before contact, as you have been practising (Fig. 3).


THE FORWARD ROLL
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Fig. 3
Fig. 4


CHAPTER 7
THE FORWARD ROLL
Place your right foot well forward, bend your body and place
your right arm, which is boomeranged as in the preceding break-
falls on the ground slightly ahead of your feet, as shown in Fig. ,
making sure that your right knee is outside your right elbow.
Turn your head to the left and push with your right leg, at the
same time raising your left leg as shown in Fig. 2.
Roll over your right shoulder and down your back towards your
left buttock; the right arm should gently guide your body over
and down your back as shown in Fig. 3.
When rolling, bend your left leg under your right and with your
right leg, kept straight, land on the mat as shown in Fig. 4.
Be careful not to turn your hips to the left or right when using
this roll. This is a common fault with beginners. The hips and
body at the hips should be kept quite straight. Practise at least
twenty times.
Do not try this breakfall on the left side until you have mastered
the roll on your right side.
When confident that you have mastered the roll as described
above, try this variation. Lightly clasp the hands in front of your
belt and proceed with the roll as described above, without using
the arms to guide the body.
Be careful not to throw the weight violently on to one shoulder
or on to the back. You must roll over, quickly taking the weight
off any one part. This is most important, for without the constant
correction and demonstration of a qualified instructor, pupils tend
to throw themselves heavily on to their shoulders and backs, to the
risk of a broken collarbone or injury to the Dorsal spine.
Practise this breakfall twenty times; it often comes in very handy
when thrown in such a manner that it is not possible to use the
orthodox forward roll.


THE FORWARD FALL
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Fig. 3


CHAPTER 8
THE FORWARD FALL
Kneel on the mat and raise your hands as shown in Jig. 1. Topple
forward, making sure that your body is kept quite straight, and
your head is turned to one side. When your body is about to hit
the mat, strike rapidly downwards (Fig. 2), hitting the mat
that same portion of the arm as in the side and back breakfalls.
Note the relative position of the arms to the body. Both hands
are close together and form an inverted V. The legs should be
bent at the knee (as shown in Fig. 2) on completion of this fall.
After fifty falls try it from the standing position.
Keeping the body straight, fall forward as in the preliminary
stage (Fig. 3), hitting the mat when the body is about to reach
the mat.
It is important to keep the head turned to one side when
executing this fall.
Both this breakfall and the forward dive into space should not
be attempted by females.


CHAPTER 9
THE FORWARD "DIVE INTO SPACE"
This should not be attempted until the previous breakfall is
mastered. From the standing position throw your legs from under
you (Fig. 1) and fall forward, landing as for the forward fall.
Do not, as the title suggests, dive towards the ground. Simply
leap horizontally and come straight down.
This could be compared to a “belly flop.” Note that the legs
are bent at the knee.
Remember to turn your head to the side and to tap as in the
forward fall.
Fig. 1
CHAPTER 10
A FINAL WORD
The breakfalls shown here are the basis of all Judo training.
Each fall should be practised at least five times on each side before
commencing each practice session, and as many times upon its
completion.


CHAPTER 11
THE FUNDAMENTAL NATURAL POSITION
There is no restriction as to the way of holding your opponent’s
jacket. You may grip him at any points that you desire. However,
it is usual to take a grip that affords the maximum leverage.
For teaching purposes all holds and throws will be described
with the opponents holding each other s left collar lapel with theii
right hand, and with their left hand gripping the opponent’s right
sleeve just above the elbow.
STANCE
Slightly bend the legs; this lowers the centre of gravity, making
it more difficult for the opponent to break your balance. Keep the
body upright. When moving, scrape or slide your feet over the
mat, i.e., do not lift your feet. Do not, at any time, cross your legs,
a common fault when moving sideways. When moving to the left,
first move your left leg, then bring the right up to it, etc.
When you are “on balance,” you should be able to lift one leg
at any moment and still be perfectly balanced. You are off
balance,” however, when, on a slight tug from your opponent, you
overbalance in the direction of that tug.
Keep your arm and body muscles relaxed; a tight grip is taken
by the fingers and hand, however.
Always move in the “direction of progression”; that is, if your
opponent pushes you to the rear, move to the rear, if possible
slightly faster than him, and by so doing “break” his balance.


THE STOMACH THROW
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Normally, one or both
feet of the thrower
should remain on the
ground at the comple-
tion of the Stomach
Throw. However, Fig.
3 shows thrower with
both feet off the
ground because she is
in process of following-
on to a hold down by
doing a backward roll.
Fig. 3


CHAPTER 12
THE STOMACH THROW
The stomach throw is known as a sacrifice throw. By this we
mean the voluntary sacrifice of one’s upright position, using the
momentum of the falling body to throw the opponent.
Sacrifice throws are usually very spectacular; the thrower, leaving
the upright, position, seems to the uninitiated, to have been thrown
by his opponent, when suddenly his opponent leaves the ground
and flies through the air, much to the puzzlement of the spectators.
The stomach throw is perhaps the most spectacular of all the
sacrifice throws. It is comparatively easy to learn, and most effective
against an opponent who persists in leaning or pushing forward.
Practise slowly at the beginning, aiming at precision rather than
speed. Real speed comes not from hurrying, but from blending
each movement into the next, so that the throw is one continuous
action. . , . . . „
Now for the throw itself: Pull the opponent to advance his right
leg, place your left foot well in between his feet, and, holding on
to him with both hands, roll on to your back as you were taught
in preparation for the back breakfall. Whilst rolling backwards,
bring up your right foot and place it just below the opponent s
belt, as shown in Fig. 1. As you roll on to your back straighten
your right leg and throw him over your head as illustrated by
Fig. 2.
It is important that you do not try to kick the opponent oyer
your head, as by kicking you are likely to severely injure him.
So proceed carefully, just pushing sufficiently to throw him on to
his back. £ ,
When practising endeavour to help your opponent breaktall by
holding on to his jacket with both hands throughout the throw.
As he is going over your head he should be supported by your
arms. Take care not to relax your muscles, otherwise he will very
likely fall on to his head.
The stomach throw as described above has a breaktall ot its own.
The thrown person bends his legs as in Fig. 3 and lands on the
balls of his feet. Loosely held in this manner, the legs act as shock
absorbers, taking all the force off the fall. With this breakfall it
is possible to practise the stomach throw dozens of times without
any unpleasantness. . . ..
You must be careful, however, not to depend on this breaktall.
For the thrower may let go of you as he pushes you over his head.
In this case the breakfall described above is of no use. You must
be ever ready to go into the forward roll.


CHAPTER 13
COUNTER TO THE STOMACH THROW
This counter, though simple, needs much practice. When you
are proficient it will surprise you just how easily you can counter
your opponent’s attempts to stomach throw you.
As the opponent raises his right foot, sweep it to your right with
the edge of your right arm.
If the opponent raises his left foot, sweep it to your left with
your left arm, and step forward to prevent him from using his legs
against you.


CHAPTER 14
THROWS
ANKLE SWEEP
With your right hand holding your opponent’s left lapel, and
your left hand holding the sleeve below his right elbow, you watch
your opponent’s feet. When his right foot is brought to the fore,
and a split second before his full weight is placed upon it, place
the sole of your left foot against the outer side of his right ankle
and sweep his leg high and to your right side. At the same time
pull him forward and towards your left back corner. With your
grasp still on his left sleeve, “pilot” him to the mat for a quick
follow-up as described later.
COUNTER TO ANKLE SWEEP
Simply lift the leg on which the ankle sweep has been made and
allow the foot to travel easily in the “direction of progression.”
At the same time, maintain balance on the other leg by transferring
the body weight to it.


HIP THROW
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Fig. 3


CHAPTER 15
HIP THROW
From the fundamental position, pull the opponent’s left sleeve
with your right hand. This will make him advance his left leg.
Place your left foot in front of the opponent’s feet so as to make
an isosceles triangle with them. Let go of the opponent’s sleeve
with your right hand and slide it around his waist, at the same
time pivoting on your left heel to your left.
As you are turning, slightly bend your knees, making sure that
both of your feet are inside his. (This is most important, and a
point usually overlooked by beginners.) Fig. 1.
Continuing your pull on the opponent with your left hand, and
with your right arm pressing his chest to your back, quickly
straighten your legs and throw him to the mat (Figs. 2 and 3).
It is most important that you remember to let go of the opponent
with the arm that encircles his waist, and to tightly hold him with
your right hand throughout the throw, otherwise he will hit the
mat head first, with regrettable consequences.
For safety sake the thrown person should hold on to the thrower
with his right hand, and with his left soundly hit the mat. (Side
breakfall.)
Counter
To counter this throw simply sag your body at the knees and
slip your left hand between his legs as the opponent commences his
turn. He will now find it impossible to throw you.
This throw may be performed on either side. However, it is
advisable to practise on one side until all the movements become
one continuous action, then transfer to the other side.
It is essential that you be directly in front of your opponent
before attempting the hip throw. To check on your position, stop
the action when you have completed the turn to the front of the
opponent and then stand upright.
If you are even slightly to one side the position is incorrect. The
cause of this inclination to one side of the opponent is in the
faulty placing of the feet.
If you place the feet as described above, you MUST pivot on
the HEEL. If you desire to turn on your toes, place your left foot
directly in front of the opponent’s left foot.


SWEEPING LOINS THROW
Fig. 1
Fig. 2


CHAPTER 16
SWEEPING LOINS THROW
From the fundamental position, pull the opponent’s sleeve to
advance his right leg. Place the toes of your left foot in front of
your opponent’s feet and pivot on your left toes; at the same time
slipping your right arm under his left armpit, and resting your
hand on his left shoulder blade.
Your right leg should be kept straight, and should rest outside
of the opponent’s right leg. The right side of your body must be in
close contact with the opponent’s chest.
Slightly bend your left leg and lean forward, pulling the
opponent with you. Watch his right foot, when he is balancing on
his toes, swing your right leg back in a sweeping motion (Fig. 1).
This is a hip throw, not a leg throw, as many novices seem to
think. The leg plays its part as a fulcrum, over which the opponent
is tipped by means of your hip and arm action (Fig. 2).
Novices try to lift the opponent by means of the leg action, only
this is incorrect. The leg is kept straight; all the lifting power
comes from the turning of the hips to the right.


CHAPTER 17
THE CROSS HOCK
From the fundamental position, pull the opponent to advance
his right leg. As he brings his leg forward, fall into the position
shown in Fig. 1.
Lean your body to your left rear corner and, with your left arm
pulling at his right sleeve, and your right hand pushing and lifting
at his left collar lapel, throw him to the mat.
The leaning of the body to the left rear corner is very important;
this action greatly increases the pull on the opponent, throwing
him much cleaner than if you simply pulled him over your out-
stretched leg.
The action of the arms requires much attention. The left arm
should be kept close to your body, and the pull should take the
path of an arc described around your body.
A point which will greatly assist you is to turn your outstretched
leg slightly to one side, i.e., have the leg inclined so the rear of
the knee tends to be placed against the opponent’s leg. This may
be done by turning the foot so the toes point to your left and
having the inner side of the sole flat on the ground.
Fig. 1
CROSS HOCK COUNTER
Shift the body-weight from the leg on which the opponent has
designed his pressure, lift it smartly and step over the opponent’s
leg, and forward in the “direction of progression.”


CHAPTER 18
THE STRAIGHT LEG TRIP
As the opponent is moving forward and is about to advance his
right leg (which is to the rear), place the sole of your left foot
on the outside of his right knee as shown in Fig. 1.
At the same time, push at the opponent’s collar with your right
hand and pull his right sleeve with your left. The opponent is then
pivoted around your outstretched leg and thrown to the ground.
Whilst the opponent is falling you should let go of his collar
and, with your left hand, “pilot” him to the ground.
This is a very useful throw and sometimes referred to as a “high-
graded, old man’s throw,” “high-graded” because a good deal of
skill is necessary for its execution; “old man’s throw,” as it requires
very little physical effort.
Opportunity for leg throws occur more often than for hip or
shoulder throws. For this reason they should be thoroughly under-
stood and able to be applied with equal result on either side.
The counter to the straight leg trip, like a considerable number
of other counters to more-or-less straight-forward moves, is in itself
somewhat complex. It requires considerable practice, shrewd sense
of timing and balance, and that indefinable “anticipatory” sense
that comes from experience. Such counters as this will be dealt
with exhaustively at a later stage—in Volume Two—where the
novice will be better placed to comprehend the instructions.
Fig. 1


CHAPTER 19
THE SHOULDER THROW
Pull the opponent’s sleeve to advance his right leg. Place your
left foot in front of his, and turn to the position shown in Fig. 1,
at the same time letting go of his collar with your right hand and
drawing his right arm over your shoulder with your left hand.
Take hold of his arm with your right hand as shown in Fig, 1.
Straighten your legs and throw him to the mat by leaning for-
ward and to the left, at the same time pulling at his captured arm.
To avoid accidents it is important that the palm of your oppon-
ent’s hand is kept facing down.
Fig. 1


CHAPTER 20
THE "LAPEL" SHOULDER THROW
While the opponent is advancing, step in as for the orthodox hip
throw; whilst turning, however, retain the hold on the opponent s
lapel. The right arm will be bent at a right angle (Fig. 1) upon
completion of the turn.
Straighten your bent legs, and at the same time lean forward
and to your left, flinging the opponent over your shoulder as you
would a towel (Fig. 2).
Strictly speaking, this is a hand throw, as the shoulders do not
come into play at all. The hands are the deciding factor of the
throw. . , u rn •
Be careful not to throw the opponent too hard, as the tall is
from a greater height than that of the hip throw.
You must retain your hold on the opponent’s sleeve, letting go
of his lapel so that he is able to breakfall. Letting go with both
hands would throw him directly upon his head.
This throw is more readily executed than the hip throw, as there
is no break in your hold whilst you throw your arm round the
opponent’s waist.
To practise this throw on the other side it is necessary to reverse
your grips on the opponent. That is, your right hand grasps the
opponent’s left sleeve, while the right hand holds his right collar
lapel. As this means “telegraphing” your intentions by a complete
reversal of your hold, the throw on this side is not recommended.
Fig. 1
Fig. 2


THE SIDE SCISSORS THROW
Fig. 1


CHAPTER 21
THE SIDE SCISSORS THROW
This is another of the side sacrifice throws.
From the fundamental position, push the opponent to make
him retreat. Whilst he is moving, let go of his sleeve with the
left hand and, supporting your body with your right hand grip
of his collar, jump to the position shown in Fig. 1.
Upon reaching this position, twist your body to the right; your
legs having a scissor-like action on the opponent’s legs, he is briskly
thrown on his back.
The “jump-in” is made easier if you are slightly to the right of
your opponent. The throw should be made when the opponent is
supporting his weight evenly on his heels. The “jump-in” should
commence when the opponent has his left leg forward (the right
arm when you are attempting the throw on his right side), for by
the time your “jump-in” is completed, the opponent will have
brought his legs together and will be supporting his weight on
both heels.
The opponent should take great care of the back of the head
when practising this throw, for the impetus of the fall is very great.
It is advisable for the novice to warn his opponent when about
to execute this throw.


SHOULDER WHEEL
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Fig. 3


CHAPTER 22
SHOULDER WHEEL
From the fundamental position pull the opponent’s right sleeve
to advance his right leg. Lift his right arm high, at the same time
bending your knee's and placing your right arm between his legs
(Fig- 1) •
Make sure that your right shoulder is below his belt, as far
below as possible. Pull his sleeve to your left corner, at the same
time straightening your body, assisting this with a lifting motion
with your right arm.
When the opponent is supported in the horizontal position
shown in Fig. 2, throw him to your left, remembering to hold on
with your left hand (Fig. 3). The opponent should breakfall with
his left arm.
Novices usually try to lift the opponent by sheer strength without
regard for his centre of gravity. This is very difficult. The right
shoulder should act as a fulcrum, over which the opponent is tilted
by the pull of the left arm, helped by the lifting action of the right.
You must not lower the body by leaning forward, but bend the
knees and leaning to the right as shown in Fig. 1.


CHAPTER 23
THE BACK RICK
From the fundamental position, pull the opponent’s right sleeve
with your left hand, at the same time stepping back with your left
leg.
As the opponent advances his right leg, hook it with your right,
so that the back of your knee is in contact with that of the oppon-
ent’s (Fig. 1).
Now pull his sleeve to your left corner, at the same time turning
your hips to the right and lifting his trapped leg with yours.
Your right hand lifts and pushes the opponent’s lapel to help
the action of your left arm, i.e., pushes to your left.
These actions combine to throw the opponent to the ground.
Do not “kick” back the opponent’s leg; this can be the cause of
a nasty accident. You simply “lift” the trapped leg by the action
of your hips.
Fig. 1


CHAPTER 24
THE INSIDE BACK RICK
As the opponent advances, step close to him, hook his left leg
from the inside with your right leg as shown in Fig. 1.
Push hard with both hands in the direction of his left back
corner, and at the same time sweep his leg from under him by
leaning forward and swinging your right leg to the rear (Figs. 2
and 3). The opponent here applies the back breakfall.
The throw is much cleaner if you sweep away the leg the moment
he is about to place his weight upon it, so practise sweeping and
pushing a little sooner and later, until you have found the right
moment.
You can’t mistake it; the throw is so different. It is like slipping
on ice.
The opponent must take care to tuck his head well in as he
falls, for the impact is very hard, and a fractured skull may result
if precautions are not taken.
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Fig. 3


CHAPTER 25
INSIDE THIGH THROW
When the opponent moves sideways to his left, move slightly
faster in his direction of progression. Place your right foot in front
of his, so as to make an isosceles triangle with them.
Hold him firmly with both hands and pivot on your right toes,
bringing your left thigh inside his legs and against his right thigh.
Lift his legs from under him by sweeping back with your left
leg and forcing down with your hands (Fig. 1).
He will then be thrown hard on the mat, and should breakfall
with his right arm.
Be careful to retain your hand on his left lapel, and to go
with your left hand when you feel that he is “well on the way.”
It is optional whether you keep your left leg straight or slightly
flexed, but under no circumstances should it be well bent. Doing
this can fracture your own leg.
The “forcing down with your hands” as described above comes
from the turn of your body as you swing up your leg. It is this
turning movement which is the cause of the throw.
The inside thigh throw is very useful, and should be attempted
when the opponent is moving to one side. Like most Judo throws,
it may be performed on either side, although it is advisable to
practise on one side until competent, then transfer to the other.
Fig. 1


CHAPTER 26
THE ANKLE ROLL
As the opponent is about to advance his right leg (either volun-
tarily or as the result of judicious pulling on your part), place
your right foot near the opponent’s left foot.
Sink down backwards (as for the stomach throw), at the same
time pulling the opponent with your left hand and slightly lifting
with your right. Simultaneously place the sole of your left foot
on the side of the opponent’s right ankle.
As you reach the ground, quickly lift the opponent’s right leg
with a sweeping action of your left and, with your hands, fling him
to your left side (Fig. 1).
This is another “sacrifice” throw. It is known as a “side-body”
throw.
The ankle roll is a very dangerous throw and should be practised
with care; the thrown person should do a forward roll to his right
side, and should take care not to throw out his hands when ap-
proaching the ground.
Great care must be taken that the thrown person does not land
on his head or shoulder.
Fig. 1
THE
ANKLE
ROLL
Counter to Ankle Roll
To counter this throw, simply take a long step over the thrower’s
advancing left foot, with your right foot.
No amount of practice is too great for this counter. Try ten
throws each and then ten counters.


CHAPTER 27
GROUNDWORK
Groundwork is very often passed over by the novice, who con-
centrates on throws, the more spectacular the better. He cannot,
or will not, realise that the simpler a trick is, the more likely is
the chance of success.
So it is with groundwork; this much-overlooked branch of Judo
is, in the author’s opinion, most important.
Whilst strength and weight are an asset in any form of self-
defence—and Judo is no exception—they are by no means the sine
qua non.
You may say that one must be strong and hefty to excel in
around work. This is not so. Have you ever tried to pm down an
eel? The eel is by far the weaker and smaller, but it is so slippery
and so fast that you simply give up in despair.


CHAPTER 28
THE ETHICS OF GROUNDWORK
Groundwork has its ethics, just as the throws have theirs. To
avoid injury, both the attacker and the defender should thoroughly
understand these ethics and have a knowledge of the principle of
the lock or strangle they are about to practise.
Both should realise the result of such a hold, and should not,
under any circumstances, “see how far they can go.”
This counsel specially applies to the strangle holds. The border
line between the realisation of approaching unconsciousness and
the actual “black-out” is too narrow to be defined.
As soon as you feel that the opponent has obtained a correct
hold you should at once signify your recognition of the fact.
d his is done by double or multiple tapping the opponent, the
mat, your body or hands; in fact, any place that will make the
taps heard.
The reason we tap more than once is that, if only one tap is
given, it is likely to be overlooked by the opponent or referee, who,
as likely as not, will regard it as an attempt to escape.
By thus tapping you are not submitting yourself to any injury
and are helping your opponent in the true Judo spirit.
The contest should not degenerate'into a battle of strength (as
most novices seem to think all groundwork is). Rather should it
be a battle of wits.


CHAPTER 29
GROUNDWORK
THE POSITIONS OF THE ATTACKER
With the edge o£ the right forearm, the attacker bru sjj e ® th< -
opponent’s legs to his right. (With his left forearm he would brush
the legs to his left.)
When he has closed with the receiver, the attacker must be in
as well balanced a position as possible. Fig. 1 shows the attacker
with one knee and one foot on the ground. The reason why we
do not have both knees on the ground is that such a P osltl ?£ a § a £
lacks balance and manoeuvrability. In other words, with both
knees on the ground there is a definite handicap to your freedom
of movement and the sudden necessity to stand or shift your
position is rendered more difficult, as one must first raise one foot
to the ground before any further movement can be attempted.
(You will also notice that the attacker is to one side of his
opponent; this position is recommended instead of straddling the
opponent, because it is possible for the receiver to throw off his
attacker by a series of quick turns of his body, to the right and
left, finishing with a powerful heave in the direction that he feels
his opponent is most off balance.)
If we adopt the illustrated position, it is logically impossible foi
the opponent to throw us to his right, as we are already there, so
all his efforts must be directed to his left side. Again it is evident
that no man, however strong, will find it easy to lift another from
this position, so, provided we keep a well-balanced position, he
must either push himself away or stay put.
If the attacker has just succeeded in throwing his opponent, he
should move with the object of getting behind his opponent and
applying the back strangle.
Within the compass of this book, this is all that can be said
about the attacker’s positions. Throughout the following lessons
it will be shown how one can make use of them. It is advisable
to repeatedly re-read this lesson. It is the basis of groundwork,
which, as I have said before, is in my opinion the most important
phase of Judo.


POSITION OF ATTACKER
Fig. 1


THE DEFENSIVE POSITIONS
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Fig. 3
Fig. 4


CHAPTER 30
THE DEFENSIVE POSITIONS
Illustrated by Fig. 1 is the first defensive position of grouitd
work. As the opponent approaches, let him come to within striking
distance of your legs. In serious combat suddenly kick him in the
groin, stomach or knees, or throw him with one of the leg tiips
described later. In Randori, of course, kicking is not allowed. In
that case, place your foot against his groin, stomach or knees and
push him off. Figs. 2 and 3 show other methods of defence. In
Fig. 2 throw the opponent to your left by a scissors action of your
legs. In Fig. 3 push against his knee and pull his ankle from under
him.
If the opponent tries to circle round you, spin so that your legs
are always facing him. In Randori, it is not advisable to continue
this circling for too long, otherwise the encounter will become a
stalemate. Encourage your opponent to advance, and let him come
past your legs, then use the second defensive position.
This is shown by Fig. 4. I uck up, or bend the leg nearest the
opponent so that it is wedged securely against him in such a
manner as to enable you to heave him away from you.
A more experienced Judoka is likely to slip past these barriers.
If he does so, throw out the arm that is nearest him, place it
against his neck and reinforce with your other hand, by grasping
the wrist of the arm that is nearest him.
Push him away from you. If he is too big for this, push youiscll
away, always bearing in mind never tp turn your back to yoiu
opponent, and always trying to get behind the opponent.
Supposing that he eludes this move and attempts to slip an aim
around your head. With the other arm, i.e., the one fuithest from
him, parry his arm in its “direction of progression,” simultaneously
withdrawing your head from under his arm.
If the opponent obtains a cross*or bar strangle, you must stop his
arms from descending, thereby stopping the scissors action which is
the cause of the strangle. This can be done by slipping your hand
under the attacker’s arm, holding it there, and attempting to
wriggle away from him or throw him to one side.
These are the most common moves of ground defence. It is
advisable to repeatedly practise them. They may be the means of
getting you out of a lot of trouble.


A LEG LOCK
Fig. 1
Fig. 2


CHAPTER 31
A LEG LOCK
The illustration is almost self-explanatory; the opponent s leg is
taken under your armpit and the edge of your right forearm is
pressed against the lower portion of his calf-muscle; your left ha
grasps your right at the wrist.
Squeeze the foot under your armpit and lean back on the toes,
simultaneously lifting with your forearm (Fig. 1).
This hold may be applied on either leg and under either arm,
it may also be applied from the standing position (Fig. c) .
Note the position of the attacker’s leg. Pressure applied with
this leg keeps the opponent in the prone position, stopping him
from rising and attacking you.
You may find this hold useful as a “follow-up” from the side-
scissors throw.


CHAPTER 32
AN ARM LOCK
This lock is an admirable “follow-up” from the hip throw or the
Haraigoshi, in fact, from any throw that puts you in the position
illustrated by Fig. 1.
Place your left foot close to the opponent’s body, just below his
shoulder*. and with your right foot step around his head, simul-
taneously falling onto your back as shown in Fig. 2.
The pull on the opponent’s arm should be just enough to keep
it straight and to pull it into the position shown in Fig. 2. The
right leg is stretched across the opponent’s throat and your left
buttock should be as close to your left heel as possible.
Force down on his trapped arm, which should be across your
left groin, and not across the right, as is a common error with
beginners. The left thigh is lifted slightly to help bring pressure
to bear on his elbow joint.
The reason for placing the buttock as close to the heel as possible
is the necessity for the opponent’s elbow to be above your groin.
It is only when the elbow is in this position that the full control
of the opponent’s arm can be secured and the necessary leverage
can be brought to bear, culminating in unbearable pain on the
part of your opponent.
Fig. 1
Fig. 2


CHAPTER 33
THE CROSS STRANGLE
Before proceeding with the description of this strangle I must
caution you to be exceedingly careful when practising this and
other strangles.
The taker should tap WELL BEFORE HE EXPERIENCES
EITHER A CHOKING SENSATION OR A SENSE OF THE
EYES BULGING, OTHERWISE HE MAY LOSE CONSCIOUS-
NESS. “Holding out” or testing his natural resistive ability against
strangulation is very risky, and can even be fatal if there is no
Black-belt holder with a knowledge of Katsu present.
The border line between realisation of approaching unconscious-
ness and actual unconsciousness is too fine to be divined.
Conversely the attacker should not get excited and apply the
hold too vigorously; he should watch for signs of approaching
unconsciousness, namely, bloodshot eyes, a dark, almost blue
colouration of the face and a relaxation of the opponent’s muscles.
However, enough of this morbid subject; let us try the cross
strangle.
Kneel alongside the opponent and slide the left hand inside the
opponent's left collar, palm uppermost. The fingers should be
inside the jacket and the thumb on top.
Slip your right hand under or over the left, whichever is the
more comfortable, and take a similar grip with the right collar. !
The hands should reach as far around as possible, with a scissors
action, compress the jugular vein and the carotid artery.
Such a strangle hold, correctly applied, will render the average
man unconscious within eight to ten seconds.


THE BAR STRANGLE


CHAPTER 34
THE BAR STRANGLE
Kneel alongside the opponent, slide your right hand inside the
opponent’s right collar, so that the thumb is on top of the jacket
and the palm uppermost.
The left hand takes hold of his left lapel, as shown in the illus-
tration. (The hold is taken on the jacket approximately 4 to 6
inches from the opponent’s neck.)
Whilst maintaining a steady pull on his left lapel, bring the
radial edge of your forearm down against the opponent’s throat.
The pull on the jacket is most important; this acts as a fixed
pivot, from which the jacket cuts into the opponent’s neck, being
tightened by the descending right arm, which also is strangling
by pressure on his wind-pipe.
The illustration shows the attacker with his thumb inside the
opponent’s jacket. This is a variation, but the method described,
i.e., with the thumb on top as for the cross strangle), is recom-
mended by the author.


THE BACK STRANGLE AND BODY SCISSORS
Fig. 1
The Back Strangle executed from a kneeling position.
Fig. 2


CHAPTER 35
THE BACK STRANGLE
The back strangle is perhaps the most effective and conclusive
hold in the whole repertoire of the Judoka. Once correctly applied,
it is impossible to break.
. ■J. c .... . ..... . . . 1 , i
The opening for this hold occurs whenever the opponent turns
his back to you, hence the necessity of always facing your opponent.
In Tachiwaza (throwing technique) the execution of some'of
the throws necessitates the turning or half turning of one’s back
to the opponent. In countering such throws there is little or no
opportunity for your opponent to apply a back strangle. The
advice not to turn your back, therefore, applies more to ground-
work. '.
'i V, t . j V. i
Slide your left forearm (it can be applied with either arm) across
the opponent’s throat and under his chin, as illustrated by Fig. 1.
The palm of the right hand should face down.
Clasp your left wrist with your right hand and squeeze the
opponent’s throat, simultaneously pressing the back of his head
with your head or shoulder, whichever is the most convenient.
It is this pressing of the opponent’s head which helps the fore-
arm to strangle. Novices are inclined to forget this, simply
squeezing with the arms and then wondering why the opponent
escapes.
Practise this throw and “follow-up” twenty times.


CHAPTER 36
THE STANDING NECK LOCK
If the opponent lowers his head, or rises while looking at the
floor, you have an opportunity to apply the standing headlock.
The attacker takes his opponent’s head under his right armpit
by sliding his right arm under his opponent’s throat; with his left
hand he grasps his right wrist.
Tightly holding his opponent’s head, he presses back with his
shoulders and simultaneously lifts with his arms.
Again the pressure must not be applied with a jerk; such treat-
ment is dangerous and contrary to the Judo spirit.
You must at all times treat your opponent gently, and at the
same time he should recognise this, realising that he would have
no chance of escape (or indeed of avoiding serious injury) were
the pressure applied with a jerk. That being the case, he should
be quick to acknowledge your victory by tapping in submission.


CHAPTER 37
THE NECK LOCK
This is a particularly punishing hold. Kneel down on your right
knee and throw your right arm under your opponent’s neck.
Throw your legs to the position shown in Fig. 1, simultaneously
grasping your right wrist with your left hand. Your right shoulder
should press under the opponent’s jaw, your head in the position
shown by Fig. 1.
Apply pressure by squeezing with your arms, the sharp edge of
your right forearm pressing upon the opponent’s nape, and with
your shoulder press upon his jaw, forcing his head back upon your
arms.
The pain caused is unbearable, the opponent soon tapping in
submission.
The attacker’s body should be at right-angles to that of his
opponent.
Fig. 1


CHAPTER 38
SELF-DEFENCE
Unarmed defence is a branch of Judo, taught in the Katas
(which are a set of prearranged exercises) and in Atemi-Waza,
which is the art of attacking vital points.
If an opening occurs tor a throw, by all means take it. Unarmed
defence is very drastic; it should never be used unless the situation
warrants it.
Great care should be taken in practising these movements; some
are extremely dangerous.
Here are a few exceedingly simple, but very useful, methods of
making an aggressive street-roughneck feel both silly and sorry-
based on his most likely forms of attack.


CHAPTER 39
THE BACK STRANGLE IN SELF-DEFENCE
I his exceptionally good hold, once correctly applied, is impos-
sible for the opponent to break. It can be used extensively in
unarmed combat when the opponent takes a punch at you or
attempts to swing a knife at your stomach. Brush away or parry
the blow, i.e., if he lunges with his right hand, brush it to your
right with your left or vice versa. , ,>•’
_ # V■'lt)'.v i i) ii .
Step quickly behind the opponent and apply the back strangle
simultaneously forcing him backwards. This puts him completely
off balance. His entire weight is supported by your grip of his neck.
He is completely at your mercy.


CHAPTER 40
WRIST BREAKAWAYS
When an opponent grasps your wrist as shown in Fig. Ejnstead
of struggling aimlessly, "pull” against the opponents thumb as
illustrated by the dotted line in Fig. 1.
Note the position of the defender’s legs (Fig. 2). With a sl £ dde £
straightening of these legs, the leverage against the attacker s thumb
is sufficient to break the strongest grip. .
Needless to say that if the opponent grasps your wrists as shown
in Fiff 3 the “pull” against his thumb will be as shown in rig. .
If you find your wrist held by the attacker’s two hands, reinforce
with the free hand as shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Fig. 3
Fig. 4


CHAPTER 41
"DON'T ARGUE"
When the opponent attempts to encircle your waist or to make
a similar move, grasp his belt or the top of his trousers with either
hand; the other hand should hit him hard on the point of the jaw.
Simultaneously push with the hand which is on the jaw and pull
with the hand holding his belt, forcing him to the ground.


CHAPTER 42
COME-ALONG
Take the opponent’s right wrist with your right hand. Turn to
your right, at the same time pulling hard with your right arm. The
opponent’s right arm should be drawn under your left arm as
shown in Fig. 1. Lock the opponent’s arm above his elbow. This
is done by wrapping your left arm around his right and placing
your left palm on your breast. Pressure is applied by pushing down
on his trapped wrist with your right hand and lifting with the
left arm.
Fig. 1


CHAPTER 43
THE MISSED "COME-ALONG"
Sometimes a strong opponent turns his arm palm down just as
you are about to apply pressure, making it impossible to apply
the come-along. As soon as the arm is twisted, help it in its
twisting action, i.e. to say, help the opponent to turn his arm by
forcing it downwards faster than he intended by means of the
grasp with your right hand. You should bend to the position
shown in Fig. 1. If the movement is correct the opponent’s right
arm is trapped under your left shoulder and you will have both
hands cupped and forcing his hand back along his wrist. (Note
the palm of the opponent’s trapped hand should now be facing
upwards.)
Fig. 1


CHAPTER 44
COUNTER TO A STRANGLE
Clasp the hands together, suddenly and forcibly thrust your
arms, which take the shape of an inverted V, upwards and between
the opponent’s arms. The thrust should be as close to the oppon-
ent’s wrists as possible. I his causes a much greatei leverage. s
the opponent’s arms are flung from your throat, step in close and
drive your knee into his groin.
Counter to a Strangle
Counter to Straight Front Strangle


CHAPTER 45
COUNTER TO A STRAIGHT FRONT STRANGLE
Bring your left forearm over the opponent’s right and under his
left. Cup your left hand with your right.
Quickly force your left forearm upwards and twist the opponent’s
arms to your left.
CHAPTER 46
CHOPS AND THEIR USES
The amount of force behind a chop is unbelievable. Correctly
applied in the right place, the chops will “drop” the biggest man.
Indeed the use of excessive force is liable to kill the opponent.
The chop is delivered with that part of the hand between the
base of the little finger and the wrist. The fingers should be
together and rigid. The chop should originate in the movement
of the body, i.e. to say, that the weight of one’s body should be
behind each blow, not merely the arm action.
Points to attack are the back and sides of the neck, across the
throat and the kidneys.
WARNING! DO NOT PRACTISE-THESE BLOWS.






