

THAI CULTURE AND BEHAVIOR
AN UNPUBLISHED WAR TIME STUDY
DATED SEPTEMBER, 1943
RUTH BENEDICT


THAI CULTURE AND BEHAVIOR
An Unpublished War-time Study Dated September, 1943
Ruth Benedict
(Third printing. May 1963)
Data Paper: Number U
Southeast Asia Program
Department of Far Eastern Studies
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York
February, 1952


PREFACE
This stimulating study of traditional and recent patterns of Thai culture
by the late Professor Ruth Benedict was prepared in the United States under war
conditions. It was completed in September, 191*3. In 191*6 the monograph was
processed for limited distribution by the Institute for Intercultural Studies,
Inc., 15 West 77th Street, New York, of which Dr. Benedict was a director and
vice-president. By the time of the author’s death in September, 191*8, the
Institute's issue was already exhausted. There had been a constant demand for
the essay, and this demand has continued. For this reason it is now re-issued
by the Cornell University Southeast Asia Program through the courtesy of the
Institute for Intercultural Studies and by special arrangement with the Insti-
tute's secretary. Dr. Margaret Mead.
The limiting conditions under which this study was made are outlined by
Benedict in her "Foreword". both to some of her data and to some
of her conclusions could be taken by Thai or by those who know Thailand well.
She relies heavily on material more- relevant to the,.-Lao.-of the north than to the
m,iority qf.Thai. Buddhist monks in Thailand need not be as unoccupied as
r she pictures them, nor does every man become a monk. Tales may be told and
enjoyed which do not necessarily express Thai attitudes or behavior which would
be approved. But these are relatively minor matters, and this essay remains
nevertheless of value to students of Thailand and has not yet been- superseded
by any other study.
Students who have not had access to this paper have had to rely on a
summary of it and of a companion paper on Burma by Geoffrey Gorer which is now
unavailable for re-issuq provided by Professor Alfred Kroeber in the 191*8 edition
of his Anthropology (New York: Harcourt Brace and Co., pp. 589-590)* Kroeber
uses both studies as the basis for a discussion of the problem of the development
of divergent character structures in Burma and Thailand, two countries in which
most of the formal institutions, and indeed many detailed items of behavior, are
so similar that similar personality types might be expected. Readers who now
have this full report by Benedict will still find Kroeber's discussion of interest.
Precisely because of the conditions limiting it, this essay is noteworthy
as an example of what can be accomplished by using methods of cultural anthropo-
logy in the study of "cultures at a distance" even when available data are
fragmentary and inadequate. The reader will here find the author systematically
using available sources to reach useful conclusions regarding a culture in which
she had no first hand experience. Essentially the same method was used later
on a more intensive scale in her longer study of patterns of Japanese culture.
The Chrysanthemum and the Sword (Boston: Houghton, Mifflin Co,, 191*6, 32i* pp.),
which has been of value to experts on Japan. Undoubtedly, some part of the success
of these studies is related to the fact that Ruth Benedict was a poet as well as
a scientist, an acutely sensitive and perceptive person. Nevertheless, more
prosaic students, seeking to understand Southeast Asian countries or any foreign
society which is inadequately reported, should read her paper and take heart and
emulate her as best they can.
Lauriston Sharp, Director
Southeast Asia Program
Department of Far Eastern Studies
Cornell University
Ithaca, New York
February, 1952


Contents
Foreword ii
PART ONE
I, Traditional Background...... 1
11. Religion lU
Animism...... 17
111. Adult Life 19
PART TOO
IV. The Child 26
V, Some Thai Characteristics. 3h
The Enjoyment of Life. 3h
The Cool Heart 38
Male Dominance.... I*o
Summary.
THAI CULTURE AND BEHAVIOR


FOREWORD
This study of the Thai is an attempt to investigate their way of life
and regularities of their customary behavior for the use of those who will deal
with them during and after the war.
Thai culture can boast of a centuries-long continuity unknown in Western
cultures, and its carriers have been conditioned from infancy £o certain kinds of
behavior appropriate to its fundamental tenets. This appropriate behavior is
integrated into certain patterns which are manifested not merely in Thai dealings
with foreign nations or in economic matters or in religious practices or in
family life; all these aspects of their culture are equally relevant and
interrelated with one another. Only by treating the whole culture - its sociolo-
gical as well as its psychological aspects - its child rearing as well as its
international relations - is it possible to see what consistency emerges and
how far certain patterns of Thai behavior can be stated.
I have not attempted to pile up examples and to cite all supporting material.
Selection has been exercised. I have, however, not omitted any relevant item
because it was inconsistent with other behavior. That would falsify the study.
Any consistencies which emerge include those details which, from the point of
view of our own cultural standards, appear contradictory.
The present study describes the life of the Thai people, not merely the
life of the court and of officialdom. This relative weighing is necessary not
only because the agricultural villages are 90$ of the Thai population but because
the upper class and village customs are rooted in the same - or in complementary -
attitudes, and the former is unintelligible without the latter.
A greater difficulty in organizing the material comes from the many changes
which have been enacted by legislation or have simply overtaken the Thai during
the lifetime of the present generation. Some of the customs described are no
longer general. These have been noted in many instances, but I have, nevertheless,
included them, acting on the assumption that customs which have been practiced
during this generation have still conditioned this generation. Each generation,
in any culture, in order to become the carriers of that culture, must have
certain attitudes and selected types of behavior conditioned in them, not merely
by long past historical events but by experiences they themselves have actually
undergone. These attitudes and selected types of behavior can be studied from
the customs operative in their youth and are likely to have a very strong hold
upon a population.
I have examined the literature on Thailand, and, owing to the fact that the
best books on the Thai way of life are out of print, I have summarized or quoted
portions of these volumes. Of these the most indispensable is Graham’s Siam,
originally published in 1912 as Siam; A Handbook of Practical. Commerical,
and Political Information. Young f s Kingdom of the Yellow Robe contains some
excellent material, arid Le May’s comments on Siamese life contained in his
Siamese Tales Old and New are acute. Recent volumes still in print include Virginia
Me Lean Thompson’s indispensable Thailand: The Mew Siam.. prepared for the
Council on Pacific Relations and Landon's valuable Siam in Transition, 1999*
Entirely different in character is Chandruang’s My Boyhood in Siam.


1 have arranged the very scattered material from the literature but
much necessary information, especially on child rearing and the relations of
men and women, had to be secured from Thai men and women now in this country.
They were most helpful and gracious and I owe special gratitude for their
generous cooperation.
The methodology used in this study is that of cultural anthropology, and
as an anthropologist I am keenly aware that any study of this kind is inade-
quate which is not based on personal observation of acts and procedures in
Thai homes and villages. However, since no such study and report was attempted
while it would have been possible to base it on first-hand field work in
Thailand, the present study was undertaken in spite of the limitations of data.
The following books have been consulted:
Alabaster, H., THE WHEELS OF THE LAW, London, 1871.
Andrews, James M., SIAM: SECOND RURAL ECONOMIC SURVEY, 1934-35, Bangkok, 1935.
Bidyalankarana, Prince, RHYME MAKING AND SINGING IN RURAL SIAM, Siam Society
Journal, 1926,
Campbell, J. G. D., SIAM IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY, London, 1902.
Chandruang, Krub, MY BOYHOOD IN SIAM, New York, 1938.
Collis, Maurice, SIAMESE WHITE, London, 1936.
Colquhoun, A, R., AMONGST THE SHANS.
Crawford, John, JOURNAL OF AN EMBASSY TO THE COURTS OF SIAM AND COCHINCHINA,
2 vols., 2nd edition, London, 1830.
Credner, Wilhelm, SIAM, DAS LAND DER TAI, Stuttgart, 1935.
Dodd, W, C., THE THAI RACE, Cedar Rapids, 1923.
Fleason, K. N., LAOS FOLKLORE OF FARTHER INDIA, New York, 1899.
Graham, W, A., SIAM, 2 vols. (3d edition) London, 1924. (First published as
SIAM: A HANDBOOK OF PRACTICAL, COMMERCIAL AND POLITICAL INFORMATION,
London, 1912),
Heiser, Victor, AN AMERICAN DOCTOR'S ODYSSEY, New York, 1936.
Hesso-Wartegg, E., SIAM DAS REICH DES WEISSEN ELEFANTEN, Leipzig, 1899.
Hutchinson, E. W., ADVENTURES IN SIAM IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY, London, 1940.
Kornerup, E., FRIENDLY SIAM, London, 1928.
Landon, K. P., SIAM IN TRANSITION, Shanghai, 1939.
Le May, Reginald, AN ASIAN ARCADY, Cambridge, 1926; SIAMESE TALES OLD AND NEW.
(quoted Le May A.), London, 1930; BUDDHIST ART IN SIAM, Cambridge, 1938.
Leonowens, Anna H,, THE ENGLISH GOVERNESS AT THE SIAMESE COURT, Boston, 1870.
Loti, Pierre, SIAM, Paris, 1907.
Loubere, M., de la, DESCRIPTION DU ROYAUME DE SIAM, 2 vols., Amsterdam, 1914.
Pavie, Augueste, ETUDES DIVERGES, Vols. I, 11, 111, Paris, 1898-1904.
Pratte, J. 8., THE PILGRIMAGE OF BUDDHISM, New York, 1928.
SIAM AND LAOS, as seen by our American missionaries, Philadelphia, 1884.
SIAMESE AND ENGLISH RECORDS OF THE SIAMESE EMBASSY TO ENGLAND IN 1857-1858,
Bangkok, 1928,
Smyth, W, H., FIVE YEARS IN SIAM, 2 vols., London, 1898,
Thompson, P. A., SIAM, Boston, 1910,
Thompson, Virginia, THAILAND: THE NEW SIAM, New York, 1939.
Wood, W. A. R., A HISTORY OF SIAM, 2nd edition, Bangkok, 1933;
LAND OF SMILES, Bangkok, 1935.
Young, E., THE KINGDOM OF THE YELLOW ROBE, London, 1900.
Zimmerman, Carl, SIAM: RURAL ECONOMIC SURVEY, 1930-31, Bangkok, 1931.


THAI CULTURE AND BEHAVIOR
Part One
I. TRADITIONAL BACKGROUND
Thailand, the newly assumed name for the country earlier known to outsiders
as Siam, is no artificial designation. The people who inhabit it have called
themselves Thai* since earliest history, and the Thai are the most numerous and
widely distributed ethnic group in Southeast Asia, Representatives of this group
live in great numbers not only in Thailand but in Yunnan, in Indo-China, where
they are known as Laos, and in Burma, where they are known as Shans. The Thai
language is cognate with Chinese, and its linguistic differences from region to
region are only dialectic. "Their long history and numerous legends dating back
3,000 years, in addition to certain distinctive traits, differentiate this pepple
from neighboring races" (V, Thompson 16). The different Thai groups, however,
separated from each other by great mountain ranges, usually ignore each other's
existence; if their interests conflict, they fight each other as heartily as they
fight non-Thais. Only in Thailand are the Thaia dominant peoples of the country
and in that country Chinese accounts as early as the beginning of the seventh
caktury enlarge upon the splendors of the royal court (Graham II: 173)*
Besides its reference to a great ethnic group, the designation Thai meand
"free men". Naming their kingdom "The Land of the Free" is by no means an empty
boast. In all of Southeast Asia and western Indonesia, Thailand is the only
country which had not fallen under European rule. Bordered on the east and north
by Indo-China under French rule and on the west and north by Burma under English
rule, to the south by the Malay States and flanked by Indonesia under Dutch rule,
Thailand has maintained its native administration through all crises. Only twice
in its six centuries of centralized rule, and then only for a few years, has its
seat of government been held by its neighbors: in the last decades of the sixteenth
century, its capital was twice sacked by Burma, and in 1?6? it was practically
destroyed, also by the Burmese. The Thai are more than compensated for these
short periods of eclipse by the periods when they had extended their kingdom
into Burma, into Indo-China, and into the Malay States.
Thailand was in 1940 a country of about 200,000 square miles considerably
smaller than Texas with a population of about 14,000,000 people. The country
is ecologically extremely diverse, from the rugged mountain terrain of the north
to the sea level lands of the central plains and.’the green jungle southern,
peninsula Thailand, from the laterite soil of the great Korat plateau of
Eastern Thailand to the rich alluvial soil of the drainage of the Menara Cha« ?hya.
Climatically, the whole country lies in the monsoon area. The succession of the
seasons is much alike for all the regions except the eastern peninsular coast.
The southwest monsoon blows from the end of April to November and gradually brings
the rainy season; this is followed by thd north-easterly winds of the dry season
*ln this memorandum Thai refers to a great linguistic group in Southeast Asia;
Thai, without italics, to the dominant people of Thailand.
1


which last until the end of February; after a couple of months of the hottest
weather, the monsoon brings the rains again.
Those who call themselves the Thai are racially and linguistically the
close kin of most of the very numerous Laos of North Thailand who are indeed as
Thai as the Thai themselves. The classification is cultural, political, and
geographical. In spite of all the complicated ethnic mixture of Thailand, the
native people fall, broadly speaking, Into three great groups: those of the
mountain, the forest, and the plain (Credner, Das Land der Thai, Stuttgart, 1935)*
The mountain and the forest peoples are non-Thai, and have been little inte-
grated in Thailand’s economy. They are simple tribes, living in small groups
and subsisting largely on hunting and food-collecting, though they are also
primitive agriculturalists. The mountain tribes generally use only the hoe and
planting stick. The plains people, living at an elevation below 3,000 feet,
are Lao Thai,® laeorrigibly low-land people who raise their omnipresent rice
on the Inundated surfaces of the valleys and plains. They use a simple plow,
usually harnessed to the water buffalo or bullock and on the plains their country
is laced with intersecting waterways and canals which bring water to the rice
lands.
These waterways have no locks or water-gates to control the flow of water
to the fields, and no reservoirs, natural or man-made, impound the flood waters
of the rainy season. They have made no inventions for the control of floods and
the one area recently opened by commercial irrigation is a western innovation.
The waterways of the plains, however, represent a vast investment of human labor
carried out under the absolute kings of the past centuries, presumably by corvee
labor. Their upkeep in the past century has been haphazard and the local popu-
lation has never taken responsibility for repairs; in this the Thai contrast
strongly with similar areas in China. Western engineers have always recommended
extensions and upkeep of the waterways instead of the Siamese government’s
favorite investment in railroads.
This study deals with these people of the rice lands, the Lao-Ihai,
living in North, Central, and East Thailand; the area which extends into the
Malay Peninsula is not considered except when specifically mentioned.
The Thai, since the beginning of the Christian era, have been drifting
southward from the southern provinces of China into the under populated and fertile
valleys of Southeast Asia. They are supposed to have brought with them from
China some form of Mahayana Buddhism but at least by the fifth century Hinayana
Buddhism, the form characteristic of Ceylon, Burma, and Cambodia, had become
the religion of the people and Brahrainism, tne religion of the ruling class.
From contacts with the Khmers of Cambodia, Brahrainism and ideas and practices of
absolute kingship spread among the Thai, and by the middle of the fourteenth
century, the seat of an absolute Thai monarch had been set up at Ayudhia, the
great capital which was the seat of government for more thafi^centuries. The laws
of that kingdom recognized Buddhism as the State religion; their Buddhist ecclesi-
astical order was self-governing within its internal organization with the king
as its lay defender who had power to make appointments to the highest offices and
to enforce secular, law among its members. (V. Thompson 625) In the kingdom at
large, secular laws defined who could give evidence before the court and
2


prescribed punishments for stealing from the go 1 -nment, for those who abducted
other's Slaves, and for witches end sorcerers. The laws with reference to filial
piety aid to marriage are of special interest. "If any unfilial man attempts to
bring a case against his parents or grandparents, let him be flogged as an example
to others; and his claim shall not be admitted." "If a husband and wife have a
physical or mental distaste for one another and desire to be divorced, let it be
as they wish; for they two have no further blessing on their union, and therefore
should not be compelled to live together." (Wood 67, 69)
The greatest medieval king of Thailand was King Trailolq who was crowned in
1440, some fifty years after the fall of Angkor (Cambodia), Thailand’s former liege
state. Since, as Wood (85) says in 1912, "the system of King Trailok survives to
the present day" and since this long continuity of law and custom is one of the
most significant facts of Thai culture, the laws of this period are relevant to
this study,
Trailok established a centralized kingdom which both levied taxes and main-
tained an army. He ended the old feudal scheme whereby each petty prince furnish-
ed his quota of an armed force. Every man henceforth owed his military services
directly to the absolute King, and instead of the old feudal ties to petty chiefs,
a patron -adherent relationship came to prevail, under which serfs were not tied
to the land but became adherents to certain patrons. The princes and the feudal
lords were made officials of the government, holding posts in a Ministry of the
Interior, of Finance, of Agriculture, and of the Royal Household, or they became
ministers in charge of military departments, A hierarchy of titles graded
all officials,, from highegt to lowest;
The status of the absolute King was also fully hedged about. Death was the
penalty for whisparing during an audience or for shaking the king’s boat or for
sending a love poen to the king’s women or for allowing stray animals to get into
the palace.
Chinese accounts dating from the Mng Dynasty (1368-1644) add other observa-
tions to this picture of medieval Siam (Mng Shih chapter 324,p. 19 b- 20 a);
"The nation is divided into ten classes, from the king to the ordinary
citizen,"
"When there are e. airs to be settled, they are settled by women. In deter-
mination and. .Tvdgment, • .e women really surpass the men."
"... .the rich are particularly devout toward Buddha. Those who own 100 catties
of silver will .■ ontribute one-half of their property (to monasteries and convents)."
" m hen the wealthy die, mercury is poured into their mouth before burial,"
"They are used to figjhting on water."
All these laws and accounts of early Siam reinforce Sir John Bowring’s observation
made in 1857 (1*101) that "descriptions of A,D. 1250, or 1650 or 1850 scarcely
differ as to custom, usage, and fundamental attitude of ndlid,"
3


These traditional "customs and usages" can be summarized under certain generd
headings:
1. The Absolute King. The omnipresent fact of Siamese history has been the
absolutism of the king, an absolutism which in theory and practice meeaat that his
caprice made and voided the fortunes of those who surrounded him. His power of
punishment and of death extended to the princes of the royal blood and to his min-
isters. The heads of the chief departments of the government were flogged before
the court for missteps and, though the blood of royal princes could not be shed, a
prince was traditionally put in a sack and beaten to death with a sandalwood club.
The learned English governess whom King Mongjcut imported for his 70 or 80
children in the 1860’s writes: "In Siam, the King is not merely enthroned he is
enshrined" (Leonowens 99). A superhonorific language, with a special set of pro-
nouns and declensions of the verb, was used in addressing him, and all the parts
of his body and many objects associated with him had special terms. Until 1874
all his subjects crouched on hands and knees before him and crawled into and out
of his presence. He was hedged about with such restrictions that he had little
direct contact with any except subservient officials. It was, however, customary
for him twice a week to receive complaints from such subjects as washed to present
themselves.
The great harem of the King had political significance. Officials from all
parts of the kingdom offered their daughters to him as wives for the purpose of
cementing relationships, Fithin this century there have been as many as 600 wives
attending upon the king. Inevitably this city of women and children, which no man
but the king himself could enter, isolated him still further. The affairs of the
harem were extremely time-consuming. Also if difficulties developed in the outer
world, it was an easy retreat for the king to sequester himself with his women and
children.
The king stood to his subjects as the symbol of the nation and the protector
of the nation. The Siamese equivalent of national holidays in other countries
was the three-day annual celebration of the king (a birthday). At his death all
his subjects except the youngest children shaved their herds and assumed mourning.
His obsequies, held in a long series of special rites, were attended by his people
from far and near. Annually before rice could be sown in any of the rice fields,
the king, or the Minister of Agriculture as his delegate, ritually plowed with
white bullocks harnessed to the plow and scattered the seed over a traditional
plot; until the last few years it has been the occasion of a crowded festival.
Because of the great sacredness of the King, his Queen had to be his own half-
sister and from among her children his successor was chosen. Of the five 19th
century kings of the Chakri dynasty, four were the children of such marriages.
However, neither order of birth or any other circumstance determined wrhich parti-
cular son should succeed his father. Interregnums accompanied by disorder and
violence occurred in the capital during the struggles of royal brothers to gain
the throne and the successful candidate put his brother to death along with his
adherents. Not till 1887 was a law passed requiring the king to name his succes-
sor during his life time.
4


2. Bureaucracy. The social system of Thailand has been a bureaucracy from
the time of Trailok. The power of local hereditary chiefs and kinglets was sapped
by Trailok’s program of centralization and the earlier warrior nobility was trans-
ferred gradually into an official class (?, Thompson 235). There is in Siamese
history no parallel to the rise of the great hereditary noble families of Japan,
Even the Thai royal family did not constitute a perpetual aristocracy, except
actual sons and daughters of the king born of a marriage with his half-sister.
All others were commoners in four generations. The children by his queens,
his half-sisters, were Chao Fa; by other wives, Fhra Ong Chao; their children and
grandchildren had progressively lower titles and their great-grandchildren no title
at all. Their status, moreover, was further assigned. Twelve princes in any one
generation were given appointive status and titles and occupied official positions
in the king’s service; no one of these positions was automatically filled by rea-
son of order of birth, geneology, or other considerations. They could be demoted
at the royal pleasure (Graham I; 231-233), The princes were regarded as above
the law.
This system of administrative titles held not only for the royal family but
for all civil servants of whatever status, and they alsq of course held their titles
and positions at the king's pleasure. Whatever his title, a roan was addressed by
it at all times, and it defined his place in the status hierarchy. It also defined
his wealth. To the holder of each title went "land according to his honor”, and
with this land, of course, a toll from the produce of the farmers living upon it.
From this prerogative the official drew his revenue, and he received no other salary.
"Every Prince, official, and private person, had a certain amount of land allotted
to him*. For instance, the Chao P’yas, or ly'as holding important posts, were allow-
ed to hold from 1,000 to 4,000 acres. Subordinate officials, such as K'uns and
Luangs, held from 160 acres upwards. Common people held 10 acres. This system'
not only definitely fixed the relative rank of every roan in the Kingdom, but it
actually placed a value upon him. He was literally ’worth’ so and so much. If
he had to be fined for any offence, the fine was graded according to his Sakdi
Na, and if compensation had to be paid for his death or for any injury, this was
likewise computed on the same scale" (Food: 85). Even when, about 1900, this
system was formally abandoned, the old prerogatives were merely replaced in terms
of land-substitutes; the essential sakdi na system remained.
This system of titles for civil servants was as little conductive to rise of
a permanent aristocracy among the non-royal as the system of titles was among the
princes. Each man held his title during his life at the whim of the king or of
his subordinates; he certainly did not transmit it to his son, Whatever tendency
there was for high status to run in family lines was due solely to the better op-
portunities a man might be able to provide for his children or to the favor of his
superiors, but family dynasties did not arise. Just as political status was not
transmitted intact from one generation to another, so high financial status was
transitory. This was due partly to the great insecurity of political tenure, but
perhaps even more basically to the Thai laws of inheritance. Indivisibility of an
estate is contrary to all Thai custom; all children inherit, daughters as well as
sons, and wives also receive their own personal shares. This inheritance law holds
good for all classes but its effects were the more extreme among princes and of-
ficials because plural wives were almost the rule among them and children very
pumer ous.
5


Though the sons and daughters of lesser wives did not have claims to their father's
holdings equal to those of the first wife, they always shared in the property di-
vision. The result was a very considerable mobility up and down the social scale
and the absence of permanent, entrenched ’’feudal" families. At any given moment
of time, however, the hierarchy was explicit, and the rewards of status were defi-
nite ,
The chief endeavor of any man who had attained status was, not to consoli-
date his power for the benefit of his family line, but to keep a fairly precari-
ous footing with his superiors, A job well done was not so likely to achieve
this end as presents well placed, inconspicuous routine observance of formalities
and knowing the right people. It is true that in districts far removed from
Bangkok an official could have things much on his own terms but this was balanced
by the losses which ambitious men felt that they sustained in going to such pro-
vinces. Residence in such parts was regarded as exile and being absent from court
meant that their names dropped into oblivion, and the king might well appoint to
their position a current favorite (Graham I: 321).
All semblance of caste is, of course, lacking in such a system as prevailed
in Thailand,
3, The Villagers. According to the 1937 census, 88.5 percent of the popu-
lation of Thailand were engaged in agriculture and fishing. The peasants live in
small villages either strung along the banks of a waterway or grouped together in
a little forest' of fruit strees in the midst of the great unfenced rice fields.
Exceptionally, there are some isolated farm houses, but these too belong conceptu-
ally to some village unit.
These villages comprised from 10 to 80 families and were organized under a
headman selected by both men and women of the village. In the villages described
by my informants, a headman retained this position for life or until he was too
old to perform the duties of his office, but Zimmerman writing of Siam in 1930
says that they were chosen "each five years". This may well not be contradictory
since there was certainly no feeling that a good headman should succeed himself.
The headmen of some 10 to 20 villages select from among their number a commune
headman, the kamnen, to deal with matters which may concern them all and to re-
present this group of villagers to the governor of the district (amphur). This
governor of the district is an administrative official appointed and paid by the
Central Government in Bangkok and is not a local man. He passes on to the local
commune and village headmen the government's demands in the way of taxes, corvee
labor, etc., end they carry out the requirements. Though in 1934 the local head-
men were by law made officials of the Central Government, I have nevertheless used
the present tense in describing these arrangements because in all the known cases
the traditional arrangements were not modified by this change of terminology; local
incumbents were left in these positions and the Central Government has voted down
proposals to pay a salary to them from the government treasury.
Local matters are handled by the village itself acting together under the
headmen. The fields are planted and harvested by work parties drawn from the whole
village which do the work on individual fields in turn. These arrangements are
cleared through the headmen. If a waterway becomes clogged, some villager speaks
to the headman, and the latter arranges the necessary village cooperation.
6


"If they ahe lazy in their field duty, e good 'Fu Yai Ban’ will stir them to work,
and one particular duty may be mentioned of beating the gang at the cry of thief
to summon all the villagers to help to catch him" (Le May, 146). The headman also
arbitrated quarrels between villagers, and disputes in the village are still heard
by the headman and other elders; more and more such cases, however, are argued be-
fore the judges appointed by the Central Government. These appointive judges are
very much respected in the rural areas and since by law they accept no witchcraft
cases, this change has, from all accounts, worked to reduce not only the incidence
of witchcraft charges but also the suspicion of witchcraft generally.
Another shift has recently been made in the traditional manner of administra-
ting justice. This is in the direction of more nearly limiting responsibility for
crime to the individual offender. Traditionally, if a case of theft had to be
dealt with by higher authorities, the village or even several villages were res-
ponsible for making up two-thirds of the amount stolen, the victim taking one-third
of his own loss (V,. Thompson 287). In many other kinds of antisocial behavior,
also, the family, more or less extended, or the village was responsible for pro-
ducing and chastising the malefactor. This, too, still continues, though during
most of this century, the individual himself has legally been held solely res-
ponsible to the State.
The village, acting through its headman, also prepares village floats, racing
canoes, dramatic performances, and offerings for the temples and priests on the
occasion of festivals in which many villages take part. Each village tries to ex-
cel in the costumes of its performers, the speed of its racing team and the lavish-
ness of its offerings.
In contrast, however, to almost all other countries with such responsible
local village organization, there are no cases discoverable where protest was made
to the representatives of the Central Government or to landlords about the amount
of taxes or rents or about abuse of corvee labor. The villagers have accepted
without formal complaint the demands of higher authorities and have lodged no
face-to-face protest. They do, however, sometimes escape the imposition. The
evacuation of Wide villages- used to occur in anticipation of the visit of" the
recruiting sergeant; conscription for military service has pot beefi popular in
Siam. In cases described by informants, too, when an exacting landlord required
too large a toll; the whole village loaded itself into its boats and set itself
up on other land;
It is extremely important to realize that Thaihnd is underpopulated and that
it has been possible to take up new lands either individually ° r q^ m g roups. This
is locally impossible today inthe most fertile parts of Central Siam, but such areas
are not typical of the whole country even today.


in 1910 P.A. Thompson wrote; "It is probable that not more than one-half
of the delta of the Menam is under cultivation," and the Menam is the heart of
Central Siam. "Any man can go into the jungle and bum off the long grass and
bamboo scrub, and so clear for himself a space in which to plant his rice. For
this he pays nothing except the annual land tax, and if he likes he can claim
the land henceforth as his own. If, on the other hand, he prefers to clear a new
patch of jungle and abandon his old clearing, he can do that also. By far the
greater number of Siamese are small freeholders, cultivating on an average about
eight acres, which are sufficient to support a family of four or five in comfort."
This freehold land, was, in Siamese law, a part of the sakdi na system;
just as "land according to his honor" was allotted to a prince or civil servant,
so ten acres was legally due each head of a biological family for his military
and corvee services. Actually, "ownership" of land was reckoned as one’s pri-
vilege of cultivating it, whether as tenant or freeholder until 1901 when regis-
tration of landed property was begun. It is still the way in which the peasant
reckons his ownership.
The arrangements of a village of freeholders and a village of tenant
farmers differ hardly at all. Traditionally, they all were subject to military
or corvee labor. Tenant farmers generally pay only a small part of their rice
to the landlord, often a tithe, and, for the rest, get a certain satisfaction
out of being called the great man's "man". Up to 1905 probably one-fourth of
the population were slaves, mostly debt-slaves who could redeem themselves if
they were able. Slavery was peacefully abolished in 1905 following a series
of laws mitigating the slaves' conditions, and Le May writes of them:
"If the slaves found a good master, they were very content
to remain in the household, as they gained considerable advantages
by doing so, such as protection and free food in return for their
services. Knowing the Siamese passably, I have little doubt that
a great many of the slaves became such by selling and attaching
themselves and their families to the households of important men.
It gave them prestige to be called so-and-so's man," (Le May, A 141)
The same remark applies also to tenant farmers and their usual relations to
their landlords.
Landlords who came into direct contact with the peasants were generally
prosperous local farmers of the region. These often held their lands as tenants,
in their turn, of some prince or high official whose home was in Bangkok, but
they were a rich peasantry. Andrews (p. 31?) found, in the Economic Survey of
that about half of peasant indebtedness was held by relatives of the
debtor, and this is easily understandable because of the predominance of peasant
landlords in most parts of Thailand, and also because of the comparative mobility
of village population (as compared to China or India, for example) which spreads
any man's relatives not only into many parts of the country but also into dif-
ferent income groups.
The hardships of the traditional system were in regard to forced labor.
In 1855 Sir John Bowring wrote: "Every Siamese is bound to devote one-third of
the year to the service of the King" (V, Thompson 123) and since this service was
8


in practice exacted by his underlings who hold this right as a prerogative and
there was little or no check upon abuses, the peasants were often quite helpless.
Graham says of the days prior to 1900; "The faces (of the peasantry) were for-
ever being ground." By this century’s introduction of better laws regulating
military service and corvee labor and by the introduction of regulated poll taxes,
etc., "the social conditions of the lower classes have been totally changed."
(ibid 239)
In Central Siam almost all villages have markets, (Graham I:21) which are
typically run by the women. Small villages, especially in the north, may not
themselves have markets, but there is one nearby. The central, old-established
larger market town with its circle of small villages so characteristic, for in-
stance, of China, is not characteristic of Thailand. These larger towns with their
stores and their public buildings are, rather, in Thailand administrative centers
and cater to the resident administrative officials. The peasants’ village has,
besides its market, its temple and its resthouse which often served as a temple
and was besides a place where any wanderer could sleep with a roof over his head
and a dry floor. The temples also were the schools where the monks taught all
Siamese boys at least to read, "Education was free in Siam long before it was in
England" (Campbell 128), and literacy was practically universal among men and
common among' women under the traditional Siamese regime.
The history of Thailand records no catastrophic crop failures and manure,
either animal or human, is not traditionally used. The one economic danger is
flood. Though all the richer areas of Thailand grow wet, not dry, rice, there
were, in Central Thailand, until the last decade, no systems of controlled
irrigation. In poorer North Thailand, north of the flood plains, the peasants
must use weirs because without these there would be no crops at all, but Central
Thailand depends upon the annual inundations which cover the country. The vast
system of waterways, natural and artificial, channels the water to the fields,
but they are built for boats to use, and no control of water is attempted. A
too-great or too-small rise of the waters made a bad season, and floods in some
years have been disastrous.
The greater disasters which history records in Thailand have been wars
with its neighbors. The histories of Thailand largely concern court'intrigues
and laws passed at various times, but until recent years such matters very rarely
affected the great mass of the population. On the other hand, ware with Burma
for instance, in spite of the inefficiency of the array and of military tactics
from the Western viewpoint, meant conscription, the overrunning of the country,
sack of the cities and whole populations put to the sword or removed bodily to
another country. In 1828 "the expedition against Laos was successful. As usual
in Siamese warfare, they laid waste the country, plundered the inhabitants,
brought them to Bangkok, sold and gave them away as slaves." The king (of the
Laos) "was confined in a large iron cage, exposed to a burning sun." "In this
cage was placed with the prisoner, a larger mortar to pound him in, a large
boiler to boil him in, a hook to hang him by, and a sword to decapitate him; also
a sharp-pointed spike for him to sit on" (Bowring 1:61 .2). Periods of peace,
internally or with its neighbors, on the other hand, automatically meant compara-
tive prosperity for the people, and for the last century there has been peace.
The Thai peasants have never probably been enthusiastic soldiers and they
trace during historical times as unenthusiastic as possible. In the last century,
9


"officers rarely led their men but remained discreetly behind them, a naked
sword in hand. Siamese tradition held that if a soldier retreated even a few
steps before the enemy, the officer must cut off his head. The generalissimo
stood furthest behind of all, holding a long lance with which he periodically
prodded his soldiers in the back, crying, ’Forward, childrenl'" (V, Thompson 296)’
The underpopulation of Thailand, Indo-China, and Burma is probably closely
related to the policies of devastation carried out by the periodical victors.
Disease seems no more rampant than in overpopulated India or China, and the Thai
birth rate, as recorded in recent censuses, has been only second to that of the
U.S.S.R,
European Contact and Modernization
Like all countries of Asia and the Pacific, Thailand has inevitably been
caught up in the changes occasioned by the spread of Western interests and the
dissemination of Western ideas. This common cultural transformation has, how-
ever, had in Thailand a character unique in all of Southeast Asia and the Malay
Archipelago owing to the fact that in this country it was carried out, not only
by an Asiatic state acting as a sovereign people but also, until 1932, by an
absolute monarch the only one left in the world after the fall of Abyssinia.
The great Western powers were all interested in Siam in the seventeenth
century. Portugal, Holland, France, and England vied xtfith each other for
advantages and, incidentally, taught the Siamese certain techniques which became
basic in the country. Thus, the Portuguese taught the Siamese the arts of can-
non foundry and musketry, and the Dutch the art of modern shipbuilding (V.
Thompson 207-211), The king Phra Narai in the latter half of the seventeenth
century, through the coaching of a Greek sailor-adventurer, Constantine Phaulkon,
who rose to be the king's favorite and dictator of Siamese policy, made himself
the principal Siamese merchant in his kingdom and his port a clearing house for
products of China, Japan, Sumatra, and India. Phra Narai reckoned, however,
without the court and the officials. Jealousy of Phaulkon and fear for their
own way of life brought on a court revolution during which Phaulkon was killed,
and the king died. The new king killed all the royal family to remove possible
competitors for the throne and then closed the doors of Siam to Europeans,
When in the nineteenth century official contacts were again resumed, they
had a quite different aspect. Siam's export trade was expanded and Western
trading companies were interested in removing the more cumbersome restrictions
on their trade. Also, both France in Indo-China, and England in Burma were ex-
tending their Asiatic empires, and Siam was caught between them. The pictures
of their negotiations drawn by European representatives at this period have all
of them a family likeness. The Siamese Government never used force or threats,
but it was adept at humiliations and subterfuges and infuriating requisitions.
"The one diplomatic receipt of Siamese officials is 'Delay, delay, delay,
again and again; and if pressed, ask, as a last resource, for the advice of
the person who is pressing you; then say that you must refer it to headquarters;
and thus keep the ball rolling, until he perhaps gives up in despair of ever
getting to the bottom of your diplomacy'" (Colquhoun 225). From the point of
view of the Kingdom of Siam, these methods could hardly have been bettered, and
Siam actually maintained her independence. But the method was, naturally
enough, not popular with Western representatives.
10


Crawford, who attempted to negotiate an English trade treaty in the 1820's,
was kindly received In royal audience In a hall where "every inch of the floor
was covered with prostrate courtiers carefully ranged In hierarchs 1 order. The
Siamese had arranged the whole ceremony so that Crawford and his companions had
to make more than the usual number of obeisances, and their gifts were repre-
sented as tribute" (V. Thompson 147). Sir John Bowring in 1855 quotes the
opinion of a French priest: "Ships trading to Bangkok should bring three
cargoes, one of presents for those in high places, one for bribes to the custom
officers, and one for the purposes of trade" (Graham II: 121).
In spite of the unpopularity among Europeans of the methods employed by the
Siamese court. Slam was able to avoid taking part in the First Anglo-Burmese War,
and to remain neutral in the Second, In 1893 when the French claimed an area on
the left bank of the Mekong, French gunboats actually proceeded up the Menam to
Bangkok. The king of Siam called a truce.' When it was later discovered that the
French military orders to the commander had not been in good form, the Siamese
premier congratulated him on his skill and daring in forcing an entrance. When
the French ships departed, the people along the river casually remarked that their
king would not let them stay any longer, Siam then accepted the cession to the
French of Luang-Prabang and of their part of the Chantabun (V. Thompson 188).
Modernization has been gradually making headway in Siam since 1850, and the
initiative in these moves was taken by the kings themselves, certainly never at
the instance of any popular pressure and often against the will of the princes
and officials.
The remarkable King Chulalongkorn's abolition of the practice of obeisance
to the king is typical of later modernizations. "Until the year 1874 A.D., all
persons approached the sovereign on hands and knees, crawling with the head upon
a level with the monarch's feet" (Young 131). In that year 1874 the king assem-
bled all the court and a decree was read to them of which the following paragraphs
formed a portion; "Since His Majesty ascended the throne, it has been the Royal
purpose to cherish the State and augment the happiness of the greater and lesser
princes, ministers and nobles, the clergy, the Brahmins, and the masses of the
people all over the Kingdom. Whatever is oppressive and burdensome, it has been
the Royal purpose to remove from the people and abolish from the State.... The
custom of prostration and human worship in Slam is manifestly an oppressive
exaction which an inferior must perform to a superior, causing him embarrassing
fatigue in order to honour a superior. These acts of showing honour by such
prostrations and worship. His Majesty perceives are of no benefit whatever to the
country" (Young 132-33). The edict then proclaimed that men should henceforth
stand in the presence of their king "after which the whole crowd rose from the
ground, and for the first time in the history of the country, the subject stood
upright in the presence of the sovereign" (Young 134). Twenty-five years later
some noblemen still required their servants to approach them on hands and knees,
but the custom of crouching before a superior has gradually been done away with.
The peaceful freeing of the slaves by King Mongkut's son, Chulalongkorn,
during his reign, 1868-1910, was a remarkable achievement in any country and
was carried out by royal edicts with complete success. When he became king, it
is estimated that one-fourth of the population were slaves, mostly debt slaves,
Chulalongkorn first ruled that slavery was no longer hereditary and that the
children of slaves were free men. Some years later he declared a wage scale
which landlords were compelled to pay their slaves for labor; if these wages
11


were not paid, the unpaid suras were credited against the price for which the
slaves had sold themselves. In 1905 he freed all slaves unconditionally. In this
whole period of emancipation, there is no evidence of popular support or of
court resistance; the king acted and the country accepted.
A recent modem social pregram is that .of vaccination. In 191 4 the
Government passed a compulsory vaccination law applicable to all Bangkok Circle,
and this has been extended until epidemics of smallpox are now, even in areas
where there have been no Improvements in sanitation nor in medical care, a thing
of the past. Vaccination has been accepted by the people,, even in rural dis-
tricts, "So ready are most people to be vaccinated that they are sometimes ex r
ploited by quacks and swindlers. During one smallpox scare a bogus doctor
vaccinated the entire population of three villages with Nestle's tinned milk at
twopence a head" (Wood; Land of Smiles 17).
The people have recognized also the value of quinine as a specific
for malaria. "It was readily accepted and today is on sale very cheaply"
(Landon .127). It has not been so easy to get people to wear foot coverings
in order to decrease the incidence of hookworm.
Since 1917 when 7»000 people died of plague in Eastern Thailand, con-
trol of infected rats has become so effective that the country was in 1939
almost free of plague (Landon 127).
In 1937 on the outbreak of a cholera epidemic "the nation mobilized
as for war...A law was passed which required everyone toobe injected. The
government health centers injected people by the thousands. Many of the rail-
road stations had temporary injection stalls erected." (Landon 126),
It is clear that definite programs to innoculate the people or to get
them to use certain specifics have been quite successful . but desirable changes
in traditional custom including all habits of garbage disposal, sanitary
arrangements, etc. of slower in gaining acceptance.
The greatest change in all Thai political history was accepted by the
people and, this time, by the king himself, with the most peaceful compliance
the coup d'etat of 1932 which ended the absolute monarchy, "The people remained
passive throughout. A curious throng pressed around the Throne Hall, but there
were no demonstrations. The general order was so complete that the shops, which
had been closed on the morning of June 24th, reopened one by one during the
course of the afternoon" (V. Thompson 63) . Throughout all the succeeding con-
spiracies and intrigues also, the peaceableness of the populace was remarkable.
Efforts to get the people interested in public and political affairs
have not met with much success. The Thai have no traditional habits like those
in Burma where men spent a good proportion of their time electioneering for lo-
cal village positions. The village and commune headmen were regarded just as
"the best men." Now that the Thai are supposed to vote in elections and meet
for public discussion there is little response. One-tenth of the people turned
up to vote in 1933 "in an atmosphere of calm amiability bordering on indiffer-
ence" (V. Thompson 83 ), and a wreath of flowers was placed around the victor's
neck.
12


Economic modernization has involved the development of trade and of
more systematic production. The Thai, however, have let the profits to be de-
rived from such activities go by default, and business was developed by immigrant
Chinese. The Thai raised the rice, but the Chinese were the middlemen; they
owned and ran the rice mills or worked as coolies in them. Practically the
whole rice export trade was in their hands. "The Chinese was the pawnbroker,
the tailor, the boot-maker, the dyer of cloth, the furniture-maker, the iron
smith, the market gardners, the fish-dealers, the old tin can collector, and
the- hawker" (Le May A: 165). They filled the yawning labor shortage whether
as merchants or as rickshaw men, for the Thai of the upper classes were only
too glad to have them do the wage-service which they themselves refused.
The Chinese in Thailand followed the usual South Sea pattern of
Chinese emigration; they came from the southeast coastal provinces as tran-
sients. They left a wife in China —to whom they would eventually return
but they married a Thai wife and their children grew up as Thai and usually
remained there. The children too prospered. During the first World War the
Chinese for the first time began bringing their women with them and thus grad-
ually led to a separation which had hardly been possible earlier. By the 1930’s
when the depression hit Thailand, the Chinese were a ready scapegoat and the
reason "why peasants are in debt" though Andrews in the Economic Survey of
1935 shows how unjustifiable this view is and with the growing nationalism
of the later 30 ! s, much anti-Chinese legislation was passed.
Economic modernization has not yet induced the Thai upper class to
give up their exclusive predilection for civil administration positions or
the lower class to accept either wage-labor or small business.
The recent nationalist movement, which culminated in Thailand's
present alliance with Japan, has been led, as in Burma, by university and for-
eign-trained Thai. It has had a number of planks in its platform, some of them
dominant at one moment and some at another. Besides the u.~ual anti-foreign
agitation, which in the thirties led to some demonstrations against the Chinese
"exploiter" and has this spring drawn a complaint from the Vatican against
Catholic discrimination, the nationalists in the early thirties urged constitu-
tional rather than an absolute monarchy and better agrarian conditions. The
nationalists stepped into power as a result of the bi.ood.less palace coup d'etat
of 1932 in which army officers took a leading part. Their front was theagrarian
leader Luang Pradist Manudharm, who in the new government functioned ably as
Foreign Minister and Minister of Finance. The Array soon put in their own men as
premiers, and at the time of the Japanese invasion in December a general,
Luang Pibul Songgrara, who had received his military education in Germany, headed
the government. He maintains this positon today under the Japanese.
On January 25, 1 Thailand declared war against Britain and the United
States, Radio Bangkok has been especially ecstatic over Japan's gift to Thailand,
J uly % of the Northern Shan States (ex-Burma) and of the four Malay States
which lie south of peninsular Thailand; Perils, Kedah, Kelantan, and Trengganu.
Those four Malay States Siam had ceded to Great Britain in 1909. The Bangkok
Government celebrates Thailand's role today in Japan's co-prosperity sphere as
a fit alliance between the two great Buddhist nations of the Far East which had
maintained their independence from European control.
13


II. RELIGION
The Thai are Buddhists and follow the Southern or Hinayana form of that
religion. Buddhism is the State religion, and the king the defender of the
Buddhist faith. Innumerable figures of Buddha occur everywhere in temples and
the open air, and every home has an altar to Buddha, (Young 38).
Historically, it is interesting to separate Buddhist ceremonies and prac-
tices from those of Brahmanism but culturally the two are welded into what appears,
to all Thai, who are not historians a consistent and homogeneous whole, Brahmanism
was earlier the religion of the nobles, and many of the most impressive Thai
ceremonies of the present day are of Brahman derivation. Buddhism is tolerant
and has incorporated these with no sign of fissure.
The Buddhist monastery, wat. is omnipresent in Thailand. It is a collection
of buildings of different types, generally set together "in no sort of order but
with delightful irregularity" (Pratt 151) place is found for them when some
merit-maker erects one, "To build a new wat (or any shrine in a wat) is accounted
one of the surest ways of making merit, but to repair one which someone else has
made is considered merely to increase the merit of that other. Hence, he who
desires to lay up riches in Heaven prefers to erect a new building rather than
to repair an old one" (Graham 111 237). An effort has been made in recent
decades to change this attitude.
The wat is surrounded by a brick wall and. 'facing the main entrance stands
the temple, bawt. crowned with its series of tiled, overlapping roofs. Inside,
it is dim and cool and bare of furniture; the altar at the far end supports a
large, gilded Buddha with lesser images grouped about it. Outside, the temple
is set off as sacred ground by eight large flat stones conventionally represen- 1
ing the leaves of the bo tree which sheltered the Buddha (Graham II".;236).
Other holy buildings within the wat enclosure are the needle-spired shrines,
phra chedi. and the image houses which contain figures of the disciples of the
Buddha, the fat belly-god, the mother earth, and the judge of souls. Besides
these are the lecture hall where sermons may be preached and the rest house
where any traveller can sleep and which in some villages serves as temple (P. A.
Thompson 180), a bell tower, and the small houses where the monks live.
These wats are more numerous in the rural districts than in the urban.
In 1939 there were more than 18,000 in the country not counting those in
ruins averaging in East and North Thailand almost one to every 500 persons.
They are the hub of village life. They serve as "church, town hall, hotel,
recreation center, school, crematorium, and home" (V. Thompson 630).
The wat is the home of the monks, the "yellow-robes". These monks have
taken vows not to eat after midday though they drink tea and coconut milk,
chew betel and smoke tobacco to make the deprivation bearable, to remain
aloof from all women, and to own only eight possessions: "Namely, three cloths
all of which are worn at the same time and which the wearer is supposed never to
put off, a waist-girdle, a begging bowl, a razor, a needlecase and a small cloth
through which to filter drinking-water, the last not for hygienic purposes but
to prevent the accidental destruction of life by swallowing of aquatic animalculae.
To these were long ago added by common consent a fan, a spittoon, and a water
14


vessel" (Graham II;240). This rule of poverty is honored in the breach and the
possession of many luxuries is quite general and no cause of embarrassment. The
monks also have a whole list of specific rules about the height and width of the
beds they can sleep on, about not using scents, and about "not loving one man
better than another," In public they must keep their eyes on the ground a few
paces ahead of them so that they will not look upon a woman.
The monks' routine is unexciting, He rises at dawn and takes his begging
bowl "as big as half a pumpkin" and walks silently to some part of the town or
the village to receive his food. The women keep watch and fill his bowl; he is
not allowed to knock or signal his coming or to speak in thanks. The giver makes
merit by the gift, and no thanks are due. It is no secret to anyone that the
contents of the bowl are often thrown to the dogs that swarm in every wat. after
which the monks breakfast on food prepared by their own servants. For the rest
of the day they relax according to their pleasure or wander abroad. They have no
responsibilities except such as they may seek, and no full routine of devotions,
such as is common in monastery life in all countries, fills up the monk's day.
They can give free rein to lassitude.
At the last census in Thailand there were more than 225,000 monks and
novices, 4,500 students resident in the monasteries, and 100,000 temple attendants.
The monks and novices, however, are by no means life-long incumbents; the monkish
vows in Thailand never,under any circumstances, are assumed for life; though some
choose to stay all their lives, anyone can leave at any time. With equal free-
dom a monk can return again if he wishes. The one rule is that every Thai at the
age of 20 becomes a monk, and the almost universal minimum period was three months
He had very likely lived in a monastery earlier either as temple atten-
dant (attending upon individual monks, or living in the wat as a pupil) or as a
novice (boys who, in contrast to temple attendants, wear the monk's yellow robe,
and have usually entered the temple service "for the soul of" their father or
their mother who has died.)
Every male Thai is, therefore, ordained as a Buddhist monk. The ceremony
of acceptance into the monastery is a festive occasion. "The applicant arrives
at the temple with a host of relatives and friends dressed as for a holiday. He
is clothed in white and over his ordinary garments he wears a mantle of gauze de-
corated with gold and silver spangles. A procession'is formed and to the sound
of a band that plays in the open air, hean dhis male friends march three times
around the outside of the temple. He next enters the building and sits down on
the floor in a place reserved for him. The women of the party sit on one side of
the temple and the men on the other. They all chew betel-nut, and the men smoke
while all refresh their thirst from the numerous tea-pots that circulate round
and round the congregation" (Young 256-257). A post-monk friend of the candidate
then leads him to the superior who sits in the midst of the rows of priests at
one end of the hall, and the .superior catechises him as to whether ho is free
fromdisea.se., whether he is sound of mind, whether he is male, whether he is a
fugitive from justice, wtether he is -unencumbered by debt; (both those later ques-
tions are pertinent because men sometimes take refuge in the monastery to avoid
the consequences of debt or of desertion from the army), whether hehas reached
the age of 20, and whether his parents have given their consent. The candidate
then goes forward toward the superior on hands and knees and three times salutes
him with the palms of his hands pressed against his forehead and asks that he be
raised "from the lowly condition of the laity to the perfect condition of priest-
15


hood." When this is granted, he retires to one side, and in full view takes
off his festive clothes, tramples them underfoot, and puts on the yellow robes
of the monk. "The ceremony concludes with the paying of homage to the newly
made priest. He sits on the floor and then all present who are acquainted with
him come, one by one, and prostrate themselves to the ground before him, at
the same time giving him some present. If he has many friends, the floor of the
temple around him is seen covered with about as motley an assortment of articles
as it is possible to gather" (Young 260). From now on "he regards the superior
as a second father."
The monks must in no way pass moral judgments upon the people; one of their
vows is that they will judge no man. Their public repetition of moral sayings
is, however, regarded as immensely important and able to transform even the most
evil-minded person. A folktale tells of the powerful official who used to put
to death his watchmen until he heard the supposed dolt who was watching that
night teaching a moral lesson; he withdrew and in the morning he "was found
possessed of a kind and loving spirit and no longer desired to destroy his people"
(Fleason 122).
The number of monks and novices at the last census was more than one
in every 30 males; adding to these the temple attendants, one in every 20 males.
Of all the vows which they take the strictest one and the one least often
broken is that of chastity. Not even the folk-tales which sometimes lampoon
the monk’s lassitude or greediness tell of any approaches made to women; even
imposter monks who in the tales swindle villagers and live high never get into
any sexual difficulties. Nor is this vow regarded as onerous; the one forbidding
eating after noonday is the chief deprivation always mentioned first.
Public ceremonies are all of them religious except theatricals and games,
which the monks are forbidden to witness. However, no calendric religious
ceremony or religious rite de passage passes off without these amusements, and
to the people they are inextricably intermingled. The heavily sanctioned formal
etiquette and lack of levity characteristic of a royal audience contrasts
strongly with the gossiping, the laughter, the betel chewing-*, and tea drinking
which accompanies even a temple service. "The service had not begun when I arrived
and the congregation were having a pleasant social time, chatting, chewing betel
nut, drinking tea, one or two of the men smoking, and some of them quietly
praying. Men and women are present I confess it was hard for me to tell
which was which —as well as a few children. Each newcomer took off his
shoes on entering, got down on his hands and knees and crawled to his mat,
bundle in hand—for all come pretty well armed—and on reaching his place
proceeded to unpack and arrange his possessions. First the candles had to be
lighted up and put in place. Then the betel box, spitoon, and perhaps teapot
and teacup must be conveniently located near the mat. These things being,
attended to, the newcomer would put his hands together, extend them toward the
Buddha, and make a little silent prayer" (Pratt 181).
Annual ceremonies for the worship of Buddha, or the King’s First Plowing,
or the annual Presentation of Monastic Robes to the monks, or the New Year,
or the Songram festival at the beginning of the rainy season when not only the
sacred images but ary man and woman, especially younger ones, get good dousing
of water, or the Krathong ceremony when floating baskets of fruit, flowers and
betel nut, made up into curious and artificial forms, are floated down the fiver
16


as offerings, or the Swing Ceremony for Phra Isuen (Shiva) who "likes to see
swinging" on the gigantic 3-foot high swing all these are occasions for
pleasure trips, picnics, plays, and all the amusements the Thai knows. "Booths
for the sale of offerings are erected at the sides of walks laid out round the
foot of the hill, theatrical performances and displays of fireworks continue
all night, and a dense crowd of chaffing youths and laughing damsels move
slowly to and fro up and down the long spiral stairway giving access to the
shrine. The scene is illuminated with pink paper lanterns shaped like lotus
flowers, temporary restaurants provide exhausted merit-makers with food of
all kinds; toys and fairings of every description are to be had, and everybody
spends his money and is happy" (Graham H: 250). According to the means
of the family giving the life crisis ceremonies, these occasions also include
all possible recreations. Cremations are enlivened by orchestras and dances and
fireworks and eating and drinking.
Animism
Acts and prayers of propitiation in Thailand are made not in the Buddhist
worship but to the phi. Even a peasant hardly makes an appeal for specific help
in Buddhist worship, but the phi are propitiated and besought. These are
spirits of the dead; not the soul* which represents man's full character and
passes on into endless reincarnations, but his "lower" soul, his passions, which
may haunt the world he has left and disturb the living. The peasants continually
make offerings and prayers to these spirits of the dead "whom they ardently
desire not to see" (P.A. Thompson 63).
The 'lower soul" under certain circumstances "persists for a time after
death, but gradually as the impulse it received during life becomes exhausted,
its component parts are scattered abroad," (P.A, Thompson 147-^4B). These
circumstances are primarily "violent" death, including women dying in childbirth,
people killed by wild animals and those who died away from home and had no
proper ensequies, or from cholera, smallpox, etc. Such persons are not cremated
but are buried, and their spirits are dangerous. Little bamboo birdhouses
are set up near their graves, and men and women who can discover which of these
spirits are responsible for bad fortune and can exorcise them are much in
demand. Phi of this kind spirits of those who have died violent deaths are
also useful; at least they were used in the past to protect public buildings.
Three men vfore taken at random in the crowd (Leonewens 218) and buried alive
under the gateposts of the buildings (Alabaster 212). Their violent phi protected
it from harm.
Besides these uncremated spirits there are also the spirits of particularly
remembered dead, and nearly every house has "for the accommodation of each
phi, a miniature house, about the size of a small birdcage, set up either
on the verandah or on a post in a shady corner of the garden and before it
incense sticks are burned, and flowers, fruit, and rice are offered to avert
misfortune in the daily round of domestic affairs. The approach of crises such
as the birth of a child, the annual school examination or the drawings of one of
the frequent State-sanctioned lotteries, is marked by the appearance before
these little shrines of more considerable offerings such as horses, slaves or
cattle, though these take, of course, the convenient form of rough images in
clay or other material" (Graham II; 286).
17


There are endless named groups of phi: phi who terrify persons out alone
after dark, phi who guard hidden treasure and make sick any person who disturbs
it, phi who trouble pregnant women, phi which give help in finding lost objects.
Wood says that in North Thailand a woman who controls this latter phi puts on
trousers wheh she exercises her power (Land of Smiles 107). Then there are the
spirits of evildoers, phi who are condemned to perpetual hunger; they are taller
than trees and have such tiny mouths that they can hardly get food in. There
are phi of women who were passionate lovers and who lure men with their great
beauty and afterwards devour them (Graham II: 287). There are rare phi, too,
which make a man or woman they enter absolutely refuse to wear clothes; Wood gives
examples from North Thailand of both a man and a woman whom he met (Land of Smiles
104 - 05).
In Northern Siam those who exorcise such spirits are said to inherit the
power, a man from his father, a woman from her mother, and there is some trance
behavior at such rituals. Some phi can only be controlled by women who put on
some article of man’s dress (ibid. 109). Offerings and charms are, however, the
usual means of controlling the phi: even the monks peddle charms, and all persons
wear them. The little bird-cage houses for them are universal; Graham says in
1912 that these were to be seen "not only in every house but in every forest
glade, in the fields, even in the crowded streets. The very wats themselves are
not exempt, for in the rural districts spirit offerings are sometimes exposed on
the walls of them and even within the sacred precincts" (II: 292). In the San
Chao Lak Muang, a great shrine at Bangkok, images of phi are grouped around the
central richly-gilded pillar and the "guardian phi are freely consulted by persons
in search of lucky numbers to both private and public lotteries of which there are
many, of tips for the local races; while childless women go there to pray for
children" (Graham II; 284).
III. ADULT LIFE
The family, the unit of Thai life, is not the large extended family of the
Chinese; it is the biological family. Zimmerman, in his Survey of 1930, found
that the average Thai family consisted of between five and six persons, and each
of these small biological families has its own house, its own fields, and its
separate economy; its meals are prepared and served among its own inmates. The
ties to the extended family are, however, close. The commonest traditional
arrangement was to build the house for each young couple close to the wife's
parents' home, but in all periods the house might alternatively be in the hus-
bands' village; this latter has become more common today; and a boy's mother's
brothers are often widely scattered. One informant described several years of
residence with his various mother's brothers in many sections of the country as
extremely important to his education. The warm tie between a brother and his
sisters is carried down into the next generation, and a sister's son is welcomed
by his mother's brothers. Even more general is residence with the grandparents,
whose relation to their grandchildren is very warm though they do not usually
live in the child's own family unless one of the grandparents is dead and the
survivor too feeble to support himself alone.
18


In the village each family house is built on piles and has a fence around it,
generally of bamboo, which keeps the animals in at night; these latter usually
sleep all together under the house floor. The peasants' bamboo house is a frail
structure tied together at the joints, and its floor of bamboo has chinks large
enough to drop down through most of the waste and garbage. Especially in the dry
season when all moisture is dried out of the house materials, it has seemed to
Europeans as if any strong push would knock the whole structure over. The bamboo
ladder, too, is usually a rickety affair, A platform or verandah runs at least
across the front of the house, and the main room is open to the verandah so that
day-time family life is open to the view of passersby. Mats are spread in the
living room for sitting and in the bedroom for sleeping. There is also a kitchen,
and the smoke of the fire, made in a kettle or between bricks, is not drawn out
by any chimney arrangement.
There were two meals a day in Central Thailand, one at about 7 A. M. and the
other about 5:30 P. M., but eating and cooking was highly irregular. Whenever
anyone was hungry, he ate, regardless of meal hours, not only cold leftovers but
freshly cooked food which any member of the family might prepare for himself.
Husbands and little children knew how to cook properly and often did so. At
mealtime the big bowl of rice stood in the center of the floor and before each
person his individual dish of "garnish" with a spoon in it. Rice is taken with
the fingers, rolled into small balls, and dipped in the garnish before it is put
in the mouth. In Central Siam the flavoring of garnish is a very respected art —
mixing of "sweet-sour," hot, and various spices. It is very hot to European
taste.
Each family averages about eight acres of rice land, and rice is not only
the chief food of the human members of the family but also of the animals. The
wet rice fields —most Thai agriculture is of wet rice—are not fenced but lie in
great level stretches, under water during the growing-time of the grain, and
caked and barren during the dry season. The work in the fields is highly season-
able, with long periods of leisure between. People planted the fields of their
neighbors in succession, and each farmer provided for the work party "plenty of
good white rice and a special brand of dried fish." In the evening the workers,
washed and clean from the mud of the fields and dressed in dry clothes, partake
of the superior rice and fish of their hosts, on which they do not fail to compli-
ment him, then, after a smoke, more chaff and perhaps a round or two of semi-
improvised verses touching on the incidents of the day, the party breaks up, to
meet again and go through the same routine the next day. Reaping and winnowing
by concerted action are conducted in the same way, when, the weather being fine,
the ground reasonably dry and the sexes indiscriminately mingled, there is even
more room for jollity than the planting season affords" (Graham lls 14, 15).
The women do the milling of the rice in the villages. The pounder is raised
by placing the foot on an attached lever "and then jumping up so as to press upon
the lever with the whole weight of the body. In any small village, you can hear
the steady thump, thump of the hammers from morning to night, and see the girls
and young women jumping on and off the short end of the lever, with an almost
painful regularity and precision" (Young 209).
19


Throughout the year women tend market. They carry their own produce for
sale and buy others' produce. They take great pride in beating down the price
and in getting a good bargain, and the "mouth of the market women" is proverbial
for fast and shrewish talk. In farming villages, because of the market, the
women handle the day-by-day money, though the men usually handle the sale of the
rice crop to the Chinese middlemen, etc.
Life on the water is almost as important as life on the land. Every house-
hold has its boat, and men and women equally are strong and skillful paddlers.
Bangkok, at the proper season, is thronged with the houseboats of families from
a wide radius who come down with the whole family and their household goods, to
dispose of their crop and have a "trip." Everyone is in and out of the water
daily; the native pantaloons are not removed but get "washed" in this way.
The entry into adult life, is, for the boy, his entry into the monastery
when he is 20. For the girl there is no corresponding ceremony but about this
same age of 20 she usually bears her first child, and this traditionally marks
for her the assumption of adult responsibilities. Marriage did not, for until
the birth of the child, though the young wife of course labored as she had done
before marriage, the wants of the new family were supplied by the parents of the
spouse in the close vicinity of whose home their "wedding house" had been built.
Certainly in Central Siam the "cooking" of the young mother was essential after
childbirth. She lay during this period on a long narrow flat board. The room
was like a furnace. The "cooking" lasted a month. The woman, because of it,
was supposed to lose her looks. When she took up life again, she owned her own
property, managed her own household, tended her baby, and provided for her
husband's wants. She was adult.
For the women of the upper classes, the birth of the first child did not
usually mean this change in responsibilities. The first wife permanently managed
the household economy, and the lesser wives were under her management. It is
significant that Siamese tales "describe the junior wives as wicked, deceitful,
bewitching (given to witchcraft) and treacherous" (Chandruang 63). In the royal
households the "forbidden women" as they were called, were cared for by servitors
and usually had practically no responsibilities at all. Polygamy was made illegal
in 1935; Rama Vi's earlier efforts to abolish it after the first World War had
been met with such strong resistance, led most obstinately by upper class women
themselves, that the measure was pigeon-holed (Graham I; 246).
Marriage, for the man, closely follows his period of monastic life. The
courtship is short, and there is plenty of opportunity for the young men to choose
their own mates. There is no infant or childhood bethrothal at all. The boy has
mingled very freely, outside of school and the monastery, with girls of his age,
and there is often an understanding between them. The great rule is that he must
not touch her body before marriage. One informant said that if a boy seized a
girl's arm he attacked her kwan (soul-stuff, guardian spirit), and a boy would
not do this before he had spoken to his mother asking that marriage negotiations
be undertaken. His parents then choose go-betweens of both sexes who formally
visit the girl's family and open the delicate negotiations.
20


The go-betweens say that the parents of the boy have asked him if he had
anyone in mind "to whom he could trust his life in sickness and his obsequies
after death", and he had mentioned their daughter. There are several visits
before the great subject of property settlement is mentioned, for relatives
must be consulted and astrologers must determine the compatability of the couple's
years of birth. The Thai have the twelve-year cycle of the Chinese: the year
of the Rat, Cow, Tiger, Rabbit, etc., and a couple, one of whom was born in the
year of the Rat and the other in the year of the Dog, would not be happy. Most
"years", however, allow for harmony, and when this is determined important matters
must be settled. The property settlement concerns the nest-egg for the young
couple themselves —not an exchange between their elders, as is so common in other
cultures. Only "the payment for her mother's milk" is paid to the elders, a
comparatively small sum paid by the bridegroom to the girl's mother. The rest
is for the young couple—so much for the house, and the furnishings, so much for
trade. The bride's and the bridegroom's family bargain as to how much each shall
contribute, but, as one informant said, if the bride's family astetoo much, the
bridegroom's go-between can deal a careful insult: "Do you desire to sell your
daughter?" Until all is arranged and the house is built and the wedding day comes,
the girl is carefully chaperoned by her parents, and the couple do not see each
other (Young 89-95).
The marriage ceremony is simple. It takes place at the bride's home. The
bridegroom's party comes bringing the gold and property agreed on, and this is
laid out opposite that contributed by the bride's family. Both contributions
are examined and counted. The groom and the guests arrive bringing all kinds of
gifts, many of them live fowls and animals. Food and drink are provided for all
who come, and the monks come to pass a holy thread around the bride and groom,
pour holy water over them, and pronounce a blessing. The bridegroom then arrays
himself in a new suit of clothes provided by his wife, and the party feasts till
it is time to make the bridal bed at night, A happily married elder couple
spread the mats and arrange the pillows "calling upon the angles, the house
spirits, the sun, moon, and rain to be kind to the young couple throughout their
life," the bride is led in to her waiting bridegroom, and the girl's father and
mother press their noses close to her cheek and inhale strongly (the Thai "kiss")
while the mother says to her, "Away from your mother's breast into your husband's
arms. My son, keep her and love her. And you, my daughter, serve him as a loyal
wife." Then a great beating of gongs that "covered the entire valley and shook
the heart of the jungle" announced the marriage, and the party withdrew from the
bridal room (Chandruang 131).
In case the husband takes a lesser wife, there is no ceremony of this kind.
She is bought and can be sold again, though there is relatively high stability
even in marriages with lesser wives. To break up a duly arranged marriage, how-
ever, means a property arrangement, with loss to the husband; even more important
perhaps, sentiment is against it. Divorce is extremely rare.
The adult male’s ambition to rise in status during his lifetime took quite
different forms according to his class position. The prince and the civil servant
were dependent on favors from above, and these were never guaranteed for long. It
was necessary to remain in favor or to lose out publicly. The peasant, however,
sought few favors. He accepted taxes, rents, and corvee labor as the laws of
21


existence, even when they were arbitrarily increased for the personal benefit of
the collector. Few of the impositions were directed against him personally; they
affected the whole village or area together. To achieve standing in the commu-
nity a man could make a reputation for his wit and rhyming skill as a performer
in "sings", he could be known as a good farmer, he could make a name as such a
"sound" man that he became village headman, or he could be given special honor
by all if he gave it all up and lived as a monk. Peasants sometimes became very
well-to-do and made merit by building wats and rest houses, but such merit-making
was not a recognized status-ladder with rungs to which one climbed in competition
with one's fellows. Status anxiety was very low, and all observers comment on
careless self-reliance and the absence of servility among the peasantry.
The "sings" are an important adult pastime, and the unmarried play a chief
role in this game. Such "sings" are an accompaniment of any group activity like
planting or harvesting or being on a holiday and hold a special position at the
Thai New Year. They are not rote performances but tales played out on certain
themes during the enactment of which the players must carry on the unfolding of
the plot no matter what turn ± s given it by an interrupting player or by the vis-
a-vis player of the moment. They are truly extemporaneous. But they demand
a practical and witty facility. Double meanings are particularly approved by
the audience, though except in the least common and wholly masculine bands of
players these double meanings are not obscene—and the Thai recognize obscenity
and have an elaborate cursing language which is obscene and is particularly
characteristic of the market place. Formal requirements of prosody must always
be met, no matter how impromptu the plot. The audience sings a chorus of nonsense
words, and all the actors' lines must rhyme with the last syllable of this chorus.
Each line extemporized by the actors has also a special "inner assonance" which
is obligatory and the line must be of a fixed number of syllables. If the rhyming
starts off with a six-syllable line, the actors must keep to six syllables. An
expert is highly valued and may be engaged to lead off and set the pace by the
farmer whose field is being harvested, etc., and who will agree to pay him two or
three days' exchange labor for one which the expert gives in return. This expert
gives the "call" and the invocation to named male experts., "Gru This and Gru That,
rural men just like himself, now dead and gone, but famous as rhymsters in their
day" (Bidyalankarana III), and a woman answers eulogizing named women experts.
These sings may be staged in boats as well as in the fields or the villages.
When they are on land, the actors move around in a ring and accompany their
singing with gestures, in the case of harvest sings by a very vigorous dumb show
of reaping with a sickle the rice sheaf they hold in the left hand. In boats,
there is, of course, less possibility of gesture. At any festival where people
congregate in canoes, boatloads of men will be on the look-out for a woman's
boat where the crew will "answer" them. When they get started, another boatload
may interrupt, and bring new complications into the plot, (ibid, 113-122).
Dancing takes a more serious form in the lakhon dance performed by women.
It is "stately as a minuet" (P. A. Thompson 173), and is danced to the music of
an orchestra which, when it is complete, consists of 21 instruments. There is
also a chorus which sings,the lines. The plots are taken from the Ramayana or
other Hindu sources, but the acting never "tells the story"; as is usual in


Southeast Asia, it refers to the story somewhat obliquely. Professional troupes
perform in the villages. The only men in such a dance are clowns who enliven
the women's very formal posturing. "The make-up of the women consists of powder
plastered on the face until it resembles a smooth white mask, and of strongly-
marked black eyebrows and red lips. This covering entirely precludes all facial
expression of the emotions; hence joy, sorrow, pleasure, anger, and fear are all
expressed by conventional signs. The dialogue, except that of the clowns, is
conducted at a high and monotonous pitch of the voice, and the singing, which
forms a great part of the entertainment, is always slow, loud and of a strong
nasal intonation" (Graham 11:207). There are also veeqai dances performed by men,
which are less stylized, and sword dances which require very smooth and flowing
movements; two sword dancers dance opposite, but "neither one wins."
Towns, as opposed to villages, have a theater where people go nightly to see
these performances or shadow plays (introduced from South Thailand) or a mari-
onette show or, latterly, motion pictures. No admissions are charged. Towns
also have clubs for officials and civil servants where men go in the afternoon
to play games, drink tea, and relax, and their wives and children frequent these
with them; they are not "men's clubs".
Kite-flying is a man's game and very popular with spectators too. During
the windy months much time is devoted to it, and Young (p. 50) says that in his
day "men might often be seen on calm, dull days flying their kites from boats
as they pass up and down the river". The most popular kite game is a contest of
male and female kites (see below Chapter V.) but, in another form, fine ground
glass is applied to the string of two kites, and the object is for the two kites
to get their strings around each other and "saw". The one which cuts the string
of the other kite "wins."
There is gambling on kite games and on innumerable other occasions,on fights
between crickets, beetles, and fish, a "numbers" game which is a monopoly sold by
the State, taking "chances" of all kinds, and national lotteries.
The State has regulated gambling for a long time, and cock fighting, for
instance, was made strictly illegal a generation ago—though it was, nevertheless,
übiquitous (Bowring I: 154). The Thai, Young says (p, 150) are "born gamblers",
and P. A. Thompson (p. 69) relates it to Thai lack of interest in laying money
by. As soon as a man (he is speaking of Bangkok) receives any money, "he will
go off to the nearest gambling-house and stop there until it is finished. If he
is lucky it may last him a week; if the luck is against him he has to return to
work the next day. It is his form of amusement and he never contemplates the
possibility of making money by it."
The Thai attitude toward money—or any surplus —is given vivid expression
in a folktale translated by Le May (A: 13-18). The king on his travels asked a
peasant what he did with his surplus. "Your majesty, all the money lam able
to save, after paying the expenses of our frugal household, I divide into four
parts. The first part I bury in the ground; the second part I use to pay my
creditors; the third part I fling into the river; and the fourth and last part
I give to my enemy." The king sent his retinue away and asked him to specify.


The peasant answered: "The money I bury in the ground is the money I spend on
alms and in making merit. The money I give to my creditors is what it costs
me to keep my father and mother, to whom I owe everything that I have. The
money I fling into the river is the money I spend on gambling and drink and
opium; and the money I give to my enemy is the money I give to my wife." The
answers pleased the King, except that he protested that a man's wife was not
his "enemy." The point of interest here is that no part of the surplus was
thought of something to be put by or to put into buying animals or tools,etc.;
the money given his "enemy" was, of course, spent on jewelry, etc., and insofar,
in some sense, savings. But "burying in the ground" and "throwing in the river"
are folk designations of where money should go, and "paying one creditors" is
supporting one's parents, not meeting debts in a financial sense. "Meeting
obligations was not the specialty of either prince or peasant. Peasants indebted
themselves with all lightness of heart, and the most honest among them took
every possible means of avoiding legitimate payments" (Graham I: 58^)•
Corvee labor was, until legal changes were made in this century, a heavy
requisition which the peasant accepted as part of theway the universe was made.
In Bowring's time (1855) he said it might be as much as one-third of a man's
working time per year (I: 123). Insofar as it was agricultural labor, it
followed more or less the usual "work-party" scheme; when corvee labor was
used to build modem roads, etc., it was more resented. The Thai have not
willingly engaged in industrial labor even when wages are paid; the tin mines of
South Thailand are worked by Chinese (Bowring II: 72) as are also the industrial
rice mills, etc. Working for wages on another man's project or undertaking the
responsibilities of commerce on one's own account seems to them a poor way of life.
Thai ideas of politeness should also be mentioned. It involves, among all
who are not explicitly Westernized, a running fire of questions about the
stranger's private affairs age, plans, cost of articles he is wearing,
and everything else they can think of. If a stranger is not asked these questions
it means that he is of no interest, and the Thai feel strongly that anyone who
has nothing to hide will respond freely.
The Thai certainly do not conceive of life as a round of duties and respon-
sibilities. They accept work and make it as gay as possible; when it is done
they are free to take their leisure. They have no cultural inventions of
self-castigation and many of self-indulgence and merriment.
The greatest celebration of all is the one that follows death. It consists
in a whole series of rites. A cremation of members of the royal family used to
last "for a month, during the whole of which time thousands of persons were
fed daily and entertained with all manner of diversions at the royal expense"
(Graham I: 165). Down to the poorest peasant, the greatest efforts of a life
time were spent in providing worthy obsequies, but there was no loss of merit
to the dead nor of respectability to the living if these were inexpensive
when times were bad or where the peasantry were hard pressed. The essential
observances were not expensive; a fee to the monks for their participation,.a
coffin which might be just a lidless wooden box covered with wallpaper and
a few logs for the pyre.


The best description is Chandruang’s account of his mother's funeral rites.
She was the first wife of an appointive judge in a town of Central Thailand. Her
body was washed and embalmed, dressed in her favorite dress, and placed on
a raised dais in a room of her own home. Her palms pressed together under her
chin held flowers and incense to show reverence to Buddha. The monks intoned
their prayers, and friends and relatives laid flowers around her and sprayed
perfume over her. For seven nights neighbors kept the wake with the family;
playing chess and card-games and listening sometimes to the monks reciting the
punishments of the eight hells, each divided into sixteen sub-hells. The first
important rites took place on the seventh and the fiftieth day after death
when an orchestra and a shadow play were provided, and Taoist priests burned
paper models of luxuries for the use of the dead in the next world.
Until the 100th day her soul had not reached the Buddhist heaven.
The body still lay in the house, and every evening her children brought fresh
flowers, incense, and candles, and a servant brought food to be set beside
the body. On the 100th Day, on her entrance into heaven, there was a great
feast, two orchestras, and a puppet show.
The body was not removed from the house till the arrangements were made for
the cremation four years and three months after death. On that day the town
theatres were closed for plenty of theatricals were offered at the feast, merchants
did a heavy trade, and orchestras and fireworks and even an outdoor motion
picture were provided. After dark the pyre was lighted and when it had burned
down, a handful of ashes was put in an um and placed in the house. (Chandruang
153).
There is no effort to build monuments to perpetuate the name of the dead.
The Thai are "content to accept the complete annihilation of the body intended
by nature, only marking occasionally the spot where the corpse of some one
or other of their great ones was reduced to ashes, by a nameless spire, all
memory of the origin of which is usually soon forgotten" (Graham II: 176).
PART TWO
IV. THE CHILD
The Thai, like many other Eastern Asiatic peoples, count a person’s age
from the time of conception. The months in the womb are described in the ritual
of cutting the top-knot as those days when "thou hast enjoyed every pleasure"
(Young 7?) and during this period the mother must keep a "clean heart",
i.e. clean of all turmoil. She must be calm, not make fun of people, and avoid
jerky or violent motions; if she breaks a cup, her child will have a cleft lip,
etc. No similar rules are reported for the prospective father, but he must
cherish his wife, especially he must try to provide anything which she craves to
eat and such cravings are usual for pregnant women.
Gestation is terminated, again in the words of the top-knot ritual, on that
day when the "time of delivery arrived and thou hast suffered and run the risk of
perishing by being bom alive into the world." However, all attention is focussed
on the ritual for the mother: the month-long "cooking" is not for the child, it


is for the mother. She has lost blood, and the fire is necessary to bring her back
to normal life. The child is regarded as having still a tenuous hold on life and
should be kept away from contact with it; even after the cooking period is over,
the baby is not taken out of the house if it is possible to avoid it. It
does not sleep with others of the family. At birth it has a little wicker
basket, and very sdon a little cradle is hung from the rafters and a string
attached to swing iV by; the father and older children, as well as the mother,
sit swinging the cradle for hours while they chew betel-nut and sing for the
baby. Informants comment on young mothers in America who wheel their little
babies out to the store when they do their marketing; a Thai mother would not do
this. "The least trifle," the ritual continues, "frightens thee and made thee
shudder." The baby must be protected. One way of protecting it is by giving it
a slurring name so that spirits will not jealously snatch it away; the mother's
term to her baby, however, is "phra ong. holy baby" (Leonowens 103). The mother
always nurses the baby sitting, cradling the baby in her lap and arms, and she
gives the child the breast whenever it wants it. Mothers are said to like the
act of nursing, and it is certainly regarded as the maternal act i.e,, rather
than gestation. The payment td the girl's family on her marriage is, for instance,
phrased as "payment for the mother's milk." The baby is seldom "kissed" Thai
kissing is with the nose pressed against the cheek but it is handled "much more
than any American babies." It is massaged in bathing, and powdered from head to
foot. Nineteenth century observers describe all babies as, almost from birth,
rubbed with a yellow tumeric paste supposed to keep mosquitoes away and
this was renewed all through childhood. (Young 16).
The first teaching the child receives is in gestures of obeisance. A mother
holding her infant in her arms puts its palms together between her own and raises
them to the chin, to the nose, to the forehead according to the degree of
deference that is called for. Before the baby is taken from the house, its
hands will be put in proper position to greet guests, and when the mother takes
it to the temple, she raises its palms still higher to the forehead to
greet Buddha.
As soon as it can hold its head up, the baby is carried straddled on the
hip, supported by the left hand. As one informant said, "When you carry a baby,
it's a main job. You don't carry anything else, and you don't do anything else
while carrying it." If the mother is not free for the job, the father or other
children carry it. This hip-straddled position never admits of the baby's passive
relaxation to every movement of its carrier's body, as shawl-carrying does,
and the baby is supposed to stay awake while it is carried. If not, tie father may
sling it on its stomach over his shoulder, supporting it behind with his hand.
Older brothers and sisters take equal care of the babies. Before the baby
is born, they are told, "You'll have a real live doll to play with soon,
lou won't have to pretend," and they help in making the things needed for the
baby. In every way they are encouraged to identify with the mother in expecting
the infant and in looking forward to caring for it. From the next older, a
special renunciation is required; the infant is loaded with bangles, usually
of silver or gold,and these are taken frorathe next older child, since it is


no longer "the baby". In view of the great love of bangles in Thai life, it
seems^ likely that this can properly be called a "renunciation", but no information
on this could be secured. Perhaps it is not important; there are plenty of
ornaments worn by children even when they are no longer "the baby".
From at least three months, the baby is given little pellets of rice rolled
into a ball by its elders. The rice is mashed or masticated, and there is no
attempt to make the baby take it until it swallows it without gagging. As
soon as it likes it, the mother is freer to leave the baby in the care of the
older children or of the father because if the baby cries it can be satisfied by
being given the mush-like rice. Throughout babyhood there is no attemptto
discipline the infant about crying; the child stops because it is attended to
in some way, and a great deal of attention is offered it. This attention is
certainly ungrudging; to older children as we have seen, it is phrased as a more
satisfactory doll-playing, and a folktale gives a man’s gloating daydream about
taking a wife and "when we have a child large enough to sit alone. I’ll take
care of it while my wife works the rice fields" (Fleeson 83). Before the child
can walk, he is thrown into the water by. his mother; "wings" are attached to
his body to keep his head above water, and he paddles around and often learns to
swim without the wings as soon as he learns to walk. His walking, too, is
something he learns by himself. His elders do not offer him their fingers to
encourage him to walk under their tutelage; they clap him on their hips. When
he walks, he walks by himself. He is very early made responsible for small acts
like offering the proper entertainment to guests. Even very small children set
out the various making of betel-nut, the cuspidor, and the tea things, and they
make the obeisance as second nature. These are all done under the approving
eyes of their parents, but the elders do not interfere.
When the child has learned to walk, his need of good motor coordination-
going up and down the bamboo house ladder, swimming in the water, and paddling
boats, walking over the separated slats of the bamboo floor is considerable,
and as the top-knot ritual says, "Thou wast ever falling flat on thy face and on
thy back." After the child*s teaching in obeisance, his teaching in motor control
is that which is next insisted on. He has not as yet been clothed, and' he has
not been given toilet training. He may or may not have already had experience
of not getting much attention when he cried; especially if he is the youngest
child, that will probably be delayed longer.
The self-reliance inculcated by carrying-habits, by learning to swim and
walk under his own steam, as it were, and Reinforced in later childhood remains
permanently with the Thai, and their selection among Buddhist teachings is that
what a person is depends on himself alone. A person's first duty is to meet a
situation adequately; to bemoan the existence of the situation itself is weak
and foolish, as is also to seek for recognition of one's adequacy from others.
Their stress on this latter point shows clearly in the Thai elimination of most
of the ten auspicious childhood rites of Hinduism; they have none of those which
gave public honor to the child's achievement, neither celebrating the child's first
eating of rice, nor the first steps, nor the first words, nor the first swimming.
The Thai baby had traditionally only the very minor rites of birth (directed mostly
toward the mother), the baby's head shaving at four weeks, and the christening
which was his recognition as member of the family; all that is known of these
two latter ceremonies is that the monks came and intoned, the soothsayer was called
to cast the child's horoscope and there was entertainment of guests according to
the position of the family.


The eminently satisfying suckling period of the Thai baby lays the basis
for his life-time lack of food anxiety, his belief that the morrow will take
care of itself, and his attitude that if you are having a good time you are
surely eating and chewing and smoking and drinking, "Wherever we are and whatever
we are doing, we like first and best to eat" (Chandruang). The early training
in gestures of obeisance makes it possible for the Thai, figuratively, to fed their
mother’s hands pressed over theirs in all hierarchal behavior; it is not demeaning
as it is in some countries. The exact placing of the gesture to denote degree
of respect becomes second nature for them, and the obeisance itself is wholly
consistent with complete personal dignity. "The groundwork of all Siamese
institutions and habits is a reverence for authority" (Bowring I: 124), but the
child is "quick-witted and independent" (Graham I; 257), and he is "not cringing".
Belief that he relies on his own efforts is apparent in the attitude of parents
toward his learning to walk, to swim, to paddle, to achieve motor coordination,
and the lesson the child thus learns does not have to be unlearned later. He
does not look to others for applause when he has achieved these skills; the lesson
he learns is that he is himself sufficiently rewarded if he masters them.
The Siamese child learns little from his own experience about sex differentia-
tion. His older siblings, whether brothers or sisters, take turns caring for him,
his father fondles him and cares for him and may do anything except nurse him.
They all feed him rice-mush. More than most babies of the world, his dependence
is diffused between the sexes, and his affection, though it remains warmest
toward his mother, is not exclusively directed toward her. Nor are there
distinguishing marks set upon the sexes. The baby’s own name, if he is a boy,
would be just as appropriate for a girl, and none of his brothers' and sisters*
names are sex-typed. If he has siblings old enough to be wearing clothes,
their clothes are—or were, until recent innovations—identical. So were his
father's and mother's clothes. European observers often remarked on the
difficulty of telling men and women apart; when seen from the back, there seemed
no way of telling. Informants report that, as children, they were not at all
interested in the outward difference of girls' and boys' sex organs.
The place taken in some cultures by sex differentiation is taken by age
differentiations. Sibling terms are "older brother", "older sister", and"younger
brother or sister;" for uncles, "parent's older brother," "parent's older sister,"
and "father's younger sibling," "mother's younger sibling". All these aunts
and uncles, plus his grandparents, call him by one terra. Elders, even his next
elder siblings, deserve respect which is not accorded to juniors. Where there
is a difference in generation, the chasm Is unbridgeable even in fantasy. His
mother treats his father as a member of one generation, the children as members
of another. "They cannot be rivals". This non-exacting deference to parents is
maintained all through life, A Thai woman commented upon the help with their
children which young American mothers expect from their mothers: "she tells
her own mother to take care of the baby this afternoon; I wouldn't ask my mother
to pass me the salt at the table." Such an attitude toward the older generation,
practiced consistently after babyhood in every contact within the family, the
Thai transfer in adult life to those in authority over them. Superiors are not
people from whom one demands assistance and toward whom one feels resentment
if it is not forthcoming; they are "second parents" "to whom one owes all".
Being their "man" gives one reflected glory; it does not make them partners to a
contract in the usual Western sense.


Another trait inculcated in these early years, especially in the girls'
experience, is love of all kinds of bangles. "Before she is able to walk, and
years before clothes of any sort become a necessity, the Siamese girl begins
to wear Jewelry. Bangles of silver, or of gold if the parents are well off,
encircling each ankle, and the small heart-shaped ornaments called chaping.
suspended in front by a cord around the waist, constitute a girl-child's
everyday apparel during the years of infancy, to which on festive occasions,
bracelets and a chain necklace are added. Also a gold pin for transfixing the
top-knot when the wisp of hair left for the purpose has grown long enough to be
dressed. In four or five years clothes supersede the chaping. and at about the
age of 13 the Jewels of infancy are all abandoned, and the ears are pierced for
the wearing of gold or Jewelled ear-studs. The boys, in childhood, wear little
or no jewelry, the string of phallic charms tied round the waist of the male
infant scarcely coming within that category, but when adolescent the modern
youth greatly affects studs, buttons, watch-chains, rings and even gold brace-
lets, a taste which, however, usually passes off with the arrival of years of
discretion (Graham II: 167).
Informants say that this Jewelry is given individually to a particular
child and is its property, i.e., principally the property of girls. In adult
life women's greater purposive activity in regard to property, as compared to
men's, has been remarked by all observers, and their greater childish ownership
of property is consistent with this. In adult life, the female's love of
adorning herself persists also, and male vanity in Thailand, class for class,
distinctly does not equal the woman's. Early stress on jewelry is, in addition,
important in conditioning another adult trait; "Almost the first idea which,
presents itself to the mind of a Siamese when, by a turn of fortune, he finds
himself possesses of a little spare cash, is the purchase of jewelry, and this
no matter how low he may be in the social scale or how little the possession
of gold and silver trinkets may be in keeping with his personal appearance and
condition of life" (Graham II; 166),
During all these early years -- to the age of about three -- there has
still been no emphasis on toilet training. It is allowed to come of itself.
No disgust is expressed by the elders. After the child is three, he will
probably go where the others go, but individual differences are given great
leeway. Wetting the bed at night continues much longer, and informants say it
would not be especially commented on in a child of six. Thai lack of compul-
siveness thus has an early foundation, as has also the casual disposal of filth
and garbage; even in Bangkok all food leftovers were dropped down between the
floor chinks, and what the dogs did not scavenge was left there. The Thai have
no compulsive cleanliness about their surroundings.
Table etiquette is taught also in these early years. Except in the fami-
lies of the upper classes, the whole family eats together and making one's own
rice balls and eating in a proper way is learned early. There is one special
rule: each person, after eating, washes his own bowl and spoon, even the little
children. It is not the mother's responsibility.
No attention is paid to the boy baby's play with his genitals or to any
erection. The child is eertainly not punished.


By the time the child is about three years old, he is playing freely with
children of the neighborhood, both on land and in the water. The play group is
not a solid phalanx of "relatives", and the child adjusts early to an "outside"
world. Here the clear hierarchy in which one's own family is arranged is
absent, and the child has to find himself in an environment where it is not the
role of one group or people to care for one and to receive deference, and of
another group to be cared for and to give deference. The fact that the child enters
this non-hierarchal world of age-mates so early i.e,, that he plays freely
with children who do not come from his own extended family—is important in that
it makes the contrast between the two worlds much less of a psychological problem
than it is in many Asiatic countries where the child does not go "outside" until
sometime in adolescence. The Thai child -- like the adult man moves freely
between two"worlds". But the un-hierarchal world of age-mates seems to be a
prototype of an important relationship which figures throughout all Thai life.
This is the relationship called "play friend", poen len and the terra is particu-
larly apt if the assumption of its early play-group pa-cteming is correct. The
opposite of "play friend" is the "die- friend" who will be your friend to death.
"Die friends" are rare indeed, and Thai stories emphasize that they are probably
never to be found, "Play friends" feast with you when you can feast them, betray
you if it is to their profit to do so, and certainly disappear if you become a
nonentity. Among "play friends" you live by your wits, and a great many Thai
stories describe with approval the "deceit and guile" which bring a man advantages.
In a Thai philcsspher 1 s description, "play friends" give tit for tat, and if you
want something from them you must pretend to offer them deference in order to
get it (Young 88). In a cut-throat world, all the ideas clustering around the
"play friend" would give scope for great hostility, but the Thai as is
consonant with the hypothesis that it is learned in the child's happy and irres-
ponsible plfiy group —do not carry it to this length. Everybody knows the
rules and what to expect; and the dolt— the one who got cheated always draws
a laugh. That is, laughter is directed toward the cheated, not condemnation
even moral condemnation toward the cheater. The latter has a "cool heart",
sangfroid, which is one of the most admired Thai assets, see below.
Dealing with "play friends" involves offering pretended deference, and
Chandruang (40) describes his childish games with a little prince before he
was old enough to go to school. He had to let the little prince beat him in
every game. "If I let him win, he would feel fascinated about his superiority,
and he would give me generous rewards. I soon realized that in playing with a
prince it paid not to win. This diplomatic tact Father also applied when he
played chess with the Viceroy" (the little prince's father). It is not demeaning
to pretend lack of skill in this fashion.
During the whole period roughly from two or three to eight years, the
child learns that he is a nuisance if he cries and that it is up to him to express
any discomfort in quieter terms. He is no longer petted when he cries. His
elders use several methods. Most characteristic are repudiations like the
mother's "You aren't my child. Father found you floating on the river in a
basket" or "What was the use of bearing you?" (Le May A: 152), and threats of
ogres who will come and take naughty children away forever. These may be
reinforced by spanking if necessary from any elder but this is usually not


necessary. Also the child may be shamed by being told he’s a baby. Exactly
the same sanctions are used to a crying child and a disobedient child, for
crying is a form of disobedience. The picture given the child in these ways is
of a compact safe home from which he runs the risk of being excluded or to
which, perhaps, he never belonged, Le May says that a child who is told that
he was found on the river points to his mother's stomach and says, "No, I came
out of there," and certainly the child is not confused by lack of knowledge of
the way babies are bom. The effect of these sanctions, however, remains
explicit in the folklore in the recurring -theme of the father's giving his
child away to a stranger. This role is not given to the mother unless she
is acting on instructions from a cruel stepfather. Nor does the cruel step-
mother figure in the stories; the role is taken by the stepfather. The father is
pictured as the unreliable member of the family. Sometimes he gives his child
away to make merit—having given away everything else sometimes, as stepfather,
he prompts his wife to abandon them. In a story told by an informant, the
son who was given away says, "If I had a mother, she would have been as good as
a father and a mother. I had a father, and it was no better than having no
parent at all."
The fact that the abandonment theme is pinned upon the father has undoubtedly
a basis in the father's early relation to the baby, but what this is could not
be discovered, and would probably require first-hand observation of child rearing
in Thai villages. The father's motivation of merit-making in giving away his
children is, of course, thoroughly appropriate to Thai customs.
Both the literature and informants' statements repeat that girls and boys
are brought up alike until the boys begin to go to the monks' schools at about
eight years of age. But the statement must be qualified; in comparison with
most countries, the statement is relatively true, but the differences are
nevertheless, important. Little girls and little boys do the same things about
the house, but little boys are given less resposibility, though they help with
the bullocks or water buffalo; they "run wild" much of the time amusing themselves
as they see fit. Girls are a part of the children's play group, but they are
oftener absent than the boys are. Partly they are helping their mothers, sometimes
they play with their dolls more than the boys Mrs. Leonowens said of the
court children as she saw them in 1855 that they "observe with grave formalities
the eventful ceremony of 'hair cutting' for their favorite dolls" (p. 168)
and partly they are practicing posturing like the Thai dancers. "At the age of
about four years the Siamese girl-child is frequently seized with the desire to
become a prlma-donna, and there upon proceeds to practice both singing and
dancing with the utmost seriousness" (Graham II: 204). The little girls sit
forcing their fingers back as far as they will go, practice "double-jointing"
their elbows, and then practice the steps. These steps are never "skipping,
tripping, or pirouetting" but involve "swaying and writhing the body and advancing
or retiring with gliding motion" (Graham II: 20?). Many boys, too, practice
the motions; for both sexes "some proficiency is usually attained, and the pose
becomes familiar to such an extent that upon the sudden experience of joy or
triumph in later life, the body is almost involuntarily thrown into the attitude
of the dance as the most adequate way of expressing the feelings" (Graham II:
208). There are dancing classes for girls, too, though few girls become profess-
ionals, It is declasse to be a professional woman dancer, and anyone who has been


one at some time in her life will resent reference to it. Village "sings" and
dancing processions, however, give scope for amateur dancing, and there are
amateur travelling dance companies which perform on holidays.
Boys of this age have their exclusive games kite flying and fighting
insects. Chandruang describes playing kites with his father and how they were
so unwilling to stop at nightfall that they fastened candles to their kites so
that they could follow their course in the dark. Little boys keep crickets
in match boxes and teach them to fight; they have fighting fish which they train
to fight their own images reflected in mirrors attached to the bottles in which
they are kept. They train beetles to fight. They are passionate spectators
of fighting, though it must be noted that these fights of crickets and fish and
beetles which sometimes grab their opponent and hold on for twenty minutes while
the spectators watch patiently are not very "violent".
Boys are critical if tales are "not fierce enough". Young tells of a boy
who dismissed our Jack the Giant Killer with this comment and told in return
a "good" story where the hero had more scope.
Girls do not train fighting insects nor join in the groups that watch them
gamble on them. It has no attraction for them.
Traditionally, the children put on the Thai pantaloons at eight or nine.
Girls* when they put these, on never removed them in public; even when they changed
them in private,they wrapped the clean cloth around themselves first before they
removed the one they had on. The modesty taboo was much less rigorous for boys,
who when thirteen and fourteen used to swim and dive together naked in the villages.
About the time children were clothed, boys began going to the monks’ school.
They also continued to help with the bullocks or water buffalo or to scare off
birds from the rice fields. Girls, however, helped increasingly about the house
and with the rice milling. They were often taught their letters, too, but at home,
and by their mothers, who had, in their turn, learned from their mothers, or
perhaps, after marriage, from their husbands.
The great ceremony for the child, either boy or girl, was the cutting of the
top knot. This fell into disuse generally in the childhood even of the present
older generation so that detailed description is not necessary. It was a feast
as great as the family could make it, and the child was arrayed in all possible
ornaments and finery, Buddhist monks intoned and were served by the child and
the guests feasted, often for two days, before all malignant influences were safely
counteracted by the sacred words. At last three of the family’s oldest members—
to give the child long life and most respected guests to make him successful
~ cut his top knot which had previously been separated into three strands. The
child then ascended a "throne" of special structure and was doused with water
for ritual cleansing by the monks and then the relatives and honored guests.
After the child had descended and put on dry clothes, he served the monks with
rice and sweetmeats. The most interesting part of the ceremony was the "capturing"
of his soul-stuff and its return to him. His soul—which resides in the crown
of the head had been exposed by the shaving and may have escaped. It is
tempted by an assortment of sweets and unguents set forth on a little pagoda


erected for the purpose, and a napkin is thrown over it while it feasts, then
rolled up tightly and given the child to hold close to his breast for three days.
"0 gentle Kwan, come into thy corporeal abode; do not delay this auspicious rite,
Thpu,art now full-grown and dost form everybody's delight and admiration. Let
all the tiny particles of Kwan that have fallen on land or water, assemble and
take permanent abode in this darling little child. Let them all hurry to the site
of this auspicious ceremony and admire the magnificent preparations made for them
in this hall." (Young, 77-78)* Then the priests make on the child's forehead
the scroll which represents the way Buddha's hair grew between his eyes, and
the child is fed a taste of all the food his soul has been feasting on, and
"having thus imbibed the food of the kwan, ensures ultimately the kwan's permanent
residence in his body" (Young 79)•
The whole ceremony is an honoring of the child, an invocation of blessings,
and a protection against all evil. The top-knot cutting in no way changes his
status or responsibilities, and he remains a "child". Legally his childhood
ended until 1935 when the old poll tax law was changed at eighteen when he
was subject to this tax and, if he could not pay, to corvee labor. Actually
the period of monkhood at twenty, and his marriage which followed its conclusion,
placed him as fully adult.
V. SOME THAI CHARACTERISTICS
The Enjoyment of Life
The Thai enjoy life, and their usual human intercourse is easy and friendly.
Their greetings as they pass each other on the waterways and the roads are jolly,
and the hospitality they offer to strangers is unsuspicious and gracious. In
Campbell's phrase, "trouble touches them lightly" (12?); "they have a happy
carelessness" (126),
Their festivals are occasions 0 f lighthearted gaiety and of sensory enjoyment
Whether the occasion is the king's first Sowing or worshipping the Buddha's
footprints or a tonsure-cutting or a cremation, there must be an orchestra,
theatrical performances and displays of fire-works, plenty of tidbits available
for everybody to eat, and often a deafening racket. At the fairs and public
festivals, "everybody spends his money and is happy" (Graham II: 250).
The Thai find life so enjoyable that they very rarely indeed seek oblivion
from it either in drunkenness or in opium smoking. They like alcohol for the
exhilaration it gives, not for withdrawal. Because opium offers only withdrawal,
opium smoking has never been a social problem among the Thai. The Chinese in
Thailand use it extensively and obtain it no matter what the official restrictions
but it has proved to have little attraction for the Thai. They have no liking
for addictions which interrupt the everyday routine pleasures of life.
This deep-seated capacity to make this life a thing to be freely and simply
enjoyed has made Thai Buddhism quite a different thing from the view of life
taught by Gautama. Central in Gautama's teaching was the doctrine that sorrow
attends existence and that only from the extinction of desire can come cessation
of sorrow. But the Thai have an indestructable conviction that existence is good.


and they have characteristically placed the promised rewards of Buddhism in
this life rather than in the life to come. Thai exegesis describes Nirvana as
an eradication of evil wishes such as can be achieved by man in this life (Landon
229), and in the folktales even a monk of long standing knows that his merit is
exhausted because his mother has lost her money (Le May A: 96); there is no
reference to another world where his merit has accumulated. Thai references to
the classic Nirvana of Buddha are ambivalent. Young (p. 277) tells of his
Siamese boy who hoped that he would not accumulate too much merit; he did not
want to take a chance of achieving bodiless existence. "The average Siamese
layman....trusts that he will always have enough merit to avoid the more painful
hells, and to escape the inclusion in his career of the life of a draught-ox or
other long-suffering beast, and he hopes either for rebirth as a man in a better
worldly condition than the present or for a few million years of rest among the
pleasures of one of the Lower Heavens" (Graham II: 228).
Like the Four Noble Truths about suffering and the extinction of desire, the
Five Great Commandments of the Buddha have been culturally interpreted. The
Five Great Commandments are;
1. Not to destroy life. The Thai have had to exercise their facility in
rationalizing this unpleasant rule for they have remained a nation of fishermen
eating fish daily, and they do not forego meat when they can afford it. The theory
is that fish are not "killed", they are taken out of water and if subsequently
they die a natural death, no man is responsible (Graham II: 38). A slightly
different line covers the matter of meat for the upper classes: no man could
without guilt send to the market or give orders to his servant for some particular
animal or kind of meat which he would then be responsible for having had killed,
but if he sent for an animal or fowl which was dead already he had no guilt
(Alabaster 60).
2. Not to obtain the property of another un.iustly. There is plenty of
theft in Thailand. "The number of petty thefts is really appalling. In the year
population of 750,000 which exceeds the number of cases in the whole of southern
Burma with a population of six millions. Yet I do not believe that this is
the result of innate depravity, but only of a careless disregard of the rights of
property. The Siamese have a passion for pretty clothes and jewelled rings and,
like children, they instinctively take what they want" (P.A. Thompson 69-70). This
petty thievery is characteristic of Thailand today also, and no informant is
provided with a rationalization that squares the tendency with the Buddhist
commandment except that they say that people are pressed by poverty.
3. Not to indulge the passions. Alabaster (p. 62) summarizes the wording of
a great Siamese commentator on this commandment: "Women who are objects of
another's jealous care that is, wives and unmarried women, who are cared for
or supported by their husbands or relatives, and women who are betrothed are
all improper objects of desire; but as this is 'the undisputed opinion of all
except those bad men who think there is no harm in adultery unless it is discovered 1
the main point considered is, why, under this commandment, men and women are put
on a different footing that is, why" polygamy is allowed?" In other words, this


commandment which is in many countries the most stressed of ethical precepts is
passed over in Thai comment because exhortation is unnecessary* Certainly the level
of morality in the Western sense according to which the commandment means
"morals" —is high and divorce is very rare. This will be further discussed under
Male Dominance, see below.
4. Not to tell lies. Many proverbs and sayings record the Thai's own
verdict on veracity. Some of them are the usual ones:
"What people say, divide by five."
"Ten mouthfuls are not sc good as an eyeful (i.e., ten
people may lie or exaggerate; it's better to see for
yourself)."
There are others which refer to more than exaggeration, like:
"His tongue is so long that he can wind it around his ears"—
which, as Le May says, means that he "can twist his words and so manipulate their
use that he can make them mean whatever he pleases. A wise old Siamese states-
man once remarked that to be a good diplomat you must not only be able to 'wind
your tongue around your ears, 1 but that you must be able to wind it seven times."
(Le May A: l6h).
In the Thai legend of a Land of Women, these women are said to have been
fed up on men's lies and to have gone off to form their own community. They
welcome men when they come to their country, but these men never stay long because
the women expel them as soon as they find them lying. (Chandruang 61).
5- To refrain from all intoxicants. "The Buddhist precept against intoxi-
cants is not observed by many. A merry party, a wedding, a festive day, is
hardly considered to have been properly celebrated unless there has been a
large amount of beer, wine, and 'whi-sa-key' consumed. The beer hall has become
a regular part of most large towns" (Landon 151)* This is not to say that
drunkenness is a social problem in Thailand; it is relatively minor, see below.
But no tabu against the use of intoxicants is generally observed.
The ethical rules for obtaining the good life are thus Buddhist but with
Thai cultural emendations. There are similar cultural emendations in the
Buddhist doctrine of mystical contemplation. The Thai are not mystically inclined,
and the elaborate Indian physical techniques of inducing contemplation are absent.
Sven the meaning of the word is changed, for Alabaster (p. 195) notes that
chan, their word derived from Sanscrit dhvana. meaning meditation, is translated
in the Bangkok Calendar as 'sinbuming' and, as he says, this is •incorrect". The
very idea of dhvana has become a kind of negative merit-making.
To the Thai the essential doctrine of Buddhism is merit-making, and their
interpretation of merit-making is that if a man exercises sufficient care in
following the rules he need not be anxious. It depends upon himself. Everyone
repeats the proverbial maxims "In this world everything changes except good deeds
and bad deeds; these follow you as the shadow follows the body."


"King Prajadhipok (1925-1933)> in the preface to a widely used textbook of
religion, expressed the opinion that the essential of Buddhism for young people
was their realization of the principle that what the child becomes depends upon
himself and nobody else. He who does good receives good, and he who does evil
receives evil, not only in this life but in the existence of the future. This
is the mainspring of religion, and the basis for morals and character.... His
Majesty says nothing of Heaven, Hell, or Nirvana" (Landon 221).
Merit-making, not as a measure for the conquest of desire and attainment of
other-worldliness, but as an ethical precept of the good life is basic in Thai
Buddhism. And merit-making is only exceptionally derived from special acts of
getting along well with one's neighbors. The Thai do get along well with their
neighbors, but those merit-making acts which figure in everyone's calculations are
rather, giving food to the monks each morning, being a monk, plastering a few
square inches of gold leaf on a Buddha, erecting some building in a wat,
buying an inexpensive copper votive tablet, joining the feast at the days of
worship of the footprint of the Buddha, and innumerable other observances. There
were plenty of opportunities, all of them with accompanying rewards of having
a good time or getting the approval of his fellows. One can cash in too, on
an inadvertent calamity; a woman who was robbed even made merit for her lost
property after the same fashion as the gypsy, who, according to the Eastern
European proverb, "When his hat blows into the river, says "For the soul of
my father'".
Merit-making provides a series of pleasurable activities there is no
fasting nor self-torture included at any point by which a man is assured of iis
own own moral solvency, but the very real human goodwill which prevails is not
"counted" in the same way. Even a deliberate act of aggression when it occurs
is not reckoned against the specified merit-acts, and the story of the young
Buddhist monk of good family who tried to kill a baby is characteristic, A
soothsayer told him he would marry a slave's daughter, and he identified this
prospective bride a baby at the moment hanging in its cradle under his room. So,
to avoid the prophecy, he dropped a knife through the slats of the floor. It
hit the baby's body but did not kill her, and eventually he wooed and won the
girl without knowing it. But his merit as a monk was untouched by knifing the
baby (Le May A; 93).
The good life is not a series of acts which can be counted like "merit",
and folk ideas about it are consonant with their patterns of child rearing. The
Thai do not think it is necessary to strive mightily to make life good
it is good if it is accepted. The laugh is always against those who find their
lot bad, and they tell the story of the Man in the Moon who got lodged there
because he was always wanting to be something he wasn't (Fleeson 37). Patience
with one's lot and patience in one's projects is the great male virtue. One
with patience can rest in peace.
Anger is reckoned as a prime disturber of the good life. It heats the heart,
(which is bad), and it gets out of hand and results in violence. Therefore,
anger must be curbed while it is small. The moral lesson drawn from a folktale
by the Siamese editor is; "The force of anger, is like a forest fire; if one has
not sufficient sense to stamp it out at once, it is likely to spread until it


becomes a calamity of the direst kind," and he admonished men "to suppress any
cause of quarrel while yet it has but little power." A stranger dropped one
drop of honey from his load, and even in a village where peace, contentment, and
happiness reigned and no man's hand was raised against his neighbor, when the
lizard crawled out to Ijek the honey, the cat ran for it, and the dog ran after
the cat, and their owners fell to separating them and then into a violent fray,
and "the cause of all this trouble was a single drop of honey" (Le May A; 123).
This didactic counseling against anger goes with and not against the Thai
grain. Siamese, by nature, are a quiet people. The idea of mass movements
against authority seems foreign to their nature. A very noticeable thing about
large gatherings of Siamese is their orderliness." An unruly mob of Siamese is
difficult to imagine." (Landon 215). As we have seen, there were no riots
or arson even on the day of the coup d'etat of June 1932 which ended the absolute
monarchy.
Private disputes also characteristically pass off without violence. In the
midst of an altercation, one party will suddenly leave eff and turn his back on
the whole thing. An informant says the best way to show your opponent up
for a brute is to give in to him. Anger is the least advantageous method of
meeting a difficult situation. "The Siamese are of a forgiving nature,"hor, as
a rule, are they easily irritated, and it is a rare sight to see a Siamese
excited, unless he is under the influence of liquor" (Le May A; 155)*
This excitement when intoxicated, of which Le May speaks, requires definition.
The Thai drink for the exhilaration and not to "pass out"; when drunkenness passes
this point, it has little attraction for them. Nevertheless, drinking eventuates
neither in violence or in eroticism. Festival crowds are dense in Thailand, and
alcohol is popular, but men who have been drinking do ndt .annby women nor
proposition them, and they are exceptionally non-quarrelsome. Typically, a man
who has been drinking is noisy, but such behavior only raises a few degrees the
usual and approved behavior of crowds; Europeans speak of the "frightful din" most
marked in Central Thailand festivities. Drinking does not release repressed
aggressions in a Thai crowd; typically, they are happy when they have had something
to drink.
The lack of vengefulness among the Thai could not be better illustrated
than by their version of the almost worldwide tale of the deserted children, A
cruel stepfather persuaded their mother to refuse them food, and they wandered off
and eventually the older boy married the prince's daughter. Then the two brothers
came back to see their parents, but instead of humiliating them or killing
them, as other people's tales relate, they brought them a bundle of bamboo joints
stuffed with gold. The tale ends by telling how the parents scolded the boys for
bringing them onlyya bcrndle of bamboo, and when, too late, they discovered the
gold, they "were unable to endure their remorse and died on the wayside" (Fleeson:
126).
The .Thai emphasis on curbing anger and vengeance is complemented by their belief
that good is-more-powerful than evil-. A folktale tells how a good priest frauduently
comforted a girl ,her family who had become convinced that she was bewitched;
when her f mind was set at ease, she got well.- The moral is: "Joy and pleasure, and
happiness, once aroused, are able to drive away'bll thought of disease, hnd thus
the disease itself. So we should regard and happiness as the finest medicines
...that have ever been vouchsafed to us" (Lt Hay A: 92).


In dealing with spirits, the Thai project this faith as an infallible
technique for controlling the supernatural. When they wished to capture the
boy's soul which might have escaped when his top-knot was cut, they set out
choice dishes and sweet unguents, and when the soul was presumably occupied in
deep enjoyment of these delights, they threw a napkin over the whole array and
gathered up the spirit in order to restore it to the boy (Young ?6). On all
occasions methods of enticing the spirits are overwhelmingly used. They are
hardly ever beaten off and violence is not used against them; they are offered
food, or music is played for them. The behavior used toward the spirits is
only that behavior which the Thai also rely upon in their dealings with their
fellowmen.
The enjoyment of life is to rest at ease. "They rarely quarrel amongst
themselves, as they dislike worry and trouble of every description. Their
idea of the millenium is that the tide will flow up one side of the river and
down the other so that everyone may go whithersoever he pleases without the
trouble of rowing. There will be no work of any description, and men will lie
in the sunshine, as happy as birds" (Young 138).
The Cool Heart.
But Thai behavior is more complicated than it appears from the above
description. The Thai, in common with many Far Eastern and Oceanic peoples,
have special attitudes and emotions which they designate as "cool" and others
which they designate as "warm". In Thai those that are desirable are "cool",
and the undesirable are "warm". Being "cool" means several things. In the
first place, it means not being an anxious person and thus refers to enjoying
life in the sense just described. As Alabaster says, "being 'warm' is inability
to rest at ease" (p. 186). Bearing a grudge makes you "warm" and so does
quarreling.
But being "cool" means, in addition, a kind of sangfroid,. "The term
implies coolness of attitiide toward work, responsibility, or trouble, A certain
girl who held a prominent position and who, when caught in adultery and theft,
stood to lose both good name and position, met the situation with a coolness
that was most astonishing, was described by Siamese as undeniably choei"
(Landon l)
Most of the Thai tales translated by Le May celebrate the "cool heart"
or expose the foolishness of people who act without due weighing cf all the cir-
cumstances. For instance, four impostor monks had made themselves solid with a
certain village and secured for themselves a big feast, with plenty to drink, on
what they told the people they must bring to feed a company of demons. One of
the villagers by chance caught the monks at their drunken revels and proclaimed
the fact. But the people believed the demons had made him mad, and they bound
him with ropes and kept him locked up for three days. When he still stuck to
his story, they took him to the "monks" to be cured. The head monk ordered
six strong men to hold him down while he blew pepper up his nose. He "nearly
went off his head," and the monk prepared a second dose. The poor victim
"could not see himself becoming a martyr for a thousand such rogues as these,"
and he made it appear that he had just wakened up from a bewitchment, and he


did obeisance to the "monks" and thanked the Lord Buddha that he had regained
his senses and could shake off the effects of his evil dream. He had not yet
learned wisdom, however. Wien he got home and was alone with his wife, he
appealed to her again to believe him. But his wife ran to her father ciying,
"He is raving again," and there was nothing for the poor man to do but to leave
home and go back to his mother's village. The moral is that even if you speak
the truth, no advantage will come of it either to the speaker or the listeners
if you are speaking against their convictions; "indeed it may well happen that
disaster will overtake the speaker... This story is an excellent example of the
old sayings, "A little water will not extinguish a great fire, 1 or 'if you
live among folk whose eyes are'closed, you had better close your own as well 1 "
(Le May A: 99-111)
Tales also describe how when a good end is in view it is praiseworthy
to use "deceit and guile". In one of these, the good monk carefully rigs up a
magical demonstration to save a girl who thinks herself bewitched. "There is no
use my telling these foolish folk the truth," he says to himself, and the moral
of the tale is that praise is due him for his trick, "for he did it to gain a
good end, and his reward was great" (ibid, 80-92).
Others of these tales describe cool betrayals of husbands by their
wives, and the moral then points to the woman’s "shameless, brazen heart" (ibid
65-70). "Coolness" in a woman must draw a public censure. But as Le May says,
"Still it must be remarked that the laugh always rests with the lady against the
husband, who is pictured as a dolt, and easily guiled" (p. 139).
'Audacious as a woman" is one of the stock Thai phrases and means that
if there .is advantage to be gained from it your wife will not only leave you for
another lover, but will betray you to your death. Women are not "patient," the
Thai says. In many traditional tales, the favored and successful lover then
coolly decides that a woman who would be faithless to one man will be faithless
to another and either abandons her or kills her as she had her husband killed.
In such cases, the Thai judge that the woman did not have a cool heart, and the
man . did.
This is to us an unfamiliar phrasing of aggression. To us the lover's
killing his woman is extreme aggression; in Thai tales, it is a sensible pre-
caution, not in any way based on superstition. To us, the woman committed a
crime passionel and is to that extent exonerated; to the Thai she is the dangerously
aggressive person - the one who was not "patient", who did not act with worldly
wisdom.
This interpretation of aggression as being necessarily the act of a person
who cannot or will not estimate consequences in a rational way underlies the
Thai version of witchcraft, Thai witchcraft is very specific; it is a
belief in ghouls. Your neighbors, male or female, may be ghouls - who go out at
night in an astral body with a tail, cut out people's livers without leaving
a trace and consume them. This is a variant of the widespread Pacific Islands be-
lief in vada. but usually in other parts of the Pacific the sorcerer who takes his
victim's vital organs, learns his trade and when he practices it against someone,
works himself up into a ghastly imitation of the death agonies. In Thailand, being


a ghoul is involuntary. A woman inherits from her mother, a man from his
father, and no ghoul knows he is one. He is merely a person who by an involun-
tary curse is unable to direct his own behavior. Therefore, his detection - and
exiling him from the community - devolves on his neighbors. This occurred, es-
pecially in North Thailand, within the last generation. With the establishment
of non-local courts which refused to take witchcraft cases, concern with ghouls
has rapidly diminished. The essence of it was always that the curse was invol-
untary - and prevented the ghoul from knowing what he was doing and from using
his wits.
In situations where hierarchal status is well established, the Thai
have clear and unresented patterns of behavior; where they are not, the virtues
of the "cool heart" are the code provided. One is "cool", too, in hierarchal
relations -using flattery, allowing the Superior to win the game, etc. - but
not placed in a clear hierarchal position - one lives by one’s wits and counts
it as virtue to be as inventive as possible.
Male Dominance
The most revealing of all Thai summaries of male and female character
is the proverb which is on every tongue; "Man is paddy; woman is rice, i'.e,,
ifian is the,seed rice able to reproduce itself, woman is rice polished for eating.
As Thai women informants said, "She can only be swallowed once," "she can't re-
produce unless a man comes to her." But a man can "produce by himself," An in-
formant illustrated with a "rice" (woman) as a kernel inside a closed circle;
of "paddy" (man) as a short straight line with arrows radiating out from him.
The proverb is used in the education of girls to teach them to guard their
virtue - for they can only be "eaten" once, i.e., by one man. In the education
of boys, it bears testimony to their superiority; they are the "seed" which
produces the harvest.
In spite of all the freedom of Thai village women and of the wives of
officials, the one superiority - fertility - which is ascribed to them by most
peoples is not theirs by Thai definition. They provide a nest for the child in
the womb and nourish their husbands, but they have not the virtue of creativity
in themselves.
Yet they can nourish their husbands well. As men say in Thailand,
"A play friend is not equal to a die friend and a boy friend is not equal to a
girl friend," i.e., a man is a fair-weather friend, but from a woman one can
expect loyalty till death, When a man courts a girl, he selects one to whom, in
the Thai phrase, "he can trust his life in sickness and his obsequies after
death." It is the woman - not the husband, as in our Episcopal marriage service
- who must "cherish...till death do us part."
This is the great Thai day dream and it is the betrayal of this day
dream that is usually elaborated in story and proverb and simile, A woman
who does not satisfy this dream, since she has no other justification in liv-
ing, has betrayed her kind. The Thai say: "A male elephant, a crocodile, and
a loving wife, put not your trust in these," They say: "Three days absence
from home and your wife is another's."


The best statement of what men hope and fear for in their wives is
the writing of the Siamese philosopher quoted by Young (86-88):
1. Some wives are to their husbands as a younger sister.
They look to their husbands for approving smiles as the
reward of their kind and affectionate forethought. They
confide in him and feel tenderly towards him. And when they
have once discovered the wish, the taste, and the ideas
of him whose approval they respect, they devote themselves
thoughtfully and assiduously to the realization of his desires.
Their own impulsive passions and temper are kept under strict
control lest some hasty word should mar the harmony of their
union.
2. Some wives are to their husbands as an older sister.
They watch sedulously their husband’s outgoings and in-
comings so as to prevent all occasion for scandal. They are
careful as to the condition of his wardrobe and keep it
always in order for every occasion. They are diligent
in preserving from the public gaze anything that might
impair the dignity of their family. When their lord
and master is found wanting in any particular, they
neither fret nor scold, but wait patiently for the time
when they can best effect a reformation in his morals
and lead him toward the goal of upright manly conduct.
3. Some wives are to their husbands like a mother. They
are ever seeking for some good thing that may bring gladness
to the heart of the man for whom they live. They desire
him to be excellent in every particular, and will them-
selves make any sacrifice to secure their object. When
sorrow or trouble overtakes them, they hide it away from
the eyes of him they love. All their thoughts center
around him, and they so order their conversation and
actions that in themselves he may find a worthy model
for imitation. Should he fall sick, they tend him with
unfailing care and patience.
Some wives are to their husbands as a common friend.
(t.e,, "play friend"). They desire to stand on an exact-
ly equal footing with him (i.e., they give tit for tat).
If ill-nature is a feature in the character of their
husbands, they cultivate the same fault in themselves.
They will quarrel with him on the slightest provocation.
They meet all his suggestions with an excess of carping
criticism. They are always on the look-out for any
infringement of what they deem their rights, and should the
husband desire them to perform any little service for
him, he must approach the subject with becoming deference
or their refusal is instant and absolute.


5. Some wives wish to rule their husbands. Their lan-
guage and manners are of a domineering nature. They
treat the man as if he were a slave, scolding, commanding,
and forbidding with unbecoming asperity. The husbands of
such women are a miserable cringing set of men,
6. Some wives are of the robber kind. Their only idea in
getting married is the possession of a slave and the command
of the purse. If there is money in the purse, they are
never satisfied until they have it in their own grasp.
Such wives generally take to gambling and staking money in
the lottery, or purchasing useless articles. They have no
care as to where the money comes from or by whose labors
it is earned, so long as they can gratify their own extra-
vagant and ruinous fancies.
7. Some wives are of the murderess kind and possess
revengeful tempers. - Being malicious and fault-finding, they
never appreciate their own homes and families, and are
always seeking for sympathies from outside. They share
their secrets with other men, using their pretended
domestic discomfort as a cloak for their own vice and
and excuse for their greatest misdeeds.
The wives who are on a female pattern are all "good"; they are "younger sister,"
"elder sister," and "mother." They will be "die friends," and in looking for
a wife a man looks for one who will reproduce his relations with the women
of his family. Yet Thai men are so rarely impotent that it is not a subject
of gossip, not even a cursing accusation. Those wives who follow the pattern
of their husband’s mothers and sisters are submissive and ideal.
The wives who take their prototype from males are "bad". From the whole
context and from the whole description of Thai concepts and behavior in this
memorandum, this is evidently not because of taboes separating the respective
spheres of the sexes but is, rather, a projection upon women of all the non-
hierarchal relations between men. These latter, as we have seen, are relatively
"difficult" in Thailand. First there is the "play friend" type who returns evil
for evil and will do her husband "no little service" unless he pretends deference.
Then there is the domineering woman who orders her husband about, and he becomes
a "miserable cringing" being. The "robber kind" are out for money and interested
only in spending it at their whim. Only the last and "murderous kind" betray
their husbands by taking other lovers. Wandering sexual fancy is only
characteristic of one out of four "bad" wifely types which disturb a man's peace.
The man's attitude toward the relations of the sexes is given symbolic
elaboration in the national game ofkLte flying - which is played exclusively
by men. This game is unknown in other countries and is carried out with a skill
which all observers have admired. It is a "courtship" of a female kite and a
male kite. The female kite is a four-sided diamond shape and goes up with a
lilting motion to the accompaniment, in any exhibition game, of a
dancing tune from the orchestra. There is a special orchestra for the female


kite and another for the male kite when it finally comes up to "court" the
female. The man who flies the female kite stays in one part of the field,
and his kite is not allowed to cruise. Presently another kite-flyer from another
end of the field sends up his male kite. This is a much heavier kite, perhaps
six times as big, in the shape of a five-pointed star. It ascends higher
than the female kite and cruises toward the female to "capture" it. It must
not get too close to the body of the little kite or its balance would be
upset, and it would "lose"; then the male kite's orchestra would play a lamenting
tune and, if the female kite has an orchestra, it will play triumphantly.
But the string of the male kitehas attached to it, up toward the kite, two
small curved twigs of bamboo which project out in four points. The female kite
has a slacker oord attached to its string up in the air, and into this loop the
male kite must get its tentacles. It swoops down on the dancing female kite and,
If It Is successful, drags her in triumph to its end of the field where they both
fly eotahgled to the triumphant music of the male kite's orchestra. She is "his".
The male is the huge, heavy kite, the female the little, dancing one. The
male is the cruiser, the female is anchored. The male pulls her into his orbit
and flies with her in triumph; if he gets too close to her and falls, it is
"she" who caused his fall and "she" triumphs. "I have never, I think, seen the
Siamese so serious with attention so riveted, as when they assemble in thousands
every afternoon for hours at a stretch to fly their kites. That for them is
the real business of life." (Campbell 107.)
The game well symbolizes the relation of men and women. Men are not
doubtful of their masculinity - which is here symbolized in the kite-'-s size
and shape and activity. Men mark their kites with their insignia or name and
may have three or four at hand to continue the game if one falls or is damaged.
The object of the game is to keep a "wife" within their orbit and both male
and female "flying; if "he" falls, it is the woman's fault, and "she" has won.
But attacking her too closely - perhaps it would be fair to say dominating
her, or possessing her, in the European sense - would mean, in the kite game,
falling to the ground and being defeated. Thai men assume that she is small
and fragile and has no "game" to play unless a man "captures" her. It is the
same statement under another simile, which they make in "Woman is rice but man
is paddy," Success, for the man, depends upon skilled maneuvering and a not
too close approach to the body of the other kite - on one's own wits, in
daily life, and one's canny skepticism about others.
The plots of their impromptu "sings" show the rules of the game between
men and women as they are thought to work themselves out in Thai behavior. After
the male leader has sung the invocation,the answering female leader invokes
dead women leaders to assist her "in making men humble and discomfitted, in
fact to make her victory over them absolutely crushing?. It is again the
"contest" of the kite game. The most popular ways in which the "sing" may
develop is "contending for a lady" or contending for a man. In the first form,
described by Prince Bidyalankarana, the husband is urging his wife to return to
him no matter what her infidelities; "despite her faithlessness his love
for her is as deep as ever, and he implores her to abandon her lover and return
to husband and child," It is not necessary for the husband to defend his "honor";
he wants her within his orbit. In the plot of contending for a man, the man finds


himself "an unhappy fellow who stands between two sharp tongues." He has, lost
the initiative to the women, and the story only ends when he is once more
paired with one of them. Oboiously, the "crushing victory" for which
the women ask is preeminence in repartes; they do not seek a "defeat" of men
in the sense of humiliating them.
The high pHace of the male in his world is powerfully reinforced in a real
life by Buddhist teachings and by the male prerogative of the monkhood, from
which women are unconditionally excluded. But the Buddhist doctrine of man’s
superiority is divorced from sex; by definition the monk is asexual. Among the
Thai this operates merely to remove from men a possible source of anxiety; they
do not have to prove their virility by affairs with women or even by their relations
with their wives. They are in Pallogoix's words "almost passionless" - and one
man in twenty is at any given time unquestionably chaste since he is in a monastery
-yet impotence is hardly recognized except that it is admitted that it might
be found in a psychopath. King Mongkut retired to a monastery for more than
twenty years and when he came out, at forty-five, he fathered more than eighty
children. This is regarded as natural, and the enforced celibacy of the monk
is regarded as equally unneeding of remark; it is not considered as a serious
frustration. Even today reformers speak of the harm not eating after midday
may do to a delicate constitution, but they do not speak of sex frustration.
The villagers, especially in later life, enjoy bandying insults and they have
a language for this which is obscene in their sense. It accuses the other
person of sexual irregularities, even of incest. This is what is referred to
when they speak of "the mouth of a market woman," but the older men take active
part also. The more usual form of insult, however, is a delicate manipulation
of respect terns and gestures; the least shade of difference carries the insult.
Summary
The psychic security which makes possible Thai cheerfulness, easy convi-
viality, and non-violence is grounded in a Hong and remarkably permissive
infancy during which no disciplines are imposed either in feeding or sleeping
routines or in toilet training, and no attention at all is paid to infantile
erections or to the child’s playing with his genitals. The Thai as adults are not
pursued by a sense of catastrophe, and they have faith that the world is not
fundamentally against them. They gamble with pleasure, are indolent rather than
hard-working and accept easily subordinate positions in a hierarchy which was
first presented to them in infancy as based on relative age in the family, With-
out an authoritarian family, in the Western sense, without disciplining parents,
they accept without resentment the reverence due to the hierarchy. The Thai
also do not punish themselves with masochistic practices; they greatly prefer
jollity and relaxation.
Their self-reliance is inculcated in their first learning of motor skills,
in which thpy are thrown on their own responsibility; in later life they stress
self-responsibility as the chief tenet of Buddhism. In relatively unpatterned
relationships which lie outside the hierarchal arrangements, this self-
responsibility becomes the virtue of bringing any situation to a this-worldly
satisfactory conclusion, a procedure in which guile may be used without censure


and in which one nay capitalise, also without censure, on one's opponent's
ignorance, greed, fete. In the words of their proverbs: Use a thorn to draw
a thorn, And, Keep your eyes crossed in a cross-eyed town. Thai attention is
directed, not toward condemnation of the means but toward ridicule of the
person duped.
Finally, the Thai identify psychic security with not being a dupe. A little
story used in children's schoolbooks neatly expresses their view. "Theme were
rabbits living in a wood. When they cane put to feed in the fields, they were
afraid of the bullocks, they were afraid of the water buffalos, they were afraid
of people. At last they said, 'We had better be dead. We are frightened every
day. It is not worthwhile to go on living.' In the morning they all went down
to the river to die. As soon as the frogs down by the river saw them, they
jumped into the water, scared as they could be. The oldest rabbit said to
his relatives, 'The frogs were afraid of us. We couldn't have hurt them. Perhaps
the bullocks and water buffalo are just as harmless. We w&re dupes. Why
should we die? We'll go back to our woods and not be frightened any more.'"
Anxiety is not only unpleasant: the person who is afraid is a dupe.


CORNELL UNIVERSITY SOUTHEAST ASIA PROGRAM
I. SOUTHEAST ASIA PROGRAM DATA PAPERS
Including Cornell Thailand Project Interim
Reports Series
11. CORNELL MODERN INDONESIA PROJECT PAPERS
Interim Reports Series, Translation Series,
and Monograph Series
111. STUDY AND TEACHING MATERIALS
Ithaca, New York
Spring
1963


The papers listed here have been issued irregularly since 1951
in processed format by the Cornell Southeast Asia Program or by
research projects associated with the Program. These series are
designed to provide materials on Southeast Asia which should be made
available promptly and not be delayed by publication in more perma-
nent form; which are explicitly tentative or provisional in charac-
ter, but which may elicit helpful criticisms or suggestions to be
incorporated in a later publication; which may not be suitable for
either ultimate journal or monograph publication because of length,
the nature of the data, or other reasons; or which, as in the case
of translated or reprinted materials, may not be readily accessible
to teachers, scholars or others interested in the area. Suggestions
for additional numbers will be welcomed.
Some papers have been reissued because of a constant demand.
Others will be reissued when the demand warrants. For this reason,
as well as to provide some impression of the character of the
materials which the Program is interested in issuing in this form,
the following lists include a section giving titles which are cur-
rently out of print.
All Southeast Asia Program Data Papers still in print are ob-
tainable from the Southeast Asia Program, 100 Franklin Hall, Cornell
University, Ithaca, New York, at the prices indicated, ordinary
postage free. All Cornell Modern Indonesia Project Papers can be
obtained from the Cornell Modem Indonesia Project, 102 West Avenue,
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, The papers should be paid for
in advance, preferably by check or money order made out to the
Southeast Asia Program or to the Cornell Modem Indonesia Project,
depending on where the papers are ordered. Institutions or individ-
uals may wish to place a standing order for all papers to be sent to
them as soon as they are Issued; in this case the recipient will be
billed after the papers are sent. In view of the high production
Cost of these publications, no trade or other discount can be
allowed. Readers may also have their names placed on a mailing list
to receive announcements of papers as they are issued.
CORNELL UNIVERSITY SOUTHEAST ASIA PROGRAM


IN PRINT
X. SOUTHEAST ASIA PROGRAM DATA PAPERS - 100 Franklin Hall, Cornell University*
Ithaca, New York,
Number 4 THAI CULTURE AND BEHAVIOR, An Unpublished War Time Study Dated
September 1943, by Ruth Benedict, 1952, (Third Printing 1963)»
45 pages, $2.00.
Number 31 A BIBLIOGRAPHY OF INDONESIAN GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS AND SELECTED
INDONESIAN WRITINGS ON GOVERNMENT IN THE CORNELL UNIVERSITY LIBRARYJ
by Daniel S. Lev, 1958, 58 pages, $2,00,
Number 33 BIBLIOGRAPHY OF INDONESIAN PUBLICATIONS: Newspapers, Non-
Governmental Periodicals and Bulletins, 1945-1958, at Cornell
University Library, by Benedict R, Anderson, 1959. 69 pages. $2.00,
Number 34 BIBLIOGRAPHY OF SOVIET PUBLICATIONS ON SOUTHEAST ASIA, As Listed
in the Library of Congress Monthly Index of Russian Acquisitions,
by Ruth T, McVey, 1959. 109 pages. $2.00.
Number 35 THE PHILIPPINE FEDERATION OF FREE FARMERS, A Case Study in Mass
Agrarian Organizations, by Sonya D, Cater. 1959, 147 pages. $2,00,
Number 38 TWO PAPERS ON PHILIPPINE FOREIGN POLICY: The Philippines and the
Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, by Roger M, Smith; The Record
of the Philippines in the United Nations, by Mary F, Somers,
1959. 79 pages, $2,00,
Number 39 MATERNAL AND CHILD HEALTH IN A SIAMESE RICE VILLAGE: NUTRITIONAL
ASPECTS, Studies in Bang Chan, 1952-1954, by Hazel M, Ilauck.
Cornell Thailand Project, Interim Reports Series; Number Five,
1959. 70 pages, $2,00.
Number 40 SOUTHEAST ASIA PUBLICATIONS SOURCES; AN ACCOUNT OF A FIELD TRIP,
1958-1959, by Cecil Hobbs. 1960, 145 pages. $2.00,
Number 41 U HLA PE*S NARRATIVE OF THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION OF BURMA, by U Khin.
1961, 96 pages, $3.00.
Number 42 THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION OF THE PHILIPPINES, LEYTE, 1941-1945, by
Elmer Lear, 1961, 246 pages, $3,00,
Number 43 TRENDS AND STRUCTURE IN CONTEMPORARY THAI POETRY, by James N. Mosel.
1961, 53 pages, $2,00,
Number 44 THE MAN SHU (Book of the Southern Barbarians), translated by
Gordon H, Luce; edited by G, P, Oey, 1961, 116 pages. $4.00,
Number 45 OVERSEAS CHINESE IN SOUTHEAST ASIA A RUSSIAN STUDY, by N. A.
Simoniya, 1961, 151 pages, $3,00,
Number 46 AN EXPERIMENT IN WARTIME INTERCULTURAL RELATIONS: PHILIPPINE
STUDENTS IN JAPAN, 1943-1945, by Grant K. Goodman. 1962. 34 pages.
$2.00.
Cornell University Southeast Asia Program


Number 47 A BIBLIOGRAPHY OF NORTH VIETNAMESE PUBLICATIONS IN THE CORNELL
UNIVERSITY LIBRARY, by E. Jane Godfrey. 1962. $3.00.
Number 48 THE PACE AND PATTERN OF PHILIPPINE ECONOMIC GROWTH: 1938, 1948
and 1956, by Marvin E. Goodstein, 1962. 220 pages. $3,00,
11, CORNELL MODERN INDONESIA PROJECT PAPERS - 102 West Avenue, Cornell University,
Ithaca, New York,
A, Interim Reports Series
THE SOVIET VIEW OF THE INDONESIAN REVOLUTION, by Ruth T. McVey. 1957;
Second Printing 1962. 90 pages. $2.50.
THE DYNAMICS OF THE WESTERN NEW GUINEA (IRIAN BARAT) PROBLEM, by Robert C.
Bone, Jr, 1958; Second Printing 1962, 182 pages. $3.00,
SOME ASPECTS OF INDONESIAN POLITICS UNDER THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION: 1944-
1945, by Benedict R, O*G, Anderson. 1961, 136 pages. $3.00.
B, Monograph Series
THE POLITICAL CHARACTER OF THE INDONESIAN TRADE UNION MOVEMENT, by
Iskandar Tedjasukmana, 1959. 130 pages, $2.50.
ASPECTS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN A SUMBAWAN VILLAGE (EASTERN INDONESIA), by
Peter R. Goethals. 1951. 156 pages. $3,00
SOME SOCIAL-ANTHROPOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS ON GOTONG ROJONG PRACTICES IN TWO
VILLAGES OF CENTRAL JAVA, by Koentjaraningrat. (Translated by Claire
Holt), 1961, 76 pages. $2.50.
THE NATIONAL STATUS OF THE CHINESE IN INDONESIA: 1900-1958, by Donald E.
Willmott, Revised Edition, 1961, 152 pages, $3.00,
THE DYNAMICS OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT IN RURAL CENTRAL AND WEST JAVA:
A COMPARATIVE REPORT, by Selo Soemardjan, Mid-1963. Approximately 50
pages. $2.00.
THE CHINESE COMMUNITY IN A SUNDANESE TOWN: A STUDY IN SOCIAL AMD CULTURAL
ACCOMMODATION, by Giok-Lan Tan, Mid-1963. Approximately 300 pp. $4.00.
C, Translation Series
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AS A CULTURAL PROBLEM (Konfrontasi, September-
October, 1954), by Soedjatmoko, 1958; Second Printing 1962, 28 pages,
$l.OO.
THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC BASIS OF THE INDONESIAN STATE: ON THE INTERPRETATION
OF PARAGRAPH I, ARTICLE 38 OF THE PROVISIONAL CONSTITUTION, by Wilopo
and Widjojo Nitisastro, (Translated by Alexander Brotherton). 1959.
20 pages, $l,OO,
Cornell University Southeast Asia Program
IN PRINT (Cent *d)


PAST AND FUTURE, by Mohammad Hatta. (An address delivered at Gadjah Hada
University at Jogjakarta on November 27, 1956). 1960. 17 pages. $0.30.
AN APPROACH TO INDONESIAN HISTORY? TOWARDS AN OPEN FUTURE, by
Soedjatmoko. 1960. 22 pages. $l.OO.
MARHAEN AND PROLETARIAN, by Soekarno, (Translated by Claire Holt).
1960, 30 pages, $l,OO,
111. STUDY AND TEACHING MATERIALS - Obtainable from Southeast Asia Program, 100
Franklin Hall, Cprnell University, Ithaca, New York,
THAILAND MAP SERIES, Prepared by G, William Skinner, Cornell Research Center,
Bangkok, 1954*1955,
A, Central Thailand, 7klo Inches; scale: 34 to to I inch. Price $0,25 each;
$l,OO set of five,
1, Jangwat Outline Hap, 1955.
2, By Amphoe, 1947,
3, Population Density by Amphoe, 1947,
4, Proportion of Chinese by Amphoe, 1947,
5, Concentration of Chinese by Amphoe, 1947,
B, Thailand, 13x22 inches; scale: 50 miles to I Inch; except B*lo as noted.
Price $0,25 each; $l,OO set of five,
6, By Amphoe, 1947,
7, Population Density by Amphoe, 1947,
8, Fertility Ratios by Amphoe, 1947,
9, Concentration of Chinese by Amphoe, 1947,
10, Untitled (Amphoe Outline Map), £6x44 Inches in two parts, each 16x22
Inches; scale; 27 miles to 1 Inch,
11. Jangwat Outline Hap, 1955.
THAI INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC# Performed or directed by Kaool Ketusiri, recorded
and narrated by Carol Skinner in Thailand, 1954, Two 12-iuch long-playing
records (4 sides), $lO,OO,
BUA; A BUDDHIST ORDINATION IN BANG CHAN, THAILAND, 1954, One reel (400 ft.)
16 mm silent film in color. Copies available for rent only; price on applica-
tion,
DAWADUNGS; A DANCE OF THE SECOND HEAVEN, A Thai Classical Dance Performed
by Hiss Yibbhan Koomsai, 1956, Ope reel (400 ft.) 16 nap. sound film in
color. Copies available for rent only; price on application*
OUT OF PRINT
SOUTHEAST ASIA PROGRAM DATA PAPERS;
Number I REPORT ON THE CHINESE IN SOUTHEAST ASIA, DECEMBER 1950, by G,
William Skinner, 1951, 91 pages.


Number 2 A CENTRAL JAVANESE VILLAGE IN 1950, by Paul M. Kattenburg. 1951.
17 pages.
Number 3 AN ACCOUNT OF AN ACQUISITION TRIP IN THE COUNTRIES OF SOUTHEAST
ASIA, by Cecil Hobbs. 1952. 51 pages.
Number 5 RURAL ORGANIZATION AND VILLAGE REVIVAL IN INDONESIA, by Ch. J.
Grader. 1952. 15 pages.
Number 6 TEACHING AND RESEARCH RELATING TO SOUTHEAST ASIA IN AMERICAN COLLEGES
AND UNIVERSITIES, 1952, by George McT. Kahin. 1952. 11 pages.
Number 7 LABOUR AND TIN MINING IN MALAYA, by Nim Chee Slew, 1953. 48 pages.
Number 8 SURVEY OF CHINESE LANGUAGE MATERIALS ON SOUTHEAST ASIA IN THE
HOOVER INSTITUTE AND LIBRARY, by Giok Po Oey. 1953. 73 pages.
Number 9 VERB CONSTRUCTIONS IN VIETNAMESE, by William W. Gage and H, Merrill
Jackson. 1953* (Reissued 1956). 14 pages.
Number 10 AN ACCOUNT OF THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION OF BANJUMAS RESIDENCY, JAVA,
MARCH 1942 to AUGUST 1945, by S. M, Gandasurbrata, Resident of
Banjumas, 1953. 21 pages.
Number 11 ACCOUNT OF A TRIP TO THE COUNTRIES OF SOUTHEAST ASIA FOR THE LIBRARY
OF CONGRESS, 1952-1953, by Cecil Hobbs. 1953. 89 pages.
Number 12 POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS OF OLD BURMA, by John F, Cady. 1954. 6 pages.
Number 13 TADAGALE; A BURMESE VILLAGE IN 1950, by Charles S. Brant. 1954.
41 pages.
Number 14 THE VIET MINI! REGIME: GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION IN THE DEMO-
CRATIC REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM, by Bernard B. Fall, 1954. (Reissued
in a revised, enlarged edition 1956), 143 pages.
Number 15 SELECTED ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS IN BURMA AND INDONESIA
NOTES AND COMMENTS, by Charles Wolf, Jr. 1954. 11 pages.
Number 16 SOME OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING THE ROLE OF ISLAM IN NATIONAL AND
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS, by Mohammad Natsir. 1954. 25 pages.
Number 17 MALAYA; A STUDY OF GOVERNMENTAL RESPONSES TO THE KOREAN BOOM, by
John Paul Meek. 1955. 32 pages.
Number 18 CONCEPTIONS OF STATE AND KINGSHIP IN SOUTHEAST ASIA, by Robert
Helne-Geldern. 1956. 12 pages.
Number 19 THE PHILIPPINES: A SURVEY OF CURRENT, SOCIAL, ECONOMIC AND
POLITICAL CONDITIONS, by Gerald D. Berreman, 1956. 55 pages.
Number 20 BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THAILAND, A Selected List of Books and Articles
with Annotations by the Staff of the Cornell Thailand Research
Cornell University Southeast Asia Program
OUT OF PRINT


Project, by Lauriston Sharp, Frank J, Moore, Walter P, Vella
and associates. 1956, (Reissued 1957 without corrections or
additions). 64 pages.
Number 21 THE STATUS OF RURAL LIFE IN THE DUMAGUETE CITY TRADE AREA
PHILIPPINES, 1952, by Robert A, Poison and Agaton P, Pal. 1956,
108 pages.
Number 22 ASPECTS OF HEALTH, SANITATION AND NUTRITIONAL STATUS IN A SIAMESE
RICE VILLAGE: STUDIES IN BANG CHAN, 1952-1954, by Hazel M. Hauck
and associates. 1955. Cornell Thailand Project, Interim Reports
Series: Number Two, 73 pages.
Number 23 THE REVISED UNITED STATES-PHILIPPINE TRADE AGREEMENT OF 1955, by
Frank H, Golay. 1956. 61 pages.
Number 24 COURSES RELATED TO SOUTHEAST ASIA IN AMERICAN COLLEGES AND
UNIVERSITIES, 1955-1956, by Barbara S. Dohrenwend. 1957. 39 pages.
Number 25 FACTORS RELATED TO ACCEPTANCE OF INNOVATIONS IN BANG CHAN,
THAILAND, Analysis of a Survey Conducted by the Cornell Cross-
Cultural Methodology Project, May 1955, by Rose K, Goldsen and
Max Ralls. 1957. Cornell Thailand Project, Interim Reports
Series: Number Three, (Reprint) 72 pages.
Number 26 THE ROLE AND IMPORTANCE OF PHILIPPINE INTERISLAND SHIPPING AND
TRADE, by Frederick L. Wenstedt, 1957, 132 pages.
Number 27 ON THE WAYANG KULIT (PURWA) AND ITS SYMBOLIC AND MYSTIC ELEMENTS,
(Translated from the Dutch by Claire Holt), December, 1957,
37 pages.
Number 28 FIVE PAPERS ON THAI CUSTOM, by Phya Anuman Rajadhon, 1958, 19
pages.
Number 29 FOOD HABITS AND NUTRIENT INTAKES IN A SIAMESE RICE VILLAGE:
STUDIES IN BANG CHAN, 1952-1954, by Hazel M, Hauck, Saovanee
Sudsaneh, Jane R, Hanks and associates, 1958, Cornell Thailand
Project; Interim Reports Series; Number Four. 129 pages.
Number 30 A SIMPLE ONE, The Story of a Siamese Girlhood, by Prajuab
Tlrabutana. 1958, 40 pages.
Number 32 RANTJAK DILABUEH; A MINANGKABAU KABA, A Specimen of the Tradi-
tional Literature of Central Sumatra. (Edited, translated and
with an introduction by Anthony H, Johns). 1958, 152 pages.
Number 36 INDONESIANISASI; POLITICS IN A CHANGING ECONOMY, 1940-1955, by
John 0. Sutter, 1959, Four volumes, 3,382 pages.
Number 37 AMERICAN DOCTORAL DISSERTATIONS ON ASIA, 1933-1958, Including
Appendix of Masters Theses at Cornell University, by Curtis W,
Stuck!, 1959, 131 pages.


CORNELL MODERN INDONESIA PROJECT PAPERS;
A, Interim Reports Series
THE NATIONAL STATUS OF THE CHINESE IN INDONESIA, by Donald E, Willmott.
1956.
DECENTRALIZATION IN INDONESIA: LEGISLATIVE ASPECTS, by Gerald S. Maryanov.
1957.
THE INDONESIAN ELECTIONS OF 1955, by Herbert Felth. 1957.
SOME FACTORS RELATED TO AUTONOMY AND DEPENDENCE IN TWELVE JAVANESE
VILLAGES, by Barbara S. Dohrenwend. 1957,
PROBLEMS OF REGIONAL AUTONOMY IN CONTEMPORARY INDONESIA, by John D. Legge.
1957.
DECENTRALIZATION IN INDONESIA AS A POLITICAL PROBLEM, by Gerald S.
Maryanov, 1958,
THE CALCUTTA CONFERENCE AND THE SOUTHEAST ASIAN UPRISINGS, by Ruth T.
McVey. 1950.
B, Monograph Series
THE BEGINNINGS OF THE INDONE SIAN-DUTCH NEGOTIATIONS AND THE HOGE VELUWE
TALKS, by Idrus N, Djajadlnlngrat. 1958,
THE WILOPO CABINET, 1952-53; A TURNING POINT IN POST-REVOLUTIONARY
INDONESIA, by Herbert Felth. 1958,
THE GOVERNMENT, ECONOMY AND TAXES OF A CENTRAL JAVANESE VILLAGE, by Widjojo
Nitisastro and J, E, Ismael. (Translated by Norbert Ward, 1959),
C, Translation Series
INDONESIAN WRITING IN TRANSLATION, compiled and edited with an introduction
by John M, Echols. 1956,
LIVING CONDITIONS OF PLANTATION WORKERS AND PEASANTS ON JAVA IN 1939-1940,
by the Coolie Budget Commission, (Translated by Robert Van Niel). 1956,
STRUCTURAL CHANGES IN JAVANESE SOCIETY: THE SUPRA-VILLAGE SPHERE, by D. H.
Burger, (Translated by Leslie H. Palmier), 1956,
STRUCTURAL CHANGES IN JAVANESE SOCIETY: THE VILLAGE SPHERE, by D. H.
Burger, (Translated by Leslie H. Palmier)• 1957.
THE TOBA BATAK, FORMERLY AND NOW, by J. Keuning, (Translated by Claire
Holt). 1958,
THE OFFICE OF PRESIDENT IN INDONESIA AS DEFINED IN THE THREE CONSTITUTIONS
IN THEORY AND PRACTICE, by A, K, Prlnggodlgdo, (Translated by Alexander
Brotherton), 1957,
THE COMMUNIST UPRISINGS OF 1926-1927 IN INDONESIA: KEY DOCUMENTS, edited
and with introduction by Harry J, Benda and Ruth T, McVey, 1960,
