

Peru
£\ <T
[Crown copyright reserved .
ARMY ORDER.
War Office,
2wZ November , 1917.
I. — Thanks of the Houses of Parliament to the 121
Navy and Army for their services during the pi e.ent 9HB
war. —The Army Council direct that the following
Resolution passed by both Houses of Parliament be
communicated to officers, warrant officers, non-com-
missioned officers, and men of the British Armies in the
field and to the women in the medical and other services
auxiliary thereto.
“ That the thanks of this House be given to the
officers, petty officers, and men of the Navy for their
faithful watch upon the seas during more than three
years of ceaseless danger and stress, while guarding our
shores and protecting from the attacks of a barbarous
foe the commerce upon which the victory of the Allied
cause depends.
“ That the thanks of this House be given to the officers,
warrant officers, non-commissioned officers, and men of
the British Armies in the field, and also to the women in
the medical and other services auxiliary thereto, for
their unfailing courage and endurance in defending the
right, amid sufferings and hardships unparalleled in the
history of war, and for their loyal readiness to continue
the work to which they have set their hands until the
liberty of the world is secure.
“That the thanks of this House be accorded to the
gallant troops from the Dominions Overseas, from
India, and from the Crown Col onies who have travelled
many thousands of miles to share with their comrades
13000 11/17 HAS 6196w0


from the British Isles in the sacrifices and triumphs
of the battlefield, and to take their full part in the
struggle for human freedom.
“ That the thanks of this House be accorded to the
officers and men of the Mercantile Marine for the
devotion to duty with which they have continued to
carry the vital supplies to the Allies through seas
infested with deadly perils.
“That this House doth acknowledge with grateful
admiration the valour and devotion of those who have
offered their lives in the service of their country, and
tenders its sympathy to their relatives and friends in
the sorrows they have sustained.”
By Command of the Army Council,
