



ONE SHILLING AND SIXPENCE.
The Good Old Days
of
Molong.
BY I.C.L. FITZPATRICK.


THE
GOOD OLD DAYS OF
MOLONG.
BY
J. C. L. FITZPATRICK.
“The Future is only the Past again, entering through
another gate.”
SIR ARTHUR PINCEO.
Parramatta, A.S.W.
THE COMBLERLAND ARGUS LTD., PRINTERS, CHURCH & MACQUABIR STS.
1913




PREFATORY NOTE.
This little book does not pretend to be more
than a mere gathering together of such odds
and ends of local history as have been made
available in an old-established district where
the custom of making and keeping notes has
never been practised by the oldest inhabitants.
It does not claim, in every detail and particu-
lar, to be accurate beyond dispute—even to the
dotting of the i’s and crossing of the t’s—but
it is as accurate as careful enquiry and the
somewhat difficult conditions under which its
varied contents were obtained and woven to-
gether, would permit it to be.
No other purpose is sought to be served by
its publication than that of furnishing some
sort of rough and ready record of facts and
features associated with the pioneering of the
Molong District, and which may prove of use to
the historians of the future. It would be well,
in this regard, if throughout the State each of
the early-established centres of settlement were
dealt with in similar fashion by some local
enthusiast, so that there might be conveyed to
future generations an adequate idea of the
difficulties which beset the men and women
who, three-quarters of a century ago, braved
the dangers of the bush—who blazed the track,


and rendered it possible for those who follow-
ed in their wake to live in the far out-back in
some sort of safety and security.
I am indebted to several local residents, not-
ably Mr. J. S. Taylor, for much of the material
which finds place in these pages; also to the
files of the local Press—particularly the
“Molong Express,” which, established as far
back as 1876, has through close upon 40 long
years done valiant service in the interests of
the district in which it is published. It is
worthy of note, by the way, that the “Express”
has never changed hands, the present pro-
prietress, Mrs. M. Leathern, being widow of the
original proprietor; the present manager, Mr.
C. J. V. Leathern, being her eldest son.
A large portion of the material here pub-
lished was contributed to the “Molong
Argus” by the writer, when he was proprietor
of that journal; its columns of years before
have furnished other facts of value, of which
the present proprietors, Messrs. Wigg and Dig-
nam, have permitted the use.
If this humble contribution to the * ‘ Good Old
Days” series serves no better purpose, it may be
least confer an hour or two of pleasure upon
that large section of the people who have a
kindly regard for the happenings of the past,
and for the good men and true who participated
in them. For, as Whyte Melville puts it in
“Katerfelto,” “Tou may make an old man
happy at trifling cost if you will only yield a


few minutes of patient attention while he wan-
ders back through its well-remembered maze,
and loses himself in the labyrinth which we
<call life.”
J. C. L. F.
1912.




CONTENTS.
Chapter. Page,
I. —Introduction .. .. .. .. 9
II. —Its Initiation . . .. . . .. 15
111. —First References .. .. .. .. 19
IV. —Major Mitchell and Yuranigh .. .. 33
V.—The Early Days of Molong .. .. 47
Yl.—Pen Pictures of the Past .. .. .. 55
VII. —Charles Henry Cobden and Others .. 63
VIII. —The Old Cemetery 73
IX. —Early Settlement .. .. .. .. 79
X.—Vale Head and Rev. Samuel Marsden .. 84
Xl.—The West End 90
XII. —Copper Hill and Its Surroundings .. 94
XIII. —A Letter .. .. .. .. .. 102
XIV. —Some of the Earliest Settlers .. .. 105
XV.—Historic Data .. .. .. .. 110
XVl.—The Marble of Molong .. .. .. 120
XVll.—About the Aborigines .. .. .. 122
XVIII. —An Early Western Pioneer .. .. 126
XIX. —An Old Coaeh-driver’s Story .. .. 130
XX.—The Old Western Road 142
XXl.—Old Times 144
XXll.—God’s Acre 146
XXIII. A Controversy ' .. 152
XXIV. —A Scientific Discovery .. .. .. 159
XXV.—The Lord Family 162
XXVl.—Larra, “The Honest Jew” .. ..166
XXVll.—Miscellaneous .. .. .. .. 168
XXVIII.—'“In ’66” 170
XXIX. —Spring in Molong .. 176




OLD MOLONG.
‘ ‘ Tell me the Tales that to me were so dear,
Long, long ago—long, long ago!”—Old Song.
■“The moving finger writes; and, having writ, moves
on.”—Omar Khayyam.
I.—INTRODUCTION.
It was the immortal Dickens, that great mas-
ter of pathos and of humor, who, in one of his
hooks, .ventured a remark to the effect that
"We must not think of the old times as sad
times, nor regard them as any but the Fathers
and Mothers of the Present”—and however
much we may have been led by certain of the
scribes of to-day to look back on early efforts
in the direction of colonisation with feelings of
abhorrence, we must at least give some degree
of adherence to a sentiment so admirably ex-
pressed.
They were hard old days—they were battling days,
They were cruel days —but then
—well, the conditions of the period admitted
of little else than hardships and privation, for
.the country was being wrested from the native
race, and all the pioneering work which has
proved of so much benefit to the people of to


day had yet to be accomplished. One looks
down the long list of worthy and, perchance,
unworthy men who occupied positions of res-
ponsibility in Australia during the early days
—Philip and Hunter, King and Bourke, Mac-
quarie and Bligh—and, reading between the
lines, one learns of the well-nigh insurmount-
able difficulties which they had to encompass.
The material out of which they were expected
to manufacture useful and worthy citizens was
often crude and unworkable enough, in all con-
science—frequently it was spoiled by the rough
hands of the officials entrusted with the task
of moulding it into shape—and the wonder,
under all the adverse circumstances, is not that
Australia as a whole has turned out to be so
bad as it is frequently pictured as being, but
that it should be so good.
With an almost limitless area of territory
with which to juggle, the ruling powers natur-
ally turned their thoughts away from the sea-
board, seeking the green oases which they knew
must exist at the feet of and beyond that great
mountain range which cast the shadow of its
protection over the Eastern slopes. Gregory
Blaxland, with W. C. Wentworth and Lieuten-
ant Lawson, crossed these mountains as early
as 1813, and in 1814, George William Evans
was sent to explore more minutely the passage,
when, having accomplished this task, he and his
party traversed the valley now known as Bath-
urst Plains, discovered a river which they


named Macquarie, and penetrated some dist-
ance beyond. To these intrepid men we are
indebted for the whole of the earliest informa-
tion , available respecting the centuries-old
secrets of life in the interior of our great Aus-
tralian Continent, “away back in the dim red
dawn of man.” They did valiant service, these-
stalwart men—they blazed the track along
which travelled the throngs of hardy pioneers;
who later on broke the surface of the soil and
built the towns which now dot verdant plain
and hillside the wide West through.
It is unfortunate, in this connection, that the
true history of the means under which our de-
velopment has been effected will probably
never be fully or faithfully told. There are,
of course, records available which will furnish
us with the bare facts relating to exploration
and settlement in those several localities which
were the first outposts of Southern Hemisphere-
civilization ; but no detailed data exists which
will enable the future historian to write up
more completely a record of the trials and tri-
bulations to which the hardy men and women
were subjected who came West into the wilds
to hew and plough and sow and reap, and thus
clear the way for their following fellows. In
all old-established districts the same difficulty
is experienced—one has often to trust to the
naturally treacherous recollections of men of
advanced age r who no doubt do their very best
to be accurate, but who find it very difficult to


.separate, satisfactorily, the tangled threads
which have accumulated in their memories of
incidents remote of origin and enacted in the
days when men took little note of the march of
Time. The Public Library authorities in Syd-
ney have done much in the way of setting down
in black and white interesting records of the
early efforts of Governors, officials, statesmen,
and history-makers in all the departments of
State—by collecting old journals, prints, manu-
scripts, and the like—and thus there is pro-
vided for some future colonial Kingslake the
nucleus of a history which may be written
right from the records themselves, and which
will furnish a most emphatic exemplification of
the correctness of the old saw that “there is
only one thing stranger than fiction—that is
fact.” To their utter disgrace, be it said, the
Government of the day, in 1904, ordered the
discontinuance of the publication of the “His-
torical Records, ’ ’ and it was not until 1912 that
there was taken any definite step towards set-
ting aside this decision. Better that “Han-
sard,” with its miles of “words, words, a
deluge of eloquence, signifying nothing,”
should be discontinued for a period than that
the good work commenced so auspiciously by
Mr. James Bonwick, P.R.G.S., and continued
by the late Mr. F. S. Bladen, Mr. G. B. Barton,
Mr. H. C. L. Anderson, Principal Librarian,
should be allowed to lapse for the sake of a
few paltry pounds in the way of printing
charges.


In this connection, it may be said, invalu-
able aid has surely been lent future historians-
by the late Mr. D. S. Mitchell, whose generous
gift to the people of N.S.W.—his Australian
library and his pictures, his choice and price-
less manuscripts, and the other treasures of his
varied collection—is now housed in the
Mitchell Wing of the Public Library. All that
money could purchase in the way of document-
ary and printed evidence relating to the birth,,
growth, and development of Australia, Mr,
Mitchell acquired—and then, in his later days,
and when due provision had been made by the
State for the accommodation of all his gather-
ings, he handed them over, patriot-like, for the-
benefit of the present and future generations.
Molong—little Molong—dumped down in a
fertile spot, two hundred miles and more from
the site of Australia’s first settlement—Molong"
set here in an amphitheatre of hills—has asso-
ciated with its’ birth, growth, and development
much that is of keen interest to one possessed
of antiquarian tastes —it is “old—and a mine
of memories,” and the writer proposes to deal
as accurately and effectively as possible with
such meagre information as it is within his-
power to acquire from the sources at his dis-
posal—to weave into something like a consecu-
tive story the tangled threads of its early suc-
cesses and failures. It will be no ambitious
effort this —merely “abstracts and brief chron-
icles of the times,” collected from official


sources, with such excerpts from the pages of
the ‘ ‘ Sydney Gazette ’ ’ and other early publica-
tions as can be readily brought into requisi-
tion.
There are those in our midst—not necessarily
in Molong—who venture the view that ’twere
better to “let the dead past bury its dead”—
but not so. The rising generation should be
taught to regard with some sort of honest
reverence these forefathers of theirs who at
great personal risk rendered it possible for
them to live and have their being in out-back
centres; they should have made clear to them
a matter to which in the hey-day of life they
have, perchance, given little, if any, solid
thought—that Molong and Bathurst and Dubbo
were not always as they are now, replete with
every civilising influence and rich in every
comfort of life. It will do them good—whilst
as far as the aged are concerned, their hearts
will surely be cheered by being afforded an
opportunity of fighting their battles over again
—for do they not all in their honest hearts feel
that
It lightens the days that are
To think of the days long ago.


II.—ITS INITIATION.
We primeval forests felling,
We the rivers stemming, vexing we and piercing deep
the mines within,
We the surface broad surveying, we the virgin soil
upheaving,
Pioneers! O Pioneers!
Walt. Whitman.
Molong was one of the earliest established
centres of population beyond the blue hills
which divide the East from the West—those
hills—or mountains—which mark the discrep-
ancy which exists between the lowlands and
that section of the country which towers above
.and overawes it.
When we look at Australia, and compare our
country as far as antiquity is concerned with
those lands, like Great Britain and China and
others of that character which have borne the
brunt of centuries upon centuries of change,
we feel that we here are only as
Infants crying in the night,
Infants crying for the light,
And with no language but a cry.
Certainly, Australia to-day has men and
women of the good old type within its boun-
daries who could speak readily, as the result of
their reading, with reference to the matter of
Cook’s landing—they, by the way, knew, at
Any rate, of most of the Governors after Philip


and Bligh—they knew of good old Macquarie,
stern of countenance, who in the ’2o’s was a
particularly conspicuous figure in the circles
of the local “mighty”—they knew the good
work that he did in those degenerate days when
to be as he was was to be a king indeed.
But they have forgotten a lot, and it is only
by digging and delving through the unwritten
pages of history—by piercing the tangled
strands which, Brought together, serve to make
up a complete whole—that some good work in
the way of laying the foundation of a record of
past work in the interests of a country can be
effected.
Too many folk who are strangers, practic-
ally, within our gates, are prone to talk about
the times that have passed as “the bad old
days”—simply because to some extent the men
and women who came to our shores came, as
Pickpocket George Barrington said, “for their
country’s good.” Not so —if they came for
their country’s good, it was also very much
for the good of the country to which they came.
They proved to be the bone and sinew of a land
which needed all it could get in the way of
good stalwart men and brave, buxom women;
and the circumstnce that a great proportion ot
the early population of Australia rose to posts
of prominence and became affluent is the best
argument possible of use in answer to the some-
what vile and undigested suggestions of that
class of newspaper writers who seem to run


away with the- absurd idea that only the people
have been in gaol who ought to be there. Men
were sent along to Australia in the early days
for mere nominal offences which to-day would
be punished by a fine of the “nimble shilling”
—women were sent, as were Margaret Catch-
pole and Mary Hay dock (who subsequently
married Captain Raby or Reiby, and became
the grandparent of a Colonial Premier and a
M.S.W. Supreme Court Judge), because of a
youthful indiscretion not worth noticing now
—hence it follows that there is no good reason
why any slur should be cast upon the descend-
ants of those who so came along. Men like
George Barrington, who displayed his posses-
sion of so much brilliancy of mind; men like
Andrew Thomson, whose humane efforts to
save others from death resulted in his own
decease; women like Mrs. Reiby and Mar-
garet Catchpole—well, in any decently consti-
tuted community they would be held up to the
people at large as heroes and heroines —but as
Edmund Burke said many years ago, “the age
of chivalry has gone”—as far, at least, as some
sections of it are concerned.
There is really no great need for reticence on
this score—no good reason why there should be
any soft whispering or any close secrecy ob-
served when one starts out to talk of the dead
past, and to tell tales of the days when men
went forth to prove the dangers of the wilder-
ness and to open up the unknown for the bene-
B


fit of their less resourceful fellows. The day
that is dead has for some men a more actual,
a more vivid identity, than the day that exists
—nay, than the day as yet unborn—and why
should it not be so ? In a country as young as
ours, the boys and girls of to-day and yester-
day have heard their fathers tell of the trials,
and troubles of half-a-century ago—and they
are interested for the reason that they know
that never again in Australia will such experi-
ences be repeated, or such demands be made
upon the courage of its men and women-folk.
Why, then should they seek to score
from their memories those records of valour
and heroism, which, performed during “the
piping times of peace,” are indeed more com-
mendable than deeds accomplished to the ac-
companiment of martial music on the field of
battle.


III.—FIRST REFERENCES.
“So we’ll live, and pray and sing, and tell old tales.”'
Shakespeare.
But here I am digressing in a most incon-
siderate fashion, instead of writing as much as
I can learn of the history of Molong, certain
particulars relating to which have kindly been
furnished by an authority unrivalled with re-
gard to his knowledge of early Australian in-
cidents. I give his letter with one or two small
excisions—the matter cut out is purely per-
sonal :
“We have not been able to glean much for
you about Molong, but I sent you the few
references that we have made, chiefly from the
old “Sydney Gazettes” and the “Government
Gazette.” I am very glad to hear that you are
going to write up the early history of the dis-
trict, because that will stimulate inquiry and
set a good example. If each country district
would do the same, we should be much encour-
aged in our plan of making an index of all the
New South Wales newspapers, which we have
now commenced, and have already found very
useful. It is a tremendous task, and according
to present indications a profitless one, but for
myself I believe there will be an awakening
with regard to our early history, and people
will be exceedingly glad to avail themselves of


our enormous quantity of references taken from
the old papers. Of course, we are almost en-
tirely dependent on metropolitan papers before
the year 1895, wdien I commenced to bind and
keep for reference every paper published in
the State. It is pathetic to think that very few
of our country newspapers have a complete file
of their own publications, and of course there
is none in the State Library or elsewhere, so
that the original sources for writing history
are absolutely lost. We are now indexing the
“Sydney Gazette,” which is our great mine of
wealth, and we are also starting on the metro-
politan papers, working backwards. Any refer-
ences to Molong will be duly noted and con-
veyed to you. If Molong had any other names
in the early times, such as Kangaroo Flat,
which I notice in one place is apparently
synonymous with Molong, we shall be very glad
to know of it, so that we may make the neces-
sary cross-references in our index.”
The above wms in reply to an application
forwarded Mr. H. C. L. Anderson, late Prin-
cipal Librarian of the Public Library of New
South Wales, a gentleman who has taken a
more than ordinarily keen interest in matters
relating to early Australian history. In en-
deavouring to secure information on such pre-
liminary matters as those proposed to be dealt
with herein, one has necessarily to go to the
public archives and great private collections
of data to secure even the most infinitesimal


amount of knowledge relating to any early
Australian incident of moment. Fortunately,
as before remarked, many of these have been
carefully treasured and preserved for the use
of future generations, and but for the interest-
ed vandalism of some of our recent rulers that
storehouse from which the historian might have
aecpiired a wealth of knowledge would to-day
have been well-nigh inexhaustible. Some Jack-
in-office, eager to immortalise himself, issued
instructions to the effect that tons upon tons
of public documents should be taken from sev-
eral of the public departments to the ash-heap
and there be burned—an instruction which was
obeyed with heated alacrity by some of the
officers in question, whose names were far more
honored than dishonored by the presence of
similar names in some of the records in ques-
tion. Anyhow, there was no hand to stay them,
and the records to a goodly extent disappeared
in the form of smoke and flame.
However, to come back to the main question,
one is able from early copies of official and
newspaper publications to learn the following
facts relating to early Molong, and I give them
here just as they have been furnished me from
the most authentic sources —saying at the same
time that I am indebted to Mr. H. C. L. Ander-
son and Mr. W. H. Ifould, past and present
(1912) Principal Librarians of the Public
Library of N.S.W., for them:—
N.S.W. Government Gazette, 1846, p. 1603.


Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 21st De-
cember, 1846. PETTY SESSIONS.
His Excellency the Governor has been
pleased to appoint the undermentioned places
to be places for the holding of Courts of Petty
Sessions, under the provisions of the Act of the
Colonial Legislature, 3rd William IY., No. 3,
viz.—ln the district of Bligh, Molong. By his
Excellency’s command, E. DBAS THOMSON.
N.S.W. Government Gazette, January 5, IS 17.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, sth Janu-
ary, 1847. PETTY SESSIONS.
His Excellency the Governor has been pleas-
ed to appoint the undermentioned gentlemen
to be Clerks of Petty Sessions at the places
mentioned in connection with their names res-
pectively, viz.—Molong, Mr. John Liscombe;
Dubbo, Mr. David Henry Dunlop. By his
Excellency’s command, E. DBAS THOMSON.
N.S.W. Government Gazette, January 26,
1847. Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 22nd
January, 1847. POLICE BEYOND THE
BOUNDARIES.
His Excellency the Governor has been
pleased to appoint the following persons to be
Chief Constables at the places mentioned in
connexion with their respective names, viz.—
Molong, Mr. Joseph Fleming. By his Excel-
lency’s command, E. DBAS THOMSON.
N.S.W. Government Gazette, 30th April,
1847. MOLONG.


The Court of Petty Sessions at Molong have,
under the provisions of the 6th Section of the
Act of Council, 10 Victoria, No. 10, intituled
"“an Act to amend the Laws respecting the re-
covery of Small Debts in all parts of the
Colony,” appointed Mr. Joseph Flemming to
be Bailiff of the said Court. By order of the
Court, JOHN LISCOMBE, Registrar. Court
of Petty Sessions, Molong, 26th April, 1847.
N.S.W. Government Gazette, May 25, 1847.
—The Court of Petty Sessions assembled this
day, have appointed Mr. John Liscombe to be
the Registrar of the Court of Requests at
Molong, in accordance with the sixth clause of
the 10th Vie., No. 10. R. J. BARTON, J.P.,
LOUIS HOPE, J.P. Court of Petty Sessions,
Molong, 14th May, 1847.
N.S.W. Government Gazette, July 21, 1848.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 18th July,
1848.—POLICE BEYOND THE BOUN-
DARIES.—His Excellency the Governor has
been pleased to appoint Mr. Samuel Evans to
be Chief Constable at Molong. By his Excel-
lency’s command, E. DBAS THOMSON.
N.S.W. Government Gazette, October 10,
1848. Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 9th
October, 1848. SLAUGHTER HOUSES*—His
Excellency the Governor has been pleased to
appoint Mr. Samuel Evans (Chief Constable,
Molong) to be Inspector of Slaughter Houses
and of Cattle' intended to be slaughtered in the
District of Molong, under the Act of the Gov


ernor and Legislative Council, 5 Gul. IY., No.
1. By his Excellency’s command, E. DBAS
THOMSON.
N.S.W. Government Gazetter, 1849, p. 792.
Notice. PUBLIC POUND AT MOLONG.—
Notice is hereby given, that in accordance with
the provisions of the Act of the Governor and
Council, 4th William, No. 3, the Bench of
Magistrates has appointed a Public Pound, at
Molong, on the 7th day of May, 1849. JOHN
LISCOMBE, Clerk of Petty Sessions.
N.S.W. Government Gazette, 1849, p. 558,
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 27 th
March, 1849. MOLONG. —Notice is hereby
given that a site has been fixed upon for a Vil-
lage at the undermentioned place, and that a
copy of the approved plan may be seen at the
Office of the Surveyor General, in Sydney, or
at the Police Office, Molong, viz.—Molong, at
the Molong Creek. By his Excellency’s com-
mand, E. DBAS THOMSON.
Supplement to the N.S.W. Government Ga-
zette, 1856, p. 725 . . 732. PROCLAMATION.
By his Excellency, Sir William Thomas Deni-
son, Knight, Governor General in and over all
Her Majesty’s Colonies of New South Wales,
Tasmania, Victoria, South Australia and West-
ern Australia, and Captain-General and Gov-
ernor-in-Chief of the Territory of New South
Wales and its Dependencies, and Vice-Admiral
of the same, &c., &c. Whereas by an Act of
Council passed in the nineteenth year of the


reign of her present Majesty, and numbered
thirty-four, intituled “An Act for registering'
Births, Deaths, and Marriages,” provision is
made for the division of the Colony of New
South Wales into Registry Districts, for the
purposes of the said recited Act. Now, there-
fore, I, Sir William Thomas Denison, as such
Governor aforesaid, do by this my Proclama-
tion, for that purpose issued, with the advice
of the Executive Council, divide the said Colony
into the following Registry Districts, the boun-
daries of which are hereunder described, that is
to say:—34. MOLONG. —Embracing a western
portion of the County of Wellington, and part
of the adjoining Squatting Districts; and
bounded on the north by the boundary of the
Settled Districts (which is a curved line west'
ward of the Town of Wellington), including all
land within ten miles from any point of the
outward limits of the Town, to the nearest
point of the Little River; thence by a line west-
erly to that river, and by that river upwards to
Mrs. Ireland’s station, Oberly; thence by a line
to Gerranogie, Messrs. Caley, Templar, and
Richards’ station on the Bogan River; thence
by that river downwards to the Barwon on the
north by the River Barwon or Darling to Fort
Bourke; thence on the west by a line bearing'
south-easterly to the confluence of Kalinga-
lungaguy Creek with the River Lachlan; on the
south by the River Lachlan to the confluence
of the Belubula River; and on the east by the


western boundaries of the Counties of Bath-
urst and Wellington to the confluence of the
Molong and Borrehove Creeks; thence by the
Molong Creek to the south-west corner of
Joseph Taylor’s 2560 acres; thence by the west
boundary of that grant to the Bell River; and
by that river downwards to the north boun-
dary aforesaid.
N.S.W. Government Gazette, March 28, 1856.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 26th
March, 1856. DISTRICT REGISTRARS.—His
Excellency the Governor General directs it to
be notified that, in pursuance of the Act of
Council 19 Yict., No. 34, for registering Births,
Deaths, and Marriages, and with the advice of
the Executive Council, he has appointed the
following persons to be District Registrars for
the Districts mentioned in connexion with their
respective names, viz.—Molong, Mr. Archi-
medes Byrne. By his Excellency’s command,
E. DBAS THOMSON.
N.S.W. Government Gazette, 1856, p. 1437.
Oolonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 20th May,
1856. DISTRICT REGISTRARS.—His Excel-
lency the Governor General, with the advice of
the Executive Council, has been pleased to
make the following appointments under the
Act of Council 19 Victoria, No. 34, for Regis-
tering Births, Deaths, and Marriages, viz.—Mr.
Archimedes B. Liseombe, to be District Regis-
trar within the Police District of Molong. By


his Excellency’s command, E. DBAS THOM-
SON.
N.S.W. Government Gazette, 1856, p. 159.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 21st Janu-
ary, 1856. DOG ACT.—His Excellency the
Governor General directs it to be notified that
-the provisions of the Act of Council 6th Wil-
liam IV., No. 4, intituled “An Act for abating
the nuisances occasioned by Dogs in the Streets
of certain Towns and on Highways in New
South Wales,” have been extended to the town-
ship of West Molong. By his Excellency’s com-
mand, E. DBAS THOMSON.
A proclamation was issued in the “Govern-
ment Gazette” of 1859 (11th July) directing
that Courts of Quarter Sessions be held as
under:—Molong, Wednesday, 19th October;
Orange, Monday, 24th October. Signed, W.
DENISON. By his Excellency’s command,
LYTTLETON HOLYOAK BAYLEY, Attorney
General.
N.S.W. Government Gazette, 1859, p. 2304.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 20th Oct-
ober, 1859. His Excellency the Governor Gen-
eral, with the advice of the Executive Council,
has been pleased to appoint the undermentioned
Gentlemen to be Coroners for the several dis-
tricts specified, in connection with their names
respectively, viz.—Molong, Andrew Ross, Es-
quire, M.D.; Dubbo, Walter Hugh Tibbits,
Esquire, M.D.; Rylstone, William Clifton Wes-
ton, Esquire, Surgeon. CHARLES COWPER.


N.S.W. Government Gazette, 1847, p. 421.
MOLONG MINING COMPANY.—The above
Company having now commenced operations:
Notice is hereby given to the public, that all
the expenses of carrying on the business will be
paid out of the paid up capital and profits of
the Company, and that no parties whatever are
authorised to contract any liabilities whatever
which can be binding on the Company, with the
following reservations only, that is to say,—
the Board of Directors for the time being, of
whom a list is hereunto attached, are empow-
ered to raise the means for the proper carrying
on of its mining operations, according to the
terms of the deed of settlement:—The Commit-
tee of Management for the time being, of whom
a list is hereunto attached, are authorised to
announce contracts, accept tenders, and make
agreements, for the purpose of the effectual
working of the mines of the Company. The
only orders from the country that will be re-
cognised by the Company must either bear the
signatures of two of the Committee of Man-
agement, or must be signed by their Superin-
tendent for the time being, and countersigned
by one of the Committee of Management. All
orders from the interior will be drawn upon
Messrs. Montefiore, Graham and Co.; all
cheques drawn in Sydney, will be signed by
two of the Directors. The Directors in Sydney
for the time being are: J. B. Darvall, Esq.,
M.L.C., T. H. Hood, Esq., P. H. Castilla, Esq.,


Henry Rickards, Esq., J. L. Montefiore, Esq.
The Committee of Management at the Mine for
the time being, are: Honorable Louis Hope,
Henry Rickards, Esq., C. W. Finch, Esq., A. C.
Hood, Esq. The Present Superintendent of the
Mine at Molong is: Mr. Benjamin White.
Molong Mining Company’s Office, Spring-
street.
N.S.W. Government Gazette, 1850, p. 1014.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 29th June,
1850. WEST MOLONG.—Notice is hereby
given that a site has been fixed upon for a vil-
lage at the undermentioned place, and that a
copy of the approved plan may be seen at the
office of the Surveyor General, at Sydney, or
at the Police Office, Molong, viz.—West Molong.
By his Excellency’s command, E. DEAS
THOMSON.
N.S.W. Government Gazette, 1858, p. 2174.
PROCLAMATION.—By His Excellency Sir
William Thomas Denison, Knight Commander
of the Most Honorable Order of the Bath, Gov-
ernor General in and over all Her Majesty’s
Colonies of New South Wales, Tasmania, "Vic-
toria, South Australia, and Western Australia,
and Captain General and Governor-in-Chief of
the Territory of New South Wales and its De-
pendencies, and Vice-Admiral of the same, &c.,
&c. Whereas by an Act of the Parliament of
New South Wales, passed in the twenty-second
year of her present Majesty Queen Victoria,
intituled, “An Act for establishing District


Courts, and for enabling the Judges thereof to>
act as Chairmen of Quarter Sessions,” it was
amongst other things enacted, that it should be
lawful for the Governor, with the advice of the
Executive Council, from time to time to order
by Proclamation in the Government Gazette,
that Courts, to be called District Courts, should
be holden at such towns and places as he should
think fit, and to divide the Colony of New South
Wales into Districts for the purposes of the
said Act; Now, therefore, I, Sir William Tho-
mas Denison, as such Governor aforesaid, do l
by this my Proclamation, for that purpose is-
sued, with the advice of the Executive Council,
divide the said Colony, for the purposes of the
said Act, into Five Districts, in manner follow-
ing, that is to say:—[Here are enumerated the
constituent centres of the several Districts, the
Western District comprising the following;
Mudgee, Orange, and Rylstone.] Given under
my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Syd-
ney. this ninth day of December, in the year of
our Lord, one thousand eight hundred and
fifty-eight, and in the twenty-second year of
Her Majesty’s reign. (L.S.) W. DENISON.
By his Excellency’s command, ALFRED J. P.
LUTWYCHE, Attorney-General.
In the “Sydney Gazette” of January 19 r
1832, in an article entitled “An Excursion
from Bathurst to Wellington Plains,” there is
mention of the country of which Molong forms
part. At this stage, by the way, it is meet to


mention the fact that the old “Sydney Gazette”"
has played a remarkable part in the matter of
furnishing information to those in search of
facts relating to early colonial days. There
are few complete copies of it in existence —one
is possessed by the Public Library of N.S.W.,
and another is included in the David Mitchell
bequest—it is very rare and is monetarily valu-
able in the extreme. The first volume at the
Public Library threatened to become so muti-
lated that at the suggestion of the Principal
Librarian it was reproduced in facsimile, 100
copies being printed in England, one of which
is in possession of the writer of this little book.
It bears dates between March 5 and February
26th both inclusive and the address to the com-
munity at large which it published puts the
position thus:
Innumerable as the Obftacles were which
threatened to oppofe our Under king yet
we are happy to affirm that they not
infurmountable, however difficult the tafk
before us.
The utility of a PAPER in the COLONY
as it muft open up a fource of folid infor-
mation, will, we hope, be univerfally felt
and acknowledged. We have courted the
affiftance of the Ingenious and Intelligent.
We-open no channel to Political Difcuffion
or Perfonal Animadverfion;—lnformation
is our only Purpofe; that aecomplifhed, we
fhallconfider that we have done our duty,


in an exertion to merit the Approbation of
the PUBLIC, and to fecure a liberal Pat-
ronage to the SYDNEY GAZETTE.
This, then, was the type of journal which
{certainly improved as the years rolled on-
ward) chronicled the first obtainable record of
the country occupied by Molong, and over
which in the early 40’s, Major (afterwards Sir)
Thomas Livingstone Mitchell travelled at the
head of his little band of attendants. Here he
left an indelible mark upon the landscape—he
left behind him the patient, zealous, and loyal
aboriginal whose grave occupies an at present
delightfully green and fertile slope not more
than one mile from the Molong of to-day.


IV.—MAJOR MITCHELL AND YURANIGH.
On a verdant slope in Gamboola Paddock for
years there stood a sandstone tablet surrounded
by a post-and-rail fence, which latter, in the
course of time, went the way of all mundane
things, but which, a few years since, at the
instance of several local residents, was replaced
by the strong picket fence. Close by are sev-
eral trees scored and marked with stone toma-
hawks in the manner peculiar to the blacks, to
indicate that the body buried under their ant-
hill-like mounds is that of a man. No such
scoring or marking of trees is done when the
deceased is one of the opposite sex. The ori-
ginal enclosure round the grave was a quarter-
of-an-acre in extent—that more recently erect-
ed is about the size of the usual graveyard-
palisade enclosure. And looking down the face
of the fretting stone one read the following
inscription, in some parts with difficulty, as
Old Time, that grim destroyer of all things, has
set himself the task of obliterating the work of
the sculptor:—
c


TO
NATIVE COURAGE
HONESTY and FIDELITY
YURANICH
WHO ACCOMPANIED THE
EXPEDITION OF DISCOVERY
INTO TROPICAL AUSTRALIA IN 1846
LIES BURIED HERB
ACCORDING! TO THE RITES
OF HIS COUNTRYMEN.
AND THIS SPOT WAS
DEDICATED AND ENCLOSED
BY THE
GOVERNOR GENERAL’S AUTHORITY
IN 1852.
JS. CONNOR.
[The name Yuranigh is spelled Yuranich in
the inscription; but Mitchell in his book of
travels spells it Yuranigh.]
The stone, as before stated, fell from its ori-
ginal position some years ago and for a con-
siderable period lay face downwards across the
grave. When it was placed into position again
it stood upon a base of Molong marble into
which was cut the inscription:
THIS MEMORIAL ORIGINALLY
ERECTED IN 1852 WAS RE-ERECTED
ON THIS BASE OP MOLONG MARBLE
BY THE GOVERNMENT IN 1900.
In giving the inscriptions as above, I have
observed the methods of the two sculptors in
regard to their use of capital lettering, and the


lines as printed are as they run upon the stone
itself. About the year 1908, a slab of station
marble, set upon a base of the more durable
Molong marble, was substituted for the old
monument, at the instance of the Hon. J. H.
(afterwards Sir Joseph Hector) Carruthers,
then Premier of N.S.W., who, during a casual
visit to Molong found time to look up the soli-
tary sepulchre of the dusky Yuranigh.
It will be seen that reference has been made
upon the stone to the fact that Yuranigh was
buried “according to the rites of his country-
men”—and one of those rites has been quoted,
but others remain to be. It would appear that
many mystic ceremonies were engaged in on
the occasion of the burial of a great warrior of
the tribes, and that, as a matter of fact, there
permeates the methods of one and all of the
blacks of Australia somewhat the same rever-
ence for death and belief in totems and the like
as affects the aboriginals of Central Australia,
about whom Spencer and Gillen, two S.A. ex-
plorers and scientists, wrote so very learnedly
recently. Digging with their stone weapons
and spears a grave sufficiently deep, they tie
the corpse up in such a way that when placed
in the grave it occupies a squatting position.
’Midst expressions of sorrow, wails, and dirges,
and the performance of certain ceremonies
which are weird and fantastic, they cover it up
with earth, raising a huge mound which is ant-
hill in shape and sheltered with bushes. Then


they hew into the trees with their stone axes
certain designs of fantastic shape, all indicative
of some tribute to deceased and some appeal to
the Good Spirit who is to watch over him as
he marches away to the Happy Hunting
Grounds of their imagination.
Very few Molong residents are aware of the
splendid services rendered to one of the most
prominent early-day pioneers of unknown Aus-
tralia by Yuranigh. Many there are who,
though long resident in our midst, have not
seen this isolated grave; many there are who
having seen it, scarcely, perhaps, fully realise
the romance associated with the life and death
of that patient, zealous, and loyal son of the
soil whose bones have long since mingled with
their mother earth. We “in this enlightened
age” are far too prone to regard the aboriginal
of Australia as being unpossessed of any attri-
bute worthy our recognition; but in the case
of the faithful Yuranigh, at least, this feeling
must be set aside —for ’twas he who piloted
Major Mitchell and his retinue into the then
new and unexplored lands of the north-west,
so that later on their fertility might be made
known and their natural riches opened up to
thousands of hardy settlers. One can draw a
mental picture of the party, strange of dress,
and “bronzed and bearded like pards,” wend-
ing their way, weary and travel-stained, round
the verdant hills and through the rugged
gorges, until


At last
A clearer point is reached, and all around
The loftier ranges loom in contour blue
With indigo shadows and light-veiling mist
Eising from steaming valleys.
And at the head of that hardy pioneering caval-
cade rode Yuranigh the Brave—and here in the
beautiful Molong valley he set up his everlast-
ing rest, after a life of usefulness to the then
new community.
In his “Journal of an Expedition into the
Interior of Tropical Australia, in Search of a
Route from Sydney to the Gulf of Carpen-
taria,” Lieutenant Sir T. L. Mitchell, Kt.,
D.C.L., Surveyor-General of N.S.W. (who start-
ed out from Parramatta on November 17,
1845), makes frequent and often touching re-
ference to Yuranigh. Mitchell was a native of
Stirlingshire, born 1792, and joined the Army,
in Portugal in 1808; he distinguished himself
during the war, receiving the Peninsula Medal
and five clasps for his services. In 1827, he was
appointed to survey Eastern Australia, and his
map, in three charts, was published in 1835.
In 1831 he made his first journey northward,
discovering the Namoi and Gwydir. In 1835
he started on his second expedition, to explore
the course of the Darling; and in 1836 he went
off on his third jaunt, being the first to pene-
trate into that portion of the country to which
he gave the name of Australia Felix. In 1840
(after having been elected to Parliament, from
which he resigned) he set out on his fourth


expedition, to explore tropical Australia, and
reached the Balonne, discovered Fitzroy
Downs, the Maranoa, the Warrego, and the
Victoria. He was a man of most versatile type
—for instance, he published a trigonometrical
survey of Port Jackson, patented a boomerang-
propeller for steamers, and translated “The
Lusiad” of Camoens, the classical poet of Por-
tugal, who reached Macoa, in China, in 1498
(after an exciting voyage, during which he was
shipwrecked) and where his remains lie buried
in the grotto within the gardens which bear his
honored name in that interesting Eastern Por-
tuguese city.
For the following extracts from the “Jour-
nal” above alluded to I am much indebted to
Mr. E. 0. Milne, son of Mr. Superintendent
Milne, of Orange, who takes a warm interest
(as indeed, his father also does) in all matters
of historical moment relating to early Austra-
lia and its bold pioneers. And it would be
well, indeed, were a larger proportion of the
rising generation to evince a keener interest
than now in regard to matters affecting the
deeds of derring-do on the part of our first
colonists, who braved the perils of the bush so
that they might carve out tracks which could
be safely and profitably trodden by their suc-
cessors. We are prone to pay too little defer-
ence to the heroes of the past—we don’t read,
or think, or investigate enough about them;
and consequently we fail to realise to the full


their difficulties and the trials and tribulations
which they suffered for the sake of the men
and women who were to came after them. And
yet we have much for which to be thankful,
and with Maarten Maartens may well say:
“For the things that are, —Oh, God be thank-
ed—are better than the things that might have
been.”
EXTRACTS.
“sth January (1846), p. 25.—Three of the
young cattle having escaped during the night,
retarded us in the morning until 8 o’clock, at
which hour they were brought into the camp,
having been tracked by Yuranigh, a most use-
ful native who had come with us from Buree.
19th February, p. 66.—Such were the reflec-
tions suggested to my mind by the young sav-
age as he tripped on lightly before me by the
side of his two half-civilised brethren of our
party, who, muffled up in clothes, presented a
contrast by no means in favour of our preten-
sions to improve and benefit their race. Yet
our faithful Yuranigh was all that could be
wished. He was assiduously making to the
stranger such explanations of our wants and
purposes as induced him to conduct us* in the
direction these required. He led us, thus ad-
monished, over those parts of the country most
favourable for the passage of wheels.
31st March; p. 109.—Still my guides led
westward towards the woods, and as we ap-
proached them, the shout or scream of little


Dicky, a native child of the Bogan, follower of
jny camp, first drew my attention to a black
phalanx within the forest, of natives presenting
a front like a battalion. Yuranigh, my inter-
preter, halted and demonstrated; our elder
guide ran forward, and on his reaching that
body, the sound of gruff voices that arose from
it strongly reminded me of Milton’s description
of Satan’s army:
‘ ‘ Their rising all at once was as the sound
Of thunder heard remote. ’ ’
Yuranigh would not advance another step, al-
though much pressed by the other native re-
maining with us to do so, but declared that
“those fellows were murry coola” (very
angry). We therefore retraced our steps to
the camp, without having seen either the Bal-
ongo or Congo. Our guide soon overtook us,
accompanied by fourteen of the strange na-
tives, who, all curiosity, passed the night at our
camp, and they brought with them a lad named
“Jemmy,” who spoke a little English, and had
visited many of our cattle stations. He was
very intelligible to Yuranigh, who but very
imperfectly understood the language of the-
rest.
2nd April; p. 113.—0 n arrival at the
“Cawan” we saw two natives fishing in a pond
with hoop nets, and Yuranigh went to ask them
about the ‘ ‘ Culgoa. ’ ’ He returned accompanied
by a tall athletic man. . . . Yuranigh and he
scarcely understood a word of what each other


said, and yet the former had the address to
overcome the usual difficulties to intercourse
between strange natives, and their shyness to
white men, and to induce this native thus to
become our guide.
6th May; p. 149. —(Banks of the Cogoon.)
On these off banks or bergs of forest, land,
Yuranigh drew my attention to large, old,
water-worn trunks of trees, which he showed
me had been deposited there by floods. As they
were of a growth and size quite disproportion-
ed to other trees there, I was convinced that
they were the debris of floods; and, consequent-
ly, that a vast body of water came down this
channel. This native was taciturn and obser-
vant of such natural circumstances to a degree
that made his opinion of value in doubtful
cases. Such', for instance, as which of two
channels, that might come both in our way,
might be the main one; thus my last resource,
when almost “in a fix,” was to “tomar el
parecer,” as they say in Spain, of this abor-
iginal, and he was seldom wrong.
19th September; p. 317.—0ne of the emus
was easily shot from the horse’s side, and, that
evening being the Saturday night of a very
laborious week, we were not slow in seeking
out a shady spot by the side of a pond in the
river bed. There my men had a feast, with the
exception of Yuranigh; who, although unable
to eat our salt bacon, religiously abstained from
eating emu flesh, although he skinned the bird


and cut it up, “secundum artem,” for the use
of the white men.
22nd September; p. 321.—The bees were also
new to Yuranigh, who drew my attention to
their extreme smallness; not much exceeding
in size a gnat or mosquito. Nevertheless, he
could cut out their honey from hollow trees,
and thus occasionally procure for us a pleasant
lunch, of a waxy compound, found with the
honey, which, in appearance and taste, much
resembled fine gingerbread.
25th September; p. 325.—0ur position, on
the contrary, was anything but enviable. With
jaded horses scarcely able to lift a leg, amongst
so many natives, whose language was incom-
prehensible, even to Yuranigh. I asked him
whether we might not come to a parley with
them, and see if they could understand him.
His answer was brief; and, without turning
even his head once to look at them: “You go
on!” which advice, quite according wdth my
own notions, founded on experience, I willing-
ly went on.
Page 327.—At dusk, I met with a tributary
containing a fine lagoon, and near this I fixed
my bivouac. Yuranigh most firmly objected to
our sitting down close by the water, saying we
might there be too easily speared by the wild
natives who were then probably on our track;
but he did not object to my bivouac on the
more open plain adjacent, one man keeping a


good look out. I called these Turanigh’s
Ponds. Latitude, 24 deg. 19 min. 22 sec. S.
Summary written after return from the ex-
pedition, early in 1847. Page 414.—1 t would
ill become me to disparage the character of the
aborigines, for one of that unfortunate race has
been my “guide, companion, councillor, and
friend,” on the most eventful occasions during
this last journey of discovery. Yuranigh was
small and slender in person, but (as the youth
Dicky said, and I believed) he was of most
determined courage and resolution. His intel-
ligence and his judgment rendered him so ne-
cessary to me that he was ever at my elbow,
whether on foot or horseback. Confidence in
him was never misplaced. He well knew the
character of all the white men of the party.
Nothing escaped his penetrating eye and quick
ear. His brief but oracular sentences were
found to be sage, though uttered by one deem-
ed a savage; and his affection and kindness
towards the little native Dicky seemed quite
paternal. The younger was the willing servant
of the elder; who obliged him to wash and
clean himself before he allowed him to sleep
near him. Yuranigh was particularly clean in
his person, frequently washing, and his glossy
shining black hair, always well-combed, gave
him an uncommonly clean and decent appear-
ance. He had promised himself and Dicky a
great reception on returning to Sydney, and
Avas perhaps, disappointed. Dicky had never


before seen houses, and Yuranigh took much
delight in showing him the theatre and what-
ever else was likely to gratify his curiosity.
The boy was all questions and observation.
I was at a loss how to make these natives com-
fortable, or suitably reward their services.
The new Governor kindly granted the small
gratuity asked for Yuranigh, and Dicky became
a favourite in my family. Both these natives
loathed the idea of returning to the woods, as.
savages; and, as if captivated with the scenes
of activity around them, both expressed a de-
sire “to work and live like white men.” This
shows that, when treated on a footing of equal-
ity, as these had been in my party, the Austra-
lian native might be induced to take part in
the labours of white men; but at the first
annoyance, the old freedom of the bush seems
to overmaster their resolutions, and attracts
them back to it. Yuranigh was engaged (for
wages, and under regular agreement) as
stockman to a gentleman who had cattle in the
north, and he took an affecting leave of my
family.”
So ends Mitchell’s reference to his dusky
guide.
Even though it be to “an aboriginal,” it is
well that such relics should be preserved—it is
well that such memorials should be erected—
the more particularly in the case under review,
for it indicates, at least, that the leader of the
great north-west expedition realised and recog


nised the sterling faithfulness of a man who,
though his skin was black, had in him a heart
white as that of the best of the party. Well
might Mitchell and his confreres have mourned
the loss of so worthy a guide as Yuranigh—
well might they have put themselves tempor-
arily in the position of the Aboriginal mother,
in Charles Harpur’s “Aboriginal Mother’s
Lament,” and said:
No more shall his loved tomahawk
Be plied to win our cheer,
Or the shining fishponds darken
Beneath his shadowing spear;
The fading tracks of his fleet foot
Shall guide not as before,
And the mountain-spirits mimic
His hunting call no more.
So much for Yuranigh—Yuranigh the Brave.
Much' has been written from time to time
with regard to the special characteristics and
the splendid services to the country of Sir
Thomas Mitchell; hut it is not, perhaps, gener-
ally known that that eminent explorer was one
of the few men in this country to fight a duel.
-Other duels were fought earlier, of course, not-
ably that between Captain Macarthur and
Lieutenant-Colonel Paterson, about 1801, when
Paterson was very seriously wounded; and that
between Mr. Saxe Banister and Dr. Wardell, a
journalist, in 1826. Sir Thomas Mitchell’s
affaire-de-honor took place in 1851, his antag-
onist being Mr. (afterwards Sir) Stuart Alex-
ander Donaldson, a Member of the Legislative
Oouncil, and the first Premier of this State un


der Responsible Government, who had had a.
statement of his, relative to the expenses of
the Surveyor-General’s Department, character-
ised as “false.” Three shots were exchanged
—one whizzed close to the ear of Sir Thomas,
whilst Mr. Donaldson’s hat was pierced by a;
bullet from his adversary’s pistol. Then the
seconds interfered, and the combatants left the
ground, but without a reconciliation. Mitchell
urns a very able man, and it is to his credit that
being elected to Parliament in 1844, and on it
being intimated that his vote as a Government
officer was required to be given in favor of the
Government, he resigned his seat.


V.—THE EARLY DAYS OF MOLONG.
‘*' When you • leave Time behind you, you ’ll find it
very short. It’s only Yesterday and To-morrow that
seem a long way off —Yesterday, because it’s gone so-
utterly, gone so much more than last year; and To-
morrow because you’re waiting for it to come.” —
"Mirage."
Molong, as I have said, was first discovered
by Sir Thomas Mitchell with a flying party
from Boree, where his main camp was at the
time. He followed the pine ridge over, and
from here discovered the Bell River, and so
went on to what is now Wellington. The first
settlements were Government cattle stations—
one at Frederick’s Valley, one at Heifer Sta-
tion, one at Boree-Cabonne, one at Molong, one
at Bathurst, and, I think, one at Blayney. It
is somewhat difficult to accurately ascertain the
exact period at which the pioneer settler set
up his camp on the fertile slopes which sur-
round the Molong of to-day. They were den-
sely wooded, of course, and the first task which
fell to his lot was to clear away the Giants of
the Forest—a task entailing a very considerable
amount of arduous labour. If one could but
hold communion with that first settler, many
particulars of more than mere passing interest
would be forthcoming; but alas, like all things
human, he has gone the way of his kind—has
“set up his everlasting rest and shaken the


yoke of inauspicious stars from his world-
wearied flesh” —and, as a natural consequence,
it becomes necessary to seek some other source
for the information needed. Apart from the
facts and dates recorded in my last
paper, we have authentic information to
the effect that at least a portion of
the Molong District was traversed as far back
as 1832, when a pioneering party went through
from Bathurst to Wellington, where had been
established thus early in the history of inland
Australia a stockade similar to that which
existed here. But the account of that trip,
which appeared in the “Sydney Gazette”
under date of January 19, 1832, and which
bore the title, “An Excursion from Bathurst
to Wellington Plains,” does not convey to the
reader much that is of value from a mere local
standpoint. Hence, one must accept from those
who are with us to-day whatever memories they
retain of “the times when this grey old
wrinkled world was young.”
Verily there is a vast fund of truth in those
old pregnant words of A. J. Davis: “The
world is a theatre of incessant action —the
scenes change perpetually, the actors come and
go like autumnal clouds; and the parts which
they perform are comic or serious, dramatic or
tragic, invariably, in accordance with the moral
culture and external circumstances of the
actors.” What a fascinating romance it would
make were one able to live through those early


years of hardships and luxury, dissipation and
frugality, kindness and cruelty—and he able
to tell the story without restriction and with-
out embellishment. The most realistic romance
that ever came from the prolific pen of our
most notable novelist would vie in vain with
the tale that might be written in all its terrible
nakedness —perhaps ’twere just as well that
the task is to a great extent one that is beyond
the possibility of accomplishment—perhaps ’tis
well that “the old order changeth and giveth
place to the new.” At any rate, there is no
hope now that one can go back to the dead and
buried past—so we will content ourselves with
living in the present, and with quoting as ac-
curately as possible those “abstracts and brief
chronicles of the time” in which lived some
of those good old folk who to-day still remain
amongst us and have their being.
To my mind there is nothing in this world
more pleasurable than to wander through old
places and to read and talk about old things
and old times. There is a wealth of solemn
thought associated with a deserted township,
a crumbling edifice, a broken-down, briar-
grown parapet—one wonders how and why the
decay was permitted to set in; one draws upon
his imagination with the object of picturing
the type of people W T ho lived here and there
when those buildings were fresh from the
hands of the builder and his craftsmen. It was
this idea, no doubt, which filled the mind and
D


made easy the run of that facile pen wielded
by Will Ogilvie when he wrote the poem en-
titled “Abandoned Selections,” of which the
following is a typical stanza:—-
I stand by your fenceless gardens,
And weep for the splintered staves;
I watch by your empty ingles,
And mourn by your white-railed graves;
I see from your crumbling doorways
The whispering white forms pass,
And shiver to hear dead horses
Crop-cropping the long gray grass.
It was with thoughts half solemn, half sad*,
and wholly interested that a start was made
t’other day across the fields, green and springy
with their thick carpet of succulent grass, to
view the site of Molong the Original. It was
a pleasant morning for the time of the year—
a Sunday, “that golden clasp which binds the
other days of the week together”—and the
sound of the Church bells as they invited the
faithful to devotions called to mind a couplet
in one of the good old simple English poems
of Oliver Goldsmith. Wandering on, through
East Molong, one heard from the local “guide,
philosopher and friend” particulars relating
to every home by which we skirted—learned
the names of those whom he recollected as hav-
ing first inhabited them, and had characteristic
stories told of their comings and goings and
their doings generally. Yonder on the rise just
beyond Moon’s Hollow, the town was earliest
established, on private property—then it was


moved away to a site under the Betts estate of
to-day. there, also occupying private territory;
eventually changing its location again and tak-
ing up a position on the Crown-granted village
reserve. In the distance one sees Gamboola
homestead —a block of sturdy, commodious,
and presentable buildings; below the three
huts, which occupy a glade which slopes river-
wards, used at one time to run the road, wdiich,
somewhat recently, comparatively speaking,
was deviated so that to-day one can mark its
course up above the stock-yards yonder. Gara-
boola was originally part of the Yale Head pro-
perty, and of it the late Hon. John Smith be-
came manager. He lived at the head station in
a residence situate opposite where the flour mill
of Messrs. John Black and Sons now stands;
the clump of acacia trees which occupied por-
tion of the grounds around it may still be seen.
The late Mr. S. Beadle was employed on the
station, as also was Mr. Wra. Stacey, names
both still favorably known in the district to-
day. Mr. Smith made a most successful man-
ager, and earned the good-will of the employees
on the estate. Later on he took up Gamboola,
and married Miss Tom, daughter of Rev. Mr.
Tom, a minister of some renown in the west in
those early days, and whose son set up a claim
against Hargraves as being the first discoverer
of gold in Australia. He progressed and be-
came the owner of many flocks and herds, and
of much wealth, besides becoming a citizen of


note in the land. The neighbouring property,
Boree-Nyrang, belonged to Messrs. Barton and
Darvall, presumably of the families of which
the Messrs. Barton, of Wellington, and the late
J. B. Darvall, of political fame, later on be-
longed. This estate, as well as that known as
Boree-Cabonne, was later on acquired by Mr.
John Smith, and both, until a few years since,
when Dr. N. W. Kater acquired Nyrang, were
held by his descendants, whose name is legion.
The late Mr. Smith once contested the Molong
Electorate against the late Dr. Ross, ex-M.L.A.,
but was defeated by six votes, and never after-
wards sought success in that particular direc-
tion —though he was subsequently appointed to
the Upper House, a position which one of his
sons, Mr. F. Jago Smith, also secured, after
having represented a constituency in the Legis-
lative Assembly for a number of years.
Before proceeding farther, it is worth while
to note, in this connection, that the Samuel
Beadle referred to above (and who died in the
1900’s), after a residence in the district extend-
ing over half-a-eentury, was an Essex man, and
came to this country in 1834, before he was 21,
entering first the service of the late Mr. John
Betts, who then held what is now the Gamboola
Estate. When the property was acquired by
Mr. John Smith, Mr. Beadle’s services were re-
tained, and for 30 years or more he was a
sturdy and trusted employee, only retiring to
take up land for himself in the vicinity of what


is now the Molong Racecourse, and where he
resided up to the time of his death. He follow-
ed farming here for 20 years, and died at the
age of 80, respected and mourned by those who
knew him best, and leaving to their small heri-
tage a family of sons and daughters who have
followed well and worthily in their father’s
footsteps. When Mr. Beadle came first to
Molong, there was but one house in the neigh-
bourhood of the town as it stands at present,
an old slab dwelling demolished some years ago
by Mr. H. S. M. Betts, on the eastern side of
Molong Creek, nearly opposite the site of
Messrs. Black and Sons’ mill. This house was
at that period occupied by Mr. Andrew Kerr,
father of the late Hon. A. T. Kerr, M.L.C., of
Orange, then superintendent for the Rev.
Samuel Marsden, who owned the Yale Head
Estate. The Rev. Samuel, by the way, was a
man of much influence in N.S.W. —or Botany
Bay, as Australia generally was called in those
early days; and many are the stirring and
startling stories that might be told of him had
one the space to spare. He died at the Church
of England Parsonage at Windsor, after a most
eventful career. I have by me at the present
moment a copy of an address presented him on
the occasion of his departure for England on a
visit about January 1, 1807, same being signed
by 300 magistrates, landowners, farmers and
others in the Hawkesbury District —which fact
would surely serve to prove the righ regard
of the good people of those stirring times.


The John Betts whose name will crop up
again in these hoary chronicles was the father
of Sir. Henry Samuel Marsden Betts, who died
in 1899 from the effects of an accident which
hefel him on the Yale Head Estate, in which he
held a big interest, and of which he had the
management. A native of Parramatta, born in
’37, Mr. H. S. M. Betts, who was called after
the Rev. Samuel Marsden aforesaid, made him-
self early in life conversant with matters ap-
pertaining to the development of the land of
his birth, settling down on the Molong property
after gaining some experience away up north
in the Gulf and Bowen country. His was an
active life, and dead though he is to-day, and
gone before
To that unknown and silent shore,
there be those in our midst who hold his name
in reverence and reflect on the truth of that
sentiment of Wordsworth’s that
The good die first,
And they -whose hearts are dry as summer dust
Burn to the socket.


VI.—PEN-PICTURES OF THE PAST.
“Day by day they pass away,
Genial spirits from their elay. ”
Wander we now on again, along by brave
old John Woolbank’s home—he had (1905)
then passed his eightieth milestone, and was
yet struggling along light of heart and staff in
hand. A good type of colonist was the vener-
able John—hardworking in his day, when the
blood ran quickly through his veins, and ere
Time tried his strength and whitened his hair.
Close by lived Mr. Joseph Smith—his decease
took place in 1908. A soldier in his earlier life,
he was in India with Roberts and saw service
in the New Zealand war; he drew a small pen-
sion from the Imperial authorities as a slight
reward for the good work he did under arms
in the countries named. A strong believer in
Spiritualism as a “science,” he made himself
famous in the locality, and the anecdotes that
are related of his acts of faith would be well
worth retailing here were space not a con-
sideration of some moment. The story of Jjis
uprooting of a famous plum-tree which occu-
pied a point of vantage just behind his resi-
dence is quite modern—his visitors from Sha-
dowland had imparted to him the information
that at its roots, did he but dig deep enough,
would be found a mass of virgin gold—and fol


lowing their suggestion, he dug and dug again
until the tree itself was uprooted, only to learn
that the precious metal was an absolutely un-
known quantity, as far as that field was con-
cerned, at any rate. Still his faith was un-
shaken, and until his death he continued to
hold communion with unseen visitors, just as
did the mystic Hamlet of Shakespeare’s crea-
tive fancy. Many changes saw both these old
men since they first set foot in the Molong
.District—fairly clear recollections they had of
those who had come and gone in the interval,
and of the varied and stirring incidents which
marked the march of time. And they waited
with a calm philosophy their own call to that
bourne from which no traveller returns.
In the early days, and before there was much
settlement in the vicinity, this part of the en-
virons of the Molong of to-day grew grass up
to the saddle flap, and was a favorite browsing-
ground for innumerable kangoroos, emus, and
other game; whilst the local blacks established
here their camp on the verdant slopes, in the
neighbourhood of a copious supply of game and
of water. The Willocks family resided here—
an old-established family they were, Willocks,
senior, his wife and sons—and here also both
the former died.
Farther West still, one sees, fringing the
creek, a paddock which formed part of Mo-
long’s earliest racecourse—to be sure, it would
be difficult now for any but cross-country


horses to follow the old track, even if it were
perceptible, for many fences have been erected
where years agone there was not the slightest
obstruction. To-day, to get over that old
course, a steeplechase would have to be includ-
ed in the There was a grandstand
of somewhat primitive type in the paddock
bottom of Cole’s yards in those palmy days;
and one can draw upon fancy and a knowledge
of the interest that was taken in racing all over
the land at such a remote period for a picture
of the gatherings which took place whenever
the local club here held its periodical re-union.
■Mr. Whitley, father-in-law of Mr. S. Phillips,
who had a station on the Bogan, was killed dur-
ing one of the meetings. Whitley’s remains
were laid to rest in the old cemetery. He had
two sons, Samuel and John; the former mar-
ried a Miss Lipscomb, and the other, John
Whitley, who was a blacksmith, died here.
Close by was a crossing at the creek, and here
lay the road from Forbes, through Davy’s
Plains, by Boree, to Ironbarks and Wellington.
Over the fence on the opposite side of the
lane, and we are trespassers upon Erambie Sta-
tion (or, more properly termed, Merambie, “a
cray-fish”), the property now of Mr. G. H.
Hebden; years ago it was owned by the late
Mr. William Kite, and portion of it was known
at Kite’s Swamp. Mr. Hebden purchased the
estate, and came from the Jerilderie side to re


side upon it, effecting wonderful improvements
in every possible direction.
Here, where we are now standing, was the
site of Early Molong—the first town ■ and
varied are the thoughts which crowd through
one’s brain as he gazes upon the ruins of those
one-time up-standing structures which consti-
tuted it. All is silence, save for the lowing of
the sleek, soft-eyed cattle which graze peace-
fully Where once human life and activity made
themselves manifest. Perhaps ’twere venturing
from the sublime to the ridiculous to associate
with the fall and decay of a small xVustralian
village the beautiful words which Edgar Allan
Poe addressed to the ruins of the Coliseum at
Rome; and yet one who had memorised his
poem could scarcely fail to recollect the rela-
tion its language bears to any set of structures
similarly conditioned:
Yastness and Age and Memories of Eld!
Silence and Desolation and Dim Night!
I feel ye now —I feel ye in your strength!
And again, when viewing the crumbling walls:
These stones-—alas! these gray stones—are they
all—
All of the famed and the colossal left
By the corrosive Honrs to Fate and me?
Not all, the Echoes answer me—not all!
Prophetic sounds and loud arise for ever
From us, and from all Ruin unto the wise,
As melody from Memnon to the Sun.
Here where once was the ring of hammers and
the trundle of heavy waggons and the riot and
laughter of strong, bearded, horny-handed


men—here to-day the stillness was scarce dis-
turbed by our footsteps on the sodden turf.
Time was when the township was a sort of
caravanserai between the Lachlan and Wel-
lington—when teams camped by the dozen on
the green in front of the old hotel whose foun-
dations are still visible, though the building
itself has been razed to, the ground.. Yonder
one John Murray, of Toogong, kept a store —
his wife was a Lipscomb. Lipscomb was the
Postmaster; and when the bulk of the residents
moved away from this locality to the new site
chosen for the township, he went with them.
On that knoll, where one sees the broken
brick and stone relies of a building of some pre-
tensions was the first village hotel—we are told
that with the naked eye it could be seen on a
clear day from off Old Man Canoblas yonder.
It was of brick, and in the 50’s was kept by a
landlord named Cobcroft. A Miss Cobcroft
was married to one of the Lipscomb’s, a family
to whose members frequent reference will prob-
ably be made later on. Mr. Thomas Wynne
subsequently held the license (the hotel was
called the “Wheelwright’s Arms”), and both
he and his good wife, the father and mother of
Mr. J. P. Wynne, until recently resident at
Molong, died here. Mr. Wynne kept the house
after the death of his father, and was in it when
the Forbes gold fever broke out. Moving from
this old hostelry later on, he kept an hotel on
or about the site of Dr. Veech’s late residence


-—it having been built for and kept by one
James Martell. Others who presided over the
destinies of the same house later on were Mr.
J. McGroder, a familiar figure in Molong for
many long years, Mr. J. Burgess, and one Jules
Thomas, a relative of Martell’s. Subsequently
Mr. Wynne occupied the still-existing Free-
mason’s Hotel, erected by Bernard Francis
Hughes; opposite the Freemason’s in those
days, and where Garlick’s forge, Wright,
Heaton’s, and the intervening buildings now
are, Ralph Tolano kept the first store, which
was built about the some time as the hotel
named. The store was afterwards managed by
the late Mr. John Ruble, of Garra. Bernard
Francis Hughes was reputed to be wealthy in
those days, but rumor has it that he suffered
great losses and ended his existence in a tragic
manner.
But to get back to Old Molong again—it is
so easy to get away from it, following, as one
does, the footsteps of the men who in the hey-
day of its prosperity were active and living
entities! Near by the hotel ruins one sees
where the stables were located—here was the
kitchen and there the remains of its chimney.
Beyond was a stockyard and a fruit-garden,
with several dead trees still standing to mark
the spot upon which they once flourished.
Until a few years since, they bore a slight crop.
On the slope of the ground, t’other side from


the hotel, were the butcher’s and the black-
smith’s shops. Davie Boure, brother to Mrs.
Pearce, was the village smith, one of the type
about whom good old Longfellow sung. The
butcher at the particular period respecting
which these are the chronicles, was one Billy
Johnston—and where that clump of rocks now
finds place, Mr. G. Coleman, a daughter of
whom was Mrs. Tucker,- of Molong, kept the
shoemaker’s shop, the post-office (of which
Mr. Lipscomb had the management) being
close by. Well up on the rise was Cobden’s
store, of which more anon; and close to it the
first school-house, of which one Thomas John-
stone was the teacher—a private institution, of
course. Over the point of the hill, Mr. J. T.
Parslow, sen,, had a farm, which proved profit-
able to him, although the area was compara-
tively speaking small, seeing that during one
year at least he is credited with having secured
£1 per bushel for the maize crop he raised
there. Mr. Parslow resided here, but later on
took over the hotel on the hill at the Yale Head
Estate, leaving it to go to the “Home in the
West,” Peabody-road, at which he spent the
evening of his life. In addition to the build-
ings mentioned, there were a few scattered
structures on the bank of the creek near by.
The population was small, and the travelling
public practically kept the village tradesmen
going. They were brave old days—gone by for
ever, alas, like the snows of last winter:


They were hard old days —they were battling days?
They were cruel times, but then,
In spite of all we shall live to-night
In those hard old days again—
And, perchance, we will realise to some extent
.at least the fitness of that Dickensonian senti-
ment expressed in the “Christmas Carol: “I
will live in the Past, the Present, and the
.Future—l will not shut out the lessons they
teach.”


VII.—CHARLES HENRY COBDEN AND
OTHERS.
Anything but history, for
History must be false.—Walpole.
The perky Sydney “Bulletin” some time
since published a paragraph in which it made
reference to the circumstance that a brother of
Richard Cobden, “the English corn-law
crank,” was buried in a little cemetery on the
banks of the Bell River—and this writer
promptly pointed out that it was when the
“Bulletin” was most sure of its “facts” that
that cocksure journal was most likely to be
wrong. In this case it was wrong—for the un-
marked grave of Cobden is located in a little
briar-grown flat not far from the banks of
Molong Creek, on the old Yale Head estate
previously referred to. Here, also, others of
“the rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep”
their last long sleep,
Mixed with the shapeless dust on which the herds
Trample and graze!
Charles Henry Cobden was a burly man,
well-built, possessed of considerable educa-
tional attainments, and colloquially termed a
“good sort.” He came to the district long
before his brother, the “corn-law crank,” be


come famous on account of the good work ac-
complished by him as the result of his agita-
tion in favor of cheaper bread for the hungry
masses of his native land. Cobden, the great
Corn-law Reformer, was a crank only in the
sight of some cross-eyed economists—who
never can see virtue in any political party
whose members do not howl wildly for high
protectionist duties—who do not advocate the
taxation of the people “through the belly and
the back.” Any man who asks that the masses
shall get cheap bread with which to feed their
hungry dependents and cheap clothes with
which to cover their nakedness, is, from their
point of view, the enemy of the manufacturer
and the foe of the market-manipulator—he is a
crank! Unfortunately for these lop-minded
people, they are not always happy in their
choice of similes —they liken Cobden to a crank,
forgetful of the fact that the crank is the
most important—-the indispensable—feature of
certain pieces of machinery and mechanism,
without the aid of which the remainder of the
parts would be so much scrap-iron. And Cob-
den was the crank through whose medium a
great machine was set working in the cause of
that body of oppressed humanity who, in Great
Britain, were being starved and perished by
reason of the imposition of high tariff dirties
on the common necessaries of life, for the
especial benefit of a band of fiscalists and
monopolists.


But to get back to a more congenial subject
—to Charles Henry Cobden. He kept a store
away in the old original township, and
later on he presided over the destinies of the
old house on the hill yonder, in the Yale Head
property. He died in 1859—his wife pre-
deceased him —and both were laid to rest in
that grass-grown cemetery just across the creek
from Black and Sons’ mill. The couple had
three sons, Richard, Fred, and Charles. Thomas
Johnston was the schoolmaster in those days—
the first pedagogue in the district, an English-
man who came here before the diggings broke
out —and to him for tuition went Cobden’s trio.
Johnston was the exact counterpart of the
hedge schoolmaster of Goldsmith’s beautiful
poem, “The Deserted Village”:—
There, in his noisy mansion, skilled to rule
The village master taught his little school;
A man severe he was, and stern to view,
I knew him well, as every truant knew.
# * # #
Yet he was kind, or if severe in aught,
The love he bore to learning was in fault.
* • * *
But past is all his fame. The very spot
Where many a time he triumphed, is forgot.
Richard Cobden, the eldest of Charles Henry
Cobden’s sons, was in high favor with school-
master Johnston; he was held up as a painstak-
ing lad and an example of propriety and schol-
astic industry to the remainder of the pupils
of the establishment. He took away home-
work in the afternoon, and returned next morn-
E


ing with every arithmetical problem solved and
all his lessons mastered. But he omitted to ex-
plain to the teacher that he had had his sums
worked out for him on a slate at home by his
father, and had merely transferred them to an
exercise-book, whilst with regard to such other
lessons as had to be completed in school, he
brought with him each morning from home the
necessary particulars. Evidently the suspicion
dawned upon Pedagogue Johnston that “things
were not just what they seemed,” and he laid
himself out to discover the secret of the white-
haired boy’s success. Johnston sometimes wore
goggles—and when he put them on the school
subsided into silence and heads were bent over
books and lessons. They never knew which
way the tyrant was looking when his eyes were
sheltered by those great blue-glass, wire-
rimmed eye-protectors. Anyhow, one day he
put them on to some purpose; the class were
engaged on English composition, and teacher
Johnston came down from his high desk, and
walked carefully round the room, eventually
bringing up close behind the unsuspecting
Richard Cobden, capturing, as he did, a piece
of paper upon which was written in the hand
of his father the lesson of the day. Richard’s
star paled after that—he was never again held
up as the shining light of the school!
When Charles Henry Cobden died, relatives
in the Old Country wrote to Australia, making
enquiries as to the age of his sons, and offering


to take charge of and educate and bring up
Charles, the youngest, who, later on, went to
England. Of him nothing has been heard of
recent years, as far as one can learn locally.
The other two boys were somewhat wild. Fred,
went to Queensland and led a wandering life, it
being reported some years ago that he had been
killed by the blacks. What became of Richard,
history reeordeth not; but let us hope that his
career was one of success and his end, if it has
come, peaceful and happy.
The letter quoted below (and the original of
which I had from Mr. Cousins, sen., of Heytes-
bury Park) possesses a historical, as well as
a local interest, inasmuch as it was written by
Richard Cobden himself:—
(Date, etc., missing.)
“Dear Sir, —I am much obliged to you for
your kind letter, and, without losing a mail,
I hasten to thank you very sincerely for all
the kindness you have shown to my brother’s
family, and more especially to my nephew,
Richard. Let me also express my warm ac-
knowledgments to Mrs. Cousins, of whose
goodness towards these helpless young ones I
have heard grateful mention by my nephew
Charles. (Then follows reference to the kind-
ness and benevolence of Mrs. Brazier, whose
death was recently recorded, and others whose
names are obliterated, save one which looks
like Wetherbridge.) I wish I could see my
way to being able to take the responsibility
in this matter entirely off your hands. But I
am, unfortunately, not a rich man. Public life
during nearly 30 years, without ever having


held a salaried office, has not conduced to my
prosperity in a pecuniary sense . It has placed
me in a prominent position, where a certain
style of expenditure is unavoidable
These energies might have been otherwise em-
ployed in profitable private pursuits. Some in-
vestments, too, have not turned out well. At the
same time, I have a family of five daughters
to provide for, and, like everyone else in Eng-
land, I have to meet the claims of others who
are nearly related to me. I think it is due to
you to make this explanation. Perhaps it is
also due to myself, for it is the fashion to con-
sider me richer than I am. After turning the
matter over in my mind, I think the best I can
do is to make this offer to Richard. He is get-
ting, I understand, a salary of £3O from you.
Whatever he saves .... on Ist January
next I will give him the same amount at the
end of the year. For example, if he should
save £ls, I will give him £ls. Will you be so
good as to explain this to him. I shall be
obliged by your saying that it is not without
difficulty that I can give him this little. He
calls me a ‘great person in England’ in his
letter to his aunt. Be so kind as to show him
the difference between a great and a rich per-
son. I hope he will be able to set a good ex-
ample, and to ultimately help his younger
brother. I wish they could both, while still
young, improve a little their education. Books
are, I suppose, cheap with you. If not, we
could find some. But what Richard requires
is to practise writing, with somebody at hand
who will correct his spelling. He would do
well to copy extracts from books. His younger
brother, I suppose, stands more in need of im-
provement.


“lt has occurred to me to inquire whether
hy chance there is any one in your colony to
whom I could write respecting these poor boys.
It may happen that I have friends, or, at least,
old acquaintances, at Bathurst or elsewhere, to
whom a letter of introduction from me might
he useful. I have been most widely known,
and find old acquaintances turn up everywhere
I go. Can you or your brother suggest any-
thing of the kind?
“I will only add that if there he any way,
within my power, in which I can be available
to you in England, pray make use of me, and
I remain, dear Sir,
“Yours sincerely, ED. COBDEN.”
Mrs. Cobden died in the hotel on the A r ale
Head hill—the old building is hut slightly
altered;.and in those times it was a hive of in-
dustry. The road to Wellington skirted the
house, and there was a good deal of traffic in
and out the year round. When his wife died,
and after her remains had been laid to rest,
Cobden left the hotel, and Mr. J. Parslow took
it. Cobden went away to Stony Creek, by
Stuart Town, about 1856; and later on, when
Mr. Parslow went into private life again, he
came back to the Yale Head hostelry, where he
remained until Death beckoned him.hence and
he followed. He died about 1859. The only
cemetery in these parts at that early stage was
that which one may see on the other side of
the creek from Black and Sons’ Mill. Save for
a few decaying corner-posts, and here and there


a shattered piece of picket-fence, there is noth-
ing to indicate the fact that some hundreds of
Molong’s dead occupy this plot as their last
resting-place. Thick clumps of impenetrable
briar grow over what were the graves, and
there is not one name or date legible on the
two or three slabs which stand as mournful
monuments to the forgetfidness of human-kind
and of the age in which we live. No stone was
used for tablet purposes in those early times—
whenever an inscription was set up, the head-
“stone” was of wood, with an iron plate cover-
ing its face, upon which was painted the name,
age, &c., of the dead. Time, and the action of
the elements, have long since removed and des-
troyed all these records, so that one has to
depend upon the overtaxed memories of old
hands for what one learns regarding their con-
temporaries—and absolute accuracy as far as
dates are concerned is out of the question. No
tablet or fence was ever placed upon or round
the grave of Cobden or his wife—one has point-
ed out to him the exact spot where they were
interred; but nothing is to be learned from a
glance at the grass-grown earth which covers
all that was mortal of the brother of one of
Britain’s most illustrious men.
One wonders, as he stands here, looking in
upon that wild growth of red-berried briar and
that rank collection of weeds which well-nigh
hide the few white pickets that remain intact
—one wonders what brought Cobden to Aus


tralia, and what flight of fancy caused him to
turn his face Molongwards! “Nothing is
stranger than the dominance of Chance”—and
Chance, or Destiny, or whatever else one likes
to call that weird influence which seems to
direct men’s footsteps through life—Chance,
with bent finger and other signs of encourage-
ment, no doubt, led Cobden on and on until he
paused within the shades of this prolific valley,
to remain here for the remainder of his days.
It is passing strange how men representative of
the best British blood, and the most honourable
of old country families, gravitate to out-of-the-
way centres in this remote Southern land. I
have met in wayside hamlets, far out back in
N.S.W. and Queensland, occupying the hum-
blest positions, or indulging in the wildest
orgies as they knocked down their remittance-
money, men whose fathers and brothers occupy
positions of great eminence in that land which,
with all its faults, is to-day the envy of the
other nations of the earth. They are the harum-
scarum elements of the country from which
they came—the Harry Morants and the Sir
Harry de Houghtons of the aristocracy; and
they came along to us or are sent here, so that
their fires may burn out —so that they may
mend or end, and they generally do the latter,
for ‘ ‘ a short life and a merry one ’ ’ is the motto
which, for the most part, these wild spirits,
filled with love of adventure and strong drink,
have emblazoned upon the banners under which
they fight.


By the way, in 1909 the death took place of
the Joseph Parslow alluded to in this chapter.
He arrived in Sydney from England 80 years
before, and settled in Molong (then known as
Mulong) about 1839. Not more than once in a
score of years did he revisit Sydney, and then
only on imperative business. His long, healthy,
and happy life is a testimonial to the virtues
and preservative qualities of limestone coun-
try, the rich soil and invigorating atmosphere of
Molong. In the 60’s, Molong was on the main
artery to the Bogan, the Darling, and outback
generally. Bullock teams trailed along the
banks of the creek, and drays, coaches, carts,
and caravans conveyed passengers, produce,
and provisions from and to Sydney town. In
that time it was not unusual to see 40 vehicles of
every variety, several hundred head of horses
and cattle, and a colony of human beings camp-
ed on the flat. Young Parslow—then, and ever
afterwards, known as “Happy Joe” —on ac-
count of his pacific disposition and zest for
merriment and innocent enjoyment—was in the
employ of early pastoralists.


VIII.—THE OLD CEMETERY.
A thousand fantasies
Begin to throng into my memory,
Of calling shapes, and beckoning shadows dire,
And airy tongues, that syllable men’s names
On sands, and shores, and desert -wildernesses.
Milton.
A desolate-looking little cemetery is this
through which we now walk, in a vain endea-
vour to discover some painted plate which will
disclose the identity of the man or woman or
ehilit whose bones have disintegrated in this
sodden earth. 'Not one—the rich and the poor
have been treated here without any display of
distinction—in six feet of soil all are equal.
The Socialistic party, whose desire it is to make
all men equal on earth—a very commendable
desire, if its accomplishment were not abso-
lutely beyond the bounds of human possibility
—these gentlemen will one day realise, no
doubt, that the only such experiments which
have been truly successful in any land or clime,
are those which have been instituted by King
Death, assisted by his grief-stricken subordin-
ate —the Undertaker. Run past Rookwood in
the train, and, looking out, see those thousands
upon thousands of marble monuments and
modest stone tablets and fresh-made mounds of
earth—many of them above the resting-places


of men and women who in life toiled self-saeri-
fieingly in their own particular spheres of
action on behalf of their kind, and fretted and
fumed because of their want of good fortune
in the attempted regeneration of their little
world. They have left the City of Sorrows for
the City of Silence —they have joined the only
Socialistic Settlement possible of successful
establishment and maintenance whilst ever
human nature remains as it is, selfish and pet-
tish—whilst ever the necessity exists for men
to accumulate and keep all they can, because
of the fear of poverty and all the evils it brings
along in its train. But if there are no marble
headstones in this little cemetery—which, by
the way, is still smaller now than it was origin-
ally, for the reason that part of the old fence
has been moved nearer to the creek—if there
are no marble headstones, there are records on
the memory-tablets of many old residents re-
garding the identity and idiosyncrasies of a
host of those who rest within their narrow beds
here. It is little wonder that small trouble was
taken in the early days to mark the graves of
the dead, seeing the difficulties that were asso-
ciated with the task—even in the large towns,
and the cities themselves, when one ventures
a visit to the cemeteries he realises how fickle
and forgetful is human nature; grief, like
beauty, is but skin-deep, and once the first pas-
sionate burst is over, thought for those who
have gone before decays and disappears. The


good man needs no monument, however—if he
is able to truly say, “I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the faith,” he has erected for himself a monu-
ment more durable than Marble, more lasting
than Time. All this agitation in favor of the
erection of statues to the great literateurs, the
poets, explorers, and philanthropists of our
race, whilst very commendable from certain
points of view, is so much waste of energy and
capital. Where is the actual need for statues
to Shakespeare, or Burns, or Scott, or Colum-
bus, or Burke and Wills, or Cook, or Dickens r
or, coming nearer home, to Parkes or Mort —
their names will go down to posterity intimately
associated with that particular phase of the
world’s work in the performance of which they
exercised their talents and to which they gave
their adherence. The mere building up of a
pawky pedestal to his honor will not rescue
any man’s name from oblivion; neither, if he is
worthy of the world’s recollection, will the
neglect to so perpetuate his memory cause for-
getfulness of his worth to affect students of
history in all countries and ages, right down
to the long track of Time!
With such thoughts as these coursing through
one’s mind, it was scant wonder that there
came to memory those crisp, sympathetic senti-
ments of Will Ogilvie’s which are contained in
his poem entitled “The Graves Out West,” and


which admirably sum up the situation we are
here discussing:
If the lonely graves are scattered in that fenceless
vast God’s Acre,
If no Church-bells chime across them, and no mourn-
ers tread between;
Yet the souls of those sound sleepers go as quickly to
their Maker,
And the ground is just as sacred, and the graves are
just as green.
If we chant no solemn dirges to the virtue of their
living,
If we sing no hymn-words o’er them —in the glory
of the stars,
They can hear a grander music than was ever ours for
giving, _
God’s Choristers invisible —the winds in the belars.
If we set them up no marble, it is none the less we
love them;
If we carved a million columns, would it bring them
better rest?
If no gentle hands have fashioned snowwhite wreaths
to lay above them,
God has laid his own wild flowers on their lonely
graves out West!
The first interment made in this old ceme-
tery was that of the remains of a soldier’s child.
The stockade was situate not far away, in the
elbow of the road to the racecourse, a few hun-
dreds of yards distant —one can see still stand-
ing a post or two to mark the exact site. Wel-
lington had the principal stockade in the West
in those days, and but a few men were located
at Molong, in charge of a small force of mili-
tary. The hotel on Yale Head was not built
specially for the purpose to which it was after-
wards put—it was intended as a private resi-
dence. The timber used in its construction was


drawn by the late Mr. Charles T. Daulton Bell,
who died as recently as March, 1905. Mr. Bell,
who was familiarly called Charlie Bell by a
host of friends the whole country-side over,
had lived in the western district for over 60
years, and had attained the ripe old age of 84
wdien called to “pass in his checks.” He was
born at the Cowpastnres, as Camden District
was then known, in November, 1820. Here
were lost in the early days of the country, the
greater part of the cattle stock of the Botany
Bay settlement, only to be accidentally found
later on, then having increased and multiplied
to such an extent as to make quite a present-
able herd. Bell’s father was in the Navy; the
son came to Bathurst in ’4O, and during his-
long association with the West he had followed
many occupations, that of drover being the one
to which he was most attached. He claimed tu
have taken cattle to Sydney without crossing
the Blue Mountains; and he is certainty credit-
ed with having landed at Back Creek, near
Bathurst, the first crushing machine and weigh-
bridge that came West. He was the father of
12 children, and though he led a wandering life
for many years, and had kept hotels in several
localities, he never tasted grog and never
sought the soothing influence of the fragrant
weed. He set an example in one other respect
which might well be followed by the great bulk
of our young men and old of to-day, whose
lethargy in regard to public affairs is phenom


enal, as well as unpardonable—lie never missed
voting at an election! No matter where he hap-
pened to be just prior to polling-day, he always
managed to make back to the locality in which
he had to cast his vote; and Charlie Bell has
been known to ride 60 miles to put his little bit
of paper into the ballot-box. One would not
mind what the views of such a man were—if he
were one’s most bitter opponent, he would be
entitled to the highest regard, for a man who
took so keen an interest in the affairs of his
country as this display of activity would indi-
cate, could not be very far wrong in his views
as to what was best for the land in which he
lived.


IX.—EARLY SETTLEMENT.
The valleys that smile to our tillage,
The hills where our banners unfold,
Were won by the men of the village
And bought with their axes of old.
Ogilvie.
Before we leave the old cemetery on the Yale
Head Estate, it will be worth while to look
round the enclosure —if the rickety old fence
which once did service may be so called to-day.
In that corner were laid the remains of Dr.
William Tredwin, a native of Padstow, in Corn-
wall, one of Molong’s earliest, if not actually
its earliest, physicians. He was about 42 years
of age, and died somewhere in the ’so’s—no
one appears to be able to give the approximate
date, for few made note of the march of time
in those days. Poor fellow—he wms a confirm-
ed dipsomaniac, and the temperance advocates
of his time managed to have inscribed on the
iron plate which was attached to the wooden
head-“stone” placed upon his grave, words to
the effect that it was hoped that “his untimely
death would be a warning to all intemperate
drinkers.” All trace of this inscription has
long since vanished, so that one is unable to
quote it authoritatively. Dr. Tredwin lived and
died in a little cottage which formed one of a
group in a lane or street leading up through


the Yale Head Estate, from the bank of the
creek opposite to where Black’s Mill now is r
hut where the police quarters then were, to the
hotel on the hill, then kept, as before stated,
by Charles Henry Cobden. One can still see an
outcrop of rock and the relics of a small settle-
ment in the locality mentioned. There were a
blacksmith’s and a saddler’s shop; and close
by, where there is a clump of apparently dead
acacias, was the site of the Vale Head Home-
stead. The road to 'Wellington skirted the
house on the hill over whose destinies Cobden
presided. Never a stone or mark of any kind
was placed over the Cobdens, though they were
as much entitled to this mark of respect, seem-
ingly, as were others whose resting-places were
indicated by modest enclosures and such like.
Another grave my guide recollected was that
of two children, whose names, however, escaped
his memory—who were accidentally drowned,
The local schoolmaster, Thomas Johnston, read
over their poor little coffins the burial service.
Then there was a Mrs. Coburn, who had a
wooden “stone” placed over her grave—and a
host of others whose identity has been lost and
whose dust has long since commingled with
the dust of Mother Earth. How many graves
there were in the old cemetery no one appears
to be able to determine; but seeing that it was
the only burial-ground in the district for quite
a number of years, it is reasonable to assume
that the number was considerable.


Where Molong township now is was a mere
cultivation-paddock, fenced in round by
Quinn’s and the public-school, and down Hill-
street. There was another enclosure on the flat,
called the police paddock—where the recrea-
tion ground now is—and save for a building or
two —a wooden place between Mr. Janies Has-
lam’s and Miss Keay’s being one, the remainder
was covered by bush. The first constable’s
name was Eoland Graham, and he held office
for a long period. The Police Station was al-
ways, from its establishment in 1848 or 1849,
just about where it is now. A lockup was built
of slabs, and a Court-room 24ft. by 18ft., in
which was a dais raised for the use of the magis-
trates and a table for the officials, etc. On the
east side of the building, near the creek, was a
place set apart for their horses whilst the magis-
trates were performing their duties inside. It
was the Chief Officer of the Police ivho used to
live where Mr. A. Bamford now resides. Ser-
geant Samuel Evans, a Peninsula veteran, who
afterwards went to Dubbo, was one of those
who occupied these quarters. John Davis was
another—he was chosen by the magistrates for
the post —as was the custom in those days.
Davis was stationed at Molong till ’6l or '62.
He had long retired and was on pension at the
time of his death in 1904. Mr. Joseph Morris,
who visited Molong first in 1852, and who came
here to reside in 1854, furnished this latter in-
formation, and it may be taken as authentic.
F


One early-day officer in charge of the local
police-station was Senior-Sergeant Thomas
Wallings, subsequently shot dead by a man
named Gibson, whom he was attempting to
arrest, at Wonbobbie, on the Macquarie River,
on September 20, 1878. Wallings was a fear-
less officer—Gibson was armed with a rifle, and
warned Wallings not to approach. Nothing
daunted, the Senior-Sergeant made for his man,
who kneeled and took aim, shooting his would-
be captor dead. Wallings was an officer highly
esteemed by all who know him, and his un-
timely end was a matter for regret amongst a
large circle of friends.
There were no churches at that period. The
courthouse, a rickety old wooden building, was
used when service was to be held by Parson
Watson, who came over from Wellington, and
was then the only Minister who officiated at
Molong. Bishop Barker paid the place a visit
somewhere in the 50’s, and owing to the large
attendance of worshippers and sightseers, he
was compelled to officiate outside the court-
house.
Where there is a clump of rocks in front of
and about half-way between the house on the
hill and the creek, was where Messrs. Bowler
and Passmore lived; in the locality, also, some
time after the death of Dr. Tredwin, lived Dr.
Ackrett (?), father of Mrs. Cusack, wife of
Sergeant Cusack, who was succeeded by
Sergeant Hicks. Another doctor who was here


was named Sickler, afterwards at Tambaroora,
and, later on again, at Bathurst. Other names
which crop up in connection with the Molong of
that time are those of Commissioner for Crown
Lands Sibthorp, and R. Whiting. Mr. Whiting
came through with Major Mitchell, and lived
here with Mr. H. Pearce for a number of years
afterwards, his remains being interred in the
new cemetery.


X.— VALE HEAD AND REV. SAMUEL
MARSDEN.
“He was of the stuff of which heroes are made —
a man of many parts.”
As previously stated, the Yale Head Estate
was originally the property of the Rev. Samuel
Marsden, “the blacksmith parson,” as Mr.
James Bonwick styled him. Born in the village
of Horsforth, Leeds, in 1764, he was induced,,
through the influence of Mr, William Wilber-
force, to accept a chaplaincy in that country of
somewhat nebulous type known in Great Bri-
tain as “Botany Bay,” but referred to in offi-
cial documents as “His Majesty’s territory of
New South Wales.” He arrived at Port Jack-
son with his wife in 1794, having just previous
to his departure married Miss Elizabeth Tris-
tan. For a considerable time he was assisted
in his ministrations in the colony by the Rev.
Mr. Johnson, who, later, went away to Eng-
land and left Marsden with his heavy charge.
In 1807 he made a trip to the Old Country, and
prior to his departure was presented with an
address signed by 300 persons, who expressed
regret because of the loss the colony would
sustain by reason of his absence. Returning to


Botany Bay, Mr. Marsden brought with him
several eminent ministers, including the father
of the late Dean Cowper, Rev. Richard Cart-
right, and others. He died on May 12, 1858.
Critics of the Rev. Samuel Marsden differ
very materially in their respective estimates of
his character. The late Rev. Dr. Woolls, an
eminent churchman and a scientist of note,
wrote many years ago:
We are, perhaps, living too near the days of
Samuel Marsden to form a just estimate of his
life, character and labors. Though not dis-
tinguished for literary and scientific attain-
ments, or for the eloquence and pathos of his
preaching, he was a man of no ordinary type.
Some of his papers and letters display a con-
siderable amount of good sense and clearness
of expression, whilst his speeches and sermons
were sound and practical, designed rather to
enlighten the understanding and to improve
the heart than to electrify by the wisdom of
words.
Unfortunately for Mr. Marsden’s reputation,
says a recent writer, “it has been the subject,
on the one hand, of the most bitter animadver-
sion, and on the other of the most indiscrimin-
ate laudation. He was probably not so grossly
unsaintly as the Langs (Dr.) and Wentworths
—who were in bitter antagonism to him—de-
clare him to have been; nor so pre-eminently
saintly as Archdeacon Gunther insists upon it
that he was.” It is but fair to say that he lived
in a time and under conditions which rendered
somewhat hard the heart and paralysed the feel


ings of those in authority. They had to deal
with a horde of men and women, some of them,
certainly, of a good type, hut the great hulk
of them criminals of the coldest and most cal-
lous character. Writers of a certain type have
denounced in their time most of the men, from
Phillip down, who held posts of honor and influ-
ence in Australia, and have never wearied of
showering upon them the very worst epithets
which they were capable of creating; still, the
fact remains that in the interests of the law-
abiding section of that early community in
N.S.W., it was absolutely necessary that the
licentious element should have a complete curb
put upon its actions. Certain it is, of course,
that, in the name of law and order, many grave
indignities and barbarous cruelties were inflict-
ed upon defenceless men and women; but
Botany Bay was not singular in this respect, as
every attempt at colonisation made for cen-
turies past has been accompanied by excesses
which, whilst they were to be regretted, were at
the same time unavoidable where such an olla
podrida community was brought together, as
was the case as far as Australia was concerned.
The Rev. Samuel Marsden, though he died at
Windsor, was buried at Parramatta, in the old
cemetery at the right-hand side of the railway
line, as one goes towards the Capital from the
West. The tomb is plain, solid, and square,
with four metal tablets on its sides, on which
are engraved the following inscriptions:—


To the Memory of
ELIZABETH MAESDEN,
the beloved wife of the Eev. Samuel Marsden, who
departed this life October 2nd, 1835; aged 63.
Also,
To the Memory of the
EEY. SAMUEL MAESDEN,
Minister of St. John’s, Parramatta, for nearly
half-a-century, and one of the first Chaplains
vho arrived in the Colony. He departed
this life May 12th, 1838; aged 73 years.
“Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.”
Upon the other tablets are inscriptions to the
memory of grandchildren of Mr. Marsden; also
Alfred Musgrave Betts and John Betts; also
To the Memory of
EEY. H. H. BOBAET,
who was for 18 years Minister of St. John’s Church.
He departed this life July 19, 1854; aged 47.
In the chancel of the Church of St. John’s,
Parramatta —that building, with the twin
steeples, which is silhouetted against the clear
blue sky, and which has intertwined with its
very existence a history full of old romance—
in its chancel is a memorial, erected by the
parishioners, which reads:
SAMUEL MAESDEN,
Senior Chaplain of this Colony, and first Minister of
this Parish, Pounder of the Christian Church in
New Zealand, an honored servant of the Lord
Jesus. Died May 12, A.D., 1838, aged 75 years,
after aa active life spent in preaching the Gospel,
and in promoting the welfare of his fellow-crea-
tures.
“The Memory of the Just is Blessed.”


It is well in writing of the life and death of
this prominent and influential man to remember
that he had a lot of the humanitarian in his
character—whilst he ministered to the souls
diseased, he also took a keen interest in matters
relating to the industrial growth of the com-
munity. He was one of Australia’s first sheep-
breeders and wool-raisers. Next to Captain
Macarthur, he was the largest owner of sheep
in the colony in 1804, his flock numbering 554
males and 650 females. The Crown owned 478
males and 772 females. Marsden was a strong
believer in the future of the Australian wool
industry; for certain, for we read that, writing
from Parramatta on September 5, 1804, he
urged that better rams should be sent out from
England, giving a brief outline of his own
operations, and saying: ‘ ‘ One true-bred Spanish
sheep and ewe, with four half-bred Southdowns,
w'ere the sheep which improved my flock be-
yond expectation in beauty of outline, consti-
tution, and weight of fleece.”
Whilst located in the Parramatta district,
Marsden was the colleague of Atkins, after-
wards Judge Advocate, reputed to be a tyrant
of the worst character, and cruel to boot. Mars-
den had a very serious quarrel with Governor
Lachlan Macquarie—a quarrel which led to the
appointment of Mr, John Thomas Bigge as the
King’s Commissioner, to enquire into the law r s,
regulations, and usages of the settlement, etc.
Mr. Marsden had written to someone in Eng


land, expressing concern at the depravity of
the colony generally; and, in reply, Macquarie
hinted that if such depravity existed at all, it
was because greater care was not exercised in
the appointment of Magistrates. Macquarie
said that Marsden’s movements were too rapid
for grief, and that his time was divided between
the cares of farming, grazing, and trade.
Wentworth was his opponent also, and he sar-
castically remarked on one occasion that “the
parson’s mill at Parramatta never kept Sab-
bath.” The “factory” at Parramatta, above
alluded to, was really a depot in which female
prisoners were kept—it was only a “factory”
in the sense that the licentious amongst the
officials of the day used it for immoral purposes
and turned out of it women of loose character.
Marsden and Lieutenant-Governor Grose quar-
relled, and he and Macarthur were at logger-
heads, whilst as far as Macquarie was concern-
ed, there was no love lost between them. What-
ever his faults, Marsden was a strong man, and
could brook no superior—“when the irresist-
ible meets the irremovable, then must there be
chaos.”


XI—“THE WEST END.”
“To the West End, the West End —that dear lovely
spot.’’—Old Song.
The above quotation forms the refrain of a
now long-out-of-date old English Song—but it
was called to mind one bright sunny Sunday
morning as the writer took his walks abroad,
seeking, as “a snapper-up of unconsidered
trifles,” to secure some additional particulars
relating to the subject of Molong’s early his-
tory, and in the publication of which so much
genuine interest has been taken by a large
circle of readers. The labor is one of love,
though it is also one involving much hard work,
the more so because it is so difficult at times
to secure that information relating to day and
date which is absolutely essential if these re-
cords are to be of any permanent value at all.
Many are they who have evinced a generous
willingness to give assistance, and it has been
availed of with pleasure; and yet there are
insuperable obstacles in the way of obtaining
just what happens often to be the most valu-
able feature associated with a particular inci-
dent. A farmer, for instance, may possess every
one of the many pieces which go to make up a
dray—bar one, the axle! Without it, the re-
mainder of the component parts of the vehicle
become so much useless lumber. And so it is
with the material one needs in the manufacture
of “the true story of our lives from day to
day”—if the particular data upon which the


value of the whole production rests be missing,
then the work becomes, if not altogether worth-
less, at least minimised in value to a very con-
siderable extent.
However, let us proceed towards the red-
brick structures which for the most part make
up the West End. Crossing the bridge over the
railway line we come to the somewhat strangely
constructed building in which Mr. S. Phillips
once lived, now occupied by Mr. W. Windred.
The kitchen is detached, and is built parallel
with the road, with a passage between it and
the residence proper. Mr. Phillips at one time-
kept the hotel at Yale Head, before Cobden.
He owned a considerable area of land in the
Molong district —as well as a station, Wallam-
billa, on the Bogan. To the left, Dr. A. Ross
resided for a number of years, the property
belonging to the Phillips family. Close by is
where R. Whiting, previously alluded to as
having come here with Sir Thomas Mitchell,,
resided with a Mr. Pearce. The place had
developed in 1905 into a mere tangle of vegeta-
tion, where once was a well-kept garden, made
up of fruit trees, flowers and shrubs. One can
see even now the relics—the rose-bush arbors,
the quaint-cut beds, the trunks of dead trees,
and the rusted pipes through the medium of
which water was conveyed hither and thither.
It was a regular Sunday afternoon rendezvous
was this garden of Pearce’s—to which came
fair maiden and love-sick swain to talk sweet


nothings in shady arbors and eat luxurious
fruit the while they cast upon each other their
“sidelong looks of love.” Goldsmith might
e’en have had in his mind’s eye such ruin and
■desolation of a once delightful trysting-place
when he wrote those simple lines of his anent
some of the features of “The Deserted Vil-
lage”:
Sweet smiling centre, loveliest of the lawn,
Thy sports are fled and all thy charms withdrawn;
Amid thy bowers the tyrant’s hand is seen,
And desolation saddens all thy green!
Amidst thy desert walks the lapwing flies,
And tires their echoes with unvaried cries.
Sunk are thy bowers in shapeless ruin all,
And the long grass o ’ertops the mouldering wall.
Now the whole place is overgrown with grass
and rank weeds, and the festive rabbit has its
burrow in the ruins of decaying out-buildings.
There are the remains of a stone structure
which Whiting himself was erecting when
■stricken down by the hand of Death. When he
went hence, nothing further was done with the
structure, over which the blackberry-bush
clambers and in the recesses of which the wild
birds build their nests.
Crossing the line again, on the way back, one
is able from a neighboring altitude, to get a
good glimpse of Copper Hill, and to be told
■of the activity which at one time there prevail-
ed. Captain Clymo was the manager of this,
the first copper mine opened in N.S.W., “its
■early discovery,” says Mr. J. E. Came, the
N.S.W. Geological Surveyor, “being doubtless


due to its exposed situation, close to the old
Sydney to Dubbo Road, which passed by the
side of the hill, where the characteristic green
and blue colorations of copper carbonates are
still visible in the remaining portions of the
rugged outcrop.” But Copper Hill is a place—
or was a place—of sufficient importance to war-
rant a chapter to itself.
Captain Clymo’s old residence was on the
property, and there was a row of huts on the
fall of the hill. An hotel-had been built there
by Mr. Martel; it possessed a splendid bar, din-
ing-room and cellar. This building has long
since been removed. Opposite, Mr. W. Bloom-
field kept a store. Captain Clymo, after the
Copper Hill mining operations had ceased, kept
for some time the old Yale Head House Hotel.
There is a distinct air of antiquity about
West Molong; though the houses are kept
spick-and-span, they wear the appearance of
having been built on quite an original plan.
One can easily imagine that the builders them-
selves were their own architects, and when addi-
tions were necessary and alterations impera-
tive, they took little heed of the methods adopt-
ed to-day—they just effected whatever work
or change they saw fit, and were satisfied with
the results. The aesthetic eye of the passer-by
—if there existed anything so stupid as
aestheticism in those days—might be shocked
beyond expression as far as they were concern-
ed, and they cared nothing!


XII.—COPPER HILL AND ITS SUR-
ROUNDINGS.
Copper Hill enjoys the distinction of being
the first copper mine opened up and worked in
New South Wales. In a .very useful publication
issued by the Department of Mines and Agri-
culture, and entitled "The Copper Mining
Industry,” by J. E. Came, P.G.S., the follow-
ing reference to it is made, and though perhaps
■somewhat lengthy, it is well worth quoting in
extenso, as being the outcome of research on
the part of a scientific authority of note in the
land:—
‘‘Copper Hill Copper Mine, about two miles
South of Molong, 8., Molong, Dn.—This was
one of the first—if not the first—copper mines
opened in New South Wales, its early discovery
being doubtless due to its exposed situation
close to the old Sydney to Dubbo Road, which
passed by the side of the hill, where the charac-
teristic green and blue colorations of copper
carbonates are still visible in the remaining por-
tions of the rugged outcrop.
‘‘Mr. James Ranken, of Bathurst, states that
he saw mining operations in progress in 1845.
In 1847 a company was formed to work the
lode—Mr. (Sir Saul) Samuel being manag-
ing director. Shafts were sunk 70 and 146 feet,


and smelters erected. A quantity of ore was
converted into regulus, and carted to Sydney,
but no records of the amount are available. The
company ceased operations in 1851, when gold
was discovered. In 1852 Geological Surveyor
Stutehbury reported the mine as ‘deserted and
not accessible.’ He described Copper Hill as
consisting of ‘elans’ and decomposed clayslates,
followed by porphyries, with occasional altered
slates, until, it joins the granite of Molong men-
tioned in his former reports. The following in-
formation was derived from a Mr. Clyino, form-
erly, manager of the mine. He first describes
‘Hood’s’'shaft to be 21*4 fathoms (189 feet)
deep;' the first vein or bunch of ore was struck’
at 45 feet; it consisted of green and blue car-
bonates with red oxides; this shaft was driven
180 ft. north. The first shaft was sunk along-
side a smooth slickensided wall oh which were
found strings of.native copper, Another level
nr cross-drift was cut 60 feet east,.wheit.a lode,
of quartz and ore was found 9 feet wide, andi
dipping to the east at an angle of about.2o
degrees. Some unsuccessful attempts at smelt-
ing had been made, the failure of which Mr.
Stutehbury attributed to probably the- unsuit-
able open-mouthed furnaces adopted.
“In 1871 the Molong Consols Copper-mining;
Company was formed, according to local re-
port, on the strength of statements of the large
amount, of ore available at grass. Three rever-
beratory furnaces were erected, but only one


was charged; but it is evident from its internal
and external condition no regulus or refined
copper was produced. Practically little pros-
pecting was done by this company beyond sur-
face work.
“In 1885, p. 130, C. S. Wilkinson, late Gov-
ernment Geologist, visited Copper Hill, and des-
cribed it as a huge mass of felsite, with horn-
blende porphyry in places, traversed by numer-
ous lodes or dykes of porous ferruginous
quartz. In connection with the latter, it is
interesting to note that the late Mr. J. B. Kelly,
on whose estate the hill occurs, submitted 14
tons from it and neighboring outcrops to bat-
tery treatment for a return of 4dwts. of gold
per ton. A sample of the copper ore lying at
surface was selected by the writer, but yielded
under 2dwts. of gold per ton by assay.
“About 1888 a Newcastle syndicate carried
on a little surface prospecting higher up the
hill.
“A good deal of copper carbonate is mixed
in the fines and screenings from the old work-
ings, but their copper contents are not recover-
able by furnace methods, as mechanical separa-
tion of the siliceous waste is not possible; leach-
ing alone could effectively treat this material.
The outcrop has a very deceptive appearance at
a distance, owing to the strong blue and green
colorations in sheltered crevices and excava-
tions, arising from the internal leaching of the


thinly distributed copper ores and redeposition
in the form of sulphates and carbonates in shel-
tered spots by evaporation of the percolating
solutions.”
Captain Clymo was the manager of the mine
about 1849-50, and his residence was on the fall
of the hill, where also was a row of houses
which have long since been demolished, as well
as the hotel to which previous reference has
been made, and the remains of which are still
to be seen. Captain Clymo, as well as a num-
ber of men who worked under his supervision,
came from Cornwall under contract. It is
alleged that the salaries paid them were some-
what low, and as the period during which they
were located at Copper Hill was one of extreme
excitement, due to the discovery in several
parts of the Western district of rich, deposits
of gold, they fretted and fumed, and would like
to have broken their bonds. But the terms of
their contract were very stringent, and heavy
penalties were provided for any infringement
thereof. So, being eminently practical mining
men, they laid their .heads together and sought
to achieve their liberty by a ruse which proved
thoroughly successful. They worked on what
is termed “the hide” of the lode. The ex-
penses went on week by week without any re-
sult cheering to the management. They, Dick
Swiveller-like, “staggered” the shareholders,
the rumour going forth that in reality the de-
posit was slight, and one that could not be
G


profitably worked. Sir Saul Samuel, after-
wards Agent-General for N.S.W., was the Man-
aging Director of the Company, but he knew
nothing whatever about the practical work
associated with such a venture, and when it
was suggested to him, by Captain Clymo, that
the agreement between the Company and him-
self, as well as with the miners who had been
introduced, should be terminated, the sugges-
tion was eagerly adopted. Amongst those who
were connected with Copper Hill in those times
in various capacities were Mr. Joseph Parslow,
Harry Smith and Jim Steele—all three of whom
have now passed in their checks.
Later on the property was acquired by Mr. J.
B. Kelly, who will be remembered in political
and journalistic, as well as in mining circles—
he was familiar to the great bulk of those
people who take an interest in public matters
by the soubriquet of “Stockwhip” Kelly, for
he was the proprietor of a newspaper bearing
that distinctive title which at each week-end
administered very often a well-merited lashing
to men in the political and social life of the
State. Mr. Kelly was a half-brother to the
Hon. Alick Brown, of Newcastle, and was for
some time one of the Members representing the
Bogan in Parliament. His mining venture at
Copper Hill, however, turned out no less disas-
trous than his journalistic—for he went under
eventually in both. Kelly induced a syndicate,
which included Mr. Alexander Brown, to put


■up a little money with the object of testing the
property; they spent something like £IOOO in
nn endeavour to bail the mine out with the aid
of a whim, Abe Everett being entrusted with
ihe task; but they might just as well have at-
tempted to shift the hill itself —and eventually
the project was abandoned.
Copper Hill formed part of a Crown grant of
1283 acres, set down on the map as 1320 acres,
and I believe it originally belonged to the estate
of the Rev. Samuel Marsden. It by divers
means reached the hands of the Mr. J. B. Kelly
aforesaid, and then drifted into the possession
of the Union Bank of Australia, Ltd. The
house on the property, which was erected for
his own accommodation by Mr. Kelly, occupies
a very attractive site, facing the main ready and
sheltered by a back-ground of beautiful hills.
Mr. J. Wynne later on secured a lease from the
Bank, and some five years afterwards pur-
chased the property from that institution.
Many mining specialists have visited Copper
Hill from time to time during the past few
years, and all have spoken in high terms of the
prospects its working promised. Amongst their
number have been Messrs. Tom Bruce, Alfred
Argyle, Louis Horn, W. F. Thompson, Mr.
Longworth (Cobar), Thomas Smith (Croydon,
<3.), J. Lewis (Ballarat), and Browne (Bro-
ken Hill) —all men versed in the secrets of
mineralogy, and with capital at their backs to
work any good thing that came their way. It


was not that they were fearful as to the results
of their enterprise—they were not. They ob-
jected to the terms sought to be imposed, and
of which the letter quoted below will convey
some idea; and they failed to see why, assum-
ing that the deposit did not come up to expec-
tations, the money lodged by them to prove
their bona-fides should be confiscated. The sub-
joined communication was written to Mr. Louis
Horne in 1899, which was prior to the acquisi-
tion of the property by Mr. Wynne:—
The Union Bank of Australia, Limited,
General Manager’s Office,
Melbourne, 9th January, 1899.
Louis Horne, Esq.,
408 Collins-street,
Melbourne.
Mineral Section about 130 acres.
Sir, —Referring to our interview to-day we
herewith confirm the proposal then mentioned,
namely, that the abovenamed property of
about 130 acres shall be under offer to you
for one week from this date on the following
terms; —
1. That you will lease the mineral section
comprising 130 acres or thereabouts for
six months at a rental of 10s per acre per
annum.
2. That you will have the option of purchas-
ing the said area at the end or during the
currency of this lease at £25 per acre cash.


3. That you will, before entering upon the
said lease, pay to us a deposit of £750,
which amount will go towards payment
for the land in question should you decide
to buy at £25 per acre at the end of six
months or sooner, but to be forfeited to
the Bank in the event of your deciding
not to purchase as aforesaid.
Yours faithfully,
WILLIAM LEES,
Acting General Manager.
The above conditions constitute what Mr.
Richard Swiveller, in “The Old Curiosity
Shop,” would denominate “an unmitigated
staggerer,” and it is not to be wondered at,
therefore, that Copper Hill to-day—instead of
being a hive of industry, with smoke-stacks
rearing themselves heavenwards, and hundreds
of men engaged in extracting wealth from the
bowels of the earth—is desolate and deserted,
its drives the places of refuge of foxes and rab-
bits and other of the vermin which render
miserable the lives of the farmer and the gra-
zier alike. In 1907-8-9 some efforts were made
to turn the Hill to good account, but they all
proved more or less abortive—generally more.


XIII.—A LETTER.
In re the chapter devoted to Copper Hill, the
following letter will prove interesting:—
To the Editor of the “Molong Argus.”
Sir, —I saw a letter in the “Molong Argus ,r
recently, referring to Captain Clymo and the
miners who were employed by the Molong Cop-
per Mining Company in 1848. You must have
been misinformed in regard to that portion in
which you stated that the gold-fields broke out
about that time, and that Captain Clymo and
the miners got dissatisfied with the terms of
their agreement to work for the company—
that they worked “the hide of the lode” in-
stead of the bowels. My father was one of
those miners who came out under the contract;
we arrived in Sydney in the ship 11 Elphin-
stone” about the beginning of September, 1848.
From there we were taken by Mr. George
Wiles’ (better known as “Beardy Wiles”)
teams to Copper Hill. The miners were engag-
ed for twelve months, and their time com-
menced from the day they landed in Sydney,
On the 15th September, 1849, they were dis-
charged. I have my father’s discharge in my


possession now. Now, Mr. Editor, the mine was
stopped and all the men discharged some two
years before the gold was first reported on the
Ophir., After the mine was stopped, my father
worked it on tribute for a short time. He had
to dress the ore and send it to Sydney, but it
did not pay him, so he gave it up. He made
Copper Hill his home until 1855, when he went
to the Crangra ( 1) copper mine. With regard to
the works at Copper Hill, most of the copper
got there was from a quarry between the old
whim-shaft and the Molong Creek. There were
several tons of copper smelted there in 1849.
The smelting works were on the bank of the
creek, below the road cutting under the hill.
The blast was driven in the furnace by a water-
wheel in the creek. I was speaking to a man
here who worked in the mine in ’49; he has
been in all the principal copper mines in the
country, and he says it is what the Cornish
miners call “a blow”—just bits of copper scat-
tered about here and there. I called at Copper
Hill when Captain Grundy was in charge, when
the last copper fever was on there; and was
introduced to him. They were building furn-
aces and baling out the old whim-shaft. I told
the Captain what way the levels ran from the
shaft. He said, “we have got the water out
now to the 18 level.” I saw one of the miners
who cleaned the shaft out, and when he came
on top he said to the Captain, “We have clean-
ed her up, Captain,” and the Captain replied,


“Well, how is the lode, Tom?”; but Tom said,
“There is no lode there.” There is a shaft
about a mile north-east that we used to call
“Ulmarget”—it is up a valley on the right-
hand side of the old Wellington road, where it
used to go at the back of Copper Hill. I have
heard that there were traces of silver got there,
and there is another shaft on Mr. Passmore’s
land, now Mr. Lee’s, where the said traces of
silver were got also.—Yours, Etc.,
ONE OF COPPER HILL OLD FORTY-EIGHTS.


XIV.—SOME OF THE EARLIEST
SETTLERS.
The late Thomas Kite, the Lees, John Smith,
and others were early settlers on a large scale.
Davy, the Welshman, took up Tharrey Tuckera
or Davy’s Plains. Old Mr. John Street took up
Boree Cabonne and the Government changed
with him to Toogong. Mr. Lawson bought
Davy’s Plains, and Davy the Welshman took
up Boree Nyrang, and when he died he left his
property to a sister in Wales, who sold it to
Captain Hecton. It was managed by the late
David Donald, of the Springs, and Mr. Sam
Phillips was overseer in 1840. It was again
sold to Messrs. Barton, Darvall and Docker.
Ultimately Mr. Barton became sole owner of it,
till, just before he died, he sold it to a Mr.
Hamilton, who again sold it to the Hon. John
Smith, of Gamboola. Mr. Smith was the first
man to commence fencing grass lands; also the
first in this part to commence wire-fencing, and
to fence with white box wood. Before, it was
all stringy bark that was used for fencing, no
matter how far users had to haul it. Mr. Smith
was also, perhaps, the first to enclose his sheep
in paddocks, but he paid men to follow them.
He also started ringbarking on a large scale
first in this part of the country.


The Robertson Land Act was passed in 1861,
and came into operation on the Ist January,
1862. In that year the first four selectors in
the Molong District were:
Thos. Neville, 50a., p. Copper Hill.
George Neville, 60a., p. Copper Hill.
Jos. J. Morris, 80a., p. Copper Hill.
James Wykes, 160 a., p. Copper Hill.
In 1863 John Delaney and Wm. Higginbotham
selected 100 acres and 40 acres respectively in
part of the district for which there was then
no parish name, hut which is now known as
parish Manildra. In 1866, John Rubie took up
98 acres, parish Brymedura; and in 1866 Rich-
ard Townsend selected 80 acres and 50 acres in
the parish Dulladerry. At the time when the
four first-mentioned selections were taken up,
the country was in a wild state, such houses as
there were being of the most primitive charac-
ter. The first bit of brickwork done in the
Molong of the present day was part of the Free-
masons ’ Hotel, and the second building of brick
was that occupied by a Mr. Vincent, photo-
grapher, and which was erected by Mr. Bowler.
As a matter of fact, Mr. E. G. Finch (who has
had a long local experience) states, and his
statement is borne out by reference to the
books of the Lands Office, the very first selector
in the Molong District, after the coming into
operation of the Robertson Land Act, was one
Elias Astell, parish of Burrawong, where he
kept an hotel. This holding was taken up in


-1862, and in the Lands Office books is numbered
62-2, 25th March.
Gamboola, which was originally taken up
about 1847, was until lately the property of
Mrs. W. A. Smith, the Hon. F. Jago Smith,
M.L.C., being trustee of the estate of the late
Mr. W. A. Smith, but it has now passed to the
possession of Messrs. K. and D. Smith, her sons,
Mr. F. Jago Smith resided at Gamboola for
many years during the early portion of his
life, and he is, therefore, able to speak with a
good deal of authority regarding the progress-
of the district. Mr. Smith says that Gamboola,
which is now a freehold property of 12,000
acres, originally carried 40,000 sheep, but with
the reduction in area the number of sheep de-
creased accordingly. About 12,000 sheep are
now shorn annually, and Mr. Smith points with
pride to the fact that the shed in which the
shearing is still done has been standing since
the forties. Mr. Smith delights to tell of the
days when Molong was the merest of settle-
ments, and when the district was as much in
the bush as it possibly could be. In those days-
there was a mail only once a week, and Mr,
Smith well remembers going for the mail and
paying postage on the letters (for there were
no stamps then), lOd being charged on letters
from Parramatta and Is 3d on correspondence
from Sydney. Mr. Smith relates that his father
(the Hon. John Smith), who came to New South
Wales in 1835, was the first man in the district


to fence, to excavate tanks for stock, and to
induce splitters to split ironbark and box tim-
ber for fencing. Mr. Smith was obliged to give
more than double price for fencing material to
induce splitters to tackle it. For many years
afterwards, and in fact until now, says Mr.
Jago Smith, nothing but these latter hardwoods
have been used. The original Gamboola Home-
stead, which is still standing, but which has
been added to, is in a remarkable state of pre-
servation, and the massive cedar fittings, and
even the hardwood verandah posts, show not
the slightest signs of decay. And as a further
proof of the durability of our hardwoods, Mr.
’Smith has a large garden stake which is in as
good condition to-day as when put in the Gam-
boola garden 51 years ago. When Lord Bel-
more (the then Governor) visited the district
in 1870 or 1871 he was entertained at Gamboola,
and held a levee at the old courthouse in the
town.
It is worthy of note that in 1909 an old
Molong identity passed away in the fullness of
years and honor—in the person of Mrs. E. M.
Barton, relict of the late Mr. Robert Barton,
for many years owner of Boree-Nyrang. In her
■earlier days Mrs. Barton, who was daughter of
Major Darvall, and who had attained her 91st
year, had an experience at Boree, the recollec-
tion of which was never effaced from her
memory. Boree was an unsettled and very wild
part of the country in those days, and the occa


fiion referred to was an attack made by the
Yass blacks upon a tribe of Lachlan blacks, the
immediate vicinity of the homestead at Boree
being made the centre of a conflict, which be-
came a merciless massacre. A number of Boree
blacks, especially the old men of the tribe, were
ruthlessly murdered all round the homestead,
only the young and agile men showing fight,
and eventually escaping into the bush when
outnumbered. The gins and some of the old
men made for the homestead as the last re-
source, and were taken in by Mrs. Barton and
other members of the household, and sheltered
by being hidden in rooms and underneath the
beds. So keen were their enemies in pursuit
that they came up to the windows of the house,
but eventually they were beaten off. The morn-
ing following that never-to-be-forgotten night,
one of the station men discovered, under a bush
near the stables, an opossum cloak rolled up
in a bundle. Upon pulling it out, he was sur-
prised to find compressed in it, within the
smallest possible space, a gin and her picca-
ninny, the dusky mother having saved her
life as well as that of her infant by this simple
little ruse, though how they managed to main-
tain the extraordinary cramped position for so
many hours was something of a mystery.


XV.—HISTORIC DATA.
To Rev. Canon Alldis we are indebted for the
following data, ranging from 1857 to 1906:
The first entry in the Church hooks
.back to 29th Nov., 1857, when the baptism of
Matilda, daughter of Thomas and Clara Turner,
of Molong, was recorded by Rev. Robt. H.
Mayne. The number of baptisms up to 1906
was 3128.
From 1857 to 1865 the district of Molong was
worked by the clergy of Orange. The “School
Church” here was opened on the 18th March,
1860—40 years and 5 months ago. The Rev.
R. H. Mayne was Rector of Orange when
that building came into use. From that date
onward regular entries of services and other
church ordinances were made and kept.
Prom 10th November, 1860, to 22nd June,
1862, the ministrations of the Church were car-
ried on by the Rev. Graham Pox. Confirma-
tion was given by Bishop Barker, of Sydney, on
27th November, 1860, seven persons (four males
and three females) being then confirmed.
The first Holy Communion was recorded on
the 10th March, 1861, eight present. After
this four, five, and six persons (communicants)
are recorded at celebrations, with long intervals
between.


The first quarterly collection is entered as
being made on Ist January, ’61 —£3 Is 6d. This
was before the regular Sunday offertory was in-
troduced. Rev. R. H. Mayne returned to the
charge of the parish of Orange—probably from
England, etc. —for the Bth Sunday after
Trinity, 1862, and continued to work and visit
Molong. Rev. Edward Synge visited, as Chap-
lain of the Bishop of Sydney, several times in
’63, ’64, and during Epiphany ’65.
In 1866 no services are recorded. That was
a time of terrible drought which may account
for the blank.
On 13th January, 1867, Rev. J. Stack took up
the duties of first parish priest of Molong and
continued to the end of January, 1873. With
Mr. Stack’s incumbency the regular offertory
system was introduced and continued there-
after, varying from 2s 6d to 26s Bd. When
visiting clergy appeared the offertories were
extra, e.g., sth January, 1868, a.m., 255; p.m.,
17s 9d; Rev. J. Fletcher officiating. On the fol-
lowing Sunday the offertory dropped to ss.
From 1867 to 1875 Molong parish included
Wellington, Cudal and the Upper Bogan dis-
tricts.
The first recorded marriage took place on
2nd March, 1867-—that of William Gardiner, of
Wellington, to Margaret Arneil, of “Miserable
Flat.’’ The first marriage by banns was on
18th June of the same year, between Thomas


Halliday and Annie Rowe, celebrated in the
Court House at Stoney Creek.
On Tuesday, 18th April, 1868, Thanksgiving'
Service was held for the escape of the Duke of
Edinburgh from death by assassination in Syd-
ney. On May 19, 1868, the Bishop of Sydney,
Dr. Barker, again visited Molong. The collec-
tion for Church Society was £4 3s Id.
In 1869 the See of Bathurst was formed and
Dr. Marsden (who died December, 1912, in
England), was appointed first Bishop.
On sth April, 1873, Rev. F. B. Boyce took
charge of Molong and continued to the end of
January, 1875. While here Mr. Boyce organ-
ised the parish and left it on a good footing.
Pleasant memories of the Canon’s work and
character have remained ever since.
The Rev. A. W. Gardiner followed. He was
an eloquent man, and mighty in the pulpit, but
his term was marred with troubles and left a
blot on that period, with some literary and ink
blots on the parish books, up to July, 1877. On
Bth July Rev. H. Martin came as Curate in
charge for three months, but some friction
arose in ousting Mr. Gardiner.
On 7th October the same year Rev. P. M.
Dalrymple took charge, and held the parish to
the end of March, ’B4— 6!/2 years, Mr. F. G.
Neild assisting as catechist in 1879 and Mr. W.
K. Howell in 1882-3. Mr. Dalrymple’s time was
progressive. The country out west was being
fast opened up by free selection and rapid :


settlement, while the busy and affable pastor
made good use of his time and left many friends
with pleasant memories when h 6 resigned. The
largest number of communicants at one celebra-
tion is shown when Mr. Dalrymple was leaving.
On 4th April, 1884, Rev. Keith Forbes suc-
ceeded to the parish as fifth incumbent, but he
did not stay a year. After Mr. Forbes —on
Good Friday, ’Bs—Rev. G. A. Carver took up
the duties. All appears to have gone well for a
year, then tension and friction arose again.
His second and last year was not a happy one.
Mr. Carver resigned early in ’B7. His last ser-
mon, printed in the “Molong Express’ of 18th
June, 1887, was described by an able critic as
“not at all encouraging for his successor.”
The present Rector was at Rockhampton
when the Molong charge became vacant and
was selected to be nominated to the Vicar
General out of a number whose names were sub-
mitted. This was the second time the present
holder of the license was asked to allow him-
self to be nominated for the parish—first in
1884 (when it had to be declined) and secondly
in 1887.
A deadlock ensued after the Y.G. accepted
the chosen nominee. Arrears due to the retir-
ing Clergyman and Catechist were not paid.
This was got over for a time by borrowing £IOO
at 8 per cent, to pay the' outgoing workers, leav-
ing it to be repaid with other big debts during
the incoming worker’s office. The parish was
H


in difficulties. A circular letter was read to the
parishioners showing the state of things, signed
by the Avardens and Rector. The assistant had
to be let go; but work increased and has been
growing ever since. The Rectory, and all
churches in the parish—and the parish Avorking
fund—were in debt from £9O to £IOO each and
dowmvard, at high interest. Moreover all the
buildings were unfinished, unfeneed and poorly
furnished. The old fence about the Molong
Church and Rectory, like the shingles on the
roof, Avas literally rotten.
After being forewarned, however, by a former
rector and by the most active warden that
“things Avere in a great mess,” the task was
faced. All debts Avere paid off in a year or two
and in the third and fourth year fences were
erected, furniture proA r ided, and grounds im-
proved ; the cemetery put in order, trees plant-
ed about churches and in cemeteries and rec-
tory grounds. Four churches consecrated and
four cemeteries likeAvise. Then four churches
and the rectory were re-roofed, and the rectory
and St. Matthews’ (Cumnock) enlarged and
much improved; new organs provided for eight
churches; while a handsome and convenient
church was built in 1899 at Balderogery free
of debt, and added to in 1904.
The parish church just built in Molong has
had a special history. In 1880 a decision was
arrived at and a fund started “to build a übav
Church or add to the existing one.” This fell


into abeyance. When the present Rector took
over the parish he was gradually made aware
of the past efforts, and of the existence of a
balance of funds after paying over £4O for
plans never used. A year later the balance,
£157 9s lOd, was handed to the Rector with dis-
cretionary powers as to trust. In correspond-
ing with the original treasurer three names
were mentioned out of whom one might be
entrusted with a share of guarding the fund.
It was mutually agreed between the Rector
and one of the said three, who was a trustee
for the Church land at Molong, that they share
the financial trust of what money was then
held for building.
This £157 10s was deposited in the Savings
Bank on the 10th June, 1888. Later on it was
lent under good guarantee at 8 per cent. By
December 1905 it had grown by interest alone
to £361 16s 1 lOd.
For some time before 1902 it was urged that
the need of better accommodation was so press-
ing, and prospects of a new church so far off,
that the funds in hand had better be used in
making the existing church fit to meet urgent
wants. This was first suggested, discussed, and
favoured by those who took most interest in
Dhurch work and welfare in 1889. In 1893 it
was revived again by the assistant clergyman,
Rev. R. S. Smith, at the Easter Meeting, but
deferred. Again it was brought forward in
1896 by Mr. Rae on his selection as warden.


The Eector consulted the trustees and wardens
and especially the original treasurer, who had
given the funds over to him. It was generally
desired that the existing church be added to,
but the ex-treasurer suggested that what seem-
ed to him the fairest way would be to let the
people for whom the money was held on trust
decide by properly constituted meeting how
they wished the money to be used. Eminent
counsel was taken (free of cost). A meeting
was duly convened and it was decided (in 1899)
that the funds be employed in adding a vestry
and chancel and side windows, etc., to the school
church. A canon was passed through Synod of
1900 (in the absence of the Rector in England)
to legalise the use of the fund as decided by the
people of the Church. This, however, was not
assented to by the Rector’s co-trustee. The
trustees’ warden, after some delay, reported
that the objecting trustee would only agree on
certain conditions, which the Bishop would not
accept.
Soon after Easter, 1902, on seeing the reports
of the parish and how much money was in
credit for church building, the Bishop suggest-
ed a new church. This idea occurred to the
Rector too and soon afterwards efforts were
made to raise funds. An urgent application to
the S.P.C.K. resulted in a grant of £7O (in
1904). Offers of other help encouraged hope
and efforts, until tenders were called in Sep-
tember last and a contract signed on 28th of


that happy month. The first stone was laid on
14th October, 1906, by Mrs. Jas. Lee, who with
Mr. Lee and family has all along assisted and
cheered us in the work of erecting a sacred
building in Molong. Other liberal helpers have
also assisted, some very freely and willingly.
The constant and ardent and steadfast hon. sec-
retary and treasurer (Mr. Bridekirk) has been
ably seconded by his co-workers, Mr. Packer,
and the wardens and councillors and By will-
ing ladies in bringing this good work to a suc-
cessful issue, which it is trusted will benefit
this, and future generations, who may do even
greater things for their successors.
Among the honored names of those who in
the past have worked for and kept the Church
alive are the Hon. John Smith. M.L.C., Mr. H.
S- M. Betts, Mr. Rubie, Mr. James and Mr.
Beadle, whose memories are respected and
whose good works will long live after them.
Prom other sources the following interesting
data has been obtained: —
In the early 60’s Molong had a court of petty
sessions sitting every week and a district court
thrice a year. Now it takes it all its time to
rake up sufficient business for a court to sit
once a month.
In 1866 Molong had two hotels—the Free-
masons’ and the Golden Fleece, the latter being
Uobb and Go’s, booking office. There was also
the Union Inn at Copper Hill. The population


at the time numbered—East Mo long 14, West
Molong 263. Total 277.
In 1866 Molong had but two churches —
the Anglican and Wesleyan. R.C. services
were held in the Court House.
Forty odd years ago Murga was officially re-
cognised as a township. It had one tobacco
factory (Campbell’s) and the plant was exten-
sively cultivated in the district —at least an old
time chronicler tells us so. The nearest tele-
graph station was Orange. There was one hotel
(the Murga) whither all the miners from the.
Long’s Corner alluvial diggings (four miles
away) flocked regularly and held high revel.
The population of the town was then about 50,
Toogong, in those good old times, had a popu-
lation of 17. Yet it took two pubs to cater for
their and the travellers’ requirements—the Too-
gong and the Travellers’ Rest hotels.
Eugowra in those days belonged to the police
district of Molong and had a population of
exactly two dozen people. Eugowra station of
50,000 acres was owned by Hanbury Clements
who paid the Crown the tremendous rental of
£137 10s per year!
How it is changed from ‘ye olden time’;
Booree Noir, Booree-noir, Boree-noree, Boree-
nore, and now Borenore.
Cudal village was founded in the early CO’s
and the first public house was the Union—a
small roadside inn which drew most of its trade
from travellers.


Wellington and Molong comprised one (dec-
tor ate in the days we speak of, and in the gen-
eral election of 1864-5 only 520 electors out of
1549 on the roll voted. The successful can-
didate was Saul Samuel, Esq.
“Molong,” says a chronicler of the 60’s, “is
an agricultural and pastoral district abounding
in minerals, principally copper. Mines were
worked at Copper Hill some time since, but
have been abandoned, although it is contem-
plated by a private company now forming to
re-open one or more of them. Good coal has
also been found in places.”
Orange in those early days was Molong’s
market town, Cobb and Co’s, coach journeying
between the two towns thrice a week.


XVI.—THE MARBLE OF MOLONG.
When basalt in a molten tide
Ban rivers down the mountain side,
And seared and scarred the fertile plain,
Volcanic ashes fell like rain.
Primeval man in awful dread
Before the flaming torrent fled;
Above the scene still reared his head,
Old Man Canoblas!
Goodge.
The first-time visitor to Molong is at once
struck by the peculiar outcrops of stone which
on every side present themselves to the eye;
and he marvels, no doubt, as to the character
of that convulsion of Nature which resulted in
such strange upheaval, as well as to the period
at which it occurred. He recollects that cen-
turies agone Old Man Canoblas was an active
volcano, and that this fertile valley was within
the scope of its influence. Anyhow, here are
the outward signs of a tremendous internal dis-
turbance, a casting up of huge basaltic blocks,
a throwing into strange-shaped heaps of moun-
tains of marble. The side-walks of the township
are paved with it; it is broken to gauge and
used for road-making purposes; it is chiselled
into strange shapes by local monumental
masons, whose faith in it as a future source of
local wealth is unswerving. Years ago were
submitted some samples to a renowned Italian
sculptor then living here, who said that one


specimen, a pure white, was quite good enough
for statues; another, a beautiful streaky kind,
and a lovely pink marble, would be invaluable
for building purposes and the like. If anyone
had enterprise and cash enough to import the
necessary machinery and skilled workmen from
Italy to work these marble quarries, he would
beautify our cities and towns to a marvellous
extent, and make a handsome fortune into the
bargain. There would seem to exist a wide belt
of this marble, stretching acres, from Borenore
to Molong, varying in quality, of course, though
much of it is of the very best, possessed of
manifold beauties when brought to the polished
state —and of many and diversified hues. Large
quantities of this material are even now being
used by the architects of the Metropolis—at
the great Sydney railway station and in connec-
tion with other palatial structures in the city,
Molong marble has been largely used for facing
and other purposes, and is much in evidence.


XVII.—ABOUT THE ABORIGINES.
The late Dr. Ross, for a quarter of a century
the Parliamentary representative of Molong,
ventured some years since to relate his experi-
ences of the district aborigines, and during the
course of a lengthy statement, said: As far back
as the year 1860, or thereabouts, I was called
in by the then owner of the Brymedura run
(Mr. Edward Finch, J.P.) to attend “King
Sandy,” the king of the Brymedura tribe, then
numbering 300 to 400, and I was present when
his death took place at the station from a severe
attack of bronchitis, having arrived only a few
minutes before he died. The “King” always
wore on his breast a large brass plate, on which
his name was engraved, attached to a chain
hung round his neck. I was also present when
the tribe buried him, on the following morning
at sunrise, near the head station, in the open
bush, with several trees carved round the grave,
as is the custom of blacks to do on such occa-
sions. The tribe, one and all, left the station
after the “King” was buried, as is the custom
in such cases, and according to their religious
rites, and they are forbidden to return till 12
months after. On a subsequent occasion I was
called in to attend one “Harry,” an aboriginal
who was employed by my brother, William


Ross, the then owner of Dilga Run, who received
a severe spear wound in the abdomen in a fight
with another aboriginal at Copper Hill. The
spear (about 6ft. to 7ft. long, with three sharp
barbs) was left in the wound, and I had to cut
it out from the patient’s back. The patient
made a splendid recovery under the influence
of eucalypti fol&ge fomentations, applied by
his gin, in the shape of a festoon, heated in a
billycan of warm water, and constantly applied
night and day for one week, when the wound
was completely healed, and the patient able to
get about his usual work. The remarkable case-
of recovery from spear wound in the abdomen
was at the time published in the “N.S.W. Medi-
cal Gazette” and the London “Lancet,” and
referred to by Baron Yon Mueller in his stan-
dard work of “Eucalyplographia, 10th Decade,
1884.” This was the first occasion that any
notice was taken in the history of the colony of.
the medicinal value derived from the foliage of
the eucalyptus or gum trees, and which has;
since, of late years, become such a popular
remedy in the shape of eucalypti oils. “Harry”
lived for several years at Dilga after his recov-
ery from the spear wound in the abdomen, show-
ing that, in some instances, “blacks” recover
much better from severe wounds than the white
or European subjects. In those early days regu-
lar cemeteries were unknown. It was the cus-
tom generally to bury the bodies of deceased
persons in the bush, or probably at head sta


lions, where residing at the time of death. The
skeleton recently reported to have been found
near Molong must have been one of those:
buried in the bush, as many of them, to this
day, are to be found, especially about old head
stations. To an experienced bushman the skele-
ton or bones of a European are easily distin-
guishable from that of the aboriginal by the
color and thickness of the bones, especially the
skull, which is thicker and more dense than
that of the white man. At that early period I
may say that I not only acted as coroner, medi-
cal officer, and magistrate, but also, for nearly
20 years, as registrar of births, deaths and mar-
riages; and, therefore was pretty cognisant of,
I may say, nearly every death that took place
in the district, and no death during that period
was ever reported to me to have occurred from
any tribal fight, and then the district had sev-
eral black tribes; but they, generally speaking,
were always weir conducted, and made useful,
faithful shepherds, and good trackers after lost
stock or stray cattle. I had also occasion to
frequently visit the gold diggings called Bur-
randong, Stoney Creek (now Stuart Town),
Muckerawa, &c., but never heard of a solitary
case of a blaekfellow having died or been killed
from any tribal fight. If any great battles took
place between aboriginal chiefs or aboriginal
tribes, they are unknown to me; and my bro-
ther (William Ross), who has been a resident
in the district since 1849. does not remember


hearing of any such tribal fights ever happen-
ing, although at times he has heard of the
Bogan blacks becoming occasionally trouble-
some to settlers and stationowners, such as the
early pioneers of the Bogan River settlement—
viz., the late Andrew Kerr, of Wellwood,
Orange, and father of Mr. Andrew Kerr,
M.L.C., of Wellwood, Orange; and the late Mr.
Lee, of Bathurst, and father of John George
Lee, M.L.C.; and Mr. Jas. Lee, of Larras Lake,
Molong. I have a pretty good recollection of
what occurred in the early days of settlement,
more especially in my official capacity as medi-
cal officer and registrar for the district, as I had
to make myself familiar with events that were
taking place in and around me and throughout
the district, which then included the now thriv-
ing and prosperous townships of Parkes,
Forbes, &c.


XVIII.—AN EARLY WESTERN PIONEER.
Among the Official company of the first fleet
was one Lee, a native of Cumberland (Eng-
land). On account of his intelligence and
robust build, he was specially selected for the
difficult task of assisting to maintain discipline
amongst the desperate convicts who formed
portion of the freight of unfortunates. Later,
he was joined by his wife in Sydney, and she
accompanied him when he was transferred to a
responsible position at Norfolk Island. Lee died
at Norfolk Island, leaving two children, Wil-
liam, born on April 1, 1794, and Maria. The
widow and children were sent to Tasmania, and
then over to Sydney. Soon afterwards the
widow returned to England, leaving the boy
and girl in charge of the Rev. Richard Johnson,
the first Australian clergyman. The mother re-
married, and never again set eyes on the child-
ren. William Lee, an infant of eight, thus faced
the world without parental solicitude and guid-
ance. But he and his little sister had a devoted
friend in the Rev. Richard Johnson, who, by all
accounts, was a gentle strong character, a min-
ister of grace in social and official Bedlam, a
kindly spirit in the midst of the most diabolical
system of vicious and villainous ingenuity one
could conceive and realise.


As a robust lad of 14, William Lee attracted
the attention of Captain Cox, of Mudgee, and,
crossing the Blue Mountains with him, got some
idea of sheep and cattle. Later, he renewed
Acquaintance with William Charles Wentworth,
who was born at Norfolk Island two years be-
fore him. The friendship of boyhood lasted
life-long. No one was more impressed with the
importance of the discoveries beyond the Blue
Mountains than William Lee. His enthusiasm
and energy impressed Governor Macquarie, who
granted him 1000 acres of land on the Mac-
quarie River. William Lee settled on his grant,
Claremont, Kelso, and from the Governor he
received a few head of cattle and horses. With
rich grass and abundant water, the stock
thrived famously. He built a mud cottage,
fenced paddocks, and became a first settler.
Thus assured he took the long and tedious jour-
ney to Windsor, on the Hawkesbury, and there
•entered into matrimonial partnership with Miss
Mary Dargin, daughter of a settler, at St. Mat-
thew’s. The young couple settled down at
Kelso. As a breeder of pure shorthorn Durham
cattle, William Lee became famous, and his
herds stocked the runs far and wide. As to Lee
horses, the Barb, never beaten, was bred by Mr.
George Lee. Others included Sappho, Emily,
Nellie, Javelin, Lilia, Alpacca, Luma, Wood-
lands, Jessemine, Little John, Coquet, Muruel,
Pasha, Vulture, The Gift, Vixen, Sweet Briar,
.Zulu, Lady Elizabeth, Paraguay, and hundreds


more from the Lee studs, for the Lees are racing-
men all. Contemporary pioneers of William
Lee at Kelso and Bathurst were the Kites (Wil-
liam Kite originally owned the property now
known as Eramhie, then at Kite’s Swamp), Sut-
tors, MePhillamys, Rankins, Pipers, Stewarts,
and Campbells. William Lee, on the report of
a blackfellow, was the first to take up the mag-
nificent estate of Bylong. He opened up Caper-
tee, and originally occupied Larras Lake, at
the confluence of the Bell River and Molong
Creek. On the Bogan he secured Bulgandra-
mine and Genanigee, in 1843. William Lee
was one of the earliest elected members of the
New South Wales Parliament, having defeated
William Henry Suttor, son of his contemporary
pioneer, George Suttor. In public life he
evinced the same simple sagacity and quiet de-
meanour which characterised him in pastoral
and private affairs. He was one of the most
reserved men ever associated with the House in
Macquarie-street. He was imperturbable in any
commotion, and kindly in any disagreement.
He was made of the sturdiest stuff of the best
of humanity, and his numerous descendants
bear his name with honor. He died at Kelso,
where he had so long lived in peace and happi-
ness with his fellow men, November 18, 1870,
at the age of 76, survived by six sons and three
daughters. The sons were; Messrs. George Lee,
M.L.C., Thomas Lee, John Lee, James Lee, Wil-
liam Lee, Henry Lee, and Edward Lee (Crown


Prosecutor). The daughters were: Elizabeth
(married Mr. George Lord, M.L.0.), Maria
(married James Brady), and Mary Jane (mar-
ried Robert Austin). A granddaughter in Eng-
land, Ida Lee (Mrs. Charles Marriott), has won
distinction as an authoress. His little sister
left alone in the world with him at 5 years of
age, lived to her 99th year.
£


XIX.—AN OLD COACH-DRIVER’S STORY.
By clear ridge-country rivers, and gaps where tracks
run high,
Where waits the lonely horseman, cut clear against the
sky;
Through stringy-bark and blue-gum, and box and pine
we go;
New camps are stretching ’cross the plains the routes
of Cobb and Co.
Henry Lawson.
In the “early fifties” (wrote “An Old Coach-
driver” in the “Molong Express”), a Mr. James
had the mail contract from Bathurst via Molong
to Wellington, taking two days to do the trip
each way—the first day from Bathurst to Joe
Cobcroft’s hotel (the site of which was at that
time known as Molong). The Post Office was
near Coberoft’s Hotel and was conducted by
Mr. John Lipscombe—a gentleman who had
previously been in a good financial position,
owning many pastoral properties in the west,
but who had been involved in financial ruin
through the first Bank smash in Australia. A
Bank, in which he was a large shareholder,
went with the general crash and Liscombe lost
so heavily that he never recovered himself. He
died many, many years ago in Molong. The
principal part of Molong half a century ago was
on T. Kite’s land [see the reference to original
site, in earlier paper] and everyone was then a
tenant of the Crown, for at that time it was a


very difficult matter to purchase Crowu lands,
the Department being exceedingly slow in un-
locking them. Moreover, those in authority
had a strong inclination to keep these lands
for sheep walks. This part of Molong, at the
period I am speaking of, was the centre for
business and a busy place it was too. The
coach, on its return from Wellington, used to
again put up at Joe Cobcroft’s, and did so dur-
ing the whole term of James’ contract. After
Mr. James completed his contract the postal
authorities deemed it desirable to discontinue
the mail service from Molong to Wellington for
the reason that Ironbarks, Stoney Creek and
Muckerawa were booming, and carried a large
population. Consequently traffic was diverted
thence and the mails followed suit. When the
next mail contract (Orange to Molong) was let
it was to Hugh Wright and after him to Ed-
ward Nicholls—the chief storekeeper in
Orange. He had as his driver for some time the
late William Couch. When tenders were next
invited, Gus Coulson was the successful man
and on the expiration of his term tenders were
called for a tri-weekly service from Orange to
Wellington via Molong. Edward Moon, who at
that time kept the Freemasons’ Hotel, secured
this contract, but before the expiry of his term
he sold out of the hotel and took over the Royal
in Orange. His successor at the Freemasons’
was Mr. John Burgess. In 1864 E. Moon was
successful for the mail contract, Ironbarks to


Wellington, and John Wynne for the Orange,
Molong and Wellington service, which he car-
ried on for four years or more —until 1868, if
I remember aright. John Wynne also conduct-
ed an hotel on the hill in the house built and
kept for a time by James Martel. Subsequently
he ran the old Freemasons’ for a. number of
years. In the old days Johnnie Robards and
Jim Power were the drivers for E. Moon; and
Bob McGroder and George Willoeks handled
the ribbons for Wynne. The Jehus of the past
had to face difficulties and dangers that the
men of the present generation never dream ftf.
They, however, were skilful and resourceful,
and despite the dangers by flood and field were
ever watchful over the interests of those in
their charge and accidents involving personal
injury were exceedingly few and far between.
In those days not a rod of the road from Wel-
lington to Orange was either metalled or clear-
ed. Neither, of course, were there any bi’idges,
although there were the Molong Creek and
Three Rivers all to be crossed—-ofttimes at the
risk of being washed down the stream. The
starting time from Orange was 11 p.m., rather
a rough hour in the winter time, especially
when snow w T as falling, which was very fre-
quently the ease. It was all night work too,
right from Orange to Wellington. What a con-
trast between the coach drivers of “ye olden
time ’ ’ and the tram drivers of to-day! Why I
see that these latter gentry are asking to be


■enclosed in glass cases while tooling the trams
along the Sydney streets in wet weather.
It was in the ’7o’» when Cobb and Co. came
■on the Molong line with coaches.
The police court business may have been large
in those days, but if it was then the size of the
Courthouse was in inverse ratio to the amount
of business transacted. The building was an
old slab, lath and plaster structure, erected
away down on the bank of the creek.
Mention of Saul Samuel recalls the fact that
I was present at the last political meeting he
held in Molong. He won the seat, but was
shortly afterwards appointed Agent-General in
England. He represented the Wellington Elec-
torate, which included Molong, &c., in the 4th
and sth Parliaments (1862 to 1868). Well do
T remember that meeting and the lively time
that ensued. Charlie Blakefield was one of the
throng who took a hand in the proceedings that
night. Charlie was a man of the people, a good
honest sort and one strongly opposed to any-
thing savoring of corruption or underhand
work. The Sir Jno. Robertson Land Act of ’6l
was the great bone of contention at that time.
Blakefield was a consistent and strong advocate
for the Act, and of course there were many
opponents amongst the wool kings of the dis-
trict, who wished to retain the earth and all
that was thereon and therein. The last time
that Sir Saul Samuel addressed a public meet-
ing in Molong was just subsequent to the pass


mg of the Robertson Land Act of ’6l. Matters
political were still in a state of ferment, the
excitement engendered by the adoption of this
beneficial piece of legislation not having yet
died down. Sir Saul’s sympathy was undeni-
ably with the squatters and Crown lessees, he
himself having been interested in station pro-
perty, having previously owned Euromadah
Station on the Macquarie. At his last meeting
in Molong Sir Saul claimed to have done a lot
for the old town and pointed out that away
back in the Forties he was a very large share-
holder in the copper mine at Copper Hill. The
reason for this election coming so soon after the
general election was this: Some time previously
an appeal was made to the constituencies to re-
turn members pledged to assist Sir John Robert-
son in passing his famous Land Bill. For the
constituency of which Molong formed a part the
candidates were Mr. Sylvester Brown Daniels
(a pro-billite) and Mr. E. B. Cornish (an oppo-
sitionist). The latter, of course, had the solid
support of the squatters and Crown lessees, but
Mr. Daniels was elected by a large majority.
He sat in the 3rd and 4th Parliaments (1860).
He only remained long enough there to carry
out his hustings pledges, and after the Bill went
through and became law he gracefully dropped
into the billet of Crown Lands Commissioner
and land rent appraiser, with powers similar to
the police magistrates of the present day. He
resided in what were known as the Commission


er’s Quarters —situated between Molong and
Copper Hill. A Mr. Whitty was the first Com-
missioner who lived there and next came Mr.
Sibthorpe. The last one to occupy the house
and discharge the Commissioner’s duties was
Mr. Daniels.
Coming back now to Sir Saul Samuel’s last
meeting, there is no doubt it was rather a lively
one, both for the supporters of the Act and
those opposed to it. Both sides were most em-
phatic in the expression of their opinions about
the measure. From hot words, they rapidly
came to something more convincing. The prin-
cipal actors in that lively scene have long since
passed away and although their opinions about
the Act were as opposite as the Poles, there is
this much to be said about them: all were good
men according to their lights, men who had
pioneered the land and helped to make history
and men who have left honored names behind
them. That final meeting took place at Wynne’s
Hotel, and Sir Saul was returned and repre-
sented the district until he accepted the position
of Agent-General for the colony in England.
With the departure of Sir Saul Samuel the
seat became vacant and was then won and held
by Mr. John Samuel Smith, better known as
“Eurimbla Smith” because of the fact that he
not only owned but resided on Eurimbla Sta-
tion on the Bell Eiver (Eurimbla is now includ-
ed in Larras Lake Station). “Eurimbla Smith”
was a white man and a gentleman, and, although


a squatter, lived on the most friendly and
neighbourly terms with all those who had se-
lected on his run. He represented the elector-
ate for several years, but taking a trip to Eng-
land he never returned to N.S.W. The first
time he contested the seat he was opposed by
Mr. Gerald Spring, but the latter was badly
beaten. Mr. John Shepherd and Sir Patrick
Jennings were the candidates after Mr. Smith’s
departure and after a very keen and hard-
fought contest the former proved victorious.
He only sat for the constituency in one, the 9th,
Parliament (1877). The electorate then com-
prised Wellington, Molong, Hill End, Tamba-
roora, Stuart Town and other outlying centres,
and was of course a difficult one to cover by the
candidates.
The passing of the “New Electoral Act” —as
it was called—converted Molong and district
into a separate constituency and at the first
election thereafter occurred that memorable
fight between Mr. John Smith, of Gamboola, and
Dr. Ross, wherein the latter was victorious by
six votes. When the news reached me of Dr.
Ross’ victory I could not help thinking that Mr.
Smith’s supporters must have sadly misman-
aged affairs, for he would certainly have won
the seat had he had anything like a good com-
mittee. During my sojourn in Molong Mr.
Smith was always regarded in the highest
esteem by all classes of the community. He
was a good employer, always paid the highest


salaries to his employees, generous, and a most
conscientious man as a magistrate. However,
the victory was a great feather in the old
Doctor’s cap and the venerable medico lived to
prove the confidence of the electors was in no
wise misplaced. He held the electorate against
all-comers for well nigh a quarter of a century,
and then, coming in with a “new” Electoral
Act, went out with the passing of a “newer”
one. He sat in 10 Parliaments, from the 10th
to the 19th inclusive (1880 to 1901).
Harking back to “ye olden times,” well do
I remember my first trip to Molong. The road
then went over the highest point of Gohanna
Hill, midway between the present road and
Molong Creek. I remember that all the hills in
those days looked exceedingly pretty, being
thickly studded with kurrajong, the hand-
somest and most serviceable of all our Austra-
lian trees. Their value in droughty seasons was
universally recognised by teamsters, whose bul-
locks for months at a stretch thrived on the
succulent leaves and tender shoots when grass
was at a premium. The road in the times I
write of used to strike Molong Creek at the
“Five Mile Waterhole.” I suppose there is
scarcely a person living who could point out
this waterhole now. It was called the Five Mile
because it was reckoned to be five miles from
the then village of Molong. From thence the
road crossed over Kite’s Swamp and then kept
on to Martejl’s on the eastern side of the creek.


Sam Phillips kept the hotel—a substantial
brick building—at the five mile (Molong) end
from this waterhole, and he was succeeded by
Joe Coberoft. The next place of importance
was Copper Hill, where Martell kept the hotel
—a large, red brick house. All the stables and
out-buildings were constructed of the same ma-
terial, while an adjacent brick store was run by
Billy Bloomfield. The next place of note on the
Wellington-road was the hotel at the Three
Rivers, yet another brick structure with stables
similarly erected. In fact, all the hotels and
stables of that time from Bathurst to Welling-
ton, except the old Coach and Horses at East
Orange, were built of brick, and fine large
houses, too; thus showing that ‘ ‘ running a
pub.” in those days must have been a very
profitable business, although the rents were
very high. Florat Martell, a Frenchman, was
an ideal inn-keeper and well adapted for the
role of boniface in that joyful period. He made
tons of money at Copper Hill and also later on
while landlord of a pub. between Molong of
the past and Copper Hill—both of which places
must, by this, closely resemble Goldsmith’s
“Deserted Village.” A Mr. Clymo opened the
Round House [“Vale Head.”—F.] as an hotel,
and in this he was succeeded by Richard Cob-
den, a brother of the great English Corn Law
Reformer, who was in turn succeeded by Joe
Parslow, and then by Henry Johnson. Frank
Smith also resided there for many years, and


subsequently Mr. H. S. M. Betts took it as a
residence. George Hanly succeeded Martell at
Copper Hill; then came Tom O’Brien, who built
the first hotel at Cudal. James Hull carried on
the business at Copper Hill for some time, and
after him came William Hartland.
Reminiscences.
Mr. J. J. Morris, resident of the district for
well-night 60 years, arrived in Molong from
Orange in May, 1854, as a police officer, the
chief constable at that time being Mr. John
Davis. There were very few houses here then,,
there being only three or four at West End.
The first brick house built in the town of to-day
was the Freemasons’ Hotel (which is now
being demolished). This hotel was then kept
by Mr. Bernard Francis Hughes, who came off
the staff of the “Bathurst Times,’’ but the first
building erected was a store on the now pro-
perty of Messrs. Cockram Bros., near where
the Military Hall stands. This store was man-
aged by the late Mr. John Rubie, for Mr. Ed-
ward Nicholls, of Orange. Mr. Morris, in
speaking of the police force, said that in those
days the duties of a constable were very differ-
ent from what they are to-day, having on many
occasions to make long trips to secure the
“wanted” men. He mentioned, amongst oth-
ers, one instance where he had to make a trip of
300 miles down the Lachlan district to secure a
witness, and found out on returning to Molong’


that the man was not required. This incident
happened in the year 1856. The last long trip
made by Mr. Morris was in company with Chief
Constable Davis, to arrest a man who had been
in the employ of the late Hon. John Smith,
M.L.C. The “wanted” man in this instance
had to take out the rations, etc., to the station
hands, but instead of doing so, he got away
with all the rations and a horse and cart. After
& chase of 300 miles the prisoner was captured
on the Macquarie River, at a place known as
“The Mole.” The “wanted” man got two
years. Mr. Morris also recollects many more
similar incidents of former days. The magis-
trates at this time were Messrs. R. J. Barton,
Ed. Finch, and Thomas Boulton. Mr. Morris,
.and the late Messrs. Robt. Shield and C. H.
Packham, used to use the old premises opposite
the Freemasons’ Hotel to hold lay service on the
Sabbath, and once every month Parson Watson
(as he was then called), came from Wellington
and preached to a small gathering of worship-
pers in the old Courthouse, which was then a
small slab building. This rev. gentleman also
performed good work amongst the aboriginals
in those days. In the year 1875, Mr. Morris and
the late Messrs. Robt. Shield and C. H. Pack-
ham called a public meeting for the purpose of
starting a fund to build a place of worship in
Molong. Subscription lists were circulated, and
Mr. Henry Whitty, who was Commissioner for
Crown Lands, in making one of his trips


through the district collected a substantial
amount towards this worthy object, and the
work of constructing the House of God was
commenced, the site chosen being at top of
Bank-street, where the Methodist Church now
stands. The foundation stone of the new
church was laid on the birthday of the late King
Edward, in 1857. The sacred edifice was open-
ed about the time of the late Queen Victoria’s
birthday, in the year 1858.


XX.—THE OLD WESTERN ROAD.
Mr. E. J. Milne, District Superintendent of
Railways at Orange, who takes a deep interest
in all matters relating to the early history of
Australia, has, -with the assistance of the secre-
tary of the Mitchell Library, Sydney, been
hunting up some old data with regard to the
Western districts from the N.S.W. Calendar
and General Post Office Directory of 1835. An
extract therefrom concerning what was then
known as the Western Road contains the follow-
ing references of local interest: —
“151 Mile Peg. —Place called Kangaroo Bay,
where a village reserve has been marked. The
road winds between two streams; on the south
is the Molong River; on the north Nandillion
Ponds.
“162 Mile Peg.—The road passes by the
north bank of the Molong River. To the north
of the road we have been describing from the
settlement upwards, the intervening country,
towards the banks of the Macquarie, gets
gradually worse, and is ill supplied with water.
To the south, the country extending to the War-
wick Plains Road is partly occupied by a large
church grant, the remainder being a well-water-
ed grazing country, but not much taken up.


‘ ‘ The road now continues through a limestone
country along the banks of the Molong River.
The country is called Molong Plains. The
daughters of the Rev. Mr. Marsden have grants
here. Passing the confluence of the Molong, or
River Bell, with the Nandillion Ponds, the road
recrosses that river and continues along the val-
ley of the Bell. The tortuous course of a
branch of the Bell obliged the first travellers to
ford it thrice at short intervals, and to give
that part the name of ‘The Three Rivers.’ The
valley improves as we approach.”
“Molong River!” What memories does that
revive? The late Hon. John Smith called
Molong “Melong,” and contended that it was
its correct name. In 1828 there was a military
camp at “Moulong Plains.”


XXI.—OLD TIMES.
The following very old advertisement will
make very interesting reading for the present
generation:—
“Department of Lands and Public Works,
“Sydney, 4th August, 1859.
“To Builders and Others.
“Watch House, Three Rivers.
“No tender having been received for the
above work, notice is hereby given, that Ten-
ders will be received at this Office, until 12
o’clock on Tuesday, the 6th September, from
persons willing to contract for the erection of a
Watch House, Three Rivers, midway between
Wellington and Molong.
“Tenders to be endorsed, ‘Tender for Watch
House, Three Rivers.’
“Plan, Specification, and form of Tender may
be seen, and further particulars obtained at the
Colonial Architect’s Officer, Sydney, or at the
Police Office, Wellington.
“Tenders must state the time within which
it is proposed to complete the work, and at the
foot of every Tender there must be a memor-
andum signed by the party tendering and two
responsible persons as securities agreeing to be


answerable for the due performance of the con-
tract in the event of the Tender being accepted,
and undertaking in that event, that they will
severally execute and deliver at the Office of
the Crown Solicitor in Sydney, or at the Police
Office, Wellington, within four days from the
usual notification of acceptance, a Bond to Her
Majesty in the penal sum of £l5O for securing
such performance, otherwise the Tender will
not be taken into consideration.
“JOHN ROBERTSON.”
J


XXII.—GOD’S ACRE.
■“Let us talk of graves and worms and epitaphs.”
The tender descriptiveness of the Saxon
phrase, “God’s Acre,’’ at one time could scar-
cely be said to apply to the Molong Cemetery
of 1905; these words should of themselves call
forth images of reverential tendance to the
resting places of the dear departed, of the ver-
dure of smooth turf, of the loveliness of gently-
nurtured flowers, and of thoughts laden with
an atmosphere of hallowed quietude. But this
was before attention was paid to its surround-
ings ; when the enclosing fences were in a con-
dition of decay, and there existed a consequent
neglect of the graves in which reposed for all
time the mortal remains of honored citizens
and of the youth of the township. A local
movement, however, resulted in the erection of
a new fence, netted to keep out the rabbit; and
to-day the result of this gentle care on the part
of the people is apparent. Though a rank
growth of grass is noticeable, the enclosure on
the whole is in some sort of order, and save for
those palisades which are crumbling away as
the result of the laying on of “Time’s remorse-
less hands, ’ ’ the graves are cleanly kept, whilst
many of them evidence kindly attention on the
part of friends and relatives of the dead. On


■some of them are flowers fresh from the plant
that bore them; others are decorated with arti-
ficial emblems, whilst more again are just kept
free from the tangled growth that completely
■enshrouds the balance.
The “dead who go beyond recall” have here
some friends who have not forgotten them, as
too many folk are prone to do in this work-a-
day world of ours. A caretaker keeps clean
the walks and expends some labor upon the dif-
ferent sections set apart for the several Chris-
tian denominations represented in town, and
the effect upon the visitor is not lost. Though
there is perhaps ever a growing tendency to
forget them, there must still be maintained in
some hearts a remembrance of the trials of the
pioneers in the days that are gone—
For the valleys that smile to our tillage,
The hills where our banners unfold,
Were won by the men of the village,
And bought with their axes of old.
A glance through the cemetery reveals the
fact that its occupants bore some of the most
honored local names—names that have been
closely associated with the growth of the town
and district; names which are home to-day by
many representatives of their families, not
merely here, but in other parts of the State.
Here, for instance, is a monument to the mem-
ory of Caleb Parker, the elder, and inscribed
upon the same pedestal is a notification to the
effect that that worthy one-time townsman’s


son, of like name, also sleeps in the same nar-
row bed. Not far away is the grave of Henry
Paton, who died at Obley in 1879 —“he was
lost in the bush for two days and two nights,
which caused his premature demise” at the age
of 39. Here rests a centenarian, Michael Logue,
105 years of age, and his wife, Bridget, 67; and
yonder John Colbran, who died in 1898, at the
age of 94. A very old grave is that of Mary
Callaghan (63), who died in 1861, and of Peter
Callaghan (79). A few steps farther on and
the reader is informed that—“here rests Wil-
liam Barton, who met his death by a fall from
his horse at Brymedura.” Another victim to a
fatal accident was one “John Neilsone, who
met his death by falling down a shaft at Copper
Hill on 29th March, 1873, aged 40 years.” It
is a child who sleeps in this little enclosure,
Annie Williamson, who died December 29,
1866, daughter of John and Mary Williamson;
and on we go until we reach the grave of Allen
Edward Duncan, native of Glasgow, who died
July 26, 1876, aged 61, with, as next door
neighbour, John Harnded, aged 70, “an old and
faithful servant, native of Norfolk, England.”
Many years have run their course since “Jessie
Elopethe, daughter of Walter and Charlotte
Miller, of Mumble,” was laid in her last long
home in 1866—let us hope that the earth has
lain lightly o’er her remains. Here is the stone
marking the burial place of Sarah Downey,
who was gathered to her fathers on April 20,


1883, at the age of 78. Then comes a familiar
and respected name, that of Mary Stapleton
Evers, died June 19, 1883, dearly beloved wife
of Edwin Evers; and close by Samuel Hillan
and Titus Evers (78). Another silent sleeper
in Thomas Williams, died February, 1883, at
the age of 62.
Come we now to the grave of John Cotter.
John was a monumental mason here, and the
■carved stone above his remains was of his own
handicraft, whilst it would appear from the
inscription upon it that the sculptor had a
humor of his own, and carried it to the inside
of the cemetery. It reads :
Here lies John Cotter, born in London on
Good Friday, 1824. Died
What was his age when he died, in years,
months, weeks and days?
•Seeing that the date and hour of his death is
not notified, the deceased Cotter has set a
conundrum which only those who are acquaint-
ed with the facts can accurately grapple with.
But the inability of the rank and file to furnish
.a reply to the query now scarcely interferes
with the rest of the man of stone, surely.
James Harrop Griffin, so it is notified, died
June 9, 1891, at the age of 63—the stone at his
head being “erected by his personal friends.”
Later we come to the representatives in this
congregation of the dead of another name
closely associated with Molong’s past—Thos.
Phillips, born 1844, died July 18, 1868, aged 24,


and beside this tomb another, Samuel Phillips,
“Who departed this life on the Ist December,
1861 aged 61, ’ ’ with this verse added:
Honored and loved and full of days
We laid thee in the silent earth;
And here this humble stone we raise—
A tribute to a parent’s worth.
The Phillips family had big interests in and
around Molong when the town and district were
in their infancy. They did valuable pioneering
work in those times, ’midst all the trials which
stood in the way of the out-back settler. Here
are the graves of two other representatives of
the name—George A. Phillips, died 9th Septem-
ber, 1864, and Susannah Phillips, died 1886,
aged 67. Still another well-known patronymic
—James Bowler, died 4th December, 1889, aged
75. And yet one more—for here is the grave of
Henry Samuel Marsden Betts, aged 60. Bear-
ing the name of the pioneer missionary to Aus-
tralia, Samuel Marsden, who was a relative, the
late Mr. Betts was a citizen who enjoyed the
hearty regard of a large circle of friends, and
who left behind him a record of good works
that cannot often be claimed in a world where
most men are prone to spend the great bulk of
their time fighting to secure their own survival.
In the same enclosure is resting Louisa Betts,
who pre-deceased the previously-mentioned H,
S. M. Betts by nine years. Come we then to the
stone which marks the bed of Henry Yale
Leathern, deceased as far back as 1879, -it the


eomparatively early age of 36— : twas he who
established the local “Express”; whilst here
is the grave of William Finch, who lied m
1884, aged 69. Then on to a stone which bears
the inscription “sacred to the memory of
Samuel Beadle, aged 80, who died July 4,
1899.” And so on, and on through pathways
bordered on each side by plots in which the
dust of good men and women return unto the
dust from which they came, there to moulder
away,
Till the sun grows cold,
And the stars grow old,
And the leaves of the Judgment Book unfold.
We have all to go that way one day—the strong
man and the weak, the wealthy and the poor,
the humble and the potentate, for Death recog-
nises no distinctions; and sooner or later those
who to-day pay their regards to “absent
friends” will themselves be laid to rest in the
silent city, to be mourned by those who knew
them best. Then—
Shall we sigh for one who has ceased to sigh,
Having gone, my friends, where we all must got


XXIII.—A CONTROVERSY.
“Who shall decide when doctors disagree!”
About 1908 a controversy raged for a little
time in the local Press on matters relating to
the early history of Molong, and especially in
connection with several aspects of same re-
ferred to in the earlier pages of this book. It
will be well to accord space to some of the cor-
respondence. One writer, Mr. A. H. Howard,
ventured the following statement; —
“Yale Head, called Round House, was built
by Mrs. Marsden on her own land. She let it
to Mr. Betts, afterwards to Captain Clymo, then
captain of big Copper Hill, and when he left
Mr. Sam Phillips took it and opened it as an
hotel. Then Mr. Cobden kept it as a pub., and
died there, but before he died he got Mr. Joe
Parslow into it. Old Harry Johnson then held
it as a pub., and his son took over his horse
team and drove same. It was built by Robert
Whiting and Robert Henry Place. John Wool-
bank had it for a short time, and then it was
vacant for years. Young Mr. Henry Betts, old
John Betts’ son, made a sheep station of it, and
following Mr. H. Betts, old Mr. John Smith,
brother to Mr. Francis Smith, grew wool on it.
Old John Liscombe, of White Rock or Mount
Tamar, six miles out of Bathurst, lived in it


with his family in Mr. Phillips’ time. Captain
Buttenshaw used it as a private residence, and
the whole of what is Molong township now was
rented to old John Liscomhe as a horse-pad-
dock. The writer got the above from Thomas
Liscomhe, son of old John Liscombe, who was a
schoolmate of Mr. Lance and Mr. Jago Smith,
and is now living on Buckinbah Creek, Yeo-
val. ’ ’
Forthwith came along quite a host of village
to controvert at least some of the
statements made by Mr. Howard, “Old Chum”
being responsible for this most interesting con-
tribution to the discussion:—
“Recently I have read a controversy that has
taken place about who built the round cottage
on the hill. ‘Old Chum’ in his letter says that
■Captain Buttenshaw built it. Hon. Jago Smith
contradicts that in a letter and says that either
Mr. Betts or Mr. Marsden were the builders,
though he is doubtful which of these persons
had the cottage erected, so there is still a doubt
who the actual one is. The matter can be left
at that. I was a good-sized lad at the time, and
well remember this cottage being built. One of
the principal men working on the job was a car-
penter named Robert Whiting. He had pre-
viously been with Major Mitchell on his ex-
plorations in the wilds of Australia. At that
time he was a life-guardsman. Captain But-
tenshaw and family were living in the cot-
tage before it was finished; and at that time,


and for a long time after, it went by the name
of the Captain’s cottage, which might lead to
the idea that he built it. Lady Buttenshaw had
a young lady, who came out from the Old Coun-
try with her, as lady’s companion. This young
person got married to William Bell, a young
blacksmith, at that time living at Boree
Nyrang, Captain Barton’s station. It was the
intention of Captain and Lady Buttenshaw, and
the young lady who came out as her com-
panion, to return in a short time, as they had
no intention of staying in the colony, having
only come out for a trip. Captain Hope lived
at the cottage a very short time, but Captain
Clymo certainly opened the cottage as a public
house. He was an elderly man, and his wife
a young handsome woman. He had been the
Mining Captain at Copper Hill Mine previous
to taking on the public house. Mr. Cobden
succeeded Clymo in the business. Cobden kept
a store on the Wellington and Bathurst road,
when the great rush to Stoney Creek (now
Stuart Town) took place; some years after
Cobden built a public house and removed there,
A person, whose name I cannot now remember,
carried the business on for some time, until it
was taken over by Joseph Parslow, who car-
ried the public house business on for about a
year, when Cobden returned to Molong and
purchased the business back from Parslow. A
short time after Cobden died. Then Henry
Johnson took the business over and carried it


on until about the year 1860. Prank Smith up
to that time lived at the old homestead near the
creek. I must now go back a bit. In the for-
ties, Floreat Martell built, at his own cost, the
public house on the Wellington road at Copper
Hill. About two miles further on a Mr. Pass-
more lived. When the cottage on the hill was
built, Andrew Kerr, who afterwards settled at
Wellwood, near Orange, was the superintendent
at Yale Head. About that time the Government
had a cattle station there consisting of one
thousand head. Jack Edwards was chief stock-
man, and his assistant was Hugh Hanley. I
well remember the names of some of the station
hands at that time, viz., Charley Jones, Jack
Swan, Sam Beadle, “Daddie” King and his
wife Nancy, an immense big woman; Levy, the
sheep scabber, who was a valued person, he
being a professional At that time
sheep were subject to a disease called scab.
John Smith succeeded Andrew Kerr as super-
intendent, and managed the station for some
time, until he built the homestead higher up-
the creek, and went to live there and named it
Gamboola. Formerly it was called The Plains,,
where in the year 1840 Bryan McGroder lived,
who was in the employ of Mr. John Betts.
Gamboola is an aboriginal name, or as I have
heard the blacks sound it as ‘gambulle,’ which
means a deep stony hole.”
Then the Hon. P. Jago Smith,M.L.C., took a
hand in the discussion (March 21, 1908):


“I have been looking over some of my
father’s old papers since I wrote my last letter,
and I find there is a copy of the lease of Yale
Head house to Captain (Thos.) Buttanshaw for
three years from March 25th, 1841, evidently
held by my father as manager for the lessor,
John Betts—and by an old letter of Captain
Buttanshaw’s wife it seems that her husband
was dead before May 18th, 1842. I also found
that Captain Hope was living at the old house in
April, 1846, and in 1847. The open part of the
grant on which Yale Head house and paddock
stand was leased by my father for years after
he moved to Gamboola, and he undoubtedly
grew wool on that part of it, but he never leased
either Vale Head house or paddock. My
father’s sheep station, on the open part of the
grant, was at what we called ‘Point Look Out,’
beyond Vale Head paddock fence, and just op-
posite to Mr. Bennett’s garden in West Molong.
My father gave it up eventually to my uncle,
Frank Smith, when the latter was leasing Vale
Head, but not till about 1859. Henry Betts,
one of John Betts’ younger sons, came to my
father to get colonial experience in February,
1856, and left in December, 1859, and a splendid
fellow he was. He then went to Queensland
for years, somewhat towards The Gulf, I be-
lieve, and did not return to Molong, and occupy
the house till after I was married—not until
about 1870.”
Following the above came a communication


from Mr. John Frederick Betts, then resident
at Bowna, near Albury:—
“Being about six year old, I think, when my
father lived at the “Vineyard,” Parramatta,,
about 1839, and having had the Yale Head
house built and furnished, and having bought a
large old English coach, he took his family up
to Molong. Our first stoppage was at Black-
heath, and the next, I think, Bathurst. All I
recollect of Bathurst was the red barracks at
the river ford, and McPhillamy’s store. Next
I recollect Orange. There was not a house there
then. We stopped at Summer Hill (one of my
father’s stations), which the late Mr. A. Kerr
was manager of. There was only an old hut
there then. It was winter, and snowing all
night. Next day Yale Head was made. The
manager’s (Mr. John Smith) house stood on the
eastern side, also men’s huts, and two stumps
with hand mills on them for grinding oats to
make oatmeal cakes, on the western side, the
site, I believe, of the Molong town. I can well
recollect Governor Gipps paying a visit to
Molong. He stayed a fortnight at Vale Head,,
and father took his children To help me plant
willow cuttings along the river. That father
built Vale House I am sure. It was said he
took his idea from a round lodge on the Pen-
rith-road at Bungarrabee. Captain Buttan-
shaw gave my father bank shares in exchange
for a cattle station on the Bogan. This was just
before the Bank of N.S.W. failed, thus making


my father liable. He lost the station, cattle,
.and all. Captain Buttanshaw and his three
sons were killed coming down the Mountains
by the caravan being upset. When my father
came down to Sydney again he sold and shipped
two ship loads of sheep for New Zealand, but
the purchaser went insolvent. Father went
down to New Zealand just as the Maori war
broke out and he found great trouble down
there to get rid of his sheep. He was in New
Zealand some time, and when he returned
things at Summer Hill, Molong, and Cox’s
River had gone queer. He was always a great
man for breeding upstanding coach horses and
had many falls from horses, and the injuries he
received shortened his life. Not because he was
my father do I say it, but he was a man of great
energy and pluck. What I have written must
have taken place from 1838 to 1850. I myself
then went to sea, and know no more about
N.S.W. or Yale Head. In 1860 I left the sea,
afterwards spending 18 years in Victoria. I
am now not many feet across the border. I
could fill up many pages with more than I have
written. My memory has not failed me. I
often meet some old chums, but in their years
they are a bit mixed, but I never contradict
them. I am 74 myself.”
[The trouble is that memory fails and dates
trip up the old hand to such an extent that it
is difficult “when doctors disagree to find out
who shall decide.”—P.]


XXIV.—A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY.
In 1909 a discovery of some moment (to
scientists, at any rate) was made at Molong—
that of a number of fossil bones—by Mr. W. T.
Campbell, the manager of the Little Copper Hill
Mine, at a depth of about lift, from the sur-
face. The remains appear to have once formed
the head of some very large animal, and were
in a somewhat decomposed state. They were
impregnated with copper, and were discovered
in country which was undisturbed previously.
The bones were presented to the Sydney
Museum and one of the staff of scientists at
the Museum has afforded some interesting in-
formation respecting them. “The bones,” said
the officer, “are probably those of a big dipro-
todon, or huge animal of the wombat species,
now extinct.”
“What does diprotodon mean?”
“It signifies two teeth in front, and the
gigantic diprotodons were probably peculiar to
Australia. Here is a cast of a tooth,” and he
■displayed a huge mass of dark-looking stuff,
which must have graced a skull of enormous
■dimensions.
“Why,” said the reporter, “that fellow must
have been 20 yards long.”


“Well, not quite so large as that,” was the
reply, ‘ ‘ for you see he was bulky, and his girth
would be great, but not so his length—like our
wombat, you know. But he answered to the
mammoth in bulk and was quite an Austra-
lian marsupial.”
“Is it not an unusual thing to find fossilised
bones coppered?”
“You don’t get them coppered in the ordin-
ary sense of the word, but bones infiltrated with
metal are common enough. On an old battle
field, for instance, where a cannon ball may
have been buried in the earth among some of
the bones of soldiers, should the bones be at all
well preserved by a natural action, the iron
would rust from the ball and the bones would
be found to contain iron. It is the same with
copper, of course, and frequently bones have
been found in such a state.”
“I see only pieces of the bones of the dipro—
the great animal here. Have you not a com-
plete specimen?”
“No, unfortunately, but in Adelaide there is
one. It is a complete model, the missing bones
having been supplied. It was found at Lake
Callaboda, a district near the northern border
of New South Wales, and an old dried-up
swamp there contained many such remains.
The animals had probably been driven to the
swamp from all sides during an enormous
drought, or from some other cause, and got
bogged. The South Australian Government


organised an expedition under Professor Ster-
ling to search for bones and some most inter-
esting discoveries were made. They dug up a
head and portions of bodies which enabled a
complete skeleton to be formed.”
“Was the diprotodon a burrowing animal?”
“You will see here, from this cast of his feet,
that his hind feet are so formed. He burrowed
like the ordinary wombat.”
“He was not so large as the mammoth?”
“Oh, dear no. The mammoth is the largest
animal we have. The diprotodon was probably
exterminated by the blacks. Being a large and
clumsy animal, he would fall an easy prey, and
you know, a spear put through your inside is
generally enough. It would about finish almost
anything. But they have been destroyed by
many other means, such as natural calamities,
taking away their supply of food or such. I
fancy the bones from Molong must have be-
longed to one of these species, for they are the
best known of all the ancient animals of any
size which inhabited Australia in the past.”
K


XXV.—THE LORD FAMILY.
Mr. Simeon Lord arrived in New South
Wales in the first nineties of the eighteenth
century. He was a smart business man, and
was in business soon after his landing. His
name is mentioned in the Harwell mutiny trials,
1798, as agent for Captain Cameron, in paying
over some money for (insinuated) questionable
service. In 1800 he, with other, free and bond,
traders appealed by petition to have the whole
of the cargo of the Minerva thrown open for
purchase by any dealer needing stores. Prior
to that, privileged persons only were allowed
to purchase. Governor Hunter gave the re-
quired permission, and so broke up the mono-
poly. In 1801 we find him acting as a ware-
houseman. Ensign Bayly, an officer of the
N.S. Wales Corps, remonstrates with the Gov-
ernor for placing an “arrow” or “R” upon a
cask of spirits stored in Mr. Lord’s house.
In 1803 he appears to be in occupation of a
store in the High-street, formerly in the occu-
pation of Mr. Simpson, and in the “Sydney
Gazette” of the 26th June, same year, he adver-
tises the sale of “a substantial dwelling-house,
kitchen and stable detached, also a garden, well
stocked with fruit trees, situated at the corner
of Pitt’s Row.” This corner is identical with


that on which the Empire Hotel now stands,
and! was, without doubt, the property of Parson
Johnson prior to the year 1800. In 1804 we
find Mr. Simeon Lord registered as a ship-
owner, and dealing in all kinds of produce,
wool, oil, sealskins, etc. Three years later we
find him in great trouble with Governor Bligh.
He had written a letter to the potentate on the
subject of transferring cargo from one vessel
to another in harbor, as a saving in landing and
re-shipping. Messrs. Underwood and Kable
were involved in the same letter.
Reading between the lines, we may find that
Governor Bligh had good and sufficient reason
for insisting upon the landing of goods from
the colonial vessels before being shipped for
England. Many colonists had been exiled for
smuggling, and “smuggling” in New South
Wales was looked upon by the inhabitants as a
very venial offence, smuggling and illicit dis-
tillation being carried on to a great extent. As
a preventive, Bligh insisted that all vessels
should land their imports before placing them
on shipboard for export. The three old-time
merchants were somewhat saucy in their letter,
and Bligh gaoled them, through Judge Advo-
cate Atkins, for one kalendar month, and a fine
of one hundred pounds each. Anyone reading
the letter will see traces of the master hand of
John Macarthur all through it. In the list 'of
signatures attached to the requisition to Colonel


Johnston to arrest Bligh, Lord’s signature is
No. 4, just four months after the gaoling.
Mr. Lord, as an auctioneer—amidst many
other occupations—conducted a couple of sales,
which may be deemed historic. On the 2nd of
January, 1805, he sold some furniture, sheep,
andl a 50-acre farm on the Hawkesbury, let at
a rental of £2O a year, payable in farm produce,
by order of the trustees, acting under a commis-
sion for the management of the estate of George
Barrington, a lunatic, deceased; this deceased
lunatic being the historic, as distinct from
notorious, pickpocket, who became good and
pious, drank rum, and was chief constable at
Parramatta. George Barrington was buried on
Brush Farm, near Parramatta.
The other sale was on March 7, 1823, when
the effects of Governor Macquarie were brought
under the hammer. The articles included fur-
niture, linen, pictures, chandeliers, a secretaire
and bureau, and a complete set of new mount-
ings for a carriage.
Mr. Lord was the pioneer of the woollen in-
dustry in Australia, with a mill at Botany, and
was also a manufacturer oFhats. In the latter
business he had at one time a partner named
Williams, and in 1813 we find a quaint adver-
tisement from the firm: “Messrs. Lord and
Williams announce that, in consequence of the
great depreciation in colonial currency, they
are augmenting the price of their hats, which


will be in future one pound thirteen shillings
sterling, or two pounds ten shillings currency.”
Mr. Lord was appointed a magistrate very early
in the reign of Governor Macquarie, and he
gave three sons to the political and municipal
life of Sydney. Francis Lord was, for a great
number of years, a member of the Legislature;
George Lord also occupied a seat, and was for
a term Colonial Treasurer in the Ministry of
Sir James Martin; and Edward Lord was for
many years City Treasurer. This Francis Lord
was engaged in sheep-raising, etc,, at Cumnock,
and was the original owner of the property now
known as Burrawang.


XX VI.—LARRA, “THE HONEST JEW.”
In a recent article in a Sydney paper on “Old
Sydney,” mention is made of one James Larra,
who was a licensed spirit dealer at Parramatta
in 1813. In the Memoirs of General Joseph
Holt, the Irish insurgent of 1798, and who came
out as an exile in 1800, mention is made of
Larra. Holt’s Memoirs are rarely seen to-day
outside the great Public Libraries or the collec-
tions of such literary treasure-seekers as Mr.
David Mitchell, the gentleman who has given
to the people of N.S.W. a wealth of books and
manuscripts worth many thousands of pounds,
and to house which the Government have
erected the new Mitchell Library buildings.
Holt had no trial—he was simply deported ; and
he records the fact that being in Parramatta
w r ith Father Harold in 1802, they “dined to-
gether at a tavern kept by James Larra, ‘an
honest Jew,’ where we had some nice lamprey
and some hung beef. ’ ’ Holt says that whatever
was put upon the table by Larra was of the
best. The host prided himself on the style in
which he conducted his business, which was
purely Parisian. In 1820, when public house
signs were the order of the day, Mr. Larra call-
ed his hotel “The Freemasons’.” The writer


of the “Old Sydney” records aforesaid says:
“I cannot find that the name of Larra has come’
down to us, excepting it be in Larra’s Lake,
the property of Mr. James Lee, between Molong
and Wellington.” Whether or not there was
any connection between the man who catered
for the wants of customers and the source from
which the name was derived which Mr. Lee’s
splendid property bears, remains a dark secret
—but it seems strange that to-day, as far as the
writer is aware, there are no direct descendants
of Larra, “the Honest Jew,” in this State of
ours.


XXVII.—MISCELLANEOUS.
Molong was municipalised in 1879, and its
Mayors from that period onwards to 1912 were
as under:—lß79-1880, W. Tanner; 1881-1882-
1883, John F. Wynne; 1884-1885, H. S. M.
Betts; 1886-1887, John Black; 1888, John
McGroder; 1889, W. J. Windred; 1890, H. S. M.
Betts; 1891-1892-1893, John Black; 1894-1895-
1896-1897-1898, George Packham; 1899-1900,
John F. Wynne; 1901-1902-1903, John Black;
1904-1905-1906, John McGroder; 1907, P. F. A.
Kinna; 1908, George Packham; 1909-1910,
John McGroder; 1911-1912, P. F. A. Kinna.
From the Lands Department, October 3,
1912: Sir, —Referring to your enquiry of the
Chief Secretary, respecting the date of the
establishment of Cudal, I have the honor to
inform you that the design* of the subdivision
of the Village of Cudal was transmitted to the
Surveyor-General by Mr. District Surveyor
Edward Fisher on the 3rd July, 1867, and was
approved by the Minister for Lands on the
22nd! July, 1867. The boundaries of the vil-
lage and suburban lands were notified, under
the provisions of the Crown Lands Alienation
Act of 1861, on the 25th October, 1867, and the


Tillage was re-proclaimed under the Crown
Lands Act of 1884, and Village and Suburban
“Boundaries” re-notified on 20th March, 1885.
These latter were subsequently cancelled and
re-notified on the 31st July, 1896, and again on
the 14th November, 1896. The municipal dis-
trict of Cudal was proclaimed on the 21st
October, 1890.”


XXVIII.—“IN ’66.”
Prom an old copy of Baillier’s “New South
Wales Gazetteer” (published 1866), the follow-
ing information in relation to stations in the
West is taken:—
Balabala Station (Lachlan district): Occu-
pier, S. Caldwell —19,200 acres, grazing capa-
bilities, 700 head cattle, old charges £54 13s 9d,
but rental recently appraised at £7O.
Upper Balabala Station: S. Caldwell—3o,oßo
acres, 900 head cattle, old charges £42 16s 3d,
recently appraised at £65.
Bangaroo Station: Thos. Icely, occupier—
—ls,62o acres, capability 640 head cattle, old
charges £4O, reappraised £6O.
Barrabadean Station (Wellington district):
Occupier, J. Strahorn —96,000 acres, grazing
capability 640 head cattle, old charges £4O, re-
appraised £4O.
Bartley’s Creek Station (Wellington dis-
trict) : Occupier, Thos. T0m—32,000 acres,
carrying capacity 4000 sheep, old charges £4O,
reappraised £BO.
Belbula Station (Lachlan): B. B. Conish, oc-
cupier—32,ooo acres, capacity 1000 head cattle,
rental £450.
Belubula Station (Wellington district): John
Grant, occupier—lo,ooo acres, capacity 4000


sheep, old charges £4O, but reappraised at £l6
13s.
Berchen Lagoons Stations (Wellington dis-
trict) : Occupier, Thos. Phillips—l6,ooo acres,
capacity 640 cattle, rental £3O.
Bloodsworth Plain Station (Wellington dis-
trict) ; T. D. Baird, occupier—32,ooo, capacity
4000 sheep, charges £3O 10s.
Bogan West Station (Wellington district) :
J. Aarons, Jun., occupier—46,000 acres, capa-
city 1200 head cattle, charges £sl.
Boree Bogan Station (Wellington district):
Janies Keenan, occupier—l2,ooo acres, capacity
640 cattle, charges £47.
Derribong and Back Stations: Andrew Kerr,
occupier—6o,ooo acres, capacity 4000 sheep and
1300 cattle, rental £75.
Dilga Station; William Ross, occupier—19,200
acres, capacity 4000 sheep, old charges £4O, re-
appraised £6B.
Eurimbola Station: F. Lord, occupier—20,000
acres, capacity 6000 sheep, old charges £60 r
reappraised at £l5O.
Fifteen Mile Waterhole Station; John Stra-
horn, occupier—l6,ooo acres, capacity 4000
sheep, rental £26 10s.
Gamboola Station; John Smith, occupier—
-19,000 acres, grazing capacity 6000 sheep, old
charges £l7 10s, reappraised rental £25.
Glencoe Station: Jas. Keenan, occupier—
-19,110 acres, 4000 sheep, rental £3l Is.


Goimbla Station: A. H. Richardson—l2,Boo
acres, 640 cattle, old charges £4O, reappraised
at £62.
Gradell Station: Jno. Strahorn—2s,ooo acres,
1200 cattle, rental £BS.
Little Eiver Station (near Obley) : J. P.
Josephson, occupier—19,200 acres, capacity
5000 sheep, old charges £SO, reappraised £125.
Loombah Station: James Callaghan, occupier
—IO,OOO acres, capacity 640 cattle, rental £4O.
Manildra Station: Occupiers, Towns, Stewart
and Forlonge—2o,ooo acres, capacity 4000
sheep, rental £4O.
Mandadgery (or Bald Hills) Station: Robt.
J. Barton, occupier—ls,ooo acres, capacity 4000
sheep, rental £4O.
Mungara Station: John Dargin, occupier—
-70,000 acres, capacity 1280 cattle, old charges
£BO, reappraised at £l7O.
Myall Cowell Station (Wellington district):
John McNevin, occupier—16,000 acres, capacity
640 cattle, charges £3O 10s.
Narragal Station (Wellington district): Join!
Maxwell, occupier—16,218 acres, capacity 4000
sheep, rental £SB 6s Bd.
Nooary (or Neurea) Station: Robert McPhil-
lamy, occupier—Booo acres, capacity 640 head
cattle, rental £2O.
Obella Station: T. McCulloch, ocupier—26,ooo
acres, capacity 7000 sheep, rental £IOO.
Boree Cabonne Station (Wellington district):


John Smith, occupier—44,ooo acres, capacity
8000 sheep, old charges £26 ss, reappraised at
£36 ss.
Boree Nyrang Station (Wellington district);
Robert J. Barton, occupier—66,s6o acres, cap-
acity 640 cattle, old charges £l5O, recently ap-
praised at £3OO.
Buckinhah Station (Wellington district):
Occupiers, John and A. B. Patterson —area
45.000 acres, grazing capacity 6000 sheep, old
charges £63 15s, recently appraised at £BS.
Burrawang Station and Blocks A and B
(Wellington district): Francis Lord, occupier
—111,200 acres, capacity 3000 cattle, charges-
£l64.
Carra Creek Station: J. and A. B. Paterson—
-19,840 acres, capacity 7000 sheep, old charges
£4O, reappraised rental £l2O.
Cardington Station (Wellington district):
Occupier, John McNevin, area 23,000 acres,,
capacity 6000 sheep, rental £6O, hut reappraised
recently at £l6O.
Cheeseman’s Creek Station (Wellington dis-
trict) : Occupier, James Keenan—l2,ooo acres,,
capacity 640 head of cattle, old charges- £32 10s,
recently reappraised at £4O;
Colonel Station (Wellington district): Rob-
ert Trudgett, occupier—area, 16,000 acres,
capacity 640 head of cattle, charges £35.
Cona Station (Wellington district): H. S-


Oooper, occupier—l6,ooo acres, 4000 sheep,
rental £25.
Dandaloo Station: Ploreat Martel, occupier
—32,000 acres, capacity 4000 sheep and 640
cattle, rental £126.
Darouble East and West Stations: John
Strahorn, occupier—32,ooo acres, capacity 8000
sheep, rental £BO.
Davy’s Plains Station (Wellington district);
William Lawson, Junr., occupier—64,000 acres,
capacity 12,000 sheep, old charges £lßl 17s 6d,
reappraised at £3OO.
Molong Station: Andrew Kerr, trustee for
Mrs. Betts, occupier—l6,ooo acres, capacity 600
cattle, rental £25, old charges £l9 7s 6d.
Molong Nyrang Station; Isaac and Samuel
Alexander—4ooo acres, capacity 1000 sheep, old
rent £l7 10s, reappraised at £25.
Molong Swamp Station; Thomas Kite, occu-
pier—3332 acres, capacity 640 cattle, old rent
£l6 9s sd, reappraised at £2O.
The Plains Station: James Keenan, occu-
pier—16,000 acres, 640 cattle, rental £4O.
Tomingley Station: John Gilmore, occupier—
-38,000 acres, capacity 1280 cattle, rental £9O.
Toogong Station: John Smith, occupier—
-64,879 acres, capacity 8000 sheep, old rent £l2O,
reappraised at £163.
Tragarie Station: J. S. Campbell—22,4oo
acres, capacity 640 cattle, old rent £4O, re-
appraised at £9O.


Wandawondong Station: J. Strahorne—
-45.000 acres, capacity 7000 sheep, old charges
£75, new rental £l4O.
Warrabcrry and St. Gilet Station; Thomas
Wagstaff—46,ooo acres, capacity 4000 sheep,
rental £4O.
Myall Cattip Station: John N. Gilmore—
-16.000 acres, capacity 640 cattle, rental £3O.
Genanagy Station: J. N. Gilmore—76,Boo
acres, 1600 cattle, charges £92 16s 3d.
The Reedy Waterhole on Back Creek Sta-
tion: J. N. Gilmore —16,000 acres, 640 cattle,
rental £3O.
Wallenbillen Station: J. N. Gilmore—lo,ooo
acres, 640 cattle, rental £32.
Waterloo Plains Station: J. N. Gilmore—
-10.000 acres, 640 cattle, rental £3l Is.
Murrundery (Yullundry?) Station: Andrew
Kerr—l9,2oo acres, capacity 4000 sheep, old
rent £4O, reappraised £B6.
Apparently in the early days “Wellington
District” extended practically from Bourke to
Cowra.


XXIX.—SPRING IN MOLONG.
When all the brown is turning green,
The baby buds and leaves are seen;
They push their heads out, one by one,
And nod and smile and greet the sun.
When all the brown is turning green,
The little birds their feathers preen;
They love the coming of the Spring—
And so they build and nest and sing.
When all the brown is turning green,
Over the brook the bushes lean,
And drop their fingers in the tide,
And scatter drops on every side.
And so I like to romp and play
On such a warm and sunny day;
I feel as happy as a queen
When all tfce brown is turning green!
Annie W. McCullough.
In Molong, with the coming of the spring,
there has been witnessed a veritable transform-
ation scene, and seldom has this hill-circled
town appeared to better advantage than now.
The paddocks and lanes are richly carpeted,,
and along the creeks and in the streets, the
trees, which but a few weeks ago were un-
frocked and destitute of leaves, now sport
a dainty foliage which daily grows darker
in hue and more dense and beautiful.
The almost miraculous effect of a bountiful
fall of rain is observable on all sides
—only a short while since the hills were brown


and bare, and the pasture lands stricken by a
season of dryness, and the cattle gaunt and
■with bloodshot eyes; and, behold, with one
gentle wave of a magician’s wand, the whole
aspect of the countryside is completely changed
—the rocks have been struck as though by a
modern miracle-worker, and they well forth
their refreshing waters, the while the grass and
the clover and the luscious variegated thistle
spring forth and flourish and satisfy the hunger
of the lowing herds. The air is crisp and a
Wealth of pungent perfume is borne along on
every breeze—it is a glad time, to be sure, for
the harvest prospects have been brightened,
and the spirits of the toiler on the land have
been exalted beyond measure. The heart of
man exults, for there is nothing more beautiful
in this world than a perfect morn in Spring-
time, with a blue sky overhead, and a gentle
heat coming from the sun, which thrills one to
the very heart—a morning that is bright and
fair, when
. . . . the warm sun, that brings
Seed-time and harvest, has returned again.
To the farmer, with all his prospects depend-
ent upon the vagaries of the seasons, this
change, when effected under fortunate circum-
stances, comes as a harbinger of hope—and
through him the other people of the universe
are given good reasons for being glad. For the
farmer, as Balph Waldo Emerson put it,
“stands close to Nature; he obtains from the
n


earth the bread and meat. The food which was
not he causes to he. The first farmer was the
first man, and all historic nobility rests in pos-
session and use of the land. . . . The profes-
sion has in all ages its ancient charms, as stand-
ing nearest to God the first cause.” And it is
because the above sentiments are true in the
main, that in all countries and climes the
farmer, strong of purpose and of sinew, loves
in the ploughing season to have the smell of the
fresh, moist earth and the tang of the crisp,
sharp morning air in his nostrils, and to know
that a good spring will mean a bountiful crop
and bams bursting with wheat that is golden
and hay that is clean and full of substance.
Little wonder that those who have been long
sheltered within its walls of marble love quiet
old Molong, and appreciate its beauty at a time
like this—and even though the flowers are few
(save at such a season), and that there are
serious disadvantages which must be experi-
enced during the more extreme periods of the
year, there exist now so many good features to
look upon and admire, that they furnish an
■appreciable compensation for all the shortcom-
ings of the past. In truth,
It is good to be in Molong when the mists are soft
and grey,
And the wind sings by the river in the sedge;
"When the Spring has waked in daffodils and blown dead
leaves away,
And thrown a veil of green on every hedge.
December, 1912.
