













THIS NARRATIVE OF
THE CRUISE OF THE “ SCOUT,”
Hespedtnlly 3Dci»icatcC>,
(without permission),
VICE-ADMIRAL SIR GEORGE STRONG NARES,
K.C.B.jE.R.S.
THE AUTHOR,
WHOSE PEITILEGE IT HAD BEEN TO SEEVE ON THE SAME SHIP.


@ 9
KZ) O'
DEDICATORY SONNET.
IM proud to be a Briton, and to claim,
Moreton, with thee, one racial lineage
Of speech and language measured by the gauge
Of centuries sculptured with the deathless fame
Of Britain’s Chieftains. And so long as wares
Shall gleam on the horizon’s hem, and toss
Their spray toward Polaris, and the Cross,
Where England’s tempest-christened ensign braves
The frosty breath of Winter at the Poles ;
So long, brave Moreton, may sea-voices ring
Till all the tameless winds thy prowess sing;
Proclaim—from skerries where the north wind rolls
Its hissing trouble where the North Light flares
To Erebus —thy cousinship with NARES.


THE CRUISE OF THE “ SCOUT ” is a story with a brief sketch of the daily
routine, and the type of officers and men who manned the ships, and fought the
guns of the British Navy of thirty-five years ago. Herein will be found a rough
outline of a man-of-war’s-man’s life afloat that might, possibly, be of interest to
those who, in their heart of hearts, keep a warm niche for the memory of the men
that, on every league of every sea, asking not—“ Why P” played their parts in
deeds that built the Empire. I am second to no man in a full-hearted and
passionate patriotism. All I have attempted to write, here and elsewhere, bears
testimony. Let that be my excuse for desiring to assist, in a degree, through the
medium of this little story, in lessening the risk of the Colonial Britons (to coin a
phrase) of to-day remaining in ignorance of the conditions under which the brave
fellows who have preceded them fought and won. To-day there is a general topsy-
turviness in naval matters as compared with those days. Yet, as heretofore,
whatever the emergency, the courage to meet it will not be lacking.
Reefing topsails, setting studding sails, shifting topsails, topsail yards ; and
top-gallant masts are not now tests of the crews’ smartness. Now officers and men
have a very different set of duties to perform. That portion of the “ Scout’s ” cruise
here outlined was undertaken in times of peace. The incidents, mainly, are such as
fell within my own observation and experience. The Captain, officers and men, are
truly representative and typical men'of their day. Such officers as Morton, Hasted,
and DeLacey were, happily, becoming less rare than in the earlier years of the
century. Gounard, Ainsworth. Wedburn and others are true to that type who, for
the mere love of change and adventure, would leave one ship and join another
under assumed names, pursuing their fortunes until something fresh turned up
which took their fancy. The personages herein introduced to the reader would be
easily recognised by men of the old “ Edinburgh,” “ Conqueror,” “ Severn,” “ Sans-
Paroil,” “Janus,” or “ Euryalus.” Her Majesty’s ships whose commissions
extended from January 1854 to the end of 1867; in all of which I served. My
aim has been to show how, by the influence of even one good man, many may be
benefitted and rendered happy while following the hazardous occupation of a sailor’s
career in the British Navy,
J. K.
®T3 W®




CHAPTER I.
Ready For Sea
CHAPTER 11.
Under Sealed Orders
CHAPTER 111.
Breaking The Seal
CHAPTER IY.
In the Trades
CHAPTER V.
In Calm and Storm
CHAPTER YI.
Where the North Star
CHAPTER VII.
Sighting a Derelict
CHAPTER VIII.
The Cape of Storms
CHAPTER IX.
Repairing Damages
CHAPTER X.
Revelations
CHAPTER XI.
Singapore and China
CHAPTER XII.
Hong-Kong (changes)
CHAPTER XIII.
The Links Connected
COKTTEnSTTS-
Dips 26




THE CRUISE OF THE
Along the Western hills, and where gleamed white
Sea-foam around the yellow beach, young Day,
Lifting his eyelids, threw to sombre night
His strong, fierce glance across the flashing bay.
IIfPfAHT to go out to the Sound, sir?” asked old Ned, the
pAy waterman, as I made my appearance on Mutton Cove,
Devonport, about daylight one morning, a few years after the Crimean
War.
“ Yes I answered, taking my seat in the boat at the landing
steps.
“What ship, sir?” asked Ned.
“ The ‘ Scout” said I.
The old chap shoved off, stepped his mast with the aid of a stout
lad, hoisted the lug-sail, and we proceeded to beat down to the Sound
against a smartish breeze.
Now Ned was a typical man-o’-war’s man of the old school, before
the advent of Hay and" Martin’s blacking into the service, since which
time and, partly by reason thereof, the navy had been “ going to the
dogs.” Such were the opinions held by Ned and others of the same
school ; a wad of oakum dipped in the slush-cask did duty for blacking
in their time. On Sundays and muster days their otherwise shoeless
feet were encased in pumps—as shoes were called—hauled to with a
rope-yarn. Ned would have endorsed this statement.
What a difference thought I, as we passed Drake’s Island, between
these times and the stirring times of a few years ago, when the war
was at its height. Then, on the shore at Mutton Cove, North Corner,
New Pas#age, and on the Hoe itself were to be seen crowds of eager
officers and seamen rushing here and there—some landing, others
going off to the harbour and the Sound, where their ships were
anchored in various stages of preparation for sea; the Dockyards
too, and the Royal William victualing yard, were also scenes of unusual
bustle and activity.
Red-footed War, then, drave his horrid cars ;
Now, ’neath our conquering shields, alas ! what scars.


Aye! talking of scars, here was an example before me in the
person of old Ned, whose “ starboard tin,” (as he called his ijight arm)
had been shot away while doing duty before Sebastopool, with the
gallant Captain Peel, the present General Sir Evelyn Wood (he was
then a midshipman on board H.M.S. “ Queen ”) and others ; the said
arm having been replaced by a mechanical contrivance with an iron
hook, which did duty for a hand.
“ We shall get a wet jacket this morning, sir, a-beating down to
the “ Scoutsaid Ned, as the boat flew around on the port tack, and
headed for the Mount Edgecumbe shore.
“ Get a pull of your sheet, Bill he shouted to the lad.
I thought we had already got the wet jacket, as the sprays she
tossed from her weather bow flew aft, giving us in the stern-sheets
a good drenching.
At length we made our last tack towards Cawsand Bay; the next
tack would lay us on board the “Scout,” and in time for breakfast,
too, fur we could plainly see the steam of the cocoa ascending in white
wreaths from the cook’s coppers. Ned and the lad were glad of the
prospect of having a full basin of cocoa, “ especially,” said he, “ if a
dash of ship’s rum is put into it.”
Miss Weston had not then begun her Temperance work in the
interest, and for the sake of our blue-jackets. The moment is fast
approaching if, indeed, it has not already arrived, when quite fifty per
cent of our blue-jackets shall have become, if not total abstainers,
more closely related to its principles, and therefore, desirous of
cultivating the intercourse proper to such friendship.
There were but two other ships of war lying in the Sound, and
noble specimens they were of their respective classes —the “ Royal
.Albert,” three-deck line-of-battle-ship, and the “ Warrior,” an armour-
plated frigate, one of the first built.
As we headed for the heights of Bovisand for the “ Scout,” who
had the blue peter flying, we passed the above-named ships, whose
crews were just tricing up hammock gantlines, it being scrub
hammock morning with them ; and my word for it, anyone having a
desire to witness a lively scene, in which soap-suds and scrubbing-
brushes played a prominent part, he should visit a ship-of-war on an
occasion of this kind ; four hundred or more scrubbing-brushes, whose
fibrous fingers scratched upon several hundred yards of canvas at the
same time; add to this the slashing about of wash-deck buckets, and
mess-tubs, and you get something to be remembered.
As we scudded under the stern of the “ Royal Albert ” she was
being festooned fore and aft with snow-white hammocks triced up to dry.
“ Ah, sir,” quoth Ned, “ many’s the hammick I’ve scrubbed in mi
time, aboard the old ‘ Cale ’ (meaning the “ Caledonia,” a fine
three-decker in her day) “ and the ‘ Britomart ’ brig, sir, on the
coast.” This latter expression, in the navy, always meaning the
Coast of Africa.
We were now close to the “ Scout,” and the “side boys,” whose
duty it was to hand the man-ropes, were at their posts ; old Ned now
put"his helm hard to lee, and the little craft shot up into the wind


It
I i
ill. U ◄
I'dif *




and alongside ; at the same moment the halliards were let go and the
sail secured. Whereof we are glad. Safe on board, wet jacket and
all.
Ned made his boat fast alongside, and then hauled himself on
board, and quickly disappeared below for his hot cocoa, the lad
remaining in charge of the boat, his turn for cocoa would come later.
Ned received a warm greeting from shipmates who had been with him
in the old “ Cale.”
I, after the usual salutations and hand-shakings, went to my
cabin, a shift into dry clothes, and breakfast off such as falls to the
lot of a Boatswain in her Majesty’s Service. About thirty minutes
sufficed to alter this state of affairs —in my case the breakfast being
inside, and the bos’n out —when a rap at my cabin door was succeeded
by the call;
“ Mr. Avant, the first lieutenant wants you on the quarter-deck,
sir, please.”
“ All right, Martin,” I answered, and in less time than it would
take a cat to lick her whiskers, I made my obeisance to “ Number
One,” as that officer is generally designated.
Now, Lieutenant Despard —or “Black Jack,” as he was more
frequently called —and I were on pretty good terms, and certainly I
had no desire that that state of things should be altered ; I knew my
man, and my duty.
“ Ah, Mr. Avant,” said he, “ glad to see you on board again, hope
you have enjoyed yourself thoroughly.”
“ Yes, 1 thank you very much, sir;” I replied.
Said he, continuing: “Do you get the cat and fish-falls rove,
and stretched along the deck —the carpenters will get the capstan
rigged —preventer backstays, and all chaffing gear aloft, and placed
upon the rigging and yards ; in short, see all in readiness for weighing
anchor by to-morrow’s first quarter ebb tide. Turn the hands up !”
“ Aye, aye sir I replied, and at once proceeded to carry out his
orders.
The hands being up, and the necessary orders given to the captains
of tops, forecastle ad other parts of the ship ; the watch going aloft;
the other watch getting up from below the gear, and swaying it aloft
to be placed in position. These duties kept the hands on board well
employed, the boats’ crews being occupied in getting on board a
further supply of fresh provisions, poultry also, and a few sheep for
the use of the officers’ mess on the voyage.
“ Seven bells, sir !” exclaimed the sentry to the officer of the
watch.
“ Make it so,” he replied. “ Bo’s’n’s mate, pipe clear up decks.”
This was the signal for the watermen to haul their boats alongside,
laden with the wives, mothers, and sweethearts of some of those on
board the ship, to enable them to make their farewells; very much
latitude being usually allowed on these occasions, so that, our
preparations for sea being completed, little else was done besides
entertaining our visitors, the last time, in all probability, for a long
spell.


All too quickly for many of us came, seven bells—half-past-three
—when “clear up decks” was again “piped,” and all visitors
requested to leave the ship.
In a short tira. the little fleet of boats were dotted here and there
upon the calm waters of the Sound. All making their way towards
the harbour ; while of more than one dear heart in that little fleet it
might have been said :
Again she looked, as slow towards the beach
The boat was rowed, and as she watched, the land
To sight grew bolder. Yet, no tongue for speech
Had she; for she would miss his guiding hand.
The morning of 186 broke very much as we have seen many
a one before, but none the less as a great mystery, seen so often that
we had come to think very little of it, and now, once more, the grand
old Devonian lulls, as seen from our anchorage, were all aglow with
the morn’s new-born splendours ; again the light poured down upon
us with a touch gentle as of old, and one by one heaven’s lamps grew
paler. Venus herself being last in the train of night. The hands
were turned up, and the hammocks stowed, when promptly at two
bells —live o’clock —the shrill “pipes” were heard along the decks,
preluding the gruff cry: “Hands shorten in cable!” and quickly
our smart fore-top-men unbitted the cable and brought-it-to the
“ messenger while to the merry notes of fife and drum the men at
the capstan soon ran in a few shackles of the cable, encouraged
frequently by our merry-looking second lieutenant, Mr. Hasted, (“ old
Spikem,” as he was called), who would now and again look over the
bows from his station on the head gratings and call out, as if speaking
to someone at the bottom of the sea :
“Let go the man’s anchor!” then, looking inboard: “Heave
around, men ; heave around !” At length enough cable having been
taken in, Hasted called out to the first officer in charge on the quarter-
deck :
“Up and dowm, sir !”
“ Aye, aye, avast heaving,” was the response.
Orders were now given to “ loose sails,” which was soon accom-
plished, and the topsails mastheaded, the fore-topsail yard being braced
up to pay the vessel’s head off the wind ; the topgallant sails being
loosed, merely, but not sheeted home.
The Captain having now come on board with his final instructions
from the Admiral, orders were given to “ Up anchor !” when once more :
“ Let go the man’s anchor !” was shouted by the genial Hasted
from his post tor’ard, and up she came, the ship’s head at the same
time “ paying off,” her yards were braced up on the desired tack, the
topsails filled, and the “Scout” moved ahead; topgallant sails were
set, and we were soon outside the breakwater ; having received from
the other ships a parting hurrah ! while their bands played “ Auld
Lang Syne,” our band playing “ The girl I left behind me.”
And by the time breakfast was “ piped” we were fairly outside,
between the land and old Eddystone, shaping our course down


Channel. Our destination was, even to the Captain, a secret, until a
certain spot marked on the chart was reached. Our orders being
sealed till then. Meanwhile, it would be found, no doubt, that the
numerous duties claiming our attention would fortify our minds
against falling into a state of monotony. And if we are wise enough
to narrow our desires down to environment and circumstances, there
may be a reasonable chance of having them gratified, and of being
made happier in the process. Remembering that it was now our duty
to mortify the flesh by a return to a diet composed principally of salt
beef and pork, with biscuit, and perchance, potato for the first week
at sea. The much pleasanter meals of dainty mutton chop or beef-
steak, with which our mothers and sisters had contrived to tickle our
palates, being things of the past.
CHAPTER 11.
UNDER SEALED ORDERS.
We dared to leave the land, heedless of ill,
Through dark and light our course was Southward still.
jpjjlUT, as stated in the previous chapter, none knew whither.
|lp|' Our progress down Channel was not very rapid, the wind being
unfavourable for a straight-ahead mid-channel course, compelled us
to make a long leg and a short one under a kind of “ soldier’s wind,”
as a side-wind is called. It was, however, a brisk wind, which kept
the weather rigging and back-stays well taut, while we danced merrily
along, getting a view now and again, as we stood towards the land, of
the soil whence sprang many of those worthies who fought with Drake,
Hawkins, Raleigh, Gilbert, and other heroes of century,
“ Our ‘ number one ’ looks a queer card, Tom,’ ” remarked Joe
Humphreys to his topinate, Sawdy, as the two were, with others,
occupied in bending the fore-royal to its yard the next morning, before
sending it aloft to be lashed in the topmast rigging, its usual place,
when not crossed.
“ Yes, I think so, too,” answered Tom, “ he is always a-looking
down to his toes ; and I heard that when he was in China, in command
of the ‘ Seahorse,’ he had things pretty much his own way on board
of her. He used to keep the hands slung in boTin’s, a-scraping the
ship’s side by lantern light at nights, when the chaps of the other
ships were ashore, or a-dancing and skylarkin’ aboard.”
Now, as a matter of fact, Tom and Joe had credit for being the
two greatest growls in the fore top; and whether their opinion of our
“Number One” proved to be the correct one, future events will
determine.
Some time after hearing the foregoing conversation, Charley
Martin and I were taking a few turns fore and aft the weather gang-
way ; we had been shipmates before on the *“ Edinburgh,” when she
formed part of the flying squadron in the Baltic, under Admiral Sir
Charles Napier, during the Russian War, 1854—5. Our conversation
* Flagship of Rear-Admiral Chads.


naturally turned to those old,times, and to the subject of the probable
destination of the “ Scout Charley believing it would prove to be
the North America and West Indian Station ; whilst I held it would
be that of China, India, and Japan.
“ Bye-the-bye, Mr. Avant,” said Martin, “of course you
remember that devil’s chicken, as we used to call him, Hughey
Macdonald ? Ah, many’s the time I’ve seen him slip in amidships to
old ‘ Johndy’s ’ mess (short for “ Master at Arms”) while he was on
deck a-getting his smoke after dinner, and steal his grog from off the
table. Hut they understood one another, and I don’t s’pose Hughey
had it all his way. Well, 1 heard the other night when I was ashore,
that he had passed for Gunner, and had been appointed to the ‘ Fox ’
frigate, round the Horn, out Callao, and Valparaso way, you know.’ ”
“ STes,” I answered, “ I remember him very well as being one of
the smartest gunner’s mates on board the ‘ Edinburgh,’ but had not
heard of his promotion.’ ”
Our conversation was cut short here by an order from the cheery
Hasted, who had charge of the deck, to turn the watch up to trim
sails.
“ Weather braces !” shouted Hasted, and Martin, as bo’s’n’s mate
of the watch, repeated the order as the men tumbled up the hatchways.
The wind had hauled aft a point or two, and presently, the yards being
braced to the desired angle, every stitch began to draw well for a
mid-channel course.
On retiring to my cabin that night I felt it were impossible to
resist dwelling for a short space on the thought of again leaving the
land and all those whom I had learned to love ; as some there were for
whom I felt something far beyond a mere friendship. At length,
being fairly tired out by the day’s work, I sought repose in my snug
little cot, and was soon coiled up in the snow-white sheeis which
loving hands had placed, among other good things, in my sea-chest;
her’s it was, whose merry eyes, to me, always seemed to twinkle like
the Lizard lights on a frosty night; and whose prayers and good
wishes would be for me wherever I might sail. Thus meditating,
sleep claimed me for his own, and —
When morning broke we could just see the land away on the
starboard quarter ; the “ Scout ” was bowling along in grand style when
I appeared on deck to take a turn round before breakfast, and get
the sails tautened up by a pull on the halliards ; the decks having
been previously washed, and the ropes coiled.
“ Hillo, Bill !” exclaimed a little nugget of a flying-boom-man,
named Tom Harris —who had just coiled down the flying-jib-sheet—to
Bill Jewry, a fore-top-man, who stood near him. “ I’m blessed if the
skipper aint on deck already. It’s the first time I’ve set eyes on him
since I sighted him on the Hoe a-bruisin’ along with stu’n’s’ls both
sides, (meaning a lady on each arm). Well, he do look a likely chap,
anyhow, and let’s hope he’ll turn out so good’s he looks.”
“ He’s not the only likely chap that’s aboard this vessel, if what
old Joe Humphreys tofd me turns out right side up remarked Bill.
And here, perhaps, a few words having reference to Captain


Morton may be in order. He was a man about five feet nine inches
in height, broad-shouldered, and deep-chested, stood well upon his
legs as a sailor should. He had served in one Arctic expedition as
sub-lieutenant, and was connected with the good old Devonshire
family of Morton’s, of Haldon Court. Thus much I had gleaned con-
cerning him from the conversation of two officers at Keyham Docks
while the “ Scout ” was fitting out.
Having, so far, introduced to my readers the Captain, and first
and second lieutenants only, it must not therefore be assumed we had
not our full complement of officers on board ; they were all here, and
will appear in due order as may be required for the purposes of this
narrative.
Before dinner was “ piped,” the weather had begun to wear a
squally countenance ; and quartermaster Phill Gounard, as he stood
upon one of the quarter-deck guns conning the ship, was heard to
remark :
“ We shall have a blow before long.”
It may be well to state here that Phill —from what had been seen
of him during the period of our fitting out, and from hints dropped
concerning his career on board a smart little brig on ‘‘the coast,” a
few years prior to his joining the “ Scout ” —was, by some, regarded
as a species of ogre, a man who would not be trifled with, or thwarted
in any way. Tall and swarthy, with something of the look of a
Spaniard, or Frenchman, and with an admixture of the peculiarly
excitable qualities of both ; he, wore a look at times that would have
‘‘frightened the whiskers off a fo’c’s’le man.” Such, at any rate, were
the impressions on a casual glance at the man. Though there are
those who affirm that unnecessary apprehensions .are entertained with
respect to his connection with the “ little brig ” referred to above.
“Better take in the topgallant sails, Mr. Despard,” said the
Captain, to that officer who had the first watch. “We shall have that
squall from the westward down upon us shortly.”
“ Aye, aye, sir said Mr. Despard.
“ Bo’s’n’s mate, pipe watch shorten sail ! topmen aloft and take in
the to’gallant s’ls ! to’gallant clew-lines, stand by to’gallant sheets
and halliards !” were the orders given in quick succession, and to
promptly carry out which all bestirred themselves.
“ Mind your weather helm, quartermaster !” shouted Despard.
“ Steady, port,” called out he to the helmsman. Meantime the
hands aloft made good progress in securing the sails to their respec-
tive yards, and soon succeeded in making all snug, as far as the
to’gallau’ s’ls were concerned.
“ Scarcely, however, had the men come down from aloft, when the
cry: “Man overboard!” was heard, quickly followed by the order:
“ Away lifeboats’ crews !” and soon, every man who could move,
was on deck. The ship was hove-to, and the starboard cutter lowered
into the water; but before the lifeboats’ crews had reached their
boats, the Captain’s coat and cap were hung on the quarter-deck, and
their owner was struggling with the swell of the Atlantic, to the
rescue of the unfortunate who had fallen overboard.


Not more than ten minutes had elapsed when “ The cutter has
got them on board, sir !” was shouted from the mizen top by young
Lord Montgomery, the midshipman, who had gone aloft to watch
events. „ „
“All right,” was the reponse. The cutter’s falls were now
stretched along the deck, and in a few minutes more the boat was
hanging to her davits, and all her hands safe on board.
° r rhe rescued man, one of the “ carpenter’s crew,” had fallen
overboard whilst securing one of the bow ports and, when hauled on
board the cutler, it was seen that he had begun to lash himself to the
life-buoy, by means of his neckerchief, and that he still held the
hammer he was using at the time he fell. Upon being asked “ why
he had not thrown it away ?” he replied: “ It would have cost three-
and-sixpence to buy another.” *He was a Maltese, and that accounts
for a great deal. There is but small chance in Malta for either mendi-
cants or Jews. < .
The Captain went up a few degrees in the estimation of all on
board, and even Tom Harris remarked to Bill Jewry : “ That’s a chalk
to the skipper, Bill.” Whereupon Bill replied:
“ You’re right, mate, didn’t I tell you so.” (This he invariably
said whatever things happened ; whether he really had “ told you so,
or not.
The Captain, after giving instructions to Dr. Hargreaves to see
to the rescued man, went to his cabin, satisfying the anxious enquiries
of the officers that he (the Captain) was all right.
The ship was brought to her right course again, the weather
looking more threatening than before.
A few minutes after Captain Morton had gone to his cabin, a
smart ring of the bell brought the sentry smartly to the cabin door.
“ Send for the Chief Engineer, sentry said the captain,
“ Yes, sir replied he, raising his right hand smartly to his
forehead in true military style. The messenger-boy was soon face-to-
face with Mr. David Sharp, chief of the band of brave fellows who
fed the “ Scout’s ” furnace fires.
The wind was screaming very energetically as that chief stood, cap
in hand, in the cabin receiving his orders. The propeller was lowered
in position, and connected with the machinery, as expeditiously as
Mr. Sharp knew how. At that task “ the hands ’ on deck duly
fulfilled their part, while the heavy thuds of the sea against the
“ Scout’s” sides told us unmistakably that the wind had not vanished.
The both watches of sweating fireman, in front of the glowing
furnaces, soon enabled their chief to report to the Captain. Keady
to steam up to every pound she can carry, sir.”
“ Very well, Mr. Sharp replied he. Thereupon the “ steam
chief ” returned to the engine room,
“ All the watch !” shouted by the bo’s’n’s mates, was the signal
for the watch below to go below.
“ Crounard will be correct about the blow he predicted this
* Outside the native population, for, indeed, numbers of them are both. (Jews in
money-hoarding is here meant). J.K.


morning, for it is gathering up fast, and we were none too soon with
the top-gallant sails,” said Mr. Brodie, the midshipman of the watch,
to the bo’s’n’s mate. Whereat he replied :
“Tou’re right, sir, and if we don’t have to take a reef down
before long, my name aint Frank Ainsworth, that’s all.”
Mr. Jarnays, our third lieutenant, had charge of the first watch ;
and a smart officer he was, too, but just a little bit too much given to
keeping the watch on the jog-trot, dry-hauling—now on this brace,
now on that, sweating up halliards, now this sheet would bear a pull,
now that, and so on. But it seemed he would be employed more to
the purpose this watch, for already, as Ainsworth was speaking, a
smart crack was heard, followed by the violent flapping of the fore-
topsail, which sounded like a volley of musketry. The weather-sheet
had carried away.
“ Fore-topsail clew-lines ! hands by the fore-topsail halliards !
watch trim sails !” shouted by Mr. Jarnays, set the whole watch in
motion, The fore-staysail was set, and the spanker brailed up, to
counteract the effect of the accident and. in a measure, prevent the
ship flying up into the wind. Such other precautions being taken as
the presumed proximity of danger suggested ; whilst the yard was
clewed down upon the cap, and the topmen sent aloft to secure the
sail and, if possible, bend the sheet afresh. These orders were carried
out as quickly as was possible amid the gathering darkness, and wind
that seemed increasing to a gale. Moreover —
The silver stars had all withdrawn
Behind the murky air ;
No longer tranquil as at dawn.
Black seas leapt everywhere.
And—
It was ten o’clock ere the topsail was again ready for setting, and
we heard the order :
“Watch, make sail!” when it was quickly mastheaded. This
time it was set with a reef taken in, as in all probability the hands
would be turned up at seven bells to reef; meanwhile most of the
watch sought the shelter of the main deck, a few, under the lee of the
boom-boats, and it was to the latter place that Harris and Jewry had
gone.
“ Bless’d if I don’t think that ‘ Black Jack,’ and our quartermaster,
Gounard, have been shipmates before said Tom.
” I told you so,” quoth Bill, “and may be I could tell you more’n
that.”
Curiously enough that was the topic of conversation between
Sawdy and Humphreys, who had perched themselves on the side-tackles
of one of the main deck guns.
Said Joe, who was the older man of the two : “You mind me
saying, Tom, that I thought our ‘ Number One ’ was a queer card F”
Tom answered in the affirmative, and again repeated his conviction
as recorded in the first part of this chapter.
An abrupt ending to their spell of leisure was here brought about
by the cry : “ Jib-sheet carried away, sir !” which was duly emphasised


by the violent flapping of the sail, and the beating of its pennant with
the block attached, against the bulwarks and hammock netting. Then,
vociferously :
“On deck, the watch! jib down-haul!” were the orders that
followed the shrill cry of the boatswain’s mate, as he repeated the
orders of Mr. Jarnays ; and with the alacrity of a man-o’-war’s crew,
the obstreperous sail was hauled down, and secured on the jib-boom,
the rope spliced, rove and again ready for use. This accident had
been the cause of sending one of our fine young fellows on his last
cruise. He had been conveyed below to the sick berth during the
bustle, merely stunned, it was thought, bv a blow on the head by the
pennant-block, while he was in the act of handing out the down-haul ;
he never regained consciousness. The sad accident claimed additional
sympathy, from the fact that he had been but recently married.
And thus one soul we lost of our brave crew,
As o’er the deep, dark sea our vessel flew.
The weather, when the sentry reported “ seven bells,” seemed as
determined as ever to challenge us to battle. As the bell was struck
the Captain came on deck.
“ Turn the hands up, Jarnays !” said he “ Hands reef topsails !”
Very soon both watches of topmen were aloft upon the yards,
each on their own side. No small amount of amusement was here
created for those nearest the hatchway, down which a ship’s corporal
was bellowing: “Nicksdorf! on deck, Nicksdorf !” he answering in
pigeon English : “ Vas tell de officer af de vatch I schall have two
legs in von troush.” Himself appearing as unmoved as a stone,
while his solemn gravity lent quite a touch of humour to the situation.
It transpired that, turning out in the darkness below he had, in
his hurry to get on deck become confused and, instead of putting on
his nether garment in the orthodox manner, he had got considerably
mixed in getting into his pants ; some wag having turned one leg
inside out while he slept, and had taken an overhand knot in the
other.
During the work of reefing the vessel did her best under fore and
aft canvas ; and the whistling gale kept things pretty lively on board
H.M.S. “ Scout,” while getting her under double-reefed topsails that
night, and ere the work had been accomplished and the watch relieved,
it had gone three bells, (half-past-one). And —•
So blust’ring Boreas midnight’s threshold crost,
A shadow on his features as he tost
The thick mist right athwart the waning moon;
Blowing his challenge to th’ approaching noon.
“ Whose watch is it, Tom ?” shouted Joe Humphreys from the
port cat-head, where hq was putting in an hour on the look-out,
“ Old Spikem’s,’ and we shant be bothered again this watch not if
he can help it” answered Tom Sawdy, as he took shelter from the
heavy sprays, and bellowed to Joe on the cat-head above him.
“ Boatswain’s mate !” send the watch down on the main deck out
of the wet, but tell them to be smart on deck at the first sound of the


‘ pipe ” called out the thoughtful Hasted from the bridge. That order
did not greatly disconcert the watch.
, After Joe had been relieved from his look-out he gravitated—as
surely as water finds its level—to where Tom had stretched himself,
upon the side-tackles of a main deck gun ; there being just now a
scarcity of dry planks anywhere. But dry planks there will be again
with the advent of fine weather. So reasoned our two friends who
if they could growl, had also their philosophical moods.
The next evening, amid the war of elements, the men who fed
our furnace fires had been called to duty. Fore and aft canvas only
being shewn to the gale to steady the ship.
And almost within sight of the home he had so recently left, the
body of young Williams —the man who was so fatally injured by the
jib-sheet block —was consigned to the deep.
“ That young Williams that’s just been buried puts me in mind
of a chap I got acquainted with when I was aboard the ‘ Calcutta,’ in
the East Indies, Tom said Joe Humphreys, “ his name was Williams,
too, and it was in a queer way I got to know him. A few years after
I first dropped in with him he was keeping a grog-shop, at Singapore,
and the sign of it was —what do you think, Tom ?’”
“ P'raps ’twas the ‘ Blue Anchor?’ ” queried Tom.
“ Wrong !” replied Joe. “ No, it was ‘ Three Times Eleven.’ ”
“ That’s a queer name for a ‘ grog-shop ’ to have,’ ” remarked
Tom, as he dived down the fore hatchway to get a smoke, Joe follow-
ing And as the light from' the “ dip ”in the suspended lantern fell
upon them, Tom watched the bronzed countenance of Joe till a cloud
of tobacco-smoke threw a transitory shade across it, then the pair,
having withdrawn somewhat from the crowd- of smokers, perched
themselves upon the tackles of a gun. Said Joe:
“ You don’t know lan D’Evon, Tom, do ye P”
“ Never been shipmates with him, Joe replied Tom.
“ Ah,” continued Joe, “he’s a smart chap, he is, and he’s got a
head full of learning, too. He does think a deal of the skipper, does
lan. He was with the skipper aboard the same ship when the skipper
was gunnery leftenant, up the ‘ straits ’ (Mediterranean). There
was some real curios on that ship, so I’ve heard lan say. And to
hear him tell of the doings of old Jack Healy, and Bill Bray, ’specially
when they went ashore, was enough to make a fellow blush for his
kind For they was never charged with coming aboai'd in the same
suit of clothes they went ashore in, not they ; nearly always a brown
paper suit was good enough for them to go aboard in. Then there
was a harem-skarem leftenant, a Mr. Le something, I don’t mind
exactly wdiat. As for names, well, there was about the querest lot on
her books I ever heard tell of. There was two Drakes, and a
Pidgeon ; and one Crane; there was one Budd, and two Roses; one
Lilly ; a Red, and Black ; three Greens, and four Whites ; and a
Blue ; and no less than seven Murphys; Joy; Jolly; and Cross;
alongside of Polkmghorne, and Horniblow ; besides two Lanes, and a
Greensward.”
The “ pipe ” “ out lights,” put an end to their smoke while Joe was


rounding off his yarn with a little romance of his courting days, away
home in the little country village where came but once a week a
penny broadsheet from the metropolis to disturb the sleepy tenor of
their lives.
As signs of any permanent hnprovement in the weather were
entirely absent, the Captain ordered the sails to be furled. Steam
was resorted to, and for forty-eight hours did the hungry roar of the
wind and sea, as it hurried landward, smite upon our ears. While
upon the iron floors of engine room, and stoke-hold, men, grimy with
dust and sweat, amid the furiously-hissing clouds of steam, and rapidly
moving machinery, did their duty. Below the water-line, they could
hear, but could not see the tumbling waves with which the “ Scout ”
fought bravely, defying the forces of old Neptune, who seemed to
dispute our right to make any southing, for indeed, steam power,
notwithstanding, on the morning of the second day of the gale, we
found ourselves up off the Isle of Wight, with, in addition to our
other mishaps, the loss of our fore-topgallant mast.
Now this was, it must be confessed, an exceptional experience
for a man-of-war, well found in every respect, after having just cleared
the Channel. Sail was again made. And it was thought that we
might return to Plymouth, but Captain Morton decided otherwise ;
his intention being to sail just near enough to report himself, merely.
Our spare topgallant mast having been sent aloft, we were, with
the aid of a slashing breeze, soon down off the Land’s End, again ; this
time with a fairer prospect of soon being in the desired latitude and
longitude which, it was rumoured, lay somewhere in the vicinity of
Madeira,
CHAPTER 111.
BREAKING- THE SEAL.
As evening walked tlie western stretch of sea,
And zenithwards the shiv’ring shafts of light
From Phoebus leapt; oh ! it was joy to be
At sea on such a night.
H|T was two bells in the last-dog-watch, and a fine evening, seven days
lH after leaving the shores of old England, that the decks of H.M.S.
“Scout” must have presented to the eyes of that fabled “Cherub that
sits up aloft to keep watch over poor Jack,” a very pleasant spectacle
indeed as she glided smoothly along upon a quiet sea, under a serene
sky. Along the starboard side of the main deck as far aft as the main-
mast, those of the crew who choose might have been seen smoking, and
discussing a variety of subjects, such as usually find favour with
seamen, viz: how they had spent their time whilst on shore, and with
whom, during the period of fitting out the ship. Opinions were
expressed on the hundred and one incidents of interest, even to the
appearance of .1 ack Friend, captain of the foretop, in his ‘ long-shore ’
togs, and to ‘gallan’ funnel (stove-pipe hat) Jack being of opinion that
that style of hat always commanded a certain amount of reverence and
respect, and demanded especially good behaviour on the part of the
wearer; and that under its shadow he was bound to observe due






courtesy and moderation of language, even to the noisy, bad-tempered
newspaper paragraphist who declared that he (Jack) looked “all at
sea ” in a civilian’s outfit. Nevertheless Jack had forgiven the said
writer, declaring he was entitled, like more plebeian sinners, to an
opportunity for repentance. One of the so-called sinners was Jim
Blair, who asserted that “ Jack looked as if all his head-stays were gone
and, as a consequence, his mast had a tendency to fall over the stern.”
Some of a more speculative turn of mind, so far anticipating events
as to be laying plans for their intentions, should they and the “ Scout ”
reach home again.
Abaft on the port side, our very efficient band, under bandmaster
Hardaway, was discoursing lively music; whilst the tell-tale jingle of
glasses in the ward-room mess testified that matters were lively in that
direction. In short, the whole scene gave evidence of a united crew,
who had abandoned for the moment, the shibboleths of Caste.
“ Is that you, Ian?” I called out in answer to the enquiry : “ Are
you in, Mr. Avant?’
“ Yes I replied.
“ Good evening, sir ;” said my visitor, a smart fore-topgallant yard
man, was my young friend, lan D’Evon, by name ; he had been a few
years in the service, and had followed, previously, the profession of a
sculptor.
“ What news, Ian?” said I.
“I am come to request the loan of Herschell’s Astronomical
Works, Mr Avant, if you please;” he replied.
“ With pleasure, my boy ;” I answered, handing him the book.
And thanking me, he departed
“ 1 say, Bill !” exclaimed Tom Harris to Jewry. (The worthy pair
having stowed themselves in the hammock netting just abaft the fore
rigging ) “It strikes me that lan and the bo’s’n is getting perty thick,
I saw them a-going into the bo’s’n's cabin, in the dog-watch.”
What added to the strangeness of the situation was that Bill him-
self seemed to have made that discovery, for he cooly replied :
“Yes, I know, didn’t I tell you so?’ anyhow, I believe there’s
something in that chap, lan. And I believe they’ve been shipmates
before, too.”
“ What about that yarn you started the night when it came on to
blow, and we was a-spelling a bit under the lee of the launch ?” said
Harris
“ The night the topsail-sheet carried away V queried Bill. “ Oh,
well, it was like this, you know. My ‘gal ’ used to live servant with a
family down in Oxfordshire, by the name of Despard ; and many’s the
time she had heard them talk about their son who, they said, had gone
away, and they had lost the run of him for a long time and, by last
accounts he was on a vessel as got lost round ‘ the horn.’ (Cape Horn).
And since I have been aboard the ‘ Scout ’ I have kept my eyes open, and
ears, too, for that matter. Now it’s my opinion that ‘ Number One ’ and
Phill have been shipmates before. And so 1 said that night ! if you
remember. You see, it’s not a long difference betwixt Despard and


Gounard, is it ? anyhow, if there’s any ereglarari’ty about that ’ere
enouncrnent you needn’t let on to anybody else what I have told you,
that’s all, and before the ‘ Scout ’ hauls down her pennant, may be we
shall know raor’n we do now as regards these two individuals.’ ”
Claiming our notice there is yet one other group. In the captain’s
cabin are assembled, by his invitation to dine, lieutenants Despard and
Hasted The conversation was, during dinner, as might have been
expected, on our very extraordinary experiences in the Channel.
Afterwards, over their wine, it took a more general turn, touching, at
times, the fringe of Politics and Biography ; Religion and History ; the
Array and Navy, which led, as Captain Morton had intended, to the
subject of our Sealed Orders. The ship, it was expected, would make
her destined position by noon on the morrow ; and while speculating
on the matter, the captain said : “ Well, gentlemen, I certainly shall
be pleased if my instructions are to proceed to the China and East
India stations, which will, according to recent regulations, embrace that
of Japan also. Because, although an old traveller in many parts of
the world, I have never had an opportunity of visiting Japan.”
“ Indeed,” remarked Lieutenant Hasted, “ I have been more
fortunate in that respect, having spent the greater part of a commission
in Japanese waters, while on board the ‘ Lapwing,’ And I assure you,
sir, the Japanese are a very interesting and progressive people. To
instance this, their women lead a life of much greater freedom than is
generally the case with those of other eastern countries ; there are no
harems, as in Mohamedan countries ; their single women associate freely
with their friends and relatives; while men (contrary to what often
obtains in more civilized Christian countries) never descend to disparag-
ing expressions with regard to them, nevertheless. Reforms are needed,
which there, as elsewhere, will counteract the evils which abound, not
more, perhaps, than in nations that are under the influence of Chris-
tianity. Japan, of course, is but a highly-civilized heathen country.
They are undergoing, in my opinion, a species of social evolution, and
in the near future they will play a most important part in the world’s
commercial development, as well as in war’s more serious affairs. And,
in spite of the rigid suppression of everything hitherto regarded as of
western origin, they appear to be bracing themselves for the work
which is, undoubtedly, before them,’ ”
Said Captain Morton: “Referring to the conditions of moral
fitness of that people, all that makes for that, whether of the individual
(and it must start from that point) or the nation, will tell in their
favour. Without such they will not hold their own, much less play a
conspicuous part on the stage of the world. Will they emerge from
their present condition and be equal to such a work, say—as to main-
tain a leading position in mundane affairs ? Do they desire it ? If
so, to be successful, one duty is before them which is not yet, in ray
opinion, in course of active fulfilment. I firmly believe that there is
nothing which holds the kernel, so to speak, of permanency, but the
embracing and holding fast to those principles of Christianity for which
numbers of our forefathers laid down their lives.”


Captain Morton and Lieutenant Despard complimented Hasted
on the very lucid, though necessarily brief description he had given of
domestic life of Japan; Despard endorsing nearly all he had said, as
borne out by his own experience of that people whilst employed in
those waters (reference has been made to such employment in the first
part of this narrative). “ But,” Despard added, “I do not quite agree
respecting the refining influence of Christianity It appears to me
that among some sections of Christians, there are evidences of a disposi-
tion to force men into acceptance of their particular ideas and belief.”
“ 1 acknowledge,” replied Hasted, “ that tolerance of the views of
others is not so much practised as one could desire ; but do you not see
that such as those lack in practise these very Christian precepts what-
ever be their professions ?”
By a judicious bit of diplomacy, Captain Morton directed the
conversation into another channel, and concluded by proposing: “ The
Queen! gentlemen, the Queen !” In a parting bumper Her Majesty
was pledged, and the guests retired to their cabins. The Captain
leaving orders to be called at daylight, retired also. While all—
The sea was calm, with mist all fringed around.
And with grey mist was high * Esparto crowned.
Aye, a beautiful night it was, the watch of the middle hours,
between twelve and four o’clock.
“ Boatswain’s mate,” said Mr. DeLacey, our gunnery lieutenant,
who had the watch, “send the'watch aft to set the spanker !”
“ Aye, aye, sirreplied Bill Heath, the bo’s’n’s mate of the watch ;
and blowing his shrill pipe, shouted his superior’s orders to the drowsy
watch, who came “ tumbling aft,” rubbing their eyes as they stumbled
along, some of them not without knocking their unprotected toes
against an up-standing ring-bolt and, for the information of the un-
initiated, I may say that such a collision, while running along the deck,
in enough to make one wince.
The gaff, which had been lowered to enable the sail maker to repair
the head of the sail, (torn accidentally), was soon hoisted, the sail hauled
out. and the watch, partaking somewhat of the drowsiness of the atmos-
phere, relapsed into that state of quiet which, now and again, is the
experience of all those who “go down to the sea in ships, and occupy
their business in great waters.”
The “ Scout ” was just moving sluggishly through, and along her
appointed path, surrounded by that element, the presence of which
enables life to be maintained—both animal and vegetable—on the face
our planet. The look-out men would dreamily sing out:
“ Port cat-head !”
“ Starboard cat-head !” and so on, from their repsective posts
around the ship, and aloft, as the bell told off the half-hours.
But even here, amidst this ocean solitude, with nought but a plank
between us and the deep, dark womb of ocean probably miles in depth,
the spirit of evil and bitterness was at work.
* Esparto Pass, Madeira.


“ Yes,” soliloquised one restless spirit, as he lay sleepless, while his
hammock kept time to the swing of the ship, and the straining and
creaking of the mainmast, which passed down through the deck close to
where it was suspended. “ I know he will use all the cunning of his
slippery nature to persuade Beatrice that there can be no longer any
doubt about my having been lost in the ‘ Blenheim,’ when that vessel
was round the Horn; seeing that so long a time has elapsed, and
nothing further has been heard at Lloyd’s, of ship or crew. He
always fixed his eyes upon me as though he desired, Basilisk-like, to
annihilate me with his look, whenever he saw us together. Called me
a villain, too, the other night. It is not my desire to plunge into the
adventure of an immediate rupture with him, though I have had quite
enough of his irritating interference between Beatrice and myself. I
will, however, keep quiet, and abide my time, I wonder if he has
heard that Beatrice has gone to Japan with the Du Fresney’s.”
Promptly, as across the eastern casements of the sky the daylight
crept, Captain Morton came on deck, saluting the officer of the watch
with :
“ Good morning, Hasted !”
“ Good morning, sir;” responded that officer.
“ What a beautiful scene is here presented,” continued the
Captain, from whose optimistic nature there was ever rising one
golden ladder of melody, “in the sky above, on the sea around. But,
while talking of scenery, Hasted, what can excel in beauty the coast
of Spain, for instance, near Malaga, and Barcelona ? how pleasing to
note the frequent interchange of towering mountain-ranges, and green,
vine-clad hill-sides; the blue sea dotted with those picturesque lateen
sails which are such a peculiar feature in that part of the world.”
“ Yes,” said Mr, Hasted, “ that coast-line possesses a most
singular beauty of its own.”
The captain now left the bridge for a walk on the quarter-deck,
the usual routine of scrubbing decks having been completed.
“ Pipe breakfast, bo’s’n’s mate !” was responded to by the hurry-
skurrymg of the watch down the hatchways, and as the last shrill
rattle of the “ pipes ” died away, Jim Blair rushed with all speed to the
galley fire, with a slice of raw salt pork impaled upon the end of a
long stick, it being his intention to give the said morsel a grilling
before laying it upon a huge biscuit which he held in the other hand.
“ After you, with the fork, Jim !” shouted our old acquaintance,
Humphreys, who had been just relieved from an hour’s look-out at the
mast-head, and stood lighting his pipe at the suspended lantern.
“ Where did you stow away in the first watch, last night, Joe ?”
asked Jack Friend, giving a knowing wink to lan D’Evon, who was
standing near him. “ 1 looked everywhere for you, and as Tom
couldn’t, or wouldn’t tell me, I imagined you had gone overboard on
the quiet.”
“ Not so, my friend,” said Joe, “ I was a-studying Hastronomy
along with lan, there, wasn’t I now, lan ?” and Joe was about to
explain further, when he espied Jim had just finished with the grilling,
“ Ah, all right, old man,” quoth Joe, making a dart after the fork.


Whilst the watch were engaged at gun-drill that morning there
were in the Captain’s cabin our Navigating Lieutenant Mr Heighten,
the First Lieutenant, and the Captain himself. The ship’s position was
indicated upon the chart which lay upon the table, and it was found
to agree with the spot named in the Sealed Orders.
The portion relating to our destination were now opened, and it
proved to be China, the East Indies, and Japan, as the Captain had wished.
Here, then, in this interesting region, with the Island of Madeira
in sight, and the small island of Porto Santo not far to the
north-east, was made known to us in which portion of the globe we
should, all being well, spend the three or four years of our commission
Here, too, it was, that drifting messengers from the American
Continent, in the form of carved wood, trees, and largo reeds were
discovered, which had been borne hither by the circling currents of
ihe ocean, at that time so imperfectly understood, and which confirmed
Columbus in his belief of its existence. He persevered in his search,
despite the clamours of his rebellious crew at seeing nothing day after
day but a shoreless horizon ; with what result we all know now.
The wind being favourable, the “ Scout ” was brought to her
proper course for the Canary Islands. Probably we should sight
Teneriffe.
“ Watch make sail ! weather braces ! Get the port stu’nVls
ready, Mr. Avant!” shouted Mr. Despard that afternoon, and it acted
as a rare stimulus to the watch on deck.
“ Aye, aye, sir,” 1 replied, and in a brace of shakes we had the
stu’n’s'l gear adrift from the fore and main yards, and the topmen
aloft vied with each other as to who would be first with the top-gallant
stu’nVls. The news of our destination gave general satisfaction, few
on board had ever been there.
“All ready for’ard, sir!” exclaimed Mr. Hamilton, the midship-
man on duty there.
“All ready the stu’nVls aft, sir!” so declared the bo’s’n’s male,
Ainsworth.
“ Sway away !” from the officer of the watch, sent all four sails
swinging out in mid-air, and the tramp of the booted feet of the
marines, the thud-thud of the bare-footed blue-jackets, commingled
with the shrill whistling of the “ pipes,” several hundred yards more
of light canvas did their best to conquer Time’s twin brother, Space.
“Avast swaying the fore-topmast stu’n’s’l, sir;” called Mr.
Hamilton, from the forecastle, then, hailing the foretop —“ throw the
man a rope !”
It had become evident what had occurred, as we could see a man
hanging from the fore-bowline bridle. A rope being thrown him, he
passed it around his body under the arms, and thus safe-guarded, he
climbed up the leach of the sail on to the fore yard, none the worse
for his mishap.
“Lucky for Cato that he caught the bowline bridle,” observed
Mr. Hamilton to Bill Bubb, the captain of the foretop.
“ Yes, sir, or there might have been another job for the Captain
said Bill.


“ Ton and Cato have been shipmates before, 1 believe remarked
Mr. Hamilton.
“ Yes, sir, I knew him when he was a nipper just big enough to
carry a toastrack aft to the ward-room mess ; or pass a basin of cocoa
through the crowfoot. That was aboard the old ‘ Edinburgh,’ sir ;
and a smart boy he was, too. I’ve seen that youngster when he was
a skylarking about aloft of an evening along with other lads, go up to
the fore-royal-mast-head, and stand upon the truck, holding on by his
knees to the spindle of the vane like grim death to a mop-stick ; then
he’d straighten up like a bobstay, off blue shirt, wave it in the air, put
it on again, then slide down the royal back stays, and when he landed
on the deck he’d make a bow, sir, like for all the world I’ve seen a
clown do in the circus ; and I never see any other boy in the Service
do that, sir.”
CHAPTER IV.
v IN' THE TEADES.
As speeds our ship across this breezy zone,
All luminous with phosphorescent light
The sea appears, when o’er the deep is thrown
The sombre shades of equatorial night.
|||Hp|YE ! and I know no more beautiful sight afforded by the sea
11111 l than that of a full-rigged ship with weather studding-sails set,
dancing merrily along in these latitudes, especially at night, when her
wake is one long line of silvery light, while around her bows the waves
flash like wreaths of lambent tire, the sprays she dings from her path,
disdainfully aside, have the appearance of the luminous “ star-dust.”
so called, of the “ milky way.” And thus for days and nights we sail,
hardly needing to touch a rope, more than to ease halliards down at
night to allow for shrinkage of the canvas, and tauten all up again on
the morrow.
Several days have elapsed since Cato fell from the fore yard ;
Lieutenant Hasted is in charge of the deck, and whilst the “ Scout ”
is gliding beautifully along, suppose, dear reader, we descend to Mr.
Despard’s cabin. Grounard was there by his superior officer’s request,
and upon the features of both men could be traced signs, unmistak-
able, of envy, hatred, and malice. The quartermaster, in appearance,
was at a disadvantage, as compared with the lieutenant, easily
accounted for in the rougher experiences of the former, which neces-
sitated his living amongst less elevating surroundings, and mixing
with companions of a different polish.
“ Of course,” said Hespard, who was the elder of the twain, “ I
recognised you the instant you appeared on board the ‘ Scout,’ when
you were drafted from the ‘ Impregnable.’ ”
“ And you then knew I was not drowned in the ‘ Blenheim ;’ ”
interjected Grounard. “ Only then knew ?” And here his excitable
temper seemed to gather warmth from the flame of memory, and he
exclaimed —“ Dissembler ! did you not recognise me on board the
‘ Seahorse,’ also, during your reign of terror on board that vessel ?
your main object being to crush the life out of me, and have the grim


satisfaction of seeing mj body carried to Happy Valley* where, it was
your boast, you had sent so many of your men. I escaped that probable
fate by deserting from the ship. And by the fortune of war, here I
am again to give the lie to all your cunning inventions to Beatrice
regarding my fate. Whatever may be the reason for the exagerated
and audacious calumny to which I have been subjected, it appears to
have originated in something more than a casual fit of ill-temper.
Notwithstanding all that is past, while on board the * Scout ’ I shall,
of course, obey you as my superior officer ; then let us do the best we
can to advance, by a larger effort, a spirit of goodwill and regard,
which, on my part, will be most heartily welcomed and appreciated.
My identity, for reasons well known to us both, will remain a secret.
I am here by your invitation, and entered your cabin unobserved ; I
will leave as secretly ; the sentry has gone to report the time to the
officer of the .vatch, so I will bid you good-night.’ ”
With that remark Gounard left the cabin, and as the after part
of the watch were lying about on deck, asleep, he passed forward to
his hammock unnoticed by them.
After the departure of Quartermaster Gounard, Despard, feeling
some relief from the acute tension he had experienced, and left to the
companionship of his own thoughts, threw himself upon his cot, but
not to sleep. Much of what Gounard had said during their brief
interview went far to convince him that his conduct towards him had
not been in accordance with truth and justice.
“ Yes,” he soliloquised, “ too many are the divisions which
separate men in this complex civilisation of ours ; I have not been
innocent of hostility towards Edgar, and have vilified him without
giving him the chance of self-justification. In short, I have succeeded
admirably in establishing uneasy relations between myself and him.
Hasted was correct when he said : ‘ there is a deplorable lack of
faithfulness to our convictions and loyalty to our friends !’ A grand
fellow is Hasted, and I will seek more of his society.’ ”
This seems a fitting place to make some reference to the relation-
ship subsisting between the lieutenant and the quartermaster. Cyril
Despard, lieutenant of the ‘ Scout,’ came of an Oxfordshire family.
He entered the Navy in the usual manner as a Cadet, and served in
many parts of the world ; working his way to promotion by slow
degrees—slow, because he had no friends at Court. Nor was his
sphere of interest wide enough to secure for him membership in the
Carlton. And by the social weight of his friendship his exclusion
from the Marlborough was assured. Moreover, his pecuniary status
effectually prevented his admission to the Army and Navy Clubs.
Bo that his road to the lieutenancy of the “ Scout ” had been a slow
and rugged one.
Edgar Despard (Gounard) and Cyril Despard were cousins.
Edgar had entered the Mercantile Marine, passing with credit the
first stages of an officer’s life in that service ; during which time he
had paid several visits to his native town, having on one of those
* The Cemetery at Hong Kong


occasions become acquainted with a very estimable young lady named
Beatrice Dalton ; she favourably received his attentions, and with an
amount of reciprocity that encouraged the young sailor.
But xMrs. Dalton, her mother, favoured the suit of Cyril Despard
who, as stated in a former chapter, had endeavoured to force his atten-
tions upon Beatrice. While Mr. Dalton, content to allow his daughter
to follow her own inclination in the matter, remained neutral.
“ Dive minutes to eight bells, sir (four o’clock in the morning)
said the sentry as, with the usual military salute, he reported the time
to the officer of the watch, Lieutenant De Lacey.
“ Pipe reelers said that officer to the bo’s’n’s mate, and pre-
sently two half-asleep “ lambeys ” (mizen top-men) came pattering
along the deck in obedience to the “ pipe,” and accompanied by Mr.
Brodie, the midshipman of the watch, proceeded to heave the log;
having ascertained the ship’s rate of speed, the midshipman reported
to the officer of the watch —“ Ten knots, sir calling to the sentry —
“ Strike the bell eight!”
“ Call the other watch said De Lacey.
Thus all night long we chased, and strange new stars
Seemed playing hide afld seek among our spars.
The stars, aye ; how few comparatively, ever take the trouble to
lift their eyes in the direction of the stars to admire them ; fewer still
make any attempt at the study of them. There is one beautiful con-
stellation, Orion, before me now, just about to sink below the western
verge of the ocean. Its position in the heavens is conspicuous, and
easily found by the three stars in the warrior’s belt which, in one
direction points to the red star Aldebaran, and in the other to the
largest and brightest star in the heavens, Sirius , in Canis Major. As
1 had been reading quite recently Herschell’s Works, small wonder
that such thoughts as these occupied ray mind.
The morning is Sunday, and w r e are still running along in fine
style ; the trade winds at this time of year —the sun is north of the
equator —extend as far as 32 deg. N. latitude, so that we fall in with
them soon after leaving Madeira. The “ Scout ” is reeling off eight
knots, and the tall Peak of Teneriffe is astern ; while the winds begin
to vary a bit in force, and also in direction, as we approach the
equator. Sunday at sea, especially on a man-o-war, has its especial
duties. And already the decks are washed and dried, and breakfast
over; the topmen and others of the watch are busily engaged polish-
ing up wood and brass work, the shot ranged along in racks are
getting their Sunday rub ; in short everything, in every place is being
prepared for Captain’s inspection.
“ Priend;” said Mr. Hamilton, midshipman of the watch, to the
captain of the fore top. “ The first lieutenant’s orders are that you
send men aloft to put a ‘ stopper ’ on the royal sheet which, you
sav, is badly chafed, and splice it, as he would rather keep the royal
set.’ ”
“All right, sir;” said .Tack. And to Bill Jewry and two others
was entrusted the work of carrying out these orders; and presently


Bill, with his fellow topmen, mounted the weather rigging, one with
a marlinspike slung.round his neck; the others following with the
necessary tackle,
“Hillo, Tom! your masthead, old man?” shouted Bill to his
friend, Tom Harris.
“ That’s so, mate replied Tom. And soon the cheery fellows
who had been sent aloft for that purpose, had the wounded royal
sheet spliced and hauled taut again. Sending his fellow helpers down
into the top with the tackle, Bill, at a wink from his friend Harris,
who was on the look-out, remained on the topsail yard.
Said Tom : “ What about that piece of paper you was a going to
show me ?”
“ Well,” answered Bill, “ as I may make out a few minutes more
a putting things square afore I goes down, read this said he, handing
him a scrap of newspaper taken from the little bag he wore around
his neck.
Tom read: “It has been placed beyond doubt that the man
Stanley, who was suspected of having been implicated in the myste-
rious disappearance of his shipmate, Bogers, from H. M. brig, ‘ Dido,’
when on the coast of Africa some years ago, has perished in the ship,
‘ Blenheim,’ which foundered with all hands off Callao, He, Stanley,
having shipped in her as Stamford,’ ” —Morning Herald.
“ Didn’t I tell you so ?” chuckled Bill, as he returned the paper
to the “ finam-bag,” and stowed it inside his blue shirt, then, flinging
the old used-up plug of tobacco away to leeward, he fitted a fresh one
into the recess in his starboard cheek ; gliding down the rigging as
the rattle of the drum summoned all hands to quarters for inspection.
Teneriffe was then two days astern, and we were approaching the
fringe of the variables. The stormy petrels were hovering in our
vicinity. Occasionally the leap of terrified flying-fish, chased by their
foes, described a curve in the air of a hundred yards long, and nearly
twelve feet above water. It was late in the afternoon, and Lieutenant
Despard’s watch. Jenkins, our chief quartermaster, (he is also the
Captain’s coxwain) stood conning the ship from his station near the
dog-vane, which was suspended from the ridge-rope, just in the wake
of the main topmast backstays, to indicate the direction of the wind.
And as he stood there upon one of the quarter deck guns, he struck
one as a fine specimen of that type of blue-jacket which some tell us
is fast dying out—one of the class referred to in the first part of this
narrative.
“ How does she carry her helm, Jenkins ?” questioned Mr.
Despard.
“ Quite easy, sir,” replied the quartermaster, “ from a half turn
to a turn of weather hellem does her, sir.”
Captain Morton then came on deck, which was the signal for all
on the weather side of the quarter deck to shift over to leeward. He
at once ascended to the bridge and, after making a few observations to
Mr. Despard about the weather, our running for the day, and other
matters of interest, observed to that officer: ‘‘ I should like, that is,
if the men are ready, to have the theatrical performance for which


they have been rehearsing, take place to-morrow evening, while the
wind remains steady. It were a pity to loose the opportunity of dis-
playing their histrionic powers on the quarter deck of the ‘ Scout,’
after being at so much pains in the study of their various parts.’ ”
“Very well, sir,” replied Mr. Despard, “I will request Avant to
inform them of your wishes.”
“ Pipe supper, boatswain’s mate was the welcomed order from
Mr Jarnays, as the bell was struck one (half-past four). And to the
shrill rattle of the “ pipes ” the watch scampered down the hatchways
to their sumptuous meal of tea, biscuit, and salt beef (if there had
been any left over from dinner) as red as cedar, from which it would
have been easy to have produced a tobacco box.
Sunset in the latitude of Cape Verde was, on this occasion, (and
indeed generally is a very beautiful sight) nowhere surpassed, except
perhaps, on the Queensland coast. Below a description of this
particular one in a few' measured lines, which I found lying upon my
table ; having been left there by my young friend, Tan D’Evon who,
in his bones, and in his very soul, is an enthusiast:
“ ’Twas sunset, and I saw—all ribb’d with light,
With ruby light—the thin clouds spread themselves
Above the sinking sun in lace-like veils ;
Flakes, rosy-hued, bedecked the massive clouds.
And mottled patches, interspersed with gold,
Like scales of some huge dragon mythical,
’Broidered their seaward edges; while the waves
Did blush a rosy red.
“ Is this for me ?
I asked. For me, and these who are my mates,
Here, in this ocean solitude ?
“ A Voice
Spake to me as I watched the sun throw now
His level rays along the gleaming waves,
Which said: ‘ For you ! this glory is unrolled.’
“ Then, with bowed head, I dared not look aloft,
For my whole being felt the awfulness
Of the Almighty Presence in the air !
Only my soul did speak! My tongue was dumb.
“ Blest Power, whose hand paints simultaneously
This gorgeous sunset: Builds meteoric rings
About far Saturn: Holds the winds in leash
That, blow about these Poles : And clothes the tops
Of heaven-aspiring hills with robes of mist:
Quickens the fiery feet of Mercury,
And guides the flaming car of Jupiter.
Only ONE attitude be mine—WORSHIP !”’
So, in the oriel of the West,
Beneath that boundless reach of sky,
We saw retiring Day divest
Himself of his cloud-panoply.


CHAPTER T.
'• IN CALM AND STORM.
Last night, between the sky’s blue and the sea,
I saw the stormy petrels ho rering ;
Bird answering bird, from weather and from lee ;
Ail else was heavy silence, preluding
The black storm’s smothered agony.
|T| HAH just thrown off my coat on entering my cabin on the evening
|y alluded to in the previous chapter, and was about to partake of
the “ cup that cheers but does not inebriate,” when the shrill voice of
the messenger-boy greeted me : “ Wanted aft in the first lieutenant’s
cabin, sir, please !”
“ Very well, my lad,” said I. And, resuming my attire, proceeded
at once to Mr. Despard’s cabin.
“Ah, just a few minutes, Avant. The Captain is desirous that
the performance for which some of the men have been rehearsing,
shall come off to-morrow evening. Just you see Briggs and Warsnip
about the matter, and let me know the result immediately after
supper.”
“ Aye, aye, sirl replied, and retired to my cabin and my tea.
An hour later I was in communication with the two men named
above, who were the moving spirits in the theatrical business. The
piece under notice being —“ Mat with the Iron Hand,” and the very
old farce of “Box and Cox.” It duly came off, and was pronounced
a success. The leading characters were well represented by Warsnip
as Mat; and by Briggs and another as Box and Cox. But the make
up of “ The Landlady ” taxed the resources of the Management
considerably, and to have rigged out in all the glory of ribbons and
crinoline such a specimen of femeninity as they did, said very much
for their taste in millinery and dressmaking. Captain Morton was
highly pleased with their first effort in this direction. Indeed, he
showed himself in full sympathy with the pastimes of the men ; while
with the firm grip of a capable commander he kept all ranks up to
their duties and responsibilities which, in a well disciplined ship, is
conducive to the welfare of all. (Would that we had more who were
willing to submit themselves to such a healthful course of training as
that which is necessary to build up the perfect seaman ; and fewer
“ mashers ” about our towns). He clearly recognised the interdepen-
dence of each with all, thereby saving himself from narrow dogmatism.
Eor several days we had been threshing our way through the
variables with varying success. Sometimes, beating the waves into
frothy flakes which sluggishly floated off to leeward as the “ Scout ”
bobbed up and down three or four times in one hole, as it were, with
a heavy lee lurch and weather roll, under the faint breathings of the
wind that seemed afraid to blow. These conditions, however, were
subject to rapid changes ; once by a storm of tremendous violence.
And now, whilst waiting for the wind that seems afraid to blow, I
will gße a brief description of that eventful night, the remembrance
of which will, no doubt, remain with some at least, of the “ Scout’s ”
crew to their dying day. And will tend to shew that the blood of the


I
old Norse Vikings (from whom the English have largely descended)
asserts itself to-day in the persons of our brave seamen. Let us then
look back a few days.
The day had been oppressively hot, with thick air. Captain
Morton, with the usual fore-thought, had ordered the topsails to be
double-reefed, the royal yards sent down, and the top-gallant sails to
be furled. Thus, we lay waiting for the attack. And at the approach
of night it came, the rain falling in sheets.
Thus, in this belt of calms, deluging rains
Fell from the unloosed clouds —that, hurrying, roll
Towards th’ Equator, from the nearer Pole—
Ere fell fierce Hector on the Ilian plains.
And, as the rain fell, the lightning streamed from the clouds in
sheets of flame, accompanied by peals of thunder which sounded like
the explosion of a powder magazine. The heavens appeared as a vast
arsenal of lire which threatened to overwhelm with fiery wrath our strug-
gling ship, and With its tongue of flame lick up the waters of the sea
itself. The violent downpour of rain eased off a little, while the wind
struck us with greater force as it howled through our rigging. Cap-
tain Morton then took charge; all* hands were on deck, the topmen
were just laying in off the yards having, after three hour’s toil,
succeeded in close-reefing the topsails. And the “ Scout ” was tearing
through the water as though she would strip the sheets of copper
from her sides.
“ AV hat’s that ?” exclaimed the Captain, as a sharp crack rent
the air, followed by a loud thud as of the fall of some heavy weight
upon the quarter deck. It was apparent to those in the after part of
the ship that something serious had happened.
• “ Main yard gone m the slings, sir !” shouted Bob Hall, the cap-
tain of the maintop, explained the first; while a group of men around
the bodies of two poor fellows who had fallen from aloft accounted
for the latter. One man lay across a gun, the other upon the deck
between the guns, both moaning piteously. The Surgeon was
thereupon summoned, who at once ordered" their removal below.
They had been very seriously injured, but not, it was hoped, fatally.
Aloft matters looked bad indeed—one man, out on the maintopsail
yard, was in dire peril, holding on to the topsail lift, as he could not
get upon the foot-rope because of the terrific fluttering of the sail.
How true it is that, in face of great danger, the coolest, as a rule, are
those who are familiar with the particular risk to which they are at
the moment exposed ; and no man on board was more often with this
class of risk than Jack Eriend. lie had gone aloft with a few of his
smartest fore topmen to assist the main topmen. Having hauled into
the top enough of the top-gallant stu’n’s’l halliards for' his purpose,
he passed them around his body, then, a man attending the rope, he
leapt from the rigging in the direction of the topsail yard-arm, hang-
ing for one awfully anxious moment in mid air, in his flight towards
the topsail lift at the yard-arm ; he grasped the lift, passed'the bowline
around his man also, then, seizing a favourable roll of the ship swun"
with his freight back into the rigging.


Such storms as that just described are usually most violent, but
short-lived, and in this instance, an hour after the accident, the wind
had considerably diminished in force. The maintopsail had been
furled only by the most strenuous efforts of those engaged in the work.
The hands were fully occupied all night in getting the wrecked yard
and sail down on deck ; and were still at it when day dawned.
Surely, it must be confessed that the “ Scout’s ” appearance was
a very unique one just then —without a main yard, the topsail yard
mast-headed to enable us to sheet home the top-gallant sail ; the blank
space between it and the deck giving the ship a most uncouth outline.
The carpenter’s crew were all engaged “ fishing ” the wrecked yard, and
with a number of extra hands were fully occupied for several days.
After this brief description of the storm-we will take up the thread of
our narrative, dropped while waiting for the wind which, even now,
seems afraid to blow.
The day is Sunday. And having “ piped ” down all mess stools,
Martin and I are taking a few turns fore and aft the weather gangway,
after attending divine service. “ How did you like the sermon,
Martin ?” I asked.
“ Very much, sir, I always likes to hear the Captain read* them
fine words:
‘By thine agony and bloody sweat; by thy Cross and Passion ;
bi/ thy 'precious Death and Burial; by thy glorious Resurrection and
Ascension ; and by the coming of the Holy Ghost.’
“ And how solemn it sounds when all hands say : * Good Lord deliver
us.’”
My thermic register goes up considerably as I endorse the honest
fellow’s sentiments. For nowhere, in my opinion, is there a more
beautiful Liturgy than that of the Church of England. Many a
hearty “Amen” have I heard uttered on board a man-of-war at the
concluding sentences of the first prayer, (to be used at sea): “And
that we may return in safety to enjoy the blessings of the land , with
the fruits of our labours , and with a thankful remembrance of thy
mercies to praise and glorify Thy Holy Name ; through Jesus Christ
our Lord. — Amen.”
Much exercises as the above are most salutary, not only on ship-
board but elsewhere, as we are yet some distance from the full
realisation of human omnipotence,
Sunday afternoon, whether in harbour or at sea, on board a man-
of-war, is regarded as a lime of general relaxation from all duty,
excepting, of course, that which is necessary. The luxury of a smoke
may be indulged in all the afternoon, and it is the time of social
reunion when a member of this mess pays a visit to an old shipmate
for’ard, or aft, as the case may be, putting in the time pleasantly,
(according to their lights) over a basin or two of three-water grog.
Now the bare mention of grog brings one too near the drink question,
into the intricacies of which Ido not propose to enter. Still, much
could be said in defence of the sailor of that day having a weakness
# The Captain acts as Chaplain in ships which do not carry the latter.


for the unity of the two liquids, for really, he had little to console
him. And who, I ask—a thousand leagues from land, having been
three hours on a topsail yard, reefing, the rain beating on his devoted
back, as he leant over the yard, thence down the legs of his pants as
through a shute —who ? but would rejoice at the sound : “ Lay aft,
men, for your grog.”
“ But I rejoice to know that in these latter days greater consider-
ation is being shewn our blue-jackets by a more liberal dietary than
used to obtain. And, of course, reefing topsails has become a thing
of the past, in great measure.
Into what mysterious labyrinths do we often drift when allowing
our thoughts free scope ; I find myself so drifting, this afternoon, for
since piping “down mess stools,” I have, with the help of Martin, got
through the sermon, and the Church of England Liturgy. And
touched the fringe of the “drink question.” And to complete the
circuit I now turn up an old letter. Ah ! what interest centres in an
old letter. A letter has the interest of the hand that wrote it; and
in this case, it is the hand of a woman, and a very young one too.
What visions of dewy morning wajks ; what clusters of moss-sur-
rounded primroses; what dew-spangled sprays of red and white
hawthorn. Oh! the pathos of the past. But what does it matter
now P She didn’t marry me. And, while recognising all the gravity
of the situation, I say no pang comes to ray heart thereat. Thus
musing, I turn to the looking-glass hanging against my cabin bulk-
head, and notice that the finger-penclings of Time shew themselves
amongst the stubby hairs of my beard, yet I am not disconsolate,
remembering that someone has said—“ good spirits and a keen sense
of humour are the unfailing signs of the greatness of a nation; and
no country has enjoyed its be*r without them.” Such an assertion
does not make me quiver wdth revolt, because I believe it to be the
duty of all by a life of Christian cheerfulness, lived ! not preached
merely ; to assist in bringing about a more healthy state of things
than obtains at present Those fashionably unhappy folk who con-
temptuously regard good spirits as a sign of inferiority, notwith-
standing. Christian cheerfulness holds the kernel of an enormously
vitalising power. It will furnish the antidote to a numerous progeny
of ills that flesh is heir to.
CHAPTER YI.
WHERE THE NORTH STAR DIPS.
Five suns had lit (lie eastward rim of blue.
Telling, each mom, God keeps his promise sure ;
The whistling breeze, a lively overture
Piped in our sails and cordage as we flew.
|j9|||ND one could die of rapture beholding such a sight as it was our
jUggl lot to see on the sixth day after we had crossed the line where
the north star dips. That senseless mock pomp and ceremony one
may have read about in old sea yarns, is never observed now on board
a man-of-war. The event, however, usually furnishes a theme for
conversation, and there it ends.


It was the forenoon watch ; Mr. Despard had the deck ; .the
retreat from quarters had just been rattled off by the drummer, and
the watch below were ‘‘ tumbling down ” the hatchways, the majority
would, no doubt, round off a couple of hours sleep before pea-soup
time ; while others would out ditty bag with sewing gear, and proceed
to make and mend their clothes. Most sailors learn to make all they
wear, even to their while grass hats, first splitting the grass, then
plaiting it into what is called sinnet, finally making the hat. Some,
indeed, are very proficient in this business, earning many pounds by
their industry during a commission. And I aver (as I have done in
another place) that there is not a man born of a woman but would be
benefit'ed by a course of sea training.' I say that, caring not for any
gust of passion from the most jaundiced critic.
Lieutenant Hasted remained on the bridge after “ quarters,” in
earnest conversation with the officer of the watch, Mr Despard. That
fact was noticed by two others, to wit, our old friends Jewry and
Harris.
Said Bill, in a voice that was exceptionally convincing :
“ D’ye mean to tell me that ‘ Number One ’ and Phill aint in no
way related to one another? just look at the two men now, Tom,
notice their build ; observe how Phill carries his head as he stands
there on that gun a conning the ship. Then just let your eyes glance
upward to the bridge where Mr. Despard is a standing by the compass,
and tell me if they don’t look like the 1 Siamese twins. In fact,
there’s more’u me that’s of the same opinion.’ ”
Well, now I comes to pay partic’ler attention to the. men, they
do seem very much alike said Tom. “ And I believe, now I come
to think of it, that it was about these two parties that Tom Sawdy and
Joe Humphreys was talking; 1 could’u make out exactly all what
they said, anyhow, it was something about the * Seahorse,’ the time
she was on the China Station. And the ‘ Dido ’ brig, but I can t make
much sense to it now, as they knocked off when I hoye in sight.
Then, quite abruptly, like a man who had suddenly remembered
the most important thing of all, Bill exclaimed :
“ Didn’t I tell you so ?” then bolted down the fore hatchway,
and made straight for the lantern to light his pipe, as the whistling
pipes ” of the bo’s’n and his mates rolled, and rattled, and screeched
—“dinner.” Tom following closely and shouting:—
“ Tell me what ?”
“ What makes you ask that?” said Bill, then in his ear, softly :
“ Man alive! don’t you remember the piece of newspaper I shewed
you? don’t you know how much ‘Number One’ and old ‘ Spikem ’
have been together, lately? don’t you know that Tom Sawdy and Joe
Humphreys have commenced unravelling, too ?’ ”
“ Well,” said Tom, “ I know that when old Joe starts unravelling,
there’s something the other end of the yarn.”
“ Hillo, Ian!” exclaimed Tom. “I didn’t know that you was
a standing so near; now you're a good judge, 1 know. What’s your
Verdick ?”
“ Well,” said the young topman addressed, “ with reference to


the resemblance between the first lieutenant and quartermaster
Gounard. Bill Jewry was correct when he remarked: ‘ There’s
more’n me that’s of the same opinion.’ For indeed I hold to similar
conclusions ; and furthermore, I do not hesitate to express the belief
that what obtains credence among some of our shipmates, regarding
the men under notice, who do not trouble to look below the surface of
things, will, in all probability, prove to have been greatly exagerated,
or non-existent. I believe Despard is not a bad man at heart. But
vexes men, perhaps, as I have known men to do, merely for the joy it
gives him in the power to vex. At any rate, it is undoubtedly true
that when rumours which are detrimental to a person’s character, get
even a twenty-four hour’s start, it will take Truth all its time to
catch them up, when it is often too late to counteract the measure of
the mischief done.
“ One thing, however, is certain, whatever Lieutenant Despard
might have been whilst in command of the ‘Seahorse,’ he has shewn
no disposition to tyrannise on board the ‘ Scout.’ And the close inti-
macy that appears to have been established between that officer and
Lieutenant Hasted is, I think, sufficient guarantee that he will not.
For a better man, officer and gentleman;* than Mr. Hasted, could not
be found, not excepting Captain Morton himself ; that is saying a
good deal. Moreover, I hold that whoever comes under the influence
of a good man, is bound to be the better for it.’ ”
“ Out pipes!” was an order that testified but too certainly that
the dinner hour was exhausted.
And amid the cries of : “ Well done, lan, my boy !” the “ hands ”
were “ turned up,” for the purpose of swaying aloft the main yard.
We had succeeded, with the help of some spare stu’n’s’l booms,
lashings, and wedges, in “ fishing ” the yard sufiiciently to carry us to the
Cape, where we would be enabled to replace it by a new one from the
dockyard. Meanwhile, this make-shift would permit the setting of
the maintopsail.
The bell struck three (half-past one) ; the shrill “ pipes ” sounded,
the boatswain and his mates shouted: “ Hands sway up the main
yard presently the jeers were brought to the capstan, and at the
sound of a merry lilt from fife and drum, the men at the capstan bars
had soon run the yard aloft “ The watch ” was called, then sail
made upon the ship, and soon the ample folds of the main-topsail once
more swelled the breeze—
That piped a funeral dirge long, long ago,
O’er many a south-bound ship;
Or sang as it sings now, both sweet and low.
When Phoebus ’gins to dip.
Yes, the sun was about to dip below the horizon. And the
“ Scout ” seemed herself again. The day had been a perfect one, the
sea sparkling in the perfection of moving, lively beauty ; the brisk
wind just whipping the waves’ crests into foam which, breaking up
into flakes of crystal spray, spread along the hollow’d trenches of the
sea in silvery streaks ; thus for the past week had we been gliding
along.


“ Tour first watch out to night, lan ?” so I accosted my young
friend. Whereupon he answered, with a lively, good humoured smile :
“Yes, sir; and my first trick at the wheel. I enjoy a two-hour-
spell at the ‘ Scout’s ’ weather helm immensely, especially on a clear
night as this promises to be ; because one has the stars which might
be pressed into one’s service ; it is a considerable relief to lift the eyes
from the glare of light in the binnacle, and look ahead to the star
most favourable for your purpose.”
To this I assented, having on many occasions, when my duties
called me to take a two-hour-spell at the wheel of a ship, been glad
if a star on the weather leach of the fore-topsail shone out to my
assistance ; but a glance at the compass card occasionally is necessary
to be sure that you do not deviate from the course, as the earth’s
motion upon her axis from west to east soon renders your star useless,
and another must be selected, or you may hear the quartermaster
shout:—
“Now, then, where the d’l are you steering? you’re a p’int off
yer course.”
We were now far to the southward of Cape St. Roque, having
struggled through the “ doldrums ” fairly well ; now a breeze, and
from breeze to storm, and calm varied with rain, and it can rain in
these latitudes. And it is usually welcomed in that it affords all hands
an opportunity of having a general wash-up.
“ Call the watch, boatswain’s mate !” said Mr. De Lacey, as the
bell struck eight in the last-dog-watcb, (eight o’clock).
Bill Heath responded to that order, by leaning his gaunt form
over the main hatchway, and using his left hand as a sort of funnel,
he bellowed in that well-known (to some of us) long-drawn growl:—
“ All the starboard watch !” then in a smarter tone : “ Watch to
muster!”
The main topmen were first call, and when the midshipman of the
watch called —“ Canethe captain of the main top, Bob Hall,
answered: “Sick, sir.” The mustering finished. The watch was set.
Mr. Hasted had charge of the deck, and was on the port side of the
bridge. The helmsman and look-outs had been relieved. The night
was clear with star-light, and the light wind just filled the royals ; this
last fact necessitated the presence aloft of some hands who, in the
event of an order being given to furl the royals, the men already in
the tops would proceed aloft to the yards, others coming from the
deck would clew up the sails, and thus the work would be performed
expeditiously.
The fourth sub-division of foretop men were for duty aloft that
watch. And our friend lan, having fitted himself in a coil of rope,
proceeded at the earnest request of his fellow topmen to roll out in a
strong baritone voice the following words of “The Derelict:”
See her, sorrow-stricken, drifting
On the walls of foam,
Derelict, with currents shifting,
None to steer her home.


Wrathful seas on board are shipping,
Who dare interdict ?
Tattered sails the winds are stripping.
Lonely derelict.
CHORUS.
In mid-ocean helpless rolling.
Funeral knell her own bell tolling :
Wave-swept derelict.
Heaven’s face has ne’er a rift in,
Windows which the stars
Look thro’ while the seas are lifting
Shattered masts and spars.
Lifeless decks; and bulwarks batter’d ;
Ropeless, splintered blocks ;
Along her channels torn and shatter’d
Tangled seaweed mocks.
Chorus : In mid-ocean, &c.
Lifeless, did I say her decks were ?
Aye, but for one moan ;
Faithful sentinel kept watch there
On her poop alone.
“ Hero,” had the brave Commander
Named him while in life;
Hero, loving Newfoundlander!
Guards Him ’yond the strife.
Chorus : In mid-ocean, &c.
The vociferous cheers that followed split the soft night wind into
splinters, that expended themselves like a rattling volley of musketry
against the bellying sagging foretopsail, as it pulled at the si oets,
and banged back again, making the whole top quiver. Just then a
head was observed, from out which proceeded the query :
“ Hillo Bill! old man, you here ?”
“ That’s me, mate, don’t you hear me?” replied Bill The salu-
tation came from Joe Humphreys, as he clambered over the ful rock
rigging, and dumped himself down upon the top of our old friend
Jewry, who was about to coil up in the foot of the top-gallant stu’nVl,
which he had loosed from the yard as it stood, lashed, in the top-
mast rigging.
“ Hear you !” exclaimed Joe. “ I should rather calculate that I
did.”
“Any chance in the stu’nVl ?” growled Joe, as he landed in the
top.
“ All right, come along, ’t wont be for long. Something’s in the
wind, to-night.”
“ Where’s Tom ?” yelled Bill.
“ Oh, he’s just about knocked up, a looking after poor old
“ Paddy Pish,” and he’s gone on the sick list himself said Joe, as
he hauled the sail around him.
“ Why, there’s a lot on the list,” remarked Bill ; “ there’s
Jonathan Cane gone on, too, however, he’s got a good chum in lan,


he has;” then in a halting tone of voice, as if half ashamed of the
question, he ventured to ask . ~,
“ That’s not his real name, ‘ Paddy Pish, is it r
“ No, that’s a purser’s name;” replied Joe. “His real name is
Haddock. But, you see it’s been improved upon, and now Haddock is
Pish, d’ ye see ?” . , . , »,, • •
Haddock was one of the unfortunates knocked out ot the rigging,
when the main yard collapsed. His injuries were internal, and much
complicated ; the other man had broken a leg but was progressing
favourably. The lee stu’n’s’l was utilised as a shelter from the chilly
night air on this occasion by others of the “ fourth sub ; ’ and perched
un against the after side of the foremast head, our theatrical friend.
Warsnip, was the central figure of thrdb ; he was reciting some lines
from Shakespeare, and his audience were representatives ot a very
numerous class of persons. One meets such everywhere, their eyes
invariably rest upon the black side of everything, bo' our friend
Warsnip was trying to knock the blues, or blacks, out ot them .
1 Beseech you, sirs, be merry ; you have cause
(So have we all) of joy; for our escape
Is much beyond our loss ; One hint of woe
Is common; every day, some sailor’s wife,
The master of some merchant,-and the merchant.
Have just our theme of woe ; but for the miracle
I mean our prc serration, few in millions
Can speak like us ; then wisely, good sirs,
Our sorrows with our comfort, Prithee, peace !
Hardly had this burst of eloquence subsided, when the ominous
rattle of the drum summoned all hands to night quarters for action;
whereupon Bill Jewry whispered softly in the ear ot Joe, as they
emerged from the stu’n’s’l ;
“ I told you so.”
Two minutes from the roll of the drum men were streaming up
the hatchways, expeditiously and silently, )io confusion was there as
the living stream, in passing up and down, kept to the lett ot a
the hatchways. The hammocks were stowed, the guns cast loose, and
loaded as directed ; another thirty seconds and the words
“Run out! ready!” were repeated in rapid succession by the
captain of each gun as he brought his gun into action, and its tongue
of flame shot out into the darkness at a supposed enemy on the
weather bow ; while the crunching of the sand (spread on e ec s
to prevent slipping on the ensanguined slime of real warfare), gave a
touch of grim reality to the scene. Him spectres of tie ie an
Trafalgar confront us, the ghastliness of which with t e mur erous
ship to ship, muzzle to muzzle, sword to sword fighting, no even our
newer methods with terrible engines of destruction will eclipse.
The order: “ Cease firing” being given, the guns were secured,
the hammocks “ piped ” down, and by one bell (halt-past twe ve) t e
watch below wore all “ turned in.” ,
We are yet a long way from the line of universal peace. Hence
the necessity of being in a state of preparedness for war. And an


occasional call to night quarters is considered to be a part of the
necessary discipline of a man-of-war. One may be pardoned for
adding that, therefore, no apology is needed for advocating a policy of
the greatest liberality in the matter of expenditure upon our Navy.
Seeing it is a question upon which, in no subordinate sense, the safety
of our Empire largely depends. Moreover, events, ever developing
and significant enough in all conscience, render it increasingly uncer-
tain when the struggle for supremacy might have to be decided. It
has ever been the business of nations to incur enormous expenditure
in perfecting engines of war, and in training men to kill their fellows.
And to-day Great Britain cannot afford to be niggardly in these re-
spects, because negligence might be fraught with public mi chief
gigantic in its results.
CHAPTER VII.
v SIGHTING A DERELICT.
Beneath Day’s shaggy eyebrows glowed the moon,
That looked askance at us—while huge clouds slept
In melancholy silence —none too soon
She lit our midnight way; a light wind swept
Our vessel t’ward the derelict that kept
Her dead crews’ secret. While two sad hearts wept
Where lay th’ uncoffin’d dead —unterrified,
In darkness, wishing that they, too, had died.
|j|T was three days after the call to “ night quarters,” and the
HI “ Scout ” was ploughing her way, close hauled, towards the Cape
of Good Hope, The merry breeze kept our sails well filled ; albeit
we were not making much headway on our true course, the chart
shewing a bit of zig-zag work for the past two days. Lieuieuaut
Jarnays has the deck ; while a portion of the watch are ranged along
the weather side of the quarter deck at sword exercise.
Therefore, dear reader, as my services on deck are not likely to be
called for, suppose we descend to Mr. Hespard’s cabin, (I am at liberty
to take a friend). And while there I will take notes.
Lieutenants Hasted and He Lacey were present by invitation of
Mr. Hespard. It has been recorded in a previous chapter that the
latter gentleman had resolved to “ seek more ” of Mr. Hasted’s society
than he had done hitherto. Since forming that resolution he had
included Mr. He Lacey in his list. At the moment of our entering, the
subject of conversation was —sympathy. It was the opinion of Lieu-
tenant Hespard himself that he sorely needed the symjiathy of his
fellow-men. That he sought it there was no longer any room for
doubt. And there he sat, smiling as tho’ not all hope of a new life
was dead ; Mr. Hasted whose every look was instinct with kindly
cheerfulness, as a patient listener, and Mr. He Lacey as a most
judicious adviser, whose fine features, and boldly projecting nose, was
indicative of a well-balanced mind.
Said Mr. Hasted : —“ I believe there scarcely could be found
throughout the human family one single member to whom sympathy
was repugnant. Some possibly there may be who, so completely self-


absorbed, would desire to live apart ; even eating and drinking alone.
Going about the world with souls imprisoned in bodies as opaque as
the moon. Veritable human icebergs of unsympathy. Sympathy is
the best security against that life-weariness of which so many people
complain.”
And very benign seemed the lieutenant’s ruddy face as he added :
“ Then why are we so slow to accord that which costs so little,
and yet might accomplish so much P Furthermore, I ask :
“ Why wrap about thee cold unsympathy ?
See, heart-sick, and with hungry eyes and dim
Thy fellow-man beseeching thee. To him,
And on his mem’ry’s crown of misery
If thou but turn one kindly look and sweet,
While darkness sits upon him, and the wind ,
Is keen, staying not to ask : ‘ Wherein hast sinned P’
High Heaven will bless thy not unwilling feet.
Thus may’st thou cheer a downcast brother’s soul,
Touch that, by kindly deeds, no force could move—
Nor plead in vain if sympathic love
Move thy thought’s lead him to his goal.
Think not with tvords of blank philosophy
To sqw good grain. He’ll fling them back to thee.’ ”
Both officers were very much impressed by Mr. Hasted s vigorous
appeal for a wider sympathy, and complimented him accordingly.
Thereafter Mr. Hespar’d said ; “ But if by any stress of fortune
one is driven to seek refuge within one s self, as it were, the warmest
sympathy can scarcely penetrate the door of the heart, once it is shut.
It may act as a gentle anodyne, perhaps ; but one feels that, after all,
the bearing of the burden must be one’s own.
“ Nevertheless,” remarked Mr. He Lacey, “ it is difficult to under-
stand why anyone should voluntarily shut himself off from the soothing
influences of true sympathy, the comfort of which those who have
been strangers to its power can hardly conceive. Some may be less
demonstrative, perhaps, at its first gentle touch. And some un-
doubtedly there be who spend their lives in a vain search for it. ’
And here our little party became somewhat disconcerted by the
sudden cry of the masthead man, who reported —“ the hull of a large
vessel away on the lee bow.” This brought every soul on deck. And
there, sure enough, it could be seen, black against the clear horizon, a
little to the southward of the setting sun.
The “ Scout’s ” weather braces were hauled in, and we squared
away to run down on what was, to all appearance, a drifting derelict.
“ Call the starboard watch, bo’s n’s mate ;’ said Mr. Heighten, as
four bells was struck in the first-dog-watch.
“ The moon is about full to night, Heighten ; remarked Hespard,
as he stepped on to the bridge to relieve that officer. Whereupon the
officer addressed replied :
“ That is fortunate, as it will enable us to board the derelict in
the first watch, providing the wind keeps down.”
At sunset the masthead was called down, and the placed ;
strict orders being given to keep “ a sharp look out ’ in the direction
of the mastless vessel.


Eight bells was struck. It was Mr. Hasted’s watch. The Captain
was on the bridge where he had taken his station when the stranger
was reported in sight.
She appears to be a vessel of large tonnage, Hastedhe
remarked to the officer of the watch.
“ Yes, sir he replied. “ Probably one of the line of famous
tea ships. There are some crack vessels employed in the trade between
China and London; notably the ‘ Ariel,’ the ‘ Eiery Cross,’ and the
‘ Black Prince,’ who made the run home from Hong-Kong in 102, 110
and 118 days respectively.”
The bell struck one. The watch were busily engaged washing
clothes upon the main deck where, between two guns, two men might
have been seen whose bared arms were elbow deep in soapsuds—
Gounard and Jan D’Evon, i
“ It is report d that the derelict is, very probably, one of the
famous Kong-Kong clippers said lan.
“ So I understand ,” answered Phill.
The bell struck two. Whereupon Maurice Ahern from his post
yelled out:—
“ Port Cat-head !”
Then, simultaneously the order;
Watch, shorten sail!” caused a rush on deck of the washing
party. And as Phill Gounard made his way aft to the wheel, this
faint soliloquy escaped him :
“ 1 hope she’s not the ‘ Omar Pasha.’ ”
Maurice’s relief, duly, at the striking of the bell, put in his
appearance at the port bow. While Maurice, having helped to “ trim
sail,” dived below to his wash tub, which happened to be next that of
Gounard, and proceeded to finish off a pair of white-duck trousers,
beginning by untying the knot he had taken in the washed leg
previous to going on the look-out. Gounard, curiously enough, did
precisely the same thing with a pair he had been operating upon
before responding to the call—“ shorten sail.”
Presently, both men having finished (as they thought) their pants,
held them up to the light of a suspended lantern.
“ AVhy, shiver mi timbers,” roared Maurice, “ if I aint washed the
same leg twice, an’ the devil a bit av the other wan is done at all, at all,”
lliereat, Gounard, taking the hint from the exclamation of his
shipmate, as he surveyed his work also, and 10, he was forced to the
same conclusion by the murky appearance of one of the legs of his
ducks. Whereupon lan made the quiet remark :
“ That’s a strange coincidence.”
“ Yes Phill replied, adding :
“ But life is full of coincidences, some of them very dramatic.”
It transpired that some wag (some said Bill Jewry) had dex-
terously tied the “ port leg,” untying the “ starboard one,” in each
case ; hence the contusion.
Here the watch was again started into activity by the order from
Mr. Hasted, to :
“ Eurl the top-gallant sails.”






This called our friend Maurice aloft, so flop went the ducks into
the wash tub again.
The completion of the work saw Maurice again on deck, when he
was saluted by Jonathan Cane, who whispered :
“ Here you are, Maurice.”
The genial Irishman was not slow to rightly interpret Jonathan s
“ here you are so Jonathan put his finger on his lip and, taking
Maurice by the hand, drew him between two guns.
“ Tha'tT do, me darlin’,” said Maurice, softly, “ avast heavin’ ”
with the wather. I likes it (the grog) so that the smell jist goes up
mi nose.”
That was a proof of his invincible preference for the neat thing,
and, alas ! was the one failing of the good-natured fellow ; for a better
shipmate than Maurice Ahern would be hard to find. Hints have
been dropped aforetime in these pages of Jonathan’s predilection for
“ spirit brands,” tho’ otherwise a fine specimen of a British blue-jacket.
Captain Morton, who had been looking intently for some time in
the direction of the derelict, gave orders for the “ Scout to be hove
to,” and the starboard cutter’s crew to stand by their boat. iSo sign
of life was apparent on the drifting wreck, all seemed as silent as the
grave ; except for some clanging sounds, as of chains and other iron
work, (probably from the main yard, which lay across the gunwales,
where it had fallen when the masts w r ent “ by the board,’ ) which
dashed againt the sides with every movement of her helpless hull,
which sagged and rolled —
Upon the shifting currents of the sea,
Sparless and sailless, hull and rigging torn;
Helpless she drifts, while never breaking morn —
On storm-rent decks, to weather nor to lee—
Will wake again the sailor. Heedless, he.
By seven bells the “ Scout ” had dropped dow r n sufficiently close
to board the derelict. The cutter was lowered, and a small supply of
provisions put on board, not omitting what are known as “ medical
comforts,” in case any ]soor might be discovered alive. Mr.
He Lacey was in charge of the cutter, with Mr. Midshipman Hamilton
as his second.
The lighted lanterns flickering fore and aft the wreck was evidence
that a vigorous search was being made. Not many minutes, but to us
it seemed an hour, the grouping of the lights near the stump of the
mainmast testified that the boat’s crew Avere trying to get something
into the cutter.
“ Main top, there !” shouted the officer of the \\ r atch.
“ Sir Avas the prompt response from Bob Hall, the captain of
the top.
“ Get a double whip on the main yard !”
“ Aye, aye, sir quickly followed the order.
And before one suffering from an over-development of delibera-
tion could have said—“ Jack Bobinson,” the tackle was ready, and a
col, which Hr. Hargreaves had ordered to be brought up, being duly
slung, Ave awaited the approach of the cutter.


“ Stretch along the cutter’s falls bellowed Frank Ainsworth, he
having received that order from the officer of the watch, which was
followed by a second order :
“ Call the other watch.”
Yet there was no need, forasmuch as they had already began to
“ tumble up ” on deck.
As the boat drew up off our quarter Captain Morton hailed her :
“ Anyone alive, He Lacey ?”
“ Yes, sir,” was the reply; “ two females, both in a very feeble
state, one being delirious.”
Had anyone near Quartermaster Gounard at that moment (he
stood near the weather helmsman) noticed the ghastly and terrified
look that passed across his fine features as the reply came from the
cutter ? perhaps not.
Another brief interval. A group of eager and solicitous ship-
mates. Gounard ? Motionless, as in an ecstasy of woe, bolt upright;
speechless ; immovable.
So rapid had been the events of those last few minutes, whereof
we had been witnesses, that aIL hands, for the nonce, seemed dis-
organised, But on the removal of Gounard, (who had been stricken
with temporary paralysis) and the approach of the cutter to a position
under the main yard, attention was diverted in that direction ; and the
work of getting the unfortunate sufferers on board the “ Scout ” sub-
ordinated everything else. That was speedily accomplished, and the
rescued persons handed over to the care of Hr. Hargreaves. A few
additional minutes saw the cutter secure between her davits.
Temporary accommodation was afforded the rescued by screening
off two guns. Thither they had been conveyed, and under medical
directions all available remedies were applied to give them relief.
The Captain directed the “ Scout ” to be hove-to under topsails,
and kept near the wreck until daylight.
Things had returned to something like a normal condition when
Bill Jewry, in the middle hour of that middle watch, was taking a few
turns in his anatomy by walking fore and aft the fo’c’s’le, when he
encountered lan H'Evon, to whom he remarked :
“ Fhill had a bad turn of what d’ye call it, Ian?”
“ Paralysis replied lan.
“ Aye, yes, that’s itsaid Bill, adding :
“ When he come to a bit a’most the first thing he said was—
‘ What’s her name !’ ”
“ Who’s name V said the doctor.
“ The ship’s name,’ said Phill; “ and then he’d go off again, half
dazed like, a murmuring about Omar Pasha, whoever he is And about
Kohinsidences. What’s that, lan V ”
The bell was struck six. lan, glad to escape his interrogator, went
to relieve his man on the look out. And—
At daylight, o’er the deep sea floor,
Our cutter urged her way
Towards the drifting hull that bore
Her unburied dead away.


Mr. Despard was in charge of the cutter with orders to prosecute
a diligent search for documents of any kind, and to report of what her
cargo consisted.
An hour later and the “ Scout ” had dropped down to within speak-
ing distance, whereupon the Captain hailed : “ What results, Despard ?”
when back came the reply : “No living soul on board, sir,”
“ Secure whatever you deem important, and come on board !” said
the Captain.
“ Aye, aye, sir was the response, and in a few minutes more the
cutter was seen pulling towards the “ Scout.”
The cutter’s crew on board. Tne boat at her davits. The “ Scout ”
on her course. The Captain and Mr. Despard retired to the cabin ;
there, for the present, we will leave them.
It was decided to fire a few rounds of shell into the derelict, and
thus fire and sink her. Mr. Despard had reported her laden with tea,
and quite water-logged. No papers had been discovered. And to all
appearance the officers and crew, or some of them at least, had left in
boats. Her name could not, with certainty, be ascertained ; a piece of
the quarter bulwark had been secured, which bore the remnants of two
letters only, and might have been taken for an HA., or an RA., it
could scarcely be determined, which. A portion of the figure-head,
however, which might have been the remnant of the flowing drapery of
a Turk or a Cleopatra. There were not wanting evidences that the two
rescued ones had made a very determined fight for existence, as under
the break of the forecastle there had been discovered remnants of tinned
meats, vegetables; and a few mouldy biscuits. This, also, had
apparently been the last battle ground of two of the crew, whose bodies
still lay in their bunks whereto they had gone, about a week before, for
the last time. Her deck was strewn with a miscellaneous collection of
seamen’s clothing—opened chests, which aforetime had contained them.
Hence, it was conjectured that the remnant of her crew had taken with
them, in the boats, as much as they could.
About four bells on that forenoon watch there was but small
chance of anything coming into collision with that once beautiful ship.
Name unknown.
She’s gone. And wild winds smite the Oceans
Challenging another race ;
Now Science maps and charts their motions,
Almost denying God a place —
In His own universe. * * * *


CHAPTER VIII.
THE CAPE OF STORMS.
Ouk canvas stiffened to the rising gale,
And skies ope’d wide their shutters, pouring down
The angry, howling blast upon the crown
Of Table mount, uprising stern, and pale
With misty wreaths : The lighthouse, far away
Shot winking glances o’er the darkening bay.
{WjWAB near the time of dawn, Saturday, and our fifty-first day out.
j'jL- The “ Scout’s ” topmen were upon the yards shaking out the
reef taken in the topsails twelve hours before, the rest of the watch
were holy-stoning decks. In one of the ranks of holy-stoners were our
two old friends, Humphreys and Sawdy. Said Joe, as he deliberately
ground away upon the deck, a stone in each hand :
“ Phill Gounard had a close shave of stowing his last hammock,
when that fit gripped him, Tom.”
“You’re right, mate,” answered Tom ; “an’ I’m blessed if I don’t
think that there’s some queer things in store for some on the ‘ Scout ;’
things seem to be developin’ for a storm, there looks as if there is a hi’
pressure an’ a law pressure about Jo koinside, as the weather profits
tell us.”
“ Come, fleet-o there, Sawdy ; here, take my knife and cut that
yarn of yours, come, close up on the front rank said Jack friend,
whereupon the rank appealed to straightened up on their legs, gave
their pants a pull up at the waist-band and knuckled down to the holy-
stoning again. Torn resumed his yarn nevertheless. “ I believe,” he
continued, “ that Phill has got something on his mind, what nobody
else don’t know anything about. He’s a chap that’s knocked about a
bit, and he knows a thing or two, in my opinion.”
The reef having been shook out of the topsails, the watch was
summoned on deck to the topsail halliards, and to trim sail. Thither
went our holy-stoners. Thence to breakfast. And there were ample
grounds for believing that their morning’s work had effectually braced
them for the occasion.
The survivors from the derelict had been removed from their tem-
porary berth to Captain Morton’s cabin. He having taken up his
quarters between the guns instead. Upon the ship’s arrival at the
Cape they, the survivors, of course, would be transferred to the shore
to the proper authorities. The unfortunate ladies were making satis-
factory progress towards recovery from the effects of their dreadful
experience.
“ Hid you notice the looks of the two ladies at church on Sunday
morning, when the Captain gave out that hymn ?” said Frank Ainsworth
to Charley Martin, as they paced the weather gangway on the Monday
morning following.
“ For those in peril on the sea,’ you mean ?’ ” asked Martin.
Frank “ nodded ” assent.
“Yes,” said Martin, “ and I think it is the best in the whole book,
and our fellows sang it well, too ; moreover, I noticed how the head-lights
of the ladies got blurr’d by the tears trickling down their dear faces.”


“ The Captain’s coxwain was telling me,” said Ainsworth, “ that
there had been a consultation, or enquiry, or something of that sort in
the Captain’s cabin, and everything was taken down in writing about
the wreck ; and it close up knocked the ladies over, again. However, I
s’pose we shall know more about it when we get to the Cape \ and we
shall be there, if all goes well, in about a week.”
“Come, Frank,” said Martin, “what do you say to a smoke? I
see Jack Friend has just gone down the hatchway. Come along.”
Thereupon the two made for the main deck and the proposed
smoke.
“Now, Frank,” said Jack, as he, with others, sat upon the comb-
ings of the hatchway.. “ Come, give us one of your whaling yarns.”
“ Aye, come along, old ship,” chimed- in our ancient friend, Joe
Humphreys, “ give us a yarn adding :“ I was once acquainted with
a chap, a whaler, as kept a ‘ grog shop,’ and he had painted on a sign
over the door, the words ; ‘ THREE TIMES ELEVEN said Joe.
At that announcement Ainsworth started, at the same time casting
on Joe a most penetrating look, but he said nothing.
“ Here, fill yer pipe from this cake of cavendish that I brought
from Plymouth, and it’s my last one, too.”
Whereupon Frank, nothing loth as to the cavendish, proceeded to
fill his pipe, and then struck out somewhat as follows :
“ Well, my hearties, here goes then : When I was away on the
A merican coast, off Californi’, in the old ‘ Columbia,’ she was a fine
old craft, at the time Captain Greenaway had her ; she was barque
rigged and as wall-sided as a house ; but never mind that if she wasn t
very fast, she was very sound, and very comfortable for a whaler.
Well, one morning—>ve had lost sight of land about two days—we fell
in with a full-grown sperm whale, and I should judge he was about
seventy feet long, anyhow, and his body could’n be less than twelve
feet deep, with a head I’d be safe in saying was five feet across. And
my word, such a feller as that has got a happetite for squid, that s
what they feeds on. Did you ever taste squid, Joe?” questioning
Humphreys.
“ Yes, once, when I was up the Straits(Mediterranean), replied
that worthy, “ there’s plenty of squid up there, but no sperm whales,
but it’s a dainty I don’t .care for ; a shark’s tail is more to my mind.
Now any respectable shark, had he overheard the foregoing remarks,
would have viewed with alarm the apparently ready acquiescence of
“my hearties ”as to the daintiest part of his body, to wit “ his tail.
“ Well,” resumed Frank, “ we soon got the lines coiled away in
the tubs, there’s about 200 fathoms allowed for each boat, and each
boat has, of course, got a tub ; then there’s four harpoons, besides
lances, in each boat. The boats was very soon ready for lowering, when
Jack Wedlock cried out: ‘There he spouts again! Ihe boats was
lowered, and away we went, as hard as we could go, for ray noble whale.
My chum, Jack Wedlock, was harpooner of the boat I belonged to, and
all at once Jack roared out: ‘Ah, down he goes! That s what we
calls sounding when the animal dives below. Jack spotted where he


went down; he can’t stop long, you know, he’s got to come up now and
again for fresh air.
“ There he is again !’ shouted the steersman, and off we goes, our
boat leading and the others following us up.
“ Look out, lads !’ bawled out Jack, who was in the bows ready
with his harpoon ; then with all his might he fixed it in the whale’s side.
41 Back astern, all !’ our steersman cried. And, by jingo, it took
us all our time to get out of his way. 1 suppose the harpoon tickled
him a bit, for he started to strike out with his tail, and very soon the
water looked as if a tank of brewer’s ’east had been started from the
boat, the waves all lashed into froth. Then off he goes once more at
a great rate, dragging us after him ; then he sounded again, but he
got dead beat, at last, and when he appeared again we got some of our
lances into him. At last he lashed out with his tail, and struggled
awfully, and once or twice we had a narrow escape as we got too near
his flukes. Wpll, after a hard fight for it he gives in, and turns upon
his side. The wind had dropped to a’most a calm, and we had to tow
him alongside the ship, when the tackles were soon hooked on to him.
Then all hands set-to, with bo’liffs round them, and spades in their
hands ; they went over the side, and dropped on the carcass and cut
him up. All the pieces as we cut them off was hoisted aboard by
tackles from the main yard ; at last, when all was sent aboard that
was of any use, what was left of him was cast adrift. That was the
finish of one of the biggest fish I ever see. I had a small interest in
that voyage ; so when we got back to London again all right I lifted
a good few notes, and spent them like a man. That was the end of
my last whaling cruise, and it is the end of my yarn.’” said Ainsworth.
“ Well told, old man!” exclaimed Jack friend. “ Now, as a
clewer-up to the yarn, suppose you give us that old song of yours ?”
“ Aye, aye, the whaling song!” vociferously shouted Joe
Humphreys, and others. And it was rolled out by Trank, and
chorused with a noise that was quite out of proportion to the number
of those who made it:—
The grey seas ran a mill-race,
As the starboard boat bore down,
And, mainsail flowing, took her place
To loo’ard of his eye—
The whale’s eye, the whale’s eye —
To loo’ard of his eye.
CHORUS.
There’s fifty casks beneath his coat,
Prices are going up.”
W as shouted from the larboard boat:
“ An’ more a blowing to wind’ard,
Their noses in the air.”
Then up sprang our harpooner.
And while laying down his oar,
Tailed out —“ lor’ ain’t he a boomer !”
Then drove his iron in,
First iron, fast iron,
Got his first iron in.
Chorus : “ There’s fifty casks beneath his coat,” &c.


The boat’s wrapped in a foam-cloud ;
The harpoon’s abaft his fin ;
“ Stern all!” old Jasper called aloud,
“ The second iron’s in !”
One iron, two irons,
Fast just abaft his fin.
Chobtjs : “ There’s fifty casks beneath his coat,” &c.
He turned flukes, then dipped his head,
And zip-zip the leaping line
Went spinning round the loggerhead,
The wet line, smoking line,
Through chocks, round loggerhead,
Leapt the line, the wet line.
Choetjs : “ There’s fifty casks beneath his coat,” &c.
A slack line, a wounded whale,
The boat flying in the air
A wreck of splinters, ne’er a sail.
And lo! amid the din
Six heads bobbed up and down,
In the sea ’mid the din.
CHOEUS.
The fifty casks beneath his coat
We never got aboard.
But shouts came from the larboard boat ;
“ There’s more a blowin’ to wind’ard,
Their noses in the air.”
And that brought the end of the watch.
“ All the port watch !” shouted from the stentorian lungs of Bill
Heath, caused the starboard watch to disappear down the hatchways
to their hammocks.
The port watch was set. Thereafter might have been seen an
attentive group of a half-dozen topmen gathered around Bill Jewry
who, as there was nothing to do, was giving them an account of his
experience gained whilst on board a transport steamer, some years
before. The group indulging in a little pardonable levity at Bill’s
expense, he proceeded thus:—
“ The steamer * British Consul,’ was chartered somewhere about
the middle of June, 185 , Captain Ernest Dalton had her then,
he got into the China trade afterwards, and when we was a fitting out
the ‘Scout’ I read in the shipping news column of the Western
Morning News that he was in command of the tea clipper ‘ Omar
Pasha.’ “ Well,” resumed Bill, “we took aboard provisions, bales of
clothing, and what they calls ‘ medical comforts,’ but for my part I
could never see what comfort there was in swallering med’cin’ ; if they
means the grog part of it, well, then I agree. Besides all that we took
aboard to serve out to the ships a blocked in by the ice, we had a
general cargo for Archangel. We had a ticklish time in the North
Sea, We passed not far from where the whirldpool is. (Meaning the
Maelstrom, off the Lofoten Islands). We took a pilot aboard from
one of the islands, and he said they had a awful winter up there. Oh,
it was a grand sight a rounding the North Cape, it was midnight,
mind you, and yet the sun was shining bright as day.’ ”


“ On deck, the watch!” shouted sharply down the hatchway put
a stopper on Bill’s yarn.
“ Lee braces !” shouted Jarnays, who had the watch.
“I told you so growled Bill Jewry, as he nudged Tom Sawdy
under the ribs, “ and as sure as you see that gentleman laugh (meaning
Jarnays), the wind hauls ahead.”
“ I calls that a pregediced statementsaid Tom.
These observations escaped the pair as they hurried up the hatch-
ways to their stations for trimming sails.
“ Look out for your weather helm !” exclaimed Mr. Jarnays to
the quartermaster.
“ Aye, aye, sir, she’s got itwas the prompt response. Then
to the helmsman :
“ Steady, so !”
Bill was quite right as to the wind hauling ahead. But whether
he was correct in connecting that fact with the laugh of his superior
officer, may be open to question. So it appears, thought Tom. At
any rate, before daylight fell upon us again all hands had been
fully occupied in combating the forces of the storm hurled upon us at
so short notice; and during which the “ Scout ” had been so roughly
handled that it was thought advisable to send the temporary main yard
down. And twelve hours later it had found a billet, securely lashed,
in two sections, one along each gangway.
It could not be said that there had been much monotony in our
voyage, so far. Now, if it be only through monotony that change
comes to have any value, should we be censured though we complained,
just a little, at the amount of change that had been apportioned us ?
This query, by the way.
Four days had elapsed since our main yard found its resting place
along the gangways. Meanwhile the course of events had maintained
a high standard of interest. Among the crew the chief topic of con-
versation was the derelict and her survivors. Bill Jewry being usually
appealed to on all disputed points in this connection ; it was he who
always “ told them so.” Moreover, it was he who had seen a “ certain
party,” as he put it, just going in, or coming out of, “ Number One’s ”
cabin. It could be none other who had “ picked up a piece of paper ”
that had been washed out from between the guns where the ladies had
been temporarily lodged.
All such little fragments as the foregoing had leaked out whilst
the scrubbing, painting, and general furbishing up had been going on,
which marks a vessel’s near approach to her destined port. And with
quite an air of mystery had Bill succeeded in investing all that he
came in contact with. Indeed, he thought it was quite obviously his
duty to do so. The ward room, and gun room “messes,” too, had
caught the epidemic ; and Mr. Midshipman Hamilton, who was chief
of the “ gun room mess,” had frequently questioned old Teddy Eowe,
(these two were particular friends, in a way), as he (Teddy) was
generally accredited with being in “the know” of things ‘ which
appeared to surround the case under notice. Moreover Bill, in his
own mind, kept treasured up for future use (perhaps) the delirious


ravings of Gounard, about Omar Pasha, Bill’s innocent enquiry of
lan, as before noted, notwithstanding. But all seemed agreed that
when the “ Scout ” arrived at the Cape, all that could be gleaned about
this mystery of the sea would be made known.
Thebe, no man hath control. The playful spray,
The deep voice of the blast, the whirling wave,
Each in its turn, above the sailor’s grave
Whistle their notes of woe; or, flashing, play
A quiv’ring overture. * * # * *
“ Mast head, there!” called out the officer on duty forward.
“ Keep a sharp look out for land !”
“ Aye, aye, sirwas the ready response from the man aloft upon
the topsail yard, one arm around a rope" to steady himself, while at
the same time he beat a tattoo with his heels upon the bellying
topsail.
“ Mr. Deighton expects that we shall make the land this after-
noon said Mr. Brodie, the officer above alluded to, addressing the
captain of the forecastle, a regular old salt, by the way ; named Jim
Pidgeon.
“ Glad to hear it, sir,” said Jim, “ as my stock of pipes is about
run out; besides, I’m in hopes to get a letter from my dear old
mother when we gets in ; she wasn’t first rate when we left Plymouth,
sir.”
“ No, sir, I ain’t married he said in reply to the question ;
“ and I s’pose from the way the ladies look at it, I ain’t worth so much
this year as I was last year adding ; “ anyhow, I’ll chance getting
a wife when I wants one. But you can’t get a mother just when you
likes.”
“ Land, right ahead, sir shouted the look-out.
“ Very well was the response from the officer of the watch.
“ Didn’t I tell you so ?” triumphantly exclaimed our friend
Jewry, as usual, to whoever chanced to be near him at the moment.
The report was received with much satisfaction ; and visions of a
change of diet to fresh meat, and vegetables, fruit and, perhaps for
some of us, a run ashore was heaving in sight. Anon, all the tele-
scopes and binoculars on board were directed on that curvature of the
horizon directly ahead.
“ Vou will ‘ pipe ’ supper earlier than usual, Mr. Despard,” said
the Captain, “ that the men may be afforded an extra hour for enjoy-
ment in their own way. Our preparations for anchoring are well
forward ; moreover, [ intend to take a reef down, and keep the ship
under easv sail for the night; making for the anchorage at Simon’s
Bay at daybreak.’ ”
“Aye, aye, sir; replied that officer, then, addressing himself to
the officer of the watch : “ Mr. Hasted, pipe supper at eight
bells.”
“ Very good, sir ;” said Hasted.
The supper over. The reefing accomplished. The dancing and
skylarking began, and was continued with spirit until the “pipe”—■


“ out pipes, clear up decks.” The band, so Bill Jewry “ told us,”
never played better than on that evening. And so —
Gaily our sailors sing of wind and storm ;
Of friends at home beside their firesides warm ;
While the blue sea—as night is gathering—
Between us and the land is narrowing.
When the day dawned the rugged promontory of the Cape of
Good Hope was well in sight. And as we drew nearer the land its
gigantic outlines loomed grandly in the grey dawn. The group of
mountains northward which partially enclose Table Bay, rising nearly
4,000 feet above the sea, is a fine feature in this delightful panorama,
and certainly a most welcome break in the monotony (we could not
complain on that score) of a long sea voyage. The new lighthouse
erected on Cape Point, stands nearly 800 feet high, and as we
approached the land its grandeur and wild sublimity appeared very
impressive. At what may be called the south-west extremity of Africa
boldly jutting into the ocean, are the cliffs of the Cape of Good Hope,
whose base laved by the mighty waves which rise high against their
wall-like sides, awakening wierd echoes in the deep chasms which are
the dwelling places of sea fowl.
“ Pour bells, sirso reported the sentry to the officer of the
watch.
“ Hands, shorten sail!” drew every man on deck. And exactly
as the bell struck out six, our cheery friend, Lieutenant Hasted, from
his station on the head gratings, repeated the order from the quarter
deck to: —
“ Let go the anchor !” then, with a—
“ One, two, three, let go !” bellowed by the boatswain, sent the
man’s anchor, with a loud splash, to its billet in the mud of Simon’s
Bay, which is a portion of Palse Bay, a snug anchorage, and sheltered
from all winds. It is also our principal naval station in this part of
the world.
CHAPTER IX.
REPAIRING DAMAGES.
Oh, ye whose barks swim a fair island sea,
Beware ! lest haply there a rock should be;
See that His sovereign hand controls the helm,
Who bade the storm “Be still!” nor overwhelm.
Pp|N some respects a man-of-war resembles a country village, or
jJL, rather the inhabitants of both have traits in common. Accus-
tomed to seeing each other daily for years, usually from three to four
in the case of the former, each learns something of the affairs of the
others and, during the intervals off duty, those who find pleasure in
that sort of thing, will gossip. It need not, therefore, surprise us if,
among so many, there be some who are disposed to cause a little relief
to the dead level of routine throughout a long commission by engen-
dering animosity amongst others. b
“ Ah, Hasted !” exclaimed the first lieutenant of the “ Scout,” as


that genial square-headed officer entered his cabin. “I am glad you
have come, pray be seated. I have somewhat to tell you.”
Whereupon a smile climbed up the broad, sun-burnt face of the
second lieutenant, its beams touching everything as he glanced around
the cabin; and, desiring to respond to his superior’s amiability,
enquired ;
“ What now ? have you been further enlightened as to what your
future attitude towards your cousin should be ?”
Then, becoming suddenly very excited, Despard said :
“ You have often helped me ; help me once again, for I know
that in the main you are right. I have been a prey to unhappy
thoughts. My selfish shrinking from what is plainly my duty towards
Edgar, has become quite hateful to me ; and now I am determined to
make amends for a long, guilty, and unprofitable pest. And, so far
as I can, to ‘ repair damages.’ ”
While he was speaking Hasted stood eyeing him with amazement,
as blast followed blast of frantic self-vituperation. He ceased speaking.
There was a pause, then Hasted, assuming an easy tone, said :
“Be calm, dear Despard, do not agitate yourself.” For he was
terrified at the pale and anxious face of his brother officer. “ Let the
dead past bury its dead.”
Very much more was said here having reference to the bitterness
and animosity that had heretofore existed between the two cousins
who by a string of marvellous “ coincidences,” had been brought face-
to-face again. But it must be regarded as too sacred to be set down
in these pages. Said Despard, continuing :
“It is high time that something startling occurred to bring
matters to a head, I will not spare myself in my confessions to you,
and ”
“ Nay, brother,” interrupted Hasted, “ not to me. But to Him
who, hating iniquity, yet bears with us all so patiently. You ask my
advice. It is this : When the derelict’s passengers are landed they
will probably be quartered at the Cape Hotel. An interview could
then be easily arranged for, when everything might be so adjusted as
to meet the views of all concerned.”
“ You are very kind, Hasted, very kind. It shall, therefore, be
as you advise.”
“ I am glad, my dear fellow, that you consent to this course ;
said Mr. Hasted. '• Good morning and thereupon withdrew.
Speculation had been busy enough as to the object of the second
lieutenant’s visit to “ number one’s ” cabin, inasmuch as Bill Jewry
had not been slow to note the many remarks he had heard on this head,
here and there, as to the purport of that visit. Nevertheless, he was
content to let the jade “ speculation ’ alone to her own work, and
await fui’ther developments. More important for the moment are the
orders relating to the landing of the rescued passengers, &c.
After leaving Mr. Despard’s cabin, our genial second lieutenant
retired to his own, and prepared for his next watch on deck.
“ Mr. Despard said Captain Morton, as he accosted that officer
on the bridge, “ You will be sure and have all ready for landing the


ladies rescued from the derelict by six bells this afternoon. It is my
intention, while on shore, to seek an interview with the British Consul
in reference to the matter. I will send word on board by Jenkins as
to the result.”
“Aye, aye, sir;” replied Mr. Despard, and thereupon proceeded
to address himself to the task before him.
Sails were unbent; the upper yards sent down on deck. The
wrecked yard found a resting place in the dockyard. There had been
many things taken in hand that day, and something there would be for
us on the morrow, no doubt; moreover, on the morrow it was expected
the English mail boat would arrive. And one was led to ask : What
fresh developments there would be for those on board our little world,
the “Scout?” Some, doubtless, would anticipate events with some-
thing like apprehension.
The arrival of the mail boat was announced, a few hours ahead of
her time, by a long line of smoke in the distance, seawards ; the
occasion, in this instance, js one of great importance. And one
cannot but echo the words of Lord Macauley, that: “ Our English
Post Office is a splendid triumph of'civilisation.” Nearer she came,
till with a splash, and the rattling leaps of the cable through the hawse
pipe, the anchor measured its length in the mud of the harbour.
“ Away, first cutters!” this order from the officer of the watch,
and bellowed along the decks of the “Scout” by the boatswain’s
mates, sent the boat-keeper (half-asleep in the stern-sheets of his boat
fast to the swinging boom) forward to the paynter, which he cast off,
then dropped the boat alongside, and presently ten pairs of arms did
their best to urge her through the water in their endeavours to be first
alongside the mail boat.
The mail on board, and the letters distributed to whom they were
addressed, bringing to some ill news, to others good ; the good evidently
predominated on the “Scout” that evening, as it does throughout God’s
providential government of our great world and its affairs.
Society, ashore or afloat, is the same the world over ; but every
ship furnishes amongst its crew deeply interesting types. On the
main deck, leaning against a gun, stood Phill Gounard. He had
recovered from the “ stroke,” and looked his old self again. He was
deep in the perusal of a letter, his eyes and lips bespoke indomitable
energy, (perhaps something in the letter had awakened it) ? There
are those who affirm that it was so.
Between the next two guns was the “almost a pensioner,” Teddy
Rowe—the butt of our mischief-loving “ middy ” Hamilton—absorbed
he seemed, and the strongly-marked lines, deep-furrowed by dint of
long service, appeared as though they had formed some additional
curves since opening the missive he was reading. The smoke from his
pipe curled upwards in a slender spiral, none issuing from between
his lips ; he appeared to have forgotten all about it, (the pipe) so deep
in thought was he, yet he gripped it firmly with his set teeth. What
can be the reason ? I’ll ask Bill Jewry, here he comes.
“Ah, Mr. Avant,’ said Bill, in reply to my question, “ I expects
as how Teddy’s got news of his brother. He (Teddy) was a telling


me as how when he was at the masthead, one day, lashing a chaffing
mat on to the horn of the cross-trees, he saw his brother sitting astride
the lee cross-trees, and holding something to his mouth, as it might be
picking a bone or eating. And says Teddy to me: ‘ Bill, I believe my
brother’s very ill or dead,f and that’s why he come and sat on the
cross-trees when I was there. ’ ”
ik * * * * * *
“ That’s a fine looking barque, there alongside of that paddle-box-
boat!” exclaimed the invincible Bill to his friend Harris, as they
leaned over the side-tackles of another gun to peer through a port and
criticise the appearance of ships in the harbour.
“ So she is, mate;” replied Tom, but I don’t like that bluey sort
of a baud round her. She would have looked better with a white band,
painted frigate fashion, you know, to imitate the port holes.”
Bill was unwilling to acquiesce in that opinion, and said: —
“ Ah, that may be your idea of beauty ; but, you see, her owners,
most likely, is Quakers. That’s the meaning of the blue band. I
have heard say as how they mostly paint their ships that colour, or all
of a drab, the colour their women folks like to wear.”
“ Whereupon Tom broke out in this little bit of pleasantry:
“ Did you ever konsider, Bill, what queer navigation it must be
for a feller to run his bowsprit into one of them coalscuttle bonnets, a
trying to get soundings upon them ruby rocks, about amidships a’tween
her head lights ?”
“Well, no, I never did think much about the matter,” answered
Bill, but if I found myself in such a fix I’ll be bound I’d find a way to
the ruby rocks. But, listen to me, Tom. The name of that barque
is the ‘Arrow Swift;’ that is if the ‘ sailing instructions ’ I’ve got by
this mail is right. And there’s a chap aboard of her that we shall
know more about bve ’n’ bye. Don’t you recollect I told you so ?”
*******
“So rapid has been the course of events since my joining the
‘ Scout,’ that very much appears to me a troubled vision. Regarding
some matters, why am I the victim of this horrible suspense ? The
‘ Arrow Swift is her name, is it;’ ” so soliloquised Phill Grounard, as
he paced the quarter deck an hour after he had left the position he
occupied against the gun. “ And, furthermore, I understand she is a
whaler, bound round the Horn. Strange coincidence, very strange,
and if ever I saw Rogers in my life, 1 saw him going on board that
whaler this morning. I wonder if Cyril will insist in his annoying
attentions to Beatrice. If he does he will find no more comfort in the
attitude now than heretofore. * * * * I wonder —but, nonsense, I will
not anticipate untoward events, should such arise I will then do battle
with them. * * * * To-morrow we are to meet Beatrice at the
Cape Hotel. Then, ah then.”
In pursuance of the Captain’s orders, as transmitted by the hand
of Jenkins, thither had they been conveyed. The Hotel was a very
commodious and comfortably appointed building, which would be a
t Such was the fact, as communicated in the letter alluded to, and told us by
Rowe himself. His brother died about that hour.


most welcome change for the unfortunate ladies. All that was deemed
necessary to be made public was duly chronicled in the Cape Times.
And were briefly as follows :
“ Respecting the ill-fated ship, ‘ Omar Pasha,’ Captain Ernest Dalton,f hound
from Hong-Kong to London with a full cargo of tea, and carrying two passengers
who went on hoard at Hong-Kong, viz : Miss Beatrice Dalton, a cousin of the
Captain’s, and her maid, Miss Cardwell. All went well until the ship had passed
Java Heads, and was fairly in the Indian Ocean where, during a violent gale she
became dismasted. Most of the crew being aloft at the time were carried overboard,
hardly one escaping destruction, while many of those on deck were' seriously
injured by the falling gear. Thereafter many days of arduous toil the uninjured
had in clearing the wreck, and administering to the needs of the injured ones, the
Captain being among the number of these. Finally, the vessel having become
quite water-logged, the remnant of her crew, after patching up the two boats that
alone remained to them, left the ship to her fate. Everything that was possible
had been done, short of sheer force, to induce the Captain, a seaman, and the two
lady passengers to leave also ; they were left to their fate. A self-chosen fate in
the case of the passengers who, with that conspicuous heroism so characteristic of
the sex, had volunteered to remain chiefly to attend to the two unfortunates above-
named. This, surely, is another instance wherein one is justified in saying that
the example of women have strengthened the upward foothold of the race ! Will
anyone write against this statement one word of withering rebuke ? Captain
Dalton urged his shipmates to look out for themselves as he was too far gone, and
they would need all the room in the boats. The other poor fellow was a stage
further on, so had no voice in the matter. There were five men in each boat, with
a plentiful supply of provisions and water ; and thus, three weeks after the vessel
had been dismasted, did this “ forlorn hope,” not without a pang at parting, put off
from the ship, hoping to be picked up by some homeward bounder, or of making
Madagascar.
“ Thenceforth, and for the space of six weeks, as nearly as the unfortunates
could keep account of time, did these heroic nurses battle with this ‘ sorrow on the
sea.’ Finally, the Captain and the seaman succumbed. And their nurses being
too weak to bury them, they were left in the two bunks where they had died.’ ”
The rest of the report was substantially the same as that recorded
in a previous chapter, giving an account of the state of matters when
the “ Scout’s ” people took the survivors off the derelict. Consider-
able impression had been produced at Simon’s town by the publication
of this story of the sea.
The evening previous to the departure of the home-bound mail
boat, “ Seringapatam,” a spacious room in the Cape Hotel contained
quite an interesting party, viz . Miss Dalton ; her maid Miss Cardwell;
Lieutenants Despard and Hasted; and Quartermaster Go unard. This
interview had been brought about mainly through the mediatorship of
Mr. Hasted. The recognition between the cousins and Miss Dalton,
with the exception of Captain Morton and Mr. Hasted, had been kept
a profound secret. No one on the “Scout,” it was supposed, had the
least idea of the relationship subsisting between them. All the
incidents leading up to Miss Dalton’s departure from England were
related by her —Beatrice, (we may call her so now), her sojourn at
Hong-Kong, and Japan, with the Du Eresney’s, who had been her
fellow travellers throughout; having left England together. • Beatrice,
being desirous of again returning to England, she was offered a
passage thither by her cousin, Captain Ernest Dalton who, as we have
t The Captain’s name, as also that of the ship was elicited at the enquiry held on the “ Scout.’


seen, was Captain of the ill-fated “ Omar Pasha.” All this, and very
much more, which must be deemed too sacred to find a place in these
pages, was poured into the ears of Cyril and Edgar. Cyril braced
himself for the conflict before him ; but it was easy to see that a deep,
unspeakable sorrow remained. “He was reconciled to his fate he
said. The reconciliation had touched every heart. Love had con-
quered. Edgar had won.
“Oh ! Beatrice,” Cyril exclaimed, “ I can but bless you ; do as
you please, I have no claim to you. I will carry, as best I may, what
burdens the future may bestow.”
Edgar, his face radiant with joy—his speech, lacking neither
eloquence, nor rhetoric, poured from him as from one who knew the
luxury of speaking his own mind—approached Beatrice, who appeared
to him more enchanting than ever ; she extended to him her hand,
saying in her sweet, low voice ;
“ I have much to say to you, but must not now make a long story,
later on and then.”
Edgar’s heart was full of gratitude. He paused long ere he could
get a single syllable to his lips, they all stuck in a knotted mass in his
throat. At length he said :
“ Dear Beatrice, I rejoice to know that now you are released from
the cumulative weariness of long-tried patience ; and through the
clouds in our immediate neighbourhood I seem to see a future full of
happiness, which will be for you a fitting culmination to all that you
have endured. Eor myself —the glowing passion of love consumes me.”
He could get no further. And when the morrow dawned, all
difficulties had been smoothed down. During the day all necessary
documents relating to the derelict, “Omar Pasha,” and her*two
survivors, were signed by the Captain and officers of the “ Scout.”
The sun went to its couch in the West as the “ Seringapatam ” steamed
out of Simon’s Bay.
There was an interval of a week, from the sinking of the
“ Seringapatam ” below our horizon, during which Bill Jewry—than
whom no man on board the “ Scout,” (so he told us,) possessed a
keener faculty of determining the relative weight of conflicting testi-
mony —declared, in reference to the “ Omar Pasha,” and the Captain,
“that he had told us so.” Moreover, “ number one ” had gone up
considerably in his estimation, (holding that opinion himself seemed
to him to be unimpeachable justification for “ telling us so,”) in that
he had given him leave to go on shore at the Cape when he was not
entitled thereto. Therefore Bill aver’d that he would :
“ Pay him back in the pure metal of a ’onest an’ straightforward
friendliness. I don’t believe in payin’ a man for a good turn, in a
depreshiated koinage of mere words; not I.” Such was his manner
of expressing himself.
Finally the “ Scout,” all damages repaired, “ the man’s anchor ”
having been again hove up, steamed from her anchorage to do battle,
if need be, upon and with her natural element —the Ocean.
Having steamed well out of the bay, the foam of the breakers
that harmlessly flung themselves at the foot of the cliffs showed as a


light fringe along the coast; the order was shouted down the mouth-
piece, at the bridge-rail, to the engine room to —“ stop her.” Mr.
Lynch (second engineer) received the order, duly responding : “ Aye,
aye, sir.”
The wind, which had for a time vanished, soon filled every inch
of the “ Scout’s ” canvas that had been spread to woo it.
CHAPTER X.
REVELATIONS.
Her fore-foot spurned the waters of the hay,
And as a charger loosened from the stall
Paws the green turf, impatient for the call
Of huntsman’s horn, she toss’d the playful spray
Aside in snowy flakes of furrowed foam,
Grlad that her sailing time at length was come.
|j»|i|lGHT came down —our first out from Simon’s Ba) r —as softly as
|||i| a child closes its eyes in sleep, the light breeze that played
through our rigging, and toyed with our sails, brought from the west-
ward a sheet of white cloud which hid a portion of the blinking stars.
It is on such calm, quiet nights as this under notice, that one is easily
lulled into a semi-forgetfulness of things present, and half-uncon-
sciously we gather up link by link the fugitive associations of former
days Into such a train of contemplations as the foregoing had I
fallen, but was suddenly brought to a sense of things present by the
cheery voice of Martin :
“ The ‘ Scout,’ all a-taunt-o looks like herself again to-night, Mr.
Avantsaid he. “ Well, I should have been adrift to gain my living
anywhere else but at sea, and to be aboard such a perfect model of a
craft as our ‘ Scout ’ is, reminds me of what I learned of an old song,
‘ Tom Bowline,’ I think it was. Lor’ help them, how I pities them
unhappy folks on shore now !’ ”
Such words of cheerful submission to a sailor’s life drew from
me a hearty endorsement of the gallant fellow’s sentiment. My secret
desire to be in a certain nook of old Devonia, at the time, notwith-
standing,
“ What o’clock, is it, Martin I asked.
“ Gone four bells, sir he answered.
“Has it indeed, then I shall away to my cabin;” and bidding
him “ good-nightl went below.
“ The bo’s’n’s gone below, Billsaid Tom Harris to his friend
Jewry.
“ All right, old man,” was Bill’s reply to that important announce-
ment, “ now the gangway’s a bit clear let’s get up into the hammick
netting.”
W hereupon the two cronies betook them to their perch. Tom
leading off with this question :
“ What d’ye think of the fresh hand that joined from the
whaler ?”
Said Bill: “ He’s in our watch of maintopmen, and by the way
he skimm’d aloft yesterday, I should say he’s not green to a man-o’-war.”


As the night advanced the wind dropped, and indications were
not wanting that it had partly made up its mind to shift. It shifted,
and with it came the order :
“ Watch trim sail!” that ended the yarn in the hammock netting,
and sent the watch “ flying ” to their several stations.
“ Ton mind what I told you about the whaler ?” said Bill, as they
were hauling on the main brace.
“ I do, mate replied Tom.
Whilst the yards were being braced some little consternation was
caused by the exclamation of the officer of the watch: —
“ Hillo ! what have we here, is the man ill?” he enquired of
Quartermaster Gounard.
“ Yes, sir,” replied he, “ the man has fallen apparently in a faint-
ing fit; I believe it’s the man who shipped from the whaler.”
“ Get him taken below said Mr. De Lacey.
Sails trimmed, ropes coiled, and reelers “ piped,” then came
eight rattling strokes of “the bell,” and :
“ Call the other watch !”
I wonder has the reader ever kept a night watch at sea, on a
man-of-war ? if he has it will not be difficult for him to recall the
rattle of feet, booted and bootless, dowm the hatchways, of the watch
whose “watch” had expired. And the half-asleep watch whose
“ watch” was about to commence, as they fumbled up the hatchway
ladders and “ made tracks ” for the quarter deck in time to answer to
their names, pass round the “ middy ” who was mustering, each calling
out his number on the “ watch list ” as he did so.
A week had elapsed since Martin called that watch. John
AYedburn’s watch had been mustered many times, the captain of the
main top answering—“ sick list, sir,” to the call —“ AYedburn.” But
on the night here referred to, that first division of the night that
immediately succeeded the death of a glorious day. AYedburn answered
for himself in response to his name being called :
“ Three thirty-three, sir.”
Now there was nothing very extraordinary in the fact that
AYedburn’s number chanced to be what it was. But Bill Jewry had a
way of his own in interpreting what he had seen and heard which a
Daniel would be proud of. Bill had nicely calculated his attitude in
these respects, being careful to do naught that might lower his prestige
or bring him under the contempt of his shipmates.
“Three thirty-three ; three thirty-three,” again soliloquised that
worthy. “ AYhy ‘ THREE TIMES ELEVEN ’ is thirty-three. AYhat
a kohinsidence.’ ”
But one other man of that watch heard Bill. And that man was
Frank Ainsworth, as he paced the weather gangway. He looked hard
at Bill, but said nothing. That was the second time he had heard that
mysterious number mentioned on board the “ Scout.
“ You do not recollect me, AYedburn ?” said Phill Gounard, as
he seated himself beside him on “ the booms ,’ soon after the watch
had been called.


“No, I can’t say as I do,” lie replied, “ not by your name, any-
how, still I fancy I have been shipmates with you before.”
Phill then whispered in his ear : “ Do you remember the wdialer,
‘ Columbia ?’ ” to which he replied :
“ Of course I do, but you ;” then drawing nearer to his
interrogator, he whispered back some words, to which Phill answered :
“ Yes ; but mind, not a word.”
Whereupon Wedburn paused, as if in doubt, then looking as one
who had suddenly aroused from a deep sleep, or as if his past life had
been one long-troubled, indistinct dream, from which he had just
awakened to the reality of existence ; was about to proceed when, fixing
his black eyes on Gounard steadfastly for a moment, during which it
seemed as if his whole being had been brought to a standstill; shook
into movement again by a well-known voice :
“Up there, are you ?” shouted by Ainsworth, brought a hearty :
“ Aye, aye !” from the “ new hand from the whaler.”
Weeks ago it had been noted by the lynx-eyed Bill Jewry, that
Gounard and Ainsworth were on a.more intimate footing than hereto-
fore. The intimacy was real enough, tho’ Bill’s usual keeness had
failed him in this instance. But now, as he saw “ the new hand from
the whaler” fixed between the men named, he gave Tom Harris a
nudge, and with a charming audacity declared, as was his custom,
that —“ he had told him so.”
Gounard, Ainsworth, and Wedburn remained on “ the booms,” in
earnest conversation for some time. With respect to Gounard, this
singular secrecy regarding matters that evidently occupied his thoughts
continually, and occasioned him no small amount of anxiety, had led
many of his shipmates to regard him with suspicion. Bill Jewry,
however, was unwilling to acquiesce in the almost general verdict,
forasmuch as he believed in his uprightness and integrity, and felt
sure that, some day, when it suited him, he would explain all that
now appeared mysterious in his conduct.
Many days had elapsed since the trio met on “ the booms.”
And—
The boisterous winds that on the sea
Laid heavy hands, and swept the deep
With clamerous discontented sweep,
Moved now in happy melody.
“ Band on the weather bow, sir !” such was the announcement
from the masthead-man. And it passed like an electric current along
the decks.
“Aery well;” responded Mr. Jarnays, w'ho had charge of the
deck. All eyes being centred on the island, looming in the mist of
evening. The Island of St. Paul:—
An island anchored in a lonely sea,
Heedless of winds in low, or lofty mood.
“ Hands reef topsails !” sent every man to his station ; that
evening evolution performed and the ship made snug for the night,


she continued to cut her way through the waters of the Indian Ocean
toward the lonely rock, which stands up head and shoulders above the
waves, looking wierdly grand in its isolation. “ The hands ” having
been “ piped to dance and skylark, they acquiesced, as one man, in
the paramount importance of the order, no one raising a counterblast
of dissent.
“ Ever been to Batavia, Joe ?” said Tom Savvdy to his topmate,
Humphreys, as they sat smoking their pipes, and noting the nimble
movements of the dancers along the port side of the main
deck.
“ Yes !” replied that worthy, salted specimen of a son of Neptune,
as he pressed the burning weed down the bowl of his pipe, “ When
I was on the ‘ east indy ’ station. They’re'most all Chinese at Batavia,
Tom ; ’twas New Year’s day when I was there ; and talk about noise ;
what with drums, gongs, bells, and crackers, you would just fancy
they could top the record for noise; and all to frighten away evil
spirits, so I’ve been told.’ ”
“ I should think that was a very handy way of getting rid of ’em,
too broke in Tom.
“ Be that as ’twill,” answered Joe, “ that’s their notion, anyhow;
well, I was cap’n of the fore top of the ‘ Calcutta,’ then, Tom ; and
after we sailed from there we fell in with a pirate, among the islands
in the straits of Sunday.’ ” (Sunda).
“Oh ! I’m fond of them sort of yarns cut in Tom, impatiently,
“ come, let’s have it, Joe.”
“ Well,” resumed Joe, “ we had just passed through another such
a blow as the “ Scout” had the other night—and that was about as
fine a specimen of a hurricane as you’d care to see again, I reckon—
when I looked over the rail for’ard, and see a craft under every stitch
she could set. I sung out to the look-out-man on the port cat-head,
and pointed the ship out to him ; he called out like mad : ‘ Sail, ho !’
and in a twink all hands on deck was a peering out into the haze at
her ; and away to loo’ard of her was another craft, which I at once
put down to be a Malay pirate, by the queer cut of her sails ; and I
was right, so it turned out. The wind dropped down to a most a calm
before eight bells that first watch ; so we done little else only watch
the strangers till the night haze had gathered up, ’Twas my morning
watch next morning, and I was in the fore top, just come oft: the yard,
after shaking out a reef; when the wind got up a bit and cleared the
haze ; when, sure enough, there was the pirate ; but she was only a
speck on the horizon, she had caught the breeze afore us, and made
the best of it. She dropped down to it that we was a man-o -war, and
skedaddled ; and most likely she was safe enough among them islands,
and laughed at the idea of uS follering of her.”
“ But what about the other craft, Joe P” said Tom.
Here occurred a not unpleasant break in the conversation by our
theatrical friend, Warsnip’s exclamation ; (Bill was always a welcomed
number to any little group on the “ Scout.”)
« Hillo, Joe!” said he, “ why I thought it was your weather


helm !” Then his cheerful, manly voice, rattled off a few lines of his
favourite Author, slightly altered :
What news, my noble Joe ? every minute now
Should be the father of some stratagem :
The times are wild : contention, like a horse
Full of high feeding, madly hath broke loose,
And bears down all before him.”
“ Now that’l do ye, we ar’nt having no contenshion, Bill,” replied
Joe. “I was just a giving Tom a bit of a ‘cuffer’ about the
* Calcutta.’ ”
*• Ah, what about her?” said Warsnip.
“ Well,” resumed Joe, “ as I was a coming down the fore rigging
at the ‘ pipe to breakfast,’ I sees the skipper, and some of the officers
on the poop a watching the queer behaviour of the brig ; she seemed
to be tumbling about with no one aboard ; her braces was all gone,
and of course her yards was a wobbling about anyhow. So we made
sail on the ‘ Calcutta,’ and very soon overhauled her. Well, my mess-
mate, Darby Kelly, we used to call him, was cox’n of the cutter, and
I have heard him say many a time, he-never looked upon such a sight
before ; the decks was littered with cases of cargo the devils had
broached ; her whole deck was a fearful sight, with the dead and dying
of her crew —the captain, and first, and second officers a gagged, and
their throats cut from clew to earing. In fact, there was only one
man with any signs of life in him; he was brought aboard the
‘ Calcutta ’ and after a while he got all right again. I had many a
yarn with him ; he had been a trip on a whaler —the ‘ Columbia.’ ”
“ I wonder if she was the ship that Frank Ainsworth was aboard
of ?” quoth Tom.
“ Hushsaid Joe, desiring to fix Tom’s attention into the
channel down which his own thoughts were drifting. Then, resuming :
“ We sent him ashore at Singapore, and I didn’t hear tell of him again
till I sees him behind the bar of the ‘THREE TIMES ELEVEN.’
The latter part of the sentence he whispered in the ears of the two
men.
“ Ah !” exclaimed Tom, “ I mind you a telling me about that
chap, the night we buried young Williams, when we was a tumbling
about in the chops of the Channel.”
Said Joe, resuming and finishing his tale : “ The brig, of course,
we towed into Singapore.”
“ Out lights ! clear up the main deck !” were the two orders that
came upon the heels of Joe’s “ cuffer.”
And night’s deep darkness, with the thunder’s shock;
Sunrise and sunset, many a clear blue sky,
Mid noon’s hot glow, these each in turn passed by.
At length the “look out ” saw, ahead, the rock.
“ Yes, that’s Java Head!” said Joe Humphreys, to a group of
his topmates, three weeks after he had related the incident of the
pirate. That same locality we were then fast approaching.


“ Java Head, sir so reported the sailirtg master, Mr. Deighton,
to Captain Morton, who was in his cabin engaged in earnest conversa-
tion with his first lieutenant, Mr. Despard.
“ Thank you, Deighton,” responded the Captain, “ but since the
wind has fallen, our near approach to it is some hours off. Do you
please have the anchors ready.”
“ Aye, aye, sir ;” answered “ the master,” and retired.
Captain Morton, resuming his conversation with Mr. Despard,
said :
“ la it not a deplorable fact, that to refer to such a subject as
religion at any but special occasions invariably produces in the
company assembled a very uncomfortable feeling ? And we need not
be at all surprised at it, when one considers' the inconsistency between
those things we usually do, and the things we ought to do. You know
what my advice to you has alw'ays been respecting your unfortunate
differences with your family, (Captain Morton was, by marriage,
intimately connected with a branch of the Despards,) and I am glad
to hear such has been productive of good, and that you have become
reconciled to each other What may be thought of the life of the man
Gounard, of the ‘ Scout,’ during the time he has been on board, must
have relation to his previous education and habits. Conditions are
pleasant or grevious to us according to our sensibilities. I will use
my influence in the proper quarter, and recommend for the favourable
consideration of “ their lordships ’ of the Admiralty the case of
‘ Stanley, of the ‘ Dido,’* to recover for him, if possible, the time he
had served on that vessel.’ ”
And so ended a most profitable intercourse between two chiefs of
the “ Scout.” If it had been possible to place in command of all our
ships of war men of the Morton type, life in the Isavy would have
been more worth the living than it was. And it was good then.
“We sha’nt be up inside Java Heads to-night, Tom remarked
our old friend Jewry, to Harris as they walked the forecastle that
“ Then I shall loose my grog to-morrow,” answered Harris, “ for
I bet Joe Humphreys we would be inside afore sunset.”
Whereupon Bill replied to that astonishing revelation, by a most
astounding announcement, thus : .
“ Never mind yer grog, old man, you shouldn t give yer mind to
such things ; be like me, for I’d so soon have ‘ two lots ’ as one, any
Down that road lies madness, which might, if persistently followed,
provoke a catastrophe.
“ Here let’s get up into the hammick netting, 1 ve got something
to tell ye You mind the ‘ Arrow Swift ’ whaler, and the chap that
joined us from her ? You mind me saying we would know more about
him by’n bye?”
“Of course Ido replied Tom. , f
“ Well,” continued the irrepressible Bill, Ive got a letter from


my friends’ home, in Oxfordshire. How queer things do come about,
to be sure; that same man, Wedburn, is no other than ‘my gal’s’
brother, Jack liogers, and he was supposed to be drowned years ago,
a chucked overboard from the ‘ Dido ’ brig, when she was on ‘ the coast,’
by a bo’s’n’s mate, called Stanley. But they could’n bring it clear
agin him, so the case dropped. You mind the scrap of newspaper I
read to you that time afore we crossed ‘ the line ?’ It said that Stanley
was drowned in the ‘ Blenheim,’ and that he (Stanley) had shipped on
her as Stamford. This is how the case stands, Tom—Jack Eogers was
picked up by a ship and landed at ‘ ’Frisco,’ then he joined the whaler,
‘ Columbia,’ as Wedlock. Now he turns up again as Jack Wedburn,
d’ye see, ain’t it queer ? a reg’lar batch of kohinsidences for ye. You
keep your eye on Phill, and Frank, and Jack, and you’ll see what you
will see. And then praps you’ll reckolect * I told you so.’ ”
It has been hinted in a former page of this narrative that, “ Bill
believed in the integrity of Grounard.” Certainly events seemed to
point that way. There was no record against him of personal injury
or unkindness, therefore, many of his shipmates were charitably
disposed to leave him to his own devices. Forasmuch as there was a
complete dearth of proof on the matter of the “ Dido ” brig episode.
Java Head had been successfully negotiated. We were now
persuing our course among the Indian Islands toward Singapore,
which is situated at the south-east entrance to the Straits of Malacca,
and is an important naval station.
Whilst sailing among that lovely group I was much struck with
the beauty of the sky. Skies do not appear in their most enchanting
garb when perfectly cloudless. Yet how few, comparatively, are alive
to the beauty of clouds. What imagery was here, as I looked aloft,
depicted among those mighty pillars of cloud ; what gorgeous trans-
formations were continually taking place overhead as I watched the
stately movements of the clouds’ procession.
Yet one kindred soul there was on board the “ Scout ” to whom
those beauties appealed not in vain. It was lan D’Evon. Here
following are a few lines, penned by him ; it has been recorded that
he did likewise on a former occasion:—
“ There, in deep caverns, deep cloud-caverns built
Against the clear blue of the sky, did lurk
The fury of the wind ; the blue sea tossed
Aloft its tangled spray ; and near the sun
I saw cloud-beauties dance; in sooth, old Time
’Mid life and laughter seemed to be wed
To a perpetual summer: Cloud-flakes streamed
Out on the wind ; and all the balmy air
Was laden with health-giving iodine.
Cold is that heart, as cold as the dead moon,
That thaws not ’neath such cloudy witcheries,
That thrills not tho’ skies spread their golden mist
O’er the broad ocean, and the hills that rear,
To sapphire-tinted skies, their shoulders bare,
On which the clouds build pyramids of fire.


In vain, for such, is the clouds’ pageant reared ;
In vain the swinging moons’ magnificence ;
The stars above, deep-set in the sky’s blue.
These have no charm for souls so pinched and thin.”
CHAPTER XI.
SINGAPORE AND CHINA.
(further revelations.)
Smooth o’er the sunlit waves ’mongst Indian Isles,
Gaily we urged our unapparent path ;
We saw the fire-flecked sun uprise, all smiles.
Beheld him drop, at eve, his cloudy swath,
Then, headlong, take his gokl and purple bath.
great cities resemble each other in most respects, nevertheless,
each has its own peculiarities ; and Singapore possessed; for
the most part, quite a set of its own. With regard to clothing, there
is nothing so indelicate as clothes when they are “ off,” has been
justly observed. Here then, at Singapore, clothes for the native
population were mostly “ off,” and entirely so if we except a very
scanty girdle about the loins. Here too, every country in the world
had its representatives. Mongolians from the north of China, the men
of Thibet, the Corean from the East, and Siamese from their homes
had here found scope for that enterprise that seemed to be taking hold
of all men, even men from the hitherto secluded provinces of our vast
Indian Empire were here, all under the British flag. The spectacle
of the various nationalities here presented, confirms the opinion held
by many, even of our American cousins, that —“ Britain s rule is one
of unselfishness,” in all her colonies. The born Briton has no advan-
tages attaching to the accident of his birth over that possessed by men
ofany colour or race who become residents of the same locality.
During the intervals “ off duty,” whilst refitting here, as at the
Cape, and “indeed at all times, Captain Morton, always intensely
interested in the welfare of those under his command had, to this end,
formed a class for reading and study, and his efforts had been crowned
with most beneficial results. He had been ably seconded by the hearty
co-operation of Lieutenants Hasted, He Lacey, and others. We have
alreadv seen the effect of his timely mediation in the reconciliation of
the cousins Hespard. His intended pleadings to their lordships,
on behalf of Stanley of the “ Dido,” also bore witness of his goodness
of heart; never too much engrossed to be sympathetic.
« Here, Tom, bring along a hand of bananas, and a ‘ soft tapk,’
(bread) and some boiled eggs from the ‘ bom boat, 111 do as much for
you when you gets yer toe jammed in a brace-block;’” said Joe
Humphreys to Tom Sawdy, as he sat on “ the booms, ’ nursing the
foot that owned the “ toe.” Tossing Tom a rupee, he completed the
winding of the bandage about his injured foot. }
“ All right,” Tom answered, “ ’tis a pity to shift you out o that,
for you seems so comfortable, up there.
“ Ugh, comfortable ?” growled Joe, “ well i am. 1 m not
like some people who is never comfortable anywhere.


After the work df the day had been done, and the decks cleared
up, Joe, having cleared up the residue purchased that morning, took
his perch in the hammock netting just by the fore rigging ; there, as
per arrangement, Tom Sawdy drifted.
“ Then you wants me to ball up some of the yarn you’ve been
‘ unravelling,’ do you, Joe ?’ ” enquired Tom. Whereupon Joe
replied :
- “ Aye, mate, come up here, I thought I’d get to the far end of
that yarn about Phill Gounard, and Bill Jewry is beginning to see —-
so he says—but I think he’s seen it all along—that Phill is not so
black as he’s been painted. Look you here, I was where I couldn’t
help hearing what the ‘ three cronies ’ was a talking about ‘ on the
booms,’ one night. And since I’ve been on the doctor’s list I’ve had
a bit more time to knot together the scraps of yarn 1 unravelled then.
The bottom of the concern seems to me to be —‘ a letter,’ or pieces of
one, and they expects great things from it when we gets to Hong-
Kong.’ ” v
Here the conversation was checked by the irresistible appeal of
the irrepressible Bill Jewry :
“ Got any tabacker on ye, Joe ?”
“ Aye, mate,” said that worthy, “ that’s a luxury I mostly carries
in my cap, to be handy when wanted; I likes to be in a position to
supply an old friend what has run short; I don’t believe in a man
keeping his good things to himself; I believe in raceprocity of
interests, and a compassernate konsideration for them as ain’t so well
off as yerself.” I suppose few people would care to make a vigorous
protest against such a doctrine F “ Here, man alive, pass yer opinion
on this bit of ‘ Sygnapour ’ cavendish,’ ” handing Bill a piece as he
spoke. Bill, depositing himself in a space the other two men had
made for him, entered into the subject under discussion, viz ; the
doings of the “ three cronies ” on *‘ the booms,” and upon which he
was a recognised authority, altho’, at times, disposed to ultraism.
The three having disposed, for the present, of that subject, Bill
proceeded to give them the substance of another “ letter,” in response
to the enquiry of Tom Sawdy.
“Any news from home, did ye say? Yes, I got a ‘letter’ as
come by the mail boat what left ‘ Sygnapore ’ this morning.’ ”
“ Good news, I hope, old man ?” chimed in Joe.
“ Yes > thank’e,” replied Bill, “ all what’s of a private sort is very
good ; but what’ll mostly take your fancy is what it says about a gent
who is a solicitor; my gal’s ’ been living with the family, and she
tells me they’re all a coming out to China; and she is coming with
enn So, may be, I shall see her up there in Hong-Kong
Two days later the familiar cry. “Hands shorten in cable'”
brought us to within a few hours of our departure from Singapore •
the genial Hasted was again at his post, and that invisible personage
at the bottom of the sea he again exhorted to—“ let go the man’s
anchor. The sails lilled; the “ Scout ” leaned to the breeze as a


maiden to the kiss of her lover; and in a short time Singapore could
not have been seen but from the masthead.
Above us bent the sky ; our vessel leaped
As ’twere against the heavens, while sank the shore
Whence we had waved farewells. Perhaps no more
Would we behold that low land, sunset-steeped.
Bravely our handsome “ Scout ” was cutting her way up the
China Sea toward Hong-Kong, while I stood upon a forecastle gun,
one night, watching the topsails bellying out to the breeze, and noted
the graceful curve of the top gallant sails above them. Thence my
eyes would wander to the sinuous line of phosphorescent light in the
ship’s wake ; when Martin accosted me with :
“ I reckon we may call this a splendid night and not be far out
of our reckoning, Mr. Avant,”
“ Yes, indeed, Martin;” I replied. “Well, what news did you
receive from home by the last mail ?”
“ All hands well, thank you, sirhe answered. “ But,” said
he, “ talking of ‘ news,’ it seems to me we arn’t short of that article
on the ‘ Scout,’ just now, Mr, Avant. Of course, everybody has been
under the notion that Phill Gounard was a queer one. But by what
I can hear he ain’t Gounard at all, only so far as the ‘ Scout’s ’ con-
cerned. It seems that he’s the man Stanley who belonged to the
‘ Dido,’ when she was on ‘ the coast,’ and I hear the Captain is going
to try and get his time back what he served afore he run away from
her,’ ”
And very much more did my shipmate Martin regale me with,
calling it “ news,” which had been known to most of us for some time.
However, it transpired that he had become acquainted with the very
latest, also—in the matter of “ the letter ” which has already been re-
ferred to by Joe Humphreys. In relation to which Martin was about
to give me some particulars, as far as he knew them, when the word
was passed along from the quarter deck—for the bo’s’n.
Being summoned to the first lieutenant’s cabin. Thither I
repaired.
“ Ah, Avant,” said he, “ I want to learn from you what are the
abilities of the man Wedburn as a seaman, and let me know the result
forthwith, forasmuch as the Captain believes him to be just the man
for a vacancy —rendered so in consequence of the second captain of
the main top having been invalided home —which I have to fill up.
The Captain is most anxious that Wedburn should receive the appoint-
ment.”
“ Aye, aye, sir I answered, and retired.
There are, here and there, a few who, in their endeavours to do
good, may be likened to a clustering archipelago of palm-fringed
islands in a sea of leaden indifference. Both these were represented
on the “ Scout.” The first by Captain Morton, and his little band of
workers The second, in the Cynic, for he was present; ah, who has
not met him ? he was here, and his conspicuous impiety led him to
speak, and he could speak, like a lawyer, from a brief j but, in this


case, the brief must have been the production of the Evil One himself.
Our cynic’s soul had been converted, by it, into a machine. The
plummet of his mind had followed every letter of that brief. Into
the darkest labyrinths of selfishness he had followed the instructions
it contained. He had graduated, and had become a most capable
Counsel for the Destroyer of souls. His criticisms of the professors
of Christianity were unique in the quality of malice that pervaded
them. With regard to the natural beauty of the world ; a living
Being, ever present, who is the great source of all we see around us
of explained and unexplained phenomena ; His brief was sufficiently
conclusive, and whoso differed from him ought to be properly sat upon.
It is not conventional exaggeration to say that there are those
whose religion consists in pulling down rather than in building up ;
such an one was our cynic.
The following morn, the bosom of the sea.
Inlaid no longer with the starry hosts.
Hurled its mad foam along Phillipine coasts.
Drenching the air to weather and to lee.
“ Stand by the best-bower anchor I”- came as a most welcome
sound after our forty-eight hours shaking in the grip of the changing
monsoon.
The cheery voice of the leadsman calling from “ the chains,” the
shallowing soundings as we approached the anchorage at Manilla,
struck as a welcome note upon our ears, in strong contrast to the
screeching monsoonal gale.
The anchor had left the bows ; the yards were on the caps ; the
men appointed to this particular duty were upon the yards furling sails,
save two who were in the water; one of them had fallen, the other
leapt to his rescue. The first —Gounard ; the second—Wedburn.
Manilla is on the largest of the'group known as the Phillipine
Islands. We stayed but a couple of days here giving the ship a few
final touches, rendering her as smart looking as possible ere she
appeared at Hong-Kong. The day following the rescue of Gounard by
Wedburn’s plucky leap into the sea, was marked by—“ further revela-
tions, as in the Captain’s cabin there sat a sort of court of enquiry :
“ So you declare to being the man known on H.M.S. brig, ‘ Dido,’
as Sogers ?’ ” said Captain Morton, addressing John Wedburn.
“ Yes, sir Wedburn replied.
“ Make a note of that, Mr. Brettsaid the Captain—who was
particularly anxious to acquire all possible testimony with regard to
the case under notice—addressing the paymaster’s clerk, who was
taking the depositions.
“ And you further state—* that you were accidently knocked over-
board ’ whilst the £ Dido ’ was being ‘ put about.’ Is that so P’ ”
“ Yes, sir, that is the truth answered Wedburn.
Said the Captain, continuing, and addressing Gounard : “ I have
applied to the proper authorities that your period of servitude,


Gounard, be restored to you, up to the date of your desertion from
the Service, solely on account of your exemplary conduct on the
‘ Scout,’ and the confirmatory evidence of Lieutenant Despard that
you are Stanley of the ‘ Dido.’ A court-martial having acquitted you
of the charge of causing to fall overboard the man known as Rogers
on that ship. And there is no longer any reason to believe that you
were, in any way, responsible for the mysterious disappearance of
Rogers from Her Majesty’s Ship, ‘ Dido.’ The further confirmation
of your innocence being now strengthened by the declaration of
Wedburn, by which name he is known on the ‘ Scout,’ but who, in
reality, is Rogers of the ‘ Dido.’ Taking these facts into consideration,
and also that yesterday, he (Rogers, alias Wedburn) courageously
leapt into the sea, thereby rescuing you from drowning. I will, there-
fore, take the earliest opportunity to advise ‘ their lordships ’ that the
time served by Rogers on the ‘ Dido ’ brig, be restored to him also.
Then, addressing the first lieutenant: —
“ That will be sufficient for the present enquiry, Despard.’ ”
That was the signal for all to retire.
In the foregoing enquiry we are permitted a further insight into
the character of the “ Scout's ” Commander, the man to whom we
largely owe the cooling down of the flames which jealousy and
animosity had kindled.
CHAPTER XII.
lIOKG-KONG.
CHANGES.
A good man finds his reward in well-doing,
Despite thy sullen gales, ungrateful world,
And storms of ridicule by cynics hurled :
He draws supplies of strength, for strength bestowing,
From the Great Fountain Head; climbing t’ward heaven
On altar-steps of prayer morning and even’.
Vv?()NQ- K OXG is an Island separated from the main land by a very
narrow passage, which widens out to a commodious anchorage.
Once you are inside the Capson-moon passage, the one mostly used, by
ships approaching from the south, the harbour appears quite land-
locked. Of course, everyone is aware that it is a British Colony. At
the time included in this part of the narrative, there were anchored
there —the old three-decker, “ Princess Charlotte,” as “ guard-ship,”
a number of British gun-boats, and merchant vessels from every nation
under the sun. Here, too, were to be seen a fleet of fine steamers,
whose quaint-looking engine-cranks swayed up and down above the
level of the bulwarks ; they plied a busy trade from Hong-Kong to
Canton, about ninety miles up the river.
One could not, on a first visit to this distant part of our Empire,
but be struck by the strange spectacle presented by many scores of
boats (sampans) covered at the‘after end, in which hundreds of the
native population pass their lives, rarely setting foot ashore. And
upon a closer acquaintance, other most noticable features claim one’s
attention, such as small feet (made so by compression) among the


women, and what are known as pigtails among the men. It appears
that about two or three centuries ago the Manchus, who had become
the rulers of the Empire, commanded all Chinese to shave their heads
and grow a tail like themselves. And although in a general way the
Chinese peasant is a most submissive, good-tempered fellow, a con-
siderable amount of trouble was at first experienced in enforcing the
order. So that really the custom of wearing the pigtail, and the
compression of the feet, did not originate with themselves, but with
their conquerors, the Manchus.
The Chinese also believe in the practice—a very old one, as it
seems to have been in vogue centuries before the commencement of
our era—of breath-swallowing as a means of rendering the human
frame invulnerable to disease. They are also great consumers of pork.
No pig can be too fat for a Chinaman ; and it appears to agree well
with him notwithstanding all that has been said against the consumption
of it in a hot climate.
The inhabitants of Malacca, and the Phillipine Islands also, are
extensive consumers of pork.
The foregoing is a brief sketch of the locality, men and manners
as they obtained in the early sixties when H.M.S. “ Scout ” first
clewed up her topsails, and dropped anchor in the harbour of Hong-
Kong.
China had not, in the main, been longing for the fulfilment of
promises which had their birth in the first efforts made to introduce
Christianity into the remote regions. But it was devoutly hoped that
those engaged in the laborious task, and who were hopeful and
expectant, would soon witness more satisfactory results.
“Quite comfortable, Joe, old man?” such was the enquiry of
Tom Sawdy of his topmate, Humphreys.
“ Aye, aye, mate was the cheery response of Joe, adding : “ but
you’re come before I wanted you.”
That question was put and answered at Hong-Kong, six months
after “the man’s anchor ” had been lifted from the mud of that
harbour for the first time, and
Upon our quarter had the freshening gale
Burst the salt billows into foam,
While like a jewel on our fore topsail,
The moon hung from high heaven’s dome
Having returned from Shanghai, and Yokohama, we were then
under orders to fill up with coal, provisions, and stores, before
proceeding southwards.
“However,” continued Joe, “seeing as how ‘changes’ is the
order of the day, I’ll change my billet up here in the hammick netting
and come down to you.’ ”
“So poor Jarnays has slipped his cable, Joe;” remarked Tom.
“ Shall you go to the funeral to-morro.w afternoon ?”
“ Yesanswered Joe. “ Mr, Jarnays was a hofficer that I didn’t
much admire, taking him in some ways, still as a all-round man I liked
him well enough. I’m sorry though that he’s took off so young, and


at such short notice ; however, I means to pay my respects to his
memory by going to his funeral. Ah, Tom, many’s the time I’ve
marched to * Happy Talley,’ and helped to lay a shipmate under the
turf, when I was aboard the old ‘ Princess Charlotte,’ she what’s a
lying out there Kow-loon waysaid Joe, pointing towards the old
guard ship in the harbour.
The funeral took place, the mortal remains of the late Lieutenant
Jarnays were laid to rest in the cemetery known as “ Happy Talley.”
Reference has been made before in these pages about the deceased.
As an officer he knew his duty and did it. But as an individual he
was mostly unapproachable, cynical and unsympathic ; yet possessed
of a strange power which enabled him to ingratiate himself with the
Captain, in whose estimation he held a high place. Apart from his
recurring battles with the “ demon of doubt” within him, he had few
troubles. But men will doubt as long as they think, and many of them
will doubt weakly and foolishly. Captain Morton was not ignorant
of his failing, and had endeavoured to win him over to different views
of life and its responsibilities. But his last words to the Captain
were: —
“ It is too late, I fear to rectify the mistake.”
The place of our deceased shipmate having been filled by Lieu-
tenant Ingram from the guard-ship, “ Princess Charlotte,” and our
stores completed, we sailed for the South.
During our previous absence from Hong-Kong, the Captain had
received from their “ lordships ” a favourable reply respecting the
“ time ” forfeited by the two men—Stanley and Rogers, formerly of the
“ Dido.” The latter (Wedburn, of the “ Scout ”) had been promoted
in accordance with the Captain’s wishes, as herein before set forth.
The mystery of the “ letter ” had been partly cleared up.
Gounard, Ainsworth, and Wedburn having answered an advertisement
that appeared in the Hong-Kong Gazette , (twelve months after the
death of the Testator, which was according to the Testator’s instruc-
tions to his solicitors) as follows :
“If Captain Edgar Greenaway, Francis Ainsworth, boatswain, and John
Wedlock, seaman, all of the whaler, * Columbia,’ of Boston, and who were engaged
in whale-fishing in the Pacific, in the year 185 ,on the said ship ‘ Columbia,’
of Boston, will communicate with the Firm of Austey Foote, Solicitors, of
Hong-Kong, they will hear of something to their advantage.’ ”
There was, however, one “link” missing. That prevented the
full establishment of their claims ; Gounard had failed to produce his
portion of the “letter;” the two portions produced by the men,
Ainsworth and Wedburn, agreed with the original document in
the possession of the Solicitors, and set forth in the codicil to the
“ Will ” of the late William Williams, one time of the ship, “ Emma,”
of Boston, and later of Singapore, at which place he died. A copy of
the Singapore Times (produced) contained a report of the landing of
Williams in the vear 185 ,as also the announcement that the ship,
“ Emma ” had been towed into Singapore by H.M.S., “ Calcutta.”


Our passage Southwards had been so far uneventful, save that—
Again, thro’ portals of the Sunset,
We heard the Monsoon call ;
Saw Borneo, asleep and nodding,
Sink ’neath a cloudy pall.
And as we drew near Tomadjoe, a small island near Borneo, we
were startled by the cry :
“ Did you hear that ?” from Jack Friend the question came, and
was addressed to Charley Martin, the two men were looking over the
rail of the “ Scout ” towards a forty-horse-power gun-boat that was
puffing and snorting away, doing her best to steam four knots an hour,
for at about that rate she approached the “ Scout,” just as “ the man’s
anchor ” was “ let go.”
“ Yes,” answered Martin, “it sounded like a riffle shot,”
Presently was heard the rattle of cable through the hawse pipe
of the “ Janus,” the gun-boat referred to, and immediately her gig was
lowered into the water, and hauled alongside her gangway, into it her
Commander stepped, (Lieutenant Richard Adams by name, a fine sailor
and a “ taut ” band), a moment, and they pulled with all haste towards
us. From the gun-boat’s mast head flew out the “ Church pennant,”
which signifies—among other things—prayers, death.
“ I wonder what’s up on the ‘ Janus ?’ ” was the enquiry of all.
We were not left long in doubt, for as the “Janus’” gig shoved off
from the “ Scout ” the news flew round the ship, as ill news is known
to fly, usually :
“ Harry Benson has shot himself!”
The unfortunate fellow was gun-room steward of the “ Scout,”
and having failed to return on board at the expiration of his leave at
Singapore, we sailed without him. The “ Janus ” leaving soon after
to join the Scout, Benson had gone on board her for passage down
to us. The poor man had shot himself rather than face the con-
sequences of his leave-breaking.
He was buried on a detatched patch of land separated from the
island by a reef that was just awash, and crowned with such a wreath
of foliage.
He failed to see that life lived in the light
Of Hope, left human effort a wide range.
It has been mentioned in a former chapter that Bill Jewry had
found, while washing decks, something which he thought might “ come
handy ” some day. Bill had favoured me with a look at it; here it is,
as it appeared when laid open, the action of water had separated the
parts: —
In addition to these mysterious characters wTiich were - upon the
inner face of one of the pieces, there was written upon the outer face
of each piece the words—“ THREE TIMES ELEVEN.”


It has been previously noted that Bill seemed endowed with the
faculty of turning up at all places, in divers ways, and at most out-of-
the-way times. He possessed, too, the ability to utilise whatever came
to hand, he owned the bump of curiosity in an unusual degree. In
fact, he could make axe-handles out of any wood, and this led him to
regard the most trivial circumstances as “ links ” that, possibly, might
serve to connect important events. Hence he had preserved the paper
above noticed. In pursuance of these notions he was ever —all eyes,
and ears ; therefore he had not been slow to connect an expression he
had heard drop, more than once, by the three cronies on “the booms.”
He was, however, very reticent, thinking it might “ come handy ” by’n
bye.
*******
Three months had elapsed ; the “ Scout ,r was again at Singapore.
Her furnace fires had been watched and tended.
Almost stark-naked men had, “ slice ” in hand,
Fed flames that flared thro’ red-hot iron mouths
Which, gaping wide, disclosed a white glare.
So strong men toiled, daring as need arose.
And again upon “the booms” were men discussing what, doubt-
less, was of interest to them ; towards one of the groups Phill Gounard
went, and with a quiet greeting, sat down among them ; but remaining
silent longer than was his wont, Frank Ainsworth ventured the
remark in a somewhat tropically florid style;
•• You’re a bit silent to-night, Phill, have you got any news of the
lost ‘ password ’ yet ?’ ”
“ No,” replied Phill, “ I have advertised in the Singapore and
Hong-Kong papers, but, so far, without results.”
“ Why don’t you ”
He did not finish the sentence, seeing some one approaching,
“ What cheer, mate ?” shouted the übiquitous Bill Jewry, as he
hoisted himself over the gunwale of the launch. That arrested the
attention of the little group, Bill forthwith depositing himself in their
midst, continued :
“ Phill, old man, I see in a paper when I was ashore the other
night that you want’s to know if anybody has found a docyment what s
got on it the words—' THBEE TIMES ELEVEN.’ Now I’ve got a
piece of thickish paper with just them words on it; I picked it up one
morning while we was a washing decks, and with the wet it got split
open, and one piece has got a lot of queer letters on it. See here !
exclaimed Bill, producing the pieces containing the mysterious
characters already alluded to. _
To say that the three men principally interested in the recovery
of the “ missing link ” were astounded, would be putting it mildly.
They saw the importance of the “ link, from the fact of those myste-
rious characters being upon the inner face of one piece, thereby
convincing them that the other portions then in the hands of the
solicitors were capable of separation also ; (this, up to then, they were
totally ignorant of), therein lay the full establishment of their claims
to the legacies left them by the late William Williams, at one time of
F


the whaler, “ Columbia,” later of the ship “ Emma,” of Boston, and
still later of Singapore,
A keen observer might have noticed two men in one of the groups
just referred to who, at the mention of—THREE TIMES ELEVEN,
by Bill Jewry, looked significantly at each other, for they had heard
the words distinctly from where they sat. Their names —Humphreys
and Sawdy.
The reader would not have failed to notice why that look was
given, nor think it extraordinary that they should connect the circum-
stances of the mysteriously-worded sign of the hotel, or “ grog-shop,”
as Joe has called it. Nor why Ainsworth had looked so scrutinizingly
at Joe when, on a former occasion, the latter had named the sign of
the “ grog-shop,” within his hearing, as previously recorded, for to
him, and the other two men, Gounard and Wedburn, there were many
things in connection with “THREE TIMES ELEVEN” that still
retained an extraordinary vitality.
Any notion to the contrary would have been preposterous in itself,
and easily refuted by k every day facts which should be matter of
common knowledge.
CHAPTER XIII.
THE LINKS CONNECTED.
(conclusion.)
How rarely things are what they seem,
Often life’s mighty wheel inclines
To unquiet motions : Then men’s faith declines.
My those, who, fixt to nothing, catch the gleam
Hope sheds across the stream, upon their grief,
Till links, connected, bring despair relief.
VvRO V ERBIALLY, all matters relating to “ law,” whether they be
lawful matters or not, move very slowly. It had taken six
months to prove the claims of Messrs. Gounard, Ainsworth, and
Wedburn, of the “ Scout,” to be identical with those of Greenaway,
Ainsworth, and Wedlock, of the “ Columbia.”
“ Didn’t I tell you so?” triumphantly shouted the irrepressible
Bill Jewry, to a group of his topmates composing a part of the “ sub ”
aloft in the forelop, one night as the “Scout” ploughed her way
towards Hong-Kong. “ I always had a notion that there would be
something in the wake of that ‘ scrap of paper,’ because of them queer
letters a printed on one side, which was the inside, mind you.’ ”
“ How much money is Phill, Frank, and Jack to get’?” asked Joe
Humphreys.
“ Five-hundred pounds a-piece ;” answered Bill.
And you re to have one hundred pounds for that piece you
handed over to Phill, are you?” said his interrogator, Tom Sawdy.
“ That’s so, mate replied Bill, with a knowing wink.
Two days after the above conversation took place the “ Scout’s ”
anchor again lay prone upon the slimy sediment of Hong-Kong
harbour. Twas midnoon, and the 24th of May. All true Britain's
know what event that date commemorates. The ships in harbour were
decorated gaily with bunting, aud from the flag-staff upon the summit


of the island there streamed —“ The flag that’s braved a thousand years
the battle and the breeze.” While on the “ Scout ” quite twice twenty
pairs of eyes followed the movements of the Captain, who looked so
thoroughly what he was —(no borrowed varnish of refinement here) —
a sailor and a gentleman from heel to brow, as he strode along the
quarter deck towards the gangway where his “ gig ” lay waiting to
convey him ashore. For on that particular day the claims of
Greenaway, Ainsworth, and Wedlock to the legacies of the late
William Williams, gentleman, of Singapore, were to be settled ; Cap-
tain Morton having received an invitation from the solicitors to be
present as witness to the transaction.
Promptly at the appointed time at Anstey and Foote’s chambers,
in Victoria Street, Hong-Kong, there were assembled the three men
chiefly interested, the Solicitors with their two clerks, and Captain
Morton. “ The Will ” was read, especial stress being laid on the
codicil that referred to the legacies in question. Then followed the
piecing together of the mysterious three-part document held by the
claimants. The “ missing link,” so strangely recovered by Gounard,
being laid upon the office table by itself, looked quite unintelligible;
but when the other parts which had been held by Ainsworth and
Wedlock had been placed in juxtaposition, it read thus :
W A MIE I N All RI T L O
i i s|e|a yj n oj h d c
L L 6IE I W A| S wjw E{ K
Which, upon being read down and up from left to right, spelled out
four names—the testator, Williams, and the three claimants —
Greenaway, Ainsworth, and Wedlock.
It appeared that, according to the original documents held by the
Solicitors the deceased man, Williams had, while on board the whaler,
“ Columbia ” been sick unto death. But by careful nursing by his
three shipmates he had recovered. In gratitude for those acts of
kindness he had written upon the inside of a sheet of rather thick
paper the mysterious “ lettersafterwards, by some adhesive sub-
stance, securing them together, and writing upon the outer face of
each slip (having out the sheet) the “ password, IHEEE TIMES
ELEVEN ” in such a manner that it helped to conceal the printed
characters’within The number of letters being—“ three times eleven.”
Presenting one to each man, a slip enclosed in an envelope, saying as
he did so Captain Greenaway, Francis Ainsworth, John Wedlock,
keep this, it may be useful to you some day.
Three cheques were drawn by the Solicitors, in favour of the
claimants, and duly attested to by Captain Morton, each cheque being
of the value of five hundred pounds sterling.


Bill Jewry duly received his reward of one hundred pounds for
the “ missing link,” by each of the recipients contributing an equal
amount.
So ended that twenty-fourth of May which had witnessed the
connection of some important “ links ” of this narrative. Others are
to follow, meanwhile it may be deemed proper to state just here that,
according to information possessed by the Solicitors, he (the Testator)
had affixed the mysterious words —“ THREE TIMES ELEVEN,”
over the entrance to his hotel, (“ grog shop ”) hoping thereby to
attract the attention of his former benefactors of the “ Columbia ”
if, peradventure, they should chance that way. But the sequel has
demonstrated that no one on the “ Scout ” had seen the curiously-
named hotel, or (“ grog shop,”) as Joe Humphreys had called it, but
Joe himself. And he would not allow his rights to that honour to be
undermined or spokeshaved away.
Other links—Gounard’s time in the service having expired, he
was merely waiting a passage home. Wedlock and Ainsworth invested
their legacies as Captain Morton advised. Lieutenant Despard
(“ number one,”) left the “ Scout ” for the Severn ” frigate, to this
latter he had been appointed as her Commander. But ere he left for
his new command there had been a most affecting interview between
the genial Hasted and himself. It has already been noticed that the
two officers had been very much together, therefore it might be deemed
proper to set down some particulars of that interview in this place : ,
“ Listen to me,” said Hasted ; “ I speak not as an enemy, but with
the unbiassed judgment of man to man. Pardon my candour, dear
Despard, when 1 say—lt is difficult to implant new ideas, or new
methods into a mind impoverished by the growths of a selfish existence
covering nearly half a century. Yet you may, in your new sphere of
duty, by a judicious exercise of will-power, obliterate much of the past,
and rise by your talents and reputation which mark you in most of your
shipmates’ eyes as destined for the highest preferments in the Service.
By a coincidence which throws light upon the nature and origin of the
reports, which hitherto had been in circulation, respecting your cousin
Edgar (Gounard) while on the “ Dido,” the reality of the presence of
the man Rogers ( Wed burn) on board the “ Scout ” explodes that theory
altogether. Moreover, the evidence of the man Rogers (Wedburn)
showed that the relations between himself and Stanley (Gounard) had
never been other than of the most friendly description. That fact
shows out most clearly in the * Columbia ’ episode. As also now on the
‘Scout.’ Wherefore then, dwell so despondingly on the past? Now,
dear Despard, finally—The exhibition of temper by you towards Edgar
(Gounard) is one of those incidents which I very much deplore ; I had
hoped that the breach between yourself and him was effectually bridged
over by the interview at the Cape. But a jealous nature, such as yours,
is not a calmly reasoning one. Moreover, in justice to Edgar, I must
say one need have taken no sides in the quarrel to admire his conduct.
You have not practised the supreme art of forgetting all that is
irrevocable in a bitter past, therefore, what had been built up of hope
and peace is now crumbling to pieces in your hands ; and I aver that


every attempt will prove futile to remedy the ills of which you com-
plain—aye, as useless as tonics would to build up the system of a person
slowly bleeding to death—unless you discontinue the practice of slow
alcoholic poisoning to which you are addicted.
“ Ever remember that—The essential condition of inward peace is,
the complete merging of the man’s will in the Will of God. And with
peace is included also that of intellectual and spiritual enlightenment.’ ”
Hasted became first lieutenant of the “ Scout.” Captain Morton
sailed for England in an early mail boat, he having been appointed to
the command of a vessel then fitting out for scientific exploration in the
South Pacific. Captain Bradshawe succeeded him in the “ Scout,” and
entered heartily into the good work initiated by his predecessor, and
was as cheerfully supported by Hasted, DeLacey and others. Moreover,
through them there came about a state of things in the men-of-war on
that station, unknown before.
I severed ray connection with the “ Scout ” shortly afterwards at
Yokohama, having received orders for home—promotion. Thither I
sailed in the frigate “ Euryalus,” as did also Gounard, and other time-
expired men ; landing at Plymouth safely, when ’twas Summer, and—
The shingled roofs steamed when uprose the sun,
And Night, outworn, departed. Pay, set free,
His eyelids lifting, looked along the sea,
And saw old Tamar, as he hurried on,
Eager to wed his waters to the sea.
Aloft, I saw white cloud-flakes spread themselves
Among the forest leaves which topped the shelves
Of rugged rock : the wind, the solitude,
Prompting to worship by its every mood,
’Twas then I heard a loved voice calling me.
But few “ links ” more remain to be connected. My old friend
and shipmate, Martin, had passed for a Boatswain’s warrant on board
the old “ Princess Charlotte.” The irrepressible and übiquitous Bill
Jewry had, with a portion of his “ hundred pounds,” purchased his
discharge from the Service, and having secured an appointment at the
signal station at Hong-Kong, thither he went, having married his
“ aal,’ as come out with the Solicitors.’ ” And as guests at the
wedding were—Edgar Despard, Frank Ainsworth, Jack Rogers, Joe
Humphreys, Tom Harris, Tom Sawdy, and others, and of course, Bill
himself ; it was he who “ told me so.
In due course Edgar Despard and Beatrice Dalton were married.
I accepting an invitation, was present on that auspicious occasion.
And “ Fordham Lodge,” near the city of Oxford, thereafter afforded a
very snug anchorage for the Despards.
“ The ” as it was familiarly called by the people of the
neighbourhood, had been purchased by Mr. Dalton from the Du Fresneys
between whom and the Daltons there had been for years a feeling of
true neighbourliness; Mr. Dalton bequeathing “The Lodge,' at his
death to his daughter, Beatrice. Mrs. Dalton, being otherwise amply
provided for, remained with the newly-married pair.


The festivities ended, I bade adieu ! for my home in the south of
Devon.
Edgar Despard had been long absent from England previous to his
marriage; and doubtless he was well pleased to be landed once more
among the well-remembered scenes of his boyhood. It was Autumn—
An© on the dew-steeped grass the gaunt old elms
Flung down their rusted leaves, leaves that were old
As hopes, and longings which the summer brought.
Before finally taking leave of the “ Scout ” and her crew, whose
foibles and frailties we have seen were in no wise different from what
one may meet with elsewhere, let me say a few words in vigorous pro-
test against the oft repeated assertion that “ the race is degenerating.’
There were men on the “Scout” who had followed the call of Duty
through bitter cold, hunger, and mismanagement in the Crimean War ;
the honour of the “grand old flag” they had maintained at Bomarsund
and Sweaborg, in the Baltic.' In Peel’s naval brigade during the Indian
Mutiny, in 1857. In short, men who had won the respect of all under
whom they served. And respect is not usually accorded to simpletons
or cowards. They would have done likewise on'board the “Scout ” had
occasion of the hour called upon them. Yes, dear reader, in the British
seaman there is as good steel as ever. And I am bold to aver that,
should any challenge to open combat they will assuredly find such a
challenge convincing enough, though their savage hatred of our “ tight
little island ” forbids their regarding us with admiration. “ The British
Nation played out.” Indeed ? Fiddle-de-de.
Twelve months had passed since “ The Lodge ” had received its
latest tenants—the Despards, when Beatrice, her heart palpitating with
hope, with her child in her arms, stepped out into the ivy-covered porch
to receive a letter from the mail-man. * * * *
That morning was a gloomy one at “ The Lodge.” Its inmates were
dull and dispirited.
“ Poor Cyril ! Poor Cyril !” sighed Beatrice, as she turned away.
“ Dead more than six months, and here is the proof of his death.”
The gravity of the news is sufficiently obvious, even if there was
not the sad record of the far-back years to enhance the feeling of bitter
sorrow with which it was necessarily received. It had transpired that
Cyril, after his appointment to the “ Severn ” frigate, separated from
those beneficent'influences which had surrounded him on the “ Scout,”
had shot rapidly along the down-grade.
Deep darkness his horizon had submerged.
Drink, followed by remorse, had terminated in suicide. He had
leapt through his cabin window into the sea, while under the influence
of the “demon” that held him, and—
To him, what did that breezy morning bring
Whom morbid impulse caused thus to swerve ?
There came of old friends no remembering.
No eye beheld his slow last agony.
His vessel, the “ Severn,” being anchored in Madras roads at the
time,


Hence do we see by this closing scene, as herein briefly depicted,
how, when influences which made for good have been withdrawn, it
happens, too often, alas ! that the unfortunate victim glides rapidly
along as though upon the surface of a mighty avalanche, to destruction.
“ And here is the proof of his death !” sobbed Beatrice a second
time.
“ You have said truly, dear Edgar, ‘ that life is full of strange
coincidences, some of them very dramatic.’ I recall a few—My voyage
to China with the Du Fresneys, and through them the finding of you.
The appointment of dear cousin Ernest to the ‘ Omar Pasha ’ about
that time, and the strangeness of the events which led up to my going
on board that vessel for passage home. The sad fate of Ernest, allied
to the course of the winds that brought the ‘.Scout ’ to our assistance,
these surely, were marvellous coincidences ; forasmuch as they brought
together two who, through the cup of bitterness (from which all must
sup little or much) had been at enmity for years, and which resulted in
the restoration of the balances between them ; Cyril, through the
instrumentality of a good man, was reclaimed, moreover, it was hoped,
firmly set upon his feet again. That hope, alas ! has been rudely
shattered by the hand of our unfortunate cousin himself. * * * And
here is the proof of his death !’ ” said Beatrice for the third time.
A brief silence ensued, during which all seemed buried in deep
thought, broken by Edgar’s interrogation ;
“ Is it possible that his faculties could have been so undermined by
things which happened long years ago ?”
“It would appear so answered Beatrice, when she relapsed again
into silence.
Edgar, meanwhile going to the library to refer to a former letter of
Cyril’s, did not hear Mrs. Dalton’s question :
“ Did the hatred begin with Cyril or Edgar, Beatrice ?” nor the
reply of Beatrice :
“ I don’t know, I had no suspicion of its existence; there it was,
however, a huge barrier between two who should have been one in heart
as they were in name.”
Edgar, upon rejoining the ladies remarked, in a somewhat saddened
tone of voice :
“ Captain Morton and others seemed to have laboured in vain, so
far as Cyril was concerned, leaving no ray to relieve the darkened close
of this tale of human fraility. I wonder if the balances will be adjusted
in another life ?” said Phill Gounard of the “ Scout.”
THE END.
W. S. Lambert, Machine Print, Wharf Street, Maryborough.








“ONE PEOPLE, ONE DESTINY,”
AND OTHER POEMS.
(BY JOHN KNIGHT, 1894.)
Extracts from Letters and Press Notices: —
Sir H. W. Norman, (Governor of Queensland). —“I wish to tell you
how much I approve of the general tone of your verses. I am especially
pleased at your allusions to the Navy. Nothing but good can come from a
perusal of your poems, and T should be glad to see them widely distributed.”
Lord Lamington, (Governor of Queensland). —“ Pray accept my sincere
thanks for your volume of poems treating on many subjects, but with particular
effect on that of our almost national object —the sea. All displaying a most
patriotic spirit.”
Lord Brasset, (Governor of Victoria), through his P. S., E. W.
Wallington, Esq. —“ lam desired by His Excellency to thank you very much
for your book of poems. Lord Brassey will retain it with much interest.”
The Late Sir H. Parkes. —“ I thank you for your polite attention in
sending me a copy of your volume of poems. Though much occupied I have
looked thi’ough the series, and have read with much gratification several of the
pieces.”
Vice-Admiral Sir G. S. Nares. —“ I am indebted to you for your kind
thought to send one of your former shipmates your volume of poems, which
I accept with much pleasure, and shall peruse, I have no doubt, with profit.”
Bear-Admiral Cyprian A. E. Bridge. —“ Your volume of poems has
just reached me. I beg you to accept my warm thanks for the kindness which
prompted you to send it. I have been much struck by the patriotic spirit in
which they have been expressed.”
Rev. H. Joplin, Yarrow-on-Tyne, England. —“ The volume does you
credit. They bear the stamp of genius, and could only have been written by
‘ one to the manner born.’ They scintilate with beauty, and burn with true
poetic fire. May tin ybe largely circulated, and prove a factor in the upbuilding
of the civilisation which is gradually extending under the sky which holds the
Southern Cross.’ ”
The following Institutions have placed The Book in their libraries t —
“The Navy League,” London.
“The Royal Colonial Institute,” London.
“The Imperial Institute.” London.
The Schools of Art
Maryborough (Queensland).
Bundaberg
[Over.


Warwick „
Gympie „
Ipswich „
Toowoomba
Rockhampton ~
Brisbane „
Townsville „
Gayndah „
Y.M.C.A., Newton, Devonshire, England.
Captain John R. E. Pattisson, R.N. —“ Thank you very much for the
book of poems. I shall read them with interest as written by an old shipmate.
There are not many of the old S s left now. With kind regards.”
Captain Walter Drake, R.N., (Q.M.D.E.) —“ I have to thank you for
the copy of ' One People, One Destiny.’ Many of your poems, more
particularly those touching on Naval matters, and Patriotic themes appeal
especially to me.’ ”
Bishop Dawes, Rockhampton, (Queensland). —“I have just received a
copy of your published poems. A glance at ‘ Drifting,’ and one or two others,
suffices to assure me that the tone is excellent.’ ”
R. B. B. Clayton, Esq., London.—“ Let me congratulate you on the
contents of your Book, and Alston and Co., on the finish of such a pretty
little volume. The subject has my great sympathy. I wish ‘ One People,
One Destiny,’ a great and deserved success.’ ”
Maryborough Chronicle. —“ Mr. Knight is not a rhyraster, but a graceful
singer, making poetry the handmaiden of his ideas and his optimistic philo-
sophy.” The title poem breathes the spirit of ‘ Federation.’ Ho loves to
sing sturdily of England’s oaken bulwarks. A very good and rather striking
effort of the imagination is a ‘ Yoyage round the Sun.’ ”
Bundaherg Star. —“No one can read these poems without being favour-
ably impressed with the cultured and enobling strain of the author.”
Oympie Miner. —“ The work is one that. Maryborough may well be proud
of, and the critical will note that in construction, and the happy manner in
which the ideas are expressed, considerably more than the average poetic
talent is exhibited.”
Bundaherg Mail. — “ After a careful perusal of this interesting collection,
we are inclined to think that his best lines are entwined in the initiatory poem.
On the whole, the publication is a meritorious addition to the library of
Australian poetry.
Wide Bay Betas. —“ This volume of poems is a most conscientious effort
on the part of a generous-minded man to record what he has seen in his travels,
what he has seen in the earth and vaulted sky, and what he has felt in his
heart of hearts. The one strain he is to be praised for is tlfat never-failing
optimism which flows from him like a fountain, night and day.”
South Devon Advertiser” (England).—“The author is evidently a man
of high ideas, and lofty impulses, every line being full of pure thought.”
VV. S. Lambert, Print, Wharf-street, Maryborough’
