

MELANESI AN
MISSION.
A LETTER
XO THE EDITORS OF THE AUSTRALIAN CHURCHMAN,
jes, and
NELSON: .tPitt”
«. LUCAS AND SON, BRIDGE STREET. ill of a
1 cotton
MDCCCLXIX. f a mile
mission
lospital,
1




THE
MELANESIAN MISSION.
(To the Editors of the Australian Churchman.)
Sirs—
I have recently had the privilege of spending a week with
my friend Bishop Patteson, at St. Barnabas’ Mission Station,
Norfolk Island, the head-quarters of the Melanesian Mission.
Since arriving here, I have been requested to offer you for
publication, a brief account of what I saw there, as something
certain to interest your readers. It is difficult to describe so
strange and unique a work, but I will attempt to do so, simply
premising that I am in no way connected with the mission,
and that my remarks may be fairly taken to be those of an
impartial lay observer.
Perhaps your readers scarcely need reminding that Norfolk
is a little grassy island some five miles long, containing about
9,000 acres. The old convict town, with its huge dilapidated
barracks and gaols, officers’ houses and servants’ huts, is situ-
ated on the S.E. edge of the island, where the little Nepean
islet gives shelter enough to form a precarious roadstead avail-
able in certain winds. This old town is occupied by the ex-
Pitcairners now, some 300 strong, all told. Three miles from
this across the island, on its North-eastern shore, and commu-
nicating by a fair road with “ the town,” and also by a fair
road, some three miles long, with the other Eastern landing
place at Cascade Bay, lies the Mission Estate of about 1,000
acres, facing North, and sloping gently down to low sea cliff
and a rocky shore. The land —a low table flat, broken by
gentle gullies—is a light red soil, of fair quality, covered natu-
rally by a close growth of wild couch-grass, sprinkled, after a
beautiful park-like fashion, with Norfolk Island pines, and
“ white oak,” while the gullies and flanks of “ Mount Pitt ”
(the chief hill of the island, 1,000 feet high,) are full of a
thick growth of a wild lemon scrub, tree ferns, wild cotton
and wild tobacco, and guava. On a slight ridge, half a mile
from the sea, stand the scattered group of wooden mission
buildings. The chapel, the Bishop’s two rooms, the hospital,


and a spare room, forming one building, the kitchen another,
the mess-room and the rooms of the junior aids of the Bishop
another. The two rooms of the Rev. Mr. Codrington and the
dormitories another; the cottage of the married couples (black)
another; there are four or five such couples of married
blacks.
Fair space has been allowed in all these buildings, but they
are nearly fully occupied by the present number, some 50 or
60, including nine women, (of whom six I think are married,)
and three girls. And here I may remark, that I give these
figures from memory, for having made this visit for my own
satisfaction purely, without any idea of publication, I took no
notes of many points which I now wish that I could give with
perfect, and not merely approximate accuracy. I observed
this, however, with certainty, that should the number of stu-
dents be materially increased, then the chapel, the mess-
room, the kitchen and the dormitories must be materially
enlarged.
I pass on now to give some slight notice of the daily routine
of life. First the working staff. The Bishop, five white
clergymen, and one white candidate for orders (to be ordained,
D.Y., next week) ; the senior Melanesian (black) scholar is
also to be ordained next week. Farm bailiff (white) and car-
penter (white).
No servants, white or black. This is a very note-worthy
point of the Bishop’s system of work —no menial servants, no
mere paid laborers. The idea that “ one volunteer is worth
two pressed men” has never been more thoroughly carried out
in principle and in detail.
Well, at 7 a.m. the bell rings for chapel, for about one
minute, and all hands promptly repair thither. In spite of the
vast varieties of languages and dialects spoken by the 50 or
60 human beings collected from 20 or 30 islets of the Pacific
main, no practical difficulty has been found in using “ Mota”
as the general language for chapel and school, so that in a short
time a congregation of 20 languages are soon able to join
in worship in the one Mota tongue, more or less akin to all the
rest ; and a class of (say) nine boys speaking by nature five
different languages peaceably agree and easily unite in using
the one Mota language, just as a Frenchman and a German, a
Russian, a Pole, an Italian and an Englishman, all meeting in
the same cafe or railway carriage, on the same glacier or moun-
tain top, might harmoniously agree to use French as their
medium of communication. So the service is conducted in
Mota by the Bishop and Rev. Mr. Codrington, and by George
Sarawia, of Mota, who reads the lessons, and who, D.V., will
be ordained a deacon of the Church of England next week.
One execution only is made—the Collect for the day is read in


English, as a brief allowable concession to the ears and hearts
of the English members of the mission. The service consists
of the greater part of the Church of England service translated.
Some modifiations have been made to suit the course of reli-
gious instruction. The Psalms are chanted, and hymns sung
in parts, and always in admirable time by the congregation.
Noteworthy are the perfect attention, the reverent attitude,
the hearty swing and unison of this little congregation, a
lesson (I felt with shame) to many of our white congregations.
Immediately after service chinks out the breakfast bell, and
with marvellous promptitude and punctuality white and blacks,
lay and clerics, are seen flocking to the mess-room. The whites
sit at the upper end of the table, but beyond the special privi-
lege of tea all fare alike, chiefly vegetable fare —yams or sweet
potatoes, and carrots or vegetable marrows, as may suit the
season, with plenty of ship biscuit for more ambitious teeth,
and lots of milk to wash it down. Soon afterwards comes
school for an hour and a half. Then work for the boys and
men—planting yams, reaping wheat, mowing oats, fencing,
carting, building, as the call may be—only no caste of distinc -
tion, no ordering about; it is not “go and do that,” but
“ come and do this,” whether the leader be an ordained clergy-
man, a white farm bailiff, or a white carpenter. This is note-
worthy, and your readers will gain no clear idea of the mission
if they do not seize this point, for this is no matter of mere
detail, but one of principle. The system is not that of the
ship or the regiment, of the farm or the manufactory of the old
country, but essentially of the family. It is not the officer or
the master saying Go, but the father or the brother saying
Come. And to this, I firmly believe, is the hearty cheerful
following and merry work of the blacks chiefly due.
At one p.m. is dinner —much the same as breakfast—meat,
though not unknown, is the weak point as yet of the mission
dietary. In the afternoon school for an hour; at six tea ; in
the evening class again for an hour or two—this evening class
being sometimes a singing lesson, heartily enjoyed by teacher
and taught. At some time in the day, I forget precisely when,
the boys have to prepare matter arising out of the lessons they
have received viva voce.
There are evening prayers, and bed-time is early.
Noteworthy is the happy conjunction of perfect discipline,
with perfect jollity, the marvellous attainment of a happy fa-
miliarity which does not “ breed contempt.”
I presume, I need scarcely say to your readers, that besides
education in reading, writing, and arithmetic through the me-
dium of the Mota language, that instruction in the Holy
Scriptures, and the most careful explanation of their meaning,
and mutual relation, forms a main part of the teaching given.


The men and boys of the senior classes take notes, notes not
taken by order expressly to be inspected, but, so to say, private
notes for the aid of their memories, and from the translation
given to me by Bishop Patteson of their notes, I should say
that few, even of the senior class of an English Sunday-school
could give anything like so close, sometimes so philosophical,
an explanation of Scripture, and that sometimes in remarkably
few words.
Remains to be noticed, one most effectual means of doing
good. After evening school, the bishop, his clergy and his aids
retire mostly to their own rooms. Then quietly and shyly, on
this night or the other night, one or two, three or four of the
more intelligent of the black boys steal silently up to the
bishop’s side, and by fits and starts, slowly, often painfully,
tell their feelings, state their difficulties, ask for help, and I
believe, with God’s blessing, rarely fail to find it. Not gush-
ing as negroes but shy as Englishmen, we Englishmen ought
indeed to have a fellow feeling for these poor black boys, and
help them with all our hearts. Such is the routine for five of
the six work days. Saturday is whole holiday, and all hands
go to fish, if the sea permits, or perhaps to play rounders or
what-not. Merry lads they are as ever gladdened an English
play-ground.
On Sunday the early chapel is omitted—the full liturgy is
divided into two services—l forget the hours—and a kind of
sermon in Mota is given ; and in the afternoon the bishop, or
one of the ordained members of the mission, usually goes down
to “ the town,” to relieve the Rev. Mr. Nobbs in his service
for the Pitcairners. '
Now, as regards the manual work of the station, this general
principle is observed —women for washing and housework; and
men for planting and out-door work; but no one, white or
black, is to be too grand to do his share. The bishop’s share,
indeed, is to study and investigate and compare the languages
and the necessary translations ; but no one is to be above
manual labour —no one, qua white man, is to say as it were,
“here, black fellow, come and clean my boots “ here, black
people, believe that I have come to give you a treasure of ines-
timable price ; meantime, work for me ; am I not your supe-
rior ? can I not give you money, calico, what not ? ”
Well, this Christian democrary, if I may so call it, has
worked well in the long run. A little patience, and boys who
might have kicked if told to black boots for a white master,
have gratefully volunteered to do it for a well beloved white
elder brother,* and girls have come to feel hurt to see their
white teacher, really revered and loved, really felt to be un-
speakably their superior, sweeping his own room or dusting
his own books, and have humbly prayed to relieve him of that
bother.


Mr. Editors, the subject grows under ray pen, as it quickens
ray memory. I must hasten to leave the present, to say a few
words of the probable, the hopeful prospects for the future.
The boys raise nearly all their own provisions—yams, maize,
wheat, bananas, sweet potatoes, vegetables, fruit, and then the
dairy. A small flock of good sheep will soon contribute effec-
tually to working expenses.
After the ordination now near at hand, of one white and of
one black candidate for orders, the bishop will have seven
clergy to help him—namely six white and one black. With
this staff, Bishop Patteson feels, and I could well see, that he
could easily treble the number of men and women under in-
struction ; and the change of headquarters from Kohimarama,
Auckland, New Zealand, to Norfolk Island, makes it easier to
bring away this larger number, by increasing the number of
trips of the schooner. Now the bishop, for three reasons, is
most anxious to increase this number. First, in order to in-
crease the whole number, from whom to select promising candi-
dates for orders, future missionaries to their own islands. Se-
condly, from the less bright and earnest scholars, men or
women, boys or girls, to find a few Christian parishioners, so
to speak, a few Christian families, whom to settle three or four,
ten or a dozen, alongside each black missionary, as support,
comfort, and reference in his hard campaign against the hea-
thenism and brutal ignorance which will surround him, and
threaten, else, to drag him back, like the Jews of old, even
into concessions to sheer idolatry.
Thirdly, old people of whom little hope can be entertained
even to make them Christians, far less Missionaries, often ask
anxiously after their sons or nephews, suspiciously after the
bishop’s meaning or motions. To such the bishop would fain
be able to say, “ well, come along, my friend. See for your-
self ! Take a trip in the schooner ! come and stay a couple
of months with us and see for yourself how your young folk
are treated ! ” And such men the bishop believes, and I be-
lieve would go back to the islands, after their trip, convinced
that it was all right and above all, a really good thing for the
youngsters, and would be the bishop’s staunch friends down at
the islands, perhaps useful pioneers to clear the way to exten-
sion of the missionary work.
As regards the present youngsters the difficulty diminishes
steadily; more and more of them wish to stay on to winter
on Norfolk Island, and go on with their education and with
their Christian education. Others perhaps, similar in spirit
though differing in its manifestation, conscious of brawny
thews and muscles and skill in rowing and sailing, volunteer
to break off the schooling they really love, to accompany him
in his next cruise, to man his boat, to pull him ashore, and to


face the poisoned arrows which once shot, know no distinction
of white skin or black, in the whaleboat’s crew.
With such a subject it is hard to stop. What is the upshot ?
This, I think, from my own observation. The pioneer work is
almost done. Next winter, D.Y., the Rev. George Sarawia
and three or four couples of Christian Melanesian blacks will
be settled on Mota as the nucleus of a Christian missionary
village, the first, please God, of many such. The Melanesian
mission is fast passing, has almost passed, from the stage of
tentative doubtful experiment, to that of ascertained success,
of proved practicability. Every pound given to it tells.
Every ten pounds will recruit (D.V.) a new boy from the hea-
then to the Christian army. Every fifteen or twenty will
maintain a man, a candidate for orders, such a man for the
work which lies before him, as is an undergraduate of Oxford or
Cambridge, for his work—and even, by the reflux of good
which God gives to all good work, little as it was foreseen, it
now seems to be highly probable that the linguistic researches
which this mission has necessitated, will yet throw bright
light on many obscurities and difficulties of the Hebrew Scrip-
tures ! Then Mr. Editors, for their sakes, and our own sakes
alike, for Christ’s sake, who said “ Pray ye therefore the Lord
of the harvest that he will send forth laborers into the har-
vest,” I appeal to the people of Australia, and the people of
Australasia to support heartily this mission, which we ought
surely to be glad to claim for our own ! Let the huge heathen
masses of India and Africa, Burmah and China appeal to Great
Britain, good ! but surely the handful of islets of the Pacific may
find'christian friends nearer home, and if we are worthy sons
of the first great missionary country of the world, we shall
start gladly forward to help this good hopeful work, aglow
with honour and sympathy for our noble countrymen, with
compassion and sympathy for the Melanesians, heathen, wa-
verers, or Christians, who have so much against them from
which we, happy Englishmen, have been spared.
“ Who is He who maketh thee to differ ? ” Pardon the
length of this letter, Mr. Editors. Many, perhaps most of
your readers must take a deep interest in the Melanesian mis-
sion, and if they cannot go with all I have said, they will yet, I
hope, find a scrap here and there to arouse, freshen, maintain,
or give precision to their interest in this noble work.
I have the honor to be,
Your obedient servant,
C. HUNTER BROWN,
Nelson, New Zealand.
Sydney, December 14th, 1868.
8
