

'
5 - >
• . A
Engineering School War
Memorial Lecture
SIR HENRY BARRACLOUGH, K.8.E., V.D.,
M.M.E., M.INST.CE., M.I.MECH.E., M.I.E.AUST.,
Dean of the Faculty of Engineering, University
of Sydney, and formerly Colonel in the
Australian Military Forces.


JFS&-


The Spirit of the Engineer
Engineering School War
Memorial Lecture
SIR HENRY BARRACLOUGH, K.8.E., V.D.,
M.M.E., M.INST.C.E., M.I.MECH.E., M.I.E.AUST.,
Dean of the Faculty of Engineering, University
of Sydney., and formerly Colonel in the
Australian Military Forces.
PUBLISHED FOR THE UNIVERSITY
ENGINEERING CLUB
THE AUSTRALASIAN MEDICAL PUBLISHING
COMPANY, LIMITED, SYDNEY,


: A-;-; ■; ■;V i;' : ; ;; ' V : : : i' ■ : : : . ' ::: : : : ■ : : ■ ; ■: V : '.
;|||
' ■ ■ ■ Ii; II 3 ' ■ '
i T vV' : : -..:■■■■ :.■ :6■ Vvl■ ■ ; ■ : •. ■ ■ ■' ' : :: >• ■ ■ ■ ' • ■ . ■"; ■ V'/' : ■ : ;'■ ' ' ;
.. . . . . : . .
IHL \ , I mBBBm
SIR HENRY BARRACLOUGH, K.B.E.


THE SPIRIT OF THE ENGINEER.
Being tlie Inaugural Lecture of the Engineering
School War Memorial delivered in the P. N.
Russell School of Engineering, University of
Sydney, on the eve of Armistice Day, November
10th, 1926, in the presence of the Deputy
Chancellor, Fellows of the Senate, Members and
Friends of the Engineering School and Members
of the University Engineering Club under
whose auspices this Memorial is maintained,
by SIR HENRY BARRACLOUGH, K.8.E., V.D., M.M.E.,
M.INST.C.E., M.I.MECH.E., M.I.E.AUST., DEAN OF THE
FACULTY OF ENGINEERING, AND FORMERLY
COLONEL IN THE AUSTRALIAN MILITARY
FORCES.
Mr. Deputy Chancellor, Ladies and Gentlemen:
This lecture is delivered in very unusual circumstances.
The lecturer tonight was to have been the late Professor W. H.
Warren. But the hand of death has frustrated our intention
and we join his memory with the memory of those whom we
now commemorate.
When it was decided to establish an Engineering School
War Memorial in the University, and further that it should
take the form of an Annual Lecture to be delivered by leading
Engineers who might be invited for that purpose, it was generally
felt that the inaugural lecture should be given by Professor
Warren. He alone knew the Engineering School from its first
day. He was the only one who had known each and every man
who went from the Engineering School to the War. For 43 years
he had devoted himself to the development of the School,
from its humble beginnings to its present acknowledged position
as one of the greatest Schools of Engineering in the Empire.
Thus by common consent it was clear that he should be
the first Lecturer. There was some little delay in making the
preliminary preparations, and then Professor Warren decided to
take a year's leave of absence before retiring from his Chair.
Unfortunately, during the course of this year abroad, a long-
threatened trouble to his eyesight developed rather rapidly,
and, on his return to Sydney last year, he felt it would be
impossible to prepare the lecture until after a necessary opera-
tion had been performed on his eye. He, nevertheless, looked
forward to delivering the lecture during this present year, and
arrangements were made for giving him assistance in collecting
the necessary details for it.


£~y — ,• - - >■>.*■ % v r — \/ V
i
1
1
pitiftte
'\~ <*■,Jit2 fin -.««
&?gaHksa»2
ifcW« •
m mmH\ '•
WffiP8f%"
fcWMfc a
1
[
;
1
1
wk
' i a^..ll.4^H,..^^CT'^^^WRl\rf?i-i$
81
jr
lit
|
|
1 TO THE GLORY OF GOB !
! AND TO THE MEMORY OL
ONE MILLION DEAD
: j np SDIT|JU FHPt&E
! ' WHO FELL ■ " '* :; i
IN 'THE GREAT WAS j
! ■ (Qt4 # <0S8. i
AND OF WHOM THE
1 GREATER PART REST :
IN FRANCE
1 0 '*■ ->fei ifc |
H
p
»
Isi
|
1'
I
E
1
m
1 A LA GUOiRE DE OS ISO !
ET A LA MEM01RE
J DO MILLION DE MORTS DE '
S LEMP1RE BRITANNIQUB 1
! TOMBES DANS '
1 LA GRANDE GUERRE '
j tpi4 # tgts i
5 ET QUI POUR LA ;'T
FLUPART
i REPOSENT EN FRANCE j
1
He thus said his official farewell to the School in December,
1925, and expected to return in an informal way in Lent Term
of this year to carry on some research work and to deliver
the Memorial Lecture. But it was decreed that he should not
return here again, as, on January 9th, he died suddenly in his
own room whilst speaking to a friend.
The Tablet placed in Notre-Dame Cathedral, Paris


The three or four years' delay in the delivery of the first
lecture is, perhaps, not to be regretted from one point of view.
The years as they roll by, although in increasing measure they
hallow the memory of those whom we have lost, yet soften
the poignancy of our grief and make it possible perhaps to refer
more fully than we otherwise could to matters that are in our
hearts. The Committee of the University Engineering Club,
which is the body charged with the maintenance of the Memorial,
and the Trustees of the Memorial Fund, have asked me to
deliver this inaugural lecture in my capacity as Dean of the
Faculty of Engineering, and as one who knew all the men
concerned, except some of those who joined the School during
the course of the War; and, further, as one who had had
opportunity of seeing them in training and at work in Egypt
and in France, and in Great Britain.
THE ENGINEERING SCHOOL MEMORIAL.
The reason for the institution of the Engineering School
Memorial perhaps deserves a word of explanation. The Univer-
sity already has ordered its Memorial and it is now being con-
structed in the form of what we understand will finally be the
greatest and most beautiful Carillon in the world—the most
wonderful series of bells ever fashioned by the hand of man.
In the Engineering School we enthusiastically supported this
splendid project and the members of the School raised the sum
of £750 for the purchase of one of the larger bells to be known
as the Engineering Bell.
But there was a strong desire for an Engineering Memorial
as well —something specifically associated with this particular
School. It was felt that we had something special to com-
memorate: something belonging to the Engineering School we
would wish never to forget. In the great and glorious enter-
prise of the War there is no place for competition or comparison,
and we would suggest none. Others may have done better, but
we do know that the Engineering School achieved a record
which was worthy of its highest hopes.
OUR RECORD.
If you take a University Calendar of 1914 and count the
number of members of the Engineering School—past and pre-
sent —you will see that it was —including everyone from the
oldest graduate to the youngest freshman —360. The only addi-
tion to this number could be those students who entered the
School during the course of the War. I think it is, therefore,
a notable record that —
210 members of the School actually went overseas to play
their part in the War.
That many of them did brilliant work.
That not one of them failed.
That to these men were awarded no less a total than
58 military decorations for distinguished service.
That 74 of them, alas, met with wounds or death.
And of these 74, 40 came not back to us.
It is a record, I think you will agree, for which we have
a right to be gratefully proud; and it is because we wish the


lli If WKK/m
Sr Jiff
memory of these two score of our number who laid down their
lives in the great cause, to remain in this School that we are
instituting tonight this Memorial Lecture.
MEMOKIAL MONUMENTS.
The desire for Remembrance, for a memorial for ourselves
or for those to whom we are devoted, is universal and instinctive
in the human mind. Memorials are certainly as old as wars,
which carries the story far back in history. It would be interest-
ing, did time permit, to trace the development of Memorials
in relation to Wars from the days when Joshua besieged Jericho;
memorials from the early dynasties of Egypt; memorials in the
far-off days when Cyprus was the naval ruler of the Mediter-
ranean; memorials in Grecian times when beauty in plastic form
was at its zenith; or, in the great days of Rome, when monu-
ments and memorials of every kind were multiplied a thousand-
The Monument of French Gratitude to the United States.
A lighthouse of reinforced concrete, 300 ft. high, erected
at the Pointe de Graves, where Lafayette originally
embarked for America, and where the first contingent
from the U.S.A. landed in France during the war.


j| III ; ; . |
fold —and so through medieval times up to to-day. Perhaps on
some future occasion in this series of lectures our colleagues
in the Department of Architecture will furnish us with such a
study of the Art of the War Memorial. For the present, I
venture to show you a few slides to illustrate the memorial idea
in history and its place in the remembrance of War.
The Memorial Plaque presented by the Nation to
the next-of-kin of each soldier who fell in the war.
But first let me point out the, perhaps, obvious difference
between the memorial of those earlier days and of our own
time. Then the memorial was almost invariably to the Ruler or
to the Victor. It was the Victory that was celebrated. But now
our memorials, in their tens of thousands, are, almost without
exception, to the memory of those who fell fighting in our
defence, or in recognition of those who came to our help in our
dire necessity. So almost every home in England has its
memorial Plaque—a grateful and beautiful tribute from the
nation to the relatives of each individual man from the United
Kingdom who gave his life in the War. Almost every village has
its cross; every town will have its monument, every city its
cenotaph.
In vain does the wise and prudent person say, 'Why spend
this vast sum on objects that are sometimes not even beautiful?"
"Why not do something useful with the money?" Or, in an
earlier day, " Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred
pence and, given to the poorf"
The human heart ignoring such shrewd dictates insists upon
having its Memorial.
TIIE IMPERIAL GRAVES COMMISSION.
But the greatest of all the memorials of the War, appealing
to the imagination with almost painful intensity, has been pro-
vided by the work of the Imperial Graves Commission under
the presidency of the Prince of Wales. I wonder whether it is
yet generally realized what a beautiful and wonderful world-


U HK U-:
monument this splendid Commission has made of the grave of
the soldier —whether he be a general or a bugler, a field officer
or a private. It is too long a story to tell tonight. It also
would make a lecture in itself. I can only indicate a few of
its more striking features. The Imperial War Graves Commis-
sion was set up in May, 1917, to serve, in the first place, the rela-
tives of those who fell in the War, to locate and protect indi-
vidual graves, and to provide photographs and other informa-
tion. But its scope rapidly extended and its activities to-day
cover the whole world.
One of the most important principles underlying the
decisions of the Commission was that of securing the perman-
ence of all war graves. Perpetuity in sepulture has in the past
The Headstone of each Unknown Soldier.
been a very rare thing, assured as a rule only to the Great
of the earth —most commonly by burial in some historical
monument, such as our own Westminster Abbey. To ensure
this quality of perpetuity has been the task which the Com-
mission entrusted to the foremost architects and engineers.
The work of the engineers is less apparent than that of the
architects, but, as the Commission report says, with them rests
the last word on structural stability and durability. The method
adopted is not without its special technical interest to members
of this School. A trench is dug at the back of each row of
graves and a continuous concrete beam is constructed in it. On
the upper side of this beam are sockets into which the head-
stones are fitted and fixed immovably with cement. The land


| '
— I ljj§
:■.■■' iwir- ,„! ■ r^-3 =^C l J 1 - (V- «'-. ■) «™
" ■
k"iS&a»wS£&* s ®S&®
rdji,- r " r '' r„j- v' 1 , 1 i' li''/.isUIHfe■", „ .J ,iV ' ,.dra!.-;!r' w £;' bl11 ' , r ■ »■ , -"'', -jgiMpI
Bwaileiiiilfcf^
|| ' ! " ' 1 fff '' L: '
for the cemeteries has been given in perpetuity in each allied
country by the people of that country and a Fund of £5,000,000
has been provided for the continuous maintenance of the graves.
The headstones are all of the same shape, 32 in. high, 15 in.
broad and 3 in. thick, and on each is reproduced the regimental
badge which the soldier wore on his cap. The name, age and
military position are engraved on the upper part of the stone.
In the middle there is a cross or other emblem (for example,
the six pointed Star of David for Jewish soldiers) and below this
a text or other personal tribute chosen by relatives. The only
variation, as you will see from, the illustration, is in the case of
those who could not be identified. In all cemeteries there is
The Beautiful Tynecot Cemetery. Tynecot was a German
stronghold of blockhouses.
a great Cross of Sacrifice and a Stone of Remembrance, each
stone bearing the inscription "Their name liveth for evermore."
The horticultural side of the problem was personally super-
vised by the Director of Kew Gardens, and his efforts have
added much to the beauty of these memorial areas. To prevent
an impression of barrenness, in the larger cemeteries, some with
as many as 12,000 headstones, other structures are introduced
such as shelters and record houses.
In the Tynecot Cemetery, in Belgium, where 11,000 soldiers,
mostly unknown, lie around German block houses, the central
block house forms the base of the great cross, and on the rising
ground behind it, a shelter and record house are joined by a
curved wall, inscribed with the names of some 35,000 of those
who have no known graves.
TIIE HAPPY RESTING PLACE.
I am convinced that to have followed our instinct to leave
our loved ones lying in the land where they fell is a much surer,
a much sounder, impulse than the decision of the United States


f
i|
J
• ' • §1 /, ' .
. M . ■ • ■ •. . •
mi ?
The Cross in the Tynecot Cemetery, built over one of the
conquered blockhouses, portion of which is left in view.
to bring them home to rest in their native land. It is essentially
a matter to be decided by each nation for itself. We can
sympathise sincerely with the desire to have the graves of
their heroes in their own keeping. But to us there is a sug-
gestion of something narrow, something almost parochial—a
touch of aloofness, in this view. It seems in some sense to deny
the oneness of mankind, to ignore the sacred comradeship of
Arms.
Perhaps, because of our Empire history, we, of the British
Race, more readily feel at home in the world at large. We have
been accustomed to take our country with us as we pioneer
forth. Rupert Brooke expressed it exactly in his wonderful lines,
they have become proverbial—-
If I should die, think only this of me:
That there's some corner of a foreign field
That is forever England
We in this land desire to protect and preserve our scattered
"corners" of Australia. We tonight are thinking of the distant
"corners" of the P. N. Russell School of Engineering.
I think you will see now why I have described the work
of the Imperial Graves Commission as the greatest of the War
Memorials. It is a collective Memorial over the mortal remains
of the 1,020,000 Dead of the British Empire.
A WORLD MEMORIAL.
It is a Memorial that may be said to stretch from the
Cenotaph in Whitehall and the grave of the Unknown Soldier
in Westminster Abbey, in a great chain of beautiful cemeteries


across France and Belgium, through Switzerland, and across
Italy. It passes on through Macedonia, the Balkans, the Greek
Islands, and down the Gallipoli Peninsula, to Smyrna; through
Syria and through Palestine, branching off south through Egypt
into East Africa, and eastward to Mesopotamia. Then the great
chain extends across the north of India to China, down to
Australia and New Zealand; across the Pacific, over the watery
graves of the gallant Admiral Craddock and all his men, through
Canada and so across the Atlantic, passing, amongst many others,
the resting place of Lord Kitchener and the men of the Hamp-
shire, and of all those who lost their lives in the naval engage-


ments of the North Sea, and so back again to the centre of our
Empire in Whitehall.
Surely never was an Empire linked together in such a
fashion. It is a great Memorial Wreath around the earth; a
garland of memory placed upon the globe itself. In this wonder-
ful memorial garland the University Engineering Club tonight,
by the establishment of its Memorial, is bold enough to place
another flower; we would add one more star to the great
galaxy.
PLANS FOR OUR MEMORIAL.
To establish the Engineering School Memorial we have
raised a special fund. The Memorial is to take the form of an
Annual Lecture and will, therefore, be an expanding series. It
is proposed to put a special bookcase in the Library to contain
the series of lectures as it grows from year to year.
In future, no doubt, the lectures will gradually become
general in character and will deal with engineering affairs at
large. That is inevitable —and natural. Already the War is
rapidly disappearing into history. Tomorrow is Armistice Day!
It is difficult to realise that the Peace has lasted almost twice
as long as the War. To those of us who vividly recall every
incident connected with the start of the Great War in August,
1914, it is an astonishing fact to contemplate that the Freshmen
who come up to the University and to this School next year
will probably be quite unconscious of that period.
Just as it is clear then that, in future, the scope of the
lectures will become much more general, so it is equally obvious
that tonight the lecture must be particular and, indeed, domestic.
It must be related to this School and to ourselves. You will
forgive me, then, if our treatment of it is self-centred. You will
not be critical if I appear to magnify this School and its history,
its members and their achievements. It was felt that the
lecture must be in this lecture theatre, although other places
might be more convenient. We want to remind ourselves that
it was from these very desks, from those very seats, that our
brothers rose up, and went on their great enterprise.
ENGINEERING.
Engineering, as a calling, is a closely-knit brotherhood,
although, as a profession, not yet as highly organised as Medicine
or Law. And the Engineering School is much more than just
these buildings. These lecture rooms and laboratories are not
merely the place where we work. The Engineering School has
a corporate life and personality of its own. To the meetings
of this University Engineering Club each Term come back many
of the old graduates who knew the School 30 and 40 years ago.
They feel that it is to the School they return, not to mere
buildings and equipment. Perhaps there is something significant
in the fact that the Faculty of Engineering is the only one
which is officially known as a School —"The Peter Nicol Russell
School of Engineering." And I venture to think there is nothing
incongruous—there is something fitting—in relating the aims
and the activities of this School and this profession to the yet
greater achievements and ideals of our heroic dead whom we
commemorate tonight. There is, in fact, an essential connection.
More than a century ago one of the great Civil Engineers,
Tredgold, gave a definition of Engineering:
"Engineering is the art of directing the great sources of
power in Nature to the use and convenience of man."


psat
ililli.
Jlpl
I piiff Isi# :•■:
mmrmmmmrn «, www
f Jl
jgB • . .
I ; /| k I
J •./ i f\ . I
The Helles Memorial, Gallipoli. On this Peninsular
are 31 cemeteries, the greater number of which
stretch in a chain from Suvla Bay to Anzac Beach.
This definition was incorporated in the Royal Charter
granted to the Institution of Civil Engineers—the leading body
of Engineers in the world —and I suppose it has been quoted and
discussed, adapted and adopted, by Engineers and by Engineer-
ing Institutions to a greater extent than any other statement
that ever was made about the Engineers' calling. It was felt
to embody an Ideal.
THE IDEAL OF THE ENGINEER.
Engineering involves essentially these two main ideas:
(a) The control of the materials and the forces of Nature;
(&) so as to be of service to mankind.


One might add that the highest aim of an engineering
school such as this, is to put the students who come to us
in the way of controlling these materials and these forces,
and to suggest to them that the only satisfactory field for their
activities is in service for the comfort and well being of their
fellowmen.
Perhaps we have received something of this spirit from
our great benefactor, Sir Peter Russell, whose name the School
bears. He himself was a great controller of the materials
and the forces of Nature when he lived and worked in this
city, and his attitude towards his fellows was indicated by the
large proportion of his wealth given during his life time for
the endowment of this School.
Do you think I am guilty of an exaggeration in claiming
these two characteristics as especially those of the Engineering
profession? In reply I perhaps might quote the reiterated
opinion of that extraordinary genius, Henry Ford, who, by his
achievements in one limited direction and in a single short
generation, has constituted himself one of the most unique and
amazing industrial and social phenomena of all time. He has
earned the right to speak with authority. His affairs are on
the scale of a Kingdom rather than a business. Indeed, his
annual Budget is such as to make to water the mouths of the
Chancellors of Exchequer of many European countries.
In his book My Life and Work, Henry Ford lays it down
that the ideal of service for others is the fundamental principle
of successful business. He says: "The institution that we have
erected is performing a service. That is the only reason I have
for talking about it. The principles of that service are these
four." For the purpose of my argument I will read in detail
only the third of these principles:
"3. The putting of service before profit. Without a profit,
business cannot extend. There is nothing inherently wrong
about making a profit. Well conducted business enterprise can-
not fail to return a profit, but profit must and inevitably will
come as a reward for good service. It cannot be the basis —it
must be the result of service."
THE LEGEND OF PKOMETIIEUS.
It is a cherished notion of mine that in the old legend woven
by Aeschylus into his great Tragedy of the Greek god,
Prometheus, you can find the secret of the Engineer. Pro-
metheus —the foreseer, the provider: He was the god-father of all
Engineers. May I recall in briefest outline the story of this
wise and compassionate Deity, who, in the early dawn of history,
looked upon the earth and saw the sons of men feeble and more
miserable than the beasts of the field, living in dark and gloomy
caves, blindly conscious of undeveloped powers, but impotent,
and fearful of destruction lurking for them everywhere. Bent
on an errand of mercy, and unmindful of the awful sufferings
that were to come to him in consequence, Prometheus,
the story, took a hollow reed, and stored in it the mysterious
seed of Fire, and went his way to the dwellings of men with
his priceless gift—Fire, the mother of all arts, and source of all
material comfort to men. When they had learnt its use he
revealed to them the treasure hidden in the bosom of earth —
gold and silver and iron—and taught them to make weapons
and tools and vessels for daily use. Forthwith they began to
till the ground and build houses, and make ships, in which they
braved the unknown terrors of the sea.


""■■■ •:
This is the legendary story of the great missionary enter-
prise from the celestial regions to the sons of men—faint but
beautiful shadow of more real gospels yet to come.
I am convinced that, however much in practice the Engineer
may fall short of these ideals, the romance and the lure of
the Engineering profession lie in them. Nothing else explains
the persistent desire of so many men to follow the Engineering
calling—a calling that, from a material point of view, usually
has poor rewards to offer. I use the term Engineer, of course,
in a very general sense —the Civil and the Military Engineer—
the Mechanical and the Electrical Engineer—-the Engineer
Technologist—the Chemical and Industrial Engineer—the Mining
Engineer—the great builders and constructors and makers of
every kind.
WHAT IS AN ENGINEER?
It is rather unfortunate that the meaning of the term
"Engineer" is popularly misunderstood. There seems to be a
very prevalent idea that an Engineer is a person who, in some
way, has to do with engines. The precise reverse is the case.
There were Engineers long before there were engines. The
word Engineer is closely allied to the word "ingenious." It has
the same root as "genius." Engineering is a mode of approach.
It is a way of looking at things. The Engineer is one who
searches about and finds the successful solution of a problem.
There is room for the Engineering spirit and method in every
walk of life.
Perhaps this is why some of our graduates do so well in
other callings. They make, and have made, good farmers —
good business men —good Railway Commissioners —good in
The War Cemetery at Jerusalem. (2,247 of the United Kingdom,
142 Australia, 34 New Zealand, 51 South Africa, 40 British
West Indies.)


' . ' • "
- : ■ " " ;s ' ■ -.. ' P 'I \
' *"
\ l. \
■&" . >igSp Slfc* &im "£m ■ tm *"'" w " "
' " P w *8 : <cf , E » jf jf* * V ■-' £
"[-*■; >•• ' " , , , ' - JBUPu- - '" ijlSr Hp .JP_L -M #* 1% , Jj$J
afe:
This map (divided vertically at the centre) represents a part of
France with over 900 cemeteries containing nearly 300,000 British
war graves. The lower portion (eastward from Amiens) will always^ be associated with the gallant deeds of the Australian troops.


Hj /
ppP , . ifcgg % . t .
■ .. 2 ?' '" -t.'-.v"
anything! I might even quote the case of a very recent appoint-
ment in which we are specially interested as it was obtained
by one of our own members. The Municipal Council of Welling-
ton, New Zealand, wished to select a Town Clerk to manage the
affairs of that important city, and with an extraordinary flash
of intelligence, as it seems to me, they decided, and announced,
that they intended to appoint an Engineer to the post. Not
that they wanted his technical knowledge particularly, but they
wanted his Engineering —his way of looking at things.
THE WAR AND THE ENGINEER.
I am quite sure that this was the spirit in which our men
went forth from this School to the Great War. We fain would
think they represent the highest, the ideal embodiment of the
Engineering spirit. It is only by putting a definite restraint on
myself that I refrain from any recital of the work done in the
War by the individual men. To begin would be to take up all
the time available. The full story of each man must be given
in a separate lecture.
These general considerations, however, are not the only
relation between the Great War and the Engineer. In periods of
stress, definite ideas have a way of emerging; and it may be
asserted without risk of contradiction, that one of the matters
to come to the surface of public comprehension in the Great
War was that of the function of the engineer, and the extra-
ordinary part which his efforts play in modern life. Engineer-
ing may indeed be said to have suddenly come into its own.
It became proverbial. The man in the street said with an air of
conviction: "This is an engineers' war." Mr. Lloyd George,
as the first Minister of Munitions, continually preached from
the text: "This is a war of mechanics."
No longer could physical force and muscular power be of
much avail. Occasionally in the Trench warfare it did come to
hand-to-hand combat, but even then the hands usually carried
The Memorial at Giza, Egypt, to the Egyptian Labour Corps
and the Camel Transport Corps.


deadly weapons. So the Nation summoned the Engineer and
bade him produce on a titanic scale the Materials, the Munitions,
of War. "Give me men and munitions," Lord Kitchener is
reported to have said, "and the enemy is in the hollow of our
hand." Men and munitions; but, above all, munitions.
MUNITIONS OF WAG.
An amazing word is this word "munitions" in the present
day. Although popularly (and erroneously) thought of as mean-
ing chiefly weapons and ammunition, "munitions" is, of course,
a technical term denoting all the material equipment required
for war. Its connotation in our time has a wide sweep, undreamt
of even by our immediate forefathers. Embraced under tne
heading of "munitions" are all the ships of the sea —battleships,
cruisers, troopships, submarines —the finest product of naval
architectural skill —with all their marvellous equipment of
engines and machinery, their stupendous guns, their horrific
torpedoes, their beautiful instruments of precision, their range-
finders, their magical wireless installations. It includes every
product of electrical science, of generations of chemical investi-
gation, of the hard-won knowledge of the internal combustion
engine; the legions of motor cars, the aeroplanes—all the beauti-
ful materials that make these possible; the wonderful alloys,
the marvellous array of modern steels; all the output of all
the workshops and factories; the products of the mines, the
collieries, the oil fields —all of these and ten thousand things
more are "munitions," are the stuff of modern war. And the
engineer in his various grades and degrees was called upon
to produce these things—urgently—in millions, mountains of
them, to pile them up furiously so that in the final scrap heap
of Europe there might be more of our stuff there than the
enemy's.
And so we were enabled to win. As Ruskin said: this "is
modern war —scientific war—chemical and mechanic war —how
much worse than the savage's poisoned arrow!" It is an awful
and appalling spectacle. A thousand million pounds worth of
good stuff gone to "scrap" in a year—waste that should belong
to a century accomplished in a single day.
THE SCRAP HEAP.
I suppose no one realises like the engineer, even in peace
time, the pathos and interest of a scrap heap—the regret at dis-
carding some splendid piece of machinery that has been a friend
and served one well, because it is no longer good enough and
must be replaced by something newer or more cunningly devised.
I understand by remarks in certain undergraduate publica-
tions and other similar sources of information that I have been
awarded the title of the "Scrap Iron King"—a distinction I
believe I share with my colleague in the Electrical Engineering
Department—in view of the amount of gear and machinery in-
stalled in this School after being discarded by its original
owners.
It is a title from which I am not averse in so far as it
means that we have been able to take equipment which was in
truth "lost" and give it a second life, a reincarnation, in this
School, where —either because of its historical interest or its
value as a model, or its capacity, when reconditioned, of again
attaining full working power—it becomes as good as new.


*%■%* J »?r .♦ \-«i^r"*gigaK^Sg^S
A City as a Scrap Heap. The important industrial and
commercial town Lens was one of those completely
reduced to "scrap" throughout its entire length and breadth.
You may be surprised to hear that in this School there is
probably £lOO,OOO worth of such gear and I can safely challenge
you to walk round the laboratories and pick out which it is.
Some of it is of great and, occasionally, of unique value. Im-
portant parts of it come from Germany—a side-line of the War.
A good deal of it we were allowed to retrieve from H.M.A.S.
Australia before she went to her watery grave. I hope we will
continue our search through the junk shops and the scrap heaps.
But, of course, the amount of such scrap material we can rescue
is relatively infinitesimal.
The extraordinary interest of a "junk" shop, the curious
fascination of walking around a collection of old stuff that has
seen its best day, is known to every engineer—here a pile of
ancient material, rusty and slowly deteriorating; there an
assemblage of odd machine parts waiting vainly for someone
that might use them; or again a row of antiquated engines,
pumps, machines of all sorts that have broken down, and it was
not worth anyone's while to repair them, or that have proved
inefficient, and it was more economical to buy a new machine
rather than try and improve them—a great mass of mere
material that only the molten fire of the blast furnace can
reincarnate once more into something useful. All this is
melancholy enough on the small scale, but to witness the reduc-
tion of a whole country to a scrap heap is a spectacle to appal
both gods and men. I have just now quoted the legend of
Prometheus bringing the gift of Fire to the sons of men as
embodying the spirit and the scope of the Engineers' calling; but
had that wise old god of the ancients foreseen the spectacle of
the sons of men in our twentieth century (between August, 1914,
and November 11th, 1918 —eight years ago tonight), he might


well have paused before entrusting to them the secret which
was to unlock the door of their material development.
There is indeed something to be said for the view that the
Engineer has been too successful. It would almost appear as if
the Civilisation of the engineer were like to be consumed of
itself. The material arts of life take on the form of a monster
about to destroy the creator of them. What now has become of
Tredgold's definition of Engineering? "Engineering is the art of
directing the great sources of power in Nature to the use and
convenience of man!" That surely was no definition of German
engineering in 1914! It rather was in truth the art of training
every worker, of cultivating every faculty, of investigating
every material, devising every contrivance, and constructing
every weapon that might conceivably enable the German nation
to crush its competitors and rule as lord over all!
OUR LATE ENEMIES.
At a season like this when Germany has just been admitted
to the League of Nations, when this League is struggling
(against stupendous obstacles) to create a clean heart in the
nations, when all right-minded men desire that the "Spirit of
Locarno" should become a reality and not merely a by-word,
one hesitates to emphasise our differences with our late enemies.
But let us not attempt to forget these differences in our
point of view. In 1914 we thought them worth struggling and
dying for. Let us not gloss over the horrors of that struggle.
It is our duty to remember, our safeguard, not to forget. n
justification of this declaration of my belief I venture to quote
at length from the most recently published of the great books
on the War.
The Great War through which we have passed differed
from all ancient wars in the immense power of the com-
batants and their fearful agencies of destruction, and from
all modern wars in the utter ruthlessness with which it
was fought. All the horrors of all the ages were brought
together, and not only armies but whole populations were
thrust into the midst of them. The mighty educated States
involved conceived with reason that their very existence
was at stake. Germany having let Hell loose kept well
in the van of terror; but she was followed step by step
by the desperate and ultimately avenging nations she had
assailed. Every outrage against humanity or international
law was repaid by reprisals often on a greater scale and
of longer duration. No truce or parley mitigated the strife
of the armies. The wounded died between the lines; the
dead moulded into the soil. Merchant ships and neutral
ships and hospital ships were sunk on the seas and all on
board left to their fate, or killed as they swam. Every effort
was made to starve whole nations into submission without
regard to age or sex. Cities and monuments were smashed
by artillery. Bombs from the air were cast down indis-
criminately. Poison ga,s in many forms stifled or seared the
soldiers. Liquid Are was projected upon their bodies. Men
fell from the air in flames, or were smothered, often slowly,
in the dark recesses of the sea. The fighting strength of
armies was limited only by the manhood of their countries.
Europe and large parts of Asia and Africa became one vast
battlefield on which after years of struggle not armies but
nations broke and ran. When all was over, Torture and
Cannibalism were the only two expedients that the civilised,
scientific, Christian States had been able to deny them-
selves: and these were of doubtful utility.


But nothing daunted the valiant heart of man. Son
of the Stone Age, vanquisher of Nature with all her trials
and monsters, he met the awful and self-inflicted agony
with new reserves of fortitude. Freed in the main by his
intelligence from mediaeval fears, he marched to death with
sombre dignity. His nervous system was found in the
twentieth century capable of enduring physical and moral
stresses before which the simpler natures of primeval times
would have collapsed. Again and again to the hideous bom-
bardment, again and again from the hospital to the front,
again and again to the hungry submarines, he strode un-
flinchingly. And withal, as an individual, preserved through
these torments the glories of a reasonable and compassionate
mind.
These are gloomy and dramatic words written by one whose
experience, whose accurate information and unusual powers of
perception and imagination justified him in forming and express-
ing an opinion. His statement contains scarcely a syllable
of exaggeration.
If the terror of that War should pass from us, if we fail
to realise in increasing fashion that the War, no matter who won
or lost, was a humiliating confession of failure on the part of
civilised humanity at large, then we are indeed in bad case.
The cup of wrath will inevitably fill again, and Armageddon,
sooner or later, will repeat itself with diabolic skill, and Civili-
sation (as we know it) already shaken to its foundations, will
vanish.
A grave in France identified for relatives by the iecturer in 1916.
When recording cemeteries in thousands and graves in millions
we would remember the tragedy in each individual grave.


A DESPERATE ENIGMA.
We are left face to face with a question to which the
average man has found no answer—why, in this Twentieth
Century of our Christian Civilisation, should War be?
As technically trained men we Engineers cannot but extol
the splendid technical work of many of our late enemies. German
engineering and German science evoke genuine admiration from
us, their brothers in the craft. During the War we excelled in
certain directions such as, for instance, our complete mastery
of the air by aeroplane; but they equally excelled us in other
directions, such as their immense .skill in the construction of
large airships—indeed, it is from them that we have learnt
almost everything we know about these monster craft.
Why is it then that the technical skill we have in common
should be occupied in contriving means for our mutual destruc-
tion? What has come over the spirit of man that every advance
in scientific knowledge is eagerly examined to see if it can
be made to have any bearing on the art of war? A century and
a half ago, when James Watt was developing the steam engine
and the many other contrivances that have made him famous,
such questions were not in the forefront. You can scarce find a
suggestion or a remark in any of James Watt's numerous writ-
ings to indicate that he ever gave a thought to the possibility
of his labours being devoted to war and weapons.
Why, then, in this century should every civilised country
look askance with obvious suspicion at every other country? We
hate the very idea of war. There is no more fervently-uttered
prayer in the church service than "Give peace in our time, 0
Lord." And yet war threatens us. There are more men under
arms to-day than there were at the beginning of the Great War.
The problem is a desperate enigma.
A SUGGESTION.
To provide a solution to a problem so baffling is not given
to the Engineer. I am no philosopher nor statesman to analyse
the conditions which led our Western Civilisation to such a
debacle. But there is one remark I would like to make. Amongst
all the discussions and explanations of the mystery, the argument
that has appealed to me more strongly than any other —and I
can only state it in brief-—is that the direct cause—not the only
nor even possibly the main cause —of the trouble is to be found
in the amazingly powerful effect produced on the German mind
by the publication of the Darwinian hypothesis in the middle of
last century.
The Darwinian theory was a brilliant, a vital discovery
which "revolutionised the thought of civilised man in a day."
But the vital idea of Darwin grew like a cancer in wrong places
and in wrong directions. Our medical colleagues tell us that the
vital cells of the body can become misdirected for reasons that
elude our knowledge. Due to some mysterious stimulus they
start to grow and develop in places and directions where they
should not, and thus accumulating they become not healthy flesh
but a monstrous and deadly scourge of mankind. So it was
with the Darwinian idea when applied, or misapplied, to the
social and, especially, the political life of Germany. In greater
or less degree it affected the thought of every civilised nation,
but it was in Germany that the seed found the most fertile soil.
"Darwin's science of the animal efficient in his own interest was
conceived to be the science of civilisation itself." It provided
apparently a scientific basis for the principle that might is right,
that, the superman is the ideal personage, that world power


4-
ML» 1
is a nation's greatest objective. Time does not allow of any
elaboration of this matter and I would therefore not have
referred to it at all but for one consideration. If it be indeed
true that the parlous condition of civilised Europe in 1914
was due to the gradual penetration in the minds and hearts of
the peoples for several decades of a distorted idea, then it is
obvious that no easy remedy is to be had. No nostrum will
suffice to cure the deadly ailment. No artificial adjustment
of the balance of power between the nations will permanently
avert war. Only another equally vital and powerful idea can
heal the spirit of the peoples. And those of us who pin our
faith to the League of Nations, notwithstanding all the obvious
difficulties and incongruities it presents, do so because we fain
would believe that from it may spring this cleansing ideal for
which the nations wait.
The Cross of Sacrifice in the Cemetery
at Nairobi, Kenya Colony.


A PARADOX.
If war presents us with a desperate enigma it also confronts
us with an extraordinary paradox that has some element of
cheer in it. Although war is horrible, it seems to have the
power of calling out the most God-like qualities in man. No one
can doubt that, as a nation, we were finer in war than we are
in peace. In the disillusionment of the post-War period we yearn
for something of the magnificent spirit of the War time.
This paradox was one which Ruskin tells us came as an
astonishing revelation to him. In a lecture on War which
he gave 50 or 60 years ago to the Military Cadets at Woolwich,
he told them that he had discovered in history that war was
the foundation of all the arts and of all the high virtues and
faculties of men, and he went on —
"It was very strange to me to discover this; and very
dreadful —but I saw it to be quite an undeniable fact. The
common notion that peace and the virtues of civil life flourished
together I found to be wholly untenable. Peace and the vices
of civil life only flourish together. We talk of peace and learn-
ing, and of peace and plenty, and of peace and civilisation; but
I found that those were not the words which the Muse of History
coupled together; that, on her lips, the words were: peace and
sensuality; peace and selfishness; peace and death. I found, in
brief, that all great nations learned their truth of word and
strength of thought in war; that they were nourished in war,
and wasted by peace; taught by war, and deceived by peace;
trained by war, and betrayed by peace—in a word, that they
were born in war, and expired in peace."
Whatever explanation we try and arrive at in seeking for a
solution of these mysteries, tonight, at any rate, we rejoice that
there is this heroic side of war, and in instituting this Memorial
we recount the fact that from this School there went men
who neither faltered nor failed.
THE COMMEMORATION OF OUR DEAD.
It is the desire of the Committee that there should be at this
lecture some formal commemoration of the names of those mem-
bers of the School who gave up their lives in the War. In this
view I am sure you will concur. We have endeavoured to obtain
an individual photograph of each man and, up to the present,
have been successful in the cases of all but two or three. These
blanks in our records we hope to fill at a later date. I should
like to take this opportunity of expressing my unusual indebted-
ness to Mr. E. F. Campbell, of the Electrical Engineering Depart-
ment, who is the Honorary Keeper of the Archives of the
Engineering Club.
Mr. Campbell has devoted his spare time for many months
past, first collecting the historical data about this Engineering
School and then in preparing, in great detail, accounts of
the men who went from this School to the War. Without his
unselfish aid I would have found it quite impossible to get the
data together in the necessary time. I hope that on some future
occasion there will be an opportunity for Mr. Campbell to put
before the members of this Society a complete account of the
doings—and many of them were very striking—of each man
whose name appears in our Roll of Honour. On the present
occasion I must restrict my statement to the directly military
particulars of each man.


T._"» 7 ~'> d SJL ■-
I now beg to invite you to stand while I recite the list of
the names, and show you the portraits of the men.
{The list of names and the particulars set forth in the
Appendix hereto were then read, while the portraits were shown
on the screen, after which the lecturer continued.]
Those of us who took part in the Memorial Service held in
the Great Hall last month as a part of the University's Com-
memoration of Benefactors —and chief amongst those Bene-
factors the University will always count those who fell in
the Great War —were privileged to join in a form of prayer
composed for the occasion and read by the Master of Wesley
College.
I beg leave to repeat a paragraph occurring in that prayer
which expresses the feeling we have after this recital of the
names of those who made the great sacrifice for their country:
Especially do we offer our gratitude to Thee for our
gallant fallen, who in the day of our extremity gave their
lives for us on the field of battle. Save us from forgetting
in the midst of all our progress their great and enduring
service. As the years lengthen between us and the day of
their offering may gratitude hold it dearly in our memory,
as that which should never die.
The Memorial Church at Ypres. More than a quarter of a
million men gave up their lives in the Ypres Salient.
Our desire in these lectures is that "as these years lengthen"
between the terrible happenings of the Great War and the
arrival in this School of succeeding generations of students, to
each incoming student there may be the stimulus and inspiration


■
-- '
:w^jg* Wn^
i (lliB^
m* ■■
The Hall of Memory, built at the old Menin Gate of
Ypres as a Memorial to nearly 60,000 of the "Missing."
of their predecessors in the School who quitted themselves as
men and left a magnificent heritage for those who should follow
them.
OUE AIM.
I would conclude this address by yet another quotation, from
a notable utterance in that same Great Hall of the University,
whose walls have re-echoed to so many splendid words during the
past three-quarters of a century. The Vice-Chancellor, speaking
of the great losses the University had suffered, not only during
the War but also in the intervening years, when death seemed
to have been very busy in our midst, and referring, in particular,
to the loss we had suffered by the death of Professor John Hunter
right at the start of his brilliant career, called to our mind by
way of solace and stimulus, the parable of a star which has shone
in the firmament and then gone out. It has vanished, we say.
But the light that shone from that star goes on through space for
years, for generations, for centuries, illuminating every object
that comes across its path.
Were a star quenched on high,
For ages would its light,
Still travelling downward through the sky,
Shine on our mortal sight.
So when a great man dies,
For years beyond our ken
The light he leaves behind him, lies
Upon the paths of men.
This illustration exactly describes the aim and object of
these Memorial Lectures. We wish them to be the means year
by year of bringing to the members of the School —undergradu-
ates, graduates and members of the Staff —a reminder from these
our heroes of those ideals of Service, of Responsibility, of
Knowledge and of Efficiency which should characterise every
Engineer worthy of his high calling.


f-tfeU
>"/■"
7 sS?:--'"- ■ ... . ::::; 1:717
wmm
The Last Post.
The end of the King's pilgrimage through the war cemeteries
Note: The illustrations are selected from a large number
shown on the screen during the course of the lecture.
The Lecturer desires to acknoivledge the quotations from the
writings of the Rt. Hon. Winston Churchill and of Mr. Benjamin
Kidd, and also the numerous illustrations taken from the
publications of the Imperial Graves Commission. Grateful
acknowledgement is also tendered to the Librarian of the
University for his cordial assistance.


THE
SPIRIT OF THE ENGINEER.
29
Appendix.
0
>
c3
0
®
SH
0
XI
0
ds; Belgium,
ion; Prance,
Prance, July,
ids; Prance,
At sea, Julv,
England, De-
Prance, Sep-
Prance, Feb-
on; Prance,
Dardanelles,
Prance, May,
Mesopotamia,
D
£
I—I
Pi
H
W
£
1—1
O
£
FFI
How, When and
His L
Died of Woun
October. 1917
Killed in Act
August, 1918
Killed in Action ;
1916
Died of Woui
August, 1916
Died of Illness;
1916
Died of Illness;
cember, 1918
Killed in Action :
tember, 1918
Died of Wounds;
ruary, 1917
Killed in Acti
August, 1918
Died of Wounds
August, 1915
Died of Wounds;
1917
Died of Illness;
July, 1916
Decorations.
Gold Medal,
Serbia
Military Cross
Military Medal
fe
o
J
o
o
W
a
w
EH
A
«
a
FH
m
A
o
PH
P
o
£
o
W
Military
Unit.
36th Battalion,
A.I. P.
4th Field Coy.
Engrs., A.I.F.
Royal Engrs.,
B.E.P.
Aust. Army
Service Corps
Motor Trans-
port, A. I.P.
9th Field Coy.
Engrs., A.I.F.
Royal Horse
Artillery,
B.E.P.
1st Battalion,
A.I.F.
1 56th Division,
Royal Field
Artillery,
B.E.P.
34th Battalion,
A.I. P.
1st Field Coy.
Engrs., A.I.F.
54th Battalion,
A. I.P.
Royal Engrs.,
B.E.P.
J
A
H
zn
m
P
Pi
p
o
n
EH
H
M
05
K
A
>
TH
£
P
P
O
p
p
O
Pi
Military
Rank.
Bomber
Corporal
Major
Driver
Corporal
Major
Dieutenant
. , J !'.
Lieutenant
Lieutenant
Sapper
Private
Lieutenant
T-H
z
D
cr>
OS
B.E., 1909
Eng. II, 1915
Pi
H
H
H
PH
H
|TJ
Degree oi
Year.
Engin. Mech
Staff
B.E., 1913
B.E., 1904
Eng. I, 1913
Eng. IV, 19
B.Sc., B.E.,
1914
Eng. II, 1911
Arts, Eng.,
Eng. I, 1909
B.E., 1915
Eh
Name.
WILFRED WILLIAM BARBER
HUBERT DE VERB ALEXANDER . .
JOHN NICHOLAS FRASER ARM-
STRONG
ROBERT JAMES MACGREGOR
BARNET
WILLIAM GEORGE BILL
CECIL ALFRED BOURNE
LEWIS MARSDEN BULL
FREDERICK WILLIAM MERE-
WETHER BUSBY
VINCENT CHARLES CALLEN
EDWARD MOORE CARTER
GILBERT LANGTREE FITZGERALD . .
REGINALD WILLIAM GELME


30
TJ
to
s
s
■+-}
8
o
O
is
How, When and Where Gave
His Life.
H
2
Killed in Action ; France, 2
October, 1917
Killed in Action ; France, m
November, 1916 bi
Killed in Action; France, hh
October, 1917 2
2
Q
Killed in Action; France, Feb-
ruary, 1917
Died of Wounds; France, C*
March, 1918 JL
Died of Wounds; France, Sep-
tember, 1918 fi
H
§
O
Died of Wounds ; France, July, W
1916 S
Killed in Action ; France, June, tL
1917 ~
Died of Wounds; France, July, t-<
1916 H
Killed in Action ; France, Sep- q
tember, 1916 faj
Killed in Action; Dardanelles, d
August, 1915 M
Killed in Action ; France, April, m
1917 •
Died of Illness contracted dur-
ing War ; Buxton, N.S.W.,
April, 1919
Killed in Action; France,
October, 1917
- Decorations.
| Military Cross
Mentioned in
despatches.
Recommended
for Military
Cross.
Military Cross
Military
Unit.
7th Field Coy.
Engrs., A.I.F.
j 7th Australian
Field Artil-
lery Brigade,
A.I.F.
30th Battalion,
A.I.F.
Australian Fly-
ing Corps,
A.I.F.
Royal Engrs.,
B.E.F.
1st Field Coy.
Engrs., A.I.F.
45th Battalion,
A.I.F.
A.I.F.
1 st Field Coy.
Engrs., A.I.F.
4th Battalion,
A.I.F.
3rd Field Coy.
Engrs., A.I.F.
13th Field Coy.
Engrs., A.I.F.
45th Battalion,
A.I.F.
O
£
o
W
fa
o
fa
fa
o
£
Military
Rank.
Lieutenant
Sergeant
Gunner
Signaller
Captain
Lieutenant
Sapper
Corporal
Lieutenant
Lieutenant
Lieutenant
Lieutenant
Lieutenant
Lieutenant
Degree or
Year.
B.E., 1914
B.A., B.E.,
1901
Eng. I, 1915
Eng. I
Eng. II, 1915
B.E., 1915
B.E., 1915
Eng. II, 1915
Special course,
1914
B.E., 1909
B.E., 1914
B.E., 1915
B.E., 1915
Eng. II, 1915
Name.
FREDERICK WILLIAM GIBBES
WILLIAM HILDER GREGSON
NORMAN EDWARD HIATT
ARTHUR JOSEPH HILL
RICHARD WATSON HOWARD
EDWIN OCTAVIUS HUTCHINSON . .
RALPH GRANVILLE IRONS
ERIC ALEXANDER KINGEL
CHARLES HAROLD LATTA
JAMES MCBRTDE
JOHN YOUNGER MACKINNON
JOHN TERENCE MCMAHON
JAMES STOKES MILLNER
ALEXANDER ROXBURGH MUIR . .


When and Where Gave
His Life.
in Action; Prance,
nber, 1916
3
•"O
oT
o
£
£
£
-H
£
o
<<
£
Wounds; Prance, Janu-
L917
in Action; Prance,
i, 1918
in Action; Prance,
er, 1917
in Action ; Prance, Janu-
1917
;d in Action; Prance, Sep-
nber, 1917
in Action ; Prance, July,
in Action; Prance, De-
ir, 1916
by Accident; England,
1917
: Wounds; Prance, May,
by Accident ; England,
1917
3
•"3
s
2
3)
3
pq
£
o
o
£
3d in Action; Prance,
cember, 1916
-
<D
Killed
1916
Died oi
ary,
Killed
Marcl
Octob
Killed
ary,
V O
50 nU £
r^OO
o
ffl
3z
M
s
£5 a
1 — 1 Oi 1 (p
-RH O
M M
HH
*£
Q
K/
hH
M
02*
£
O
£
Service
r, Mili-
Cross
02 5
02 " -H
O
5|
>..2
j despatches
Decoi
02
J?
M o -2
s
£ 4->
£ £
r
jk —Continued.
Military-
Unit.
1 st Battalion,
A. I.P.
N.Z.E.P.
Royal Engrs.,
B.E.P.
11th Australian
Field Artil-
lery Brigade,
A.I. P.
14th Field Coy.
Engrs., A.I. P.
Oxford and
Bucks Light
Infantry,
B.E.P.
3rd Battalion,
A.I. P.
Royal Plying
Corps, B.E.P.
6th Field Coy.
Engrs.. A. I.P.
Royal Plying
Corps, B.E.P.
4th Field Coy.
Engrs., A. I.P.
Royal Plying
Corps, B.E.P.
11th Battalion,
Machine
Gunners,
A.I. P.
9th Light
Trench Mor-
£
02
£
W
£
£
ROLL OF HONOI
Military
Rank.
Private
Private
Lieutenant
Lieutenant
Sapper
Captain
Private
Captain
Sapper
j Lieutenant
Lieutenant
Lieutenant
Captain
Lieutenant
M
bi
£
H
HO
ZD
HO
CO
Degree 01
Year.
ia
•*
lO
03
OS
HO 7-1
03
r—1
05
TH
1-1
O3
O
H
M
M
bi
£
H
Oi
H
m
Eng. I
B.E., 19
Arts I,
1907
TH
HH
bi
£
B.E., 19
Eng. Ill
>
M
bi
£
HH
hH
HH
bi
£
H
2 M
rbx
CQ
B.E., 19
hH
1—1
bi
£
H
05
h
Name.
DAVID MACLEAY MURRAY . .
RICHARD HENSLEIGH O'CONNC
WILLIAM EDWARD PIKE . .
WILFRED MIRFIELD PLASKITT
THOMAS ROBERT RAE
HUBERT WYATT HAY RAW SON
KENNETH KNOWLTON SAXBY
ALFRED SEYMOUR SHEPHERD
MURRAY RAINSFORD SMITH
GEOFFREY SULMAN
ERIC HAMILTON THOMAS . .
HECTOR KINGSLEY PORTUS TIDI
JOHN STUART DIGHT WALKER
JOHN EDWARD STEELE WALSH


, E. A. Kin gel.
JL -Jfc-
*
32 ENGINEERING WAR MEMORIAL LECTURE.
T. R. Rae.


* V .
.FSrST R - w - Gclme.
fcX ' J
r \
R. G. Irons.
I ~*t : .jf
J. N. F. Armstrong. I, %. . '. ' ' A I ll
*\ %/ i


W. H. Grecjson.
BBEiJ
[ShST] • c flBSB'^^4jMMMHBIIRsHj J 4HBM|
■pF r
.' \. " ' •.-, - ''* ■•■;.- - -v.
' ; ■ : ' .' ■"' " : '' ■■"■■■':■■■.'" ; . ';. ! "
J. '1\ McMahon.
A. R. Muir. *iV%.
1 k ' SR< I- 1
■jk SEjlhl r
W. W. Barber.


9C. H. Latta.
T\ W. Gibbcs.
I -j.- nflkH E II. Thomas.
'■"fni ■ ; - ■ ■ * n is *
.
■■ .; ■ •
*


" ,l '^
A. S. Shepherd. ' " "I


/ " ■ -IF
■git Ip^
G. Sulma.il.
!
/v. .if. Bull. ••jr^ftwigcg|


■ vHHIk U^ 5 '" yr
J- V. C. Callen.
M. R. Smith.
G. A. Bourne.


Splendour undying for their land they Won
And the shadowy Robe of Death put on,
Yet died and are not dead for their brave might
Fames and uplifts them from the realm of night.
—Simonides.






*. .
