













THE
YISITOR’S GUIDE-BOOK
BALLARAT
AND ITS
ENVIRON S.
B ALL AE AT:
JAMES CURTIS, PRINTER, ARMSTRONG STREET.
1875.




VISITOR'S GUIDE-BOOK
BALLAEAT.
THE CITY AND ENVIRONS.
Sallarat is the second city in Victoria, and
has a population of near 40,000. The name
is aboriginal, and means “ a resting-place,” the
site having, from time immemorial, been .a
favorite camping place of the now vanished
native tribes of the district. Loved by the
aborigines, Ballarat the primeval has not lost
but gained in attractiveness by the new creations
of civilization. Wherever its citizens wander,
they almost always persist in longing to return
to their old “ resting-place,” and strangers in-
variably express their admiration of the bosky
beauty and large extent of what has aptly been
called the “ Garden City of Victoria.”, 'Anthony
Trollope, who has seen nearly all the world, has
of brave cities praised this one of Ballarat in the
following terms :—“ Ballarat is certainly a most
remarkable town. It struck me with more sur-
prise than any other city in Australia. In point


of architectural excellence and general civilized
city comfort, it is certainly the metropolis of the
Australian goldfields.” Only recently, too, an
American visitor, a member of the Senate of the
United States, the Honorable D. S. Hastings
was here, and at Maryborough he spoke of
Ballarat as, to quote his remarks in the Mary-
borough Advertiser , “the most surprising inland
city, considering its age, he had ever seen, and
he thinks there is no other inland city in the
world of its age comparable to it for size, extent,
population, and the solidity and magnificence of
its public buildings and general improvements.”
Mr. Kennedy, too, of the “ Twa hours at hame”
company, who has travelled all over the world,
says of Ballarat, “ It is the bonniest city of all
the colonies.” Thus do its visitors regard this
great monument of auriferous wealth and human
enterprise. And they reasonably ask to see
THE FAR-FAMED GOLD MINES,
which will be found both East and West, access
to which the visitor can easily obtain by appli-
cation to the managers. Both quartz and alluvial
mines are at hand within the boundaries of the
city. But the visitor will first take his fill of street
sights, get a bird’s-eye look from some tower, and
observe that Sturt Street, wide as a Parisian
4
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


boulevard, has a mile of gardens along its middle
portion, where native and exotic shrubs spread
their lowlier beauty beneath the growing grandeur
of the eucalyptus, the oak, the elm, and the lime.
Victoria Street has the sides of its broad way
lined with lusty trees of various kinds, and these
two larger thoroughfares are but the more
notable examples of a system of public and
private tree-planting which has made the city
look like a flock of palaces nestling in bowers of
cool and verdant shade. Seen from any of its
towers and hills the city is fair to look upon.
The lines of planted streets, the public and private
gardens, the Wendouree Lake with its fleet of
boats, the wooded ranges that bound the city in
the east, the green and purple hills that skirt the
more distant western horizon, the bustle of the
streets, the elegance of the central and the public
buildings, are all a fascination to the spectator.
These, with its convenient public institutions and
its manifold resources of comfort and pleasure, all
go to make up material parts of that whole which
the old citizen when absent longs to return to,
£.nd which the stranger as he goes away desires
to revisit.
Ballarat comprises three portions. The
western is called the City of Ballarat; the
eastern, the Town of Ballarat East; the southern,
5
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


the Borough of Sebastopol. Taking the City,
the central, richest, most populous, and, munici-
pally, the senior part of Ballarat, as the point of
immediate reference, we may state that it is
1437 feet above the level of Port Phillip Bay, is
50 miles distant from Corio Bay, in latitude
between the 37th and 38th degrees south and a
few miles west of the 144th degree of east
longitude. The railway distances of the City
from the other centres in Victoria are in miles
as follow Melbourne,
Creswick, 11 ; Clunes, 20; Castlemaine,
Sandhurst, 9 Sj4] Ararat, 56 ; Maryborough, 45 ;
Talbot, 31 ; Kyneton,
more,
Albury (N.S. W.), 290. Ballarat is thus in
direct railway communication with all the larger
centres of population, and will soon be placed in
possession of additional means of travel by the
iron-horse to the Western District, to the Wim-
mera District in the north-west, and to Gippsland
in the south-east. Its elevation above the sea
gives to the climate a temperature more moderate
than that of nearly all the other centres at similar
or greater distances inland ; and its salubrity has
made it a place of resort by invalids requiring a
bracing air without the Alpine severity of the
mountainous parts of the colony, and without the
6
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


arid heats of Melbourne and Sandhurst. Official
returns of vital statistics show that we have in
BALLARAT THE HEALTHIEST CENTRE
of population in the colony. While even sea-
side Geelong,has a death-rate of 18-50 per 1000,
Castlemaine the same, Sandhurst 22-85 P er
1000, Melbourne 18-74 P er 1000, the rate in
Ballarat, with its hospital, its asylums, its
dangerous mines, is but 17-08 per 1000, while
in Ballarat East, where the hospital returns are
not reckoned, the rate is only i6‘o6 per 1000.
Ballarat, then, may well be regarded as a natural
sanatorium. Its contiguity to the seaside also—
but two hours distance—affords to its inhabitants
easy access to sea air and bathing, whilst its own
lakes and reservoirs give splendid opportunities
for fishing, rowing, and yachting.
Of the sights of Ballarat, and of its many
pleasant haunts, we may now speak' in detail.
One of the most notable" street sights is that
presented by
BALLARAT ON SATURDAY NIGHT,
when thousands of shop and market going folk
and idle strollers parade Sturt and Bridge Streets,
making a good half-mile of the central thorough-
fare like a busy fair. The brilliantly-lighted
7
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


shops with their various and costly stores, and
the ever-shifting crowds that fill not only foot-
paths but roadways and throng the markets,
make up one of the gayest scenes in Victoria.
Not only do the townsfolk turn out in great
masses, but the railways and coaches bring in
hosts of country visitors, who avail themselves
of cheap and convenient means of travel to make
their purchases in the larger market offered by
so important a centre as Ballarat.
STURT STREET
is, in some respects, the finest thoroughfare in
Victoria. It is three chains wide, a mile and a
half long, is embellished with gardens in its
centre portion, and has in it some of the most
elegant and spacious buildings in the city. The
City Hall, Post Office, Mechanics’ Institute,
Savings and other Banks, Theatre Royal, Dis-
trict Hospital, St. Patrick’s Cathedral, St. Peter’s
Church, St. Andrew’s Kirk, are among the
principal edifices in this street
BRIDGE STREET,
in Ballarat East, is a continuation of the Sturt
Street line, and connects it with Victoria Street
in the east. It is one of the busiest of the busy
spots in the great Saturday night’s gatheringfor
business and pleasure. Here is the Freehold
8
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


Market; and through it the visitor has immediate
approach to the Borough Market of Ballarat
East, used only on Saturdays. From the narrow
Bridge Street to
VICTORIA STREET
is an agreeable change; for Victoria Street
almost immediately opens out to a width like
Sturt Street, and like it is ornamented with trees,
but being out of the centre is less rich in palatial
buildings. St. Paul’s and St. Alipius’ Churches
and the District Orphan Asylum are in this
thoroughfare.
THE GREAT ARTERY
running through Ballarat from west to north-east
is made up of the three streets just named.
MAIN STREET
branches off to the south-east where Bridge
Street becomes Victoria Street, and trends north-
east. Main Street, the site of one of the first
settled parts of Ballarat, was once the busiest and
richest part. It is now decaying in its remoter
portions, and apparently reverting to the uses of
the fossicker and the humbler class of shops and
beer-houses. In it are some moderately good
buildings, the most pretentious of which are the
Charlie Napier Brewery, at first a theatre, and
9
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


the London Chartered Bank. Out of it, or
crossing it, is Eureka Street, which leads to the
site of
THE EUREKA STOCKADE,
where, on the 3rd December, 1854, the insurgent
diggers were attacked by the Queens troops
and were defeated. Crossing Main Street also is
BARKLY STREET,
where will be found the admirable Public Library,
the Town Hall (and a perfect gem of arborifer-
ous beauty in the garden there), the Eastern
Fire Brigade station tower, Wesley Church East,
the Synagogue, and St. John’s Presbyterian
Manse. Turning back westward, and entering
Sturt Street from Bridge Street, we cross Gren-
ville Street, in which we see on our right hand
THE ALFRED HALL,
erected for the reception of Prince Alfred, and
since then used for dramatic, choral, ball, public
meeting, church, school, and exhibition purposes.
On the left are
THE GAS-WORKS,
whose tall tapering chimney is one of the land-
marks of the city. The visitor will find these
10
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.






works a model of order and precision. But the
odors are not of “ Araby the blest,” and we
hasten to fresher and pleasanter spots.
THE EASTERN OVAL
can be reached in ten minutes from here, and
there the visitor will find one of the best
kept cricket-grounds in all Victoria ; its borders
ornamented with fish-ponds and plantations of
trees, while the pavilion and grand stand give
ample convenience for spectators. Here too is
THE BALLARAT BOWLING-GREEN,
which forms a part of the general reserve, and
like the oval and its borders, is becoming plea-
santer year by year as the trees and shrubs grow
lustier and more stately. If the visitor leaves
this pleasant spot for the centre of the town, and
ascends to the balcony of the City Hall tower, he
will command a view of all the notable buildings.
Facing east he will have, at the intersection of
Sturt and Lydiard Streets,
THE BURKE AND WILLS MEMORIAL.
And adjacent thereto, on the left, the
POST, LAND, AND TREASURY OFFICES, AND
SAVINGS BANK.
11
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


Below the Savings Bank, 'in Sturt Street, are
the offices of two of
THE THREE DAILY NEWSPAPERS,
namely, the Star and Courier ; the Eveni7ig Post
having its office in Mair Street. The Miner
and Weekly Star is published at the Star office.
In Camp Street, near the Savings Bank, is
THE MASONIC HALL ;
and in Grenville Street, close to the Gas-works, is
THE SOCIETIES’ HALL,
where oddfellows and foresters assemble for
their observances, and where other assemblies
are held occasionally. In Lydiard Street,
northward from the Post Office, is
THE RAILWAY STATION ;
while on the far right, and still in Lydiard Street,
the visitor on the tower will see the gaol build-
ings, and close by them
THE SCHOOL OF MINES,
whose library, museum of minerals and fossils,
electric apparatus, chemical laboratory, mining
designs and general appointments for the several
classes of students, will be readily exhibited,
12
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


and the great value of the school be made
obvious to the observer. Nearer than the
school the visitor will perceive
CHRIST CHURCH OR CATHEDRAL,
the oldest and most central Anglican edifice
in the city, and probably the site of Bishop
Thornton’s chair, and
THE ACADEMY OF MUSIC,
one of the largest and most elegantly-embellished
halls in the colony. It fronts in Lydiard Street,
and possesses a stage width equal to that of the
Theatre Royal in Melbourne, and an auditorium
capable of seating comfortably 1700 persons.
Close by, but fronting Sturt Street, is
THE MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE,
with its ladies’ and public reading rooms, library,
spacious and beautiful hall, smoking and con-
versation room, lecture room, and various offices,
altogether forming by far the best institution of
the kind in Victoria. Adjoining the Mechanics'
Institute is
THE FAMOUS BALLARAT CORNER,
or Mining Exchange, its offices, its brokers,
speculators, “bulls,” and “bears.” Not long
13
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


since, offices, footwalk, and street side were
crowded with the busy dealers and brokers, but
the bustle and the crowd have sensibly de-
creased. Looking west the visitor will have
beneath him Mitchell’s Buildings, - the finest
commercial block in the city. It includes
THE THEATRE ROYAL,
which has a neatly-ornamented interior, and will
accommodate an audience of some 1500 persons.
Further west, past St. Patrick’s Cathedral and
St. Andrew’s Kirk, will be seen on the right
the tower of the
CITY FIRE BRIGADE STATION,
and a little way beyond it
THE DISTRICT HOSPITAL,
at the corner of Sturt and Drummond Streets,
an edifice in the Italian style, built,on a reserve
of five acres, and having beds for about 140
patients, besides a roll of between 500 and 600
out-patients. Left from the Hospital and fur-
ther to the west will be seen
THE BENEVOLENT ASYLUM,
a splendid pile in the Elizabethian style, built
on a reserve of five acres. This is the home of
14
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.






the worn-out and decrepit poor of both sexes,
and the place whence are issued weekly rations
to hundreds of poor people. In this building
there is also a lying-in hospital for women in
distressed circumstances. Retiring his view
again to what is close by, the visitor on the
tower will see beneath him
THE PHCENIX FOUNDRY
buildings, where the locomotive engines for the
new railways have all been made. The exten-
sive works and costly machines in this and the
other foundries in Ballarat should be visited by
all who take interest in such things. So also
THE BALLARAT WOOLLEN FACTORY
at Mount Pleasant should attract the visitor,
who will be courteously shown over the premises,
and will witness there the processes of the manu-
facture of tweeds, shawls, flannels, and blankets.
Recalling his eye to objects nearer, the spectator
on the tower will see spread out around him the
banks, shops, hotels, warehouses, and offices of
the centre of the city.
THE CITY PRODUCE MARKET
is at the intersections of Doveton and Armstrong
15
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


Streets with Mair Street. In Armstrong Street,
fronting the market, are
THE TURKISH AND SWIMMING BATHS,
where also ordinary hot and shower baths can
be had.
THE SHEEP AND CATTLE YARDS
adjoin the Royal Park on the south-west side,
and are about two miles distant from the City
Hall. Of
THE BALLARAT HOTELS
the most notable and central family houses are
Lester’s hotel, fronting the Theatre Royal in
Sturt Street; Craig’s Royal hotel, fronting the
Academy of Music, in Lydiard Street; the
George hotel, fronting the Police Station, in
Lydiard Street; Brophy’s hotel, at the corner of
Sturt and Doveton Streets ; the Royal George,
at the corner of Lydiard and Mair Streets ; the
Town Hall hotel, the Stork hotel, and the
Edinburgh Castle hotel, in Armstrong street;
the Adelphi hotel, fronting St. Patrick’s Cathe-
dral ; the Unicorn hotel, at the Corner ; Bussell's
hotel, at the corner of Sturt and Albert Streets ;
and the Club hotel, alongside the Academy of
Music, in which hostelry
16
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


THE BALLARAT CLUB
has its quarters, with all their comfortable
appointments. In the East the visitor will find,
in Barkly Street,
THE PUBLIC LIBRARY,
an elegantly-finished interior, stored with heaps
of the best books and papers, and open free to
the public. Further east, in Victoria Street, is
THE DISTRICT ORPHAN ASYLUM,
the home of orphans of both sexes, and
pleasantly situated in a large reserve, with
gardens and shrubberies. Strolling westward
the visitor will find that
THE WESTERN OVAL
is more than a mile from that in the east, and
occupies a space bounded by Eyre, Pleasant,
Urquhart, and Ripon Streets respectively on the
north, west, south, and east. The reserve is an
area of nine acres, and includes
THE CITY BOWLING-GREEN,
and a grand stand, whence, at the proper seasons,
visitors may see the
CALEDONIAN SPORTS,
17
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


ST. PATRICKS DAY SPORTS,
CRICKET MATCHES ;
sports and matches being also a feature of the
Eastern Oval during summer, besides
THE EASTER FAIR.
which is held there annually, in aid of the Public
Library in Barkly Street. From the Western
Oval a short walk along Pleasant Street brings
the visitor to
LAKE WENDOUREE,
a charmingly situated water of 600 acres in ex-
tent, margined by plantations, walks, and swards
on the east and south, its shores dotted with
boat-houses and jetties, and its broad and safely
shallow waters covered at fete times with
steamers, yachts, rowing-boats, sculling-boats,
and canoes. Here our boating parties enjoy the
summer days and nights, and the angler secures
amid its tiny islands and reed-covered reaches
the perch and carp which swarm in the waters
of the lake. Stepping into a boat, we row, or
sail, or steam, in a short time, across to
THE BOTANICAL GARDENS,
on the western shores, where the visitor again
18
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.




♦
'


finds islands, and boat-jetties, ornamental ponds,
trout-ponds, summer-houses, swings, a collection
of animals and birds, housed or at large in special
reserves ; the maze, and its lofty central house ;
the beautiful flower-gardens, and the leafy
avenues of cypress, oak, elm, and lime; the
acacia walk near a mile in length; the magnificent
Wellingtonia gigantea avenue, and walks and
drives about the general reserve at pleasure.
These and the lake are
THE GREAT PLEASURE RESORT
on Sundays and holidays, when thousands flock
hither to enjoy the cool airs on the lake, the
shady recesses of the gardens, and join in or look
upon the coming and going of the ceaseless
crowd of horses and carriages and pedestrians
that almost seem sometimes to reproduce here
the Rotten Row of Hyde Park in London. Ad-
jacent on the south is
THE ROYAL PARK,
a reserve of 323 acres, where have been held
military displays, and where the football clubs
sometimes disport themselves. Still closer on
the west are
THE INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS
and reserve, only separated from the gardens by
19
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


a road, accessible from the gardens. From the
shores of the lake the eye has a fine view of the
eastern ranges and
MOUNTS WARRENHEIP AND BUNINYONG,
both of which, as well as the pretty little
TOWNSHIP OF BUNINYONG,
are reachable by a short drive. The ride from
Ballarat to Buninyong is extremely pleasant, the
road for the most part of the way being bordered
with young forest-trees.
THE WATER RESERVES
in the forest in the north-east are another pleasant
and favorite place of resort during the summer.
The cool and shady nooks which border Kirk’s
Reservoir are especially popular; the limpid
waters as they bound over the clear granitic by-
wash and dash into the leafy gloom below giving
always a sight of beauty and a sense of delicious
rural distance from the hum and bustle of the
neighbouring city. Silence, sometimes, and
more or less of garden and landscape beauty,
with food for solemn thought, may be had in
THE CITIES OF THE DEAD,
the Old and New Cemeteries. The first is not
20
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


far from the centre of the city, and is situated at
the junction of Drummond and Macarthur Streets
with the Creswick Road, within five minutes’
walk of Lake Wendouree and the
AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY’S SHOW-YARDS,
an area of 10 acres, substantially enclosed and
admirably fitted for the uses to which the place
is devoted. The New Cemetery is outside the
city boundaries on the north, Lydiard Street
leading straight to the entrance-gates. From
the mounds and slopes of this cemetery some
wide reaches of country are seen, including
THE - PYRENEES,
with its purple shadows and broken outline, and
THE BALD HILLS
about the fertile farm-lands and rich pastures of
DOWLING FOREST,
where the well-kept fields betoken the progress
of agriculture and the presence of some of the
best soil in the colony. There, too, is
THE BALLARAT RACECOURSE,
with its grand stand and other accommodations
dear as well to sporting men as to picnic parties.
21
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


From the hill at the rear of the grand stand a
view is had of
LAKES LEARMONTH AND BURRUMBEET
and the well-tilled farms and rich grass lands in
that locality. Lake Burrumbeet is a splendid
water, 20 miles in circumference, and stocked
with fish ; the shores being skirted by the Bal-
larat and Ararat Railway. Its ample borders
afford pleasant haunts to picnic parties during
the summer months, the spot growing in popu-
larity as its pleasant nooks become better known.
The other lake is one of the beauty-spots of
LEARMONTH TOWNSHIP,
which is prettily situated on the uplands that
slope from the northern shore of the water. The
lake and its boats, the neat buildings, the culti-
vation around, the patches of plantation, the
bowling-green, and the beauty of the landscape,
make the village well worth a visit. Closely,
too, is
CERES,
the home of Mr. Thomas Bath, famous alike for
its gardens, its paddocks, its Lincolns and Lei-
cesters, and the hearty hospitality of its master
and mistress. The charms of water and landscape
will also be found at
22
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.






THE LAL LAL WATER-FALLS,
which are reached by a short walk from the Lai
Lai station on the Ballarat and Geelong Railway.
Not far from Lai Lai are the
THE FALLS OF THE MOORABOOL,
which, like those of the Lai Lai, are not only
beautiful in themselves, but are set in a charming
garniture of pleasant scenery.
Borrowing from Withers’ History of Ballarat
we may add the following-:
“ From the northern boundary of Ballarat West borough
to the southern boundary of Sebastopol borough the distance
is five miles and a quarter, and from the western boundary
of Ballarat West Borough to the eastern boundary of Ballarat
East borough the distance is four miles. These distances
are measured along the central thoroughfares, where the
whole alignment, with immaterial exceptions, is built upon.
Thus, starting from the eastern boundary at the Canadian
and going to the western boundary at Alfredton, the traveller
passes along Main, Bridge, and Sturt Streets, and performs
a journey of a few hundred yards over four miles. This is
a distance as great if not greater than that in London from
Hyde Park Corner to the Bank, that from Westminster
Bridge by water to the Tower, or that from the Elephant
and Castle, south of the Thames, to Highbury Park in the
north. It is as great as the distance in Melbourne from the
University to the Junction at St. Kilda, or from the Spencer
23
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


Street railway terminus by way of the streets to the junction
of the Merri Creek with the Yarra Yarra on the eastern
boundary of Richmond. In starting from the northern
boundary of Lydiard Street and passing to the southern
boundary at the Bonshaw, the traveller performs a journey
of five miles and a quarter and traverses Lydiard, part of
Armstrong, Skipton, and Albert Streets. This long stretch
of street is represented in London by the distance from
Hyde Park Corner past the Bank and Whitechapel to the
Mile End Road, from the Elephant and Castle to the New
River reservoirs, or from Westminster Bridge by water, to
Limehouse Reach. In Melbourne it is equal to a walk from
Flemington to St. Kilda, or by water from the mouth of the
Yarra Yarra to Richmond. The traveller while traversing
the Ballarat thoroughfares mentioned passes along the two
central lines of streets of a city with near 40,000 inhabitants,
56 churches, 3 town halls, 477 hotels, many other large
public edifices, over 10,000 dwellings, 84 miles of made
streets, 164 miles of footpaths, 15 miles of pitched channelling.
He will pass over the two centres of a city comprising an
area of 9400 acres in extent, where lie more than over 60
miles of water mains, 50 miles of gas mains, and over 3000
lineal yards of stone flagging. He will see about him long
reaching lines of stately buildings, and elegant shops, banks,
iron foundries, breweries and distilleries, flour-mills, and
other manufactories, all within the town boundaries. The
western half of the city is spread over a basaltic table-land,
the foot of whose eastern slopes is traversed by the Yarrowee
Creek, which for a part of its course is the boundary between
the boroughs of Ballarat West and East. Its eastern half is
spread over-schistose ranges and made-hills of auriferous
detritus, and includes the oldest inhabited portions of the
city. From it issued the leads or gutters of golden drift
24
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


which are now being worked beneath the elevated plateau
of the western portion of the city.”
BALLARAT WEST.
“ Ballarat West was constituted a municipality on the
17th of December, 1855, and on the 14th of January, 1856,
the first council was elected, consisting of Messrs. James
Oddie, Robt. Muir, Jas. Stewart, M.D., Wm. Tulloch, Alex.
Binney Rankin, John Smith Carver, and Patrick Bolger.
James Oddie was the first chairman for 1856-7, and Joseph
Comb and Samuel Baird were the first town clerk and town
surveyor. The subsequent chairmen were James Stewart,
M.D., 1858-9; William Collard Smith, 1860-1 ; Robert
Lewis, 1862-3. In October, 1863, the municipality became
a borough, the last chairman of the municipality being chosen
first mayor of the borough. The mayors since then have
been Matthew Campbell, 1864; Joseph Attwood Doane,
1865 ; Gilbert Duncan, 1866 ; Thos. Davey, 1867-8 ; James
McDowall, 1869 ; Thos, Cowan, 1870.”
Then the borough was proclaimed a city, and
the following mayors have since held office :
H, B, Chalmers, 1871 ; R. Lewis, 1872 ; F. M.
Claxton, 1873; J. H. Williams, 1874; Major
W. C. Smith, M.L.A., 1875.
PRESENT COUNCIL.
Daniel Brophy, Mayor. Councillors Robert Lewis, D,
Brophy, F. M. Claxton for the Central Ward ; W. C. Smith,
J. H.Williams, J.P. Howard for the South Ward; Geo. Smith,
J. W. Gray, Henry Leggo for the North Ward.
25
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


OFFICERS.
Town Clerk and Treasurer—Richard Ford; Assistant Clerk
and Treasurer —F. C.Wainwright; Clerk of Works —T.Wood;
Auditors —Alexander Marshall and J. A. Chalk; Collectors —
William Marshall, Robert Wynne, and M. R. Nicholson; Hall
Keeper—Joseph Pill; Inspector of Nuisances—Sergeant W.
McCullagh ; Inspector of Produce Market and Weights and
Measures—J. Richards ; Inspector of Cattle Cards—S. Cad-
den ; Inspector of Dogs—John Westwood ; Poundkeeper—
James Miller; Solicitor —Henry Cuthbert, M.L.C. ; Standing
Counsel —R. Le Poer Trench ; Bankers—Commercial Bank,
Ballarat; Botanic Gardens Curator —G. Longley; Baths
Superintendent, J. W. Shewring.
The Council meets at the City Hall every alternate Mon-
day, at 3 p.ra.
MAGISTRATES.
W. H. Gaunt, P.M. ; I, J. Jones, R. F. Hudson, M D.;
David Fitzpatrick, Thomas Coghlan, J. H Williams, Thomas
Cowan, John Permewan, Henry R. Caselli, William Scott,
Hy. Josephs, Jas. Baker, T. H. Budden, G. S. C. Butler, M.D.;
George Clendinning, M.D.; J. A. Doane, John Fussell, Robt.
Lewis, James McDowall, N, R. Macleod, W. B. Ochiltree,
James Oddie, W. C. Smith, A. Anderson, Fred. M. Claxton,
John W. Gray, Henry Costin, P. L. S. Chauncy, J. W. King,
Edmund Elliget, John Victor. Clerk of Petty Sessions—
J. S. Cooper.
The City Hall in Sturt Street, a handsome
building in tooled bluestone with superstructure
in brick, was built from a design by Mr. Lorenz,
adapted by Mr. Percy Oakden. The contractor
for the works was Mr. Cowland, for the sum of
26
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.






,£16,76 7, and the contract was completed in 1871.
On the 14th January, 1870, Mr.Thos. Cowan, the
mayor, laid the new memorial stone of the City
Hall. His worship in his address on that occasion
made the following statement as to what has
since then been realised :
“ The Sturt Street frontage will occupy a space of 153 feet.
The principal entrance to the municipal offices will be in the
centre under the tower, which will stand right out to the
front so that the stone which has just been laid will also be
the foundation-stone of the tower. This tower is to carry
the Alfred Memorial Bells which have already arrived in
Ballarat. They have been cast by Messrs. Mears and
Stainbank, of Whitechapel, and competent judges have pro-
nounced them to be the finest peal that has come to these
colonies. There are eight bells in all, pitched in the key of
E flat, and the largest—the tenor bell—is 4 feet 3 inches in
diameter, and weighs 23 cwt. The total weight of the eight
bells is nearly tons; the weight of the eight bells in
St. Patrick’s Cathedral, Melbourne, being only 3I tons.
The Alfred Memorial Bells are valued at In addi-
tion to the bells, the tower will contain a splendid illuminated
clock, with four dials, each 9 feet in diameter, and which,
besides striking the hours and quarters, will ring a chime
every hour on fifteen small musical bells, that will be placed
in the roof of the tower. The centre of the clock face will
be 95 feet above the street, and the total height of the tower
about 135 feet.- It is to be observed that the building now
in progress will leave nearly half the town hall reserve un-
occupied, the depth of the ground being 132 feet, and the
depth of the building only 70 feet, so that'if at any future
27
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


time it should be decided to erect a spacious public hall,
there will be a site available for the purpose of 120 feet by
70 feet.”
The first assessment was in 1856, and showed
that there were then 267 tenements within the
municipality, and 297 vacant lots, the whole
valued at £40,061. The receipts from all sources
for the financial year ending 30th September,
1874, amounted to ,£24,299 12s. iod., and the
expenditure t0£28,242 6s. id. The total revenue
received since the proclamation of the munici-
pality to the 30th September, 1874, amounts to
£330,785 12s. nd.,and the total expenditure
to £375>360 ios. 2d,
TOWN OF BALLARAT EAST.
Ballarat East was proclaimed a municipality
on the sth May, 1857, and on the Ist June 1857,
the first council was elected, consisting of Messrs,
Daniel Sweeney, John Gibbs, William McCrea,
Richard Belford, William Bramwell Robinson,
William Bickham Rodier, and Geo. Clendinning,
M.D. Mr. Rodier was chosen chairman, and
Mr. John Campbell was appointed town clerk.
The municipality became a borough in October,
1863. Following Mr. Rodier as chairman of
the municipality there were Messrs. Richard
28
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


Belford, 1858 ; William Scott, 1859 ; George
Clendinning, M.D., i 860; William Scott, 1861 ;
Charles Dyte, 1862; and Frederick Young, 1863.
As in Ballarat West, so here, the last chairman
became the first mayor of the borough. His
successors have been respectively Messrs. John
Fussell, 1864; George Clendinning, M.D., 1865;
Emanuel Steinfeld, 1866 to 1869 ; and Edward
Eastwood, 1870. Then the borough was pro-
claimed a town, and the mayors have been Messrs.
J. Ivey, 1872 ; J. K. Baird, 1873; H. Josephs,
1874 ; J. Russell, 1875.
PRESENT COUNCIL.
James Long, Mayor. Councillors William Scott, James
Russell, John James, James Long, David Turpie, William
Dunn, O. E. Edwards, William Robertson.
OFFICERS.
Town Clerk —W. Q. Pinnell; Town Surveyor—R. C.
Young; Rate Collector—Alexander Fraser; Revenue Officer
and Dog Inspector —John C. Shepherd ; Inspector of Nui-
sances —Sergeant Lamer; Health Officer—George Clen-
dinning, M.D. ; Office Assistant—J. B. Phillips.
The Council meets on alternate Fridays, at 7. p.m., in
the Council Chambers, Town Hall.
MAGISTRATES.
W. H. Gaunt, P.M.; I. J. Jones, R. F. Hudson, M.D.;
David Fitzpatrick, Thomas Coghlan, J. H Williams, Thomas
Cowan, John Permewan, Henry R. Caselli, William Scott,
Hy. Josephs, Jas. Baker, T. H. Budden, G. S. C. Butler, M.D.
29
The Visitor' s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


George Clendinning, M.D.; J. A. Doane, John Fussell, Robt.
Lewis, James McDovvall, N. R. Macleod, W, B. Ochiltree,
James Oddie, W. C. Smith, A. Anderson, Fred. M. Claxton,
John W. Gray, Henry Costin, P. L. S. Chauncy, J. W. King,
Edmund Elliget, John Victor. Clerk of Petty Sessions—
J. S. Cooper.
The municipal council held its meetings in
several rented houses during the earlier years of
its existence, but in 1861 the present town hall
was built by Messrs, Irving, Glover, and Co. for
the sum of £2877 ns. 6d., Mr. C. D. Cuthbert
being the architect. The borough includes an
area of 4320 acres, and has ratable property
valued at ,£58,387 for the year ending 30th
November, 1875.
BOROUGH OF SEBASTOPOL,
The borough of Sebastopol was proclaimed
in October, 1864, and the first election of
councillors took place on the 12th December,
1864, when Messrs. F. F. Beverin, Thomas
Dickinson, John Edwards, Richd. Miles, Ellis
Richards, John C. Rowlands, Geo. C. Robinson,
Geo. Tait, and Isaac Vickers were elected.
Mr. John Wall, formerly of the Local Court and
a mining surveyor, was appointed town clerk
and surveyor, and now holds those offices. The
mayors of the borough have been Messrs.
30
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.


Beverin, 1865-6; Vickers, 1867; Dickinson,
1868; Whittaker, 1869; Edwards, 1870; T.
Dickinson, jB7l ; J. Morris, 1872; T. Bray,
1873; N. Kent, 1874; P. Alroe, 1875.
PRESENT COUNCIL.
James Barrie, Mayor. Councillors P. Alroe, D. Hughes,
J. Morris, J. H. Ellsworth, T. Dickinson, J. W, Storey,
H. G. Williams, John Morgan.
OFFICERS.
Town Clerk —John Wall; Collector —N. Kent; Auditors
—C. Klug and M. Franklin ; Inspector—G. Davidson.
The Council meets every alternate Thursday, at 6 p.m.,
at the Town Hall.
MAGISTRATES.
W. H. Gaunt, P.M. ; T. Bray, N. Kent, P. Alroe,
Petty Sessions held every Thursday, at the Town Hall.
Clerk of Court and Electoral Registrar—John Wall.
James Curtis, Printer, Armstrong Street, Ballarat.
31
The Visitor s Guide-Book to Ballarat.










