

The
Woolinappers
By
Tilly Aston


The Library is open to Members at
each meeting. Members may keep
books one month. If kept longer the
borrower is expected to contribute a
silver coin to the Library Fund.






THE WOOLINAPPERS
OR,
SOME TALES FROM THE BY-WAYS
OF METHODISM
BY
TILLY ASTON
MELBOURNE :
Spectator Publishing Co. Pty. Ltd.,
Post Office Place.
1905.




PREFATORY NOTE.
Dear Miss Aston.
Some two months ago, when you asked my opinion
regarding the publication, in a collected form, of some
short stories you had contributed to “The Spectator,”
I readily undertook to revise your proofs, and to write
a short preface for the little volume. Unhappily I was
prostrated by a severe illness immediately afterwards,
from which I have not yet recovered, and am unable
to carry out that critical examination which you desired.
But a rather hurried reading of the papers left on my
mind the impression that you had, to a certain extent,
struck new ground in this department of Australian
fiction.
It has been one of my pleasures to delve pretty
freely in every phase of Australian literature, and I
have more than once expressed pretty strongly my
regret that the short story which has achieved popularity
has generally been based on the “Bulletin” model.
And that model is just the antithesis of what is wanted
for the home circle. I need not specify particular


books or individual writers, but the editions that go off
by their thousands—that have become practically
typical Australian stories—are, as a rule, shaped on a
low moral standard; the incidents arise out of the
meanest motives; shameless dishonesty and mendacity
are commended as “ smartness and "generally the
seamy side of our colonial life is prominently dis-
played.
It is refreshing, after so much of this coarser aspect
of our humanity to find a few simple episodes of life
told without exaggeration, yet with a sufficiency of
detail and a naturalness of motive to make them in-
teresting. The sayings and doings of the Methodist
contingent of the primitive hamlet of Woolinap may
contain nothing but what comes before us all in fol-
lowing the conventional round of our existence. But
it is pleasant to rest by the way and consider the
applicability of some of the stories to ourselves, and
how we should have acted under the given circum-
stances. A little mild introspection is better for our
character than the increased pulse from a perusal of
some daring piece of sensationalism, or some glaring
prevarication of the possibilities.
Personally, I have a great liking for stories touch-
ing on variations in the current forms of religious
belief. Ido not mean theological discussions under
the guise of fiction, such as “ Robert Elsmere,” or
“ John Ward, Preacher,” but stories dealing with the
characters of people that have been formed under some
special scheme of faith. The best illustration I can


call to mind will be found in the charming short
stories of Mary E. Wilkins, who maintains, through-
out a very long series, an absolute distinctiveness
and individuality in her puppets, while showing the
underlying force of the old New England puritanism,
stamping its imprint, not only on man, woman and
child, but upon everything that goes to make up the
world of action in which the scenes are set.
I believe there are phases of Methodism that
specially lend themselves to an artistic framework for
fiction, and I trust that you may be spared to work out
some of its problems, as a creator of character, to
your own satisfaction and that of your readers.
I trust that your little volume will meet with a
generous reception, and may be only the prelude to
several.
Yours faithfully,
HENRY GYLES TURNER.
St. Kilda, 18th November, 1905.




NOTE FROM THE AUTHORESS.
I desire to tender my thanks to The Spectator
Publishing Company, for their kindness in allowing
me to reprint these tales in book form ; also to Mr.
Nelson Rudduck and many others who have made
this enterprise possible by ordering a number of
copies beforehand. lam likewise deeply indebted to
Mr. Henry Gyles Turner for the introductory letter
which appears in this volume. The high esteem in
which that gentleman’s literary insight is held makes
an introduction from him invaluable to a compara-
tively obscure writer like myself, and I trust ever to
produce work that shall not shame his kindness on
this occasion.
This little volume is not an ambitious effort, but
perhaps there may be some of my readers who will find
an echo of old times in their hearts as they peruse the
outpouring of mine, who will recall the pleasures, pains,
squabbles and reconciliations of the days when they
lived in a Woolinap. Everything here written has
been conceived in a kindly spirit, and" in that spirit I
beg my readers to make the acquaintance of “ The
Woolinappers.”
TILLY ASTON.
6 Williams Road, Moonee Ponds.


CONTENTS.
REFORMING THE CHURCH MUSIC ... ... I
A COMET APPEARS ... ... ... ... II
RENDER TO CAESAR ... ... ... ... IQ
THE PENITENT ... ... ... ... 27
A SUNDAY SCHOOL EPISODE ... ... ... 36
RIPENED FRUITS ... ... ... ... 44
THE GOLDEN WEDDING ... ... ... 52
THE BLUE RIBBONERS ... ... ... 6l
THE STUDENT ... ... ... ... 70
THE BULGONG TEA MEETING ... ... ... 8 1
SHADOWS ... ... ... ... ... 89
CHANGES ... ... ... ... ... 98


THE WOOLINAPPERS.
CHAPTER I.—“ Reforming the Church Music.”
BY TILLY ASTON.
lii the little town of Woolinap there were two churches
—the Roman Catholic and the Methodist. They did
not quite meet the requirements of the district, for Dave
MeAndrew wanted a Presbyterian Church, and drove
fourteen miles each Sunday rather than patronise the
Methodist, which was a mile from his door. Jack Daw-
son, again, was Anglican, and went nowhere, since he
could not have a service according to the prayer-book;
and Wilky Dane longed ardently for a Congregational
establishment. His difficulty, however, was that he
would have to build the edifice, pay the minister, lead
the choir, and act as sole trustee; so his desire was not
likely to become a reality.
So the Methodist chapel was left to serve the spiritual
needs of the Protestants, and accomplished that work
fairly well ; and of course the Rev. Father O'Brien saw
that it did not interfere with his flock. The little con-
gregation consisted of a strange assortment as far as
nationality and temperament are concerned; there was
Joe Dunn, a fiery, quarrelsome, enthusiastic Irishman,
who was often obliged to rely upon the tact of his wife to


get him out of his church scrapes; then came Jacob
Trenewy, a Cornishman of the stiff-backed order, with a
decided preference for revival services, and a keen sense
of what is due to leading church officers. The next in
importance and in character, a reflection of the other
two, was Dick Hilton, or Yorky Dick, as he was called,
a man who followed the exciting and useful occupation
of horse-breaking for all the farmers round. The only
other man worth mentioning was the jovial, soft-hearted
store-keeper, Mr. Rigbert, who made it a rule never to
dispute what the other three agreed to do. These four
men practically ran the Methodist church in Woolinap,
and woe betide the adventurous spirit that should dare to
poke a nose in amongst their affairs.
Now, it happened that, after much consideration, and
after a judicial weighing of the pros and cons, Wilky
Dane had approached Mr. Trenewy with a view to joining
the class meeting, of which the latter was leader. He,
Wilky Dane, said that he was losing his pleasure in
spiritual feasts through the lack of communion with
fellow Christians, that the Methodists differed from the
Independents more in matters of church government than
in doctrine, that he had determined to take up Christian
work, and that his first step was to unite himself with the
one Christian body in the town. At that time Wilky
had been in Woolinap only a few months, but was quite
a settled man in his little tailor’s shop.
Jacob had said that he would be very glad to have such
a fellow-worker in the Church, that the harvest was great
and the reapers few; he had also named the hour of his
class, and invited Wilky to attend. At the first meeting


of the class the leader announced that the Lord had put
it into the heart of their brother to throw in his lot with
God’s people in this Zion, and that he knew they would
all welcome the newcomer in the name of Christ. So
Wilky Dane started his career in the cause of Methodism
at Woolinap; and pray, good Methodist, take the hint!
For, had any other denomination been first on the field,
the Methodists might not have won this resourceful,
steady-minded, industrious worker. Many a good
Methodist has been gathered in in this way, and we trust
that many more may be in the days that are still
unwritten. /
Mr. Dane was a very different type of man from his
co-workers; he was an American, but had lost much of
his Yankee assertiveness during his twenty years’ resi-
dence in various parts of this State, but he was of a
masterful temperament, not altogether overbearing, and
one who had the ability to get his own way withouOltirt-
ing other people. He had, above all, that originality of
mind which is required to maintain his ascendancy when
he had got it. He had received a much better education
than the four men described above, and, although God
can use even babes for His glory, yet a Paul, learned in
all the learning of his age, was the greatest power, after
Christ, that Christendom has ever seen.
When the American had joined the Methodists, gen-
eral delight had been the note; one dissenter had spoken,
however, and she was Mrs. Trenewy. “Take my word,
Jacob, there won’t be much good come of it! That man
will soon turn us all out, and take the managing of the


whole concern himself!” But Jacob didn’t believe it,
and said so; and his wife, being a true Paulian woman,
held her peace, and croaked no more.
And Mr. Dane soon began to be useful; he joined
the choir, of which Yorky Dick was conductor and sole
tenor; he lent some new anthems, and persuaded Dick to
try a few new hymns, in addition to the regular twenty-
five, which constituted the repertoire of the choir. His
next idea was to get a new organ; and certainly a new
one was needed, for the little portable “Alexander,”
that had done duty for the last five years, was squeaky in
the bellows, and croaky in the reeds. It was simply
exhausting to play upon it ; unless the bellows were
worked rapidly the music came forth in gasps and grunts
of a most diverting description; and Miss Sarah Trenewy,
who officiated as honorary organist, would have found
the treadmill an easy task, had she been so unfortunate
as to be set to it.
The singing at the services was something like this;
the tune is “Stella,” and the words “Now I have Found,”
and please remember that the squeaks concur with the
words, or rather syllables, excepting where there are two
squeaks to a syllable that has to be sustained
Now I have found the ground wherein —
Squeak, squeak, squeak, squeak, squeak, squeak, squeak
and so on, and right through all the verses, and at the
slowest rate possible.


Yorky Dick did not mind the rhythmic interruption
of the singing, but Wilky Dane did, hence his proposition
to get a new organ.
So the matter was broached to the two trustees*
Dunn and Trenewy, and they declared that it couldn tbe
done. No money was available, the interest on building
loan was nearly due, and, in short, there was to be no
new organ! The old one had done so long ; let it do a
little longer! and so forth. But everybody knows in
what light the non-musical portion of a church regards
the demands of the other side.
The choir-master agreed with the trustees, while the
choir took Mr. Dane’s view; the American himself said
very little, but had Mr. Trenewy seen his look when the
decision of the trustees was communicated to him, he
would have known that the Methodists were going to
have a new organ, and that very soon.
On the following Sunday the harmonium behaved
worse than ever; in addition to the squeak of the bellows
and the bronchial croak in the reeds, one of the notes (the
lower B flat), emitted a caw like a great grand-father
crow, every time the treadle was worked; so there was
now a rhythmic and discordant “Caw, caw,” accom-
panying the “Squeak, squeak,” as the song of praise pro-
ceeded. Sarah looked mightily worried as she battled
away at her tread-mill, and her face grew hotter and
redder every hymn. Outside the chapel after the service,
Yorky Dick was greeted with the question, “What’s up
with the choir this morning? Some of ’em were off the
track, weren’t they?” “Very likely, when they never


come to practiseJ” There was a point in this remark,
for Mrs. Lade was standing by, and she always absented
herself from this interesting gathering. “Wasn’t it the
organ?” suggested another, “I was hearing that the choir
want a new one!” “The choir is always wanting some-
thing,” said Trenewy. “And sure, they’re not likely to
get it,” added Joe Dunn; “and if it comes to a point,
they could sing without an instrument, just as they did
before organs were invinted.” Mr. Dane suggested that
that was a very long time ago, since Jubal was the father
of such as handle the harp and organ, and that this
notable musician is mentioned early in the book of
Genesis. The American could be sarcastic when he
liked, and sarcasm was a weapon against which Joe Dunn
had no chance whatever; he did not understand it,
although he was an Irishman, and consequently a reputed
wit.
Things went on in this fashion for a few weeks, and
each Sunday the harmonium grew more intolerable to
that section of the congregation that had made up its mind
for a new one; then Wilky held a little party at his
house, to which he invited the choir, but not its con-
ductor, since Dick was on the trustee side; he also called
in a few of the advanced thinkers of the general body,
and in camera they discussed the situation. It was cer-
tain that the proper people, the stewards and the trustees,
would not take the matter up; that unless someone else
did so, the service must be marred for many a day to
come by the groanings of the tortured harmonium; and
finally, it was agreed that the choir should see to it
themselves, and if necessary, raise the required money.


But how ? That was the question! The giving capacity
of most Methodist congregations is pretty well taxed, and
the presenting of a fresh object for beneficence often with-
draws from the sustenance of others; and this was as well
known to Wilky as to the trustees themselves, therefore
he offered another suggestion. “I vote for getting some-
thing out of the people who do not come to church, and
I think I know how, too, if you will just leave it in my
hands for a week or two! I suppose the trustees won t
mind accepting the organ when we have got it? Just
leave it to me for a week or two, and I’ll see what can
be done.”
So it was agreed, and a fortnight later the town of
Woolinap was placarded in every available quarter with
this innocent announcement in red letters on a white
ground: —-
“COME TO THE SHIRE HALL ON THURSDAY
NIGHT,
TO HEAR TWO SWEET SINGERS SING THE OLD
SONGS!
THE SINGERS ARE NAMELESS TILL THEY
appear.
IRISH SONGS A SPECIALITY!”
This placard was very vague, as it was intended to
be, and naturally drew forth much comment. Every-
body wondered who had put it up, and who the singers
were; everybody wanted to know; everybody liked old
songs; everybody thought he would go; and so it came
about that the Shire Hall was crowded, inside and out-


side, more for curiosity than for a love of music and the
old songs. The piano was open—a rumor said it had
been tuned—and the audience waited impatiently to
discover the identity of the performers; most suspected a
trick. Then, at five minutes past eight, the door leading
from the anteroom on to the stage opened, and no less
a person than Wilky Dane appeared. A roar of derision
and vexation arose from the hall, and a hiss came from
the back seats. Wilky stepped forward, and was
greeted with an apple thrown by a member of the
audience. “Thanks,” he said, coolly, as he caught it,
and put it into his coat pocket; “and now, friends, you
think yourselves sold, don’t you? Well, I know you
are not! But wait until I explain! It was I who put
up those placards; it was I who booked this hall; I also
got the piano tuned, and I am going to see that you get
your money’s worth. All of you know that I met some
friends at the coach to-day. They are your entertainers,
and my cousins, ladies and gentlemen, Miss Nelly Dane
and Mr. Prescott Dane, both of whom are known and
welcome with Melbourne audiences! I have no fear in
leaving your pacification to them, and I trust you may
enjoy the concert as well as I shall enjoy the takings.”
The Methodists present thought that Wilky Dane
had gone mad ; but he hadn’t. The singers kept the
audience in a good humor for the next two hours, with
song after song of the old school, reaching all hearts with
the sweet, sweet memory-laden tunes, and bringing back
the pure emotions of childhood and youth with the simple
and tender words of the long ago


There was no dissatisfaction when the programme
ended: Willey in particular was jubilant, for he had in
his pocket fourteen pounds, and could hardly forbear
from dancing his journey home along the street. 'I
have plundered the Philistines, he cried: “I have
extracted from the O ’Dwyers and Maloneys, and all
without their knowing it, a goodly number of shilling’3
towards the Methodist Church organ!” “But,” pro-
tested his cousin Nelly, “Do you think you ought to have
got the people there without telling them to what pur-
pose the money should be put?” “I guess I do! They
didn’t come to help me, or the Church; they came for
curiosity and a concert, and they have gratified the one
and enjoyed the other. Now we shall have the organ;
only six pounds more to get, and that I can raise easily
with the help of the choir!”
Next day Wilky went to see Yorky Dick. “What
in the name of all that’s good were you up to last night ?”
said the choir-master. “Were you off your head, man?”
“Not quite, but very nearly; I was doing a little organ-
building, Dickie.” Dick looked incredulous. “I have
got fourteen pounds towards it!” Dick looked more
incredulous. Then Wilky showed him the money.
“Fourteen pounds? Why, man, that is nearly enough to
buy one! We could almost afford to have one with
stops.” “Yes, Dick, and my cousin knows where we
can get a good one for twenty pounds! Will you give us
a hand to get the rest?” Mr. Hilton looked doubtful,
but at last he said, “What about Dunn and Trenewy?”
“Oh, they’ll be all right when we hand over the new in-
strument, bought and paid for!”


The choir was hilarious and the congregation glad,
so the balance of the money was made up in no time.
Jacob Trenewy alone objected, for he resented the irregu-
lar mode of procedure by which he had been overruled, he,
the first trustee and steward, and class-leader; so he
retired from his stewardship as a protest, and withdrew
his daughter from her post as organist, which last was a
great shame, now that she might have got a little pleasure
out of her work. But time cures all such vexations, and
after a period of sulks the Cornishman resumed his place
as class-leader, at the entreaty of Wilky. It was not,
however, till he acknowledged that the organ was “pretty
fair, ’ ’ that Sarah realised that her father was bending to
the inevitable.


CHAPTER II.
A Comet Appears.
Just about the time the new organ had been placed
in the Wesleyan chapel at Woolinap, Mr. Rigbert found
that his business was becoming too much for him to
manage single-handed, and that he must get assistance
from some quarter. Hitherto his wife had taken her
place in the store on busy days, but now that her family
numbered four, all restless, hungry and hearty, the poor
woman declared that she could no longer cope with the
work in both home and business. So a council was held
by the couple, and it was agreed to engage a shop assist-
ant. An advertisement was sent to “The Spectator,’ in
which fair inducements were offered to any young grocer,
but a Methodist preferred.
Mr. Rigbert was a jolly old soul, and for a whole
week he plagued and pleased his girl acquaintances by
telling them that he was bringing up from Melbourne a
fine young man for one of them, and that next Sunday
they must all put on their anniversary dresses, and look
their very best. Of course, they did not take any notice
of his teasing; nevertheless, these same young ladies
looked slyly towards the storekeeper’s pew when they
came into service on the next Sunday morning.
Alice Hilton, daughter of Yorky Dick, was perhaps
the prettiest girl among them, and she had soft yellow
hair, pink cheeks, and roguish, blue eyes. Now, Alice
sang in the choir, ably backed up, if not overwhelmed,


by the large and predominating voices of the Mesdanies
King and Lade; there were also in the choir several very
young misses, but they must be regarded as too simple
and innocent to have any interest in the advent of a
fresh young man. None of the other young women were
in the choir, and since Sarah Trenewy had resigned from
the organ, Jack Rigbert, a boy of fifteen, had taken her
place. So Alice had the best opportunity to see and be
seen, from her place in the choir beside the little pulpit.
She cast her eyes towards the Rigbert pew as soon as she
was fairly seated, and there he was, a tall youth, in a
neat townified suit, a glossed shirt front (glossed shirts
were unknown in Woolinap), and the loveliest blue silk
tie.
The young man had other advantages, too, in the
shape of a fine, intellectual face and a set of well-formed
features; the reader of character, however, would have
noticed a cynical curve of the upper lip, and a rather
disconcerting challenge in the eye.
He took note of everything and everybody in the
church, and joined heartily in the singing; and Yorky
Dick smiled pleasantly in anticipation of an addition to
his faithful brigade.
And when the service was over, the people crowded
round the stranger, and shook him warmly by the hand;
only the girls stood off, giggling shyly. Then Mr. Rig-
bert turned, and saw pretty Alice standing by, and so
sweet she looked that he at once drew her forward and
introduced her. “Mr. Bridge, this is Miss Hilton, the
daughter of our choirmaster, and one of our best lady


singers ! Of course, you will join the choir, and then you
will soon get to know each other!” Mr. Bridge bowed,
and Alice tried to do the same; but she was more accus-
tomed to hand-shaking, and managed the bow rather
awkwardly; still she had triumphed, and w,g_s the envy
of all the girls, not one of whom had been presented to
the newcomer.
That evening the young man was invited to take tea
with the Hiltons, and the acquaintance between Alice
and himself was considerably matured. He was pretty
well cross-questioned by Dick as to what church work
he had been doing, whether he was a local preacher or
a Sunday-school teacher, or had he been in the choir;
did he belong to a class, and so on; and Alice assisted her
mother to get the tea in style, with the best china and
Alice’s own d’oyleys, at the same time making sheep’s
eyes at Mr. Bridge whenever a suitable opportunity of-
fered itself.
After tea Mrs. Hilton sent her daughter off to the
front room (otherwise the parlour) to have some singing,
while she did the washing up; and there Mr. Bridge
helped the family to sing hymns until it was time to go
to church. And Alice walked to the sanctuary beside the
new young man, and bore herself proudly beneath the
quizzing of the other girls as they stood about the gate,
waiting for the arrival of the minister, who was to take
the service.
_ lam afraid that his sermon did Alice very little good,
for she did not hear it. She was thinking of another
matter altogether, and perhaps she may be excused when


it is remembered that she was but twenty, and the
prettiest girl in Woolinap.
But the proceedings of that Sunday were repeated
upon the next, and, in fact, upon every Sunday during
the three months that followed; and young Jimmy Dunn
began to look very unhappy indeed, because he had been
for some time trying to bring his courage up to the point
of walking home with Alice. He had even thought of
joining the choir because she went to the Friday night
practice; but without any voice, and without any ear to
keep him from wandering into the deeps of bass when
he should be upon the heights of the treble, he felt that
this scheme might end in ignominy, and the scorn of her
whom he wished to conciliate.
But Mr. Bridge stuck to his advantage, and regu-
larly attended Alice home after choir practice. There
was, however, one thing that displeased Alice, and that
was the fact that her knight would never stay to a prayer-
meeting. In the church at Woolinap, staying to a
prayer-meeting was one of the signs of grace, and Yorky
Dick did not much relish the idea of his girl keeping com-
pany with a young man who could not enjoy a good
rowdy prayer-meeting. But. just about that time an-
other problem began to occupy the minds of all the
Wesleyan community, and Dick let Alice’s affairs slip
behind him a little in order to try his skill in solving the
other.
Five or six miles from Woolinap had sprung up an-
other township, around some payable mines that had
been discovered there some years before. This town had


a flourishing trade, a market and a bank, and, above all,
a weekly paper. It was in connection with this paper
that the annoyance of the Wesleyans had arisen.
There began to appear in its columns every week a
short article under the heading, “Doings in Zion, in
which every trifling detail of the chapel’s inner conduct
was held up to view, all the petty squabbles, all the small
gossip, the advent of a top hat on the head of the young
and aspiring school-master, and everything else upon
which a sarcasm could be pasted, or a witticism hung.
The author of these articles was clever, and generally
amused all but those upon whom he was for the moment
practising. It makes all the difference, though, if your
own particular style of walk, dress, or speech, is cun-
ningly analysed and aptly described, and it is almost
certain that you will not like it quite so well as when it
is someone else’s.
So the annoyance went on, not without affording
some delight to the juniors; but the older folk did not
appreciate the compliments paid them, and were very
busy trying to find out the culprit author. One week
it would be an account of Dick’s method of conducting
the choir; another it would be a description of a very
lively prayer-meeting, given from the stand-point of one
who does not understand the spiritual significance of the
religious emotions; again it would be a covert reference
to some new courtship looming in the near future.
It must be one of their own people, for the contri-
butor to the columns of “The Flag” knew altogether too
much for an outsider.


The school-master was suspected, and taxed with the
perpetration of the scourge; but he quickly pointed out
bow sharply he had been smitten himself, and that it
was beyond reason for a man to hold himself up to ridi-
cule. Then Wilky Dane was accused, but he denied all
knowledge of the matter in such a fashion, and looked so
formidable at the same time, that his accusers retired in
confusion. All efforts to find the culprit proved equally
abortive, and the cutting, probing and ridiculing went
on in “The Flag.”
That very week in which Wilky had been accused,
the satirist politely narrated how a little accident had
occurred to an unmentionable portion of a certain gentle-
man’s costume, when the gentleman was getting out of
his buggy at a certain church door, on the previous Sun-
day morning; and that, before the service could proceed,
the gentleman had gone into retirement with a needle and
thread. The writer sorrowfully pointed out that such
an accident could not have occurred had those buttons
been sewn on by a Methodist tailor, and with Methodist
thread, and he further expressed a hope that the said
gentleman preacher would in fixture drive out to W. and
get his nether buttons put on by the “One Tailor” in the
shire.
For six long months did the hearts of Yorky Dick
and Joe Dunn burn under such inflictions; and then a
report went round the town that Mr. Rigbert’s assistant
was going to leave. He had got a better situation in
Melbourne, and although he had been very happy among
his friends in the country, his advancement necessitated


his leaving Woolinap. So the church people gave him
a send-off social, and expressed keen regret that circum-
stances were about to rob them of such a fine young man,
and he bore it all complacently, and looked as much
pleased with himself as sorry for leaving them.
With the best of good wishes, he departed by the
coach next morning, and Alice Hilton nearly broke her
little heart as she heard the rumble of the wheels die
away in the distance.
That evening, however, there was another kind of
excitement in the house of Yorky Dick. When the
family was just finishing its late tea, there came a sharp
rap at the kitchen door, followed immediately by the
appearance of Wilky Dane’s broad shoulders. “Dick,
I say, here’s a little bit of news for you! I got this letter
at the post to-night. It’s from that scamp Bridge!”
Alice looked up with startled eyes, and asked, “What
is it, father?” “Um ! I see ! So it was that young man,
was it? The scamp, to be coming here, and holding up
his elders and betters in a public paper to be the
laughing-stock of a whole district!” “What is it,
father?” Alice again pleaded. “Read that, my girl!”
It was a neat note from Mr. Bridge, stating that it
might be interesting to Mr. Dane and his friends to learn
that he had been the author of the articles so much dis-
cussed in Woolinap of late, and that he hoped they would
all enjoy the discovery of his identity as much as he had
enjoyed their bewilderment.
Alice dropped the letter, and ran to her bedroom,
where she eased her indignant heart with a few more


tears; then she came out again and said, “Father, I must
have had a share in that newspaper business, for he used
to be always asking me questions, and I never supposed
that he wanted to know for any other reason than kindly
interest in our mutual friends! I’ll never have any-
thing to do with another boy from Melbourne ! ’ ’
And she kept her word, for the following Sunday
evening, when Jimmy Dunn said good-night to her, she
put out her hand, and was so gracious, that he got courage
to walk with her to her gate, and, having tasted bliss, he
was not satisfied until he had secured for himself the full
draught. By-and-bye the circuit funds were augmented
by the amount of a marriage fee, and Yorky Dick was
jubilant because his girl had chosen to have a steady
young chap who wasn’t ashamed to go to Sunday-school,
nor to raise his voice in a prayer-meeting.
Mr. Bridge is now employed on one of our weekly
papers, and if he shows as much ability in his work as he
did when he parodied the Woolinap Methodists, he
should be a valuable addition to the staff of that publica-
tion.


CHAPTER III.
“Render to Caesar.”
When Mr. Trenewy had found himself obliged to
resign from his post as steward because the rest of the
people would no longer put up with a broken-down,
squeaky harmonium, his place had, of course, to be filled.
Mr. Wilky Dane was named for the honorable position,
and with due modesty assumed his new duties. He first
of all asked innumerable questions of Joe Dunn concern-
ing the trust and other affairs; but he expressed no
opinions, for Jacob was still a trustee, although he never
appeared in that capacity just now. But it soon became
apparent to the American that the finances of the church
were in a bad way, and that unless something startling
were done the cause of God in this particular place must
always be dragged down by a debt that was too heavy
for the people, and too large for their Christian credit.
At last Wilky determined to offer his assistance to the
remaining active trustee, and, going to Dunn’s house
one evening, he said, “Joe, my boy, don’t you think that
between us we could make a stir, and dispense with some
of that debt ? Here we are, paying away twelve pounds
a year in interest alone, half of our Sunday morning col-
lections ! Then we have to meet our share of the circuit
expenses, and our contributions to all the general funds
as well; and we have nothing left to extend our work,
or to do properly what we have already in hand. Now,
I’m not a trustee, but since Jacob holds off, I know you


are practically left to fight the debt alone. Don’t you
think we could do something together?”
“What now, Wilky ? Would you be holding another
concert ? I fear it wouldn’t take so well as last time.”
“Bah, no! A concert would only bring in enough to
pay the interest for another year! I want to see the
debt wiped out, so that we can start another.”
“And what’s your notion?” asked Joe doubtfully.
“Well,” replied the other, “I think the people ought
to be told exactly what the position is, first of all; hardly
anybody but the stewards and trustees know that things
are so bad! Then I could suggest ever so many ways of
raising a little, and by degrees, say, by this time next
year, we might be owing only one hundred pounds instead
of two hundred; and that would mean that we pay only
half the present interest.”
“But,” protested Joe, “they put us into office to
manage these affairs for them, and I doubt whether
they’d like us to throw them back upon their shoulders!”
“Tut, man, you are not going to make up the interest
yourself, are you? Well, then, since you have no better
plan, why not give mine a trial?”
So the usual thing happened; Wilky got his own
way, and a special meeting of the congregation was called
for the following Wednesday, to consider the serious
financial position of the church.
There was a good deal of surmise as to what had
happened to occasion such a meeting, and most thought
that the bank had threatened to close upon them, and


that their pretty little chapel was about to be seized for
debt. At this meeting, to which most of the families
came or sent representatives, Joe informed the people
that the interest would be due in a month; that they
were five pounds short, and that it had been thought
advisable to make a direct and special appeal. Then he
called upon Mr. Dane to state the case more fully, and
to offer a few hints as to the ways of raising the money.
Wilky ought to have been a preacher, but he always
declared that he had not been called to that work. On
this occasion, however, he rose, with conviction in nis
heart and a determination to force it upon the hearts of
others.
"My friends,” he began, “it seems to me that as a
church we should go further than meeting our interest
annually; that plan suits the lender, but it is not so
good for us, the borrowers! We should not be contented
to go on year after year owing a man, or a bank either, a
sum which is very nearly the full value of all we as a
Christian community possess. The Holy Book says,
‘Owe no man anything, but to love one another ; and it
appears to me that when Paul wrote that he meant it to
apply to churches as well as to individuals. While we
have this debt dragging us down we shall not prosper; we
shall never be able to build a Sunday-school; to start a
library; to give our help and countenance to missions at
home and abroad; while we keep this debt we are blunt-
ing our moral faculties by thinking it is all well while the
interest is paid; we are bringing dishonor upon Christ, to
whom we profess to offer nothing but reverence and loving


service. We can do no good while we owe this money, so
let us set ourselves to the task of rendering to Csesar what
is Caesar’s; then we shall be better able to render to God
what is His! Let us raise the money to pay off the
bank, then we can use the interest for a better
purpose, and hold up our heads among God’s people!
But I should not have said so much if I had felt it im-
possible to do more than talk. There are but few of you
who can afford to give money right out, but you can offer
some self-sacrifice and some labor. I will reveal to such
of you as desire that this debt be paid my plans for getting
at least some of the money. First, I’ll ask my cousins
to come up and give another concert, if you like; then
two of the girls or ladies might undertake to call upon
any members of the congregation who would promise to
contribute a shilling or sixpence a week. There are some
of us who could afford that much every week out of God’s
bounty to us ! And some of you men who have carts, you
could go out into the ‘bush’ and cut an occasional load
of wood and bring it in, and sell it, for the good of the
church; some of the women might do some sewing, or
give the proceeds of their poultry yard! You laugh, do
you? Well, if God thinks the sparrow worthy of His
care, if Jesus thought the grass of the field worth using
as a lesson text; if every trifling act we do is noted and
counted to our credit or otherwise, we should not be above
small means when we, as a church, wish to clear our-
selves of a troublesome and not altogether creditable debt.
Let every man, woman, and child do his or her best, and
I believe that the smile of God will rest upon it, and that
our effort will be blest.”


There was a hum of voices and a rustle of clothes
when Wilky finished; then presently he rose and said,
“Who will give sixpence a week? Hands up!” Up
went one hand, then another. “Come on, don the bash-
ful. Four, five, six, and I make seven! Any more?”
Three more went up. That will bring in five shillings a
week ! Now then, who will bring me a load of wood, the
price to go to the trust funds?” Young Jimmy Dunn
cried, “I will!” And now promises of all kinds began
to come in. “I will give our pet sheep, if the butcher
will buy it!” (The sheep offered had taken to hutting,
so the donor was not absolutely disinterested in her
offer.) “I’ll give a pound of butter a week, whatever
it brings!” “And I’ll give a setting of Plymouth Rock
eggs, if anyone will buy!” Wilky undertook to become
general agent and salesman, and from that night, or
rather the day which followed it, his back yard, and a
tidy shed there, became the emporium for a miscellany of
goods and living things. He devoted all his leisure to
the task, and the people seconded him with all their
might.
It seems almost incredible, hut by the end of six
months they had paid the interest, and had also dis-
charged one hundred pounds off the principal. Wilky
was careful not to let the enthusiasm flag. The ladies
held sewing meetings, to which the mothers who were
poor needlewomen brought their children’s clothes to be
made. Sarah Trenewy, who by this time had come back
into the work, sold crocheted collars and hand-made lace,
so by the gradual accumulation the savings had mounted
up to one hundred pounds. The Woolinap Methodists


at that time were more like a small co-operative society
than anything else in the world, for they bought and sold
and bartered among themselves, all for the sake of the
trust fund.
The other hundred was not so easy to raise, but at
the end of eighteen months the church debt amounted to
a mere twenty pounds. Then the great efforts were
slackened, and Joe Dunn ceased to look worried.
The edifice around which so much devotion had cen-
tred was a neat weatherboard building in the gothic
style, and having seating accommodation for more than
required it generally. It was not the unsightly structure
often seen in the little country towns, but a pleasant
looking, well designed chapel, fronted by a pretty porch,
and having a small vestry attached to the rear. It was
painted a deep chocolate color, with a paler shade for the
windows and doors, and the yard surrounding it was laid
out with trees and shrubs. It had been erected about
five years prior to the purchase of the new organ, and
was therefore comparatively new when the people paid
off the building debt. But just at that supreme hour a
grievous calamity befell the little band of earnest workers,
severely testing their faith and endurance.
One day that summer, after about thirty-six hours
of the most unbearably sultry weather, a dark cloud
appeared upon the horizon, and the inhabitants of those
parts, looking away to the north-west, became aware that
something was about to happen. It looked like a dust-
storm, and Wilky Dane thought that whatever it was
there would be plenty of wind with it; so he advised his


neighbors to take in all light chattels and, to close up
their houses, unless they wished to have their roofs blown
off. Acting upon this opinion, he shut up his own
establishment, back and front, and then sat down to
watch.
Presently a roar as of many trains coming at express
speed was heard in the direction of the cloud, and within
a few minutes the cyclone leaped upon the town, howling
and tearing round the houses, lifting from its place every
movable object, hoisting up sheds by their roots (or foun-
dations), and laying low trees that had weathered many
a blustering wind of both winter and summer. The
tumult was tremendous ; every family looked after itself,
for none could hear or see his neighbor. There was a
rattling of iron r6ofs detached from their holdings, and a
crashing of falling chimneys or outhouses; and these
sounds, coupled with the roaring of the tempest, made
a din which could alone be likened to the roar of battle.
It did not last for long —twenty minutes, perhaps—
and then the wind dropped to a stiff breeze, and the folk
sallied forth to see who was killed and who was not.
Wilky Dane first came to the store, and there stood Mr.
Rigbert, dismayed and helpless, viewing the wreck of his
premises; for its roof, no paper-made affair, lay in a
jumbled, dinged heap on the opposite side of the road.
The American just stopped to offer a word of sympathy,
then hurried on to see how his beloved chapel had fared.
Round the corner he darted, and there before his
affectionate eyes lay the once admired house of prayer,
turned over upon its side, and now little more than a


gaping, ugly ruin. After all the struggle, all the work,
all the economy, all the self-denial, to have the result
knocked down in less than half an hour by a breath from
Heaven ! For a little while Wilky thought that God
had not treated His children in Woolinap fairly; the grief
was universal, for all had participated in the tremendous
effort made to clear the church of debt, working together
as one man. And now it was all thrown away! That
was what the people felt, but they did not know every-
thing, while God did.
The story of their devotion was told abroad when
their calamity became known; how they had fought and
thought to "Owe no man anything, but to love one
another ’; and this seemed a fitting opportunity to two
rich and generous Methodists to “help the poor that are
of the household of faith,” and so “render to God the
things that are God’s.” These men sent fifty pounds
apiece to start a new building, or rather to re-erect the
old one. The organ, although it got some damage, was
soon repaired by the ingenious Wilky; and at the end of
it all was a glorious re-opening, at which the songs of
praise to God for His mercies, even though made mani-
fest in the blight of a destroying gale, were triumphant
and sincere.


CHAPTER IV.
The Penitent.
Netty Fame and Gilbert Smith were both in service
at the farm of Mr. Me Andrew. Netty was an orphan
girl, without kindred of any kind as far as shei knew;
Gilbert had come from another district in search of
work the previous Spring, had been taken on by Mr.
McAndrew, and had made himself so useful that he
had been retained, even when the milking and harvest
seasons were over. Netty belonged to that class of
girls who are too big to be natty, and too strong to
be dainty; she was, however, a good servant, and there
were few kitchens in the vicinity of Woolinap like unto
hers, and few dairies sweeter than that in which
she did the daily scouring. Netty and Gilbert shared
the kitchen in the evenings, and it was only natural
that an attachment exceeding that of friends should
spring up between them. There was, however, a, matter
in the road that had not yet been adjusted, and it
lay in the question whether or not Gilbert would go
to Church. Netty belonged to the Methodists; Gil-
bert was not certain that he belonged to anything,
Netty heard vague suggestions about the unsuitability of
Gilbert’s companions in the town, and Gilbert protested
that they were all pleasant fellows; and so they stood
related at the time when our story begins.
One morning a hawker called at the farm with his
cart-load of drapery, and, although Mrs. McAndrew


did not generally buy from such traders, this time she
was beguiled into purchasing some damaged calico said
to have been ini the wreck of something or other. As
change she received a half-sovereign, and being called
away at the moment she laid it upon the mantelpiece
in the kitchen. Not until evening did she remember it
again, and on returning found it gone. Netty was in-
terrogated ; she had not seen it; search was made, but
the little gold coin had entirely disappeared- The
whole household was worried and disturbed about it;
Mrs. McAndrew had always found Netty honest, but
now a doubt crossed her mind, and Netty, who was
indeed honest, felt the indescribable blight of that
doubt.
Gilbert was out that evening, and knew nothing of
the search for the missing coin; and at breakfast next
morning he noticed that his fellow-servant was very
downcast. “What is it Net? What are you looking
so glum about this morning?” “You know, Gilbert,
there is a half-sovereign belonging to Mrs. Me. lost, and
I'm not quite sure that she doesn’t think I have taken
it.” Gilbert looked rather uncomfortable, and shifted
uneasily in his chair.
Netty looked up suddenly and saw his embarrass-
ment; and her own face went ghastly white, then,
flushed a deep crimson. She arose from her seat and
went around to her lover; she compelled him to look
her in the eyes. “‘Oh, Gil, give it back at once, and
I’ll try to make them think it was found, that you did
it for a joke!” “I can’t; I haven’t got it! I lost it


going across the paddocks to the town last night.’ There
was a painful silence between them, then Netty re-
turned to her seat with a burning spot upon each cheek,
while Gilbert brought his breakfast to a premature con-
clusion, and made ready to go out. As he was leaving
the kitchen he said, “Are you going to tell?” “No; I
shall not tell! I must think !”
That afternoon Netty went to her mistress, and
offered to repay the money from her future wages. “In-
deed,” exclaimed Mrs. Me Andrew, “So it was you!
Well, as far as repaying from your wages, you shall
not have a chance! You can go this very night; I
won’t have a thief in my house! And before you go,
I’ll have a look through your box and see that you
have nothing else of mine.” The poor girl clasped her
hands in agony of shame and horror, for she had not
expected such sharp retribution; she had expected a
lecture, a permanent breach of confidence between her-
self and her mistress, but had looked to have a chance
to repent and repay. For a moment she wavered in
her purpose, then her course was clear before her.
“Very well! But where can I go! I have no home
and no friends here who will take me in, and I have no
money!” Mrs- McAndrew softened a little. “There
are two weeks’ wages due to you ” “Which will
just pay the ten shillings due to you,” interposed
Netty in a quivering voice; “And you may stay till
Saturday. After that you must go, or take the con-
sequences of your wicked conduct!”
From the little bedroom which Netty occupied,
there came the sound of cruel, bitter weeping; she had


lightly assumed the intolerable burden of another’s
wrong-doing, without fully counting the cost, and she
now saw that it w'ould take all her heroism to go through
with it. When she at last grew calm enough to return
to the kitchen, she got the tea ready in a quiet,
mechanical way, and then put on her hat and jacket
for walking. Gilbert had been sent to a distant farm
with some cattle, and could not be home until to-morrow
night, and she was glad that he was absent; she
hardly knew what she could have said to> him, had he
been home for the evening meal, sitting at the same
table with her. Having fulfilled her duties, Netty went
to the dining-room hall to tell her mistress that she
was going out; then she made her way across the l pad-
docks towards the town, and along the gravelled road
to that portion of the street where Mr. Dane’s shop
stood, its door still wide open. The tailor looked up
as she nervously asked, “Is Mrs. Dane at home?”
“Yes, Netty; anything wrong?” The girl nodded. ‘I
would rather see Mrs. Dane, please!” “Go through,”
said Wilky, resuming his work; and he added to him-
self, “The poor girl looksi ill, at any rate, and in that
case the wife will be the best to hear her troubles!”
He listened to learn what had brought Netty to his
wife; he had a fatherly interest in her, for she was a
Sunday School scholar and a member of the church, and
Wilky was very jealous for the honour of the church.
All he could hear was the sound of sobbing, and his
wife saying, “Poor girl!” Presently the door between
the shop and the living room opened, and Mrs. Dane
came to her husband and said very quietly, “Wilky,


she is in disgrace and I want you to be very kind and
gentle with her! Will you, dear? It was just a
moment of weakness, I know; but she has taken half-
a-sovereign and cannot restore it!” There was a pause.
“Well, mother?” said Wilky, expecting further eluci-
dation. “She is willing to work and pay it back, but
Mrs. Mr Andrew has sacked her, and she has nowhere
to go ! Come in, and speak to her yourself!”
She passed back into the room, and Wilky followed.
“Wilky, dear, she has been ordered to leave the day
after to-morrow, and she is a lonely, homeless girl!
Couldn’t she come here till something else is arranged ?
Netty shrank back beneath the eyes of Mr- Dane,
covered her face with her hands, and wept afresh.
“Why, my poor girl, however did you come to forget
yourself so far?” Still Netty wept and writhed under
his words, but the wife pleaded, “She is very sorry,
Wilky! Just say she can come here for a. week or two,
till we see what else is to be done!” “Get along with
you, Clara ! You know 1 as well as I do that she can
come! You take the matter in hand, and I will stand
by you in whatever you do!” At this Netty dropped
on her knees before them, and the pair never forgot
the beseeching look of shame and anguish that she sent
up into their faces. Now, she had not positively said
that she had stolen the money, but she had left it to
be inferred by her agitated looks and words; and the
most intolerable drop in her cup was that these two
kindly, pitying hearts should believe her a thief. The
Danes remembered that look afterwards when the whole
story came out.


Wilky undertook to tell Jacob Trenewy of the affair,
and did so that night; and Jacob, the class loader, re-
commended that the girl should attend the class as
usual the following Wednesday; it would be a painful
experience, but Wilky and his wife agreed with the
Cornishman in thinking that it would strengthen the
penitent in all future conflicts with evil, and be the
most effective way of stifling malicious comment.
Of course the news of Netty’s misdemeanor soon went
round, and great surprise was expressed that Mrs.
Dane should receive her after she had so disgraced her-
self; and the worst of it was, so the people said, that
the thief was a church member. The grace of God
claimed by such should be sufficient to preserve from
stealing as well as other sins; but Wilky Dane re-
marked in answer to the critics, “The good overcoats
I made for you are sufficient to keep out the rain; but
if you leave them at home always, you’ll be some day
caught and get as wet as if you had no coat at all.
We often leave the grace of God at home, or, more
likely, at the chapel; and when we haven’t got it with
us, we can’t expect it to keep us safe in temptation.
I am afraid Netty left hers at chapel!”
Netty did not go to church that Sunday; she felt
unfit to face the looks of curiosity, reproach and pity that
would be cast at her; but she had consented to attend
the class-meeting on the Wednesday. After that she
would go right away to a place where she was not known,
and try to make a fresh start. There were times when
her conscience told her that she had not done well to
shield Gilbert, but now it Avas too late to turn back. She


was deeply wounded, too, by the apparent callousness
of her lover; he offered not even a silent sympathy, and
when bidden to drive her and her box to Dane’s, had not
spoken a word upon the journey, nor raised his eyes even
once to her white and sorrowful countenance.
Wednesday came, and Gilbert had not been near her;
but Mr. Trenewy had, and he most laudably “rubbed in
the magnitude of her offence, and advised her that, until
she acknowledged her sin before God’s people, she could
not take part with them in their acts of devotion. So
her suffering grew more and more intense as the hour for
the class-meeting approached. Mrs. Dane took the girl’s
hand in her arm, and walked with her into the chapel,
amidst the hush of curious glances from the score who
were present ; they took their seats in the front row, and
Sarah Trenewy, a girl of the kindest impulses, came and
sat beside her disgraced companion.
Jacob conducted the meeting, and opened with a hymn
and prayer; then he read Paul’s tender comments on the
erring Corinthian, who was not to be overcharged, lest
he be “Swallowed up with overmuch sorrow.” “And
now, friends,” said the leader, “we shall have a few
experience testimonies!” There was a fidgety pause,
and nobody offered to speak. “Come, Brothers and
Sisters! Never be slow to tell what God has done for
you.” So Willey rose, and returned thanks for the
mercies of the past week, and was followed by one or two
more, who recited glibly a stereotyped formula that has
served for many a class-meeting since Methodism was
inaugurated. In the next pause Jacob looked in Netty’s
direction, and said, “Our sister, I think, has had some


experience lately ! Will she not relieve her own heart by
asking counsel and prayer of God’s people in her dis-
tress ?”
The girl cowered before him, for the leader, although
a man of unswerving rectitude, had not fully learned the
law of Christ, which is love, mercy; he was more nearly
related to the Mosaic dispensation, and it is good for the
church that we have a few such men; they keep the
balance from going down too far on the side of senti-
mental leniency, reminding us always that God is just as
well as merciful.
Mrs. Dane whispered something to Netty, then
taking her trembling hand, she rose with her before
them all. The erring sister tried to speak, her face was
white and quivering; for here, in the presence of God,
and before her fellow Christians, she was going to lie —
to lie wilfully, for the sake of one who, being unworthy
of them, had possessed himself first of her love, and then
of her reputation.
“Courage, sister!” said Jacob, with a softening mien;
“God knows your struggle, but it will do you good to
speak!” Netty clutched Mrs. Dane by the arm and
whispered, “Tell them I ask God to forgive me for His
dear Son’s sake!” Amid the silence that followed these
words, repeated aloud by Mrs. Dane, a footstep was
heard at the back of the chapel, and the eyes that turned
in that direction beheld Gilbert Smith coming up the
aisle.
Netty did not raise her head, as she stood trembling
and pale, before the table at which Jacob sat. Gilbert
was also pale, but his head was erect and his step firm, as
he approached the group in front of the little congrega
tion. Those who saw him thus marvelled, for never be-
fore had he entered the Methodist chapel, and his usual


bearing was not half so manly as now. He came right
up to the table before Netty seemed conscious of his
presence; then she raised her head, uttered a cry, and fell
upon her knees, with her arms on the seat under her face.
“Mr. Trenewy,” said Gilbert as soon as he could collect
himself enough to speak, “I want to tell you, and all
these people here, that Netty did not steal the money!
I took it; and when I was coming down to the township
to waste it in foolish pastimes, I lost it on the way. Sne
found out that I had taken it, and I thought she would
tell; but instead—Oh, Netty, Netty, forgive me!” He
was now beside her on his knees, and above the girl s
hysterical sobbing, and above the lad’s broken entreaties,
Jacob lifted up his voice, and said a little unsteadily,
“You should ask God to forgive you first!” Then he
added in broken tones, “My friends, let us pray!”
And so the class-meeting was turned into a prayer-
meeting, and all hearts were raised to heaven for charity,
for zeal, for holiness, for a loftier love of Christ, and of
their fellows, and for healing balm upon the minds of the
erring youth and devoted maiden before them. It was
also a revival meeting, for then and there Gilbert saw,
through the self-abnegation of a Christian, the eternal
love of the Christ.
Mrs. Dane hurried the exhausted Netty home to
bed, and Wilky took charge of Gilbert; and after due
consideration it was thought best to get the young couple
right away from the district.
Let every Methodist praise God for His saving and
keeping grace, for Netty is now the life and soul of
another Methodist church, and her husband, Gilbert, is
her first lieutenant.


CHAPTER V.
A Sunday School Episode.
The district in which Woolinap was situated was a
large one, speaking from a Methodist standpoint, and
comprised about twenty-five preaching places. The
head of the circuit, and the abiding place of its super-
intendent, was a large mining town, previously referred
to in these chronicles as possessing a bank, a market, and
a newspaper. This town, like the centre of our great
solar system, had its more important planets, of which
Woolinap was one, and these in their turn were centres of
other smaller systems. Woolinap had its three satel-
lites, Bulgong, Greenhills, and Spring Gully. Since the
circuit was fortunate in the possession of a good staff of
local preachers, the superintendent was able to afford
each of these places a fortnightly service; and it happened
that the Greenhills service always took place in the even-
ing. Most of the people were satisfied with this ar-
rangement, but Mrs. Rumby was not; she came regularly,
and brought with her her two young hopefuls, but as a
rule there were very few children at the chapel, and Mrs.
Rumby did not approve of the condition of heathenism
in which the youngsters were growing up. So she be-
thought her of the time-honored plan of opening a Sun-
day-school. With Mrs. Rumby, to think of a plan was
to act upon it; therefore she waited upon the two prin-
cipal men of the congregation, themselves fathers, and
asked them to inaugurate an afternoon session.


But these worthies, although quite approving the
idea, did not feel equal to the task of superintending the
thirty children who might be expected to attend, and
Mrs. Rumby’s scheme must have come to nought had she
not determined to take the job in hand herself.
She was a widow, strong, not only in mind, but in
body; she stood five feet eight inches in height; was large
and muscular, and gave the casual observer the impres-
sion of being equal to anything. To her natural powers
experience had added much. Her husband had died
some ten years before, leaving her two sons to keep and
a small unfriendly farm, and a horse and dray with which
to keep them. Since that time Mrs. Rumby had done
her own farming, and in the intervals of agriculture she
had turned her horse and dray to account by carting
wood to the mines, ten miles away. It was quite a
common sight to see her driving through Woolinap with
a load of firewood; her strong hands flourishing a sub-
stantial switch, and her great boots well exposed to view
by her extremely short skirts. But the bad impression
created by her rough exterior was at once dispelled when
you looked into the brown and wrinkled face that shel-
tered beneath the green or lilac sunbonnet. There you
saw the real Mrs. Rumby, the kindly, toil-worn woman,
whose aspirations, although not above the clouds, were
decidedly on the tops of the little hills. In life she had
been chastised, but never yet defeated, and now that she
had conceived the idea of having her own and her neigh-
bors’ children instructed in the truths of eternal life, it
"would be no small obstacle that -would thwart her.


On© day as Wilky sat in his shop, stitching away at
a new coat for Joe Dunn, Mrs. Rumby and her dray
stopped before his door, and the good woman dropped
from her chariot, and entered the establishment. “Good-
day, Wilky!” “Good-day, Mrs. Rumby! Fine weather
isn’t it?” “I ain’t come to talk about the weather; that
can take care of itself!” “Very likely,” remarked the
tailor, with a twinkle in his brown eye. “What have
you come to talk about then?” “Fust and foremost, my
Johnnie wants a new trouser, and here’s his measure to
make ’em by! And the next is that I’m going to start
a Sunday-school at Greenhills, and I want your advice
and approvin’ countenance!” “M—m, indeed? Well,
who is going to be superintendent ?” “Meself,” said the
matter-of-fact lady. “And who will teach the chil-
dren?” asked Wilky. “Meself,” again she replied.
“But how to begin, and what to say is just exactly what
I don’t know, so I’ve come to ask you!” Wilky looked
doubtful. “About the teaching,” he said. “Couldn’t
Dember help you?” “He don’t seem to care for the
job!” “Nor Johnson?” “Nor him neither! But, look
here, Wilky, I can read my Bible, and I can sing a
hymn in toone, and if I can’t teach them youngsters a
little more than they know now about the grace of God
and the love of His Son, I ain’t a fit person to be a
Christian.”
The American looked relieved, for she was on the
right track, and surely there should be no Christian who
cannot hold forth on those two glorious themes. So Mr.
Dane espoused the cause of Mrs. Rumby’s Sunday-school
“It’s only three miles out to the chapel, Wilky! Could


you walk out for a Sunday or two, and give us a start,
like, on the reg’lar lines?" “Yes, I think I could!
Do-you begin next Sunday?" “Yes.” “Then I’ll be
out to give you a hand in keeping order.”
Mrs. Rumby was just going out of the door, but she
paused at this remark. “It ain’t that I want you to
keep order! I just fancy I can do that!” She looked
admiringly at her own right arm. “No, I understand,”
said Wilky. “I meant that I should go out and set you
right in the order of service, and that sort of thing, you
know! lam not afraid to trust the discipline of the
flock in your hands!”
So the brawny widow departed, and set about mus-
tering her class.
When Wilky reached the Greenhills chapel about
three o’clock on the following Sunday, Mrs. Rumby was
waiting for him at the door. “I’ve got them together,”
she said, “And now I don’t know how to put them in
their classes. There’s Jim Dember, and Liz Johnson,
and my Tom, almost too big; and the little Mewtons,
almost too small! But come in and see for yourself!”
Mr. Dane followed her up the aisle, and noted with
satisfaction that she had the judgment to put boys on
one side and girls on the other. Then he stepped up on
the platform, and took a hymn-book from his pocket.
Presently he said, “Let us open the school by singing a
hymn! Hands up those who have got hymn-books!”
Nobody had one; so Wilky said, “Hands up those who
know “When He Cometh!” Nearly everybody knew
it, and by reading over each verse the leader got the


children to sing that hymn, dear to all juniors, with great
heartiness, if not with musical precision. “Let us
pray!” said Wilky at the conclusion of the singing, and
several knelt down, hut not all. Mrs. Rumby now
spoke for the first time. “All of yez kneel down! You,
there, Bob Skilly, kneel down, or I’ll come and make
you!” Bob knelt down, but with that sharp command
was planted in his mind the seeds of rebellion, and he
forthwith determined to have a very good time out of the
Sunday-school, and out of Mrs. Rumby too, before he
had done with them.
The prayer ended, Wilky read a chapter from the
Bible, and explained it very simply, while Mrs. Rumby
kept her eye of terror upon the whole assemblage. “Now,
boys and girls, as you will have only one teacher, I
think you had all better gather up into these front seats,
and we’ll have a talk about the lesson !” He was obeyed,
and soon the young people were hearing and answering
questions, and appearing to enjoy it very much. By
and bye they sang two other hymns, and were dismissed
with the Benediction; but Wilky had a good deal to
say to Mrs. Rumby. He advised that Lizzy Johnson be
put in charge of the very small children; that the rest,
boys and girls, be placed in one large class under her
own control, until such time as another worker should
be raised up to help her. He promised to write an
appeal to the “Spectator,” asking for old Bibles and
hymn-books; and finally added that he would come out
each Sunday for a month to see how things went.
On the following Sunday, the mode of procedure was
very like the first, but at the third session the pro-
gramme was varied a little.
O


First of all, there was an abundant supply of Bibles,
and nearly enough hymn-books to go right round. There
were none of them new, some in fact had leaves missing,
but they served well the needs of Mrs. Rumby’s scho-
lars, and the donors would have congratulated themselves
had they heard Jim Dember shouting in a fine double
forte, '‘Dare to be a Daniel,” and with his mouth open
nearly wide enough to swallow one of Daniel’s lions.
But there was another diversion that day, which
requires a more detailed consideration. Bob Skilly, as
we said, had determined to have a good time, if possible,
so before going into school he had held a council with
several other boys, in which he confided to them his plan
of attack on the lady superintendent. He had in his
pockets a box of matches, likewise a string of tiny
crackers ; his intention was to wait until the whole com-
pany should kneel down for prayer, then, with every
possible precaution, to light the string upon which the
crackers were tied, and drop it over the next seat, where
it would go off in a mimic feu-de-joie. "My! Won’t the
girls squeal,” said Bob, with a relish. “And they’ll all
hop up, and Mother Rumby’ll be as mad as anything!”
“I don’t think you’d better do it,” said Johnnießumby;
“if you’re caught ” “Pooh!” said Bob, “what can
she do? She ain’t got a cane, nor nothing!” “No,”
said Johnnie, “but —but ” “Are you going to
tell?” said Bob Skilly, in a sudden fury. “No, I ain’t!
But you’ll be sorry if she catches you, I can tell you ; and
I ought to know !’ ’
After that Johnnie held his peace. He did know,
and he also knew that to elude his mother’s sharp eyes


was well nigh impossible. Then, when the school
assembled, Johnnie, having no desire to share in the
glory of the exploit about to be accomplished, found a
seat as far from Bob’s as he could get, and awaited the
issue with anxiety. The hymn was sung, and Wilky
began his supplication for all sorts and conditions of
men; then Mrs. Rumby perceived a slight disturbance in
the vicinity of Bob Skilly, which caused her to be even
more on the alert than usual.
She was praying, of course, but she was watching
too, and soon she saw a brown hand lifted surreptitiously
to the lower rail of the form back, and something fell
softly to the floor two seats ahead of Bob. There was
a hiss, and snap! snap! went the fireworks, starting the
whole school into a hubbub, and effectually stopping the
leader in his eloquent address to the Almighty.
“Bob Skilly,” said Mrs. Rumby, “I saw you drop
them crackers. Just you come outside along with me !”
Bob did not particularly wish to go, but when the lady
super, started to move, he was obliged to do the same,
because her strong hand had him by the collar. This
was intolerable ignominy to the boy, but Nemesis was
unrelenting; and the bitter experience that followed was
only tempered by the fact that it did not take place
inside, and before the assembled school.
Meanwhile the assembled school could only guess
at what was happening by the thwack, thwack, and the
howl which accompanied it; and Wilky thought it advis-
able to smother even that source of intelligence by rais-
ing the chorus, “Oh, that will be joyful.” The humor-
ous application of the words to the present position struck


him before lie had got through a line, but he kept it up
until the conquering hero returned with her subdued and
tearful captive. The tailor thought Mrs. Rumby’s
measure somewhat arbitrary, but he did not interfere.
As a matter of fact, it was the first and last salutary
lesson required by the boys of the Greenhills Sunday-
school. And now, provided with books, a superinten-
dent and a teacher, the little school was fairly started,
and at the next quarterly meeting \Vilky gave a glowing
report of “The New Branch of Our Work” going on so
well under “The Able Superintendence of Our Good
Sister, Mrs. Rumby.”


CHAPTER VI.
Ripened fruits.
We crave the leniency of our readers for at this
point suddenly taking them from Woolinap and its
surroundings, and for unceremoniously bringing them?
down the tide of time over about ten years. But we
desire just here to tell the story of Bob Skilly to its
glorious end, and to the glory of Mrs. Rumby s little
school. We cannot tell, when the seed is sown, where
the plant will spring up and blossom-; we have a rea-
sonable hope that it will arise somewhere not far away,
and God Himself has promised to look after the in-
crease-. And so it was with that earnest, unconven-
tional woman, who bravely faced the difficulties cf
starting and carrying on the instruction in spiritual
matters of the Greenhills children- At the time when
Bob Skilly came to the hour of his triumph and mar-
tyrdom, Mrs. Rumby had retired to housekeeping, and
the managerial seat in her affairs. Johnnie now drove
the wood-dray, while her other son worked the farm.
But the cry of the people that sit in darkness had
gone forth through the Church, and from some it had
drawn money; from others their widow s mite of
prayerand from the- depths of the soul of Robert
Skilly it had drawn the full and complete offering of
a life of devotion to Jesus, who came to save the whole
world. The way had not been made easy for him; he
had been obliged to toil and sweat in a foundry, while


he qualified for what he knew to be God’s appointment
for his future. In due time he was ready for the mis-
sion field—a fit soldier, moulded by study, by self-
denial, and by ardor for service. And he had depart-
ed from his native Australia, borne upon the wings of
the soft Southern breejzes, and within the month was
deposited by the schooner upon one of the smaller is-
lands of the Pacific, alone save for God and His hosts,
and the dusky savages, whose immortal part he hoped
to be the means of saving.
It was a beautiful island on which he had been
deputed to labor; tiny blue bays with yellow sand bor-
ders, and flanked or hemmed in by luxuriant tropical
vegetation, were the chief features of his new country.
A low range occupied its midlands, and from the sum-
mit to the base flourished rich forests and extravagant
undergrowth.
With his zeal unabated by loneliness, he set
about building himself a house, and rejoiced and
praised God when he found that the people amongst
whom he had cast his lot were disposed to be friendly.
They brought him presents of fruit, and showed him
where to get the best material for his building opera-
tions
By slow degrees he acquired their language, and
after a few months his work as a Christian teacher was
actually begun He could not live and labor quite
alone, so he induced a lad out of his intended flock to
act as his servant; and with this small household he
lived on, planning, toiling, learning, until a year and a
half had passed.


One evening, wearied by the heat and exertion of
a long day’s journey up l into the hills, he sat before
his house enjoying the fresh sea-breeze and the odors
from tree and flower in the neighboring forest The
young missionary had set his dwelling at the top of a
long slope that went down to the water’s edge, and
right below him lay one of those reef-locked bays, so
still and blue through the hot, bright days, and so
softly murmurous and gleaming in the moonlit nights.
Every star could be seen reflected from the unruffled
surface of the lagoon, and there was an expectant haze
of light where the moon would rise in half an hour.
Near the beach the water was dark with shadows of
hill and tree, and nothing seemed to move but the
tiny wavelets upon the sand It was an hour of peace
and remembrance to Robert Skilly, as he looked across
the starlit sea; and he gave himself up to dreams of
home. There was the farm-house at G-reenhills, stand-
ing amongst the undulating paddocks, all green in
winter and spring, and greyish white through summer
and early autumn; and the father and sisters who lived
there, praying for him, and longing for
him, and consecrating him, to the service
of God- He smiled as he recalled the
old Sunday-school, with Mrs. Rumby at its head, and
almost wished that he could have the advice of that
most practical woman at this very moment. There
were especial difficulties confronting him just now; for,
although their friendliness had not abated in any way,
he had discovered that the people in the village had
in hand some secret undertaking of which he was to


be kept in ignorance, and he shrewdly suspected that
it was a warlike expedition against the tribe at the
other end of the island- He could not force the people
to abandon it ; he could not persuade them out of it,
being yet uncertain of their real intentions; so he had
concluded that he must wait until God showed him his
duty.
In the composure born of this determination he
sat thus, gazing out upon the fast brightening sea, and
indulging in sweet thoughts of home. By-and-bye his
attention was recalled by a shout that came from the
village to his left. A vague fancy floated through his
mind that the noise might be connected with the
secret undertaking, and he wondered whether this were
the time to discover what was afoot. But the idea, pass-
ed on like a feather that is sailing with the wind, and
with heart and voice he began to sing that magnificent
missionary hymn, “Let there be Light,” while his eyes
watched the moon rising over the sea.
“Move on the water’s face,
Bearing the beams of grace;
And in earth’s darkest place
Let there be light!”
“Teacher,” came a whisper at his elbow, and turn-
ing sharply in the midst of his song he found his young
manservant standing at his side. “What, boy?” he
asked kindly, as he noticed that the dark face was dis-
torted with pain; “what is it ?” “I go to the village.
I hear the wise man say that the great spirit will not
prosper the warriors on this journey unless he has a


feast! He say one must die to make a feast. He cast
lots, and it is my beautiful flower chosen, my bright
shell upon the sands!” The lad broke into bitter
weeping, and Robert touched his hand kindly. -Tell
me more, boy! What journey?” “The warriors go to
drive the men of the other tribe out of our plantation!’
“When?” “When the sun comes out of the sea! And
what did you say about a feast?” “They feast to-night!
They are going to make feast with my desired maiden,
for the lot fell to her!” “Do you mean,” cried Robert
“that they are going to kill the girl and—and—eat her l ’
The lad sobbed yet more bitterly, but could not answer.
“Come with me to the village,” said the missionary.
“In God’s name I will stop the loathsome rite, or die!
O Father, Father, I thought they had forsaken at
least that abomination! 0 God above, give me
strength and wisdom to save her and them!”
He clenched his hands and stood for a moment in
silent prayer, gathering confidence and composure for
the ordeal before him. Then he went inside, wrote a
few lines in his diary, and, taking with him a stout
stick, used generally for the pacific purpose of hill-
climbing, he started down the slope in the direction
from whence came the sounds of hideous festival.
Down by the sea,-shore, in an open space surround-
ed by the huts of the village, Robert found the whole
tribe assembled. A great fire had been lighted, and was
tinging everything in the vicinity with a fierce red
glow; the men were rushing about the open ground in
an irregular, furious dance, all equipped for war, and
with faces dark and cruel, while the women contributed


to the din with yells and screams, as they darted ont
of the way of their demoniac lords. A few paces from
the .fire stood a small group, consisting of the wise man
or priest of the tribe, the young and graceful girl who
was beloved of the missionary’s servant, and the father
of the girl. The hands of the maiden were bound, and
she cowered beneath the grip of her sire, who- for the
time was little better than a human tiger.
Robert saw and understood all, and, walking swiftly
through the restless throng, lie stood before the little
group near the fire, and demanded what they did with
a bound victim. A sullen silence fell upon the savages,
the frantic dancers paused, and all gathered round to
■watch the issue. The girl, supposing that the mission-
ary could deliver her, wrenched herself away from her
father, and darted into the protecting aims of the
white- “What does this mean, foolish people? Have
I not told you that the great Spirit does not delight m
blood, and that He commands you to live peaceably,
and to keep your hearts pure? It is horrible, , this
feast! You cannot, you must not, go on with it!” The
intended victim hung yet more closely about him., hav-
ing slipped her tied hands over his head and around his
neck ; and thus he stood, with his arm about her, at bay
before the wizard, the, father, and the whole expectant
tribe.
The maiden had not submitted tamely to her fate;
all day she had eluded capture by creeping through the
woods; but she had little chance of escape with the
whole tribe of bloodhounds at her heels, and at night
fall she had been taken and brought back to her father,


to be handed over to the mercy of a hideous supersti-
tion, When the wise man beheld his prey so suddenly
snatched back from him, the pent-up venom of the last
eighteen months shot from his ©yes; he turned to the
tribesmen, and consigned them to all the powers of evil
known to him; he threatened that none* of them should
return from the journey of the morrow, and that their
village should be: burned with fire. At his words there
was a swaying of the crowds and a hushed pause;
then suddenly a man leaped out from the ranks,
lifted his heavy club, and brought it down upon the
hapless head of Robert Skilly. So the festival went on,
but with two victims instead of one, and the evil spirits
had their will that night in one of the fairest islands of
the South Seas.
About six weeks later a schooner called with letters
and stores for the missionary, and to gather such articles
of commerce as the natives could offer in exchange for
others. They found no missionary; his house was a
blackened ruin, and none could or would tell what had
happened to him. Everything was done to discover the
truth, but in vain; so the captain made his preparations
for departure, supposing that the young Australian had
acted without judgment, and had been murdered in con-
sequence. The tide, however, was not favorable until
midnight, so he lay to in the little bay that spread itself
before the site of the mission house, and waited for the
moon and high water. About ten in the evening, the
night being dark and the sky overclouded, a canoe came
silently under the bows of the vessel, and a lithe figure
clambered up the side to the deck. It was the young


native who had been servant to the missionary, and he
carried with him a bundle tied in an ordinary Turkish
towel. This he presented to the officer on duty, and re-
turned as silently as he had come. The man at, once went
to the cabin, where his captain sat reading and smoking,
and together they untied the bundle, and found that it
contained Robert Skilly’s books. Among them was his
Bible, also a short treatise on Maori and kindred tongues,
and, best of all, the young man’s diary, written neatly
in a large exercise They set the rest aside, and turned
to the journal with sorrowing hearts, for they expected
to find on these pages the record of the last days of an-
other of God’s army of martyrs. They hastily scanned
the earlier pages, which told only of building and gar-
dening, and of hopes that were destined never to be
realised; then, they came to the last entry and read.
September 11th,18 —nine p.m. —My servant has
just come in to say that a cannibal feast is about to take
place in the village. I go in God’s name to stop this
murder and abomination! Into His hands I commend
myself, body, soul, and spirit! And in this hour of
peril I send my love wafting home to dear ones! My
eternal gratitude to my spiritual mother, Mrs. Rumby!
Boundless as ocean’s tide,
Rolling in fullest pride,
Through the world far and wide,
Let there be light!


CHAPTER VII.
The Golden Wedding.
Fioni the time and place of Robert Skilly’s martyr-
dom we again return to Woolinap, and to the winter
after the cyclone that demolished the Wesleyan chapel.
It was July, an Australian July, with tenderly green
paddocks, and trees that had half a mind to put out
flower buds; in fact, the almonds had done so, and
were preparing to burst into their fragrant pink and
white- But the wind that blew from the north was
cutting, and the wind that blew from the south was
stinging, and all the other winds were bitterly search -
ing; those who had plenty of food, fire and clothing
had reason to thank God, and those who lacked them
had need of the bounties of their more fortunate fel-
lows. In Woolinap there were not many needy people,
excepting those whose business in life was to be poor,
or those whom the devil of drink had enslaved; so it
happened that the Lady Bountiful and the Lord Gene-
rosities had little scope for the exorcise of alms-giv-
ing.
In the Wesleyan regular congregation there was
but one very poor person, Mrs. Thomas Jones; and
the prevalent idea was that she was too proud to ac-
cept relief. She was an old Welsh body, and her hus-
band an old radical of a Welshman; they had no
children, and in their lonely old age were obliged to
fight a more strenuous battle for life than is usual.


Thomas Jones had bought a small farm in the vicinity
of Woolinap, and might in the days of his vigor have
done well; but the racecourse and the bar-room had
more attractions than the plough, and his wife was not
hardy enough to manage the farm on her own ac-
count ; so things went to pieces, leaving them heavily
mortgaged, and able to do little more than keep the
interest paid. The struggle had sobered up Thomas,
but it had also hardened him, and he was now, at
the age of seventy-four, the most notorious cynic in
the district. How Rachel had kept her faith and
sweetness through her various trials was a mystery to
all but the pure in heart, of whom she was one; and
every Sunday her wrinkled, but beautiful, face shone
from the corner of Trenewy’s pew, a beacon for the
preacher, and a soft radiance for many another in the
congregation.
But Sarah Trenewy had made a discovery or two,
concerning her aged protege, for between the young
woman and the old there existed a strong affinity,
Sarah was a soft-eyed, sweet-faced girl, whose mission
in life appeared to be the lightening of other folks
burdens; it was she who very nearly always patched
up her father’s squabbles, and she was first to turn
up at the bedside of a sick mother who was worrying
herself to death about the washing, the milking, or
the baby. Towards Mrs. Jones she assumed a maternal
demeanor, but in reality she sat at the old woman s
feet, learning through her clear soul the love and
power of Jesus; and Paul was never more apt a pupil


of Gamaliel than Sarah Trenewy of the little Welsh
Christian.
±>ut to return to those discoveries: The first was
that the Jones couple had started the winter with ab-
solutely no means, and that want stared them in the
face, the next was that both the old people were piti-
ably short of warm clothing; a third revealed that
their wood-heap was showing its foundations, and that
they had neither money nor strength to renew it; and,
lastly, Sarah found out that at the end of July the
old people would have been married fifty years. This
last discovery at once suggested to Sarah a solution
of many troubles, and she spent a day or two in earn-
est thought. The first step l as the outcome of her think-
ing was to call on Wilky Dane, and after that all her
plans went smoothly. On the following Sunday she
walked part of the way home with Mrs. Jones, and
questioned her as to the exact date of her weddino-
day. “We were married on the twenty-sixth of July,”
replied the unsuspecting Rachel, with the semblance
of a sigh, “at Cardiff, fifty years ago!” “Well, dear,”
said the maternal Sarah, “that will be a Saturday this
year; and as we don’t get a golden wedding in Wooli-
nap every day, the choir would like to do honor to
the occasion. You won’t mind them going up about
eight o clock, will you? But mind, you are not to
make any preparation, excepting a big boiler of hot
water for coffee. Xll be with them to do the work,
and we are taking a big wedding cake, and the rest!
We want to have some fun, and you and your hus-
band must join us. You’ll let us, dear, won’t you?”


“I will gladly do it ; but Thomas may not be so
pleased. But you needn’t mind if he says something
tart. It is just his little way, you know.”
A fortnight later, on the day that saw the Jones
jubilee of wedded life, the old woman, said to> hei
partner, “Thomas, some of the young people are com-
ing up to-night, and I have promised to have some
hot water ready for their cofEee. Will you cut me
some extra wood and help me tidy up the place a bit?
“What are they coming for? We are too old for par-
ties, woman!” “I didn’t ask them, Thomas; they aie
coming on their own accord, because they have heard
that—that it is our golden wedding day!” A queer
expression passed over the face of the man, ana he
stood for a moment, wistfully gazing at the wrinkled
face that bent over the fire- “I had forgot it,” he said
at last; “but we’ll have the water ready. And, oh,
Rachel, I never thought to bring you to such poverty!”
There was a quiver in his usually gruff voice, and a
tear lurking in his eye. “If we wanted to offer them
meat and drink we couldn’t do it, and this our golden
wedding!” “Don’t mind it, ihomas! Sarah tells me
they are bringing a wedding cake and some coffee', and
only want the use of our kitchen and the company of
ourselves; and so long as you don t go back to the
old wavs, I’ll never grumble about being poor! Go
now, and chop me a bit of wood, and the Lord will
send some more when that is gone.”
With a sorrowful face Thomas Jones took up his
axe. His wife’s reminder of their long life together,


and her fortitude under its lieaped-up ills, had touched
him in a place far deeper than his cynicism and rail-
lery against all men’s pretensions; but his wife had
always said that he never criticised her piety, and her
fellow Christians knew that he could not, because of
its perfect purity and high-souled sincerity. It was
about eleven o’clock when he came out to the spot
where, their last half dozen logs lay, and he was smit-
ing away at one knotty old soldier from among them,
when he heard a rattle of wheels beyond his dwelling.
In those little country places a cart cannot go by
without the inhabitants of the wayside houses inspect-
ing it from the windows or yard; so- Mr. Jones rested
his axe upon the ground and looked towards the road.
A dray had stopped before the gate, and a man was
busy negotiating the complications of a remarkable
latch improvised out of a, length of fencing-wire. The
aged wood-chopper walked towards the man, and pre-
sently recognised him, to be young Jimmy Dunn.
"What do you want there, young fellow?” "Oh, good-
day, Mr. Jones! I want to bring this cart in.” He
had managed the latch, and setting back the gate, he
brought the cart safely into the yard with many
"woo’s, and "gee-up’s.” "What are you going to do?”
asked Thomas in perplexity. "Ah, well,” said Jim, in
an off-hand manner, "Sarah Trenewy and the Missus
are coming up to-night for a coffee supper, and they
want to make it hot for you two old folks ; and I put on
a log or two extra on my own account, just as a wedding
present, you see. Show me where to put it, and you
might lend us the axe, and I 'll chop up a bit to do


the girls to-night- Suppose this weather makes the
rheumatics talk a bit ?
Mrs. Jones had come out, too', and her speaking
eyes uttered speechless thanks, as the tall, strong young
fellow pitched the logs from his dray, and chopped up
a goodly pile for present use. Thomas was silent;
he only nodded a farewell when Jimmy departed; in
silence he ate his midday meal, and did the little bit
of clearing-up which filled his Saturday afternoon,
and when he came in to his tea he was still thought-
ful and uncommunicative. “They’ll be here about
eight, Thomas. Will you brush yourself up a bit?”
And the old man obeyed without a protest.
By and by the sound of merry voices came from
the road, and in a few minutes the choir trooped into
the big barn-like kitchen, where Thomas had piled on
the firing, and where his wife had hung up the largest
boiler upon the hooks that swung from a bar up the
chimney. There was Sarah, and Jimmy Dunn and
Mrs. Jimmy, who, it will be remembered, was the
prettiest girl in Woolinap; and Mrs. Jimmy s father,
Dick Hilton, and Wilky Dane, and all the choir be-
hind them. Two or three carried substantial parcels,
while the general body of juniors was responsible for
the safe conduct of a heavily laden clothes basket.
“A good wedding night to you both,” said Wilky,
as he shook hands; “God’s blessing, and good luck to
you. We intend to have a jolly time together this
evening. And first we should like to offer you both a
little wedding present, since there is no couple in this
district married so long as you. It- is from all of us,


and others who could not come to-night. Of course,
on such an occasion we should have brought golden
gifts ; but we thought that such things would not be
appreciated by you, so you won’t mind accepting some-
thing which we thought of much more use, will you?
Jim, where are those parcels ? One for you, Mrs.
Jones, and this for you, Sir!”
The old people were too surprised to attempt the
untying of strings, so> Alice and Sarah took charge of
. that task, and soon displayed a new dress for one, and
an overcoat for the other. Rachel at once began) to
shed grateful tears, but Wilky interrupted, “Now, you
girls, just see that your present is a good fit, while we
see to the coat! Would you mind, Mr. Jones, if we
have the pleasure of putting it on you for the first
time ?”
Thomas nodded his head and stood up, and Jim
and Wilky helped him into the coat, which all pro-
nounced to be first-class- Meanwhile, Alice, who made
the blouse and skirt, had escorted her victim into the
bed-room, from whence she presently brought her,
arrayed in warm black merino, to be admired of and
to admire her husband. How the tongues wagged.
Jimmy cracked jokes, and everybody else laughed, and
some of the youngsters were shifting back the table to
make room for some games. “But however did you get
my measure so near ?” said Rachel, beginning to re-
cover from her astonishment. “It was that wicked
Sarah,” said Mrs. Dunn; “that wicked girl sat be-
hind you in church, and slyly took certain measure-
ments with her handkerchief. I hope you will read her


a sermon on such a wicked proceeding. And. really,
I believe she got the waist length by hugging you;
and the sleeves I had to guess, and you’ll need to
shorten them a little, you know.” Young Mrs. Dunn
was prettier than ever, and Jim was immensely proud
of her that night. When she had given a twitch to
the collar, a tweak to the cuffs, her husband whispered
something to her, and she disappeared at once into the
bed-room, with a third parcel. This contained a good
rug, and having spread it on the bed, she left it there,
to give Mr. and Mrs. Jones a fresh surprise when they
should retire for the night.
And now the fun began; they played “poisoned
handkerchief” and “geography,” and made enough noise
to bewilder a dozen old Welshmen like Thomas. Then
Yorky Dick proposed that while Jim, and Sarah got
the supper ready they should have some music, Alice
pretended to be desperately jealous of Sarah, but her
fury did not prevent her joining in the choruses, as
the company sang many of the oldest hymns and
psalms. The grand finale to the concert was a solo
from Thomas, who was prevailed upon to sing “The
Ash Grove” in his native Welsh, and laughed at him-
self because he could not recall a second verse- After
that the supper was ready, and the party proceeded
to lighten the clothes basket by consuming a portion
of the good things it had contained, and the golden
bride, laughing and almost blushing, was called upon
to cut the great iced cake which Mrs. Dane had made
for the occasion. They drank the health of the bride
and bridegroom in coffee 1 , and insisted upon a speech


from Thomas: and at last Wilky announced that it
was half-past ten; that the cups had better be packed
up, so* the choir sang the evening hymn and made its
way homeward, happy to have made others happy.
In the old farm-house there was a sound of weep-
ing, and it came from Thomas, who knelt like a child,
with his head in Rachel’s lap, and confessed to her that
he was a mean man to enjoy the bounties which God
had sent them, on account of her great goodness; that
he did not deserve anything but her reproaches and
God’s wrath, and that he would—he would begin anew,
even at this late hour of his life. And the aged lovers
sealed the vow with a kiss, and sat hand in hand until
the fire burnt low, and until the echoes of the young
voices rang in their hearts like a sweet and distant
memory.
What joy a few kind people may bestow', when
they unite to do it! The misfortune lies in the fact
that the one leading mind is not on hand to suggest
it.


CHAPTER VIII.
“The Blue Ribboners.”
About the time when Mr. and Mrs. Jones had
rtheir golden wedding celebrated by their Methodist
friends, Wilky Dane was one day at work in his shop,
when the most notorious of the Woolinap disreputables
rolled in through the door, and started a conversation.
"Could you lend me a sixpence, Wilky?” ‘l'm
afraid I can’t, my friend! It would not be good for
you or my sixpence!” ‘‘Why cant you lend me some-
thing? I’m an honest man, and a customer of yours,
ain’t I?” The tailor smiled as he looked at the object
before him, and thought that his clothes were little
credit to anybody. The unfortunate man wore a dingy
brown coat, and very ill-fitting moleskins, while one
of his large, outstanding ears carried the full weight of
a battered and greasy top-hat. "Perhaps you were a
customer of mine, but I have forgotten ivhen. How-
ever, that wouldn t make any difference, and I have
no sixpence to 1 lend you!’ ‘ But why not? peisistcd
the inebriate; "I belong to the Wesleyan Church, and
we’re all brothers there, ain't we ?” "Yes, John; all
men are brothers; and it is on that account that I
can’t let you have the sixpence!” "Lend us three-
pence, then!” "No, not threepence either! Judging


by your appearance, and the smell you brought in with
you, a good number of threepences have already gone
down your throat to-day! If you like, I’ll ask Mrs.
Dane to get you a good meal, and some coffee to sober
you up a bit!” “Thanks, old chap, I’m not hungry!
But won’t you lend us a penny?” “No, not a cent!”
“Well will you buy some fruit if I bring it up?”
Where he intended to get the fruit Wilky did not
know, for the poor fellow was now long past growing
any- “No. I won’t! Look here, John, you are pretty
well drunk now. Go home to your hut and have* a
sleep, and this evening I’ll call round and see you!”
The old man stood irresolute for a minute; then he
said, “All right, old man! But there’s no offence,
is there? You’ll shake hands, won’t you?” Wilky
humored him in this, and during the five minutes re-
quired for the ceremony he quietly edged the drunken
man towards the door.
By-and-bye the besotted creature rolled off down
the street to seek a field more fertile than the heart
of the American, and the tailor was able to resume his
work again. As he stitched, his thoughts ran upon
many things suggested by the visitor just successfully
steered off the premises. In Woolinap there were seve-
ral such men, who lived precariously, drank every penny
they could earn or “cadge,” and both amused and dis-
gusted the more respectable inhabitants of the place.
They had all come to Woolinap in the early days; some
as shepherds on the surrounding stations, others being
stranded there on their way to the more bustling min-
ing centres. Wilky wondered what they had been as


young men, and what homes they had left behind them
in old England or Ireland; there was not a Scot among
the Woolinap disreputables. John Walker, his late
visitor, was an Englishman, as he always boasted when
he was half drunk, and in the company of his quarrel-
some friend O’Malley, who would straightway describe
Englishmen with some unsavory adjectives, fall upon
the hapless John with his fists, and end up with a night
in the lock-up; and a sentence of three days for breach
ef the peace.
But unlike his nationality, John Walker’s religious
convictions were very easily altered to suit his com-
pany. That very morning he had asked Mr. Donovan
for sixpence on the ground that they were both good
Catholics, just as Wilky had been invited to lend the
same amount because they were brother Methodists.
The tailor pondered long upon these hard cases,
as he had often done before, and longed, oh ! so ardent-
ly, to deliver them from the bondage in which they
were languishing, even unto death; and then a vision
of the future days came up before him, when there
would be other John Walkers evolved by the present
drinking customs, out of, perhaps, some of the very
youths who lived about him, and sat in the forms at
the chapel each Sunday; and perhaps some of the
Woolinap mothers would be mourning by-and-bye over
heartless prodigals who had slipped away to the West,
never to come home again, just as these forlorn and
bestial old men had disappeared forever fromi the home
circle in the old lands. The picture conjured up by
imagination was so horrible that the tailor resolved


there and then to do something to prevent its realisa-
tion.
At class the following evening he broached the
question to Yorky Dick, and to his surprise found him
unsympathetic. “I’m not a drinking man, as you
know, Wilky; but I’m not a-going to sign any pledge,
nor ask other people to do so! Pledges are for them
as can’t keep sober without them! ’ Wilky agreed, but
pointed out Paul’s attitude in the matter. But take
heed, lest by any means this liberty of yours become
a stumbling-block to them that are weak!
Wherefore, if meat make my brother to offend, I will
eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest I make my
brother to offend.”
But Dick didn’t see it in that light, and wouldn’t
come into line with Wilky’s proposal. He mentioned,
however, that Alice and Jim were Rechabites, or some-
thing of the sort, and would very likely help.
Wilky then interviewed Mr. Trenewy, and was
glad to find him ready to further his project; also,
Joe Dunn and his family were favorable; so all three
met one evening at the tailor’s house to consider what
could be done to promote the cause of temperance in
Woolinap.
Joe proposed that they should get a celebrated
temperance orator from Melbourne, and have him lec-
ture in all the little townships round about; but Wilky
objected on the score of the expense, and, besides, he
wanted something permanent, or at any rate, some-
thing that would last for a few months, if not longer.


Jacob thought that a branch of the “Sons of Temper-
ance” might answer; but. when Sarah suggested, “And
Daughters, too,” he withdrew, declaring that lodges
were not for women, not if he could help it.
“Look here,” said Jimmy Dunn; “don’t you think
we could have regular blue-ribbon meetings in the
chapel once a week? I vote for Saturday nights; and
we could have some singing and a temperance address.
Sarah would do the playing, and my missus would sing
sometimes, and we would get singers from other places,
too, and speakers! and every meeting we could invite
the people to sign the pledge. The entertainment
would bring them there, and some of the young fellows
who don’t come to Church would lend a hand, I know !
And we could have a collection once a quarter, to pay
for lighting.” “And on that night you would not have
many there,” said Wilky, slyly. They all laughed;
but it was Jim’s proposition, in a modified form, which
was ultimately adopted. It was decided to hold the
blue-ribbon meetings fortnightly, and to begin at
once.
The first three meetings were a grand success, if
large audiences, energetic addresses, and very passable
singing make a successful temperance meeting; also a
goodly number of the young people took the pledge,
and donned the outward token of a loop of blue ribbon.
But after that the interest began to flag, and the re-
citations perpetrated upon the Woolinap public by
youthful aspirants were a pain to be forgotten quickly.
For nine months the meetings were kept going, then
shortness of entertainers and of audience caused them


to be abandoned. But the originators had one
splendid result of their loving labors, which is worth
recording more fully than the thirty or so pledges
signed by those who had never known the power of
drink. It happened at the fourth meeting, and was
due, humanlv speaking, to Sarah’s gentle tact and
Christian kindness. There was in the neighborhood a
poor soul, a lonely, childless woman, who was known
as Mrs. Polkett, but whose husband was altogether an
imaginary person. She was a good worker when sober,
but sobriety was not one of her shining virtues. She
was Cornish, and (as Jacob said), not much credit to
her country. When angry or intoxicated, her voice
grew shriller and her accent broader, until she could
be heard the length of the street by the lads who de-
lighted to plague her She was absolutely an outcast
in Woolinap society of every degree excepting that of
John Walker and company, while even the children
made her a butt for their pranks, just to witness her
violent explosions of temper. She was considered a
thoroughly hard case, and the idea of reforming ‘‘Old
Mother Polkett” never entered the mind of anybody.
She came sometimes to the blue-ribbon meetings, and
on that fourth night she was sitting well forward,
apparently enjoying the singing and recitations.
Sarah, from her place on the organ stool, could
watch the old woman, and now and then she fancied
that in the degraded face' there lurked tokens of softer
feelings, reawakened by the music from the dormant
memories of better days. The young woman felt a


great pity arise within her, and a few kindly tears
blurred the staves from which she was playing.
As Mrs. Polkett was passing out through the
door a little later, Sarah of the soft eyes and pleasant
voice saluted her. “Good-night, Mrs. Polkett! How
did you like the meeting?” “Fine, Sarah, my girl!”
“May I walk with you to the bridge?” The old woman
stopped, and looked earnestly at the speaker. “Do ’e
want to come?” “Yes, I do! I want to ask you to
sign the pledge, and come to chapel sometimes, and
be what God meant you to be— a good, hard-working,
respectable woman.”
They went along the dark lane that led to the
bridge, and Mrs. Polkett remained silent for a time.
“Do’e really feel so kindly to a poor thing like me,
Sarah ?” “Indeed I do! I know you ought to be
something quite different; so do try, dear!” Miss
Trenewy was not eloquent with her tongue, but her
hands, her eyes, her whole personality, were eloquent
with sympathy, and the outcast felt it, and wept —
wept in pity for her own low condition, and for joy
awakened by the unpatronising kindness of one of the
true servants of the lowly-minded Jesus. “Oh, child,
I be very bad, and you be too—too kind toi me; but
I'll try to mend, Sarah ; I’ll try! Tell Wilky Dane to
have a pledge ready in the morning.” “Won’t it be
better to-night?” suggested Sarah. “And it’s very
cold! Come home with me, and mother will give us
some hot coffee!” she had her w r ay, and that night
Wilky had a pledge that he considered worth all the


labor of the temperance meetings; and Sarah waited
upon her mother’s charwoman at supper.
Now, sceptics and cynics, and all other unbelievers,
do not sneer; for this pledge was kept, and the last I
heard of Mrs. Polkett was that she had paid a man to
paint and repair her house, and had made a garden for
flowers and vegetables both at the back and front. Mrs.
Polkett also became a good Methodist; she was par-
ticularly fond of a prayer-meeting, and when she led
the company in prayer, the lads on the opposite side
of the road declared that they could hear her thumping
the form, and shouting, “Oh, Loard, do ’e save the
drinkers! Convince them of sin, O Loard, for, be-
hold, the day of wra-ath is at hand!”
This catch of Sarah’s inspired Wilky with the de-
termination to have one of his own; and John Walker
wfas the fish he desired to take. Every possible device
was used to bring him in, and Wilky succeeded so far
as to get him toi the blue-ribbon meeting one Saturday
evening; but John disturbed the others present by
walking up to the front several times, and demanding
the honor of a friendly grip from the chairman ; and
when Wilky protested, the irrepressible John blustered
“I’m a temperance man, ain’t I? I’ve got as much
right here as any of you!” and it took Jimmy Dunn
and two other young fellows to convince him that in
this case might was right.
For many months Wilky persevered in his endeav-
ours to save the old man; and then, one day, in the
beginning of May, the local policeman called upon


Wilky to toll him that old Walker was very ill in the
hospital, and had asked to see him in preference to the
parson. “Been lying out in the rain all night, and
got some lung trouble ! I found him groaning under
the bridge, and thought he was drunk, but when I got
him to the lock-up my missus said he was ill! So I
run him off to the doctor, and he says he’s pretty well
cooked!” Poor old man! Poor wasted life! Just
then Jacob was driving by with his fruit waggon, and
Wilky asked for a lift to the neighboring town, near
which the district hospital had been built. There he
found John sick unto death, and for three days minis-
tered to the comfort of his body and soul; but the
tailor always said with sorrow that old Walker had
beaten him, and that the case was one of his greatest
disappointments.
In spite of its brevity, this temperance campaign
did much good; Mrs. Polkett was its crowning glory,
and the fine band of blue-ribbon boys and girls gave
equal satisfaction; but the workers most rejoiced in
the comments of the local publican, who described them
as fools and hyprocrites combined, for the Devil is
hard hit when he takes to bad language.


CHAPTER IX.
The Student.
While Woolinap was being teetotalised by the blue-
ribboners, other matters were afoot which concern some
of our Methodist friends in that little town. First of
all Yorky Dick had been initiated into the honorable
estate of a grandsire, and showed as little sense over
Baby Alice as if he had been her father instead of her
grandfather. Of course, there was a Christening, and
the usual fuss, and Sarah embroidered a beautiful robe
for the occasion in those wonderful stitches so dear to
our grandmothers. But there was something of more
importance still to Sarah, and we must leave the tempt-
ing theme of “Baby” to narrate this other tale.
In December of that year, the superintendent of
the circuit, the Rev. Charles Demeron, had a very seri-
ous illness, and was advised by his doctor to take a
three months’ holiday from his pastoral work, if not
from his preaching too. He therefore appealed to the
Conference to send him help in the shape of another
minister, or else a student or home missionary. Con-
ference had not another minister to spare, so it re-
sponded with a student, Mr. Blumine, who had done a
good deal of work in country districts before. He
was a young fellow of considerable promise, talented, of


good appearance, and charming manners, altogether a
most desirable assistant in such a large and influential
circuit. He was to board at the parsonage in the
mining town, but his dtuties took him into all the
other towns and townships that were included in the
pastorate; and of course Woolinap was duly honored.
It was also natural that the standing invitation of the
Trenewys should be extended to the newcomer as to the
regular minister; so it happened that Mr. Blumine was
often at the “Orchard House” for dinner and tea, not
to mention the intermediate repasts thought necessary
by the hearty country people. From the first he
showed a decided preference for the sweet and kindly
Sarah; his face would soften and his eyes brighten
whenever she spoke to him, and now and then he would
beg her to accompany him on his little journeys out
into the country that she might show him the way,
play the organ for a service, or comfort a sick one to
whom he was of little use. In fact, very few weeks
had passed before Woolinap had eyes and ears, and,
most particularly tongues, and it was soon settled that
Sarah Trenewy was spoony on the young parson, and
he upon her. Nobody asked her how matters stood,
but the cute ones could see it all —how she gallyvanted
about the country with him, and how her mother ought
to know better than to let her; how she had brightened
up in looks and dress, almost as vain as Alice Dunn;
how she blushed, and smiled, even in church, when the
student appeared there to preach —in short, she was
making herself mighty cheap. Now, we regret to have
to own that she was somewhat indiscreet; she certainly


went half way to meet the attentions of Mr. Blumine,
for never before had she been thrown into such close
contact with a. fascinating, accomplished, young man,
and she never imagined that his behaviour did not
mean what she and others took it for, nor that she her-
self was an unlikely person for him to fancy. The two
had much in common, and also contrasts sufficiently
marked to make them a suitable pair. Even Mrs.
Trenewy thought her daughter honorably courted, and
had anybody suggested that it was otherwise she would
have pointed to Mr. Blumine’s sacred calling, and told
the rest of the world to mind its own business.
It was all very sweet and very entrancing to Sarah;
and so the three months went by, and yet another six
weeks, ere the regular minister was able to resume his
work.
And now the week came when Mr. Blumine was to
go to another part of the colony, and Sarah was low-
spirited and wistful. He had not spoken, and she be-
gan to doubt whether he would speak. There are nob
many young men who realise the awkwardness of a girl's
position, when she is being courted, and before she has
been asked the very important question; sometimes one
is tempted to wish for the good old times in such case,
when the suitor made his intentions known first, and
then set to courting the maid; but that course would
not be non-committal enough for these cautious days.
On the Friday before his last Sunday, Mr. Blumine
came in the circuit buggy, and asked Sarah to take a
drive with him. Her mother helped her into her
jacket and hat, and soon the buggy was running


smoothly along the road that led to Bulgong", six miles
away. The girl looked up at her companion, and saw
that his face was unusually grave. "Sarah,” he said
at last, bringing the horse to a walk, "I have to go
away on Monday !*’ "Yes, I know !” "And I wanted
to say a particular goodbye to you, and to ask you for
advice!” "Yes?" she said, with drooping eyes; “what
is it?” "I —I find it hard to tell you, but I fear —I
have not been behaving quite properly to you, and I
don’t know exactly what toi do !” Sarah was silent for
a few minutes, then she fixed her beautiful, candid eyes
upon his glowing face, and said, “I think you should
speak right out; is there any reason why you should not
have behaved to me as you have?” "Yes!” The
brown hands of the girl clutched each other beneath the
rug, and she waited until she could trust her voice to
obey her without quivering. "Go on with your story,”
she said at last. "I am involved with another lady!
I have not given her any promise, but she had! good
reason to suppose that I meant more than friendship,
and now I don’t know what to do between you.” There
was another long pause, during which Sarah kept her
face turned away. “Oh, do forgive me, Sarah, do; and
remember that whatever I am obliged to do, I like you
best.” "Oh, indeed,” said Sarah, bitterly, and it was
the first time the young man had heard! a harsh ex-
pression from her lips; "in your next place of labor
you will probably find another girl who will be as easily
taken in as I was!” "Oh, don’t, don’t, Sarah!” She
had hurt him sorely, and without thinking, and imme-
diately her kind heart relented; she felt very indig-


cant, however, and her indignation helped her to main-
tain her maidenly pride in the presence of the one who
had struck such a blow at her self-respect. So she
composed herself, and faced him once more. “Mr.
Blumine, you have indeed behaved badly to me, but
worse to yourself; for you have forgotten what should
be the rule of your life, to do to others only what you
would have them do to you. If you meant to mislead
me, your conduct is unpardonable; but I think now
you just drifted with circumstances, andi I fear I helped
you along ! And let the memory of it go away be-
hind us ! I shall not revive it. You said you wanted
my advice. Then do your duty, and keep the unspoken
promise' you made first. Perhaps I was too easily flat-
tered, and too ready to: encourage you; but- you ought
to have told me of the other—lady!” Sarah fought
down the tears of shame and vexation, and continued,
“I was very silly, I fear; and you were weak; but it
is not too late to make amends to the other one.” The
fiery glow had left the cheek of the young man, and he
sat wistful and pensive. “I suppose you are right,
as usual; but I incline to other counsel! I will do as
you bid, if you will say a word of forgiveness to me!”
“You must do what is right, whether I say it or not;
but I will forgive you, only remember, never to mis-
lead anyone else And now we shall not speak of it
again.”
Mr. Blumine felt somewhat chagrined at this curt
and peremptory dismissal of the whole matter; he had
seen a new aspect in Miss Trenewy’s character, and re-


cognised it as a touch of paternal obstinacy. By-and-
bye he bent down to get a look at her face, and found it
pale and agitated; he was human enough to enjoy a
conquest, but somehow his humane and better self
spoiled the pleasure of this one. He was very sorry to
have hurt her, and was slowly discovering that she had
the power to hurt him too, if she! persisted in her deter-
mination to put an end to their intercourse.
On coming to* the circuit he had taken her for
nothing but a simple country girl, eager to win the
favor of his august self, that she might flaunt it before
her mates; but he had found out his mistake, as by
dlegrees she had laid open to his view the sweetness of
her spirit and the high-souled intelligence’ that regu-
lated most of her actions; he had learned toi appreciate
her nobility and Christian graces, her power toi turn
circumstance to; good account, and her fine’ capability
for adapting herself to all sorts and conditions of men,
save the worst sort. Then, as his stay drew near toi a
close, he found the idea of leaving her most distasteful,
the thought of never coming back to her unbearable,
and above all, the remorse at having left her in ignor-
ance of his true position a veritable scourge to him.
And now that he had made his revelation, she was only
angry, not grieved; and it didn t matter to l her if he
never entered her presence again; he had hoped that
she would bid him, release himself from the other tie,
and make a more definite one with her, but. Sarah s
counsel had been sharp and to the point, leaving him
with no alternative but to return to Ellen. Sarah’s
position was equally painful; she had allowed herself to


dwell upon his many little attentions, and to weave a
tender chain for her own heart ; but she now owned
that all she had won was a life-long lesson in self-re-
spect, and the implanting of a resolve never again to
be so foolish.
For the rest of the drive there was silence, save
when he asked her to accept a new Bible as a parting
gift; this she refused, and he must perforce put it back
in his pocket.
“Are you cold, my dear?’' said her mother’, as
Sarah entered the house. “No, mother.” 'Aren’t you
well, then? “Yes, mother; let me take off my hat,
please!” She hurried away to her room, the mother
following with anxious, expectant face. “What is the
matter, my pet ? she said again, as Sarah seated herself
upon the bed. “Oh, mother, lam ready to die with
shame. I let him take me in so very, very easily!
He’s engaged to somebody else ! But, oh, mother dear!
don’t let people think we didn’t know!” Sarah broke
down at last, and cried bitterly; her mother hugged
and kissed and petted without avail for a- long time, in-
termingling such strong denunciations as “the mean
fellow!” “the smooth-faced hypocrite!” “No, my pet,
I’ll say you knew all the time!” By the time Mrs.
Trenewy came to this announcement, her daughter was
beginning to recover herself, and her true soul saw
clearly the falsehood of such a course. “No, mother,
we must have no lying! We ll tell nothing if we can,
but if we must tell, it shall be nothing but the truth!”
Sarah did not go to church on Sunday morning, for
she could not bear to meet Mr. Blumine before them


all. When the student came into the pulpit, he looked
sad and ill, and preached the worst sermon they had
heard from him since his coming five months before.
He had hoped, and yet feared, to see Sarah there, and
understood only too well why she was absent. He
said boodbye to everybody, and drove away amid the
God Speeds of the whole congregation, and so this
bright and shining star disappeared from the firmament
of Woolinap Methodism.
Perhaps the most curious to know how matters
stood between the student and Sarah was Alice Dunn,
the proud and pretty mother of a pretty baby girl. It
is wonderful how keen upon such topics are young mar-
ried ladies, as though they would have every single girl
in the same happy bondage as themselves. At any
rate, Alice, longing for news, waylaid her friend during
the following week, and commenced a display of her in-
quisitorial powers. “I suppose,” she began, “it’s all
right between you and Mr. Blumine?” Sarah winced,
and! to gain time answered, “In what way ?” “Well, I
never! He has asked you to marry him some day,
hasn’t he, Innocent?” “No,” said Sarah, “he has not!
In fact, Alice, he is engaged to somebody else. I did
not know until last week, and I was very angry that he
did not tell me before ; but it’s all right now I know all
about it!” “The beast!” said Mrs. Dunn, in a perfect
fury, for she was recalling a similar experience of her
own a few years before; “and he led you on like that!”
“And the worst of it is that I was willing to be led! on.
But please don’t say any more to me about it, Alice;


and if anybody else asks you, just tell them what I have
told you.”
Alice did so, and more; and if it were true that the
left ear burns when a person is being unfavorably dis-
cussed, Mr. Blumine’s must have been utterly consumed
during the ensuing fortnight.
Pride helped Sarah to recover’ from her disap-
pointment quickly, and soon she was filling her old
place, looking after the poor and sick, and cheer ing
everybody with her gentle ministrations. Thus a year
went by, and a month or two besides, and it was the
anniversary of the A\ r oolinap church, and everybody
looking forward to a great treat, because' the Rev. David
Aylworth was coming round from Sandhurst to conduct
the festive services.
On the day preceding anniversary Sunday, however,
Jacob came in to tea with the intelligence that the Rev.
David was too ill to keep his appointment, and that he
had sent a substitute. '‘By the way, Sallie, its that
old flame of yours, young Blumine.’ Sarah colored
deeply, and said, “Oh!” “I was talking to him just
now, and he says he is coming up this evening!” “Is
he?” said Mrs. Trenewy rather tartly; “then we don’t
particularly want him !” The mother had not for-
gotten the slight put upon her daughter, and meant
what she said; but she could hardly meet the young
minister at the door with a similar announcement, so
preparations for his reception were made. Those made
by Sarah were of a rather peculiar nature. She set out
cake and scones, and put the supper things upon the
tray; then she went to her room and donned her hat


and jacket. “Mother/' she said, “I am going up to
spend the evening with Alice and Baby, and I shall not
be back until late' !” Mrs. Trenewy hardly knew what
to think, and for once in her life she noticed that
Sarah’s eye was not soft, and that her mien was as
haughty as was compatible with such a small person.
So off went the daughter to visit Mrs. Jimmy Dunn,
while Mr. Blumine was forced to pass a dreary evening
in one-sided arguments with the father upon every
imaginable topic, from politics to spiritualism. At
last, at about ten o’clock, he mustered up courage to
enquire after Miss Trenewy, and on learning where she
was, offered to go and fetch her home. “I think,” said
Mrs. Trenewy, a little abashed, “that Sarah would not
care for it!” “Very likely,” said Mr. Blumine; “but
I have something to tell her !* And when she has heard
me, I’ll leave her if she wishes.”
He was clasping and unclasping his hands ner-
vously, so Mrs. Trenewy yielded; but she followed him
to the door and whispered, “She went out on purpose to
avoid you, and I think you had best let her be!” Mr.
Blumine caught her hand, and whispered his reply, “I
love her, and now lam free—honorably free. I will
do anything to atone, but I must see her and tell her!”
But he was not destined to tell her that night; for
when Sarah found, that her quondam sweetheart had
come to escort her home, she secretly arranged that
Alice should go too, “just for a little walk.” When
she heard from her mother, however, what had been
whispered at the door, she consented to stay at home for
the Sunday tea, at which her father had invited the


young man to jctin them. Well, the end of it was the
same old story; the other lady had found a more con-
genial partner in the young doctor of her town, and had
accordingly jilted Mr. Illumine; and he, as is the way
with men, put his own case 1 so well that Sarah could not
help forgiving him, as is the wa,y with women. He
was to be ordained at the next Conference, and soon
after that they would be married.
Alice was not enthusiastic about the matter at first,
but Sarah soon converted her. Nevertheless, Mrs.
Dunn always declared that that young man was the
luckiest fellow in the world to get such a sweet, clever,
good, suitable girl to help him in his ministerial work.


CHAPTER X.
The Bulgong Tea Meeting.
The little church at Bulgong, one of the satellites of
Woolinap, was on the main road between the two places,
and nestled in a> clump of trees, from whence its white-
painted weatherboard wall shone coolly in the summer
days. The edifice was not devoted entirely to the ser-
vice of religion, for it was town hall, school and general
rendezvous for all sorts and conditions of Bulgong
society.
On a certain beautiful Tuesday afternoon early in
October, there was some stir in the vicinity of this com-
bined chapel and! school, and the cause of it was a tea-
meeting, for which vast (speaking in Bulgong terms)
preparations had been made. There were to be four
tables, provided by the following parties, one by Mrs.
Jonathan Dembler, sister-in-law of her who was very
conspicuous in the Greenhills church work ; one by Mrs.
Jenkins, the champion bread-maker among the farmers'
wives around; a third was to be overseen by the Misses
Barry; and the other was under the control of the
bachelors of the locality, or their deputies. There had
been much warm discussion as to whether the ladies and
gentlemen concerned should go in for a uniform style


of providing; but Mrs. Dember had carried the day,
and each provider was to please l him or her self.
It was about half-past four in the afternoon when
buggies began to arrive at the chapel, bringing whole
families, from the baby to* grandma ; and very gay they
looked, with every girl in her best Sunday frock, and
the children flourishing great bundles of sweet wattle-
blosson gathered from the roadside as they came.
Everybody was talkative; fathers yarned about cattle
end crops, mothers exhibited rosy, good-natured babies,
daughters discussed —well, we shall not say what; Bin
and Dick, Joe and Jack, leaned against the fence, talk-
ing “horse” and “dog,” or casting sly glances at the girls
who gathered in a bright group not far away.
Inside the church, the ladies in charge of the tables
scurried round, and banged things about in such a way
as to excite considerable curiosity. Then another trap
would arrive, and there would be fresh greetings to
offer. “Hullo, Tom! How are yer?” would be the cry
on all sides; or, perhaps, it would be George or Harry;
and everywhere was the same hearty, jovial welcome,
until presently Bill, Dick and company would casually
saunter to the group of girls, and begin to make sheep's
eyes at some particular one of them. “Oh, Dick,”
Janie would say, “you’ve l been leaning up against a
white wall! Come here and let me brush you!” There-
upon would ensue a series of gentle flicks, interspersed
with “Oh, don’t be frightened of hurting me, Ja’! I’ll
stand to be groomed!! Why don’t you brush harder?
Ho, ho, ho! Why, I can’t even feel her doing it!”
And Janie would pretend to give him a tremendous slap


on the back, and then run away giggling, with Dick
close behind her. A group of still younger people
were occupied in a very different fashion. One boy,
about eleven years of age, was cautiously making his
way towards the door of the building, while his com-
panions waited and peeped round the corner. This
young gentleman, being the most renowned for skill and
daring, had been commissioned by the rest to effect a
strategical entrance into the chapel, to take a survey
of the tables, and to hasten back with a report as to
which was most liberally furnished with goodies; the
intention of the main body was to rush the best table
at tea-time, before it could be taken up by the adult
company.
Willy Whyte, the spy sent forth, quietly ap-
pioached the door; it was ajar, and he peered through
the crack. “Oh!” he mentally ejaculated, and his eyes
grew large with anticipation; for there, right in his
view, was Mrs. lumber's table, profusely spread with
dishes of tarts and cheese-cakes, and jam sandwiches
iced with pink and white sugar, and a piled up bow o
big reddish oranges. Willy was so absorbed in the
vision of delight that caution forsook him, and, pushing
open the door, he stepped in to admire the wcmder at
closer quarters. “Out you go!” said Mrs. Jenkins,
turning him round sharply by the collar; and ou e
went, without getting even a glimpse of the remaining
tables. He was a little hurt at this summary treat-
ment, but he had seen one table, and had something
to report “There was lovely things,” he said, on
the table just inside the door!” “Sandwiches! m


quired one little girl. “Yes, ham ones!” The ham
was a flight of Willy’s imagination, for he could not
have seen it, even had he seen the sandwiches them-
selves; but that was a trivial matter, and the party
unanimously decided to take that table by storm, as
soon as tea. was announced.
In this they were disappointed, however; that
table was Mrs. Dernber’s, and Mrs. Dernber had taken
infinite pains to create a sensation, and was not going
to have it wasted on children; so when the door was
opened, and Mr. Jenkins stood taking the money, and
saying cheerily to everybody who passed in, “How are
yer?” Mrs. Dernber was at his elbow, to turn the
juvenile torrent in the direction of the Misses Barry,
who had provided a substantial fare of pastry, sand-
wiches, and good home-made cake, better suited to the
appetite of Willy Whyte and his hungry contingent.
The bachelors’ table was appropriately decorated with
broken mugs, pannikins, and tea billies; its flowers
crouched down in lipless jugs and aged jam. jars; but for
all that the fare was of the best.
The wonder of the room was, however, Mrs. Jen-
kins’ table. She had also aimed at a sensation, andi
beyond a doubt hit it. She had provided herself with
plenty of good cakes and tarts, but right down the
middle of the table was an array of. plates, heaped up
with crisp, dripping Spring salads —lettuce, raddishes
and onions—from which arose cool and refreshing odors;
salt and vinegar had not been forgotten, and with the
aid of Mrs. Jenkins’ own best bread and butter, he or


she who could not make a. hearty tea should do with-
out.
Thither came most of the lads and girls, giggling
tremendously at the novel tea-meeting fare, while Mrs.
Jenkins beamed upon them all from behind the cups,
and declared that if they all ate onions it wouldn’t mat-
ter how close together they got together afterwards.
More giggling followed, and when the grace had been
sung to “Beulah Land,” Dick offered Janie one of the
fragrant bulbs, and said, “Come on, I like onions! You
have one, and it won’t matter then!
Anri now there was a comparative quiet for ten
minutes; a subdued munching came from Mrs. Jenkins’
table; a genteel tinkle of spoons on china from Mrs.
Dember’s; but by-and-bye the hum of talk arose again.
“Now, then, you people who are finished,” said Mr.
Dember, “there’ll have to be another sitting! Make
haste out, as soon as you can, or we shall be late start-
ing the concert!” Most of the young folks trooped
out, and, as it was quite early, and the glow of the sun-
set still in the west, some games were organised; the
Jolly Miller’s Wheel went round with a good deal of
noise, “Nuts in May” were gathered in spite of their
pulling back and shrieking, and a game of “Rounders
called forth some fine displays of agility on the part of
the young ladies, and some very excellent play-acting
on the part of the other sex. One or two couples did
not join in this fun, but strolled off to find some un-
usually fine wattle-blossom that grew down the road
behind the chapel; and there the effect of mutual onion
eating was to be seen, for Janie was sitting with a great


heap of fluffy wattle-blosson (the good old sort with
great yellow balls upon it), and Dick, who' had been
needed to reach it from the lofty branches, was sitting
on a log beside her, with his arm about her waist. It
was really very reprehensible conduct, I know; but
they didn't know, and when it is remembered that they
got back in time for the concert, perhaps their conduct
may be excused a little; and, after all, it may have
been something to do with Mrs. Jenkins' onions.
When Dick and Janie reached the chapel again, a
great commotion was going on. Half a dozen men were
puffing under the weight of Mrs. Dember’s organ, which
had been lent for the occasion because it was so much
better than the one belonging to the chapel; by-and-bye
it was safely landed in the corner by the pulpit. Forms
were being dragged into place, and Jacob Trenewy, the
chairman, was fixing up his spectacles, preparatory to the
deciphering of a hieroglyphic programme. The people
had paid one and sixpence each for their tea, and now
Mr. Jenkins was turning them all out again, that he
might levy another sixpence per head for the concert.
It would be ill-natured to say that the concert was
dear at the price, but to strangers it would have been,
unless they happened to possess a keen sense of humor.
Every performer was a friend of at least half the audi-
ence, and love makes us deaf as well as blind, sometimes.
The concert started with a hymn and prayer; then
came the statement of the secretary and treasurer com-
bined, during the reading of which the back forms grew
restive, and whistled “Get your hair cut”; but at last


the programme was fairly begun, and every item was
encored. Miss Elsie Barry, a fine buxom, country gm,
sang in the tiniest of voices, “The Song that Reache,.
My Heart”; little Mary Dember recited “Five Little
Pussy-cats,” and had to be prompted “eleven times.
Mr. Wallis, a man of unusual height, and the possessor
of a gruff bass voice, made the very lamps tremble witn
his vigorous rendering of “Sing Me to Sleep” (first ap-
pearance of this song in the district, and great applause
at its conclusion). But we cannot enumerate, the who e
of the items, and we have no need, since the local paper
(that in which the scurrilous hits of Mr. Bridge were
printed) always attends to such matters. The audience
was kept engaged/however, until after ten o c o, c , an
to fill up the half-hour before: the moon would rise, the
Mesdames Dember and Jenkins served coffee and cake
at sixpence per head, thus disposing of the leavings to
the profit of the church.
The company at last dispersed, after the lusty sing-
ing of the doxology. Mrs. Dember was quite satisfied
with the impression made upon her neighbours by
splendid table; the Misses Barry, sensible staid girls,
had enjoyed looking after the youngsters; the deputies
at the bachelors’ table had likewise had a good time ;
but Mrs. Jenkins had a, grievance, and she announce:
it to her husband at breakfast the following morning.
“Look here, Ned, I don’t believe any of ’em had a better
time than my table; bute-and I’m ashamed to say it oi
him—old Trenewy never paid anything for his tea, nor
the concert! And him got the big orchard, and lots
of money, too!” Ned shifted upon his chair. “I


think you’d better keep that to yourself, old girl! He
didn’t pay; neither did you.” ‘'Well, I never ! After
me giving a whole table, to say I didn’t pay! It’s just
like you!” “All right,” said Ned, with a twinkle in
his eyes, “Jacob is square toe. When I went to pay
him for the oranges, he said, ‘That’s my donation, Mr.
Jenkins,’ and Sarah sent this as hers,’ and he pops five
shillings into my hand; so just mind what you get say-
ing about Jacob’s tea, and his paying for it!” Mrs.
Jenkins did mind, and soon all Bulgong knew what a
handsome gift it had received from the Woolinap or-
chardist.
The days of tea.-meetings are over in Melbourne,
but if you should long for one of the dear old-fashioned
gatherings, just contrive to take a trip to Bulgong in
the Spring, or to any such by-way place at anniversary
time, and you will be sure to have one.


CHAPTER XI.
Shadows.
In the little world of Woolinap, as in every other
small community, there were times of shadow as well as
of shine. The affairs of such a place could not be
expected to go on without some gaps occurring in the
ranks; and during the Bummer prior to Sarah Trenewy’s
marriage, there were several breaches.
The town of Woolinap lay nestled in a green valley,
through which the Black Creek swept in Winter, or
babbled over its gravel in the Summer. It was a pleas-
ant spot in which to live, with its trees along the creek,
and its low, billowy hills in the distance on every side;
but a few of the “Croakers,” as Joe Dunn called them,
were forever declaring the place unhealthy. Until the
present summer, however, there had been no serious
grounds for such an assertion; but now the scourge of
typhoid fever fell upon the people, and almost every
second house had its case, either slight or serious.
Some of our Methodist friends were smitten; Jack
Rigbert, now a young fellow of twenty, was being nuised
at home by his mother; Joe Dunn’s youngest girl lay in
the hospital, seriously ill, and Mrs. Dane was confined
to her bed with a mild attack. The case which excited
the most sympathy, however, was young Mrs. Dunn.


One day Jimmy had appeared at his father-in-law’s,
and had suggested that Mrs. Hilton should run down,
and see what she thought of Alice. “I’ve brought the
nipper away, so that she may have it quiet, and Sarah
has offered to take care of the child for to-day, if you will
go to Alice !” Mrs. Hilton was not long in reaching the
home of her daughter; and such a neat, pretty little home
it was, all embellished with tasteful trifles such as a girl
like Alice would fancy. But the mistress of this estab-
lishment was much more seriously ill than her husband
had supposed; the rounded rose of her cheek was aflame,
and her beautiful blue eyes glittered with fever fires.
“Oh, mother, I think lam very bad! And what will be-
come of Baby if lamto be ill long?” “Baby will be
cared for, my pet! Jim and father and Sarah will see
to that, and I’ll see to you ! Let me shake up your pillow
a bit, and bring you a cup of tea! There now; you’ll
soon be quite well again.”
But in spite of the cheerful prediction, Alice grew
worse, and during the afternoon Jim was despatched to
the mining town, five miles away, to bring the doctor at
once. From that hour Mrs. Hilton established herself
at her daughter’s; Alice first moaned and moaned with
the pain in her head, then became delirious and raved
incessantly about the baby, Jim, Sarah—everything and
everybody that had come within touch of her for years
past. She told her mother over and over again how
she had been deceived by that newspaper man at Rig-
bert’s, and how she would never, never have anything
to do with a Melbourne boy again; she went over the
events of the day when the cyclone blew down the chapel,


and how Mr. Blumine had treated! Sarah shame-
fully ; and then she would moan aga\gjßh, mother, it s
my head, my head!” It was wearer work for the
mother to watch her, and since the seizure of Alice, a
younger child, Laura, had been taken with fever, but
fortunately in a mild form. Laura was now tossing m
the next bed to Annie Dunn’s, in a ward of the neigh-
boring hospital.
If ever there were two forlorn men in this world,
those two were the husband and the father of Alice
Dunn. Jim went about his work with a woe-begone
face, calling in at the house a dozen times a day, as he
passed with his dray; he bought three loads of tan, and
spread it on tfie road before his door, that the rumble of
wheels might not disturb his wife in her drowsy haif-
consciousness; he absolutely pestered his mother-in-law,
to tell him what he could do or get next for Alice, and
was miserable because he could neither do nor get any-
thing.
Yorky Dick relieved his feelings by taking charge
of the little Alice, now a beautiful and interesting child
of two. He tried hard to be cheerful; he would come
into Wilky Dane’s shop with a hearty “Good-day! and
then his face would fall as inquiries were made after his
two sick children. It was about a fortnight after the
sickening of Mrs. Dunn, when he appeared there one
afternoon with the little girl upon his shoulder. He looked
very sad as he seated himself, and set the baby upon
his knees. “Well, Dick, how is the patient this after-
noon? Has the doctor been yet?” “Yes, the doctor
was there at noon, and she’s not too well—not at all well!


The truth is, Wilky, he says she won't get over it, most
likely!” Dick’s voice broke, and to hide the tears that
filled his eyes, he leant over the baby’s yellow curls.
“Oh, Wilky, man! I can’t abide the thought of losing
her! What are me and the wife to do without her, and
Jim, and the little one here? Oh Wilky, Wilky, if the
Lord were but here to bid the fever go, as He did for
Peter’s mother-in-law!” The poor fellow sobbed as
though his heart would break; and the tailor stitched
away in silence, finding himself powerless to aid his
friend in such an overwhelming hour. At length, how-
ever, he put down his work and came across to the grief-
stricken man; he put one hand upon the bowed shoulder,
and the other upon the child’s beautiful head. “Dick,
old man, she’s not gone yet! Cheer up ! It is not well
for God’s own people to spend their tears over troubles
that may never come! Cheer up, old friend!” “I’ll
try, Wilky; but why should it be God’s will for her to
go, a young happy woman, so needed by us all?”
Wilky stood silent for a time; this was a problem
he had faced for himself years before when a beloved
sister had been taken from her week-old baby and her
affectionate husband; yes, he had settled it for himself,
but would Dick understand? It was not that he could
lessen the grief of parting with Alice, but that God
should will such absolutely cruel separations he was not
willing to believe. After a few moments’ consideration,
he took the little Alice, and sat down beside her grand-
father.
“Dick, I don’t think it is the will of God that your
dear girl or any other young person, should die; we


ought not to leave this life until our course is fully run.
I don’t believe that these things, these calamities, are
any more God’s doings than the coming of sin into the
world ! Mind you, He sees that all things work together
for good to them that love Him, but he never willed that
evil should be a part of all things, and He only makes
the best of it, now it is here. But we must put up with
sin, and with death too, until the Lord Christ cleanse all
things! Don’t lay cruelty like that at God’s door,
Dick. You remember, perhaps, that a few years back
my sister died, and I was fiercely angry with the great
Bather, until I thought it all over carefully; I began to
remember how many thousands of people used to die of
small-pox and how few even catch that sickness now!
Was it God’s will that they died? Not a bit of it, Dick;
it was man’s want of skill, and any amount of the people
who go away young in these times, die for the same
reason. And men are learning, and through them
God is fighting man’s great enemy, untimely Death!
Have you ever thought that none of the people who were
miraculously brought back to life by Christ and His
disciples were old ? It was a little boy who was recalled
-to life by the Prophet, too ! Ah, no; we mustn’t accuse
God of what is caused by our own ignorance, and since we
know so very little, we can’t ask Him to save us in spite
of ourselves can we ? Supposing you either threw your-
self down a well, or carelessly fell into it, you wouldn’t
expect God to preserve you from hurt by a miracle, or
give you a set of cat’s claws by which you could climb
out! I don’t find it easy to make myself clear, but do
you see Dick? This fever in the town is due to some-


body’s carelessness or ignorance about sanitary laws,
and I am not prepared to sentimentalise about 'the will
of God,’ when I know perfectly well that the proper
name for the trouble is plain, short ‘Dirt!’ ’ “Yes,
said Dick, now somewhat calmer, “I see your drift; but
it won’t make it any easier to part with her!” “No,
friend; but if to the bitterness of that parting you were
to 'add resentment against the most tender Father, you
would have indeed a black time before you. Ah,
well,” said Mr. Hilton, with a deep sigh, “I’ll just take
a walk up to the house, and see how she is now! and
that was Dick’s little journey about once in every hour.
The church people did what they could to relieve
and comfort the distressed family; one would bring a
dainty for the nurse, or mutton tea for the invalid;
another would take a turn in the sick-room, or under-
take the charge of the weekly washing; flowers, fruit
and kind messages of every description reached the sick
one, but she was delirious most of the time, and such
attentions comforted her kindred more than herself. At
the weekly class-meeting Jacob prayed that God would
spare the young wife and mother, or comfort her pass-
ing moments with His own gracious presence. Mrs.
Polkett wept as she cried aloud to Heaven for mercy, but
still Alice sank lower and lower, towards the verge of
that stream we call death, and which is but the door of
the kingdom immortal. At last, one afternoon, after
the sufferer had been dozing quietly for an hour or so,
Mrs. Hilton found her with wide, intelligent eyes, and
with the fires of fever almost burnt out.


“Mother, dear mother,” whispered she, and then
paused. “I want Jim, and Baby, and FathePf” “Yes,
Pet! Are you feeling better?” Alice did not answer,
but her face grew wistful. “Bring them,” she whis-
pered; so Mrs. Hilton went to the kitchen where her hus-
band sat with the baby, and bade him call Jim from
the stable, and come to the bedroom quickly. “Give me
the child!” and she took little Alice from his hands.
Her heart was ready to burst, but she stifled back her
sobs, and stood with the little one in her arms, beside
the bed of the dying girl. Alice was sinking fast, the
mother could see it; she sat the child on the bed,
where the blue eyes, so soon to close upon this life, could
rest upon the baby face. “You will be her mother?”
Alice whispered again. “Yes, love,” was all the mother
could say; then Alice closed her eyes, and waited for the
coming of Jim. In a minute his step was heard in the
passage, and he came and knelt by the bed, crying,
“Alice, my darling, my darling!” Alice opened her eyes
and gave him a look of unutterable love. “Jim, come
to me in heaven by-and-bye, and I’ll tell the Lord Christ
about Baby, too! Tell dear old Sarah I’m not afraid to
go!” There was a long pause, broken only by a laugh
from the baby, who evidently supposed the whole sorrow-
ful scene enacted for her express amusement. Alice lay
quite still, and Dick thought she was gone; but she
roused herself again to whisper, “My own dear, good
Jim!”
For a long time the watchers remained in the same
position; so awe-inspiring is the moment when the hu-
man spirit gets a fuller revelation of its Maker, that they


almost feared to draw breath. Then Baby Alice sud-
denly perceived that all was not well, and said in the
plaintive little lisp she had learned from her grandfather
during the last three weeks, “Poor Mumma tho thick!”
and the fountains of woe were opened, and they wept
together in the presence of the dead.
Not a heart in Woolinap but throbbed in sympathy
with the bereaved ones; all that men and women could
do was done; they brought what flowers they could
muster at such a hot season of the year, and filled the
white hands with the sweets they had loved to cull in
life. The face was wasted, but still sweet and fair; the
yellow hair, cut short for the sake of the living head, now
clustered in tiny curls above the pure brow, softening the
rigid lines of mortality. So sweet and fair was the face
that Mrs. Rigbert, after looking upon it, feared not to
bring her little daughter into the mysterious presence.
“Plow lovely,” she thought, “must be the spirit, when
the empty casket that held it is left so fair!
All the people in the district attended the last cere-
mony, and it was a sorrowful hour; the young wife and
mother had seen but twenty-three summers, and to be
smitten in her youth, to have but tasted the joys of earth,
was to most of her friends the saddest part of it.
On her way home from the grave, little Ivy Rigbert
said, “Mother, if Jesus had been here, He would have
said, ‘Wake up, little maid,’ and she would have opened
iher eyes! But He wasn’t here, and I wish He had
been!” The mother looked into the child’s pale and
wistful face, and thought, “Ah yes, and He may be here


soon!” but she said aloud, “My darling, He did come,
and He said it to Mrs. Dunn, and her spirit heard Him,
and awoke and went to be with Him forever, where He
is!” Ivy looked up with the light of understanding in
her grey eyes. “Will He say, ‘Wake up, little maid to
me too, like He did to Jairus’s daughter?” “Yes, some
day,” said the mother; and Ivy was satisfied. The lov-
ing command of the Lord did come to this little maid a
few months later, and everybody said, “God is indeed
good !” for Ivy was delicate, and always a sufferer. And
so the shadows came and went, and the days of sunshine
too, all working together in their turn for the good of
them that love God.


CHAPTER XII.
Changes.
it must have been about seven years after the great
cyclone—if my dates are not correct will the Woolinap-
pers kindly excuse me—when signs of considerable
changes began to show in the Methodist horizon. Of
course, changes had been occurring all along, one by one,
but so rarely as to cause a nine days’ wonder, and then
to fall into the great pit of things forgotten. Mr. Rig-
bert now required two assistants in his shop, as well as
his son Jack, and was said to be doing a flourishing busi-
ness with the country people, who found the large min-
ing town too far removed for ordinary shopping; the
beautiful, blue-eyed Alice Dunn had died, and (must I
say it ?) Jim had his best eye upon a successor to his heart
and home. Sarah was now Mrs. Blumine, and living
only fifty miles away from her old home and friends, in
another country circuit, where her husband was stationed
for the next two years. Wilky had succeeded in carry-
ing out some of his large schemes, but not all; for in-
stance, he had not yet secured the erection of a Sunday-
school, and each Sunday the children still gathered in the
chapel itself. Nevertheless, Mr. Dane continued to in-
sinuate his opinions into Yorky Dick and Mr. Rigbert;
and in spite of Jacob’s persistent opposition, the time was
not far distant when Wilky should get his way.
My readers must also learn that a railway now ran
through Woolinap, that the Presbyterians had a church
in the town, and that the whole neighborhood was per-
vaded with an air of serene prosperity.


The large mining town five miles away was also
thriving, and was still the head of the circuit; but it was
one of Wilky’s ambitions to have a minister at Woolinap,
if not the superintendent himself.
One day a young fellow named Gibbs came into the
tailor’s, shop, and said, “You are one of the managers of
the Wesleyan chapel, aren’t you?” “Yes, Mr. Gibbs,
lam one of the stewards. Can Ido anything for you?’
“I think so 5 I should like to have a talk with you about
a speculation that myself and another chap are wanting
to make. You see, my mate is an old digger, and knows
a good deal more about the mining business than these
School-of-Mines fellows, I can tell you ! Well, he always
said there was gpld about Woolinap, and as we were both
out of work, he proposed to do some prospecting in that
timbered paddock just behind the chapel grounds. We’ve
had splendid prospects, good enough to follow up, but the
lead runs into the chapel ground and could be worked
better from there! Now, Dane, we are willing to do the
fair thing to the chapel crowd, but we want leave to open
up workings in their paddock. What do you say to a
royalty, or something of the kind?” “Well,” said
Wilky, “I can’t say anything. It is the trustees who
have control of such matters; Dunn and Trenewy are
your men.” “Urn!” said the young man thoughtfully,
“Dunn is a blab, and the other a mule! Couldn’t you
help us at all?” “I’ll think it over, said Wilky.
“Come round this evening,” and with that assurance Mr.
Gibbs was obliged to be satisfied for the present.
Wilky did think it over. Hitherto, no gold, except
that which could be washed out of the surface dirt, had


been discovered in the neighborhood of Woolinap, and he
wondered how much warrant the prospectors had for
their hopes. He foresaw great things to follow the
advent of gold mining; first, an increased population;
next, a crowded chapel; and above all, should the chapel
paddock turn out as rich as supposed, there should
be money enough to build a Sunday-school, and to pay
the stipend of a second minister in the circuit, for at
least a time Wilky was so absorbed in these reflec-
tions that he did not notice his wife when she called him
to dinner, and before tea-time he had it all worked out,
so that when Mr. Gibbs dropped in during the evening,
he was informed that if he and his partner really wished
to mine in the chapel paddock, and would give satis-
factory proofs, both of their honorable intentions and of
their grounds for such expectations, then he, Wilky Dane,
would do his best to get them leave to begin work. Mr.
Gibbs promised to give the proofs asked for, and offered,
as a token of good faith, to take Wilky in as a share-
holder; but this offer the American declined ; he thought
it savored of bribery, and his high sense of honor forbade
him doing anything that might have even the appearance
of evil, remembering, as he did, that he had the Lord’s
good name to care for as well as his own.
He used all his blandishments, however, upon the
two trustees, and soon had them persuaded into coun-
tenancing the enterprise of Gibbs and Company; by
the united admonitions of Jacob and Wilky, Joe Dunn
was won to silence, until there should be some reason for
believing that the Wesleyans had a valuable property.


Well, Gibbs and partner soon had a shaft down, and,
to the joy of all, found their hopes more than realised.
Great excitement prevailed when the truth was made
public; some of the Wesleyan congregation thought that
the church itself ought to work the mine; some feared
that the discoverers would cheat the trustees ; and Jacob
and Joe were at a loss to know how they should deal with
the whole affair. Wilky alone was cool; he examined
every step carefully, and spent some time each day about
the mine itself. It soon became evident to him and to
the prospectors that this was no two men’s concern; so
a lawyer was called in, an agreement drawn up, and the
mine floated into shares, the proper proportion of which
belonged to Joe and Jacob, as trustees of the chapel.
The undertaking prospered and developed quickly;
ugly mounds of earth thrown up began to approach the
very walls of the sanctuary, and the “Bang! bang!” of the
“knocker” intruded itself on the week-night meetings:
even Mrs. Polkett was disturbed, as she lifted up her
voice in energetic appeals to the Almighty; but the gold
fever had taken hold of them all, and beauty, reverence,
peace, must all fly before the potent malady. .Yet, some-
thing must be done; it was an unseemly sight to see long,
spidery poppet-heads uplifting themselves above the
white roof of the little Gothic prayer-house; wreaths of
black smoke -from the toiling, snorting engine curled
round the belfry (excuse the term, but what else shall I
call the queer structure which bore aloft the noisiest
member of the Methodist cause in Woolinap?). Every-
where it was dirt, dirt, dirt! Puff, snort, hiss! Clank
and stamp ! Shiver and grind ! And all this right at the


very door of the chapel. Not even Sunday was free from
the turmoil, for water had appeared in the mine, and
pumps must be kept going, weekdays and Sundays, from
midnight to midnight.
Besides these inconveniences, there was another. The
discovery of gold, not only in the chapel paddock, but in
other places round about, had brought a large addition
to the population of quite a different character from the
old inhabitants of Woolinap. Some of the newcomers
were Methodists; for miners are often Cornish, and Cor-
nishmen are often Methodists. The consequence was
that the little chapel was now overcrowded; on Sunday
evenings, when the air was oppressive out of doors, it
was well nigh intolerable in the chapel, with its small
windows and great, flaring kerosene lamps. So Wilky’s
hour had come; the chapel was too small for the congre-
gation ; the trustees had a large credit balance at the
bank, and a prospect of more to come from the mine;
there was also a fine piece of land for sale, two streets
away, just large enough to accommodate a new church,
the old one beside it, to be used as a Sunday-school, and
in the far corner, a neat little parsonage.
With all these facts before him, Wilky bestirred
himself among the people, and it was not long before he
had created a settled conviction in their minds that the
chapel must be moved. The new land was therefore
purchased, a great “jinker” was brought up to the
chapel, and the building lifted on to it bodily. Talk
about excitement! Every boy in Woolinap came to
superintend the operation. How many men were re-
quired has not been recorded, but it took twenty bul


locks to draw the “jinker” out of the chapel paddock
and up the road to an open space, where there was room
enough to turn the corner with a great sweep. It took
nearly the whole day to accomplish the short journey,
before the chapel, still upon its wobbly “jinker,” was
hauled into the new paddock, where foundation blocks
had been prepared to receive it.
The building was ready for service within the month,
and there the people met for worship until the new
church should be finished.
On a certain Sunday, about nine months later, a fine
congregation gathered in the new building to celebrate
its opening. This edifice was much more pretentious
than the old wooden chapel. It was constructed of
bright new bricks, showing up against their redness the
white lines of the mortar that held them together; white
were the doors and window frames, and the roof was cov-
ered with slates—absolutely the first used in Woolinap.
The trustees were brimming over with pride concerning
this ornamental addition to the town, and early that
morning, as upon many other mornings, you might have
seen Joe Dunn taking a leisurely survey of the church
from every standpoint excepting the clouds. How Wilky
admired it, too! And even Jacob was quite enthu-
siastic !
Mr. Blumine, a wiser and a better man for his
unpleasant experience, and for the lapse of time and the
difficulties overcome, was to preach the opening services;
and Sarah was with him, still soft-eyed and gentle, and
wearing an added charm of thoughtful contentment,
never visible to Woolinap before. Of the doings of that


opening Sunday, we need not say more; but there was
a great teameeting on the following Tuesday, a “catered-
for” tea, -and, to the disgust of some of the older mem-
bers of the church, three of the tables were under the
care of three mesdames who had come with the influx
of miners, "Just as if we couldn’t manage the tea without
them,” said Mrs. Dunn, "and that Mrs. Hughes is a
regular boss ! ’ ’
There was one cloud, however, that passed over the
the Woolinap Wesleyans at this time; Mr. Dane, having
bought some shares in the "Chapel Mine” when it was
put into the open market, now found himself with a con-
venient little sum in hand; and, as his wife’s sister
lived in Ballarat, and as that lady very much longed to
be near her sister, Wilky had decided to invest his
capital in a large business, and to leave Woolinap for
good. It was a great blow to Jacob, who, although he
often squabbled with the tailor, had learned to prize his
many gifts and virtues. Such a worker is always missed
when, he leaves a place, but we should remember that
God’s vineyard needs toilers wherever the vines are
planted, and that which was lost by Woolinap was gained
by another section of the great divine garden. He left
the church in Woolinap growing and prospering, and
with him we must also leave, for these are "Tales From
the By-Ways of Methodism,” and after the discovery of
gold in Woolinap, the man who would dare to call the
town a by-way would be brave indeed. Yet, God-speed
to all our by-way churches, sowing the seed in every
corner of this land, and toiling for that day when the
Lord shall gather His great harvest home.




