

pErnt fnn',
H &
UNIVERSAL DESTRUCTION
ABORIGINAL RACES
COLONIZING NATIONS,
AND EVENTUALLY OF
THE NEW ZEALANDERS.
THE CAUSE OF THIS EVIL AND ITS
SURE PREVENTIVE.
ADDRESSED TO
THE RIGHT HON. THE EARL GREY,
HER MAJESTY’S SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE COLONIES.
A.p'urTo/3ov\ o?,
AUTHOR OF VARIOUS WRITINGS ON POLITICAL AND SCIENTIFIC SUBJECTS.
LONDON:
SMITH, ELDER, & Co., CORNHILL.
Price 4d., or 3s. per dozen for circulation.


London : Printed by William Clowes and Sons, Stamford Street.


THE EIGHT HON. THE EARL GREY
HER MAJESTY’S SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE COLONIES,
My Lord,
Highly grcitifiGd 3.t the cUiiiouncGDiGnt by your
Lordship of a polity for New Zealand, closely allied to
that briefly sketched at page 28 et seq., which has long
appeared to me the very best for such a colony, I do,
with the utmost deference towards and reliance upon
your Lordship’s sagacity and high principle, very ear-
nestly commend to your attention the chief subject of
this paper, to which I have endeavoured to give all the
brevity admissible, and something of the force demanded,
by the importance of its object. It has no less an ob-
ject than to exhibit the cause and to suggest the pre-
ventive, in the case of New Zealand, of that extermina-
tion of the aboriginal race, which not a few statesmen,
from its almost universal occurrence in other lands,
have pronounced inevitable; and inevitable I verily fear


it will prove (however promising an intercourse may
for a time exist between some of the natives and the
Colonists), if its sure and universal cause shall continue
to be overlooked.
This grievous issue may no doubt be protracted in
these days by that respect for principle which in every
conflict will leave it to the disaffected natives to take
the initiative ; but it is not, I fear, in the power of man
to prevent its ultimate completion, even by the admir-
able polity propounded by your Lordship, unless a
policy also shall accompany it of an especial and pecu-
liar character, based upon principles in human nature
which are universal and unalterable.
It will be perceived that I have declined any support
from low arguments of economy; but it might be shown
that the destruction of a numerous and brave people by
repeated conflicts is a course the most expensive as well
as the most inhuman —expensive of public and private
money, life, time, and, during its progress, of security;
while it induces a prevailing spirit of irreligion and in-
fidelity in all minds which have taken a part in or lent
their countenance to the perpetration. Whereas, such
a policy as is here advocated would,* even on a most
* No single cause has done so much injury to the moral principles of
Colonists as this, or tended more to render any profession of religion hypo-
critical.


liberal scale, be far less costly. It would also lead to a
rapid growth of the Colony by inducing both a sense of
security and a supply of native labour, while the ap-
proving conscience and benign feelings it would foster
in the Colonists would, more than any other earthly
means, favour the growth of piety and morality amongst
themselves.
The following matter remains in the form in which it
was written, more than a year ago, as an article for a
periodical; but the small promise of public attention to
the subject at the time has caused it to be laid by, until
now drawn forth by your Lordship’s able and hopeful
measures.
I have the honour to remain.
My Lord,
With much respect and admiration,
Your Lordship’s most obedient servant,
AplirrOjSovXoj.




fyc. S)-c.
THE NEW ZEALANDERS,
It is not to be imagined that the inhabitants of Europe,
practised in drawing forth the resources of nature from
the soil and from the mine, and already tilling up every
fertile spot in that continent, could much longer have
allowed such a country as New Zealand to remain un-
occupied, except by a rude and scanty population. The
people of England especially—pressed by the high de-
mands of their many artificial wants, and charging with
their difficulties an assumed redundance of their popu-
lation—could not but be impatient to subject to their
colonizing spirit islands far superior to their own as to
climate, and not inferior perhaps in soil and in mineral
riches. The man who thinks that the Government
could have prevented, for any length of time, the occu-
pation of that country by British subjects, altogether
overrates the power of constitutional authorities.
While we hold the colonization of New Zealand then
to be inevitable, we consider it, if rightly pursued, to be
no less desirable; but it is impossible to know the
doings throughout the Indian world, in the East and in


the West, of nations calling themselves Christian and
civilized, and amongst them, we blush to say it, of our
own, without the deepest alarm lest the extermination
of another noble race of our fellow-men should be added
to the long black catalogue of the crime of Europe—
lest from New Zealand her hundred thousand human
souls should be hurried by English violence to their
dread account, there to charge English example with
the half of their vices,* and to lay the half of their crimes
to vexation and disappointment caused by English op-
pression and misleading.
We cannot then complain of, we applaud the motives
of those who, dreading this result, from universal ex-
perience wherever the knowing -j* people of Europe and
America have found it convenient to exterminate their
less knowing fellow-men, have hoped that New Zealand,
far off in the antipodes, would escape such European
approach, and would remain guided by those only whose
chief object had been its conversion to Christianity.
We cannot, however, for a moment persuade our-
selves that so tempting a field could for any long time
be closed against the enterprising spirit of England;
and we have from the first been convinced that efforts
to foster a spirit of exclusion, jealousy, or discontent, on
the part of the natives, could only issue in the worst
results to both races. We are persuaded that by such
* Not only lawless convicts who have escaped from Australia to New
Zealand, but even the crews of ships touching there, have promoted the
native vices and revengeful wars, while in various parts they and the
settlers have introduced the crowning vice of England—drunkenness; and
with it its promotive—distilled spirits.
f This is the right epithet, not “ civilized.”


measures, however well intended, the troubles have
been precipitated which have already occurred.
But we believe, after a careful study, during several
years, under favourable circumstances, of the human
character in its simpler forms, that there is no reason
on earth, as there assuredly is none to be found in the
dictates of Heaven, why a cordial and beneficial union
might not be effected between the two races, especially
where the same faith is professed in common by so
many of nem. Their being to each other of geogra-
phically antipodean origin is no allowable reason for
their struggling feet to feet to overthrow each other.
It need in no way prevent their peaceful union, hand
in hand, for mutual good. He who talks of a necessity
that “uncivilized” men must perish away before
“ civilized,” proud though he may be in his fancied
light, is, with respect to the nobler qualities of man,
barbarous and uncivilized himself.
That almost all historical experience is on the side
of the exterminating politician, we are compelled, alas !
to admit, to the shame of our race and of our country;
but, in the name of Humanity, we indignantly deny
that the circumstances which impel the “ civilized ” (?)
race to root out the uncivilized are inevitable. To say
so, involves in it a contradiction in terms. The race
which is so ignorant or neglectful, both of the high pur-
poses of man’s existence, and of the first principles of
his nature operating in the poor savage, and forming
the very constitution of his mind, and its deeply im-
planted desires, as to allow all those circumstances to
arise, the issue of which must be the destruction of the
weaker race, either by sanguinary conflicts or by their


falling into despondency,* and into a reckless adoption,
to their ruin, of the worst vices of themselves the do-
minant race—this latter race, we affirm, which can
neglectfully allow such a state of things to arise, has no
real title to the name they have assumed of “ civilized
and Christian.” They are not rightly civilized them-
selves, however extensive and skilful a command they
may have obtained over mere mundane nature, only to
build upon it a system of boundless pride and luxury!
They are not civilized, we repeat. Neither are they
Christian, however far and correctly their “ sciences ”
may represent the workings of Creative power and in-
telligence, if they have imbibed nothing of those higher
attributes of the Deity—benevolence and love! On
the contrary, they are, as to the higher and happier
purposes of our existence, blind and uncivilized them-
selves —very barbarians who can coolly anticipate such
barbarity, or neglect any efforts to avoid it, whatever
large demands such efforts may make upon their
liberality.
When two alien races fall into juxtaposition, the one
highly advanced in knowledge, and, of consequence, in
power, and the other unenlightened, and therefore ex-
terminable—a kindly union, and not a destruction of
the latter, is to result, some self-restraint will have to
be exercised by the former, and some small expendi-
ture of money and trouble to be incurred as a duty of
humanity.
The colonizing Government must not hastily take it
for granted that a polity which is considered best for an
* It is well known that despair and New England rum sweep away all
the poor Indian races of America who do not fall by the musket.


advanced, can be successfully extended over a rude
people at once; or that municipal arrangements, desir-
able for the former in proportion as they interfere least
with the freedom of the subject, can be understood by
the latter, or be conducive to their prosperity.
I here is a first and leading principle or property of
human nature which must be kept in view, to which
due respect must be paid, and the operation of which
must be carefully provided against, before the untaught
race can be brought into a safe relationship with the
cultivated. Man is gregarious, not as an animal only,
but also as an intellectual being. The opinion of his
fellow-men is the object to which he by nature looks for
happiness above every other throughout life. Men
must also have each other’s society, or distrust, dislike,
and ultimately hatred, will arise between them. These
two appetites are universal. With respect to the first,
what more powerful passion of the mind is there than
the love of respect ? In cultivated life it is the main-
spring of human action 5 and it is so jealous a passion
even there, as to require for its conciliation, in addition
to the courtesy natural to refined feelings, an especial
department of manners-etiquette. This passion is the
chief motive power which urges men to seek political
influence, wealth, display, reputation, &c. When rightly
guided, it is highly beneficial in its effects; but when ill-
trained, trifled with, or neglected, it has proved the fruit-
ful cause of human conflicts, crimes, misery, and folly.
In whatever good faith, therefore, and with whatever
good will, the savage may surrender his authority and
his lands, to imagine that he can be safely left to" him-


self to feel his loss of influence, and to brood over the
change, is an error into which, had it not been univer-
sally committed, it would seem incredible any humane
and sagacious statesman could fall. How few, even in
civilized life, can tolerate the loss of influence or of
caste! Bather than submit to the smallest sacrifice of
such a nature, a man will risk his own and take an-
other’s life. To imagine that every New Zealander in
authority should give up his power to the British throne,
and his lands to British colonists, and retire quietly
into insignificance, would be to suppose him either
more or less than a man. He must be an angel or a
dastard to do so. Christianity has taught many of
them much, hut they have not yet arrived, any more
than most of ourselves, at that beatific degree of meek-
ness and humility.
The other passion of the human mind, arising out of
its gregarious constitution —namely, the desire of asso-
ciation —requires, equally with the former, a watchful
and considerate attention in dealing with aboriginal
races. Even in the case of our fellow-countrymen and
neighbours, we cannot neglect it without damage to
good-will. Human minds become estranged and soon
hostile towards each other, through mere separation
and want of intercourse. The kindlier emotions of our
nature require to be cherished by frequent and friendly
association. When left to themselves they fade away
by mere neglect, and give place to suspicion, jealousy,
dislike, and, in time, to aversion. These latter evil
emotions, such is the infirmity of the human mind, need
no substantial injuries to feed upon. They grow strong


and rank upon nothing—upon simple neglect. Even
in a civilized community, every man is aware that in
public and political life, as well as in private, social in-
tercourse and hospitality have to be maintained for
keeping in check this tendency in our nature to cold-
ness and estrangement. In England, especially, feast-
ings as well as meetings are an important instrument
in the preservation of good-will and union in our public
bodies.
Between two races then, already, from various causes,
predisposed to estrangement of feeling, and even to
mutual hostility, how far greater must be the need of a
constant and friendly exchange of good feeling! The
party which feels itself in every way the inferior of the
two, and which must naturally fear depression by the
growth of the other-, does need to experience the unre-
mitting exercise towards it of a watchful and generous
attention.
Let, then, these notable truths be applied to the case
before us. Had they been duly present in the minds
of statesmen, and been made the basis of all Colonial
policy adopted towards aboriginal races, the extirmina-
tion of these throughout the world would not have
disgraced and belied the name of civilization.
In the case, then, of the natives of New Zealand, we
hold that it matters comparatively little, for the ulti-
mate peace of the country, what may be paid for the
land purchased from them; or whether the safe and
reasonable principle were instilled into them, and en-
forced, that land upon which they had expended no


labour was not theirs by right, but the property of the
Government. As surely as the vendors would see it
acquiring, in the hands of the settlers, a value much
higher than any that could possibly be paid to them-
selves for it, and a value durable and permanent, long
after the utmost sum or things payable in reason for it
had been spent or consumed, so certainly must discon-
tent and bitter jealousy arise from this cause alone.
But with this change must come the elevation of the
foreigner, and their own depression; and it is this espe-
cially which human nature cannot endure. Moreover,
in no community of savages does such an equal
democracy exist but that there are amongst them, if
not hereditary leaders, at least some leading spirits in
each tribe of greater or less ability. To these, exter-
mination of their whole tribe and of themselves is pre-
ferable to an extinction of their influence. They cannot
and will not live without of inferior minds,
and the general respect of their fellow-men. Nor can
we blame them; for, what is it but the same object
(we must again repeat, since the fact is so neglected)
for which men amongst ourselves seek so ardently
wealth, or mental distinction, or political power ?
While we think that no impartial man, acquainted
with their efforts, can doubt the anxious desire, either
of the Government or of the New Zealand Company,
for the welfare of the natives, and while we would fain
attribute the unhappy disputes between the Govern-
ment and the Company mainly to this desire on the
part of the former, we are compelled, upon the cer-
tainty of the principles we have laid down, to pro-


nounce the very framework of the policy of either of
these parties, however good in many respects, to be in
this important point seriously defective. The more it
may correspond in structure with the system of non-
interference, which is in accordance with public feeling
in oui free and advanced state of society in England,
and the more therefore the natives are merely pro-
tected in what are considered their rights, and then left
to themselves, and to the educational influence of the
missionaries only, however faithfully exerted, the more
certainly are we compelled to predict the occurrence of
lamentable conflicts, and the ultimate extermination of
a noble people, in part by the sword, and in part by
their pining away, unsettled and discontented, through
want, disease, and reckless dissipation.
Men, if there be any such, who could calmly calcu-
late on this result, and would not desire that every
humane effort should be made to prevent it, and at any
necessary cost, we hold to merit at the hands of Provi-
dence, whatever may be His inscrutable dispensations,
extermination themselves.
Keeping in our view the fact, which no one perhaps
will question, first, that of all the passions and propen-
sities of man s nature there are none which exercise
over his mind a more universal dominion, nor any
which even the best men find more difficult to regulate
in themselves, than those we have dwelt upon se-
condly, that when European dominion is extended over
aboriginal races, these particular properties of human
nature are put to the severest trial in minds least able
to withstand it; and, thirdly, that a mere commonplace


protection of the person and of property, and adminis-
tration of justice, right and necessary as they are, offer
no adequate provision against the adverse operation of
these desires of the human mind-—with these stern
truths before our view, we believe that, unless a peculiar
policy shall be adopted, especially suited to the case, it
will be impossible to establish a friendly union between
the two races. The one or the other of them must
disappear from off the land.
The pleasure of novelty, and an admiration of our
wealth and skill, together with temporary gain to
themselves, and the dissipating luxury it supplies, may
have caused many native leaders to adhere to our in-
terests, and we would fain hope a higher principle has
actuated others who have felt some of the civilizing
influence of Christianity; but sooner or later those do-
minant desires of our nature upon which we have dwelt,
will, we believe, assuredly gain the ascendancy over
the mind of nearly every one of them, and will urge
him to any extremities, if, for his declining influence as
a chieftain of savages, no substitutes have been pro-
vided in his new relationship—if his mind has not been
kept occupied in enjoying the respect of office, and the
hospitality and society of the European authorities and
the Colonists. However culpable we may consider it,
and however treacherous and traitorous it may appear
to our partial and selfish view, it is only natural that
even our best friends, who may at present be sincerely
attached to British interests and authority, should one
by one, after the example of Heki, lead their followers
against us, or, hopeless of success by open measures,


secretly aid the disaffected; and in either case bring
upon themselves a terrible retribution; while many of
them, equally unable to endure the gnawings of dis-
appointed desires, will in reckless despair give them-
selves up to a destructive debauchery. Thus in New
Zealand, as in America, the bayonet and alcohol , admi-
nistered by Christian hands, will lay a whole population
in their graves,—there to trouble us no move, —until
that day when they will stand up before us, an accusing
army clamorous for judgment! *
The policy we would advocate would comprise a
systematic provision for giving a right direction to
those irrepressible desires of our nature operating in
the New Zealand mind, which, if left to rankle in
neglect, must engender bitterness and hatred towards
us: but which, fostered in a politic manner, might be
converted into the surest bond of affectionate loyalty to
the crown of England, and of friendly union with the
Colonist.
The following is an outline of such a policy. To
give it due effect, the Government must, in the outset,
be prepared as a bounden duty of humanity, while it is
* The intended military colonization of the islands by out-pensioners of
Chelsea Hospital is a measure which seems more especially to require the
corrective influence of the policy advocated in these pages. However
deserving they may be of their country’s gratitude, military pensioners are
not a class amongst whom we can hope for a prevalence of the two virtues
anxiously to be desired in Colonists— peacefulness and sobmety ; their
training and habits of thought little favouring the cultivation of the former,
and their habits of action being too frequently opposed to the latter.
Guarded, how'ever, by the following system, these worthy veterans might
enjoy the happy privilege of henceforth aiding the Government in the
preservation, instead of the destruction, of their fellow-men.


one of eventual economy, to call upon Parliament for
an annual grant to the necessary amount.
To preserve a hundred thousand* living souls from
destruction, and to lead them, mind and body, to lend
their efforts powerfully to aid, instead of dangerously to
oppose, the colonization of their country by her people,
would be a great and noble achievement on the part of
England—one more worthy of her ambition, and in-
vesting her with a truer glory, than would the subjuga-
tion of a world by arms! But that which is great and noble
will have its price. A public effort which is to win a
country, and to save a nation, must be allowed its cost.
It is scarcely possible to imagine an act of national
parsimony more unprincipled, more short-sighted, and
more degrading than would be that of a wealthy people
which, having assumed a terribly responsible sove-
reignty over a nation of uncivilized, but living and im-
mortal beings,—a sovereignty, too, acquired under the
cover of their consent, —should allow it to issue in their
destruction, rather than incur the temporary outlay
necessary for converting them into loyal and contented
subjects. If the following plan be objected to upon the
ground of its cost merely, with any such objectors we
can have no feeling in common, and to them have
nothing to say, unless it is to express a regret that such
minds can claim a relationship with Humanity. But
if it be objected to by any, as singular and unusual, we
beg to remind these that the preservation of an ab-
* Their number is now estimated nearer two hundred thousand.


original race by a Colonizing Government is also, alas!
a singular and unusual proceeding—so nearly without
a precedent as to be coldly pronounced impracticable
by some. The means, then, which are to effect it for
the first time must, from this sad fact itself, be peculiar,
unusual, and without precedent.
I. In the first place, we hold that it would have been
perfectly right and necessary, for the ultimate good of
both races, that the sovereignty of Her Majesty should
have been proclaimed absolute over the whole country
before any attempt to colonize it had been made.
11. That all land which was in a state of nature, and
which was beyond a certain distance from native habi-
tations, should have been pronounced the property of
the Crown. This we have long considered to be in all
such cases one of the preliminary measures indispensably
necessary for the ultimate preservation of the abori-
ginal race. We hold it to be a weak sensibility, or a
cruel mockery, in rulers who had assumed an uninvited
and most responsible sovereignty over a savage people,
to create or recognise rights which they must per-
ceive, if qualified for their undertaking, are sure to
issue in grievous wrong to all concerned—which must
lead to endless disputes amongst the natives, and col-
lisions with the Colonist and the Government.
111. Prior, however, to the assumption of the sove-
reignty, and of the territory, of the islands by Her
Majesty, it would have been of much importance, we
think, had her Government dispersed, for some months,


over all parts where safe residence could be had, a well-
instructed machinery of functionaries, zealous in win-
ning the confidence and good will of all the leading
minds, and bearing to them useful, though not neces-
sarily expensive, presents from Her Majesty.
IY. The measures, upon the principles we have
laid down, first in importance, immediately after the
assumption of the sovereignty, would have been the con-
ferring of local rank and titles on all influential men,
under deeds of an imposing description, and the nomi-
nation of such of them as were willing at the moment
to take office, to all manner of respectable posts, jointly
with Europeans , though for a time they might be of
little use themselves. Some of the very leading men
ought certainly to sit in a Colonial Legislature; others,
with Europeans, as magistrates; others, again, as super-
intendents of police, nominal surveyors of land, officers
of customs, &c.; two, three, or more, might accompany
each European official. Two hundred thus engaged,
though of little other use, would be virtually hostages
of great value for ensuring the good conduct of their
several tribes. They especially who sat on the magis-
terial bench in each district would form a link connect-
ing their jurisprudence, which might gradually be
abrogated, with ours, and impressing the minds of their
countrymen with a respect for our laws, and for the
decisions of the European magistrates with whom they
sat. An imposing robe of office, and probably not
more than fifty or sixty pounds a year expended upon
each of them, would, with the charm of rank and influ-


ence, ensure a loyalty which perhaps not one of them
would fail to exhibit on every opportunity, and which,
from its happy effects, would be worth any price.
Y. A colonial army of a few thousand men ought,
we think, next to be raised. The commissioned and
non-commissioned service, as well as the rank and file,
should contain both natives and Europeans. The two
races being thus equally dealt with, and closely mixed
together, there would be on the part of the natives no
motive for, nor possibility of, any extensive conspiracy:
and a fatal evil would be avoided—that of stamping
the native race with official debasement; let this once
be done, and their advancement, and perhaps their pre-
servation even, will become impossible.*
VI. The lands remaining in the hands of the natives
should not be left as uncertain property of the whole.
Each plot should be assigned to one, or at most a few
individuals ; and this should be done by a joint com-
mission of natives and Europeans, composed chiefly of
the former. Directly the adjudication was made, and
any appeals against it had been duly attended to by
* The case of India is totally different. There, a dominant race, though
it should surpass the Tartar in inhumanity, could have neither the power
nor a motive to exterminate a swarming population whose labour was neces-
sary for themselves; and there the sharp-witted amongst the Hindoos are
by constitution and long subjugation contented to feed the same ruling desire
of the mind-—love of respect, by the acquisition of wealth and the expendi-
ture of it on some public work —a temple, a g’hat, &c., so as each to make
himself a name. Moreover, the numerical odds are in India so seriously
against the European, that it has been thought prudent to grant no higher
commission than that of subadah (nominal captain) to the native; especially
as the climate and difference of religion make it impossible that a European
rank and file could be so mixed in the native regiments as to influence the
minds of the sepahees, and to hear of any disaffection.


another authority, also containing natives, but in the
minority, all land should be held under title-deeds from
the Crown, ornamented and imposing in their cha-
racter, which they might be rendered at a small cost,
being engraved forms sent from England to be filled up
by the local authorities. The possession of these would
exercise an important influence over the minds of the
natives, who would not part with them hastily, and for
a trifle, to repent of their folly afterwards, and hate the
supplanting race ; and when they did part with them,
they would feel that they really had relinquished all
hold on their land. Let not this be considered a trifling
proposal. Even in Europe, showy deeds, heraldic
bearings, and seals of office, have an effect upon the
mind in the way of commanding respect, which cannot
be dispensed with. How much higher must be the
effect upon minds influenced less by reason and reflec-
tion, and much more by things acting upon the senses ?
We consider an early and impressive settlement of pro-
perty to be a point of leading importance. It might be
accompanied with a reception of individuals having
tangible claims, but unavoidably disappointed, into the
public service, or private employment, away from the
scene of dispute. The land-commissioners should also
perform a monitory part, and allow one month’s grace
before the precipitate minds of a people in its nonage
were bound irrevocably to engagements with settlers,
which strip them of lands on which they lived. We
think the purpose of the New Zealand Company to
retain lands as “ natives’ reserves ” an excellent arrange-
ment; such lands would offer to any thus disappointed


the prospect, by good conduct and industry, of recover-
ing a property in the soil ; while they might be so
selected amongst colonial plots as to mix together the
two races as much as possible.
VII. Every encouragement should be given to the
natives generally to acquire habits of industry ; and
they who would not change their own habits should be
induced by all proper means to let their children enter
industrial schools, their time being divided between an
improvement of the mind, and a learning of useful
trades connected with domestic art or agriculture. As
far as possible, the whole rising generation should be
educated into the pursuits of civilized life (properly so
called), intermixing with their training as little as we
could of our own false civilization. Even that portion
of the adult population which preferred their primitive
mode of life would by these means, as well as by those
advocated under the former and the following heads,
be brought to remain peaceably disposed towards the
Colonists, amongst whom members of their own families
were both living (virtually as hostages) and earning the
fruits of industry,* which would often doubtless be sent
home to benefit themselves.
VIII. Intermarriage between the two races, espe-
cially between native females of rank and educated
Europeans, should be encouraged by various means;
such as a grant of land without purchase; and in the
* Before the unhappy disputes between the two races arose (the natural
and sure consequences of our neglectful policy), natives were not only be-
ginning to labour steadily, but were thriftily laying by a part of their wages
more providently than the colonial labourers themselves.


case of these last, perhaps by official employment, or a
seat in the Colonial Legislature. Nothing would con-
duce more to the preservation of the natives, and to
their advancement, than such a union. It would
equally promote the security of the Colonists. Every
tie of this kind would check the otherwise too certain
growth of unworthy feelings between the races—invi-
dious and hostile ones on the part of the natives, and
contemptuous and exclusive in the Colonists. The elite
of the population being thus secured, and each tribe
represented in the public service, a firm hold would be
obtained over the affections of the natives, and a well-
founded loyalty be implanted in their breasts; while the
preservation and increase of their numbers, and the
elevation of a portion of them into a superior class,
would give them and their mixed descendants an influ-
ence in the Colony, which would serve in future years
as a salutary balance to the power of the European
population, should these ever imprudently contemplate
a premature separation from the mother country.
IX. We have next to consider the other deeply-rooted
principle of our nature, which, as forming an insepa-
rable part of the moral structure of the human mind,
we have shown to demand a careful attention in our
dealings with an uncivilized race—namely, the tendency
to, and sure growth of, estrangement of feeling, and then
of hostility between men, when the duty of association
and of hospitality is neglected. To cultivate the moral
graces in the ignorant mind, we must win its affection;
for which a kindly attention is a necessary duty. He,
who of mortals had the deepest insight into the human


heart, well knew this, and therefore made it one of the
requirements of a bishop that he should be “ given to
hospitality.” Not only should all influential Colonists,
by the exercise of private hospitality towards them, set
the example of a friendly association with the natives,
but several public festivals should be established, to be
observed at short intervals during the year. In pro-
cess of time, the intervals between each might be allowed
to increase, and some of the observances to fall into dis-
use, if desired, when a thorough harmony between the
two races had led to an abundant private association.
The public festivals should be made the occasion of
bringing large numbers of the natives into the towns,
and within sight of the exhibition of European civiliza-
tion (such as it is), power, and art. These festivals
should be especially devoted to the purpose of keeping
in their minds, as an occasion of rejoicing, the connexion
of their country with Great Britain. One of them might
be held on the anniversary of Captain Cook’s landing
in New Zealand. Her Majesty’s gracious reception of
the islands under her sovereignty as a part of her em-
pire should be commemorated for some years, twice at
least, annually; that the fact itself, its importance, and
its unalterability might be kept fresh in the native’s
mind by an imposing, and at the same time a pleasing
pageantry —by processions, salutes, music, and aquatic
feats, in which his own skill should be given the oppor-
tunity of displaying itself, and be rewarded by prize
medals, flags, &c., presented in Her Majesty’s name.
The relation of his country to the British crown
would thus assume in the native’s sight a happy reality;


and a stability, which he would neither desire nor ever
hope to disturb.*
The first landing of the missionaries, and their intro-
duction of Christianity into the islands, ought to be the
subject of a festival of a different and higher character.
It would be well that it should be constituted of rites
purely religious, that all right-minded amongst the
people might feel the solemnity of the occasion, and
might bear in mind to what people they owed, as in-
struments in the hand of a merciful Providence, the
introduction of that light, which alone could wrest from
the powers of darkness a race so far gone hell-ward as
to prey upon each other’s flesh as well as lives, and be
the slaves of a most sanguinary superstition, and might
entertain towards that people an affection deep and en-
during in proportion.
With respect to the form of government to be esta-
blished throughout the islands, important as the question
is for the prosperity and contentment of the Colonists,
we hold it to be one altogether secondary to the great
principle of dealing with the natives as human beings,
the preservation and gradual civilization of whom is a
duty laid upon us by our common Creator from the
moment we assumed the sovereignty of their country.
* The most actively hostile native, Heki, for instance, himself, might, we
believe beyond a question, have been thus led to direct all his activity to the
support of the Queen’s authority, when he found himself invested with
authority as a commissioner or (nominal) magistrate, and with an imposing
robe of office, and occupying a conspicuous place in a procession, or called
upon to award some of the prizes, &c., on these public occasions; while at
the same time the whole scene would inspire him with awe at the thought
of opposing an order of things of which this was but a joyful exhibition.


As human beings, we ares bound to recognise in them
the leading principles of oiur nature, and the ruling de-
sires of the human mind arising out of them; and to
hold out gratifying and imnocent objects for their exer-
cise, that we may lead them in a useful direction.
If care be taken to cultivate by all practicable means
a good understanding between the natives and the Colo-
nists, the latter will assuredly thrive under the usual
system of government in omr Colonies. It must, how-
ever, be admitted that the government of our Colonies is
in many important points defective. Inall our Colo-
nies, but more particularly iin such as are at a great dis-
tance from the mother country, the system of self-govern-
ment should, we think, be introduced as far as the cir-
cumstances of each admit of it. It might be carried,
we believe, with safety and advantage to a considerable
length, if the country were previously divided into small
states or municipalities, each having the distinct control
of its internal affairs, and sending representatives to a
central point of general government. A reference to
the mother country should be confined chiefly to ques-
tions affecting the foreign relationships of the Colony.
In proportion as it undertook to bear the burden of its
expenses, it should be allowed the management of its
own financial concerns.
Men of mind and capital from England should be
encouraged to settle in the country by opening to them
a position of usefulness and of distinction. Men who
carried out large property, and would devote a fourth
part or a moiety of it to public purposes, might be given


rank in a Colonial Nobility, high in proportion, and a
place in an Upper House of Assembly, composed only of
such and, perhaps also, of a few leading natives. There
are not a few men in England of sound judgment and
principle, possessed of considerable, some of them of
great wealth, but without local rank or adequate influ-
ence, whom the same universal passion upon which we
have dwelt—love of respect, would induce to turn Colo-
nists upon the offer of high local rank. It is not im-
probable, that by means of their munificence, thus re-
quited by honours, important public works might be
carried into effect; while the employment of their capi-
tal in the Colony would soon open sources of wealth ad-
vantageous to themselves and to the labourers they
employed.
While we think the mother country cannot proceed
in too encouraging a manner towards the Colonists, and
that by such a course she will alike advance her own
and their interests, we desire that the general views, we
have ventured in a brief manner to express upon this
point, may be held distinct from those we have main-
tained upon the more urgently important question —the
preservation of the aborigines, and their peaceful union
with the Colonists. Whatever may be the opinion en-
tertained of the one part of our views—those in favour
of Colonial self-rule, we rest the other more impor-
tant part —the course to be pursued towards the native
population,—upon principles in man’s nature which are
universal and indestructible, which give birth to desires


irrepressible and paramount even in civilized life (so
called), and the main-spring <of its boundless wants and
endless follies, as well as off most of its nobler acts.
Such desires ruling the poor savage, may be trained in-
deed to the most valuable results, but can be repressed
only by the extermination of his race.
London : Printed by William Clowes and Sons, Stamford Street.
