

THE
BALLARAT
BEACON




The Ballarat Beacon
VoL. I. 19 17, No, 1.
Unregistered at the G.P.O- as umpteenth-class reading matter. Published at Sea.
EDITORIAL.
OUR HUMBLE EXPLANATION.
Even were it not the custom for each of His Majesty’s
Australian troopships to have its own newspaper’, we
think the scope which exists, from a journalistic point of
view, on H.M.A.T. Ballarat would have readily sug-
gested such a production. At any rate, the cordial re-
ception given by all ranks to the decision to inaugurate
‘‘'The Beacon” constitutes, in our opinion, the hap-
piest auguries for its success.
We have first of all to render our thanks to the C.O.
Troops, Lieu.-Colonel R. M. M’Vea, V.D., for kindly
permitting the publication of “ The Beacon,” and be-
ginning with ids hearty sanction, we hope it shall “ carry
on ” in such a manner as to merit- his complete com-
mendation. We have also to acknowledge our indebted-
ness to the Purser and to the Chief Steward, Mr. T. J.
M’Garbhy, for allowing us the use of his office, as well as
his duplicator, which was the best substitute for a print-
ing press available.
It is intended to select the best from all the shipboard-
issues of ‘‘ The Beacon,” and, with the addition <h
sketches and photographs, reproduce it in the form of
an artistic and comprehensive souvenir at the conclu-
sion of the voyage.
The co-operation of all ranks in the production of “The
Beacon ” is invited, in order that it may be thoroughly
representative of all that is best and happiest, on board.
In this way, its value as a souvenir will be increased, and
it will prove a potent factor in relieving the Indian'oT
“'The long Trail.” Everyone, therefore, is asked to
accept a personal responsibility in regard to the matt, ‘
Ther e is certainly no room on this ship for the mp
critic. He is really a lazy individual —a parasite on €■ b
goodwill .and energy of others. Of course, there is thv
active critic. He is reminded that unkind criticism of
other units is neither permissible nor desirable, and that
this publication must conform to military rules and re-
gulations
“OUT OF THE FULNESS OF THE HEART.”
There is something which “The Beacon” regards
as a first and bounden duty, and that is to express, as
publicly as possible, the unanimous appreciation feltyby
the troops on this ship of the hearty welcome accorded
them by the people of Albany, Fremantle and Perth,
It has left behind it a glow which will warm our hearts
towards our Western friends throughout the years to
come.
Whether or not it is a fact that warmer climes tend to
thaw the reserve of those residents therein, we are not
here to say; but we do. know that there was a frankness,
a geniality and a perfectly obvious sincerity about our
Western welcome that must have melted the misanthropy
of the greatest grumbler on board. We were strangers,
and we wore khaki. These facts were sufficient to con-
stitute the open sesame to the good graces of everyone.
The frank appreciation of the khaki that was evinced
appealed to us all most sensibly, and made us feel that
we wanted to live up to the general good opinions of it.
Add to the universal popularity of the khaki free tram
and train travelling for soldiers, and we do not wonder
why Western Australia is able to maintain her full
quota of recruits.
Was there ever anything more exhilarating than that
ride from Fremantle to Perth in the fast running
“soldiers express” whose departure from the port, sta-
tion was the signal for each railway engine in the yard
to let off evory available ounce of steam in a jovous
“Hip, hip, or was it rt Cook-a-doodle-do ? ,
Anyhow, it does not matter much. Tire spirit of tne
thing was that which counted most. Every engine
passed on the track heralded us in like manner, and the
climax was reached when we finally pulled up at the
Perth platform, for there a score of engines in many
keys shrieked in a chorus of welcome, with our own en-
gine—exhausted, but triumphant—doing its best to
make its responses heard above the din. It may not
have been very melodious, but it was tremendously jolly,
and put the boys in great good humour with themselves.
Tire folks along the line were, not one whit less demon-
strative tliarr the railway engines, and the enthusiastic
waving and cheering were continous all the way from
Fremantle to Perth.
We should like to writ© at considerable length of the
smart city of Perth. We should really like to rhapso-
dise regarding the magnificence of its situation. We
could fill an entire issue with stories of the hospitality of
the good people of Albany, Fremantle and the capital.
But if our appreciation is unlimited, our space unfor-
tunately is not, so we must be content with simply bow-
ing our acknowledgments, as it were.
If the West welcomed the stranger, it also sued the
parting guest, and quite a number of the Fremantle folk
assembled on the wharf to cheer us on our way. Our
boys were happy in their adieus. They had made many
new acquaintances. They had spent a joyous time—


and incidentally mast of the cash they, could spare— and
as shore leave had been generous, they did not grudge
the going. We all hope to renew our acquaintance with
1 lie West, and would say, with feeling of the liveliest
anticipation, ‘’’An revnir. but not good-bve.”
THE DAILY INTERRUPTIONS.
(“ Week in, week out, from morn till night, we hear
the bugle blow.”)
Reveille. —Oh! its nice to get up in the morning.
Rations. —Give us this day our daily bread.
Ist Parade. —Art thou weary. Art thou languid?
Sick Parade.—Who were you with last night ?
Kit Inspection.—Count your blessings, name them one
by one.
Mess Orderlies.—Nil desperandum.
Breakfast. —Australia will be there.
Dental Parade. —And there shall be wailing and gnash-
ing of teeth.
Tent Inspection. —Wit at is home without a mother 1
Letters.—“ When you’re a long, long way from home.”
Fatigues.—England Expects that every man this day
will do his duty.
Dress for Parade. —Put on your Ta-Ta, little girlie.
Fall-in.—l hear you calling me.
Advance.—Let’s all go down the Strand.
General Parade.—-They also serve who only stand and
wait.
March Past.—Alexander’s Rag-Time Band.
Orderly Room—Hold your hand out, naughty boy.
Smoke Oh ! —’Neath the shade of the old Apple Tree.
Visual Training.,—There is a gremOhill f a~ away.
bS-fmier.—Carve’a little bit off the top for me.
Afternoon Parade. —Here we are again.
Route March. —The long, long trail.
Bath Parade. —Shall we gather at the river.
Foot Inspection. —Roses, Roses, everywhere.
Boot Inspection.—ls it well with thy soul?
Dismiss. —Now the labourer’s task is o’er.
Tea. —I do like a s’nice s’mince s’pie.
Inspection of Leave Men.—Oh ! you Beautiful Doll.
Guard.—Thy sentinel am I.
Defaulters.—Come, Sinner, Come.
Retreat.—When the golden sun sinks in the West.
First Post.—The day Thou gavest, Lord, is ended.
T a ttoo, —Absent.
Last, Post.—Just a wee deoch and doris.
Lights Out. —The end of a perfect clay.
EUCHRE TOURNAMENT.
A euchre tournament, conducted by Sgt. B. Tenni, of
the Railway Unit, was held in the Sergeants’ Mess, and
extended over three nights. There were 40 entrants.
The successful pair were Sgt. ,T. Hawkins (“ Teddy-
Bear ”) and'Sgt. H. Freestone, both of the R.U. Their
opponents in the final were Sgt. R. O’Sullivan, R..TL,
and Sgt. W. R, Armstrong, 24/14th,
UNTO THE LAST.
This absorbing storyette suggests a startling possibility
concerning the ultimate fate of that world-famous and
characteristic type of Australian Soldier, known as the
Duntroon Sergeant.—(Ed. B.B.)
Slowly the H.M.A.T. “Ballyrat” ploughed her way
through the beautiful blue waters of the Indian Ocean.
Many a voyage had she made ’twixt Australia and Eu-
rope, and the strain was beginning to tell upon her. An
experienced seaman would have told you that all was
not well with her. Although the sergeants had been
allotted quarters on the port side, the vessel had develop-
ed a decided list to starboard. An impending sense of
danger seemed to permeate all on board.
Algernon Fitzpercy leaned against the rails on the
port deck, a half smoked Capstan between his teeth.
Tall and handsome, his uniform cut by one of Mel-
bourne’s smartest, tailors, a short moustache, reminiscent
of a certain picture celebrity, surmounting his upper lip,
he was what could be rigidly described as the ‘''latest
thing in soldiers.”
He gazed into the murky depths, a prey to the most
miserable forebodings.
To eat, to rub shoulders with men, sprung from good-
ness knows where, to sleep with others that never were
and never would be his equal, how every fibre of Ids be-
ing revolted at the very thought!
The click of glasses and sound of light laughter from
a partially opened window in the Officers’ Mess struck
upon his ear, and, with a muttered curse, he strolled to
(die starboard deck. Suddenly a terrific explosion shook the
vessel and with a deafening crash the funnel fell to the
deck, wrecking the for’ard cook galley. God ! What was
Chat? A mine? Instantly there was pandemonium.
Officers, men and stewards were in a- hopeless medley of
contusion.
The scene grew calmer, and the various units were to
be observed quickly taking up their allotted posts. Al-
gernon Fitzpercy’s brow cleared. Here was a chance to
show them all what die was made of. Hastily pulling a
revolver from his pocket he rushed towards the boats.
‘‘Steady!” he roared, ‘‘Railway Unit first!” Quickly
Use boats, freighted with their human cargo, were lower-
ed. The last boat was at the davits. Visions of his home
'|e flashed through his mind —his happy days at the
Melbourne Grammar School—how proud lie was when
' was declared dux of the school ! How successful he
was at the University !
There was one vacant seat left. Brushing a tear from
his eye, he rushed to the bridge and shouted to the Cap-
tain, “There's room for one, Sir, you go.” The vessel
gave a nasty lurch. The Captain slowly descended.
God ! What a man !
“Who are you that you give up your seat for me,” he
said. “Do you know that lam the Captain?” “Yea,
Sir,” was the proud rejoinder,” but I—but I—l am a
Duntroon Sergeant” ! ! !—E. J. C.
—■ —-
You know that gambling’s not allowed.
So sternly says our boss.
Why does lie, then, allow this ship
To keep at pitch and toss ?
2


QUAVERINGS, QUIBBLES AND QUESTIONS.
TILLINGS WE ALL WANT TO KNOW.
Did the ship "lay to” on the morning of the llth iusl
in view of the fact that the sergeants had eggs for
breakfast. ?
Why has the editor thought, it necessary to take box-
ing lessons on the boat deck each morning before break-
fast'?
Is it a fact that, the sub-editor has decided to follow
his example ?
Has a certain unit commander decided to give up pho-
tography as a had job ? —(The answer is in the negative.
-'Ed. B.B.)
Were not the sergeants abrupt in awakening to a
sense of duty on the morning of the 9th inst. ?
Is it true that the president of the sergeants'’ mess is
taking a weight reducing dope each night just before
turning in ?
Who is the sea-sick sergeant who was overheard to
say that he didn’t give a d if the ship did go down —
he didn’t own it ?
What means this eager anxious throng ? Is it that the
sergeants’ afternoon tea is on or that somebody has just
taken a snapshot “we all want ?”
Dye “Ken ” the returned 0.8. M. who, at the mess
table, harrows our souls and makes each particular hair
stand on an end with his awful predictions of what is in
store for us on “the other side?”
Is it true that a certain “ Aiizac” sergeant is the most
methodical man on board, and that he can always hud
his toilet articles if he can only remember where lie put
them ?
Does “Tuck” really want to play trains and has lie vis-
ions of joining the TR.U. ?
Is the “Brig” really seaworthy, or does his claim to
be an “old salt” only apply during the sea’s calmer mo-
ments ?
Who is the junior sergeant who had the audacity to
address a senior sergeant of his unit without standing
at attention? Is it true that a “veil” had to be d“-wn
over the ensuing proceedings ?
Who is the sergeant so much in demand by all 1
Ss it because of his personality, his politics, his promises
or his pyjamas ?
What is the name of the officer who said severely to a
private., “Yes, I’ll take your word for it; but don’t do
it again?”
Did a certain C.B.M. suddenly discover that “the
first shall be last and the last, shall be first,” when he
tried to convince the cheery A.M.C. orderly of his seni-
ority arid superiority'?
Is another C.S.M. a stoic or simply sardonic ?
Is a member of the R.U. known as the “literary cor-
poral," and has he compiled a diary which would pro-
vide the troops with a literary treat if In's modesty did
not prevent its publication? Is it not also a fact that
application to No. 32 mess. No. 2 Troop Deck will dis-
cover his identity ?
Is this ship haunted, and are the weird noises arising
nightly from No. 13 Cabin (significant uunibet) the
emanations of lost souls ? Should not the matter be en-
quired into at any Price?
Is it true that when we reach the torrid zone ladic
B. intends to don shorts?
Is it true that THE Glengarry cap is to he sold by auc-
tion and the proceeds devoted to the Penniless Punters'
Fund ?
Does the sanitary fatigue ever hear any of the wire-
less messages ?
Is there any truth in the rumor that one well known
member of the Amusement Committee is taking physical
exercises in secret to reduce girth measurement s ? Eh!
Jinks !
Is the ship’s time only altered one© a day? When?
Should the extra time be shared equally between reliefs?
Is the band solely engaged in cleaning and tuning in-
struments ? (No, decidedly not.—Ed. B.B.)
Who is the officer who is always smiling ?
Who calls the Bugler ?
If two officers were treated for heart failure after I he
“man overboard” signal on the sth iust.?
If it is true that “Bed” McClusky, of the 37th, war,
requested by the “old man” to assist in navigating the
ship into Fremantle as a last resource but refused Vo
do so?
Did not a certain young officer, (whose home is not
south of the line) find at the death-knock “something”
really attractive and worth while in Australia?
Is Bendigo a conservatoriuin of music or was it just
mere chance that, gave the 14th such aalent in its quqfca
from the mining city ?
“Where Does Daddy Go When tie Goes Out?” asked
with almost hourly persistency by Billy Williams (Edi-
son Record) in one of the sergeants’ cabins. We don't
care where daddy goes if he will only take the Pathe-
phone with him occasionally.)
Is it a fact that Duntroon sergeants are assiduously
cultivating the acquaintance of the long steward, in the
hope that he may hand them down some “stars?”
Where has the “Captain Beau ?” To see the .Ballyrat.
How do you,know? Well did not “Dimsee-him” and
Q.M.S. “Crowe” about it? I heard “Mar-tell” “And-
’er-son” also.
Is it a fact (asks “Machine Gunner”) that a certain
infantryman, whose pet subject is the food problem,
seriously informed a brother beetle crusher that the
letters “M.G.” worn by a particular unit stand for
“market gardeners,” who are being sent home to cul-
tivate the public parks in order to provide the Austral-
ian troops with vegetables ?
Is there- a possibility, before the end of the voyage,
of the unfortunate sergeants, who sit at the port side
of the mess, being served first?
Is it probable that the aforesaid sergeants will ever
have any of the necessary commodities passed to them
without asking for them ?
3
THE BALLARAT BEACON.


is it true that Mr. Vxckski intends studying law
on his return to Australia ?
Is it a fact that we owe the reported beginning eva-
cuation of Franc© by the Bosches to the amendment to
I.T. 1914, section 22, para 2., which refers to the com-
mand “Halt,” and says: “The word ‘halt’ must be
given as the right foot passes the left. The right foot
then completes its pace and another full pace is taken
with the left. The right is then brought in line with the
left.’ ” This brings the soldier a pace nearer the enemy,
and, perhaps, has upset all the calculations of the Ger-
man War Staff.
Even if a Duntroon sergeant has had the courage to
enlist in the ranks of the benedicts as well as the army,
does it proclaim him sufficiently strong-minded to read
“Breezy Stories” (January number), “The Winning
Post’ ’ and other literature of a cognate character ?
If the incessant band practices below a certain cabin
are not a source of great joy to the occupant?
If the aforesaid- occupant would not take a fiendish
delight in dealing with a certain instrument in a manner
known only to himself ?
Who is David the “dinkunx dummy dag?” Is his
second baptismal appellation Claude?
Is “Doc” getting any?
Was our Sergeant W. R. A. the first into his life belt
and on deck when the siren blew four blasts recently?
Did he wish he had not been?
Did Andy lose two cigars to Fin at German whist ? and
was the* winner congratulated by the owner of the cigars ?
Who was the large corporal who trailed his coat up
and down the deck on the morning, of St. Patricks’ Day?
Is it true that the Vaughan, (24/14) has gone in fox
animal training, in view of the fact that he was seen in
in Perth leading a ferocious-looking crayfish round on a
string. i -
SUBMARINE DRILL.
Ou the alarm sounding, all ranks will fall in with
life-belts (at the slope), kit bags and training cards.
Officers will not wear Sam Brownes, but may carry cabin
trunks.
Absolute silence must be maintained, and on no ac-
count may conversation of any kind b© carried on with
the crew of the hostile submarine.
On the command, “To your boats move,” the right
hand man of each boat party will lean over the rail and
look inwards, taking care to block the gangway. The
remainder, taking the time from him, will drop their
kit bags on the heads of any men already in the boat
(which should previously be lowered). The whole will
fileu move into the boats by the shortest route, while
the band, which will assemble on the poopcleck, plays,
“So long, Letty.”
No N. 0.0. or man will be allowed to enter a life-boat
without his training card.
(Duntroon Sergeants must present their certificates
before falling' overboard.)
Anyone infringing the foregoing rules will be immedi-
ately paraded by the nearest officer or N.C.O. to Ship’s
Orderly Room, and the ship will not sink until all
such cases have been fully dealt with.
TROOPSHIP STANDING ORDERS.
BY LANCE-CORPORAL BILLJIM, O.C.
MAN OVERBOARD.
PARA 1.
The following routine must be observed when a private
fails overboard.
Report same to orderly corporal, who must immedi-
ately rush to the sergeants’ quarters, and awaken the
orderly sergeant. He in turn reports same to platoon
commander. It must then be brought to the notice of
the O.C. of the company.
If the O.C. thinks it of sufficient importance he will
suggest to the Adjutant that a Board of Inquiry be ap-
pointed to ascertain : —-
1. How came this man to fall overboard ?
2. Had he some ulterior motive in so doing?
3. Should the ship be stopped and a boat, lowered to
his rescue ?
Should the Board consider that the man fell overboard
accidentally and that lie had no ulterior motive in so
doing, they may instruct the Ship’s Q.M.S. to requisi-
tion for a life belt.
This done the duty company must lie informed by the
S.O.R.S. that a fatigue party of two men must be de-
tailed to throw a life belt, in the direction the man was
last seen.
By this time any self-respecting private should be well
and truly drowned.
Obituary notice in the “Herald.”
ATKINS. Pte. Thomas, Drowned at Sea, He laid
down his life for the cause.
r V. PARA. 2.
In the event of a Duntroon Sergeant falling overboard
the following routine must be observed:
1. All life boats to be lowered into the sea.
2. AH rafts and anything floatable to be cast over-
board.
3. All units to parade with life belts, same to be
thrown iu his direction.
■ A All gangways to be lowered.
5. Oil to be poured on the waves.
Wireless signals to be sent- in all directions.
?. All men to kneel in an attitude of prayer and sup-
plk |tiou.
A Ship’s baud to play some suitable time such as
“Throw out the Life Line.’’
9. If life boat fails to pick up Duntroon sergeant the
Captain of the boat to be ordered to “Right-about-turn”
and take the ship back to Australia. The war is lost!
PARA 3.
In the event of a sergeant of the Railway Unit falling
overboard the following routine must be observed;-
1. The Captain to signal to the engine rootn “Full
Speed ahead.”
2. Keep it there.
The bancl strikes up, “'What is one amongst so many.”
5 ‘I 1 ’ » i II ■■■ ■ ■ !■
Why is the canteen like a suburban train ?—Because
it has short waits.


THE TAIL OF A HEAD
or A REFORMATION THAT FAILED.
(A Story without a Moral. )
(By Rarmsay Wood).
Ho, 6086, Pie. Lougwood, Albert Leslie, familiarly
known as " Piggy,” was reckoned to be the most inve-
terate ami case-hardened gambler on troopship AOO.
He played two-up morning, noon and night. From re-
veille to lights out his raucus voice could be heard in the
ring, shouting “ Any money ’eads.” His luck had
been pretty good, and three limes in a week he had gone
to his O.G. with suras totalling ,£ 17. But during the
last four days he had gone steadily down on heads.
“ Blime,” he remarked to the Lizard, his pal, “ aiiifc 1
stiff.”
“ Chuck it fer a bit, Piggy,” advised the Lizard ; “ Yer
luck ’s dead out.”
“ I got ter chuck it,” he replied laconically. “ Ain’t
got ©mother bean.”
“What!” gasped his pal; “'yer ain’t done the ’ole
bloomin lot in, ’ave yer?”
“ Not quite.” said Piggy. “ Still got a liver with filter
boss.” “Damme,” lie added, “I’ll go and get it now.
I’ll beat that b—— yet, s’welp me if I don’t.”
, A few minutes later Piggy had got his last fiver from
his 0.G., and was making his way as fast as he could
back to the two-up school. As he neared his goal he
felt a heavy hand on his shoulder. Turning quickly, be
confronted the company sergeant-major. *
‘V What are you doing, Piggy?” asked the C.S.M.
“ Nothin’,” said Piggy. ”
( “ Then your’© just the man I’m looking for,” said the
C.S.M. We are on© man short for guard, and you’ve
got twenty minutes to get ready.”
Argument was out of the question, as the C.S.M.
turned the scale at 12. st. 7 lb., and had a useful left into
the bargain. So muttering dire and bloodthirsty threats
under his breath, th© disappointed gamester made Ink
way to In's mess deck, and changed into his uniform.
All that evening, on and off duty, Piggy rurniuatec* on
the appalling sequence of tails which had"proved ms un-
doing,
“ ‘Strewth,” he remarked to himself as the relit#
marched away after,posting him to number Eight; “ it’s
time for a run on eads.” He gazed dreamily out at the
peaceful, gently heaving ocean. The evening was warm
and No. 8 post outside the saloon doors was very quiet.
Always alert to any chance of dodging his work, Pio-wy
decided to sib down for a while. He closed his eyes, and
dozed off for what seemed a few seconds.
When he opened his eyes again he was startled to sec
a face peering at him through the rail.
“ Who the Ail are you?” he gasped out.
“ Hands up,” was the reply, backed by an ugly revol-
ver.
For once Piggy obeyed without protest.
Still keeping the revolver at an angle dangerous to
Piggy’ B health, the mysterious visitor climbed the rail
and dropped softly to the deck.
Listen/’ he whispered fiercely, “ I'm a German offi-
cer in charge of the newest type- of submarine. I’m
going to sink this vessel, but 1 want to know first whether
the troops on board are South Africans or Australians.
What are you?'”
■'Tm an Australian,” replied Piggy.
1 don’t believe you,” said the- German. “ I lived in
Sydney before the war, and I know Australians. I’ll
bet you ten shillings you’re not an Australian.”
" All right, you ! I’ll bet you. ”
\uu win, said the German. “I recoguise your
language.”
He fumbled in his pocket, and paid over some coins.
■Amongst them were three pennies.
“ ‘Ere,” said Piggy, his passion for gambling rising
within him, “ I’ll toss yer fer the ten bob.”
Done,” replied the German.
" Rig!it,” said Piggy; “ ten bob I ’eads ’em.”
He flung up th© two coins, and both eagerly watched
them fail.
“ ‘Ead ere, cried Piggy, excitedly.
“ Tails here/ ’ said the German,
Bliine ! two ones,” remarked Piggy, picking up the
coins.
Another spin.—this time tails!
It s mine, said the German, greedily holding out
his hand for the money.
_ Piggy was in (die grip of his ruling passion again.
Diving his hand into his pocket, he pulled out his last
five notes. ” ’Ere, come on,” he cried, ” put ’em up
aguio. Jen bob I ’eads ’em this time.”
But his luck was still out. Tails continued to fall
with unfailing regularity. .Before lie realised what had
Happened lus five pounds had been transferred to
German.
’’Well, at any rale, you’re a sport,” said the latter,
as he pocketed the notes. •• I’ll tell you what I’ll do.
[ll spin you again. If you win the ship is safe. If you
lose—pouf ! !■—You all go to hell.”
Strewth,’ muttered Piggy to himself; it must be
’eads this time.”
Right o, you're on,” he replied.
The German spun the coins, and poor Piggy trembled
in every limb. With eyes that started out of their
sockets he watched the coppers descend.
“Tails,” cried the German, triumphantly.
* again,” muttered Piggy, hoarsely. “ I oughter
bin. backin’ tails all the time.”'
it ho ut further ado the German climbed over the
ship’s rails and disappeared. A strange numbness over-
took Piggy. He wanted to cry aloud, but his tongue
clove to the roof of his mouth. He waited tensely for
the explosion that would send him and his comrades to
an awful death. He tried to run to the sentry,
but his legs were powerless. lie heard shouting, con-
fused and meaningless. Someone called his name. Then
came a deafening roar, and—oblivion.
Piggy opened his eyes, to find the sergeant of the
guard shaking him roughly by the shoulder, while the
men in the second relief looked on with intense interest.
“ What arc you doing, asleep at your post?” growled
the sergeant.
9
THE BALLARAT BEACON.


“Oh, sergeant,” stammered Piggy, “ I’ve had an ’ell
of a dream.” He- then recounted brokenly and dis-
iointedly his awful nightmare.
Now, the sergeant was a Methodist and something of
a reformer. Here was a chance to work upon the feel-
ings of the incorrigible gambler--ves. a chance to turn
him From his besetting sin.
“Bee here,” he said kindly, " If ! overlook this will
you let it be- a lesson to you?”
“ kSwelp me, v-es, sergeant,” said Piggy, fervently, as
he put his hand in his pocket and found that the roll o!
notes was still there.
“ All right,” said the sergeant: “ now get away.”
“ What are von going to do,” lie added, as Piggy
hurriedly made his wav aft. Going to see the
Padre?””
“ No,” replied Piggy, disappearing down the aft- 0)111-
paniomvay. “ I’m going to back tails.”
HEARD ON THE ROUNDS.
The officer of the ship’s guard was visiting his sentries,
accompanied by his sergeant. Pte. Blobb, at No. 10
post, salutes with his left hand.
Sergeant; “That’s not the way to salute. Why don’t
you salute with your right hand ?”
Pte. Blobb; “Please, Sir, I can’t; I'm left-handed.’’
Orderly Officer: “Any complaints?”
Private Sinks; “ Yes, Sir, the spuds is black."
Orderly Officer (inspecting spuds): “I see nothing
wrong with them.”
-Pdvate Binke: “Yes, Sir, the spuds is black/’
did he pass the eyesight test.”
Orderly Officer: “Any complaints V'
Mess Orderly : “No ! ”
Orderly Officer (Severely): “No, what?”
Mess Orderly: “No b complaints.”
Offu •er (examining the stew) ; Yes, it is a bit on the
turn.
Mess Orderly (an erstwhile jockey) : On. the turn. Sir ?
Blim-e 1 its half way up the straight!
Soldier ( writing letter) : How do you spell hippopo-
tamus, Bill?
Bill; Why, yer stretchin things, ain’t yer?
Soldier; No, I ain’t, I only want to let them know at
home about the hippopotamus we saw yesterday
Bill: Oh ! 1 see ! Then, spell it p-o-r-p-o-i-s-e.
(Inquisitive young “ Sub,”): How far are we from
land ?
Ships’ Officer (with patience exhausted); About
seven miles.
(1.Y.5.) : In what direction ?
3.0. (laconically); Straight down.
FACE FUNGUS.
(By D. Claude Robortson.)
If there is one thing more than another that has struck
a merely casual observer on this troopship as remarkable
it is the marked increase in- the number of upper lips
which are covered-with a fungus growth, a growth that
in civil life might possibly be known as moustaches.
In the variety ot ( lie growth lies the charm, m- humour.
Moustaches cannot he classified. They conform to no
rules. they -imply follow their natural course, modi-
fied or accentuated, as the case may be, by the whim of
flm weai cm The sanest opinion is that the growth in
most cases is an attempt, by Australians to outdo the
11-'ius in t heir acts of frigh.tfulness.
How well they have succeeded! We shrink in terror
when we see a former friend of an inoffensive nature
wearing on his upper lip a ferocious stubble. We yearn
to holder him some friendly advice; but he may be sen-
-hive, «o we forbear. Others, again, of the toothbrush
variety, give us unfeigned delight. We chaff the per-
petrators. And lo ! in a day or so, the growth is gone —
“ Sent to its account with all its im perfections on its
hpAd.” Others are wonderful examples of Australian
initiative and inventive ingenuity. I overheard a eon-
-ersation tire other day anent a certain moustache. It
1 ast take some strength to grow a moustache like
yours, Jack?”
"I don't- know about growing it,” chimed in one of
the party, “ but it. must take some strength to wear it.”
D. CLAUDE ROBERTSON,
24/6th.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
VILLAINOUS AND FRIVOLOUS.
An announcement: —We have pleasure in announcing
to our readers that Sgt. Warded-Greenwood has decided
to place his wonderful cure for seasickness, “Retcho,” at
the disposal of those on board. He may be consulted dai-
ly by all sufferers from mal-de-mer at his permanent ad-
giress. No. 17 bed, Ship’s Hospital; Hours: Reveille to
Retreat.
'•* To whom it may concern : The M.G.Coy issues a chal-
lenge to play any unit on board a Rugby League
.Match at next post of call. This is dinkum.—M. J.
Kearns, Hon. Secretary.
Pte, ,1. Sharp wishes to announce that if the man who
‘'pinched his hat and tunic will kindly call on him, he
may have the whole uniform.
host a band ot Pierrots, last seen wondering when they
would make an appearance. Anyone returning the
whole or pari of the troupe to C.S.M. Dunne will be
severely dealt with.
Corporal Wrathall (ex-featherweight boxing champion
ut the Navy) and Private W. Meeske (ex-heavyweighc
wrestling champion of Australia) intend commencing a
Jiu-Jitsu class immediately after leaving South Africa.
This is dinkum.
10
THE BALLARAT BEACON


THE ACCEPTED, REJECTED, AND DEJECTED.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
“ Macßobertson.” —Your patriotic effusion cover-
ing' ten sheets of A. M.C.A. notepaper too lengthy for
publication, but we quite agree with you that the
Scotch thistle will never be sat upon—for long.
“ The Sentimental Bloke.”—Your verses commenc-
ing—
“ The Albany girls are so sweet and so true.”
not up to publication standard. By the time you had
seen Perth you were reduced to a condition of
drivelling incoherency, as witness the following:
‘‘ My Perth little girlie is a clear darling pearlic.”
We expect an awful attack from you after visiting
the next port, and our earnest advice is; Neither mix
your girls nor your drinks,
“A Chess-Knut.”—Ship's Orderlv Room can only
be used as a rest home for Duntroon Sergeants by
permission of the S.M.O.
. “ Remuneration.”—The editor lias nothing to com-
plain of, and draws it regularly every week.
“ Frozen Fish.'—Your question frozen out by the
censor.
“An Isolated Case” (J.F.W.) —We certainly hope
that your attempt to versify is “ an isolated
and that it will ever remain so. So far, you have a "
clean conduct sheet, therefore you are acquitted
under the First Offenders’ Act.
“ W. J. J.” —Perhaps the deficiency is in the menu,
but there seems to be something wanting in your
Grace Before Meals on Aooo—
() Lord! make us able
To eat all on tin’s table!
Though the taties be but small.
Make them just enough for all.
And if they do our tummies fill
'Twill be a wondrous miracle.
Anyway, you have achieved a miracle in those last
two lines. You really seem to lie suffering from a
bad conscience in your second spasm. “ A Soldier's
Farewell to His Girl.”
Remember me when this you see.
And bear me in your mind;
When I am gone say nothing wrong
Nor speak of me unkind.
Oceans may roll between us.
And distance be our lot;
Though we may part to meet no more
Darling, Forget-me-not.
" H.A.C.”—We wrestled anxiously until “'lights
out ” with your contribution “To the Women at
Home.” After a sleepless night reveille found us
still in the dark. Wipe should we suffer the affliction
alone? Here goes:
Now I have left you all at home,
Now I am out of sight,
And likely in the time to come
That I will h ave to fight
For King and country and for you!
Tell me, should you avoid,
Or like to see the others,go
Without our soldier boy.
I would like to be at home with friends,
But had to leave or lose it.
Now I fight for home defence
While other men refuse it.
1 said good-bye, and left you all,
To play the greatest game;
And now we’re fighting side by side
To make Australia’s name.
We.are sure that your fighting will be much better
than ydur writing.
“L, A. H.”—“ The Mystery of the Stolen Ham-
mock ” remains a mystery despite your courageous
attempt to elucidate it in five verses.
/
“ Momentum.”--The censor used ins blue pencil
with such freedom and momentum that there was
nothing left of your “adverse animadversion” on
boat drill to publish, excepting the words “ assinme
propensities,” which is, in itself, significant.
“R. I’. Corporal.”—Your lines “To the Girl I
Left Behind Me ” will warm the heart of every Sister
Susie in Australia, and we print three verses for that
reason:
My heart is yours for ever, dear,
None else can take away;
The love that warmer deeper grows
With each succeeding day.
Though many others f may meet
And they be kind and true;
Your are the magnet and the charm
That draws my heart to you.
I will be true whatever comes
And wherever I may be;
The thought that you are still my own
Ts more than life to me.
" Yiddle.”—We do not know the system of the
man that broke the bank at Monte Carlo, but evi-
dently he was not a Jew.
11
T HE BALLARAT BRACON.


M Tav.”— Your appointment as Staff '■■•Officer ioi
Records (and Gramophones) does, not extra;
duty pay, nor does it entitle you to 4/laGan.othet star.
"Aub IsaacsT—Yes, bookmakers'require a licence
in South Africa, but all Jews are honorary members
of the South African Turf £lub.
“ Hon. Captain,”—No, war ■ does not make a
country richer, but many A.I.F. officers have benefited
considerably.
"Lieut. Brandy (Martell's.)” — An N.C.O. carry-
ing a plate of meat does not constitute a body formed
for mutiny. See K.R., para. 182, Section “ A,” Sub-
section “ A 70.”
“ Lieut. TommyT—Yes, you are entitled to charge
standard rates for developing films for other people
in'spite of the fact that your tank is borrowed, and
you are not registered at the V.R.C. •<
" Father Bryan.”—(l) No, The largest size ser-
vice tunic on issue is only 95 chest. (2) Why not
attend the puttee rolling classes conducted by Lance-
Corporal K. on the aft well deck. Perhaps your
puttees are not the right size.
“ Play the Game,” “ Situations Vacant,” “ No. Com-
plaints ” and other contributors with grievances.—
“ The Beacon ” has no desire to usurp the func-
tions of the Ship’s Orderly Officer or the Ship’s
Orderly Room. You must adopt the proper proce-
dure, *' ■
“ W.* H. J.’W-Why spend yourself in eleven verses"*
detailing in an ordinary way the ordinary incidents of
the voyage. We see a glimmering of hope for our
own welfare in para. 11:
We are now going to Bed
A place which we delight in;
Owing to a sleepy head
• I must knock off writing.
Please take a sleeping draught whenever again you
feel like breaking out into the same quality of verse.
“ R. P.”-—There are some good lines and excellent
sentiments im your <£ Beautiful Snow,” but it is hardly
suitable for this publication.
To Numerous Contributors. —We are sorry that
space in this issue does not permit th§ inclusion of
many of the excellent items that have been received;
these may be published in subsequent issues.
Pte. Tom. A., the grand old lady of the 24/8, is now
taking in washing at moderate prices.
Why do not th© sanitary orderlies smoke Capstan
cigarettes?—Because they'prefer a Milo.
Our Competitions.
[ADJUDICATED BY HANNAH-NIAS.]
BEST FURPHY.
At to a.m., on the loth inst., by the aid
of the searchlight, an aeroplane was seen steam-
ing rapidly westward with only its periscope showing.
Later: The object discerned at 10 a.m., on the 10th
inst., proved to be a submarine, and a well-aimed shot
from the aft torpedo tube brought it to earth with a
shattered wing.
Other good furphies received are the following:—
Duntroon sergeants will be glad to learn that a
well-known previous Commandant of one of the
Stales has enlisted for active service abroad, and will
go away with the rank of Acting-Sergeant, with
extra duty pay.
On arrival in England the R.U. will encamp in the
grounds of Buckingham Palace, and be reserved for
the purpose of driving the Royal trains. They will
wear Windsor uniforms. I have been appointed .re-
ceiver of applications for transfers to the unit in ques-
tion from infantry N.C.O.’s desirous of appointment
to the posts of assistant steam-raiser, assistant
greaser, and pit-boy, with commensurate pay,—
“ Scotty.”
After leaving Cape Town the men will dine in the
saloon and officers on the troop ■ decks, owing to the
complaint of the latter, that the men are too well fed,
and that, a week or two on Copsomme, Petite Mar-
Sole (Maitre d’Hotel), Selle d’Agneau, Cour-
gettes an Gratin, Poulet, -Salade, Charlette des
Pommes, Glace Vanille, Dessert and Cafe would make
them realise what the officers have to put up with.
—“ No. 7228, 24/sth.”
An O.T.S. for Duntroon Sergeants' is to be
held in the vicinity of Verdun or such other place as
may be decided upon from time to time. —“ J, B.”
■■Duntroon sergeants, on their arrival in England,
will be received by the King, and have the freedom
o!' London conferred upon them; also, owing to their
wish to have their commissions granted in Australia,
His Majesty has graciously decided to accede to their
request, and will grant them on their return to Aus-
tralia. —" No. 7228, 24/sth. ,s
Best Thumb-nail Description of Voyage.
(Not to exceed 12 words).
Good-bye. Waves high. Sea-sick. Sports. Two-
up. Ports. Tin-fish dodge. Safe home lodge.—
“W. J.” '
Other good efforts are the following: Tears*. Cheers.
Water. Snorter. Stew. Spew. Drill. Nil. Port
Sport. Tinfish. Finish,
Water everywhere. Men everywhere. Meal
times. Looking for land. Lights out. —“ J. B. B.”
I m !!!!!! ! “ Nick.”
Townehend, Taylor & Snaahall, Printers.
