

COMMONWEALTH
OF AUSTRALIA
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
BULLETIN NO. 53
The Flying Fox ( Pteropus )
in Australia
BY
F. N. RATCLIFFE, B.A.
Report of co-operative work conducted on behalf of the
COUNCIL FOR SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH, the NEW SOUTH WALES
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, and the QUEENSLAND HOME
SECRETARY’S DEPARTMENT
MELBOURNE, 1931
Registered at the General Post Office, Melbourne, for transmission through the post as a book.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia.
By Authority; H. J. Green, Government Printer. Melbourne




CONTENTS.
PAG®
Foreword ~ .. .. .. .. .. • - 5
Summary .. .. .. .. •. •. - • 6
I. Introduction —Objects of the Investigation .. .. .. 7
11. Biology and Ecology—
1. General—
(i) Description of the Australian species of Pteropus .. 8
(ii) Australian Megachiroptera other than Pteropus .. . . 10
(iii) The genus Pteropus —General .. .. .. 11
(iv) The daytime camps .. .. .. .. .. 12
(y) Intelligence, &c. .. .. .. .. .. 15
(vi) The search for food .. .. .. .. .. 17
2. The Flying Fox Population in Australia—
(i) Estimates of the numbers in camps .. .. .. 19
(ii) The distribution of camps .. .. .. .. 21
(iii) The distribution of the species .. .. .. 23
(iv) Migration .. .. .. .. .. .. 24
(v) Changes in the flying fox population .. .. .. 27
3. Reproduction, &c. —
(i) Breeding seasons, gestation, and care of young .. .. 34
(ii) Possibility of hybridization .. .. .. .. 36
4. The Natural Regulation of Numbers .. .. .. 36
5. Parasites .. .. .. .. .. .. 39
6. Diet—
(i) General .. .. .. .. .. .. 39
(ii) Species preferences and differences .. .. .. 40
(iii) The importance of blossom .. .. .. .. 41
(iv) The importance of cultivated fruit .. .. .. 42
(v) Note on nutrition, teeth, and body odour .. .. 43
111. The Flying Fox as an Economic Pest—
1. General .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 45
2. Review of Cultivated Fruits—
(i) Bananas .. .. .. .. .. .. 46
(ii) Citrus .. .. .. .. .. .. 48
(iii) Pineapples .. .. .. .. .. 50
(iv) Pome fruit .. .. .. .. .. 50
(v) Stone fruit .. .. .. .. .. 51
(vi) Paw-paws .. .. .. .. .. .. S 3
(vii) Mangoes .. .. .. .. .. .. 54
(viii) Miscellaneous .. .. .. .. .. 55
3. The Economic Importance of the Flying Fox .. .. .. 55
IV. Possibilities of Control—
1. General Considerations .. .. .. .. .. 57
2. Biological Control—Control by Introduced Disease .. .. 60
3. The Scalp Bounty System .. .. .. .. .. 65
4. Commercial Utilization of the Skins .. .. .. .. 68
5. Methods of Mass Destruction—
(i) Poison gas .. .. .. .. .. .. 68
(ii) Flame guns .. .. .. .. .. 70
(iii) Explosives .. .. .. .. .. 71
(iv) Organized shooting .. .. .. .. .. 71
6. Protection of the Fruit Crop—
(i) Shooting and poisoning in the orchards .. .. 73
(ii) Deterrents .. .. .. .. .. 75
V. Conclusions and Recommendations .. .. .. .. 77
C. 9212.—2




FOREWORD.
For some years prior to 1928, tlie Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research had under consideration the question of carrying
out investigations with a view to the control of “flying foxes”
(P ter opus spp.), which were alleged to cause very serious losses to
fruit-growers, particularly in Queensland and Hew South Wales. Many
'obvious methods of destruction had been tried. Shooting had been
found to be expensive and ineffective; strychnine poisoning in the
orchards was only partially successful; poison gases in the camps of
the flying fox were not effective because it was impossible to give a
lethal dose before the animals took wing. Other methods, too, had been
tried, but in every case were found to be inadequate.
In 1928, the Government of Hew South Wales through its Depart-
ment of Agriculture, and the Government of Queensland through
its Home Secretary’s Department, agreed to co-operate with the
Council in an investigation of the problem and to contribute funds for
that purpose over a period of two years. The position of biologist to
carry out the work was filled by the appointment of Mr. F. H. Ratcliffe,
8.A., who was formerly an officer of the Empire Marketing Board, and
who commenced his work in March, 1929. The specific purpose for
which he was appointed was to make a biological study of those species
of flying fox which are a pest in Australia, as a preliminary to the
formulation of a programme of work aimed at the development of
methods of control. The plan of work included the collection of as
complete information as possible regarding the flying fox population
of Queensland and Hew South Wales; its significance and extent; the
relations of the different species to one another; the nature and cause
of their migrations; the individual and collective habits of the animals;
and the extent and value of the economic losses involved.
Mr. Ratcliffe has completed his Teport, which is now published in
this Bulletin. The conclusions reached by him are of considerable
interest, and are summarized at the end of the Bulletin.
Finally, the Bulletin represents results of co-operative investigations
for which the necessary funds were provided in equal shares by the
three co-operating bodies. The Council acknowledges with appreciation
the action taken by the two State organizations in co-operating with it,
and also the action which the Queensland Home Secretary’s Department
has made in contributing towards the cost of publishing the Bulletin.


SUMMARY.
Since the earliest days of settlement, flying foxes (Pteropus spp.)
have attacked cultivated fruit along the eastern coast of Australia.
Control by means of shooting, poison gas, explosives, flame guns,
poisoning in the orchards, &c., has proved unsatisfactory.
The object of the present investigation was to obtain information as
complete as possible in regard to the flying fox population in Australia,
its size and extent, the relations of the different species one to another,
the nature and cause of the migrations, the individual and collective
habits of the animals, and the extent and value of the economic losses
involved, with a view to determining whether it would be possible to
suggest effective control measures or promising lines of further investi-
gation to such an end.
Tour species of Pteropus are found in Australia, namely, polioce-
phalus (the Grey Headed Fox), gouldi (the Black Fox), conspicMlatus
(the Spectacled Fox), and scapulatus (the little Bed Fox). They are
practically confined to coastal areas, and their numbers, which cannot be
assessed, must amount to many millions in the numerous “ camps ”
scattered along the north-south stretch of some 2,000 miles.
It is shown that the animal is mainly a blossom feeder, and that,
contrary to the general belief, it is not a serious menace to the com-
mercial fruit industry, although large losses occasionally occur, notably
when soft fruits —figs, peaches, nectarines, &c., are grown. Fruit grown
in domestic gardens is attacked to a much greater extent than in orchards,
largely because it does not have to be picked at an early stage of maturity
for carriage to distant markets.
The attempts that have been made in the past to control the pest
by providing a bonus (3d.) for each fox scalp obtained are discussed at
length and in relation to the habits of the different species. Reasons
are given on which the opinion is based that the bounty system is, on
the whole, neither economical nor effective.
The main conclusion of the report is that no proved method of mass
destruction likely to be inexpensive in operation is known and that
indirect methods of control, for example by an introduced disease, are
not practicable.


The Flying Fox ( Pteropus ) in Australia.*
I. INTRODUCTION —Objects of the Investigation.
From the earliest days of settlement along the eastern coast of
Australia flying foxes have apparently attacked cultivated fruit. Steps
have naturally been taken to cope with them. Growers have patrolled
their orchards at night with shot guns, and have employed poison and
devices to scare the foxes from their fruit with varying success. The
opportunity of wholesale destruction presented by the animals’ habit
of forming close congregations in the daytime was seized, and periodic
shoots or “ battues ” have been arranged. Although growers undoubtedly
benefited by all this, particularly by their own efforts of shooting and
poisoning in the orchards, the problem remained to be tackled anew
every year. Thus the conviction grew that the pest should be dealt
with by some central authority.
Except when it was realized that the good effects of their action
might be negatived by the migration of animals from some other district,
the attitude of the fruit-growers to the problem has been entirely a local
one. Their object for the most part has merely been to kill as many
flying foxes as possible. Moreover, it has been made evident that the
general conception of the present investigation was that its object was
to discover some wholesale method of destruction which would once and
for all relieve growers of the onus of dealing with the pest.
In the case of such an animal as the flying fox, a central body which
intends to initiate some method of control must adopt an entirely
different point of view from that of the local grower; From the
geographic ranges of the different species (see pp. 8-10), it will be seen
that we are dealing with an animal of very wide distribution, extending
along the coastal belt from the north of Western Australia to the Vic-
torian border, and including a considerable tract of inland country in
Queensland and Hew South Wales. Thus only in a portion of its range
does it overlap with close settlement, and even in the settled area there
are tracts in which fruit cultivation is negligible. The problem that
has to be solved by this central body, therefore, is this; How can a real
degree of benefit be conferred on growers who suffer losses from flying
fox attack at a cost commensurate with these losses ?
The pest is widely and continuously distributed, and is moreover
a complex of four distinct species of widely differing economic import-
ance. The losses are localized, and vary greatly from district to district.
The solution then does not lie in the mere killing of the maximum
number of flying foxes. If the general control of the pest is to be
undertaken by a central body, apart from discovering an economic
method of destroying the animals, it will be necessary to decide where,
and to what extent, the destruction must be carried out. It is clear,
therefore, that before any action is taken, there should be available as
complete a picture as possible of the flying fox population in Australia,
its size and extent, the relations of the different species one to another,
the nature and cause of the migrations, the individual and collective
* T/pescript recV.v:d for publication 11th May, 1931.


habits of the animals, and, in addition, the extent and value of the
economic losses involved. The collection of such* information has been
the object of this investigation.
This general picture of the flying fox situation must he built up by
piecing together local information from districts at all points of the
animals’ range. It will thus be in the nature of a mosaic; and the
extent to which this picture approaches the true facts of the situation
will depend entirely on the accuracy and completeness of the contribut-
ing items of local information.
Unfortunately, it has proved very difficult to obtain reliable informa-
tion. In the first place, very few people are in a position to give any
sort of information at all. Fruit-growers, usually, merely know flying
foxes as visitors to their orchards or gardens. The ordinary individual
sees and hears them at night, and may have visited one or two “ camps.”
Occasionally, when a camp is near the dwelling, it is possible to obtain
rather fuller information. Men who are constantly in the bush, and
thus have a better chance of being acquainted with the animals, are
usually not particularly interested in them, and rarely distinguish
between the different species. Altogether, although the more obvious
information regarding the flying foxes has been easy to come by, and,
in fact, was fairly well known before the inception of this investigation
(having been accurately detailed by Tryon*), data of the quality neces-
sary to form a really accurate picture of the situation have been next
to impossible to collect, e.g., the approximate size of camps, the period
during which each is occupied, the species of fox present, and their
natural food at different periods of the year. The information which
follows, therefore, has been very largely based on my personal observa-
tions. When the investigation was well advanced, and the habits of
the different species were known with some accuracy, it was often
possible to “ place ” the information of other observers, and thus help
to complete the picture.
II. BIOLOGY AND ECOLOGY.
1. General.
(i) Description of the Australian Species of Pteropus. —The animals
known as flying foxes or fruit bats in Australia comprise four (or five)
species of the genus Pteropus, being placental mammals of the order
Chiroptera, or bats. As there is no possibility of their being confused
with any other members of the Australian fauna, it is needless for the
purpose of this survey to describe their characters in detail, except in
so far as is necessary to distinguish the different species.
1. Pteropus poliocephalus, Temminck; the Grey-headed Flying Fox.
Range (in any numbers). —From central Queensland (Rock-
hampton) to Victorian border.
Colour. —Body dark-grey, usually with a rather grizzled appear-
ance, due to an admixture of light-tipped hair's. Head also grey,
usually distinctly lighter than body. “ Mantle ” and fore part of
breast reddish-yellow. (The “mantle” is the patch of fur
extending from about the base of the ears to the shoulder-blades,
and, in a large majority of the species of this genus, is brightly
* Queensland Agricultural Journal, 14 : 74-76, 1920.


coloured in marked contrast to the fur of the body.) During this
investigation, some young individuals were collected in which the
body colour was a light silvery-grey, and the ‘‘ mantle ” and collar
almost a lemon-yellow.
Fur. —Long and soft in comparison with the other Australian
species, and extending on to the legs as far as the ankles.
Size. —The largest individual shot during this investigation was
an adult male measuring just under 4 feet from wing-tip to
wing-tip, and weighing precisely 2 lb. Forearm (which in flying
foxes is usually slightly under one-sixth of the wing-spread) up to
165 mm. S:
Young. —Born with distinct “ mantle ” and “ collar,” though of
duller colour than in the adult.
Identification in the Field. —This is the only Australian species
in which the light-coloured fur completely encircles the neck. The
Grey-headed Fox is readily distinguished by its “ furry ” appear-
ance and this “ ginger ” collar, which is very prominently displayed
when the animals hang head downwards in the day-time. As their
broad shoulders mask the rest of their body, from directly below
they look like ginger animals with grey head and dark wings.
2. Pteropus gouldi, Peters; the Black Foxf.
Range. —In the coastal belt in Queensland north from the Mary
River, the Northern Territory, and northern West Australia.
Colour. —Uniformly black, sometimes showing a grizzling of
lighter hairs. “ Mantle ” dark rusty-red or chocolate to yellowish
(latter in old individuals). In some almost fully-grown specimens,
the fur has to he ruffled to discover the reddish tinge. Certain
specimens have brown markings on the face, particularly round
the eyes.
Fur. —Short, and rather hairy, extending on leg only to the knee.
Size. —Slightly larger than Pt. poliocephalus, forearm up to
180 mm.
Young. —Born completely black, with no sign of a light “ mantle.”
Identification in the Field. —Although there is more variation in
this species than in any other, due to the alteration of the <m mantle ”
colour with age, it is easily distinguished because it really looks
black. Certain individuals, however, approach Pt. conspicillatus
(below) rather closely, having an extensive, light “mantle,” and
quite well-defined “ spectacles.”
3. Pteropus conspicillatus, Gould; the Spectacled Fox.
Range. —Cape York south to Cardwell, also New Guinea.
Colour. —Body black, similar to Pt. gouldi, hut with the grizzling
perhaps more frequent and pronounced. “ Mantle,” which extends
to slightly in front of the ears, pale yellowish or straw-coloured.
Rings of pale-yellowish fur round the eyes. In many individuals,
* Unfortunately the length of the forearm of the large specimen mentioned above was not
measured. As a reliable observer informed me that lie had collected some males of this species whose
forearms exceeded by half an inch or so the maximum given by Le Souef and Burrell (“ Wild Animals
of Australasia ”), it is probable that the forearm of the specimen shot by me was over 165 mm.
11 have adopted this name as being more descriptive than the usual appellation, Gould’s Flying
Fox, Also, in the case of Pt.. scajyitlatus (see p. 10), 1 have discarded the name of “ Collared Flying
Fox ” in favour of “ Little Red Fox,” by which it is generally known.


this pale colour extends over the cheeks and the top o£ the nose,
and the dark patches being generously shot with light shining hairs,
the head appears very much lighter than the body.
Fur. —Short, and barely extending on to the legs.
Size. —There is very little difference between this and the pre-
ceding species. Forearm up to 181 mm.
Young. —Born with distinct “mantle,” the fur of which is very
light, and has a pretty sheen.
Identification in the Field. —The well-defined ‘‘ spectacles ” and
pale “ mantles,” more extensive than in Ft. gouldi, and very
uniform throughout the species, usually make its identification easy.
4. Pteropus scapiilatus, Peters; the little Bed Fox.
Range.- —Similar to Ft. gouldi, hut extends further inland, and
south to the Victorian border.
Colour. —Uniform reddish-brown or light-chocolate. GSTo dis-
tinctly-coloured “ mantle.” The slight difference of colour, i.e., on
crown of head and round the neck, shade gradually from the general
body colour. Grown of head tends to a mousey-grey. The fur
round the neck is longer than on the body, and looks rather lighter.
Long soft hairs on the under side of the wing membranes near the
body are pale-straw coloured or lemon-yellow.
Fur. —Short, soft, and close, giving rather a mole-like appearance.
Size. —-Markedly smaller than the three species described above.
Forearm from 120-143 mm
Identification in the Field. —The small size and uniform reddish
colour make this species unmistakable. In flight they are easily
distinguished from the three larger species by the much greater
transparency of their wing membranes.
5. Pteropus hrunneus, Dobson.
The only claim of this species (which is known by a single speci-
men from the Percy Islands, off the central Queensland coast) to
be considered a member of the mainland fauna is the statement
by a Mr. Broadbent that he observed “ a camp of Pteropus
hrunneus ” flying over the Australian coast opposite Percy Islands.
As this species has never been recorded since, and as it is very
difficult even for an experienced observer to recognize the different
species of flying fox on the wing, I think that this “ record ” must
be rejected as inaccurate. Consideration of this species has of
necessity been omitted from this report, and the term “ Australian
species ” will refer only to the four previously described forms.
(ii) Australian Megachiroptera other than Pteropus. —ln addition
to the flying foxes, three other Megachiropteran species occur in Aus-
tralia. They are Nyctimene robinsoni and tryoni, the strange-looking
Tube-nosed Bats, recorded from various parts of Queensland, and
Syconyctris australis, from the coast of northern and central Queens-
land. Of the last, it is stated *“ though of such small size (forearm
only 40 mm.), this hat is said to he very destructive to fruit.” Although
I have made inquiries in the districts in which this hat occurs, I have
failed to discover any one who claims to have seen it, still less to have
confirmed the above statement.
*Le Souef and Burrell, “ The Wild Animals of Australasia.” George Harrap and Co., London.


(iii) The Genus Pteropus — General*. —The order Chiroptera, or
hats, is divided into two sub-orders, the Megachiroptera (which includes
the flying foxes) and the Microchiroptera (which includes all the
familiar insectivorous bats). The Megachiroptera, as the name implies,
are on the whole considerably larger than the forms included in the
second sub-order, and are predominantly vegetarian and frugivorous.
Of the 35 genera obtained in the Megachiroptera, Pteropus is by
far the largest. It contains 82 species, and 103 forms or sub-speciesf.
One of the species, Pt. vampyrus vampyrus, the “ Kalong ” of Java,
is the largest Chiropteran, having a wing span of 5 feet. The habits
of the other members of the genus apparently differ very little from
those of the Australian species. Some appear to he less gregarious,
and to select rather different types of “ camping ” sites, e.g., hollow
trees, &c. Others appear to be to some extent diurnal. The diet of
all species seems to he very similar, comprising practically all fruit with
a pretence to succulence. Besides the Australian forms, several species
have been reported to be blossom eaters, e.g., PL giganteus giganteus,
of India, which is also “ strongly attracted to coconut trees during the
period when toddy is drawn for distillation, and exhibit at such times
symptoms much resembling those of intoxication.”
The Australian species have more than once been suspected of
including insects in their diet; hut I have been unable to discover the
slightest evidence for this assertion. In the case of a closely-related
genus, Bousettus, this habit is apparently well authenticated. Of
B. leachi, of South Africa, it is stated that, “in default of fruit, it
devours insects, snapping them off the flowers and leaves without
alighting.” Another species of Boxisettus seems to have departed even
further from the purely vegetarian diet, thus: “ Dobson was informed
that a colony of B. leschenaulti living near the sea at Moulmein was
seen to feed on Mollusca left exposed by the tide; this would seem to
explain the occurrence of an allied species ( B. arabicus ) in so dreary
a desert as the island of Kishm, Persian Gulf, where an exclusively
fruit-eating mammal could hardly exist.”! I personally doubt the
accuracy of this observation, knowing the flying foxes’ great antipathy
to descending to or alighting on the ground, which they only overcome
in times of extreme food scarcity.
Besides being the largest, Pteropus is the most widely distributed
of any Megachiropteran genus. In fact, with the exception of the
African mainland, and of Syria, Palestine, and Cyprus (where the
widely-ranging Bousettus aegyptiacus occurs), and of South Arabia,
its distribution is practically co-extensive with that of the sub-order
itself. The geographical range of the genus Pteropus extends from
Madagascar in the west to Samoa in the south-east, and Formosa and
the South Liu-kiu Islands (of Japan) in the north-east, and includes
India and Ceylon, the Malay Peninsula, Australia, and practically all
the islands lying within these limits in the tropical belt.
This distribution is chiefly remarkable for the exclusion of the African
mainland (where species of Bousettus and other Megachiropteran
genera are found), despite the fact that a species of Pteropus occurs
• British Museum Catalogue of Chiroptera, VoL 1, pp. 61-84, 1912.
t Since the publication of the British Museum Catalogue in 1912, eleven new species and two
new sub-species of the genus Pteropus have been described. (C. C. Sanborn ** Bats from Polynesia
Melanesia, and Malaysia.” Chicago Field Museum of Natural Historv. Pub. 286. Zool Ser
Vol. XVIII. No. 2. Feb., 1931).
J British Museum Catalogue of Chiroptera , Vol. 1, p. 21,


on the Island of Pemba, near Zanzibar, which is only separated from
the mainland by a channel some 35 to 40 miles wide. This would seem
to he a most ineffective barrier to an animal which has established
itself in the widely-scattered islands of Polynesia.
The distribution of the genus Pteropus among the various
geographical regions and sub-regions (as defined by Wallace) is as
follows;
Ethiopian region . . 1 species
Malagasy region .. .. 8 species (9 forms)
India and Ceylon .. 2 species
Indo-China . . .. 1 species (8 forms)
Indo-Malaya . . . . 14 species (24 forms)
Austro-Malaya . . 36 species (39 forms)
Australia . . . . 5 species
Polynesia .. 18 species
“The two facts, that the Pteropus fauna of Austro-Malaya is
incomparably richer than that of any other zoological area of similar
size, and that all groups of the genus not represented in Austro-Malaya
are very closely related to Austro-Malayan types, i.e., pointing hack
in their probable origin to Austro-Malaya, lends support to the
hypothesis that the centre of dispersal of the genus was this sub-region,
or rather an area much larger than, but including Austro-Malaya, and
probably excluding Australia.”*
The 82 species of the genus Pteropus are arranged in seventeen
groups, according to their probable natural affinities. Each of the
Australian species is placed in a different group, which means that
individually they are more closely related to forms occurring outside
the continent than they are to one another. Thus Ft. poliocephalus is
a peculiar modification of the Hew Guinea type; Ft. gouldi is very
closely allied to Ft. alecto, of Celebes and Lombok; and Pt. scapulatus
has its closest relative in the Solomon Islands. Pt. conspicillatus
actually occurs in south-eastern Hew Guinea as well as in Australia,
and, in addition, possesses a very close relative in Pt. chrysauchen,
which replaces it in the northern and western parts of the island.
From-these facts, we must conclude that the ancestors of the Aus-
tralian species invaded the continent by the Cape York route, and that
this invasion occurred at a period sufficiently remote to allow for the
modifications which have given rise to the xlustralian species in their
present forms. Of the Australian species, Pt. poliocephalus and
scapulatus “ are decidedly the most peculiarly modified ” (in relation
to their closest relatives), and were therefore probably the earliest
immigrants into the continent. In this connexion, it is interesting
to note that these two species range furthest south, they alone being
found in Hew South Wales.
(iv) The Day-time Camps. —That they attack cultivated fruit, are
nocturnal in their habits, and form large congregations or camps during
the day-time, are about the only facts generally known about flying
foxes.
It was mentioned above that certain non-Australian species of
Pteropus were sometimes active in the day-time. This has been reported
of Pt. conspicillatus, the Spectacled Fox of Horth Queensland. All
the species are, of course, well able to see even in bright sunlight, and
readily take flight during the day-time.
♦ British Museum Catalogue of Chiroptera, p. 83.


In certain years, flying foxes have been reported to feed in tbe
day-time, often arriving at their feeding grounds well before sundown.
This can usually be attributed to special conditions; for these particular
seasons have been marked by exceptional migrations, extremes of
weather, and often by a noticeable hunger, and even mortality among
the fox population in certain districts. Thus, after a period of very
heavy rain, a specimen of Ft. poliocephalus, the Grey-headed Fox, was
shot at Baffle Creek, Queensland, at 4.30 p.m., eating a green guava.
At this time (April, 1927), it was observed that the evening flights
from a neighbouring camp started well before sundown.
The majority of the cases of flying foxes being seen abroad in the
day-time (either remaining in the trees in which they were feeding on
the previous night, or hanging in the forest some distance from their
camp), can be attributed to Ft. scapulatus, the little Bed Fox. The
animals observed in the day-time in the flowering turpentines
(Syncarpia Hillii ) on Fraser Island, Queensland, in the summer of
1926-27, were almost certainly this species. Ft. scapulatus was present
in the Baffle Creek camp that season, and the early flights mentioned
above, were also probably of this species. (Even in normal years,
Ft. scapulatus has a tendency to break camp fifteen minutes or so before
Ft. poliocephalus or gouldi, even when they occur in the same camp.)
During this and previous seasons in which exceptional migrations of
Ft. scapulatus have occurred, the animals have been found scattered
here and there through the forest, without well-defined camps, and
seemed to be suffering from weakness and lack of food. This has been
noted at Byfield and Eaglan, central Queensland.
The instinct to return to the recognized camping site before day-
light is apparently very strong. Usually, every individual has returned,
and the camp settled down to comparative quiet, by daybreak. The
last to arrive seem to fly at a greater speed than the earlier comers.
Apparently, their desire to return to the camp is greater than their
distaste for being abroad in the daylight, for a fisherman has observed
flying foxes labouring back to their camp against a strong head wind
as late as 9.30 a.m.
Seclusion and shade seem to be the chief factors influencing the
animals in the choice of a site for their day-time camp. Patches of
dense rain forest (the “scrub” and “brush” of Queensland and Hew
South Wales respectively), or mangrove are almost invariably selected.
When these are not available, camps may be formed in tea-tree swamps,
brigalow ( Acacia harpophylla ) “ scrub ”, creek-bed vegetation, such as
sheoaks ( Causuarina spp.), weeping willows, &c., and sometimes in
the “ open ” forest. As in the purely coastal districts, at any rate
north of Sydney, there are usually patches of rain forest, mangrove, or
tea-tree swamp to be found, camps in willows, or open forest are generally
formed by Ft. scapulatus, which, of the four Australian species, is least
bound to the coast in its distribution.
Once a definite camping site has been established, “ tradition,” or
some sort of homing instinct, seems to be a powerful factor preventing
its abandonment, even when it would appear to have become unsuitable
in the matter of seclusion and shelter. Thus the camp on Baffle Creek
referred to above is situated in a patch of rain forest on which settlement
and cultivation have encroached year by year, until new roads, with
occasional motor traffic, pass through it, and children go to and from
school under the hanging foxes. Again, when a certain patch of


vegetation lias harboured a number of foxes for some time, the upper
branches often become quite denuded of leaves, and thus provide no
sort of protection from the sun. In the camp shown in Fig. 1, PI. 1,
near Tweed Heads, the foxes are hanging on dead trees as bare as
bamboo poles; yet there is plenty of uncleared rain forest in the locality
in which they could find adequate shelter.
It is safe to say that every creek and river on the Queensland coast
(and most in Hew South Wales, north of Sydney), has, to a greater
or lesser extent, a growth of mangroves at or near its mouth. South-
ward from Wide Bay, or the Mary River, in Queensland, the mangroves
form only fringing growths of limited depth, though in the shelter of
islands, e.g., Bribie Passage, the growth may be fairly extensive. North
of Wide Bay, the mangroves occur in increasing amount, often forming
tracts of great area. This is probably due to the shelter provided by
the Barrier Reef, and also to the predominance of Bhizophora
mucronata, a species which is able to flourish in the breaking waves of
the open sea, and thus, by gradual accumulation of silt and mud round
its roots, helps to form “ swamps,” sometimes many hundreds of yards
deep, in suitable localities.
These great tracts of mangrove country provide shelter for a very
large proportion of the flying fox population of Queensland. Moreover,
the shelter is usually very secure. The even line of dense foliage
reduces visibility to a minimum. Between the interlocking arched
roots there is generally a foot or so of soft mud, inundated at high tide.
It is frequently impossible to locate the site of a fox camp in an area
of mangrove swamp; and if its approximate position is known, e.g., by
the line of flight at nightfall, it is generally very difficult to reach it.
Experience of flying foxes in mangrove country is essential if the full
difficulties of the problem of control are to be appreciated.
Being nocturnal, flying foxes get their necessary sleep during the
day-time. It has often been remarked, however, that a camp is rarely
quiet. Darnell-Smith writes of a camp near Wauchope, Hew South
Wales: “ The camp was a scene of incessant wrangling and contention.
Occasionally, without any apparent reason, a shrill cry would be given,
and a flock of bats would leave one part of the camp for another, there
to be met with opposition from the tenants of the branches at every
attempt to land; thus, while some parts of the camp were comparatively
quiet, in others there was sometimes noise, biting, and fighting.” On
the whole, this description is fairly typical. I have found, however,
that the mere presence of an observer, however inoffensive, is sufficient
to wake a camp of foxes, previously quiet, who will then start bickering
and screeching. Although their sudden activity appears to bear no
relation to the intruder, they will usually move away gradually from
that part of the camp. After a while, even though the observer may do
nothing to molest them, the feeling of alarm will apparently spread,
and the whole camp take wing. However, I have on many occasions
been in the neighbourhood of a camp in which not the slightest sound
or movement was made to betray its presence.
It is frequently stated that flying foxes will hang one from another
in their camps, forming “ festoons,” or clumps like a “ bunch of grapes,”
or a “ swarm of bees.” On no single occasion have I seen anything on
which this assertion could be based. A number of the animals suspended
along a trailing vine, or closely in the small branches at the end of a
limb, which would droop under their combined weights, might give this


impression to a casual observer. It would seem a physical impossibility,
however, that an animal with such a thin skin as a flying fox (as is
apparent when it is flayed), and possessing highly sensitive wing
membranes, could bear, even for the briefest period, the weight of
another individual, let alone several, suspended as it would be by its
sharp claws.
When asleep, flying foxes bend their heads forward on their
breasts, and wrap themselves in their wings. On a hot, still day, one
of the wings is used as a fan; a camp then gives the impression of
incessant quiet movement, like that of leaves in a gentle wind.
Flying foxes are very efiicient climbers, using their clawed thumbs
as well as their hind feet in the process. When ascending a vertical
branch, they climb hand over hand, very like a man. When travelling
horizontally, they hang downwards like a sloth, using all four limbs.
Ft. scapulatus especially clambers about the trees with great agility,
and when disturbed this species wull usually climb upwards before
taking wing. When launching itself into the air, the flying fox holds
its wings open for an instant, and by retaining hold of its perch during
the first wing-beat, it can fly away without an initial downward swoop.
It is usually asserted that a flying fox cannot rise off the ground.
This is not strictly correct. I have myself seen a little Red Fox, which
had hit the ground in trying to fly under a low branch, successfully
rise. The grass was long at the spot where it landed, and presumably
this enabled it to get the necessary air pressure below its wings. The
structure of the hind limbs (which, in common with the Chiroptera
generally, are rotated at the pelvic joint so that the knees bend backward)
makes this feat very difficult. I have heard of no instance when it
was attempted, except under the stimulus of extreme fear. In fact, the
disinclination to descend to the ground, or even close to the ground, is
probably one of the strongest of the animal’s instincts.
(v) Intelligence, &c. —A knowledge of the habits of an animal is
essential before action can be taken against it as a pest. These habits
are a function of its instincts and its “ intelligence ” (using the term
in its ordinary meaning). In a highly developed mammal like the
flying fox, in contrast, for example, to insects, the latter is far from
being negligible. In fact, the capacity of flying foxes to appreciate
danger and to learn from experience must be taken seriously into account
when deciding on a method of control.
The general wariness of flying foxes in their day-time camps was
referred to above. This is increased very quickly after one or two
experiences of shooters and the like. Even in an unmolested camp,
this wariness, combined with the difficult nature of the sheltering
vegetation, makes it next to impossible to secure a bag of foxes in any
way commensurate with the trouble taken. For instance, during this
investigation, when working single-handed, it was rarely possible to
obtain as many as 30 specimens in a day (or two or three shooting
hours). Three men in the employ of the Brisbane Water Supply Board,
all good shots, considered a bag of over 100 to be a good day’s work in
a rain forest camp on the Enoggera Reserve. Both these instances
apply to the number of animals actually brought down to the ground,
and take no account of those left hanging in the trees, and those
mortally wounded, which would probably exceed the number actually
collected. They demonstrate, however, that the natural impression
that the crowded camps offer opportunities for easy mass slaughter is


largely illusory. On the whole, it cannot be too strongly impressed that
a method of mass destruction in the camps must be so arranged as to
circumvent the animal’s natural wariness, or alternatively must be very
rapid, in fact, almost catastrophic.
The order of intelligence of the flying fox is exemplified by the
following experiences met during the course of the investigation. A
camp (of Ft. poliocephalus ) near Allora, Queensland, was visited in
August, 1929. It had been regularly molested by shooters, and the mere
sound of my approach caused the animals to take wing, first wheeling
in a mass high above the trees, and finally breaking up into smaller
companies and settling here and there in the neighbouring forest. A
prolonged inspection was made of the now deserted camp site, during
which I was kept under constant observation by about half a dozen
foxes. They obviously appreciated the powers of a gun (in fact,
two or three had shot-holes in their wing membranes) and the limita-
tion of their speed. They circled high in the air, and one by one dived
down with half-closed wings, flattening out as they reached the tree-tops,
where they flew round me at the limit of gun range, dodging through
the branches.
This habit of individual foxes keeping an intruder to their camp
under observation was encountered on at least two other occasions.
Ft. gouldi, the Black Fox, was the species concerned in both instances.
The first occurred in a camp at Byfield, when a very large fox followed
me for well over an hour, even into that part of the camp occupied
solely by another species ( Ft. scapulatus). It displayed the greatest
cunning in denying me the opportunity of a fair shot. It was readily
identified by its exceptional size and the slowness of its wing-beats.
(As flying foxes mature, they acquire an increasing mastery of the air.
Half-grown individuals have rather a laborious, flapping flight, which
gradually becomes more leisurely and gliding.)
The second experience occurred in a camp near Gladstone, Queens-
land. On this occasion, the fox which kept me under observation
periodically gave out a peculiar bird-like cry, presumably a warning
note. It must be confessed, however, that the other inhabitants
of the camp did not appear to take advantage of any warning that may
have been given.
The wariness of flying foxes at night is well known to all who have
tried to shoot them in orchards. Once a few shots have been fired
they are exceedingly hard to approach, suppressing their usual noise,
and slipping quietly out of the trees on the side farthest from the
shooter. Although they usually flop into a tree so as to be audible at
a considerable distance, they can alight so silently that a man standing
under the tree itself may not be aware of their arrival.
Just as they appreciate danger, flying foxes soon realize when it is
absent. Thus most methods employed to scare them away from
orchards, by noise, lights, hanging cloths, &c., have proved unsuccessful
after the first night or so.
The four Australian species of flying fox are not all equally intelli-
gent, Ft. scapulatus, the little Bed Fox, being markedly less so than the
three larger species. Although this species does profit noticeably by
experience, it is usually relatively unwary and easy of approach in
camp, and consequently more easily shot in large numbers (their habit
of crowding helping in this), a fact which is well known to men who


destroy flying foxes for the scalp bounty. The little Red Fox will fly back
over guns again and again, an error seldom made by any of the larger
species. I have even shot one of a mating pair without disturbing the
other.
The Australian aboriginals used to kill flying foxes for food by
knocking them down in their camps with sticks. I have been informed
that Pt. scapulatus was the species they preferred. From my experience
of flying foxes in their camps, this is the only species which it would
be possible to kill in this way. It would be almost inconceivable in
the case of the very wary Black Fox {Pt. gouldi). Occasionally
fishermen and others have been able to knock flying foxes with sticks
or “ crabhooks ” in a mangrove camp. This I have taken as almost
conclusive evidence of the presence of Pt. scapulatus in that camp; and
in several cases this has been definitely confirmed.
(vi) The Search for Food. —In contrast with human beings a very
large part of the mental equipment of wild animals is concentrated on
the search for food, and thus they often display, to our judgment, an
almost incredible efficiency in the process. In the case of such a
numerous and gregarious animal as the flying fox, whose diet moreover
insures its notice by man, this efficiency is particularly obvious. Where
the camps, each containing many thousands of individuals, are
separated by intervals of 20 miles, or even less, it is clear that the
feeding grounds must be very thoroughly “worked.” This is un-
doubtedly based on a system of individual scouting.
When a camp breaks up at nightfall one or more streams of foxes
will be formed. These will fly away, usually at a considerable height,
in a most purposeful manner, “ as if steering on a compass bearing.”
In addition to this main stream or streams, a large number of indi-
■ viduals will fly away without any semblance of order or definite purpose.
These “ scouts ” fan out in all directions, and at a much lower altitude.
It is usually impossible to stand for more than a few minutes anywhere
within a mile or so of a camp just at nightfall without seeing at least
one fox flying over the tree tops, or gliding here and there through the
branches.
In the course of the night a very large area must be explored in this
way, and it is easy to understand why no fruit can ripen, or tree come
into blossom within feeding range of a camp, without being discovered
by the flying foxes. (A press notice records the case of a Brisbane man
who “ hung a bunch of ripening bananas on his back balcony in the
thick of the city. Flying foxes came silently to deprive him of most
of his bunch.”)
Many observers assert that flying foxes can communicate with one
another; for when a tree with ripe fruit has been discovered by a fox,
in two or three nights several will turn up to feed in it. Flying foxes
attacked mandarins very heavily last (1930) season in the Rockhampton
area. One grower in the district made a point of poisoning directly
he noticed fruit eaten. He accounted for a score or so of foxes in the
course of a season, and suffered negligible losses. Another grower, a
few miles away, did nothing, and was visited by an ever-increasing
number of the animals, who ultimately destroyed the greater part of
his crop.
In the case of a highly-developed mammal like the flying fox some
sort of communication between individuals is quite conceivable. In the
case of a mother and her young one it is more than probable that it


occurs; but baying observed tbe very individualistic behaviour of
foraging foxes, I think that these facts can be explained more readily
in another way. For instance, I think it is probable that an individual
that has located food on a previous night, and would thus presumably fly
directly to it when the camp broke, would be followed by other foxes
who had exhausted their particular' food supply. In this way the main
flight of the animals would be gradually deflected to another course as
the supply of food which had attracted them became insufficient for
their needs (for instance, when the blossom of some particular patch of
timber began to give out). This seems to agree with the observed fact
that the direction of the main flight from a camp will continually alter
during the course of the season, the original stream gradually dwindling
as a second column, flying in some new direction, increases.
Presumably individual foxes differ in their mentality; some, the
more enterprising and individualistic, taking on the function of scouts.
In this connexion it is interesting to note that the behaviour of the
different species is not uniform. Ft. scapulatus, the little Red Pox
(referred to above as being the least intelligent of the four species)
forms very regular flights, with hardly any sign of individual scouting.
This fact has been independently noted by an observer, who watched
the flight from a mixed camp (Ft. gouldi and scapulatus ) near Ingham,
northern Queensland. He remarked on the regular formation adopted
by “ the small light species with transparent wings ” and the straggling
of “ the big black species.” Records of flying foxes dying in large
numbers, apparently from lack of food, are limited to Ft. scapulatus.
Moreover, a fisherman, telling of a camp of this species on Baffle Creek,
Queensland, was very interested in the fact that there were one. or two
“ large dark foxes ” among them, which appeared to “ take the lead in
all their movements.”
I have shot Ft. scapulatus in orchards only on one or two occasions,
and in each case Ft. poliocephalus, the Grey-headed Fox, was the first
to arrive on the scene. Knowing that when a “ pure ” camp of scapu-
latus settled in the district, fruit is rarely attacked to any extent
(Warwick, 1930; Northern Tablelands, New South Wales, various
years), at a meeting of the Pests Destruction Boards’ Association I
hazarded the suggestion that Ft. scapulatus was led into the orchards
by the larger, more intelligent, and more predominantly frugivorous
species. This suggestion was unexpectedly endorsed by an observant
fruit-grower from the Brisbane district, who had had many years’
experience of flying foxes. However, as one or other of the larger
species is to be found in all the coastal fruit-growing areas, and a few
individuals, at any rate, will usually be found in any orchard when the
fruit is ripening, it goes almost without saying that Ft. scapulatus will
rarely be found alone.
In the search for food, the flying fox is undoubtedly guided by its
powers of scent. (To the eye a difference of colour is all that dis-
tinguishes a ripe from an unripe fruit, and this would be indiscernible
at night). Thus fox attacks are noticeably more serious on still, damp
nights, when the conditions would be ideal for scent. Bee-keepers have
informed me that after they have been separating honey, and the air is
charged with a sweet smell, flying foxes would often screech round the
house all night, although there was neither fruit nor blossom to attract
them. Moreover, once a fruit has been bitten it will prove an attraction
to foxes on subsequent nights, the broken skin presumably liberating


the scent. Growers who poison take advantage of this, and I have
heard of as many as seven foxes being poisoned in one night on a single
paw-paw. One mandarin-grower said that the only good thing he knew
of the flying fox was that it would return to a half-eaten fruit, and thus
could he readily poisoned.
3. The Flying Fox Population in Australia.
(i) Estimates of the Numbers in Gamps. —lt is very difficult to
estimate the number of flying foxes in a camp. In the ftnst place, it is
rarely possible to get a general view, or even a general impression, of
the whole of a camp. This is particularly true of a camp in an exten-
sive mangrove swamp. The same applies to a camp occupying a portion
only of a large area of dense rain forest. Sometimes, particularly in
the more closely settled country in the south, where rain forest remains
chiefly in the form of small relict “pockets,” it is possible to estimate
the area of a camp, and thus the approximate number of animals in it.
This is also the case when a camp is limited to a small mangrove-
covered island.
Generally speaking, I find there is a tendency to under-e stimate the
numbers when hanging in a camp, and to over-estimate them in a flying
mob. In the latter case the movement probably deceives the eye, and
gives the impression of exaggerated density. Thus an observer is con-
stantly confronted with the apparent miracle of a camp “ discharging ”
many times the number of foxes that appeared to he in it.
In one of the camps visited, at Byfield, Central Queensland, the
foxes were distributed, in rather a discontinuous fashion, through some
sto 10 acres of rain forest. There were considerable gaps between
the groups of animals, and it was not often that a view of any large
number could be obtained. The camp “ broke ” at precisely 6 p.m.
(10th October, 1929), first forming a packed, wheeling mass above the
trees, then moving off in a great column about 100 yards wide, and 100
feet deep (in the centre). This column left the camp in almost un-
diminished intensity for a period of 25 minutes. Knowing the average
flying speed of the animals, and the approximate interval between the
Individuals in the column, it is possible to arrive at an estimate of the
numbers composing the flight.
I have timed flying foxes with a speedometer, and found that their
speed of steady flight is about 25 m.p.h. Allowing an interval of 15
feet in each direction between the individuals in the air, and cross
section of the column to he one-half the rectangle 300 by 100 feet, this
flight represents a number of about 220,000.
The photograph produced in Fig. 2, PI. 1, illustrates well the tendency
to overestimate the numbers in flight. It represents the densest part
of a great flight of foxes disturbed from a camp in the mangroves at
the Burnett River Heads, Queensland. Looking into the flight at the
time it was easy to believe that the sky was almost obscured, and that
literally hundreds of thousands of the animals were in sight. Actually
it can be seen that the sky is far from being obscured; and by counting
the foxes on an enlarged print it was found that the photograph included
from 2,500 to 3,000 individuals only.
It is obviously of importance in the assessment of the size of the
flying fox population to arrive at some estimate of the numbers in the
various camps. As the conditions in different camps differ greatly,
C. 9212.—3


according to the nature of the vegetation, and also to the species forming
them, it is only possible to get the roughest idea of the order 1 of numbers
in a camp of a certain area.
From counts made in camps (of Ft. poliocephalus) it was found that
a small tree carried about 100 individuals. The crown of such a tree
(a small rain-forest tree is usually very tall and slender), would be
equal in volume to a well-grown apple tree, some 12 to 15 feet high.
If the crowns of these trees were spaced as the trees in a typical orchard,
at 20-foot intervals, giving just over 100 trees to the acre, this would
represent a density of 10,000 foxes to the acre. In normal rain forest,
however, there is a continuous canopy of foliage, and the animals hang
in a zone which must often be 50 feet deep. It would therefore he safe
to assume that, hanging in not abnormal density, the number of foxes
in a typical rain forest camp would be twice this figure at least, i.e.,
20,000 to the acre. In a mangrove camp, the figure would be consider-
ably less, probably nearer 10,000; whereas where Ft. scapulatus, the
little Red Fox, is concerned, it would be greater. This species is smaller,
tends to form more crowded camps and, moreover, is very fond of
clustering in the lower undergrowth and vines, and thus makes better
“ use ” of a given area of vegetation.
These figures can be used as a rough basis for calculating the numbers
in a camp, once its approximate area is known. It applies, of course,
only when the distribution is uniform, and as this is rarely the case,
it is impossible to accept without a reduction some of the estimated
areas of flying fox camps reported by various observers.
From the above considerations it is apparent that a camp with an
area of less than 5 acres is not likely to contain as many as 100,000
flying foxes, unless Ft. scapulatus occurs in it in any numbers. (As this
was the ease in the Byfield camp mentioned above, it is possible that
the figure arrived at, 220,000, was not necessarily unreasonably high.)
Not many camps of this size were met with during the investigation.
Probably only two of those visited in New South Wales attained this
figure; one in a tea-tree swamp in the Nambucca State Forest (at least
50 per cent. Ft. scapulatus ), the other near Kempsey. The latter com-
pletely filled a pocket of rain forest, 5 to 6 acres in area, and contained
a small proportion of the little Red Fox. Many other New South Wales
camps probably exceed this figure in certain years, particularly in those
of heavy migrations of Ft. scapulatus, e.g., the camp at Lamb’s Valley,
near Maitland. Generally speaking, the camps decrease in size towards
the south.
In northern and central Queensland really large camps are still
common. Sometimes they attain incredible size. The following state-
ment was obtained from an informant living on the Gilbert River, in
the Gulf country: “ I heard one man who had been on the Red River
say that in his opinion all the foxes in the world were there. The camp
w T as half a mile wide, and about 4 miles long, and they were there in
millions.” In this case the figure given appears to be literally correct
There is very little doubt that Ft. scapulatus was the species present in
this case. Another report was received, also from North Queensland,
of a camp, in this case, Ft. scapulatus without doubt, which at times
extended for “ miles along a creek ”.
A few years ago, some of the southern Queensland camps must have
attained huge size. Of two camps in the neighbourhood of Gympie, one
is said to have covered 50 acres in good years (i.e., probably during


heavy migrations of Ft. scapulatus), the other 25 acres. The biggest
camp visited was probably that at Burnett Heads, where the photograph
reproduced in Figure 1 was taken. A fairly general view of the
camp was obtained by climbing a tall mangrove. It covered over ten,
possibly over 20 acres, and the animals ( Ft. scapulatus ) were hanging so
thickly that 60 were secured with six shots. It is probable that the
numbers in this camp exceeded 200,000, possibly very greatly. (This
estimate is apparently not borne out by tbe photographic count. The
horizontal angle covered by the camera being about 45 degrees, the
numbers shown in the figure cannot represent much less than one-fourth
of the flight. This flight was one of many, however, and in addition a
great number of the animals had not risen from the shelter of the
mangroves.)
In this report, the term “ small ” is applied to a camp of half an
acre or less (or a thinly inhabited camp of larger area), and thus would
probably contain up to 5,000-10,000 foxes; “ medium sized,” up to 2 or
3 acres, containing up to 50,000; and “ large,” anything over this size.
Observations made by a correspondent at Esk, in the Brisbane Valley,
seem to confirm these estimates. He writes of a “ large camp ” that
has been in the district for at least 20 years, and talks of it “ diminish-
ing to 30,000 or 40,000.” He has tried to estimate the evening flights,
and on one occasion counted 32,000 flying foxes passing over one point
in about an hour. He points out that this would not represent the
total of the camp, as more than one stream used to leave at nightfall.
(ii) The Distribution of Gamps. —A knowledge of the size and
state of the flying fox population must be based on a study of the camps.
Although certain camps are well known, the great majority are situated
in unfrequented and often inaccessible spots, and the expenditure of
considerable time and trouble is usually necessary to obtain reliable
information of them. Paradoxically, it was found that information
of camps was as hard, if not harder, to come by in the most closely
settled districts as in the least settled, at any rate in the time available.
It has proved impossible to locate and visit more than a small proportion
of the numerous camps distributed through Queensland and Hew South
Wales. Many quite large areas have had to be neglected, but, where
possible, information regarding them was obtained by correspondence.
Special attention was given to the more important districts, i.e., im-
portant economically as fruit-growing areas, and biologically in their
relation to the complex state of the migratory flying fox population.
Flying foxes, judging by the number and size of their camps, are
very much more numerous in northern and central Queensland (i.e.,
north of the Mary or Burnett Rivers), than they are in south Queens-
land and Hew South Wales. This is only to be expected in the case of
a genus which is predominantly tropical and sub-tropical. The close-
ness of settlement is also a factor in the distribution, and must imply an
actual diminution in numbers in certain areas (see p. 32).
In all, 42 camps were personally investigated, the great majority of
which were in Queensland*. Many were visited more than once, at
different times of the year, with a view to gaining knowledge of the
seasonal movements of the animals. As might be expected, with two
or three exceptions only, these camps were of a “ permanent ” nature,
i.e., inhabited annually, though perhaps for certain months of the year
*A list of these camps has not been included in this Report, as it would be impossible to describe
their situations sufficiently accurately to be of any practical value.


only, for it is rarely that the visit of an observer will coincide with
the appearance in a district of a migrating mob of foxes temporarily
camped in a “ new ” site.
In addition to the camps actually visited, information has been
collected of nearly 200 others. Many of these were purely temporary,
and others previously “ permanent ” have been deserted of recent years.
This figure, therefore, has little meaning (especially as very little of
the information concerns northern Queensland), and in order to get
an idea of the numbers and distribution of camps, it is necessary to
generalize from the particular, that is from those districts in which the
investigation has been most thorough.
In the strip of country within 30 miles or so of the coast, immediately
north of and including the estuary of the Burnett River, there are
numerous camps with an average interval of less than 20 miles between
them. All hut one, as far as is known, are annually inhabited. Most
in normal years are from medium-sized to large.
In the Rockhampton district, the camps are even more closely spaced.
In the area lying between the mouth of the Fitzroy River and Cario
Creek (about 50 miles to the north), and extending about 30 miles
inland, twelve camps were located. In addition, it can safely be said
that there would be one more at least near the mouth of the Fitzroy,
which was not explored. Of these, eight are permanent or annual,
seven being usually or often large. Two were temporary camps of
Ft. scapulatus, one being large. The remaining two were once
permanent, hut have dwindled to the point of disappearance during the
last three or four years. This does not exhaust the total of the camps
in this area in exceptional seasons. Information was received of' at
least four more sites which had been inhabited during the last few years.
Almost as close spacing of camps is found in the Townsville area,
the Hinchinhrook area (from Ingham to Innisfail), and on the Atherton
Tableland. Here, in a rather limited area, five camps were located
(three of which were visited) separated from one another by about
15 miles. Four of them are annually inhabited, and two at least are
large.
Changes in the flying fox population have been much more marked
in southern Queensland and Hew South Wales, and it is consequently
more difficult to arrive at an accurate idea of the distribution of camps
at the present time. Three or four years ago, there were at least nine
annually inhabited camps between the Hew South Wales border and the
Brisbane district, in an area some 70 miles long and 45 miles wide.
Of late, one or two of these camps have been deserted, and others are
no longer inhabited every year.
Still less can be said about Hew South Wales. Special attention
was paid to the Hunter Valley district, centred round Hewcastle and
Maitland. In the area, some 50 miles long, bounded by Morisset in
the south and Port Stephens in the north, and extending as far inland
as Cessnock, seven camp sites were located. Only two of them are
definitely known to he annually inhabited, the camps in some years
being large. One at least of the others was formerly inhabited
annually, but lately has been occupied only at irregular intervals.
This district is probably not typical of the Hew South Wales coast, as
the Hunter Valley appears to act as a “bottle-neck” in the route of
the southerly migration of the flying foxes. Judging from the in-
formation available, it seems probable that along the Hew South Wales


coast (with the exception of the closely settled areas around Sydney)
camps, now rarely large, are to be found at average intervals of rather
under 40 miles.
It will he noted that all the areas specially cited are on the coast.
Although the flying fox (especially, and possibly solely, Ft. scapulatus )
extends far inland, it is very markedly a coastal animal. By far the
greater proportion of the total population is to be found within 50 miles
of the sea. It can be said that the Dividing Range is their westerly
• limit in any large numbers, except in north Queensland. This inves-
tigation, for all practical purposes, was limited to this coastal belt.
From the considerations set forth above, it will be realized that the
flying fox population of eastern Australia is very large indeed. It
would be profitless to attempt a figure, which would run into many
millions, and have little meaning for the average man. However, if
we assume that the special districts dealt with above are not a-typicai,
it is possible to reach a conception of the order of the size of the flying
fox population, extending along the 2,000 odd miles of coast-line
between Cape York and the Victorian border.
(iii) The Distribution of the Species. —The geographical ranges of
the various species were given in brief on pages 8-10. These ranges
are such that in no district can it safely be said that only one species
of flying fox will be found, unless it is the far inland areas into which
Ft. scapulatus alone ventures.
Ft. scapulatus and gouldi have both been reported from Broome,
northern West Australia, along the north coast of the continent, and
from the islands ofl Cape York. They occur together down the east
coast ,as far as the Mary River. (A reliable report of a camp of
Ft. gouldi in the mangroves of this estuary is the southernmost record
of this species.) The western limit of Ft. gouldi is unknown.
Ft. scapulatus is a great wanderer, following the blooming of the
eucalypts and other trees, like the Brush-tongued Parrots. In this
way it extends very far afield. Southward it apparently reaches the
Victorian border; and it has been reported, in Queensland, as far inland
as Blackall, Longreach, Mitchell, and Dirranbandi. Its range is thus
practically co-extensive with the sum of those of the other' three Austra-
lian species.
Ft. conspicillatus, the Spectacled Pox, which also occurs in Hew
Guinea, is found only in the coastal area of eastern north Queensland.
Cardwell appears to be its southern record. It was the only species
actually observed on the Atherton Tableland, northern Queensland,
though Ft. scapulatus undoubtedly occurs there in large numbers at
times.
Ft. poliocephalus, the Grey-headed Pox, is found along the coast of
Hew South Wales, occasionally in Victoria, and in south and central
Queensland. During this investigation it was not found further
north than the Rockhampton district. However, as there were one or
two camps of this species in that area, it may safely be assumed to
occur further north. (There are records* of this species from Cape
Upstart, near Bowen, Horth Queensland, and an unspecified locality in
Cape York.) I am of opinion that this —the Rockhampton district-
may be regarded as the northern limit of Ft. poliocephalus in any
numbers at the present time.
♦ British Kuseum Catalogue of Chiroptera.


A few “ permanent ” camps of this species are found well over
100 miles from the coast in Queensland, e.g., near Eidsvold and
Jandowae. In Hew South Wales, no annually inhabited camp of
Pi. poliocephalus has even been recorded as far inland as Tenterfield
and Glen Innes.
(iv) Migration. —All the four Australian species of flying fox seem
to be migratory to a greater or lesser extent. Unfortunately, the type
of information from which a really accurate picture of their migrations
could be formed is not available.
Pi. poliocephalus carries out very regular, seasonal migrations,
moving southward in the spring into southern Queensland and Hew
South Wales. Darnell-Smith writes of this species; “They apparently
come from Queensland into Hew South Wales, gradually passing south-
ward from camp to camp, and returning northward by the same
route. . . . They begin to arrive about the end of Hovember.”
Beyond the fact (made apparent by the periodic desertion and re-occupa-
tion of well-known camps) that this seasonal migration does take place,
the available information is scanty. The movements within the popula-
tion of this species appear to be rather complicated. The southerly
migration into Hew South Wales and south Queensland is relatively
simple and obvious.
On the whole, flying foxes appear in the northern rivers considerably
earlier than in the more southern districts of Hew South Wales. It is
not rare for them to make their appearance early in October. (In
1929, they were recorded in Lismore in the first week in October,
and at Grafton by the 18th of the month.) In the Hunter Yalley area
(Hewcastle district) they apparently do not usually appear before the
middle of Hovember. (The visitation during the first week in
Hovember, in 1930, was regarded as rather exceptional.) In the south
coast areas, I have no definite record of their appearance before the
month of December.
The main migration into Hew South Wales must pass to the seaward
of the border range. (Information from Kyogle and Woodenbong
indicates that flying foxes are rarely seen in these districts, which
probably means that few if any foxes regularly pass southward over the
border range itself.)
Flying foxes (Pi. poliocephalus) appear in any numbers on the
northern tableland considerably later than on the northern rivers. Their
arrival at Tenterfield at the beginning of December in 1929 was regarded
as premature. lam inclined to think that the earlier arrivals, when
they are of this species, represent a much smaller, direct migration into
Hew South Wales by this more inland route, the larger numbers which
subsequently appear in the fruit season coming from the coast (having
entered the State on the seaward side of the range). This appears to
be confirmed by the fact that flying foxes seem to be more numerous
at Tenterfield than at Stanthorpe, just over the Queensland border.
How small is this inland migration, if indeed it occurs at all, is indicated
by the absence of any permanent camps of Pi. poliocephalus on the
northern tableland.
It is not true to say that the Grey-headed Fox completely deserts the
southern part of its range in the winter months. I have frequently
been informed that isolated individuals can be seen at all times of the
year. Moreover, in recent years at least, two large camps have formed
during the winter months in districts where flying foxes are normally


summer visitors only. (Namhucca, 1928 and 1929; Allora, Queens-
land, 1929. Neither of these were formed in a recognized camping
site. lam inclined to think that this represents a new departure in
the habits of this species.)
The state of affairs found in Queensland is very much more com-
plicated. In the southern districts, the camps are inhabited in the
summer months only, approximately from October to May, as in New
South Wales. From the Mary River northward, the complications
begin to be apparent. At Yerra, a few miles from Maryborough, a
camp of Ft. poliocephalus is occupied annually for approximately the
three months of April, May, and June. The camp at Baffle Creek,
just north of Bundaherg, is usually occupied from February to June or
July. In 1926 and 1927, it did not break up until after the winter.
.(The fact that the foxes arrive as early as February seems to indicate
that this camp is not formed of animals which have migrated from the
south.) Most of the poliocephalus camps between Bundaherg and
Gladstone appear to be of this type.
North of Gladstone, camps of two apparently distinct types are
found. Purely “ winter ” camps of Ft. poliocephalus occur here and
there, e.g., near Yarwun (just north of Gladstone), and at Barmoya
(via Rockhampton). In addition, there are camps, often within a few
miles of these winter camps, in which the species is found in both
summer and winter, e.g., at Raglan, Rossmoya, and Byfield, all in the
Rockhampton district.
Considerable obscurity thus remains regarding the ultimate location
of the foxes which migrate in such large numbers from southern Queens-
land and New South Wales at the end of the summer. Undoubtedly,
a more detailed survey of this (the Rockhampton) district, and probably
the area lying further north (i.e., in the neighbourhood of St. Lawrence
and Mackay) would discover additional “ winter ” camps of Ft. polio-
cephalus.
From the observed fact that there exist, in this northern portion of
their range, camps in which Ft. poliocephalus occurs in both summer
and winter, it would seem that the instinct for southerly migration is
not uniform throughout the. species. It is rather remarkable, there-
fore, that this migration should be so well established and so regular.
Certain camps in New South Wales are known to have been occupied
for some 50 years, and it is said that local men can prophesy to within
a week the date of the foxes’ departure.
In addition to this major seasonal migration, there are smaller local
movements governed apparently by the state of the available food
supply. Thus, in New South Wales, the districts just inland from
the purely coastal strip, e.g., Berrima, Queanbeyan, Cooma, &c., and
probably the tablelands generally, the prevalence of flying foxes seems
to depend on unfavorable, i.e., drought, conditions on the coast. On
the coast itself, it has been noticed (by an observer from the Newcastle
district, near whose property a large “ permanent ” camp is located)
that the numbers appear to be greatest in wet years. As attacks on
cultivated fruit will usually be heavier in dry seasons, this correlation,
if indeed it exists, would not he generally noticeable. The existence
of camps which are periodically, but not annually, inhabited, is probably
connected with these secondary, local movements.


The Black Fox, Ft. gouldi, does not exhibit any very obvious
seasonal migrations. As this species does not occur outside the sub-
tropical zone, this is perhaps to be expected. Such migrations as do
occur are probably comparable with the “ secondary ” local movements
of the previously-mentioned species. The impression obtained during
the investigation was that a considerable part of the population left
the coastal camps during the winter months. The enormous numbers
that are in evidence in the mango season, and the complication due to
the appearance of large numbers of Ft. scapulatus at times, probably
helped to create an erroneous impression of the scarcity of the Black
Fox in the winter months. Ft. gouldi was found camped on the Burnett
in May, 1929; and the fact that they attack citrus (which ripens in
Queensland from April onwards) as far south as the Burnett district,
seems to indicate that there is no general winter l exodus from the more
southern portions of their range. There is no doubt, however, that
there are considerable movements within the population, for camps
constantly vary in size, and frequently break up for periods of a month
or two.
Ft. conspicillatus, the northern Spectacled Fox, was only met with
in the Cairns and Atherton districts, and sufficient observations could
not be made to obtain an accurate idea of its migratory habits. That
the species does carry out some sort of migration is indicated by the
fact that two of the Atherton Tableland camps visited, and found to
be inhabited in November, were deserted in July. One of these appeared
to be a regular summer camp, being vacated from June to September
annually. It is quite possible that the climatic conditions of the table-
land, due to its altitude, render it unsuitable during the winter for a
purely tropical species like Ft. conspicillatus.
The extensive migrations of the little Bed Fox, Ft. scapulatus, are
almost certainly governed by the blossoming of the so-called hardwood
trees. As this is notoriously uncertain, the movements of this species
show a considerable irregularity. The biggest migrations of the little
Bed Fox are carried out independently of the other species. They are
characterized by the size of the mobs concerned, and usually by the
short periods spent in any one district, sometimes a matter only of days.
I visited a patch of rain forest (which happened to contain a camp of
Ft. conspicillatus) on the Atherton Tableland in which a horde of
migrating scapulatus had camped for “ a few days.” It looked as
though the place had been visited by a tornado. Trees were stripped
of their leaves, and branches up to 9 inches or a foot in diameter were
broken off, and hung in the vines or lay scattered on the ground.
These migrations, as was mentioned above, are by no means confined
to the coastal belt. In fact, the competition of the coastal populations
of the other species is probably a factor in driving them further inland.
Ft. scapulatus thus occurs in numbers west of the Divide, from Pentland
southward to Clermont and Springsure, and via the Dalby district to
the Dumaresq Biver, and thus into Hew South Wales by a route con-
siderably inland of that followed by Ft. poliocepkalus, the Grey-headed
Fox.
When in a district inhabited by another species of flying fox,
Ft. scapulatus will almost always use their camping sites. In fact, it
is difficult to name a camp on the coast in which this species will not
be found at suitable times. In the camp on Baffle Creek, which has
been kept under observation for many years, Ft, scapulatus has been


noticed in certain seasons. In 1930, they arrived in January (coinci-
dent with the flowering of the bloodwood, Eucalyptus corymbosa),
Pt. poliocephalus not appearing until the end of February. Scapulatus
left the camp in March, poliocephalus staying until July. How the
migrants came to select this camp site, which was uninhabited at the
time of their arrival, is a problem. Possibly they were guided to it by
the few individuals of a larger species (probably poliocephalus) which
were noticed among them (see p. 18).
There is, of course, some sort of order in the general migrations of
the little Red Fox, the main southerly movement taking place in the
summer. In the north, there are “ pure ” scapulatus camps which are
quite regular, e.g., at Woodstock, near Townsville, in which the foxes
arrive annually some time in August or September, and leave regularly
before the wet season (in the first week of November in 1930). In
the winter months, Pt. scapulatus is found in “ countless numbers ” in
the far north (Gulf Rivers and Cape York*) feeding on the-blooms of
tea-trees ( Melaleuca spp.).
The coastal migrations into New South Wales appear to be carried
out largely in conjunction with Pt. poliocephalus, the species regularly
camping and feeding together. This migration varies greatly from
year to year, being insignificant, possibly non-existent, in certain seasons.
The great variation in the numbers of the little Red Fox is probably the
chief factor in determining the severity of attacks in cultivated fruit,
i.e., the “good” or “bad” flying fox years, in New South Wales).
(v) Changes in the Flyiny Pox Population. —The very great
probability that flying foxes colonized Australia by means of the Cape
York route was explained on page 12. From a study of the physical
characters of the Australian species in comparison with those of their
closest relatives, it would appear that Pt. poliocephalus and scapulatus
were the first immigrants. This is borne out by their 1 geographical
ranges at the present day, these two species alone having reached New
South Wales. Assuming this hypothesis to be correct, it is possible to
reconstruct the process of colonization.
Ignoring for the moment Pt. scapulatus (which in many ways seems
to stand apart from the three larger species), there must have been a
period when Pt. poliocephalus alone occurred in Australia (or rather
the ancestors of this species in its present form). First established on
Cape York, it gradually extended its range southward along the east
coast. At a later date, Pt. gouldi invaded the continent. It probably
mixed with Pt. poliocephalus (as it does to-day in those districts
where their ranges overlap), and also pushed southward, and in addition
westward, along the north coast. Gradually, as Pt. poliocephalus
extended its range further and further south, until by means of seasonal
migrations it managed to establish itself in New South Wales, it was
supplanted in the more northern districts by Pt. gouldi, and thr s cut
off from the Cape York connexion altogether. Then, at a still later
date, Pt. conspicillatus succeeded in gaining a footing on Cape York,
and pushed southward to the limit of its present range, i.e., approxi-
mately Rockingham Bay, North Queensland. While these changes
progressed, Pt. scapulatus also succeeded in adapting itself to Australian
♦ Thomson, D. F., Unpublished report of visit to Cape York, 1928-9.
t It was hoped that it would be possible to discover the factors controlling the variations
in this southerly migration of Pt. scapvlaius ; but, unfortunately, the information regarding the
migrations in past years is so scanty that the basis for any attempt at correlation, say with
climatic periods, is unobtainable.


conditions, and increased its range until it, like Ft. gouldi, had reached
northern Western Australia, and like Ft. poliocephalus, managed by
seasonal migrations to colonize New South Wales.
After their arrival in Australia, Ft. poliocephalus, gouldi, and
scapulatus, being cut off from their relatives in the northern islands,
became specifically distinct. Presumably each species, at one time in
its history, existed in a state similar to that found to-day in the case
of Ft. conspicillatus, which occurs in identical form in north Queens-
land and south-eastern New Guinea.
The question now arises: Has this progressive colonization achieved
a stable stage, or is it likely that further changes will occur; in which
case, how will they affect the practical aspect of the problem ?
I think that there is some evidence that natural changes in the flying
fox population of Australia are still in progress. In the first place, it
appears (from the records of museum specimens), that in comparatively
recent years, i.e., in the latter part of the nineteenth century, and later,
Ft. poliocephalus was found as far north as Cape York. During this
investigation, this species was not found further north than Rockhamp-
ton (where it was very greatly outnumbered by Ft. gouldi), though it
probably occurs somewhat further north than this. All camps locatable
were visited, and hundreds of thousands of foxes were seen in the
Townsville and Bowen areas considerably south of Cape York, yet no
single specimen of Ft. poliocephalus was met with, although it would
probably have been distinguishable, even on the wing. Thus it appears
that the supplanting of Ft. poliocephalus by gouldi in northern and
central Queensland is still in progress.
If it is true that the range of Ft. poliocephalus is being gradually
restricted in the north, it is natural to look for some compensating
change in other directions. Its western limit has apparently been
reached, and having found its way into Victoria, it can hardly hope
for an extension of territory in the south. There remains, however, the
possibility of extending its winter range. This could he achieved
gradually, by limiting the northward migration in the autumn, or by
means of a sudden experiment, a sort of “ habit mutation,” appearing in
a section of the population. This rather unlikely possibility appears
actually to have taken place. In 1928, a large mob of Ft. poliocephalus
formed a camp in the Nambucca State Forest, in New South Wales,
and stayed there through that winter and the next. In 1929, another
very large mob spent the winter in a mountain gully near Allora, on
the eastern edge of the Darling Downs. (This winter happened to be
exceptionally cold, 12 degrees of frost being recorded in this district.)
Although records of stragglers wintering in the south are common, the
case of large camps doing this appears to be without precedent. (The
fact that only young animals, almost certainly of the previous year’s
brood, and very old individuals were shot in the Allora camp, may be
significant.)
There are not sufficient records available to indicate whether or not
Ft. gouldi has ceased to extend its range southward. This happens to
be a matter of some practical importance, as the Black Fox is a species
which, in contrast to Ft. poliocephalus, the southern Grey-headed Fox,
readily attacks citrus fruit.
The case of Ft. scapulatus, the little Red Fox, is particularly
interesting. It has been possible to collect a considerable amount of


information regarding its movements in recent years; and this informa-
tion leaves little doubt that this species has rather suddenly increased
the scope of its migrations. This change apparently took place in
the year 1926-27.
It was mentioned above that Ft. scapulatus migrates southward into
New South Wales, partly in conjunction with the Grey-headed Fox,
Ft. poliocephalus, and partly independently—this independent migration
being more obvious in the inland areas, where the larger species rarely
occurs*. This inland migration has apparently not been regular. Thus,
at Inverell, foxes “ only appear at irregular intervals ”; at Bundarra,
they occur “every two or three years”; at Narrabri, “odd foxes only
are seen.” The flying foxes occurring occasionally at Coonabarabran
and Gilgandra probably represent the southern advance guard of this
inland invasion.
The coastal migration of Ft. scapulatus is largely obscured by the
more obvious annual invasion of Ft. poliocephalus. As the two species
are rarely distinguished, it has been difficult to get an idea of the extent
of the invasion. An informant at Grafton reported that one year
(undated) he noticed a number of smaller light-coloured foxes cluster-
ing thickly in the vines in a camp of Ft. poliocephalus. The two
species were also known to growers of old standing at Kurrajong.
A fruit-grower on Mount Kembla, on the south coast, said that he was
visited by the little Red Fox “in some years.” An officer of the
Department of Agriculture in Brisbane, knew Ft. scapulatus in the
Bega district (on the south coast near the Victorian border) in his
boyhood, and stated that they formed a small minority, perhaps only
one in 100.
This coastal migration, therefore, was well established prior to
1926. That it was inconsiderable is indicated by the very small number
of observers in New South Wales who realized the existence of a second
species of flying fox. lam of opinion that Ft. scapulatus was, so to
speak, carried along by the southerly migrating Ft. poliocephalus.
The summer of 1926-27 was quite exceptional. Generally through-
out southern Queensland and New South Wales, flying foxes were more
in evidence than they had been for many years, and losses to fruit-
growers were abnormally high. This state of affairs appears to have
been directly caused by a quite exceptionally heavy migration of Ft.
scapulatus. The following observations support this assertion; —
(1) In many poliocephalus camps in south Queensland, Ft.
scapulatus was definitely noticed, e.g., Coondoc, near Gympie;
Flinders Peak; Baffle Creek, &c.
(2) Ft. scapulatus appeared in great numbers in south Queens-
land, camping here and there along creeks, &c., e.g., in the Stau-
thorpe and Beaudesert districts. (One of my informants, who has
* The evidence that Pt. scapulatus is the only, or at any rate the principal, fox concerned in this
inland migration is purely indirect, for none of the reports from these areas differentiate between the
species. A comparison with Queensland conditions, where Pt. scapulatus is undoubtedly the chief,
if not the only inland wanderer, points to this conclusion. Moreover it appears that in the camps
near Yandilla and Dalby in Queensland (which are probably points on the route followed by this
migration) Pt. scapulatus occurs in great, usually preponderating, numbers. In this inland belt of
New South Wales no “ fixed camps of Pt. pol ccephalus are known. In the corresponding belt in
southern Queensland such camps are widely scattered and diminishing in nun bers. It is hardly
conceivable, therefore, that large scale migrations of Pt. poliocephalus could originate from this tract
of. country. It is quite likely, however, that small numbers of Pt. poliocephalus would be found in the -
migrating mobs of the little Red Fox, knowing how the two species habitually mix. (Since writing
this Report I have obtained evidence that the species of flying fox occurring at Inverell in the summer
1930-31 was indeed Pt. scapulatus.)


lived all liis life in the latter district, stated that the little Red Fox
was practically unknown in this area before the heavy migration
of 1926; since when, however, it has been in evidence.)
(3) In Hew South Wales, Ft. scapulatus was specifically dis-
tinguished in some districts, e.g., the Orchard Inspector at Windsor
reported the foxes in his district to be “ the small species, apparently
from Queensland, which, owing to drought conditions there,
migrated south and the Forester at Eden reported that the “ little
Red Fox” appeared “in winter (1927) following the blooms
of the above native trees,” i.e., bloodwood and woolly-butt
{Eucalyptus corymbosa and longifolia, flowering in April, May,
and June; and an employee of Sydney University, who was in
Dungog, north of Newcastle, in the summer of 1926-27, informed
me that Ft. scapulatus came in large numbers into the orchards of
this district that season.
As Ft. scapulatus is not generally distinguished, this evidence is
naturally rather scanty; such as it is, however, it must be considered
conclusive. To any one acquainted with the migrations of this species,
the conditions noted in Hew South Wales in 1926-27 were quite typical.
In all coastal districts flying foxes appeared in great numbers, feeding
on the flowering treees, and settling in sites not previously used as
camps.
At the beginning of this investigation, a questionnaire was circulated
through Hew South Wales in which information was requested as to
the dates when flying foxes were specially prevalent. The summer of
1926-27 was the only date mentioned in the replies received from the
following localities:—Richmond River, Urunga, Hambucca and Raleigh,
Tanban, Wyong, Gosford (“worst since 1910”), Hawkesbury River,
Windsor, Kurrajong, Parramatta, Glen Innes, Armidale, Merriwa,
Young, the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area (Leeton and Harrandera),
and Howra, Milton, Pambula, and Eden on the south coast mentioned
in addition one subsequent year. (In the replies from Dubbo and
Molong, the following season, 1927-28, was given as the only occasion
of visits of flying foxes. In view of the general uncertainty of recollected
dates, and the mass of evidence in favour of 1926-27, it is hard not to
believe that this is an error.)
The inland migration, noted at Merriwa, Gilgandra, Forbes, Young,
and the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area, was more extensive than any
previously recorded, this apparently being the first known appearance
of flying foxes in the two last-mentioned districts.
This exceptional invasion of Ft. scapulatus has proved of more than
temporary importance, for it appears to some extent to have established
the habit of extensive southerly migration into Hew South Wales.
During the seasons 1927-28, 1929-30, and 1930-31, records of this species
occurring in considerable numbers have been obtained from some district
or other in this State, e.g., Newcastle, Maitland, 1927-28; Hambucca
and the Northern Tableland, 1929 30; Kurrajong, Kempsey, and the
Northern Tableland, 1930-31.
This change in the habits of the little Red Fox is already having
serious economic consequences, for Ft. scapulatus, in Queensland almost
exclusively a blossom feeder, has readily taken to soft fruit in the coastal
districts of Hew South Wales, particularly in the early part of the
season. (This can probably be partially explained by the fact that the


trees on which this species principally depends for food in these districts,
e.g., bloodwood and spotted gum, do not blossom until after Christmas.
Thus the months of November and December are probably rather
“lean,” and recourse has to be made to the orchards.) The attacks on
fruit by the larger Pt. poliocephalus, in the Newcastle-Maitland district
at any rate, seem to have increased in recent years (i.e., since 1926).
This might be expected, as the presence of large numbers of competing
species must make an appreciable difference in the supply of “ natural ”
food available.
The following extracts from a report by the secretary of the Hunter
River Fruit-growers Association, who kindly made inquiries on my
behalf among growers, give an idea of the gravity of the present situa-
tion; and also indicate definitely that the prevalence of Pt. scapulatus
is a recent development:—
1926- the large Grey Fox was very bad, but have no report of the small
Red Fox for that season. ...
1927- being very bad, the shooting raid was made (on a well-known local
camp). This is the season in which the Red Fox made his appearance in large
numbers. . . .
I can find no grower of 20 or 30 years’ standing who knew of the Red Fox
in this district. . . .
The Red Fox is increasing, and is very destructive. . . .
The growers contend that the small Fed Fox is more destructive than the
other, as they knock fruit off when alighting and leaving the trees, also in the
way they bite, as if to sample the fruit. . . .
Changes in the geographical distribution of animals are usually very
gradual, and are only made obvious by a comparison of records covering
a considerable period. In the case of a species with strong migratory
instincts, it is conceivable that the process might be accelerated by the
occurrence of exceptional conditions giving rise to an abnormal mass
movement. This appears to be what has happened in the case of the
little Red Fox, Pt. scapulatus. Drought conditions, severe enough
to affect the food supply over a considerable area of the normal range,
would be the most obvious cause to seek for such a movement. A very
severe drought was actually experienced over a large tract of northern
and central Queensland in 1926, which, measured by its effect on the
wool clip in the Clermont-Emerald-Springsure district, has in this
century only been surpassed in severity by the drought of 1902.
The quite exceptional severity of this drought, causing widespread
failure of feed, disappearance of surface water, and heavy losses of
stock, was remarked in the annual reports of the Land Commissioners
for the coastal district from Cairns to Maryborough, in addition to the
more seriously affected inland districts. Thus it is clear that a very
great proportion of the normal range of the little Red Fox must have
been affected, which would presumably result in migratory movements
of quite abnormal size.
Whether the conditions which have obtained since 1926 will prove
of a permanent nature, it is impossible to say. Droughts of equal
severity have occurred in the past, and were presumably accompanied
by widespread movements of Pt. scapulatus in search of alternative
feeding areas. There seems no reason to suppose, for instance, that the
effects of the drought of 1902 should be radically different from those
of 1926; but it has naturally been impossible to discover whether heavy
migrations of Pt. scapulatus occurred in the years immediately following.


It is possible that other factors have been at work in recent years (i.e.,
since 1926) which have played a part in keeping up the increased
annual southerly migrations of the little Red Fox. A more effective
colonization of New South Wales would presumably be advantageous
to the species, and would probably have been gradually achieved in any
case, since the smaller migrations of past years indicated that it was
possible. However, it would seem that the migration as at present
carried out was not biologically efficient. This is indicated by the very
severe attacks on cultivated fruit that have occurred in the early part
of the season, e.g., in 1930, at Kurrajong and Windsor, in the Hunter
Valley (where green stone fruit was attacked), and at Copeland, near
Gloucester (where citrus, usually immune, was eaten). Although these
attacks on unripe fruit and citrus were undoubtedly the work of the
larger Ft. poliocephalus (the weak dentition of the little Red Fox
rendering such a feat virtually impossible) they indicate a general
shortage of food which would be felt by both species alike. It is
probable, therefore, that before the increased migration is of real
biological advantage to Ft. scapulatus, the time factor may have to be
adjusted somewhat, which would largely neutralize the serious economic
consequences of this change of habit.
Apart from these inferred “ natural ” changes in the flying fox
population of Australia, there has undoubtedly been a marked decrease
in the numbers of the animals, due to the settlement of the coastal areas.
This has naturally been greatest in the south, and has thus chiefly
affected the Grey-headed Fox, Ft. poliocephalus. There is plenty of
evidence of this diminution of numbers.
First, there is the obvious fact that a large number of the long-
established, regular ” camps of this species in southern Queensland
and New South Wales have been permanently deserted within the last
decade, e.g., Eli Eli (near Nambour), Beaudesert, Lark Hill, Woodford,
Skyring Creek, Rosewood, Esk, Mooloolah, and Aramara (all in Queens-
land). This list could be almost indefinitely extended. Then practi-
cally all of the regular camps of which information is available were
apparently much larger in past years. Many are no longer annually
inhabited, though they may be occupied at irregular intervals, e.g., the
camps at Canungra, and Flinder’s Peak, in Queensland, and Grafton,
Mount Vincent, and Minmi, in New South Wales.
In reports received from local bodies, &c., in the following districts,
the decrease in the numbers of flying foxes was specifically remarked
on; —Warwick, Allora ("no camps for ten to eleven years”), Coomera
(in 1925 “several camps,” none now), Wynnum, Pine, Kilcoy (camps
five years ago), Landsborough, Buderim, and Calliope, in Queensland;
and Lismore, Nimbin (“most prevalent before 1905 ”), and Port
Macquarie (“ rarer since 1915”) in New South Wales.
During the course of this, investigation, when large numbers of
growers and old settlers were personally interviewed, the reiteration
that “flying foxes are nothing to what they used to be years ago,”
became almost monotonous. There can be no doubt that this decrease
has been very real. It would be rash to hazard a figure, but from the
picture that I have been given of conditions in past years, it seems
probable that the flying fox (Ft. polio cephalus) population is very
much less than half its previous strength. The exceptional conditions
of 1926-27, in fact, seemed to many like a return to old times. The
true figures, if obtainable, might show an even greater decrease, for my


personal impression of the present situation has been gained under what
must be considered exceptional conditions, for the flying fox population
in the south has been augmented during the last few years by heavy
migrations of Pt. scapulatus.
It is probable, therefore, that the problem presented by Pt. polio-
cephalus is gradually solving itself. The clearing of “ scrub ” or
“ brush,” and the ring-barking of forest areas for pasture has already
destroyed a considerable part of the animals’ shelter and feeding grounds.
The constant harrying of the camps, too, falling as it does largely in
the breeding season, must have affected their numbers considerably.
The fact of this decrease is stressed because it is commonly believed
that flying foxes have benefited so greatly by settlement and cultivation,
Increasing their numbers and range, as to be a far greater pest, or
potential pest, to-day than they have been in the past.
It is dangerous to draw comparisons between different species; never-
theless, the following information supplied by the Zoologist-in-Charge,
Phytopathological Institute, at Buitenzorg, Java, is of interest, for it
indicates the position of the flying fox (Pt. vampyrus ) in a very
closely-settled country: —
The flying fox pest cannot be considered here as being a serious one. Our
Javanese “ kalong ” really does cause some damage to native orchards by
devouring some kinds of fruit (mangoes and others), and also .... the
flowers of the kapok tree. Pt. vampyrus, indeed, is a numerous animal in Java
and the surrounding islets. Most of its day-time camps are inhabited by
hundreds of individuals; a few of them, perhaps, comprise about 1,000, or even
more. Most of the smaller camps are only temporary. . . . There is nothing
exactly known about the number of “ kalongs ” in former days; but we think
they are diminishing gradually in the long run.
From the above it is clear that the flying fox succeeds in surviving
in some numbers even in a closely-settled country. Judging from the
estimates given for the numbers in the camps, however, it would seem
that the density of the Javanese flying fox population was slight (less
than one tenth) in comparison with Australia.
Regarding the future of the flying fox situation in Australia, I think
there is little doubt that Pt. poliocephalus will become less and less
numerous, despite the possibility of it extending its winter range.
Pt. scapulatus, of course, introduces an uncertain factor. It is possible
that the increasing competition of this species will affect Ft. polio-
cephalus adversely (that the phenomenon of the latter wintering in large
numbers in the south has only been noticed since 1926 may be signifi-
cant). Whether attacks on orchards will ultimately diminish no one
can say. It must be remembered that the cultivated fruit actually eaten
is an unimportant item in the diet of the flying fox population as a
whole. Thus attacks on orchards must be considered more an indica-
tion of general food shortage than an essential part of the annual food
supply (see p. 42). Ultimately, the future of the flying fox problem
will probably depend on whether the final decrease in numbers (before
some sort of equilibruim is attained) has been brought about by a
restriction in the natural food supply, or by the direct effect of closer
settlement and continuous disturbance, to which gregarious animals are
usually peculiarly sensitive. If the latter is the case, probably food
shortage will be of rare occurrence, and attacks on cultivated fruit will
diminish.


3. Reproduction, &c.
(i) Breeding Seasons, Gestation, and Care of Young. —Flying foxes
are, of course, placental mammals. One young one only is normally
produced at birth. The occurrence of twins, although definitely estab-
lished, must be considered very exceptional. It was not once noticed
during this investigation, although great numbers of breeding animals
were observed.
The testes are withdrawn, or partially so, during the greater part of
the year. On the approach of the breeding season, they are protruded
rather obviously in a naked scrotum.
Coition has been studied in an allied genus, Rousettus, kept in
captivity*. The male is suspended behind the female, and contact with
the under parts only takes place. On the one occasion during this
investigation when the process was observed {Ft. scapulatus being the
species concerned), it seemed to be performed in the manner described.
At birth the young, in the case of the larger species, has a body about
the size of that of a large mouse, measuring about 3 to 4 inches in
length. The disproportionately large expanse of the wings is not
noticed, as they are kept closely folded against the body. (In Pteropus,
the pelvic girdle differs in structure in the two sexes. Whereas in the
male the normal symphysis is found, in the female the ischio-pubic
bones do not even converge ventrally. This is presumably an adapta-
tion to permit the development in utero to reach a stage when the young
will have sufficient strength to support itself on the underside of its
parent for considerable periods at a stretch.)
The females have one pair of mammae only. These are thoracic,
and are situated almost in the region of the armpit. As soon as it is
born, the young one clings to the mother, using the claws of its thumbs
and hind limbs, but chiefly depending on its mouth, which retains a
most tenacious grip on one or other of the teats.
In the case of Rousettus, mentioned above, birth took place fifteen
weeks after the last copulation. It is hard to arrive at an estimate of
the period of gestation in the case of the Australian species of Pteropus,
for the birth of the young has not been observed in Ft. scapulatus, and
this is the only species for which a definite record of the date of copula-
tion was obtained. At best, the estimate would be very rough, for there
is considerable variation between individuals. Thus embryos from
females of Ft. gouldi shot near Townsville on 30th July, 1929, varied
from less than 1 inch to over 2 inches in body length, the containing
uteri varying from the size of a cherry to that of a large plum. This
would probably represent a, difference in the time of conception of several
weeks.
The following facts were, however, established; —
(1) Coition occurs in the case of Ft, scapulatus in October
(observed in the Rockhampton district), and probably
earlier.
(2) In the case of Ft. gouldi and poliocephalus, the young are
born in this month.
(3) Pregnant females of Ft. scapulatus shot at Xambucca, Hew
South Wales, on Ist February, contained embryos com-
* British Museum Catalogue of Chiroptera .


parable to the most advanced of these found at Townsville
on 30th July. Therefore, it may he inferred that birth
in the case of Ft. scapulatus will take place in April.
(4) By March and April, the testes of Ft. poliocephalus are
obviously protruded, and mating seems to occur.
Thus the breeding season is completely reversed in the case of
Ft. scapulatus, as compared with the larger species. The season of
births in the case of these three species is not coincident. Ft. gouldi
appears to be some weeks in advance of Ft. poliocephalus-, and judging
by the growth of the young seen in a camp near Cairns in early Novem-
ber, Ft. conspicillatus in turn must be nearly a month ahead of Ft.
gouldi. This might be expected, in view of the geographical distribu-
tion of the three species. It is probable that even within a single species
the breeding season is earlier in the more northern parts of its range.
Thus it is recorded in the British Museum Catalogue of Chiroptera
(vol. 1., p. 372) that, in the case of Ft. gouldi, the young are born in
north Australia in March and April, and in August many females have
young of considerable size attached to the breasts.
For a considerable time, the young one remains attached to the
mother, who, when hanging in the camp, covers it completely with one
of her wings. In flight, the young one is readily distinguished as it
clings to the under surface of the parent.
During the later stages of pregnancy, and the period of suckling, the
females tend to segregate together in the camps. They are noticeably
quiet, and exhibit a marked reluctance to take wing. This reluctance
increases as the young one grows, and becomes a greater burden and
handicap to its parent. When visiting a camp of Ft. poliocephalus
near Maitland, New South Wales, on 21st January, 1930, I made a note
as follows:—“Females carrying young about the size of adult
scapulatus ; carried on the back when climbing in the trees. Mothers
reluctant to fly, and were easily shot.”
This observation throws some light on the length of the period
during which the young remain dependent on their mothers, as do the
following. In a camp at Martinsville, near Newcastle, visited on 20th
January, “many of the young had left their mothers”; at Nambucca,
on 31st January, “ very few (saw less than half a dozen in all) females
still carrying young”; at Kcmpsey, on 4th February, “two females
seen still carrying young.” (All these observations were made in New
South Wales, and were of Ft. poliocephalus.)
The following observations were made of the above-mentioned
Eousettus sp. in captivity: —The young is rarely seen for the first
months after birth, being hidden by the wing membranes of the mother;
by the end of the third month, it begins to partake of the parent’s food
(the juice, not the flesh, of moist fruit) ; it remains in its protected
position at the breast of its mother till the end of the fourth month;
at the age of eight months, it is still not fully grown.
At any rate in the early stages, the young are carried by the females
to the feeding grounds in the evening. The slower flight of these
burdened individuals is easily distinguished. At times one may be
noticed to “ lose its balance ” in the air for a moment, presumably due
to a sudden movement on the part of the young one. It is also well
established that the young are taken to the orchards when they are old
C. 9212.—4


enough to hang by themselves, and are left in a tree, and periodically
supplied with fruit. On the other hand, there seems to be strong
evidence that the young are sometimes left in the camp at night. Thus,
at Barmoya, a farmer sometimes heard the young foxes squealing in
a near-by camp at night, and at first mistook them for sucking pigs.
I was informed that in March and April the foxes returned to feed their
young in the Bafile Creek camp at about 8 o’clock. Whether this nightly
abandonment of the young, when they become too heavy to carry long
distances, is universally practised, it is impossible to say. If so, it is
probably of importance in the natural regulation of numbers (see p. 38).
(ii) The Possibility of Hybridizationj —As it is normal, rather than
exceptional, for the Australian species to form mixed camps, and as
they are very closely related biologically, there would seem to be some
possibility of natural hybridization. One individual was obtained in
a camp of Ft. poliooephalus in southern Queensland which had a colour-
ing apparently intermediate between that species and Ft. gouldi. The
body colour was very dark-grey; the chestnut colouration did not form a
complete collar anteriorly; and the head was, if anything, darker than
the body, the sprinkling of lighter hairs being confined to the latter.
In its skull, teeth, and length of fur, it resembled Ft. poliocephalus, of
which it probably must be considered merely an extreme colour variety.
Another similar individual, with body fur almost black, was shot in the
camp at Bafile Creek.
The relation between Ft. gouldi and conspicillatus presents a more
difficult problem. Unfortunately, sufficient specimens were not collected
to throw light on the true state of affairs. These two species belong
to different “groups” (see p. 12), which, however, are very closely
allied. The two groups are distinguishable only by the colour of the
mantle, a slight difference in the shape of the ears, and the fact that
the dentition, though of identical type, is rather heavier in the con-
spicillatus group. Uone of these characters is really very satisfactory,
for Ft. conspicillatus has, for its group, a rather light dentition, and
thus approaches Ft. gouldi in this respect; and Ft. gouldi, though
normally possessing the dark mantle typical of its group, shows great
variation in this character. Thus, in most camps of the Black Fox,
Ft. gouldi, individuals can be found which have light golden-yellow
mantles. Moreover, brown markings on the face, similar to, but usually
darker than, the “ spectacles ” of Ft. conspicillatus, are of frequent
occurrence in Ft. gouldi. In fact, the species appear to converge very
closely.
In a camp of Ft. conspicillatus at Cairns, an adult male was shot
which, had it occurred elsewhere, I should have had no hesitation in
identifying, on a superficial examination, as Ft. gouldi. Moreover,
other individuals were secured in this camp which showed perfect
gradation from the typical conspicillatus (with a considerable amount
of pale-straw colour on the face) to this gouldi-like individual, in which
the “ spectacles ” were brown rather than straw-coloured, though the
mantle was typically pale.
4. The Natural Regulation of Numbers.
Neither sex seems to preponderate in the flying fox, although in
certain camps the two sexes may be very unequally represented, owing
to segregation, which undoubtedly occurs to a great extent (apparently
after the mating season). Assuming then that the numbers of the two


sexes are equal, and that every female produces a young one yearly
(which seems to he the ease, as 100 per cent, pregnancy was normally
found in adult females), we get a figure of 50 per cent, for the annual
increase. Allowing for the “ natural ” death-rate (which, it must be
confessed, has little practical meaning), and the fact that females do
not appear to breed until their second year, a potential annual increase
rather less than this is arrived at. (As a flying fox has been kept in
activity for seventeen years, and another for eleven years*, it seems
safe to allow each female, under natural conditions, an average potential
breeding life of ten years. On this basis, the potential annual rate of
increase of a flying fox population is approximately 40 per cent.)
Except for relatively slow changes in the size of the flying fox
population, the numbers from year to year are presumably approximately
the samef. This means that some natural check occurs which
neutralizes this potential increase, and accounts for some 40 per cent, of
the animals each year. In a problem such as that presented by the
flying fox, it is important to discover what factor or factors are con-
cerned in this regulation of numbers. If the principal factor, acting
directly or indirectly (e.g., by lowering the physical condition, and
thus increasing the liability to disease), is a shortage of food (which
would presumably only occur at certain periods of the year), it is clear
that artificial control, in the form of destroying numbers of the animals,
might be largely ineffectual. It would ease the pressure of numbers in
the time of food shortage, thus allowing a greater percentage to survive;
and in this way the artificial would merely tend to take the place of the
natural control.
Heavy mortality among flying foxes, which can be attributed to
the shortage of food (or water), seem to be limited to Ft. scapulatus
(reported from Raglan, Byfield, and Cloncurry —all in Queensland).
A large part of the population of this species is found in the inland
area, which is subject to periodic and severe droughts. Although these
can be avoided to a great extent by migration, it is possible that large
numbers of the animals may be “ trapped,” and perish; or they may
manage to arrive in an already crowded coastal area, where food may
not be sufficient to give them the strength for further migration. (This
appears to be what occurred at Raglan and Byfield (see above).)
The heavy mortality among foxes (probably Ft. poliocephalus)
reported at Mallanganee, Hew South Wales, in 1913 or thereabouts, and
at Helidon, Queensland, in 1905, can probably be attributed to the direct
effect of the extremely high temperatures which occurred at the time.
Natural catastrophes, such as heavy hailstorms, may also occasionally
cause wholesale destruction among flying foxes, e.g., I was informed that
a camp in the mangroves on the Fitzroy River, Queensland, was “wiped
out ” a few years ago by a hailstorm which completely defoliated the
trees.
At first sight, it does not seem likely that natural enemies could
play an important part in the control of their numbers, for such animals
as attack flying foxes are general predators, which appear to evince no
sort of preference for them as an item of diet. The animals definitely
known to attack flying foxes are the following;—Crocodiles (C. johnstoni
♦ Chalmers Mitchell, P., “ Longevity and Relative Viability of Mammals and Birds." Proc. Zool.
Soc. (Lond.), 1911.
t This assumption can be made in the case of most wild animal populations, except where periodic
fluctuations in numbers occur, of which there is no evidence in the case of flying foxes.


and possibly porosus ), which in the north snap up the flying foxes as
they fly down to drink; “goannas” ( Varanus spp.) ; carpet snakes
(Python spilotes et spp. alia ); the Wedge-tailed Eagle and the White-
breasted Sea Eagle ( Uroaetus audex and Haliaetus leucogaster ); and
probably the other larger birds of prey, such as the Powerful and Great
Winking Owls.
As an adult flying fox is far from being stupid or defenceless, it
is probable that the toll of natural enemies would fall most heavily on
the young. If it is a fact that the young, when they become too heavy
to be carried long distances by their mothers (see p. 36), are habitually
left behind in the camps, it is possible that large numbers may be
accounted for by nocturnal predators, and that animal enemies are thus
a more important factor in natural control than first appears to be the
case.
In order to discover whether heavy mortality occurs in the young
stages, it would be necessary to know the percentage of individuals which
reached maturity. In the case of the females, it is possible to obtain
figures from which this percentage could be calculated, for one can tell
by the size of the nipples whether or not an individual has bred.
“ Immature ” females, whose nipples are very small, can with some
certainty be classed as under two years old.
Unfortunately, the importance of this matter was not realized until
late in the investigation, and consequently special counts were not
obtained. The records of the specimens collected, in the case of the
three larger species, are not of much use here, for the numbers are too
small to be representative, particularly as the different classes of
individuals tend to segregate together within the camps. Thus, eleven
females were shot at Byfleld in one visit to the camp; only one was
“ mature,” and of the other ten, eight were shot in one tree. The fact
that young individuals are less wary, and consequently more easy to
shoot, also renders these figures questionable.
I have been more fortunate in the case of Ft. scapulatus, where
larger and obviously more representative series were obtained. At the
Burnett Heads camp (November, 1929), 47 females were collected, 6
of which were “ immature.” At Ross Island, Townsville (November,
1930, 16 were shot, 3of which were “ immature.” The percentage of
immature individuals is 12.8 in the former, and 21.25 in the latter
case. Combining the two totals, the percentage works out at just over
14. This figure certainly points to the fact that there is considerable
mortality among the young; but whether it is due to natural enemies
it is impossible to say.
The number's of flying foxes accounted for by man is far from being
insignificant, particularly since the inception of the scalp bounty system
in recent years. (For a detailed discussion of this system see pp.
65 to 67). With the exception of the recently reconstituted Pests
Destruction Board, at Bowen, northern Queensland, the scalp bounty
system has not operated further north than St. Lawrence, and thus has
chiefly affected Ft. poliocephalus and scapulatus.
It will be seen that evidence pointing to a shortage of food being a
factor in the regulation of flying fox numbers is lacking. In fact, it
must be confessed that the problem of natural control still remains to
be solved.


5. Parasites.
During the course of this investigation, specimens were examined
for parasites. The only ectoparasites met with were the highly
specialized, wingless Nycteribiid flies of the genus Cyclopodia. The
only species hitherto recorded from Australia is C. similis Speiser 1900
(= pteropus Rainbow, 1901); but Mr. A. Musgrave, of the Australian
Museum, who has examined my specimens, informs me that some of
them belong to a second species, which he proposes to deal with at some
later date. (These Nycteribiids in turn were frequently found to be
parasitized by numbers of a small mite, unidentified to date, which
attached themselves to the bases of the legs, and to the junction of the
thorax and abdomen.)
Of the four species of flying fox, Pt. scapulatus is by far the most
heavily infested with these parasites, up to two dozen being sometimes
found on a single individual. Specimens of Pt. gouldi and conspicillatus
were rarely, if ever, found to be free. Pt. poliocephalus were compara-
tively lightly infested, so that frequently no parasites could be obtained
from any of the specimens shot in a camp.
No special search was made for endoparasites, though if present
in the gut, at any rate, they would almost certainly have been noticed
during stomach examinations. None were found in adult individuals.
In the case of suckling young (Pt. poliocephalus) one or more Nematpde
worms (unidentified to date) 3 to 4 inches in length, were found in the
small intestines of several specimens.
6. Diet.
(i) General. —-The principal food of flying foxes (all species) in
Australia is undoubtedly blossom. The following is a list of the trees
on whose blossom the animals are definitely known to feed: —Bluegum
(.Eucalyptus tereticornis), spotted gum ( E. maculata), lemon-scented
gum (E. citriodora), white gum (E. alba), bloodwood (E. corymbosa),
blackbutt (E. pilularis), ironbark (E. paniculata et spp. alia), Moreton
Bay ash (E. tesselaris), box (E. hemiphloia), stringybark (E. acmeni-
oides ?), a messmate (E. Cloeziana), woollybutt (E. longifolia), apple
(Angophora subvelutina and/or intermedia), cabbage or sugar gum
(A. lanceolata), tea-trees ( Melaleuca spp.), turpentine ( Syncarpia
laurifolia and Hillii), the black bean or Moreton Bay chestnut
(Castanosperum australe), Banksia aemula, and integrifolia, Bauhinia
Hookeri, and mistletoe (Loranthus spp.).
Fruits, particularly of rain forest trees, also provide food for flying
foxes. Chief among these are the wild figs, especially Ficus macro-
phylla, the Moreton Bay fig, which is grown widely as a shade tree.
During this investigation, flying foxes (Pt. poliocephalus) were found
to feed on the fruit of the wild tobacco ( Solanum sp.), a tall herb which
grows profusely in cleared rain forest areas; and in north Queensland
(Pt. conspicillatus) on the fruit of certain unidentified species of
Eugenia. They are reported to feed on the Chinese Apple (Zizyphus
sp.), a prickly shrub regarded as a pest, round Bowen, north Queens-
land; and on the black apple ( Sideroxylon australe), in New South
Wales. They are also fond of the fruits of various palms (including
the young stages of the coconut), which are grown, chiefly for ornament,
in Queensland; and also on the fruit of the tamarind ( Tamarindus
indica).


Almost all varieties of cultivated fruit are attacked at times by flying
foxes. The following are known to be eaten; all pome, stone, and citrus
fruits (even lemons, Seville oranges, and grape-fruit), grapes, mangoes,
bananas, figs, custard apples, “ sour-sops,” paw-paws, grenadillas, passion
fruit, persimmons, loquats, guavas, and mulberries.
Under the stimulus of hunger, flying foxes will apparently tackle
almost anything in the vegetable line which is at all succulent. Reports
were received of their eating the following; the young shoots and leaves
of Eucalypts, and of Populus fustigiata; the buds of the paw-paw;
flowers of the sugar hanana, the mango, and the coconut palm; ripening
maize; the berries of the pepper tree ( Schinus molle ) ; unripe and half-
formed fruit, even of citrus varieties, such as lemons and kumquats;
and finally pineapples.
The diet of flying foxes being so general, the mere list of known foods
is practically meaningless unless something is known of the preferences
shown by the animals. (In the case of cultivated fruits, this is
discussed in detail below.) In certain respects, evidence as to the prefer-
ences shown by flying foxes is rather conflicting. On the whole, stone
fruit, particularly the sweeter, softer varieties of peach, and apricots
seem to be most favoured. Figs, persimmons, loquats, &c., are sought
after in some districts, and apparently left untouched in others. The
following information, supplied by a mixed-fruit grower in the Tweed
Heads district, New South Wales, indicates the general tastes of the
Grey-headed Fox (Ft. poliocephalus ): —
Stone fruit (peaches, plums, &c.). —Yery heavily attacked.
Pome fruit (apples and pears).—Heavily attacked.
Loquats. —Attacked most years.
Bananas. —Never noticed attacked.
Mangoes, Paw-paws, Passion-fruit. —Not touched.
(To one acquainted with the flying fox in the north, the inclusion of
mangoes in the last class seems almost incredible. Other reports have
been received, however, which indicate that Pt. poliocephalus does not
share with the two northern species, Pt. gouldi and conspicillatus, their
exceptional fondness for this fruit.)
Selective preferences are not so obvious in the case of “ natural ”
foods. Regarding blossom, all that can be said is that bloodwood
( E. corymbosa ) seems undoubtedly to be the most favoured, while the
ironbarks appear to be placed low on the list, the silver-leaved variety
( E. melanophloia ) rarely, if ever, being visited. (This species must
evidently be a poor honey-yielder, for it never seems to attract Lorikeets
and other honey-eating birds.) Bloodwood produces a strongly-smelling,
dark-coloured honey, rated lowly by beekeepers. That of the ironbark
is pale and almost scentless. It is possible, therefore, that the scent
of the honey is a factor in determining the scale of preference.
(ii) Species Preferences and Differences. —The four Australian
species of flying fox do not all evince the same preferences in the matter
of food. In comparison with the three larger species, the little Red Fox
(Pt. scapvflatus ) is unique in its dentition, which is markedly reduced.
The canines are of normal size; but the cheek teeth are exceedingly
small and narrow. The weakness of its dentition probably accounts
for the rather special feeding habits of this species, for fruit plays a
relatively unimportant part in its diet. In Queensland, the little Red
Fox is almost exclusively a blossom feeder. It very rarely seems to


attack cultivated fruit, with the possible exception of mangoes (and
mulberries). It has been reported to me that it is unusual for Ft.
scapulatus to be poisoned or shot in an orchard, even in districts in
which it occurs in great numbers. It has occasionally been taken on
figs, persimmons, paw-paws, and mandarins. (In the case of man-
darins, the grower in question stated that he had “ once or twice ”
poisoned Ft. scapulatus. This could be explained by the fact that the
skin had already been broken, for only those fruit partially eaten
were poisoned, thus enabling the animal to reach the pulp. Even in
the case of such a soft fruit as the mango, I was informed that “ the
little Red Fox sucks those fruit which have already been bitten by the
large black variety.”)
In Hew South Wales, and the Stanthorpe district in Queensland,
Ft. scapulatus attacks cultivated fruit, since 1926 at any rate, to a
considerable extent. (Some fruit—peaches, nectarines, and apricots—
are specially affected, reliable records of pome fruit being eaten by this
species being rare.) The difference between the two States can be
explained by tbe fact that (with the exception of the mango) it is only in
the south that soft fruit, acceptable to this species, is extensively grown.
Also, as was explained above, there appears to be a general shortage
of blossom in the early part of the summer in certain districts in Hew
South Wales. As the little Red Fox has relatively weak teeth, the claim
that it is peculiarly destructive because of its method of sampling large
numbers of fruit before finding one ripe enough to eat, is probably
justified.
In the case of the three larger species, the only important difference
of taste appears to be that, whereas the northern Ft. gouldi (and
presumably conspicillatus') readily attacks citrus, the southern Ft.
poliocephalus will only do so under exceptional conditions.
(iii) The Importance of Blossom. —The paramount importance of
blossom in the diet of flying foxes (all the Australian species) has not
been sufficiently appreciated in the past. “ Bush fruit ”is usually given
as their natural food, with possibly a mention of “ nectar-bearing
flowers.” Thus Tryon* writes; —“ They (flying foxes) are also very
fond of honey-yielding flowers. . . . This appetite for honey,
exhibited apparently by all our flying foxes ... is a feature that
the less common of our south Queensland foxes especially manifests,”
an obvious reference to Ft. scapulatus.
Compared with the open (Eucalypt) forest association, the areas
of rain forest in eastern Australia are almost insignificant, particularly
in south Queensland and Hew South Wales, where the “scrub” or
“brush” is now only found in relict patches. (There are still con-
siderable areas of rain forest to be found along the border range; but
flying foxes do not appear to be very numerous there, judging from my
personal observations and from reports received.) Whereas flying
foxes derive food in the form of blossom from practically all the larger
trees of the open forest association (e.g., the species of Eucalyptus,
Angophora, Syncarpia, &c.), a minority only of the rain forest species
are a source of food in the form of edible fruit. Moreover, as the fruit
of most rain forest trees ripens in late autumn and winter, it is not
generally available to flying foxes in southern Queensland and Hew
South Wales.
• Queensland Agricultural Journal, 14: 75, 1020.


The nightly congregation of great numbers of flying foxes in a
tract of open forest, where some species is in bloom, is a very familiar
phenomenon; but I can find little evidence of comparable activity in
the case of rain forest areas, except when certain species of Ficus are
bearing fruit. I have examined quantities of fruits scattered on the
ground in rain forest areas, but with the exception of the Eugenia-
referred to on p. 39, I can remember no instance when a fruit obviously
bitten by flying foxes was discovered. Thus the mere comparison of
the areas of open forest and rain forest in eastern Australia probably
does not provide an adequate measure of the vastly greater importance
of the former in the economy of the flying fox population. In fact, it
may be said that only by acquiring the habit of being blossom eaters
first and foremost could flying foxes have built up and maintained the
vast numbers of their present population in Australia.
(iv) The Importance of Cultivated Fruits —As the depredations of
flying foxes are often heavy enough to be serious to a whole fruit-
growing district, it is perhaps natural to assume that cultivated fruit is a
food item of considerable importance to the animal. Speaking broadly,
i.e., in terms of the flying fox population as a whole, this is far from the
truth; and the realization of this fact is essential if the nature of the
flying fox problem is to be properly understood. It is not very easy
to provide figures to illustrate this point, though some indication of the
insignificance of cultivated fruit in the diet of flying foxes in Queens-
land can be derived from the statistics of the Department of Agriculture.
(In comparison with Hew South Wales, where only a small part of the
fruit crop is grown within the area where flying foxes occur in any
numbers, Queensland presents rather a simple case, for fruit-growing
is almost exclusively coastal, little, if any, fruit being found outside
the range of the flying fox.)
In 1929, there were in Queensland 32,291 acres of commercial fruit,
including those not in bearing (but excluding pineapples, which are
not affected by the problem). This total was made up as follows:
Bananas . . .. .. 19,357 acres.
Oranges and mandarins . . . . 3,872 „
Mangoes .. .. .. 204 „
Apples .. .. . . 4,012 „
Miscellaneous (chiefly peaches and
plums) .. .. . . 4,846 „
Thus, in comparison with the great areas of open forest (in which,
as was stated above, practically all the larger trees provide food for
the animals) there are just over 50 square miles of orchards and
plantations in which cultivated fruit can be sought. Moreover, even
this figure is well-nigh meaningless. Of the 3,872 acres of citrus,
2,633 occur outside (south of) the range of Ft. gouldi, and are thus
practically speaking immune from attack; and the greater part of the
peach and apple crop is grown in the Stanthorpe district, where flying
foxes are not particularly troublesome (see pp. 50 and 51).
It must be remembered that commercial fruit is usually picked before
it is ripe, and thus before it is readily acceptable to flying foxes. Their
opportunities of feeding in commercial orchards and plantations are
therefore limited. This is especially true in the case of bananas, which
provide the biggest item—over 19,000 acres— in the total fruit acreage
of Queensland. The actual quantity of this fruit eaten (in contrast


with those scratched and rendered unsaleable) is very small indeed
(see p. 47). In fact, as a source of food for the flying fox population,
the commercial banana plantations may really be ignored.
The conditions in New South Wales are very different. In the
first place, the local population of flying foxes is much smaller; and
then considerable quantities of soft fruit, readily acceptable to flying
foxes, are grown in the coastal belt. The very heavy attacks which
occur here in some years must mean that a considerable part of the
local flying fox population is, for the time being, dependent on the
orchards for food. It is possible also that when mobs of foxes are
driven to migrate inland by adverse conditions on the coast, and reach
some of the most important temperate fruit districts, they may be
largely supported by cultivated fruit. Unfortunately, no information
is available to indicate the state of the “ natural ” food supply in these
areas occasionally visited.
What may be termed “ back garden ” fruit presents rather a special
problem. Unlike fruit from commercial orchards, it is usually allowed
to ripen on the trees or plants, and is thus attacked by flying foxes
to a much greater extent. It is possible that (excepting the stone fruit
of the New South Wales coast) flying foxes obtain as much food from
this type of cultivation as from the infinitely greater area of commercial
plantations. Even after this is taken into account, however, it must
be realized that the total amount of cultivated fruit eaten is of very
small significance in the economy of the vast flying fox population in
Australia.
Many varieties of cultivated fruit, particularly the soft stone fruits,
are very acceptable to flying foxes. Thus, even when there is apparently
an abundance of “ natural ” food available, individual foxes will be
found visiting the orchards at most times when there is ripening fruit
on the trees. It is probable, therefore, that certain individuals have
acquired the fruit-eating habit, and are inveterate orchard robbers.
Such individuals might be of importance in guiding others to the
orchards when the supply of “ natural ” food begins to be less abundant.
(v) Note on Nutrition, Teeth, and Body Odour. —There are one or
two matters of general interest -which might be mentioned here in con-
nexion with the feeding habits of the flying fox. The part played by
pollen in the diet of the animals may be important. Nectar and fruit
juices alone would hardly provide the nitrogen required in the animals’
metabolism. Pollen grains are found in great numbers in the stomach
and intestines of flying foxes which are feeding on blossom. They are
certainly not digested as such; but judging from their collapsed appear-
ance, it is possible that they are sufficiently affected by the digestive
enzymes to permit the transfusion of a part at least of their contents.
Flying foxes do not appear to eat their food in a strict sense, but
to crush each mouthful to extract the liquid contents, spitting out the
hard or fibrous matter. This is very noticeable in the case of mangoes
and peaches. (Thus a fox is reported to have succeeded in feeding on
peaches, despite the fact that a mosquito net had been spread over the
tree, by sucking the fruit through the mesh.) The actual food taken
in being thus predominantly of a liquid nature, the process of digestion
is naturally very rapid. It was found that, in order to carry out
stomach examinations, specimens had to be obtained either while actually


feeding, or immediately on their return to the camp at dawn. (The
intestine of the flying fox is short, and the abdomen disproportionately
small in consequence.)
In an article on flying foxes which appeared in the press*, it was
stated that fruit bats ( Rousettus sp. ?) could devour four times their
own weight of fruit in 24 hours. Being active animals, it seems certain
that a large quantity of fruit must be eaten to obtain the amount of
solid matter (in solution in the juice) necessary for their sustenance.
It, therefore, seems strange that the amount of fruit actually eaten is
so small. This is particularly marked in the case of citrus. Several
growers have stated that the flying fox is not a glutton (its chief offence
lies in the amount of fruit it damages and knocks down), and that half
a dozen large mandarins would represent a fair night’s feed for one
individual. As the solid nutriment contained in their juice would
seem to be hardly a sufficient day’s allowance for an animal which weighs
about 2 lb., it may be that citrus fruit is normally eaten for some
special dietary factor, or even as a source of moisture, rather than as a
main item of food. (Flying foxes, particularly when feeding on
blossom, drink regularly, the process being carried out on the wing, the
animals skimming low over the surface of the water, and apparently
lapping it up as they fly.)
It was mentioned above that the teeth of the various Australian
species differ, the dentition of Pi. scapulatus being markedly reduced.
Of the other three species, Pi. gouldi and conspicillatus have very
similar dentition. Pi. poliocephalus has smaller teeth than the two
northern species. There is apparently a difference in their consistency
as well. The molar teeth of Pi. poliocephalus (and incidentally of
Pt. scapulatus ) appear to be harder than those of Ft. gouldi and con-
spicillatus, for specimens with badly worn teeth are rare. Moreover,
they wear down with very little discoloration, the worn surface showing
the layers of enamel and dentine in an apparently perfect condition.
The larger teeth of the other two species seem to be more “ chalky,”
and to have poorer enamel. In fact, even in young individuals, the
enamel tends to come off in flakes when the skull is being prepared.
The molars of the average adult gouldi or conspicillatus have almost
formless, rounded crowns, stained dark-brown, and giving a superficial
impression of sponginess. Aged individuals were often obtained with
molars so worn that the crowns had totally disappeared, the two roots
alone remaining, each ending bluntly in a small knob of discoloured
dentine. There appears to be no evidence that this difference in dental
structure can be correlated with differences in diet. Its early manifesta-
tion indicates that it is fundamental.
When I had had experience of the different species of flying fox,
it became evident that they differed in their body odour. It is naturally
almost impossible to describe this difference in words. Pt. scapulatus
is markedly the most strongly smelling. I was once led to search for
this species in a camp of Pt. poliocephalus in southern Queensland by
a sudden fleeting olfactory impression, which seemed to bring up a
memory of a recent visit to a large and smelly camp of Pt. scapulatus.
As a result of this search, I discovered a small colony of the little
Red Fox segregated in a corner of the camp. This camp was visited
on several occasions; but this was the only'instance of its containing
a second species.
* Campbell Brown, Sydney Mail, 4th August, 1926.


Ft. poliocephalus is not a very strongly smelling animal. I found
no difficulty in distinguishing it from Ft. gouldi. The scent of the two
northern species, Ft. gouldi and conspicillatus, seemed to he identical,
which is of interest, in view of the other indications of their very close
relationship (see p. 36).
III. THE FLYING FOX AS AN ECONOMIC PEST.
1. General.
If the damage done by flying foxes in orchards were limited to the
fruit they actually ate, the losses they caused would not he considered
of much account, for as it was explained above, the amount of cultivated
fruit actually eaten by the animals is small. Unfortunately, this is
not the ease. For every fruit eaten, there are many more knocked down
and rendered unmarketable by scratches and bites.
The flopping that announces the arrival of a flying fox in a fruit
tree is generally accompanied by the sound of falling fruit. Moreover,
when more than one fox is feeding in a tree, there is usually a good
deal of noisy bickering, which results in some fruit being dislodged.
In fact, the usual sign of a visitation by flying foxes is the fruit lying
scattered below the trees.
The losses due to the scratohings, sampling, and knocking down of
fruit vary considerably with the different varieties. They are greatest
in the large, round fruit, such as peaches and apples, which the animals
apparently find difficult to handle. Sometimes the fruit is carried
bodily away, and eaten in some nearby tree. Usually the fox will feed
on the tree itself, biting at the fruit where it grows. Naturally, a large
number will be knocked down in the process, and once on the ground,
they are lost to the fox, which begins on another. In addition to this,
the animals seem to sample a number of fruit before finding one which
meets their taste. This is particularly noticeable in the case of bananas.
When one or two of the fruit in the top “ hand ” of a bunch have
ripened, the foxes will be attracted. The ripe ones will be eaten, and
tooth-marks will be found on most of the adjacent fruit, though the
skin will not be broken. (In certain fruits that “hang” well, such
as figs, the loss to the grower practically corresponds to the amount
actually eaten.)
One of the stated objects of this investigation was to assess the
amount of damage caused by the flying fox in Australia. Sufficient
has already been indicated of the habits of the animals to make it clear
that a quantitative estimate of this sort is impossible to obtain. The
losses vary from year to year, from district to district, from week to
week throughout the season for any given variety of fruit, and from
orchard to orchard according to the different varieties cultivated, and
the action, or lack of it, taken by the grower. This extreme variation in
the losses sustained is probably most marked in the case of the two most
important types of commercial fruits attacked, pome and stone fruits.
It is hard enough to arrive at an idea of the state of affairs obtaining
in the relatively unimportant areas on the coast of New South Wales,
where stone and pome fruit are grown in the heart, so to speak, of
flying fox country. In the case of the more inland areas, such as the
tableland districts, the Blue Mountains, &c., where flying foxes occur


in occasional years only, as a result of migrations from the coastal belt,
even the roughest estimate of the damage caused is unobtainable. Where
the flying fox is only an occasional visitor, it is natural that such damage
as occurs is particularly obvious. Probably a grower in an area of
this kind would regard with anxiety the incidence of attacks which a
coastal grower would consider trifling. Thus the reports received from
the inland districts must probably be accepted at a discount.
As might be expected, in the collection of information a good deal
of exaggeration was met with. The experience of an exceptional year,
possibly unique in a decade, would be given as typical, and only in
subsequent conversations would its abnormality be confessed. In the
same way, damage done to individual trees, possibly the only ones in an
orchard to be attacked, would be recorded as though it were representa-
tive of the whole crop.
As a result of reports of this nature, a mythical idea of the appalling
destructiveness of the flying fox has gained ground. It completely
dominates all popular writing, e.g., press articles, on the subject. So
firmly rooted has this idea become, that it is possible that the following
attempt to give an accurate picture of the conditions found in the case
of each type of cultivated fruit will be considered in some quarters to be
a definite misrepresentation of a situation which is assumed to he very
serious. My information has been derived entirely from the growers
themselves, and from fruit inspectors and others in close contact with
the industry. Where possible, I have quoted extracts from corre-
spondence and notes of personal interviews. These extracts represent
the opinions of individuals, and so it is quite possible that there are
growers in the various districts mentioned whose experience will not
tally with those set forth. On the whole, leading growers, i.e., probably
the most efficient and careful, were interviewed. For this very reason,
it may be that they suffered rather less from flying foxes than smaller
and more casual growers.
2. Review of Cultivated Fruit.
(i) Bananas. —The area of banana plantations in Queensland
exceeds the combined areas of all the other fruits grown commercially;
and since bunchy top has been largely overcome in northern New South
Wales, bananas are becoming year by year increasingly important to
that State. Of the 19,357 acres in Queensland (1929 figures), over 9,000
acres are in the Gympie district. Maroochy comes next with 2,258 acres,
and Eedcliffe third with just over 1,000 acres. Commercial plantations
exist as far north, at least, as the Daintree River, north of Cairns.
In ISTew South Wales, banana cultivation is limited to the north
coast, chiefly from the Tweed to the Richmond River; though planta-
tions, increasing in area each year, are found in the Coff’s Harbour
district.
Bananas are picked for the market in an unripe state, i.e., “ full ”
but uncoloured. (As th,e inclusion of fruit showing colour almost
invariably results in the case being classed as “ mixed ripe,” the practice
is avoided by all careful growers. In this stage, bananas are not
attacked by the flying fox. At times it is impossible to prevent some
of the fruit of the top “ hand ” ripening, i.e., in a dry period when the
fruit has to he left on the plant to give it a chance to fill out properly.
Almost as soon as the banana shows “ colour,” it will attract flying


foxes. Only the ripe fruit on the hunch will he eaten, but many others
will be ruined by claw and tooth marks. Even so, not all the fruit on
a bunch visited will be rendered unfit for market; usually half at least
will be saleable.
It is clear, therefore, that the flying fox cannot be considered in any
way an important pest of commercially-grown bananas. The following
extracts from information obtained from growers in various districts
make this evident:—
Queensland.
Montville (near Nambour). —
(1) Flying foxes do not really worry bananas, and even in bad years are
not serious.
(2) Flying foxes are almost unnoticeable in most years; “notice them a
little ”in bad years. In 1927, about 5 per cent, of the fruit had to be
rejected on packing.
Kin Kin (near Gympie). —
(1) Dozens of foxes fly about over the plantation, but few descend, and
very little damage is done.
(2) 1927 was the only season in which the foxes were bad enough for
action to be taken, and a shoot was arranged. It was necessary to keep
“ second croppers ” late in the hope that they would fill out to their grade.
About 15 per cent, of the bunches had some ripe fruit, and practically all
of these had fox marks. Such bunches were not a total loss. The loss to
the actual fruit was 5 per cent, at the outside.
Amomoor (near Gympie). —
“ I have grown bananas for 34 years, and not lost as many pence through
flying foxes.'*
Gympie. —
Flying foxes were in the bananas “quite badly ” round Christmas, probably
worse than ever before. They damaged a few fruit, but there was no real
loss, as only the unsaleable ripe ones were eaten.
Yerra (near Maryborough).—
Flying foxes ate coloured fruit, but caused no real loss. “ A man who took
proper care of his plantation would not lose one-quarter per cent.”
Rosedale. —
“ I have 130 acres of bananas, and have never seen one touched by flying
foxes.”
Targinnie (near Gladstone). —
Bananas not touched.
Yeppoon (near Rockhampton).—
(1) Flying foxes cause no trouble in bananas; “ what little there is is
ray own fault.”
(2) A few foxes come to “Sugars” and “Ladies’ Fingers,” but only
if they are really ripe.
(3) “ Cavendish ”■ must be slightly coloured before flying foxes will touch
them; but they take “ Sugars ” and “ Ladies’ Fingers ” earlier, “on the
turn.” As far as Cavendish bananas are concerned, the losses are negligible;
they only come to them when a bunch has been missed.
Byfield (near Yeppoon).—
(1) Foxes were very bad this year (1930), and have actually tackled
“ Sugars ” and “ Ladies’ Fingers ” while still green.
(2) There has been a drought lately, and bananas have been attacked
rather badly.
(3) Bananas are not troubled much by flying foxes, “but I poison
regularly.”
Dunk Island. —
Flying foxes do not trouble bananas at all.


Cardwell.- —
Flying foxes no trouble to bananas.
Bowen. —
Flying foxes are in the mangoes all night, but have never seen them in
the bananas.
New South Wales.
Grafton. —
Flying foxes “at times attack bananas.”
Coff’s Harbour. —
Bananas are not attacked, “ but most other fruit is eaten.”
The experience of banana-growers thus appears to. he very uniform.
Except where it was definitely stated otherwise, i.e., hy one of the Byfield
growers, it was always asserted that only ripe fruit was eaten. Certain
growers, e.g., at Kosedale, appear never to have seen the signs of a
flying fox in their plantations. The Byfield district is rather excep-
tional, in that a large camp of flying foxes is situated in the very centre
of the fruit farms. Both citrus and bananas seem to be more heavily
attacked here than in any other district I visited in Queensland.
(ii) Citrus. —Citrus is one of the most important of the commercial
fruits of Queensland, and probably the most important of the fruits
grown in that part of New South Wales in which flying foxes regularly
occur. As was stated above, citrus fruit is not attacked hy the southern
Grey-headed Fox ( Ft. poliocephalus ) except under abnormal conditions.
Thus all the oranges and mandarins grown south of the Burnett Eiver
are practically speaking immune from flying fox attack. This applies
to just over three-quarters of the citrus in Queensland, and of course
the whole of the New South Wales crop.
It is particularly difficult to get an idea of the extent of the damage
done by flying foxes to the northern citrus crop. Although readily eaten
by the species Ft. gouldi, and (?) conspicillatus, citrus does not appear
to be a favourite food as, say, are mangoes. Thus in certain years it
is hardly, if at all, attacked.
Mandarins seem invariably to be attacked before oranges. It is
difficult to state the order of preference among the different varieties.
In the case of mandarins, each of the three chief varieties, i.e.,
“ Emperors,” “ Scarlets,” and “ Glen Eetreats,” have by one grower
or another been classed as the foxes’ first choice. On the whole, how-
ever, the sum of the evidence seems to favour “ Scarlets.”
Oranges are very much less favoured than mandarins. In fact,
there is little evidence that the flying fox can be considered in any way
a serious pest of oranges, even in North Queensland. This is probably
due to the fact that there are generally mandarins available when citrus
is being attacked; for when this is not the case, oranges are readily
eaten. Some citrus-growers (e.g., at Cairns) stated that they had never
suffered the slightest loss among their oranges.
Citrus fruit is particularly open to attack by flying foxes, as, unlike
practically all other types of cultivated fruit, it is often allowed to hang
on the tree for a considerable period in a state of ripeness. It is a
regular practice of growers, particularly in districts where the margins
of profit are small, to hold their fruit against a possible rise in prices.
In a wet season, prices tend to be poor, for the fruit, having a high
moisture content, is inclined to travel badly. If the fruit is left to
hang under these conditions, flying fox attacks will he augmented by


losses from other causes, e.g., blue mould, fruit-fly, and excessive falling,
as occurred in the Rockhampton area in 1930. When fruit is falling
prematurely as a result of climatic conditions, it is clearly impossible
to distinguish those knocked down by foxes, and thus to assess the
damage attributable to them.
That losses due to flying fox attack can in certain circumstances be
really serious is exemplified by the experience of a grower in the Rock-
hampton district in 1930. This grower had 1,000 trees, with a low
average yield estimated at about two cases per tree. About 750 cases
were sold at the beginning of the season. Prices then dropped, and
the remainder were left on the trees in the hope of a rise. Plying foxes
came in increasing numbers, and only half a dozen more cases were
ultimately marketed. This complete destruction of the crop was
probably not due entirely to flying foxes, for a neighbouring grower told
me that the rain at this period, i.e., the end of June, “brought down
tons of fruit,” and that mould and fly had also been bad. When no
action whatever is taken against flying foxes, the number of individuals
increase, until possibly hundreds may be “ working ” an orchard. It is
easy to see that, over a period of three or four weeks, such an army
of foxes could play great havoc with a light crop of fruit, probably
hanging very poorly.
The exceptional losses in this case must he attributed largely to the
personal attitude of the grower, who merely left his fruit to the mercy
of the foxes. A neighbouring grower, who regularly poisoned at the
first sign of flying fox attack, suffered no unusual losses in 1930; that
is, his losses, according to his own statement, were negligible.
Altogether, the extent of flying fox damage to mandarins in northern
and central Queensland is extraordinarily varying and uncertain. From
the evidence obtainable, it appears to be serious in occasional seasons
only. The following extracts from information supplied by growers
give an idea of the nature of the losses: —
Cairns (Grower of mixed fruit, bananas, paw paws, passion-fruit, granadillas,
citrus, &c.). —
Foxes only touch “ Scarlet ” mandarins. There is not much sale for
“ Scarlets,” as they are too “ delicate,” and do not travel well. Foxes
come to the orchard in two’s and three’s only, and are not a serious pest.
Cardwell (Fruit Inspector).—
There are about 300 acres of citrus in the district. Has received com-
plaints for about two weeks only, towards the end of the mandarin season
in 1930. The foxes then appeared to leave the orchards.
Bowen. —
(1) Mandarins are not troubled, probably because the trees are low
and very bushy.
(2) Half an acre of “Emperors,” which are heavily attacked by flying
foxes. When these are gone oranges are eaten. The heavy years are
interspersed with light ones. In bad years, such as 1930, “ easily a quarter
of the crop ” is taken.
Rockhampton and Yeppoon. —
(1) Markets about 5,000 cases of citrus annually, about 1,200 of which are
mandarins. Flying foxes were “troublesome” this year (1930); heaviest
on Glen Retreats.” The prices were so bad that the losses were not
noticeable. It was impossible to assess the damage due to the foxes, as
mould and fly were very bad, and heavy rain in June brought down tons
of fruit. Taken over a period of years, the loss'due to flying foxes is
only about one-tenth of that caused by the fruit fly.
(2) Has been in the district twelve years, and only in one year wag really
troubled by flying foxes. ‘ J


(3) Has 450 mandarin and 100 orange trees. This (1930) is the only
year the flying foxes have been really troublesome, and the first year that
oranges were attacked. Started to market fruit at the end of April.
Flying foxes were first noticed at the end of May, when about a score
seemed to visit the orchard. “ Scarlets ” were chiefly attacked, the tops of
the trees being eaten out. The loss estimates to he between a half to one
case per tree. About one-quarter of the crop was lost as a result of sudden
ripening at the end of the season, and failure to pick the fruit. The
loss due to flying foxes was small in comparison.
Targinnie (near Gladstone). —
No citrus touched until 1930.
Baffle Creek (near Bundaberg).—
(1) In 1926 (a dry season) it was estimated that 20 per cent, of the
mandarin crop was taken, and oranges were also attacked. In 1927 (a wet
season) flying fox attacks were worse than the average, but not as had as
in the previous year. There was no bother in 1928 or 1929. In 1930, the
first fox appeared in the orchard at the end of June.
(2) Has 280 mandarin trees. In normal years, the loss is under 10 per
cent. In 1930, it was probably 15 per cent., i.e., perhaps 80 to 100 bushel
cases. In this season, about 40 cases per week were lost from mould, fly, &c.,
of which probably 7 were attributable to flying foxes. Shoots at night when
prices are high.
(iii) Pineapples. —Pines, which after bananas are the most im-
portant of the commercial fruits of Queensland, are immune from
flying fox attack, owing to the nature of their growth. It has
been reported that, in times of extreme drought, when rendered
desperate by hunger, flying foxes have crawled on the ground and
attempted to eat pineapples.
(iv) Pome Fruit. —In Queensland, practically as great an area is
devoted to apples as to pines (i.e., over 4,000 acres), and this for all
practical purposes is limited to the Stanthorpe district. The cultiva-
tion of pome fruit in !New South Wales is, of course, very much greater
than in Queensland. Unfortunately, it was not possible during this
investigation to visit many of the pome fruit centres in blew South
Wales, and accurate information regarding the extent of flying fox
attack is consequently lacking. Pome fruit is grown on the northern
and southern Tablelands, the Blue Mountains, certain far inland districts,
such as the Murrumhidgee Irrigation Area, and, to a lesser extent, on
the coast (very little being grown further north than Gosford).
The species of flying fox concerned with attacks on pome fruit is thus
the southern Grey-headed Fox, Pi. poliocephalus, and, to a much smaller
extent, the little Bed Fox, Pi. scapulatus. Pome fruits seems to he
regarded by Pi. poliocephalus in much the same way as mandarins
are by Ft. gouldi ; that is to say, they are very readily eaten, hut are
apparently passed over unless there is a shortage of “ natural ” food,
or of a more favoured type of cultivated food, such as peaches. Flying
fox attacks are thus extremely irregular and selective. In certain
seasons, apples and pears will not be touched, although there may he
plenty of foxes in the district. When orchards are visited, one or two
trees will usually be picked out, and the damage done to their crops may
he considerable. Great numbers will he knocked down, for a firm,
round fruit like an apple is not easily handled by a flying fox.
It was discovered, rather unexpectedly, that flying foxes were not
particularly troublesome in the Stanthorpe district, very much less so,
in fact, than in certain New South Wales districts in which they might
be expected to be less numerous. I could find no evidence that a camp
of Pt. poliocephalus had ever been located in the Stanthorpe district,


though migrating mobs of the little Red Fox, Ft. scapulatus, settle
in the neighbourhood at times, e.g., at Ballandean, in 1926. Flying
foxes in two’s and three’s visit the orchards fairly regularly. The
brunt of their attack is borne by the stone fruit. In certain years, the
attacks are increased, e.g., early in the 1930 season, when most orchards
were visited nightly by half a dozen or more individuals. The losses
were still, however, as fan as I could gather, limited to stone fruit, for
the main apple crop had not begun to ripen.
I visited many growers in different parts of the Stanthorpe area,
and the consensus of opinion was emphatic that flying foxes were not
a real pest. As such losses that occur are, practically speaking, limited
to stone fruit, it must be concluded that the flying fox can be disregarded
as a pest of the commercial apple crop of Queensland.
The conditions found in Hew South Wales are very much more
complicated. Pome fruit in the coastal belt may be seriously attacked
in certain years. The small amount grown near Newcastle has been
so heavily attacked that flying foxes may be considered one of the
contributing causes in its gradual replacement (in common with stone
fruit) by citrus. Thus a grower near Martinsville, where there is a
large “ permanent ” fox camp, suffered so heavily that he cut out his
1,000 or more apple trees and replaced them by citrus. The Wyong-
Gosford area is chiefly devoted to citrus; but some stone fruit and early
apples are grown. Such information as I have indicates that the losses
to the apples have been inconsiderable of recent years, though in 1930
it was reported, by the Fruit Inspector at Wyong, that the early apples
were “ nearly all destroyed by foxes, which were very bad in parts.”
Apples are grown on Mounts Keira and Kembla, near Wollongong,
and are at times rather seriously attacked. Information obtained from
local growers was as follows:
(1) Twenty to twenty-five years ago, flying foxes were very bad every
season. There are occasional bad seasons now; but usually they are not
troublesome. (This grower poisoned regularly, and thus reduced his losses
considerably.)
(2) Sometimes flying foxes are very bad, e.g., in 1927, when some trees,
each bearing approximately 10 bushels, had about five cases of fruit scattered
below them.
The northern T ablelands district appears to suffer more heavily from
flying foxes than the very similar area in Queensland, i.e., round
Stanthorpe. lam informed that flying foxes are worst from the end
of February to the middle of March, when the late apples are ripening.
During my visit to the district, however, stone fruit (nectarines and
peaches) were the only fruits being attacked.
In Hew South Wales, generally speaking, it may be said that flying
foxes attack pome fruit in a very selective fashion, the damage being
limited to scattered trees. In certain districts their attack may be
severe enough to be very serious (i.e., at Martinsville and Copeland, near
Hewcastle), in others, to be very annoying, as at Tenterfield, on the
northern Tableland, and the south coast districts. In the remaining
areas, i.e., the Blue Mountains, the southern Tableland, and the western
slopes of the Tablelands generally, taking the local crops as a whole,
the losses, when they occur, are probably insignificant.
(v) Stone Fruit. —Stone fruit (peaches, nectarines, apricots, plums,
and cherries) are not of great importance to Queensland outside the
Stanthorpe area. They are very badly affected by fruit fly. On the whole,
51


it may be said that the stone fruit grown in the coastal areas of Queens-
land and northern New South Wales is grown out of its proper environ-
ment. Nevertheless, it is grown very largely as a back-garden crop
in these coastal districts, and few mixed-fruit farmers do not have one
or two trees. The major part of this casual or semi-commercial crop is
probably lost with some regularity. Fruit fly will usually get into all
the late varieties, and a year when flying foxes do not take a heavy toll
is probably exceptional. (However, conditions in this respect have
greatly improved in recent years, as a result of the general decrease in
numbers of flying foxes in southern Queensland and New South Wales.)
Regarding the commercial stone fruit crop, the state of affairs
found at Stanthorpe was touched on in the previous section. Of all the
growers interviewed in this district, only one complained seriously of
flying foxes. The general attitude was well summed up by an old-estab-
lished grower, who said that there were usually a few flying foxes about
when the peaches were ripe; but that they were not a serious pest. They
were “ sometimes annoying, but never disastrous.”
In common with many New South Wales districts, Stanthorpe
suffered more than usual in the early part of the 1930-31 season. This
state of affairs lasted for three weeks or more, the attacks easing off
rather suddenly at the beginning of January. The local fruit instructor
reported that “ Practically every orchardist reports that about six or
eight foxes visit his orchard every night. They do not generally attack
any one orchard in large numbers, but split up into small parties.”
Plums seemed principally to be attacked. One orchardist stated that
he only remembered two or three bad years in the last fifteen years or
so, and that this was the rvorst. He estimated his loss at twenty cases.
As in the case of pome fruit, the conditions found in New South
Wales are rather complicated. On the whole, it may be said that the
two types of fruit are similarly affected, but stone fruit is almost always
more heavily attacked than apples and pears.
In the Tenterfield district, conditions are comparable with those
found at Stanthorpe, though flying foxes appear to be rather more
numerous just south of the border. Further south, i.e., at Glen Innes
and Armidale, they seem to be less so than at Tenterfield.
Of the stone fruit grown in the belt affected by the main southern
migration of the flying foxes, that cultivated in the neighbourhood of
Sydney seems to be relatively untroubled in normal years. In certain
seasons, however, considerable losses may be sustained; but the visita-
tions do not appear to extend over a long period, so that usually one
phase only of the fruit crop will be affected. Thus, in 1930, flying-
foxes (both Ft. poliocephalus and scapulatus) made their appearance
shortly after the middle of November around Hurrajong and Windsor.
They visited the orchards in numbers for from four to five weeks, and
then suddently eased off. They started on apricots, and when these were
picked, went to the early peaches. There was no lack of ripe fruit
when the attacks ceased. In the same period, flying foxes were reported
attacking plums at Kenthurst, Glenorie, &c.
The small amount of stone fruit grown on the south coast is more
regularly attacked. Thus a grower at the foot of Mount Keira con-
sidered the patrol of his orchards with a gun to be part of his normal
routine. His greatest complaint against flying foxes was that they
spoiled the growth of his young peach trees by breaking off the leaders
when they alighted.
52


Ho reliable information bas been obtained from tbe inland districts,
and it may be assumed tbat, wherever flying foxes occur in Hew South
Wales, stone fruit, if available, will be attacked.
A certain (decreasing) amount of stone fruit is grown in the Hunter
River area, of which mention was made when the migrations of Pt.
scapulatus, tbe little Red Fox, were discussed on p. 30. This district
is in tbe direct path of the main coastal migration, and is very seriously
affected by flying foxes. Even here, however, there are certain years
in which the fruit is hardly troubled, and even in the bad years the
foxes are usually in the orchards for a part only of the season. The
following are typical extracts from information obtained from
growers: —
(1) Flying foxes prefer the soft white varieties of peach, such as
“ Greensborough ” and “Carmen,” and also “Triumph” (yellow-fleshed).
They are heavy on apricots and some varieties of plum, e.g., “ Santa Rosa.”
In 1926, the losses were very heavy, and practically no fruit could have
been sold had not the foxes suddenly disappeared the week before Christmas.
In 1930, foxes attacked early peaches for a fortnight or three weeks, dis-
appearing in the first few days of December. Thus it was possible to pick
the whole crop of “ Triumphs ” and ‘‘ Greensboroughs,” a large part of
which was usually destroyed by the flying foxes.
(2) The foxes usually ease off from about Christmas on. Sometimes they
return for the later fruit; but they are most troublesome to the early
varieties, which comprise about one-quarter of the orchard. By shooting
at night, the loss is kept down to below one-eighth of the early crop.
Apricots, especially “ Masculines,” and “ Bell’s November ” peaches are
favoured most.
The Fruit Inspector estimated that about 40 per cent, of the stone
fruit in this district could be classed as “ early.” “ Elberta ”is
probably the latest variety grown, which would be picked out by the
third week in January. The cultivation of later varieties is made
impossible by the fruit fly.
Very little can be achieved by hurried picking in the case of stone
fruit, as the flying fox will attack them, if anything, before they are
ready for the market. In bad years, when there is apparently extreme
food shortage (probably enhanced by a heavy migration of the little
Red Fox), stone fruit is eaten while still quite green.
(vi) Paw-paws. —This fruit is so widely grown in gardens, &c.,
throughout Queensland, that the statistics of its cultivation are probably
of little value in determining its importance. The annual report of
the Department of Agriculture (1929) gives the area under paw-paws
as 693 acres. That the quantity of this fruit grown is, however, over-
estimated in the general mind, is exemplified by the fact that a company
which started operations in northern Queensland, with the principal
object of marketing preserved paw-paw in various forms (having been
informed that an ample supply was assured), found that it was neces-
sary to contract with growers for the planting of considerable new areas.
All the four species of flying fox attack paw-paws, the three larger
ones readily. The fruit must be ripe, however, before it is acceptable.
Paw-paws can be, and often must be (i.e., when sent to a distant
market) picked at the very first sign of “ colour.” At this stage, they
are not sufficiently ripe to be attacked by flying foxes, and thus it is
possible by careful picking to reduce the losses to practically nothing.
Of all the growers with whom I discussed the question, only one doubted
whether it was possible to beat the flying foxes by picking. He was
situated near Brisbane, where he marketed his fruit, and allowed his


paw-paws to get “ fairly ripe ” before picking. All the others, many
of them growers on a considerable scale (one had over 1,000 plants)
were very definite on this point. One grower at Eollingstone, north of
Townsville, who grew paw-paws chiefly for the Sydney market, estimated
his loss at under 2 per cent, per annum, although flying foxes were in
his plantation every night (probably attracted by the scent, which on a
still evening is very powerful, even to the human nose). He stated
that flying foxes were better judges of paw-paws than he was. Often
when he had passed over a fruit, thinking to let it hang an extra day,
it would be bitten that night, and he would then see that it was ripe,
despite its outward appearance.
Thus it is clear that the margin of time is not large, being one or
two days at the most. As it is not possible to go over a large plantation
with the care necessary to pick out all the fruit which are in the
“ turning ” stage, a slight loss is unavoidable. As in the case of bananas,
when a fox descends to a plant it is liable to damage the unripe fruit,
which, bleeding readily from any scratches it has received, would
probably be ruined for the market.
(vii) Mangoes. —lt seems likely that the importance of the mango
as a commercial fruit will increase considerably in the future. There
is already a steady demand for good-quality mangoes in Sydney; and
in one district at least in north Queensland several growers are planting
mangoes in place of citrus.
According to the report of the Department of Agriculture, there are
just over 200 acres of commercially-grown mangoes in Queensland;
though, as in the case of paw-paws, this figure is probably of very little
value as an estimate of the importance of the fruit, for mangoes are
grown extensively as shade trees, and a considerable part of their crop
is made use of locally.
As the mango is a quickly-perishable fruit, its successful marketing
depends very largely on careful picking and packing, and also on its
rapid disposal at the consuming end. The latter depends on the exist-
ence of a ready demand for the fruit, which in turn will depend
on the care given to its presentation, i.e., the picking and packing. As
the mango is almost a weed in north Queensland, it is perhaps natural
that hitherto this necessary care has not always been taken.
It is of interest that whereas only the so-called “ improved ” varieties
of mango are acceptable in Sydney, and command high prices, the
“ common ” mango actually seems to be preferred by Queenslanders.
The extreme partiality shown by flying foxes for mangoes is very
evident in north Queensland, and it is generally believed that they
would provide an almost insuperable obstacle to the successful com-
mercialization of the fruit. This anxiety is not justified, however,
The “ commercial ” mangoes are practically all sent south to Sydney
and Brisbane. For this purpose the fruit has to be picked before it
is ripe, that is, generally speaking, before it is acceptable to flying
foxes. In this way the losses suffered by growers of commercial
mangoes are very much less than one would be led to expect from the
terrible havoc played among the garden crop. The following informa-
tion, supplied by two growers from Bowen and Rockhampton respec-
tively, gives the main facts of the situation:—
(1) A particular variety of mango is specialized in for the Sydney market.
Great care is taken in the picking (each individual fruit being caught before


striking the ground) and grading. The fruit has to be picked firm, and not
quite ripe. In this way the foxes are beaten.; but, having a number of
common ” mango trees interspersed with his improved varieties, whose fruit
is allowed to ripen, helps to protect the main crop. At times, the fruit will
ripen with a rush, usually after a wet hot spell. The flying foxes then cause
some loss; but these are the only circumstances under which the special fruit
suffers from fox attack. At such times a good deal of fruit will fall naturally.
Fruit that has ripened in this way, if carefully selected and sweated, can he sent
south.
(2) The flying fox prefers the stringless varieties of mango, which are princi-
pally sent south. When picked for southern markets the fruit is too hard for
them to tackle. Fruit which the foxes would just eat could be sent to Brisbane,
but not much farther. A ripe mango has only a “ life ”of some three days,
or seven to ten days from the normal time of picking. A special pole with a
knife edge and a netting bag is used for picking the fruit to avoid bruising. The
flying foxes do not constitute a real pest, though they may get plenty of fruit
when there has been a burst of quick ripening.
On the whole, the very great damage done by flying foxes to the
north Queensland mango crop is not of great economic importance.
The commercially marketed fruit is largely unaffected, and for the rest
the mango is so excessively common that there is usually no difficulty
in obtaining sufficient fruit to meet local requirements; though in some
places this may necessitate early picking. Growers who depend on a
local market, and do not practise early picking, undoubtedly suffer
heavily from fox attacks.
(viii). Miscellaneous. —Passion Fruit and Orenadillas. —Although I
have come across odd records of flying foxes attacking these fruits, I can
find no evidence that they are normally eaten.
Grapes. —Grapes are undoubtedly eaten at times by flying foxes; but
this must he regarded as distinctly unusual. By no stretch of the
imagination could flying foxes be classed as a pest of this fruit.
Custard Apples. —Custard apples are readily eaten when ripe. As
they are picked for the market unripe, flying foxes rarely get the
opportunity of eating them. Commercial cultivation of this fruit is,
practically speaking, limited to southern Queensland, where it ripens
from April to September, that is, after the mass of the flying foxes have
migrated north. All the growers interveiwed stated that their custard
apples were not touched by flying foxes.
Figs. —Figs are grown to a very small extent in south Queensland,
chiefly for jam-making. They are a favourite food of the foxes, and
are attacked almost annually, sometimes very heavily. One grower
stated that in 1926 or 1927 he lost three-quarters of his crop. Reckon-
ing over a period of years, possibly over 10 per cent, of the fig crop is
eaten by flying foxes. Although this fruit is apparently a favourite
food, strangely enough it seems to be ignored in some districts, e.g.,
Grafton, New South Wales. The same thing applies to persimmons,
which are grown to a certain extent in Queensland and New South
Wales.
3. The Economic Importance of the Flying Fox.
The importance of the flying fox as an economic pest can only be
assessed by adopting a general point of view, and seeing such losses as
occur in their proper perspective. Thus, broadly speaking, the
loss to the commercial fruit crop of Queensland is so inconsiderable as
to be almost trifling. It is significant, I think, in this connexion that


no agitation against the flying fox has, as far as I can ascertain,
originated or received serious support from a body representing major
fruit-growing interests.
Serious losses to commercial fruit are, practically speaking, limited
to ISTew South Wales, where soft fruit is grown to some extent in the
coastal belt. In one fruit-growing district only, I think, can the flying
fox he classed as a major pest —the area round Newcastle and Maitland.
Even this district is largely devoted to citrus, and as a soft fruit centre
is of relatively small importance. Elsewhere the attacks of the flying
fox can probably he classed as annoying rather than serious.
This distinction in turn may he rather annoying to growers who in
some years have seen half the crop of certain of their trees scattered
on the orchard floor. The nature of the fruit industry is unfortunately
such that the financial position of growers varies greatly from year to
year as a result of big fluctuations in the size of the crop and in market
prices. In most of the New South Wales fruit-growing districts sub-
ject to attacks by flying foxes, heavy losses are usually limited to indivi-
dual trees, and to short periods only of the fruit season. Thus as
a percentage of the total annual crop the losses will generally prove
small. In view of the much greater handicap to which commercial
fruit-growers are subjected it is difficult to class these losses as really
“ serious.”
In Queensland, at any rate, the cultivation of much of the fruit
liable to attack by flying foxes (e.g., mandarins) gives the impression of
being rather casual in nature. This is probably due to the fact that
the prices commanded being so uncertain, and the margin of profit being
in many districts so small, it is unsafe for a man to put “ all his, eggs
in one basket” (banana-growers providing the chief exception). Thus
a mixed crop is the rule, and often fruit-growing is carried on in con-
junction with dairying, &c. When prices are bad —as generally in
1930 —a considerable part of the crop may be left unpicked (e.g., citrus
at Byfield, near Rockhampton, and figs in southern Queensland, where
one grower did not trouble to pick the fruit from the tops of his trees).
Losses from flying fox attack in such circumstances can hardly be
regarded seriously.
Yarious growers have attempted to give me an estimate of the
actual cash value of the fruit destroyed by foxes. This has actually
been calculated on the basis of the market value of the fruit knocked
down and destroyed. It is clear that this basis of reckoning does not
provide a fair measure of the economic loss. Flying foxes do not
destroy fruit on the market floor, picked, packed, and railed. The
loss must be calculated on a basis of the value of the fruit on the tree,
which is a very different matter. When the actual outlay for the
cases, the freight and cartage, agents’ dues, &c., and the labour costs of
picking and packing have been deducted from the price received for
the fruit, there is usually only too small a margin left over. It is this
figure which must be taken as the basis for the measure of the actual
flying fox damage.
Such figures as I obtained are unfortunately of little value, for the
prices ruling during 1930 could not be taken as in any way typical.
Thus with mandarins, towards the end of the season (from June on)
the prices were so low that they barely covered the cost of cases, freight,


commission, &c., in the case of certain disadvantageously placed districts.
In certain instances, in fact, they did not cover it, and the fruit was
actually sent south at a loss.
In setting forth these considerations, it is in no way intended to give
the impression that flying foxes do not cause financial loss to fruit-
growers. These losses, such as they are, are in the nature of irrefutable
facts, and cannot be argued away. It is intended, however, that the
incidence and importance of the damage caused by flying foxes should
be seen in proper perspective. If undue emphasis seems to have been
given to considerations which appear to minimize the importance of
the flying fox as an economic pest, it is because hitherto the error has
been entirely in the other direction.*
During this investigation one point of paramount importance has
become evident. The assumption that the flying fox is a menace to
the commercial fruit industry of Australia is quite definitely false,
and cannot be cited as a valid reason for the expenditure of public
money on its control. Broadly speaking, the flying fox is not an
important pest of cultivated fruit. It can best be described as a general
nuisance, affecting chiefly the small “ home ” grower, who clearly has
far less claim on public moneys for the protection of his crop than the
members of the commercial fruit industry.
IV. POSSIBILITIES OF CONTROL.
1. General Considerations.
The information available, as set out in the preceding sections, in-
dicates clearly the outstanding points in the practical problem presented
by the flying fox —
(11 The numbers of flying foxes occurring in Australia are very
great. This vast population, whose size it is difficult
to imagine, is supported mainly by the flowering trees of
the “open” (Eucalypt) forest association.
(2) A small part only of the total flying fox population is con-
cerned with the attacks on cultivated fruit. Flying foxes
are distributed continuously from the Victorian border to
north Queensland. In this belt the commercial fruit-
growing districts are, geographically speaking, isolated
and inconsiderable areas. Thus the major part of the
flying fox population is out of touch with commercial
fruit cultivation, and even in the fruit-growing areas the
animals concentrate on “ natural ” food.
• That this error is partly natural was pointed out above (see p. 46). It is generally assumed
that the presence of large numbers of flying foxes in a district is invariably accompanied by heavy
losses to fruit-growers. This is well exemplified by a letter to the Queensland Department of
Agriculture reporting the presence of a large mob of foxes near Warwick, 8.Q.; “ A public organized
shoot of flying foxes took place at Canning Downs South on the Ist instant. A large party went
out and knocked over 10,000 (estimated number). lam told no appreciable difference in numbers
can be noticed, so you will see in what countless numbers they are. As this camp is only 18 miles
from the fruit-growers (Stanhope district), it can be seen what damage is done during the fruit season.”
The animals in question were a migrating mob of the little Bed Fox {Pt. scapulatus), which only
remained in the district for a few weeks, and caused little, if any, damage to fruit.
Psychological factors play a far from negligible part in determining the general attitude towards
the flying fox. The very nature of the animal precludes an unbiassed assessment of its economic
importance. It is a bat, and an unnaturally large one into the bargain. It is nocturnal, noisy,
smelly, and usually Infested with parasites. During this investigation it was quite astonishing
the number of individuals who prefaced their information regarding flying foxes with a statement
that they were “ stinking, lousy brutes.” This attitude is really very significant.


(3) Serious attacks on cultivated fruit are the result of a tem-
porary disturbance in the local supply of “ natural ”
food.
(4) The flying fox population is a complex of four species,
which differ in their habits and range, and are thus of
unequal economic importance. Thus the two northern
species, Pt. gouldi and conspicillatus, live in areas rela-
tively unaffected by settlement, where very little com-
mercial fruit is cultivated. The former, at any rate,
occurs in immense numbers. Thus their economic im-
portance “ per head ”is minute. The little Red Fox
(Pt. scapulatus) has the widest range and the largest
numbers of all the species. It is only in isolated locali-
ties in the south that it eats cultivated fruit to a notice-
able extent. Thus this species also is of trifling economic
importance, judged on a “ per head ” basis. The range
of the southern Pt. poliocephalus probably includes more
than 90 per cent, of the cultivated fruit affected by the
problem. It may, therefore, be considered the flying
fox from the economic point of view.
(5 ) The flying fox population is not stationary. All the species
are to some extent migratory, two, at any rate, carrying
out regular and extensive seasonal mass movements.
The various courses of action which could be followed in an attempt
to deal with the flying fox problem may be considered under three
heads—
(a) General control throughout their range;
( b ) Local or selective control by mass destruction, limited to
definite areas or species of fox; and
(c) Destruction in the orchards, and orchard protection.
The consideration set forth above indicate the a priori possibilities
of each of these types of action. In the first place, it may be said at
once that the numbers of flying foxes in Australia are so vast, and
their range extends so far outside the limits of close settlement (and
even in the relatively closely-settled areas their haunts are often little
known, and difficult to reach) that a system of general control based
on the direct destruction of the animals must be ruled out as a physical
and economic impossibility. The only hope (such as it is) of general
control, therefore, lies in some system of indirect destruction (see page
60). Some of the control measures proposed or adopted (e.g., arti-
ficial epidemics or the scalp bounty system) although probably aiming
at a general control, would, in effect, prove of local application only.
It is inconceivable in practice that action should be taken in Cape
York or the Gulf country, because flying foxes sometimes eat man-
darins round Rockhampton, and peaches in Hew South Wales.
It is probably action of the second type that is usually implied when
a solution of the flying fox problem is considered, that is to say general
slaughter, presumably carried out in the camps, and limited to those
localities in which the flying fox is particularly troublesome. The
chief difficulty in the way of successful local control is the highly
mobile state of the flying fox population, complicated by the inter-
relation of the different species. This is best illustrated by an example
based on the case of some particular district.


The most obvious locality in which to attempt mass destruction
with a view to local control is the Hunter Valley area in Hew South
Wales. Here the fruit is attacked heavily in the early part of the
season (i.e., November) by two species of fox, Ft. poliocephalus and
scapulatus. At this time it may be assumed that the main southerly
migration is still in progress. If one or more of the local camps were
destroyed, attacks on the orchards would presumably cease, for the time
being, at any rate. To what extent might this benefit be expected to
prove permanent? The greater part of the flying foxes in the district
at the time have been destroyed. It would be quite on the cards,
however, that these individuals were not those which would settle in
the district by the time the migration was completed; thus there might
even be further losses later in that season. As to the following year
or years, it would not be safe to hazard a prophecy. It is certain,
however, that in time a redistribution of the population would take
place, and the “ gap ” would be filled.
It seems to me that there is one factor which would be favorable
to the success of local control; that is the intelligence of the animals
themselves. The regularity of the annual migrations of the Grey-
headed Fox (Ft. poliocephalus ) was remarked on above. Year after
year identical camp sites are occupied with great precision. It would
seem that this phenomenon must be based on the memory and
“ homing ” instinct of individuals. If this is the case, it is quite pos-
sible that the destruction of a “ permanent ” camp would have more
than a temporary effect. It might well take years before it regained
sufficient size (by the gradual accumulation of individuals who would
come to regard it as their regular summer “ residence ”) to be a
menace to the district. Thus I think that in the case of Ft. polio-
cephalus, which is the species principally concerned in the loss to fruit
in Hew South Wales and southern Queensland, the chances of local
control being successful are quite good—assuming that an economic
method of mass destruction can be found.
Ft. scapulatus, the little Red Fox, presents a very different problem.
In Queensland it can be disregarded as a fruit-eater. The migrants
into Hew South Wales, a very small minority of whom are involved,
with the larger Ft. poliocephalus, in the orchard raids, represent the
overflow of a huge population (Ft. scapulatus being the most
abundant of the Australian species, its total numbers possibly exceed-
ing the sum of those of the other three). In comparison with Ft.
poliocephalus, its migrations appear to be irregular and rather hap-
hazard, and thus it is unlikely that the destruction of one mob would
have an appreciable effect on subsequent visitations to a district.
The third type of control—dealing with the foxes as individuals in
the orchards instead of en masse in their camps—can only be under-
taken by the growers themselves. Thus even if it would prove to be
the most economic means of reducing the losses to cultivated fruit, it
would probably not be accepted as a satisfactory solution to the
problem.
When isolated individuals only from a large local population are
feeding on cultivated fruit, it is obviously more logical to deal with the
actual malefactors than to attempt a campaign of general destruction.
This is, in fact, the state of affairs found in most, if not all, the
districts in Queensland, and in Hew South Wales in “normal”
seasons. In certain districts in Hew South Wales, as was stated


above, there appear to be times when a temporary shortage of food
will drive the greater part of the local fox population to seek food in
the orchards. In this case mass destruction in the camps is clearly
indicated, if practicable.
2. Biological Control —Control by Introduced Disease.
Direct destruction of flying foxes throughout their range being out
of the question, the only hope of general control would lie in some
“ biological ” method, on a parallel with the methods used against
insect pests. The success of biological methods in the latter field is
based on the high degree of specialization that is found in the insect
world. Phytophagous insects usually limit themselves to a small
number of food plants, and in turn are preyed on and parasitized by
other insects, usually even more specialized, some of which can be
trusted to limit their attention to a single-host species. A mammal
like the flying fox presents quite a different problem. Flying foxes
are only attacked by the small number of predatory animals which are
large and powerful enough to tackle them. These could not possibly
be used as a basis for the biological control of flying foxes. In the
first place, flying foxes form a very small item in their diet (which in
many eases includes domestic animals), and in the second it would be
quite impracticable to foster their multiplication and distribution.
Under the heading of biological control must be placed the destruc-
tion of flying foxes by an introduced disease. This has been re-
peatedly suggested as a method of dealing with the pest by people who
know little about the causes and dissemination of infectious diseases.
As it will probably be suggested again in the future, it might be advisable
to go into the question in some detail.
In order to assess the possibilities of this method of dealing with
the pest, it is necessary to take account of the results of past attempts
and experiments, and from our knowledge of the special conditions
obtaining in the case of the flying fox population, to determine to what
extent the experience in other countries, and with other animals, would
apply in this case.
Recorded past attempts to control an animal pest by means of an
introduced disease —an artificial epidemic—have (with the exception of
the flying fox experiments discussed below) been limited to rodents
(chiefly rats and mice), and, with one exception, have been based on
the employment of bacilli of the Salmonella group.* Organisms of
this group play an important part in the diseases of animals. In
addition to rats and mice, &c., all domestic species of animals and birds
(with the possible exception of the Carnivores) are subject to their
attack. Moreover (apart from three or four types, which include
organisms concerned with equine and ovine abortion) all the known
Salmonella types have been found associated with, and certainly or
probably causing, disease in man.
In these attempts to control rat and mice plagues the infections
used have been strains of either Bacillus actrich or B. enteritidis types
(types which cause serious diseases in man, usually of a gastro-
enteritis nature). They have been isolated from epidemic infections
which have occurred either in laboratory animals (e.g., Loetfler’s
* A System of Bacteriology in Relation to Medicine. British Medical Research Council, Vol. 4 ;
pp. 127-136, 1920.


bacillus from laboratory mice), or natural populations (e.g., Danysz’
bacillus, “B. typhi murium,” from field mice, Arvicola, and in one
case from a human “ Eatin,” isolated from the urine of a child with
cystitis). Although great care and labour have been expended to
maintain and increase the virulence of these strains in laboratories,
and although it has been claimed that they have succeeded in practice
as rodent vermin destroyers, subsequent experiments have failed to
confirm these assertions. Although there is no doubt as to the lethal
effects of the infected baits when taken by rodents, there is also no
doubt that no widespread epidemic among a population of wild
rodents has ever been initiated by such artificial means. This is ex-
emplified by the results of a campaign against field mice in the Army
Zone in France in 1918. Highly virulent B. typhi murium proved
most efficacious as a poison; but no epidemic could be started.*
It may be said at once that there is no a priori reason why an
introduced disease should not be effective in the control of an animal
pest. It is known that an epidemic introduced (naturally) into a
virgin animal population can cause great havoc, i.e., when plague
spread among the veldt rodents in South Africa in 1923-24, and was
estimated to have killed 80-90 per cent, of the gerbilles in some dis-
tricts. (However, these animals are reported to have bred up to a
“peak” again in two or three years.)
The efficiency of an epidemic in reducing an animal population
will depend on several factors, the most obvious of which are the
mortality of the disease (i.e., the percentage of fatal cases among
individuals which receive the infection—and which may have little or
no relation to the percentage of deaths in an infected population), and
the method and speed of the spread of infection. The high mortality,
as indicated by laboratory tests, of some of the strains of infection
tried in connexion with rodent destruction (even up to 100 per cent,
in some cases) gave rise to great hopes of their probable efficacy as
practical rodent destroyers, which did not materialize. In this con-
nexion d’Herelle, who organized the unsuccessful campaign in the war
zone referred to above, points out that in the case of many naturally
contagious bacterial diseases, the experimental disease is not
contagious.*
This appears to be borne out by the following experiment, which is
particularly interesting, as it deals with conditions which at the out-
set seemed too good to be true (such, for instance, as a man working
in connexion with flying foxes could scarcely hope for). These con-
ditions include the discovery of a new disease occurring naturally in
epidemic form, and causing high mortality in a population of a
rodent pest; its successful isolation, and the establishment of the fact
that it was innocuous to domestic animals, but that small rodents could
readily be infected by feeding infected baits; and the probability, know-
ing the habits of the animals, that it would spread readily among them.
*ln 1925, gerbilles (Tatera lobengulae —a species of small veldt
rodent), near the Tiger River Station in South Africa, were found to
be suffering from a disease. It was reported that the animals in the
vicinity of the station “ appeared to be almost completely wiped out.”
From dead animals found lying about, an organism, hitherto unknown,
t * Mitchell, J. A., Pirie, J. H. H., and Ingram, A. “ The Plague Problem in South Africa:
Historical, Bacteriological, and Entomological Studies.” Publ. S. Afr. Inst, for Medical Research,
Vol. 3, No. 20: pp. 85-256, 1927. Also Annual Rep. S. Afr. Inst, for Med. Res. for year ending
Bee., 1927.


was isolated in pure culture. When inoculated into small veldt rodents
and house mice, it was found to be highly pathogenic, the symptoms
being similar to those found in the gerhilles which had died in the
natural epidemic. For rabbits, &c., and the larger veldt rodents its
pathogenicity was less or nil; for cats, dogs, &c., it was non-pathogenic.
It was also found that infection could he spread by feeding, which was
assumed to be the method occurring in nature —probably assisted by
cannibalism (i.e., the devouring of the corpses of those animals killed
by the disease) which was known to he very prevalent among gerhilles.
A small scale experiment was then organized to test the possibilities
of the “ Tiger River virus ”as a rodent destroyer. This experiment
met with i: some success.” These results were not confirmed in a later
attempt, and it was confessed “ that the hopes which were entertained
that Tiger River virus might prove to he of value for rodent destruc-
tion on a grand scale have not materialized.” As in the case of the
campaign in France, in 1918, against field mice, it was found that the
virus employed acted most efficiently as a poison, hut that there was
no evidence of any spreading epidemic among the animal population.
From this sum of experience we must conclude that, although one
or two claims to success have been made, the failure of the great mass
of attempts to initiate epidemics among wild populations, using ex-
perimental infections of high mortality, indicates that this method of
vermin control cannot be considered generally practicable. Too little
is known of the factors which influence the spread of an infection
among wild populations to suggest any particular reason why this
should have been the case. With wild rodents, the fluctuations of whose
numbers have been studied by Elton,* it appears probable that epi-
demics occur regularly when the local population has increased to such
an extent that there is overcrowding to the detriment of the species as
a whole, and with which population the more slowly-breeding predators
(weasels, foxes, owls, &c.) cannot cope. In fact, it might be said that
epidemic diseases are employed by nature as an additional check to an
over-great increase in numbers resulting from the very high fecundity
of these animals. This high fecundity, and the fact that the popu-
lation is never completely exterminated by an epidemic, in turn ensure
that the check is only temporary, the population rapidly recovering
normal density (as in the case of the South African gerhilles mentioned
above). It seems safe to conclude, therefore, that there is little
chance of initiating an epidemic in a wild population except at those
periods when conditions (of overcrowding, &c.) for its spread are most
favorable. Moreover, as some of the attempts in this direction must
have coincided with “ peak ” or ‘‘ plague ” conditions (i.e., the 1918
campaign against field mice in France) there are clearly unknown
factors antagonistic to the successful initiating of an epidemic even
when the conditions appear to he most favorable.
The results of an experiment in the employment of an infection in
the case of flying foxes in Queensland are summarized by Tryon.f
Unfortunately, the origin of the experiment was an attempt to exploit
a secret preparation (which turned out to he a culture of B. typhi
murium), and the facts of the case were obscured by wild statements by
• Elton, C. “ Animal Ecology ** (London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1927).
f Tryon, H. Unpublished memo. 1917.


individuals who were somewhat annoyed by the caution displayed by the
representative of the Government. This experiment took place in
about 1898, and, as far as can be ascertained, the facts are as follow
It was found that flying foxes could be fatally infected by means of
food to which part of an culture had been added*, but that an
attempt to initiate an epidemic proved a failure because the animals
could not be induced to eat the baits set out in the camp. After this,
the official co-operation in the experiment ceased. Tryon reports that
further experiments carried out in Queensland, independently of
Mr. Pound (the bacteriologist of the Department of Agriculture and
Stock), seemed to have demonstrated the efficacy of these cultures;
and he quotes the following assertions pronounced at a deputation to the
Secretary of Public Lands (May, 1913) ; “ When we used ‘ Chicken
Cholera ’ (the name by which the infection in question was spoken of
in the press, and elsewhere) the cry was that it was going to affect
fowls. If we had been allowed to go on with that there would not have
been a fox left to trouble us. There is no doubt we killed hundreds
of thousands.”
It is in connexion with statements of this nature that the term
“ wild ” was employed above. Mr. Pound stated definitely (in a
personal interview) that the statement was in no way based on fact.
If it was even in part correct (it is interesting to note that it was
made many years after the experiment) it contains within itself proof
almost positive of failure to initiate an epidemic. What better focus of
infection could be hoped for or expected in a camp of flying foxes than
even one thousand infected individuals? Yet mortality apparently
ceased with the successful primary infection—if, indeed, the latter ever
actually occurred.
Of a similar experiment in Samoa, Tryon writes:—“ B. typhi
murium was tested as a disease producing agent in Samoa in 1897.
. . . It was found in the course of this experiment that on exposing
baits contaminated with the virus containing the organism, a few dead
and sickly flying foxes were met with.”
The results of these rather unsatisfactory experiments seem to add
their quota to the general conclusion that a bacterial infection may act
efficiently as a poison, but that it is difficult or impossible to initiate an
artificial epidemic among a wild population by this means.
So much for the lessons of past experience. In so far as it includes
the Queensland and Samoan experiments, it touches on the problem of
the flying fox. It would be as well, however, to discuss further the
rather special conditions associated with this animal.
The principal factors to be taken into consideration are probably the
following:—
(1) In the day-time flying foxes form close congregations—their
crowded camps—which would seem to present very favorable condi-
tions for the spread of an epidemic infection. It is possible, however,
that this assumption is quite erroneous. Hanging in high trees, sub-
jected to air currents, and imperfectly protected from the sunlight (one
of the most efficient germicides) is entirely different, and surely a great
* The protagonists of the use of J 5. typhi murium as a rodent pest destroyer have always claimed
that although fatal to rodents, it has no effect on domesticated animals. It is interesting, therefore,
to find that it is fatal to a bat, which is probably quite as remote from the rodents as are most
domesticated animals.


deal more “ healthy,” than overcrowding on or below the ground, in
contact with their excreta and the sources of their drinking water, as is
the lot of most rodents.
(2) Flying foxes do not excrete when hanging in a camp, as this
could not be done without fouling the fur of their abdomen and chest
(the anus opening anteriorly). Defecation and urination are carried
out on the wing. Thus the opportunity of contact with their own
excreta is reduced to a minimum, and with it the chief factor in the
spread of enteric infection (to which class belong all the epidemics
referred to above).
(3) The only important external parasites of flying foxes (the wing-
less Mycteribiid flies, Cyclopodia spp.) are very specialized, and must
probably be ignored as possible vectors of an introduced disease (as
fleas are the vectors of plague among rodents). Thus an infection
selected for the purpose of control would have to be one which would
spread readily by contact.
(4) The flying fox population of Australia is broken up into a large
number of units, more or less independent, based on the scattered camps.
This would probably tend to localize an epidemic in the particular dis-
trict in which it originated.
(5) The rate of increase of flying foxes is relatively low, and it
would therefore take longer for their population to recover from a
serious decrease in numbers than it would in the case of the more fecund
rodents. The effects of an epidemic, causing a certain mortality, would
therefore be of greater duration than in the case of a rodent poula-
tion.
(6) There is little or no evidence to show that the flying fox popu-
lation is subject to natural epidemics causing high mortality. (The
two cases of wholesale mortality in camps that have come to my notice
were both associated with extremes of temperature. One, in 1905,
recorded by Try on, was observed in a camp near Helidon, Queensland.
The other, which occurred at Malianganee, Mew South Wales, was
described to me by a local bullock driver. I have also heard of one or
two cases* of considerable mortality among Ft. scapulaius (see p. 37).
These may have been due to disease; but as they too occurred during
exceptional climatic conditions disease, if responsible, must be con-
sidered a secondary factor. It is interesting to note that all these
instances were purely local).
From these considerations we must assume that, in comparison with
the conditions found in most rodent populations, an epidemic would
have small chance of spreading rapidly and easily among flying foxes;
that the effect of an epidemic causing a certain mortality would be
rather more permanent than in the ease of rodents; and that the oppor-
tunity of isolating an infection from a natural epidemic among flying
foxes is probably very remote. In other words, the chances of success
in this direction in the case of the flying fox seem, from a priori con-
siderations, to be smaller than in the case of rodent pests, which means
that they are very small indeed. I think therefore that in view of
past experience the verdict on the advisability of initiating experiments
in the control of flying foxes by an artificial epidemic must unquestion-
ably be —it is not worth while.
* The mortality among flying foxes at St. Lawrence “ a year or two ago ” (attributed by the
observer to an epidemic), which has been brought to ray notice since the preparation of this Report,
was probably an additional example of local mortality among Pt. scapulaius, resulting from the
1916 drought.


Even without a knowledge of the great difficulties which experience
has shown to be in the way of the successful initiation of an epidemic
in a wild population, it is rather strange that such great hopes have
been entertained for this method of dealing with a pest. Extermination
is even glibly spoken of. Epidemics do not exterminate, even in the
case of “ closed ” populations in experimental conditions, e.g., mice in a
laboratory. In nature they merely cause a reduction in numbers,
sometimes very considerable, hut which it is usually well within the
powers of a species to rectify in a comparatively short time, animal
populations having the power of rapid increase held, as it were, in
leash. (In the case of the flying fox, for instance, which produces a
single young one each year, assuming that breeding begins in the second
year, and allowing for an average breeding life of ten years, 100 foxes —
50 males and 50 females—will give rise to over 6,000 descendants in
this period, if all checks on their increase were removed).
3. The Scalp Bounty System.
The payment of a scalp bounty may be considered the obvious,
“ plain man’s ” method of dealing with an animal pest. Its application
is clearly limited to animals of some size, though it has been employed
in the case of an insect pest of sugar cane. The argument for it is
clear: If an animal is an economic pest it should be killed, and if a
sufficient bounty is put on its head, it will be killed. The destruction
of a pest by an artificial epidemic appeals to the general mind because it
seems so “ easy,” while the scalp bounty system is so “ practical.”
It is clear that the cumulative effect of destroying numbers of a pest
(if they are large enough not to be rectifiable by the annual increment
of the population) must ultimately prove beneficial. Whether or not
the resulting benefit has been too dearly bought is another matter.
The working of the scalp bounty system is relatively so simple
that its value in the case of any particular animal can be judged purely
on a priori considerations. The actual number of individuals it can
account for annually can be calculated, for it is limited by the amount
of money made available. If the approximate size of the population of
the animals is known, we can get an idea of the probable effect of this
annual loss of numbers, and the economic benefit, if any, which would
result.
The scalp bounty system will act most efficiently in the case of an
animal which is a 100 per cent, pest, i.e., where every individual member
of the population is concerned with the economic damage. The
economic “ value ” of the average individual (obtained by dividing the
total annual loss among the whole population) would in this case be
relatively high. If the bounty offered were less than this hypothetical
figure, the system would probably be beneficial.
On the other hand, the system will act least efficiently when a small
percentage only of the population of the animal concerned causes
economic damage. This is the case with the flying fox. The numbers
occurring in Australia are so vast that the economic “ value ” of the
average individual is very low, very much lower, in fact, than the
bounty of 3d., which is offered under the system prevailing in Queens-
land. In other words, the State could not afford to destroy a significant
part of its flying fox population at the cost of 3d. per head. Would
the destruction of the numbers which it could afford to pay for at this


rate result in any appreciable benefit to fruit-growers? An actual
instance of the working of the system in a particular area should
provide an answer to this question.
In Queensland, the scalp bounty system is administered by a number
of Pests Destruction Boards, each responsible for an area comprising
a number of shires, from which its funds are obtained in the form of
an annual precept. Thus the Pitzroy Pests Destruction Board covers
an area of five shires, and has £7OO available for its annual expendi-
ture. If the whole of this sum were devoted to paying bounties on the
flying fox, it would account for 56,000 individuals per annum. (In
practice, an appreciable part of the annual income of the Board is
devoted to paying bounties on other pests, such as crow's, and to the
expenses of administration.)
On p. 22 mention was made of the number of flying fox camps
which are to he found in a small section of the area administered by
this Board. In a coastal strip some 50 by 30 miles in area, twelve
camps were located in one year, seven being permanent or annual, and
usually large. During heavy migrations of the little Bed Fox (Ft.
scapulatus ) anything up to half a dozen more camps may he formed.
This is one section only of the area covered hy the Board, which extends
from south of Gladstone practically to St. Lawrence, and includes
extensive tracts of mangrove swamp, which are known to harbour many
large camps. It is quite possible that at times over 10,000,000 flying
foxes would be found in the Fitzroy Board’s area. Of these, it has
money available to pay for 56,000 —just over 0.5 per cent. —and actually
pays for considerably less. As the scalp bounty system is totally
unselective, foxes being shot where it is most convenient, and not where
particular damage is done, it is quite obvious that the destruction of
this fraction of the local population could result in no appreciable
benefit to fruit-growers.
In Queensland, the scalp bounty system is rendered particularly
inefficient by the complicating factor of the little Red Fox ( Ft.
scapulatus). This is the most numerous of all the species. It occurs
at times in all districts where flying foxes are found. Its camps are
generally less inaccessible than those of the larger species, and its habit
of crowding, and its relative stupidity, make it easy to shoot in large
numbers—a fact which is exploited by men who shoot flying foxes for
profit. It is quite possible that over 50 per cent, of the individuals
destroyed under the scalp bounty scheme belong to this species. As the
little Red Fox, in Queensland at any rate, is almost exclusively a
blossom feeder, the bounty money paid on this species is to all intents
and purposes wasted. As it is impossible to distinguish between the
claws of the various species (on which the bounty is paid), it is
difficult to see how this state of affairs could be remedied.
This general condemnation of the scalp bounty system must be con-
ditioned somewhat. In the first place, it operates less inefficiently in
the southern districts, where Ft. poliocephalus (the. Grey-headed Fox),
is the dominant species. This is the most economically important of
the four Australian species, and has the greatest per capita “ value ”
as a pest. Then the effect of the system is not limited to the mere
number of individuals killed. Many flying foxes must die as a result
of wounds, though their bodies are not recovered. The payment of a
scalp bounty insures that the camps are constantly harried by shooters.
This disturbance of their peace takes place largely at a time when the


females are carrying young (October to January), and, therefore,
probably has a considerable effect on the successful reproduction of the
species. In fact, it is likely that the “indirect ” effect of the system
has, on the whole, been more important than the “ direct ” effect, as
measured by the numbers actually killed. The latter, however, cannot
be considered negligible, as is indicated by the fact that in the first
three years of its existence the Brisbane and East Moreton Pests
Destruction Board accounted for nearly 300,000 Hying foxes.
It was stated above that in the last ten years or so there had been
a marked decrease in the number of flying foxes (Ft. polio cephalus )
in southern Queensland. As the Boards were not functioning in the
early part of this period, it is impossible to attribute this decrease
wholly to the operation of the scalp bounty system, though it
undoubtedly was an important contributing factor. The years since
1926 have been marked by migrations of the little Red Fox. Thus it
must be assumed that a considerable part of the bounty has been spent
on this relatively harmless species.
On the whole, it is probably fair to say that the scalp bounty system
is the least efficient method of dealing with an animal pest. Such
beneficial effects as may accrue from it could almost certainly be
achieved more economically by other methods, which take some
cognizance of the habits of the animals in question, and their relative
economic importance in different districts (e.g., in the case of the
flying fox, organized shooting as described on p. 71). It is hard to
say whether the system is seen at its worst in the case of an animal
like the flying fox, where statistical considerations show it to be almost
ridiculous in most districts, or in the case of a pest, such as the dingo
in Australia or the coyote in America, where the intelligence of the
animals is a factor of considerable importance,* and the size of the
bounty offered leads to irregular practices. In a report on the control
of the coyote in California, f Dixon, under the heading of ‘ The
Dangerous Bounty System,” sums up the situation as follows ; —“ The
bounty system is, at best, well-nigh futile. . . It is the opinion
of those who have made a study of this question that the bounty system
is not only vastly expensive, and productive of endless fraud, but in
no case has it given any general or permanent relief.”
The suggestion that the scalp bounty system is not an economic
method of dealing with the flying fox pest is not new. Indeed, this
investigation was largely the result of action taken by representatives
of the Pests Destruction Boards, who realized the shortcomings of the
system they administered, and wished to see the flying fox problem
dealt with in a more effective way. When it is realized that the flying
fox is not a serious menace to the fruit-growing industry of the State,
I think that it will be rather hard to find an excuse for the retention
of the scalp bounty system in Queensland.
* An animal with the general intelligence of the dingo is very much more easily killed in those
districts in which it has not been persecuted. Thus if the bounty system is general, as was the case
in Queensland, it is fairly safe to say that the majority of the scalps paid for will have been obtained
in districts where the animal is not a pest. I have met men in the sheep country who for years
on end have never seen a dingo, whereas on the coast, and in the cattle-raising areas where they are not
much persecuted, they can be seen in numbers.
t Dixon, J, “ The Control of the Coyote in California.” Univ. of Calif. Pub., Bull. No. 320. 1920.


4. The Commercial Utilization of Flying Fox Skins.
It has been suggested that if some part of the flying fox could be
put to commercial use the wholesale destruction of the animals would
follow as a matter of course. The value of the animals as a commercial
article would then take the place of the scalp bounty at present offered.
The pelt seems to be the only part of the flying fox which might
have some commercial value. Accordingly, a series of skins of Pi.
poliocephalus (which has the longest and finest fur of the four Aus-
tralian species) was obtained, and sent to Fur Dressers and Dyers Ltd.,
of Sydney. The managing director of the firm kindly consented to have
the skins dressed, and to report on their commercial possibilities. His
verdict was wholly unfavorable, and made it clear that the skins were
‘‘ totally unsuited for commercial purposes.”
It is thus unnecessary to discuss this matter further, but it should
be pointed out that a fairly substantial financial inducement would
have to be offered if, in addition to killing the animals, they had to
be treated in some way for the market. To collect the scalp bounty
it is only necessary to cut off the feet, yet very few men consider that
much profit can be made by destroying the animals for 3d. per head.
It is a thoroughly unpleasant job at best, and, moreover, it is necessary
to average at least one fox per shot to cover the cost of the ammunition)
(12-hore shells cost about 2|d. apiece in Queensland). Even this is not
always easy, for a large number of the animals remain hanging in the
trees, and the larger species are in any case not easy to shoot in
numbers.
5. Methods of Mass Destruction
It was not the object of this investigation to carry out practical
tests of control methods. Little can be added, therefore, to the infor-
mation already available concerning the various methods of mass
destruction which might be employed. It would be as well, however,
to discuss their respective merits and possibilities in relation to our
knowledge of the animals’ habits, &c.
(i) Poison Gas. —The use of gas to destroy flying foxes has been
repeatedly suggested. The closely congregated camps seem at first sight
to offer a splendid opportunity for its effective employment. Actually
the probability that poison gas can be used successfully against flying
foxes is very remote. The following are some of the difficulties which
present themselves! —
(1) In their camps the animals are usually suspended some con-
siderable distance from the ground. The majority
probably would he found between the levels of 20 and
60 feet, but in some rain forest camps they will hang in
the crowns of trees up to and over 100 feet high. (In
a mangrove camp very few would be found more than
25 to 30 feet from the ground.) As all the gases likely
to he available for the purpose are heavier than air,
special arrangements would have to be made to raise them
to the necessary level, unless the camp to be dealt with
was so situated that the gas could he liberated from a
height (e.g., the camp in Lamb’s Valley, near Maitland,
New South Wales).


(2) Flying foxes are very wary in their camps, and, unlike
soldiers, they can, and will, move quickly away from
danger. Any gas employed would, therefore, have to
be very rapid in its action, otherwise the animals would
be. warned in time, and escape its effects. Even if a
rapidly lethal gas was used, it is improbable that many
foxes would be killed without the camp as a whole
becoming alarmed and taking flight. Once on the wing,
of course, they are out of the reach of gas. A few
individuals might blunder into its zone, hut the mob as
a whole would keep well above it, and would not settle
where it lingered.
(3) Many of the camps are situated in very inaccessible places,
and the transport of the gas cylinders, &c., to them would
he a very difficult task. In the case of a camp in the
middle of a mangrove swamp, it would be well nigh
impossible.
(4) Poisonous gases are not cheap. Some, such as chlorine,
which is a by-product of certain industries, are relatively
inexpensive. The remainder are likely to be very dear.
Most would probably have to he imported into the country,
at any rate, at the present time. As a considerable
quantity of gas would have to he used to destroy a flying
fox camp (for a zone covering several acres to a depth
of 100 feet or more would often he required), its cost
would probably rule out the method as impracticable.
An experiment with chlorine was carried out in 1921 in a camp at
Upper Coomera, Queensland, under the direction of an experienced
officer. His report was uniformly discouraging, as the following
extracts show:—
The experiments went to show that chlorine is not a suitable gas for the
work for the following reasons; —
(а) Gas too heavy, the great concentrations remaining at 20 feet and
under, and if shot higher rapidly sinking.
(б) The gas which did penetrate to the foxes on the trees was apparently
quickly irritating enough to make them take to wing before they
suffered any real damage, and the camp in the proximity of the
gas remained on the wing until the gas had diluted so as no longer
to he effective on them.
The report, after stating that conditions in the case of phosgene would
presumably he similar, suggests that “ the so-called mustard gas of the
late war must be very favorably considered in regard to its chances of
success in this work.” It seems to me, however, that mustard gas may
be taken as an example of the utter unsuitability in this connexion of
the gases developed for the special conditions of the war. In favour of
mustard gas the following points are put forward in the report:—
(1) Very great eye and burning effects.
(2) Remarkable persistency on account of slow evaporation of liquid
and splashings.
(3) Would not quickly irritate like chlorine or phosgene.
Mustard “ gas ”is a volatile liquid. The heavy vapour (so useful in
trench warfare on account of its accumulating in shell holes, &c.) could
not possibly he kept at foxes’ level, and its “ remarkable persistency ”
would he a source of grave danger to human beings, and would have a
disastrous effect on wild life in general.


Hydrogen cyanide (hydrocyanic acid gas), used so extensively in
fumigation, being lighter than air, would seem more suitable for the
destruction of the hanging foxes than the heavier gases. A small scale
experiment was carried out in Hew South Wales by Darnell-Smith.
The results were not hopeful. “Nothing happened to the hats,” he
states, “ when the gas was generated, the dilution of the gas by air being
too great, and its passage upward being apparently too rapid to affect
the bats which hung 10 feet above, but not directly over, the generating
apparatus.”
A Queenslander whom I interviewed informed me that he had car-
ried out a similar experiment many years previously, “ more or less as
a joke.” He used a big oil drum as a generator, and conducted the gas
upward into the trees by a home-made canvas pipe. He stated that
he killed hundreds of flying foxes; but as he assured me that this
was done at night, when the animals would not be in camp, I was
generally sceptical. It is just possible that if sufficient gas were used,
wholesale destruction might he carried out in a camp. The cost, how-
even, would almost certainly he prohibitive.
The question of expense would be the deciding factor against the
employment of gas for the destruction of flying foxes, assuming that a
suitable gas could be found for the purpose. Considerable preliminary
organization would be necessary, which would cost money. Costly
apparatus would have to be obtained, and trained men specially em-
ployed for the purpose. On the whole, the sum of the trouble and
expense involved would not be justified by the economic importance
of the pest.
(ii) Flame Guns. —An experiment in the use of flame guns (“ liquid
fire ”) was carried out under the direction of the Agricultural Chemist
in Queensland. The results, judging by the following extract from his
report, were distinctly promising:—
As the first trial against foxes clearly indicated that the foxes were disturbed
and put to flight by the noise caused by the port-fire cartridges, this cartridge
was replaced by cotton waste soaked in petrol and lit with a match. The foxes
were not disturbed by this small flame, and the first gun killed in one operation
100 or more foxes in one tree alone. A second gun fired almost simultaneously
was equally successful. . . . The experiment proved that the flame projected
was quite quick enough to kill all the foxes in the tree operated on, as dozens fell
down burnt to cinders, and dozens were so badly burnt that their death was only
a question of time. All the killing was done in the first few seconds of the dis-
charge, and the remainder of the discharge, which burnt for about fifteen seconds,
was practically wasted. For this reason small flame guns holding only a charge
of one gallon of fuel mixture would be more economical, on account of lighter
weight, more easily handled and carried about. The present guns, with
about 230 lb. of pressure, did throw a flame to a distance of 80 to 100 feet, but
this distance is hardly sufficient for large camps with tall trees. . . . The
great advantage of the flame guns is the fact that the operation is so quickly
done, requires no special preparation for action, and practically the only time
lost is the travelling from camp to camp. The operation can be done at any
time and in any weather, without danger to the neighbourhood. It is necessary,
however, that the operators of the flame guns take all precaution, and are
clothed in fireproof clothing or overalls, as the weapon is undoubtedly dangerous,
and accidents may easily occur.
I have discussed the possibilities of this method with the officer who
carried out the above test. He informed me that the apparatus could
just be carried by one man, and that the necessary pressure was supplied
by a compressed-air cylinder, which also would require one man to move.
Thus it is clear that the apparatus cannot be accurately described as
mobile, and the method could only be used in the case of easily accessible


camps. He also stated that the guns had to be located outside the camp,
the flame falling like rain on the trees. Thus only a small camp could
be effectively dealt with. It is probable, however, that clear patches
could usually he discovered in larger camps, from which individual
trees could be “ sprayed.”
It appears that this method of mass destruction might conceivably
be worth considering as a practical means of dealing with the flying
fox, if it were not to be rejected at once on the score of cruelty. Its
drawbacks are much the same as those of the employment of gas. It
would necessitate the formation of a specially trained squad of men, and
its application would be limited to certain advantageously located
camps, which would not necessarily be those against which action was
most desirable.
(iii) Explosives. —The report (also by the Queensland Agricultural
Chemist, 1917) of a trial of the efficacy of explosives in the destruction
of flying foxes is very brief and definite:—“ Two experiments with explo-
sives, made at considerable expense, were complete failures, and even if
repeated under the most favorable circumstances, do not promise any
results.” This experiment was also discussed with the officer in question,
and I learned that the services of a good climber were obtained, who
strung plugs of gelignite, totalling “ well over a hundredweight,” about
the trees in a flying fox camp. These were detonated simultaneously,
with devastating effect on the branches and foliage, but the foxes took
wing unharmed! The experiment was then repeated with even larger
quantities of explosive, with the same result.
There can be little doubt as to the reason for this failure. The
effects of the explosion of a plug of gelignite, due to rapidly moving
gases, are very local. Should a plug explode accidentally in a man’s
hand, the damage will generally he limited to that member, and, pos-
sibly, the lower part of the forearm. The great killing power of a
high explosive shell or a Mills bomb is due to the flying pieces of the
casing, not to the explosion itself. Thus it could hardly he expected
that the explosives hung in the trees would have a very great effect on
the foxes, beyond giving them a very severe shock. On the other hand,
as the gelignite plugs were tied against the branches, it is natural that
these should have been shattered.
If explosives were employed in some such way as the following, I
think it possible that they might prove effective. Large tins could
be filled with scrap iron or small pebbles, with a sufficient charge of
explosive embedded in the centre, which could be set off by an elec-
trically fired detonator. These home-made bombs could he suspended
at intervals throughout a camp, and simultaneously exploded at a
suitable moment.
A professional flying fox killer who operated in Queensland em-
ployed a somewhat similar device. lam told that he had three large-
bore little cannons cast, which he would fill to the muzzle with scrap
iron. These would be arranged at suitable points outside a camp.
The flying foxes would then be disturbed, and the cannons fired into
the mob as they formed a massed flight above the trees.
(iv) Organized Shooting. —There must he very few flying fox
camps in southern Queensland or Hew South Wales against which a
“ battue ” has not been carried out at one time or another. It is
difficult to assess the value of these semi-organized shooting parties.


Their cumulative effect on the flying fox population may be consider-
able. Most men who have taken part in them would say that they
made no impression on the numbers in a camp; which is natural,
for nobody could be expected to distinguish between, say, 50,000 and
48,000 flying foxes. These battues, though stimulated by the bounty
offered on flying fox claws and often assisted by bodies who provide
money for ammunition, are largely carried out for sport. They are
selective only in that they are probably more often carried out in
districts where cultivated fruit is attacked. Often the expense and
energy are largely misplaced, as when action is taken against migrat-
ing mobs of the little Red Fox, e.g., near Stanthorpe (see note on
page 57).
Of shooting generally, it may be said that—(l) it is practically
useless as a method of eradicating a camp; (2) a heavy battue might
cause a camp to shift temporarily, though it would probably re-form
somewhere in the neighbourhood. (In the case of migrating mobs, it
might accelerate their departure from a district); and (3) an organized
campaign, pursued over a number of years, might have a very bene-
ficial general effect if it were directed against one species, e.g., the
Grey-headed Fox, Pt. poliooephalus.
The object of such an organized campaign would he to reduce the
population of this species of fox, starting in chosen areas where the
attacks on cultivated fruit were most serious. (It was stated above
that there is some reason to believe that a local reduction in numbers
would have more than a temporary effect, owing to the nature of the
migration of this species.)
The shooting should he carried out by parties of men employed for
the purpose, who should be given wages, and not he paid by results
(as the latter would entail a great waste of time in the collection and
counting of the animals, and would he unsatisfactory as so many of
the flying foxes shot remain hanging in the trees). Both guns and
rifles should he used. Periodic visits should be made to the camps
selected, and only females carrying young should be shot. These
are easily distinguished, both at rest and on the wing. In the early
part of the day it is probable that shot guns only could he used, for
the animals would he active and wary. Gradually, however, they tire
of flying from one part of the camp to another, and become reluctant
to take wing. It would then he possible to use the more economical
rifles, keeping the guns for multiple shots. For the greatest effect
parties of at least half a dozen, and preferably more, should be em-
ployed. This would enable the shooters to distribute themselves round
the camp, and to harry the foxes with a minimum of delay wherever
they settled.
The shoots should he started as soon as the animals appear in the
camp in the spring (when the young are horn), and he continued, say,
at least once a week, throughout their stay, or until the young ones
left their mothers. The campaign should he carried out over several
years (if, indeed, the foxes would return to the same camp site under
the circumstances) whether or not cultivated fruit is being seriously
attacked.
The effects of such a campaign would he measured by more than
the mere number of foxes killed. In the first place, a considerable
number of the next generation would be destroyed, which would pre


sumably otherwise return to the same district and camp in following
years. Further, it is possible that the destruction of the females in
sufficient numbers to destroy the balance of the sexes would result in
many of the males leaving the district (or failing that, it might dis-
organize the reproduction of the species).
I think it quite possible that working in this way the population
of flying foxes in selected localities could be reduced in three or four
years to such an extent that very real relief to fruit-growers would
result.
6. The Protection of the Fruit Crop.
(i) Shooting and Poisoning in the Orchards. —’Killing the foxes
when they visit the orchards is the usual method adopted by growers
to protect their fruit, poison or a shotgun being used for the purpose.
As the fruit-grower in the height of the season is usually a very busy
man, it is only natural that he should regard the nightly patrol of
his orchard with distaste. Nevertheless, many growers take the trouble
to do this, realizing that although they cannot eliminate the losses by
shooting, at least they can reduce them considerably. All that can be
said on the matter is that in order to effect the greatest benefit the
foxes should be shot on their first appearance in the orchard, for if
left alone for several nights their number will almost certainly increase,
whereas if prompt action is taken it is often possible to keep an orchard
free from foxes for weeks at a time.
It has been mentioned above that poisoning in the orchards is
very commonly practised by growers, sometimes with surprisingly good
results. It is only fear of accidents that prevent this method being
adopted more widely. When proper precautions are taken, however,
the danger is almost negligible, and poisoning can be carried out safely
even where pigs, &c., are allowed to roam the orchards. The following
are the precautions which should be observed: —
(1) The actual growing fruit should not be poisoned, unless it is
marked in some way;
(2) No fruit should be used which is liable to fall to pieces;
(3) The poisoned fruit should be firmly attached to a branch,
preferably high up ;
(4) The bait should be removed as soon as it has ceased to be
attractive.
The best bait to use is undoubtedly a ripe apple, as it merely
shrivels up, and does not fall to pieces like a peach. It is sufficiently
attractive to flying foxes, particularly when the skin has been broken,
liberating the scent, in the process of inserting the poison. The
apple should be quartered with a knife, and a small amount of powdered
strychnine (which is the best poison for this purpose) spread on the
cut surfaces. The four pieces are then firmly bound together by
a length of wire wound round the “ equator,” which can also be used
to attach the bait to the tree. In a very few r hours the poison will
have permeated through the fruit, then all that appears necessary is
for the fox to puncture the skin with its teeth.
One man who regularly poisons in this way told me that his dog
made a habit of eating the foxes which he killed, without showing the
slightest ill effects.


I have been informed that foxes will often not touch the baits on
the first night, though on the second and subsequent nights they are
readily taken. Apples will prove an effective lure even when the fruit
being attacked is seemingly more to the foxes’ taste, e.g., peaches and
sweet figs. This is probably because the apples are riper than the
growing fruit, and thus more attractive; possibly, also, a flying fox
likes to vary its diet.
Many growers poison fruit on the tree, particularly when once it
has been bitten by flying foxes. Thus a ripe paw-paw makes a very
effective bait, owing to its powerful scent. This is enhanced if the
hole made by the fox is enlarged with a knife to’expose the moist flesh.
The poison can be smeared over the cut surface, or, better still, inserted
into the flesh, using the point of the knife. The practice of poisoning
the fruit on the tree is clearly unsafe where there are children; but
elsewhere there is not much danger, for the half-eaten fruit can always
be recognized and destroyed.
Poisoning, if carried out generally, would certainly greatly reduce,
and possibly abolish, the incidental losses caused by individual foxes,
which from district to district and year to year must add up to a
considerable amount. When the attacks on the orchards are very
intense, as in the Hunter Valley at certain times, the protection it
would afford might be hardly noticed, and other methods of control
would be required. Even in these circumstances, however, poisoning
would always be well worth the trouble involved, for the number of
foxes which can be accounted for by a dozen or so baits is quite
astonishing. One grower in the Hunter Valley district poisoned over
60 foxes in one night on four apple trees.
During the latter part of the investigation, an experiment was
carried out to discover whether foxes could be induced to take an
artificial bait. When an apple or some other fruit is used as a lure
it will be eaten by the foxes, so to speak, when they come across it.
Its attractiveness is not so much greater than that of the growing crop
as to ensure its being eaten before a considerable amount of damage
has been done to the latter. If the animals could be induced to accept
an artificial bait, it should be possible to prepare a highly scented lure
which would attract the foxes as soon as they entered the orchard, and
thus probably he the first thing they would sample.
In this experiment a liquid base was used, made of concentrated
mango juice mixed with honey in which strychnine had been dissolved
(the honey being used chiefly to ensure that desiccation would not take
place). Small sponges were soaked in this syrup and suspended to the
branches of trees in a fig orchard regularly visited by flying foxes. The
experiment was a complete failure. That the foxes were attracted by the
scent of the lures was indicated by the fact that in the case of one of
the baits, which had been inserted in a hollowed-out fig (to protect it
from rain), tooth marks were found on the skin. Knowing that flying
foxes will tackle almost any kind of fruit, whatever its form and con-
sistency, and that their method of eating a mango, for instance, is
rather similar to the process of pressing juice out of a sponge, I was
rather surprised at their complete indifference to these baits. How-
ever, as there can be no gainsaying the fact that they were quite


ineffective, and as there appears to be no alternative method* of pre-
paring a lure which is likely to prove attractive to the animals, it would
seem that the use of artificial baits holds out no possibilities.
(ii) Deterrents.- —Under this head may he considered all those
devices which are employed to keep the flying foxes away from the
fruit trees. Absolute protection of the crop can be obtained by covering
the trees, e.g., with wire-netting; but this is clearly out of the question
in normal circumstances. Partial protection can be given to the crop
by stretching strands of barbed wire above the orchard, which catch
the wings of the animals as they fly down to the trees. If sufficient
wire is used to he really effective, the method will prove far too costly
to be practicable, apart from the fact that the poles on which the wires
are suspended will seriously interfere with the cultivation between the
rows.
The various noisy devices, such as rattles, hells, jangling tins, &c.,
which have been used by growers to scare the foxes, need not be con-
sidered seriously. They would be quite intolerable if adopted on a wide
scale.
Certain growers make a practice of hanging strips of light-coloured
cloth or newspaper on to their trees, and claim that they derive some
benefit thereby.
There remain those methods which exploit the foxes’ sensitive powers
of sight and smell. These appear to deserve serious consideration, and
it was hoped to carry out some practical tests along these lines during
the latter part of the investigation. For such a trial to be of any
value, it would have to be properly controlled, and for this regular
and heavy flying fox attacks would be essential. As it turned out,
flying fox attacks had completely ceased (by mid-December) in those
New South Wales districts in which I had hoped to find suitable con-
ditions for the experiments. It is only possible, therefore, to consider
the methods on a priori grounds.
Various growers have claimed that they have completely protected
individual trees by the use of some strongly smelling substance, such as
carbolic acid or acetylene. (In the former case, a bottle containing
a carbolic solution was hung in the branches of the tree; in the latter, a
tin of calcium carbide was used, the gas being slowly generated by the
moisture in the air.) As flying foxes undoubtedly seek their food by
scent, it is more than probable that this method would prove quite
effective. The deterrent odour would either he repulsive in itself, or
would mask the scent of the ripening fruit.
The hanging of lights in the orchards has often been tried. It is
not effective, as the animals get used to them in a night or two, and
will then take fruit within a few feet of the lamps. One grower stated
that they “ just about settled on them.” That a naked light is not
effective against flying foxes is indicated by the fact that they have
been known to eat fruit on a tree whose branches practically touched a
brilliantly lighted window.
One New South Wales grower has developed (and patented) a
‘‘ protector ” which is a source of light in a container so constructed
. Slnce the preparation of this report, it has been suggested to me that the attractive and the
poisonous principles need not be combined in one bait. For instance poisoned apples might be
attached to the branches of a tree in which was also hung a vial of some attractive essence, or fruit
juice. In this way the foxes would be attracted, and might be expected to take the baits before
attacking the general crop.


that only the rays above the horizontal plane are allowed to pass out.
These are erected on poles above the level of the tree tops, and distri-
buted at intervals through the orchard, one lamp being used for every
four trees. The protective power of this device is based on the fact
that an animal in the illuminated zone would not be able to distinguish
the trees below, which are shrouded in shadow. The idea is beautifully
simple; and presumably a sensitive nocturnal eye, such as that of the
•flying fox, would find it particularly difficult to look into a patch
of shadow behind a source of bright light. The inventor, who has
tested the device over a number of years, claims that, with proper care
in the arrangement of the lights, complete protection can be obtained.
A low-flying fox could get under the zone of light at the edge of a
protected orchard, and although the inventor thought that this could
be prevented by placing a row of lights near the ground, he considered
that a high netting fence would be the best way of dealing with this
difficulty.
Although methods of protecting the fruit, such as the use of a
repellent scent or a lighting device, may be beneficial in certain cases,
(heir application is so limited that it is unlikely that they would provide
anything in the way of a general solution to the flying fox problem. In
the first place, they do not actually make it impossible for the foxes
to reach the fruit. It may be said that they merely make it so
difficult or unpleasant that the animals prefer to seek food elsewhere,
even though their sense of smell may tell them (when a lighting device
is employed) that food is available. Thus it is safe to say that when
practical starvation would be the penalty for failing to find food in the
orchards, such methods of protection would not prove absolute in the
case of such an intelligent animal as the flying fox. These conditions
may be obtained at times in such districts as the Hunter 'Valley, when
the greater part of the local flying fox population seems to be driven
into the orchards in search of food.
In the second place, a lighting device, such as that described above,
is designed to protect an area, not individual trees. The greater part
of the commercial fruit in districts liable to severe flying fox attack is
grown in mixed orchards, the losses being limited to individual trees,
and usually occurring only in occasional years. This is particularly
true of the inland temperate fruit districts of Xew South Wales, which
only experience flying fox attack when abnormal migrations take place
from the coastal belt. Under these circumstances no grower would
consider installing a device for the general protection of his crop, so
that whole blocks of orchard would have to be dealt with in order to
protect the crop of a relatively small number of trees. (In the case of
the patented “ protectors ” described above, the cost of their installa-
tion and maintenance, in their present form, is likely to prove an almost
insurmountable obstacle to their adoption by fruit-growers.)
The use of a repellent scent, by which individual trees could be
protected, would be particularly applicable to small growers of back-
garden fruit. In the case of commercial orchards, it would probably
not prove very beneficial, unless it was applied to all the trees whose
fruit was ripe enough to be tackled by the foxes. Otherwise it would
merely drive the animals from one tree to another.
This sort of effect on a grand scale will be found in the case of any
orchard protection device. It is unlikely that they would be adopted


by more than a fraction of the growers in any one district. These
would then merely benefit at the expense of others, who would suffer
proportionately greater losses, the district as a whole benefiting not at
all.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
From the information set forth in the previous sections it should
he clear that no obvious and simple solution of the flying fox problem
presents itself. A campaign against an economic pest must be regarded
as an investment, and before it is initiated there should he no doubt
that the money spent will result in an appreciable benefit to the industry
concerned. In considering the case of the flying fox pest, account must
he taken of the following facts: —
(1) Contrary to the general belief, the flying fox is not a
serious menace to the commercial fruit industry (see
pp. 45-57).
(2) The numbers of the animals in eastern Australia are far
greater than is generally imagined (see pp. 19-21).
(3) There is no proved method of mass destruction likely to
be inexpensive in operation (see pp. 68-73).
(4) Indirect methods of control, i.e., by an introduced disease,
are not practicable (see pp. 60-65).
Stated bluntly, this means that the control of the flying fox is
not as necessary or important as we have been led to believe; that it is
a much bigger task than we believed, and that there are no obvious
methods of achieving it. We are still confronted by the fact that
cultivated fruit is attacked throughout Queensland and Hew South
Wales, and that the losses sustained by individual growers are some-
times serious. These losses are so widespread that they could only be
abolished by a general reduction of the flying fox population, which is
clearly out of the question. The only possibility remaining, therefore,
seems to be to employ some method of local control in those districts
where the losses to commercial fruit are sufficiently serious to justify
the expense involved. As such districts will only be found in Hew South
Wales, it must be concluded that no course of action against the pest in
Queensland can be recommended. Moreover, there is no real justifica-
tion for the retention of the scalp bounty system in that State (see
pp. 65-67).
Actually it is difficult to name more than one fruit-growing area, i.e.,
the Hunter Yalley district in Hew South Wales, where the losses are
sufficiently regular and serious to warrant an attempt at local control,
knowing that this could only be achieved by some method of mass
destruction in the camps, and that none of the methods available are
likely to be anything but expensive. Moreover, there are many fruit-
growing areas where local control would be out of the question in any
ease. Thus no camps of the fruit-eating Ft. poliocephalus have been
located on the northern tableland of Hew South Wales (or the Stan-
thorpe district in Queensland); and in the soft-fruit areas away from
the coast the flying fox is only an irregular visitor. These ’districts
could only be benefited by a general campaign against the species.
The most promising method of dealing with the camps in areas
which may be selected for local control seems to be organized shooting


carried out in the manner described on pp. 71-73. The use of flame
guns (see pp. 70-71) might be considered if it were decided that the
cost of their operation was reasonable. In one camp in the Hunter
Valley area (at Lamb’s Valley), conditions would probably be very
suitable for the use of poison gas; but this could not be justified as an
experiment, for this method would certainly be impracticable, except in
the case of a very few similarly situated camps.
Poisoning in the orchards is already widely practised by growers,
who have convinced themselves of its value. There is no doubt, how-
ever, that many growers, who so far have failed or refused to adopt
it (either because they were ignorant of how it should be carried out,
or because they considered it too dangerous) would employ this method
of dealing with flying foxes if they were convinced of its practicability
and safety. The offices of fruit instructors and inspectors might be
employed in this connexion.
The use of deterrents, although it would probably be of benefit to
certain small growers (see pp. 75-77), will only have a limited appli-
cation. It might be worth while, however, to carry out some practical
tests of their efficacy, and to disseminate the results.
It is clearly very difficult to recommend any line of action which
could be adopted by the Government in dealing with the problem. Local
control by mass destruction in the camps would be in the nature of a
gamble, and! probably rather an expensive one, owing to the methods
available being unproved in practice, and to the mobile state of the
flying fox population. Beyond encouraging the practice of poisoning,
however, it seems to be the only course that could be adopted. If it
proved a success in a preliminary trial, say, in the Hunter Valley
district, it might he extended with a view to achieving a general control
of the grey-headed fox (Pt. poliocephalus ) in Hew South Wales and
southern Queensland, and thus to benefit other districts where local
control is impracticable. (Control of the other three species must be
set aside as economically impossible.)
If the Government decided to initiate a campaign of local control in
one or two selected areas, there would undoubtedly be agitation for the
benefit to be extended to other districts, probably wherever cultivated
fruit was attacked. There would thus be a very grave danger that
the expenditure involved would grow out of all proportion to the
economic losses actually sustained. The only way in which this danger
could be met would be to make the local growers responsible for a part
of the cost of the campaign. An attempt to raise a precept of this nature
would probably provide the best indication of the real importance of
the flying fox in the various districts affected.




PLATE 1.
FIG. 1.—View in a camp of Pt. poliocephalus near
Tweed Heads, New South Wales.
FIG. 2. —Flight of Flying Foxes (Pt. scapulatus) disturbed from
mangroves at Burnett Heads, Queensland.


PLATE 2.
FIG. 3.— Pt. gouldi in the characteristic
resting position.
FIG. 4.—Full grown male of Pt. gouldi.


BY AUTHORITY I
H. J. GREEN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER MELBOURNE.
