

THE HYDASPES
GAZETTE






THE HYDASPES GAZETTE,
A WEEKLY NEWSPAPER
PUBLISHED ON BOARD
The " Hydaspes,”
COMMANDER, E. S. BA EOT,
UN HER VOYAGE FROM
SYDNEY TO DON DON.
MARCH TO JUNE, 1875.
EDITED BY MR. CURVES.
• LONDON;
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY DUNN, COLLIN AND CO.,
ST. MARY AXE, E.C.
‘ 1875.


The Hydaspes Gazette
A WEEKLY NEWSPAPER
PUBLISHED ©N BOARD
Th.e “ Hydaspes,”
COMMANDER , E. S. BA EOT,
ON HER VOYAGE FROM
SYDNEY TO LONDON.
MAECH TO JUNE, 1875.
EDITED BY MR. PURVES.
LONDON;
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY DUNN, COLLIN AND CO.,
ST. MARY AXE, E.C.
1875,


INDEX.
1 Page 1
» 2 - „ 7
» 3 „ H
” 4 „ 19
” ® „ 25
» 6 „ 29
” 7 „ 34
» 8 „ 38
» 9 „ 42
»10 „ 47
?> 11 ••• ••• -•* ••• ff 53
»12 .. „ 58
» 13 ~ 62
„ 14 „ 68
Supplementary Number „ 74


THE
Hydaspes Gazette & General Adbertiser.
No. l.
March 13th, 1875.
Respectfully dedicated to Captain BABOT, by the Publishers .
J, GENERAL desire has lately been expressed for a medium (not neces-
sarily spiritual) of communication between the various streams of
l\ thought which flow between the far-distant ends of the good Ship
/V “ Hydaspes,” as she swiftly glides over the ocean’s heaving field. The
\J spirited proprietors of the Gazette have therefore determined (not with-
out due consideration, and an enforced abandonment of their innate modesty)
to undertake the arduous task of launching upon the wide ocean of literature
a little craft, to cruise about among the shoals of passengers ; and they would
fain take this opportunity of expressing a sincere desire that their bark may
prove worse than their bite.
As the • “ Hydaspes Gazette and General Advertiser” is intended for the
benefit of those on board the noble Clipper, the publishers hope that none ou
board will be bored by the perusal of it.
To the Owner of the Gaset.
Hon’d Sun,
I heer aa how you R goin 2 set up a jurnal on board this vossil. Wei, mi boi, I wish
you joi, whitch by the way is rime or poekry as the nobs call it. Now I want 2 give you
advice. Doant be pussonal in your ritings, and doant receve anonimous kontribushuns,'
whitch is not good in a general way—cause if a kove as enythink to say and wants 2 let
pepul no it, he wont be afrade 2 rite his naim—at least I never wos, and I’ve rit
some in my day.
Doutless many kusses will snear at the idear (which is rime agen, but that is nether hear
nor thare), but let them, “ they smiles longest who smiles larst,” and you’ll smile larst mi
boi, if yure principuls are korrekt. Set yure face agen awl kinds of littel-mindedness, and
dispise quarrells, speshully those whitch R about nothin ; and B it said to our shaim, sich
often happen in a ship whare a few pepulj are amalgamaited 2 gether for a few periods.
Now, Mister Editur, dosent this show that we havent neerly reeched the Millendiumm yet 1
Tawk about liuns and lams agrein—it aint likely as they will agree much, were thay twig
pussens kalling themselves kristiuns, etsettery, fiting about nothen. No, no, Mr. Editur, let
yure motto be “ Piece ” and “ Fun.” Maik yoomerous remarx about anythink that happens.
Thems my sentiments, and as it is lait and the seductif is peowerfull, I will go 2 roost.
Yours slumberously,
BLOWHARD


important meeting.
On Tuesday Evening, 9th March, a Meeting was held at the “ Hydaspes ”
School of Arts, to decide the ways and means of passing the voyage pleasantly,
and of causing general amusement. Captain Babot took the chair, surrounded
by several influential men of literature and science; the spacious hall was
crowded to excess—there being a very strong muster of the fair sex. The
gallant Chairman rose amidst much cheering which lasted for several minutes,
and in a very able speech, well expressed, explained that it would cause the
time to pass pleasantly if certain amusements were arranged for the voyage
(hear, hear), such as a newspaper, concerts, theatricals, Ac., and that certain
committees be formed to direct the same. The formation of a choir was
unanimously entrusted to the management of Mr. Byron, and the Rev. D. Ross
kindly volunteered his assistance to choose the sacred music. The Chairman
then proposed the election of an editor for the paper; Mr. Purves was unani-
mously elected, being proposed by Mr. Hemsley, and seconded by Mr. Powell.
This gentleman, in a short and unpretending speech, said he would be delighted
to take upon him the duties of editor, and felt highly honoured at being chosen
out of so large and learned a community. Mr. Purves then resumed his seat
amidst loud clapping and hurras from the fait sex.
A series of concerts with readings were then proposed by Mr. Liddell, in a
short but elaborate speech ; Messrs. Wilson, Powell, and Robb being universally
chosen as the managing committee. Mr. Purves then proposed the health of
the chairman, the Captain, together with Mrs. Babot, which was heartily sung
by all with the usual honours. The gallant chairman then thanked the meet-
ing for the very kind manner in which Mrs, Babot’s and his health had been drunk
(?verbally), and “shouted” champagne on the spot (England to the front).
As the bottles were freely passed round we noticed much conviviality in every
corner. Before parting “ Auld Lang Syne ” was resounding throughout the
hall, and we particularly noticed the linking of hands (? feet) round the table,
and one of our oldest favorites, having half drained his glass, deposited the
I’emainder on the head of a recumbent member present (perhaps too much
champagne the cause), thereby ensuring safety against a charge of “ heeltaps,”
eliciting shrieks and yells of applause from the community. Mr. Wilson, in a
brief and appropriate speech, proposed the health and “ many happy returns of
the day ” of two of the ladies present, it being the anniversary of their birth.
Messrs. Powell and Metcalfe ably responded. Her Majesty’s health was then
proposed and loyally drunk, and the National Anthem swelled through the
long avenue of Saloon Street as the clocks were chiming the hour of ten.
Several shorthand writers were in attendance, and we offer our thanks for
their assistauce.
ALL HAIL THE ADVENT OF THE “HYDASPES GAZETTE”!
Dear Mr. Editor, —Permit one who is much interested in all connected with our good
ship to offer hex warmest thanks for your kindness in starting, and promising for a time Jto
conduct, the editorship of this paper ; under your able management that time, I am sure, all
hepe may continue the whole of the voyage. With my sincere wishes for the success of an
undertaking which must tend to afford pleasure and amusement, thereby enlivening the
monotony of a sea voyage,
I remain, dear Mr. Editor, yours truly,
BETA.


AN IMPENETRABLE WITNESS. — Counsel: Said he’d heave half a brick at him,
did he ? Well, but look here, witness, what were the exact words that the prisoner made
use of when he was talking to you, before he assaulted Mr. Smith ?— Witness; Why, he said
he’d heave ’arf a brick at ’im, to be sure.— Counsel: Yes, yes, my good fellow, but I want
you to say it just as prisoner said it; now just think.— Witness ; Well, Sir, I don’t know ;
but he said he’d heave ’arf a brick at ’im. — Learned Judge (interposes majestically) ; No, no,
no; listen to me, witness, just listen to me. What counsel wants to get at is the exact
expression made use of by the prisoner. Now he wouldn’t say, “ he’d heave half a brick at
him,” would he ? He wouldn’t put it in the third person, but in the first, wouldn’t he ?
Witness: Please yer honner there wasn’t no third person at all ; there w*as only him and me,
and he said he’d heave ’arf a brick at ’im. (Judge gives it up with a sigh.) YORK.
Tlie following epigram, written by some one who bad suffered at the
bands of tbe law, was once published in a newspaper, and elicited the
equally smart reply :
In Essex Street, Strand, many lawyers are bound,
In the Thames, at the bottom, coal barges are found.
Fly, Honesty, fly to some safer retreat,
For there’s craft in the river and craft in the street.
REPLY.
Why should Honesty fly to some safer retreat
From the lawyers, and barges ’od rot ’em ?
For the lawyers are just at the top of the street,
And the barges are just at the bottom, —YORK.
LOST. —A thundering Yankee hat. One bottle of rum reward. Apply at
the office of this paper.
FOUND. — A cambric handkerchief unbranded. The owner may have it
on application at the office, Saloon Street, “ Hydaspes,” on payment
of the usual charges. If not claimed within three days it will he sold by
auction.
. —March 4th, at No. 2, Fo’castle Square, Mrs. Feline, of two sons
and a daughter. Mother and children doing as well as can he expected under
the circumstances.
IDfiltijS.— March 3rd, at her residence, Bird Cage Walk, Miss Budgere Gar>
leaving three sorrowing brothers and sisters to lament their loss.
March sth, at sea, of a broken heart, Mr. Opossum.
Commercial Report.
Considerable activity has characterized our market for some days past.
The demand for Pale Ale has been very large, and good brands fetch large
prices. Also Stout, in pints, has a ready sale. Spirits still high. A steady
enquiry for PB , JDKZ, LL,, and other favorite brands. There is no demand
for wines, the market being overstocked. Shirting still unchanged. —D. Robb.
REBUS.
1. A name that four times ruled the English race,
2. A forest wherein the stately deer they chase.
3. A place whence Israel’s king once fetched his gold.
4. A lover dying, when his love seemed dead and cold.
5. A point where English and Australian steamers meet.
6. A suburb of London, and a well-known retreat. —“ AU REYOIR.”


WANTED KNOWN.—That young ladies and gentlemen wishing to have
their fortunes told may do so by applying from eight to nine on Tuesday
and Friday Evenings at No. 2, Right Street Saloon, “ Hydaspes.” —Terms Cash.
NOTICE. — “The Hydaspes Gazette” has, or hopes to have, the largest
circulation in the world ; at present, howeveT, the circulation is confined
to “ The Hydaspes ” for obvious reasons.— Ed. “ Gazette ” Office.
HE HYDASPES iNCOPHEROUS FOR THE HAIR.”—WiII restore
the thinnest and harshest to full and vigorous beauty. For 50 years
before the flood it has been in constant use ; and we have not known a single
failure. Try it! Try it ! oh, do ! .
* * THE SOUTH ATLANTIC SEA WEED CREAM.”—The most won-
derful and innocent of all preparations for beautifying the face, hands,
neck, and arms. It does not produce a chalky, pallid white, but gives to
faded cheeks the rich and healthy bloom of youth. Try a bottle, and be young.
Address, 17, Saloon Square.
%* Contributions to be addressed to the Editor of “The Hydaspes Gazette,” at the Office.
N.B.—All communications to be accompanied by the name of the author ; not necessarily for
—publication, but as a guarantee of good faith.
THE LOVER’S MISTAKE.
A fond youth serenaded his love,
Who sleeping—“ Love never should sleep.”
Her father was peeping above—
“ 0 fathers, you never should peep ”
To his daughter’s balcony he brought.
Her monkey, in muslins arrayed.
The youth was o’erjoyed, for he thought
’T was the form of his beautiful maid.
He gazed on the figure in white,
Whose nods gave new life to his hopes.
His heart throbbed with love and delight
As he threw up the ladder of ropes ;
His charmer hopped down it, and then
The happy delusion was o’er ;
Girls often meet monkeys like men,
But man never woo’d monkey before !
From the window enjoying the joke,
Her father feared danger no more.
And she by the bustle awoke,
And made her escape by the door ;
“ Come, come to your Rosa,” she said,
“ Unless you prefer my baboon,
And pray let your next serenade
Take place at the full of the moon.”
X. Y. Z.
ACROSTIC.
Having left Australia's shore,
You all do hope to see once more,
Don’t fail to help to cheer the way—
A long one, too —across the “ say; ’
So send a “jerk” to that black box
Purves from time to time unlocks.
Endeavour to amuse our “ crowd,”
Sure that no scandal is allowed.
FROM OUR SHIPPING REPORTER,
Our good ship, after being detained in Sydney in consequence of a severe
gale from the S.E., with thick rainy weather, finally made a start on
Wednesday the 3rd March, 6 a.m., with a light wind from the North and fair
weather, all promising well; but unfortunately appearances are not always
to be trusted. At midnight the wind suddenly shifted to the south, slightly
damping our hopes. This wind lasted three days, increasing to a fresh breeze,
accompanied with a high rolling swell knocking the ship about considerably,


truly causing many to“ cast up their (Sydney) accounts.” On the 7tli, wind
shifted to the east, gradually working round to the north, enabling the ship
to make a little progress. On the 9th, a fresh breeze from the N. to N.N.W.,
daily reckoning increasing. On the 10th and 11th, dense fog with strong
N.W. wind. On the afternoon of the 11th, passed by dead reckoning, sixty
miles north of the Auckland Isles, which are described by H.M. Ships
“Erebus” and “.Terror” as “one great magnet.” Our compasses were
slightly affected, and no observations having been obtained for the last two
days a little anxiety was felt, the weather being thick with a dense fog—
scarcely able to see anything at the distance of half-a-mile. At midnight the
wind shifted to the south, but with no appearance of clearing up. At 8 a.m.
wore ship to S.E., wind veering to the N.E. with rainy weather. Friday
noon, 12th, wind N.E. with same unpleasant weather but smooth sea. So
far we can report but poor progress r however as we are now in the latitudes
where westerley winds prevail, we hope our next report may be more satis-
factory. “ Well trust to Providence and keep our powder dry.”
Ship’s Log. —March 3rd, 6 a.m., parted with the pilot four miles outside
Sydney Heads. Wind light from the N. with fine weather. Midnight—sudden
shift of wind to S.
soil pi mal £ pcnsc.”
I WOUND on deck a part of a lady’s attire ; the owner shall receive the same
. on application to the editor and the payment of 1/- If not claimed
within seven days it will be sold to defray expenses. Identification by pro-
duction of its fellow indispensable.—H. S. Q. M. P.
LA TEST EDITION\
A Concert took place in the “ Hydaspes ” Saloon on Friday, March 12th.
The company favored us with some well given songs, interspersed with readings.
The following is the jirogramme :— :
PROGRAMME.— Part I.
Overture Miss BYRON.
Glee “When first I saw your face ” COMPANY.
Solo “ I gazed upon the glittering sea ” Mbs. B Y RON.
Reading Mr. SIMPSON.
Duet .... “ Oh ! ye voices gone”
Mas. PURVES &
Mr. ROBB.
Solo “Evangeline” Mu. WILSON.
interval of ten minutes.
Nuts, Oranges, A pples, and Qingerlread provided.
Part 11.
Overture Miss METCALFE.
Solo ' “In happy moments ” Mr. ROBB.
Duet “ Truth m Absence”
Mbs. TURVES and
Mu. WILSON.
Reading v Dr. WILSON.
Glee “ Sec our oars with feathered spray ” COMPANY.
Solo “ Kathleen Mavourneen ” MbSPURVES.
Solo . “ The Scolding "Wife ” Mb. HEMSLEY.
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.


IVT OTlCE.—Cathedral Service 'will be performed by the Rev. Duncan Ross
and Captain (Mr. Layman) Babot, in the “ Hydaspes ” Meeting Room,
on Sunday, 14th March. Chants—“Yenite, ’’“TeDeum,” “Jubilate.” Hymns—
Ancient and Modern, Nos. 77, 81, 85.
Last Evening the first of our series of popular concerts came off in the
“ Hydaspes ” Royal Music Hall, and was attended with immense success.
The Hall was crowded to excess, there being a very strong muster from the
surrounding neighbourhood ; the building was well light up with decorated
chandeliers. The concert was opened by a well executed overture on the
piano, from “Moses in Egypt,” by Miss Byron, which brought forth well
merited applause ; then followed the favorite glee, “When first I saw your
face,” sung by the Company with capital effect. Mrs. Byron exhibited great
taste in her solo from “Lombardi,” “ I gaze upon the glittering sea.” Mr.
Simpson then read with great eclat one of Mark Twain’s short amusing
stories entitled “A Melting Story,” eliciting well deserved applause. The
duet, “ Oh! ye voices gone,” was tastefully performed by Mrs. Purves and
Mr. Robb, their voices blending well together. By singing Gabriel’s pretty
song “ Evangeline,” Mr. Wilson ended the first part of the programme. The
second part of the entertainment, after a short interval of five minutes, com-
menced with Sydney Smith’s selection from “ Faust,” which difficult piece
was played by Miss Metcalfe with great skill and taste. Mr, Robb’s mellow
voice then resounded through the Hall in the favourite song, “In happy
moments day by day.” Next on the programme came the duet, “ Truth in
Absence,” and it was well executed by Mrs. Purves and Mr. Wilson, and
caused much applause. Dr. Wilson then read a favorite piece from Byron,
with great feeling and pathos. The great hit of the evening came next,
“ See our oars with feathered spray,” which was sung by the whole Company
and brought down the house with renewed applause and delight, and the
audience would not be satisfied until they had a repitition of that glee. The
much admired Irish Ballad, “ Kathleen Mavourneen,” was then sung with
exquisite taste by Mrs Purves, the flute like tones of whose voice, echoed
sweetly through the numerous pillars and lofty roof of the noble edifice. An
amusing song called the “ Scolding Wife ” closed the evening’s entertainment,
and was sung with truly comic style by Mr. Hemsley, and elicited peals of
merriment from all parts of the house. After “ God Save the Queen ” had
been sung a large number of Passengers repaired to the dining hall, where a
sumptuous supper was prepared.
Mrs. Purves acted as accompanyist throughout the evening, with her well
known finished style. We must not forget to note the perfect unison and
harmony of the voices in the glees, the effect of which was manifest by the
applause produced.


THE
Hydaspes Gazette and General Adbertiser.
No. 2
March 20th, 1875.
r UR Staff cannot be otherwise than greatly gratified by the enthusiastic
/jj reception accorded to the first appearance of the “ Hydaspes Gazette,”
II I and we hope that the succeeding numbers will prove equally popular.
lI J We must admit that it was with no small degree of diffidence that
J we undertook to send our paper out last Saturday morning. We sincerely
hope that our readers will remember that we are “new in the trade,” and
that they will pardon any shortcomings, always convinced that our desire is
to please, not to offend.
Important Meeting.— A Meeting was held on Monday evening to arrange
further amusements to cheer us on our way. The Doctor was unanimously
chosen chairman. Amid cheers he took the chair (Robb’s bed), and stated
in a neat and appropriate manner that the present meeting was held for the
purpose of arranging theatricals. Om burly friend Robb kindly offered to
provide footlights (cheers). Mr. Wilson was, with acclamation, elected stage
manager. In the same manner was Mr. Liddell elected scenic artist. Mr,
Purves with his usual modesty agreed to become general manager. Messrs.
Simpson, Powell and Purves were then chosen to select from the “ Hydaspes ”
theatrical repertoire suitable plays, and cast the characters. Considering the
amount of talent in the ship we are of opinion that a company second to none
will be found—perhaps equalled (though we doubt it) by the “ Haymarket ”
one. The orchestra will be one of the best; “ bones ” and “ wind-jammer,”
prominent. Before the meeting terminated Mr. Powell proposed a vote of
thanks to the chairman, which was carried in a “ square ” manner.
Goodbye,— lt is a hard word to speak. Some may laugh that it should
be, but let them. Icy hearts are never tried. It is a word that has choked
many an utterance, and started many a tear. The hand is clasped, the word
is spoken ; we part, and are upon the great ocean of time ; we go to meet—
Where ? God only knows. It may be soon ; it may be never. Take care
that your goodbye be not- a cold one : it may be the last you can give. Ere
you can meet your friend again death’s cold hand may have closed his eyes,
and chained his lips for ever. And he may have died thinking that you loved
him not. It may be a long separation. Friends crowd onward and give you
their hand. How do you detect in each “Goodbye” the love that lingers
there; and how you may bear away the memory of those words many,
many days. We must often separate. Tear not yourselves away with care-
less boldness that defies all love, but make your last words linger. Give the
heart full utterance ; and if tears fall, what of it ? Tears arc not unmanly.
ONE WHO HAS PARTED OFTEN.


17 and 18 Vic., Cap. 104, Sec. 260.
NOTICE TO ALL BRITISH SHIPMASTERS.
PROTECTION FOR BRITISH SAILORS.
ARTICLE I.
That no Officer shall address a Sailor with his head covered,
ARTICLE 11.
That all vessels shall be furnished with spring beds, and hair mattresses for
the use of the Sailors.
ARTICLE 111.
That no Sailor shall be required to do duty when it rains, or the deck is wet.
ARTICLE IV.
That no Sailor shall be disturbed, or required to take in, or make sail in his
watch below.
ARTICLE Y.
That no Sailor shall ever go aloft in the night, without a lantern ; never be
required to stand at the wheel in summer, without an umbrella over his
head, nor in winter, without a hot water tin under his feet to stand
upon,
ARTICLE VI.
That every Sailor shall have the following scale of provisions regularly served
out to him :
Sunday. — Roast turkey, tomato sauce, and boiled onions; plum pudding and
brandy sauce.
Monday. —Pickled eel’s feet and ears, with mock turtle soup.
Tuesday. —Boiled potatoes, beefsteaks and oyster sauce.
Wednesday. —Roast lamb, green peas, and peacock’s eggs.
Thursday. — Chicken fried in butter, with various kinds of salad; cream cake
and Washington pie for dessert.
Friday.—-Baked spare ribs and mutton chops, with apple sauce, and mince
pies.
Saturday. —Smoked salmon, tadpoles, gizzards, and humming birds’ eye-balls,
ARTICLE VII.
That it be particularly understood by all Officers, that night caps, dressing
gowns, and carpet slippers, be found at ship’s expense, for the use of the
hard worked Sailor, a glass of brandy hot (choice brand), with pipes and
cigars, to be considered necessary for their comfort after leaving the
deck.
ARTICLE VIII.
If any Master shall neglect any of these Articles, he shall for every such
default incur a penalty not exceeding £lOO, to be recovered by the
Forecastle Lawyer, and used for his benefit.
By Order of the Oommittee,
NAUTILUS.
Respect to be
paid to Sailors.
Rules for the
general amelio-
ration of the con-
dition of Sailors.,
Provisions for
ensuring safety
to life arid limb.
Scales of Provi-
sions to be served
out to each Sailor
in unlimited
quantity.
Comfort to be
provided for
Sailors on leaving
the deck.


Commercial 3lntellig:ence.
Since your last issue I have to report (with regret) that, owing to no
fresh arrivals, the market is in a very low state, more especially in the soft
goods line. The run on blankets, rugs, monkey jackets, long stockings, and
flannel has been very great; also sea boots and fur caps fetch high prices,
owing to the cold weather. Amongst the muffs, hooks and lines are in great
request, the fishing season having commenced. Beer is flat at present, but
rates are firm ; stout the same as last week. There is a very fair rush on
whiskey (for punch), prices a little in advance of last week. I have to draw
attention to the new spirit just imported, named “ Blanchette.” It is much
sought after and bids fair to become a favourite amongst us. Other articles
have been very unsteady lately, consumers having over-reached themselves
during the late gales.
D. ROBB, Commercial Reporter,
TO THE “HYDASPES.”
“ Speed, good ship, speed, and hear your living freight
Those yearning souls—to varied homes they prize.
No one so cold, so lonely, doomed by Fate,
But owns dear friends where those grey cliffs arise ;
And bosoms there, long mourning the departed,
Will soon again embrace them joyous hearted.
Glide, good ship on, the very waves seem gay,
Flashing a welcome, sporting round your way.”
March 17th, 1875. INE.
Some time ago there appeared in the papers the announcement of the
marriage of a Mr. Day to a Miss Week. The groomsman was guilty of the
following verse on that subject.
“ A Day is gained, a Week is lost;
Yet time must not complain ;
There’ll soon be little Days enough
To make a Week again ! ”
THE BRIDGE OF MY NOSE.
By A. Long-Fellow.
I fell on my nose at midnight,
As the clerks was strutting their hour ;
And the ground rolled in the City,
And tossed with awful power.
I saw the bright reflection
In the waters under me;
Like some battered noses shining,
And looking on the- spree.
And deep in the muddy current,
Of that gutter helped by none,
The tip of my poor proboscis
Gleamed redder than the sun.
Among the dark black waters,
My wavering figure lay ;
And the current that rushed to the sewer
Seemed to lift and bear me away.
As gurgling, and edging by me,
Dashed the demented tide;
And, streaming through my coat tails,
The rubbish floated wide.
And ’midst those waters rushing,
Exposed to people’s jeers,
The pain of my nose came o’er me,
And filled my eyes with tears.
How often, oh ! how often !
In the days that had gone by,
I had gazed on its bridge with pleasure,
And thought not its smash was nigh.
How often, oh ! how often !
I now wished that my wandering stride
Would bear me away to my lodging,
O’er the street so long and wide.
B


For my legs were wide and reckless,
And my walk was full of care,
And the grog I’d put within me,
Was stronger than I could bear.
But now such scenes have vanished ;
I have given up each spree,
And only the mark on the nasal,
Brings a sorrow unto me.
Yet whenever I cross that gutter,
On its arch of crooked shape,
The odour that comes from the current
Brings the thought of that night’s scrape.
And I think how many dozens
Of grog-encumbered men,
Each holding his quartern of liquor,
Have crossed that place since then.
0, see the tight procession,
Still tumbling to and fro ;
The youngest mad and noisy,
And the old quite “screwed” and slow.
And for ever, and for ever,
As long as the gutter flows,
As long as a man feels thirsty,
As long as out he goes;
That man and his broken proboscis,
In the streamlet will appear,
As the token of love of drinking,
Will his staggering form lie here.
Accident.— Mr, Charles Canine, well known among his acquaintance as
a convive, met with an accident on Saturday morning last. It appears that
late on Saturday night he conceived the eccentric fancy of making a bed
among the machinery of an engine in “ Midship Street,” The consequence
was that the engineer, not perceiving him in the morning, set the engine in
motion, and Mr, Canine narrowly escaped the loss of both legs (perhaps the
lower part of his body also). Fortunately, however, he was promptly
dragged out, and conveyed to the hospital in Boyce’s (Boys) Square, where
he was skillfully attended by the surgeon in charge. His injuries proved
but slight, being a violent contusion of the left leg, with a small abrasion of
the skin. He stayed in the infirmary for two days, and then was able to
get about again. He has now very nearly recovered, hut still retains the
evidence of his eccentricity. We hope that this will be a warning to him,
and keep in his mind the maxim that “ As he makes his bed, so he must lie
upon it.”—S .
Accident. —Mr. Fitz-Gerald Cato Plum Canine met with an accident on
Thursday morning, March 18th. Mr. Canine was proceeding along Midship
Street, when an engine in motion attracted his attention. He was imme-
diately seized with a desire to examine the machinery, but while attempting
to count the spars on the wheels, checking them with his fingers, his hand
was nipped between the two, and he narrowly escaped the loss of that
member. Surgeons Watson and Pritchard were soon on the spot with un-
limited Friar’s Balsam and bandages, and Mr. Canine, after some resistance,
allowed his hand to be dressed by them, which prompt attention, we are
happy to say, obviated the necessity of amputation. It was considerably
lacerated, however, and we do not expect that he will regain the full use of
it for some little time. He then walked home, accompanied by a few sym-
pathising bystanders.—S .
CAUTION!
The public are cautioned against a disreputable individual who has been
seen lurking about our streets, late in the evening and at night. One night
he entered the residence of a lady in Saloon Street, and fairly ransacked her
pockets. Last night he was seen to enter the dwelling of a lady in the
Square, and but for the timely appearance of her huge mastiff, who put him


to flight, no doubt would have secreted himself in the house to execute
his oft-repeated villanies. In his hasty flight he came in contact with
some young ladies, and his disagreeable and unprepossessing appearance
fairly frightened them out of all propriety. Being foiled in that attempt, he
next invaded the house of two old bachelors in Church Street, with the
intention, doubtless, of feloniously possessing himself of sundry candle ends
and cheese parings (said to abound in such quarters), but the watchful ear
of one of the inmates discovered the culprit before he had time to commit
much depredation. It is to be hoped that policeman X will be on the alert,
and catch this unwelcome intruder, and give him what he richly deserves—a
night’s lodging in the cage. He may be easily recognised; he has a long
peaked face, and large whiskers ; wears a rough brown, long-tailed coat, and
goes without shoes.—“ Funido.”
“ STUFFED DOG:”
I suppose that most of our readers have read the story of Mark Twain’s
“ Sinful Jim ”?it is with just such - another Jim we have to deal. Now
this Jim went one night to make a raid on a neighbouring farmer’s orchard.
He got up a tree abundantly loaded with his favourite apple, and was soon
busily engaged loading his bag. Unfortunately for him, however, the farmer
had been an unobserved witness of Master Jim’s ascent; going into the
house he quickly returned with a large stuffed bull dog, with glaring glass
eyes. While Jim was busily engaged stowing away his booty in the top of
the tree, the farmer had set the stuffed dog to watch at the bottom, and
went in to supper. As soon as Master Jim had secured as many apples as
he wanted, he began to come down. He had not got very far before he espied
the sentinel at the bottom. Here was a pretty go; he had clean forgotten
about the farmer’s dogs. Perhaps he might coax him—“ Here, ‘ Towzer,’
old fellow, poor old ‘ Towzer,’ fetch ’em, boy ; ” but never one inch would
‘ Towzer ’ move, and poor Jim fancied he could see an affectionate grin on
the dog’s ugly phizog, as if he would like veal , or otherwise “calf,” for
supper; so, settling himself in a fork, he decided to wait till the dog should
go, and then- slip down. After watching for some time Jim began to get
sleepy, and finally dozed off and slept till daybreak. The first thing Jim did
on waking was to look down for his obnoxious enemy, and sure enough there
he was, just in the same position. Jim looked a little closer. “No wonder
the beggar don’t move ; why, I’ll be whipped if he ain’t stuffed I ” “ Ay, my
lad, that you most certainly will,” observed the farmer, appearing at the
foot of the tree. We never heard exactly what followed; but some of the
neighbours said it wasn’t wholesome to say “ Stuffed dog ” to that boy now.
York.
CRICKET.
The following match was played on the “ Hydaspes Oval,” on the 16th
instant, between the Zingari and the Wanderers Clubs, being the opening
game of the season, and, as will be seen by the score, the Zingari were
victorious in one innings, and fourteen runs to spare. The Zingari Went
first to the wickets, Mr. Hemsley handling the willow, and soon totalled up
nine, including a fine hit out of the ground for five, when he was bowled by
Poweil. Mr. Liddell came next, and also placed nine to his credit, making
a fine off drive for five, but he also fell a victim to Powell. Dr. Wilson
came next, but failed to score. Simpson, after adding one, was clean bowled
B 2


by Mr. Powell. The Wanderers then took their place at the wickets, but
owing to the excellent bowling of Mr. Liddell failed to score. They then
followed their innings, not having halved the score of the Zingari. In their
second innings all their scoring was done by Messrs. Purves and Powell, the
rest failing to make any runs. Score as under :
ZINGARI.
ls£ Innings.
Hemsley, 5 1111 ... b. Powell ... 9
Liddell, 112 5 ... b, Powell ... 9
Dr. Wilson, b. Purves ... 0
Simpson, 1 b. Powell ... 1
19
WANDERERS.
Ist Innings.
Metcalfe ... b. Liddell 0
Powell b. Liddell 0
Purves b. Liddell 0
Paton b. Liddell 0
0
WANDERERS.
2nd Innings.
Purves, 111 ... run out ... 3
Powell, 11 ... b. Liddell... 2
Metcalfe, ... b. Liddell 0
Paton ... b. Liddell 0
Total ... 5
FOUND on Maindeck Street, a small parcel containing a very pretty lock
of hair. The owner can have the same by applying to the Editor,
giving description and paying 6d.
FOUND, —An Oynx stud. Application to the Editor and Gd. will
fetch it.
FOUND. —Penholder, knife attached ; description and a tanner to the
box brings it. Apply to the Editor.
FQUND. —A single-bladed knife. A bender and description will jerk it
forth. Apply to the Editor.
FEOM OUE SHIPPING EEPOETEE.
A few hours after the publication of our last, the wind shifted to N.N.W.
with sky trying to lift. Moderately clear throughout the night, with a
fresh breeze. At daylight on the 13th weather again set in foggy. Noon,
no observations. At 7 p.m. another shift of wind to S. and S.E., with clear
weather. Fresh breeze throughout the night, Sunday, 14th, observations
were obtained at noon, and found that we had passed 40 miles S. of the
Antipodes islands, and at 3 p.m. had crossed the Antipodes and made anotheg
Sunday, March 14th, noon, sharp wind and colder weather, to dense for
and damp, drizzling weather; wind E. In the afternoon wore ship, wind
variable, light easterly ; 9 p.m, wind hauled to N., and cloudy weather to
fresh gale and thick rainy weather ; throughout the night high cross sea,
ship labouring heavily. Moderately clear noon 15th, brisk breeze N. Noon
16th, fresh gale and cloudy weather, high cross sea. At 5 p.m. shift of wind
to W.S.W., weather hue and clear, and it has since continued most
enjoyable. Although making but little progress, everything seems to be
making the most of the weather: may we soon have stronger winds. As
we are about going to press, March 19th, weather still continues fine, with
every appearance of a continuance. In our last, as we were then in the


latitudes where strong westerly winds prevail, we hoped to he able to give a
better account of the ship’s progress ; all we can now say is, we never before
experienced such changeable, unsatisfactory weather, and for the future will
say nothing, but just take it as it comes.
True course and distance made good last week, S 88° E 1800 miles.
i&Uicfte. —On 17th instant, probably owing to the Anniversary of
Ireland’s Patron Saint, and to too many applications to the “ whiskie,” two
valuable Muscovy ducks deliberately committed then* bodies to the deep, and
were gladly welcomed by hungry Albatrosses.
. —No. 3, Fo’c’sle Crescent, the wife of Jehosaphat Grunter, Esq.,
of eight-All Twins.
—We don’t use them.
IBeati)#. —‘The wife of John Bull, Esq., Of Knife.
Riddle. —Why is a Lawyer like an uneasy man in bed ?
Epitaph for a cannibal—One who loved his fellowmen !
What is the best way to start a Nursery ?—Get Married.
WANTED.- —A Medical Practitioner to cure broken rest. Apply, No. 1,
Queen Street, Steward Square.
The Editors hope that all Contributions will be found in the box not
later than Thursday Evening.
The Shamrock, in honour of St. Patrick, was drowned in much Whiskey
Punch on hits day, the 17th March. After supper we discerned large white
jugs of the afore-mentioned steaming beverage going the rounds. Several
songs appropriate to the occasion were sung, and after “ Auld Lang Syne,”
and “ God Save the Queen,” the Passengers adjourned—some to sleep, and
others to smoke and yarn.
ANSWER TO THE REBUS IN OUR LAST.
G eorge
E pping
O phir
R omeo
G alle
E aling.


THE
Hydaspes Gazette and General Adbertiser.
No. 3.
March 27th, 1875.
*AV ie P er^s Angers of the vasty deep ”we are ;
jj but there are as many on land. We all remember
some such song as this :
One night it blew a hurricane,
The seas were mountains rolling,
When Barney Buntline turned his quid,
And said to Billy Bowline ;
“ A strong sou’ wester’s blowing Bill ;
“ Lord ! don’t you hear it roar now,
“ Lord help ’em ! how I pities ’em
“ Unlucky folks on shore now !
“ While you and I here on the deck
“ In comfort now are lying;
“ My eyes what tiles and chimney pots
“ About their heads are flying.
“ How often have we seamen heard
“ How men are killed and undone,
“ By overturns of carriages,
“ By fires and thieves in London.
“ What dangers do those landsmen run,
“ From noblemen to tailors ;
“ Whilst you and I, Bill, ought to thank
“ Providence we are sailors.”
Let us then be as jolly and happy here as on shore, and do our best to make a
pleasant trip of it, and all will look back with pleasure upon the voyage in the good
old ship “ Hydapses,” which we hope will bear us in safety to dear old England, and
to dear friends who are anxiously looking for another glimpse of our faces. During the
past week no events of any importance have occurred. Of course the usual amount of
deaths among the sheep, pigs and poultry happened. No birds were caught, notwith-
standing the ardour displayed by our enthusiastic fishermen (birder men ?) Don’t let any
one be down in the mouth, and fancy that we’re going to have a long monotonous voyage.
No, we will get along well. If we judge from the good feeling that has existed among
us since we left Sidney, we may surely calcutate upon a very pleasant and harmonious
voyage.
FIGHTING WEIGHTS.
st. lbs.
Mr. Robb 14 8
Dr. Wilson 13 3
Mr. Purves 13 2
Mr. Hemsley 12 13
Rev. D. Ross 12 2
Mr. Powell 11 11
Mr. Liddell 11 9
Mrs. Byron 11 4
xt. Ibs
Mr. Wilson 11 4
Mrs. Turves 10 0
Miss Metcalfe 10 0
Mrs. Selfe 9 5
Mrs. Pike 8 13
Mr. Metcalfe 8 0
Miss Whiteside 7 8
Mrs. Powell 7 3
st. lbs.
Capt. Babot 12 0
A man who attended a lecture on the “ Antiquity of Intoxication ” got
home about 2 ami., and told his wife he’d been to hoar some remarks on the
“ Into,city of Antiqnationf
A saloon keepeb, in Union County, Indiana, keeps a saw in his bar
room, which he amuses himself filing when the ladies-call and pray with
him.


To the Editor of “ Hydaapes ” Gazette.
Sir, —Will you allow me space in your valuable paper for a few remarks on icebergs
or ice islands ?
From the great quantities of ice drifting in all parts of the ocean in High South
Latitudes, it is probable that the formation of ice islands is much more rapid than is
generally supposed.
Their formation is easily explained. In the first place the ice seems to require a
nucleus, whereon the fogs, snow and rain may congeal and accumulate ; this the land
affords. Accidents then separate part of this mass from the land when it drifts off, and is
broken into many pieces, and part of this may again join that which is in process of
formation. From the accumulation of snow, such a mass gradually increases in thickness,
and weight, by the congealation of rain, snow and fogs, the last having no small influence
in contributing to the accumulation as may be supposed, when a few hours’ suffice to give
the rigging and spars of a ship a coating of ice a quarter of an inch thick. When the
icebergs are fully formed they are all fiat topped, nearly even, and perfectly wall sided,
varying from 180 feet to 220 feet in height above the sea, and probably 600 feet beneath it.
They begin to dissolve at the base, generally irregularly, and then become tilted. As they
reach lower latitudes, and their distance from land increases, they are seen in all stages of
decay, some forming obelisks, others Gothic arches, some exhibit lofty columns with a
natural bridge resting on them, of a lightness and beauty inconceivable in any other
material. With the exception of one locality, the course of an iceberg is E. by N. at the
rate of ten miles per day, the only exception is, after it has passed to the eastward of the
Horn, when its course bends to the N.E. veering back to the E., as it approaches the
latitude of 40° S. on which parallel its progress is scarcely one mile daily. There is one
use in floating ice. That which is clear and transparent, without flaws or enclosed apertures,
which will contain salt water, will afford the purest and most delicious water in nature.
Having given some notion of their general character, I will conclude with a few cautions as
to avoiding them. The indications of an iceberg are : Ist. A natural effulgence or “ ice
blink ” which frequently renders them visible at some distance, even in a dark night; at a
short distance this effulgence may appear like a white cloud, nearly extending over a
vessel’s masts. 2nd. A considerable decrease in the temperature of the water, as shown by
the thermometer. 3rd. The roaring of the sea at the base of the berg may be heard some
distance off by an attentive listener. 4th. The safest and the best way to discover them is
by keeping a good look out, the eyes constantly tracing and retracing the dark line of the
horizon ; for ice will always make that part of the horizon where it is lighter.
Yours, etc.,
Good look out.
“ Sermons in stores ” the bard says hidden
He;
Well don’t disturb such dull ZMography ;
Of dismal yarns the world has quantum suffj
It groans too often, laughs not half enough.
To sit in sack-cloth for our sins we’re told,
On pain of pitchforks in the lower hold,
Where, say the Cantwells, jolly fellows go,
Toasted to be by Beelzebub & Co.
But, jovial reader, Heaven’s enlivening beams,
The smiling flowers, bhthe birds and dancing
streams,
And above all, the human instinct strong,
By God implanted, to laugh loud and long,
The perfect innocence of mirth proclaim,
And put Cant’s “ Serious Family ” to shame ;
By way of safeguard ’gainst such bigots
grim
The lamp of wit for cheerful souls we’ll
trim,
And like that humorous tricky elf, Tom
Thumb,
Defy tlie ogres and their “ fee-fo-fum ! ”
I Jokes of all types, in lecture, speech and song,
I Some sharp and short, some broad as they
are long,
I We hope to tender in these pages to be wise,
: Whose mirth, not grief runs over at their eyes.
| Your classic prigs, who deem a joke a fault,
Unless *tis flavoured with the “ Altic Salt,”
May think, perchance, the feast before them
spread
Too unrefined te suit the learned head :
Well, let them try it, ’ere they’re half-way
through
They’ll find good humour has as rich a “gout,”
As polished wit, too often tinged with gall.
j In Horace, Dry den, Pope or Juvenal,
111 natured satire, born of spleen and guile,
Provokes at best but a sardonic smile.
, Butwholesouledhumomyvoid of poisoned sting
| Makes the sides quiver, and the rafters ring,
| Better the sportive than the venomed pen,
1 And laughing gas, than vitrol and cayenne.
WILL-o’-THE-WISP,


An Exchange, in speaking of the magical strains of a hand-organ,
says:—“ When he played ‘ Old Dog Tray ’ we noticed eleven .pups sitting
in front of the machine on their haunches, brushing the tears from their
eyes with their fore-paws.”
There is a newly-married man in Ohio, whose wife has to pat him on
the head daily with a brickbat, to prevent him having too much happiness.
TO SERAPHINA WELHELMINA SKEGGS
I wish that the muse would inspire me
My feelings toward thee to express,
And to tell of thy charms she would fire me,
And thy power o’er my bosom confess.
How with rapture the sight of thee fills me,
What joy in thy presence to stand ;
And then oh what ecstacy thrills me
At each touch of thy dear dainty hand.
Thy footfall so light and so airy,
Tinkles like bells, low and sweet ;
And thou glid’st like a beautious fairy,
To the tune of thy delicate feet.
Deep, deep in my heart do I cherish
Thine image, which there is enshrined ;
Where ’twill rest until memory perish,
And oblivion steal over my mind.
How oft on those moments I ponder,
On the time that so rapidly flies ;
While my gaze o’er thy face I let wander,
Viewing “love in thy luminous eyes.”
When close to my bosom I press thee,
And hang on thy lips in a kiss,
Twine my arms round thy waist an d caress thee;
Oh ! who would not covet my bliss ?
Adolphus Snozzell.
FROM OUR SHIPPING REPORTER.
The fine weather reported in our last continued until the 22nd, when it
again set in hazy, damp, drizzling weather, with light breeze inclining
northerly. These light winds are very unusual at this time of the year,
namely, the equinox, when strong winds are expected and looked for. Noon
23rd, wind set in N.E., with thick drizzling weather, barometer falling fast;
shortened sail to single reefs, as it was thought unadvisable to run too far
south ; wind continued fresh throughout night, with same unpleasant weather ;
barometer 29.35. In the morning, at daylight, wind commenced to die out.
Noon 24th, breeze sprang up from the westward, with hazy weather. 25th,
same steady breeze, with foggy weather. A.M. wind hauled to N.E. Noon
26th, moderate breeze N.N.E. and drizzling, thick weather.
I have heard of various expedients for wit, but the one which I admire
most is that of a mathematician, who, according to his taste, threw the art
of poetry into a short problem and continued tables, by which anyone, with-
out knowing a word of grammar or sense may, to his great comfort, be able
to compose, or, rather, to erect verses. These tables are a kind of poetical
logarithms, which, being divided into several squares and all inscribed with
so many incoherent words, appear to the eye somewhat like a fortune-telling
screen. What a joy must it be to the unlearned operator to find that those
words, being carefully collected and written down in order according to the
problem, start of themselves into hexameter or pentameter verses ! I have
only heard of one improvement beyond this: the project of a Dutch me-
chanic, and mentioned to a stupid pretender to poetry, viz., a mill to make
verses ; this being the most compendious method of all which have yet been
proposed, may deserve the thoughts af many of our virtuosi, who are weekly
racking their brains for a “jerk ” for our good ship’s Gazette, —Rover.
True course and distance made good during the last week, S 80 E,
1070 miles.


AN AMERICAN LOVE LETTER.
Dear Sweet, —Oh ! my love of love, clarified honey, and oil of citron, white loaf of my
hopes and molasses of my expectations ! you have been absent from me three whole days.
The sun is quite dark at mid-day. The moon and stars are black when thou art absent.
Thy step is the music of the spheres ! and the wind of thy gown when you pass as a zephyr
from the gardens of Paradise in the spring time of fresh flowers. I kissed you when we
last met, and my whole frame was filled with sweetness. One of your curls touched my
nose, and that organ was transmuted to loaf sugar ! Oh ! spice of spices ! garden of
delights ! send me a lock of thy hair, send me anything your blessed fingers may have
touched, and I will go raving mad with ecstasy. One look from you would translate me into
the third heaven ! Your words are molten pearls di opping from your mouth ! My heart
blazes at the thought of them ! My brain is an everlasting fire ! The blood bums and
scorches my veins and vitals as it passes through them. Oh, come most delightful of
delights, and breathe upon me with thy seraph breath. When you come be sure and bring
me that two shillings which you borrowed of me, as I want to buy some tobacco.
Yours in the bonds of truest affection, X, Y. Z.
TO THE EDITOR
Sir, —The children of the present day have grown so precocious, that it has been found
necessary to re-write the old nursery rhymes in suitable language. The following is an
instance ; perhaps some of your readers may recognize an old favourite in a new guise.
’Twas not on Alpine snow and ice,
But on plain English ground ;
“ Excelsior” their high device,
But lowly fate they found.
’Twas not in search of fame they went,
But on stern duty’s call ;
They were united in their aim.
Divided in their fall.
L.
Commercial Intelligence.
Since your last issue there has been a steady demand for all woollen
stuffs, and this is likely to continue. Messrs. Shiver & Co, had a sale last
week of blankets and rugs, which fetched very good prices. We advise
importers to look to this, as they are very scarce. Flannels are much sought
after, and stockings are up. Beer is still flat, but holders expect good terms
when the warm weather sets in. Spirits are still firm, and a good demand
keeps prices up. In sugar there has been some stir, more especially in loaf,
owing to the late festivities. In the Meat Market beef is firm at 3/8;
mutton, 2/4. Pigs have been largely imported.—D. Eobb.
Grand Celebration.— Wednesday, 24th March, was a day long to be
remembered, our noble captain having added one more year to the number
of his days.
The 24th of March, 'thirty one
Into this world saw him come ;
And in '46 he took to the sea,
But if he gives it up for the shore,
At his present age forty four,
He would like it better, ’twixt you and me.
Soon after daybreak the popping of corks was heard in more than one cabin
to commemorate the event; and as the melodious saloon bell pealed out, an
unusually large number of the passengers appeared at breakfast, their
beaming countenances expressing good-will and long life to our captain.
The day passed quietly, everyone reserving themselves for the coming-
evening’s festivities. During the afternoon we noticed the goodly steward
tacking and filling between his cabin and the storeroom with dishes and
bottles of everything good, and it has even been said that several passengers
gave up their lunch in order to be able to partake more largely of the sump-
tuous dinner, or we should rather say banquet, to come off in the evening.
During the day the captain received many appropriate presents in wool, and
from the dear ones who are ever foremost on these occasions. 6 p.m,
c


arrived, the passengers seated, and what a sight lay before them ! There
was everything, from the dusky boar (not forgetting the buffalo’s sister)
down to the tender goose; from the good old English plum pudding to the
cheesecake. Champagne passed freely round, and after a large distribution
of phillipines (Philopoenes) had taken place between the ladies and gentlemen,
Mr. Wilson, in a loud and stentorian voice, requested a replenishment of all
glasses, which being done, and when silence reigned supreme, he rose, and
in a very appropriate speech expressed the general feelings of the passengers
towards the captain, and proposed that his health, with many happy returns
of the day, should be drunk, which was heartily responded to, with cheers.
The gallant captain then rose, and in well-appointed speech, with great feel-
ing, returned thanks for the very kind manner in which his health had been
drunk. After dinner the music hall was resorted to by many, till the hour
of supper arrived. After refreshing the inner man on capital baked potatoes,
&c., and when the tables were cleared of the debris, several of the stewards
were observed wending their way through the cloisters of Saloon Street,
staggering under the weight of what appeared like two enormous cauldrons,
but on their nearer approach turned out to be immense bowls of whisky and
rum punch, the contents of which soon began to disappear under the
influence of songs, &c. Many ladies and gentlemen joined in, and after a
couple of hours had passed, and a good many “ fore-bitters ” had been sung,
some of our latent talent (under the influence of toddy) soon came to the
front, in the form of improvised words for the songs. At about 11 p.m. the
table was cleared, and all the passengers (many of whom were by this time
in a state of “ Tooly-rural ”) began to make tracks for Bedfordshire. This,
however, was not such an easy thing to do, as the streets were completely
blocked at intervals. After some time the stillness of night returned. We
regret to hear that there were some very serious cases of housebreaking,
drunk and disorderly, &c.; and though we hear that all the influence possible
was used to get the unfortunate clear, they have been summoned to appear
at the county assizes on Saturday, the 27th inst. As is always the case on
these occasions, the Police when most required are farthest off, as none could
be found.
At a party, while a young lady was playing the piano with a peculiar
brilliancy of touch, a rich batchelor exclaimed, “ I’d give the world for
those fingers.” “ Perhaps you might get the whole hand by asking,” said
the young lady’s mamma.
The First English Song. —The following old English poem is said to
have been the first English song ever set to music. It was written about the
year 1800, and first discovered in one of the Harleian Manuscripts now in
the British Museum :
APPROACH OF SUMMURR.
Sumer is i comen in,
Shude sing cuccu;
Groweth fed and bloweth med,
And springeth the wde nu,
Sing cuccu.
Awe bleateth after lomb
Lhouth after calve cu ;
Bullock stertefch, buck verteth ;
Mare sing cuccu.
Cuccu, cuccu,
Wei singes thee cuccu:
Ne swik thow nawer nu,
Sing cuccu nu
Sing cuccu.
The following is a literal prose version : Summer is coming loudly sing
cucco! Groweth feed and bloweth mead and springetli wood new. Ewe
bleateth after lamb, loweth cow after calf, bullock startetb, buck verteth, %.e.,
.harboretb among tbe ferns, merrily sing cuckoo! Well singestthou, cuckoo.
Nor cease to sing now ; sing cuckoo, now, sing cuckoo.


THE
Hydaspes Gazette and General Adbertiser.
No. 4.
April 3rd, 1875.
THE PLACE WHERE THE OLD HORSE DIED.
In the hollow, by the pollard, where the crop is tall and rank
Of the dock leaf and the nettle growing free,
'Where the bramble and the brush-wood struggle blindly o’er the ballk,
And the Pyat jerks and chatters on the tree,
There’s a fence I never pass,
In the hedges and the grass
But for very shame, I turn my head aside,
While tears come thick and hot,
And my course is on the spot
’Tis the place -where the old horse died.
There’s his hoof upon the chimney, there’s his hide upon the chair,
A better never bent him to the rein ;
Now for all my love and care, I’ve an empty stall and bare,
I shall never ride my gallant horse again !
How he laid him out at speed !
How he loved to have a lead !
How he snorted in his mettle and his pride !
Not a flier of the hunt
Was beside him in the front,
At the place where the old horse died.
Was he blown ? I hardly thinlc it. Did he slip 1 I cannot tell;
We had run for forty minutes in the vale ;
He was reaching at his bridle—he was was going strong and well
He never seemed to falter or to fail.
Though I sometimes fancy, too,
That his daring spirit knew
The task beyond the compass of his stride ;
Yet he faced it true and brave
And dropped into his grave—
At the place where the old horse died.
I was up in half a minute, but he never tried to stir,
Though I scored him with my rowels in the fall;
In his life he had not felt before the insult of the spur,
And I knew that it was over, once for all,
When motionless he lay,
In his cheerless bed of clay, ’
Huddled'up without an effort on his side ;
’Twas a hard and and bitter stroke !
For his honest back was broke,
At the place where the old horse died.
With a neigh so faint and feeble, that it touched me like a groan,
“ Farewell,” he seemed to murmur, “ ere I die,”
Then set his teeth, and stretched his limbs, and so I stood alone,
While the merry chase went heedless sweeping by.
Am I womanly and weak.
If the tear was on my cheek,
For a brotherhood that death could thus divide ?
If sickened and amazed,
Through a woeful mist I gazed,
On the place where the old horse died ?
c 2


There are men both good and wise, who hold that in a future state,
Dumb creatures we have cherished here below
Shall give us joyous greeting, when we pass the golden gate.
Is it folly that I hope it may be so ?
For never man had friend,
More enduring to the end,
Truer mate in every time and tide;
Could I think we’ll meet again,
It would lighten half my pain,
At the place where the old horse died.
Charade, —My first a curling tail displays,
My second is a tail always,
My whole’s a tale of other days.
Riddle. —Why is the Nose like the letter Y in Civility ?
AN AUSTRALIAN YARN.
There is no doubt that the Yankee is “ par excellence ” the best
“blower” in existence, but I am of opinion that a thorough Australian
“ bush hand” would take fair honours, even at a Yankee University, on
that score, as I fancy the following story will show. In the course of a trip
up the country, I had the pleasure of spending the night at a station owned
by an old friend of mine. It happened to be just about “ mustering” time,
and there were, besides myself, several present who were not usually resident
on the station. We had just concluded a hearty supper, which bush
appetites, after a long day’s work or ride, know so well how to appreciate,
and were seated on the verandah enjoying “ Barrett’s twist ” and a modicum
of old J., when the conversation turned on Kangaroo hunting, with all its
various exciting incidents and curious recollections. Several good yarns
had been spun by different persons present, causing various comments and
a degree of amusement; but the yarn that capped all was told by an old
bush hand, who seemed determined not to be outdone “ Well,” he said,
“ you can blow about your ‘ old men ’ (i.e., Kangaroos), I don’t count them
much, though no doubt they are bad enough in their way, but give me an
old Doe when she has a young one by her side. I’ll just spin you a yarn
of what once happened to me;” and with many asseverations as to the
truth of his talc, which I need not mention, he proceeded to tell us how he
was one day riding along when he saw a very pretty Joey—quite a youngster
—and determined to become possessed of it, so dismounted and gave chase.
Feeding at a little distance was its mother, and the Joey, immediately on
seeing him, sought its natural place of refuge. He pressed on, and approached
the mother ; but she, heavily laden as she was, preferred showing fight to
running for it. This rather took him by surprise, and he began to bethink
what weapon he had handy, and the only thing he could lay his hand on
readily was a large clasp knife he had in his pocket; this he opened, and
proceeded to the attack. The Doe made one spring towards him, and, seiz-
ing him by the wrist, wrenched the clasp knife from his hand, shut it up,
and having dropped it into her pouch in charge of the Joey, squared up to
him afresh, with an expression in her countenance which, as plainly as
words could speak, said, “ Now we’re on equal terms ; come on.” But as
he finished his yarn, I was so amazed that I let him go, kbife and all.
Commercial Eeport.
The heed o’ oor reporter is na weel.


While rapid coursers prance along the plain,
Urged by the lash, and govern’d by the rein,
Sailors in ships delight to run a race,
Crowding all sail the flying foe to chase.
Courses are frigates coursers, and when
these
With flowing sheets receive thefav’ringbreeze,
Then, as she scuds, the vessel in her speed
May proudly cope with the most agile steed.
But when the adverse gale with ruthless force
Drives her six points to leeward of her course,
The prow no more obeys the helmsman’s
will
Vain is his labour, useless then his skill.
But to the succour of mechanic art
To keels, ere long, new impulse shall impart,
When sails icork paddle wheels ! our ships no
more
Shall beat in vain to claw off the leeward shore.
Wind bound in port no more shall seamen lie,
Watching each cloud that flits along the sky ;
But the ship freighted weighing then with glee,
Hoist their last boat in and stand out to sea ;
Brave adverse current, stem the strong spring
tide
And in the wind’s eye onward safely glide.
Nautilus. •
FROM OUR SHIPPING- REPORTER.
March 27th, Noon, fresh breeze N.W., and thick hazy weather. 28th,
wind westerly, same weather; midnight, wind again hauled to N., with
hazy, thick weather ; shortened sail. 29th, fresh increasing breeze N.;
hazy weather, low barometer ; reefed topsails ; 4 p.m., shift of wind to N.W.,
with cloudy weather ; 3 a.m., wind hauling again to N. 30th, Noon, light
unsteady breeze N. to N.W., and fine weather ; barometer 28.95; throughout
the night brisk breeze W.S.W., cloudy weather. 81st, same breeze and
foggy, hazy weather throughout the night. April Ist, brisk breeze N.W.,
and hazy, thick, drizzling weather; increased to a fresh gale ; 8 p.m., single
reefed topsails; midnight, shift of wind to W. with fine weather ; made sail.
2nd, Noon, brisk whole sale breeze, and cloudy, fine weather.
True course and distance made good last week, S. 84° E. 1330 miles.
Cape Horn E. N. 730 miles.
Charade.—My first is a member used most in a fight,
My second’s a part of a general known
In the first wars with Erin, ere England’s brave knight
Won that gem of the West, to embellish her throne.
> While my whole is the name of as gallant a band,
As ere caused raid, or riot in Scotia’s land.
A JEST.
A certain priest bad hoarded up
A mass of sacred gold,
And where he might secure the same,
He knew not, as we’re told.
At last it lik’d his fancy well
To lock it in a chest,
Within the chancel, where he wrote
Thereon, Hie Bern est.
A merry grig, whose needy mind
Was seeking such a prey,
Regarding not the reverend words
That on the casket lay,
Took up the gold, and blotted out
The priest’s inscript thereon,
Wrote “ Resurrexit ; non est hie :
Your God is rose, and gone.”
We have to announce, with very great regret, the death of one of
our fellow-passengers, Mr. Thomas Revington, who, notwithstanding the
utmost care and attention from the the rest of the passengers, breathed
his last on Wednesday morning, the 81st inst. He was extremely ill
when he came on board, and it was hoped that the sea voyage would
restore him—partially, at least —but unhappily these hopes were disap-
pointed. He was insensible for two days before his death, and died
without pain.


BAFFLE.
To be Eaffled for, at 2 o’clock on Monday afternoon, a splendid Sewing
Machine, the “ Princess of Wales.” It can be worked either by hand or
foot, and is in excellent order. Tickets can be obtained from Mr. England.
Mr. E. hopes that the crowd will roll up, and come to the front in a proper
manner.
KING BABY.
His sceptre is a rattle,
His throne his mother’s arms,
He reigns a tiny tyrant
In all his dimpled charms.
Yet round his royal presence
Our loving hearts entwine,
Dictator of the cradle,
And king by right divine.
Whatever be his mandates,
No courtiers dare rebel,
His mother’s chief of the household,
Prime Minister as well.
In yon perambulator,
His downy car of state,
Exacting rosy monarch,
What triumphs on him wait.
In purple ease and splendour,
Long, long he seeks to reign,
All hints of nose disjointed
He smiles at with disdain.
Alas ! that royal greatness
Should ever be disowned,
Here comes a tiny stranger,
King Baby is dethroned.
Central Criminal Court*
Eegina v. Holloway.
Before his Honor Sir Joseph Geoege, C. J., and a Jury of Four — (Ladies)
Sir Lawrence Smith, Q.C., prosecuted for the Crown, and the prisoner
was defended by Mr. Buz-fuz, Q.C., and Mr. Phunky.
The charge, stated by the Clerk of the Court, was, that the prisoner
did, on the 24th March, feloniously, and of his malice aforethought, break
and enter the house of one Mrs. St. John, with intent to rob.
The Crown prosecutor opened the case for the Crown as follows :
“ My Lud, and Ladies of the Jury, never in the course of my professional
experience, which has extended over many years, not only in the Colonies,
hut in the Old Country —I say again, my Lud, that never in the course of
my experience have I had such a truly sad and glaring case to lay before a
jury ; and I feel certain that, as soon as you have heard the evidence which
I shall produce, you will not entertain a doubt in your minds as to whether
the prisoner is guilty or not. My Lud and Ladies, I shall prove satisfac-
torily to you that the prisoner was aware that many valuables were con-
tained in Mrs. St. John’s house, and there cannot he the slightest doubt that
it was for a felonious purpose that the prisoner broke and entered. I shall
also prove to you that he was seen loitering about the publichouses in the
neighbourhood during the preceding part of the day, and was also seen
making love to the cook, which in itself is very suspicious. Ladies of the
Jury, you must bear in mind that if we prove the felonious intent, that is
quite sufficient for our case. This, lam sure, his Honor will tell you. Of
his guilt there can be no doubt, and your verdict will, I am sure, bear me
out I shall now call my witnesses, and leave the matter in your hands.”
Captain Weathereye was then called, and deposed: —“ lam a “ shell-
back.’ A ‘ shell-back ’ is a worn out old sailor. I live on board ; in the
coal-hole, better known as the iron pot. Early on the evening of the 24th
March, I was in the aforementioned vessel; later on I was in Saloon Street,


at about 10.30. I heard a slight disturbance. I saw the prisoner was the
cause of the disturbance, I noticed that his gait was shaky. I didn’t see
him walking, I only saw him on all fours.—Cross-examined: I gave the
entertainment that night. It was my birthday. The prisoner left the
table perfectly sober. I was sober—l can answer for myself.” Counsel:
“ What did you see that night ? ” (Here the witness hesitated, and counsel
for the defence remarked that he was “ making up a yarn.” His Honor;
“No insinuation, Brother Buz-fuz.”)
Mrs. Allen was called, and deposed;—“l am a married woman, and
live at No. 6, Saloon Street. I take in lodgers. On the 24th March I was
at home. I went to bed early — at 1 a.m. I was kept up late because my
husband was sick, and I was doctoring him. I do not keep a stock ot
medicine on board, bnt when I want any Igo to the nearest hotel. There
was a great noise on that night. I saw the prisoner at No. 8, Saloon Street.
I cannot say he was sober.” Cross-examined : “ I live next door to Mrs.
St. John.”
Mr. Robert Scotland deposed:—“l have seen the prisoner, and served
him with liquor. He left my house late. He was the same as I have seen
him many times before—he could not walk quite well. He drank sixteen
glasses of Rum Punch in my house.”
Sergeant Watchit deposed :—“ I did not know the prisoner before the
24th March. I saw him that night in Saloon Street. I was then on the
look-out. I was principally engaged in helping gentlemen home. The
prisoner was the sixth. I took him home to the lock-up. When I first
saw him he was sitting on the floor in Mrs. St. John’s cabin, and trying to
get up. I never drink. That night I drank some water. I was helping
Mrs. Allen’s lodgers home.”
This concluded the evidence for the prosecution.
For the defence, Counsel called—
Miss St. John, who said : —“I remember the 24th March. At past
II that night my light was burning, and the door of our house was rudely
broken open by a man. He had light whiskers. I will swear it was not
Holloway.” Cross-examined: “ I only drink port wine. I had been at a
party. We keep a good cook. She has followers. I will not swear that
the prisoner is not one of her followers.”
James Starboard :—“ lam a friend of the prisoner’s. I consider him
a good fellow. I was with him on the 24th March, It was between 11 &12
p.m., and I swear he was as sober as the Judge.” Cross-examined : “ I was
sober. He was not arrested when in my company.”
The Clerk of the Court then read the affidavit of Mr. David Robert!?,
which was as follows :
“ ‘ I was in company of the prisoner at 12 o’clock on the night of the
24th March. I walked home with him, I saw him enter his house. He
told me he had been walking with Mr. Starboard for an hour before I saw
him. He was perfectly, sober at the time. My firm belief is that he had
not tasted a drop that night.
(Signed) “ ‘ D. Roberts.’
“ Sworn before me, this 26th day of March, 1875.
(Signed) “ Jonathan Jeeker, J.P.,
“ Commissioner for Affidavits.”
This concluded the evidence,


Mr, Buz-fuz, Q.C,, then rose, and addressed the Jury :
“ My Lud, and Ladies of the Jury, when I first undertook the defence,
I felt completely overwhelmed with a sense of the heavy responsibility
imposed upon me ; a responsibility which I never could have supported were
I not buoyed up and sustained by a conviction, so strong that it amounted
to positive certainty, that the cause of truth and justice, or, in other words,
the cause of my much injured and oppressed client must prevail with the
high-minded and intelligent quartette of ladies whom I now see in that box
before me. I propose, my Lud, and Ladies of the Jury, to review the
evidence in detail; first, that for the prosecution, and then that for the
defence; and, after I have done so, lam sure you will all agree with me,
that the charge against my client is utterly groundless and fictitious.”
The learned counsel then commented upon the evidence ; after finishing
which, he continued: —“I feel sure, after hearing this, you will return a
verdict of ‘ Not Guilty,’ and that you will send forth my client free from
this dock, to resume that station which he has hitherto occupied in society,
without a single stain upon his character, or blemish upon his fame. You
are responsible to your own consciences for the words you will utter here
to-day, and my duty requires that I should tell you that you are to come to
your conclusion by a due understanding of the facts laid before you, by just
and natural inferences from those facts, and by weighing well and dispas-
sionately all you have heard here, to the utter exclusion of anything you
may have listened to outside of this court.”
His Honor then summed up ;
“ Having heard the evidence so fully, it is not necessary for me to do
more than give you the briefest outline of what was said by the witnesses,
The charge is that the prisoner broke and entered the house of Mrs. St.
John, with intent to commit a felony. Captain Weathereye says he saw
the prisoner on the 24th making a row and on all fours. Mrs. Allen says
he was at the door of Mrs. St. John’s house at 11.80, and did not seem
sober. Mr. Scotland swears that he had sixteen glasses of rum that even-
ing. Sergeant Watchitt, P. 8., was in Saloon Street, and saw the prisoner
in Mrs. St. John’s cabin sitting on the floor, but ‘ trying to get up.’ One
of the ladies into whose house prisoner is said to have entered states, that
the man had light whiskers, whereas, you see, the prisoner’s are as black as
Erebus.’ 1
After a few more comments, his Honor saicl;—“Ladies of the Jury,
you are aware that my province is to he impartial, and that character I
intend to maintain, but I cannot help remarking that the prisoner’s
appearance is far from prepossessing, and the evidence is very strong against
him. In fact, I never heard such frightful evidence against any prisoner.
As I said before, you have heard the evidence, and it now rests with you to
convict or discharge the accused. I need hardly remind you of your respon-
sibility in the position in which you are placed, and bid you bear in mind
that, whether you allow a guilty man to get off scot free, or imprison or fine
an innocent one, you are equally wrong. Weigh, then, well the evidence on
both sides, and give your verdict according to the same. Eetire, and look
sharp about it! ”
The Jury retired for 2 seconds, and brought a verdict of “ Not Guilty,”
and the prisoner was discharged; the learned Judge remarking that he left
the dock without a stain upon his character.


THE
Hydaspes Gazette and General Adbertiser.
No. 5.
April 10th, 1875.
iT last the far-dreaded Horn has been reached and passed ; no icebergs
have troubled us, not even a ship has been seen ; once more the head
of our noble clipper is turned towards the warmer latitudes which,
with a continuation of the same propitious weather, we hope soon to
reach. What delightful times we shall then have ! Picture to your-
selves the glorious sunsets, the lovely starlight nights, the moon in her well-
known grandeur ; when tinder the canopy of heaven you will be able to
w,alk the deck and ruminate on the happy days spent on Australia’s shores,
with hopes for their equivalent in the old country.
We feel certain that as the cold regions are now passed, our friends and
supporters will give us every assistance in their power to keep up the
character our Gazette has enjoyed so long ; and that, at the end of each
week, we may continue to have more than enough for one Saturday’s publi-
cation, so as to enable us to work throughout the following week for the
issue of the next number.
Charade.—My first is to exist ;
My second is to put away,
And my whole is to give.
ODE TO A FELLOW PASSENGER,
Come grieve with me, my butcher’s.dead,
The bird I loved so well.
Some thought the cold its blood had shed ;
What killed him I can’t tell!
At Wyagdon, near to Bathurst town,
First saw he the light of day;
His nest was lined with sticks and down,
The outside was covered with clay.
Two brothers, and a sister, too,
Lived in this little home,
Their mother oft did o’er them coo,
They were but skin and bone.
The night was dark, no moon did shine,
As to the nest did steal
A knowing young rascal, with evil incline,
Who hurried home his prize to reveal.
One day to this house I happened to 1011,
Paid a pound for the choice of two,
His melodious voice did say “ pretty poll,”
He could also say “ How are you '? ”
I hoped to be able to take him home,
Though much the long voyage did dread;
If always the sun on him could have shone,
His life perhaps might not have fled.
- Norseman.
ADYENTUEES IN QUEENSLAND.
Eeturning from' a trip in the north of Queensland, I pulled np for the
night at the station of a friend, who persuaded me to “ spell ” the next day
with him, as he said he was going about 250 miles along my road, and
would be glad of my company.
Of course, I was only too delighted to get a “ mate,” as it is miserable
work riding a long journey by one’s self, I therefore turned my horses into
the paddock, and stayed. I gave B. a “ hand” next day to shoe his horses,
and on the following morning we started. The nearest station was 70 miles
off; this was too heavy a stage to make in one day, and on a long journey
such as I had before me, so we agreed to “ camp out ” half way, and make
two days of it.
There was no track whatever for some miles, but both of us knew the
country. We turned out in the middle of the day to give the horses a
“ spell ” and have a “ pot of tea ” ourselves. On resuming our journey in
D


the afternoon, I noticed that the sky had a rainy appearance, and said to 8.,
“ I expect we shall have a wet night of it.” He turned round and said,
“Are you afraid of ghosts?” Said I, “Ghosts?” “Yes, ghosts,” he
replied. “Of course not,” I said; “ what do you mean?” “Well,” said
he, “do you believe in them?” “Certainly not; hut what on earth
makes you talk about ghosts?” “Oh! never mind,” said he, “we’ll go
and camp at the old Westhill station to-night; there is a hut with a pretty
good roof on it there, which will keep some of the rain off us, and it is not
more than two miles out of our way, and you might see a ghost.” On
asking him what he meant, he said that there really was a ghost at this
place. Of course, I said, “Humbug.” He evidently did not like being
chaffed about it, and remarked, “ Well, I never did believe in such things
one time, but they say that seeing is believing, and I have seen it—at any
rate, I have seen something very extraordinary there that I cannot well
describe—and lam not the only one who has seen it; my partner and
stockman have both seen the same thing, and two men who were travelling,
and camped there one night, were nearly frightened out of their wits. My
stockman would not camp there again for a year’s wages. I never can
make out exactly what it is like, though I have seen it twice, but I hope we
may see it to-night.”
I knewß. too well to imagine for one moment that he was “romanc-
ing,” but I certainly told him that I did not believe it was a ghost. “ Well,”
said he, “I will tell you all I know about it:-—Nearly nine months ago I
camped there by myself one night. It was raining hard, and I slept inside
the old hut; about midnight I awoke, and distinctly felt something cold
walking over me. The tire had gone out, and it was quite dark. I was not
at all afraid, but I could not make out what this thing could be. I put out
my hand and got hold of my revolver as quietly as I could, and then I
heard the steps going to the fireplace. I struck a match, which was
immediately blown out, but I had just time to see an indistinct sort of grey
object, about four feet high, moving towards the door. I jumped up at
once, and rushed to the door to catch it, if I could. The door was quite
fast, as I had left it when I turned in. I then struck another match, and
had a good look all round the hut, but not a sign of anything could I see.
I could not make it out at all. I looked up the chimney, and everywhere,
but not a sign of anything was to be seen. Well, I began to think that I
must have been dreaming, so I quietly rolled myself up in my blanket again
and went to sleep. About a month after this two men came to my place and
spun some yarn about a ghost they had seen at Westhill. They were
evidently in a great state of fright about it. They had camped the night
before at the old hut, and slept on the floor. In the middle of the night
they said that they had heard some unearthly noise, and that a ghost had
come into the hut and jumped on them. This, of course, I laughed at. I
asked them what it was like, but they could not tell me. Shortly after this,
my stockman and another ‘ hand ’ camped there after some stray cattle ;
they came back next day telling me that they had seen a ghost. They
were sleeping outside the hut, and this thing had come in the middle of the
night and danced round and over them, and then ran into the hut. They
described it as being of a light grey colour, about four feet high, but they
could not distinctly make out its form. They said that they could see right
through it, and were positive it was a ghost. I took no notice of this, but I
could never induce my man to go near the place afterwards. I made up
my mind to camp there the next time I went down, and see what it really


was. My partner and I went down some few weeks after this, and we
camped outside the hut and watched. It was a fine star-light night, and
about ten o’clock we heard some queer noises in the scrub, about half-a-mile
away, and shortly after we distinctly saw a whitish-grey-looking thing, about
four feet high, walking up from the creek. ‘ Here comes the ghost,’ said
A,, ‘look out! ’ The thing, whatever it was, made straight for the door of
the hut and went in, ‘ Now,’ said I, ‘ We’ll see what the beggar really is,’
and we both rushed to the door, feeling certain that we had him inside. I
told A, to wait outside the door with his pistol, and ‘ blaze away ’ at any-
thing that came out, and I would go in. So I entered, and there—standing
in the middle of the hut—was a vapoury-looking object, at which I imme-
diately ‘ let fly.’ I am certain that my pistol was not more than two feet
from it, but not a sound did I hear, A. sung out, ‘ Have you got him ? ’
I said, ‘ No, I can’t see anything ; but you keep your eyes open.’ ‘ I’ll
swear he won’t get out of this without my seeing him,’ said A. However,
I struck a light and searched everywhere, but saw nothing—not even a
track. We could not make it out; both of us had seen Hiim’ distinctly.
We heard noises in the ‘ scrub ’ afterwards, but never saw our friend again.
We have often talked about it since, and I determined to come again some
day and sit up all night watching for it, but I never could get anybody to
come with me.”
By this time we had reached the hut. I had never been there before.
It was a desolate-looking spot, on the bank of a scrubby creek, on the
opposite side of which was a dense scrub. We “ hobbled ” out our horses
on a good bit of grass, and made our supper off some “ Johnny cakes ”
and salt beef, washed down by a good pot of tea. We then .spread out our
blankets on a bit of “couch” grass just in front of the door of the old
hut, so that if it should happen to rain we could easily slip inside. Having
lighted our pipes, we sat down and began yarning ; among other things,
about the ghost. At last I said, “ Well, 8., this is all nonsense ; I’m on
for a snooze, if the beggar comes, I expect he’ll awake us.” “ Wait a little,”
said he; “ let’s sit up till 12 o’clock, for I feel certain that he will come, so
just start another pipe.” I must say that, for my own part, I felt just as
certain that he would not appear. However, just to please my friend, I lit
another pipe, and we began a long yarn about “the old countree.” I was
in the middle of my story when B. suddenly seized my arm, and I felt a
chilly sensation come over me. I was about to jump up at once, but he
held me' down forcibly, and whispered to me to keep quiet. I got hold of
my revolver, however, and looking up saw, not more than ten yards off, and
coming towards us, a most extraordinary object, something like a man in
form, but not more than four feet high, and of a lightish grey colour, rather
indistinct. It came within three or four yards of us, and then stopped
“Now,” said 8., “let him have it! ” at the same instant blazing his
revolver right at the object. I followed his example, and let the brute have
two barrels. “He” disappeared suddenly, and we saw no more of him.
but could hear yells and shrieks in the scrub directly afterwards ; so we,
jumped up and followed the sounds, but never saw anything more of the
ghost. The most extraordinary thing is that we could not shoot him, for
we were both of us very fair shots, and could break five out of six bottles at
thirty yards with a revolver, and I can swear that the animal (or whatever
he was) was not more than three or four yards off when we fired.
FROM OUR SHIPPING EE PORTER.
April 3rd, fresh breeze W.N.W., and thick, rainy weather ; 5 p.m.
reefed topsails; fresh gale, with thick, rainy weather; midnight, gale


moderating. April 4tli, Noon, fresh gale W., high, uneven sea, with hard
squalls and cloudy weather; same throughout night; at 11 a.m. sighted
Patagonian land. April 6th, Noon, fresh gale, ([high sea, and showery
squally weather ; Cape Horn in sight; 2.30 p.m. passed the meridian of
Gape Horn; throughout the night fresh breeze N.W., and cloudy weather.
April 6th, Noon, moderate breeze N.W., and fine, cloudy weather; all sail
set; p.m. increasing breeze ; in light sails ; 8 p.m. double reefed ; midnight
fresh gale ; in courses ; moderate sea and cloudy weather; barometer falling
fast. April 7th, Noon, fresh gale, thick, rainy weather, and confused sea ;
barometer 28.35 ; 4 p.m. shift of wind to S.W., which increased to a very
strong gale ; running all night under double reefs ; high sea ; 4 a.m. moderat-
ing. April Bth, strong breeze and fine weather. April 9th, fresh breeze and
very fine weather ; all sail set.
True courses and distances made good during the last week, N. 86° E.,
712 miles. N. 57° E., 650 miles. Distance sailed 1362 miles.
NOTICE.
Service will be held in the Saloon on Sunday, April 11th, at 11 a.m,
by the Eev. Duncan Eoss, assisted by Captain Babot.
N.B.—There will be a Collection after the service in aid of the
Merchant Seamen’s Orphan Asylum.
HJftltf), —On March 30th, at his residence, Cow Flat, Butcher Bird,
Esq., aged 11 weeks, deeply regretted by a large circle of friends and
acquaintances.
MOEE BIETHDAYS.
Tuesday, April 6th, was another day of great rejoicing; two of our
friends, a lady and a gentleman having (entered a new year. The same
old story was told over again at 5 o’clock, a.m., i.e., popping of corks and
congratulations through Bulkheads. Two happy faces appeared at breakfast,
beaming and causing reflections on every one present.
Nothing unusual occurred during the day. In the evening all mustered
round the banquet table, and after a hearty repast, well damped with
champagne, Captain Babot, in a very neat speech, proposed the health and
many happy returns of the day of our friends, which was appropriately
answered by Mr. Purves on behalf of the lady and by Mr. Liddell for
himself. After supper a very jovial hour was spent in songs, &c., assisted
by the punch bowl, after which everyone repaired to their homes.
The 7th April was the first anniversary of the birth of Miss Muriel
Constance Powell—Long may she live.
Commercial Keport.
Since my last there has been a great demand for Spring goods, and
owing to the non-arrival of parcels, we may say that we are at a stand until
some of otir expected shipping turns up. In exports, trade has been brisk,
and our wool nearly all shipped. We have had a great many inquiries
about learns, but they are scarce.
Bones are hard and firm. Holders of pork stuffing are doing a good
trade, the article being very scarce. Flour is much kneaded at P2O per ton.
Oatmeal, rice, and maize firm at old prices.
In wines, beers, &c., the demand is small, but fetch the last week's
quotations. Woollen stuffs are on the decline, and cast aside until next
season. Tobacco and cigars are scarce.—DJl.


THE
Hydaspes Gazette and General Adbertiser.
No. 6.
April 17th, 1875.
At pius iEneas '
in Tartara tendit.—Virg. iEn. Lib. IV., 898-446.
fO SANG Virgil a few periods since, clearly showing that both pies and
tarts were not unknown in his day. The passage above, freely trans-
lated means, that “the pie-ous rihieas rushed into the region of
tarts,” or in other words into a “ pastry-cook’s.” Thus we see that
e’en’e’as had a taste of tarts, hence we learn that it is not incompati-
ble for a pie lover to have a sneaking fondness for the tart.
Unfortunately however for posterity, Virgil does not clearly distinguish
’twixt pie and tart; —alas —could he have forseen what dire strife this
ambiguity has led to in these days, he would have devoted the whole
of an rihieid in an endeavour, if nothing more, to solve this much vexed
question. As regards the etymology of the words, it is not easy to arrive
at any satisfactory result. We suggest that the word “ pie ” is derived
from the Greek ttcuc (pais) “ a boy,” and reason that the name of the afore-
mentioned edible has reference to the fondness exhibited by boys for the
same. There are many kinds of pie, viz. : magpie, sea-pie, (for stormy
wear only) pie-do, pie-ty, mud-pie, pie-son and many others. It’s our pro-
vince now to speak of the tart, and it is too much for us almost—we can’t
derive it, in fact we fear we must “ pass it.” Since, however, Virgil has
failed to distinguish between the jucy pie and the tasty tart, let us endeavour
to remove from the eyes of the world those mists of ignorance which have
so long enshrouded tlaem, regarding the difference between the two.
Poets in all ages have sung the pie. Who knows not the legend of the
abstraction from a Xmas pie of a plum by the subsequently self-lauding
J, Horner, Esq. in a secluded spot ? So too, we have heard of the miracu-
lous notes which proceeded from the opened pie, wherein two dozen black-
birds had been baked, and which was pronounced fit for royalty.
Our object in choosing this somewhat peculiar subject for this week’s
■editorial, is to settle finally a dispute which has threatened to disturb very
seriously the peace of our little community. Did it only involve breoches of
the peace between members of the sterner sex it would not so much matter,
but when the gentler ones take up cudgels on behalf of their pet theories
we are greatly alarmed, and in order to prevent the necessity of an early
visit to Truefitt’s, on their arrival in London, We wish to set the matter at
rest. That which is in dispute is “ what is a Pie ”? and “ what is a Tart ”?
We Will leave the question of meats in connection with pastry out of the
question, for not the wildest partisan of the tart ever heard of a meat tart,
if we except Mr. Bouncer’s invitation to Mr. Verdant Green to come to his
rooms and partake of a “ dove tart and a spread eagle,” but then you know
Bouncer was eccentric. We then confine our attention to fruits and jams
■ associated with that mixture of flour and lard or butter.
We have consulted the latest English dictionary (1874) and we find the
definition thus given :


Pie. —An article of food consisting of paste baked with something in it
or under it.
Tart. — A species of pie or pastry, consisting of fruit baked on paste.
This should be final, decisive and tend to settle the difficulty for ever
and a day.
We confess our ideas run with those of the dictionary. A pie is some-
thing made in a pie dish. Who ever speaks of a cherry tart or apple tart ?
No, the memories of childhood rise up againt such an idea. Do we forget
“A was an apple pie”? No! never! —Unworthy the thought. It seems
but reasonable to adopt the sense of the words as above. We have then
the beautiful gradation—A Pie is covered : A Tart is open, and a Tartlet is
that small, round, flakey mass of pastry which surrounds a small dab of
jam, and is usually seen upon those tables at which hungry and thirsty
dancers assemble at a ball, when the midnight hour draws nigh.
KEBUS.
My Frst is in Sydney but never in City, - j
„ Second „ Jovial „ „ „ Witty.'
„ Third „ Crescent „ „ Cross, j
„ Fourth „ Profit „ „ „ Loss.
„ Fifth „ Demurrer „ „ Plea. 1
„ Sixth „ Courage „ „ Flee.
My Seventh is in Science but never in Art.
„ Eighth „ Cheek „ „ „ Heart,
„ Ninth „ Idle „ „ „ Lazy.
„ Tenth „ Fogs „ „ „ Hazy.
„ Eleventh „ France „ „ „Sweden
„ Twelfth „ London „ „ „ Eden.
As we are now nearing the warm latitudes, we may expect that the
votaries of Terpischore will indulge in their favorite pastime, and it may
not be out of place at this time to give them the
SAILING DIRECTIONS FOR QUADRILLES.
Le Pantelon. —Haul upon the star-board tack, let the other craft pass,
then bear up and get your head upon the other tack, regain your berth on
the port tack, back and fill with your partner, boxhaul her, wear round
twice against the sun in company with the opposite craft and your own,
afterwards boxhaul again and bring up.
L’Ete. —Shoot ahead about two fathoms, till you nearly come stern on
the other craft under way, then make a stern board to your berth, side out
for a bend first to the starboard and then to port, make sail and pass the
other craft, get your head round on the other tack, another side to starboard
and port, make sail to regain your berth, wear round, back and fill, and
boxhaul your partner.
La Poule. — Heave ahead and pass your adversary, yard-arm and yard-
arm, regain your berth on the other tack in the same order, take your
station in the line with your partner, back and fill, fall on your heel, and
bring up with your partner, She then manoeuvres, heaves all aback, shoots
ahead again, and pays off along side ; you then make sail in company till
nearly astern of the other line, make a stern board and cast her off to shift
for herself, regain your berth by the best means in your power and let go
your anchor.
La Teenise. —Wear round as before against the sun twice, boxhaul the
lady, range up alongside her and make sail in company ; when half way
across to the other shore drop astern of the tide, shoot and cast off the tow;
now back and fill as before and boxhaul her and yourself into the berth and
bring up.
La Pastorale. —Shoot ahead alongside your partner, make a stern
board, make all sail over to the other coast, let go the hawser and pay off


into your berth and take a turn; the three craft opposite range up towards
you twice and back astern again, now manoeuvre any rig you like, only under
easy sail, as it is always a light wind (Zephyrs as they call it) in this pas-
sage ; as soon as you see their helms down haul down in company with them
on the port tack, and make all sail with your partner into your own berth
and bring up.
La Finale. —Wear round to starboard passing under your partner’s
stern, sight the catheads of the craft on your starboard bow, then make
sail into your berth, your partner passing athwart your bows ; now proceed
according to the second order of sailing. To complete the evolutions, shoot
ahead and back astern twice in company with the whole squdron in circular
order of sailing.
A little boy commenced his composition on the “ Horse ” thus :
The Horse is a very useful animal. It has four legs—one at each corner.
It has a head at one end, and a tail at the other. The head end is the one
intended to go first, —but some horses object to that end going first, and go
the other way. They are called “jibbing” horses.
Answer to last week’s Charade: —BESTOW.
THE LILLY AND THE ROSE,
I’m in love with young Marie so sprightly and witty, ;
And think there’s no doubt of my winning her heart, j
But Katie has beautiful eyes and so pretty,
I really am loath with that charmer to part.
One cannot well marry two girls, I suppose,
So I’ll worship the Lilly and flirt with the Rose. j
Thus spoke a gay bachelor, given to flirting, j
Like a donkey between two sweet bundles of hay, j
Unwilling to choose, and quite careless of hurting ('
Their feelings, he said he was only in play. j
But a lover more earnest the fair Lilly chose,
j And a gallant young s ilor went off with the Rose.
He’s a bachelor still, but his moustache and whiskers
Are grey as opossums, he’s fat, serve him fight !
And he stands all alone, as the gay deux temps friskera
Dance by him, and laughingly wish him good night.
I But are there no ladies who flirt with two lovers ?
I’ve heard of such things, but I’m not one of those
Till morning is ended and evening discovers,
The Lilly is faded and withered the Rose,
FOUND. —On the 16th instant, in Companion Place, a Garnet Stud.
The owner can have it by applying at the office, and paying all expenses.
WANTED to purchase, A Straw Hat. Panama or Cabbage Tree pre-
ferred.
Messrs. LIDSON AND WIDDELL,
PERFUMERS AND HAIRDRESSERS,
SALOON STREET.
s. d.
Hair Cutting 0 6
„ Curling 1 0
Shampooing 2 0
s. d.
Shaving 0 6
If hot water provided 0 8
A Dry Scrape 0 2
Messrs. L. & W. beg to draw the attention of the public to their celebrated
“ Hydasphine ,” as a cure for baldness. It is a harmless, invisible, non-
existing liquid. Treatise on “ The Hair,” post free to any part of the
world for 6d.
TOOTH BRUSHES IN GREAT VARIETY.
Impromptu suggested on reading the lines on the death of the butcher
bird:—
Oh! Butcher, dear, why did you die ?
The birds die fast, and faster;
You’ve been and gone and killed yourself,
Don’t kill with grief your master.


FROM OUR SHIPPING REPORTER.
April 10th, Noon, moderate increasing breeze N. and cloudy weather;
very unsteady throughout night; midnight, wind hauling to the westward.
April 11th, Noon, light unsteady breeze S.W.; same throughout night, with
fair weather. April 12th, Noon, moderate westerly breeze and fine weather ;
p.m. wind northing ; throughout night fresh breeze and cloudy weather.
April 13th, Noon, strong increasing breeze N.W. and fine cloudy weather ;
4 p.m, reefed topsails ; 6 p.m. double reefed ; throughout night strong gale and
hard squalls ; midnight, furled mainsail. April 14th, Noon, strong breeze and
fine, cloudy weather ; out reefs ; set all sail; throughout night light breeze
and fine weather, with S.W. swell. April 15th, very fine weather. April
16th, light variable airs, and calms, with cloudy weather.
True course and distance made good during the last week N. 41° E.
1180 miles.
Commercial intelligence.
With the fine weather we have large demands for light clothing; holders
are doing a brisk trade, piices being high, I suppose owing to the non-
arrival of a fleet which is overdue. We have also large demands for hats in
felt or straw. This scarcity has been felt for some time, but will soon wear
off. We have also a brisk run on cushions, and horse rugs for deck pur-
poses, caused, no doubt, by the anticipation of long naps on deck when the
weather gets warmer. We have enquiries after theatrical properties, having
heard that a large company is expected to arrive here next week. Their
agent has turned up, and is busy turning up everything in the old theatre.
Opera cloaks, gloves, ribbons, bouquet holders, perfumery, opera glasses, and
other “ gimcracks ” are very scarce. The wine and spirit trade is at a
standstill; no fresh arrivals and no sales. Ale in quarts is still very flat;
but there is still the old run on stout in pints. This article is sure to go up
next week (with the heat). Ale will then begin to pop off. ,In aerated
waters the stock is low, and may be expected to fetch old rates.
Produce market same as last week.
Perhaps the best specimen of open wit now in circulation, is that of the
London cabby’s retort to the head of the Highland clan Mackintosh. “Do
you know who I am ? ” asked the haughty Highlander, of a cabman attempt-
ing, as Mackintosh thought, to overcharge him, “I’m The Mackintosh.”
“ I don’t care,” said the cabby, “if you were the umbrella, I mean to have
my tare.”
Last evening, April 15th, we were drawn towards the quarter deck (our
moon-lit ballroom) by terpsichorean attractions. Professor Tomini (who is
a perfect master of his instrument) performed on the violin. The dance
commenced with a quadrille, the captain acting as master of ceremonies,
after which followed the giddy fast dances; and though the stately ship
lurched continually, yet the execution of the fair sex in the light fantastic
proved them to be perfect artistes. While the dainty feet of the younger
ladies were steering them round the portion of the deck used for dancing,
our older friends were either promenading or watching the dancers; we were
glad to find Saloon Street completely deserted, and our noble recreation


grounds (or rather public park) resorted to. This is the first evening that
such has been the case, and we sincerely hope that fine weather may enable
a continuation of the same till the end of the voyage. At about 8 o’clock
the dancing was concluded by the professor playing a set of Lancers, with
great spirit, which was duly responded to by the dancers.
MEET ME BY MOONLIGHT ALONE.
Oh ! meet me by moonlight alone, love,
When the stars they are shining so bright,
When the steward has put all the spirits away.
And doused the ten o’clock light.
When all around is hushed and still,
When my rivals all have flown.
When only the officer paces the deck,
Oh ! meet me by moonlight alone.
Ob ! meet me by moonlight alone, love,
For my heart has much to tell,
There’ll be nobody near to disturb us,
But the midshipman striking the bell.
Oh ! grant me this one fond favour,
Let me call thee once more, dear, mine own,
Oh ! hear a devoted admirer’s appeal,
1 And meet me by moonlight alone.
A partly inebriated man offered to bet half a dollar, this noon, that he
could climb up a tree in two minutes ; but after sitting down on the side
walk at the foot of it for ten or twelve minutes, he suddenly picked himself
up, muttering that, drunk as he was, ke knew better than to fly in the face
of Providence by trying to climb a slippery elm.
A sad tableaux, but not an uncommon one.—A small, wretched-looking
house ; outside, a miserable apology for a man, crazed by drink, assaulting
the door, and making the air resound with his curses ; inside, a thin, pale
woman with a wan expression of features, pressing one hand tightly over
her heart, and with the other heating a poker in the fire.
We have heard that a contemporary proposes to set a series of adver-
tisements to music, and we beg to suggest the following as specimens :
Come into the garden Maud,
And sit beneath the rose,
And see me prance about the beds,
Dressed in my Sundaj T clothes.
Go fetch your pa, he’s in the boat,
Your uncles and your aunts,
And tell them Johnson made my coat,
My waistcoat, and my pants.
or this :
Gaily young Ferguson bought his cigar,
Bought it at Mulligan’s, where the best are ;
Does he want fine cut snuffs for his nose,
Gaily young Ferguson purchases those.
OR THIS :
Go to MeGunnigan’s,
Ask for a gingham,
A silk or alpaca,
And make the man bring ’em.
There they put ribs in,
Or a new cover,
Come to McGunnigan’s,
Come with your lover.
LOST, Stolen, Strayed, or otherwise Mislaid, a Three-hladed Penknife,
mother-of-pearl handle, brass hound and copper fastened. Reward—
One bottle of Beer. Apply, C. H. Watson, No. 2, Market Street, Com-
panion Place.
E


THE
Hydaspes Gazette and General Adbertiser.
No. 7.
April 24th, 1875.
fE may now congratulate ourselves on being fairly in tlie warm latitudes.
This advent of ours is plainly visible in more ways than one. The
costumes of all around have materially altered for tlie lighter. We
don’t see shivering mortals wrapped up in rugs and opossum cloaks,
J huddled together in the saloon ; instead thereof we have lightly-clad
promonadcrs, or loungers, on deck during the day, and at night the ship
resounds with the tripping of the dancers and the music of the orchestra.
Another feature.—At supper time we miss the sight of the great white hot-
water-containing jug, the fragrance of the lemon, and the flavour of
whisky; and we hear wishes expressed for ice. [lf we only had ice, what
jolly claret cup we would brew ! That, however, is a luxury we must deny
ourselves until we reach “ the metropolis of the world.”] And, then, many
of the fair sex we see busily occupied compiling letters to be sent by the first
opportunity to their correspondents in the New World. We don’t envy the
recipients their task of perusing and digesting the same, for some seem to be
of an awful length. However, it amuses them, and don’t hurt us. We only
wish they would devote some of their spare time to giving us a contribution
now and then, for it is much needed. [N.B. —This does not apply to all the
ladies, Ed., H. (I. and Gr. A.] Our box is quite useless ; the Editor opens
it in vain ; his trudges to and from it are unproductive, and our staff is at
times well nigh at wit’s end. It is gratifying to know that the theatrical
talent is being brought to the front, and we expect to be startled very soon
by an unprecedented display of histrionic art. Hunting has found much
favour of late-. The covers of Messrs. Lidson & Widdell (the well-known
Court hair dressers) were drawn a few nights ago, but unfortunately the
vermin ran to earth. Some cub-hunting has also been done. On Monday,
the covers at Lyvebote yielded no less than twelve, and the neighbourhood
of Skrettghallie afforded much sport. We regret that unfavourable weather
prevented us from exchanging files with ship—name unknown—that passed
us on Wednesday, from London bound to Adelaide. Had we been able to
do so, we would have had the latest news, and doubtless this paper would
possess greater interest than it does. The appearance of a vessel has long
been looked forward to by us, more especially one bound to Sydney, and
hopes were entertained that letters might be sent by such an one ; but this
fluttering only occurred in the breasts of the wildest enthusiasts—principally
among the fair sex.
CHARADE.
How proudly o’er the heaving sea
The good ship holds her way,
TVhile from her bows in wanton sport,
She dashes wide the spray.
Par in her wake a line of foam
Is marked in purest white,
And. billows flashing back the first,
Like diamonds sparkle bright.
Upon the deck the Captain stands,
And marks the shimmering sheen,
That spreads afar, and meets his gaze,
On ocean’s breast of green.
Now homeward bound, he thinks upon
His home hard by the shore,
For though he loves the second well,
He loves his wife the more.
Still on her course the vessel glides,
Day darkens into night,
The little stars come peeping out,
Each with its lamp trimmed bright.
Though shoals and sandbanks spread around,
And danger hovers near,
The whole points out the safest way,
And shows the track to steer.


ON FLIRTS.
It is common to speak of those whom a flirt has jilted as her victims.
This is a mistake—the real victim is the man she marries. A coquette is
like a rose, from which every lover plucks a leaf, and leaves the thorns for
her future husband.
Riddle : — What is the difference between an accepted and a rejected lover ?
Conundrum :—What is the most wonderful piece of mechanism and its contents :
It contains: —1. A box.
„ 2. Two young animals.
„ o. Two tall trees.
„ 4. One large animal.
~ 5. Two places of worship.
It contains ; — t . A great number of shellfish’
~ 7. Ten Spanish gentlemen.
~ S. Three measures.
9. Some musical instruments.
~ 10. A number of swift animals.
and 11. Two fishes.
HUNTING : —Messrs. Lidson and Widdell's hounds met on Tuesday, the
20th instant, about 4 a.m. at Gazette Gorse, and found near water-
bottle Spinney, the fox breaking for chest covert. After a merry burst of,
fifteen minutes, they earthed him near Grog Grange.
A Main Street woman doesn’t have any trouble with her husband when
he gets in a tantrum, and she wants to get rid of him, so as to have the
house to herself; she merely observes that there are a few skeins of yam to
hold, and steps out of the room to get them. Long before she returns, the
frightened victim is fleeing up the street.
FROM OUR SHIPPING REPORTER.
April 17th. —Noon, light S.W. breeze, and very fine weather, to calm
variable throughout night. G a.m. light breeze, N.W. April 18th, noon ;
moderate breeze N.W., and fine cloudy weather, throughout night brisk
breeze and fine weather. April 19th. —Noon, brisk breeze N. and fine
weather, throughout night squally cloudy weather. April 20th.—Noon, fresh
breeze and cloudy ; gusty weather. In top gallant sails 4 p.m., wind hauling
to the westward. Throughout night, fresh breeze N.W.N., with heavy head
swell, pitching heavily. April 21st, Noon, fresh breeze AY. and fine cloudy
weather, throughout night brisk breeze and fine weather. April 22nd, Noon,
moderate breeze W.S.AV. and cloudy fine weather ; same throughout night.
April 23rd, Noon, light breeze S.S.AY. and very fine light weather.
True course and distance made good during the last week N 33 u E >
1010 miles. ;
The reason an urchin gave for being late at school Monday, was that the
boy in the next house was going to have a dressing down with a bed cord,
and he waited to hear him howl.
Commercial intelligence.
With the fine weather we have large calls for all sorts of light clothing,
which, lam sorry to say, is scarce. Hats still fetch good prices ; we have
seen some at 64. each and some at £l, also a very old one has been offered
for G/. It is rather out of repair but will fetch its money. Beer in quarts is
firmer, and we expect to see it brisk by the end of the week. Stout in pints
is scarce, and by the end of the week this article will be clear of the market;
E 2


we have had some arrivals lately and have tasted some good samples o
Guiness’s stout in quarts. There is no demand for spirits or wines. Aerated
waters still enquired for ; market is well stocked. Pork, mutton and poultry
are diminishing as we proceed. Roofing is wanted but we believe there will
he no scarcity of the article. Opossum rugs are a drug in the market.
MATRIMONY.
\\7 ANTED by a gentleman, young, fair complexion, light brown hair’
V V whiskers and moustache, of the medium height, and slightly inclined
to embonpoint, a correspondence with a young lady with an ultimate view to
matrimony. The lady need be no particular height or color, hut must he
amiable, loving, musical and social, also accomplished and fit to move in the
highest society,, into which the advertiser will take her. She must not he
younger than 15 nor older than 21. Money no object as advertiser, has a
comfortable income, and very great expectations. Address X.Y.Z., care of
the Editor of the H.G. & G.A.
IN' THE DOLDRUMS.
“ From this world, so worn and weary,
From this inn, a broken guest;
From its chambers—blank, uncheery—
I depart ; I hope to rest.”
“ I’m no ties of friendship leaving ;
No, not e’en a mistress dear ;
There’s not one that I’m bereaving,
All alone I linger here.”
“ Nearly peering through the portal,
What’a to come I try t’ explore ;
Perhaps some part of me’s immortal,
Lives for ever—l no more.”
“ Howe’er it be, I shall not alter ;
Soon or late we all must die ;
I fill the glass and do not falter—
Fellow mortals, here’s good bye.”
“ So I pour this last libation,
To all I hold on earth divine,
And I drink this last potation
To money,* smoking, sleep, and wine.”
I think my fair expectancy of life may he put down at ten years ; deduct
Jive for time spent in sleep, and two for illness and staring about doing
nothing : so it would appear I rob the public of about three years services,
which as they appear to value at present at nothing I dont think they have
much grievance. As for my own settlement on the other side, that is strictly
my own affair, and if any gentleman has anything to say about that, I advise
him to keep his breath to cool his own chestnuts. I had better by way of
simplifying matters, state my own reasons :—The terms on which I exist
here are not such as any man can acquiesce in for any lengthened period. I
have tried for some time without change, and ’tis time I retired. Suppose
the jury were sane, they must find me sane. Consecrated ground is rubbish ;
wherever God is—and where is he not ?■ —is consecrated ground. So bury
me here—let the sea breeze blow over me, and don’t tumble me in amongst
a parcel of shopkeepers and dissenters in some foeted cemetery.
Latitude o°. Longitude X O . Course: —circular. Distance nil.
A delicate and skilful operation was performed last week on one of our
citizens, by our eminent professor, Dr. Wilcousin. It appears Mr. Lidhill
has for some little time been suffering from a peculiar thickening and pressure
on the back of his head, which threatened serious consequences to this
gifted and talented man. We most devoutly hope that under the Professor’s
treatment all these unpleasant obstacles are removed, and Mr, Lidhill may
once more shine the brilliant ornament of the noble and gallant house of
which he is the representative.
C was soing tn s,iy friendship, but I remember I never had anv friends but when 1 had money, so I think
rne alteration is just.


TLIEaATIcE ROYAL,,, HYDASPES.
This magnificent place of amusement will be opened on Tuesday next,
27th of Apkil (weather permitting). The manager has at <jreat expense pro-
cured an astounding amount of talent, and it is fully expected that this fashion-
able place of resort will be crowded nightly. The performance commences with
the thrilling tragico-comico-farcical play—
THE BLIGHTED BEING,
Ned Spanker,—Mb. H. POWELL. Gumming,—Mr. D. J. LIDDELL. Job Wort, —Mr.
W. A. PURVES. The O’Rapeebtv,—Dr. WILSON. Susan Spanker,—Mrs. PURVES.
To be followed by the when-once-seen-never-to-be-forgotten side-splitting farce,
BOMBA PTES FURIOSO,
The King,—Mr. D. ROBB. Fusbos,— Mr. W. M. SIMPSON. Bombastes,—Mr. G. WILSON
Distafpina,—Mrs, BYRON. Attendants, Soldiers. &c.,—COMPANY.
Eminent Costumiers, Scenic Artists, and Mechanists have also been
engaged, and the Manager expects that these pieces will be placed on the
stage in a manner hitherto unsurpassed. Doors open at 6'45 : curtain rises
at 7 sharp. Programmes to be had from the box keepers, 1/ and ihl. each,
according to quality. Proceeds to go to the Merchant Beamon’s Orphan
Asylum Fund. Carriages may be ordered for 9 p.m. There will be an
interval of ten minutes between the pieces.
VIVAT REGINA.
APRIL 21st, 1875.
To-day the sun rose bright, aud shone
Upon the ocean deep and green ;
O’er many a wave there tripped serene,
The brave “jHydaspes ” all alone.
The timbers creak’d, the waters curl’d,
Beneath the deep and crushing stem ;
A cry rose from some smokers, when
The blinding foam o’er them was hurl’d.
Thus ending soon their morning smoke,
They ran below with ardour cold,
Their clothes to shift, and on deck bold
Appear’d again, no worse for soak.
Soon afterwards a sail is spied,
As if it rose from out the sea ;
On deck we all repair with glee
Our eyes to feast, so long untried.
And swiftly now she passes by,
Borne on before the fresh’ning wind ;
Too distant far the name to find,
Her nation known as colours fly.
Another hour, where has she gone ?
No vestige of her can be seen,
So short our view of her has been,
’Tis hard to think there has been one.
A smaller speck does soon appear,
Her head is pointed for the North,
No pleasing cries from us break forth,
She draws away and does not near.
And soon the day draws to a close—
The setting sun has run his time,
Whose lovely tints and shades divine
Inspire with feelings of repose.
See what a grand sight follows soon ;
From ’neath a gold tipp’d cloud doth peer
Benton, her nightly course to steer,
Our old majestic friend, the Moon.
Oh ! lovely globe, on thee we gaze,
As oft our fathers have before,
Hoped as we to reach our shore,
With the assistance of thy blaze.
THE PETRIFYING TAIL OF TWO STORMY PETRELS.
Lightly we skim o’er ocean’s blue waves,
Poised on scarce fluttering wings ;
Aye joyous and blithsome, for sorrow to us,
Nor calm, nor tempest, e’er brings.
Our home is the boundless, limitless air,
And alike, by day and by night,
Restlessly roaming we ne’er seek repose,
Nor discontinue our flight.
We love to follow our stately ships,
When roar the winds, and seethes the sea ;
All risks and all perils are known to us,
For true sailors’ spirits are we.
We whilom sailed with the gallant’Perouse
In search of some unknown land ;
But, alas ! we sank with him and his crew—
A bold adventurous band.
And now, deep in ocean’s sparkling cells,
Our shroudless corpses he—
’Midst glitter of coral and malachite
They slumber peacefully.
Bnt our souls have been wafted up toward
heaven
And lightly we glide through the air,
Ne’er nearing the land, but o’er the waves
Free from all sorrow and c»re. [flitting,
But one thing we lack ; ’tis the gift of speech
Wherewith each skipper we’d warn,
As we guardian-like follow his freighted ship,
That there’ll be a storm before morn.
Answek to Rebus in our last —SAN FRANCISCO.


THE
Hydaspes Gazette and General Adbertiser.
No. 8.
April 30th, 1875.
? LIFE on the Ocean Wave ”is certainly very pleasant under certain
SI circumstances, as for instance, picture to yourself the following :
/I Tis a calm, still, cloudless night, the moon and stars are performing
ill/ then- usual functions, lighting up the deck of a noble ship, and in
\) the shadow cast by the lazily flapping sails, are seated a youth and
a beauteous maiden, who are all in all to each other. His arm encircles her
taper waist, and her head rests gracefully on his shoulder, while the luxuriant
masses of her raven hair pour over his vest pattern. Fie, impassioned youth,
whispers words of love into her pretty little ear, and ever and anon seals them
on her lips, and how enticingly she raises her lovely mouth to his ; verily, he
might say with the poet, “ I’d sleep a hundred years for such a kiss.” This
is all very fine and romantic too, but when the gruff voice of the mate is heard
on a stormy night, “ All hands reef topsails,” when the rain, sleet, and snow
are rushing down from the opened heavens, and rude Auster howls through
the shrouds, and the ship is rolling the lee scuppers under, then vanish senti-
mental notions, and we have to deal with stern reality. Again, I can’t say
that a life on the aforesaid wave is at all favourable to the work of an editor,
when the elements are at war with each other, and the howling of the wind
is only equalled by the howling of the children, and in the midst thereof he
attempts to roll out his ideas and commit them to paper. No, no, ’tis too
hard a task for an ordinary mortal, so we give it up. Perhaps we may im-
prove : judge for yourselves next time.
THE BURIAL OF THE BUTCHER.
By One of His Mates.
Not a whistle was heard, not a funeral chirp,
As our friend to his wet grave we hurried,
Not a bird discharged a farewell note,
As the “ Butcher ” we took to be buried.
We buried him quickly to save our fright,
Our beaks from the sad sight turning ;
And we sighed as we stood in the broad daylight.
To think him no more returning.
We thought, as we hove him over the side,
. How sadly we’d miss his whistling,
And we felt for our poor dear master’s grief,
When in vain for his whistle listening.
THE SONG OF THE LOVE SICK SWAIN.
As we thought of his dear little playful ways’
Our hearts for him were yearning,
And we thought of the many long lonely days,
Whilst we for the dead one are mourning.
Few and short were the notes we sung,
As the parrot the service was reading ;
But we thought the more of the one that was gone,
And our hearts for him were bleeding.
Slowly and sadly we hopped away,
From the eldest to the youngest birdie,
The whole of us mournfully thinking of him
Whom we left all alone in the briny.
As I stood on the deck last night,
In silence, and all alone,
I gazed on the murkey sky, and I listened
To ocean’s grand monotone.
The waves and the wind whistled weirdly,
And the heavens were overcast.
And my heart sympathetic was sad,
Though our craft was speeding fast.
I mournfully thought of the stately ships
That sunken lie in the deep,
And of the brave men who in ocean’s bed,
Are sleeping their list long sleep.
Thus mused I, when swiftly through a dark
There gleamed forth a twinkling star, [cloud,
AVhich seemed to pour its soft light on my soul,
Although it was distant so far.
And sudden the waves were illumined with
Like diamonds down in a mine, [specks,
And the star and the glittering waves hade me
So now I’ll no longer repine. [hope,
But I’ll think of a fair belov’d one at home,
Whose gaze will be turned towards Heaven,
As she fondly prays that to the “ Hydaspes,”
A speedy return may be given.


ROYAL HYDASPES THEATRE.
This fashionable place of resort was crowded with the elite of “ Hydaspes ”
last Tuesday evening, all apparently bent on enjoyment. The feast prepared
for the souls of the spectators, was a pair of farces entitled, “ The
Blighted Being,” and the well-known and never uninteresting “ Bombastes
Furioso.” As far as we could judge, the caste was admirably arranged to
suit the histrionic idiosyncrasies of the various performers. In “ The Blighted
Being,” the character of Sweet Susan, the heroine, was most gracefully taken
by Mrs. Purves. Mr. Powell, as her brother, was most effective, and showed
an immense amount of forethought in preventing the unfortunate Blighted
one from making away with himself, with the help of .£lOO, and the O’Rafferty.
The said O’Rafferty found a very able representative in Dr. Wilson. He
certainly threw all his soul into the part, and his acting and brogue were
pronounced inimitable by all. Mr, Liddell, as Gumming the Waiter, was
splendid; his “ get-up ” and his tout ememhle were really good. The chief
part iu the play, that of Job Wort, was taken by Mr. Purves about whose
activity there is very little to say, except that we have seen that part acted
many times, but we have never seen it done so excellently as it was the other
night. Mr. Purves combined the “ comic ” with the “ serious ” admirably,
and his “agony” was simply perfect. After a short interval, during
which “ Lemonade, ginger beer, and the hill of the play ” went round on the
arm of Mr. Ducks, the curtain rose to
BOMBASTES FURIOSO.
To one acquainted with the limited supply of theatrical material on board
a ship, it was perfectly marvellous how the various characters in the play
managed to “ rig themselves up.” It was very evident that all had done
their utmost to make it a general and decided success. Mrs. Byron as the
fickle, but fascinating “ Distaffina ” was dressed to perfection, and played her
part in a most finished manner. Mr. Wilson as “ Bombastes ” was gorgeous,
his brilliant uniform, combined with his good acting, evidently captivated the
hearts of all the ladies in the vast theatre. “ Fusbos ” was admirably
acted by Mr. Simpson, who showed himself a true statesman. The difficult
part of “ The King ” was exceedingly well taken by Mr. Robb. His love-
making with the fascinating Distaffina was “ Killing ” and the plucky manner
in which he defied the “ Valorous Bombastes ” delighted the hearts of all his
hearers. It would be invidious in us to distinguish any of the dresses, parti-
cularly as they were all “ got-up ” with such good taste, but we cannot close
our report without heartily congratulating the actors upon their complete
success, and we feel sure that the satisfaction they gave the audience amply
repaid them for the immense trouble they must have taken. Programmes,
written by the fair hands of some of our female aristocracy, were handed
round by Mr. Ducks, and under his able management realized a considerable
sum, which went to the aid of the Merchant Seamen’s Orphan Asylum.
MOVING ON.
AVe are moving on at a terrible rate,
Which throws ancient prophecies quite out of date,
And makes us, at seasons, seem masters of fate. j
The march of improvement, so called, broadens on, 1
Tillman’s prominent thought seems a wish to be gone i
From life’s load, which, at times, shows too weighty j
for one.
A creature of wrath, domination, and pride ;
Man taketh no rest in his horrible stride
O’er the fast pulsing heart of the universe wide.
The laggards give in, short of wind and of breath ;
i And the weakly drop down, and are trampled to death
j There’s more room tor the mighty in motion, man
saith.
Moving on in the train of dread Kaisers who smite,
Desolate, and destroy with a blast and a blight,
Like the fiends of old fable, at work in the night.
Mov ng onward with Cresars whose legions are red
With the ban of the quick and the curse of the dead,
Who, fighting for home and for altar, have hied.


Moving on like a storm thro’ a shuddering world,
While around us doom, death, and destruction are
hurled,
And the vengeance we brave about rear-ward lies curled
The ruler’s of earth for earth’s mastery strive ;
While the weak sheep to slaughter before them they
drive.
With machinery devils might blush to contrive.
Faith, Charity, Hope, and the virtues, which gave
That far away look to the countenance brave
Of the Christian, whose vision out-s ghted the grave,
Seem vanished away ’neath the hellish distrust, i
The covetous, ravaging, ravenous lust
Of empire, which tramples man s soul in the dust. ‘
The peace of contentment no longer may still \
Timours rising up in the strength of self-will, !
To crush and to conquer, to spoil, and to kill.
! The voice of the Christ has no strength to be heard,
■ At the deaf hearts of men, who refuse to be stirred
! By the whispering tones of the crucified Word !
i The priests of High God throw their humbleness
! down,
And revile their oppressors with curse and with
| frown;
And take part in the struggle for empire and crown.
jWe move in a maze—in a circle which leads
To the past we had swept from our pathway like
weeds,
As the future stretched out to our hopes and our needs.
We move in a mist, where the nations conceal
The thoughts of their hearts in a breagt-work of steel,
And the only faith left us tends all to self-weal.
We move in a dream where the vision is fed,
With promptings of horror and shapings of dread ;
While the heart and the soul and the conscience lie
dead.
AN ACROSTIC.
Dedicated respectfully to Mrs. Bahot.
E ager to aid with willing heart,
L ightly deeming labours part,
I nstant answering duty’s call,
Z ealous to please, and pleasing all.
A nd as thou art so ever be,
B right and bonny, pure and free.
E ver be thy heart as light.
T read ever thus the path of right,
He then will guard thee in His might.
B y thy kindly words and deeds,
A nd sympathy with others’ needs,
B y thy winning smiles we trace
O utward signs of inward grace,
T he stamp of goodness on thy face.
Riddle.—My first denotes a company, my second is the same as my first,
and my whole is something one can either eat or drink.
FROM OUR SHIPPING REPORTER.
April 24th, Noon, moderate S.S.E. trades and very fine weather, same
throughout night. April 25th, noon, brisk trades and fine clear weather, to
unsteady breeze hauling northerly ; same throughout night. April 26th,
noon, moderate trades E.N.E. to N.E., with cloudy fine weather; same
throughout night. April 27th, noon, moderate trades E.N.E. and fine
weather ; throughout night brisk and cloudy. April 28th, noon, brisk trade
E.S.E. and fine weather ; throughout night moderate and fine. April 29th,
noon, moderate trades and fine weather ; throughout night unsteady, squally,
showery weather, April 30th, noon, brisk trades E.S.E. with cloudy weather
and passing showers. Several outward bound ships were passed during the
week, but only one homeward bound. A barque now in company.
True course and distance made good during the week, N, 9° W. 1012
miles.
Answer to last week’s Charade — LlGHT — SHIP.
Commercial intelligence.
Since our last issue trade in all its branches has been brisk. In light
fancy goods the run has been unprecedented in the annals of our small town-
ship. Gold lace is at a premium. All manner of light fancy coloured calicoes
fetch fabulous prices, and the demand for them is still very great, caused no


doubt by the influx of fashionable visitors to our part to spend the season.
Perfumery is a drug in the market, if we except Eau de Cologne, which is
now very scarce. Beer is well up but goes down well. Stout is brisk and
much enquired after. Sodawater, lemonade, and other cooling drinks are in
great demand, stock decreasing very fast. In wines claret is steady at all
prices. There has been no enquiries after spirits.
COURT NOTICE.
Masquerade Dinner.— Guests will present their cards, with character on
the back, to the page in waiting. Captain and Mrs. Babot will receive on
the after part of the poop at 5-30 p.m. After which gentlemen will place
their names, and that of their partners, opposite the places they wish to
occupy at table. Dinner on the table at six o’clock.
AH EDITOR’S TROUBLES.
Oh ! an Editor’s life is not pleasant,
His work is a horrible bore ;
When “ jerks ” in his box are not present,
It vexes the poor man full sore.
In despair he goes to his study,
And cudgels his brain for a leader ;
But as that doesn’t come forth spontaneous
He is wild, pray believe it, fair reader.
More despair—he goes to the staff,
And says “ boys, please give us a jerk ; ”
The staff have a quaff, and at him a laugh,
And go on with their masquerade work.
Conundrum. —lf a man was on the top of the house with an eider duck, which
would be the best way for him to get down.
Eiddle. —When I got up this morning I found it, and when I found it I
picked it up to look for it, and when I picked it up to look for it I found
I couldn’t find it, so when I found I couldn’t find it I put it down and
walked away with it.
A young man becoming a little dissatisfied with the coquettish actions
of his young lady while she was shopping on Saturday, retired to another
part of the store, and, resting his elbow on the dummy figure of a woman,
gave himself up to gloomy reflection, from which he was rudely aroused by a
sharp push, while the dummy received a vigorus slap over the head from an
indignant lady’s parasol. There is hardly enough of the English language
to do justice to the scene that followed.
A Boy of tender years, whose parents live on Rabbit Hill, returned
Saturday night from a visit to his uncles in the country, and Sunday morn-
ing got an auger and perforated his father’s choice peach tree, and set out a
pail for the sap. When the old gentleman discovered the preparations for
the coming sugar season, he instituted an investigation, and the little boy,
remembering Washington, went up in the garret and hid behind a barrel.
It will be some weeks before he will he able to hide behind a barrel again.
OTICE.—There will he a Concert in the “ Royal Hydaspes Music Hall,”
i i during the course of next week, when we confidently expect an
immense display of new and hitherto latent talent.
Answer to Conundrum in our last —THE HUMAN BODY.
1. Chest. 2. Calves. 3. Palms, 4. H(e)art. 5. Temples. 6. Muscles
7. Tendons. 8. Foot, Hand, Nail. 9. Drums. 10. Hairs (Hares) 11. Soles
Answer to Riddle, — One kisses his Miss and the other misses his kiss.
F


THE
Hydaspes Gazette and General Adbertiser.
No. 9.
May Bth, 1875.
,-JiHOUGH nothing is further from our wishes than that our journal should
the in any way regarded as a penny-a-liner, yet we cannot abstain from
making a few remarks on the happy occasion of our crossing the line,
which event, we hope, may have been satisfactorily accomplished before
J this number meets the eyes of the expectant public. There are hut
few incidents which markedly vary the monotony of a long voyage, such as
that between Sydney and Loudon ; and among these we may mention “ par
excellence ” rounding the Horn, crossing the Equator, and sighting the loved
shores of Merry England. We venture to hope that in a very few hours we
may he able to say that two of these incidents are no longer in the dim future,
and though we may he inclined to grumble slightly about the variable and
unfavourable weather which we have hitherto experienced, we shall check
this futile desire, and content ourselves with expressing a heartfelt wish that
during the rest of our voyage we may be favoured with a large shoe of good
fortune. We have already witnessed almost every variety of weather, and
known almost every degree of strength of the winds of heavens. We have
seen the ocean, now calm, and now convulsed with storms, and we have felt
the good ship at one time “ Shake and reel,” as the huge waves struck against
her, and at other times we have watched her as
“ Day by day, scarce rocking, her full-busted figure head,
Stared o’er the ripple feathering from her bows.”
But let us not dwell on the memory of past misfortunes, let us rather look
cheerfully to the future, and hope that we may yet make a good passage,
though we cannot now make an extraordinary one. We do not think we can
end this article with more appropriate words than those of a well-known poet,
as he watched a ship starting from Australia for England—
“ May He, who in the hollow of his hand
The ocean holds, and rules the whirlwind’s sweep,
Assuage its wrath, and us from danger keep.”
WHAT IS FRIENDSHIP ?
What a sublime consolation it is to have a friend; one who will stick
closer than a brother, while you have anything to give away, and who, the
moment you are destitute, will cut you dead in the street, be so immersed in
business that he really cannot find time to visit you, and altogether avoid you
for a fear you might ask a loan, relying on old friendship. Mats re venom nous
a /{os moutous, and now let us ask what is friendship ? The ideal friendship
which poets have sung in all ages, and which is some sort of ethereal essence that
no human being ever did, or over can quite understand, or grasp the substance


of, is a mytli and nothing else, conceived in the morbid brain of some dis-
appointed lover, subsequently turned into a woman-hater by constant lamenta-
tion for bis false mistress, and who tried to console himself with something less
than the love be coveted. Friendship in the abstract is just a cloak put on
before the world to disguise some other feeling. Friendship, as the word is
generally understood,-is fit only for gushing young ladies in their teens, and
twaddling old people of the serious family of Cant. Now just let ns glance at
the different kinds of friendship : first, at the dearest kind of friendship, viz.,
that which subsists between husband and wife. Look at them as the world
sees them, the husband never speaking to his wife without some term of endear-
ment, and vice versa , each referring everything to the other, and each acquies-
cing in everything the other does and says, till appearances go so far that the
world exclaims, what a model couple so and so are, and how happy the married
state, when two such people are united : but see them in private, a way from
the eyes of the world ; the husband and wife have nothing in common ; constant
snarls disturb domestic harmony, and they agree in nothing, but to dis-
agree upon each and every of the hundred and one subjects that crop up in
the course of then' every day existence. Next, let us look at the friendship
that exists between a gentleman and his betrothed. How affectionate they
are, how each seeks the society of the other, how they go off by themselves
and pour out their feelings, which no doubt oppress them so much in society
for want of utterance. But see each in their own circle, the gentleman,
young G ,of the Guards, is at his club ; says S— —, a brother officer, “ I
congratulate you G old fellow, hear you’re going to marry little Emmy
S ; fine creature, and worth a plum; when you get her safe you’ll be able
to pay me the pony you owe me since the 2nd of last June.” “ Yass,” says
G ; “ doosid fine gal, by jove, and as you say‘ worth a plum.’ Twenty thou.
down, and fifty more when her old aunt dies ; I hear the old girl is very
shakcy ; pray Jupiter she may drop when I get little Emma safe.” Now,
look at the lady, seated with her mamma some morning in a pretty little
boudoir, “ Now, my dear,” says prudent Mama, “ I hope you are quite sure
of young G ,” “ Yes, Mama,” says the dutiful daughter, “ sure enough,
but he is not half so handsome as young Mr. —, the doctor.” “ Never
mind, my dear,” rejoins Mama; “He is related to Viscount Sandilands, and
there is only one sickly life between him and the peerage, and fifty thousand,
while young Mr. has nothing beyond his profession, and is a nobody be-
sides.” Now, kind reader, there’s friendship for you. Next, look at the friendship
of two gushing young ladies, just come out, and who have likely been at a
finishing school together. They meet, and such a tempest of kisses ensues ;
such a torrent of endearments and ejaculations ; such a heap of caresses, that
ultimately each has to go to her room, call for vinegar and cold water, and
use sal volatile for the rest of the day. But at such a scene we stand aghast!
We cannot describe it, and so leave the arduous task to some one better able.
Then they show each other all their dresses and trinkets, and the cartes of
their beaux ; that over, they vow an eternal and never dying friendship, and
seal the same with another storm of tears and caresses. Now let them go to
a ball together; each introduces the other to her friends of the masculine
gender. Now the beau which Miss A had made so sure ot deserts her
side this evening for the company of her friend, Miss B, and Miss A affronted and
outraged, at once seeks the company of Misses C and D and a few other select
friends, and inveighs against Miss B’s treachery, and generally throws dirt at
that young lady, who, finding herself preferred before her friend, at once looks
down upon her, and for ever after these two friends hate each other with
F 2


cordial rancour. Now let ns look at the friendship which exists between two
bachelor friends; let ns say, for example, young barristers in the Temple. A
is the eldest son of Lord Dumpo Breakneck, reputed wealthy; and B is a
younger son of the penniless Marquis of Brnlgruddery, and the two are fast
friends. A having plenty of money, and being naturally generous, always
keeps drinkables, ad lib. for the friends who call upon him, accompanied, of
course, by cigars. He spends liberally, and is easy in his manners, conse-
quently has plenty of friends. B, it is, who borrows innumerable half-crowns,
and forgets to pay them back, and B’s sympathising ear it is which receives
the recital of all A’s loves and distresses, and B it is who immediately goes
and tells all to his innamorata, Miss C. B and all the rest of these friends
profess their gratitude, and their willingness to go through fire and water to
serve A. But suddenly Lord Dumpo dies, and his estates are found so encum-
bered with debts, that A finds he has scarcely enough left to keep himself. He
lives in his chambers solitary, with the exception of a few fellows as poor as
himself, who call to condole with him, and whom he never spoke to when he was
rich and careless. Where is now the false B, the sincere friend so often
indebted to A ? Oh !he is really cramming so hard, that he positively cannot
spare time to visit his old friend. And when A’s name is brought up among
his former circle of acquaintance, they say, “ Ah poor devil, he has no chance
now, you know ; they say he can scarcely pay for his dinner.” And such is
A’s elegy with them ; socially he is dead to them. Ah friendship ! friendship!
you are all very well in a three volume novel, or a five act tragedy, but how
often in real life are you a comedy, and a cloak carefully put on to hide
covetousness, avarice, malice, self-interest, and the other moving springs of
our poor weak human nature. Friendship on earth, you are a myth ; you
are like Nectar and Ambrosia; you are only for the gods ; the name of the
vices you cover is called legion, and yet the world goes on, and poets still
sing of an ideal friendship, that never did, nor never can exist, while society
is constituted as it is. YEBITAS.
“ How do you do Mr. Smith ? ‘Do what ? ’ ‘ How do you find your-
self ? ’ ‘I never lose myself ? ’ ‘ How do you feel ? ’ Pretty smooth I
guess; feel me and see. ‘ Good morning, Mr. Smith.’ ‘ Good! no, it’s
rather a bad one ; its w T et and nasty.’ ”
SHARKS ON THE LINE.
Twas after luncheon one flue day, wjien sitting on my
chair,
The sun was very hot indeed, and not a breath of air ;
Some one then asked the captain if they might have a
lark,
To try with hook and piece of pork to catch a mighty
shark.
“ Bringhere the hook,” the Captain cried, “bring here
the hook ” cried he,
“And tell the Butcher quick to fetch a piece of pork
tome.”
He took a line, and made it fast to hook and pork
did he,
Then look’d he pleased, took up the lot and threw them
in the sea.
The bait did dangle o’er the stein an hour or so at leas
But not a shark did then appear to eat the tempting
feast.
Oh Shark ! Oh Shark ! why don’t you come and nibble
at our bait ?
We’re tired of looking at the sea, and cannot longer
wait.
At last we hear a little cry, just like a wee dog’s
bark,
’Tis little Hall who cries aloud, “ I fnk I see a
shark ; ”
We all jump up, and with our necks stretched far
beyond the rail,
Did see the monster of the deep, a wriggling of his
tail.


Also two little tiny fish did follow in his lee ;
They call them pilot fish, they say, and good to eat
they»be,
I’d sooner eat the little ones for breakfast or for tea.
For nasty shark, though fried so nice, does not agree j
with me. i
The shark he snuffed the bait so oft, hut he was veryj
shy; i.
He seemed to think, “ if that I bolt, so surely shall I
die,” i
He went away in deep disgust, but up there came !
another;
He made no bones about the thing, but swallowedl
all together.
We had him quickly on the deck, he kicked up such a
splutter,
It made the ladies jump about, their little hearts did
flutter ;
To drag him forward, Jimmy Ducks, in pluck ho was
not slack,
I The shark did give a sudden jerk, threw Jimmy on his
back.
Another too, we caught that day, such fun did make
us laugh ;
The heat was very great indeed, we drank much shandy
gaff;
But let us hope that north-east winds will smile upon
our bark.
jAnd leave this horrid latitude, the home of many a
' shark.
THE DEATH OF THE SHARKS.
It was after our meal, the first of the day,
A meal that is always attended with “ tay,”
That a youngster of ours, whose cabin is aft,
While standing on deck, the wheel abaft,
Saw a fish in our wake, he thought it a shark,
Which tidings, when spread, prepared for a lark.
The hook was brought forth, and on it placed
Of pork a mass that would have graced
The table of any noble or peer,
While all around was saltish beer ;
Beer wholesome and palatable to him,
As to a Cockney sweetened gin.
The baited hook is in the sea,
The shark swims up with joyous glee ;
But when close to, he sniffs, he flies,
Returns again, again he shies ;
Playful he frolics round the dainty morsel.
Now, coming to the surface, shows his dorsal.
Thus for an hour he held us in suspense,
Toying with the bait for him cast hence,
When from the bottom, a new chum, all unwary
To the surface came, and’he was not so chary,
But greedily the pork and hook he did guzzle,
The latter passing through his large under muzzle.
Quickly we hauled him in, and a bowline fitted
To a part of him, that Watson nearly spitted,
When he had a shy with a weapon called harpoon,
And his goose was almost cooked, but he dived too
soon,
He then came up to see how we looked on the deck,
Where of some fellows’ legs he tried to make
shipwreck.
Jimmy Ducks, having seize 1 him by the powerful tail
Dragged him away forward to the lee rail,
When the Boatswwain, drawing forth a formidable
knife,
Chopped ofl his tail and ended his life ;
The last of him we saw was at the morning meal,
Where most of us partook they said with relish real.
Two others followed in succession quick,
The last around the waist was much more thick ;
By the same means caught, by the same deprived
of life,
The latter I have already stated was by the Boat-
swain’s knife ;
Their death gave to us the most unbounded glee,
Thus ended our days sport, thus died sharks three.
apiculture anD tfjc Crops.
We are happy to inform our readers, that farming has of late been very
successful, and the demand for produce is increasing rapidly. We must
hardly pass from this subject without complimenting the robust gardener
upon his energy in so frequently supplying the market with vegetables, which
nr these tropical regions are very acceptable to all. The indefatigable Agri-
culturist has obtained, at an immense outlay, a splendid set of farming
implements, including a steam plough and watering pot of huge dimensions.
We wish him all good luck, and are glad to hear that he has had his farm
retilled, and that a second crop is now underway, the soil being in splendid
condition. The smaller farmers on the river have had a very fair harvest;
the “ crops ” have been numerous and abundant, and they ’air to be con-
gratulated upon the workmanlike manner in which the reaping was conducted.
It is confidently expected by savants, that if the present weather continues
there will be second crops in many places.
AGONY COLUMN.
EYG JBO TYE YPP PYB CYJZ WOOD WOKI WYYX
YSQKD JVVZO QOYBQO.


Did he really say so ? X Y Z.
COUET NOTICE.
In consequence of the unfavourable state of the weather, the Masquerade
Ball will be postponed for a few days.
FEOM OUE SHIPPING EEPOETEE.
May Ist, Noon, light variable winds between E and N, and showery
weather, to calm throughout night and cloudy weather. May 2nd, noon, light
air E.N.E., and fine weather to calm throughout night; light variable airs and
calms and cloudy weather. May 3rd, noon, light air, variable and cloudy
weather, passing showers throughout night, same weather. May 4th, noon,
light airs, and calms, variable and cloudy weather, throughout night same
weather with heavy rain. May sth, noon, light airs and variable, with cloudy
hazy weather, throughout night showery weather. May Gth, noon, light air
N.N.E. and cloudy, fine weather, throughout night light airs and calms with
passing showers. May 7th, noon, light airs and variable with heavy rains.
True course and distance made good during last week; N. 50 E.
274 miles.
Bear Civility— A Hug.
A Proverb Eevised.— Too many cooks spoil the police.
Intellectual Farming.— Harrowing a man’s feeling.
How would You Define as Black as Your Hat ?—As darkness that can
be felt.
CHARADE.
My first is made of wood or stone,
Which e’er may chance to be,
My second’s made of flesh and bone,
And lives on land or sea.
My whole at morning goes his round,
For pleasure or for woe,
Now, when the answer you have found,
To the editor let it go.
Commercial intelligence-
Since last week, trade in all its brandies lias been very dull indeed.
We have bad no fresh arrivals, although a great number in sight. The only
trade is, that there has been a great run in pocket handkerchiefs. Paper
collars, umbrellas, and mackintoshes are scarce. Starch is nearly washed
out of the market. Liquids are in very great demand ; the fish market has
been well stocked ; soles and eels very plentiful, none inclined to make them
their own property.
Answers to Piddle in our last—Cocoa.
~ ~ ~ Pluck it off the Duck to be sure.
~ ~ ~ A splinter in the foot.


THE
Hydaspes Gazette and General Adbertiser.
No. 10.
May 15th, 1875.
NOTES OF THE WEEK.
f N Saturday, May tlie Bth, appeared, as usual, the ninth number of our
/jl “ rag.” After breakfast the signal midshipmen and their amateur
Jj J assistants were busily engaged conversing for a couple of hours with a
ll I ship, which, we learned, was an American, called “ The Herald of
J the Morning,” from Tathiti to Queenstown, with a cargo of guano,
60 days out. She had passed Cape Horn on the Bth of April. We
also were informed that a vessel on her larboard quarter was the
“ Idomene,” hound to Liverpool. We also exchanged longitudes at
noon, and found hers tallied exactly with ours. The balance of the
day passed ‘ mid calms, rain, squalls, (of both kinds), stamping on the
deck, and general lowness of spirits. The latter, however, was somewhat
counteracted by the knowledge that we were across the line, and ideas of
approaching cool weather were not so distant as before. Sunday service, as
usual, held in the saloon. In the morning a ship, outward bound, apparently
an American, passed us, but no signals were interchanged. At noon, a
schooner, also outward bound, passed shewing English ensign andN.Q.B.M.
This number we could not find in our signal book, so, of course, did not get
the name. We hoisted our colours, and she was soon far astern. More
rain and squalls. Monday jogged along quietly, if we except that at lunch
we were enlivened by the wine of wines—champagne—in honour of the
anniversary of the birth of Master Wilfred Metcalf, who that day attained
the age of five ; judging from his youthful appearance and manner, we don’t
think we will say with the Bab Ballads, “ He died an old dotard at five.”
His health was proposed by Mr. Wilson in a most appropriate manner, and
with all good wishes for his long life and future happiness, the toast was
drunk with musical honors, the band, I mean the voices of those present,
striking up—“ For he’s a jolly little fellow,” etc. His brother Charlie
responded, briefly thanking all for the enthusiastic manner in which the
toast had been received. Afternoon without variety ; had a smart fair breeze,
which unfortunately lasted but a short time. Tuesday; dead calm; about
six vessels in sight, one of which we signalled and found to be the “ Dun-
craig,” of Glasgow, from San Francisco to Liverpool, 91 days out. Owing
to the distance and the light airs, it was difficult to read the signals. The
carpenter’s mate caused a little sensation, by-carving a hole in his leg with an
adze. He was at once removed to the infirmary, where he was attended by
the surgeon, and is progressing favourably. Wednesday; rain as ever ; low
spirits and growls. Spoke two outward bound ships, one a Dutch barque
from Rotterdam to Batavia, and the ship “ Iron Crown,” of Liverpool, who
wished to be reported all well. Thursday, worse and worse. Nothing to do,
and plenty of time to do it in. Friday came in with a nice breeze, which
we hope will prove the N.E. trades, and that they will last some time.


' WHAT IS FRIENDSHIP?
Dear Sir, — In the last edition of your paper I observed an article on Friendship), and as
I, with all due deference, do not quite agree with the sentiments expressed therein, I hope
you will allow me a little of your valuable space, in which to give my humble opinion on
the same subject. Your correspondent has evidently drawn his conclusions from a very
bitter experience of life and people, so perhaps it will not be amiss for me to place Friendship
in another light before your readers, I may begin by saying in the words of a well known
author that: —
“ I have sped by land and sea, and mingled with much people,
But never yet could find a spot unsunned by hnman kindness ;
Some more, some less —but truly all can claim a little ;
And a man may travel through the world, and sow it thick with Friendships.”
The first question that necessarily arises is “ What is Friendship ? ” Your correspondent
says that Friendship in the abstract is just a “cloak put on before the world to disguise
some other feeling,” and no doubt this definition would be a right one in some cases, but I
feel sure it would not apply in most. True Friendship, both in man and and woman, is
that knitting of two hearts together in a bond of union, which is proof against all adversity,
or time, or absence, which is void of all self-interest, or self-aggiandisement, for
“ As frost to the bud and blight to the blossom,
Even such is self-interest to Friendship,”
Now I will look at the different kinds of Frindship, and I will take them in the same order a
your correspondent. First, “that which exists between man and wife,” and, instead of
thinking of it as love, which is put on merely for the sake of appearances, to satisfy what is
commonly called society, rather let us look at it in a happier light, and think that it is
sincerei Picture to yourself the husband coming home tired after a hard day’s work, and
finding his wife waiting for him with a pleasant smile upon her face, and greeting him with
words of love ; ready to take an interest in everything that he has been doing, whether she
understands it or not; if any thing has gone wrong she soothes him, and if he has been
successful she rejoices with him ; surely this view of conjugal life is more correct, and oftener
found than the other. Now for the second case, “That of the gentleman and his bethrothed.”
The case quoted by your correspondent is, I hope and think, a rarity. Where the two seek
each others society, it is because they like it best, and because they are utterly indifferent
to that of anybody else. “ Marriages de convenance ” are all very well for the French, but
they do not suit the ideas of the inhabitants of our “ sea-girt isle.” Now let us look at the
friendship between two men. This, in my opinion, is the highest, next to that of ma n and
wife. We have many instances of it in history, but I will confine myself to one, viz-, that
of David and Johnathan of old, where their love for each other was so (Treat “that it
surpassed even the love of woman.” Nor is this kind of friendship so rare as people seem
to imagine. Look at school and college, and it will be very odd if you do not find many a
Damon who has his Pythias; and these perhaps have loved other from the day they first
met as little boys, and never lost sight of one another through life ; always ready to help
each other out of a scrape, and share their last crust together. Friendship is no myth, but
a grand reality. It is not a subject “ fit only for gushing young ladies in their teens, or
twaddling old people of the serious family of cant,” but one which numbers amongst its
votaries men of the highest intellect and learning. It is a thing which is not only found in
the abodes of princes, but also in the cottage of the humblest in the kingdom. It is only
those, who “ seeming as incapable of softer thoughts, and dead to better deeds, such no
lover of the good, no follower of the generous and gentle, can nearer grow to love, than may
consist with pity,” that say it is a thing which poets in all ages have sung of, but which
has never been ; but thank God, “ few verily are these amongst the mass, and cast in fouler
mould.”—Yours, etc., MENS CONSCIA RECTI.
NOISES AFT.
6 a.m. —Washing decks, and pumping up Neptune’s element into iron
receptacles for the purpose of purifying the general humanity of the
Hydaspes ; brooms hammering and ropes falling with a thud, as if they
begrudged those underneath their sleep, enlivened with the occasional pop
of a soda water bottle, followed by a smack of the lips, and a deep drawn
sigh of relief.


6.30 a.m.—Lively conversation between the stewards, mingled with the
pulling about of furniture, the jingling of dirty tumblers, and occasional
scrubbing of floors, drawing forth muffled exclamations of disgust, brought
about by the thought of damp feet and extravagance in pocket handker-
chiefs.
7 a.m. —Stewards still creating an uproar at their various duties, com-
bined with the screeching of parrots and the chanting of canaries.
7.80 a.m. —The active steps and joyous yells of childhood now resound
through' the saloon, clattering of cups and saucers, parrots still adding to
the din, the scuttling of slippered feet, and gaunt figures in eccentric cos-
tumes wrangling for the first shower of the briny fluid, with frequent inquiries
of How are you, George ? ” “ Was it in the Crimea ? ” was,” etc.^.
8 a.m.—Eight bells has hardly struck, when the piano goes off suddenly
and most mysteriously into a fit, this agony is brought about by placing the
four fingers before the thumb, and at a given signal off she goes, parrots are
awfully delighted, and make known their glee by cat-calls, and the use of
other languages known only to the feathered tribe.
8.30 a.m. —Bell rings convulsively, grunts and groans from those who
were happy enough to have slept through the previous din, low tones at
Gazette office, shrill exclamations from next door; right opposite the last-
mentioned cottage voices arise, “ I say, H , get up ! ” “Oh ! I say, look
here ! Here’s a blooming go. I’m—grunt sleepy, etc., snores, splashing of
water, and vigorous polishing of enamel.”
9 a.m.—Bell rings again with a will, slamming of doors follows, cries of
“ Good morning Phillipine.” “ That’s not fan-.” “ You’re a horrid thing.”
“ I don’t like you now.” *• How do you feel ? ” which tender inquiry makes
one imagine he looks unwell, with a strong inclination to rush back to his
looking glass, push out his tongue to its extreme length, and view its colour
most seriously. A murmuring voice to the Deity concerning favours for the
past, present, and future ; clattering of knives and forks, and beseeching
exclamations of “ steward ” anent favours in the way of choice morsels,
small plates, jam, etc.; conversation commences generally. “ Too much
soda in the bread,” “ Tea’s wash,” “ Do you like preserved mutton ? ”
“ What’s in front of you,” etc.
10 a.m.—Cracking of matches with a view to taking a narcotic ; small
talk and whisperings as to what has transpired the evening b.efore; strong
language used by husbands having to “just get up that trunk” from the
region of Jimmy Ducks.”
11 a.m.—Pattering of small feet, arranging of chairs, and a general
collapse.
12. —The thud of quoits, cries of “ What’s the run ? ” groans at the
small figures. J. S. now assumes a most prominent position in noises, by
chasing dogs, and causing general irritation by the windmill like movement
of his propellers.
1 p.m.—Bell sounds a welcome summons to lunch, same noises as at
breakfast, only heightened by the aid of Bass and Savill, and cries of “ I’m
glad it’s beer time! ” “ Who signed last ? ” etc.
G


2. p,m. —Trimming of sails, yells from sailors, as if suffering from some
internal complaint, more shuffling of chairs with a view to getting a more
comfortable position for a siesta, if the aforesaid feathered tribe would only let
you.
3 p.m. — Deep yawns, occasionally enlivened with a porpoise-like grunt.
4.30 p.h. —Dressing hell now awakens the sleepers and porers over
literature ; the idea of dinner producing small fillips of conversation.
5 p.m. — A repetition of lunch, only more convivial ; arguments, dis-
putes, cracking of nuts, cries of “ Here’s a phillipine,” “ What’s the word ? ”
etc.
7 p.m. —Walking now commences, it used to be somewhat disjointed in
days of yore in the low latitudes, in fact, there threatened to he a disolcation
of the knee-joints ; now it has assumed a gliding and stealthy-like action, as
if mischief were above ; certainly some have proved slippery enough, and
are marked by their various vibrations, first the heel, then the toe, some-
times seeming to balance mid-foot, not knowing which prominent part
to settle on. These noises are accompanied by murmurings, and whisperings
only to be conjectured at.
8 p.m. — Piano, singing, sometimes accompanied by an asthmatic flute
(would recommend a dose of Friar’s Balsam for this instrument) ; cards with
exclamations of “ Pass, pass, pass,” “ I take it up,” “ sixes,” “ Tray ace,”
“I’ll gammon you,” “fifteen two, fifteen four, and a pair six,” double
besique, “ha!ha!ha!”“he!he ! he ! ” “ ho ! ho ! ho ! ” “I hate you.”
“ Your’re a nasty thing.” “ I say, look here, your’re very sarcastic.”
Snatches of operas and dramatic tones from a robust member. Very con-
flicting noises in which to gather one’s ideas over a book.
9 p.m. —“ Supper, ladies, please.” This announcement brings forth all
the conversational powers, high-toned voices, whistled toasts, finishing up
with hearty and imjjressive good nights. It is lucky the meeting of hands
does not emit noise.
10 p.m. —Peace, bar rats.
10.30 p.m. —“ Lights out please ” (comparative) “ put that light out.”
11 p.m. —Stealthy steps in quest of water and candle-ends, purloined by
bipeds.
12 p.m. , 1,2, 3, and 4 a.m. —Peace, but frequently broken by the doleful
music of the staircase.
5 a.m. — Hydaspes awakes again to uproar and life. It must be borne
in mind that at all hours we are subject to the yells of officers and men, as
if trying to propel the ship by the action of their lungs. Head wind.
COUET NOTICE.
The Masquerade Dinner will take place, on Tuesday, the 18th instant,
at Six p.m. —By Order.


AGONY COLUMN.
A. B. C. answers to X. Y. Z. My firm belief is that he did say it; but
how it affects you I should like to know. Be guarded in your reply.
Answer to Last Week’s Charade— POSTMAN.
THE LOUNGE’S LAMENT,
Alas poor me ! Alack ! Alack !
Whatever shall I do,
A fearful crack is in my back,
My legs are cranky too.
They’ve sat upon me every one.
I’m hanging all in strips.
And since to pieces I have gone,
I soon must go to “chips.”
Those boys my carcase knock'about,
And into the boat they bang.
They pitch me in and pitch me out,
But never care a “hang.”
But ’tis not they alone that treat
My body so, I trow,
For two themselves oft on me seat,
When one would be enow.
My bottle-holder is no more,
My arms have gone likewise.
From limb to limb I shall be “ tore,”
Nor from my remnants rise.
Oh ! Bos’un hold ! come here, lay hold
Of this poor chair, I pray,
And fix with yarn from stem to staru,
And lash on many a stay.
The Bos’un he right merrilie
Did take and mend that chair,
And now I’ll bet that he will get
A bottle of something “ square.”
THE WISH.
You have heard said a youth to his sweetheait who
stood,
While he sat on a cornsheaf at daylight’s decline ;
You have heard of the Banish boy’s whistle of wood ;
And I wish that the Danish boy’s whistle were mine.
“ Well what would you do with it, tell me,” she said.
And an arch smile played over her beautiful face ;
“ 1 would blow it,” he answered, “ and then my fair
maid
Would fly to my side, and would here take her place. ”
“Is that all you wish it for? that may be yours,
Without any magic” the fair maiden cried ;
“ A favor so slight ones good nature secures,”
And she playfully seated herself by his side.
1 “ Again would 1 blow,” said the youth, “and the charm
; Would work so that not even modesty’s check
Would be able to keep from my neck your tine arm
I She smiled and she laid her fine arm round his neck.
i “ Yet once more would I blow and the mus’c divine
Would bring me a third time an exquisite bliss;
You’d lay your fiir check to this dark one of mine,
And your lips stealing past it would give me a kiss.’ ’
The maiden laughed out in her innocent glee,
“ What a fool of yourself with your whistle you’d
1 make,
For only consider how silly ’twould he,
To sit there and whistle for what you may take.”
BETSY JANE
YANITAS YANITATUM, ONNIA VANITAS.
On board this ship there’s many a one,
Who acts a lying part,
And ’neath an assumed gaiety
He hides an aching heart.
I’m such a one myself, I own,
The fault is none of mine.
The load which weighs my heart so down
Will ne’er be moved by time ;
The dart of love has sunk se deep
Into my throbbing breast,
1 can do nought but sit and weep,
Till my lov’d one I’ve caressed.
But no; no more I’ll sit and weej),
Her sphere’s above my own ;
But I’ll win fame in other lands,
Then return to her and home.
I’ll lay my laurels at her feet,
And all my hard won fame ;
And ask her if she will not share
With me my honored name.
Say she refuse ; why then I’ll say,
Thank you just the same ;
The cherished hope of winning you
Has spurred me on to fame.
I will not say it won’t be hard
To have to part again ;
But after all she’s good to me
For she has made my name.
What race-horse cares who plies the spur,
So he but win the race :
I’ll think of this in that dark day,
And take me heart of grace.
G 2


There’s fish uncaught as good as e’er
Were pulled up from the sea :
This maxim I will bear in*mind
If she refuses me.
But if she will accept me, when
I offer her my love ;
Oh ! then how happy I shall be,
When I have won my dove.
For she’s a dove, as gentle as
E’er lived in fabled lore ;
I’d give my life to save her pain;
What then can I do more ?
I’d treat her like an Eastern queen,
And I would be her slave;
Rewarded by the knowledge that
To me her love she gave.
The reason I can’t tell her now,
Can never plainer be;
Society has put its bar
Betwixt my love and me.
Her people they have store of gold,
And I have none to spare :
They’d reckon it an awful sin,
If we should make a pair.
The Preacher saith all on this world
Is vain and vexing too,
And, certainly, I think this case
Shows it to be too true.
Society an ogre is
Of love to make a crash :
“ Love laughs at Locksmiths ” so they say ;
So let it laugh at Cash.
FEOM OUE SHIPPING EEPOETEE.
May 3, Noon—Light variable air, and calms and cloudy weather. Same
throughout night, with light S.E. airs. May 9th, noon : Unsteady breezes
and cloudy weather, passing showers to light unsteady, N.E. throughout
night. May 10, noon: Light N.E. breeze, and cloudy fine weather to heavy
rain, and calm all night. May 11, noon: Light airs and calm cloudy
weather, to very heavy rain through night, with variable airs and calms.
May 12, noon : Light breeze S.W., and thick rainy weather, to westerly and
southerly breeze and cloudy weather. Midnight: Tacked to westward. May
13, noon: Light unsteady breeze N., and passing showers ; steady N breeze
throughout night, and cloudy fine weather. May 14, noon : Moderate trades
and fine weather.
True course and distance N., 8° W.; 355 miles.


THE
Hydaspes Gazette and General Adbertiser.
No. - n.
Mat 22nd, 1875.
-JJUESDAY was a great day on board our good old ship. From the
Vl Captain right down to the smallest boy on board there was nothing
II but bustle and joviality. All day long were to be seen busy semp-
) stresses, and was heard—“ can you lend me?” At half-past five
J punctually, the gong was heard, and it was wondrous to see what an
effect was instantly produced. From each cabin issued forms most fantasti-
cally clad, all smiling. Abaft the mizen mast, down below, was the reception
room, where the Captain and Mrs. Babot stood to welcome their guests.
Mr. Sheppard, in his capacity of page, was deputed to announce the visitors.
After a hearty welcome from host and hostess, all this motley group
adjourned on deck, to promenade and be criticised by each other and the
crew. The costumes were certainly much more gorgeous than could have
been expected, and it would be almost invidious to make remarks on this
subject. The Captain, as a post-captain, was (as the bos’un would say)
“ proper,” and Mrs. Babot, in her peasant dress, charming. Mr. Wilson
caused no small amount of fear and trembling by his apt personification of
“ auld Clootie,” and the manner in which he fraternised with every one, led
us to think that the “auld ane” is “no so black as he is painted.” The
individual, who the story books say was addicted to kleptomania, I mean
the “ Jack of Hearts,” was most neatly dressed—in fact we are afraid he
did not confine his stealing powers to tarts only. We saw also a lady of the
period of Louis XIY., and if we may accept her as a type of the ladies of
those days, We regret that we were not then in existence, to see and admire
them. Time and space do not permit us to dwell on this part of our
subject, else we would describe and pay tribute of admiration to many who
deservedly merit it. The sweet Yivandiere, the lovely stars of morn and
even, Hi Vernon looking natty and killing, the “Rosy Distaffina” should
each have a column, but space forbids. After the promenade, the “ Tocsin
of the Soul ” was sounded, and the settees below were speedily filled, and
full justice done to the good things provided. Fiz flowed freely, and after
the solids were finished with, the Captain rose to propose the health of Her
Majesty, which was received with all the enthusiasm it merited. The health
of our host and hostess was then proposed by Mr. Ross in a most eloquent
speech, nor did he confine his remarks to the subject of his toast, but
touched upon the ship, the officers, and the ladies in terms of the most
flattering description. Song, “ For he’s a jolly good fellow.” The Captain
then responded; after which, Mr. Purves briefly and appropriately asked all
to join him in drinking the health of the officers of the ship. It is needless
to say that this was received in a stentorian manner. Dr. Wilson responded.
Mr. Simpson in proper flowery language proposed the health of the fair sex


This was a signal for bumpers, and “ Here’s a health.” Mr. Liddell in a
particularly neat and well turned speech appeared as the ladies’ champion,
and thanked the company in their name. Smoking and dancing on deck
then became general, and a very pleasant evening was spent, eked out very
nicely with “ cigars and cognac.”
WHAT IS FRIENDSHIP?
Dear Sir, — Having read the letters of “ Veritas ” and “ Mens Conscia Recti ” upon this
subject, I hope you will allow me a little of your valuable space to give my ideas in, for I
think that both your correspondents have overshot the mark, and it shall now be my task to
strike the happy medium between the two if possible. There is no doubt that both of your
correspondents looking at the subject, as they do, from its two opposite sides, have each a
good deal of truth in their theories. Veritas has evidently the bump of misanthropy very
largely developed, but still he portrays his scenes to the life. If he is single we think he
drank too much limejuice, and if married, we suppose he had just had a dreadful row with
his wife, when he sat down and wrote his effusion. His opponent takes the other side
altogether, and each utterly ignores any mitigation of his theories whatsoever. We wonder
much, however, that “ Mens Conscia Recti,” whom we take for a lover of the sex, should
have left the picture of the two young ladies’ friendship unanswered, and not taken up the
. cudgels in their defence. But there, I suppose he either found it unanswerable, or did
not like to advance anything which a short time might prove untrue with regard to himself.
Each is true in a great many instances, but we hope and believe that the bright side is
oftenest towards the mass. Friendship is a grand reality, and is the greatest comfort
devised by a merciful Providence to enable us to bear more lightly the crosses and cares
that may fall to our lot in our path through life. History in all ages shews us examples of
friendships prevailing over all hardships and every other feeling whatsoever ; and there are
thousands of friendships just as true and absorbing, which go on before our eyes every day ;
we never see them, they pass away and leave no mark on the sands of time. Friendship is
our grand comfort in life, and our stay in death, when we trust the friendship of that one
“ who sticketh closer than a brother; ” this outlasts time, and lives beyond the grave. And
yet what a cloak some people make of it, for their own sordid purposes ; but then so they
do of religion, and every other good and noble feeling that was implanted by a beneficent
Creator for our pure and noble gratification. Adventurers use it as a nice warm, furred
cloak, that they may the better take in their victims under its guise ; and every sycophant,
who is in want of anything, uses the same cloak, or some other equally attractive for
obtaining what he wants. In the words of Veritas “Ah! Friendship! Friendship! the
name of the vices you cover is legion, but, when sincere, thou art our joy and happiness
throughout all time and eternity ; and thou it is who sowest the seeds from which spring
the flowers which illumine and perfume our lives ; and thou it is that causest them to
bloom; for without thee life would loose its savour, and become au empty mocking void.”
THE NEWSPAPER MAN.
Tuttle they know, or even think,
Of the work there is in shedding ink,
By the busy wielders of pencil and pen,
Generally known as newspaper men.
“ Jottings,” “ In general,” “ Spice of life,”
Variations, and rumours rife,
“ Saturday notes,” and “ Sunday news,”
All sorts of paragraphs to amuse,
Market reports, and marine disasters,
Pulls of pills, and patent plasters ;
Now at the theatre in a white cravat,
“Claw-hammer” coat and opera hat;
Then to the prize ring, where you write
Sickening details of a bloody fight;
Steamboat collisions, smash up of trains,
Election returns to bother your brains ;
Agents dramatic with long winded story,
To write up his star to theatrical glory.
Deaths and marriages, murders, rows,
Balls, parties, and minstrel shows,
Stock speculations, bubbles of air,
Tossed about by bull and bear ;
Braising the limb in the dancer’s pose,
And next the calves in the cattle shows.
Pencil in hand at the racing course,
Taking the time of a trotting horse ;
dotting down each hit and catch
Made in a famous cricket match ;
Now of a street row taking a note,
Then of a row in a college boat;
These arc the few of the many things
At which the tireless pencil swings.


SCENE.
Olympus. —Jove discovered seated in State. To Mm enters Mercury,
travel-stained and weary.
Jove ; What ho ! my trusty messenger, what news ?
To tell me ere you sleep, pray don't refuse,
I’ve heard such rows below, I’m nearly puzzled,
My thirst for knowledge really can’t be muzzled ;
Where have you been, pray tell me what you’ve seen,
And what these revels down below can mean?
Mercury, “ Most potent grave,” I beg your pardon,
sire,
Into friend Shakespeare’s rythm I was about to
“wire.”
But jokes left very, very far apart,
I’ll tell you of an awful jolly lark.
I jerked around about the broad Atlantic,
And saw a lot of folks, I thought near frantic.
They were on board “Hydaspes” homeward bound,
(Nor is It long since she Cape Horn did round).
Their costumes strange, their laughter very merry ;
Some cheeks were brown, some lips ripe like a cherry
And, by the way, my liege, I saw the old Sea god,
O’er many and many a glass o fiz hob-nob ;
And Amphitritts charms was quite ignoring,
The while perchance, at home she’s calmly snoring;
I saw him sure, all future shindies scorning,
Paying attention to the Star of morning.
Another star was there, the Evening star.
Escorted by a gall nt, A tier, Jack Tar;
She certainly his pleasure did not mar,
Nor cared a straw for frown e'en from her Ma.
A charming foreign peasant then came down,
By /R\sculapius led—He as a clown.
Great Artaxominous was there I ween,
escorting Distafflna as his queen.
His faithful minister came forth in state,
And took his seat not far from the first mate ;
He, piebald party, dressed as day and night;
One side was black, the other purely white.
The Canny Scot appeared our “jolly third,’
And all the chaff he got, he took it like a bird.
One of the British Navy too I found,
All clad in bine and properly brass-bound.
For thirsty souls nothing could be much handier,
Since at their beck they’d such a swell Vivandiere,
And when to her the slightest wink they’d tip,
Out came the cask, and then they got a nip.
Italian brigand, bearded, fierce and big,
Was there, nor seemed for aught to care a fig.
And doing duty well among the tarts,
I spied our “bowery friend,” the Jack of Hearts.
One of Law’s limbs, banded, wigged and gowned,
Among this notley group of lunatics I found .
A jockey,black and all black, and spurred and neat,
On the port-side, for'ard, took his seat.
Near “ Morning ” sat and seem’d at awful ease
Gay George—l mean old Mephistopheles.
And too I saw a childish Irish girl,
Whose forehead’s fringe was properly in curl;
She cast her eye upon a braw Scotch boy,
Dressed in the costume of the bold Rob Roy.
But now my liege I’m getting rather knocked up,
To bed I’ll go—stay, is the brandy locked up ?
FROM OUR SHIPPING REPORTER.
May 15th, Noon, moderate trades, and fine weather to brisk and
moderate throughout the week, with very fine weather. May 20th, brisk
trades, and cloudy hazy weather.
True course and distance made good during the week N. 34° W.
1080 miles.
PARODY ON “ HOW DOTH THE LITTLE BUSY BEE.”
How doth the little crocodile
Improve his shining tail,
And pour the waters of the Nile
On every golden scale.
How cheerfully he seems to grin,
How neatly spreads his claws,
And welcomes little fishes in,
With gently smiling jaws.
WANTED KNOWN wlio broke the leg of Mrs. Babot’s chair on Tuesday
night.
Ah me ! I’m ruined entirely,
And am in a deuce of a trouble :
Because some folks cannot believe,
That I was not meant to hold double.
That night of the famous masque ball,
I was camped in my usual spot ;
But was seized by a couple of spoonies,
Ah me ! how I pitied my lot.
Not only did my old frame suffer,
But my trouble it really was mental,
For I heard such a babble of rubbish,
Which they thought was quite sentimental.
At last mid their spooning and flirting,
The ship gave a bit of a lurch ;
Which threw poor George and Miss Georgie
“Kerslap,” right out of their perch.
I cared not so much for their tumble,
That gave me a chance for a laugh.
But my poor carcase was damaged
And my legs broken right thro’ in half.
So now I must go to the bos’un,
And get him to patch my old side ;
If I don’t, sure unto destruction
I’m certain in no time to glide.
Take warning ye phalanx of flirts ;
Be sure that you’re always “ all there,”
Don’t go about spooning and maundering,
Upon a rheumatic old chair.


COURT MASQUERADE.
“ BY A REPORTER FROM POR’aRD.”
A masquerade came off on Tuesday last at Government House, and as
we understand that it had been pending for some little time, great expecta-
tions were formed as to its success, which we are happy to say were fully
realised.
Captain and Mrs. Babot received at half-past five, in the magnificent
and lofty hall of Government House. The Captain wore the uniform of a
naval officer, which set off his figure and manner to perfection. He wore
two medals. Mrs. Babot appeared in the picturesque dress of a French
peasant, and fulfilled her part admirably. Now we will just notice the
other characters, taking them in the order which we think their dresses and
personification deserve. First on the list Mr. Wilson, as Mephistopheles,
was certainly the hit of the evening (although, as far as dress was concerned,
he had to dispute the palm with Mr. Watson as King Neptune). His dress
was correct, and most striking, and his manner of coming out and bounding
adout perfectly theatrical. The sinuous movements of his lithe limbs, and
the truly fiendish look and grin on his countenance would certainly do credit
to the “muckle horned clootie” himself, and his serpentine manner of
gliding about, together with his hops and bounds was perfectly inimitable,
and his “ veni, vidi, vici ” manner for the rest of the evening was extremely
entertaining. Next, and certainly first of all the ladies, we must place
Mrs. Selfe, as a Maori waiena. Her dress, even to the mat, was correct,
and her personification perfect, and so ludicrous, that it elicited roars of
laughter. She evidently took pains with' her character, and we do not
hesitate to say, supported it better than anyone else in the company. Her
walk and manner were splendid, and she treated the company occasionally
to sentences in the Maori dialect. The only thing needful to make her
perfection, was a short black clay pipe stuck through one ear, and a little
tattoo on the lower lip. Mr. Watson, as Neptune, was a good hit also, the
character being ably supported, and the dress gorgeous, magnificent, and
appropriate. Mrs. Metcalfe, as a lady of the Court of Louis XIY., displayed
all the pride and hauteur so necessary to the character, and acted very well,
evidently without any effort. Mr. Church, in full jockey rig, was resplendent,
and looked extremely well. Mrs. Byron was splendidly dressed and became
her part as Distaffina admirably. Mr. Pritchard was magnificent as Rob
Roy, and moved with just that air which his original had, when he struck
an attitude and said “ My foot is on my native heath and my name’s
Macgregor.” Mrs. Powell, as the daughter of the regiment, was beautifully
dressed, but lacked that boldness and masculine demeanour so necessary to
her part. She is always charming, but in this rig was absolutely bewitching,
and was much sought after by the sterner sex. The Doctor, in his part of
Jester, was grotesqne and inimitably droll, his Irish brogue being perfect.
Miss Metcalfe was grand and simple as Evening Star, her dress was pretty
and became her well. Mr. Purves, as Gunner of H.M.S. Rosario, was very
well dressed, and showed to advantage, although his proportions are some-
what unusual among sailors. As far as coolness and convenience were
concerned, this was the best dress in the assembly. Miss Stella Metcalfe,
as Morning Star, looked lovely and ethereal in her white robes, and her
charms were set off and heightened by a single silver star over her forehead.
Mr. Powell, as an Italian brigand, was richly dressed, but was not ferocious
looking enough for his part, and altogether looked more like an English


cavalier, than a brigand of the snnny south. Mrs. Scott looked every inch
a Spanish Donna. Her dress was at once rich and sombre, but essentially
Spanish. Mr. Eobb, as Artaxominous, was pompous and majestic. Miss
Byron, as a Swiss peasant, was picturesquely dressed. Mr. Simpson moved
with true courtier-like grace and elegance, and was extremely well dressed.
Mrs. Purves, as Di Vernon, was a conscious beauty, and looked lovely, as
indeed she always does. Mr. Liddell, as Knave of Hearts, was neat, and
had a truly knavish look on his countenance. Mr. Paton, as Night and
Day, was a regular parti-coloured individual, and looked like two men going
about. Charlie Metcalf, as a naval middy, showed up well, and upheld the
character of his class for cunning, frolic, and mischief. Mr. Hemsley, in a
volunteer uniform, figured as the representative of our gallant defenders.
Miss Whiteside, as a flower girl, had a profusion of puffed pink tulle, and an
immense quantity of flowers with which she decorated the coats of the male
portion of the masquers. Mr. Sheppard, as a page, and Miss Scott made
a very nice pair. At dinner, we are told, the usual toasts were drunk in
excellent champagne. The company then adjourned to the drawing-room
(quarter deck) where some very wild dancing was gone through, and general
enjoyment reigned till supper time, when all went merry as a marriage bell.
After supper the ball-room was again resorted to, and singing was the order
of the night. At a late hour, the assembly broke up, and retired to their
various domiciles by many circuitous routes unknown to navigators. As far
as we for’ard could judge, the whole affair passed off without a single hitch,
and we are sure that the remembrance of the masquerade dinner, given by
Captain and Mrs. Babot on board the “ Hydaspes,” during her voyage from
Sydney to London, will never be obliterated from the minds of those who
took part in it, as a very pleasant and happy event of their past fives.
LIST OF THE CHARACTERS,
Name. Character.
Captain Babot Post Captain, R.N.
Mrs. Metcalfe Lady of the time of
Louis xiv.
Dr. Wilson Clown
Mrs. Babot French Peasant
Mr. Robb Artaxominous
Mrs. Byron Distaffina
Mr. Metcalfe Midshipman
Mrs. Purves - Di Vernon
Mrs. Selfe Maori Waiena
Mr. Liddell Jack of Heart*
Miss Byron Swiss Peasant
Mr. Wilson Mephistophles
Mrs. Scott Spanish Lady
Mr. Pritchard Rob Roy
Name. Character.
Mr. Purves Chief Gunner’s Mate
H.M.S. Rosario
Miss E. Metcalfe Evening Star
Mr. Watson Neptune
Miss Metcalfe Morning Star
Mr. Church Jockey
Mrs. Powell Yivandiere
Mr. Powell Brigand
Mrs. Pike Irish Lady of the 19th
century
Mr. Hemsley Volunteer Officer
Miss Whiteside Flower Girl
Mr. Paton Day and Night
Mr. Simpson Fusbos
Miss Scott Scotch Lassie
H


THE
Hydaspes Gazette and General Adbertiser.
No. 12.
May 29th, 1875.
TOPICS OF THE WEEK.
I>T IS to be regretted that so much bad luck has attended this voyage
If wo had had the most ordinary fortune, we should have been close
to the Chalky Cliffs by this time. The run of calms has been, we
understand, almost unprecedented. Well, “Itis a long lane that has
j no turning,” but it is quite within the bounds of possibility that we may
reach England in a short time from now. All of us hope that this will be
the case, for such a prolongation of calms does not tend to improve either
the mental or bodily condition of any of us. A slight novelty was introduced
on Thursday by our enthusiastic lovers of aquatics. After breakfast the
Captain’s gig was lowered, and was speedily manned ; the intention at first
was to take a short pull round the ship, but the crew were so well pleased
with the success which attended their first spurt that they pulled to the
Barque “ Success,” almost five miles off. A full account of it will appear in
another column.
We had lately on board a case of dissection performed on the body of a
dog, and the result showed us that he had a very large heart, which, his
master said, had been faithful to him through four years vicissitudes by sea
and land—what a contrast with what was presented to us in the visionary
dissection of a coquette’s heart—the operator before he engaged in it told us
there was nothing in his art more difficult than to lay open that member on
account of the many labyrinths and recesses which do not appear in other
animals. He desired us first of all to observe the pericardium, or outward
case of the heart, which we did very attentively, and by the aid of our glasses
discerned in it millions of little scars, which seemed to have been occasioned
by the points of innumerable darts and arrows that from time to time had
glanced upon the outward coat, though we could not discern the smallest
orifice by which any of them had entered and pierced the inner substance.
Every smatterer in Anatomy knows that this pericardium, or case of the
heart, contains in it a thin reddish fluid, supposed to be bred from the
vapours which exhale out of the heart, and being stopped there are con-
densed into this watery substance ; upon examining this fluid we found that
it had in it all the qualities of that spirit which is made use of in the ther-
mometer to show the change of weather. The operator assured us that he
once made an experiment with this agent, which he found in great quantity
about the heart of a coquette, by enclosing it in a glass tube made after the
fashion of a weather glass, but instead of acquainting him with the variation
of the atmosphere, it showed him the qualities of those persons who entered
the room in which he stood. He affirmed also that it rose at the approach
of a plume of feathers, a red coat or a full pocket, even the presence of a
youthful member of the church showed a slight elevation of the fluid, but it


fell as soon as an unfashionable coat or a clumsy pair of shoes entered the
house. He even assured us that on laughing loudly the liquor rose sensibly,
but fell again as he looked serious. Having cleared away the pericardium
we next came to the heart itself; but it was so cold .and slippery on attempt-
ing to take hold of it, it glided through our fingers like a piece of ice, the
fibres were turned and twisted in a more intricate and perplexed manner
than they are generally found in other hearts, in so much that the whole
heart was tied and wound up together in a gordian knot. One thing we
thought very observable, namely, that on examining all the vessels which
run into, or issue from it, we could not discover that they had any communi-
cation with the tongue. We could not but take notice likewise, that several
of those little nerves in the heart which are affected by the sentiments of love,
hatred and other passions did not descend to this before us from the brain,
but from the muscles of the eye. Upon weighing the heart in my hand I
found it to be extremely light, and consequently very hollow, which I did not
wonder at, when upon looking into the centre of it I saw multitudes of cells
and cavities running one into another, as our historians describe Rosamond’s
bower. Several of these hollows were filled with little forts of innumerable
trifles which I shall forbear giving any particular account of.
On Thursday last, the day being very fine, and the sea being (to use the
proverbial phrase) “ as calm as a mill pond,” with little or no wind to shivei
its perfectly unruffled surface, the gig was lowered by order of the Captain,
and four of our “ Sparks,” intent on a little muscular exercise, immediately
descended into her, our jolly chief officer acting as Cox. Having as a “ pre-
liminary canter ” pulled round the ship we started on our perilous journey
to visit a small barque about five miles off, accompanied by requests, shouted
from the silvery throats of our ladies, who were all congregated on the poop,
to be sure and bring them back some “ oranges.” Pretty dears! we are
afraid they were thinking a good deal more of the “ fruit ” than of those five
heroes who, for their sakes, had trusted themselves in a little open boat upon
bosom of the mighty deep. But to continne.—After a long pull of about an
hour and a quarter, we arrived alongside the barque, which proved to be the
“ Success,” of Arendal, Norway, bound to Antwerp from the River Plate.
Our worthy “ Chief ” ascended the side first, and had a short parley with the
Captain, after which he introduced us all in form. We then adjourned to
the cabin and partook of some remarkably good “ gin,” under the influence
of which our faces, which had till then been looking rather glum, began to
expand considerably, and were soon completely wreathed in smiles. After
spending a very pleasant three quarters of an hour we re-embarked on our
homeward journey perfectly restored and ready for any amount of work.
We found the return trip much easier as the sea was smoother, so we made
our little boat literally fly through the water, all of us being in the highest
spirits, so much so in fact that one of our number, whom we have never
known do such a thing before, gave us a song in an excellent contralto voice,
which materially assisted us in our rowing, and seemed to lessen the dis-
tance between us and our good old ship, which we reached about three
quarters of an hour after leaving the barque, none the worse for our ten
miles pull, We cannot close this without saying something in praise of our
little gig, which for perfect symmetry of shape, and for speed, we have rarely
seen equalled. We are not surprised to hear after the way in which she cut
through the water on Thursday, that she won a very exciting gig race at the
Sydney regatta.
H 2


A Yankee was telling a story in company about a flock of rooks lie had
seen nine miles long, and so thick as to obscure the sun ; when a listener
demurred, “ Wal stranger,” said Yank, “ I don’t want to quarrel, so to please
you, I’ll take three quarters of a mile off the thinnest part.”
LAMENT OF THE QUARTER MASTER.
I cannot mind my wheel, skipper,
I cannot mind my wheel;
My sorrows are so very bad,
I can’t tell what I feel.
I try to steer the ship quite straight,
And eye the swelling sails,
But all the skill I bring to bear,
It never me avails.
It matters not all through the day.
Then things go somewhat mild;
Barring, of course, the birds shrill scream,
Or howls of a fractious child.
I’m bothered quite by many folks,
Asking “ What’s her course ; ”
And caring nothing how it is,
This is one sorrow’s source.
I hear a deal of foolish talk,
Which makes me often wonder ;
If the body and the brains
Are not severed asunder.
Then here’s a health to ship and crew,
May tjie voyage soon be o’er ;
And then we’ll have a “ proper ” spree,
When e’er we reach the shore.
POOR OLD CHARLIE.
Here a sheerhulk lies poor old Charlie,
The darling of our crew ;
He ne’er was known to bite or snarl, he
Was both kind and true.
His coat was dark and silky soft,
His ears were long and fine ;
His eyes were sparkling bright, and oft
With pleasure they would shine.
At night he’d take the captain’s chair,
And curl himself all round ;
Or with his master he’d keep watch,
With many a frisk and bound.
Alas ! poor Charlie ! we loved him well,
We loved his playful ways;
But death at last upon him fell,
And numbered all his days.
One day to him some food was brought,
With deadly poison on it ;
And this is how his death was wrought,
The subject of my sonnet.
And thus, good friends, it all befel,
Upon that fatal day ;
I grieve full sore, for now he’s gone,
For ever and for aye.
Alas! that there should be, whose mind
Was so debased and low ;
That he could any pleasure find,
To treat a poor dog so.
The parson says we all have need
To ask to be forgiven ;
May God forgive so foul a deed,
As mercy is in heaven.
SPECIAL TELEGRAMS TO THE “ HYDASPES GAZETTE.”
From a paper, procured from the captain of the barque “ Success,” we
obtained telegrams up to March 26th, that which interested us most, was
the result of the Oxford and. Cambridge boat race, the former winning by
four lengths.
SCANDAL.
“ We should be as careful of our words as of our actions, and as far
from speaking as from doing ill.”
It is a certain sign of an ill heart to be inclined to defamation. Those,
who harmless and innocent, can have no gratification that way, but it even
arises from a neglect of what is laudable in one’s self, and an impatience of
seeing it in another, else why should virtue provoke ? why should beauty
displease ? in such a degree that one given to scandal cannot let the mention
of it pass without offering something to the diminution of it, the lazy, the
idle, and the forward are the persons most pleased with the little tales which
pass about to the disadvantage of others. The unwillingness to receive good


Names.
Mrs. Scott ...
lbs.
123
st.
8
lb.
8
Mrs. Byron ...
155
11
1
Mrs. Purves ...
135
9
6
Mrs, Metcalfe
165
11
8
Mrs. Powell...
115
8
0
Mrs. Selfe ...
135
9
6
Mrs. Pike
125
8
10
Mr. Babot ...
125
8
10
Miss. Metcalfe
137
9
8
Miss E.
120
8
5
Miss B, ——
75
5
2
Miss M. —
53
3
8
Miss Whiteside
102
7
1
Miss Byron ...
130
8
13
Miss Scott ...
90
6
2
Mr. Ross
173
12
2
Captain Babot
...
173
12
2
Names.
lbs.
sf.
lb.
Mr. Liddell
158
11
5
Mr. Hemsley
175
12
4
Mr. Wilson
152
10
12
Mr. Simpson
137
9
8
Mr. Sheppard
85
5
12
Mr. Metcalfe...
106
7
5
Mr. Powell
165
11
8
Mr. Church
162
11
5
Mr. Paton
169
11
12
Mr. Robb
205
14
6
Dr. Wilson
198
13
13
Mr. Purves
177
12
6
Hall Scott
56
3
11
Mr. Pritchard
145
10
2
Maggie Scott
60
4
1
Boy ...
46
3
3
tidings is a quality as inseparable from a scandalmonger as the readiness to
divulge bad, but alas ! how wretchedly low and contemptible is that state of
mind that cannot be pleased but by what should be the subject of lamentation.
Nothing is so supple as scandal; nothing is so easily sent abroad; nothing
received with such welcome; nothing diffuses itself so rapidly; but how
much is advanced without a person being able to say whence it came, or
attested by one who forgot who told it them, or heard it from one of so little
consideration that they did not think it then worth the notice, still there are
those who will jump at once at it, if it be against the innocence and honour
of a fellow creature. Little minds think fame consists in the number of
votes they have on their side amongst the multitude, whereas fame is as
naturally a follower of merit as a shadow of the body. It is true when
crowds press upon you the shadow cannot be seen, but when they separate
from you it will again appear. The worst type of scandalmonger is she who
is of a lasting constitution but decayed slightly in her own eyes ; the fact of
being unable to occupy herself in useful and intellectual pursuits make her,
from her inclination that way, the receptacle of all that passes, good or bad;
but for the latter she seems to have the better memory, and can always
readily repeat the matter. Whoever receives impressions to the disadvantage
of others without due examination, can only be looked upon by the right-
minded as an object utterly mean and contemptible. HOMO.
Apothegm from Teetotal Side of the House ! — “Too much old Otard
makes many old dotards.”
FEOM OUR SHIPPING- REPORTER.
May 22nd, noon, light airs, northerly and fine weather to light air and
calms throughout the week. May 28th, noon, light air E.N.E. and fine
weather.
True course and distance made good during the week—N, 27° W.
186 miles.
WEIGHTS.
NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.
In consequence of the immense demands upon our columns, we have been obliged o
leave out several communications. We promise, however, to publish all such at our very
earliest convenience.


THE
Hydaspes Gazette and General Adbertiser.
No. 13.
June sth, 1875.
TOPICS OF THE WEEK.
LITTLE variety was introducing our every day jog trot, by the arrival
SI of a visitor from a ship becalmed about a mile from us. It proved to
f\ be Captain Curtis, of the American ship “ Ee-Union,” from Maxiland
/V for Falmouth, 104 days out, loaded with dye woods, etc. He was in
\) want of certain stores, with which we were able to supply him, and he
in return did a similar thing by us. After dinner the starboard cutter was
manned and took the Captain back to his ship, accompanied by several of
our crowd, amongst whom was our special reporter. We learned that they
were hospitably welcomed by the Yankee, who, after- showing them round
the ship, sent them away with the required amount of stores, and a quantity
of cigars, which were very acceptable. During the morning the amateur
crew of the gig pulled to another American ship, the “St. John Smith,”
Captain York, from San Francisco for Liverpool, 120 days out, loaded with
wheat (2,100 tons). His beer, much to the disgust of the crew, was all gone
save one (1) bottle, but we understand that his cyder was undeniable. On
Saturday afternoon we spoke the schooner “ Express,” of Portsmouth. The
first few days of the week passed ’mid calm ; but happily on Wednesday the
wind sprang up, light it is true, but still it sent us along very fairly, giving
us a very pleasant change from what we had lately experienced, the weather
too grows delightful, and people begin to regain health and spirits. The
theatrical world has been busy getting ready for what we expect will be the
last performance of the season, a full report of which appears in another
column. By our advertisement it will be seen that a meeting has been called
to consider what is to be done with the paper. We hope that all interested
in this journal will be present, and let the meeting have the benefit of any
suggestion that may occur to them. A great desire seems to be expressed
that the paper may be printed; this, of course, will cost money, but if all
come forward it will not fall heavily on any one individually, and it will be
a pleasant memento of our voyage to have a copy of the old “ Hydaspes
Gazette ”in one’s possession. This number is, we expect, the last but one,
so we hope that all our friends will come forward next week and endeavour
to make our last flash more brilliant than any yet. That we have talent
among us cannot for a moment be doubted, the only difficulty is to “ crack
the dry old husk, and get at the kernel,” as Beeswing would say.
A public meeting will be held in the Saloon, on Wednesday, after lunch,
to consider the advisability of having this paper printed on our arrival in
London, and to discuss other matters in connection with the Gazette. A
full attendance is particularly requested.


ADVENTURES IN QUEEENSLAND (No. 2).
I had been down to the Port to sell some fine fat wethers, and was on
my way back to the station. It was the middle of January, and hot as
anything you like beginning with H. The thermometer had stood at 110® <
in the shade for upwards of a week. In my last days stage I had to go over
a very bad range, and the road was one of the worst in the country. I wAs
dreadfully thirsty, but I knew that I could not get any water for at least
eight miles, as there had been no rain for nine or ten weeks, I noticed that
there were fresh tracks of drays on the road, so I put the spurs into my old
nag and “ hit out” in order to overtake them, for I knew that they always
carried water with them. I did not catch the drays until I had reached the
top of the range, but as soon as I saw them a joyful feeling came over me,
for I felt that I should now be able to quench my burning thirst. My
tongue felt like a piece of dried greenhide in my mouth as I ascended the
range, and I would gladly have given half a skin for a pint of water. I
knew the bullock-drivers always carry a small keg of water slung under their
dray, so I cantered up and asked one of the men for a drink. To my intense
surprise and disgust he said they had not a drop of anything, that they had
used all their water coming up the range, and were very thirsty themselves.
I had nothing therefore for it but to ride on as quickly as possible to the
next waterhole. I wished them “ good day,” and was just starting in any-
thing but a good humour, when one of the men sung out to me, so I pulled
up. I noticed a queer look steal over his open countenance as he said to
me, “Well, sir, you do look uncommonly dry, and I think you are a right
sort of chap, so if you wont split on us I’ll give you a drink.” Of course I
gave the required promise; he then got a quart pot and a stout stick about
four feet long, and walked up to the dray. Looking round at me and
laughing quietly, he gave two or three sharp blows on a dry cask that was
standing at the corner of the dray, and immediately held the quart pot
underneath. It was soon filled and handed to me, and if I never enjoyed
bottle beer before I did then ! I was at a neighbouring station shortly after
this, and heard the owner complaining greatly about the carelessness of the
carriers on the road now, and that he never could get any beer up without
having half the bottles broken, but I never told him about my friend the
bullock-driver.
“PEOPLE WILL TALK.”
We may go through the world, but ’twill be very slow,
If we listen to all that is said as we go ;
We’ll be worried and fretted and kept in a stew,
For meddlesome tongues must have something to do, —
For people will talk.
If quiet and modest, ’twill then be presumed,
That your humble position is only assumed ;
You’re a Wolf in sheep’s-clothing, or else you’re a
fool,
Bnt don’t get excited, keep perfectly cool,—
For people will talk.
If generous and noble they vent out their spleen,
You’ll hear some broad hints that you’re selfish and
mean;
If you’re upright and honest, and fair as the day.
They’ll call you a rogue in a sly cheating way,—
For people will talk.
Then if you show the least boldness of heart,
Or a slight inclination to take your own part;
They’ll call you an upstart, conceited and vain,
But keep straight ahead, don’t stop to explain,—
For people will talk.
If threadbare your coat, or old fashioned your dress,
Some one, of course, will take notice of this ;
And hint rather close that you can’t pay your way,
But don’t get excited whatever they say,—
For people will talk.
if you dress in the fashion, don’t think to escape,
For they’ll criticise then in a far different shape ;
You’re ahead of your means, or your bills are Unpaid,
But mind your own business, and keep straight
ahead, —
For people will talk.
They’ll talk fine before you, and then at your back,
Of venom and spite there is never a lack ;
How kind and polite in all that they say,
But bitter as gall when you’re out of the way,—
For people will talk.
Good friends take advice, and do as you please,
For your mind (if you have one) will then be at ease;
Through life you’ll meet with all sorts of abuse,
But don’t tlrnk to stop them, ’twill be of no use, —
For people will talk.


The trades are gone, Ah me ! I’m sad,
I miss the pleasant breeze,
That wafted us so merrily
Across the dark blue seas.
The breeze that bore us onward,
To all we owe most dear ;
To those who wait with open arms.
To greet us with a tear.
A tear that struggles with a smile,
A tear that speaks of joy ;
When the mother welcomes home again,
Her long long absent boy.
But our good ship is now at rest,
On the deep and placid sea ;
She seems as if at anchor,
And nowhere can she flee.
May 26th, 1875.
The sun at noon is vertical,
On deck we watch and sigh ;
A death-like still reigns supreme,
Not e’en a ship is nigh.
A glitteiing track no more we leave,
By which our course to trace ;
Many a time around we turn,
But forward not a pace.
The sails from the yards hang idly,
Save for a lazy flap;
Our pets put their heads behind their wings,
And quietly take a nap.
Then blow ye winds from the west,
And bear us away from the heat;
Towards the land we love so well,
The land of snow and sleet.
EXAGGERATION.
The habit of senseless exaggeration is too much the fashion of the
present day, and is frequently contracted in youth. There is always a love
of the marvellous in youthful minds. Some amount of exaggeration then
may seen pardonable in very young people. But the wise and good in every
age will try and check this most objectionable habit, not only in themselves,
but in others. Once acquired, it will increase day by day until the speaker
will hardly know when he or she speaks the truth. I would say “ she,” for
women are more addicted to this failing than men; in fact, they sometimes
lose all relish and love of truth, and lapse into a state as pitiable, as it is
despicable. There are one or two excuses for these white liars (and we may
truly term them so), one is, that slight exaggerations are simply humourous,
it is so amusing to deceive people, so clever to make a man believe one thing,
when the fact is the very reverse, but remember, no right-minded, truthful
person will see anything amusing in such proceedings, and, to say the least
of it, it is fast, vulgar, and stupid, and oftentimes is a very cruel way of
amusing oneself. Another excuse is that truth is not always agreeable, and
that it is as well to make things pleasant, or, to use a common phrase,
“ soften them down,” but those who do this should remember that to deviate
one hair’s breath from the truth is a lie. Remember that truth, pleasant or
unpleasant will come out at last. Let it not be forgotten that nearly every
vice in the world has commenced in the dereliction from truth, and one of
the highest pinnacles of vice is that which renders us most untrue to our-
selves and others. CREDE.
MOONLIGHT AT SEA.
I’m on the sea, the restless sea,
On its waters wild and deep ;
But give to me from tempest free,
The vale with its tranquil sleep.
The storm wind blows, the ship still goes,
And the white waves dash and fly,
Give me repose where blooms the rose ;
’Neath a starlit summer sky.
Some loVe the sea, the surging sea,
And its wonders dimly seen ;
But give to me the mossclad lea,
In its suit of golden green.
In fair moonshine our ship looks fine,
With her fluttering outspread sails;
But oh ! for a seat in a shady retreat,
’Mong pastoral hills and dales.
BETA.


SARG-ASSO WEED.
This species of sea-weed showed its presence amongst us last week, and
its advent has suggested that a few remarks about it might not be unap-
propriate. This weed, properly called “ Euscus Natans,” is found in the
Gulf Stream, hence it is also called Gulf weed. The Portuguese are said to
have been the first to meet with it, and from the peculiar resemblance which
the little nodules on it bear to a small species of grape, they gave it the name
u of Sal/gacao, from the wold Sargo, the name of this fruit; from thence our
sargasso is derived, and the part of the ocean in which it is found is usually
called the Sargasso Sea. The limits within which it is found, extend from
the parallel of 20° to about that of 40° north latitude, but varying much in
position according to particular winds and currents. It is found on the
coast of Guinea, the Cape Yerde, and Canary Islands, as well as on the coasts
of St. Domingo and Jamaica. It is also carried with the current through
the Gulf of Florida, and along the coast of North America. At present we
have only seen it in small detached pieces, which afford some amusement in
catching, but it is also found massed together in long bands, which are, we
read, sometimes extensive enough to impede the progress of a vessel. Upon
this weed are found numerous marine creatures —crabs in abundance, a
kind of shrimp, two kinds of fish—the toad fish and the pipe-fish, etc. Yes-
terday a crab was caught measuring at least 2£ inches across the back, a
small toad-fish also came into the net; these latter are very ugly creatures ;
they are about inches in length, full size; this weed is easily preserved in
a bottle of sea-water, and retains its colour and freshness for years.
Commercial gjntelltgence.
We are on the eve of a commercial crisis. Many failures are daily
reported, and many more expected. The Dutch firm, Hollands & Co., have
long since gone smash, and the Scotch one, McWhuskie & Co., soon followed.
Our Jamaica friends, the Messrs. Peculiar, though they have not stopped
payment, still they transact but little business. The French house Petites
Yerres et Gie, arc the only ones in the line who carry on a spirited trade.
Of the celebrated Mault & Co., the senior partner, who|was long ailing, is
defunct, and the business is now carried on, but on a small scale, by Bull,
the survivor. He, too, is very shaky and will soon come to the pint of
dissolution. Tallow is very high in price, but the market is glutted with
hides and bones. We are expecting an arrival (at Gravesend) very shortly,
by which everything and everybody will be set on their legs again.
FROM OUR SHIPPING REPORTER.
May 29, noon, light air E.N.E. to N.E. and fine weather, with occasional
calms, which continued up to June 2nd, noon, light breeze E.S.E., and fine
weather. June 3rd, noon, light breeze S.E., and very fine weather to light
Southerly breeze during the night. June 4th, noon, fight breeze S., and
cloudy fine weather.
True course and distance for the week, N. 12? E., 434 miles.
1


OF THE CHARACTER OF WOMAN.
In endeavouring to portray the character of woman, I am aware that I
am guilty of. great presumption, but I rely upon the importance of the
subject for excuse, and trust that my audacity will be overlooked. A writer
of the last century once said that “ most women have no character at all,”
that they were “ matter too soft a lasting mark to bear, and best distinguished
by black, brown, or fair.” But this idea will not hold good in the present
enlightened (?) age, when women are everywhere asserting their rights to
compete with men in matters which, a hundred years ago, they would have
been considered as mad to think, much less speak about. There are a great
many varieties of women, and it is my intention to enumerate a few of them
with their peculiarities. There is the “ Coquette ” who makes it her aim
and ambition in life to attract men around her, and when she has completely
caught them in her net, flings them off like so much dust, and then
prepares herself for fresh conquests. She may have been framed by nature,
without a single flaw. Her beauty may be unimpeachable, but she is
wanting in one thing, and that is a heart, she very likely speaks, behaves
and acts just as she ought sufficiently to satisfy the requirements of society,
but probably she has never entertained a single generous thought in her
life. And what is her fate ? Her desire in youth being to make conquests,
she leaves no room for peace and happiness at home. A beauty, like a
tyrant, grows old and friendless, until at last she dies without leaving behind
her a single regret or sigh. Then there is the “ Prude ” whose life is spent
in church and prayer, who shudders when a theatre or any place of amuse-
ment is mentioned, and turns up the whites of her eyes with holy horror if
she is asked to dance, and who owns her faults, but never mends them.
And now to go to a later period in the life of woman, let us take the “ match-
making mama ” whose only desire is to get her daughter married, a laudable
wish no doubt, if she did not resort to such despicable means to obtain it.
How many virtues a rich man possesses in her eye, while the poor man,
who may be superior in every way, except money, to the rich one is put
down as utterly contemptible, and she will hardly look at him. As an
exemplification of this I will quote an instance from “ Pickwick.” At the
ball at Bath, which Mr. Pickwick and his friends attended, there was an old
lady playing in the same game of whist as Mr. P., whose two daughters
came up to her to ask her permission to dance; the younger and prettier of
the two said “ Please, mama, may I dance with the youngest Mr. Crawley ? ”
“ Certainly not; ” says mama, how could you think of such a thing, hi sfather
has only six hundred a year, which dies with him.” The elder then asked
if she might dance with Lord Mutanhed, “ Certainly you may, you are a
good girl, he is immensely rich my dear.” This example, though taken
from a work of fiction, is one which is but too often found in the romance of
real life. And now, lastly,Net us look at the disposition of an “old maid.”
This, perhaps, is the saddest, because the loneliest position of woman, real
love is to her a thing almost unknown, she is devoid of those feelings which
the possession of a husband and children must engender in the heart of
every woman, for marriage is the source of every social tie, of united wish
and mutual joy, and it is only those who Jiave entered its state who can
understand the various joys that attend them as wife and mother.
{To he continued in our next,]


Supplement.
THE HYDASEES THEATEE.
The quarter deck of the old ship presented a very gay appearance on
Friday evening. The after part had been converted, by the aid of sails, flags,
spunyarn and other things, into a very elegant little stage, and for the excel-
lence of all the arrangements we are indebted to the united efforts of Messrs.
Paton and Wilson (our stage manager). As soon as darkness gave notice
to the theatre goers that the curtain would soon rise, the theatre was crowded
in every part. Soon after half-past seven, the curtain rose to the very
amusing farce, “ Twenty minutes with a Tiger.” This play was gone through
without the slightest hitch, and it was very evident that the various parts had
been studied with that amount of attention which was due ; the first scene,
that between Dolly (Mrs. Byron), Jacob (Mr. Liddell), and Chutnee (Dr.
Wilson) was really capital. The doctor did the irritable old tiger to perfec-
tion. Mrs. Byron made a great deal of her part, and her acting and agitation
on meeting Chutnee were to aT. Mr. Liddell’s get up was A I.' We are
sure that if all else were to fail him, he would make a colossal fortune as a
butler in a nobleman’s family, or a waiter at a tavern. Miss Bryon made a
charming little Arabella, and Mr. Purves, as the cool and impudent Bees-
wing, performed the part allotted to him in a manner consistent with its
“ Malthewsian ” character. At the close of the play, the applause was great,
nor would it cease till the curtain rose again, and the actors bowed their
thanks. A most amusing interlude then occupied their attention, and elicited
roars of laughter from the audience. Messrs. Haydon and Jimmy Ducks
appeared, the former as a German musical professor, and the latter as his
daughter ; and after a selection from “ II Trovatore ” had been sung by the
lady, in a brilliant falsetto, accompanied by her Pa on the violin ; she treated
the spectators to a dance of the Irish jig description. The rig of these
gentlemen was of the most appropriate description. The farce “ Turn him
out,” then commenced, and was acted in a most finished manner and without
any hitches. Our reporter sat at the back of the pit, and says that it went
off extremely well, both as regards elocution and acting. The ladies
Mesdames Powell and Purves deserve great credit for the manner in which
they took them parts in the play. They both spoke out, and exhibited none
of the nervousness so common to young actresses. Mr. Powell, as Nobbs,
could not have been better, and the Whitechapel nature of his “rig-out” showed
that he had bestowed a great deal of care on his “ get-up.” The Swell, Mr.
Wilson, was dressed, and acted the part of the swell destroyer of domestic
happiness to perfection, “ upon my sacred honour.” Mr. Simpson, as the
unfortunate and somewhat faithless Moke, played his part remarkably well.
In fact, it would be invidious to make any distinction, for all, in their several
roles, were so good. We regret that our theatrical talent has been so little
developed during this voyage, for it is patent to all that we have on board
the makings of a very excellent company. The performances terminated at
nine o’clock, when all the actors and actresses, led by Mrs. Byron, joined in
singing the National Anthem. Then supper.
N.B. — We are again unfortunately obliged to omit some communications.
This is however, perfectly unavoidable, and all such will be published next
week.
i 2


THE
Hydaspes Gazette and General Adbertiser.
No. 14.
June 12th, 1875.
days and weeks rolling steadily along have brought us near the end
J 1 of our voyage, and to the publication of the last number of the
j| Gazette, fourteen numbers of which we have now given to the public.
We venture to flatter ourselves that the weekly issue of this paper has
J been the source of some little amusement on board, and if this has
really been the case, we shall feel ourselves amply repaid for any little
trouble we have taken in the matter. It is a subject of regret that our
illustrated supplement was not commenced until lately, for we have perceived
that much greater interest has attached to the paper, owing to the presence
of the cartoons. In the first few numbers, perhaps, there might have been
a little more originality, but a reason for that can easily be assigned,
namely, the lack of interesting local items (which, of course, crop up as the
voyage goes on), and also the bare acquaintanceship existing among our
passengers. We are glad to be able to say that latterly the paper has, with
the slightest exceptions, been filled with original matter, and we are almost
sorry to have arrived at the last number, for we seem to have done so when
the talent for newspaper writing was becoming properly developed among
us. In one of the first numbers a hope was expressed that our shortcomings
might be pardoned, and that it was our desire to please, not to offend. We
have been careful to avoid personalities (a fruitful source of ill-feeling), and
have indulged in generalities only, to the best of our abilities. Those who
have assisted us with literary effusions (and to them our thanks are due)
must have come to a knowledge of the fact that is not an easy matter to
find interesting subjects whereon to dilate, in a small circumscribed com-
munity like ours. Here we arc thrown together—people who, perhaps,
never saw or heard of each other until we left Sydney, and it is not likely
that any previous doings or sayings of individuals -would possess any interest
in the eyes of their fellow-voyagers, so, as I mentioned above, we must rely
almost solely upon localisms, and how many weeks have we passed unmarked
by anything out of which a correspondent or member of the editorial staff
could squeeze half a column.
In all probability we shall publish a number of the paper extra-ordinary,
when we reach the channel (may the happy event so arrive), so we hope our
readers and correspondents will bear this in mind, and favour us with one
more contribution, so for the present—Farewell.
THE DIRGE OF THE DROUTHY.
At last the stout has given out,
Ah me ! alack ! alas !
The men all growl, the ladies pout.
And mourn their vanished glass.
No more, I fear, shall we taste beer,
Or foaming half and half ;
Until at Gravesend we appear,
And in a pot-house quaff.
At lunch we crunch, and biscuits munch,
Beerless, with beef and cheese ;
Nor e’en at supper is there punch,
Our sore thirsts to appease.
June 7th.
Although we’ve handy Martell’s brandy,
Claret, and some sherry ;
Each vows that when he gets to land, he
Will o’er, his beer make’merry.
My pen I’d raise to write thy praise,
But words are tame, I fear ;
I'd like to write Horatian lays,
To laud thee, lovely beer.
Now beer, “ bon soir,” but “ au revoir,”
And when we get on shore ;
For you, my darling, loud I’ll roar,
And drink a quart or more.
“SALT-HORSE.”


“NEVER HOLD MALICE.”
Oh ! never ‘ ‘ hold malice,” it poisons our life,
With the gall drop of hate and the night shade of strife ;
Let us scorn where we must, and despise where we
may.
But let anger like sunlight go down with the day :
Our spirits in clashing may bear the hot spark,
But no smouldering flame to break out in the dark ;
’Tis the narrowest heart that creation can make,
Where our passions fold up like the coils of a snake.
June 9tb, 1875.
Oh ! never “ hold malice,” dislike as you ■will,
Yet remember humanity linketh us still;
We are all of us human, and all of us erring,
And kindness within us should ever he stirring:
Shall we dare to look up to the Father above,
With petitions for pardon, or pleadings for love ?
Shall we dare, while we pant for revenge on another,
To ask from a God, yet deny to a brother?
PAX.
ON FALSE PRIDE.
There are three great ends we should all strive to attain in this world
generally, hut more especially in a small community like our own, viz.,
honour, goodfellowship, and charity, one with the other, but how few of us
have succeeded. Oh ! that dissipation of thought, which our conversing
much in the world has occasioned, what absurd false notions we receive
from it, what unnecessary ill-feelings exist: jealousy and false pride (that
dangerous reptile), false pride, which is the chief cause of jealousy, and is
the greatest enemy we have, on board ship, to contend against, in order to
attain the three above good qualities; but pride, when the word is used for
zeal and resolution in the determination of our duties, whether towards our
neighbour, or our wish to advance in life, is a glorious temper, and should
be possessed by all, but pride properly so called
“ Pride, ugly pride, which oft is .seen,
In haughty looks and lofty mien.”
did never in the world make anybody happy, but many miserable. Indeed,
for a while, it may flatter our fertile imagination like a dream, but at the
approach of truth away vanishes the false enchanting visions, and leaves
nought behind but a keener sense of misery and many enemies. To retrieve
ourselves from the ill-effect, we ought to withdraw from company and
converse much (what we above all things love, and yet above all things hate)
with ourselves. When communing with our own heart all vain images that
beset us out of doors vanish, and are thoroughly dispersed and forgotten,
all our vanities and vexations are shut out, and the considerations enter, how
much better it would have been had we all on starting taken the above into
consideration, knowing that for three or four months our lot was to be cast
together, and had thrown this vice to the winds, with the determination of
starting and continuing throughout on an equal footing. We have all been
thrown together (no matter what we may consider our social positions to be
on shore), and we ought all to act on terms of equality one with the other.
There is no occasion for unnecessary displays of affection, but there should
be a friendly feeling existing throughout; no one has any right to put them-
selves at the head of a number of people, merely thrown together by chance,
they are sure to find their own level if they do. Suppose by any chance the
ship to have been cast away on some desolate shore, perhaps on a rock, and
our having to be huddled together for what good would your false
pride he then ? it would soon vanish, and the former professors thereof have
to remain crestfallen and miserably mean, until taken compassion on by
their self-made enemies ; all would then be on the same footing. Take
warning then, I beseech you, “It’s never too late to mend,” and cast this
viper from you altogether.
During the last fortnight our younger portion of the community have
resorted to the quarter-deck for dancing ; and as the weather has been fine,


and the ship steady, they have had everything in their favour. Signor
Tourini, our Professor on the violin, performed with his usual artistic taste.
These little dances help to pass the evenings away pleasantly, when one
does not feel inclined for a bit of the romantic, which is often the case;
though I can’t help mentioning that the lovely sunsets we have lately been
having are alone quite sufficient to induce one’s mind to wander in the airy
regions, if that way inclined. As unfortunately there seems small chance of
our having strong breezes, we hope to see our young blood enjoying them-
selves in this innocent amusement as long as opportunity affords.
PUBLIC MEETING.
A public meeting was held in the saloon on Wednesday afternoon, to
consider matters connected with the ultimate destination of the Gazette ;
Captain Babot in the chair. Mr. Purves moved, “ That it is considered
desirable that the ‘ Hydaspes Gazette,’ be printed on our arrival in London.”
Mr. Hemsley seconded this motion which was carried. A subscription list
was then opened for the purpose of defraying the expenses of publishing the
paper, and £lO was speedily collected. It is thought that the whole can be
managed for £ls, which sum it will, doubtless, not be difficult to raise.
THE CHARACTER OF WOMAN.
{Continued from, our last.)
The absence of all these feelings must necessarily make the “ old maid ”
crabbed in her ideas, and as she can’t be happy herself, she does her best to
prevent others from being so ;2. How does she do it ? By making mischief,
and creating scandal, and if she succeeds in doing that, she is, for the time
being, comparatively happy. If she only knew how utterly mean and con-
temptible the “ Scandal monger ” is!in the eyes of every right minded person.
I am of opinion that she would not be so eager to make mischief as she now
is—
I like a woman that’s frank and just,
To whom a tale I can entrust;
But when that woman’s to scandal given,
From such a woman protect me Heaven.
But now let us look at the subject from a general point of view. I will begin
by saying in the words of Scott:—
0 ! woman in our hours of ease,
Uncertain, coy, and hard to please,
And variable as the shade,
By the light quivering aspen made ;
But when pain and anguish wring the brow,
A ministering angel thou.
As an instance of the variability of woman, let us take the case of a woman
married to a man, who is ready to grant her all she asks. She sighs for a
park filled with splendid trees under whose shade she can bask in the sun,
or walk in the cool of the evening. The park is bought and after a time the
husband sees his wife in tears, and on his asking what is the matter, her
grief finds vent at last in the words, “0, those odious trees.” lam sure my
readers will agree that this is an instance of the mutability of woman,
very often found in every day life. In men we find various ruling
passions, but in women two predominate—“ The love of pleasure and the
love of sway.”


“ Men some to quiet, some to public strife,
But every woman would be queen for life.
0 woman, trust not now to your resistless charms, age or sickness will take
them away. Good humour is the only thing that can teach charms to last,
it still goes on making new conquests, and maintains the past. Love, raised
on beauty will, like that, decay. Have reserve with frankness, and art, with
truth allied to it, courage with softness, and modesty with pride, and have
fixed principles, with a fancy that is always new. “ HOMO.”
Missing: “The Newcomes.” Mr, Purves would feel obliged if the
volume was returned to him as soon as possible.
It is with a feeling of extreme regret we have to inform the public that
the last of our series of concerts came off on Thursday evening in the
Hydaspes Royal Music Hall, and was attended with immense and unpre-
cedented success. The programme and advertisements appear to have done
their utmost, as the building was crowded to excess, many of the audience
having to stand outside in consequence of being unable to obtain seats. As
our protracted passage to Cape Horn prevented our Theatrical talent from
performing at fixed periods, so in consequence of the houses of entertain-
ment being closed until weather permitted, our Philharmonic Society (most
members of which belong to the Royal Theatrical Company) was unable to
decide on regular periods for their concerts, so that fewer have taken place
than was originally intended. Since our last concert, the orchestra has
been shifted, with great advantage, both as regards convenience and space
for the performers, and hearing for the public, the sound being previously
broken by the chief support of the building, the massive mizen-mastico
column being between the orchestra and the public. Last Thursday the
sound was well distributed through the delicate pillars and lofty roof of this
noble edifice, indeed, every song was distinctly heard beyond the walls. The
evening opened with an overture from Rossini’s splendid opera “ Tancredi,”
which was performed with wonderful skill and taste by our rising artistes,
Misses Metcalfe and Byron, on one of Henry Brinsmead’s splendid new check
self-escapement and repetition action pianos. Next followed that favourite
old glee “ The Hardy Horseman ” (which everyone knows), causing great
satisfaction, and was warming up the audience for what was to follow.
That pretty ballad, “Happy be thy dreams,” was then sung with great
pathos by Mr. Robb, eliciting well merited applause. This gentleman’s
mellow voice does not appear to have suffered from the long voyage. Mr.
Simpson’s “How to get a poultry dinner,” was read in that gentleman’s
usual fluent manner, and could not fail to cause the loud applause that
followed. Next on the Programme came the favorite duet, “ What are the
wild waves saying,” which all readers of Dickens must know. Mrs. Byron’s
contralto and Mr. Wilson’s baritone blended well together, and had a pleasant
effect on the public. Our favorite soprano* next appeared and warbled
sweetly through the old song, “ She wore a wreath of roses,” completely
thrilling the audience with delight, and bringing down such a roar of
applause, that she had to pacify them by singing one of her native airs,
“ Kathleen Mavourneen,” as only an Irish lady could sing it. The glee,
“ Lightly tread,” which was well sung, finished the first half of the enter-
tainment. After a short interval, our pianists, Misses Metcalfe and Byron,


again took their seats at our splendid piano, and commenced the last half
of the concert, by playing the “ Hebe ” waltzes ; this lively spirited music is
very pleasant .to the ear, inspiring one with the desire for a dance. The
company then sang “ To all you ladies now on land,” with so great effect,
their voices harmonising well together, as to bring the house down with such
renewed cheers, that the last verse of this pretty glee had to be sung over
again. This was decidedly the favorite glee of the evening. Mr. Wilson
then sang “ Down among the dead men,” by Russell, our favorite English
composer of bass songs, and was well applauded. “ The warrior bowed his
crested head,” a favorite poem from Mrs. Hemans, of which some of us had
a slight knowledge before, was then read with great feeling and effect by Dr.
Wilson, and elicited well merited applause and cries of encore. He then
read from Bab Ballads, “ The crew of the Nancy Bell,” a most ludicrbus
story, producing peals of laughter from the delighted audience. The able
manner in which this gentleman can change from tragedy to comedy is
capital and must have been well studied. Next on the programme was that,
beautiful duet “ Oh give to me those early flowers ; ” the able way in winch
Mrs. Purves and Mr. Robb sang it reflects great credit, and we question if it
could have been sung much better by professionals. Jt could not fail to
delight the audience, as renewed cheers and encores induced a repetition of
the last verse. Our favorite contralto came next, and produced on the
audience the effect all expected by singing “ Katie’s letter,” every word being
distinctly heard, thus enabling her hearers to thoroughly understand the
meaning of the song. She was, of course, encored, and then sang the
“ K, 0. 8.,” that capital comic song we have hoard performed at our Theatre
Royal. This lady could not have pleased the audience better, as nearly
everyone sang the chorus, and those who resorted to the galleries joined in
the tramp necessary to make the chorus complete. As the encores and
cheers continued, she, on her third appearance, bowed to the audience
and succeeded in quieting them. This lady's songs are very taking and
much appreciated, and wo regret that she has not had chances of favoring
the public with more. The glee, “ The Wreath,” sung by the company in
capital part, was the last on the programme, and after this “ God save the
Queen,” concluded the evening’s entertainment. We cannot conclude without
remarking how well the voices blended in the part songs, and wo felt certain
that the applause elicited was well merited, and most satisfactory to the cars
of the performers.
MARINE INTELLIGENCE.
The ocean around us on Wednesday and Tlmrsday presented a very
unusual appearance, being studded with vessels of various rigs and sizes.
Wo held both signal and verbal converse with some of these. Early on
Wednesday wo spoke the “ Ellen Goodie ” (ship), of Yarmouth (Nova Scotia),
from San Francisco to Falmouth, 112 days out. Wo also spoke the barque
“ Giovanni,” from Iquique to Falmouth, 103 days outj and the English
barque “ The Star of West Bristol,” from Iquique to Cork, 103 days out.
This vessel passed the meridian of Capo Horn on the fourth of April (one
day before wo did), and crossed the Equator on May 11. At about half-past
eight in the evening, we wore hailed by the North German brig “ Thetis,”
from Iquique, 104 days out. She crossed the Lino on May Bth, and the
meridan of Cape Horn about March 29th, cargo—nitrate of Soda. On Friday
morning we spoke the ship “ Celestial Queen,” (belonging to the same owners


as the Hydaspes), from Hawkes Bay ( (New Zealand), 96 days out. She
rounded Cape Horn on April 9th, and crossed the Equator on May Bth ;
she carries three-passengers. -In the afternoon we spoke the ship “Ocean
Mail,” from Otago to London, 1039 tons; 98 days'out. '.Passed Cape Horn
March 27th, and crossed the Equator on May 7th; she had seven passen-
gers oh board. Also the barque “ Forganhall,” of Greenock,” 1070 tons,
from Bahia to Hamburg, 44 days out.
FROM OUR SHIPPING HE PORTER.
June sth. — Light breeze S.W., and cloudy weather; midnight, light
northerly wind. June 6th, noon, light breeze N.N.E., and fine weather.
June 7th, nooh, moderate breeze N.E., and fine weather to brisk breeze
throughout night. June Bth, noon, moderate breeze, and very fine weather
to light northerly breeze, and calms to the 11th of June ; noon, light airs,
variable, northerly, calms and fine weather.
True course and distance made good during the last week, N. 2° E.,
495 miles.
LIST OF PASSENGERS PER “ HYDASPES” FROM
SYDNEY TO LONDON.
Mrs. E. Bahot, Mrs. J. Byron, Mrs. M. Metcalfe, Mrs. J. R. Pike, Mrs.
H. W. Powell, Mrs. W. A. Purves, Mrs. Hall-Scott, Mrs. Selfe; Miss Byron,
Miss Metcalfe, Miss Estella Metcalfe, Miss Beatrice Metcalfe, Miss Mary
Metcalfe, Miss Powell, Miss Annie Scott, Miss Ada Scott, Miss Maggie Scott,
Miss Marion Scott, Miss Jessie Scott, Miss Whiteside ; Rev. D. Ross, Mr. C.
W. Church, Mr. A. E. Hemsley, Mr. D. J, Liddell, Mr. C. Metcalfe, Mr. H.
W. Powell, Mr.»W. A. Purves, Mr. W. F. Sheppard, Mr. W. M. Simpson,
Mr. G. Wilson; Master W. Metcalfe and Master Scott.
lOST, during the concert on Thursday night, a new Cambric Handker-
j chief. Will.the finder please return it to the “ Intemperance Hotel.”
Marked G. Wilson, R.N.
LATEST INTELLIGENCE.
Early this (Saturday) morning we spoke the English ship “ Canter-
bury,” Captain Roberts, from Point de Galle to London, 90 days out. She
crossed the Equator on May 18th. The “ Canterbmy ”is a new ship on her
first voyage, and was built by the Albion Shipping Company. We also read
the signals of an American ship J. H. D. F., from Lobos Island, on the coast
of Pern, to Falmouth ; also the English barque K. D. Y. T. “ The Margaret
Knight,” of North Shields, 345 tons, from Callao to Cork, 74 days out. Last
evening we were hailed by the “ Hendon,” which vessel we spoke before on
May 3rd ; she was on the other tack, and passed close to us. She is from the
River Plate for Falmouth, and she gave us 66 days out.
J


SUPPLEMENTARY NUMBER OF THE
Hydaspes Gazette and General Adbertiser.
this supplementary number of the Gazette* we purpose giving our
J readers some information about the ship in which we have travelled so
J many miles together. The “ Hydaspes ” was built by the celebrated
j] London ship builders* Mare & Co., of Blackwall, in 1852, and was
if originally a screw steamer. She was engaged as a troop ship during
the Crimean war. Her are: —Length, 203 feet; breadth,
38 feet, 7 inches ; depth, 25 feet; and is spar decked. She traded chiefly
to India during the time she was a steamer. In 1870, she was altered from
a steam ship to a sailing vessel, and has since traded between London and
Australia and New Zealand. She is 2,093 tons register, and nearly 4,000
tons burden. She is classed A 1 at Lloyds. This passage of our good ship
must not be taken as a sample of her sailing, for not only has she had to
contend against most unprecedently unfavourable weather, as will be seen
on reference to our weekly shipping reports, but the ship’s bottom has not
been cleaned since she left London, and, being an iron vessel, the accumula-
tion of weeds, barnacles, etc., is very considerable, so that her powers of
sailing are very materially impeded. The last two voyages to New Zealand
were made in 75 days.
As regards the present passage, the distance from Sydney to Cape Horn
(5777 miles) was sailed in 33 days, an average of 175 miles per day, or
7*3 miles per hour. From Sydney to the Equator (10,047 miles) was sailed
in 66 days—an average of 152-2 miles per day, or 6-34 miles per hour ; and
the total to the Channel, lat. 498 25' N,, long. OS 37'W., 23rd June, 14,556
miles was done in 112 days—an average of 130 miles per day, or 5-42 miles
per hour.
The barometer lias ranged from 28-35 off Cape Horn to 80-84 off the
Western Islands. The thermometer (noon) has ranged between 458 and
858 Fahrenheit.
At 5.30 p.m., June 23rd, the Scilly Islands were sighted at 6 o’clock.
St. Agnes lighthouse was bearing N. by E. On the 24th, in the evening,
Start Point was seen; 25th, passed the Isle of Wight; 26th, Beachy Head
was passed at 9 a.m,, Dungeness at 2.15 p.m., and the pilot came on board
at 2.40 p.m.
OUR NATIVE HOME.
What spot is that with fancy drest, —■
What spot is that which seems as blest, —
When far away from it we roam ?
It is, it is our native home.
When on the rolling deep we dash,
And thunders roll, and lightnings flash,
What charm dispels the dashing foam ?
It is, it is our native home.
And when to distant climes we’ve been,
Where wealth and pomp and power are seen;
What spot is that we choose alone ?
It is, it is our native home.


LOST. —“Professor Wilson’s Tales.” Please return to Mr. Sheppard
at once.
ME. WATSON would feel obliged if several volumes of the Nautical
Magazine, which he has lent to passengers at different times, were
returned.
• • rpHE NEWCOMES,” has not turned up yet, much to the disgust of
X its rightful owner. The said owner would like to recover the
volume before the end of the voyage.
SALE.—The lease and goodwill of the well-known Hotel “The
r Piano and Parrots.” Fixtures to be taken at a valuation. Posses-
sion can be given on the 28th instant. Apply to G. Jerker, Esq., on the
premises.
FROM OUR SHIPPING REPORTER.
June 12th, noon, light breeze, northerly, and fine weather. June 14th,
light breeze N.W., and cloudy wheather. June 16th, noon, light air
northerly, and cloudy fine weather to light westerly airs. June 17th, noon,
light breeze W.S.W., and fine weather to moderate and brisk. June 18th,
noon, brisk breeze W.S.W., and cloudy weather to 6 a.m., shift of wind to
W.N.W. June 19th, noon, moderate breeze W.N.W., and fine weather to
fresh throughout night. June 20th, noon, fresh breeze N.W., and fine
cloudy weather. Same throughout night with squally weather. June 21st,
noon, brisk breeze N.W., and cloudy fine weather to moderate and light with
drizzling weather. June 22nd, noon, moderate breeze W.N.W., and fine
cloudy weather. Same throughout night. June 23rd, noon, light breeze
W.N.W., and hazy cloudy weather. 6 p.m., sighted Scilly bearing N.
20 miles.
True course and distance made good N. 64 E. 1,522 miles. At 6 p.m.,
sighted Scilly Islands bearing N. 20 miles.
From Mitchell’s Maritime Register, June 18th, we learn that the
Samuel Plimsoll and the William Duthie, both of which left Sydney the
same day as we did, arrived in London on the 14th and the 11th of this
month respectively. The Zealaudia, which left Sydney on the 16th of
February, arrived in London on the 17th June. The Sohraon from
Melbourne via the Cape of Good Hope, which was advertised to leave on
the 13th of February only got to London on the 12th instant. All this
shows that the unusually large amount of calms and baffling winds have
been the cause of our somewhat lengthy passage.


O
m
0)
O
2
a
i
O
IS
1 rs
a
DATE.
Lat.
Long.
P
s
O
U
<D
DATE.
Lat.
Lon.
(h
3
U
<D
CJ
S
a
<
!
O
a
S
1 &
1 <
s.
E.
1
S.
W.
34-59
153.3
8 50 E 95
30-21
73
Apri
i „
27
12-45
26-24
X 25WJ38 30-22
82
5
35-59
155.42
S 65 El 142
30-41
70
28
9-56
26-35
X 4WI169 30-19 82
6
36-27
155-42
South.} 28
30-48
i „
29
7-13
26-47
X 4 W 163 30 - 18j84
7
38-54
156-45
S 19 E 155
30-48 <39
30
5-3
27-0
X 8 W 131 30‘17'84
8
41-5
157-50
S 21 E 140
30 51
68
May
1
3.36
27-42 X22 W| 94
30 1980
9
44-0
159-37
S 24 Ej191
30"55
66
2
3.15
27-57 X35W
26
30-1584-
10
47-0
161-20
S 22 Ei 194
30.50
63
3
2.35
28-6
XI4 W
41
30-1484'
11
49-31
165.23
S 47 EI222
30.25
61
I
4
2.3
28-2
X 8 E
33
30-13 85
12
49-7
168-20
X 78 E118
30 26
56
5
1-20
27.55 X 9 E
43
30-12 80
13
50-9
173-36
S 73 I-
213
30-00
52
0
0-57
27-0
X67 E
59
so-nisg"
J
14
505
179-40
East.
233
30-12
53
7
0-30
26-42X35 E
32
30-11 80
W.
X.
-
K
14
48 41
177-171X65 E
147
30-09
56
99
8
0-10 25-58,X48 E
60
30-14
,82ft
15
48 54
174"5S.S 82 E
1 92
29-98
59
9
1-1125-301X25 E
60
30*T»«>\
16
50-381169-54
S 62 E 222
29-65
56
99
10
2-27 25-47iX13W
78
30-14,^3
30-OoW*
17
5M0 164-40
S 79 E 201
30-01
54
1 99
11
2-56 25-47
Xortli.
29
*
18
51-25
162-12 8 84 E
94 30-14
58
12
3-40 25-47
Xorth.
44
30-08 78
19
51-42 158-14
S 82 E 148 30-15
54
1
13
4 18 26-3
X23W
42
30-11 79
”
20
51-50 154-20 S 87 Ejl44 30-18
55
14
5-1127-38
X59W
104
30-14 80
21
52-17 149-48|S 79 E(17l[30-34
56
15
6-46 29-Mi
K454¥
X43w
186
30.19}89 :
r
22
52-36 145-40|S 83 E|l54l30-30
50
16
8-47 31-3
!ee
30207»‘
%
23
53 7
142-12 S 76 E 129 29-81
50
17
10.53 32-Sl
N4(£T?ft65
3W97&.,
99
24
25
5421 140-26S 40 E* 97
54-30133-26 S 88 29-65
47
47
99
18
19
20
12-47
15-17
18-5
34-10
3515
36-33
X35W
X23W
X24W
140
168
184
30-21|77’ :
aft.-29?5i‘
30-3ff7tf*
S
26
54-43
129.7
S 85 E;l50 29-74
47
21
20-11
37-52 ! N30W
146
■0*4ii2iL
27
54-58
124-55
S 84 EU45 29-68
48
22
21-15
38-21 X23W
69
30-45I76 8
m
4f
28
55-14
119-43
S 85 E180
29-40
46
23
21-40
•39-18 X65W
60
30-5076 ■
29
55-46
114-21
S 80 E
' 182
29-23
45
99
24
22-2
39-35 X37 W
27
30-36|76
<8
30
56 - 50
108-0
S 73 E
216
28.95
46
' j;
25
22-30
38-57iX53 E
47
30-32177,
31
56-44
104.0
X 88 E l 31
29.38
45
1 »
26
22-21
38*48 S 45 E
13
30-36
79 s
April 1
56-38
98-20
X 88 E; 185
29.40
29.12
45
99
27
28
22-32
2257
38-50X36 W
39 ; 15lX35Wi
14
30-3&
30.39
S-
2
57-11
89-25
S 85 e'292
29-40
48
29
23-35
39.381X28 W
mm
3L8
3
57-11
82-5
East.
240
29-38
46
i
1 99
30
24-37
40-3
mm
X33W
.66
30-44
76
4
56"37
75"0
X 82 E 238
29-14
46
31
25-8
40-26
37
76
5
56-12
67'-14
X 8417241
29-54
48
June
1
26-12
40-20.X 6 E
”54
30-39
76
79
62-20
X 79 E
188
29-;a
46
!
0
27-7
401L,
E
58
30-43
75
99
6
55-35
28-35
1 ”
3
28-33
39*14
$36 E
95
30-48
74
9f
99
;>
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19 |
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
55-44
53-25
50-41
48-35
47-37
44-50
41-45
39-25
37-10
35-49
34-23
33 24
31-40
30-
27-44
2410
31-
19-51
17-7
14-50
60-2
56-12
52-36
49-27
47-9
44-56
42-3
39-10
36"43
34-65:
33-25
32-20'
29-26
27-20
25-48
24-36'
24-24.
24 - 28
24-
25-
S 83 E
X 44 E
X 39 E
X 44 E
X58E
X 29 E
X 34 E
X 43 E
X 41 E
X 47 E
X 40 E
X 48 E
X 54 E
X 60 E
X 24E
X 17 E
X 4E
X 2 W
X 3 W
X18W
79
194
211
175
109
191
224
192
178
119
112
73
180
125
198
224
145
114
164
144
28-80
29-10
29-50
29-75
29-00
29-61
29-64
29-
30-
3018
30-13
•20
•10I
•04
•16
•18
•10
30-25
30-26
30-22
46
47
47
51
51
52
58
59
62
64
60
69
71
72
71
75
76
78
80
82
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
4
5
5
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
10
17
IS
19
20
21
22
23
30-
31-
32-
339
35-42
37-5
37-
38-
38-
39-
40-
41-
42-
43-
14-34
45-45
47-
48-
48-
49-
38-2#
87-34
35-
36-
36-
37- >
37-
38-
39-
87-43
35-51
34-19
3FI5
28-25
23-54
19-34
13-48
9-58
6.37
W27 E
N27 E
N55 E
X37W
X;4W
XI2 W
N44W
X29W
X 49 W
X69 E
X44 E
X48 E
X« E
N57 E
X66E
X70 E
X65 E
X?3 E
X81 E
X77 E
99
90
110
56
n§5
51
38
58
69
124
92
71
69
166
204
200
245
154
135
30-45
39-38
30-40
30-55
3078
30-84
30-84
30-83
30-80
30-75
30-68
30-73
30-73
30-72
30-6&
30-5&
30.§r
30*49
30-54
30-56
74
72
70
70
68
69
68
68
68
67
66
66
65
65
65
5^
58
60
60
Log of "hydaspes."




