

The SANDFLY
Colliery and Railway.
DESCRIPTIVE
AND
ILLUSTRATIVE
EXAMINER PRINT.




The Sandfly Colliery Company, Limited.
(Incorporated as a Joint Stock Company under the provisions of “ The Companies’ Act, 1869,”
audits amendments.) —
o— 0
Capital : £20,000, in 20,000 shares of £1 each.
President:
Mr. K. L. MURRAY, C.E.
Board of Directors:
Messrs. BOWES KELLY, T. M. FISHER, 3I.LC., Hon. G. CROSBY GILMORE, J. I). FOSTER, A. BROWNE, ■
C. W. GRANT and Dr. R. G. SCOTT.
Bankers: Solicitors:
THE COMMERCIAL BANK OF TASMANIA. Messrs. HOGGINS and GILMORE, Macquarie Street, Hobart.
Commercial Agent;
Mr. A. WERTHEIMER, 90 Macquarie Street, Hobart,
General Manager : Mine Office :
Mr. a. c. Wallace;. Secretaty : Margate, Tasmania.
Mr. J. B. HICKSON, F.T.I.A.
Registered Office :
COOK’S CHAMBERS, ELIZABETH STREET, HOBART.


Beattie, Photo.]
THE SANDFLY COLLIERY AND RAILWAY,—BAY TERMINUS.


THE
Sandfly Colliery and Railway,
SOUTHERN TASMANIA.
A good many years have elapsed since first the
existence of coal of good quality among the ranges
known as ‘‘The Sandfly,” situated about fifteen miles
south-westerly from Hobart, was talked about. Talk
went on much the same year after year,' until it
became a fixed idea in the minds of many people that
it was “only talk,” and at last the field seemed to be
forgotten. Recently, however, a railway has been
constructed from the coal centre to North-West Bay;
a jetty also has been built, and coal carried over the
line for shipment. Lately a member of the "Courier”
staff visited the district, and provided the following
details: —“I left Hobart at 7 a.m. on January 18 with
Mr. K. L. Murray, President of the Sandfly Colliery
Company. After a pleasant drive of sixteen miles
through Kingston, we arrived at Margate, where we
had breakfast, and then walked to the company's
jetty, distant about half a mile in a southerly direc-
tion. The illustration gives a good idea of the great
jetty built by the company to form the bay terminus


Beattie, Photo.]
THE SANDFLY COLLIERY AND RAILWAY. —CURVES AND BRIDGES AT THE FIVE MILE.


of their railway. The jetty is a most substantial
structure, 250 ft. long, with a width across the front of
40ft. The decking is 13ft. out of the water, which
at the jetty end is 25ft. deep at low tide, so that
LARGE SHIPS
drawing up to 23ft. can lie alongside to load coal. A
short addition to the jetty would add 10ft. to the
depth of the water, and then the very largest vessels
that come to Hobart could lie alongside and fill their
bunkers. On top of the jetty end, bins capable of
holding 250 tons of coal have been built. These bins
are filled by means of a ramp, on which rails are laid,
and the coal trucks hauled to the top and emptied
into the receptacles. The ease with which vessels
can take in coal from the bins was illustrated by the
fact that the s. Mahinapua loaded 50 tons in fifteen
minutes, actual loading time. Standing on top of the
bins one gets an idea of what a magnificent harbour
the Sandfly jetty is upon. Well landlocked, it is
available in every kind of weather, and its size is such
that hundreds of large ships could ride in it safely.
There is an area of more than six square miles of
water over 30ft. deep. Looking from the jetty land-
wards, the view is very fine. Mount Wellington
forms the background, and from it are the Sandfly
and other ranges, among which peeps of cultivation,
orchards, etc., are visible. At the land end of the
jetty is the railway yard, with its shunting sidings, in
which we could see trucks —some empty, some full.
A train of empties, with its locomotive at one end' and
A PASSENGER CAR
at the other, was awaiting us before starting on its
journey to the colliery. Mr. Wallace, general mana-
ger of the company, joined us at the jetty, and showed
us round the repairing shops, locomotive shed, and
the other necessary accessories of a colliery railway
terminus, also the pretty position his house is to
occupy on the five acres belonging to the company.
We ultimately took our seats, and the train moved
off. Our first stopping place was three miles out, at
The Sandfly Colliery and Railway.—Continued.




Poverty Gully, where the locomotive filled with water.
The arrangements for the water supply here are
ingenious and interesting. Tanks have been fitted at
a convenient height above the rails, and are filled
from a creek which runs about 20ft. below, by means
of a pump worked with steam from the locomotive
through a detachable pipe. The locomotive therefore
takes water from the tanks and filh them at the same
time, a few minutes sufficing for the process. We
stopped at several other place= to take photograph -
of bridges and various interesting features of the line
and country. The way the line
CURVES AND ZIG-ZAGS
reminded me of some of the railways on the West
Coast. An idea may be formed of its winding course
by remembering that though it is twelve miles long,
the distance between terminals in a straight line is
only about half that length. We had some very-
pretty views from the train as we wound round the
hills, always going up—peeps of water, bay, and river,
of the mountain, and of farms and homesteads, and
clearings in the forest, enough of them to show what
the country is capable of. One of my fellow
travellers remarked, ‘ What will the change be when
a thousand miners, with their families, are settled at
the Sandfly ?’ The fine timber in various parts of tie
forest impressed me as being a valuable asset. I w"S
thinking of the future prospects with coal, timber,
and fruit, when Mr. Murray remarked, ‘ There’s Coal
Hill,’ and, looking where directed, I saw a big,
thickly-timber-covered eminence rising several hun-
dred feet above the railway and extending two or
three miles roughly east and west. All through this
hill, Mr. Wallace explained, the three seams of the
Sandfly coal extend . ‘A mountain of coal’ is the
term applied to it by experts who have visited the
spot at various times, and if Mr. Wallace’s description
of the result of his workings and surveys be accurate,
a veritable mountain of coal it must be. We arrived
at the mine terminus about i p.m., and after lunch
The Sandfly Colliery and Railway. —Continued.


THE SANDFLY COLLIERY AND RAILWAY, —INSIDE ENTRANCE TO TOP TUNNEL.
Beattie, Photo.]


proceeded to look round. I was impressed here, as
at the jetty, with the substantial way in which the col-
liery has been fitted and opened out. Tire entrance
to - the main tunnel is 10ft. wide by 7ft. high, solid
timbering on top and at both sides making it secure.
The photograph of this (which was taken about 20ft.
inside) shows a bit of the coal seam to the left. The
coal does not show out well in the illustration, as it
has been exposed for several years, so is covered with
dirt and damp. To the right the illustration shows a
coal skip on a line just coming out of ‘No. 1 right,
a branch going off the main tunnel road on which
Mr. Wallace told me was ‘the level course' —the main
tunnel having a slight downward grade. We visited
several of these branch tunnels, in each of which
miners were working on the coal, that looked very
solid and bright where broken away across the ‘head-
ings’ or ‘bords.’ In one of the headings we met Mr.
Forbes, the mine ‘overman,’ or underground mana-
ger, who has recently come from Newcastle, and who
speaks very enthusiastically of the Sandfly mine. I
regretted that, not having flashlights, our photogra-
pher could not get a picture of any of these working
places, which certainly made me feel strongly that I
was in
A REAL COAL MINE.
We afterwards visited the middle and lower tunnels,
travelling down the hillside to them in a coal skip
controlled on the railroad by a rope, which was let
down and hauled up by a steam engine that does all
the mine hauling. These two lower tunnels I found
equally substantially made, but there has not yet been
a great deal of work done in them, as the difficulties
of getting to them, making a road through the dense
forest, clearing away the immense trees and logs
and other impedimenta, had taken so much time.
Mr. Forbes and Mr. Wallace consider the middle coal
seam a better one to work than the top one, as it is a
solid, clean seam, rather wider than the other, and
without blemish from roof to floor. The coal is of
The Sandfly Colliery and Railway. —Continued.




much the same kind and qualify, but they say it will
be more economical to mine. The bottom seam coal
they spoke of with a kind of awe. ‘lt's like Welsh
anthracite,’ said Mr. Wallace; ‘will beat anything in
Australia for shipping, and wherever else a great
draught is obtainable.’ I expressed the greatest
satisfaction, though really I could not see any differ-
ence between the coals till it was pointed out to me.
We inspected the screens, engine-house, and other
works about the mine, and then went to see the men’s
huts, of which the company has built a considerable
number, and is continuing to build more. Every-
thing 1 saw proved that the company has unbounded
confidence in the value and future of the colliery.
Everything is being arranged on the most substantial
scale. Both president and manager assure me that
the output from the top tunnel will not be less than
200 tons a day directly the rolling stock expected
from England this month arrives to enable them to
carry the output to the jetty for shipment. Having
examined the mine inside and out, we left on our
return journey to the bay, travelling on the car by
the force of gravity alone, and pleasantly getting over
the twelve miles in an hour. 1 was greatly pleased
with what I had seen, and nope the Sandfly Colliery
will be as successful as its owners believe it will be.
1 append a more technical description of the mine,
railway, etc., furnished me by Mr. Murray and Mr.
Wallace:—lt is strange how coal, in forming, has
taken different forms, in one place it is anthracite,
in another bituminous, but it is seldom that a seam
distinctly bituminous
and one distinctly anthracitic occurs in the same col-
This is what has happened at the Sandfly.
There is both bituminous and anthracitic coal. Of
course Coal Hill is not literally a mountain of coal,
but during the past thirty years such a number of
prospecting tunnels have been driven into the face of
it, and have struck coal seemingly here, there, and
everywhere, that it might easily be looked upon as
The Sandfly Colliery and Railway.—Continued.




a mountain of coal. When, however, the coal ex-
posed by these tunnels is carefully examined and
surveyed, it is found that there are three distinct
seams lying one above the other, with 200 to 300 feet
of shales and sandstones between them. These seams
have been named ‘top,’ ‘middle,’ and ‘bottom’ coal,
and all three are now being opened out and worked.
The top coal includes two seams about sft. and 4ft.
thick respectively, the lower one being that from
which the bulk of Sandfly coal has been obtained. It
is bituminous, or, to speak more correctly, semi-
bituminous in character, and very similar to coal
mined elsewhere, which has proved most popular and
satisfactory as a household and steam coal. The
analyses show that it is high in those constituents
which are most valuable in a fuel. The middle coal
is quite distinct in appearance and texture from the
top coal; has 3ft. 6in. of clean coal without a blemish,
and has been traced round Coal Hill for a distance
of over a mile and a quarter without showing any
alteration or indication of a fault. The practical
miners who have examined this seam all agree that
it is most valuable, and will prove to be easily and
very economically worked. The bottom coal is a
seam of about 3ft. 6in. of clean coal, and is again quite
different in appearance and chemical composition
from either of the others, as it is
DISTINCTLY ANTHRACITIC,
and contains a very high percentage of fixed carbon.
In the furnace it resembles the semi-anthracite coals
of South Wales, regarded as the best steam coals in
the world. The position and extent of these three
seams will be best understood by referring to attached
plan and section. The section shows contour of hill
surface with position of Top, Middle, and Bottom
coals at their tunnel mouth, and also at the Govern
ment drill bore, which, as will be seen, passed through
the two lower seams. The fact that this bore struck
the bottom coal thirty chains in a direct line from its
present working tunnel, and the middle coal twenty-
The Sandfly Colliery and Railway.—Continued.




ANALYSIS
OF
COALS.
Colliery.
Ivbs. of water con-
verted into steam
by 11b. coal.
i
1 Fixed carbon.
Volatile matter.
Moisture.
J3
V.
<
Sandfly (Top Coal)
13 63
62.28
25-57
2.24
8.66
Sandfly (Bottom Coal) An-
thracite
12 IO
78.26
7.40
2 02
11.64
Jumbimna (Victoria)
13-30
60.07
30.01
5.08
7.08
Co-operative (Newcastle i
14.OI
57-24
33-38
2-45
' 6.20
Dudley (Newcastle)
13-27
56.35
36-39
2.21
5-°8
Greta (Newcastle)
[ 3 9°
46.20
45.00
1 85
6-95
Wallsend (Newcastle)
I3-9 6
57 22
34 17
2-75
5 24
Burwood (Newcastle)
13-49
63 93
30.74
2 20
5 18
Newcastle (Newcastle)
13.29
61 86
30 25
2.66
5 20
Abermain (Maitland)
13 44
47-49
46.25
1.84
3-61
Hebburn (Maitland)
13.82
52-60
42 28
1 72
3-4o
Pelaw Main (Maitland)
13-73
50.82
40-54
2 84
4-63
American (Anthracite)
13 16
American (Semi-Anthracite)
13-74
American Bituminous)
13-47
American (Semi-Bituminous)
14 26
four chains from its tunnel, considered in connection
with the other fact that these seams have been found
to be continuous round the hill for more than a mile,
give some idea of what an immense quantity of coal
has been already proved, and as the position of the
seams in the drill bore is just where it ought to be,
considering the lay of the strata, it is clear that no
fault exists over that area, and that the coal will be
easily and economically mined.
The plan shows extent of present workings and
the relative positions of the three, with the railway to
North-West Bay and incline haulage road from
Middle and Bottom coal workings to screen at mine
terminus of railway. It also shows where the coal
has been proved by bores and tunnels, and that the
extent of the seams round the hill is more than a mile.
The following are analyses of Sandfly coals, made in
December last by Dr. Helms, the leading analytical
expert of New South Wales, for purposes of compari-
son with analyses of other coal obtained from authen-
tic sources:—-
The Sandfly Colliery and Railway. — Continued.




Coal.
Time of
jonrney in
minutes.
Coal
consumed
in lbs.
Comparative
1 value .j
Newcastle (an excellent sample of picked
coal)
95
378
IOO
Jumbunna (a good sample)
90
414
96
Mt. Nicholas (an average sample)
no
504
66
Sandfly (an ordinary sample)
95
364
ro 3
Sandflv (a good picked sample)
83
342
123
Dr. Helms, in his report upon the sample of top
coal, says : —“The coke is bright and hard, ash brown,
a good household coal, and will make good coke.’’
When speaking of the bottom coal he says:— “An
anthracite coal, it does not coke when heated, but
forms a loose black powder. The ash is light brown.
It is, in mv opinion, an excellent steam coal.”
In addition to these analyses, practical compara-
tive tests have been made to show the relative steam-
ing values, when doing actual work, of Sandfly, as
compared with other coals. The test conditions were
as follow: —A full load of empty trucks was taken
by the locomotive from jetty to mine, the condition
at each test being identical. There is a continuous
up grade for the whole twelve miles, and as the
locomotive fire-box is small, a fierce fire has to be
maintained the whole distance in order to keep up
steam. The trials resulted as follow:
It will be seen from these tests (practical as well
as theoretical) that Sandfly coal compares well with
the other high-class coals named; that it is an excel-
lent steaming as well as household coal, and that it
cokes well. Some objection has been taken to Sandfly
“top” coal on account of an alleged excessive amount
of clinker which is found in the ash. Well, at present
the clinker is possibly higher than that made by New-
castle, due to the fact that the working places are
still very close to the outcrop, so contain certain
The Sandfly Colliery and Railway.—Continued.


Beattle, Photo.]
The SANDFLY COLLIERY AND RAILWAY.-WATERING STATION AT POVERTY GULLY.


impurities, always present in outcrop coal, but which
are becoming less
WEEK BY WEEK,
and will doubtless disappear altogether as the works
progress further into the hill. But this chnkerirg is
more than compensated for by the fact that Sandfly
coal makes a remarkably small quantity of soot, either
deposited in flues, tubes, and chimney or carried off
as smoke. Newcastle coal, good as it is in other
respects, makes much scot and smoke, and as they
are almost entirely unconsumed carbon (the most
valuable constituent in a coal) there must necessarily
be great waste from their deposition, which also
entails considerable labour to clean tubes, flues, etc.
This non-forming of soot will make Sandfly the most
popular domestic coal, as its use dees not entail that
nuisance which housewives call “black sooty stuff,"
and which gives so much trouble from flying about
rooms, dirtying curtains, etc., besides filling flues of
kitchen stoves.
After arranging for properly opening up the three
seams of coal, constructing screens, and all other
apparatus and machinery-, getting the coal to coni
sumers was the next thing to be provided for. The
railway was therefore made, and a serious undertaking
it proved, occupying, with survey and construction,
nearly- two years, and costing, with its rolling stock,
etc., about iiß,ooo. The magnitude of the work
resulted from the fact that the mine is 1500 ft. above
sea level, so that though it is only about six miles
in a direct line from North-West Bay, in order to
secure an easy falling grade all the way the line
required to be made twelve miles long. Many
COSTLY, SUBSTANTIAL BRIDGES
had to be constructed, heavy rock cuttings made,
and great trees, logs, and scrub got out of the way,
besides other difficulties, such as finding proper
ballast, etc. However, all were surmounted, and the
line is now at work carrying coal to the bins at the
jetty. The trucks at present used are those which
The Sandfly Colliery and Railway. —Continued.


Beattie, Photo.]
THE SANDFLY COLLIERY AND RAILWAY.—SOME OF THE MEN'S HUTS,


were purchased for railway construction purposes,
and are not suitable for coal-carrying. Proper coal
trucks and another locomotive have been ordered
from Europe, and are expected in a few weeks.
The sea transport is the next thing to be provided
for. Arrangements have been made for carrying
coal to Hobart, and a hulk which will hold 300 tons
purchased. It will be towed to and from the com-
pany's jetty, and will provide means of supplying
local requirements. Negotiations are proceeding for
sending coal to the West Coast and other parts of
Tasmania, and it is intended eventually, when the
three seams are opened out, to compete for some ol
the coal supply of the neighbouring States, particu-
larly for shipping use, for which the anthracite
Bottom coal is, like similar coal elsewhere, so emi -
nentlv fitted.
The Sandfly Colliery and Railway.—Continued.


Etched and Printed at
“The; Rxaminer,” Patte:rson Street, Launceston,
Tasmania.




THE SANDFLY COLLIERY AND RAILWAY. SOUTHERN TASMANIA,—THE JETTY.
Beattie, Photo.
