

e §<?3 f
llpSfe
THE LATE
COMMERCIAL CRISIS; j
-A.3XT EXPOSE
.
OF THB
j
OF
SWINDLING BY MACHINERY,
■
(with characteristic illustrations,)
By C. CECIL.
. ♦
Price - - ONE SHILLING.
FOURTH EDITION !
Sjvmuy:
j J. G. O’CONNOR, PRINTER, 34, YORK STREET.
Up®’ :




THE LATE
COMMERCIAL CRISIS
AN EXPOSE
or THE
THEORY AND PRACTICE
dwindling bg |ladrtnerg,
WITH CHARACTERISTIC ILLUSTRATIONS,
BY C. CECIL.
fijfonni
all booksellers and newsvendors.




5-5-77
PREFACE TO FOURTH EDITION.
It is due to the public—in issuing this Fourth Edition—
to make a statement in reference to the circumstances
which originally induced the Author to write this pam-
phlet, and to offer a few comments on the criticisms —
or rather expressions of opinion—which have been
passed on his performance.
In reference to the first point he has only to say that
he was induced to write on the mercantile system of
Sydney because he had been a sufferer by it. He lost
in Sydney the fruits of years assiduous attention to busi-
ness, through “ Swindling by Machinery.” Need he
say more ? He is the expositor ef his own bitter ex-
perience as well as those of others.
The manner in which the public have received the
first, second, and third editions of this pamphlet (more
than seven thousand copies being now in circulation)
proves how gratefully his statements and arguments
have been received. Perhaps the best proof that can be
adduced in favor of the truth of his position lies in the
fact that neither of the daily journals—mercantile news-
papers—have attempted a refutation. If they could do
so would they not have gladly done so ? Of course! He
challenges them again to do so; and if they contravene
or impugn any material statement of his he will suggest
a mode by which the public can determine who is in the
right and who is in the wrong. In a particular manne r
he flings the gauntlet down to the Press. Is Muggins
—with all his phrenological fame for combativeness —
<*13155^80^9


afraid to take it up ? He is again challenged to do
so.
The severest censure passed by the public on the
Author is that he has not made hie exposure complete
enough. It is true he might have shown—-
Ist. How (and how many) foreign merchants have been
done here by the system of “Swindling by Machinery ”
which has prevailed.
2nd. The dissipated and extravagant style of living
which has resulted from this peculiar state of thing*.
3rd. How utterly inefficient the present Insolvent
Law is to meet cases of “ Swindling by Machinery,” with
illustrations drawn from judgments by his Honor the
Chief Commissioner, with evidence taken in his Honor’s
Court.
4th. The tricks of Bills of Sale,. Warrants of Attor-
ney, Mock Sales, Settlement of Estates on wives and
children , by fraudulent traders, of which class the
Author has a curious although by no means a perfect
list.
sth. A historical sketch of runaway Traders, Dis-
honest Bank Clerks,, Merchants'' Clerks and agents —all
caused (mainly) by the hypocritical system of morals
which has for years obtained here-
Now the author refrained from this full exposure—
Ist. Because no printer could be found who would
print the result of his researches.
2nd. Because under the present state of the Law of
Libel he could be punished criminally for telling the
truth.
3rd. Because he wished to spare the feelings of indi-
viduals, by dealing only with imaginary characters, but
characters which can hardly fail to be recognised. Who-


ever the reader Is convinced that “ the cap fits,” it is
most likely he is just one of those who ought to wear
it.
The Author has only one additional statement to make.
In mentioning, in a laudatory manner > certain mercantile
houses of known good repute, he did not intend to cast
any reflection on many others of equal respectability.
He only adduced the names of those of whose respecta-
bility and reliability he was assured. He is delighted
to find that his experience of a superior class of traders
was somewhat limited, and he hopes that further obser-
vation and information will greatly enlighten him in this
particular.
He now offers this enlarged and corrected edition of
his brochure as a fair memoire of an era in the Commer-
cial Life of Australia, which is not devoid of interest,
and certainly presents a very obvious moral.
Sydney, June 22nd. 1867.




LATE COMMERCIAL CRISIS.
It will be in the recollection of many men, still living
in the Australias, that after the first clouds of convict-
ism had been dissipated, and the intellectual insight and
enterprise of John Macarthur had established a peren-
nial source of national wealth, the credit and character of
the parent colony—-New South Wales—became reliable,
and respectable ; English publicists dilated on the advan-
tages which were likely to accrue to the whole Empire
from encouraging settlement on its vast plains, and de-
veloping its natural resources. British capitalists practi-
cally proved their sense of its value by inaugurating
trade with it —encouraging emigration to its shores—
establishing commercial depots at its ports—and other-
wise advancing its best interests. So great was the en-
thusiasm thus created, and the feeling of security thus
established, that for many years the Imperial Govern-
ment acted with a liberality unparalleled in the annals
of Downing-street, towards the young Britannia of the
South, and spent large sums of money in furtherance of
the grand design of establishing an Anglo-Saxon nation
in the desolate Australia. A new lustre seemed to be
added to the Southern Cross, and it rose in mental vision
before men’s view in the mother country as the type of
many triumphs, moral and material, to be achieved. Nor
.did the then population of Australia, its har sinister of


elonry notwithstanding, do discredit to the sympathetic
and co-operative feeling thus generated in the old coun-
try. In fact, they acted with such straightforwardness
and integrity, as a rule, that the credit of the young
colony rose rapidly, and the treasures of London Empo-
riums were largely and confidingly consigned to Sydney
traderj and shipped to the Sydney market. It is true
that even then the elements of corruption had begun to
work, and the virus of a deadly poison had begun to cir-
culate. In the new impulse given to emigration it is not
surprising that men of neither capital nor character,,
but who were cunning and sharp—in fact and truth*
sharpers —joined the exodus to the new state to try
their great ingenuity, unclogged by moral restraints*
in a new field of industry. Many of this class have be-
come naturalised —a limb of the body politic—in Aus-
tralia, particularly in Sydney. No convict ship ever
bore individuals more injurious to the real interests of the
country than the vessels which carried hither the scum
of the London Stock Exchange ; these bankrupt Man-
chester and Liverpool adventurers ; these runaway in-
solvents and social desperadoes. It would not be difficult
(although it might be dangerous) to particularise them
further —“ By their fruit ye shall know them it will
be sufficient to say they fastened on this community like
the parasite on the tree —like the vampire on his victim
—and since then they have been sucking the vital sap
wherever they have been fostered. The Gold Discovery
of ’sl brought hither more of the fraternity—men of
the same kidney—who at once associated and “ worked
the oracle,” like the demoniac Pythoness of old, for
their own vile greed and selfish sensual enjoyment. |
maintain, these men have destroyed the reputation of


the Sydney mercantile body. I challenge any one to
prove that our reputation is not lower now than it was
thirty) nay, twenty years ago ! It is simple cowardice-
simple snivelling—a mere plagiarism from the Sydney
Herald— an easy mixture of lie and moral—to say "that
the existence and partial success of such a class as this '
is inevitable in every young country ; and that in course
of time the country will shake them off, will pass
through her ordeal of rogues’ pranks and knaves’ cares-
ses, and become all the wiser and belter for the insult
and injury they have inflicted on her. But in the mean-
time, unless the operations of these u clever ” individuals
be checked, there will be more groans and more tears
from the oppressed; more widows and children will be
robbed ; more honest traders fleeced ; more foreign mer-
chants deluded ; more ships run on rocks (by pre-
arranged accidents !) —more houses feloniously set on Are
and burnt down, in order to do the insurance offices ;
and more fraudulent paper, bearing insolvent and disho-
nest autographs hurried into circulation. It is, there-
fore, time to stem the torrent —to expose the imposture ;
and since neither the law of the land, nor the intelli-
gence of the age, will allow one to stigmatize even the most
unworthy; the only way (consistent with avoid-
ing an indictment for libel) to expose systematised swin-
dling in the ’colonies, and that of Sydney in par-
ticular, is to expose the system! That I intend
—and now hasten—to do. I said, or stated, a few
minutes ago, that “ By their fruit ye shall know them,”
and if you fail to recognise in these papers all or any of
the men who have dishonored the fair fame of Australia,
and ruined thousands of honest and hardworking
people, you will at least be put on your guard against


a repetition of the old game. If I show you the trick f
you will never more be deceived by the conjuror. If I
show you the machinery, including its paraphernalia of
black-coats, shining hats, white neckties—called by the
vulgar, (\yho never knew or experienced their comfort •
able, cozy feel,) chokers— and if I show how the
machinery is worked, the public will surely never be
again deceived—at all events, by the old game. No
doubt, the indefatigable, double-tongued, and —prok
dolor, prok pudor ! highly respectable, ingenious indivi-
duals referred to, will strike out a new line of action, or
to put it more plainly, will try new dodges. For this we
must be prepared in a double sense : prepared to expect
it, and prepared to resist it. If we are forewarned, we
should, according to the proverb, be forearmed ; but we
must have all our wits about us, for we shall have to
contend against the ingenuity of the devil (when he puts
on his robes of light) and the malice of some of his
choicest children on earth—the sons of Mammon.
Before coming to our exposition, let us say a word on
Swindling by Machinery, and the peculiar appli-
cation I intend to give it in these pages. The term
was first applied to a nest of gamblers in America, who
operated on their victims in this wise. A sitting-room
was furnished in the usual manner, and had a faro-table
near the window, and another table placed in the centre
of the room, with chairs placed round each. The walls
and ceilings were covered with a star-pattern paper.
Directly over the room was another, but not furnished.
A portion of the flooring had been removed in tie
apartment immediately over the gambling-room, and a
small hole bored through the ceiling, above each of the
tables. As the holes came directly through the centre


of the star-ornament in the paper, they could not with-
out close examination be distinguished from below.
Each hole was so placed as to enable a person applying
his eye to it, to look directly into the hand of the player
seated in the chair below. An ingenious telegraphic
signal-machine communicated between the holes in the
room above and the chair of the gambler in
the room below. A wire, having a handle near
the hole, passed along the floor, down the walls,
and across the floor of the gambling-room to a spot
where a piece of flooring had been cut away close by a
leg of the table on which the foot of the gambler could
he placed. There it terminated in a spring and hammer,
concealed by the carpet. The method of working the
machinery is obvious. A victim to be operated upon is
introduced, and finds two chairs drawn up to the table.
In one of these the gambling thief seats himself, at once
placing his foot over the telegraphic hammer. The
victim is obliged to take the other, which is placed in a
proper position for playing. The gambler’s accomplice
above, by using the spy-hole and making the necessary
pre-arranged telegraphic signals, enables his pal to gain
a sure and an easy victory.
Now this is very ingenious in its small way ; but not
to be compared in ingenuity with the moral machinery
for doing the unwary which has been planned and exten-
sively practised here in Sydney. Let us take two
imaginery characters, and call them Brimstone and
Treacle. The former, as his name imports, is a man of
fiery temperament —of an enterprising spirit. His voice
is loud—his gait bold—his tongue glib—his whole at-
titude resolute and defiant. Treacle is his physical and
moral antithesis. He is smooth of face—oily of tongue


—modest of demeanour and very ** respectable.” The
dove would fail to typify the gentleness of his manner,
while the trail of the serpent can hardly be discovered
in any of his dealings. Had Brimstone narrowly
scanned this terrestial orb, east and west, and from pole
to pole, he could ndt have found a more fitting imp of
fraud than Treacle, in whom dark designs could be con-
cealed from sharpest light. By some extraordinary
sympathy these two have been brought together, and have
worked harmoniously for years, and by their united
industry have managed to do a gulled public out of
some hundred thousand pounds. Bet us take a sample
of their mode of procedure by imagining a conversation
which took place between them on a particular occasion
—the occasion being a sudden pressure on Brimstone.
In a cozy room of a
been removed, and something inspiriting put on the table
—they look trustingly at each other, but not without
that evanescent glance of suspicion—of each other —
which malpractice makes a habit. With a shrug of the
shoulder, and a twirl of his diamond ring, Brimstone
asks his friend,—?
“Now, Treacle, without gammon, say how I can get
out ot this scrape ?’*
I have thought it over,” Treacle replies, “ and I be-
lieve there is only one way to save you.”
“And that”—interrupts his companion.
“ You must be converted. You must become a shin-
ing light in the church !”
“ Converted ? Have I not always been a good Chris
tian ? Haye I not played that game pretty well ?”
“ But not to the extent necessary to save you now j
you must at once propose to build a chapel; and all the


better if you preach and pray in it —I will give out the
hymns. You have a few acres over the water: adver-
tise for tenders, and spend to the last hundred you can
raise in pushing on the building. In the meantime I
will work or Brown, Jones, and Robinson, and others,
to give you a little accommodation. We can then set up
half a dozen dummy establishments in different lines,
sand I will manage to fly a few dozen of their kites for
you ; just enough at first to get you a bit of capital to
work on. We can then extend the business, and so
manage it that one thing will ease another, till we get
Into smooth water. I can work at least two banks for
you —mildly at first. Like the boa constrictor, I will oil
them well at the outset, and then swallow them whole.
By a little dexterity, and maintaining a godly character,
-we shall do as well as you did in 18 —. By-the-way,
it would not be amiss to propose building a few dozen
model oottages for the poor. Of course you would not
be mad enough to do so, but you might throw out a hint
of your intention of doing so, if your business succeeded
well within a year or two. I had not a shilling six years
ago more than you have now, and yet I can raise a hun-
dred thousand to-morrow —nay, as you know, if the
bubble burst this moment I should have a quarter of a
million less than nothing.’*
At the conclusion of this discourse of the mellifluous
Treacle, these two confiding gentlemen burst into a fit
of laughter ; jokingly debate the suggestion offered;
go further into details ; enliven themselves with the re-
freshments belore them; and depart, prepared to work
into each other’s hands. What is the result ? This!
Jn one year or less, from the date ot the above conversa-
tion, Brimstone and Treacle can raise a quarter of a


million sterling on mere paper; their mart has become
the real Exchange of the city ; and we find compara-
tively as much excitement at their placeof business, as
at the gold-room of New York. Does the reader be-
lieve that this could happen ? Will he assert that it has
not happened ? No, he had better ask, kou> can
it possibly have happened ? I will tell him. In
consequence of the rotten, hazardous , gambling mode in
which Banking business is carried on amongst us.
Let me explain how persons like Brimstone and
Treacle work. An organisation, an association, or
whatever you may call it, is formed out of a number
of people who are brought together, say, from meeting
at the same chapel, or living in the same suburb j they
commence operations hy playing into each other’s hand,
and giving each other accommodation. They organise
their dummies in various trades. These dummies are
poor, reliable men, without a shilling they can call their
own. These needy dependents are tools of the Mes-
sieurs Brimstone and Treacle. Whenever their prin-
cipal is hard up, they give him any number
of bills he wants without getting consideration.
These bills he bundles into the banks, unless he can
fly a few of them to advantage elsewhere* and gets
them discounted. Thus capital is raised. Of course
these bills have to be met at maturity! Met, did
I say ? No, they can be renewed j and renewed they
are—over and over again—till a fresh batch of equally
valuable sacurities supply their places. The system is
carried on—-carried out—'enlarged—till the banks in
self-protection must give accommodation. But should
an impracticable Director with mere common sense, and
with (rarer quality!) more uncommon honesty, than his


brother Directors, drop down to the swindle, and pounce
like a hawk on a few of these “kites’’—what is the
consequence ? The bubble bursts ! The house of cards
tumbles to pieces ! The balloon, inflated with the gas
of falsehood, hypocrisy, cant, pretence, and impudence,
collapses, and then comes a crash ; and in the crash the
Banks suffer ! Bah, the Banks suffer! The people who
i .vested money in bank-stock suffer; widows and
orphans suffer ; trade suffers ; credit suffers, because it
is depreciated; the character of the colony suffers ; and
a wide-spread wrong is perpetrated. Shall we then
wonder at one Bank in the late crash losing, unless a
few of the “ kites ” can be utilised, £120,000 ; another,
£80,000; another, £15,010 ; another, &c. ?
The reader can make up the total. Can he ? No, for in
working the machinery referred to, honest traders are
drawn into the net, and there enmeshed. They are
cajoled, deceived, and finally ruined. I could fill all
the pages at ray disposal, by merely reproducing
the names of the victims —innocent victims of the late
commercial crisis—as it has been euphemistically
called; but which I shall call the bursting of a big
balloon, inflated with feeble but deleterious gas. Thus
the general public have not only suffered by Bank losses
—by the ruin of honest men—but by the general stag-
nation and distrust in business which the event has oc-
casioned. I must spare another paragraph on Bank
{mis) management in this city, before I proceed to the
other facts and illustrations of this paper.
The success, even temporary and partial, of such
characters as Brimstone and Treacle, would be impos-
sible if the Banks were conducted on a judicious and
equitable system. These establishments, if they do not


create, supply “ the sinews of war” to 1 such persons,-
How does this happen ? In this wise. By offering a
high rate of interest for fixed deposits, it was presumed
—-not unreasonably—that the savings of the community
would be collected together, and with proper manage-
ment, and with adequate guarantees, be applied advan-
tageously to general trade and commerce,- and to the
development of the country’s resources. Others, lam
aware, and with logical force, maintain that the high
rate of interest given by the Banks on such deposits, has
been the ruin of the community—has checked national*
speculation and investment—and will ultimately end in
the complete insolvency of all the Banks in the colony
not having foreign capital to fall back on. Be this as it
may; and, for argument sake, assuming the soundness
of the position ; still, I hold, the Bank Directors have
grossly betrayed the trust and confidence placed in
them. They have speculated in the money of their con-
stituents without adequate security, and consequently
without adequate moral sanction. They have worked
for themselves and for themselves alone, totally regard-
less of the solemn fact that they were custodians of the
savings of others. No matter what trash was offered as
security for advances, whether in the shape of trade
bills or squatting stations, whenever a Director had a
pecuniary interest in the matter—direct or indirect—
they were put through all right. Is it not even known
that the office of Director has been sought for the sole
purpose of looking after No. 1 ? How many of these
gentlemen would dare to reveal the true motive which
induces them to seek office ? Which of them would say
—“ Elect me. I want to get that auctioneer’s bills
through for that cargo he sold for me the other day, and


vhich he has got paid (hr ii> biils. I must with his
lame make this flimsy available, and avoid ray own re-
sponsibility in the matter; and I shall want to use him
similarly often during the year/' What Director dare
be thus candid ? Who can deny that such a statement
would embody the simple truth ?
I will now say a word in reference to the actions of
the Banks in the matter of consignments of goods. In
this matter there has been under and over hand play,
and it is quite time that the public should know how
the game is made. An agent, trader, merchant, or
whatever name you like to give him, receives a heavy
consignment cf goods. Of course, he wishes, perhaps
wants , to realise on them at once. He bundles them
into auction ; and they are sold by the auctioneer for
whatever prices they will fetch j and bills are taken in
payment. These the auctioneer puts in the Bank for
discount, and discounted they are, while honest traders
*—men who are dealing with a real and not a factitious
and fictitious capital—have no chance of getting even u
small accommodation. Indeed, it has become agrim joke,
that there is no money in the Banks for shopkeepers and
other legitimate mercantile men, because the Directors
and their following—their tail of auctioneers’ dummies
and insolvent agents —want it all. In this way the im-
porter, who is probably also a Bank Director, gets rid of
all personal and just liability which falls nominally on
the auctioneer. To state it roughly, he (the importer)
puts panniers on an ass, and the donkey bears the whole
burden.
One of the causes of the late commercial crisis is
dearly traceable to the iniquitous system ef forcing the
sale of enormous shipments of goods at auction —at


auction instead of at the merchants’ marts —an abnormal
commercial consequence which arises solely from the
facilities of discount given by Bank Directors to pet auc'
tioneers. Indeed, I have heard, perhaps seen, men of
this kind not worth the value of their dashing equip*
ages, or perhaps the tawdry tinsel on their cads’ hats—*
managing to pass their paper through several Banks and
raise thereon some three-quarters of a million sterling.
One monetary institution nearly collapsed in the recent
panic through doing an extensive business wilh these
gentry. It was an institution, too, ostensibly got up—
with the usual flourish of brazen trumpets—for the pur-
pose of assisting an enterprising class —the smaller trades-
men. I need hardly say this institution did noth-
ing of the sort; the moment the money of the public
was got into its coffers, there were Brimstones and
Treacles enough ready to seize it. And they got a
good lump of it, too I What became of it ? Will it
ever come back ? Ask the Ocean to give up its buried
treasures ? Ask the sharks to spare their prey ! Ask
Brimstone and Treacle to account for their spoils of
war !
Before I have done with the Banks—-and I hope here-
after to devote a separate paper to them—l must refer
to another kind of business done at such monetary es-
tablishments —namely, the issue of “ Commercial Let-
ters of Ci edit.’’ Now, this business, when property
conducted, is an essential element in the vital economy
of such institutions. It is peculiarly the trade an I
business of a Bank; but, to be properly conducted,
due regard must be had to the nterests ot those whose
moneys or effects are risked. Those Commercial Let-
ters of Credit, as the whole mercantile world knows,


ttW Issued for* til 3 purpose of enabling persons in busi-
ness to import goods without paying the whole price of
them at once, but providing for their payment at the port
of shipment. It is generally supposed, and the slightest
reflection will shew it is necessary, that a Bank in issu-
ing these Letters of Credit, should obtain a deposit as
security against insolvency, and a cash deposit of 25
or 33 per cent, on the amount for which the Letter of
Credit is to be issued, is generally deemed in every way
equitable—fair to the bank and fair to the borrower.
At all events, few honest traders consider it unfair or
oppressive. By this means, under ordinary circum-
stances, and when the accommodation is given to per-
sons carrying on a bona fde business on their own ac-
count, ample security is given against contingencies,
and still a man is able to do a pretty extensive trade
with small capital. Thus a person in Sydney with
£25,000 could import £>loo,ooo worth of goods, the
bank paying for such goods at the port of shipment,
and the importer paying the balance (his £25000 being
already deposited) on their arrival here ; these goods
could probably be sold at a fair profit when they ar-
rived, if there were no sharpshooters to disturb the
legitimate action of trade. We have outlined the
theoretical side of the Letter of Credit system, and how
it can be honestly and legitimately worked. But what
has been the wodus operandi here in Sydney ? The
reader will be literally appalled to hear that the Banks
have issued these Letters of Credit, not only without
the necessary preliminary security, but with a mere fic-
tion instead not to well-known solvent traders
men who had something to fall back upon- —but
to the free lances or lather the sharpshooters


before referred to. How have Brimstone and Treacle,
and their needy dependents, been able to obtain their
Letters of Credit—-upon their simply giving their bills
—and a pretty mess it has all ended in. Did they find
a veritable security'at all ? No I Whenever acash secu-
rity was demanded, this reverend body merely put
their long heads and worked their quick wits together,
and by the puerile, but in their case exceedingly inge-
nious game of “ flying kites/’ —more extraordinary than
Franklin’s, which brought lightning down from Heaven,
—they managed to make up atactitious (and fictitious)
amount of money which they deposit, and thus
they get their Letters of Credit, In all probability
before the arrival of the importations—the “kites”
have to be renewed —get sufficient string for ano-
ther four months’ flight —and this is done with
a smoothness of tongue, a sweet mixture of blarney and
palaver which Bank Directors cannot resist. After, per-
haps, further operations in kite-flying—in order to pay
the Banks the balance due on the Letters of Credit, there
is a new game —a kind qf kissing in the ring—com-
menced. Old bills have to be renewed when they can,
or new bills (just as valuable as the old) put in their
place, and there is more of the old gammon talked,
and thus the first false security is replaced by one
equally false; and thus matters get on from bad to
worse. But at last a crash comes ! The importations
arc finally forced to a sale, and thus legitimate trade is
paralysed by cargo after cargo, got out on really feeble,
if not false, pretences, being forced into the market, and
sold at prices considerably lower than those ruling at
the ports of shipment.
This is not the only fault of the Banks, although it is


the only one on which I animadverted in the first
edition. A graver one must now be added—and it is
this: the Banks have acted with favoritism—a favorit-
ism not only damaging to the important interests uf
which they are the custodians, but a favoritism widely
demoralising 5 because it gave vigor to the action of the
dishonest—while it paralysed that of those who were
acting with integrity. Have they not refused accommo-
dation to persons who were carrying on a legimate trade
with bona fid* capital, and given it to those who were
known speculators-—known dealers in accommodation
bills—known manipulators of commercial thimble-rig.
If I could only put into parallel columns the names of per-
sons who have been refused temporary assistance from the
Banks, and those who have been literally gorging the
funds of those establishments, the general public would
stare indeed. Honest men— comparatively wealthy men
I—have1—have been snubbed and denied ; while the sanctimo-
nious, with their confident airs and insolent affectations,
have never been refused. I eould give those names.
They are under my eye just now; but it would hardly
be safe. Further, can it be denied that men of charac-
ter and capital have, on the arrival of their shipments,
had to pay every farthing of the Bank lion upon them,
while the “ select few ” have been favored —the Banks
taking their “dummy bills” or their “lively kites,’’
instead of cash in similar cases. But when the Banks,
aroused by the cry of “ danger a-head,” did demand
cash, it was then the oracle of Hunter-street piteously
deplored the collapse and gingerly touched on the sub-
ject, stating that the Banks had precipitately “ with-
drawn accommodation.” What I acting precipitately
with persons who never ought to have had the loan of a


shilling. This is an excellent example of the oracle's
wisdom.. This is the mixture of “ lie and moral ”
which has so consistently characterised its teaching for
so many years. But let his words pass. His opinions
have never been current sterling logic with any consider*
able portion ot the community. I therefore do him and
his moral nostrums, for every social disease, too much
honor by noticing them.
We now see that the Banks are really the specula-
tors, and against these institutions with their enor-
mous capital and means at command, the merchant
carrying on a bona fide business on his own capital and
on his own account, has to compete; or more properly,
the honest trader has to compete with reckless desper
rate speculators, backed up by the capital of the Banks.
Further we also see how men who have been insolvent for
years —petty commission agents in the potato trade,-
have been enabled to order cargoes of tea by the dozen,
cargoes of sugar and flour by the scores ; the Banks,
or those who have deposited their money in the Banks,
having but a faint chance of profit, and alt the risk.
Recent events in Sydney clearly prove this.
The effect is this : the Banks, with the money of the
public, have in reality imported goods generally —flour in
particular —which cost landed, say £\l per ton. It
arrives into a bad market, and the consignee or importer
being unable to pay the draft against the shipment or
Bank lien upon it, and the Banks refusing to give them
up on their Bills —in fact dropping down like hawks on
“ kites ” the crash comes. Their estates are assigned
or sequestrated. But what comes of it all ? Why the
original kite-flyers buy back their own assigned or insol-
vent estates at the rate of ss. in the £, and by this


means practically get the Banks to import goods for
them, on which they can make enormous profits.
Can we then wonder, with all this gambling in bills,
—with this hot-house system of getting Letters of
Credit —with these “ oily gammon ” devices, covered
by a portly presence and a reputation for sanctity (to
say nothing of fine black coats and immaculate
cravats) —that we have had a run of failures—that our
mercantile character is depreciated far and wide—that
some of our best men, unable to cope with the sys-
tematic trickery around them, are deserting us, and
taking themselves.and their capital to some more conge-'
nial scene of action, where merchant saints shall raise
no churches, and auctioneers “ fly no kites.’’ We
have been told by the most Sacred Oracle of Delphi—
at the corner of Hunter-street—that if one part of the
community has been robbed during the late failures,
another section has had the benefit, and that by a kind
of polarity of action and reaction things will be all
right in the end. 0, most sage and Reverend Muggins,
even if all's well that ends well be good logic, will that
compensate for the loss of our good name as a trading
community. Is this any satisfaction for the piece
of perfidy practised on the man who was induced
by false pretences to accept the “ kites ” of the saints
in payment for some £ISOOO, and which eventuated in
his ruin ? Ah ! all the bills were not flimsy trash .
Some of them were finally met —met by those who
were betrayed into endorsing them, and who never got
a farthing’s worth of consideration for doing so. But
alas ! at a single stroke they have been brought from a
position of affluence—attained by a life of honorable
industry—to one of beggary ! Doubtless the Sydney


Moaning Iteratd will propound gome news,stem of
ethics by which they can justify this cruel wrong.
How many years will it take to re-establish our
damaged credit? Is it not a shame—nay, a crime,
—that Port Jackson is now a name more odious and
ignominious in certain mercantile circles of the civilised
globe than Botany Bay ever was ? But why waste
words with thee, O Saintly Muggins, since I know not
but thou mayst be a kite*flyer in thine own godly and
portly person, and perhaps be a partner in that other
Saint’s loss—l refer to the little transaction in flour—
which hath so grieved many of the faithful in the
Lord !
It mav —nay, must with strangers —w'eaken this
argument, that we have to deal with generalities; to
imagine fictitious characters ; and to state undeniable
facts under broad assertions. The state of the Law of
Libel in this colony does not allow a chance of fairly
criticising even systematic swindling. We d 6 not
know whether we should be justified (by a Chief Jus-
tice of the Supreme Court) if we appended the names
of certain bankrupts, and those of the principal banks,
that have been victimised, to this treatise. We do not
know whether we can (as the law stands) corroborate
our statements by quoting the words of the Chief Com-
missioner in Insolvency in reference ' o particular
bankrupt cases. Bui we can, and we do earnestly, re-
commend the reader to those sources < f informalio and
we feel convinced that he will come aw an satisfied that
we have understated (and all too mildly dealt with) the
sham , the duplicity, the cunnim ,, the fraud, the conspi-
racy, and the systematic swindling, which have been for
many years practised in Sydney, and which, only for


recent exposures, would probably have been per-
petuated.
I cannot yet, although the subject is not very inte-
resting, draw my remarks on the Banks to a close.
There is one particular u which they have, but not all
in the same degree, contributed to bring about the late
melancholy crisis, and for which it is more than prob-
able they will one day meet with retribution. There
is a Nemesis hovering over some of their sculptured
doorways. I refer to their system of making advances
on what they are pleased to call undeniable collateral
security. In this particular matter, they do (essen-
tially) the business of pawnbrokers, and the sooner the
Government (indeed friend Geoffrey of the Treasury is
now in want of money) makes them pay a license, and
mount the Lombard arms, significant symbols of two
for one, the quicker will Justice be vindicated and pro-
priety satisfied, Yes, the Banks are pawnbrokers;
what do they do ? What have they been in the hab t of
doing? Persons connected with the inner circle of Saints
buy certificates of bonded or dutiable goods, which they
pay for in bills to the auctioneer. These bills are used by
the knight of the hammer in the manner before indi-
cated ; but what is done with the certificates ? They
are “ popped ” in the bank for advances —in some in-
stances thrice the amount paid for the goods at auction.
Often and often are these precious certificates sold at the
“ risk of whom it may concern/’ and some of them have
been in circulation for half a dozen years. The injury
caused by this kind of business is not only the occa-
sional loss to the Banks, but the prejudice with which
the system works against the bona fide trader. The
qrdinajry pwkof in which he must jm r 9h^ se * s


turbed by forced sales. The goods which he
has for sale, and which he could sell with a fair profit
in the ordinary course of business, are depreciated in
value by the abnormal effect of monster auction sales,
“on account of whom it may concern,” on the mercan-
tile temperature of the city; and thus, practically,the
most industrious and honorable class of our citizens,
the general traders, the merchants and shopkeepers,
have to struggle with systemised injustice the best way
they can. The remedy for these evils lies mainly in
the hands of the shareholders of the Banks ; it is their
duty, a conscientious, a sacred duty, to put only such
men in the Directory as are not likely to gamble with
the capital, and turn what ought to be a monetary es-
tablishment, conducted on recognised principles, into a
mere general trading comp my. But shareholders seem
content so long as they can get good half-yearly divi-
dends. This is the fatal rock on which they will go
to pieces, unless they begin at once to look out and see
there are no “breakers ahead” —that their dividends
are not infallible signs of their capital being well-
placed and permanently productive—-that notwithstand-
ing the magnificent facades of their buildings, their
bonuses and tremendous “ dividends,” they are not
such shams as some Chinese fortifications I have read
of —varnished paper and empty tea chests. The hon. the
Treasurer, in making his financial statements during
the last session of Parliament, made some very startling
assertions in reference to the Banks. One of the hono-
rable members for West Sydney undertook to prove
that the conclusions arrived at by Mr. Eager were
egregiously wrong. Great expectations were formed, the
said hon. member being well-known in mercantile


circles as a general dealer, and whom some of the ex-
treme wicked called with irreverent sarcasm a lineal de-
Cendant of the impenitent thief , it was presumed, however
erroneously that he was well up in financial matters. All
the honorable gentleman seems to have done and said
in reply was, in effect, simply this —you have made
some statements in regard to the position of the Banks,
your remarks have surprised the public and created a
feeling of insecurity ; I cannot disprove what you have
said, but I will abuse you, and say you are an ignorant
bold pretender.
That there has been for several years a mercantile
oligarchy oleaginous or saponaceous, hypocritical
or tyrannical, or a mixture of all four—dominant in
the wide field of Sydney commercial life; that this oli-
garchy has been exclusive, insolent, and despotic ; that
the malpractices and sharp practice of its chiefs (and
not bad government, nor the agitation of Free-trade
and Protection) have rendered business and trade dull ;
that all legitimate enterprise is checked or choked by
the presence and pressure of this hideous moral mon-
ster-are facts all well-known to' every business man
in Sydney. But, perhaps the worst effects of the con-
spiracy has not been in its disturbing trade, or divert-
ing its flow from the well-worn channels. The demo-
ralisation it has produced will probably be more bale-
ful in their final issues. Unless men belonged to the
pre-sanctified they could obtain no employment
here, and this has been the case for many years. Ah|
situations, all offices, all chance of pi emotion for those
in office, have been under the sovereignty of this ter-
rible despotism. And then, too, it had its mighty
organ of public opinion—its own Times newspapec


(oh, may the mondtch journalist of Printing-House
Square pardon us for desecrating the name of his im*
penal journal !) to defend it throiigh thick and thin,
right or wrong, pel- fas ant nefas I Who forgets the
Flour episode in the history of this Conspiracy ?Is
there any one in Sydney ignorant of the fact that there
was a well-defined plot made (and partly carried into
effect) to create a bread-famine in the country, in order
that the Saints might be enriched ? Is it not known
in Gath as well as in Zion—which ieth between Park
and Bathurst streets—that Brims'one, once upon a
time, rushed from his devotions, on the Lord’s Day,
when he had received a certain message—which he did
within the precincts of the church ; nay, under the
shadow of the pulpit—that certain vessels were in
sight of the Heads ? Did he not hurry on board his
chartered steamer, kept ready for him, and, under high
steam pressure, did he not go out to sea, come up to the
vessels referred to, report himself, and give orders that
they should not come into port till four or five days
later ? Tins, however, we shall probably be told by
the S.M.H. is a new reading of the scriptural injunc j
tion—“ Be ye diligent in business.” What vessels
were these ? They were laden with fiour ! And only
through the providential existence of a second daily
paper amongst us, which got and published the account
of their arrival, a panic would have been created, and
flour would have gone up to famine prices. That all
these things were done, and done with an intrepidity
of cold-blooded calculation which makes one thrill with
horror, is well-known to at least three-fifths of the
whole adult population of Sydney ; and we still tole-
rate those who would have perpetrated this wrong. We


growl over petty grievances, and we Are silent about
the wrong-doings of men who 1 conspired to starve us —*
no, not that, that was not their tl little game ” —but
only to wring the last shilling out of us for bread ! O
Rev. Muggins, didst thou know all this plotting and
scheming, and still wagged not thy oracular tongue,
or plied not thy pen against it? O Saintly Brown*
collop, didst thou, with an easy break tho
bread of life to thy congregation from thy pulpit, while
thy few thousands sterling—thy dear wife’s, or thine
own, it matters not to me—were, like “ blood of
adder” helping to make that witch’s cauldron ol
speculation seethe, and which was to eventuate in a
bread-famine T It cannot be ! We must be all in
error ! Muggins and Brown coll op must have been ac-
tuated by purer motives? 1 Perhaps they are 1 Prophets
in the land, and that they liave got a special mission;
first to half-starve, and then to wholly convert us!
Well, give them the credit of a personal call ; but re-
joice, (and thank the good journal through whose in-*
strumentality you can rejoice,) that you are eating good
bread, which cost you threepence a loaf—Muggins and
mission to> the contrary notwithstanding.
I have written enough to account for the late com-
mercial failures;: but, as there are wheels within
wheels in all complex machinery, so are there system-
lets of double-dealing, and chicanery within- all great
organised systems of public swindling. These under-*
workings of the grand scheme are too numerous to par-
ticularise here; but a few of them may be jotted
down. One is-, the contempt, if not insolence, with
which Bank Directors and Managers treat small traders,
Not wanting them—the capital of the corporation


being otherwise applied, we know how—they treat
them with an indignity and hauteur, which would be
intolerable, were it not ludicrous. Did not a popin'
j iy of one of these establishments ra‘e a late Treasurer,
demand something from him, for the information of
the court of Directors, and lay down rules not only
for his control, but that of his successors ! A second, is
the despotism exercised over squatters, who are little
better than the stewards of the banks’ country estate,
and who merely live on the sufferance of the banks.
Mark the obsequiousness —the cringing deference with
which the squatter treats the officials of the banks,
from the manager down to the porter, directly he
alights from his dashing equipage, and puts his foot
on the bank marble. A third is the systematic way in
which foreign merchants are done here. Their goods
being generally confiscated to the rapacity of the few,
who have the command of the situation* Have we not
over and over again seen consignments of goods
bundled into an auction room, money raised upon
them to enable the consignee to live in luxury and
splendour at Darling Point. A fourth is the develop- 1
ment of an ostentatious hypocritical life amongst a
large section of the community, and the germination
and growth of a vicious mercantile morality. What has
recently come to light ? The bills of honest traders given
confidingly in blank are found to have been filled up for
double or treble the amount intended ; and worse still,
it is now known that bills have been put in Banks for
discount, the makers of which cannot now be found to
have ever existed —this, I believe, may be called a per-
fect fusion of forgery and fiction. All this too, by men
who are deemed ornaments of society ; men who, to use


the cant phrase, bear an irreproachable character, some
of them our law givers, our administrators of law, tuo.
Imposters ! Swindlers ! You whited sepulchres ! You
hypocrites, first cast the motes out of your own eyes !
Rut it is needless to go on. The general public is
now well aware that desperate speculators have nearly
brought the country to ruin; that insolvent despera-
does have, before the bubble burst, lived in the splen-
dour of princes ; that a hundred-handed Briareus has
crushed all legitimate enterprise ; that, in a word, a
systematised plan of swindling, like the devil-fish in
Victor Hugo’s epic prose fiction, called the “Toilers
of the Sea," has seised with, and holds within its poly-
pus feelers and claws, the whole body of our com-
merce. It will indeed be difficult to free ourselves from
the fearful embrace of this monster ; but unless we
make the effort we must inevitably perish.
But amid all these schemes of swindling—many of
which have been laid bare—is it not surprising that the
law has been found inoperative to punish the wrong-
doers ? Keep clear of Darlinghurst, seems to have
been their serious consideration, and the pilot of their
stormy navigation. Of course they have had their paid
legal advisers to help them in their course; there are
probably (l men learned in the law ” amongst their
initiated. At all events, the Supreme Court, in its In-
solvency Jurisdiction, has little or no terror for them.
They can pass through its dangers unscathed. The
highest officer of that Court may pronounce his well-
written legal homilies on the fraud, the prevarica-
tion, the double dealings, and the selfish greed of some
pf them, when driven before him ; but he little knows
tbe hardness, durability, and the uniform temper of trno


Corinthianhronze, if he fancies he can shame their brazen
faces. Keep clear of Darlinghurst embodies more
practical worldly wisdom than all the treatises on mer-
cantile economy that have -ever been written and pub-
lished.
It need hardly be said, although it is a pleasure to
conclude these remarks with an assertion of the kind,
that through all this stormy time—through all this
darkness and evil-doing—the star of many leading
houses never lost its lustre Itis, perhaps, a poor com-
pliment to pay such firms, as the Campbell’s, (of the
Wharf,) Cooper & Ce., Towns & Co., Daniel King & Co.
Brown & Co., Macdonald, Smith, & Co., Tanning,
-Griffiths, & Co., and some others, that they have
been in times of great temptation, and no doubt with
considerable pressure from around them—ever upright,
honorable, and just; but in a time like that we have
just passed through, such a compliment (when it can
be paid by one as in this instance —to whom they have
never done a favor, and when the general public will
endorse it) reaches the dignity of a national recognition
of worth and trustworthiness. While we have such
men amongst us, we may hope to regain thj good name
we have lost, and have our commerce once again con-
ducted on recognised principles of morality. They
have been a few amongst the many rati nanies in
qurgite vasto —but they have survived the crisis, with
its many melancholy catastrophes. May their example
induce imitation and challenge recognition; and may
Sydney be hereafter able to boast that she has many,
and not merely some half dozen, true
BRITISH MERCHANT PRINCES.


IN PREPARATION
For publication in June, (uniform with this pamphlet).
An Enquiry into their Past History, their Present
Critical Position, and Future Prospects.
By C. CECIL
Utail Jltcam Communication
Between Australia & Europe ;
Its History, and Probable Future Expansion, with a
Critical Enquiry into the best Routes and the best
Company to perform the service.
Also,
3IM CROAKER
The Australian Mormon,
POLLY HOPKINS, and others, a Tale of Mercantile,
Clerical, and Social Life in Sydney.
Owing to the quantity this story (founded on fact)
makes, it will be published in weekly numb^g.


