





THE STATUTES
OF THE
ORDER OF THE THISTLE.
WILLIAM PICKERING, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON.
M DCCC.XXVIfI.


[ONLY FIFTY COPIES PRINTED.]
Thomas White, Printer,
Johnson's C«ut.


TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS
PRINCE WILLIAM HENRY,
DUKE OF CLARENCE AND ST. ANDREWS
LORD HIGH ADMIRAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM;
SENIOR KNIGHT COMPANION OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER ;
GREAT MASTER OF THE MOST HONORABLE ORDER OF THE BATH ;
SENIOR KNIGHT OF THE MOST ANCIENT AND MOST NOBLE
ORDER OF THE THISTLE.
SIR,
It is with the utmost deference and respect
that I presume to dedicate the Statutes of the Order
of the Thistle to your Royal Highness.
The fact that your Royal Highness is the Senior
Knight of the Order now living; that upon no other
member of your illustrious House has it been conferred;
and that your Royal Highness has possessed the Order
a greater number of years than any of the personages
who have ever received it, render it imperative upon me to
take the liberty of placing this volume under your Royal
Highness’s protection.
With the highest respect and consideration,
I have the honour to remain,
Sir,
Your Royal Highness’s
most obedient humble Servant,
NICHOLAS HARRIS NICOLAS.
3rd. August, 1828




PREFACE.
The Editor’s motive for printing the Statutes of the
Order of the Thistle was, that the series of Statutes of
British Orders of Knighthood might be complete; for though
the Statutes of the Orders of the Garter, Bath, St. Patrick,
and of the lonian Order of St. Michael and St. George,* have
long been printed, those of the Thistle have, until very lately,
remained in manuscript. Since these sheets were sent to press,
he has learnt that a very limited impression has been recently
printed, for the use of such Knights as may hereafter be
elected; but the hope of rendering this volume useful to the
present members of the Order, prevented his abandoning
his intention.
* The Editor has also recently printed a Translation of the Statutes of
the Royal Hanoverian Order of the Guelphs, of which His Majesty is
Sovereign and Founder, and which having been conferred upon so many
subjects of this kingdom, may almost be classed among British Orders. It
is not a little singular, that of the Six Orders of Knighthood of which His
Majesty is Sovereign, the Statutes of the Guelphic Order alone, are unexcep-
tionable in every point of view.


No perfect list of the noblemen, who have been honoured
with the Order of the Thistle, has been hitherto compiled;
and few are aware of the trouble which has attended its for-
mation. The authorities for that which is here inserted are
a MS. in the College of Arms, which ends about the year
1775; the London Gazettes; Wood’s edition of Douglas’s
Peerage of Scotland, and other works; but considerable care
has been taken to collate the list in that MS, with the Ga-
zette notifications wherever they occur. For many years,
however, after the revival of the Order, the Gazettes did
not always notice the nominations of the Knights : in those
cases, recourse has been had to contemporary publications;
so that there is scarcely an instance in which the state-
ments in the MS. have not been verified, or at least supported,
by something like evidence. Where the word “Nominated”
occurs, without there being also a notice of the Investi-
ture, it must, in all early instances, be understood to mean
that the Editor has not been able to ascertain whether the
date which follows the word, is that of the day on which the
Knight was elected or invested ; investiture having frequently
taken place on the day of election.
The few pages which are prefixed to the Statutes, con-
tain a History of the Order, from the time of its revival by
King James, in 16'87- For the very little which is known of
the Institution before that period, as well as for the conjee-


tures which have been hazarded on its great antiquity, the
Editor refers to the Warrants of James VII. and .Queen
Anne, relative to the revival of the Order, to Nisbet’s Heral-
dry, and to the other writers who have treated on the subject,
as it is not in his power to add to the few facts which are re-
corded ; and he places too little reliance on those hypotheses,
which perhaps national prejudice rather than historical evi-
dence has produced, to repeat them.
To the Right Honourable Lord Robert Kerr, the Secre-
tary of the Order, the Editor is indebted for the addi-
tional Statute of May, 1827; and to his friend Charles George
Young, Esq., York Herald, as upon every other occasion, for
much valuable assistance.




In the few observations which it is necessary should be pre-
fixed to the Statutes of the Order of the Thistle,
no attempt will be made to follow those authors* who have
endeavoured to trace the Order to a period of remote an-
tiquity, because nothing could be said, either in contradic-
tion or illustration of their labours; but it must be remarked,
that though much ingenuity has been displayed on the sub-
ject, no positive evidence has been adduced of the existence
of the Order before the middle of the fifteenth century.
James the Fifth was, it is said, the first of the Scottish mo-
narchs who encircled his escutcheon with the Collar, at
which period we may infer that the Order, was in high es-
teem; but after the reformation, Orders of Knighthood were,
considered in Scotland, as relics of popery, and this Institu-
tion fell into desuetude.
In the year 1687, however, James the Seventh, was
pleased to revive the Order; and the following Warrant was
* See particularly Nisbet’s System of Heraldry. Ed. 1816. Vol. ii.
p. 104. et seq.


issued for the purpose, which together with the Warrant of
Queen Anne, are inserted, because they illustrate its history.
James R,
Our Sovereign Lord ordains a Letter Patent to be made
and past under the Great Seal of the Ancient Kingdom of
Scotland, making mention that, Whereas His Majesty’s royal
predecessor Achaius, King of Scots, (of glorious memory) did
institute the Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the
Thistle, consisting of the Sovereign and Twelve Knights
Brethren, in allusion to our blessed Saviour and his Twelve
Apostles, and that under the protection of our blessed Lady
and his holy Apostle, St. Andrew, patron of Scotland, the
said Order being instituted for the defence of the Christian
Religion, and in commemoration of a signal victory obtained
by the said Achaius, King of Scots, over Athelstan, King of
the Saxons, after a bloody battle, in the time of which there
appeared in the Heavens a white cross in form of that upon
which the Apostle St. Andrew suffered martyrdom, by
which apparation, the Scots being encouraged put their
enemies to flight, killing the said Athelstan with most of his
followers. And it being most certain by the general consent
of ancient and modern historians, and by several other
authentic proofs, and documents, and records of that king-


dom, that the said most Ancient and most Noble Order of
the Thistle continued in great glory and splendour for many
hundreds of years, and that several foreign Princes and Kings
have been Knights of the said Order, and that the same was
always had in great respect and honour, in all places
wherever Christian valour advanced the glory of the cross,
until the unfortunate rebellion against his Majesty’s royal
great grandmother, Mary Queen of Scots, (of most pious and
glorious memory), at which time the splendour both of
church and monarchy fell together into contempt, and the
most noble Order, with all its ornaments, and rites, and
ceremonies, was extinguished, some of the Brethren of that
Order laying the ensigns thereof aside, and out of a rebelli-
ous contempt to their then Sovereign Lady, his Majesty’s
said royal great grandmother, and others of them forced
to fly into foreign countries for safety of their lives. And
Whereas the succeeding great disorders and dismal rebellions,
in the reigns of his Majesty’s royal predecessors since that
time, hath hindered and diverted them from restoring the
said Order to its former ancient lustre, his Majesty has now
thought fit as a mark of royal favour and esteem of that his
ancient kingdom, and of the desire he hath to restore it to its
former splendour and reputation, considering the many and
seasonable instances of duty and affection it has shewn to his
royal person, both since his accession to the Crown, and in


times of his greatest difficulties, hath, as a lasting mark of his
royal favour, and in remembrance of the nation’s duty and
affection unto him, to all succeeding ages, thought fit at this
time to Revive the said Order, of which his Majesty is un-
doubted and rightful Sovereign; and doth hereby revive and
restore the same, to its full glory, lustre, and magnificency, as
it heretofore was, with such change and additions as are
already made or shall hereafter be declared by his Majesty;
hereby giving to it twelve Knights, of which, with his Ma-
jesty as Sovereign, the Order above named is to consist in
all time coming, all honours, dignities, titles, privileges,
additions, and others, which either have in time past be-
longed to the Most Noble Order of the Thistle, or which his
Majesty shall declare to belong thereunto in time coming,
as an evident proof that no dutiful or faithful service done
by his people shall be past over without suitable return of
bounty, honour, and favour from him. And his Majesty
ordains the said Letter Patent to be past under the Great
Seal aforesaid per saltum without passing any other register
or seal; in order whereunto these presents shall be to the
Director of his Majesty’s chancellary, and their deputes for
writing of the same, and to the Lord High Chancellor, for
causing the Great Seal to be appended thereunto, a sufficient
Warrant. Given at the Court at Windsor, the day of
May, 1687, and of his Majesty’s reign the third year.


May it please your Majesty,
These contain your Majesty’s Warrant for a Letter
Patent to be made and past per saltum, under the Great Seal
of your ancient kingdom of Scotland, (for the causes above
specified) Reviving and Restoring the Most Ancient and
Most Noble Order of the Thistle, in manner above men-
tioned.
Mefort.
The Patent or Diploma for the Restitution of the Order,
which was dated at Windsor, on the 29th May, 1687, never,
however, passed the Great Seal. The Statutes which were
then enacted, very nearly resemble those ordained by Queen
Anne ; but it has been thought advisable to insert a copy of
them.
James Rex.
Statutes and Ordinances of the Most Ancient and Most Noble
Order of the Thistle, revived and restored by his Ma-
jesty, James VII. by the grace of God, King of Scotland,
England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith,
Sovereign of the said Most Noble Order, for the better
regulating the proceedings and solemnities thereof, in all
the circumstances thereunto belonging.


In the first place, We think fit to continue the ancient
number of Knights, to wit, twelve brethren with ourself, the
Sovereign of the said Most N oble Order, in all time coming.
That the habits of the Sovereign and brethren be a
doublet and trunk-hose of a cloth of silver, stockings of pearl-
coloured silk, with white leather shoes, garters and shoe
strings of blue and silver, the breeches and sleeves of the
doublet decently garnished with silver and blue ribbons, and
surcoat of purple velvet, lined with white taffeta, girt about
the middle with a purple sword-belt edged with gold, and
a buckle of gold, at which a sword with a gilted hilt, whereof
the shell is to be in form of the badge of the order, and the
pommel in the form of a thistle in a scabbard of purple velvet,
over which a mantle or robe of green velvet, lined with white
taffeta, with tassels of gold and green, the whole robe par-
sem6e, or powdered over with thistles of gold embroidered;
upon the left shoulder of which, in a field of blue, St. Andrew
the Apostle his image, bearing before him the cross of his
martyrdom of silver embroidery. About the shoulders is to
be borne the collar of the order, consisting of thistles and
sprigs of rue going betwixt, at the middle of which, before,
is to hang the St. Andrew in gold, enamelled, with his gown
green, and the surcoat purple, having before him the cross of
his martyrdom enamelled white, or if of diamonds, consisting
of the number of thirteen, just, the cross and feet of St. An-


drew, resting upon a ground of green, the collar to be tied
to the shoulders of the robe, with a white ribbon. Upon
their heads, in days of solemn procession or feasting, where
the sovereign himself is present, or his commissioner for that
effect, they are to wear at these times of permission a cap of
black velvet, faced up with a border of the same, a little
divided before, wide and loose in the crown, having a large
plume of white feathers, with a black egret or heron’s top in
the middle of it, the border of the cap adorned with jewels;
the sovereign’s cap, for difference, to have two rows of dia-
monds cross the crown thereof, in form of a royal crown: the
sovereign’s robes to be of a length proportionable to his royal
dignity, and the badge on the shoulder to be adorned with
pearl, besides with other distinctions he shall think fit to
appoint.
And we having considered that it was the ancient custom
for the sovereign and Knights-brethren, on their daily apparel,
to wear the jewel of the order in a chain of gold or precious
stones, and that the use of ribbons has been broughtfin since
the Most Noble Order of the Thistle was left off, and that
chains are not now in use, we have therefore thought fit to
appoint the jewel of the said order to be worn with a purple-
blue ribbon, watered or tabied. The jewel to have on the
one side the image of St. Andrew, with the cross of his mar-
tyrdom before him enamelled as above said, or enriched with


precious stones on the cross and round about; on the back
of which shall be enamelled a thistle of gold and green, the
flower reddish with a motto written round it, “nemo me im-
bune lacesset the ground upon which the thistle is to
be done shall be enamelled blue.
Upon the left breast of the coat and cloak shall be embroi-
dered a badge of proportionable bigness, being St. Andrew’s
Cross, of silver embroidery; on the middle of which a circle
of gold, having the motto of the order in letters of blue, in
the middle whereof a Thistle of gold upon a field in blue.
The Order is to have a Great Seal in the custody of the
chancellor thereof: on the dexter side of the shield St. An-
drew’s cross, and on the sinister thereof the Arms of G reat
Britain, as they are carried by us in Scotland, encircled with
the collar of the Order, with the image of St. Andrew
hanging at it, with the motto of the order going round the
seal: on the other side the image of St. Andrew, bearing the
cross before him, with a glory round his head, written round,
“ Magnum sigillum antiquissimi etnobilissimi Ordinis Cardui,”
The Secretary shall have a mantle of blue satin lined with
white, on the left shoulder of which the badge of St. An-
drew’s cross; and upon days of solemnity his ordinary badge
is to be hung in a chain of gold, being a thistle of gold and
green, upon pens saltier-ways, with the motto round about,
and an imperial crown upon the top.


The Lyon shall have robes and badges upon the shoulder
conform to the secretary; in his hand his staff of office, and
about his neck his badge with St. Andrew turned outward.
The Usher, conform to the secretary in all things, except
his badge, which is to be two sprigs of rue in form of St.
Andrew’s cross vert, upon a ground white, upon which a
Thistle of gold, and round the motto; upon which an impe-
rial crown, and in his hand the baton of his office.
Before any can be admitted to be of the Most Noble
Order of the Thistle he must be a Knight-bachelor.
Here follows the form of the Oath to be taken by all such
as shall be admitted into the order of brethren.
First, I shall fortify and defend the Christian religion, and
Christ’s most holy evangel, to the utmost of my power.
Secondly, I shall be loyal and true to my Sovereign Lord
the King, and the brethren of this order.
Thirdly, I shall maintain the honour and dignity of the
Most Noble Order of the Thistle to my best power, if God
let.
Fourthly, I shall never bear treason about in my heart
against my Lord the King, but shall discover the same. So
defend me God and the Holy Church.
The oath being taken by the elect Knights, before any
whom the sovereign shall appoint, they may actually wear the
badges and other ornaments for the first time; and we refer


it to three or more of the Knights first made to draw the
forms, offices, and ranks of the officers, their fees, and all other
things that may any way concern the said Order; and humbly
to offer the same to our royal consideration, to the end we
may signify our pleasure therein; and in regard we have not
as yet named a person to be chancellor of the said Order, and
that there is no Great Seal or Signet thereunto belonging, we
do order that our Signet, now in the custody of our Secreta-
ries of State for our ancient kingdom of Scotland, shall serve
for any warrants or orders that we shall think fit to grant or
emit, for nominating any of the Knights-brethren or officers,
or any other thing relating to the said order, until it shall be
fully settled. The royal chapel of our Palace ofHolyrood
House to be the chapel of the order in time coming, and the
sub-prior, or dean or prior there, to be reader of our orders,
whose badge and ornaments shall be hereafter appointed.
Given under our royal hand and signet at our Court of Wind-
sor, the 29th May, 1687, and of our reign the third year.
His Majesty’s Command,
“ Melfort.”
By a Statute dated on the same day it was ordained that
the Sovereign might wear the badge in any manner he
pleased; that on the day of the feast of St. Andrew, the
Knights should wear the Collar, and on all other Collar


days; and that there should be a Secretary of the Order.
On the 31st of May, an additional Statute appointed the
precise colour and pattern of the ribbon.
The eight Knights nominated by that Monarch, whose
names will be found in the list at the end of this volume,
excepting two, either accompanied his Majesty to France at
the Revolution, or died before the revival of the Order by
Queen Anne, in 1703; until which year nothing took place
respecting it.
Queen Anne having thought proper in December, 1703,
to revive the Institution, the following Patent passed for
that purpose.
Anna, Dei Gratia, Scotiae, Angliae, Franciae, et Hiberniae Re-
gina, Fideique Defensor, omnibus probis hominibus; quan-
doquidem serenissimus noster progenitor Scotorum Rex
Achaius gloriosae memoriae, Ordinem Cardui antiquum,
ac longe nobilissimum, ex summo principe et duodecim
equitibus constantem instituisse; idque ad Christianas
religionis tutelam, et in memoriam insignis victorias per
eundem adversus Athelstanum Saxonum regem, post prae-
lium cruentum parte übi dum pugnaretur, in aethere
apparuit crux alba decussata ad formam illius qua Sanctus
Andreas Apostolus martyrium passus est, qui quidem
antiquissimus et nobilissimus ordo, non solum in archivis


nostris, et hujusregni nostri Scotiae historiis,sed etiam ab
exteris historiarum scriptoribus, honorifice coramemo-
ratur ; quae sunt authentica doeumenta praelustris esti-
mationis ejus nobilissimi ordinis generatim susceptae, sed
ob continuata bella et tumultus intestines quae post obi-
tum Jacobi Quinti Regis successivas minoritates regiae
coronae splendor, huic multis in rebus diversique
modus obumbratus fuit et inter alia honos huic nobi-
lissimae institutioni debitus, quaeque sic praestitit, us-
que ad tertiura annum regni regis nostri patris Jacobi
Septimi, qui consideratione multiplicium officii, et affec-
tionis judiciorum ipsi exhibitorum, per hoc, antiquum reg-
num nostrum, eundem nobilissimum ordinem redintegra-
vit et restituit, et ob ejusdem restitutionem, nos inter
raulta alia testimonia curae nostrae regiae antiqui hujus
regni nostri, tarn pro ejusdem honore quam aliis quae ad
idem spectant, et predict! nobilissimi ordinis ad justum
splendorem et existimationera erectione, eo ut presens
hoc nostrum seculum atque aetates futurae ad emulationem
nobilem talia gratiae regiae signa discriminantia merendi,
in suorum nobilium antecessorum imitationem excitentur
ac moventur, congruum nos nunc putamus tanquam prin-
ceps suprema dicti nobilissimi ordinis indubitatum nos-
trum jus exequi. Noveritis igitur nos redintegrasse et
restituisse, sicuti per presentes has literas nostras paten-


tes redintegramus et restituimus, eundem dictum ordinem
ad omnes honores, dignitates, titulos et privilegia, quae
olim aut nunc ad eundem pertinentem, cum omnibus aliis
additamentis, qua nos aut nostri regii successores supremi
principes dicti nobilissimi ordinis, in posterum declaravi-
mus, vel in eos conferemus, atque per presentes has literas
nostras patentes duodecim equitibus nobiscum supremo
principe ex quibus praedictus nobilissimus ordo tempore
elapso constitit, atque in posterum constabit, et successo-
ribus suis in dicto ordine damus et concedimus omnes ho-
nores, dignitates, titulos, et privilegia ad plenum suum
vigorem, gloriam, et magnificentiam, prout hactenus
obtinuit, vel quae in futurum ad eundem pertinere de-
claravimus. In cujus rei testimonium magnum sigillum
nostrum appendi praecepimus. Datum apud aulam nos-
tram de St. James, trigesimo prime die mensis De-
cembris, Anno Domini millesimo septingentesimo quarto,
et anno regni nostri secundo.
ANNE R.
Statutes dated on the 31st. December, 1703, were enacted,
which from the present Statutes of the Order. On the
4th of February following, John Duke of Argyll was nomi-
nated; and four other peers of Scotland were appointed
on the 7th of that month, which was thus notified in the
London Gazette :


“ St. James’s, Feb. 7th. Her Majesty having been graci-
ously pleased, the 31st: day of January last, to sign a Patent
to be passed under the Great Seal of Scotland, for Reviving
and Restoring there the most Ancient and Most Noble Order
of the Thistle: In pursuance of which Patent, his Grace,
John Duke of Argyll was received into that Order, the 4th,
instant, by her Majesty the Sovereign thereof; as were this
day, John Duke of Atholl, William Marquis of Annandale,
James Earl of Dalkeith, George Earl of Orkney, and James
Earl of Seafield. Her Majesty has dispensed, during her
royal pleasure, with the ceremonies and solemnities of their
Instalment, as well as that of all the rest of the Knights
Brethren. Her Majesty was also graciously pleased to give
a Commission to David Nairne, Esq. to be Secretary of the
said Order, and to confer upon him the Order of Knight-
hood. The rest of the Officers are speedily to be named by
the Sovereign.*
* London Gazette, Thursday, February 10th. to Monday, February
14th. 1703-4. No. 3992. As the additional Statutes by George the First
speak of the Fees ordained by Queen Anne, the command issued by her Ma-
jesty respecting them is here inserted.
“ The Fees appointed by Her Sacred Majesty Queen Anne, Sovereign of the
Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle, to be paid by those
who shall be admitted as Knights Brethren of the said Order at their
admission thereto.


To the six Knights then nominated must be added, the
Duke of Gordon, and the Earl of Arran at that time Duke of
Hamilton, both of whom were appointed by James the Seventh,
as it is manifest from Queen Anne’s observation on the latter
nobleman’s being elected a Knight of the Garter,-f and from
the number never having exceeded ten exclusive of them, that
they were deemed members of the Order by virtue of King
James’s creation. Thus, in the first year after the Revival of
Sterling Money;
Impr. To the secretary of the order . . . £55 .11. 1|
To the commissioner’s servants . . . 8 . 6 . 7J
To the church fees, viz. ringer of bells . • 5 . 11 . 1J
To the usher of the order, . . . . 8 . 6. 7J
To the Lyon’s Office, heralds, pursuivants, trumpets, &c. 27 . 15 . 61
It is said their present fees on this head is now £72.
To the queen’s ushers . . . . 5 . 11 . 1|
Summa £lll . 2.2
A. R.
We do hereby order and require all who are or shall be admitted as Knights
Brethren of the Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle, to
pay the fees according to the above distribution, upon their being ad-
mitted to the said order. Given under our royal hand and signet of the
said Order at our Court of St. James’s, the 29th day of October, 1705,
and of our reign the fourth year.”
t See the Note under his Name in the list.


the Order by Queen Anne, the number of Knights amounted
to eight only. In October, 1705, two were elected; but this
creation only made the number of Knights nine, one of those
elected in 1704, having died. Two more were added in the
next year; but it was not until May, 1710, that the number
appointed by the Statutes, twelve, was completed. From that
time until May, 1827, no alteration was made in the number
of Knights Brethren; but in consequence of the Coronation
of his present Majesty, four Extra Knights were created,
pursuant to the following Ordinance in the London Gazette,
of the 24th of July, 1821.
“ Carlton House, 17th July, 1821.
The King having, in contemplation of the approaching
ceremony of his Royal Coronation, been pleased to nominate
and appoint Charles Marquess of Queensberry, Archibald
Earl of Cassillis, James Earl of Lauderdale, and Robert
Viscount Melville, to be Extra Knights of the most Ancient
and Most Noble Order of the Thistle, (to succeed as vacancies
shall occur in the number of the twelve Knights Brethren
of the said Order), his Majesty was this day pleased to invest
the said Earls of Cassillis and Lauderdale, and Viscount
Melville, (the Marquess of Queensberry being absent), with
the Ensigns of the said Order.”


In November, 1823, one, and in April, 1824, another of
the extra Knights succeeded as Knights Brethren; so that
on the Bth. of May, 1827, the Order consisted of twelve
Knights Brethren, and two extra Knights. On that day His
Majesty was graciously pleased to extend the Order from
Twelve to Sixteen Knights Brethren, when the two extra
Knights became Knights Brethren, and two others were
elected to complete the Sixteen.
Nisbet states that the Church of St. Andrew, in Edin-
burgh, was anciently the Church of the Order; that after
its Revival by King James, the Knights of the Thistle were In-
stalled in the Chapel of Holyrood House; and that Queen
Anne, by a Warrant dated at St. James’s, 31st. of December,
1703, also appointed that Chapel to be the Chapel of the Or-
der. Nothing on the subject is to be found in the Statutes,
nor does a word occur in them with regard to Installations,
though the Gazette which notifies the nomination of the first
Knights after the Revival by Queen Anne, speaks of “ the
ceremonies and solemnities of their Instalment,” being dis-
pensed with; and in the Gazette of February, 1725, the
N oblemen then elected are said to have been chosen to fill the
stalls of some deceased Knights: the fact appears to be,
however, that Installation forms no part of the ceremonies of
the Order.


Since the revival of the Institution by Queen Anne, seventy-
six Knights have been elected: of these there has been only
one Prince of the Blood, His Royal Highness the Duke
of Clarence, the present Senior Knight. The individuals se-
lected have always been of the rank of Earls, or of a higher
degree, excepting in five instances, namely of the Viscount
Stormont, and the Barons Cadogan, the two Barons Cathcart,
and Lord Erskine, Although the Order has consisted chiefly
of Peers of Scotland, one or more English noblemen, not
Peers of that Kingdom, have since the year 1716, been
members of it, and the whole number of English Peers
which have been elected, besides the Duke of Clarence,
is sixteen; but only two Peers of Ireland, who were not also
Peers of Scotland, have been admitted into the Order, one
of whom was likewise an English Baron,
Generally, a Knight of the Thistle resigns the Ensigns
of the Order if he be elected into the Order of the Garter,
though no provision to that effect is to be found in the Sta-
tutes; but in a few cases they have been allowed, as a
special mark of the royal favour, to retain them. Since the
accession of Queen Anne, nine Knights of the Thistle have
been honoured with the Garter, of whom only three were
permitted to retain the Thistle; and one of these is the Duke
of Clarence.


The Statutes of this Order, like those of the Garter,
Bath, St. Patrick, and of the lonian Order of St. Michael and
St. George, require revision; not merely because the language
in which they are written is incorrect and inelegant, but
because it is desirable that the various additional Statutes
should be condensed; and that the regulations which govern
these distinguished Institutions should be intelligible and
consistent.




Statutes anb (triers of tbe Most
Ancient anb itflost Jloble ©rber of
tbeCbistle, rebibeb bg Sper #laiestg,
Sime, bg tbe grace of <®ob, (&ueen
of g>cotlanb, €nglanb, Jfrance, anb
Slrelanb, Befenber of tbe Jfaitb,
g»oberetgn of tbe saib idlest Jioble
©rber, for tf?e better regulating tbe
proceebings anb solemnities tbere=
of, in all tbe circumstances tbere=
unto belonging.
I. In the first place We think fit to
continue the ancient number of Knights,
to wit. Twelve Brethren, with Ourself the
Sovereign of the said Most Noble Order,


to be the precise number of that Order
in all time coming.
11. That the Sovereign's Habit be
such as they shall think fit at any time
hereafter to appoint: that the Habit of the
Brethren in this Order be a doublet and
trunk hose of cloth of silver, stockings
of pearl-coloured silk, with white leather
shoes, garters, and shoe-strings of green
and silver; the breeches and sleeves of
the doublet decently garnished with sil-
ver and green ribbands : a surcoat of
purple velvet, lined with white taffeta,
girt about the middle with a purple sword
belt, edged with gold, and buckle of
gold, at which a sword with a gilded hilt,
whereof the shell is to be in form of the
badge of the Order, and the pummel in
the form of a Thistle, in a scabbard of


purple velvet: over all which a mantle
or robe of green velvety lined with a
white taffeta,, with tassells of gold and
green* upon the left shoulder of which*
upon a field of green* St. Andrew the
Apostle his Image bearing before him the
Cross of his martyrdom* of silver embroi-
dery* with a circle of gold round it* upon
which the Motto* " nemo me impune
lacessit*” in letters of green; and at
the lower part of it a Thistle of gold and
green* the flower reddish. About the
shoulders is to be worn the Collar of the
Order* consisting of Thistles* and Sprigs
of Rue going betwixt* at the middle of
which* before* is to hang the St. Andrew
of gold enamelled* with his gown green*
and the surcoat purple* bearing before him
the Cross enamelled white* or of diamonds


consisting of the number of thirteen just;
the Cross and feet of St. Andrew resting
upon a ground of green; the Collar to
be tied to the shoulders of the robe with
white ribbon. Upon their Heads on days
of solemn Procession or Feasting where
the Sovereign is present* or has a Com-
missioner for that effect* they are to wear
at the times of Permission* a Cap of black
velvet* faced up with a border of the
same* a little divided before* wide and
loose in the crown* having a large plume
of white feathers with a black egrett or
Heron's top in the middle of it; the
borders of the Cap adorned with Jewels.
HI. That the Jewel of the said Order
is to be worn at a green ribbon over the
left shoulder* cross the body* and tied
under the right arm: the Jewel to have


on the one side* the Image of St. Andrew
with the Cross before* enamelled* as is
abovesaid* or cut on stone* enriched with
precious stones round it; on the back of
which shall be enamelled a Thistle gold
and green* the flower reddish* with the
before mentioned motto round it: the
ground upon which the Thistle is to be
done shall be enamelled green.
IV. That the medal of the Order be
all of gold* being the St. Andrew* bearing
before him the Cross of his martyrdom*
with a circle round* on which to be the
motto of the Order; and at the lower part
of the circle* between the joining of the
words* a Thistle; and to be wore in a green
ribbon as the jewel, at times when the
jewel is not wore.
V, That upon the left breast of the


coat and cloak shall be embroidered a
Badge of proportionable bigness,, being a
St. Andrew's Cross of silver embroidery *
with rays going out between the points of
the Cross* on the middle of which aThistle
of gold and green upon a field of green*
and round the Thistle and field a circle of
gold* having on it the Motto of the Order
in letters of green.
VI. That Her Majesty and Her Royal
Successors, Sovereigns of the said most
ancient and most noble Order of the
Thistle* shall* in all time coming* wear the
said Order on the ribbon of the Order of
the Garter* or otherwise* in any manner
that Her Majesty shall think fit; and shall
wear the Collar of the said Order on the
day of the Feast of St. Andrew* being the
thirtieth of November yearly.


VII. That the Knights Brethren of
the said Order shall wear their Collars on
all Collar Days* wherever the Sovereign
is; and within Scotland* by obligation* upon
all days of public solemnities whether the
Sovereign be there or not.
VIII. That all the Collar days be the
same ordinary Collar days now observed
by Her Majesty.
IX. That the Collar* with the St. An-
drew belonging to it* and the Medal of
the Order given by Her Majesty and suc-
cessors* Sovereigns of the said most noble
Order* to the Knights Brethren thereof at
their admission* be returned at their deaths
to the Sovereign.
X. The Order is to have a Great Seal
in the custody of the Chancellor thereof*
having on the dexter side St. Andrew's


Cross,, and on the sinister the Arms of
Great Britain* as they are carried by us in
Scotland, incircled with the Collar of the
Order, with the Image of St. Andrew hang-
ing at it, with the motto of the Order
going round the Seal: on the other side
the Image of St. Andrew bearing the Cross
before him, with a glory round his head,
written round, Magnum Sigillum Anti-
quissimi et Nobilissimi Ordinis Cardui."
XI. That there be a Secretary of the
Order, to transmit the Sovereign's orders
to the Knights Brethren, and that he attend
Her Royal Person for that effect. He shall
have on days of solemnity a mantle of
green sattin lined with white, on the left
shoulder of which the Badge of St. An-
drew's Cross. His ordinary Badge is to
he hung in a chain of gold, being a Thistle


gold and green, upon two pens crossed
saltier-ways, with the Motto round about,
and an Imperial Crown npon the top.
XII. The Lyon shall have Robes and
Badges upon the shoulder, conform to the
Secretary : in his hand his Staff of Office ;
and about his neck his Badge, with the
St. Andrew turned outwards.
XIII. The Usher conform to the Se-
cretary in all things, except his Badge,
which is to be two sprigs of Rue in form
of St. Andrew's Cross vert, upon a fund
white, upon which a Thistle of gold, and
round the Motto; upon which an Imperial
crown : and in his hand the Baton of his
Office.
XIV. Before any can be admitted to
the most noble Order of the Thistle, he
must be a Knight Bachelor.


Here follows the form of the Oath to
be taken by all such as shall be admitted
into this Order as Brethren.
l mo . I shall fortify and defend the true
reformed Protestant Religion, and Christ’s
Holy Evangel to the utmost of my power.
2 do . I shall be loyal and true to my
Sovereign Lady the Queen, Sovereign of
this most ancient and most noble Order of
the Thistle.
3 tlo . I shall maintain and defend the
Statutes, Priviledges, and Honours of the
said Order.
4 to . I shall never bear treason about
in my heart against Our Sovereign Lady
the Queen, but shall discover the same
to her.
So help me God


XV. The Oath being taken by the
elect Knights before any whom the Sove-
reign shall appoint, they may actually
wear the Badges and other Ornaments be-
longing to the Order; and in regard We
have not as yet named a person to be
Chancellor of the said Order, and that
there is no Great Seal belonging thereto.
We do therefore ordain that our Signet of
the said Order, which is to be in the
custody of Our Secretary to the said Order,
shall serve for any warrant or order that
We shall think fit to grant or emit for
nominating any of the Knights Brethren
or Officers, or any other thing relating to
the said Order.
XVI. The Royal Chapel of Our
Palace of Holy Rood House, to be the
Chapel of the Order in time coming.


XVII. That no alteration of the Habit,
Jewel, Collar, Badge, or other Ornaments
belonging to the said Order, or of the
using or wearing of them, be offered to
Her Majesty by any of the Brethren,
without a concurrence of the major part
of them.
Given under Our Royal hand and
signet at Our Court at St. James's,
the thirty-first day of December,
1703, and of Our Reign the
second year
A. R.
Her Majesty's Command,
Cromartie.


&Wndonal Statutes of tije Most 9Ln*
dent anii Most Jtoble ©rber of tfje
VCfyistle, mabe anb appointed bg
(george, bg tbe grace of (gob, 21 mg
of (great Britain, jTrante, anb 3fce=
lanb, ©efenbcr of tfje Jfaitb, €tc,
g»oberetgn of tbe oatb MLost
#rber.
hoarse li
That the words of the Oath contained
in the Statutes signed by Our Royal Sister
and Cousin* the late Queen Anne* of


blessed memory,, upon the 31st. day
of December, 1703* and appointed to
be taken by the Knights Brethren and
Officers of the said Order,, be •" Lord
George/' in the place of " Lady Anne."
That the form of the Oath to be taken
by the Usher of the said Order* be the
same that was appointed to be taken by
the Secretary.
That the Thistle in the middle of the
Star to be wore on the coat or cloak* be
green heightened with gold* upon a field
of gold ; and that the circle round the
Thistle and field be green* and the Motto
in letters of gold.
That upon the left shoulder of the
Mantle or Robe of green velvet* there be
the Star as is hereby appointed to be wore


on the coat or cloak* in place of what
was directed to be wore by the foresaid
Statutes.
That the Image of St. Andrew* which
by the foresaid Statutes is appointed to be
wore at the Collar of the Order* be made
larger than it now is* and have round it
rays of gold going out from it* making the
form of a glory.
That all Orders* Rules* and Statutes
relating to the said most noble Order*
which have been heretofore made and
appointed by her said late Majesty Queen
Anne* and not altered by the above Sta-
tutes* are hereby confirmed.
Given under Our Royal hand and
signet of Our Order* at Our Court
at St. James's* the ITth. Day of


February* V 7~ B , in the first year of
Our Reign*
By the Sovereign's Command*
David Nairn*
Sec. Nob. Ord. Card


&bbtttonal Statutes of tfje olost
rient anb jflost JBtoble (Scber of tbe
mjistk, mabe anti appomteb bg
George, bg tbe grate of (Sob, lUng
of (Sreat Britain, jTrance, anb 3fce*
lanb, Befenber of tbe jFattb. €tc.
S»oberetgn of tbe satb iEost Jtoble
(Srber, bt?.
George 3t*
Whereas we have appointed Robes
for Our Knights Brethren of Our most
antient and most noble Order of the
Thistle, for the more solemn and decent
manner of holding Chapters of Election;
We have likewise thought fit to appoint


the following Ceremonial and Method to
be observed ; as followeth:
That upon the death of any Knight
Brother of the Order, the Sovereign, or
his Commissioner, after having notice
thereof, shall forthwith give directions for
summoning as many of the Knights as
can then conveniently be had, to meet
within six weeks for the Electing a new
Brother into the Societv.
That there be three Knights at least
besides the Sovereign, or his Commis-
sioner, to constitute a Chapter; but under
this number no Election to be made, un-
less in case of exigency, the Sovereign
being pleased to grant a dispensation for
want of a full number.
That neither the Sovereign nor any
Knight Brother of the Order, enter the


Chapter without wearing both their Man*
ties and Collars* nor any Officer of the
Order attend without his Mantle and Chain.
That none have power to nominate*
but only such who are present at the
Chapter; and no proxy be admitted to vote.
That each of the Knights Brethren that
are present at the Election* shall nominate
for himself Six sufficient persons* free from
all reproach and scandal* whether they be
subjects or foreigners* provided that they
are known not to favour or abet any party
at enmity with the Sovereign; that is to
say* two Earls, or of higher degree* two
Barons, and two Knights.
That the Scrutiny be collected by the
Secretary, there being as yet no Chan-
cellor; and in the absence of the Secretary,
the collection to be made by Lyon King


of Arms; but in absence of both these
Officers the Scrutiny may be gathered by
the Usher.
That whoever collects the Scrutiny,
they must begin with the youngest Knight,
and so proceed upward from one side to
another, ending at the eldest; and after
the Scrutiny is taken, he must humbly
declare to the Sovereign the person on
whom the choice is fallen. The Sovereign
approving of the Election, the Green Rod
must be sent out, attending the two junior
Knights, to introduce the Elect Knight,
who enters the Chapter supported on his
right and left hand by the two Knights,
Green Rod walking before them, who as
soon as they enter the room must make
their low reverences to the Sovereign, or
his Commissioner; and about half way.


another ; and being advanced up ta the
Sovereign, a third low reverence; after
which the Green Rod shall draw the
Sword of State, and kneeling present the
same to the Sovereign; upon which the
Elect Knight being presented and kneeling
down, shall receive the honour of a Knight
Batchelor, which done, and the Sword of
State returned to the Green Rod, the
Elect Knight rising up, the Chancellor or
Secretary shall administer the Oath to
him, which being performed, the Chan-
cellor or Secretary shall (kneeling) present
the Ribband to the Sovereign, who will
immediately put it over the Elect Knight's
left shoulder, he kneeling again, after
which the Elect Knight rises and makes a
low reverence to the Sovereign, and then
kneels again to kiss the Sovereign's hand.


which being ended he rises and makes
another low reverence; and then the
Knights Brethren rise from their seats and
stand at their several chairs, turning their
faces towards the Sovereign till the Sove-
reign begins to withdraw, upon which they
all make him a low reverence, still keep-
ing their faces towards him as he passes,
which concludes the Chapter of Election.
The ceremony being thus ended, and
the Sovereign withdrawn to his own apart-
ment, ushered by the Green Rod, and
followed by the Knights Brethren as far
as his bedchamber, the Elect Knight then
receives the compliments of the Society,
and returns them thanks for the honour of
electing him into their most ancient and
most honourable Order.


And seeing by the former Statutes,
Our Secretary and Usher of the said
Order, as also Lyon King of Arms did
wear their Badges upon a Chain of gold,
it is hereby allowed that the said officers
may wear their Badges on a green Ribband
of a moderate breadth, except upon Collar
days. Instalments, and Chapters of Elec-
tion, or any other public solemnities, at
which time they are to wear them upon
their gold Chains.
And whereas the Table of Fees es-
tablished by Our most dear Sister the late
Queen Anne, before the Union of Our
two Kingdoms, did consist of divers arti-
cles due to the several Officers, some of
which by virtue of the said Union do not
now exist, amounting in the whole to one
hundred and eleven pounds two shillings


and twopence : and whereas likewise the
Fee of Our Usher of the said Order
being in that Table but eight pounds six
shillings and sixpence, a sum that bears
no proportion to his Office, We have there-
fore thought fit, by the advice of the
Knights Brethren of Our said most ancient
and most noble Order, and for the better
encouragement of the said Officer, to
appoint his Fee in all time coming to be
twenty seven pounds fifteen shillings and
sixpence, according to the under-written
Table, viz.
s. d.
To the Secretary of the Order -55 11 1
To Lyon King of Arms - -2715 7
To the Usher of the Order -2715 6
In all
111 2 2


Which sum of one hundred and eleven
pounds two shillings and two pence We
do hereby order and require all who shall
be admitted as Knights Brethren of Our
said most ancient and most noble Order,
to pay, according to the above distribu-
tion, upon their being admitted into the
said Order.
Given under Our Royal hand and
signet of Our Order aforesaid, at
Our Court at St. James's, the 17th.
day of July, 1717, in the third
year of Our Reign
By the Sovereign's Command,
David Nairn,
Sec




aitottfon to tte foregoing
Statutes*
And whereas the Table of Fees es-
tablished by Our most dear Sister the late
Queen Anne, before the Union of the two
Kingdoms, did consist of divers articles
due to several Officers, some of which, by
virtue of the said Union do not now
exist, amounting in the whole to one
hundred and eleven pounds two shillings
and twopence; And whereas likewise it
being humbly represented unto Us by the
Knights Brethren of Our most noble Order
aforesaid, that the Fees formerly appointed


were too mean,, and not suitable to the
dignity of the Order, and in which there
was not sufficient provision made for
the six Heralds, six Pursuivants, and six
Trumpeters, in that part of Our United
Kingdom of Great Britain called Scot-
land, therefore We will and ordain that
the Table of Fees, in all time coming,
be as followeth, viz.
<£• s. d.
To the Secretary of the Order 100.0.0
To the Lyon King of Arms -
To the Gentleman Usher of the
70.0.0
Green Rod
TO . 0.0
30 . 0 . 0
18 . 0 . 0
To the six Heralds
To the six Pursuivants
To the six State Trumpeters
9.0.0
In all
297.0 • 0


Which sum of two hundred and ninety
seven pounds sterling aforesaid. We do
appoint to be paid to the respective
Officers abovementioned, or their At-
torney, by each succeeding Knight, upon
their admittance into the said most
ancient and most noble Order.
Given under Our Royal hand, and
signet of Our Order aforesaid, at
Our Court at St. James's, the four-
teenth day of February, in the
seventh year of Our Reign.
By the Sovereign's Command,
David Nairn,
Sec


%is George ti)t tEDIjirU,
by Warrant dated the Tth of January,
1763, was pleased to appoint Doctor
John Jardine, to be Dean of the said
Order, who is to receive and take from
each succeeding Knight, upon his admis-
sion into the said Order, the sum of Fifty
Pounds sterling, for his Fee, as Dean of
the said Order.
London, 16th July, 1814.


statute for tfje extension of tfje
(©Tier.
George IV
Whereas, by the Statutes of the most
ancient and most noble Order of the
Thistle, made and appointed by Her late
Majesty Queen Anne, it is, amongst other
things, provided, that the number of
Knights of the said Order should be
Twelve Brethren, besides the Sovereign
of the Order. Now, We being minded to
mark with our Royal favour a greater
number of noble persons, do Ordain and
Declare, that the number of Brethren of
the said most ancient and most noble


Order, shall henceforth, and in all time
coming, be Sixteen.
Given under Our Royal hand, and
signet of Our Order aforesaid, at
Our Court at St. James's, this
eighth day of May, 1827, in the
eighth year of Our Reign.
By the Sovereign's Command.
R! Kerr.
Sec


Untgttf of
THE REVIVAL OF THE ORDER,
JAMES VII. IN 1687,
TO THE PRESENT TIME.




Untgftfs of tfje ancient ant)
Most Jtoble #rber of tfje Cbtstle,
mabe bg Htng 31ames tfje g»cbentb,
at tfjc rebtbal of tbe ©rber in
[those MARKED THUS * CONTINUED MEMBERS OF THE ORDER AFTER ITS REVIVAL
BY QUEEN ANNE IN 1704]
James Drummond, 4th. Earl of
Perth. Accompanied King
James to France; and died
11th. March, 1716.
* George Gordon, 4th. Marquess
of Huntley, and Ist. Duke of
Gordon. Died 7th. Decem-
ber, 1716.
John Murray, 2nd. Earl, and Ist.
Marquess of Atholl. Died
6th. May, 1703.
• James Hamilton, Earl of Ar-
ran, eldest son of William and
Ann, Duke and Duchess of Ha-
milton. Created Duke of Ha-
milton, &c. with the precedency
of the 12th. April, 1643, by
Patent 10th. August, 1698.
Created Duke of Brandon, in
the Peerage of England, 1711.
Elected a Knight of the Gar-
ter, 26th. October, 1712, and
as an especial mark of the
Queen’s favor was allowed to
retain the Order of the Thistle.
Died 15th. November, 1712.
a It having been the custom on the
Election of a Knight of the Thistle into
the Order of the Garter, to resign the
insignia of the Thistle, it was upon this
occasion remarked to Queen Anne, that
there was no precedent for a Knight of
the Thistle being allowed to retain the
ensigns of that Order after being elected
into the Garter, when Her Majesty is
reported to have said, “ Such a subject as
the Duke of Hamilton has a pre-eminent
claim to every mark of distinction which a
crowned head can confer: I will hence-
forth wear both Orders myself.”
Hamilton’s Transactions, p. 263.


Kenneth Mac Kenzie, 4th. Earl
of Seaforth. Accompanied
King James to France, and
died January, 1701.
John Drummond, Ist. Earl of
Melfort. Accompanied King
James to France. Outlawed,
1694. Attainted, July, 1695.
Died, January, 1714.
George Douglas, Ist. Earl of
Dunbarton. Accompanied King
James to France, and died
1692.
Alexander Stewart, 4th. Earl
of Moray. Died Ist. Novem-
ber, 1700.
Of these Knights, two died, and four lost all their honors by Attainder
before the revival of the Order by Queen Anne; but the other two
continued Members of it until their deaths.


Utugljts of Oft MLost Ancient anO
Most (Prber of tift Cbistle,
from lift rcbtbal of tbe <©rber bg
(Sltieen Stone to to
tbe present time.
[THOSE NAMES TO WHICH THIS MARK t IS AFFIXED ARE THE PRESENT KNIGHTS.]
1704.
I. John Campbell, 2nd. Duke of
Argyll. Nominated 4th. Fe-
bruary, 1703-4. Installed a
Knight of the Garter 20th.
December, 1710; and resigned
the Order of the Thistle, 22nd.
March, 1711.
11. John Murray, 2nd. Marquess,
and Ist. Duke of Atholl. No-
February, 1703-4.
Died 14th. November, 1724.
HI. William Johnston, 3rd. Earl,
and Ist. Marquess of Annan-
dale. Nominated 7th. Febru-
ary, 1703-4. Died 14th. Ja-
nuary, 1721.
IV. James Scott, Earl of Dal-
keith, eldest son of James
Duke of Buccleuch and Mon-
mouth, who was executed for,
and attainted of. High Treason,
in 1685. Nominated 7th. Fe-
bruary, 1703-4. Died in the
life-time of his mother, Anne
Duchess of Buccleuch, 14th.
March, 1705.
V. George Hamilton, Ist. Earl
of Orkney. Nominated 7th.
February, 1703-4. Died 29th.
January, 1737.
VI. James Ogilvy, Ist, Earl of
Seafield. Nominated 7th. Fe-
bruary, 1703-4. Succeeded his
father as 4th. Earl of Findlater
in 1711. Died, 15th. August,
1730.


VII. William Kerr, 2nd. Mar-
quess of Lothian. Nominated
30th. October, 1705 a . Died
28th. February, 1722.
VIII. Charles Boyle, 4th. Earl
of Orrery in the Peerage of
Ireland. Nominated 30th. Oc-
tober, 1705. a Died 28th. Au-
gust, 1731.
1706.
IX. John Erskine, 11th. Earl
of Marr. Nominated 10th.
August, 1706. b Attainted by
Act of Parliament, Ist. Geo. 1.,
1715, when all his honors be-
came forfeited.
X. Hugh Campbell, 3rd. Earl of
LounoN. b Nominated 10th.
August, 1706. Died 20th. No-
vember, 1731.
• At the nomination of these noblemen,
the Order consisted of seven Members only,
of which number two were appointed by
James VII. in 1687, and five by Queen
Anne. The Earl of Dalkeith, one of the
six created by her Majesty having died on
the 14th. March in this year.
b By the appointment of these noblemen,
the number of the Knights was increased
to eleven.
XI. John Dalrymple, 2nd. Earl
of Stair. Nominated 26th.
May, 1710.° Died 9th. May,
1747.
1713.
XII. David Colyear, Ist. Earl
ofPortmore. Nominated 17th.
January, 1713. d Died 2nd.
January, 1730.
1716.
XIII. John Gordon, 15th. Earl
of Sutherland. Invested
22nd. June, 1716. d Died 27th
June, 1733.
XIV. William Cadogan, Ist.
Cadogan in the Peerage
of England. Invested 22nd.
June, 1716. d Created Earl op
Cadogan, 1718. Died 17th.
July, 1726.
0 This nomination rendered the number
of Knights to which the Order was limited
by the Statutes, complete.
d Between May, 1710, and June, 1716,
the following vacancies occurred :
The Duke of Argyll, who resigned 22nd.
March, 1710-1.
The Duke of Hamilton, who died 15th.
November, 1712.
The Earl of Marr, who was attainted in


1717.
XV. Thomas Hamilton, 6th. Earl
of Haddington. Nominated Ist.
March, 1717. a Died 28th. No-
vember, 1735.
1721.
XVI. Charles Rennet, Ist. Earl
of Tankerville in the Peer-
age of England. Invested 27th.
February, 1720-l. b Died 21st,
May, 1722.
1725.
XVII. William Capel, 3rd. Earl
op Essex in the Peerage of
England. Invested 2nd. Fe-
bruary, 1724-5. c Elected a
Knight of the Garter, 20th. Fe-
bruary, 1737-8, when he re-
signed the Order of the Thistle.
XVIII. Francis Scott, Earl (fe
Dalkeith; succeeded as 2nd.
Duke of Buccleuch, 1732. In-
* Vice the Duke of Gordon, who died
7th. December, 1716,
b Vice Marquess of Annandale, who
died 14th. January, 1721.
c Between February, 1721, and 2nd. Fe-
bruary, 1724, the following Knights died ;
Marquess of Lothian, 28th. February,
1722.
Earl of Tankerville, 21st. May, 1722.
Duke of Atholl, 14th. November, 1724;
to fill up “ whose Stalls” the London Ga-
zette, No. 6344, states, the noblemen re-
ferred to in the text, were elected.
vested 2nd. February, 1724-5.*
Restored to the Earldom of
Doncaster in the peerage of
England, 1743. Died 22nd.
April, 1751.
XIX. Alexander Home, 2nd.
Earl of Marchmont. Nomi-
nated 2nd. February, 1724-5/
being then Ambassador at the
Congress of Cambray. In-
vested at Cambray, 10th.
March following. Died 27th.
February, 1740.
1726.
XX. James Hamilton, sth Duke
of Hamilton. Nominated 23rd.
September, and Invested 31st.
October, 1726. d Died 2nd.
March, 1743.
1780.
XXI, Charles Rennet, 2nd. Earl
of Tankerville in the Peerage
of England. Invested 16th.
May, 1730. e Died 14th. March,
1753.
1731.
XXII. Charles Stuart, sth. Earl
of Moray. Nominated 10th.
December, 1731.* Died 7th.
October, 1735.
d Vice Earl of Cadogan, who died 17th.
July, 1726.
* The following vacancies occurred be-


XXIII, Charles Colyear, 2nd.
Earl of Portmore, Nomi-
nated 2nd. June, 1732. Died
sth. July, 1785.
tween October, 1726, and 11th. February,
1734.
Earl of Portmore, 2nd. January, 1730.
Earl of Seafield, 15th August, 1730.
Earl of Orrery, 28th. August, 1731.
Earl of Loudon, 20th. November, 1731.
Earl of Sutherland, 27th. June, 1733.
The Earl of Portmore is said to have suc-
ceeded the Earl of Loudon.— Gentleman’s
Magazine, 1732.
The “ London Gazettes” do not con-
tain notices of creations of Knights of
the Thistle between 1730 and 1739, and
the other contemporary publications are
too contradictory in their statements to
justify any alteration from the MS. whence
this list is printed. For example; the
“ Historical Register” states, that on the
15th January, 1730, Charles Earl of
Portmore was nominated into his father’s
vacancy, whilst the MS. and the “ Gen-
tleman’s Magazine” assert that he was ap-
pointed in June, 1732; and, according to
the “ Historical Register,” the Earl of
Dunmore kissed hands on being made a
Knight of the Thistle in the room of the
Earl of Seafield, on the 17th. November,
1730. That work does not mention the
nomination of the Earl of Morton in 1738 ;
but says that in August, in that year,
the Earl of Berkeley succeeded the Earl
of Orkney; and, like the MS., that the
XXIV. James Murray, 2nd.
Duke of Atholl. Nominated
11th. February, 1734. Died
6th. January, 1764.
XXV. William Kerr, 3rd. Mar-
quess of Lothian. Nominated
11th. February, 1734. Died
28th. July, 1767.
1738.
XXVI. James Douglas, 14th. Earl
of Morton. Nominated 10th.
July, 1738. a Died 12th. Octo-
ber, 1768.
XXVII. John Stewart, 3rd. Earl
of Bute. Nominated 10th.
July, 1738. Invested at Holy-
rood House, 10th. August fol-
lowing/ Elected a Knight of
the Garter, 1762, when he re-
signed the Order of the Thistle.
XXVIII. Charles Hope, Ist. Earl
of Hopetoun. Nominated 10th.
July, 1738/ Invested at Holy-
Earl of Hopetoun and the Earl of Bute
were created in August, 1738, though
subsequently to the Earl of Berkeley;
whilst the “ Gentleman’s Magazine” for
July, 1738, asserts that“ the Earls ofMor-
ton, Bute, Berkeley, and Lord Dunmore,
were then made Knights of St. Andrew.”
a Between February, 1734, and the 10th.
July, 1738, the following Knights died:


rood House, 10th. August fol-
lowing. Died 26th. February,
1742.
1739.
XXIX. Augustus Berkeley, 4th.
Earl of Berkeley in the Peer-
age of England. Nominated
7th. June, 1739. a Died 9th. Ja-
nuary, 1755.
1741.
XXX. James Stuart, 7th. Earl
of Moray. Nominated 23rd.
February, 1741. b Died sth.
July, 1767.
1742.
XXXI. John Carmichael, 3rd.
Earl of Hyndford. Nomi-
nated 22nd. June, 1742.° In-
vested at Charlottenburg bythe
King of Prussia, at whose Court
he was then Minister Plenipo-
tentiary, on the 2nd. August fol-
lowing. Died 19th. July, 1767.
Earl of Moray, 7th. October, 173,5.
Earl of Haddington, 28th. Nov. 1735.
Earl of Orkney, 29th. January, 1737.
a Vice Earl of Essex, who resigned, on
being elected a Knight of the
Garter, February, 1737-8.
b Vice Earl of Marchmont, who died
27th. February, 1740.
c Vice Earl of Hopetoun, who died
26th. February, 1742.
1743.
XXXII. Lionel Talmash, 3rd.
Earl of Dysart. Invested
29th. March, 1743. d Died 10th.
March, 1770.
1748.
XXXIII, Cosmo George Gordon,
3rd. Duke of Gordon. Nomi-
nated 16th. February, 1747-8. 6
Died sth August, 1752.
1752.
XXXIV. William Crichton, 4th.
Earl of Dumfries. Nominated
11th. March, 1752/ Died 27th.
July, 1768.
1753.
XXXV. Francis Greville, Bth.
Baron and Ist. Earl Brooke
in the Peerage of England.
Nominated 29th. March, 1753.®
Created Earl of Warwick,
1759. Died 6th. July, 1773.
d Vice Duke of Hamilton, who died
2nd. March, 1743.
e Vice Earl of Stair, who died 9th. May,
f Vice Duke of Buccleuch, who died
22nd. April, 1751.
8 Between March, 1752, and March,
1753, two vacancies occurred; namely,
Duke of Gordon, who died sth.
August, 1752.
Earl of Tankerville, who died
14th. March, 1753,


XXXVI. John Leslie* Bth. Earl
oe Rothes. Invested 29th.
March* 1753. g Died 10th. De-
cember* 1767.
1755.
XXXVII. James Hamilton* 6th.
Duke of Hamilton, and 3rd.
Duke of Brandon in the Peer-
age of England. Invested
18th. March, 1755. a Died 18th.
January* 1758.
1763.
XXXVIII. Charles Schaw* 9th.
Lord Cathcart. Nominated
13th. April, 1763. b Died 14th.
August, 1776.
XXXIX, William Douglas, 3rd.
Earl of March and Ruglen.
Nominated 13th. April, 1763. b
Succeeded as 4th. Duke of
Queensberry in 1778. Created
Baron Douglas in the Peerage
of Great Britain, Bth. August,
1786. Died 23rd. December,
1810.
* Vice Earl of Berkeley, who died 9th.
January, 1755.
b Between March, 1755,and April, 1763,
two vacancies occurred ; namely,
Duke of Hamilton, who died
18lh. January, 1758.
Earl of Bute, who resigned on
being elected a Knight of the
Garter in May, 1762.
XL. John Campbell, 4th. Duke
of Argyll. Nominated 7th.
August* 1765. c Died 9th. No-
vember, 1770.
1767.
XLI. Henry Scott* 3rd. Duke
of Buccleuch. Invested 23rd.
December, 1767. d Elected a
Knight of the Garter, May*
1794, when he resigned the
Order of the Thistle.
XLH. John Murray, 3rd. Duke
of Atholl. Invested 23rd.
December, 1767. d Died 4th.
November, 1774.
XLIII. Frederick Howard, sth.
Earl of Carlisle, in the peer-
age of England. Nominated
23rd. December, 1767. d In-
vested at Turin, 27th. Febru-
ary, 1768, Elected a Knight
c Vice Duke of Atholl, who died Bth.
January, 1764.
d Between 1775 and December, 1767,
three Knights died; namely,
Earl of Moray, who died sth.
July 1767.
Earl of Hyndford, who died 19th.
July, 1767.
Marquess of Lothian, who died
28th. July, 1767.


of the Garter, 12th. June, 1793,
and resigned the Order of the
Thistle.
1768.
XLIV. William Henry Kerr,
4th. Marquess of Lothian.
Invested 26th. October, 1768. a
Died 12th. April, 1775.
XLV. David Murray, 7th. Vis-
count Stormont. Nominated
2nd. November, 1768, and
Invested at Vienna, on the
30th. of that Month. 1 Died Ist.
September, 1796.
XLVI. John Kerr, 3rd. Duke
of Roxburgh. Invested 28th.
November, 1768.° Elected
a Knight of the Garter, 3rd.
June, 1801; and as an especial
mark of Royal favour was al-
lowed to retain the Order of
the Thistle. Died 19th. March,
1804.
a Vice Earl of Rothes, who died 10th,
December, 1767.
b Vice Earl of Dumfries, who died 27th.
July, 1768.
c Vice Earl of Morton, who died 12th.
October, 1768.
•J* XLYII. H. R. H. Prince
William Henry, third son of
His Majesty George the
Third. Invested sth. April,
1770, d Created Duke of Cla-
rence and St. Andrew, in the
Peerage of Great Britain, 1789.
Elected a Knight of the Garter,
1782, and retained the Order
of the Thistle. Appointed Lord
High Admiral, 1827. H. R. H.
is the Senior Knight now living.
1771.
XLVIII. Niel Primrose, 3rd
Earl of Rosebery, Invest-
ed 4th. March, 1771.® Died
25th. March, 1814.
1773.
XLTX. Robert Henley, 2nd.
Earl of Northington, in the
Peerage of England, Invest-
ed 18th. August, 1773/ Died
July, 1786.
d Vice Earl of Dysart, who died 10th.
March, 1770.
e Vice Duke of Argyll, who died 9th.
November, 1770.
f Vice Earl of Warwick, who died 6th.
July, 1773.


1775.
L, Alexander Gordon, 4th. Duke
of Gordon. Invested 11th
January, 1775. a Created Earl
of Norwich, in the Peerage of
Great Britain, 1784. Died
17th June, 1827.
LI. John Stewart, 7th. Earl
of Galloway. Invested Ist.
November, 1775. b Created Ba-
ron Stewart of Garlics, in the
Peerage of England, 1796. Died
14th November, 1806.
1776.
LII. William John Kerr, sth
Marquess of Lothian. Invest-
ed 11th. October, 1776/ Died
4th. January, 1815.
1786.
LIII. Douglas Hamilton, Bth.
Duke of Hamilton, and sth.
Duke of Brandon in the peer-
age of England. Invested 3rd.
March, 1786, d Died 2nd. Au-
gust, 1799.
a Vice Duke of Atholl, who died 4th.
November, 1774
b Vice Marquess of Lothian, who died
12th. April, 1775.
c Vice Lord Cathcart, who died 14th.
August, 1776.
d Vice Earl of Portmore, who died sth.
July, 1785.
LIV. Thomas Bruce Brudenel,
2nd. Baron, and Ist. Earl of
Ailesbury, in the Peerage of
England. Invested 29th. No-
vember, 1786. c Died 19th.
April, 1814.
1793.
LV. James Graham, 3rd. Duke
of Montrose, and 3rd. Earl
Graham in the Peerage of Eng-
land. Invested 14th. June,
1793/ Elected a Knight of the
Garter, 26th. March, 1812,
when he resigned the Order
of the Thistle.
1794.
LYL John Poulett, 4th. Earl
Poulett, in the Peerage of
England. Invested 30th. May,
1794/ Died 14th. Jan. 1819.
1797.
LVII. George Douglas, 16th.
Earl of Morton, and Ist.
e Vice Earl of Northington, who died
July, 1786.
f Vice Earl of Carlisle, who resigned on
being elected a Knight of the
Garter 12th. June, 1793.
g Vice Duke of Buccleuch, who resigned
on being elected a Knight of the
Garter, May, 1794.


Bar on Douglas, of Lochleven,
in the Peerage of Great Britain.
Invested 26th. July, 1797. a
Died 17th. July, 1827.
1800.
f LVIII. John Murray, 4th.
Duke of Atholl, and Ist.
Earl Strange in the Peerage
of Great Britain. Invested
1800. b
1805.
f LIX. William Schaw Cathcart,
10th. Baron Cathcart In-
vested 23rd. November, 1805. c
Created Viscount Cathcart,
in the Peerage of Great Bri-
tain, 1807; and Earl Cath-
cart, 1814.
1808.
f LX. George Hamilton Gordon,
4th. Earl of Aberdeen. In-
vested 16th. March, 1808/
Created Viscount Gordon, in
the Peerage of Great Britain,
» Free Viscount Stormont, who died Ist.
September, 1796.
i> Vice Duke of Hamilton, who died
2nd. August 1799.
Vice Duke of Roxburgh, who died
19th. March, 1804.
i Vice Earl of Galloway, who died 14th.
November, 1806.
June 1814. Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs.
1812.
LXI. Charles William Henry
Scott, 4th. Duke of Buccleuch,
and 4th. Duke of Queensberry,
and 4th Earl of Doncaster, in
the Peerage of England. In-
vested 22nd. May, 1812. 6 Died
20th. April, 1819.
LXII. Hugh Montgomerie, 12th.
Earl of Eglinton, and Ist
Baron Ardrossan in the Peer-
age of Great Britain. Invested
22nd. May, 1812/ Died 15th.
December, 1819.
1814.
f LXIII. Henry Nevill, 2nd.
Earl of Abergavenny, in the
Peerage of Great Britain. In-
vested 23rd. May, 1814/
c Between March 1808, and May 1812,
two vacancies occurred ; namely,
Marquess of Queensberry, who died
23rd. December, 1810.
Duke of Montrose, who resigned,
on being elected a Knight of
the Garter, 26th. March, 1812.
f Two Knights died between May 1812
and May 1814; namely,
Earl of Rosebery, who died 25th.
March, 1814.
Earl of Ailesbury, who died
19th. April,'lBl4.


f LXIV. George Stewart, 9th.
Earl of Galloway, and Ist.
Baron Stewart of Garlics, in
the Peerage of England. In-
vested 30th. May, 1814/
1815.
LXV. Thomas Erskine, Ist. Ba-
ron Erskine, in the Peerage
of Great Britain. Invested
3rd. February, 1815. a Died
17th. November, 1823.
1819.
f LXVI. Charles Brudenel
Bruce, 2nd. Earl of Ailes-
bury, in the Peerage of Great
Britain. Invested 20th. May,
1819. b Created Marquess of
Ailesbury, 17 July, 1821.
1820.
LXVII. William Kerr, 6th. Mar-
quess of Lothian. Invested
26th May, 1820.' Created
Baron Kerr, in the Peerage of
Great Britain, 17th July, 1821.
Died 27th. April, 1824.
* Vice Marquess of Lothian, who died
4th. January, 1815.
b Vice Earl Poulett, who died 14th.
January, 1819.
' Vice Duke of Buccleuch, who died
20th. April, 1819.
+ LXVIII. George Hay, Bth. Mar-
quess of Tweddale. Compa-
nion of the Bath. Invested,
22nd May, 1820. d
1821.
f LXIX. Charles Douglas, sth.
Marquess of Queensberry.
Nominated 17th. July, 1821.'’
Invested 19th. April. 1822.
f LXX. Archibald Kennedy,
12th. Earl of Cassillis ; and
Ist. Baron Ailsa, in the Peer-
age of Great Britain. Invested
17th. July, 1821. e
f LXXI. James Maitland, Bth.
Earl of Lauderdale, and Ist.
Baron Lauderdale, in the Peer-
age of Great Britain. Invested
17th. July, 1821. e
f LXXII. Robert Dundas, 2nd.
Viscount Melville, in the
d Vice Earl of Eglinton, who died 15th.
December 1819.
e These Noblemen were appointed Extra
Knights, “ in contemplation of the ap-
proaching Coronation, to succeed as va-
cancies shall occur in the number of the
twelve Knights Brethren.” —London Ga-
zette, 24th July, 1821. On the death of
Lord Erskine, who died 17th. November,
1823, and of the Marquess of Lothian,
who died 27th. April, 1824, two of them


Peerage of Great Britain. In-
vested 17th. July, 1821. e
1827.
f LXXIII. George Gordon, sth.
Earl of Aboyne, and Ist. Ba-
ron Meldrum, in the Peerage
of Great Britain. Invested
10th. May, 1827. e
f LXXIV. Henry Richard Gre-
ville, 3rd Earl of Brooke, and
3rd. Earl of Warwick, in the
Peerage of England. Invested
10th. May, 1827.'
succeeded as Knights Brethren : by the ad-
ditional Statute, datejd Bth. May, 1827,
the Order was extended to Sixteen, when
the remaining two extra Knights became
also Knights Brethren; and two others were
elected.
f LXXV. James Duff, 4th. Earl
cf Fife, in the Peerage of Ire-
land, and Ist. Baron Fife, in
the Peerage of Great Britain.
Nominated 3rd., and Invested
4th. September 1827. e
f LXXVI. Francis Stuart, 9th,
Earl of Moray, and 2nd. Ba-
ron Stuart, of Castle Stuart,
in the Peerage of Great Britain.
Nominated 3rd. September,
1827. e
e Between May and September, 1827,
two vacancies occurred ; namely,
The Duke of Gordon, who died,
17th June, 1827.
The Earl of Morton, who died,
17th July, 1827,




INDEX.
[THE FIGURES BEFORE THE NAME INDICATE THE NOMINATION OF THE KNIGHT
IN THE ORDER: THE DATE " 1687” AFTER IT, THE KNIGHTS APPOINTED BY
JAMES VII i AND THOSE THUS * DISTINGUISHED ARE THE PRESENT
KNIGHTS.]
60 Aberdeen, George, 4th Earl of,*
63 Abergavenny, Henry, 2nd
Earl of;*
73 Aboyne, George, sth Earl of,*
54 Ailesbury, Thomas, Ist Earl of,
66 Ailesbury, Charles, Ist Mar-
quess of,*
3 Annandale, William, Ist Mar-
quess of.
1 Argyll, John, 2nd Duke of,
40 Argyll, John 4th Duke of,
Arran, James, Earl of, 1687.
Atholl, John, Ist Marquess of.
1687.
2 Atholl, John, Ist Duke of,
24 Atholl, James, 2nd Duke of,
42 Atholl, John, 3rd Duke of,
58 Atholl, John, 4th Duke of,*
29 Berkeley, Augustus, 4th Earl of,
35 Brooke, Francis, Ist Earl,
IS Buccleuch, Francis, 2nd Duke
41 Buccleuch, Henry, 3rd Duke of,
61 Buccleuch, Charles, 4th Duke
27 Bute, John, 3rd Earl of.
14 Cadogan, William, Ist Earl of,
43 Carlisle, Frederick, sth Earl of,
70 Cassillis, Archibald, 12th Earl
38 Catheart, Charles, 9th Lord,
59 Catheart, William, Ist Earl,*
47 Clarence and St. Andrews,
H. R. H. Prince William
Henry, Ist Duke of,*


4 Dalkeith, James, Earl of.
34 Dumfries, William, 4th Earl of,
Dunbarton, George, Ist Earl
of, 1687.
32 Dysart, Lionel, 3rd Earl of.
62 Eglinton, Hugh, 12th Earl of,
65 Erskine, Thomas, Ist Lord,
17 Essex, William, 3rd Earl of.
75 Fife, James, 4th Earl of,*
51 Galloway, John, 7th Earl of,
64 Galloway, George, 9th Earl of,*
Gordon, George, Ist Duke of.
1687.
33 Gordon, Cosmo, 4th Duke of,
50 Gordon, Alexander, 4th Duke
15 Haddington, Thomas, 6th Earl
Hamilton, James, 4th Duke of.
then Earl of Arran, 1687.
20 Hamilton, James, sth Duke of,
37 Hamilton, James, 6th Duke of,
53 Hamilton, Douglas, Bth Duke
28 Hopetoun, Charles, Ist Earl of,
31 Hyndford, John, 3rd Earl of.
71 Lauderdale, James, Bth Earl
7 Lothian, William, 2nd Mar-
quess of.
25 Lothian, William, 3rd Mar-
quess of.
44 Lothian, William, 4th Mar-
quess of.
52 Lothian/William, sth Marquess
67 Lothian, William, 6th Marquess
10 Loudoun, Hugh, 3rd Earl of.
39 March, William, 3rd Earl of,
19 Marchmont, Alexander, 2nd
Earl of.
9 Marr, John, Earl of.
Melfort, James, Ist Earl of.
1687.
72 Melville, Robert, 2nd Vis-
count,*
55 Montrose, James, 3rd Duke of,
26 Morton, James, 14th Earl of.


7 Morton, George, 16th Earl of,
Moray, Alexander, 4th Earl of.
1687.
22 Moray, Charles, sth Earl of,
30 Moray, James, 7th Earl of,
76 Moray, Francis, 9th Earl of,*
49 Northington, Robert, 4th Earl
5 Orkney, George, Ist Earl of,
8 Orrery, Charles, 4th Earl of.
Perth, James, 4th Earl of, 1687.
12 Portmore, David, Ist Earl of,
23 Portmore, Charles, 2nd Earl
56 Poulett, John, 4th Earl.
39 Queensberry, William, 4th
Duke of.
69 Queensberry, Charles, 6th
Marquess of,*
48 Rosebery, Kiel, 3rd Earl of,
36 Rothes, John, Bth Earl of,
46 Roxburgh, John, 3rd Duke
11 Stair, John, 2nd Earl of.
45 Stormont, David, 7th Viscount,
13 Sutherland, John, 15th Earl
6 Seafield, James, Ist Earl of,
Seaforth, Kenneth, 4th Earl of.
1687.
16 Tankerville, Charles, Ist Earl
21 Tankerville, Charles, 2nd Earl
86 Tweddale, George, Bth Mar-
quess of,*
35 Warwick, Francis, Ist Earl
74 Warwick, Henry, 3rd Earl
