

UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
WAR LECTURES
No. 2.
THE
SIGNIFICANCE OF T HE EMPIRE
BY
F. W. EGGLESTON.
AUSTRALIA AND THE WAR
BY
ARCHIBALD T. STRONG, M.A.
PRICE. SIXPENCE.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
Propy Ltd.,
MELBOURNE., SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, BRISBANE.


UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
WAR LECTURLS.
ARRANGEMENTS have been made with the University Authorities,
and with the Lecturers, to publish the complete text of each night’s
Lectures In booklet form.
There are many thousands who would like to hear the lectures
but are debarred by circumstances from that privilege, and It is for them
mainly that the lectures will be published. But those who have heard
them will also like to have the lectures in print for reference, and for
passing on to their friends.
The complete course, with dates of delivery, is as follows. The
list is subject to possible variation, of which due notice will be given in
the papers.
Tuesday, June 15.—PROFESSOR TUCKER—* 4 British and German Ideals."
PROFESSOR SCOTT—" The Nature of the Issue."
Tuesday, June 29.™ PROFESSOR WALLACE— 44 Recent Impressions of
Britain In War Time." F. W. EGGLESTON—" The Significance of
the Empire." ARCHIBALD T. STRONG, M.A.—"Australia and
the War."
Wednesday, July 14,—PROFESSOR OSBORNE—" Germany’s Intellectual
Strength and Weakness." R. R. GARRAN, G.M.G.—"Trade and
the War."
Wednesday, July 28.— PROFESSOR HARRISON MOORE—“ International
Relations and International Haw." MAURICE BLACKBURNE,
M.A.—" Socialism and the War."
Tuesday, August 10.— COLONEL HUBERT FOSTER, R.E., Director of
Military Science In the University of Sydney— " Strategy on the
Western Front"
Tuesday, August 24.—FRANK TATE, JM.A. (Director of Education)—"Edu-
cation and the War." DR. McKELLAR STEWART—"Nietzsche
and the Modern German Spirit."
Wednesday, September B— PROFESSOR MASSON— "Chemistry and the
War." PROFESSOR BERRY'-—"Remoter Aspects of the War."
PROFESSOR LABY — 44 The Dominions and the War."
EACH NIGHTS LECTURES IN ONE PAMPHLET


The
SIGNIFICANCE of the EMPIRE.
Lecture delivered at the Masonic Hall , Melbourne ,
on June 29th, by
F. W. EGGLESTON.
T HAVE chosen this somewhat vague title to my address
this evening because it enables me to deal with
certain aspects of the Empire which are apt to be
overlooked. To most people patriotism is enough. Loyalty
or allegiance is an instinct which needs no justification.
This is as it should be. Such feelings are the product of
the primitive social instincts which are the basis of all
commercial life. It is nevertheless just as necessary to
the continued health of a polity that it should be able to
justify its existence from the rational and ethical point of
view. In the long run a political institution which does not
serve the higher needs of its citizens will cease to exist. The
Empire is not merely a racial or a national fabric—its
strength is that it performs for its citizens and for the
world generally certain indispensable social and ethical
services.
There are, of course, many services of a more material
class which are performed by the Empire, from the mere
protection of transport and communication to the govern-
ment of undeveloped communities. The services rendered
by the Empire in these various ways would alone justify
most of its claims. But these services do not seem to me
to be unique. Many of them might be performed by other
nations as well as by England.
There is however one respect in which the part played


by the Empire is unique. The supreme utility of the
Empire to-day to my mind is that it is the main factor in
the world’s progress towards democratic ideals. A great
Roman writer expressed the idea that the two great con-
ceptions of Empire and Liberty were incompatible and
could never be reconciled. We may claim that the British
Empire has gone very far to solve this antagonism and that
if it be permitted to stand, it will be able to promote the
adjustment of all human relations on a democratic basis.
I suppose that in speaking to an Australian audience
it is hardly necessary to apologise for this way of approach-
ing the subject. But as democracy is so often a catchword,
a party shibboleth, it may be necessary to indicate with
some precision what the word really stands for. The
Democratic movement of modern times has been essentially
a movement to readjust human relations on a basis of
justice and freedom. The foundation of the modem
democratic principle is the prevalence of injustice due
to the inequality of social or economic power. Con-
ditions tend naturally towards inequality and injustice
unless checked. Democracy is a perpetual movement to
bring about and maintain am equitable adjustment of
human relations.
Democracy does not seek to do this by the establishment
of a rigid social order or by a mere redistribution of the
material things of life, as in certain forms of Socialism. It
realises that all human relations are fluid, and they should
be developed by stimulating the initiative and activity of
the individual, improving his powers of co-operation, and
removing the gross obstructions from his path. The re-
adjustment of social relations is not a change that can be
brought about from without by an external force. It must
grow out of and into the life of the people, who must
originate and be responsible for and bear the consequences
of the change. The method of democracy is the method of
self-government and freedom.
This idea of the function of the State under democracy
being to readjust social relations involved a revolution in
political ideas. The original idea of the State was that of
a shelter or roof against adverse influences. In a later
stage it forsakes the merely defensive attitude and seeks


to promote the positive interests of the members as a whole*
It is only in a late stage of development that the State
seeks to change and readjust the relative positions of its
members. The change is immensely important, for it means
a concentration on internal problems to the exclusion of
external affairs. The State no longer spends its chief con-
cern on problems of defence or national aggression, but the
whole of social effort is organised to produce beneficial
internal changes. This in itself involves some loss of
efficiency. A State in which individual interests are
organised for defence or aggression on military lines often
becomes marvellously efficient. But it is easier to govern an
army than to discharge the responsibilities of a free people,
and while the qualities of leadership and organisation and
citizenship produced in a democracy are of higher quality,
success is more rarely achieved. That lack of success is
justified in the maxim that self-government and freedom
are more important than efficiency in government.
The inefficiency of democracies so far as corporate
action is concerned is intensified because the principle of
complete autonomy leads to what is called the party system,
in which different sections of the community are permitted
to organise to" secure their ends in conflict with other
organised parties. Parties are formed which profess to
regard their opponents as more deadly foes than external
enemies. Parties are not only inevitable but useful, for it
is only when men’s minds are braced by the stress of the
social struggle that the true principles of social. life are
beaten out. The way of social evolution is through the
social conflict. It cannot be denied that the Party struggle
creates inefficiency in the corporate activity of the State
and even imperils its faculty for self-protection while a
democracy is almost entirely unfitted for aggression. This
fact is clear throughout history. Many democracies which
have been most brilliant exponents of democratic principle
and pathfinders in social progress have utterly failed when
confronted with external dangers. The history of democ-
racy is strewn with brilliant failures. It is another
instance of the way in which the lower organism will often
drive out the higher. In a fierce struggle for existence a
democracy enters handicapped.


This fact has become part of human experience, and
nothing militates against the achievement of democracy
by a people so much as the suspicion that in time of national
danger a democratic State is handicapped. When a democ-
racy is established the cry of danger to the State is con-
stantly used to fetter freedom and defeat attempts to
readjust social conditions. The most difficult problem of
democracy is to secure the safety of the State without
impairing the freedom and the autonomy of the people.
Many States do, as England has done, nobly risk national
dangers in their attempts to secure the extension of
freedom, but on the whole it may be laid down that full
expansion of democracy can only be achieved when the
national integrity is absolutely beyond doubt. Even in
modem times there are few States of which it can be said
they are completely secure. Practically the only cases are
where there is some factor such as a mountainous frontier
or the sea which isolates them and reduces the risk of
foreign aggression.
I am afraid that I have somewhat wearied you with an
account of what may be called the technique of democracy,
but I do it to lay the foundation for the proposition that
the British Empire has in its position all the conditions for
democratic life and progress, including the vital condition
of security, and that this explains the fertility of democratic
experiment within the Empire and makes the Empire the
key of democratic progress throughout the world. The
hope of democracy, the hope of progress towards more
justice in human relationships, and away from the barbar-
ism and tyranny of the past, is the maintenance of the
Empire. By this Ido not mean that all parts of the Empire
have gone very far on the path to a satisfactory readjust-
ment along democratic lines. Some parts are very far
from it, but what we can say is that in all parts of the
Empire the realisation of just social conditions is the
main aim of policy, and that in all parts the democratic
methods of freedom and autonomy are firmly established.
In some parts of the Empire democratic experiment has
been carried to further lengths than in any other country
in the world. While many disapprove of these experiments
and would prefer them to be tried in other communities


their value as testing the principles of social adjustment is
universally admitted.
The Empire is like no other Empire the world has ever
seen in that it is bound together by the mere power of
association and not by organised force. The principles of
democracy, more or less perfectly realised in the constituent
nations, are perfectly and completely realised in the system
which binds them together. No consideration even of
safety is permitted to impair the principle of the autonomy
of the various nations of the Empire. They are willing
partners in a grand democratic system. Such a system is
only possible where there is a community of national ideals
and complete mutual trust.
This extraordinary development of democracy which is
exemplified in the Empire has been made possible by one
condition, —this, namely, that for a century the Empire has
been almost completely secure from external danger. Such
wars as it has engaged upon have not threatened its
integrity. The English people had grown to love
freedom before the 19th century through living in
an island which was reasonably secure from in-
vasion and in which the national integrity was not
disturbed by racial conflict. But the battle of Tra-
falgar established for Great Britain a complete mas-
tery of the seas. On every water of the globe a British
fleet was capable of defeating the strongest fleet that could
be brought against it. At the cost of maintaining this
maritime supremacy the various nations of the Empire
were perfectly free to develop in whatever way they could,
and to devote themselves to the solution of all internal
problems. At a minimum of sacrifice they enjoyed a
freedom from care as to national defence which has been
vouchsafed to no other race. These privileges have been
eagerly availed of, and by none more so than by dominions
like Australia, which have been far from the centres of
disturbance, and have not even shared in the burdens which
England has borne. Under the protection of its fleet the
Race has expanded into every corner of the globe, cheer-
fully undertaking burdens which no other white man has
ever carried. There never has been a question that the
basis of this security, the mastery of the sea, might ever


be challenged, and in the expansion of the Race every coil-
sideration of strategical prudence has been violated, and
principles of organisation have been adopted which could
never have been entertained if the question of national
security had been the constant care of the Imperial states-
men.
The benefits of the gigantic system of freedom and
peace which the Empire represents are not enjoyed by the
Empire alone. Confidence in strength makes a nation
generous just as the fear of danger makes a nation cruel
Great Britain makes fewer exclusive claims than any other
nation. The exchange of goods is free. The passage of
humanity is unrestricted. The Empire is thus a stabiliser
of contending forces. She has been strong enough to stand
alone in splendid isolation and give the other nations the
same freedom to her own resources as she gives to her own
subjects. She becomes the protector of the weaker nations
of Europe and of undeveloped races, and having no
supremely urgent demands of her own she has been able
to treat her dependent nations as ends in themselves and
consider their interests before her own. The most urgent
of all the fundamental world problems to-day is the re-
adjustment of the population of the world to its areas and
resources. Europe is congested, dependent for its neces-
sities on the outer world, always fearful lest its supplies be
stopped or diverted. The outer world is scantily occupied
and undeveloped. This unequal development leads to an
unstable equilibrium, and the world will never be at ease
until the conditions are readjusted. The British Empire
with its great areas of undeveloped territory available,
under free government, and with all pioneering difficulties
overcome, provides the most effective medium by which the
readjustment of populations throughout the world can be
made.
It will be seen that none of these important services can
be rendered to the world by any other instrument but the
Empire. No other nation in Europe could render them.
In England centuries of freedom and security have given
the people a love of freedom and tolerance. But the
nations of Europe, with their constant wars leading to
either national triumph or dependence, have developed


types of character which look for power over others as the
national and necessary end of policy. Hemmed in by strong
enemies they, like Germany, see no alternative but world
power or downfall. One after another the great nations of
Europe have striven for supremacy. Again this absorp-
tion of European nations in problems of national security
or aggression has prevented a practical attempt to solve
internal social problems. France is a country where the
love of freedom and equality is as strong as it is in England.
Yet France makes little or no headway towards democratic
readjustment. France makes an honest attempt to achieve
freedom. But Germany abandons the attempt and organises
her nation as an army sacrificing all the prerogatives of
freedom, autonomy and justice which are the essence of
Democracy.
The grand question to-day is whether this policy is
going to be Justified by hard and brutal fact. Is democ-
racy a form of Government which will not stand the strain
and which will break down when challenged by the first
formidable opponent that crosses it? I have admitted that
the adoption of the principles of freedom and self
government does involve a loss of efficiency as an
organisation and that they tend to divert the atten-
tion from fundamental things to more internal pro-
blems. That is a disadvantage which is compen-
sated by many greater advantages: but it must be
admitted. In the case of the Empire, with its scattered
constituency, its loose system of association, the difficulties
and dangers are greater. It has to be remembered also
that the principle of safety on which the Empire depends—
the mastery of the seas—tends to give a false sense of secur-
ity. In the first place it is not absolute. The command
of the sea can never be expected, much less guaranteed,
in a world of equal maritime nations. It is only because
for 100 years after Trafalgar no other nation appeared to
be interested in challenging British supremacy that that
supremacy was maintained. Immediately the command
of the sea is challenged by a reasonably strong power the
security it previously afforded disappears until the question
of supremacy is decided. That is a principle which is not
sufficiently appreciated. The contentment of Europe with


English naval supremacy must be regarded as accidental.
Thus when Germany challenged Great Britain by building
a fleet of immense strength the old time confidence of Great
Britain in her supremacy commenced to disappear. Again
the danger of such a principle of safety is that it leads to
false ideas regarding the fundamental problem of national
defence. Naval defence involves a minimum of sacrifice
and effort for the people as a whole. A nation is defended
by armaments which vast numbers never see or hear. This
leads to a slack sense of national duty, an absence of the
spirit of sacrifice and of the realisation of the realities of
social life. The sense of security enjoyed under a perma-
nent navy leads also to false dispositions and defiance of
strategical laws and the formation of policy without
calculation as to its bearing on the problem of defence.
All these disadvantages and difficulties have to be
candidly admitted. As Cavour said, anybody can govern a
city in a state of siege. The organisation of a mighty
nation like Germany into a perfect military machine is an
easier task than the successful conduct of a free and
autonomous democracy through a crisis like the present.
In the one case all human and individual claims and rights
are sacrificed to the one impersonal state. In the other the
nation seeks to defeat its foes without at the same time
sacrificing the freedom or the self governing privileges
of its members. This is how the present war is in truth
the very crisis of liberal and democratic principles. Democ-
racy has to vindicate itself by moral and spiritual
advantages against the materialistic impersonal organisa-
tion of its enemy. The value of a political principle must
in the last resort be tested by its power to enable the
organisation to survive. However logical or humane a
political conception may be, it is of little value if it con-
demns the state that makes use of it to dissolution.
We shall never overcome the subtleties of the problem
before us unless we realise that democracy is not a mere
form of political organisation but a principle of political
life. In an autocracy or militant organisation like Germany
it is the organisation which accomplishes everything. In
a democratic state the responsibility is thrown on the
individual of providing and accomplishing the defence of


himself and his fellows. It is absurd to ask whether a
democracy is a good form of organisation for defence. All
we can say of Democracy is that the responsibility for
defence is thrown on the shoulders of all who should bear
it, and if they are healthy and strong democracy provides
the best conditions in which to discharge that responsi-
bility. When you say that a great crisis like the present is
a test for the democracy you mean that it is a test of the
spiritual and social qualities of the people of that com-
munity. If a people is strong, clean, loyal, intelligent, it
will survive the most dreadful crisis unharmed as the Athe-
nians survived the Persian war. If the people is decadent,
the finest democratic organisation will fail. The supreme
virtue and hope of democracy is that the throwing of this
responsibility on the people will stimulate the sense of duty
and sacrifice and produce results no other system knew. In
an Empire like our own with its far flung battle line these
responsibilities of democracy are simply raised to a higher
power. The condition of a great Empire like ours is an
Imperial people, a people who can comprehend the magnifi-
cent ideals for which the Empire professes to stand and
whose conduct will correspond with whatever effort and
sacrifice is needed to realise those ideals.
And this is the significance of the Empire to-day in this
its hour of crisis. It is a challenge to the imperial
qualities of the race—to qualities of leadership and citizen-
ship commensurate with the magnitude of the task which
the Empire has assumed. Our honor, our integrity, depend
upon a level of conduct which few nations have ever been
called upon to live up to. We are not going to be allowed
to blunder through this time. We cannot wage this war
on the limited liability principle. We are going to be tested
and tried by the most crucial of all the tests that can be
applied to any people. Through careless confidence in free-
dom we have assumed obligations and given recognisances
which cannot be repudiated, but must be upheld, even if we
spend our last man. That to me is the significance of the
Empire to day. It brings us to the point where we must
says to ourselves—Produce these qualities of leadership
and citizenship or we perish. Vindicate our democratic
organisation! Justify the mutual trust and confidence of


our five nations! Show that the Imperial spirit of the race
remains. Prove all these things or the light of our Empire
will go out and it will be numbered among the Great States
that have passed.
Leadership—citizenship—l suppose that every thinking
man or woman in the British Empire is questioning himself
as to whether these qualities are being displayed within the
Empire to-day in such a way as to vindicate the principles
upon which the Empire stands. Ido not intend to criticise
the leadership which the Empire has enjoyed during the
present war. To criticise without full knowledge is danger-
ous. There are one or two principles to which I may use-
fully refer. Most liberal thought is affected by the idea
that authority is incompatible with democracy, that democ-
racy must resist the exercise of authority even if it perish
for want of it. Such an idea is manifestly absurd. Leader-
ship is more important for Democracy with its unco-
ordinated masses than it is for an aristocracy with its
stratified society and the tradition of leadership in one
class, and the tradition of obedience in the others. The
essence of Democracy is the choice of leaders. Democracy
will follow the man who will lead it from the front as the
Australian officers led in the Dardanelles. The failure of
leadership in Democracy is that the leader seeks to supply
merely what he thinks the people want. He is merely an
expert kite flyer. I believe Democracy will always follow
the great leader who speaks with the tone of decision and
tells the people what they must do. We want the man who
can create public opinion, not the man who timidly tests it,
prepares it, and then fearfully introduces what he has ascer-
tained the public wants. To ask Democracy to do without
leadership is to place it in a position for which it is not
competent. Similarly I emphatically deny that compulsion
is undemocratic. Australian democracies have had a very
great experience and they have never found that they could
do without compulsion.
In its equality, its universality—in the facilities it
affords for treating various classes of the community justly,
and the advantages it possesses in the matter of organisa-
tion, it seems to me that compulsion is really democratic.
To place on the isolated individual the responsibility for


deciding whether he shall enlist is to ask him to decide a
question for which he alone does not possess all the
materials. To expect that we shall get through the present
war without the complete organisation of the whole of the
human resources of the Empire is a folly, to which many
lives will be sacrificed. If the people of the Empire are not
brought into this struggle by the most effective organisa-
tion it will be the fault of leadership. lam convinced that
the loyalty, the willingness, the courage, exist universally,
and if authority were exercised in the right way those
qualities would be forthcoming in most abundant quantity.
A little touch of the magnetism of a Chatham would elicit
them in a very short time.
Lastly, the statesmen of the Empire must realise that
the responsibility is on them to see to the articulation of
the whole Imperial fabric. This is a matter of some diffi-
culty when Ministers are responsible to entirely different
constituencies. The responsibilities of the Imperial and
Dominion Governments are mutual. Imperial statesmen
must control the Empire, but this does not absolve the Dom-
inion Ministers for suggesting and pressing what they
think is required. I think it is just here that leadership
can be held definitely to have failed both in England and
the Dominions. Neither before nor after the war was any
scheme of co-operation in wartime adopted, and since the
war the Dominions have been left without communication
and to their own initiative as to what is to be done by them.
Under the circumstances, though the part taken by the
Dominions in the present war is small compared with that
taken by the Mother Country, it is somewhat surprising
that they have seen their way to do as much as they have.
They represent a vast reservoir of human capacity and
enthusiasm which is not drawn on because the right
organisation has not been adopted to make it available, and
the right word has not been spoken either at the centre or
in the outer Empire.
But I do not intend to be betrayed into criticism of
Imperial leadership during the present war, for there is
something of which we here to-night know more of than
leadership—something which concerns us more intimately
than leadership—and that is citizenship. The vice of democ


racy is this carping at leaders. Such carping is really self
condemnation, for the test of a democracy is its ability to
choose good leaders and to follow them when chosen.
Leadership and citizenship are supplementary. Good
citizenship will not avail without good leadership. Good
leadership will not avail without good citizenship. In a
time like the present citizenship is perhaps the more im-
portant because citizenship can frequently raise the quality
of leadership by encouragement, determination and sup-
port. Far more important, then, than to question our
leadership to-day is to question our own citizenship and ask
ourselves whether our conduct as citizens of our great
Empire corresponds to the high ideals for which it stands
and the great dangers which it is facing. Perhaps it is
sufficient to put the question and leave it to your considera-
tion, but I might point to the fact that our sapient
apologists in the press say that we have not yet realised
the importance of this war. Could any one coin a more
damning indictment of an Imperial people than to suggest
that ten months after the greatest human convulsion of the
world’s history came down upon us we are still unable to
realise its meaning—our life goes on the same, our energies
are not stimulated, our sacrifices personal and financial
are trifling, and we try to make the war as small a part of
ourselves as we possibly can. This strange unresponsive-
ness, this mental apathy, with which the British race views
world developments outside its own immediate environment
is not an Imperial virtue. I wish we had heard less of our
calm and our dignity during the last six months. Calm is
not a virtue when women and children are being butchered.
I know that in a community, and especially in a democracy,
feelings and emotions are apt to be dormant or wait the
touch which will give them voice. A democracy is articu-
late only through its leaders. This perhaps is our excuse, but
it cannot be our full justification. We must remember that
the problems we must face in peace are on the whole even
more difficult and subtle than those of war. If the dreadful
stimulus of war cannot spur us into a new adaptiveness of
mind, then we may be sure that the requirements of peace-
ful policy without that stimulus will eventually be found
wanting. If the greatest industrial country in the world


cannot supply the munitions of war necessary for her own
army in war, then in times of peace even her economic
supremacy will be lost. The defeats in peace are even more
final and complete than those in war. Great Britain majt
get through the war unscathed, but with her honor and dig-
nity gone past recall. lam not so much afraid of a defeat
as of a victory obtained merely through our economic
advantage over Germany without the British character
being subjected to a complete discipline.
Many people consider that they have done their duty
when they have demonstrated the superiority of the British
constitution and destroyed the moral reputation of the
Kaiser. The Empire is not a mechanical device for protect-
ing the British race from the competition of its neighbours,
but a political principle which can only survive through a
maximum of effort and sacrifice.
We hear a great deal of internecine feuds at the present
time. They are distressing, but I think too much can be
made of them. Rome achieved her Empire while her
citizens quarrelled. Immediately a State becomes a Democ-
racy and seeks to readjust internal relations, conflicting
interests are sure to lead to deep divisions within the State.
The method of democracy is, as I have pointed out, through
the social conflict. We cannot lay this aside during peace,
and its results are sure to be present during war. What
we must realise, what we too often forget, is that beyond the
differing parties there is a unity to which all are loyal. If
this ceases to be true then the dissolution of the Common-
wealth must come. But it is true, though much of our talk
seems to contradict it. The Liberal and the Labour pro-
grammes are all designed to improve the unity of which all
parties are members. The matters which divide the parties
in Australia to-day are more superficial than we think, and
yet their effects are considerable in promoting dis-
trust and preventing co-operation. There are faults
of heart on one side and of head on the other.
What strikes one about the wealthier classes of
Australia to-day is that if their attitude toward the
less favoured classes were characterised by more of a
spirit of chivalry, the prospect of co-operation in the com-
munity would be increased. Their tolerance of monopoly,


their willingness to use their financial power to throw
economic burdens upon those who with all their efforts and
organisation are still less fortunate than themselves, betray
an unfairness which must destroy the mutual trust upon
which the Commonwealth is based. Noblesse is an
ideal Imperial in quality. It is the foundation of the
Imperial ethic, and if it disappears much of the Imperial
inspiration will perish with it. And I think I ought to say
this as well: the natural effect of economic laws—supply
and demand of labour and commodities—if allowed to come
into unrestricted operation during or after the war, will
place most of the economic penalties of this war upon the
poorer sections of the community. I think there should be
some guarantee and security offered by the privileged
classes that this should not be the case. ,
On the other hand, the attitude of many of the workers
towards the present war betrays a mental ineptitude which
is extraordinary. The common remarks that “this is a
capitalists’ war and the worker is not interested in it”—
“the worker has nothing to fight for,” “there is an irrecon-
cilable division between capital and labour which can never
be bridged,” or “it is quite indifferent to the worker
which capitalist he serves,” are examples of what I mean.
Before the invasion of Belgium there were some who said
that they would just as soon be governed by a German as
by an Englishman. I need not waste your time by dwelling
upon the obvious foolishness which is involved in these
ideas—foolishness so gross that it is difficult to acquit the
users of.it from cant. I will only just say this, that the idea
that your state is not worth fighting for, cuts the ground
from all political justification at all for our Common-
wealth. A State whose citizens will not defend it with their
lives is only a sham. It is also a reflexion on our own
social progress which has been for the last ten years chiefly
determined by the workers. Why does the French worker
cheerfully lay down his life for the State and the British
worker talk such nonsense (though he lays down his life
nevertheless). If he means what he says either the French
Commonwealth is a finer place for the worker or else the
French man is a better citizen.
The statement that the worker has nothing to lose also is


a direct negative of the whole economics of the labour school.
Its teaching, so far as I understand it, is that the power
given by wealth enables the wealthy to shift their burdens
upon the classes of the community whose economic position
is weaker. This is demonstrably true in many cases. The
economic penalties of a British defeat would not be borne
by the capitalist but by the worker. Capital is an inter-
national currency, but work depends on conditions and
circumstances. The capitalist would adjust himself, but
the worker would be defenceless. I admit that there is no
stronger condemnation of the present system than this. It
is a consequence that should lay upon every generous man
the responsibility for assisting to change it. But this
penalty is only one of the handicaps suffered by the weaker
side in the struggle, and it will be increased rather than
alleviated with the victory of Germany. It is Labour, the
claims of Labour, and the methods by which they are to be
realised, that would find Germanism entirely hostile.
Besides, does any one believe that, if all parties in the
Empire, Conservative, Liberal, Labour, Socialist could
unite upon this one great purpose upon which the hopes of
all rest, the more advanced parties would not have
everything to gain and nothing to lose? It is a strange lack
of faith in democracy which prompts suspicion in a case
like this. Is not the common burden, the common service,
the reduction of all to their primitive relations, the very
attitude of democracy? I believe that the conclusion of this
war will mark a great advance of democratic ideals. The
war marks the breakdown of democratic statesmanship, the
burdens of the war are being borne by the people. It will
be strange if they do not reap the advantage, if they play
their part well and bravely. Any selfish hesitation to throw
their lot in with common humanity will do infinite harm
to the Labour of any country and postpone the realisation
of their ideals for generations. Thus I hold that the signifi-
cance of this Imperial democracy is that it is a challenge
to its people still to exhibit those qualities of courage, earn-
estness, enterprise, and sacrifice which were the factors
through which it was built up. The test is so severe that
only a full measure of these qualities will prevent the
Empire from going to the ground. If we fail to take up


this challenge or if we take it up in anything less than the
highest and noblest way, what we retain of our Empire will
be of little satisfaction to us. The history of the fighting
has shown that we do not suffer by comparison with the
best periods of our history in personal courage, devotion
and forgetfulness of self. Indeed at no time in the island
story has there been such an outpouring of service.
But the problems of to-day are more difficult and subtle
than those of the past. We find ourselves in a situation for
which we have not been prepared. Problems of organisa-
tion and social duty confront us such as we have never
faced before. They demand, besides courage, adaptive-
ness, patience, intelligence, mutual trust and sacrifice. We
must demand a leadership, and exhibit a citizenship, great
enough for these dangerous passages. The responsibility
is on every man, and it is a responsibility to which no limits
can be set, but which can only be discharged in loyal associa-
tion with all loyal men.
Mr. Bernard O’Dowd has in his last great poem, in these
noble lines addressed to Australia, expressed more pro-
foundly and magnificently than any other writer the
spiritual basis upon which our common life depends and the
ideals for which our democracy stands. I think they might
be applied with equal force to the Empire to-day
She is the scroll on which we are to write
Mythologies our own and epics new:
She is the port of our propitious flight
From Ur idolatrous and Pharaoh's crew.
She is our own,, unstained, if worthy we,
By dream, or god, or star we would not see:
Her crystal beams all but the eagle dazzle.
Her wind-wide ways none but the strong - winged sail:
She is Eutopia, she is Hy-Brasil,
The watchers on the tower of morning hail!


Yet she shall be as we, the Potter, mould:
Altar or tomb, as we aspire, despair:
What wine we bring shall she, the chalice, hold:
What word we write shall she, the script, declare:
Bandage our eyes, she shall be Memphis, Spain:
Barter our souls, she shall be Tyre again:
And if we pour on her the red oblation
All o’er the world shall Asshur’s buzzards throng:
Love-lit, her Chaos shall become Creation:
And dewed with dream, her silence flower in song.




AUSTRALIA AND THE WAR.
Lecture delivered in the Masonic Hall , Melbourne,
on June 2th, by
ARCHIBALD` T.TRONG, M.A.
t T is probable that, during the few weeks that have
I elapsed since the great landing, when every morning
brings us fresh news of our soldiers’ heroism, we have
naturally tended in some sense to lose the problems of the
past and the perils of the future in the grief and glory of the
present. That glory and that grief are no new things in
our history. Three times already, in Egypt, in China, and
in Africa, our soldiers have fought beside the British for the
common cause, in cases where our own national safety was
in no direct sense imperilled. To-day the case is different:
had it been necessary, as the above cases show, we would
have sprung to the help of Britain, were she or the remotest
part of her Empire in difficulty or danger. To-day also it
is true that sentiment, common ideals, and our desire to help
her who helps humanity, play a leading part in our quarrel:
what makes the fundamental difference is that to-day, for
the first time in our history, we are fighting, not for our
ideals alone, but for our very life.
This fact is, or should be, obvious at the present moment
to every Australian man and woman: yet this need not pre-
vent us from considering in what sense it is true, and what
other considerations of interest and honour constitute the
issue between ourselves and Germany. As far as the moral
issue goes, we are at once faced with the argument, so
constantly put forward by Gerpian apologists, that as
we are part of the British Empire, we are consequently
part of a tremendous conspiracy to keep Germany from her


dues, and that our very presence in the land we hold to-day
is a direct challenge and check to her ambition for colonial
expansion. Literally and metaphorically, it is suggested,
we deprive her of her coveted “place in the sun.” We are
part of an Empire seized and developed in Germany’s
despite and to her detriment. We are holding a huge terri-
tory with a wholly inadequate population, while she, for
lack of a flourishing colony, has to lose tens of thousands of
her subjects every year to other countries. Consequently,
as we have all heard from German writers or talkers, Ger-
many claims some considerable portion of British territory,
and sooner or later means to have it.
Now this claim could only become valid if it could be
shown that in the past Germany had steadily pursued a
scheme of legitimate colonial expansion, and that we had
steadily and actively thwarted it. The reverse is the case,
and if Germany is not a great colonial power to-day she
has no one but herself to thank. Bismarck, to the end of
his career, steadily refused on her behalf to develop colonies,
and endeavoured to involve France in schemes of colonial
expansion which, so it was hoped, would get her into diffi-
culties outside Europe, and prevent her brooding on past
wrongs. This plot did not succeed; Bemhardi remarks
in words which epitomise the whole spirit of modem Ger-
many; “It must be admitted mortification
that the nation vanquished in 1870, whose vital powers
seemed exhausted, which possessed no qualification for
colonisation for want of men to colonise, has yet created
the second largest colonial empire and prides herself on
being a World Power.” So tardily did Germany awaken
to what she had missed, that it was only at the beginning
of the twentieth century that she instituted an independent
Colonial Office, while her first Colonial Secretary, Dr. Dern-
berg, was appointed only seven years ago!
In passing, it may be worth while to glance at the words
uttered in London in June, 1914, a month before the war,
by the gentleman just named, who for the last ten months
has been industriously blackening our name in America.
They show how much Germany owes to Britain in the
matter of colonial expansion; and considering the help we
Australians have given in this respect to our German


consuls and to visiting German professors, they have special
application to ourselves —
“When Germany had become strong enough to acquire
over-sea possessions of its own, it was again the English
who, by their example, statesmanship, and experience, gave
Germany the best help. Whenever I was in difficulty as to
how a certain colonial problem ought to be handled, I have
found a solution in the study of British methods, and I am
pleased to record here my most sincere thanks for the kind-
ness and friendly interest I have received in these matters
both from the central authorities in London and from the
statesmen in the British possessions in Africa and else-
where.”
If Germany lacks colonies to-day, or the power to develop
them, the hands and conscience of Britain and Australia
are clean. It is not we who have kept her from her “place
in the sun”: it is herself. But if she refused colonies a
generation ago, she covets them to-day, and cares not by
what means she may get them: and it is precisely here that
lies the certainty of Australia’s doom should Britain
lose this war, or allow it to be drawn on such terms that
Germany could control the Channel. The warning for us
was sounded long ago by Treitschke, who wrote: “We must
not lapse into that state of stagnation which comes of a
purely continental policy, and one of the issues of our next
successful war must be the acquisition of a colony.” The
cry is taken up by his pupil Bernhardi: “What we wish to
attain must be fought for, and won, against a superior force
of hostile interests and powers.” The relevance of this to
ourselves is evident from his remark in the same chapter
that “it is very questionable whether Canada, Australia,
and South Africa will permanently retain any trace of the
English spirit.” How short a shrift would be given us
were Britain disabled in this or any subsequent war may
be gathered from Bernhardi’s naive remarks regarding
Portugal: “A financial or political crash in Portugal might
give us an opportunity to take possesion of a portion of the
Portuguese colonies.”
So much for Germany’s ambitions. Their probable
result, in the event of a peace adverse to Britain, has been
forcibly stated by H. E. Egerton, Beit Professor of Colonial
49
AUSTRALIA AND THE WAR.


History at Oxford: “And in this state of things, what would
be the position of the British Dominions? It is improbable
that Germany would desire at once to annex them as por-
tions of her Empire. She would probably, at first, be con-
tent to put pressure to bear so that they should sever their
connexion with Great Britain, and then would attempt to
obtain the monopoly of their trade by enforcing preferential
treatment. Were emigration from Germany again to
become necessary or expedient, the emigrants would be
encouraged to go to Canada or Australasia, by which means
the German element in these communities would be
strengthened. Meanwhile, in various directions the
emissaries of German ‘culture’ would be spreading their
nets.”
After this, one imagines, the end would come swiftly.
It may seem unnecessary to some and impious to others
to contemplate the fate in store for Australia, could she
conceivably become a German colony; yet we, whose aim
it is to fathom the innermost meaning of this war, have
no right to shirk even this issue: and the clearest illustra-
tion of what we stand to lose or gain may be gathered from
a comparison of our present conditions with those pre-
valent in Germany and in territory which Germany has sub-
jugated. There are two principles which, as I believe,
distinguish more than others the self-governing portions of
the British Empire. The first is the right possessed by
e&ch of these component parts of working out its own
political, economic, and spiritual salvation after the law of
its own being. The individualism distinctive of the
British, considered personally, is here applied imperially
in such a way that each part of the whole is encouraged
to realise separately its own ideal of clean and decent life.
This first principle, the principle of individualism, affects
the Dominions in their relation to each other. The second
principle works internally, and affects each one of them
separately, in relation to the men and women who compose
it. It may be called the democratic principle, that which
allows, or tends to allow, to each individual a say in the
governance of the whole, and awards to each minority the
right to convert itself into a majority, if it can do so by the
force of reason. Both of these principles find their ex


pression in Australia, as perhaps nowhere else in the world
to-day. Considered externally, and in relation to the
Empire at large, she is strongly individualistic in that her
highway of political life is of her own making. Considered
internally, by comparison, of her political and economic con-
ditions with those prevailing elsewhere, she is equally
strongly democratic, and, so far as her present tendency
goes, even socialistic. Both these characteristics, on which
our whole national life depends, are equally abhorrent to the
German spirit of autocracy, which dislikes expressions of
individual freedom equally with those of socialistic com-
bination. If Germany were to win this war, the whole
fabric of our life would be shattered at a blow.
Those who wish an object lesson regarding the degrees
of political freedom respectively prevalent in Australia
and in Germany would dlo well first to look around them
here, and then to glance at the remarks made by Germany’s
late Chancellor, Prinz von Billow, regarding the German
Social Democratic Party. Under the significant heading,
“No Conciliation Possible,” Blilow writes as follows:
“If the Government renounced the fight against the
Social Democrats, Prussia would take it to mean that they
had yielded to the forces of revolution. And they would
be right if, after half a century of fighting, the Govern-
ment could find no other solution than a shameful peace
with the enemy. The results of a weak attitute towards
the Social Democrats to-day would be more fatal to Prussia
than weakness towards the March Revolution was.”
Elsewhere he says:
“Forcible proceedings against the Social Democrats
would immediately come into question if they were pro-
voked by any violent outburst of the Social Democratic
movement. That, however, is hardly to be expected, and
is improbable, if the Government attacks the problem of
dealing with the Social Democrats skilfully and performs
its task energetically. There are politicians who think it
would be no misfortune if a violent outburst took place,
because then there would be a possibility of cutting the
Gordian knot of the Socialist question with the sword, and
thus attaining a final solution.”


The attitude of official Germany, or, at least, of official
Prussia, toward labour is fairly accurately summed up in
the answer recently made by a Prussian Minister of Com-
merce to a demand that the standard of wages should be
raised in some of the undertakings under his control.
“The State,” replied the Minister, “should not be in advance
of private employers.” The attitude of the private employer
may be gathered from the significant remarks made a few
years ago by Herr Kirdorf, a Westphalian coal and steel
magnate, apropos of labour organisation;—
“It is regrettable that our work-people are able to
change their positions at any time. An undertaking can
only prosper if it has a stationary band of workers. Ido
not ask that legislation should come to our help, but we
must reserve to ourselves the right to take measures to
check this frequent change of employment. The proposal
has been made that all work-people should be compelled
to join organisations, and that employers should be required
to negotiate with these organisations. For myself, I would
remark that I refuse to negotiate with any organisation
whatever.”
The following figures kindly supplied to me by the
Federal Statist, Mr. G. H. Knibbs, will show the Australian
worker the exact degree of .material prosperity he enjoys
to-day through his participation in the British Empire,
and the protection afforded him by British sea power.
They also demonstrate exactly how much he would stand
to lose in case of German victory and the substitution of
Prussian standards for British. They comprise the rates
of wages paid, and the number of hours worked, in eighteen
different trades in Australia, Britain, and Germany. The
number of hours per week for all Australian trades is
48; in Germany it averages 54. As for wages, there are
only two of the eighteen trades in which the Australian
rate is not more than twice that of the German, while in
one or two it is three times as great. In the furniture
industry, for instance, the Australian rate is 585., against
the German 275. For sawmilling, it is 60s. 3d. to 21s. 7d.;
for electric working, 61s. 9d. to 295. lid.; for machinery,
625. 7d. to 235. 5d.; and for hosiery, 61s. Bd. to 21s. 3d.
These figures speak for themselves; and I may point out


that their significance is enhanced, and not diminished, by
a consideration of the cost of living and the consequent
purchasing power of wages in both countries. Mr.
Knibbs’s figures show that if the Australian workman had
to live in Germany at the standard he enjoys to-day, it
would cost him, apart from house rent, 16 per cent, more
than it actually does: that is to say, a shilling goes nearly a
fifth further in Australia than it does in Germany. The
contrast is not complete without one most significant fact.
Mr. Knibbs’s figures show that owing to the immeasurably
higher standard of wages he enjoys, the Australian work-
ing man, as a comparison of family budgets shows, is
enabled to spend, and does spend, 56 per cent, more on the
material goods of life than does his German counterpart.
Such are the economic standards prevailing in Australia
and Germany to-day, and the comparison shows how
negligible are the encouragement and help which the latter
country extends to the world’s workers. The Australian
worker, on the other hand, is enjoying a standard of life
which, whether we consider its social, political, or economic
bearing, can only be described as a fancy one. The ques-
tion whether it is good or bad, wise or foolish, maintain-
able or the reverse, is not here in issue. The point for
us is that it is the product of external protection, that it
is highly artificial, and that it has no parallel in the world
to-day. Did we stand by ourselves, outside the pale of the
British Empire, we could not maintain it for six months.
We should either have to reduce it of our own act to the
low level of the standards prevailing elsewhere, or to come
beneath the heel of some foreign power which would lower
it for us, sharply and scornfully. The unique benefits
possessed by the Australian worker to-day he owes to one
thing alone—the thing which Germany is now striving
with all her might to destroy—the supremacy of Britain’s
power by sea. The moral for Australia is obvious. We
have taken these benefits at the hand of Britain during
all the long years of peace. Were we not prepared to fight
for her in war time literally “to the last man and the last
shilling,” we should be guiltjr not merely of selfishness
and cowardice, but of the meanest and most revolting
ingratitude.


Nor need we think that, should we once come beneath
German sway, we should be allowed to fare even as the
German worker fares. Germany has extended to the
British Empire the benefit of her “best hated nation 1 *
clause, and the treatment she has meted out to the inno-
cents of Belgium, treatment to make a strong man
physically sick, would be as nothing to that which she would
have in store for Britain or any one of her Dominions.
For details I recommend you to the French, Belgian,
Russian, and British official accounts of her atrocities.
Apart from these, a glance at Prussian Poland, or North
Schleswig, or Alsace-Lorraine will illustrate better than
reams of rhetoric the fate which menaces us should Ger-
many win this war, or even make so good a draw of it that
she can start this work of hell again within a generation
or so. Were she to do so, as her leading journalist,
Maximilian Harden, has told us, Britain would be her first
goal, and with Britain, ourselves.
We must look at the possible results without flinching.
There may still be some Australians who are not striving
to their utmost capacity, according to the opportunities in
their power, for the victory of the Allies. If there are, let
them ask themselves these questions: do we wish our
country to come beneath the Prussian heel, so that our
children may be driven crazy with hatred and despair, as
occurred in several instances in Prussian Poland, where
in the year 1906 a hundred thousand school children went
on strike rather than endure any longer the hideous cruelty
of “Kultur”? Do our farmers wish to be compulsorily
expropriated from the land they have tamed and made
fruitful, as the Polish peasant proprietors were ex-
propriated for the sake of the Prussian capitalist by the
Prussian Expropriation Acts of 1886 and 1908, and as the
native Schleswig proprietors were expropriated in 1912?
Do we wish the use of English to be abolished throughout
our schools, as the use of Danish was abolished throughout
Danish Schleswig in 1886 ? Do our parents wish. to be
deprived of the very control of their children, as in 1889
those parents were who sent their children from Schleswig
to school in Denmark? Do we wish to be contemptuously
gulled by the Prussian conqueror with a Gilbert-and-


Sullivan constitution, as Alsace-Lorraine was gulled in
1911, or to see the sentence applied in 1890 by Caprivi to
the conquered provinces altered so as to run, “The experi-
ment of Germanising the people having failed, there is
only left the resource of deepening the ditch that divides
Australia from Britain.” Do we wish to undergo the fate
indicated by K. F. Wolff in “All-German Leaves” for those
whom Germany conquers: “The inferior race will not be
educated in the schools of the master race, nor will any
school be established for it, nor will its language be em-
ployed in public.” Finally, do we wish to see applied to
ourselves the impious blood-tax of Lorraine, or to submit
to the official murders and insults meted out to Alsace by
the most brutal soldiery in the world during the notorious
Zabem incident? And in the case of unsuccessful resist-
ance, do we wish to experience the “Wolfish mercies” thus
threatened us by the writer just named:— “lt is necessary
to use the most violent means to suppress such insurrection,
and not to encumber the prisons afterwards” ?
The above picture may seem a lurid one, but there is
not a single incident in it which is not strict matter of his-
tory. And it represents a certain result for ourselves of
German victory. The mere fact that we consider such
victory unlikely does not for a moment excuse us from
considering its consequences. The present is a time for
fearless thinking and plain speaking. This war should be
of instant and paramount importance to every man and
woman in Australia, and the very name of politics should
be dead throughout our shores. It is the workers of Aus-
tralia who have made her what she is to-day, and it is on
them that her present safety and her future welfare de-
pend: it must be for them to say whether they will allow
their country to be plunged into a vast internal struggle
while her very life is being threatened from without. May
I remind them of one consideration which I have been
striving to hammer home ewer since the beginning of
hostilities, that in this war Australia has even more at
stake than has Britain. It is Inconceivable that the Mother
Country, with her population of over 45,000,000, should
ever become a German province; but should Germany con-
ceivably win, it is all but certain that sooner or later we


should undergo this intolerable fate. That we should
resist heroically and to the death is nothing to the point:
Schleswig did these things, and so did Belgium. Nor, in
my opinion, can we afford to leave this war drawn without
the gravest apprehension for the future. The convenient
Bemhardi himself has told us this, and has given the
reason:—“lf the victory is only half won (by our
enemies),” he says, “they would have to expect continuous
renewals of the contest.” A peace which would give Ger-
many a hold upon the Channel, or would in any other way
neutralise our supremacy by sea, might quite conceivably
be the death warrant of Australia. For the sake of our
very life and the ideals which make it holy, this war must
be carried through to a clean finish. It is in this faith that
our heroes have died on Gallipoli. It is in this faith, too.
that Australia must be prepared to make even greater
sacrifices than the glorious ones of the last two months.


A GREAT WAR BOOK.
The Track of the War
BIT
R. SCOTLAND LIDDELL.
With Special Notes by
CAPTAIN ALBERT DE KEERSMAECKER OF BELGIUM,
At tlie very commencement of the war, Mr, de Keersmaecker
offered himself and his car to the Croix Rouge. About two weeks
later, Mr. Liddell joined him and both were in Belgium with the
Belgian Army for three months.
Mr. de Keersmaecker was a particularly daring driver. He took
his car into places where not even the Belgian soldiers could go.
Acting as a “free lance ’ ’ Red Cross man, he went on many occasions
right into the firing line in order to fetch off wounded officers and men.
During the first bombardment of Malines, Mr. de Keersmaecker
set off one night to the town and managed to get into the Cathedral,
from which he took the famous Rubens and Van Dyck pictures and
transported them in several trips to a place of safety in Antwerp.
These pictures are priceless, and at the time of Mr. de Keersmaecker ’s
visit, German shells were actually falling on the town and the
Cathedral itself.
When the Germans were driven out of Termonde, Mr. de
Keersmaecker backed his car into the town at the same time that the
enemy was leaving at the other end. And amongst other towns in
which Mr. de Keersmaecker and Mr. Liddell have been are Louvain,
Aerschot, Hofstade, Tirlemonte, Alost, Antwerp, Ostend, Dixmude,
Nieuport, Fumes, etc.
Many of the lighter sides of war are included in the book. Many
amusing experiences, even in the midst of tragedy, are narrated. And
many charming incidents of bravery and hospitality in the midst of
want, etc., are told.
Both Mr. de Keersmaecker and Mr. Liddell have received great
praise for their work from Belgian Ministers, and it may be added
that Mr. Liddell has been snmmomed by the Home Office to give
evidence of German Atrocities before? the commission which the British
Government has appointed.
Special chapters deal, by the way, with the King’s presence on
the battlefield; his bravery and Ihis encouraging example to his
troops.
VERY FULLY ILLUSTRATED.
WITH STRIKING WRAPPER IN COLOURS.
Cloth, 6/- AT ALL BOOKSELLERS.


SPECIAL EDITION
PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA.
OF
THE GREAT WAR NOVEL.
Author of “Oyer the Pass,” “ The Vagabond,’* Etc,
‘ 1 War as he knows it is what the author seeks to paint; war as
it is, not as it was or ought to be . . . . . The portions in which he
tells of the fighting between the two armies are read with realism.
Mr. Palmer’s theme is a big one, and his descriptions of modem
warfare in its various phases are vivid.” —New York Times*
“ A picture of war as it is fought to-day in the nth degree of its
modern organisation and methods. ...... It is not necessary to
recommend this book'; it is sure to be read widely, and more widely
as discussion of it spreads. ’ ’ —New York Tribune,
A Graphic Answer lo the ■ Question—
What would happen
if two great nations
should go to war ?
By FREDERICK PALMER,
War Correspondent.
Cloth, 3s. 6d.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO. Propy. Ltd.
AND ATE BOOKSEEEERS.
B. R. Gowan & Co./Printers, 492 Collins Street, Melbourne.
