

/V, T/,/tCAfHI/T&-CC£CONC
■ — rf ■ '/7/iv/if n , <- / rrr . LJi~Ci.C/fV
JW£lßO(y/?//£> M.LMvTCHmo* 30SIZ07 L/ttleColi//vS <Sr


HAS REMOVED FROM 228 TO
254 COLLINS STREET,
Four Doors from Mullen’s, opposite Bank of Victoria,
MELBOURNE.
10 A.M.
Hours \ to
5 p.m.
COBB & CO.’S
Lioerij and Letting Stables,
SOUTHERN
WATERING
PLACES
FIRST-CLASS
GEELONG.
Special Facilities
for Excursionists.
HORSES.
BARWON HEADS.
DRYSDALE.
CAREFUL
DRIVERS.
DRAGS,
OCEAN GROVE,
PORTARLINGTON.
Moderate
PICNIC COACHES,
CHARGES*
Waggonettes.
DAILY
COACHES
fflOM GEELONG. (&"
gime gable)
Private Conveyances for Families meet Trains & Steamers.
WESTERN STAGE CO.,
MiLOP STREET EAST, GEELONG,


ADVERTISEMENT.
Encourage ||eelong |nduatried.
Bf}lGflT & HITCHCOCKS
(GEELONG)
fpnnfariuring grprtitumb:
(Carried on in spacious workrooms on the premises,
over 100 hands employed.)
Gentlemen’s Tailoring,
Boys’ and Youths’ Clothing,
Uniforms and Liveries,
Ladies’ Biding Habits,
Ladies’ Dressmaking,
Tea Gowns and Wrappers,
Children’s Costumes,
Millinery,
Mantles and Jackets,
Ladies’ Underclothing,
Infants’ and Children’s Garments,
Upholstery and Fancy Work.
Large or small buyers secure special advantages both in
price and in great variety to choose from.
BRIGHT & HITCHCOCKS,
IMPORTERS & FAMILY DRAPERS,
GEELONG AND LONDON.
li t* fyssfs/r ) ; 'f-? i.


BAY VIEW TEMPERANCE HOTEL.
THIS Hotel, which indeed partakes rather of the nature of a
Superior Private Boarding Establishment, instead of the
attributes of the commonly met with so-called “Temperance
Hotels,” is situated on one of the most salubrious and sight-
pleasing positions in the Town of Geelong, being on the rise of the
hill ascending from the Bay, and standing at the corner of
Bellerine and Corio streets. From this position, a splendid view
is obtained of the water of Corio Bay ; arrival and departure of the
various Intercolonial Steamers, and large Homeward-bound Vessels;
as well as of the many smaller pleasure boats and fishing craft.
The well-known picturesque beauty of the surrounding scenery
of the Bay can also be contemplated and enjoyed from the
northern side of the establishment. Other advantages of this
excellently situated abode are its close proximity to the far-famed
hot and cold salt-water baths, owned by the Geelong Sea Bathing
Company; Ormond Park, situated on the slope of the Eastern
Beach ; and the Botanical Gardens, in which are to be found one
of the finest ferneries in Australia, whilst the steamers wharf
and the railway station are both easy of access.
The building is a two-storied one, having a north and east
frontage. There are large and well ventilated dining, general and
private sitting rooms, and smoking room, with several bedrooms,
suitable for married couples, families, or single boarders.
The Establishment has lately changed hands, and is managed
now by Miss E. De Lahunty.
With the advent of the present proprietress, the house has been
thoroughly renovated ; and the whole of the furniture was also
renewed at considerable expense, combined with taste and a view
to comfort. The cuisine is by no means one of the least praise-
worthy points in the general conduct of the Hotel ; the table
always bearing ample testimony to this fact. All visiting this
Hotel during the holiday season, or, indeed, at any portion of the
year, may be sure of receiving every attention and all the comforts
of a refined home.
ONLY MODERATE TERMS, in accordance with the
Accommodation required, ARE CHARGED.
LETTERS AND TELEGRAMS WILL ALWAYS RECEIVE
PROMPT ATTENTION.
Further Particulars on Application to—
Miss E. DE LAHUNTY,
BAY : VIEW : TEMPERANCE : HOTEL, : SEELOf/O


GEEIiORG PRIVATE ENQUIRY OFFICE,
67 LITTLE MALOP STREET,
GEELONG.
G. W. BYLEVELD, Vtlrnmn
Enquiries Of all sorts Instituted.
ADDRESSES FOUND.
DEBTS COLLECTED.
MONEY ADVANCED ON BOOK DEBTS AND OTHER
SECURITIES.
OFFICE HOURS to §‘ , , . ± Tn . ...
j Saturdays, from g to i, and 7 to 10 p.m.
MISS A. MOORE,
I j COSTUMIERE,
Geelong Dress anfl mantle EstaDllsliment,
CORNER OF
YARRA & MALOP STS., GEELONG.
The LATEST NOVELTIES in DRESS MATERIALS,
TRIMMINGS, Ac., always in Stock.
Mourning Orders
RECEIVE PROMPT ATTENTION.
FIT AMD STYLE GUARANTEED,
TERMS CASH.
CHARGES MODERATE.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
PARKVILLE BAKERY
FANCY BREAD & BISCUIT BAKER,
MOORABOOL STREET,
SOUTH GEELONG.
BREW) SENT BY COACH DAILY TO BARWON
HEADS.
A TRIAL SOLICITED.
~~
FARRIER,
GREAT RYRIE STREET,
C3-RORILOI<rC3-.
K.B— All Workmanship and Materials of
the best style and quality.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
0 BULL & OWEN,
ElUjolmk Druggists,
Dispensing and Operative Chemists,
IMPORTERS OF
CHEMICAL, SURGICAL, PHILOSOPHIC AND
PHOTOGRAPHIC APPLIANCES.
it—
QUININE & COCA TONIC
Can be specially recommended for want of Tone , Languor, and
Debility.
STOREKEEPERS AND THE TRADE SUPPLIED.
COUNTRY ORDERS PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO.
MRLOP ST.. GEELONG.
Ths GREAT WESTERN
WOOD, COAL $ CORE
DEPOT.
Firewood supplied from Is. worth to 100 Tons .
A LIBERAL DISCOUNT FOR CASH.
COAL & COKE ALWAYS ON HAND.
Rubbish Removed Weekly or by the Load.
ARCHD, S. SILK, Proprietor.
NOTE THE ADDRESS-
LATROBB TERRACE,
(NEARLY OPPOSITE SUB-WAY,)
WEST GEELONG,


ADVERTISEMENT.
®allhmton * liotcl,
and
-»- HEGREfITIOH • GROUNDS.
Extei)3iue pia^tatiOQ.
FRUIT 6L FLOWERS IN SEASON.
CThIS POPULAR HOSTELRY is HALF-WAY between
* GEELONG and QUEENSCLIFF, and within EASY
DRIVING DISTANCE of DRYSDALE, OCEAN GROVE,
and PORTARLINGTON.
Adjoining the HOTEL is an ATTRACTIVE PARK and
TEA GARDEN, with ROTUNDA, PAVILION, and EVERY
CONVENIENCE for PLEASURE PARTIES.
Marquees for Afternoon and Evening Parties.
QUOIT GROUNDS AND SKITTLE ALLEY.
WINES AND SPIRITS, ALES AND CORDIALS
OE BEST BRANDS.
w
LARGE WEIGHBRIDGE
For the convenience of Farmers and others
POST-OFFICE . AND • GENERAL * STORE
GOOD STABLING & ATTENDANCE FOR HORSES.
INEXHAUSTIBLE SUPPLY OF WATER.
AST. KEY, Proprietor.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
0 T. FENDER, 0
Contract •‘SguiYeijcr,
ALSO,
LICENSED SURVEYOR
UNDER THE “TRANSFER OF LAND STATUTE.”
OFFICE:
YARRA STREET > OPPOSITE
GEELONG. U nion Bank.
— r
A. 6ROTE & CO.,
COACH BUILDERS,
Gheringhap Street , GEELONG,
A. G. <&. CO. have a Large Stock of VEHICLES of
every Style and description , and are also prepared to build to
order any kind of Vehicle at
LGWeST PRICES.
Material and Workmanship Guaranteed.
Nothing but well-seasoned American Timber used in Construction.
REPAIRS OF EVERY DESCRIPTION EXECUTED IN BEST STYLE
AT MODERATE RATES.
N.R.—OLD BUGGIES, &c., TAKEN IN EXCHANGE.


ADVERTISEMENT.
M. L. HUTCHINSON,
WKolßsalß s Retail Bookseller and Stationer,
305 i 307 LITTLE COLLINS ST. EAST (NEAR ELIZABETH ST),
Supplies Cheaper than any House in Melbourne
STANDARD LITERATURE for the Family Library,
FROM ALL THE LEADING PUBLISHERS.
331700! • Booths • ai?d • F^quisites
OF EVERY DESCRIPTION
Children's Illustrated Books at English Prices.
WRITING DESKS, INKSTANDS, WORKBOXES.
Photographic Albums, Scrap Books, and Scraps.
Sunday School Hymn Books, Reward Cards, and Texts.
PSALM AND HYMN BOOKS FOR THE CHURCHES.
tie f
IN SUPERIOR BINDINGS
VICTORIAN AGENT FOR THE
NATIONAL BIBLE SOCIETY OF SCOTLAND,
Drummond’s Sterling Publications
THACKER & CO.’S
“INK OF INKS” & “PEN OF PENS.”
Marking Ink and Everlasting Dyes.
Weehes Co.'s Services of Song; a great variety always in stock.
AND SOLE CONSIGNEE FOR
F. COUTTS AND SONS’ GUARANTEED ACETIC ACID.
SPONGES, pLESH BRUSHES AND SPIfAYS
305 & 307 LITTLE COLLINS STREET EAST
(NEAR ELIZABETH STREET),
+ r MSLBOURN6, •••


s '\m°
,_i.X
(
**
/k C / n
/?■ x rx S j
_/o_ _ _/ 1 P t Abbeuma, W
X / I
/ 1
- / 1 1
1 / 1;
) S'
/ f/
,o V -a
\
(SP*
- — — . , . jP /
si
..0Ht - " .-fP'
1 /
p / \ > 5 t / PTWnso* M£ieo j u JH‘'
y- i j \JLk' ,7mS
■>nfi*°
/ /£ i
A r ’ c AAa — J
i
§
X ?
( s fO*°
J '
rX
< j
PT Lilias «(?y' -- X PORTA
ILlNGlBf
x
X
oX
<?\
.oXrX 6 -'"
i \
/ -
Point Gdo/tge X
I 1$
j
"S) „ pH
y huobh-'
II ■
1
£
X \ // BeXlarine
E . e
\ C x ==== __
HOTEL I] /
c L s
Y/ /
S 7i
J /noenteo Heao
■ !
i
4 5
\ 1
<N
\ Vl \ -
X ° X Cei
\V3 . CP A /
j7 tit*
iWfll / N r
x v " /
/
PT Hb.m*y £ /
A s ? /
7/
/
X X
X o
\
=====^^ X
oX
J) Xx
se n
m ■ i /
/
/
, /
/
k /■■.<!
j^-
\
\ \ t'll
\ K
yj
X;
r V ‘-
/X
/
7
v/
K
X *
~x
*,$> /i
Xf X *
/ j
f X 1
1 ST
tl^HE
1
I
1
fteo Binea
f
1
1
I
1
t
!
Lp£
/
1 '
\
Jp^r
LONG
X
-v.
f
HARD
Bay
South
Ql/fTBft
/5=\ Pa ** //
v w \
fl*
AA
j VGee
""sTrf
j IAvaas,
V«
J ORy$oALE& PonrArlington <P Hoad
uRYSDMt
>*.
\ Cj
*lf
m 7 *—1
Geelo m-g 1
x v°
• 0
/ /v4
fe(7£
COBBS
, x /
v \ / a
\ /
j
J A
IV \ / !
.
ICM70*
£
-2,
X
/■ / 1
J v /
CJfiuc* /?
/
/
/V
/ > J-X /
v 3
% / P A Y W I
5 /
i. /
T /
v ]
Jf \
V
ff
/ COHN.
X
B
IVJ U U U
L
c
V^ S * aaB =®*s- T-
>4
X
nary*/
WAS? Hi
V N
1
Mi'll Tlfi PeS£AV£. : :
' Frrcnr Lak£ ;
<X -
»/ OcFAH C/tO VE
/ *
* x r
« _ Jy\
/ / few \ — 'x
Y^y
c2|*^
JPAiA'
x
«*
%
nS. w
I i
& Coot TsC
\p
’<£
X
Lake “
/ ff
S Co
si . tl - p, X
(
Anewftpre \
\
U)
>■
o
Qr
r=jl
j
\ >7 > /txx r
\X r j /
xx. ( Xj/ /
/>> Rabbit Hjj
V x/ \x\i\ ri f s'
i.X X. -=X k'
1 X f
V ex; X_X^
Lticroon s
7 \°X x
JCpHh ( \) Mv'\ X>' ( 'r
o Q { i**PtrT*VEJ- /?•“,
£ B u:
ft A
3
Led 5
1 V
X- f
<£_4f
5 N N
-
C 0
| N -V^i
\ H H
r / tS** m P v c
F .-' k 5 3 ' xX,
ns
WiW X/s/X-
»* /# o /
/ rv ■ X /
crove oss
r X
ft OV £ "
"X
,=; ‘x
X 7M'to«\WXX
\ *■
J
1*
1 Vo
iV
CJ
$
1
°9
5
JLj
0
T /K
<f*
Bftf A a;
If TijWlilX / /
/ / /X N\
xto
f A / /)
Beach PR.
T
Aj
I
fgfeJrn
m:
Xt?
- A
X ,/ /.
1\A-
AT Yu/voe/ts
. A 4/ , htivcSta TtON
3 RTS
<? ■ f i/
XX/
C & £ •< /? £C £ P S/kNAT6WVM
r x > x. p
e Q
XMRM-rex^^
■A
—*T
0/
0/
m
p
P U I
B L
\
\
. _ _ WX
' SfiK
if
sni
lull
RN Wi
if
il
RING PLACES XLX
.
\
X
A
1
X
*
*3
N
*
c»
•*
L
>1
r *
< c \
AN - JUC X~
X Road & Railway Map X
IrTnftnuA y . > ' •* X^^
Xx io£~ or M/lhs X^
1 0 J2 -3 * .5 6 7 8
Cohb C™ Coach Poutpo ~—-—»—
•
PaH/SH PoU/VHA/f7£S
/ .
H, itr*. Gteioflc. 4 ,




r*>; ?A. 2 I
f- <7 / £)
—«-.gs THE -83*<—
TO GEELONG AND THE
HATEHING REfIGES
* ON THE BAY AND COAST, AND POPULAp
HOLIDAY HESOHTS,
■INCLUDING
TORQUAY (LATE SPRING CREEK),
BARWON HEADS,
OCEAN GROVE, NORTH SHORE,.
POINT LONSDALE, QUEENSCLIFF,
PORTARLINGTON, DRYSDALE, and
CLIFTON SPRINGS, Ac., &C.
TOGETHER WITH A CHAPTER ON
sl?e of tlye District,
By T. S. H.;
FIRST SETTLERS AND EARLY DAYS,
By Rev. Dr. CAMPBELL;
AND —
fH ||rip the ||ake<s from geelong
to Barton Headd,
By J. L. C.,
Illustrated with Authentic Views from Photographs, and a Road-
and Coast Map of the Peninsula.
glclbomrnc:
M, L. HUTCHINSON, Publisher, 305 & 307, Little Collins St.


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
Barwon Heads Coffee Palace.
~ ~ Looking North.
~ ~ Tennis Courts, &c.
Barwon River.
Clifton Springs—Sulphur Baths and Jetty.
~ ~ Hotel.
Coryule—Miss Drysdale’s House.
Drysdale—Shire Hall.
~ United Service Home.
Geelong—Prince of Wales Hotel.
Victoria Hotel.
Homes of Hope Sanatorium, Ocean Grove.
Ingamell’s Bay—Ocean Grove.
North Shore, Geelong.
Ocean Grove Coffee Palace.
~ ~ Wesleyan Church
~ ~ Bush Scene.
~ ~ Villas—“ Elsealea ” —Rev. T. Grove.
~ ~ “ Friskney ” —Mrs. Ingamells.
~ ~ General Store —Mr. M. Guide.
~ ~ “ Hopeville ” —Mr. M. L. Hutchinson.
~ ~ “Manners”—Mr. Pescott.
~ ~ “ Sea View ” —Mr. John Armstrong.
~ ~ “ Strawberry House ” —Mr. Vere.
j> ~ “ Toorang ” —Lake Connewarre.
„ ~ “ Wilhelmsruhe ” —Mr. Wm. Bruche.
Also,
Coast and Road Maps in Colors.


INTRODUCTION.
With the facilities now offered for cheap and expeditious
travelling, it seems necessary to put into the hands of the
public a Guide Book, pointing out some of the convenient
beauty spots of our colony, to which the family man from
the country, or the city man needing change and rest can
resort, without the expenditure of much time or money in
accomplishing this desirable purpose.
The Southern Peninsula, from Spring Creek on the
coast to Geelong on Corio Bay, includes a number of such
places, and although some portions of this territory were the
first occupied by our colonists, there is much to interest and
instruct the visitor or tourist still unexplored. With a view
to help in this direction, the following pages have been
written, and the publisher returns his best thanks to those
gentlemen who have assisted in this work.
The chapter on the Early Days of Geelong and District
by the Rev. Dr. Campbell ; and the article on Geology by
T. S. H., will be found to have more than a passing interest,
and the illustrations, with the road and coast map in colors,
will serve to give some idea of the accommodation made for
travellers, and it is hoped the ease with which the several
places can be reached, combined with the low charges, will
make this district popular in the eyes of the public. It may
be stated that the whole book, including printing and illustra.
tions, has been done by Mr. H. Thacker, Geelong, for the
Western Stage Company, and is issued at the low price of
sixpence per copy.
As these pages are passing through the press special
arrangements have been made between the Steam Companies
and Cobb & Co., whereby excursion tickets can be obtained
to include steamer and coach fare to Ocean Grove or Barwon
Heads either via Queenscliff or Geelong, available for one month
from the date of issue. The fare via Geelong to either place,
Bs. return ; or via Queenscliff per “ Hygeia ” or “ Ozone ” and
coach, gs. return. Full particulars and tickets obtainable
from the publishers, 305 and 307 Little Collins St., Melbourne.


INDEX
Introduction
Territorial
Geelong Saltern
Geology of the District
In the Early Days
Geelong
North Shore
Torquay (late Spring Creek)
Barwon Heads
Barwon Bridge to Barwon Heads
Angling on Barwon River ...
Ocean Grove
„ ~ Coffee Palace
~ ~ Homes of Hope Sanatorium
Newington
Wallington
Queenscliff
St. Leonards
PORTARLINGTON
Drysdale
„ United Service Home
~ Clifton Springs
Family Trip


The territorial arrangements of a country —how its people
.are or should be distributed over the face of it, and how they
should be employed so as to secure a strong and prosperous
community—is a subject much spoken about just now. It is
seldom, however, that the matter is submitted to the test of
experience. We shall look into the economic condition of this
Shire, and see what its inhabitants are doing for their own
and the common good, and what sort of moral atmosphere is
gathering* round them.
I. The Contour line of the Peninsula is as follows:
Starting from the Plowhill, on the Eastern boundary of
Geelong, it runs along the old sea-bottom for 4 miles, where
it meets the old sea-face at Kensington Hill, which raises
it to a height of perhaps 200 feet. That hill goes off to the
right for 2 miles, dividing the Barwon Swamp from Lake
•Connewarre, and then sinks into the river. To the left it
spreads out into a broad plateau, broken by short deep
gullies, and extending to the ocean on the south. It reaches
its greatest elevation in the Murradoc and Bellarine Hills,
which form its eastern termination, and whose easy ascent
will reward the pedestrian with a magnificent view of wood-
land and green field, set in the deep blue sea.
11. Its area is 124 square miles, equal to 79,360 acres,
and its population (exclusive of Queenscliff) 4911. This gives
40 persons to each square mile, and 16 acres to each person.
The number of dwellings in it is 914, which gives a little over
the usual average of 5 persons to each family. This may
seem too small an area and too insignificant a portion of the
population of Victoria to submit to examination, but you can
•examine the fragment of a rock more easily than the mass.
And if this Shire will not furnish us with a general test, it
may supply us at least with a fair sample.


111. The valuation of property for 1891-92 was
which gives to each family an average possession of the value
of 13s.
IV. Of the entire area, 9568 acres—a trifle more than
one-eighth—are under tillage, but it is estimated that there
are about 16,000 acres still available for cultivation; 23,600
are used for grazing; 22,000 are under timber; and the
remainder is occupied by government roads, lakes, and
swamps.
V. The land under tillage is in the hands of 322 cul-
tivators, giving an average of 30 acres to each.
VI. The various crops grown in 1891-92, and the
average products, were as follows
Wheat—3Bl acres. 20 bushels per acre.
Barley—3l2 acres. 22 bushels per acre.
Peas and Beans—BBo acres. 20 bushels per acre.
Potatoes —345 acres. 3£ tons per acre.
Onions —1984 acres. 5 l-7th tons per acre.
Hay—4764 acres. 1 7-lOth tons per acre.
Artificial Grasses—39o acres.
Market Gardens —42 acres.
Orchards—99 acres.
Land in fallow —97 acres.
Other crops, chiefly Carrots and Mangold Wurzels—324 acres.
The total value of these various crops may be set down at
which gives to each cultivator, to be raised by
home produce, to £l 5O a year; but from which deduct for
cost of production.
VII, The public works and factories which employ
manual labour are as follows : —Drysdale dairy factory, with
creameries at Leopold and East Bellarine ; brick and tile
factory at Portarlington; two wattle liquor factories at
Portarlington and Mannerim ; four boiling down establish-
ments at Drysdale and Moolap ; poultry farm at Drysdale;
chemical manure, glue factory, and fellmongery, near
Geelong ; and the saltern at Point Henry, a very interesting
account of which, from the pen of Dr. J. G. Carstairs, health
officer for Geelong and Bellarine, will be found at the end of
this paper.
VIII. Besides Lake Connewarre, which is four miles
long, and two broad, there are three smaller lakes—two of
them salt ; the third, lake Lome, adjoining the Drysdale
railway station, is very fresh, and is a valuable watering place,
and a favourite resort for picnickers.


IX. Mr. Hibberd, who has supplied me with the above
details, reports that the inhabitants of the Shire are generally
in a very good position, fully 50 per cent, of them living on
their own properties. The style of farming is of the first-
class, especially in the rich volcanic uplands beyond Drysdale.
Upon one of these farms I remember seeing an 80-acre
paddock, belonging to Mr. Henderson, carrying a magnificent
crop of unmanured wheat, —the tenth in succession he told me.
Some of the holdings are very small; but when one acre in onions
gives £xoo, as it used to do, a man needn’t try to spread himself
out. Down upon the flat lands, or “the Carse,” as we should
call them in Scotland, the farms run from 30 to 50 acres. But
their owners have to look for outside employment besides,
which they find in road making and mending; fencing; black-
smith’s, joiner’s, and bricklayer’s work ; and barking wattle
trees, and cutting and carrying them to Geelong. Butter, eggs,
vegetables, and fruit, bring in a considerable revenue; while
the harvest of the lake, and of the sea, makes a welcome
addition to the finances of the shooters on the one, and the
fishers in the other.
X. But now about the people : manifestly they are-
industrious and fairly comfortable, food producers as well as
food consumers—benefactors therefore to the state. But
that is not the whole duty of man. Where do they stand in
the scale of national morality ? Their circumstances are
favourable ; their advantages are certainly above the average..
Have they used them well ? The population of Bellarine is,
as elsewhere, a British mixture, but I think that I am saying
the simple truth when I state that there has always reigned'
among them a spirit of mutual kindness and goodwill. The
sobriety of the people, as a rule, stands high. The hotels do*
not exceed the statutory number, while the Sons of Tem-
perance and Bands of Hope are very numerous. Further,
the Shire enjoys a very creditable exemption from crime
neither murder nor any capital offence has been committed in
it. The court of petty sessions, held fortnightly at Drysdale,
has occasionally a piece of larceny or larrikinism to deal with,,
the culprit being, as often as not, an alien. Two police officers,
the one looking out from Drysdale, and the other from
Portarlington, are sufficient to keep the peace. The education*
of the children is provided for by the distribution of one
private, and twelve state schools over the district. The
religous establishment consists of twenty places of worship,
with seven resident ministers, representing the Episcopal,.
Presbyterian, Methodist, and Roman Catholic churches
with Sabbath schools busily at work in connection with them,
all. A spirit of Christian fellowship exists among the-


.churches, and among the people many kindnesses pass from
•one hand to another. Various instances have come under
my notice, which show that this community are not disposed
to repudiate their mutual obligations, and that while they do
:not claim to be their brother’s keeper, —which was Cain’s
idea—they do not deny that they ought to be his helper.
C.
THE GEELONG SALTERN.
(By Dr. J. G. Carstairs.)
From the Geelong Advertiser of February sth, 1892.
The Saltern, or Salt Garden, at Point Henry, deserves more
than a passing notice. It is about three years since it was
commenced, and thousands of pounds have been expended in
its formation. Some 320 acres have been enclosed and sub-
divided into paddocks by dykes ; the larger paddocks next
the sea, the smaller ones inside. The site has been well
■chosen for the manufacture of salt by evaporation of the sea
water by the sun’s rays, hence the product is called solar salt.
The water from the bay flows into the larger paddocks by
flood-gates, which act automatically ; from the larger paddocks
itj flows by sluice boxes, which can be opened and shut at
will. The density of the sea water is 3 deg. by Beaumes
hydrometer; as it passes from paddock to paddock it becomes
more concentrated—6 deg., 10 deg., 20 deg., 30 deg. When
it is sufficiently concentrated, it is run from the larger
paddocks into a canal some 20 feet wide, whence by a cen-
trifugal pipe raising about 150,000 gallons an hour, it is raised
to the condensers on a higher level, and from them it is let
into crystallisers by sluice boxes. The manufacture is a
beautiful chemical process. Sea water, besides common salt,
contains salts of iron, lime, potash, magnesia, etc. The
object is to get rid of these. Advantage is taken of the well-
known chemical law, that water containing in solution a
number of different salts, deposits them at different stages in
the process of condensation ; thus the salts of iron are first
deposited, next the sulphate of lime, after that the chloride of
sodium or common salt. The density marked by the
hydrometer shows the time when this occurs, and guided by
it, the manufacturer turns the water into the crystallisers
when it approaches 25 deg. Beaume, and by the time it has
reached 30 deg. he knows the process is completed. The
water still remaining, called the mother-water, containing salts
of magnesia and potash, is then run off, and the salt raked up
into stacks, after which it has to undergo a refining process.


Last year there were but three-quarters of an acre of crystallis-
ing ground, and the amount of salt produced was a few
hundred tons. This year there are five acres completed, and
five more in process of completion, and probably the result
will be 2000 tons or more. The owner, Mr. Cheetham,
refined 7o tons last year, but for want of fresh water had to
use salt water in the refining process. It is to be hoped that
his application for a water supply will be successful, other-
wise the salt will have to be refined elsewhere. Year by
year the condensing and crystallising ground will be extended,
and as two or three crops may be got in a year, it is evident
that very soon the amount of salt obtained will not only
supply all the colonies, but will form a large item of export.
Through the courtesy of the collector of customs of Geelong,
I learn that last year the amount of salt imported into Gee-
long amounted to 968 tons 3 cwt. 2 qrs, i2lbs,, of the value of
; this fact shows what an important industry the
saltern will become, not only to those immediately interested,
but to the Shire.
Gcclocjy of the gfotrict
(By T. S. H.)
There are few places in the colony where the geology is
more diversified than in the district comprised within a
radius of twenty miles of Geelong.
From the You Yangs to the Barrabool Hills near Ceres
Bridge the underlying rocks are of deep-seated origin, and
lie at no great depth beneath the surface. The You Yangs
themselves are granitic, and several small patches of granite
occur between this point and the Dog Rocks at Batesford.
Near Ceres Bridge occurs an outcrop of gabbro, a rock
composed of felspar and diallage. This rock is of a dark
green colour, of fine grain, very hard, and takes an excellent
polish. In the valley of Sutherland’s Creek, which joins the
Moorabool just above the viaduct on the Ballarat railway line,
the lower silurian rocks make their appearance. The strata
consist of dark soft shales and sandstones, and contain the
characteristic graptolites of the period. Rocks of this age
contain the gold-bearing quartz reefs of the western half of
the colony.
After the close of the lower silurian period a long time
elapsed, of which the rocks here contain no record ; and the
next deposit we find is, in the main, of fresh-water origin.


These rocks, which are of Jurassic age, form the great bulk
of the Barrabool Hills and of the Bellarine Peninsula. The
rocks are for the most part soft greenish-brown sandstones,,
which have been extensively used for buildings in Geelong.
The fossils found are chiefly the remains of ferns, and are
sometimes in a beautiful state of preservation. The same
beds are extensively developed in the Otway Ranges and in
South Gippsland, where they contain coal seams. The
lowest beds of the series near Geelong occur about the
hamlet of Ceres. From here to near Pakington Street an
almost continuous outcrop exposes about 3000 feet of strata.
The beds then disappear beneath the surface, and in the
Bellarine Peninsula the same series has been proved by
means of a number of bores. Although the great mass of
the peninsula from Leopold Hill to St. Leonards is formed of
these rocks, the only outcrop found occurs near the Port-
arlington jetty, being everywhere else covered by a thin
coating of newer rocks. At this point the rocks are rich in
prints of fossil ferns, and have afforded the material of which
the mill on the beach has been built.
After the close of the Jurassic period, the land was greatly
worn away by the action of the air and rain; and then a great
depression of the surface lowered a large part of Southern
Victoria beneath the sea. The Otway Ranges, the Barrabool
and the Bellarine Hills, were then islands, separated by a
shallow strait from the mainland of the Dividing Range, In
this shallow sea new deposits of the eocene age were laid
down over an area extending from the Great Australian Bight
to Lake Tyers. These deposits mantle round the old land
surfaces, and are very rich in fossils, about 2000 different
forms having been recorded, and the list is still growing.
The rocks are extensively developed in the district with which
this sketch deals. Limestones, clays, and sandstones occur,
and, judging by their fossil contents, they are now referred to
the eocetie age, though the term miocene was long applied,
and will be found in the maps of the Geological Survey. The
Waurn Ponds limestone—which is used all over the colony
for facing buildings—is of this age, as are also the clay and
limestone used at Fyansford in the manufacture of cement.
The yellow sandy limestone used as road-metal on the Queens-
cliff Road comes from a quarry in the eocene, near Fenwick’s
Gully, about nine miles from Geelong. The deposit, then, is
of great economic value to the district. The principal places
where eocene fossils may be found in the district are as
follow : —The cliffs of Corio Bay, from near the mouth of the
Duck Ponds creek to the railway pier ; in the valley of the
Moorabool, from the railway viaduct to Queen’s Bridge—the
best sections being just below Hope’s Mill at Batesford, and


at Fyansford, where the river cliff is full of shells ; the beach
cliffs, from two to three and a half miles west of Clifton
Springs ; at Ocean Grove, in an outcrop on the coast near
the Coffee Palace, and at various places on the northern
shore of Lake Connewarre, between Ocean Grove and Camp-
bell’s Point ; a hill opposite the latter place, on the south side
of the lake ; at Spring Creek, from Zealy Bay along the coast
southward for some miles (a splendid section); at Belmont,
and at various places between here and the Waurn Ponds
quarries, which are about six miles from the town, on the
Colac Road. Near Batesford the limestones may be seen
passing beneath the clay-beds of the series, and the latter
beneath loose sandstones. The lowest beds at this point are
composed entirely of foraminifera, and are given the name
orbitoides limestone. . The limestone above this is built up of
the remains of polyzoa, and is spoken of as polyzoal rock. It
is identical with the Waurn Ponds rock. The clay beds at
Belmont are only seen in well-sinkings, but have yielded
many peculiar fossils. The Spring Creek beds show a close
approach, in fossil contents, to the Aldinga beds in South
Australia ; and in both places, green earth (glauconite),
pyrites, and gypsum are of common occurrence. The fossils
throughout all these beds are essentially the same, but varia-
tions occur, owing to the nature of the deposit. Just as at
the present day, some animals prefer sandy bottoms, others
muddy ones, and others, again, clear water; so among fossils
we find some forms commoner in each of the three classes of
deposits. Where the rocks are sand} r , the principal forms are
oysters, scallops and lamp shells ; in clay we find a greater
preponderance of univalves, such as Fusus, Murex, Pleuroto-
maria, cones, and cowries ; in limestone, again, we find
Polyzoa , sea-eggs, (Echini), and scallops.
Perhaps a few words are advisable on the gathering of
fossils. To secure perfect specimens, the greatest care is
required in their extraction. No attempt should be made to
clean shells until they have become quite or nearly dry. The
mud should be loosened with a needle stuck in a penholder,
and blown off, or removed with a camel-hair brush. When
thoroughly dry the shells become fairly hard, and may be
handled without danger. The best collecting tool for clay-
beds is a strong penknife.
Two distinct of volcanic activity have left their
traces in the district, and both occurred during tertiary times.
The older volcanic rock caps the hills between Drysdale,
Portarlington, and St. Leonards, affording by its decomposi-
tion the rich soil of the “ onion country." An outcrop of this
rock, in a greatly decomposed state, occurs at Portarlington,
on the beach near the mill.


The newer volcanic rock forms the plains to the north and
west of the town of Geelong, and covers the hill on which
Geelong is built. This rock has, in many places, been cut
into by streams, as, for instance, the Moorabool Valle}'. This
lava probably had its origin in the Anakies. To the south of
Geelong, Mount Duneed has poured its lava over a wide
extent of country. At Barwon Heads a portion of the flow
is seen coming out from beneath the Bluff, and forming a
boulder-strewn platform at the mouth of the river. Small
patches of the newer rock occur along the shores of Port
Phillip, near Clifton Springs.
At Limeburners’ Point, and at Lara, freshwater limestones
occur, which are burned for lime. The beds are of pliocene
age, and probably are the remains of a once continuous
deposit which occupied the bed of a large lake. The bones
of gigantic extinct marsupials have been found at the former
place, and fresh-water shells occur in both deposits.
The sand dunes which border the sea-coast have been
formed by the action of the wind. Where vegetation is absent
the hills are constantly changing their form, and in some
cases are rapidly travelling inland, and overwhelming the
country. The old road from Geelong to Barwon Heads
formerly skirted these hills, for about six miles, but is now
impassable on account of the sand which has drifted over it.
A great part of the sand forming these dunes is composed of
fragments of shells ; these become dissolved by the action of
the rain-water, and form a cement which binds the rock into
strange forms. The so-called “ fossil trees,” which look like
pieces of wood turned into white stone, and which occur so
plentifully upon some of the dunes, are thus formed. The
older dunes have in some places become cemented into a solid
rock, which is generally spoken of as a sandstone; but as lime
is its principal ingredient, it is better known as dune limestone.
The cliffs at the Bluff, Point Lonsdale, and Queenscliff are
composed of this rock. Formed, as it has been, by wind
varying in direction and strength, it shows “ false bedding ”
in a remarkable way, whether seen in cliff sections or as a
platform—such as is displayed at low water on the south and
west sides of the Bluff. Fossils in the deposit are rare,
though fossil bones have been found in it at Queenscliff.
River borne gravels of various tertiary ages occur in the
district, and on the northern flanks of the Pog Rocks, and at
Mercer’s Hill (Newtown), have yielded small traces of gold.
In many places over the older rocks thin cappings of tertiary
rocks occur, so as to hide what lies below. These deposits
are, however, of minor importance.


\£nthe Jpays,
Great excitement was created in Scotland some years ago
by the discovery of the footmarks of certain land crabs in
the primeval rocks. They seemed to carry us back to a hoary
antiquity, and they have been carefully preserved. Even so,
we should preserve the footmarks of our first settlers, and not
allow them to be obliterated from the sands of time. They
ought to be collected and put into a gallery of “Our Pioneers.”
In such a gallery, and in the Geelong department of it,
Thomas Buckley would stand first. An Englishman by birth,
a soldier by profession, aud a convict by crime, he escaped
from the penal establishment at Sorrento in 1803, and after
travelling round Port Phillip, was surprised to find himself
gazing upon the very ship which had brought him here. He
tried to attract its notice, but in vain. And as the natives
treated him kindly he lived among them for 32 years, his
headquarters being the cave at Pt. Lonsdale, which bears his
name. Then, having heard a rumour of other white men
being seen at the Indented Heads (Portarlington), he found
Batman and his comrades there, and was the means it is
believed, of delivering them from the clubs of his blackfellows
who regarded him as a great chief. He accompanied his new
friends to the Yarra, and afterwards went to Tasmania, where
he obtained a pardon, a pension, a wife, and finally, a grave.
He made this contribution to psychological science. He
showed us how quickly a man, once he gets on the down
grade, can lose the gifts of civilization and sink into a savage.
He had lost all remembrance of his mother tongue.
Batman, who would come next, was never a resident in
Bellarine, nevertheless he claimed to be the owner of it all,
and of a few hundred square miles to boot. For worth of
goods he had purchased that magnificent estate from its
aboriginal proprietors. But the British Government had
already taken possession of the whole continent. And so
the poor fellow’s claim was disallowed.
The squatters who followed Batman, and spread themselves
over the Werribee Plains, soon discovered what an advan-
tageous site for a town was awaiting them at the head of
Corio Bay, and so they induced a few merchants and trades-
men to settle there. It was a charming spot, dotted over
with stately trees, and covered with a carpet of kangaroo
grass, which rose to your saddle-girths. The first store was


opened by Mr. J. F. Strachan, a man of much public spirit,
and for many years a valuable member of the Upper House.
In 1840 the inhabitants of this town numbered no persons,
occupying 35 dwelling houses and stores. The three most
noticeable men were Captain Fyans, stipendiary magistrate,
Lieut. Addis, his assistant, and Dr. Alex. Thomson, who
always appeared on the back of his Valparaiso pony, the first
“ equine,” it is said, which was landed on these shores.
Captain Fyans was a soldier of the old school, and adminis-
tered justice with military rigor. The first Custom-house
officer was Mr. Butterworth (a Cockney of Cockneys), whose
business knowledge was of a most elementary kind. He had no
tide-waiter to assist him; and when any piece of smuggling was
going on at Point Henry, or even at the Geelong jetty, it is
said that he was always sure to be busy somewhere else. I
suppose that he agreed with me that for a young community,
a custom-house is an intolerable nuisance. Anyway, Mr.
Butterworth was a great favorite. The first hotel was
“ Mack’s.” It was a centre for business meetings, and a great
gathering place for squatters. To-day, after a season of
decadence, I am glad to believe that it is coming into favor
again.
I have learnt from certain manuscript notes, kindly com-
municated to me by Mr. Wheatland, that at that time
Geelong was almost entirely “a he community.” There were
some brave women, however, who were not afraid to face the
discomforts of anew settlement, and, as the} 7 must have made
many a weary track on the rough roadways of the town, I
shall preserve their names. They were—Mrs. Champion,
Mrs. Gray, Mrs. Mack, Mrs. Bolger, Mrs. Addis, and Mrs.
Low ; these, with six girls and three maid-servants, formed
the female complement of the population.
The wheels of labor went very busily m those days, and for
much longer, I am afraid, than the 8 hours’ limit allows.
There was also a considerable intermixture of occupations—
men, women and children finding that there is almost nothing
a human being cannot do if he wants to do it. Mrs. Mack
was even said to have succeeded in hiring a boy for a wet
nurse.
It was in that year 1840 that the Rev. Andrew Love came
to Geelong and established the Scotch Church, but Canon
Goodman, of Christ Church, is the only clerical representative
of these early times. As a rule Sunday was well observed.
Sometimes, indeed, bullock drivers used to arrive on Sunday,
having lost count of the days of the week, and the Roman
Catholics sometimes, for the same reason, fasted on the wrong


•day. I don’t know that it mattered much. At the same time
I confess that I look upon that weekly fast as an event
of very great value. If men would ease off the work of
digestion for even half a day once a week, I am persuaded
that it would greatly add to the length and comfort of their
lives.
Dr. Foster was the first doctor in Geelong, but the towns-
people did not trouble him much ; they were too busy to think
about getting sick, even about getting love-sick. It was only
when something happened, and they could’nt help themselves,
that they gave way to either malady. For example, Mr.
Henry Anderson, a Buninyong squatter, while driving a lady
friend (Miss Lyall) about Geelong, got his leg broken by a
bucking horse, and was received into the house of Mr.
William Timms. The consequences of that accident were
that the doctor got a patient, and Miss Anderson, who came
to nurse her brother, and Miss Lyall, who assisted in the
delightful occupation, got each of them a husband.
Among these men who helped to build up Geelong, I must
not omit Mr. James Harrison, whom Mr. Fawkner sent down
to establish and conduct a newspaper there. The Geelong
Advertiser , which celebrated its jubilee two years ago, was the
fruit of his labor. Even those who did not admire the color of Mr.
H arrison’s politics, admitted his large ability. He was especially
well informed in all matters connected with art and science.
It is interesting to know that this love of science came to him
when he was a printer’s apprentice with Collins, the Glasgow
publisher, and was set to work at the composition of that
most brilliant production of Dr. Chalmers, his astronomical
discourses, which, at the beginning of the century, were so
helpful in rolling back the tide of atheism, in which many of
our upper and educated classes were getting themselves sub-
merged.
Having named Mr. Wheatland, I would present him to the
young citizens of Geelong as an example of what a single
individual may accomplish, who adopts Paul’s motto, *One
thing I do,” and gives himself heart and soul to the doing of
it. On his arrival in 1853, there was put into his hands the
work of creating a Mechanics’ Institute and Public Library
for Geelong. Setting to work with a few pounds and a few
books, he labored at it for 36 years, having during that time
raised by five successive instalments the present handsome
buildings at a cost of £IO,OOO, and collected 20,000 volumes,
and left the institution free of debt. In 1857 he organized
the first Colonial Exhibition of Industry and Art, which
realized £IOOO. At the same time he acted as honorary
secretary to the Bar Committee, which, despairing of help, for


Ibbotson & Co. ...
...£1000
Wilson & Co,
... 500
Swan stem & Co, ...
... 500
C. McKellar
... 500
W. Douglas
... 250
W. Blair
... 250
Bright & Hitchcocks
... 250
F. Champion
... 100
G. Thompson
... 100
W. Smith
... 100
H. McPhillimy ...
... 100
J. Bent & Co.
... 100
E. C. Dunn
... 250
Hon. G, Coppin ...
... 100
J. B, Hutton
... 100
J. G. Hill
... 100
J. Lowe
250
Samuel C. Higgot
... 100
Rdj. Eichter
100
Ogilvie & Robinson
... 100
Charles Nantes ...
£10O
Wm. McMullen ...
150
Geo. Warner
250
L. Bauer
100
Wood & Eix
100
John Gumming ...
100
George Gumming
100
Mrs. Gumming ...
100
James Yolum
100
Geo. Wright
100
P. B. Eogers
50
James Miller
50
C. W. Sheppard & Co,
50
Chas. Andrews ...
50
W. Watts
50
Thos. Brown
50
A. J. Talbot
50
J. & Jas. Bell
50
Thos. E. Harwood
50
Telford & Page ...
50
its removal from the seat of Government ( i.e ., Melbourne,
which it was wickedly said wished the bar to stay where it
was), resolved to take the work in hand themselves, and
started a subscription for that purpose. Although nothing
came of it, I think that the following list of subscriptions at
and above will greatly interest the present inhabitants of
Geelong. Could they, with all their realized wealth, or would
they, match it: —
I have now said enough about Geelong. Let us go afield.
Taking the Bellarine road, we come upon an old track, once
thronged with cattle and cargo, just landed at Point Henry.
There Captain Ormond disembarked the first ship-load of
emigrants. Near the point stood a little school and church
where Dean Macartney (venerahile nomen) held service after
preaching in St. Paul’s. Thence he rode to St. Mark’s,
Kensington, and finished his day’s work at Queenscliff, Hard
work—you say. But it didn’t kill him. Who can tell but
that our G. O. M. is now living on the strength which was
stored up in those pleasant canters over the grassy lanes of
Bellarine, in God’s sweet sunshine, and Christ’s dear service.
Next we pass the property of Mr. Wills, who was cruelly
murdered by the New South Wales blacks, not, however, from
any personal ill-will, but under their lex talionis, which makes
any white man’s life responsible for any black man’s. By and
bye we reach the substantial dwelling-house of Coryule,
where we shall pause, while I tell you its story.
Sometime, in the forties, Dr. Thomson received under his roof
Miss Drysdale, a Scotch lady, whose delicate health con-
strained her to repair to a serener climate, and whose love
for country life drew her to the banks of the Barwon. There


Miss Dkvsdale’s House
Shire Hall, Drysdale.




she met Miss Newcomb, who had come out under similar'
circumstances. A warm friendship sprung up between the
Scotch and English women. Then a partnership ; the
finding the money, the other the energy. The contrast
between them was complete, yet the combination was com-
pletely successful. Miss Drysdale (although she was a Scotch
woman), was a person of great delicacy of constitution and
much sweetness of temper. Miss Newcomb, who had roughed
it with her father in the Peninsular war, is said to have been
“ high-spirited, strong-willed, and not always able to hold
herself in check.” “ She is the cleverest person I ever knew”
was Miss Drysdale’s account of her; “ there seems to be
magic in her touch. Everything she does is done so well and
so quickly.” Dr. Thomson sold a flock of sheep to those
lady squatters, which carried with it the lower section of his
run. There they put up a hut, whose rough aspect was
relieved by nicely glazed windows, and people still tell with
what tasteful adornments they dressed up their sweet Australian
home. They made one great mistake, however. They built
a spare room, which attracted many visitors bringing letters
of introduction,-—two, four, or six of them of a night. Among
these came Dr. Lang, who has given us a pleasant remini-
scence of his visit, and of a ride with Miss Newcomb, “ who
was quite at home on her high-spirited steed. We galloped
along through scenery of the richest description, beautiful
grassy plots alternating with clumps of trees of the most
peaceful and ornamental foliage, till we reached Lake Conne-
warre.” These clumps were a singularly beautiful feature in
the rural landscape. They were formed by the burning of a
fallen tree, from which there sprung a verdant crown of
saplings.
Bad servants and blackfellows were the ladies’ greatest
trouble. The latter, however, were not so dangerous on the
further side of Geelong as on the upper side, which was open
to sudden attack. To forewarn the inhabitants of their
approach a great bell was set up on “ Bell Post Hill.” That
historical bell ought to be consigned to the National Museum.
It is said to be in Strachan and Bostock’s store, where it
performs the humble function of warning the men at work that
it is dinner time. The ladies of Borongong never received
any molestation from the aborigines.
At the close of their first year Miss Drysdale wrote, “ we
have made no money, but we have kept out of debt, and have
much cause of gratitude to God who has given us all things
needful, and put us in the way of being useful to our fellow
men.” Upon which last point Dr. Lang testifies that “ they
had not only exhibited the good example of a family living in


the fear of God, but had been enabled to render the most
valuable services to some who were greatly requiring such
friendly help.”
One specimen of the station work, the great operation of
shearing, is worth recording. The wash consisted of long
logs put out into the river, on which other logs were laid at
right angles so as to form two pens, into the hrst of which
the sheep are flung, and are allowed to swim for a while.
They are then pushed by a forked stick under the middle log,
and men with flat sticks rub off the dirt, after which they swim
out by an approach and join their companions.
In 1849 the headquarters of the station were removed to
Coryule. There Miss Drysdale died in the following year,
and in memory of her sterling character and manifold gracious
acts, the people inscribed her name upon their little capital.
Miss Newcomb, who inherited the property, carried it
safely through the chaos of the diggings, not without some
strange experiences however. On one occasion, when a sheep
was to be killed, no man could be found to do it; after long
waiting, a man was seen in the distance and seized upon. He
had never handled a knife, but agreed to do the act of killing
if Miss Newcomb would do the rest, which she did. Day
after day she had to mount her horse and take her flocks to
the watering. One night she found her shepherd drunk in bed,
and the sheep all away, and there was nothing for it but she
must go after them. Pleasant work for a lone woman. You
will not be surprised, therefore, to hear that she accepted the
Rev. J. D. Dodgson’s invitation to assist him in pastoral
work of a higher type, which she did with great delight till
rBj2, when it pleased God to call her to His rest.
The Bellarine road, if we travelled further on it, would take
us to Drysdale, where we would introduce our readers to
Mr. McWilliams, who has engineered the Shire with good
•skill, since it came into existence, and Mr. Levien, M.L.A.,
to whom the whole country side is indebted as a large
-employer of labor —a promoter of every agricultural enter-
prise, and their efficient Parliamentary representative. But
we must now cross over the railway to the Queenscliff road,
where we come among a cluster of cottages on Kensington
Hill, among which Mrs Moller’s holds the patriarchal place.
There are two churches, Mechanics’ and Temperance halls,
State school, and a Post Office. To this office letters from
Melbourne used to come in about a week via Kensington,
.although this latter was not a post office at all. The authori-
ties were then asked to alter it, and they named it Leopold
Hill. But the Postmaster-General, with unexpected good sense,


•erased the “ hill,” on a second request, and left “Leopold”
to stand alone in memory of the Prince, whose beautiful life,
just then ended, it was meant to commemorate. This sensible
postmaster was the Hon. James Campbell. The house on
the crown of the hill, built by Mr. George Allan, he called
“ Alian-vale,” partly in honor of himself, and partly of a
beautiful selection in the Tamar Valley, which he took up in
1823. On his death it was purchased by Mr. G. F. Belcher,
who, although now residing in Geelong, continues to take a
warm Christian interest in the higher welfare of the people.
Away to the left, we come upon a little Primitive Methodist
chapel, which is my parish church when at the Lake, and
where—although I had never seen a “ Primitive” till I came to
Victoria—l have learned to look with much respeat upon that
denomination. That little chapel has given to its church two
excellent ministers—Messrs. Richardson and Vian. Going a
little further, we find ourselves at last on the banks of
LAKE CONNEWARRE,
“ as picturesque a sheet of water (says Dr. Lang) as ever I
beheld.” Naturally it attracted a good many early settlers.
The first I believe was Mr. O’Farrell, who built a house on
the headland which separates the upper from the lower arm of
the lake. It was enlarged and occupied by Mr. A. M.
Campbell, and is now in possession of Mr. Howard. Mr.
Campbell is a fine specimen of a country gentleman, and
of the uses to which we might put such men, if our politicians
were not eaten up with the conceit that no one can do important
work for the State but themselves. Mr. Campbell acted as a
Magistrate, a Shire Councillor, and member of the School
Board of Advice, He belonged to a fighting clan in Mull, but
as there was no room for that sort of thing here, he addicted
himself to the practise of homoeopathy, and gained much good-
will by his kind attention to the cases of the poor. I have
been told that on his station on the Murray, his gentle rule
over the blacks had given him such a moral hold upon them,
that they regarded him as their father ; and when anyone had
been guilty of wrongdoing he would not rest until he had
come to his father and got a whipping. Riding through the
forest on one occasion he found himself in a nest of them.
They swarmed round him with pointed spears ready for the
fling. Looking round he saw one of his own blackfellows.
He called him and told him to go to his companions and tell
them that he was their friend, —was their father, the3 T must not
kill him ; when this explanation was made, the spear-points
dropped, and Mr. Campbell was allowed to proceed.
Next to Malaleuka come “ Constantia,” and “Como,”
both now belonging to the Rutherford family. Mr. Andrew


Rutherford was one of Dr. Lang’s emigrants, who received
a Government grant of land near Colac, and afterwards
came to the lake. He is a J.P., and has done good
service as a Protector of Fisheries. Next comes “ The
Crib,” put up by Captain McLean, of the Coastal and
New Zealand Service ; then Mr. Ryland’s property, which
I (under the compulsory provisions of a bequest) purchased
as a permanent home for my family. It had been untenanted
for several years when I got it, and was densely covered with
the golden wattle, a fact which is commemorated in its name
“ Toorang”—the w r attle tree. The house is built with boulders,
gathered from the surface, and as it was easier to build than
to break them, the partition walls were all made 18 inches
thick, which gives the house an unusual coolness. The view
from the look-out spreads over a richly diversified landscape
of wood and water and green earth, with Mount Colite upon
the one side, and Mount Buninyong, on the utmost limit of
the horizon, on the other. The property on the right hand
belonged to my old friend Mrs. Gundry, of Geelong, but after
sundry changes, has been cut up (there are 200 acres of it)
into blocks of 5 and 10 acres, and sold at £lO to per
acre for “Garden Homes.” On the further side of the lake
there are a few farms, the best belonging to Mr. Brinsmead,
which lies in a sheltered bend of the hill. The gully behind it
bears the name of the first squatter in the district, Mr.
Fenwick.
I have often wondered how it is that the banks of the lake
have not been peopled with a larger number of summer
residences. It possesses in an eminent degree what busy men
ought to covet, entire seclusion. Its banks (at least on the
western side) have been so disposed with green knolls, bays
and promontories, as to give splendid opportunity for that most
delightful of all recreations, embellishing the face of nature
with its own magnificent productions. The placid bosom
of the lake, on which are mirrored the braided clouds and
the azure sky, with the bow of heaven arching it sometimes by
day, and the golden pathway of the moon crossing it sometimes
at night, affords a spectacle often changing, but always
beautiful. For those who want gun exercise, there are rabbits
enough and an occasional hare upon the land, and a teal or
black duck, and the majestic swan upon the water. For
those who love boating, a pleasanter and safer watercourse
can nowhere be found. Only once do I remember a boat
going to the bottom, but the bottom is so near the top, that
my boys who were in her had no difficulty in walking on shore.
And althoughthere is a reigning tranquillity allround the lake,
you can have a bit of sensation occasionally if you want it.
Many years ago a high tide brought a whale and her calf into


*
<1
Ph
O
O
H
Ph
ti
<!
* .
H J
Jz ™
fc £
O <
o °_
H 3
M 1
<1 CC
2 °
_ o


the lake, which had to wait there till another big tide floated:
her out. The calf was killed. How the mother escaped 1
don’t know, but for several months it was a source of much
interest to the lake people, and the usual tenor of conver-
sation was changed from the state of the weather to the
movements of the whale. One Sabbath new year morning,
more recently, looking seaward, I was startled by the sight of
a full-rigged ship (the Sussex), which seemed trying to make
its way across the narrow neck of land which separates the
lake from the ocean, —a feat which a young friend of mine
signalized by a cartoon in the next Punch, in which it was
suggested that a series of sign-posts should be planted along
the shore, intimating to ships approaching in daylight that
“ This is Sand,” “ No Road this Way,” etc.
Finally—Having resided in this neighbourhood at various
seasons for nearly 30 years, I can testify to its exceeding
healthfulness. It is utterly free from dampness in the soil ;
the atmosphere is impregnated with the highly sanitary and
antifebrile exudations of the gum and wattle tree, while the
summer heats are tempered by the afternoon’s ocean breeze,
I have on various occasions sent invalids down to Toorang,
who have made a rapid return to health. If the people of
Geelong wanted a location for a convalescent home, I don’t
know where they could find a more suitable spot. The
benefits of such an institution may not seem large, but the
difference to a hospital patient, or one rising from the bed of
sickness, between an immediate return to the work and worry
of home life, or spending a fortnight in perfect rest and pure air,
with abundant and wholesome nourishment, must be immense.
And if the ladies of the benevolent society of Geelong should
be minded to set up such a home for their poor sisters, I
shall count it one of the happiest acts of my closing life to put
an acre or two at their disposal for that gracious purpose.


The picturesque town of Geelong occupies a commanding
position on the prettiest part of the Western coast line, and
is built upon sloping country, affording excellent natural
drainage facilities to Corio Bay on the north side, and to the
ever-flowing Barwon River on the south side. It is one of the
healthiest towns in Victoria, a fact which is being steadily
recognised by persons seeking temporary and permanent
residence by the sea-side. It is 45 miles from Melbourne,
and enjoys the advantages of railway and steamboat com-
munication with the metropolis, and of late years the port
and town have rapidly grown into favor with excursionists by
land and water. Corio Bay is a land-locked sheet of water,
affording excellent anchorage ground for shipping, and it
offers a most attractive and healthful means of enjoyment for
those fond of aquatic exercise from Melbourne. The country
between the metropolis and Geelong is perfectly level, the
railway passing principally through grazing lands, crosses the
Werribee River and the Little River, and affording to travellers
by the land route a capital view of the beautiful partially
wooded You Yang hills as the train rushes onward to the
ancient, quiet and prosperous town. The journey by railway
occupies about an hour and a half, but the express train to
Adelaide from Melbourne, which runs as far as the North
Geelong station, enables passengers in the afternoon to land
in Geelong in an hour and twenty minutes. The approach
by water is a decidedly pleasing one, the lovely stretch of
white shelly and sandy beach along the eastern or Point
Henry coast, the black rocks, and the bold picturesque bluffs
on the north and west, presenting charming views to those
travelling by the bay steamers from Melbourne or Portar-
lington. Geelong itself is strikingly pretty, its clean, broad
streets, wide and well paved footpaths, with the lines of forest
trees which, before long, will cover them with their grateful
shadow; the beautiful beach slopes running east and west, in
addition to its many handsome residences and large com-
modious business premises, all giving an effective and inviting
appearance. The bay affords pleasure and pastime for
yachtsmen, rowing parties, and scope for persons fond of
angling ; boats for all purposes being procurable at any period
of the day at very reasonable prices. Admirably kept bathing
houses for ladies and gentlemen are situated on the eastern
and western beaches, and hot sea-water baths are obtainable
at stated hours during the day in the Eastern Bathing House.
On land, visitors will find the Eastern Park and


Botanical Gardens places of great interest, the beautiful
•park affording one of the pleasantest drives in the
immediate vicinity of the town proper. The park
•comprises about 200 acres of very rich soil, luxuriantly
•clothed with English grasses, and it is prettily
wooded with a vast number of ornamental trees.
The great enclosure is well laid out with winding footpaths
for pedestrians, and broad attractive drives for equestrians or
pleasure seekers who prefer driving or riding exercise. The
extensive grounds are open to the public from sunrise until
sunset, and at all seasons of the year the place is delightfully
attractive, some remarkably charming land and seascape
pieces of scenery presenting themselves to persons visiting the
rising ground on the northern side which overlooks the bay to
the right and left of Limeburners Point, which is also a
popular pleasure resort. For picnic parties, the Eastern park
offers special advantages ; it is close to the wharves, and no
great distance from the railway station. A commodious
rotunda furnishes excellent shelter in all weathers, and there
is a plentiful supply of wholesome fresh water supplied from
the mains reticulating the town and suburbs. Several acres
•of the central portion of the park are occupied by the Botanical
gardens and nurseries, where the ornamental tre'es, flowering
and foliage shrubs and plants for the beautifying of the public
parks are propagated. The situation of the nurseries is in
one of the most sheltered portions of the park, and visitors to
Geelong should not omit inspecting one of the chief attractions
in the east end of the town. The centre of the gardens is
occupied by a magnificent fernery, which is admittedly one of
the prettiest of its kind in the colony. It is furnished with
every description of fern, from the delicate maiden-hair
variety to the tallest and most beautiful of the forest and
giant species ; these are watered by means of elegant foun-
tains, the sprays of water descending into large and well
stocked fish-ponds, which in the summer months add to the
charming picture presented to the spectator. One of the
pleasing features of the fernery is the unrivalled fairy grotto
at the eastern end, through which visitors may, if they desire
to do so, proceed on their way to the handsome conservatories.
The grotto is fantastically constructed of limestone rocks
from the seaside, dexterously ornamented with fossilised roots
of trees from the shores of Bass’ Straits, and at certain periods
of the morning and afternoon it is gorgeously illuminated by
the prismatic colors introduced from the sides of the fascinat-
ing retreat.
Johnstone Park, another very popular place of resort for
visitors, is situated in the centre of the town ; the three acres
composing the park being laid out in a highly attractive


■
manner, and planted profusely with trees of an ornamental
description, and which also provides most welcome shelter
shade from the summer heat. Here the wearied pedestrian
will find the means of enjoying a profitable rest; seats are
plentifully distributed throughout the enclosure, and in the
centre there is a large and elegant rotunda for the use of
musicians and visitors. The nicely laid out footpaths provide
a very pretty promenade beneath the boughs of the deciduous
and evergreen trees which ornament the place, whilst one
corner of the park is occupied by an attractive fernery,
forming a cool and pleasantly refreshing escape from the heat
and the dust of the street traffic. The parkis located close to
the 1 own Hall, as well as to the large and handsome
Technical College, which bears the honored name of the late
General Gordon.., It was erected with the generous assistance
of the late Hon. Francis Ormond, whose efforts to provide
the means of elevating the masses in the matter of educational
advantages are thus suitably recognised. The college is
splendidly situated both for town and country students,
occupying a portion of that area in Fenwick street formerly
known as Johnstone Park. It is almost adjoining the central
railway station, which is found very convenient for students
travelling to and from the college by rail, of whom there is a
large number on the class rolls. The workshops for practical
instruction in carpentry, plumbing, and other trade subjects,
are now open, and promise to be a great success. The total
number of students attending the college for the quarter
ending 30th June, 1891, was 266. This number is made up
chiefly of the artjgan class. The subjects taught are :
building construction, book-keeping, chemistry, carpentry
(practical) electrical engineering, English, French, freehand
and model drawing, German, Latin, mathematics, mechanical
drawing, modelling, physics, phonography, painting, practical
geometry, perspective, plumbing (practical), telegraphy,
writing and correspondence, woolsorting, and dressmaking.
The fees range from 3s. 3d. to 21s. Through the liberality of
the publishers, a large number of scientific and other useful
publications are sent to the college gratis. These are well
used and appreciated by students. The Field Science,
Photographic, and Sketching Clubs, associated with the
college, are all in a flourishing condition and doing excellent
work. Both buildings are open to public inspection on
application to those in authority.
Adjacent to the park and the college are the extensive
premisesofthe Geelong Recreation Club, which provides for
members and properly introduced casual visitors the means of
enjoying gentle in-door and out-of-door pastime, the latter
including one of the best double Tennis courts in the colony,


and a very large Bowling green having a most inviting
appearance. The commodious railway station, the terminus
of the lines from Melbourne, Ballarat, Port Fairy, Queens-
cliff, and Wensleydale, is within easy reach of the park, as
are also the wharves, forming a continuation of Moorabool
and Yarra streets, two of the main thoroughfares of the town.
The Public Library and Museum in Moorabool street,,
the former filled with literary works of every description and
supplied with all'the daily and periodical newspapers, and
the museum well stocked with curiosities, afford visitors the
opportunity of agreeably enjoying their leisure hours. And
among the other public buildings in the town are the
Exhibition Hall, used for theatrical entertainments and.
bazaars; the Telegraph and Telephone Exchange in
Gheringhap street ; the Post Office and Mechanics’ Institute
in Ryrie street.
The Newtown Fernery, situatedat therear of Mr. Jeffrey’s-
Fernery hotel, abutting on the West Melbourne road, will be
found a most delightful source of attraction. It is about two*
miles from the centre of the town, and omnibuses run to the
interesting semi-public gardens and nursery at frequent
intervals during the day at a fare of three-pence each way.
The fernery and gardens occupy about an acre of ground, the
picturesque enclosure presenting to visitors from all parts of
the colony many objects of attractive interest. The grounds
are nicely laid out at right angles, the pretty avenues being
overshadowed by elegant fern fronds, the foliage of palm
trees, and the branches of flowering trees and shrubs. There
are about 300 different varieties of ferns displayed in various
parts of the garden and conservatories in addition to the
elegant collections of flowering plants, foliage and floral
bearing trees. The rockeries and fish-ponds, together with
the unique assortment of relics or reminders of the maritime
disasters on the Victorian coast line, all form subjects of
interest. The visitor to the fernery and gardens has the
privilege of ascending the tower at the west end of the
enclosure, and from a height of about 50 feet from the hill top
where the tower is situated, a very grand view of the town
and suburbs is obtainable. In clear weather the panoramic
picture from the elevation is one of remarkable beauty,
bringing within easy optical vision the expanse of country
between Newtown Hill, and stretching away to the coast line
by Spring Creek, Bream Creek, Barwon Heads, and Ocean
Grove on the south and east aspects, and away to Mount
Buninyong, Blackwood, and Macedon on the west and north
sides. The ’bus route to Jeffrey’s fernery affords sight seers
a capital view of Geelong, Geelong West, South Geelong,


Newtown and Chilwell. Then beyond the fernery there is a
very grand view of the valley along which the Barwon River
winds its way through the Queen’s Park.
A commanding view of the Moorabool Valley, overlook-
ing the picturesque township of and the Paper and
Starch mills in the distance, is secured from the site occupied
by the extensive Cement works, which snugly rest on the side
ot the precipitous hill upon which is situated the Protestant
Orphanage. On one side of the river from Fyansford to the
Breakwater, woollen factories and tanneries display the
industrial pursuits of the labouring classes, the south side of
the river offering to the visitor the chance of an easy ride or
drive of inspection. The town and suburbs are surrounded
by numerous healthy and most pleasant places, all within
easy driving distances, and well worthy of a visit. In
summer weather, the drive to Point Henry is a particularly
nice one, but at all seasons of the year there are delightful
drives from Geelong to the You Yangs, where from the top
of Station Peak one can, on a clear day, almost look into
Melbourne ; to the Lovely Banks and the Anakies, sources of
the Geelong water supply; to Batesford, Fyansford, the
Barrabool Hills, Murgheboluc, Inverleigh, Pollocksford, and
the various attractive inland pleasure resorts.
The visitor to Geelong will find one of the most popular
drives in the vicinity of the town to be by way of Strawberry
Hill, Highton, Ceres, and across the Ceres bridge, over the
Barwon, and back to Geelong either through Fyansford or
Batesford, the homes of thriving orchardists and farmers.
The green lanes of St. Albans, where the famous stud and
racing stables of Mr. W. R. Wilson are situated, are also
pleasant drives.
It will thus be seen that Geelong is favorably situated for
offering the tourist a capital programme of interesting
localities, and the means of enjoying a lengthy holiday in
inspecting the natural advantages of the place are all of a
description bringing them within the range of the most
economic purse. Besides the lovely rural drives to Point
Henry, Moolap, Mount Duneed, and Freshwater Creek, there
is an admirable road journey to the Wallington gardens,
eight miles and a half from the town, and which are famous
for their delicious strawberry beds and afternoon tea parties.
In the same locality, the beautiful scenery of the renowned
Connewarre Lakes is within easy reach of the traveller and
excursionist by road, whilst a cross country drive along well
formed rural lanes, the sight-seer has presented every facility
for reaching the beautiful rich black hills of the Drysdale and


Portarlington districts, and the equally attractive Clifton
Mineral Springs, where every accommodation for visitors and
holiday seekers is provided.
There are many coast resorts for pleasure seekers, and
there is considerable rivalry between them as objects of
attraction. Anglesea River, and Point Roadknight, and
Airey’s Inlet are each within a few hours drive of Geelong,
besides affording excellent views for sight-seers each, during
the different seasons of the year, offer splendid inducements
to anglers who arm themselves with good tackle for river and
sea sport. Within easier range of the town, there is the
favourite drive to Spring Creek, distant fourteen miles, a
very pretty coastal holiday spot all the year round. Nearer
home there is Bream Creek, with its charming pic-nic nooks,
and further eastward, Barwon Heads presents one of the
most comfortable of seaside residences. It is barely fourteen
miles from Geelong, and is approached all the way b} r good
metalled roads. Like Drysdale, Portarlington, Wallington,
and Ocean Grove, the pretty and homely watering place at
Barwon Heads is in daily postal communication with
Geelong, effected by the Western Stage Company’s coaches,
which in the summer months make two trips daily to the
lovely stretches of beach by the sea and at the mouth of the
Barwon River.
The population of the Town of Geelong numbers n,666,
but including the suburban figures, a total is given of 22,662
persons, viz. : —Newtown and Chilwell, 5217 ; Geelong West,
5779. The omnibusses run from the stand in Moorabool
street, near the Victoria Hotel and the Free Library to the
following places at frequent intervals during the day:—-
Belmont, Chilwell, Newtown, Geelong West, North Geelong,
Herne Hill, Breakwater, and East Geelong,
itoe/Tb: shore,
There is an old saying that “ its an ill wind that blows
nobody good ” ; and one effect of the land boom has been the
opening up of one of the most picturesque and healthful spots
on Corio Bay, and the surprise to everyone, who has visited
this growing suburb, is, that it should have been so long
dormant, presenting as it does, so many natural advantages,
and within such easy access of the town by road, rail, or sea.
That the Government of the day, and the older residents were
seized with the prospects of this place is evinced by the
manner in which the numerous government roads and the
esplanade around the foreshore is laid off, and also, in the






high prices paid for 5-acre blocks at the government land
sales, in which areas all the land was originally sold. Since
then, the greater portion of the allotments have changed
owners many times. One of the original purchasers, Mr.
J. G. Carr, still holds a choice block on the esplanade.
In the early days, when representing the district, Mr. Carr
interested himself much in the establishment of docks at
Cowies Creek, and it is generally admitted by competent
authorities that if the Government had carried out the
scheme submitted, thousands of pounds would have been
saved to the county, as nature has left little to be done in
forming one of the finest docks in the world at the mouth
of the creek.
The Corporation of Geelong have a reserve of about 40
acres, with a long bay frontage at this particular spot, with
the railway line alongside ; and in all probability this will
become a valuable asset as the shipping of the port extends,
with the completion of the cutting of the bar. At the present
railway wharf there is much inconvenience, and any increase
of trade to the port will have to be provided for.
Following the bay, about half a mile beyond the creek,
several substantial villa residences have recently been erected,
and much has already been done towards improving the
locality, notably in tree planting.
The reserve named “ Armytage Park ” is vested in the
Corio Shire Council, and Messrs. J. H. Connor, jun., and
H. M. Sutherland as trustees. The establishment of an
Arbor Day was inaugurated this season, and upwards of 400
children took part in tree planting, the result being that over
1000 trees have been planted.
The Reserve, which varies from 3 to 5 chains wide, runs for
about 3 miles along the bay, and with the improvements now
being carried out, will form one of the most delightful esplan-
ades in the Southern Hemisphere. The Government are now
constructing a jetty for the use of small passenger steamers,
which will run to and from Moorabool street wharf, distant
about 2\ miles. There are several beauty spots and places of
interest along the bay frontage towards “ Avalon,” the
residence of Mr. Frank Austin, opened up as places of call,
to which the public can now have easy access that steamer
communication is established. Fare to Hutton’s Wharf and
North Shore, 3d.
No visitor to Geelong should miss the trip.


COBB & CO.’S GUIDE
FOR
VISITORS * TO * GEELONG.
PLACES OF INTEREST WORTH VISITING.
Di stan ci
Barwon Heads r (Ocean Beach, Bathing, Fishing & Boating. Exteu- T
Ocean Grove 1 sive offee Palaces > First-class Accommodation. j
Drysdale (Fine Agricultural District)
.. 13
... 14
Clifton Springs (Mineral Waters, Sulphur Baths)
Wallington Gardens (Fruit and Flowers at all seasons)
S '& O eek: (Ocean Beach. Bream Fishing, Good Accommodation 1
opring Green; -j for visitors) j
Moorabool Viaduct (Fishing, Fine Scenery)
o<3 ' (Round Trip via Fyansford and Highton, Picturesque Views, ] .. q
'" ,e ( Ocean, Bay, and Mountain Scenery)
Queenscliff (Entrance to Port Phillip, Defence Works)
Point Lonsdale (Ocean View, Buckley’s Cave)
.. 19
... 21
-o . (Bound Trip via Dog Bocks and Fyansford, Paradise Vineyard,) - Q
r>a esiora j Orchards, Delightful Views, Geological Curiosities) |
Fyansford Paper Mills and Cement Works
2
9
Bream Creek (Splendid View, Oceau Beach, and Fishing)
Portarlington (Favourite Watering Place. Safe Bathing)
Anglesea (Sea View, Grand Forest Scenery)
.. 19
.. 25
North Shore (Esplanade, Splendid Drive round the Bay)
At Cobb Sc Co.'s Stables, Malop St. East, Visitors can hire any description of
Vehicle to visit the above Places, at Moderate Charges.
CAEEFUL DRIVEES FURNISHED WHEN REQUIRED.
Horses hired from Cobb & Co. can be stabled at their branches at
Drysdale, Clifton Springs, Portarlington, Ocean Grove, and Barwon
Heads without charge.
Special arrangements made for hire of Pony Phaetons and other con-
veyances daily, by hour, at a weekly charge.
Carriages and Landaus for Weddings and State Purposes.
Large Drags and Private Coaches provided for Picnic Parties.
co “^4°™? s ’ WESTEEN STAGE COY.
Geelong. Telephone No. 1.


Torquay, (late Spring freak.)
A popular summer resort situated on the shores of the
Southern Ocean about 13 miles from Geelong in a southerly
direction. It originally formed part of the Forest
Station taken up by the late Dr. Alexander Thomson, the
first Mayor of Geelong in the days. After passing
through various hands it came to be rented from the Govern-
ment by Mr Andrew Whyte, the President of the Shire
of South Barwon. The portion now laid out as a township
having been excised by the Government and sold in
residential blocks, is now rapidly assuming the appearance of
a seaside watering place, and during the summer month's all
the available accommodation for visitors is fully utilised.
The chief attractions of Torquay to the visitor are
Fishing, Shooting, and Bathing, while over and above
all, as a Health Restorer is the clear, pure, invigorating
air, which is saturated with the life-giving ozone, continually
arising from the mighty ocean wdrich rolls at your feet, and
breaks on the delightful sandy beaches, and rounded bays.
The Old Camping Ground on the banks of the Creek in
the sixties and seventies was the centre of attraction from
what was known as Parkin’s Corner, all along to White’s
fence, used to be pretty well covered in the holiday time with
tents of all shapes and sizes, and many a happy hour was
spent in harmless diversion when the sun had sunk in the
western sky. The strains of music and the merry dance
might be often heard and witnessed by the light of the moon
shining through the trees which overshadow the banks of the
creek.
Fishing. —-The principal fish to be had in the Creek are
bream and mullet, which at certain seasons of the year are
plentiful, and easily caught by the experienced fisherman,
while from the rocks at low tide, crayfish, butterfish, and rock
■cod are not difficult to procure.
Shooting. —The principal sport in this direction is con-
fined to ducks, rabbits, and hares, which abound in con-
siderable numbers, with an occasional fox by the way to whet
the sportsman’s appetite for adventure.
Bathing. —Torquay is par excellence a splendid place for
bathing in the open sea. It possesses four distinct large
smooth sandy bays which deepen slowly, and may therefore
generally be entered by the youngest as well as the oldest


without fear or accident, provided that ordinary precaution is
taken to avoid being carried out with the long receding wave
current when there is anything like a sea on.
SITUATION OF TORQUAY.
The Township is situated on a gentle slope which rises
up from the sea on the south east, and from Spring Creek on
the west, and commands a most extensive and delightful view
from the highest situations, embracing over 50 miles of the
sea coast reaching from Cape Shank on the east, to Point
Roadnight on the west, taking in the Heads with its light-
house. The forts at Point Nepean, Ocean Grove, Mt. Colite,
Barwon Heads, and the Hummocks at Bream Creek, all
of which form features in the landscape, while as far as the
eye can reach, or with the aid of the field glass, the whole of
the shipping on the ocean as it nears or leaves Queenscliff,
becomes objects of sight and interest to the people of
Torquay.
The Road. The road to Torquay from Geelong runs by
way of Belmont and Germantown, thence by Mt. Duneed,
where magnificent views of the Lake Country can be had,
extending as far as Drysdale and Portarlington, and even the
Dandenong Ranges on eastern shores of Port Phillip Bay are
easily discernible on a fine day; for three-fourths of the dis-
tance the road is well made and kept in good order ; after
reaching the top of the sand hill there are a few patches of
road which require making, and will no doubt receive the at-
tention they desire. In the months of July, August, and
September the country here, which is wild and sterile, assumes
a lovely aspect, covered as it is with some of the finest Aus-
tralian heaths of all shades of pink, rose, white and yellow,
resembling a magnificent Oriental carpet of the rarest
description.
The Rocks and Caves to the south-west of the mouth
of the creek are the greatest source of attraction to the
mothers and children, for even in the hottest days of summer
there are always plenty of cool nooks in the many small caves
or under the huge rocks, where the sun’s rays cannot reach,
and numbers of little natural stone baths with white sandy
bottoms, wherein the children delight to perform their daily
ablutions.
In addition to the Shire Councils of South Barwon
and Barrabool, the special interests of Torquay are
watched oyer by an Improvement Association consisting
of a committee of seven members, with Mr, J. |_. Price as
President, and Mr Anderson as Hon. Secretary.


Accommodation at Torquay.— Folletts’s Palace Hotel,
with about 43 rooms, is the principal resort of visitors, where
every comfort may be had at a moderate rate, and to
which during the season a coach runs daily to and from
Geelong carrying passengers and mails. Special Conveyances
at moderate charges also meet Trains or Steamers at Geelong
if application is made to Cobb & Co., Malop Street Kast.
There are also now a number of comfortable private cottages,
which are let furnished at very moderate rentals by the month
or week, according to arrangement.
Torquay, from its proximity to Geelong, bids fair
to become noted in the future history of the Colony
of Victoria.
li
W


In giving a description of this locality, there is a difficulty
in compressing all the interesting features, which nature and
art have combined to make it one of the most desirable to
visit. The writer has heard more than one visitor declare
that it is the best and healthiest seaside place in Victoria.
The purity of the atmosphere, the close proximity to both
ocean and river, and the facilities for boating and fishing,
certainly make it a great favourite with many people.
Barwon Heads proper is marked on the maps as Point
Flinders, and it is also known as Mount Colite. The
Bluff itself is one of the most conspicuous objects on our
whole coastdine, and is easily seen from a great distance
seaward, in every direction. The township is laid out on the
lake side of the peninsula, and comprises some very pretty
cottages and villas, chiefly owned by residents of Geelong.
Flowers and shrubs abound, and the perfection to which many
kinds are grown would delight the hearts of our practical
gardeners. Recently much has been done to beautify the
public park—thanks to Mrs. Hitchcock and the boys of the
“ Ministering Children’s League ” in the locality, who have
displayed much energy and good taste in transforming a wild
waste into an attractive pleasure ground. Summer-houses,
shelter-sheds, and seats have been erected in convenient
places, and a public rotunda near the top of the cliff offers
both shelter and convenience for visitors. From the eastern
side of Mount Colite the finest view possible of Port Phillip
Heads, and the entrance between Points Lonsdale and
Nepean, is obtained, and is as extensive as it is varied, and
on a clear day well repays the visitor. The principal building
at Barwon Heads is the Coffee Palace, which is owned by
.a company, and, although only about three years' established,
has won golden opinions from its numerous patrons. The
courteous manager and his assistants have proved themselves
all that could be desired, both from the financial consideration
of the company, and the comfort and requirements of visitors.
The palace contains thirty-four bedrooms, parlors, dining
room, and sitting-rooms. An inexhaustible supply of pure
water is laid on to the premises, and fresh-water baths are
available for all. Ihe supply of fresh water is obtained by
sinking, and threewells have been so formed : two by the Shire
Council for public use, and one by the Coffee Palace Com-
pany, from which the water is laid on to the Palace and
Cobb & Co.’s Stables. The whole scheme of the water sup-


LU
o
<
CL
,■ }■%
tij
UJ
' I i
.I I S L.
M I n
o
ft) i€ to
□
rl ' : ; ,jr
I W i <
| | • CD
ill!




ply is effective, ingenious, and inexpensive; a windmill
being the motive power to raise it for distribution. We
believe the entire cost wars under £lOO. The aim of the
■management is evidently to make this seaside home replete
with every convenience, combined with reasonable charges.
A commodious Recreation Hall adjoins the palace, and is
well-lighted and seated for entertainments. The billiard-room
measures 25 feet by 30 feet, fitted with one of Alcock’s best
tables, the use of which can be obtained for a small
charge. A good asphalt Tennis Court is also attached, and
is a great attraction to many. A Post and Telegraph Office
is connected with the palace, and mails are despatched and
received daily via Geelong.
Boating, fishing, and picnic parties are made up as required,
to visit the lake and other points of interest ; those desirous
to avail themselves of such, should apply to the manager the
day previous to starting. Cobb and Co. have here well-
appointed stables, horses, &c. ; conveyances can be obtained
on very reasonable terms.
Coaches leave Geelong daily, at 9 a.m. and 2
p.m., during the summer season, and once a day
ail the year round.
The drive is a pleasant one, and if intending visitors
prefer the route east of Connewarre, or by railway, or
Queenscliff, a boat will be sent across the river to Ocean
Grove, and on payment of a small extra charge Cobb and Co.
will convey passengers to the crossing-place at the edge of the
river.
The vicinity of Barwon Heads has, from time to time,
figured largely in the matter of shipwrecks. We have only
to recall the deep interest awakened in this colony by referring
to the “Sussex,” the “ Joseph H Scammell,” the steamer
“Bancoora,” and the “Enterprise.” The two former became
total wrecks, and the two latter were ultimately saved. A
trip to Bream Creek and Spring Creek would give the tourist
the exact locality of such disasters, and conveyances can be
obtained from Cobb and Co/s Stables for drives in this
direction.
Visitors from Melbourne will find the combined
Tickets issued by M. L. Hutchinson, 305 & 307, Little
Collins Street, ensure a pleasant and inexpensive trip.
The Tickets include first-class return fares per Huddart,
Parker & Co.’s Steamers, and Cobb & Co.’s Coaches.
Tickets available for one month at the small cost Of BS.


Cobb & Co.’s Coach meets 10 a.m. Melbourne boat at
Geelong wharf.
Round Tickets may also be precured from the same
Office for 9s. The Tickets entitle the holder to a FirSt-
class Return Passage from Melbourne to Queenscliff per
bay steamers Ozone or Hygeia; also return fare from
Queenscliff to Barwon Heads.
Passengers may return, if desired, via Geelong, the
Tickets being available for Geelong and Barwon Heads
Coaches; also, Huddart, Parker & Co.’s Geelong and
Melbourne Steamers. Excursionists may break their
journey at Queenscliff, Ocean Grove, Barwon Heads
or Geelong. One month allowed for return.
Through Tickets, including Coach and Rail, are issued
at reduced Rates during summer months by M. L. Hutchln-
son, 305 & 307 Little Collins Street, or from Cobb
& Co.’s Offices, Melbourne, Ballarat, and Bendigo.
Excursionists from other distant railway towns should
procure a Sea-side Railway Ticket to Geelong, by
which a considerable saving is effected.
If advice is sent to Cobb & Co.’s Geelong Office, a Coach
will meet passengers at the local Railway Station.
All visitors should go and see the wonderful collection of
stones on the beach, about one mile from Barwon Heads,
The geologist, or, indeed, anyone loving the wonders and
beauties of Nature, will find material for thought, interest,
and discussion as to how such a variety is located on this spot.
For about half-a-mile, specimens of various strata are to be
found, including different-coloured sandstone, basalt, and
conglomerates of every form and hue. Many are really
beautiful, as well as curious ; and, we have no doubt, some
will find a new destination before years roll by.


UJ
L)
<
_J
£
UJ
LU
Lu
U.
O
U
CO
o
<
ui
X
2
O
£
DC
<
CD
h
m
D
o
(J
in
z
2
UJ
I




From Borwon Bridge to Baru/og Heads
We left the Barwon Bridge in a four-oar early on Saturday
morning. It was quite dark when we got away from the
staging, and as there was no moon we had to make our way
by starlight to the Breakwater, which runs across the Barwon
and dams back the rising tide. Though there was a strong
stream running, we managed to get over without mishap,
and the crew settled down to a long steady paddle towards
their breakfast camp. It is generally very calm in the early
morning, and if a crew are well together nothing can be more
delightful than the steady and unwavering motion of the
boat in the cool fresh air. The first streaks of red appeared
in the sky when we entered the Long Reach below the
Australian Tannery. This is a splendid piece of water, broad
enough for half-a-dozen eights to row abreast on, and lined on
the north by the beautiful willows which form the river
boundary of the rich water-meadows of St. Albans. Below
** the willows ” the river becomes more tortuous, and good
steering is imperatively necessary, especially at the narrow
channel through which the Barwon enters the lakes. There
is a fine view to the west and south-west from “ Reedy,” the
first arm of Lake Connewarre. Due west rise the Barrabools,
clothed in their bright spring verdure, while trending to the
south-west the blue mass of the Otway range is discernible.
Coming into the lake proper we skirted under the shores of
Fisherman’s Bend, and then struck across to Campbell’s Point,
on the brow of which stands Melaleuca, a house command-
ing a magnificent view of the Southern Ocean. On reaching
the point we disembarked, and with appetites freshened by
the row, proceeded to discuss our breakfast.
In early spring there is no difficulty in crossing the Lakes,
as the flood water is present in abundance, and so we were
able to steer in a direct line from the point to the lower river
entrance to the Lake. We saw a great many ducks and swan,
but what principally attracted our attention was a fine flock
of pelicans, over 50 in number, sailing majestically above us.
The river winds in snake-like fashion below the Lakes, and
the run of the tide has formed sand banks at some of the bends
on which a boat is apt to stick, but if the coxswain keeps the
middle of the stream, there is not, as a rule, anything to
impede a boat's course. i\bout ten o’clock we got down to
our camp at “ Clematis,” so-called because of the abundant
supplies of that plant, which decorate with delicate yellow
blossom the masses of ti-tree. Clematis is perhaps the best


of the river camps ; it is well sheltered, and on the north
gives a pretty view of the rising ground on which the new settle-
ment of Ocean Grove is springing up. After putting our boat
up on the turf, our crew divided into parties, and wandered
away in different directions, some into the woods, and some
towards the Heads and the sea.
At the Heads it is surprising to note the changes which a
few years have brought about. Not long ago the Ocean
Grove and Barwon Heads settlements were undreamed of,,
and crews - could wander about all day without seeing any
signs of life beyond a solitary farmhouse. Now there are
large Coffee Palaces, trim villas and neat gardens, jetties and
boathouses. A few brass bands and sham yachtsmen in
glowing costumes will entirely remove from this once lone and
lovely spot its primitive beauty. Still there is always the
sea which fortunately cannot be altered, and from the Barwon
Heads it is possible to see from Cape Schanck to eastward as
far as Split Point to the west. The air is remarkably invigo-
rating, and a dip in the breakers, most delightful form of
bathing, takes away all sense of fatigue. The fishing at the
river mouth and at Thunderbolt is very fair, but some-
what capricious ; there would, however, be very little sport if
a big basket were always certain. Our crew met again after
long rambles, at four, and after a rough meal, started
home with a splendid spring flood to help us on our way. It
was quite dark when we reached the “ willows,” and brought
our boat into the Grammar School corner, where we met
other crews, and enjoyed a “ billy of tea ” and the cheerful
warmth of the camp fire. The moon was shining brightly
when we left the “ willows,” and our row home was most
enjoyable. On a cloudy moonless night the steering from
Goat Island to the Barwon Bridge is difficult even for a
thoroughly good coxswain, and crossing the Breakwater in the
dark with a strong stream running is not an easy task. Moon-
light, however, makes everything easy, and by 8 o’clock we
had landed in safety at the staging after a day which it would
be hard to surpass. The following verses descriptive of such
a row may fitly close our article :
Starlight, and silence deep,
And gleaming waters dark.
And by the quiet river all asleep
When we embark.
Twilight along the line
Of willows greenly dim,
And faint above the misty eastern brine
A scarlet rim.




CD
>
~JD
i
0
z
jj
<
n


Sunlight above the lake,
And clash of Ocean near,
And the glad rush of forceful blades that take
The listening ear.
Twilight that slowly dies
The rosy reeds between,
And a light boat that ever swiftly flies
Past meadows green.
Darkness, and round the turn
With long-drawn stroke they run,
With heaving upward sweep from stem to stern,
All bent as one.
Moonlight, and towards the west,
O’er water churned to foam,
O’er the white glimmering river’s breast
Our crew came home.
Angling on Bartoon Riner.
[By an Angler.)
By no means the least of the many inducements offered to
the holiday makers and health seekers to visit our southern
watering places is following the favourite pursuit of Isaac
Walton.
Perhaps no better tribute of respect could be paid to
Walton than by bringing prominently under the notice of his
auspices the places where the art and sport can be most
profitably pursued.
Every genuine angler knows the fascinating pleasure of
landing a fine fish, with the after prospect of having it nicely
served up at the table. Who that has enjoyed the delicacy
of a carefully prepared dish of fillets of soles or flounders
would not seek again for that sweet morsel. And yet it is
easily at their command if they but visit Barwon Heads or
Ocean Grove , and avail themselves of the facilities afforded at
the Barwon River. There the fish that most delight the
angler are to be found in large numbers and varieties, the
chief perhaps being bream, silver bream, whiting, trout.,
mullet, flat head, and black perch.


Fishing from the Rocks.
A fish but little known, and yet of great delicacy, is the
sweep, which commands a price equal to soles or flounders,
and weigh from to 5 lbs.; this, with other kinds of rock fish,
may be caught off the rocks about a mile from Barwon bluff,
large shoals being brought up by the running tide, and as
only two or three hours sport can be obtained at one time,
anglers should secure their position just before the tide turns.
Tackle and Bait for Rock Fishing.
In angling for the sweep fish only the best gut should be
:used, with sandworms as a bait.
Bait and how to Preserve it.
It might be well to mention that the novice angler
frequently finds himself in an awkward predicament for want
of bait and even proper tackle. To avoid this, parties who
intend to enjoy themselves should be provided with best
gut and sufficient bait in order to guard against disap-
pointment and loss of time. This can easily be done either
by securing same at any fish or tackle shop, or by sending
timely notice to the manager of Barwon Heads or Ocean
■Grove Coffee Palaces. The Ocean Grove boatmen also
supply bait at nominal charges.
The best means of preserving bait is to pack it with dry saw-
dust in a wooden box ; it is important that the box should be
of wood, such being a non-conductor of heat, whereas the
tin or metal box as often used destroys the bait. A very
simple but most effective mode of preserving bait is to place it
in a cigar box well padded with dry saw-dust, place this box
in a large wooden one, and pack it well round with saw-dust.
In this way bait may be preserved for a number of days.
The baits most generally used are sandworms, shrimps and
crayfish, these baits will take almost any kind of fish.
Fish despised by Amateurs.
A fish much despised by amateurs is the leather jacket, and
yet these fish will keep longer than any other kind. When
-skinned and hung under a tree it will keep for three or four
days, and then be found fresh and sweet, and equal to the
usually popular varieties of fish. It can be boiled or fried
with equal advantage. In angling for leather jackets gimp
hooks should be used instead of the ordinary gut.


Boating accommodation for Anglers and
Sportsmen.
To accommodate pleasure parties and anglers, boats can be
hired at any hour at the river; the advertising columns of the
book give the names of several boatmen from whom boats
may be hired, at the reasonable charge of ss. per day.
Boatmen will also be found ready to take parties either by
sail or oar to Lake Connewarre, and whilst en route the
sportsman will find plenty of enjoyment with the gun, as the
lake abounds with wild duck, teal, &c.
With good bait and tackle, and fair consideration being
.given to the flow of the tide, parties can generally rely on a
fair haul, some parties getting as much as 40 to 50 lbs. for a
day’s fishing.


@eean J^rove,
Which has become one of the most popular of our Victorian
watering places, having been visited by many thousands of
people during the four years of its existence, occupies a
Commanding Position.
It is situated, as the map attached shows, on the coast-line,
where the waters of the Southern Ocean, the River Barwon, and
Lake Connewarre meet, boldly facing Bass’ Straits and the
Southern Ocean. From its altitude of one hundred feet above
the sea level the view is at once beautiful and extensive.
In front is a limitless expanse of angry billows showing their
silvery crests, on a blue tinted glassy surface revealed by an
occasional ridge of spray according to the weather that pre-
vails ; on the left, looking seaward seven miles distant, are
Queenscliff, Point Lonsdale, and Point Nepean, the white-
winged messengers of commerce, and the palatial steam liners
of the Orient and Peninsular and Oriental Company, as they
pass in and out of Port Phillip being in full view. On the
right are Point Flinders, with the Barwon Heads settlement
under its shelter, and the extensive coast line extending past
Spring Creek and Lome to Cape Otway; while the
proximity of Lake Connewarre with its extensive sheet of
water at high tide, which immediately skirts the Grove on the
west side, adds to the beauty of the scene. Ocean Grove has
Natural Advantages
possessed by but few watering places. It is on the ocean coast,
where the full benefit of the ozone laden breezes can be had.
It is well sheltered, the town and the country immediately
adjoining being well wooded, spreading forest trees and golden
wattle bushes abounding all around. It is easy of access from
large centres of population, the journey from Melbourne and
most of the inland cities and large provincial towns occupying
but a few hours; train, coach and electric wire all contri-
buting to make it approachable in point of time. Another
special feature of the Grove is that it has a
Great Stretch of Beach
which is clean, hard, sandy, free from danger, perfectly safe for
young children, and stretches in an unbroken line from
the entrance of the Barwon to Point Lonsdale ; and is ap-
proachable by a good roadway from the high ground, shelter


UJ
>
>i O
4 <£
M CD
- i Z
■ S <
:v';Vl bj
O
UJ
O
i; : f| 5
c£
:*V‘l U
Zi i ‘ 1 Llrii
:;.t1 u.
ii o
M o




sheds with seats being' placed at convenient points along the
beach. There is every facility for
Bathing, Boating, Fishing & Shooting,
The portion of the Ocean Beach immediately in front of the
township, and under the shelter of the Bluff, is set apart for
bathing purposes ; houses, ropes, and other conveniences
being supplied, whilst for those who prefer quieter waters, a
bathing ground is enclosed on the lake coast, where the tide rises
and falls as on the ocean beach. Boats may be had for sail-
ing on the open ocean or on the smoother waters of the lake,
the latter being particularly indulged in by night as by day.
A good supply of yacht and oar boats can be hired from the
jetty by the hour or by the day at moderate prices.
The expert angler can always find enjoyment, the variety
oi the fish in ocean and lake being very varied —shoals of them
coming and going with the tide, while the lover of gun can
have good sport; black swan and wild ducks abound on the
lake, and parrots, quail, and rabbits on the coast-line.
Lake and Rural Scenery.
The Grove has beauties (as its name indicates) other than
those afforded by craggy rock, rolling billow and ozone breeze.
It abounds in stately trees and pleasant foliage. It is within
easy distance of Wallington, Queensclift, Point Lonsdale,
Drysdale, Clifton Springs, Bellarine, Portariington, and St.
Leonards, all places of interest, the routes to which are
through a most picturesque country, meadow alternating
with wood, while the nooks and corners of the expansive
lake offer beauty spots not a few, to be reached by road as
well as by boat. Also at the right season of the year there is
a great
Profusion of Wild Flowers.
The natural flora of the district is exceptionally beautiful.
Some visitors in the spring of the year have collected from
the sward as many as 109 separate and distinct varieties
of wild flowers and shrubs, several being everlasting, and
suitable for bouquets. There are also several choice kinds of
ferns and orchids, which are great favourites. The Grove
offers
Pleasant Wa j ks and Easy Drives.
In addition to the drives through the rural parts already
described, the hard sandy beach at low tide offers a drive of
miles in length, the waves breaking into surf close by, while


the shady recess of the Grove itself and country adjacent,
and the wide stretch of sandy beach, offer to pedestrians
inducements of no ordinary character.
Accommodation of Visitors.
Of the buildings already erected, we might mention
the Coffee Palace. Its entire length is 156 feet, with
a fine wide verandah fronting to and overlooking the
ocean. A handsome square tower 56 feet in height stands
in the centre. There are in all 60 rooms, including dining,
sitting, reading, smoking, commercial, and bedrooms,
with bathrooms, and all the comforts of a first-class hotel.
The next building in size is “ Connewarre House," which,
resting in a pleasantly sheltered nook, also offers first
class accommodation for a considerable number of visitors.
Then there are a number of other good private boarding-
houses, and gentlemen’s residences, and tradesmen’s shops,
the charges all round being moderate. Three general stores
are now open, and the facilities for securing supplies to the
families renting cottages are all that can be desired ; every
necessary article can be obtained without inconvenience.
Church, School, Post and Telegraph
Office.
There is a beautiful Church in which service is conducted
morning and evening, with a well attended Sabbath school
connected with it ; a State school, which is efficiently
managed. “ Hopetoun Cottage,” the Sanatorium of the Home
of Hope. The Post and Telegraph Offices are at the Coffee
Palace; mails received and despatched twice daily during the
summer months, and once daily during the winter months.
A Local Improvement Association
has been established, by whose labours much has been accom-
plished (hon. secretary, Mr. J. Corr). The Central Park has
been cleared of the undergrowth, and seats have been placed
in shady position, winding and pleasant paths have
been opened up, shelter sheds for visitors and picnic
parties provided, and other important works advanced.
Ample provision has been made by the Coffee Palace Com-
pany and other boarding-house keepers.


Ld
>
0
01
CD
f- Z
e <
| LU
0
i O
1
a
cC
Z)
x
o
z
<
>
UJ
_i
CO
UJ




Bowling, Croquet, Lawn Tennis and
other Games
are to the fore, and being a prohibition township, there is
exemption from what too often occurs to mar the desired
quietness of a resting place, and, at the same time, the
climate of the Grove is dry and mild in character, neither
barometer nor thermometer being subject to wide fluctuation.
How to Get There.
Next to having a suitable place at which to spend our
holidays, and good accommodation during our sojourn, the
means of transit and the cost of the trip, both as regards
time and money, enter largely into our consideration.
Cheapness, comfort, and regularity are the three essentials in
this age of travel to induce people to leave their homes. In
Ocean Grove we have all combined, and the variety of route
is itself a charm which few of our watering places enjoy.
Thanks to Cobb and Co., the arrangements for coaching are
complete ; and, combined with steam or rail, this place can be
reached within four hours of Melbourne, at the nominal cost
of ss. via Queenscliff; or via Geelong, in conjunction
with Messrs. Huddart, Parker & Co.’s steamers “ Courier,”
“ Excelsior,” or “ Alert ” for Bs. return, the tickets being
available for one month after date of issue. The coaches
leave Cobb & Co.'s office, Geelong, daily, Sundays excepted,
at g a.m. and 2 p.m., returning from Ocean Grove at 6
a.m. and 4 p.m. During the summer months coaches
connect with the Geelong and Queenscliff railway, and
tourists can obtain through tickets to include railway and
coach fare, or steamer and coach, from Cobb & Co.’s agent
in Melbourne, or Mr. M. L. Hutchinson, bookseller, 305 and
307 Little Collins Street, who will also be glad to
give intending visitors to Ocean Grove and Barwon Heads
full particulars as to fares, route, and general features of the
locality. During the season coaches meet the steamers
“ Hygeia” and “ Ozone” at the Queenscliff Jetty, the return
coach fare being by this route 4s. The coach tickets are also
available for the railway platform should passengers prefer
to return that way. A coach also leaves Geelong for Barwon
Heads daily, and any one going or returning by that route
can do so, instead of via Wallington and Moolap, The
Barwon River is crossed by a ferry boat from Grigg’s Point,
at a charge of sixpence each passenger. For further
particulars, as to fares and routes our readers will please to
notice Cobb & Co.’s advertisement in another page, and also
the daily newspaper announcements from time to time. We


ought, however, to mention that the route via Portarlington
and Drysdale has some specially interesting features, and
when the Bay townships and Ocean Grove are connected by
better roads, this will be a very attractive, cheap, and
expeditious journey for Melbourne visitors. We hope the
time is not far distant when such necessary improvements
are accomplished.
OCEAN GEOVE COFFEE PALACE.
This lovely Seaside Home is situated on the highest position
of the Ocean Grove Estate; the owners are to be con-
gratulated upon having secured so delightful a site. The
grounds in which the Palace stands occupy about two acres,
which are artistically laid out in lawns and flower beds. Our
engraving is a south-east view of the building, and
which, on account of its Tennis Court, Bowling Green
and Croquet Lawns, is one of the many attractions of
the place.
The extent of the building may be best understood by the
following particulars : —lts length is 146 feet, with a wide
verandah facing the ocean. A handsome square Tower or
“ Look out,” 56 feet high, occupies the centre, in ascending
the Tower, and on the first floor is the Ladies’ Boudoir, on
the second is situate the Smoking Room; these two rooms are
so comfortably furnished, and the view from them so sur-
passingly lovely, that one is inclined to spend hours there.
For the appointments and size of the Dining Hall, which is
50 feet by 24 feet, the Palace has quite gained a name.
Another feature of the place is a first-class Billiard Room,
which is always free for the visitors. There is also
capacious and well furnished Reading Room, Private Parlors,
&c. The bedrooms, of which there are upwards of fifty, are
spacious, well ventilated and lofty, and the beautiful
panorama of coast scenery obtained from the windows of
these rooms, add much to the attraction of this fine hostel.
The furnishings and fittings of this large establishment are
equal in style to the finest city hotels or palaces. The table
is exceptionably well provided, and has already gained a very
high reputation. A daily supply of fish is obtained from the
river and ocean.




X
o
2
m
3
~n
X
3
0
T)
0
o
m
>
z
O
U
0
<
n


A Post and Telegraph Office is on the premises; arrange-
ments are being made for two deliveries of letters per day
during the summer months. The Melbourne newspapers
are received daily before noon.
The Coffee Palace is in close proximity to the beach, which
is reached without fatigue.
Picnic excursions and driving parties organised. The
manager can provide any description of conveyance from
-single horse phaeton to “ coach and four ” at a few minutes
notice.
The tariff is exceptionably low; special arrangements made
for children or parties by applying to the manager, who will
.give every information without any delay.
Qooan Q.tq*oOo
One of the most interesting buildings here is “ Plopetoun
Cottage,” belonging to the Homes of Hope conducted by Mr.
and Mrs. Cherbury in Collingwood, and used as a Sanatorium
for the rescued children from time to time. The cottage
stands on about an acre of ground, and has accommodation for
25 children, and the necessary attendants. Hitherto the Rev,
M. Cherbury has been honorary superintendent, giving his
time and means for the past 13 years without fee or reward,
being also pastor of the Tabernacle, Collingwood. We
understand he is in future to devote the whole of his energies
to the great philanthropic work, which his heart, and that of
his dear wife so truly loves. The objects of the Homes of Hope
is set forth in the annual report of the institution, which can
be obtained on application, and no one should visit Ocean
Grove without seeing the bright and happy children so well
cared for in Cherbury Vale. The view of the cottage is taken
from the side of the hill leading from the terrace. Anyone
interested in the welfare of such a noble work as the rescuing
•of helpless and homeless orphans will find a welcome from the
matron. According to the last report 113 children are being
provided for, and they are sent in batches to the seaside
home as circumstances allow, staying from two to three
months each visit. Their education is well looked after, and
their religious training is quite undenominational.


-®a»OOBB & CO/S 'CTE
VISITORS’ « GUIDE
TO
OCEAN GROVE.
OF JNTEREST WOI\TH yiSITING:
SPRINGS | Mineral Springs, Sulphur Baths, Beautiful 1 g
D R VQFI AI R ( Farming District ] „
UnYoUALt | Fowl Farm, Orchards, &c. [ 7
dartari IMOTONI { s P lendid Drive through rich undulating ) * .
rUK lAKLIINOIUIN | country, Fine Beach, Baths and Gardens j
AiircMcn icc ( Batteries and Defence Works I 0
ttINoOLI rr | Shipping and Lighthouses j
POINT I ONSDAI F I Port Phillip Entrance I R
KUHN I LUInoUALI j Buckley’s Cave, Wreck of “ Glaneuse ”
WALLINGTON
BACK LAKES
GEELONG
| Orchards and Flower Gardens 7
| Fishing, Shooting, and Boating | 7
f Botanical Gardens Ferneries & Conservatories 1 , -
"(Hot Sea Baths |
Also a number of short interesting Drives can be taken round
the Estate and Back Country adjoining Ocean Grove.
COBB & CO.’S STABLES AT OCEAN GROYE
Are Furnished with useful Conveyances, such as FAMILY WAGGONETTES,.
PONY PHAETONS, and BUGGIES.
DRAGS AND PRIVATE COACHES FOR PICNICS.
Experienced Drivers, First-class Horses. Moderate Charges.
SPECIAL REDUCTIONS FOR LARGE PICNICS,
Horses Hired at Ocean Grove can be stabled at Drysdale, Clifton Springs,
Portarlington, and Geelong without charge.
DAILY COACHES TO <& FROM TRAINS ,
Also, regular communication with Melbourne and Queenscliff Steamers during
the season. (See Time Table.)
Special Conveyances may be engaged to meet any Train ; also to
or from Geelong or Queenscliff, as required.
WESTERN STAGE COMPANY.
HEAD OFFICE-MALOP STREET BAST,
Cobb £> Co.'s Stables, G-BELONG.
Ocean Grove,


ADVERTISEMENTS.
ROBERT THOMPSON,
WTCfIER A [ID GROCER,
OOBAN DROVB AND ODBLEWIS
Families waited on regularly for Orders.
DRYSDALS SHOEING FORGE
BLACKSMITH & WHEELWRIGHT,
SPRINGS STREET, DRYSDALE.
OESES SHOD
Repairs executed promptly at Reasonable Charges.
Qg-IDry'sd.ale Bakery.
w. HAYSOW,
AKER, CONFECTIONER, &c.
PICNICS, TEA MEETINGS, &C., CATERED FOR.
larts ca.ll at Ocean Grove and Clifton Springs regularly.
Baker and Confectioner,
OCHAN GROYI h SPRINGS ROAR,
IDIR/YSID^-ILjIE].
Wedding, Birthday, and other Cakes on the shortest notice.
FAMILIES WAITED ON REGULARLY.


ADVERTISEMENT.
Coiuukirrc |)ouse,
OCEAN GROVE
°rj3°
T HIS Establishment is pleasantly situated on the side of the hi'
west of the Coffee Palace, and is convenient for lake ar
ocean, being within easy walking distance for bathing, boatin
fishing, &c. The views from the verandahs are extensive ar
varied, embracing mountain, lake and ocean.
The House contains 16 rooms, cool cellars, splendh
fresh water baths, and there is a good garden, with law
and tennis court, available for visitors; a billiard tabl
is also at their service free of charge.
Special attention is given in making this a Family Homi
with all the comforts and advantages possible.
The Terms for Adults are 30s. per week, and children
reduced rates, according to age.
Visitors from the country going to or returning from Conm
warre House, and wishing to break the journey by spending a da
or two in Melbourne can be accommodated with board and residenc
at “ Tregothuan,” No. 88, Grosvenor-street, Balaclava, by con
municating with the undersigned at that address.
Passengers by Cobb # Co.’s Coaches
Will be taken to the gates, and intending visitors are particular
requested to note the Address—
JP| roWn,
COMEWARRE HOUSE,
Corner of The Terrace and Field Street,
OCEAN GROVE






ADVERTISEMENT.
LITHOGRAPHING
IN ALL ITS VARIOUS BRANCHES.
Ornamental, Artistic,
0 /Plain. 0
Every description of Book:®
Bound and Repaired.
o o
PRINTER, BOOKSELLER, STATIONER, &□.,
TSyric Jgtrect, geclong.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
JOHN CORR,
IJOU6C, Eand Insurance Agen
“ CORAVILLAOCEAN GROVE.
A number of BUILDING SITES in good positions, Ocean anc
Lake views, and BLOCKS of LAND for small Paddocks o:
Orchards for SALE, cheap. Cash or easy Terms.
Several nice FURNISHED VILLAS from <£l ss. to £2 10s, pi
week, TO LET; also, GRASS PADDOCKS in the Townshi]
good feed, well watered. Terms—Horses, 2s. weekly ; 7s. 6c
per month.
R. SIMPSON, 3a
Horse {Jhoer and General Blacksmith
COACHBUILDER & WHEELWRIGHT,
OCZBJVisr GBOVE.
Awarded 10 First Prizes, 2 Certificates, 2 Second Prizes, and 1 Thin
Prize for Shoeing at the Victorian Agricultural Shows.
ALL ORDERS PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO
OCEAN GROVE MILK SUPPLY.
NEWINGTON DAIRY '
Milk, Butter, and Eggs delivered at Ocea:
Grove daily.
Also, fine variety of Fruit in Season, from Newington Orchard
delivered at Moderate Prices.
MARK THOMAS , Newington,




“Hopevi lle"
u r-' ,11
E LSI E L EA


ADVERTISEMENTS.
(^jssan
OWNED BY MR
It. HUTGHHISOJI, J.P., JfIEItBOIJHP,
Stands on about an acre of ground, having a very
commanding position, and is noted for its collection
of flowering bulbs, native trees, and shrubs.
ELSIELEA,’A
RESIDENCE OF REV. T. GROVE.
Commanding View of Ocean and Lake.
B ROOM? FURNISHED, GARDEN, sc.
TO LIST.
Apply J. CORR,
House & Land Agent ,
OCEAN GROYE.
TO-LET, F^URISTISHEI}
(AFTER Ist FEBRUARY, 1893),
‘Toorang’ House & Grounds
(SEE GUIDE BOOK, PAGE 20.)
APPLY TO
H. BLOMFIELD BROWN & CO., GEELONG,
Or C, J. So T. HAM, MELBOURNE.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
‘ I WILHELMSRUHE,”
MR. BRUCHE'S SEASIDE RESIDENCE AT OCEAN GROVE,
Occupies one of the choicest positions on the Grove, having a
frontage of 360 feet with a depth of 240 feet. From the elevated
position of the verandah which surrounds the house, a com-
manding view is obtained — the ocean spreading out in front from
Barwon Heads on the right as far as the entrance to Port Phillip
Bay and Cape Schanck on the left.
A very pretty view is also to be had from the back into the Bush
and Recreation Grounds. Mr. Bruche has had his grounds
planted with pines, shrubs, ornamental and native trees, which
will give the place a charming park-like appearance in a few years.
OCEAN GROVE.
MR. GEO. YEAR’S STRAWBERRY HOUSE
ON PRESIDENT’S AVENUE.
Four well-furnished Rooms, consisting of two large bedrooms,
with a double and a three-quarter bed in each, and one sofa;
dining room, kitchen and pantry, with every requisite, for £•.2
weekly. Wood, water and cutlery free.
Right opposite this villa there is a nice park of six acres, well
provided with seats under shady trees, with ample space for picnics,
cricket, football, and other sports.
JOHN OORR, Agent, “ coravilla,” ocean grove.
“SEA VIEW.”
Mr. JOHN ARMSTRONG, Proprietor.
6 ROOMS on the TERRACE
Near the Coffee Palace, OCEAN GROVE.
Well Furnished. Cutlery, Crockery, and Water supplied free.
Stable for one horse, Buggy House, and Servant’s Eoom.
Good Position. Splendid View of the Ocean, Lake, and Barwon Valley.
Near the Beach and Bathing Place. £2 weekly.
Apply to JOHN CORR, Agent, “Coravilla,” Ocean Grove.
“ TZECIEIj ”
Mr. T. PESCOTT, Proprietor.
TO-LET FURNISHED,
Close to the Beach, with Splendid View of Shipping
and Queenscliff.
GOOD SHPPHY OF FRESH WATEH +
For Terms and Particulars apply to
T. PESCOTT, BUILDER, McKILLOP ST. WEST, GEELONG.






ADVERTISEMENTS.
A. IM.CKWIUi ?
OOZBJLItT O-iEEOVIB,
—HAS—
Boats for Hire
Small Boat to carry 4 for Pishing, &c„ ss. per day.
_ _ J | up to 6 Adults, for 7s. 6d.
Passenger Boats , 1Q t() 2Q
Fresh F’/SH delivered daily to Customers.
JOHI BOUND,
“BARWON COTTAGE,” OCEAN GROVE.
Accommodation for a limited number of BO ARDERS
at 255. each per week.
Good BEDS and MEALS at Is. each.
Groceries, Temperance Drinks , and Fishing
Tackle for Sale.
PISHING BOATS SUPPUED FREE TO BOARDERS*
STEPHENS BROTHERS,
OOZE-AItT GROVE,
HAVE BOATS FOR HIRE.
Small Boat to carry 4, for ss. per day, fishing, Sc c.
Passenger Boats—6 Adults and under, 7s. 6d. ; XO
to 20 Adults, Is. each.
■ I ■——OQr~ ■ *-■ I
Fresh FISH delivered daily to Customers.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE SEASIDE.
(The Third House from the Coffee Palace.)
7VSRS. lISOK7^ei_L-S
(Widow of the late Mr. JOSEPH IHGAMELLS)
(Ts E.sIEES to inform her friends and those seeking a rest and change of air
1 ) at the Seaside, that she has decided to continue to receive visitors at
— ■ the above address as heretofore. In conjunction with the Misses
ISGAMELLS, it is believed that such comfort and accommodation can be
assured as will leave nothing to be desired.
“FRISKNEY” is one of the most favourably and picturesquely situated
places to be met with at this now favourite and popular seaside resort,
commanding a good view of both Ocean and Lake.
Mrs. IXGAMELLS feels that] she can .confidently prefer inquirers either to
present, residents at the Grove, or to those who have been there as visitors.
The Terms for Adults are 30s. per Week.
General Store,
OCEAN GROVE
Detached Cottage to Let.
Four Rooms furnished with all necessa
convenience. Horse and Waggon if
required.


Friskn e y
Gene l Store , M* M-Guille




u
>
0
c
(3
z
<
UJ
O
O
iH uJ
£
<
—I
HI •“
m -i
<
Si CO




• !




Jpaint 5^
Point Lonsdale, which is about four miles beyond Queens-
cliff, forms one of the headlands at the entrance to Hobson’s
Bay —the opposite one being Point Nepean. It has a Light-
house and signal station. There are a few cottages scattered
about besides those belonging to the lighthouse, none large
except a beautiful gabled house which has been recently
erected, and commands a splendid view.
There is a reef of rocks extending some distance out from
the beach, around which can be seen at low tide the remains
of many sad wrecks ; the current rushing past the end of the
reef is tremendous. Until quite recently on the sandy beach
beyond the Point the wreck of the “ Glaneuse ” was lying
with masts still standing, and at high tide the waves dashing
over her.
The climate in summer is delightful, and unless there is a
strong north wind it is never very hot.
One point of interest is the life boat and jetty which has
been built within the last two years, and makes a good place
for fishing. At low tide there is a splendid beach for walking
either into Queenscliff or to Ocean Grove, eight miles away.
After a good sea there are innumerable specimens of beautiful
seaweed strewn upon the shore.
The Cave in which Buckley is supposed to have lived for
some time is at the Point, and bears his name.
There is a constant interest in watching the ships passing
through the rip, and sometimes the sunsets are very beautiful.
Facilities are always given to visitors to go up the Light-
house tower, from the top of which a splendid panorama
presents itself, both varied and extensive. Sea bathing and
fishing can generally be indulged in at the proper state of
the tide. Much has been done of late years to reclaim the
sand hummocks, and according to the present rate of
improvement in this locality, a few years will see it one of
the most desirable seaside resorts in Victoria.


ADVEKTISEMENTS.
TO LET AT BARWON HEADS.
Charming Furnished Villa Residence,
Containing 7 Rooms, Underground Tank, Stabling.
SITUATE C LOSE TO THE SPLENDID SANDY BEACH
Qqqß Bsthing,, Every qquy amencei
Rent - £2 2s. pen week.
FULL PARTICULARS ON APPLICATION TO
H. F. RICHARDSON, Auctioneer,
Exhibition Exchange, Geelong.
“BflMimjMG.”
TO LET OK/ IFOK SA-LZB.
Containing 5 Rooms Furnished, Boat and Boathouse.
For Terms and Particulars apply
J, GELL, iSssgx
TAILOR, Malop Street, Geelongr
T. ABiaSlflT,
Ferryman,
BARWON HOUSE
BOATS FOR HIRE. + FURNISHED ROOMS TO LET.
RESIDENCE
(Of Bailarat School of Mines)
TPrp (FURNISHED
Hi ± THROUGHOUT.)
( -C ! FOR terms apply by letter.^






■ISc-Winqton.
6q>9 iJ
The district of Newington may be considered as a part of
Ocean Grove, being only two miles distant, although in point
of history it is much older than the latter. For postal and
telegraphic arrangements Ocean Grove is the most convenient
office. The country embracing Newington is very fertile,
undulating, and beautiful. It has a neat Wesleyan Church,
a perfect model for a country place of worship both internally
and externally, and Divine Service is conducted there every
Sunday afternoon at 3 o’clock. There is also a State School,
and several well kept farms and orchards. The latter give
promise of splendid results, and we should say that no better
field presents itself than the slopes and valleys of this district
for profitable fruit growing combined with vegetables. It is
already famous for melons and pumpkins both as regards size
and quality. The class of settlers are evidently comfortable
in their circumstances, and this colony just needs to have a
yeoman population satisfied with happy homes, and their sur-
roundings to make it free from the blight of avarice and
speculation which has so severely cursed our land.
4®allinqton
A favorite resort for excursionists, either from Geelong or
Ocean Grove, is the fertile valley of Wallington. There is a
hotel, store, and post office in one, and for many it has been
found a centre ot attraction as a wayside house. The
principal place of interest is, however, the famous Wallington
Gardens, justly popular for the enormous quantity of straw-
berries, and other fruits. Picnic parties find this a pleasant
resort in the season, and being within six miles of Ocean Grove
it forms a very agreeable outing for an afternoon.
Some very beautiful views of the Lakes are obtained
from this locality. Cobb & Co. supply vehicles of every~
description at moderate prices, from the cosy two-
seated buggy to the heavy American coaches, suitable
for parties from six to thirty in number. The usual
way in making up such gatherings is to fix the day
before who is to go, and gentlemen are generally found
staying at the Coffee Palace who willingly make all necessary
arrangements whether the destination be Wallington, Drys-
dale Springs, Point Lonsdale, or boating on the lakes.


The visitor to Melbourne by sea who approaches Port
Phillip Heads in daylight cannot but be struck with the
picturesqueness of the entrance. Point Lonsdale is seen on
:the left, Point Nepean on the right, as you cross the Rip
steering cautiously through the narrow half-mile which is free
from rocks. Then the two lighthouses of Queenscliff are got
into line, and the bold headland on which the}" stand is soon
passed, so close that the buildings are clearly discerned, and
strollers on the beach or cliff waving signals of welcome.
Queenscliff is prettily situated on a narrow peninsula of
.high land, having the quiet waters of Swan Bay on one hand,
.and the changeful sea from Bass’ Straits on the other. It is a
favorite seaside resort for all parts of Victoria, especially from
the cities of Melbourne, Ballarat, and Bendigo, as well as
from the warmer regions of the Riverina.
It is easily reached from the metropolis by steamer, being
.about 32 miles from Port Melbourne by the West Channel, and
the finest excursion boats in the Southern hemisphere ply
during the summer months, making the voyage in two hours.
Those who prefer the rail have generally the choice of three
■trains per diem—the railway going by Geelong and Drys-
• dale.
Queenscliff is one of the healthiest places in the colony.
The ozone is direct from the Southern Ocean. Being almost
surrounded with water, the temperature is very equable, and
-even on the hottest days of summer a gentle breeze is felt as
night falls, while during the day the thermometer always
registers several degrees below that of Melbourne.
The excursions to be made from Queenscliff are interesting
and various : —To Geelong by road or rail, ig^-miles ; to Ocean
Grove by Marcus Hill, 8 miles. During summer months
■ Cobb &■ Co.’s coaches run regularly in connection with
Melbourne steamers and Ocean Grove. Point Lonsdale,
4 miles—a very enjoyable trip. Coaches ply several times a
■ day—Fare, is. 6d. return. To Portarlington and Drysdale,
12 to 15 miles; to St. Leonards on the Bay, about 12 miles.
To Sorrento or Portsea, and the Back Beach; these can be
reached by sailing boat, or by the Melbourne steamer daily.
The distance from Port Phillip Heads to Hobson’s Bay is
32 miles. Cape Schank is 18 from the Heads, and Cape
Otway 60 miles.
Those who are fond of walking can easily reach Point
Lonsdale on foot either by road, or when the tide is out, by
the beach. Then they can see portions of the wrecks of ships


pUEENSCLI FT , HI C H LiGHT.
Queenscliff, Low Light.




which have gone ashore, almost in every case through careless-
ness or foolhardiness, or they can explore Buckley’s Cave,
the hiding place in his early wanderings.
Queenscliff possesses two fine tennis courts and a good
bowling green, and a links for players of Golf has recently
been added. On the recreation ground there are regular
cricket matches played, in which the visitors take their
share.
The baths enjoy a well-earned reputation. There are two
“ paddocks” for the gentleman's baths—a deeper and a
shallower one ; the former should be patronised only by good
swimmers. The ladies’ baths and hot sea baths, so strongly
recommended for invalids, aie also well kept and well
appreciated.
A detachment of the Permanent Force is situated at
Queenscliff, and the batteries are open to the inspection of the
public. About 100 men are resident in barracks.
The larger lighthouse is well worth a visit. The light is a
second class one. The view from the lighthouse is very
extensive.
Perhaps what makes Queenscliff peculiarly attractive is the
large number of steamers and sailing ships constantly pass-
ing outwards and inwards. Those passing up the West
Channel approach the ’Cliff, while the larger ones, which have
to take the deeper, but longer South Channel, steer for the
opposite coast, passing near the Quarantine Ground. With a
fairly good marine glass passengers may be distinguished
even in their vessels.
Horses, buggies, waggonettes, and omnibuses can always be
hired either from Elijah Wills (Cobb & Co.’s) or from Charley
Lloyd ; and excellent boating and fishing are to be obtained
in Swan Bay, or in the larger and more adventurous sea
between the ’Cliff and Portsea.
There are churches in connection with the Church of Eng-
land, Presbyterian, Wesleyan and Roman Catholic denomina-
tions ; also, Sunday schools and a good State school; and an
excellent Free Public Library and Reading Room has also
been opened.
Queenscliff boasts of its own Gas Company . The hotels are
of a very high order, the chief ones being The Grand, The
Ozone, The Queenscliff, and The Esplanade. The piers afford
a pleasant and cool promenade in warm weather, and the
steamer pier draws a large assemblage when passengers are
embarking or landing.


ST. LEONARDS,
No visitor to Portarlington should miss the short drive of
six miles to St. Leonards. The road, after crossing a common
to the east of the town, runs straight to the beach, which it
follows for the rest of the distance. On both sides the sandy
track is lined with shrubs, which on one side pleasantly vary
the view of the bay, and on the other are broken here and
there by picturesque fishermen’s cottages.
On approaching the village there is passed on the right a
large pool, or “ salt lake,” as it is called by the residents,
forming the centre of a considerable swampy morass. The
salt lake is an excellent and not too well known shooting
ground, being a haunt of numerous ducks and not infrequent
swans.
St. Leonards is essentially a fishing village, and lovers of
sea-fishing will find everything to gratify their taste at the
jetty, which runs some hundred yards out into the bay.
A pleasant walk may be taken by continuing southward
along the shore, which here begins to grow more rocky and
indented as it trends towards Queenscliff and the Heads.
Accommodation may be had at Smiley’s St. Leonards Hotel.
The return drive may be varied by leaving the coast at
St. Leonards, and gaining, by a gentle ascent of a couple of
miles or so, the main road from Portarlington to Queenscliff.






J ovtavlington.
This picturesque spot is the first port of call for Melbourne
and Geelong steamers. The distance from the Gellibrand
Lightship to Portarlington is 22 miles, and the “Courier”
-covers the distance in a few minutes over the hour. Portar-
lington is rapidly rising into favor as a watering-place within
easy reach of Melbourne, and enjoys a more secluded and
sheltered position than most of the pleasure haunts in Port
Phillip Bay. It lies on the northernmost point of the
“ Indented Heads,” as this portion of the coast was named by
Flinders in 1802. The town rises sharply from the sea-shore,
reaching to the summit of a slope, from which a fine view is
obtained of the opposite shore of the bay, with the three
remarkable hills called the You Yangs as a centre-piece.
Portarlington is much recommended for invalids to recruit
their health, and enjoy pure air and sea bathing. The first
attraction in Portarlington is the beach. Fronting the
beautiful beach are numberless shady nooks and sloping hills.
A broad fringe of bright sand runs for many miles in both
directions, and pedestrians will find a stroll to Clifton Springs
on the west, or St. Leonards on the east, well worth the
exertion. A few hundred yards to the east of the jetty,
visitors may enjoy excellent bathing in the commodious and
well-arranged baths.
Above the beach and a little to the left are the Gardens —a
large grassy enclosure, well planted with trees, and supplied
with shelter in the shape of pavilions, and numerous seats.
This is the best spot for enjoying the view from Portarlington.
Across the bay rise the You Yangs on the left ; and further
off theDandenong Ranges stretch towards the east. On clear
days the Melbourne shipping and the sharp outline of Mount
Macedon are easily discernible.
The town is neatly laid out with broad streets, some of
which are planted with English elms and pines.
In addition to the pleasures of sea-bathing, delightful
scenery and healthy walks and drives, the visitors and
residents ot Portarlington enjoy many of the conveniences of
larger cities. A very pretty and centrally situated Post
Office receives and despatches several mails daily. The
mail with Melbourne morning papers being delivered by 10
a.m.


Near the Post Office is a well-appointed Free and Circulat-
ing Library, with a large and interesting collection of books
and newspapers.
Churches of the Wesleyan, Presbyterian, and Church of
England denominations are centrally situated, each church
having its own Sunday school.
The State school is a handsome brick building, with a-good
staff of teachers, and shows very good results.
An excellent Private School, under the management of
Mr. C. Tonner, draws a number of boarders from Melbourne,
and with good school discipline, and the pleasant and health-
ful surroundings of Portarlington, it is quite easy to under-
stand that such an institution as Mr. Tonners is highly
appreciated.
Cobb and Co’s, mail coach runs to and from Drysdale railway
station, seven miles away, in connection with’ the morning
and evening trains.
The morning coach also runs through to Geelong, returning
in the afternoon at 3 p.m.
Excursionists will find no difficulty in driving about the
beautiful district surrounding Portarlington. During the sum-
mer months Cobb & Co’s waggonettes run two or three times
daily between Portarlington, Drysdale, and Clifton Springs,
at a return fare of 3s. Cobb and Co. have also a well
furnished stable near the Grand Hotel, where visitors are
supplied with family waggonettes, pony phaetons, buggies,
etc., at reasonable charges. .
The following are interesting drives in the neighbourhood of
the Port:
St. Leonards —6 miles ; good sea fishing, splendid view
of entire bay.
Drysdale —6 miles ; this drive is through rich undulating
country. Visitors have an opportunity of seeing
the United Service Home, butter factor}',,
chicken farm, etc.
Clifton Springs—7 miles; sulphur baths, mineral waters;,
beautiful shelly beach.
Bellarine Hills—B miles; a round drive, with grand
scenery. The hill overlooks Corio Bay, Swan
Bay, Port Phillip, and Bass’ Straits, with fine
view of Geelong, Drysdale, Queenscliff, Portsea,,
Sorrento, etc.
Queenscliff —14 miles ; fine drive through farm lands
grazing and forest country.


Wallington—l2 miles; Strawberry gardens, fruit and'
flowers in season.
Ocean Grove —14 miles, | fine ocean beach ; good fish-
and ing, andshootingat Con-
Barwon Heads— 15 miles ) newarre Lakes.
Geelong—l9 miles ; the drive is an exceedingly pleasant
one, through fine country ; good roads.
First-rate accommodation is provided for visitors at the
Portarlington Grand Hotel, Miller’s Family Hotel, Bay View
Hotel, also the Coffee Palace, and a number of nicely
furnished boarding houses.


Drysdale.
The township of Drysdale, situated in the centre of the
Bellarine Shire, about seven miles from Portarlington,
and 12 miles from Geelong, although at present little
known outside the immediate district, is a place of con-
siderable interest both from a resident’s and a tourist’s point
of view.
The town is easily accessible, being in direct communication
with Geelong by rail, while Messrs. Cobb and Co.’s coaches
run through from Portarlington to Geelong, passing through
Drysdale, and returning every day. Messrs. Cobb and Co.
also keep up a liberal communication between Drysdale and
the surrounding districts by cabs, and they have established
large stables at Drysdale for the convenience of residents and
fourists.
The climate is one of the mildest and healthiest in the colony,
which is proved by the longevity of its old inhabitants, and
the healthy appearance of the younger generation. In
summer especially great benefit is experienced from the
situation of the district, as the hot winds are tempered con-
siderably in passing over Port Phillip. One of the
principal objects of interest is the United Service Home for
superannuated soldiers and sailors, which w r as founded in
1891, and of which a fuller notice is given hereafter.
The Drysdale Park, nearly three miles in circumference, is,
without exception, one of the prettiest spots outside of Mel-
bourne. The trees at present are very young, but in a few
this park will be the proudest boast of the Indented
Heads. It lies next to the United Service Home, the ground
on which the Home stands having been part of the park,
from which it was separated, and presented by the Shire
Council of Bellarine to the trustees of the Home.
The scenery around Drysdale is of exceptional beauty, and
from two or three elevations, notably Levien’s Hill, Ryan’s
Hill, and Grass Tree Hill, a view can be obtained comprising
Geelong, Queenscliff, the You Yangs, and Mount Macedon,
Port Phillip, Corio Bay, The Rip, and the wide ocean. On
the Grass Tree Hill there is a curious natural formation
known as “ The Basin.” It is supposed to be the crater of
an extinct volcano, and contain a large quantity of water,
which has never failed even in seasons of excessive drought,
for oftentimes the residents from many miles round used to
bring their cattle to water at “ The Basin.”


The Clifton Springs, miles from Drysdale, occupy an
exceedingly pretty spot, and the waters of the Spa, four in
number—Sulphur, Iron, Magnesia, and Seltzar —have been
highly recommended by the medical fraternity for their health-
giving qualities. Special appliances are provided for hot
and cold sulphur baths, and the sea bathing is very good.
There is a handsome hotel, and the grounds are laid out very
tastefully. Cobb & Co.’S waggonettes meet all trains at
Drysdale to convey visitors to the Springs ; the same firm
also run a line of waggonettes between Portarlington and
Clifton, in connection with the Melbourne steamers.
Among other objects of interest, we may mention the
Chicken Farm, lying about half a mile east of the township.
It is very interesting to watch the process of incubation in under-
ground vaults, and to pass through the houses and grounds,
where thousands of the feathered tribe may be seen in all
-stages from early chickenhood to the days of martyrdom.
The Butter Factory, themainstay at presentof the district,is
also worthy of a visit. It was owing to the success of this
factory and its. creameries at Portarlington and Moolap, that
Geelong decided to establish a factory on a large scale. The
Drysdale Factory, established barely a year ago) separates at
present upwards of 1000 gallons of milk per diem.
The principal product of the district is the onion.
Thousands of acres of this stringent vegetable are grown every
year, and the onions of the “ Indented Heads,” thanks to the
original producer, the Hon. J. F. Levien, M.L.A., have been
famous for several years. Attempts are being made to
establish fruit-growing on a large scale, and many other crops
are grown in considerable quantities. In the township pro-
per are situated the Shire Hall and Court-house, substantial
brick structures ; the Church of England, and the Wesleyan
and Presbyterian churches, all pronhinent features. The
Assembly Hall in combination with the Free Library, and an
asphalte Tennis Court are greatly appreciated the
residents.


The Spirited Service Heme.
®Ja) c^to
“I hate tlie sight of a soldier" —so an ex-M.L.A. told us.
one night on the floor of Parliament. Happily the people of
Victoria don’t sympathize with that malediction. They have no
wish, I daresay, for the establishment of a large standing army.
But they do wish that, besides an effective Artillery Corps,,
there should always exist a body of thoroughly trained men—-
a sort of skeleton army —which could be raised into a formid-
able force if there came the need for it. And although they
do not agree either with the Frenchman’s dictum, that the
art of war is the highest art, higher even than the Statesman’s,,
or with Sir Garnet Wolseley’s demand, that all our young
men should take military service for a time, there is a growing
feeling among them that military drill should be introduced
into every school, and that the acquirement of that habit of
prompt obedience to the word of command, which is the
very essence of military discipline, should form a part of every
schoolboy’s education. Hence the favour which has followed
Sir Frederick Sargood’s institution of the Cadet Corps.
This Old Soldiers and Sailors’ Home is another proof of the
kindly feeling which this community entertains towards those
who spend their lives in loyal service to their Queen and
country.
It originated in the casual discovery of two or three old
soldiers, whose scanty allowances scarcely sufficed to keep the-
life in them. Their case having been brought under the
notice of Major-General Tulloch, he published a letter, in
which he told their pitiful story, and, in a few generous
words, asked the people of Victoria to provide a home for all
such worn-out and destitute servants of the Crown. The
appeal met with a very gratifying response. A Committee
was formed, whose chairman (Mr. Matthew Lang), its
honorary secretary Major Stanley, and Major Purchas its
honorary architect, carried out the work with great energy
and success. The question of site was satisfactorily settled
by the handsome offer of a six acre block at Drysdale, as a
free gift from the Shire Council of Bellarine. A eligible
site could not easily have been found. It lies in a beautiful






and healthy locality ; is easy of access, is open to the sun and
the sea breeze ; and is a mile away from any public house, but
close to the railway station.
On the 27th April, iBgi, the whole countryside turned out
to welcome the Governor, who, after laying the foundation
stone of the Home, at a civic banquet expressed the extreme
pleasure with which he had made this first visit to their
picturesque township. Under the inspection of Major Purchas,
the building has reached (by three successive instalments) its
present dimensions. The elevation is simple, but in true
architectural taste. The rooms and their fittings very suitable
for their purpose, and there is about them a pleasant look of
the cheerful and the comfortable. The common room, which
is supplied with papers and periodicals, is bright and airy, and
at the head of it hangs a likeness of the Queen, which is
greatly prized, as it was a gift from Her Majesty to the Home.
Outside, a beginning has been made with shrubberies and
garden, the care of which will give the men healthful employ-
ment, while the latter will furnish them with an abundant
supply of vegetables and fruit.
The Home has cost nearly £ 2OOO, and is almost, if not
entirely, free trom debt. The merchants of Melbourne and
the different Victorian Corps contributed the larger portion of
that sum, and the latter bodies have supplied the first year’s
maintenance fund. But as the number of inmates increases,
outside assistance will be required. The present number is
11, the possible number 14.
I have pleasure in stating that under the management of
the Superintendent, there seems to be a reigning quietness and
spirit of contentment in the institution. And as a proof of
the goodwill of the townspeople towards it, I may mention
that happening to visit it on the Cook’s birthday (an old sailor
who, though past 80, has not yet been disrated, he fortunately
not holding office under our Government), I found that several
of the ladies of Urysdale had called to offer him their congra-
tulations, while one kind friend had sent him a birthday cake.
I need scarcely add that these old men, who have got so near
their journeys’ end, receive all possible kindness and Christian
instruction from the various clergjmien in the district.
Major-General Tulloch and his coadjutors deserve the best
thanks of this community for the establishment of this excel-
lent institution.


» citws mti tin i m it
t —'-j C~& d —-■ ■
For very many years past the locality known as Clifton
Springs, or Drysdale-on-the-Bay, which is situated about 13
miles distant from Geelong, has been a favourite resort of
holiday picknickers and persons fond of pleasant country and
seaside drives. Its chief attractions were, of course, the
Mineral Springs, from which it derives its name. For a long
time, however, they were left almost in their primitive con-
dition, the rudest makeshifts for public convenience being
considered sufficient to satisfy the wants of visitors.
After the lapse of a few years the Springs became rather a
familar topic of conversation, and business men began to
speculate as to their value as a sanatory resort. The result
was that two or three ventures for the development of a
sanatorium at the locality were projected, and a splendidly
appointed hotel was erected containing from 18 to 20 bed-
rooms, sitting, dining, drawing, private, sitting and billiard
rooms, private and public bars, extensive culinary and
servants’ quarters, and all requisite accommodation appertain-
ing to a first-class establishment ; and' involving an
expenditure of more than The place is so erected
that additions may be built at any time should the hoped for
future popularity of the place demand them, and provision
will also be made to render possible the erection of a tower,
commanding a panoramic view of the country for miles around
at no distant date. The view from this structure will, it is
anticipated, be magnificent, as in clear weather Mt. Macedon,
Mt. Buninyong, the Barrabool Hills, the seaward coast
towards Queenscliff and Barwon Heads, the northern edge of
Corio Bay with the You Yangs and Anakies in the back-
ground, and the constant passing and re-passing of the three
steamers engaged in the Geelong and Melbourne trade,
together with glimpses of the shipping from outer seas, and
other attractive sights, will meet the eyes of visitors in
panoramic detail. The Springs have been covered with glass
and cement protections. Handsome bath rooms have also
been erected, and 2-horse-power engine supplies the baths with
water from the sea, Sulphur Springs and fresh water. With
regard to the medicinal value of the Springs, it is not generally
known that their waters possess all of the». properties which
have made Saratoga, Carlsbad, Kissengen, Ems, and
Harrogate famous as beneficial resorts for invalids. These


_1
Ld
h
O
X
CO
o
2
5
CL
CO
z
o
h
Ll.
Zi
O




properties are briefly summarised in the description of the
various waters —magnesia, seltzer, sulphur, soda, and iron—
and it is sufficient to add that they have been submitted to rigid
chemical examination by eminent scientists, and have passed
through the ordeal successfully. The company have not only
Springs and hotel, but the land connected therewith, which
has an area of 31 acres, with a spacious smooth sandy beach
separating its undulating hills from the bay. The spot is
well sheltered, and is not devoid of picturesqueness in the
shape of natural attractions, cloven gorges and clumps of
heavily-foliaged trees relieving the somewhat monotonous
aspect of the sea’s expanse and the stretch of level land
inward. The company do not intend to neglect the strictly
commercial aspect of the Springs’ business. They will, as
soon as their arrangements are completed, go in extensively
for bottling the waters, as they anticipate commanding for
them a ready sale. We cannot give better testimony as to
the efficacy of the Spring waters, or conclude this notice
more fittingly, than by appending the following extract from
a report of the late Mr. Johnson, Government Analytical
Chemist; —“ The main difference between the imported water
and that supplied from the Clifton Springs appeared to be
this —that the former was comparatively flat (possibly from
long being bottled and from a voyage), while the colonial was
bright, sparkling, and very brisk indeed, like the best
champagne. . . .No doubt when these really valuable
waters become known, they will completely replace the im-
ported article, which is often putrid and quite incapable of
being used. The attention of the medical profession should
be turned to this matter in the interest of suffering humanity,
as here, as it were at our own doors, we have a splendid supply
of a most unexceptionable article, at prices far less than can
possibly be paid for a vastly inferior imported article.” This
business, combined with the hydropathic establishment, must
necessarily give handsome returns on the capital invested,
and there can be no doubt that the institution of an establish-
ment such as is now proposed will prove an unequivocal
success.
Visitors from inland should secure a seaside ticket to
Drysdale Station, from thence Cobb & Co.’s waggonettes
convey visitors direct to the Springs.
Melbourne visitors will find the most pleasant route is by
steamer to Portarlington; and from the Jetty a well
appointed line of Cobb & Co.’s waggonettes run direct to the
Springs.


A family trip to He Seaside.
i. —HOW THEY MANAGED IT.
Had you entered a certain house in East Melbourne about
this time last year, you would have found the Wedderburn
family in close conclave. The subject was: a projected
excursion to the seaside. The matter had been broached the
day before, when two of their cousins called to announce that
they were arranging for another summer trip to Lome, and
“ would not the Wedderburn’s go with them ? ” Mrs. W. gave
no encouragement to the proposal at the time, but during the
day she talked it over with her husband ; and the following
evening, while the young people were still seated at the tea-
table, she announced that she had something of importance
to say to them ; and then, turning to her two daughters, she
put the straight question to them, “ Girls, whether would you
like me to get you new summer dresses, or to take you and
your brothers to the seaside.” “Oh ! take us to the seaside,
Mother,” they immediately replied ; to which reply the
boys gave a clamorous assent. But here Mr. W. interposed
“ It is easy for you boys to agree, but are you willing to help.
What will you do, Dick ? ” Now, Dick was a little spend-
thrift. He had no assets, but he offered to give his father a
lien over his Saturday’s pence. Harry, after a few moments
pause, said, “ Mother, you have often wished me to give up
my pipe, and I have often tried it—now I will do it. So
Father may keep 6d. a week out of my next year’s salary as
my contribution.” “ Very well,” said Mr. \V. “ And now,
Mother, what are you going to do for us ? ” Mrs. Wedder-
burn, thus appealed to, produced a book, which her children
had often seen, and wondered what was in it, for it had a
locked clasp, and had never been opened in their presence.
The origin of this mysterious book was this: when the
cousins, already mentioned, returned from last year’s
summering at Lome, they had come back so rosy and robust,
and so brimful of animal spirits, that Mrs, W. felt that, if it
were at all within the compass of theft means, it was her duty
to give her young people a setting up like that. And so she
had resolved to commence a system of imperceptible
economies, by which it might be possible, with thoughtfulness
and pare, to accumulate such a sum as would make a sub-
stantial contribution to “ A Summer Excursion Fund.”


“ This is my savings book,’ 1 she now explained, “in which
I have kept an account of all the daily and weekly savings
which I have been able to make during the last 10 months.
Papa has audited it, and says that the sum total is exactly
£10." “ But Mother, how have you saved all that money,’’
asked one of the girls, “ and we have never missed anything
we used to get.” “ Not much, certainly,” said Harry, “ but
now I know why mutton chops have superseded beef-steaks ;
and the roast of beef comes once a week instead of twice.”
Mr. W. concluded the family council by stating that although
he had kept no savings book, he had been trying his hand at
the saving business, and that he would give pound for pound
of their mother’s contribution. “ And these united savings,”
he said, “ will give us a three-weeks trip.”
2.—WHERE THEY WENT TO.
The young people wanted to go to Lome. L heir cousins
were going ; and from them they had heard no end of their
glorious climbings among its hills and valleys. But, for
business reasons, Mr. W. wished to be within easy distance
•of Melbourne, and so it was resolved to make a sort of pros-
pecting expedition among the various watering places, which
had been established on the shores of Bellarine.
It was agreed, however, to postpone their trip until the
crush and bustle of the New Year holidays were over. In the
meantime Mr. W. promised to show his children some of
those interesting objects and beautiful places in and outside of
Melbourne, of which they knew about as much as if they had
been situated in the much-investigated planet Mars.
The 13th of January, although it seemed long of coming,
came at'last, and after an early breakfast, the family “ taking
up their carriages,” {i.e., as much as they could carry) as Paul
■did 1800 years ago, they made their way to the Geelong
steamer. And then began, for the girls at feast, a succession
•of wonders and delighted surprises ; for strange as it may
seem, they had never been outside Melbourne —had never
been'on board-a-ship—had never sailed on, had never even
seen the sea. And that feeling of wonder grew into a feeling of
rapture as they approached Portarlington, and gazed upon
its green slopes and garden homes. Having bespoken rooms,
the fly from the hotel awaited them at the pier, and after a
hasty dinner thev went forth upon their first excursion. Getting
down to the Esplanade, they wandered along that grassy way
for two or three miles, climbing up an eminence here and
.there, to catch the various features of the panorama of Port


Phillip. They did not turn back till the fading glories of sun-
set warned them that night was at hand. Then they began
to discover that they were very hungry, and I need not say
that they did full justice to the simple, but plentiful meal that
had been provided for them. Before retiring to rest, they
assembled in their father’s room, and joined in their usual
evening song of praise.
On the following day Harry and his father returned to
office work till Saturday evening, when they came back to the
family, “came-back to stay,” as the father announced to their
great joy. On Sunday they worshipped in two of the local
churches, and spent the afternoon in a sheltered nook by the
sea, where they had a pleasant Bible talk. The next two days
were devoted to an inspection of the homesteads and farming
industries of this thriving district. Their custom was to sally
out immediately after breakfast, the gentlemen carrying
provisions for a family picnic, and the girls having a billy
each strung upon her waist-band.
The next day, the party were conveyed in one of Cobb’s
coaches to Clifton Springs, where Mr. Wedderburn was going
to try the sulphur baths for certain rheumatic affections which
had shown themselves of late; while the doctor had recom-
mended the girls to brace themselves up by drinking the
Chalybeate waters. They found many objects of interest in
that neighbourhood—Drysdale, the picturesque little capital
of Bellarine ; the Old Soldiers and Sailors’ Home ; the Butter
Factory, etc. And additional zest was given to their rambles
by the offer of a prize, which Mr. W., who was an enthusiastic
naturalist, made to the one who should collect the largest
number of specimens of a certain plant, the plant being grass.
And although the young people laughed at the proposal (for
they thought that in all the world there was but one kind of
grass), before the week was ended they had found at least a
dozen varieties.
Tuesday, the 27th, saw them again upon their march. The
mother was packed with the luggage inside, while the rest of
the party went aloft, and enjoyed a delightful drive across the
country to Ocean Grove ; the route leading them through
sunshine and shade, by pleasant tracks and overshadowing
trees. They were just in time for luncheon, at which nearly
100 persons were about to sit down when they arrived. The
girls no sooner appeared than they were seized by two of the
inmates, who turned out to be two of their particular friends.
There was no difficulty in disposing of their time at the
Grove. The surrounding country had to be explored ;
Barwon Heads had to be visited ; the river had to be fished - r


• Sulphur Baths, Cliiton Springs
Baths dj Jetty ,Clifton Springs




and if the cost was not too heavy, a day was to be given to
Lake Connewarre, where they had an invitation to land and
lunch at Toorang. As Mr. Wedderburn could handle a boat,
and Harry was a good man at the oar, the expense of this
expedition was very trifling. They had to make an early
start, however, in order to catch the flowing tide. The ebbing
7 ------ 7 0 0
tide brought them home again in easy fashion, full of that
animated and pure delight which accompanies a day spent
among the beautiful works cf God, in the unrestraint and
pleasant society of those whom we love best.
The last move was to Queenscliff —that wonderful projection
which, like a finger stretched out from the mainland, sustains
the light-houses, which guide the mariner into Port Phillip.
And the forts, with their armament of great guns, which guard
the entrace and defend the Bay.
The three weeks allotted for the trip had now expired ; and
so, after two days spent at the Cliff, the family left by sea,
and were safely restored to their East Melbourne home.
3.—THE GOOD THEY GOT FROM IT.
Next morning Mr. Wedderburn delivered his budget.
Their expenditure, he said, had kept considerably within the
estimated cost, and then there were two incalculable items
which must go to the credit of the Excursion Fund—the
amount of pleasure which they had received, and the store of
health which they had brought back. As to the latter, for him-
self he felt like a new man ; —and his daughter, who had been
suffering from brain fag when they went away, had told
him that morning that she thought she would now go up for
examination (which she did, and passed with flying honours).
Before the family separated, a resolution was carried to start
“ A Family Excursion Fund for next year.
Dr. Guthrie used to cry up City-Life against Life in the
Country. It is there men get their wits sharpened and their
sympathies broadened—there only can they reach the full
stature and capacity of manhood. Let that be granted. But
stature without strength is a poor thing; and if men will keep
thinking about money and working among goods, year
in and year out without change or intermission, neither their
sharpened wits nor their broadened sympathies will save
them from a terrible breakdown. This matter has been
taken up with great earnestness by our Home Magazines—
which, when summer comes in sight—pour out hints and
advices for the guidance of intending tourists—the numbers


of whom seem to be making enormous increases every year.
The Rev. W. J. Dawson has told us what an exodus takes
place from Glasgow on each returning summer. Here are
some of his words :
No city knows how to enjoy itself so well as Glasgow, and none so in-
telligently. With the first blush of summer the city begins to pour itself out
upon the coast. The river-steamei s begin to run ; and presently every blue
bay will be alive with boats, and amid the scented heather and beside the
shining loch Glasgow will participate in the carnival of summer; the
poor as well as the wealthy ; for there are facilities for all. I can travel
sixty miles second class by express train, and sail seventy milts through the
loveliest of the coast scenery, for the sum of three and nine pence, and if I
like to take two of my children with me, they will be included in the bargain.
The poor man who wants a breath of the sea, and a vision of the magic that
summer is making on the mountains, may travel his twenty miles to
Greenock and back, and sail up Loch Goil, that most exquisite of lochs, for
a shilling, or at most eighteen pence. What wonder that the whole city
becomes migratory in July ? And no wonder the Scotsman loves Nature.
Nature allures him on every side, and breathes her incommunicable enchant-
ment into his soul. And they do love her. The feeling of Scott that he
would die if he did net see the heather once a year seems to be the
common feeling of his countrymen. The poorest people, whose life has left
them no leisure, become enthusiasts when they speak of the loch, the moor,
and the Ben. I have heard their voices tremble, and have seen their eyes
light up with yearning, when they have told me how they saw the sun set
behind Goaffell, or walked in the early morning up the dewy shoulders of
Ben Lomond. And this is the charm of Glasgow ; it is contiguous to the
very temple and innermost shrine of Nature ; it is the best city in the world
for getting out of.
I have inserted this passage because I wish to empha-
size the fact that the love of nature is not a special endowment
of any race, and that we thwart the benevolent purpose of
our Creator, and impose a serious disability upon ourselves
if we do not cherish it, and give it free scope for exercise. In
his famous Bridgewater Treatise, Dr. Chalmers has shown
us what a wonderful correspondence there is between things
material and things spiritual, and what capacities there lie in
the former to make a virtuous species happy. We know,
indeed, that while Nature can entrance the imagination, it
cannot rectify the heart, and we have listened to the con-
fessions of an Alpine traveller, who complained that although
he felt his utter nothingness amid the grandeur of the Alps, his
sense of size and somethingness returned as soon as he had
left them, and that in spite of the beautiful things he had seen
he found himself unbsautiful still—nevertheless we believe
that no man can go further upon the landscapes of the earth—
its green woods and smiling gardens, its lakes and rocks and
rivers without a deep that He, Who made all
these things for His pleasure, made them for ours as well,
and gave us an eye that could look on them, and a heart
that could enjoy them. Canon Hole tells us that
Linnams, the Swedish naturalist, coming suddenly upon a


wide expanse of golden furze, was so affected by the
beauty of it, that he burst into tears; which did not
ridicule, but the Canon thus explained: “ Looking at
these scenes of unutterable beauty we feel that we are in the
presence of God. And our spirit, oppressed by a loveliness of
which it was unworthy and unable to apprehend, finds its
relief in tears.” And it is in such tender and animated inter-
course with nature, that we find an answer to Milton’s
question,—
“ What if Earth
Be but the shadow of Heaven ; and things therein
Each to each other like, more than on Earth is thought.”
THE END.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
The NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY
Of AUSTRALASIA, (Limited)
OFFICE
MOORABOOL STK-EET.
RISKS ACCEPTED WITHOUT DELAY
AT LOWEST PREMIUMS.
Guarantee for Fidelity granted, with a Share of Profits
of each Quinquennial Division.
GEE RON G DIREOTORS:
Hon. G. F. Belcher, M.L.C.
H. F. Cameron, Esq. (Messrs. Cameron & Gibson).
PROMPT SETTLEMENTS IN C/fSES OF LOSS.
LOSSES BY BUSH FIRES COVERED*
J. M. ANDERSON, Agent for Geelong and District.
HOT ® SEA ® BATHS
ALWAYS READY AT THE
GEELONG SEA BATHING 00,’S BATHS,
EASTERN BEACH,
iim mmm ssmiiiAi
Cures Rheumatism, Sciatica, soothes and
cures Liver and Nervous Affections, and
gives great relief to persons afflicted with
Asthma.
THE HOT SEA BATHS
Introduces a most comfortable and luxur-
ious feeling throughout the entire system.
PRICE - OKIE SHILLING PER BATH.
Hours : 6,30 a.m. to 6.30 p.m. during Summer,
and on Sundays till 9.30 a.m.
Swimming Baths, 2d., 3d, Sz A d.
J. M. ANDERSON, Secretary
Office- 66, Moc:abool St., Geelong.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
F. s. m. IVIAOISCH & S. I I. (DAWSON
Surgical & IDecTianlcal Dentists,
201 MOORABOOL STREET, GEELONG,
62 BANK ST. EAST, SOUTH MELBOURNE.
OIJVL CUWOW,
SHIP 3* GENERAL S7VYITH,
YARRA STREET, GEELONG.
All Work done on the most reasonable terms, and at
the Shortest possible notice.
ROYAL BOOT ARCADE,
MOORABOOL STREET, GEELONG,
(Opposite Exhibition Building )
Pi] IMPORTER OF pj
. ENGLISH, GERMAN, AND FRENCH GOODS. *
fn Ladies’ Dancing Shoes. Children’s Boots and Shoes 1^
J-Rj of Newest Styles. ;
ALL ORDERS PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO.
W. B. WILTOtf,
LEATHER MERCHANT & Importer of GRINDERY
RYRIE STREET, GEELONG.
PURCHASER OF THE FOLLOWING:
Rabbit and Opossum Skins, Hides, Calfskins, Sheep-
skins, Horsehair, Beeswax, Tallow, Wattle-bark.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
ml McDonald, -i£-
COACH BUILDER.
CARRIAGE REPOSITORY, YARRA STREET. GEELONG
(ISTEAAIE?/ CO3VCOVC SBCXAI B RUSTIC )
Cheapest Vehicles of every description for Cash or Time Payment.
All Vehicles built on the Premises Guaranteed.
ALL KINDS OF VEHICLES BOUGHT, SOLD, OR EXCHANGED.
PAINTING oSC, TRIMMING.
TIRES CUT.
Waggonettes, Phaetons, Single Buggies, Pony Carts, Pony
Buggies, Built to order at the Lowest possible prices.
X. HOLDEN,
fvobucc JSmTmut, €[mf£ Cutting ft Com CmsMng glUls,
MERCER * CAVENDISH STREETS, GEELONG.
And at WALLACE (near Ballarat).
Hay and Chaff Pressed for Shipment
JOHN PATERSON,
Sc GASPITTER,
MERCER STREET, GEELONG*
BATHS, WATER CLOSETS, &c., FITTED AND REPAIRED.
W A.T E "R, SEEVICHJS LA.ID ON".
(Late GEORGE CAKEBREAD)
L.HVEE, CEMENT * PLASTER STORES,
Little Malop Street, Geelong.
——
Sole Agents for the EXPANDED METAL LATHING and
FENCING CO. Builders and others can inspect samples at
our Office.
COAL, COKE, AND CHARCOAL AT LOWEST CURRENT RATES.
Laths, Bricks, Fire Lumps, Bricks and Clay, Tesselated FLOORING
TILES - COLONIAL and ENGLISH MANUFACTURE in Stock,
DRAIN PIPES. GUTTER TILES, &c.
Telephone No. 79.


gR. |RTHUR f), |OW(DfIR,
SOLICITOR, &C„
Has commenced the Practice of his Profession at
CHfIIDBERS No. 7S, YHRRfI ST., GEELONG
(Next to Commercial Bank).
NOTICE OF REMOVAL.
HEWV SPEED,•«-
3oligtor, 9e.,
(Lately Manager for Messrs. Briggs & Snowball, at Seymour and
Avenel),
H.A.S IREiMTOXTEID
No. 77 YARRA STREET (Next Commercial Bank),
Where he will continue the Practice of his late Father.
TRUST MONEYS TO LEND AT LOWEST CURRENT RATES,


AI)VEETiSEIIENT.
THE PRINCE OF WALES HOTEL
Is one of the oldest established hotels in the district, it
being a favorite with travellers in the time of the gold
rush. The present proprietor, Mr. James Wilson, of
St. Albans fame, however, decided that the place should
be re-built to make it more suitable for modern times,
and we have now in Geelong a hotel for comfort and elegance
not to be excelled in the colony, as the accompanying illus-
tration shows. The hotel is a three-storied structure,
stuccoed front. The main entrance from Little Malop street
leads to the vestibule, which is tiled throughout with Minton
tiles, and by which access is gained to the principal rooms,
including the large and spacious dining hall, 40 x 18-6, also
the private and public bars, which, by the way, are most
elaborately decorated with cedar and mirrored fittings, with
lincrusta walton decorations ; and where the best brands of
liquors can be obtained, the bar being fitted with ice chests
complete. Commercial room, parlor, smoke room are con-
veniently situated. The billiard room is a special feature of
the hotel ; it is situated underground, and is approached by a
broad and well lighted stairway. The room is lighted by the
Hayward Prismatic lights, and by this means the room is
made as light as the rooms above, gas not being required in
the ordinary hours of daylight. The ventilation is most
complete, and in the warm weather the atmosphere is quite
cool. The room is fitted with two of Alcock’s patent cushion
tables, and with all accessories, lavatories, etc. complete.
From the vestibule the main staircase starts, leading to the
several floors. Leading from the first floor is the large
balcony, running the full length of the building, 66 feet, and the
width of the footpath 120 feet. On this balcony ferns and
lounges are placed for the convenience of visitors. On the first
floor there are situated sitting rooms, smoke rooms, and suites
of rooms, also a large private dining room, suitable for private
dinners, etc. A magnificent Steinberg piano being placed
here for the convenience of boarders. There are over 40
bed-rooms. The sanitary arrangements are on the most
perfect scale. Bath rooms fitted, with hot and cold water;
and all the principal rooms are connected with electric bells
and speaking tubes. The telephone is also connected with
the hotel. Mention must also be made of the magnificent
look-out on the top of the Hanara roof, from which a splendid
view of the surrounding country can be obtained. There is
also in connection with the hotel a large and spacious livery,
letting and bait stables, capable of accommodating over 50
horses, the stalls and loose boxes being paved with patent
bricks. Special attention is given to the country visitors.
Proper attention has been given to the building in case of
fire. The architect for the building was Mr. T. F. Seeley,
of Exhibition Buildings, the whole work being carried out
under his personal superintendence.






T'V nvj ■ "v
TO CO A CHBUiLDERS AND OTHERS.
•Hp 0 ■
ANDREWS’ * NEW
ZP^TZEjIsrT
TYRING
URNACE
The Only
Satisfactory
Furnace Invented.
WILL. HEAT TYRES SPEEDILY.
WILL HEAT TYRES EQUALLY.
WILL HEAT TYRES ECONOMICALLY.
WILL HEAT TYRES SAFELY.
WILL HEAT TYRES SIMPLY.
And TO ANY HEAT REQUIRED.
NOTE.
It strikes the Inventor as being strange that, although there
are so many thousands of wheel tyres heated annually, there has
never previously been designed a furnace that would accomplish
the desired object satisfactorily, but with this new invention all
conceivable difficulties have been surmounted.
Full particulars, terms, &c., supplied on application to—
C. ANDREWS,
Latrobe Terrace and Ghe/}inshap Street,
GEELONG.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
ANDREWS’ PATENT
jNloQpareii ”
liiliig Ipp&rftfii.
These unequalled
Stoves are made
in sizes ranging
from Nos. 1 to
S- Prices from
6 to 25 Guineas,
Write for Catalogues, &c, which will be forwarded on
application to —
Guineas.
C. ANDREWS,
Gbieringlriap St., Geelong
(OPPOSITE NEW POST OFFICE.)
TESTIMONIAL.
Melbourne, 9th July, 1888.
In the course of my official duties I have requisitioned for a goodly number of
Andrews’ “ Patent Cooking Stoves ” for use at various Railway Refreshment Room
Stations in Victoria, and I can unreservedly bear testimony to their excellence and
value for general cooking purposes. Being principally made of wrought iron, they
are not liable to fractures ; the fire box sides are of cast iron, and when woin oi
broken by accident are interchangeable without disturbing the other portions; they
are easily fitted on a flat bed in an ordinary fire-place, and an intricate series of
flues, necessary for most ranges, are avoided. They heat quickly, are easily cleaned,
and consume but a small quantity of fuel.
B. G. Davies, Inspector, Victorian Railways,


Taufcs made up to 4000 Gallops,
mills to Pump up to 3000 Gals, pet Pout.




ADVERTISEMENT.
Dalgety Chambers,
gjtedmol stmt, falong.
(OPPOSITE VICTORIA HOTEL)
t ?mp'
FINANCIAL & COMMISSION AGENTS.
SKLES OF
PROPERTIES, STOCK, & FIIRRITORE
CONDUCTED
Catalogues of Town and Country Properties for
Sale or to Let, on application.
ENQUIRIES OF ALL KINDS RESPECTING PROPERTIES.
VALUATIONS AND FINANCIAL BUSINESS
ATTENDED TO PROMPTLY.
——-
ijgcnto for the gorthern Spaourcmce go.


A 1) V K 1! TISE Mi 2 Nl’.


ADVERTISEMENT.
Humble & Nicholson.
VULCAN FOUNDRY, GEELONG,
Are MANUFACTURERS of Engines (Stationary and Port-
able), Boilers, Quartz Crushing Machinery, Flour
Mills, Bark Mills, Saw Mill Gearing, Sinking Plat-
forms, Pumping and Wool-Washing Connections,
Crab Winches.
THRESHING MACHINES
(With Four-horse Power Works).
Also Three, Two, and One-horse Power Works for Chaff-Cutting,
Winnowing Machines, Tanners’ Rollers and Strikers, &c.
TAYLOR’S PATENT REFRIGERATING MACHINES AND
COLD DRY AIR APPARATUS.
These Machines are unsurpassed for Making Ice, Cooling down
Liquids, Cold Storage Chambers, Freezing Meat for Shipment,
Ventilating and Reducing the Temperature in Hospitals and other
Public Buildings, and for fitting Railway Refrigerating Cars,
Intercolonial Vessels, and Fishing Boats.
D. PERRIER’S PATENT LEVER WOOL PRESS.
The Simplest and most Expeditious Press invented, and is being
highly appreciated (as it has made the Packing an 1 Baling ot
Wool one of the easiest operations in the shed).
We make
Also, LIGHT WOOL PRESS
Suitable for Farmers, by the same Patentee
Makers of Lascelles & Anderson’s Patent Rabbit Poison Distributors, and
Phosphorising Machine for Mixing the Poisoned Grain,
Sole Makers of WALKER’S PATENT FIRE BARS.
H. & N. have a large assortment of Patterns of Columns,
Brackets, Frieze, Balcony Railing for Verandahs.
PEXCES MODERATE.


ADVERTISEMENT.
CUTTRISS
BROS..
Far nit are Fan Proprietors
iiiEi&i* gamuses
Hope Street, Geelong West.
OFFICE :
Dalgety Chambers , Moira hoot Street, Geelong.
Furniture Packed, Stored or Removed
Chargss Moderate.


ADVERTISEMENT.
AITKEN & CO.,
ELECTRICIAN ( IMPORTERS,
(WHOLESALE & RETAIL)
Moorabool Street, Geelong.
Iff ■
THE CHEAPEST <£ STRONGEST
41-BICYCLeS-*-
IN VICTORIA.
SOLE .A-GKEIETTS
FOR THE
EWBANK CARPET SWEEPERS
Eifwisfii &
PATES? « WRITERS.
TELEPHONES AND ELECTRIC BELLS
FITTED IN TOWN OR COUNTRY.
AGENTS FOR
THOS. BARTON, Electrical Engineer, England,


ADVERTISEMENTS.
SADDLERY. 4 SADDLERY.
PRioaa
Miitii i mmtm mm%
(6 Doors from the Victoria Hotel)
[Established 1864.]
On Hand, the Largest and Best Assorted Stock of SADDLEBY, including
Race. Town, Stock, .Gent’s or La lies’ Saddles,
BUGGY, GIG, AND PAIR-HORSE HARNESS.
Whips, Spurs, Bits, Ladies’ and Gentlemen’s Patent Safety
Stirrup Irons, and all Horse Appointments. The Best Value for Money.
And having an efficient staff of Tradesmen at my Manufactory, I am
prepared to execute all orders with neatness and despatch.
Best Material and Workmanship. Country Orders care-
fully attended to and packed.
THE OLDEST SADDLERY ESTABLISHMENT IN GEELONG.
JOHN BANNISTER & SON,
CARRIERS
Commission Agents,
CARTAGE CONTRACTORS,
COAL, COKE, A FIREWOOD MERCHANTS,
« ro i §1 ■'
GEELONG.
«£T»
TELEPHONE No. 159.


HARVEY BUR ft Co.
Limited,
MILLERS, «<-
QraiQ apd /T\eretya9ts,
GEELONG, VICTORIA.
CORIO ROLLER FLOUR MILLS:
GLeringLap Street-
CLYDE FLOUR MILLS:
O Little Malop Street West O
Cfiaffcuttlng anti Hay-pressing Works:
O’Parrell Place.
gffice and §torcd - 112 % 114 fforie §t.
MAUFACTURERS OF THE CELEBRATED
CLIMHX ROLLER FLOUR.
ORDERS BY WIRE OR POST PROMPTLY EXECUTED,


ADVERTISEMENT.
■ferY #( HR #Sr YD T JJ
FAMILY AND COMMERCIAL
JfJjLTJjfi JL>-
MARKET • SQUARE,
Within a few minutes’ walk of Hot Sea Baths, Railway
Station, and Botanical Gardens.
Busses start every hour to all the Suburbs.
~ HOT AND COLD BATHS. T
The extensive improvements lately made make this
one of the most comfortable Hotels in the colony.
Under the patronage of the Commercial Travellers’
Association.
Ttlephone No. 7. PROPRIETOR.




TAfj*


COBB & co:s
ttiiltt mHttilt
Ocean Groce & Bartcon Heads
Coaches leave Cobb & Co.’s Offices, Geelong —Daily, Sundays
excepted, g a.m. and 2 p.m.; Return (via Ocean Grove),
6 a.m. and 4 p.m.
During Summer Months Coaches conneffi with Melbourne
Steamers at Queenscliff. For Time Table see daily
papers.
Combined Tickets —Steamer and Coach, Bs. (available for 30
days. Melbourne to Ocean Grove or Barwon Heads and
return, Bs.
Round Tickets, 95,, available for 30 days, including Steamer
to Geelong or Queenscliff, Coach to Ocean Grove
or Barwon Heads, Steamer to Melbourne.
These Tickets are available for Huddart , Parker &= Co.'s Geelong
steamers; also, Ozone or Hygeia, and for Cobb Co.’s
Geelong, Barwon Heads, Ocean Grove, and Queenscliff
Coaches. The journey may be broken at either place, but Q/\|\|
BE COMPLETED IN ONE DAY.
«0i Ipiral
Waggonettes connect with all Trains at Drysdale ; also,
Melbourne Steamers at Portarlington.
COMBINED TICKETS—
Steamer meet Portarlington, and Return, 1 p
Waggonette,'Portarlington, Clifton, and Return J
TICKETS AJ'ID INFORMATION—
M. L- HUTCHINSON,
305-307 Little Collins Street,
MELBOURNE.
Or Western Stage Co., Geelong.


