

r p
tlo
S (o I
The Richmond River
Experiences of
Ann King
Later on Mrs. T. N. Hollingworth,
Now Mrs. H. Dawc
of Wardell , Richmond River.
Written Entirely at her Dictation,
March, 1918.
Sydney:
1929.




THE RICHMOND RIVER EXPERIENCES
ANN KING,
Later on Mrs. T. JV. Hottingworth, and now Mrs. H.
Bawe, believed to be the oldest living resident
of the Richmond River.
[Reprinted in an edition of 25 copies only from, the first edition which was privately
printed at the office of the “Northern Star,” Lismore, 1918.]
Mrs. Dawc can laj claim to being one of
the oldest, if not the oldest, living resident
of the Richmond River, having lived here
for 74 years.
She landed in Sydney from England in
July, 1844, with her parents by the sailing
vessel “St. A'incent, ” the trip taking four
months, which was a good run in those days.
They spent a fortnight in Sydney, afterwards
going to the Clarence River by a steamer
called the “Susan,” landing at Grafton,
where there were very few houses : one
store kept by Mr. Sharp, one hotel kept
by Mr. Craig, and the houses being mostly
slab and bark huts. Here they stayed four
weeks, when her father, Mr. William King,
was engaged by Mr. Ward Stephens to work
on a sheep station at Back Creek, Richmond
River. Mr. Ward Stephens at that time
owned Runnymedc station. The journey
from Grafton was made on a bullock
waggon, and took two weeks to complete,
four families being carried on the one
waggon. About thirty miles from Grafton
they came to a hotel, “The Travellers’
Rest,” kept by Mr. and Mrs. Hindmarsh.
This and a cattle station wrnre the only two
habitations they saw till they reached
Runnymedc. When they got to the Rich-
mond River, near where Casino is now, a
large gum tree had to be felled across the
river to get the women and children across,
the bullocks and waggon having to be taken
through the water. They eventually
reached Back Creek safely, and began to
live in a hut. After being there only a
few days, the wild blacks made their ’ ap-
pearance on a hill at the back of the hut,
and began roiling stones down, several strik-
ing it. Mr. King, with an old musket, and
another shepherd with a double barrel gun
and only one charge of shot, managed to
keep them at bay by discharging the shot
and showing the guns. About dusk a valu-
able sheep dog puppy, which had been given
to Mr. King, ran up towards the blacks,
who caught it and took it away to their
camp. The white people had no fear of
blacks attacking them after dark, as they
were afraid of “debbil debbil,” so Mr.
King immediately walked in to the head
station five miles distant and gave notice
of the attack, and procured ammunition.
Next day, when supplies were being taken
from the head station, some blacks who
wore on friendly terms there were brought
to Mr. King’s place and made to understand
that he was a friend, and there was no
further trouble with the blacks. After liv-
ing there a few months, a house was built
for them further down the creek, and a big
lambing down shed was also built on top of
a hill quite near. At this time Mr. and
Mrs. Exton and their family came over from
Tomki, where they had been employed by
Mr. Barnes, and spent some time with the
King family till a house was built for them.
After living in that for a few months, they
were sent to live at the place where Mr.
King had the encounter with the blacks.
One day the children noticed some bushes
moving about, and drew their mother’s at-
tention to them. Mrs. Exton saw at once
that it was the blacks on the same hill


walking toward the house with the bushes
in front of them. She immediately went
in and dressed herself in Mr. Exton’s
clothes, got the gun, and paraded in front
of the hut, showing the gun until Mr. Exton
and a shepherd came home. On another
occasion when the Extons lived near Dis-
puted Plains, the blacks came and raided
the house and took all their rations, measur-
ing the flour out in pints and distributing
it amongst themselves. One of the children
began to cry, and a blackfellow gave him
his pint of flour so he would not cry, so
they were not without feelings. After that
they went away without molesting the
family. Mr. Exton’s eldest daughter (the
late Mrs. Brown, of North Lismore), was
Mrs. Dawe’s greatest friend. The Exton
family only landed in Australia two weeks
before the Kings came, coming direct to the
Richmond River, and never left it. The
two families each had five children born in
England, and four in Australia, Mrs. Dawe
being the eldest of the Kings, and was only
ten years old when she got to Australia.
After some time Mr. King left the Back
Creek and went to live at Runnymcde, where
he was engaged bringing supplies from Graf-
ton by bullock team. At this time the
family became acquainted with Mr. Thomas
Hollingworth, hutkeeper on an out station
at Bungabee, owned by Mr. Lord. He also
carried on his business as boot and shoo
maker, the residents of the Richmond River
at that time having to depend on “Tom the
Snob” for the boots they wore. He after-
wards married Ann King, which necessitated
a trip to Grafton, as there was no clergyman
on the Richmond River.
Arrangements were all made for the wed-
ding to take place, and on Mr. King’s next
trip to Grafton for supplies he was accom-
panied by Mr. Hollingworth, and they in-
tended bringing the minister back with them.
When they reached Myrtle Creek, 25 miles,
they met a traveller from Grafton, who told
them the minister was not well enough to
undertake the journey, so Mr. King decided
to walk back and bring his daughter with
him, Mr. Hollingworth continuing the journey
with the bullock team. He reached home
about sundown, and Mrs. King got Ann
ready, also her little brother, David, about
twelve years old, to keep her company on
the journey, made a parcel of her wedding
dress and bonnet (bonnets were worn for
both women and girls in those days), and,
after having some tea, the three started off
to wmlk until they got to the bullock team,
which they reached in time to have a good
sleep before starting off again. How few
of the present day people would dream of
undertaking a journey under those con-
ditions! But the pioneers were made of
good stuff.
Grafton was reached safely, and by this
time another hotel had been started, and
was kept by Mr. and Mrs. Hewitt. Here
the travellers stayed, and on the day of their
return to Runnymede the wedding took
place at Mr. Craig’s hotel. Mr. Garrard,
the first police magistrate of Lismore, and
his family were staying there waiting for a
bullock waggon to take them to Tunstall,
where they intended living. The late Mr.
Edward Howell, then a youth, was also stay-
ing there, being engaged by Mr. Garrard to
be his spare stock driver. The eldest son,
Alfred, a boy of about eight years old, was
very curious to see what was going on in
the room, where the wedding was taking
place, so had a peep through the door, which
was left ajar, and saw the couple married.
Some years later he was instrumental in
getting a minister to christen their first
child, Diana, whom he eventually married.
On the return journey there were four
bullock teams left for the Richmond together,
the Garrard family being in one of the wag-
gons. Home was reached safely, where
Mrs. King had the wedding feast prepared,
and the party was kept up for a week, which
was the custom then. Dancing was, of
course, the great attraction, the only music
available being a jew’s harp, which was
played by the bridegroom, none of the guests
being able to play it. About this time the
Kings became acquainted with Mr. and Mrs.
McLeod and their daughter and son-in law,
Mr. and Mrs. Grimes, who came over from
Dyraaba to Runnymcde. Mrs. Grimes and
her daughter, Mary Jane, were drowned in
the schooner “Hector,” which loft Sydney
on the first trip after her maiden voyage for
the Richmond River about the year 1872,
and was never heard of again. Not a body
was washed ashore or even a spar from the
ship to show where she went down. The
suspense and anxiety nearly caused Mr.
Grimes to lose his reason.
Mr. Alfred Taylor, a brother of Mr. John
Taylor, father of Mr. W. A. Taylor, of
Woodlark Street, Lismore, was also drowned
at the same time. Soon after this the King
family and Mr. and Mrs. Hollingworth left
Runnymede and went to Wyangerie, Mr.
King being engaged by Mr. Bundock to
drive the bullock team to Grafton for sup


plies. The journey took them through
Fairymount station, now known as Kyogle,
which was then owned by Mr. Fawcett, who
later became the first parliamentary repre-
sentative for the Richmond River electorate,
prior to which he was appointed Police
Magistrate in succession to the late Mr.
Henry Garrard, who had been accidentally
killed while riding to Casino to attend court.
Mr. Hollingworth here carried on his trade
as bootmaker, as usual, and, having com-
pleted his orders, had to walk to Lismore
to deliver them, sometimes through water-
above his knees, to the cedar getters, who
were fairly numerous then about there.
Lismore station was then owned by Mr. W.
Wilson.
While still at Wyangeric, the first child
was born to Mr. and Mrs. Hollingworth,
Diana, afterwards Mrs. Alfred Garrard.
They lived there about eighteen months, and
then Mr. King took a contract from Mr.
Wilson to draw cedar. This brought the
family to Lismore, where they stayed for a
while, Mrs. Hollingworth accompanying them,
her husband having decided to go shearing
in New England, where the sheep by this
time were mostly bred, the Richmond River
having been found unsuitable for sheep.
They eventually lived at Tucki, where Mr.
King had to draw the cedar to Tucki wharf.
After the shearing season was over, some
months later, Mr. Hollingworth came back
from New England and entered into partner-
ship with Mr. Jones (father of Mr. Oliver
Jones) in the timber trade at the Pelican
Tree, near the place where three white men
had been murdered by the blacks a few years
previously; but by this time they had be-
come fairly friendly, and were often engaged
felling timber and clearing scrub. Here a
second child was born (Mary Ann), and died
at the age of three and a half years through
being accidentally scalded. They lived here
for about two years, and then went to live
at the point at Coraki, not far from the old
ferry approach, which was started many
years later. Their house was built of cedar-
slabs sawn in a saw pit by Mr. Holling-
worth and Mr. Alex. McDonald, senr., of
boat building fame, who were then partners
in the saw- pit. Mr. Hollingworth carried
each of these slabs by himself a distance of
250 yards to the site where the house was
to be built, and then built the house him-
self.
They w-ere unfortunate enough to have
this house burnt dowu three years after.
Two more children were born there, Barrett
and Ellen. While there they became ac-
quainted with Mr. and Mrs. Yabsley, senr.,
and family. Mrs. Hollingworth’s brother,
Tom, afterwards married one of his daughters
(Magdelen), both of whom are dead some
years. At Coraki the first horse races ever
held on the Richmond River took place, the
principal event being won by a horse named
Charlie, owned and ridden by the present
Mr. William Yabsley, of Coraki House, the
course being on the same site as the one
used at the present day. One of the riders
that day was the late Mr. Tom Bawden, of
Grafton.
After their house was burnt down the
Hollingworths had to live in a small house
nearby, until later on another was built for
them. In the meantime Mr. and Mrs. King
came to live at Coraki also, and the two
families were once more united. They lived
there until the Free Selection Bill was
passed, when Mr. Hollingworth selected land
at South Lismore, quite close to where the
Lismore railway station now stands. Alto-
gether five children were born at Coraki—
Barrett, Ellen, Lizzie, Clara, and Harriet.
The house at Coraki had to be pulled down,
and each piece carried to the Richmond
River a few- yards distant and made info a
raft, the larger pieces being put into the
river first and lashed together, the lighter
timber, doors, windows, etc.,, being stacked
on top of it. Next the furniture was put
on that, and Mr. Hollingw-orth, his son,
Barrett, and brother-in-law, Mr. Ben King,
brought the raft to Lismore with the tide
when it was favourable, and when unfavour-
able it was tied to a tree, and the party had
to wait for the next turn of the tide, and
by this means it was slowly brought to
Lismore and carried from the river bank to
the new- site and rebuilt by Mr. Holling-
worth. This house, w r ith the exception of
Mr. Garrard’s, which was built about the
place where the Lismore station is, and a
small humpy owned by Mr. Christie Griffin,
was the only one built on the river bank
betw-een Gundurimba and Lismore. Gun-
durimba at that time was a more important
place than Lismore, there being a hotel run
by Mrs. Johnston (afterwards Mrs. Beatty),
a store kept by Mr. Barker, and a number
of other residents, including Mr. Fred West
(boat builder), Mr. Casper Frohmuller,
Messrs. James Johnston, Ben Edwards, Peter
McDonald, Lanty Walker, and Martin
Murphy.
Mr. Barrett Hollingworth remembers the


first piano being brought to Lismore for Mr.
Wilson, of Lismore station. It was brought
from Sydney to Wardell in a schooner, then
put into a sailing boat managed by the late
Mr. H. Tyler, of Wardell, and a blackfellow,
and taken on up the river. When they
reached Coraki, Mr. Tyler remained with
Mr. Hollingworth and gave him the latest
ideas of soling boots, he being also a shoe-
maker, and had not landed in Australia til]
years after Mr. Hollingworth, They also
regaled themselves with the latest and most
popular idea in drink (rum), while Mr. Ben
King and the blackfellow continued the
journey to Lismore and delivered the piano.
The house at Lismore being completed, Mr.
Hollingworth again started his shoemaking
business; and three more children were born,
Joe, Mary, and Will, the last and youngest
of the family being born during the biggest
flood they had yet seen—March, 1870.
About nine years after coming to Lismore,
Mr. Hollingworth was taken suddenly ill one
night, and died in a few minutes, being
within a day or two of their silver wedding.
Mrs. Hollingworth after a little time left
the farm and went to Lismore, where she
started a dressmaking business, which she
carried on until her marriage with Mr. H.
Dawe, in April, 1883. A year or two pre-
vious to this the farm had been sold to Mr.
T. C. Lodge, then manager of the Australian
Joint Stock Bank, who had it subdivided and
sold as town allotments, which now form part
of the town of South Lismore.
Mr. and Mrs. H. Dawe lived at Goonellabah
for a few years, and then removed to War-
dell, where they are still living (1918), Mrs..
Dawe being in her 84th year, and possessed
of all her faculties. Her children are all
married, and their families are as follow: —
Mrs. Alfred Garrard, 13 children, 50 grand-
children, 11 great-grandchildren; Mr. Barrett
Hollingworth, 9 children, 9 grandchildren;
Mrs. Phillips, 2 children, 2 grandchildren;
Mrs. George Taylor (deceased), 13 children,
13 grandchildren; Mrs. F. E. Furlonger, 6
children, 4 grandchildren; Mr. J. N. Holling-
worth, 4 children, 3 grandchildren; Mrs. G.
McKillop, 1 child; Mr. W. T. Hollingworth,
4 children. In all, Mrs. Dawe has 150 do-
scendants living.
Those defending the Empire arc 10 grand-
sons, one of whom fell at Gallipoli in May,
1915; one being a prisoner of war, lately
transferred from Germany to Switzerland;
and one, Andrew McCaffery, killed in action
in France, May 27, 1918; one great-grand-
son, besides two husbands of granddaughters,
and seven nephews, one being killed in
France, September, 1917; and eight grand-
nephews, one of whom died of wounds in
Palestine, March, 1918.
M. B. McK.
Wardell, Eichmond Eiver.
D, S. Ford, Printers, 44'50 Reservoir Street, Sydney.




