







THE WOMAN’S ADVOCATE,
PROPOSING A
Domestic, Industrial, and Educational College,
AND PROVIDENT INVESTMENT ASSOCIATION,
For the protection and suitable employment of poor ladies of
education or talent; for the domestic and intellectual training of the
daughters of colonists; for the supplying families with skilled ser-
vants, as efficient cooks, nurses, &c.; also the working community
with thrifty wives and good managers of children; for the proper
training of the State Industrial School girls as domestics; for the
apprenticeship of the boys, the prevention of wife desertion, and for
the ultimate abolishing of pauperism—by the institution of a Govern-
ment labour agency, and converting all other agencies at command
from helplessness into wealth-creating mediums, reproducing by new
industries the £171,000, yearly granted by the State for charitable
purposes, over and over again, and at length applying the funds to
the further extension and introduction of other industries for the
benefit of the colonists.
BY M. WEBB.
MELBOURNE.
1873.




THE WOMAN’S ADVOCATE.
CHAPTER I.
WRITTEN EXPRESSLY FOR OUR LEGISLATORS.
A Glance at Victoria's Social Condition and that of the Mother-
Country , whose Institutions she has Adopted.
Irrespective of the other colonies of Australia, Victoria, inthe year
1873, with a population of about 750,000, expends on relief of the
friendless poor nearly half-a-million of guineas annually, inclusive of
Government grants and public subscriptions. And it is more than
probable that by far the largest number of poor are not relieved at
all, suffering the worst privations rather than be debased by the
stigma of pauperism, unless those who are lunatics, and their
numbers are alarming. While as to the people of both sexes who
exist by the vile institution of “ the social evil,” at the cost of
moneyed criminal men, should such people be enumerated in Victoria
alone, they would be found to already number thousands.* And
the illegitimate children supported at the public expense, and
children who are deserted by the poor and by the criminal, are
numerous also.
And, then, considering too that Australia has become “ The
Casual Ward of all the Worldthat the colonies are hampered with
the poor, and the unskilled, and the helpless of all nations, it is
evident that unless we exert ourselves to convert the expensive
burdens heaped upon Victoria into wealth-creating agencies, Victoria
must be greatly retarded in her progress, if not altogether crushed.
Indeed, it would be but just that the European States and China,
which have burdened Australia with their unskilled and destitute
people, should aid largely in some scheme to render them self-help-
ful and progressive.
Neglected children, deserted wives, and unskilled domestics,
together with other burdens resulting from calamitous conditions,
have now become so costly that prompt reform is urgently required
to effect a radical change in our social system, or a degrading
pauperism will become more ruinous to Australia than it has been
in the parent states; and we shall find when beyond remedy that
we have been training the young and the wards of State to help-
lessness, and in many instances to degradation and perhaps vice
and, like England, creating a perpetual pauperism and a criminal
* The census returns ignore these altogether, and give the number of
unemployed women as 400, thus making the State recognise prostitution as
a profession.


class —a vile institution of the nation to demoralise and pester
society to the end of time, every year becoming more unmanageable
than ever, while at the same time the reverse of all the evil would
have been far less expensive, besides keeping criminality within
check, and poverty merely accidental.
Possessing the power to train the thousands of young people from
time to time committed to the Government into wealth-creating
agencies, by making them efficient operatives and domestics, we
could not only have blessed every home with good domestics, or
with thrifty wives ; but by supplying capitalists with skilled opera-
tives, would have advanced the prosperity of the colony.
Perhaps, in laying the foundation of this new nation, we were
not in a position to create new systems, either political or social, and
may have been too eager to follow the precedents of older states —
but on finding them fatally bad, we need not continue slaves to pre-
cedents leading us to irrecoverable mischief, nor lack the courage to
originate models of our own. We can, if we will, profit by the
experience of older nations, by avoiding the errors which must
eventually wreck them if continued.
It can scarcely be denied that in Great Britain the customs of
dealing with the helpless poor are most depressing and damaging to
them, and far more costly than would be good ones, that would, place
the poor people in a position to help themselves, by competency in
labour, by which they could become creators of wealth.
The soul-crushing methods of the old countries—killing as it does
by diseases occasioned principally by want and neglect the enormous
number of 80,000 every year of our fellow-creatures, exclusive
of deaths by other diseases—costs for the wretched existence
of those who still live on in stagnant degradation (to the tax-
payers) as many millions of pounds every ten years as would
in that period cure or annihilate pauperism, and close accounts with
the poor ratepayers for all time, by converting an entire generation
of men and women into the most perfect scholars and operatives the
highest order of intelligence is capable of. A course of procedure,
which, doubtless would be more sensible than training generation
after generation to fill work-houses, and crowded hovels, in filth-
reeking lanes and alleys, to create disease and pestilence, with which
to load the atmosphere for all classes to breathe; filling the dens
and pavements also with nightly infamy, and ratepayers’ institutions
with victims and criminals, oppressing all classes with ruinous rates
to support them, while drunkenness and insanity, like frightful
plagues, are year by year increasing in an alarming ratio ; and indeed
our entire race is infected more or less by the dreadful plague of
vice, and the poison of the wretched squalor, breathing the one, and
rendering the other compulsory by law,* poisoning our race from
infancy in every house in the land.
It would be, one would think, a more sensible plan of action to
organise a profitable system of competent labour out of the material
* The fatally wrong method of vaccination.


at hand, than to drive the millions for want of their natural right
to find labour, and ability to perform it—to damage all society
and themselves fatally, leaving a horrible curse to posterity. Yet,
cast out of their natural course of livelihood, as the majority of the
people are in Great Britain, for want of apprenticeship in youth,
the wonder is that the criminal classes are not more multitudnous
than they are, and that men do not become more generally despe-
radoes, rather than abject victims.
Considering how very few of Britain’s own race are in com-
fortable circumstances or in constant work; that 30 or 40
per cent, of the people, or more, from one misfortune and the other,
consequent on their want of skill, by neglect of education and
apprenticeship in childhood and youth, are unable to support them-
selves and families; while few of the ratepayers who pay the poor
rates possess land or even houses of their own; and that less than
one to ten thousand of the entire population possess wealth as
capitalists;* and that the land capital is not spent in giving employ-
ment to the patient, incompetent British workmen; but foreign
operatives employed before their eyes, for want of the required skill
in the neglected British; considering all this, the poor of our nation
are more remarkable for their mighty endurance than for the pre-
ponderance of criminality.
It is sad that capitalists, being legislators too, are compelled to
employ foreign labour, while their own countrymen are so direfully
distressed. More humane and neighbourly would it be to legislate,
though at the eleventh hour, not to shift them upon the colonies,
but to qualify them for the work needed at home.
Now for Australia. It is this mass of helpless people, unskilled
in anything under the sun, that we have been spending the Vic-
torian taxpayers’ money to import into the colony—struggling though
the taxpayers principally are for want of full and settled employ-
ment themselves; hoping against hope, that immigrants with large
capital will come out to start manufactories, by which to give per-
manent labour to the people.
Yet, instead of encouraging capitalists and enterprising men to
come from Europe, we, by filling the country with incapables, show
that we do not possess the labour material to work their machinery;
but instead of skilled labour awaiting them, we present the prospect
to capitalists of ruinous poor rates, with which to assail their
capital. Alas! this insane system of shutting our eyes to the
wealth which competent labour would create, and of adding year by
year to the incapables we ourselves make by our costly training
to indolence the Industrial School children, will eventually drag us all
* “ Mr. Locke King lias induced Parliament to give him a most suggestive
return, a, list, county by county, and borough by borough, of the assessed
rental of all houses. We have gone through this list with much care, and,,
well aware as we were of the singular distribution of wealth in Great
Britain, we confess to be somewhat taken aback at the number of the really
comfortable. In this land of millionaires and princes it is under 1§ per
cent, of the population.”— Spectator.


down to the same level; unless we arouse ourselves, and possess the
energy to devise, and to adopt a system to raise them up instead.
Once good systems of competent labour started, and capitalists
in Europe finding us possessed of a good stock of skilled energy,
will see it to their advantage to make use of it. We could then,
after working up, at a remunerative price, the labour on the spot,
obtain larger quantities of the same material (if we must) to render
workable and efficient. Muddle and loss has been ours long enough.
Order and gain might now be tried.
.To continue our contented apathy, on the notion, that because,
with a pauperised nation, the merchants of England are still
enormously rich, and the British State unscathed, amid the mis-
fortunes of a worse than bankrupt nation, would be anything but
sane. For our colonial State is at present destitute of those giant
creators of wealth manufactories, such as are Britain’s. Nor do we
possess a foreign trade to keep them going, and to raise a customs
revenue wherewith to support the State, as does England.
We are destitute, as yet, of England’s vast resources, and our
State could not long escape the wreck of the people. Nor will the
revenue, raised by drunkenness of high or low, either by brandy
or beer, stand in lieu of the prosperity of a well-governed people.
Neither do we, like the older States, possess far-off lands, on which
to get rid of our starving outcasts; but will have to support them
to the end of the chapter, unless we place them in a way to support
themselves.
But all reform will prove futile, as do missions to the heathen,
unless we commence at home. Man’s natural and legitimate human-
ising influences are ever found in the domestic circle, and the very
regeneration of those influences are necessary if we would raise our
social status, or come back again to home purity and felicity.
CHAPTER II.
THE PROPOSED WOMAN’S COLLEGE.
The proposed Woman’s Colleges are intended to be Government
Institutions, and if not assisted into being by a Technological
Commission, in any case co-operative; filling up the several va-
cuums hitherto overlooked, and more generally diffusing the aids
of science* among the helpless classes, and those unable to attain
skill, unassisted by the State or the colony development, or an
efficient revenue, after the lands are all gone. By the enlightenment
of science, and the knowledge and experience which intellectual
minds have culled from other parts of the world, to raise the people
_ * The more necessary, as without such diffusion of scienee the reckless
disposal of the lands (which should have been leased, not sold) —lands
unprotected by any conditions as to treatment of soil—must eventually con-
vert Australia into a barren wilderness.


to skill in the several industries requisite in this new world, and the
introduction among them of every wealth-creating process.
The climate of Australia, in one or other of its degrees of latitude,
is adapted to any, and every thing, which the earth produces any
where; while with a people rendered efficient in skill, wealth could
be produced from its vast resources, to establish and maintain the
greatest works of the world, and by them billions of people, and
greater than the universe has yet known this globe to yield.
Some time, however, must necessarily be lost in the initiation of
the various processes and branches of industry to be introduced,
and men who have families to support must plod on, unskilled
though they be, to find immediate food; and as so very many young
men are so given up to besotting or to vitiating habits as to possess
neither the patience nor the lucidity* necessary to grasp any new
thing or novel industry; it appears but a rational and judicious
course to make use of any other operatives, who, not exacting
in their demands for immediate profit, and maintaining their
senses in a state of soundness, could be made available for the
first experiments, until a reasonable profit shall tempt the colonists
generally to embark in tried and proved industries. The surplus
female population, 1 and those preferring celibacy, having the most
time at their disposal, assisted by such muscular aids as the State
could supply, as the boys of the Industrial Schools, could be made
the mediums of the skill, progress, and development so much
wanted in this age of want of skill in anything, into which the
British races have drifted.
By raising to national usefulness that class of unmarried women,
who, choosing celibacy, are averse to share or to undertake the
domestic duties of other women, or to accept the position of aliens
in another’s household, but who, although averse to the toil of
domestic life, thus stripped of affinity or sympathy, possess talents
and tastes of another order, equally valuable—by raising this class
of women to skill in those lighter branches of industry, which
require neither physical strength, nor greater mental energy than
such women are capable of; and in those branches of industry and
occupations, which, because not calling into action muscular power,
nor mental effort greater than could be supplied by the helps at
hand, would reduce the adults of the male sex, if monopolising
these, to a condition of comparative effeminacy—by raising women
* The Government of China, though professedly heathen, saw the neces-
sity, in order to save the Chinese race from very serious damage and
deterioration of intellect, to prohibit the further importation of opium,
though such prohibition cost them a terrible war. Yet, strange as it does
appear to reflecting minds, the authorities of the professedly greater and
more enlightened nations afford every encouragement and every facility for
their people to destroy themselves by means quite as fatal, even depending
for the principal support of their revenues from importations and licenses,
by which the people destroy their reasoning faculties, and deteriorate their
progeny.
f Those outnumbering the males of a generation,


to skill in these, the stronger sex would be relieved of much that
tends to lower the status of men, while in the pursuits of a stronger
character, sisters could acquire skill, with which to endow their
hard plodding brothers, even in many industries which women could
only learn and teach, and not practise themselves.
It is proposed therefore to turn to account the talents of any
class of people available, to the advantage of other classes, co-opera-
tively, and of each, and all to the general good ; and thus to raise
the helpless of both sexes out of the circumstances which cripple
and entomb them, and place all grades in the road to prosperity,
and to the intellectual status of their individual capacities.
For as all nations acknowledge the labouring classes are the
wealth-making classes,* it would enrich the State to make them
prosperous. The Woman’s College co-operating with a competent
Technological Commission, and with the State Agricultural Depart-
ment, with lands adequate to the purpose, and the boys of the
Industrial School to do the strong work, could create nurseries of
every industry, commencing with the production of food for the
College, the Industrial Schools, and other Government institutions—
which Government institutions now, apparently as helpless as wild
beasts in a cage, get not only their corn and rice grown from outside,
perhaps in America, but even the loaves of bread made up for them.
The Woman’s College supplying every necessary, could save money
for more extensive usefulness, as well as by making everybody self-
helpful and contributors to the general good, use up the energies at
command, with profit to the increase, instead of the diminishing of
means.
The £171,000 now granted by the State to the Industrial
Schools and the Ladies’ Benevolent Associations could be turned
over, and in a third year twice over, increasing year by year the
usefulness to the opening up for the benefit of the whole colony the
new industries culled from Europe, America, India, China, and
elsewhere; and sericulture, and silk weaving, cotton growing, and
calico manufacture, besides coffee, tea, rice, and other articles of
food and commerce! would quickly become Australian products, at
most of which industries the females could work as well as teach.
The Woman s College will also protect the interest by or
otherwise, of all its members, poor or rich, unmarried or married.
. Clergymen, merchants, legislators, and doctors, maintained as they are
m honourable positions, chiefly by the labouring classes, would serve their
own personal interests best by encouraging and aiding projects for the
improvement and progress of the wealth-making classes, and by helping
people into the groove for which their abilities suit them.
t See “ Infamous Deception ” in the Age, 31st January, 1873.
+ The law of trover, for one, does not appear very clear, or quite accessible
to unprotected females. Women are, to use a mild term, deprived of their
wearing apparel, as well as their money due, and property among their
luggage. Besides, females are not constituted for law and police courts,
and mno case can creditably appear in such. A Crown law advocate is
wanted for women, or some equitable arrangement within their means and
suitable.


CHAPTER III.
An Institution properly organised in its several departments, and
prepared to conduct sericulture and every other industry within the
compass of female strength, with skill and efficiency, could, in a
country where families are, from one cause and the other, orphan-
ised without number, and women widowed; and where females of
the upper classes in numberless instances are destitute of any suitable
means of livelihood, afford a comfortable subsistence, saving the
friendless from the humiliation of needing the cold, hard charity of
acquaintances, and relieving the community of a heavy responsi-
bility. A not unimportant suggestion is, that the initiation and the
progressive maturity of the new industries, necessary to be introduced
into Australia, would, if first tried by men, or with small capital
calling for immediate returns, for the support of individual families,
meet with many difficulties and breakdowns.
Not so, however, if undertaken as proposed, and conducted by
females; as such industries could, under a good system, be carried
on by women, whose circumstances would induce them to be grate-
fully satisfied to live in simple comfort and in improving society,
awaiting the result of any enterprise for which they would not be
burdened with the responsibility—and, which, resulting in success,
would benefit them greatly by endowment of themselves and families
with skill in a respectable means of subsistence, and with an
equivalent for their labour, when skilled, which would start them
fair on their own account. And while so perfecting themselves,
free of anxiety, and at the risk of the establishment, they would
feel the happy assurance that they were in a great measure
repaying their benefactors and the State, by doing their part in
developing the resources of Australia, and in advancing her progress
by maturing for the benefit of all colonists the industries adopted
from other nations.
But, besides married women, there are in Australia numbers of
maidens needing other employment than that for which they may
find themselves, by unadaptation or infirmity, disabled* I —as gover-
nesses out of health, and requiring activity, and other females
needing repose from over-exertion, and from labour inadequate to
their strength.
The proposed institution is intended to supply that greatest of all
wants of the colony—a home for respectable women of every shade
of position, needing homes or protection. In its first departments,
for ladies possessing ample means to pay for the accommodation,f
but who, destitute of relatives, would seek the genial association
and woman’s mission which the colleges would supply. A home
also for educated ladies of small means, who, finding no comfort in
* The only way of life open now for such is too horrible to mention,
f It is a general lament among women of refinement who need to earn a
subsistence for themselves, that rent is too high for houses, and that no
proper lodging-houses exist for their class within their means.


living alone, and needing scope for their talents, would find their
usefulness available in cultivating 1 the minds of others; also remu-
nerative employment at sericulture or other industries; also for
those 1 of their class possessing no means at all, and for whom,
hitherto, the community have provided no protection, no suitable
employment, no means of subsistence. For, liberal as have been a
certain circle of the merchants to the poor of the illiterate classes,
they appear to have overlooked the helpless poor of their own class
altogether, or perhaps such neglect has existed for want of a pro-
moter to take the matter in hand. The refining influences of women
of cultivated intellect would be of infinite service also in raising
women of neglected education to a higher status. And in a domes-
tic and industrial college employment need not be wanting where-
with to earn a subsistence, without falling from one’s own status
while endeavouring to uplift others.
Indeed no talent, or ability, or genius of any order need be thrown
away in such a place, as all could be made to contribute to the
general good, all co-operative for one another’s well-being, and for
the eventual benefit of the colony at large. More than all, is the
Woman’s College intended to qualify females to make homes happy,
and the rising generation the better samples of humanity, which the
precocious children of Australia are capable of becoming under com-
petent management.
In our primitive condition here, beginning at the first step
of the ladder in a nation just rising out of the bush, as Victoria
is, it is necessary that women for such a life should be made
competent to impart to their children the rudiments of educa-
tion, and the foundation of principles and habits which would
ennoble their boys and girls for all time ; training their daughters
to domestic duties well, particularly as good cooks, and good mana-
gers of children, and to cleanliness in the house and surroundings,
and to kindliness of temper, and quietness of deportment, and to
habits of industry and thrift; as dairy and kitchen garden
work, the preserving of vegetables and fruit, basket and mat work,
for packing, purdahs, carpets and hats from grasses, mats and ropes
from stringybark, &c. As the adult males of a family in the bush
are worked to the utmost in grubbing and tilling the land, and dray
work,* it is not too much to expect that the females and boys per-
form the lighter duties. And mothers and sisters, on finding any
part of the light occupations too much for their strength, yet with a
skilful knowledge of such branches of industry as are required, could
in any case instruct their younger sons or brothers to perform them.
For instance, cooperage (without a knowledge of which many incon-
veniences are suffered in the country among people finding wants
* The male adults in their less busy time would, with more profit, take
lessons at the boys’ smithy in horse shoeing and treatment, and the repairing
of implements, and drays, and harness, for want of which knowledge many
a day’s labour is lost, and in digging the garden ready for the sowing and
planting operations of the females.


for more money than they can get for implements of husbandry, and
having nothing to spare for the conveniences of life) could easily be
performed by women possessing a strong hand, or by boys under the
instruction of a female possessing a strong head merely. And meat
would not so generally be destroyed for want of tubs for pickling,
nor rain water run to waste for want of barrels, nor fruit, vegetables,
and butter be lost for want of vessels to pack them in. Shoe
mending is another necessary business in which to instruct the boys*
of a household, and some women are clever enough to make their
own slippers and their children’s shoes, which, when all the duties of
home work are cleverly distributed among a family, they can find
time to do. Brooms could be made from the strong grasses, and
brushes from pigs’ bristles. Sheepskins could be tanned and curried,
instead of being thrown away, also the skins of wild animals. Sol-
dering and tin work is also much wanted in the bush, and cane work,
and bamboo chair making, light cabinet making, wire gauze, &c.,
by which small industries the young people in a family could be
taught habits of industry and usefulness, and the keeping of a home
in order, comfort, and good repair, and be prepared for a full appren-
ticeship in some wealth-making trade or profession, besides having
some small way of living, should any adversity throw them out of
capital, or out of trade; and if settling down as farmers, would
but have to add science to the general fund of knowledge attained
in the domestic circle during childhood, and even that would not be
neglected in the Industrial College.
And considering how lamentably Australians blunder in their
attempts at architecture, and how very inconvenient and ill ven-
tilated are the costly edifices of the state, as well as the poor
domiciles of the bush, architectural designs from other countries,
and of varieties suitable to town or country, could be supplied by a
scientific and competent Technological Commission ; and the lads of
the Industrial Institution, associated with the Woman’s College,
could quite as well practise house-building, and, indeed, elegant
architecture, from the clay of the wilds of Australia, as did Napoleon
Bonaparte his fortresses (when a boy) of the snows of Europe.
And, for bush buildings, perhaps nothing, if artistically constructed
as are the puckah-built bungalows of India, could be prettier than
clay buildings, whitened, polished and grained within, in imitation
of marble, and smoothed and whitened without after the fashion of
Portland stone.
Every one must acknowledge who has lived in Indian bungalows,
that for comfort as well as elegance—being cool in summer and wind-
proof in winter—no style of building, not even the most costly,
could excel them.
It certainly would be greatly to the advantage of colonists pos-
sessing, as we do, facilities to avail ourselves of the experience of all
preceding ages, and of the most approved methods of doing every-
* A branch of industry which every boy should be taught in the common
schools.


thing contained in the whole world—primitive as well as civilised—
would our Government, through their technological institutions,
supply the designs needed by people whose slender means preclude
the possibility of adopting other than primitive architecture, except
such improvements from the modern scientific as are not costly. A
rational and scientific Building Act, together with instructions and
regulations for each class of building, would ensure both health and
beauty to the colony.
The primitive Hindoo ryots (agriculturists) settle in companies of
some hundreds, forming villages, with their lands behind. The
primitive Hindoos, on arrival at the desired locality, first select a
clayey spot in which to dig a water hole—or rather tank, or magni-
ficent reservoir dug square, through an acre or so, with steps all
round and neatly smoothed.* These tanks supply them with rain
water from one rainy season to the other plentifully, while the clay
carried from their tanks forms the walls of their dwellings; but the
puckah-built bungalows, in which the European gentry reside, have
a foundation of boulders of granite, and are surrounded with capa-
cious and elegant verandahs, covered generally with woodbine or
vines, and furnished with strong bamboo and grass purdahs, which
are far superior both in durability and appearance to the Chinese
purdahs.
CHAPTER IV.
It scarcely can be considered fair dealing that men should raise
any question against females appropriating “the lighter occupations
which men have hitherto claimed,” or refuse “ admission to females
to those social openings” for which women are quite as well adapted
as men. And surely those of the strong sex raising objections against
women engaging in other than domestic operations, and who appear
to care little whether or not women are in possession of the food
to cook, or the house to clean, or the children to train, or a place to
tram them in, or food for them to eat—such men must forget that
all the best female occupations, the easiest or less toilsome, are, and
have been for many years, monopolised by men, and by able-bodied
men, too. For not only are men milliners, and fill baby clothes
and womens petticoat shops—but men, besides shopkeepers, do
woman s work, and deprive females of many of their own rightful
employments. Many in this city have established factories where
woman s labour has created the wealth by which the stronger sex
live at ease, regardless who sinks so long as they swim, and repel-
ling any effort to improve the mental or social condition of their
labourers. Also encouraging middle-men, who fleece the fleeced of
the last scrapings they can yield. For the middle-men take in work
in wholesale quantities from the warehouses, and retail it to poor
H S doos f ak f of tanks to the poor, and these are lined,
many with marble, and railed m.


women, giving them the smallest remuneration possible—in London
a starving, a prostituting pittance, that could not possibly keep a
shelter over their heads, and must drive them into the streets in
some one way; and in Melbourne* as near a copy of this cruelty
as possible ; so hard are women driven in Melbourne, that many
have been obliged to work up a long garment for the small pittance
of a penny. Widows with young children, deserted wives with
families to support, and poor, educated ladies, or women whose
feelings are too refined for the coarse slang of undisciplined
factories ; women disabled from service, and others who, in utter
wretchedness, would hide themselves from the world,t these are the
workers for such men.
Strange that in such a religious community, professionally, that
there are none so “unspotted from the world” as to find time “to
visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction,” and no shepherds
to “ search out” the friendless in their “ cloudy and dark day”
(Ezek. xxxiv.).
It would be a good thing to relieve Melbourne and other cities
of Australia of their surplus female population, and would greatly
serve the community to relieve them of bad servants, and eventually
supply them with good and properly-trained domestics, and above all,
with good cooks and with competent managers of children; more-
over, the State Industrial School boys and girls require quite a new
arrangement, one that shall convert them from the waifs and strays
* No distinction between poverty and crime.— “Vagrancies.—A young
woman named Mary A. Lakeman was charged with vagrancy. The anpre-
hending constable stated that he found the accused sitting on the steps of
the District Court, and on asking her what she was doing there, she stated
that she had no home to go to, or any means of livelihood, and that she
would like to be taken to the watchhouse. The constable did as he was
asked. She was sentenced to three months’ imprisonment. John Macken-
zie was brought up on a similar charge. The prisoner was noticed by the
constable between ten and eleven o’clock on Tuesday night, shaking the
Carlton Gardens gate, and making a noise. He was soliloquising as to his
miserable condition, saying that he was dying from hunger. Sergeant
Pewtress gave the prisoner a bad character, stating that he was a thief and
a vagabond. He was sent to gaol for six months. Elizabeth Morrell, on a
like charge, was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment. Ellen Davies,
who was charged with vagrancy, was discharged on her representing to the
bench that if she were sent to gaol her husband, who was about to go to
sea, would lose his situation.”— Age, 12th April, 1873.
The Bendigo Advertiser states that “the first good results of the
proposed formation of the Sandhurst Home were made apparent yesterday,
by an incident which strangely illustrates how much good may be effected
by such an institution. Whilst the Rev. Mr. M‘Cullagh and Dr. Pounds
were discussing the business (at the house of the rev. gentleman) to be
brought before the meeting of the Sandhurst Home Committee, a nicely-
dressed young woman knocked at the door, and asked to see Mr. M‘Culla°-h.
Dr. Pounds withdrew into another room, and Mr. M'Cullagh found that the
object of the young girl’s visit was to save another young girl from falling
into error. Having told the circumstances of the case to Mr. M'Cullagh,
and admitted to him that she was herself an unfortunate, but anxious to
save another, who had been brought to the place where she resided, the
misery she had herself experienced, and the life of infamy to which she had


and expensive burdens into skilled operatives, and into the much-
needed qualified domestics. For the dreadful apprehension is, that,
farmed out with cooped-up families, cramped in their energies and
dwarfed in their genius as the families are themselves, unhappily, no
management,, nor anything but ill domestic training, which would
require to be unlearnt, and nothing but mere drudgery and odd job
work for the boys, could be expected; therefore no qualification
by which to earn a creditable subsistence as adults, or save them
from perpetual pauperism, or occasional burdensomeness on the State,
or from becoming the progenitors of a pauper class to the end of
time, can be induced under the present farming out.
It perhaps would be a good plan—and particularly so, should Mrs.
Bladen Neill and her partners enter into the scheme—to establish a
model institution* first in the bush (where, in addition to seri-
culture, the propositions contained in the title-page could be carried
out), in some far-off locality where good land could be spared by
the State more plentifully than near Melbourne and the cities, a
locality indeed where population, and the means of drawing people
into the neighbourhood, would be desirable, and which would rid
Melbourne and the cities of the unemployed and unskilled, giving
them a chance under more favourable circumstances, on soil on
which they could at least grow their own food, with some assistance
until grubbed, and tilled, and ready to start, t Every branch of
industry necessary to bush life would become a necessity in an un-
inhabited country; and with means at hand to afford skill in the
performance, and to insist on the proper method, and the most
scientific way of doing everything, the young people of both sexes
in the institution would get just the sort of training needed to
fit them to be creditable settlers in Australia, and profitable to
been brought, Mr. M'Cullagh and Dr. Pounds proceeded, in company with
the young woman, to a noted house in Mitchell-street, where there were
four other unfortunates. They went into this house, and there they found
the young girl alluded to. She was scarcely sixteen years of age, and had
been turned out of her parents’ house, by her mother, with the very worst
intentions, but an hour or two before. She had no friends, no place to go
to, and, knowing the young, woman, who had called on Mr. M'Cullagh,
casually, she had called in there to stop, and thus the unfortunate woman
had come to the rescue of one who had not erred. Mr. M'Cullagh and Dr.
Pounds at once removed her to Mr. Lachlan Fraser’s, where a respectable
woman took charge of her until a situation can be procured for her, as she
is not, of course, a fit subject to become an inmate of the Home, and the
committee have made arrangements to defray the expenses of her mainte-
nance out of their own pockets in the meantime. The self-abnegation of
the unfortunate young woman who gave the information to Mr. M‘Cullagh,
which rescued this girl from ruin, was alluded to at the committee meeting
yesterday. She is an accomplished person, ladylike in appearance, and it is
said is a married woman; that is, she unknowingly married a married man,
who, of course, soon left her to wander through the Sandhurst streets.”
Note —Little girls turned out of doors by drunken and criminal parents, and
to whom no door has hitherto opened, but those of Chinamen !
* In which also officers and conductors for the metropolitan colleges could
be trained.
f The State could grant a loan, and exact a fee on the land.


themselves, the State, and the community. And here talented
women, finding no scope for their talents in the cities, would find
ample room for their abilities, whether in the industrial, the educa-
tional, or in the domestic departments.
CHAPTER V.
The metropolitan branches of the Woman’s College, in addition
to the domestic training, for which every house languishes, would
provide accommodation for ladies attending the University lectures,
and those of the School of Arts, as every facility would be provided
in such an institution for self-improvement, and for mutual instruc-
tion among young people of one’s own calibre.
The College would also afford any degree of education, of any
kind wanted, to the daughters of colonists and to young wives, and
withal refinement and the manners of good breeding could
surely be attainable, where talented women were associated to make
such qualities a study, assisted by any other instructors required
from elsewhere.
And among all the classes of women enumerated, the several
departments should not want for efficient officers and conductors,
for both city and bush institutions; while the industries provided
would eventually ensure the self-support of the entire institution.
•Following Heaven’s first law, order,” the Woman’s College
could, besides placing the industrious classes in the direct line of
wealth-making for themselves, and of revenue-creating for the State,
embrace all the propositions now afloat for the purpose of develop-
ing the intellectual powers of women, and to benefit the coming
generation. Thus, the Educational Training School, proposed, the
School of Design, and the Domestic College, could be amalgamated,
instead of a number of paltry buildings.
The intellectual and the domestic duties of women, and the
industries which they are capable of learning, being near at hand,
the hours spared from one set of duties could be devoted to another,
until skill in the required attainments shall be reached.
And, as the domestic character should never be severed from
females, however high, or however low, their position in life, or the
occupation by which a respectable position is to be acquired, the
State Industrial Schools should be placed under the control of the
Woman’s Colleges, not only that those young people, under the
several kinds of talent collected together in the colleges, may be
properly disciplined and trained, but that skill in the management
of children and young people may be accomplished for themselves
also. Then, for the proper treatment of children in sickness, which
without a knowledge of treatment no women, whether rich or poor,
can be perfect in domestic duties. The sick ward of the Industrial
Schools, which would be at a safe distance on the grounds of the
College, and attended by the surgeons of Melbourne, would afford


opportunity. The whole machinery could be co-operative, and
even wealthy mothers, on payment of a reasonable fee, could
acquire those most necessary branches of a woman’s education—the
management of children, and sick nursing, and a matron’s proper
participation in, and conduct of, her own household duties; while
in the intellectual departments of the colleges, other attainments
could be acquired; so that, altogether, the status of women generally
could be raised by degrees to its legitimate standard, as the equals
and helpmates of man (see Genesis i. 27-31), and of man of the
highest order of intelligence.
And then the profit and advantage to the colonies generally, and
the pleasure of prosperity; and the elevation of character, and
of improving our social status as a nation, supplying the colony with
good wives and with efficient domestics ; qualifying women to make
children the comforts, instead of the plagues, of home and of
society; this, surely, would be worth the effort, though at some
cost. And the gratification of affording the protection and the
counsel of a home, and the protection of friendship, to females of
one’s own class, and to thousands of others, who are quite destitute
of relatives in this country—though at their own expense, this pro-
tection would be beyond all valuation to them. And then, too,
acting on the “ prevention better than cure ” system, we should
close the markets of crime, by stopping the supplies of fresh
victims,* and the dire necessity of saving life from starvation by a
refuge among criminals—by prostitution, the only refuge hitherto
offered to innocent girls, unequal to labour!
CHAPTER VI.
A system of agency could be established throughout Victoria,
by appropriating the services of the Ladies’ Benevolent Associa-
tions. It would be necessary that temporary homes or lodg-
ing-houses should be opened in all large towns, and be con-
ducted by qualified matrons from the Model Institution, and under
the supervision of the ladies of the district appointed. These homes
would be used as hotels during the temporary unemployment of any
grade of respectable females either expecting to find employment in
the district, or awaiting to be sent to the model institution or else-
where, and for those requiring rest for a time. The hotel-homes
would also provide the accommodation of a board-room and office for
the ladies in their consultations on the best means of raising to self-
help any persons in their several districts requiring temporary help,
* In the search after statistics, horrible facts of premiums offered for fresh
victims from the ranks of innocence have been disclosed. Surely strong
drink must have deadened the consciences of men so madly depraved, and
so careless of their reputation ; and with such facts in existence, who among
the men of character and rectitude would refuse his utmost support to free
society from such traffic ?


or entitled as members of the Provident Investment Association to
the legal assistance at the command of the College, Ac. Throughout
the villages or shires the post-offices could serve as mediums —both
employment and complaint cards being hung there. It is proposed
that the post masters or mistresses be requested to hang cards and
their triplicates for transmission to the town board and the Model
Institution,* and people, both employers and employes, on registering
their names on their cards, could ascertain if anything suited them
on the other cards; if not, the exchange cards would supply their
wants, and one locality in Victoria would be supplied from the
other. A postage stamp affixed to their names by employers would
defray all the expenses of advertising, as well as postage, and the lady
agents of the district would call or write for the fee on engagement.
Employes, instead of paying a fee, would pay into a provident fund
a percentage of their salary; while from the funds raised from the
fees of employers, in addition to payments by boarders, the temporary
homes could be supported.t
* The Immigrants’ Home would serve as the central office for men, and
the police offices, in lieu of the post-offices, as advertising mediums.
f A short Bill could be passed, making it illegal to take fees of efhployes ;
this would close all unprincipled speculating labour marts, which now, as
Sergeant Pewtress can testify, raise large sums of money by advertising
shams, as —“ Housekeeper wanted,” “ Governess wanted,” only for the
purpose of extorting as many five and ten-shilling pieces from ladies in
desperate circumstances as possible, and from men under similar pretences.
J As much as any Act of Parliament immediately wanted is one requiring
that none other than strictly moral characters should be eligible to serve
under the Crown, law, police courts, or in the Legislature, or their agencies.
§ See the Age , December, 1872.
“ How Girls are Entrapped. —At the District Court yesterday, some
disclosures were made in connection with the prosecution of a brothel-
keeper, showing how girls are entrapped into a life of shame. The de-
fendant in the case, Madame Diana de Beaumont, residing at 140 Bussell-
street, had been complained against by some respectable neighbours for
keeping a disorderly house, and the police immediately took the matter in
hand. Inspector Rabat, who prosecuted, said that this house had not been
picked out from among a number of others of a similar character because it
was particularly obnoxious, but for the reason that it had been specially
brought under the observation of the police by persons to whom it was a
nuisance. Constables Dalton and Bourke were then put into the witness
CHAPTER VII.
The late revelations of the darker deeds of the metropolis, in
which the depraved of the opulent classes, and prominent among
them fathers of marriageable sons and daughters, and men who
move in fashionable circles, figure infamously*—such revelations
render it imperative that all respectable young men, also fathers
and mothers of every grade of position, should make a stand against
their criminal associates, not only for their own honour’s sake, but
more particularly for the protection of their growing sons from that
course of moral and physical destruction which evil example, and


box, and deposed.to seeing disorderly women standing about the door of the
house, and accosting gentlemen passing by. Mary M‘Mahon, a girl twenty
years of age, and who did not present the appearance of being wholly
ftfo3.nd.on6d., then stated that in consequence of an advertisement that
appeared in the Argus some two years ago, she applied for a situation at the
house in question. She was engaged to take charge of a small fruiterer’s
shop in the front of the house, the defendant promising to give her any
money she required. Three days afterwards she was induced to drink some-
thing by other girls residing on the premises, and after that she knew
nothing until she woke next morning in bed, and found a man sleeping
beside her. Subsequently she remained nine months in the house, leading
an abandoned life. Edward Kennett and Mrs. Kennett, his wife, stated
that they had frequently seen mothers taking their daughters to defendant’s
house in answer to advertisements, and. had warned them of the character of
the .place. . Wm. Perry, timber merchant, and a tailor named Williams gave
similar evidence. Mr. Kabat handed to the bench an advertisement cut
from the Argus of 4th inst., worded as follows ‘ Wanted a young woman
to look after a small shop and parlour. Apply Friday and Saturday, 140
Eussell-street.’ Mr. Molesworth, who appeared for the defendant, contended
that it had not been proved that the house was any worse than others of its
class, or that it called for any special inteference on the part of the police.
He also stated that the defendant would vacate the house, so that it would no
longer be a nuisance to respectable neighbours. Mr. Call said the house was
one of a class known to exist by every one, and-that perhaps were a necessity,
and he saw no reason why the defendant should be sent to prison, especially
as she had expressed her intention, through Mr. Molesworth, to leave the
premises. Had it been proved, however, to the satisfaction of the bench
that the defendant had concocted these advertisements, and that with the
object of decoying innocent girls to a life of infamy, she would have been
sentenced to two years’ imprisonment. As it was, she would be remanded
for seven days, and if at the end of that time she had not removed from 140
Eussell-street, she would have to spend Christmas in gaol. There were parts
of the city where the establishment of- such houses as hers was less objec-
tionable than in others, but they would not be permitted to remain where
they were a source of annoyance to respectable people.”
“ Thb New Hobboe (to the Editor of the Aye).— Sir—Whatever can or
may be said of the awful deeds of blood done on board the ‘ Carl,’ of which
I think the most cruel thrilling horror of all was that human monster
Murray pushing the poor wounded, deformed boy overboard, while the poor
lad’s brother savages begged for him to be spared. lam of opinion that
the Diana de Beaumont horror cries as loud to-God and man for vengeance
as does the blood of the Bougainville savages. I was very much pleased to
see the manner in which you have written of this atrocious woman and her
deeds, and much gratified, to see that a correspondent has called your
attention to the state of immorality existing among the upper class of
society ;i among which I think we may count a greater number of hoary-
headed old libertines for our population than any other community in the
more than all, such'models of immorality of such an age and status,
must eventually lead to (2 Peter ii. 17-22). And more deter-
minedly still, from many considerations of a momentous character,
should parents save their daughters from the companionship of men
whose friendship is dangerous, while any dearer tie would be fatal to
posterity, both with regard to physical and to intellectual soundness.
Renders it necessary also to protect The servant class from the
insidious wiles of men of criminal character whom they meet with
in the upper strata of society, to the utter destruction of too
many girls (when out of situation, and unprotected as they are by a
home provided by church, State, or the mistress class), and to the


world. And what else can be expected, when we find that among the
legal, the medical, aye, and the reverend professions, among our legislators,
our magistrates, and our highest civil servants, are to be found the men who
foster these nurseries of vice into which innocent girls are decoyed, and
damned, body and soul together ? What else can we expect when we know
that among these libertines are married men who have marriageable
daughters of their own, to their infinite shame and disgrace be it said ?
What else can we expect when we know that numbers of the higher officers
of the police frequent these dens, not to keep them in check, but to indulge
in the vilest profligacy and vice ? It is well known there are what are called
‘ respectable ’ brothels, that the common constables and the inferior officers
of police are not allowed to interfere with ; that when any ‘ distinguished ’
visitors of an airy turn of mind come to Melbourne, they are introduced to
one or other of these places, and the occupants, by a gentleman in Mel-
bourne, holding a very high position in the Government service, and who
acts in all such cases as the procurer (!) for the procuresses. You will readily
understand how, with such a monster social cancer as this eating into our
vitals, police magistrates and even judges may be influenced and corrupted.
I know nothing of Mr. Call, or whether he knows anything of what goes on
around him daily and nightly. He may be incorruptible ; but looking at
the facts before him in De Beaumont’s case, the decision he arrived at,
and the sentiments he is reported to have expressed, I think it is the duty of
the Government to remove him immediately, as a man incompetent for his
position. To the Government also we must look in this dreadful extremity.
That infamous woman must be punished for the souls of the innocent she has
sent t<s hell. There will be no justice done till Mr. Call has been taught his
lessson, till De Beaumont is imprisoned, till Dr. Murray is hanged like a
dog.— A Father.”
“ Sir —Mr. Call, in delivering himself as he did on the Beaumont case,
evidently forgot himselfi—forgot that he was on a British bench, and hence
talked as an ultra man of the world, to say the least. We have not yet
descended to a continental licensing of iniquity, and no wonder therefore
that Mr. C.’s apparent necessity of such houses should at once be resented
by a moral press. But there is a snobbish shamelessness in the alterna-
tive said to have been suggested by him, namely, that such houses should
be in less respectable neighbourhoods. And is this recommendation from
a magistrate who is bound impartially to study the social morality of all ?
Ought not working people to be regarded in the matter of such ruinous
snares as well as the respectable ? Is such a nuisance not to be tolerated
among gentry, but to be endured when contiguous to the poor ? This is
of a piece in principle with that strange inconsistency which excludes
public-houses from genteel districts, but thickly places them where the
residents are not potent enough to say no, and whose protests are only
laughed at by the selfish. Ido trust that Mr. C.. will either repent or go.
-r- Yours, &c., Senior. Sandridge, 21st December.”
serious damage of hitherto innocent girls thus corrupted, to the fatal
contamination'of the children and young people of households and
their circles, on re-employment; and, eventually, to the hampering
the community with infantile pauperism, and with a class criminal
from generation to-generation, as in old countries (with over 100,000
State infants), where, for want of a system of protection for the
helpless, by married women, not only does the mischief redound
with treacherous cruelty upon themselves, married women, or their
offspring, but in one way and the other involving, the innocent with
the guilty, to the damage of all the community.
Fortunately men of science and medical men of status (sad that
the clergy still sleep on—lsa. lvi. 10-11, Isa. lviii. and lix.) have


commenced to awaken to the universal havoc of criminality which
is poisoning the blood, and damaging the brain power and vital
worth of the entire nation, involving even the unborn innocent of
the innocent, in the curse of the guilty.* The mischief of the too-
long-sanctioned criminality of men of the upper classes in their
victimising destitute women of the lower grades, is now felt —too
surely to recoil with terrible vengeance both upon the criminal men
and the negligent, unsympathising women of the upper ranks; sad,
indeed, that their unoffending children are involved in the rebound-
ing mischief. The servant class, brought 16,000 miles away from
home and friends, and then wrecked on land—thrown, on leaving
their mistress’s roof, into the streets, to find a bed they know not
wheret—have now become, in cases too numerous, what their circum-
stances have made them, and are, in numberless instances, the cor-
rupters among that class, where in former years they were but the
corrupted, following the old example which insidiously ensnared
them, as heartlessly and as treacherously as did their own destroyers, J
dragging still younger and more innocent victims into the vortex of
criminality. “ Whatsoever any one soweth that shall he also reap.”
Dr. Beaney, in a new work just published, when referring to the
question of servantgalism in Victoria, and the frightful scourge of
* For, unfortunately, those of us who escape constitutional deterioration,
there remains to the physical, nervous, or mental systems, the mediums
of an injurious method of vaccination, besides infection by accident, which
may happen at any moment, bv-the-bye, to the poor women who undertake
to suckle the infants of criminal parents from the State schools, now adver-
tised for, and vice versa.
t Among the working classes hospitality is sometimes afforded to the needy
stranger, and that outside any religious teachings or promptings, from the
instincts of humanity only, though at very great inconvenience to the
family, for want of room, as well as from scantiness of food—but among the
upper classes in cities, when ? where ? Or from what pulpit is hospitality
to the “ stranger,” as one of the fundamental principles of the gospel,
taught?. Even in the face of the momentous results hinging on such proofs
of genuineness at the last ? “I was a stranger, and ye took Me not in; I was
an hungered, and ye gave Me no meat” (Matt. xxv.). For the Melbourne
Home, excellent as the institution is, as nearly the only reliable labour
mart for females—yet, as a lodging, is too expensive. While for women
without money to pay their way, sick, disabled, or requiring to earn a sub-
sistence by other means than service, or for broken-down or unskilled
domestics, the Melbourne Home is as good as non-existent, neither is it
sufficiently capacious, even as a temporary lodging for the few skilled
servants who can pay.
t “We cannot understand what the Ballarat magistrates were about in
sentencing the woman Simmons to only six months’ imprisonment. She
was clearly proved guilty of as gross an offence as a woman can commit.
She had deliberately enticed into her house a young girl, described as young
and innocent-looking by the reporter, and as ‘a square girl’ by one of the
harridans of the Simmons class, drugged her, and handed her over as a
matter of trade to ruin, and, most probably, life-long misery worse than
death. And for this she is sentenced to six months’ imprisonment. By the
clause of the statute under which she was indicted she was liable to
imprisonment for twelve months, even if not previously convicted ; and if,
as seems probable, she had already come under the cognisance of the courts,
she might have been sent to gaol for two years. Again, she might have


immoral servants,* of which there are a great number, undistinguish-
able too from the pure-minded, uncontaminated innocent of that
class, thus writes:—“ The dangers with which the nursery period is
fraught to the child are multitudinous, but none are so disastrous
as the conduct of vicious servants. The low moral tone of the
servant class is an element in the case, which lends to it an
aggravation that cannot be ignored.
“In many instances the whole life of the child is spent in the
company of the nurse, and it obtains all its impressions, whether
good or bad, from her. It is powerless in her hands, and, from the
force of association, looks up to her as its guardian. This of course
applies only to those cases —of which, by the way, there are vast
numbers —where the mother abdicates her true position to the nurse,
and leaves her children entirely to her direction. Every medical
man who has had much family practice would be prepared to en-
dorse the most emphatic censure on those mothers who are so reck-
less and indifferent as tacitly to countenance such a state of things.
It is to this condition of things that Australian mothers submit
their children, some willingly, many unwillingly. It is in this that
the gravamen of the danger lies.t In the vast majority of instances
where the minds of the children are poisoned, we have to go to the
nursery and to the kitchen for the root of the evil. The physician
has but to point out the physical evils he meets with, as the sequela
of a system of immigration which has been of doubtful benefit to
the colony. Hitherto the selections made at home have not been
been proceeded against under the 44th section of the Criminal Law and
Practice Statute, and in that way have received a punishment more in
accordance with justice, though even then miserably inadequate to her
crime. This woman is worse than the men for whom the Legislature has
from time to time provided punishments of constantly-increasing severity.
Without even the wretched excuse of drunkenness or passion, she deliberately
decoys her victims— Heaven knows how many—and for a miserable gain
not only wrecks these young lives, but perverts what should be a comfort
and a joy into a serious danger for the whole community. For an offence
of this kind, the Legislature must provide an increased penalty, if the discre-
tion of the magistrates is so wofully at fault” (Argus, 16th April, 1873).
In the case of the monster Simmons, why was not the name of the vile,
worse than brute, man exposed ? And why was he not taken into custody ?
Why are the working classes to bear the stigma (“man”) due perhaps to
another class—particularly as he could not be a poor “man,” as in the search
after statistics* which men of a certain stamp required, ere they could
believe that a protective institution was necessary for women, or would not
be “injurious,” it was discovered that there are in existence gentlemen
eminent as leading men in fashionable circles, and much honoured among
ladies of position, who have offered £2O for innocent victims. Of course
such must be caught by the police, under a better system than now obtains,
before they can be brought to justice.
* The wonder is that so many numbers as there are still innocent have
been saved, with no opportunities of culture, and only the snarer to seek for
them.
j- What sensible mother would, for the sake of her own offspring, delay to
do her part—now that her eyes are opened—in raising the status of the
servant class, both in attending to their mental culture while in their house-
hold, and in securing the protection of a home when away.


such as were likely to benefit the colony, for if their morals, were aofe
bad they are so utterly untrained in the duties of domestic, service
that their entrance into a colonial family; is a calamity rather than an
advantage. Fortunately there are some admirable exceptions! to
this rule, and with whom children of all ages would be perfectly
safe. It is sad to have to think .that such instances constitute a
decided minority.* I have plainly stated the case,” continues Dr.
Beaney in his new work, “ about the depravity of servantgalism in
its influences on childhood, in order that a certain wide-spread evil,
which I am aware existst, may be known and seen face to face by
those parents who confide their children solely to servants. The
bad practices of these girls must be stamped out, if the children are
to grow up in that virgin purity which we all expect in those of
tender years.” (Page 98.)
“ It may be safely affirmed that if the child can escape the perils
of the nursery, and those of that period in which there is necessarily
close association with the servants, his chances of being contami-
nated will be materially reduced. He then enters upon a phase of
life where there are undoubtedly dangers sufficiently imposing,
when he may or may not have sufficient sense absolutely to resist
the influence of certain vicious examples; for this will very much
depend upon the moral standard of the boy, and the value of the
counsel which may have been given him. Be this as it may, should
the ante-school period have been passed without contamination, there
is room to hope that the ordeal of the boarding-school and universi-
ties may be passed without it also.
“ He has the gymnasium for the expenditure of physical force,
and the various channels of literary occupation for the exhausting of
a superabundant nerve force. By recourse to those always available
and really efficient expedients for preserving the equilibrium of the
system, young men need never become enslaved to courses of
dangerous demoralisation. For there is a law of nature, the viola-
tion of which brings after it the most terrible penalties.
“ Moralists have at all times regarded strict temperance in food,
and abstinence from strong drinks, to be of cardinal value in the
maintenance of young men’s purity.”
There can be but little doubt that the too much animal food, and
the too little milk, and rice, and vegetables, in the dietary of
children and young people, has a most injurious tendency—while
of course strong drink is completely vitiating—while the drinking of
tea is an absurd habit, injurious too, and the sooner people of all
ages substitute for it cocoa or milk, or even ice-cold water the
better. “But the absurd practice of nobblerising which enslaves
both old and young alike, to an extent which is felt by the whole
* A respectable servant class could be raised by cultivating the minds,
and training to efficient skill in household duties, the girls of Industrial
Schools.
f The work itself must be consulted in order to fully comprehend the
extent of the evils complained of.




ipediment to
5 at all times
of any kind.
If in perfect health they have sufficient vital energy and physical
activity to render anything of a foreign or adventitious character
absolutely superfluous. There will generally be an exuberance of
animal spirits which require rather the exhaustion of great physical
exertion to expend it, than the exciting influence of the spirituous
dram” (Dr. Beaney’s new medical work).
The late revelations of an immoral and diseased state of society,
coupled with the injurious example of brandy drinking, or a besotted
state of existence of the men of criminal stamp so eminent in the
vice in question, among a circle of a certain standard of popularity,
dangerous most of all, as examples, because fashionable, added to
which, a similarly habitual drunkenness or besotted habit amongst
the lowest order of the labouring classes, and moreover through the
laxity of legislators, and of electors, and through the apathy of
comfortably-nested women towards their sex less fortunate in
circumstances, and the hitherto demoralisation of the servant class,
in consequence, and the great prevalence of child murders, and the
expense to taxpayers of the infants of wealthy men, in the Indus-
trial Schools. Then again the creation of waifs and strays, and of a
pauper criminal class, and the sale of defenceless little girls of
criminal parents to the lowest order of heathen Chinese, added to
which evils is wife desertion, and offences against women and
children by the human satyrs, altogether renders it imperatively
necessary that all respectable women and men of every grade of
position should league themselves together to devise measures to
stem the torrent of calamitous immorality by stamping out domestic
and social contamination, by which our nation is fast descending in
the scale of nations, to the level of those kingdoms which decaded by
internal decay or were annihilated by the divine wrath (see Rom. i.)
The sale of these pamphlets is required to pay for printing and
other expenses on their account. At the same time the thanks of
the female community are due to those gentlemen who have ren-
dered some assistance to help their little advocate through the press,
which may stimulate more talented writers to larger efforts in the
same The names of subscribers will be published with
the next edition j as it is to be hoped that larger efforts will be
made for the sake of the cause alone.
And the co-operation of the well-wishers of the project (whether
of the strong or of the weak sex) is solicited, either as lecturers, in
giving musical entertainments, or in any way their wisdom may
dictate to promote the object, stimulate the press, and keep the sub-
ject alive before the public, until our legislators are aroused to
action, and something effectual shall be accomplished.
*To critics. Which ? Both would be welcome.


APPENDIX.
Should the ladies of Australia wish to keep up the Woman's
Advocate as a monthly magazine, any subscriptions towards ex-
penses, and any literary contributions for insertion, will be received
for the editor at 51 Flinders-lane West, until the 30th of every
month preceding.
Another essay is also ready for the press, suggestive on a variety
of social subjects requiring reform, either political or social, and will
appear as soon as the friends of progress, or those who would encou-
rage the thinking powers or literary efforts of Australia, shall be
prepared to subscribe towards its printing and publishing. M. W.
Mason, Firth, and M'Cutcheon, Printers, 51 and 53 Flinders Lane West.
