





®hc iicnt rgufi
A WEEKLY JOURNAL
“POUR PASSER LE TEMPS.”
A Chronicle of the Voyage of the S.S. “ Kentf Capt . G. F, Gibbs ,
from London to Melbourne.
MELBOURNE :
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT, PRINTERS, 78 COLLINS STREET EAST-
1877.




%\]t fUnt
No. 1. THURSDAY, 2nd NOVEMBER, 1876.
The Editors have with little fear and much trembling under-
taken their task. They have little fear that there is sufficient
talent on board to enable their paper to be a success ; but being
well acquainted with the human nature of man, and knowing
that modesty and laziness (especially on shipboard) are two of its
distinguishing features, they tremble somewhat when they reflect
that some of the talent on board may prefer idleness to intellec-
tual exercise, and that the bashful may be too backward in
coming forward. Assuming, therefore, at once their editorial
functions as great moral teachers, they beg to warn their fellow-
passengers against indulging in vices which are entirely unsuited
to the land to which they are being borne. Feeling that the
passengers will take this warning to heart, they are somewhat
more assured, and they request that those on board, of all classes,
and of both sexes, will send them in contributions either in prose
or in verse. Anecdotes, if good, will be welcomed ; if bad,
rejected. Conundrums, if new, will be indeed a novelty ; and
information on current events will be inserted regularly. The
characteristics the Editors would most insist on are conciseness
and interest; and they would especially caution all contributors
against personalities, which in a small community lik e ours might
be only too probable, though at the same time most deeply to be
regretted. Of course, the paper will be without politics, but will
be open to receive complaints of grievances, the noticing of which
will not encroach upon the relations which the officers of the ship
have towards the ship itself and the passengers, A notice of the
preliminary meeting at which the issuing of this paper was
resolved on will be found in another column. Commending this
paper, then, to the favorable consideration of those on board, the
Editors feel sure that if adequately supported it will serve not
unprofitably to pass the time away, and afterwards be a pleasant
souvenir of the voyage.
IMPORTANT MEETING.
A numerously attended meeting of passengers was held on board the
good ship Kent, on Monday, the 30th ult., to discuss the desirability of
starting a journal to be issued periodically during the present voyage,
Mr. Doughai'ty having been unanimously voted to the chair, proceedings
were opened by Mr. Loughnan, who proposed the starting of the journal.
This was seconded by Mr. Kingscote ; and the names of Mr. Mclntyre
as editor, and Mr. Alfred Moul as sub-editor, having been proposed and
cordially accepted, the question as to the name of the paper was
submitted to the meeting. This provoked a lively discussion as to the
relative merits of the names “ The Kent Chronicle,” and “ The Kent
Argus.” The former was proposed by Mr. Loughnan and seconded by
Mr. Kingscote, and the latter proposed by Mr. Evans, seconded by
Mr, Wilson. The number of votes for each name being found to be
exactly equal, the casting vote in favor of the name Kent Argus was
given by the chairman, who accompanied his vote with a few appropriate
remarks relative to the actual unimportance of the name of the paper.
The name of Mr. May, of the Melbourne Argus, having been proposed
and cordially agreed to as publisher of the periodical, the chairman
suggested that the co-operation of both first and second class passengers
be sought, and it was resolved that notices of the meeting be at once
posted at the companions with a view of securing this. After a few
remarks from several gentlemen present as to the advantages accruing
to all on board from the publishing of the Kent Argus, the meeting
terminated with a hearty vote of thanks to the chairman.
OUR MILE STONES.
MADEIRA.
It is my intention to give a few remarks in every paper on .the
features of the several islands or parts of the world we pass or are near
on our voyage to Melbourne,
The island of Madeira, which we were near at noon on the 31st
October, comes first on the list. The date and manner of the discovery
of this beautiful island are involved in some obsciirity. The most
probable is the romantic tale of Robert Machion and Anna D’Arfet,
two lovers, who fleeing from the wrath of the lady’s friends, to the
shores of France, were driven by a storm far away to sea, and at length
met with this unknown and uninhabited island. It is stated that in
the present little church of Machico on the north-west side, is preserved
a portion of the cross found over their graves on their re-discovery in
1418.
This latter discovery arose from the circumstance of a dark cloud
being constantly seen in the south-west by the settlers at Porto Santo,
who had gone from Spain to the conquest of the Canaries. They sailed
towards it, and on Ist June, 1419, they discovered the point now called
after their vessel, Cape San Lorenzo.
Madeira is of volcanic origin, and is formed of numerous mountains,
the highest of which, Pico Puivo, is 6,056 feet high. Cultivation is
confined to the coast or to the bottoms of some of the valleys, and
occupies altogether a very small portion of the surface. Yines form the
chief feature ) for what corn is grown is not sufficient for more than is
consumed in two months by the inhabitants.
Every European and tropical luxury in the way of vegetation may be
found here. The myrtle, geranium, rose and violet may be-found here
growing wild on every side. The geranium, in particular, is so common
that the honey of the bees is strongly impregnated with its odour. The
climate generally is delicious, and strikes with a peculiar charm to a
stranger, whom a short sail has transferred to it from the very midst of
the gloom and chill of an English December. Indeed, the great natural
distinction of Madeira is the climate, which, taken altogether, is the
finest in the world. Rain rarely falls, but water is abundant, springs
being found everywhere, fed by the mountain mists which always
encircle the tops of the hills.
Funchal is the capital of Madeira, and is situated on a bay on the
south side of the island, in a kind of amphitheatre formed by the moun-
tains, and the contrast of the white buildings and villas with the green
hills for a background forms a charming picture. The streets of the
town are very narrow, and appear to a stranger like alleys. They are
well-paved, and wheeled carriages are unknown \ the only vehicles, if
they may be so called, are small sledges on which are transferred the
pipes of wine. Funchal is about a mile in length, and boasts of a fine
cathedral, also a very beautiful church, “ Nossa Senliora Domonte,”
which is one of the sights of the island.
In concluding this slight sketch, it may be mentioned that Funchal is
a great coaling station for steamers trading between England and the
Cape of Good Hope, and the Northumberland, one of Messrs. Wigram’s
steamers, touched there at the beginning of October (on her last outward
passage) to refresh, having experienced very heavy weather in the Bay


of Biscay, which drowned a considerable portion of her stock. I have
no doubt there are some amongst us who would have had no objection
if we, from the same cause, had to follow her example, to enable them
to explore the beauties of this charming island.
Nauticus.
NEWS FROM THE SEAT OF WAR,
While passing the Island of Madeira an important communication
was handed to one of the passengers, which we are informed contained
the following telegram from London :
“ London, 29tli October, 1876.—Intelligence received states that the
Russians have crossed the Pruth into the Principality. They passed the
river by three bridges of pontoons, and effected a junction of the divi-
sions near Bucharest. The invading force consists of 78,000 infantry,
five regiments of cavalry, and the usual complement of ai’tillery. In
consequence of this overt act of war against Turkey, the English Am-
bassador at St. Petersburg has demanded his credentials.”
We need hardly comment upon the alarming nature of this news ;
and what is more to the point, we cannot congratulate ourselves on
being quite free from all risks of capture till we pass the Equator, as the
latest advices received from Madeira before leaving Plymouth were to
the effect that Russian war vessels and privateers had been seen
cruising between the latitude of Funchal and the Line. We can have
no doubt as to the trustworthiness of the telegram, as one of our staff
actually saw the captain hand the communication in question to the
passenger spoken of on the poop deck, and on inquiries being made as
to the same, we found that the telegram had arrived on board by means
of a carrier pigeon from the shore. This arrangement made by Messrs.
Money Wigram and Co. for the information of passengers cannot be too
highly commended.
CORRESPONDENCE.
(to THE EDITOR OF THE KENT ARGUS.)
Sir, —Hearing that you have undertaken the publication of a journal
on board the ship Kent , or as I have heard it styled, evidently with a
view to propitiation, the good ship Kent , I venture to address a few lines
to you, in the hope that some grievances which I have against the ship,
the officers, and passengers, may be promptly redressed. Sir, it may not
generally be known to those on board that the writer of these lines is
no ordinary personage, though modesty prevents my dwelling on the
interesting subject of my own merits. And now, Sir, will you kindly
inform me why passengers who do not suffer from an agonising disturb-
ance of their internal organization during the first portion of a voyage
on the ocean, should be allowed to eat and drink to their own evident
enjoyment, whilst others of their fellow-passengers are silently (1) enduring
and starving, refusing to be comforted, and often begging those nearest,
if not dearest, to consign them to a watery grave. I ask, Sir, in the
name of humanity that the tantalising sound of knives and forks be at
once subdued, the savoury odours and the rattle of plates confined to
some portion of the vessel which will not interfere with the comfort of
the sufferers, amongst which I grieve to say is numbered
A Emerald Horn.
P.s. — l have other complaints to make, but will not now occupy more
space. —A. E. H.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Anxious Passenger.— Make the most of your remaining opportunities. Porridge
will form an item at the breakfast table for a few more days only.
Soub Grapes.—They are already exhausted.
Steerage.— lt is true that on passing Palma, one of the celebrated Canaries was
distinctly seen with the naked eye.
Saloon. —We cannot inform you why there are /ore-sheets allowed before the main-
mast, whilst two only are allowed to each cabin passenger.
X. Y. Z —We are afraid we cannot help you. If you will make the poop your
dinner table, you must expect to be inconvenienced.
Socks. —We regret that your letter is too personal to be inserted. Did you not read
our preliminary notice ?
POETRY.
SONNET.
Why did I trifle all the hours away,
When last my Cora was in pliant mood,
Methinks she then had understood
And treated kindly what I had to say.
Oh fool! ignoble fool! then to prefer
The silly banter and the idle jest
To speaking boldly of that love to her
Which lay deep-rooted in my inmost breast.
The time for speaking’s past —l might have gained
The happy consciousness of love returned,
She, known the love that ever in me burned,
And each the other’s dearer self remained.
But from avowal since I basely shrank,
She is another’s—my poor heart a blank.
ON SEA SICKNESS.
I am a sympathetic man,
So full of kindly feeling,
I ought to be professor of
The noble art of healing.
I cannot bear, when looks of pain
O’ercloud the human features,
Or misery of any kind
Is burdening fellow creatures.
My eyes will fill with tears whene’er
I see a child in trouble,
But when a man in pain I meet,
My sympathy is double.
And if the agony of man thus moves,
What is in me of human,
What must I feel if I should see
A pain-afflicted woman ?
Now, ever since I’ve been on board
This vessel, bound for Melbourne,
I’ve seen an ailment causing grief
To ladies low and well born.
Our neighbours call it mal de mer,
An evil it is truly,
Which, if we call it bad as death,
We rate it not unduly.
The symptom first of this disease
Is absence from the table;
That’s bad, for no one likes to starve
If she to eat is able.
The second symptom is a noise
Which issues from the patient,
And hurrying to and fro of the
Stewardess is occasioned.
The ladies then appear on dcek,
With cheeks by no means ruddy,
Yet do not venture very oft
At mealtime in the cuddy.
At last, with faces blanched and pale,
And with their persons thinner,
They summon all their courage up,
And try to eat a dinner.
We’ve reached this point, and now I feel
I am a deal less gloomy ;
The passengers are out of pain,
The tables are less roomy.
But what of that to one who has
A sympathetic nature ?
I’d do without a place at all
To help a fellow-creature.
ACROSTIC.
T o-day we offer you our opening pages,
H oping to interest our readers of all ages.
E ncouragement and sympathy will be our wages.
K indly refrain from harshly criticising ;
E ndeavour each to aid us in devising
N ovelties, news, or narrative surprising.
T o all we offer space for advertising.
A 11 that we aim at is but to amuse;
E ude personalities we shall refuse,
G iving no place within our columns to abuse,
U nder these light conditions send us what you choose—
S end us your contributions, and our faults excuse.
4
THE KENT ARGUS


THE RIDDLER.
Is it necessary for a ship to have stays on ? Of cors-et is !
When is a finished mast like a deluded child ? When it’s mizen-formed.
Why is a washerwoman like a newly-married wife ? Because she is so-apy
-.(so happy.)
Why is a rudder like paternal chastisement? Because it is a matter of stern
necessity.
DEATH ON BOARD S.S. KENT.
(from our special reporter.)
An inquest was held on Wednesday morning the Ist November, to
ascertain the cause of a death which occurred on board early on the
same morning. As the appearance of the body suggested foul play, the
proceedings were watched with great interest by a large number of the
passengers. An officer of the ship watched the case on behalf of the
captain, officers, and crew, while Mr. B appeared for the passengers
on board. A jury having been empanelled, the case was opened by the
coroner with a suggestion that the body should be viewed. This having
been done, and it appearing that there were no witnesses who could give
any evidence which would satisfactorily account for the cause of death, a
gentleman present offered to dissect the body in the presence of all
assembled. This offer was at once accepted, and the operator proceeded
to his task with an expertness that showed him to be no novice in the
science of anatomy. It was soon apparent that at least one of the
causes of death had been indigestion—this being proved by the most
extraordinary contents found in the stomach of the deceased; but after
a most careful and skilful dissection had been proceeded with, the
operator was heard to say, in a very marked tone of voice, that “he
believed Monkey must be on board.” This strange remark evidently
connected Monkey, whoever he might be, with the affair, and as at this
stage of the inquiry two of the crew were brought up for examination,
some light upon the mystery was eagerly looked for by all present.
The first witness was then examined.
Coroner : Is your name Monkey, sir 1
Witness (very indignantly) : No, sir, it isn’t.
Coroner ; What is your name then, sir 1
Witness : Joe Brown, sir.
Coroner : Do you think there has been any foul play here, Joe
Brown 1 (Loud laughter, which was immediately suppressed.)
Witness : I can’t say, sir, as I do.
Coroner : Does anyone present wish to ask this witness any questions 1
A voice was heard to say, “ What will he take to drink 1 ” (Calls of
“ order.”) The next witness was then called for examination.
Coroner : What is your name, sir 1
(The witness was understood to say Alfred Poultry, and his reply
again provoked loud and continued laughter, which the coroner with
difficulty quelled.)
Coroner : Will you look at the body 1
Witness : I am looking, sir.
Coroner ; Did you ever see the deceased alive 1
Witness : Maybe I have, sir.
Coroner : Now, be very careful; did you, or were you in the habit of
giving food to the deceased 1
Witness : Yes, sir.
Coroner : Did you ever give deceased paper to eat 1
Witness : No, sir, I never did.
Coroner : Did you ever see him eat paper 1
Witness : No, sir, but I’ve lost a copy of
Coroner : Never mind what you’ve lost, sir, but attend to my questions.
■Can you account for this death in any 'way 1
Witness; No, sir.
Coroner : Is there or is there not any one on board named Monkey 1
Witness : I don’t exactly know, sir,
(The witness was then heard to say “he thought there was,” accom-
panying his remark with a peculiar glance towards the gentleman who
had so skilfully conducted the dissection of the body. But he was at
once rebuked by the coroner for his unseemly jest, and dismissed.)
No other evidence forthcoming, it was decided to accept the opinion of
the dissector as to the cause of death, which he accordingly gave to be
“ disease of the lungs ” and “ indigestion inside ! ” Before the inquiry
closed the following question (which seemed to us a most extraordinary
one) was asked by the coroner of the dissector : Do you consider this
body in its present state fit for human food 1 The reply was still more
extraordinary. Answer : I do, sir.
Ultimately orders were given to commit the body to the deep, and the
inquiry ended with a hearty vote of thanks to the dissector (whom we
understand to be a M.R.C.Y.S.) for his great skill and kindness shown
on the occasion. We sincerely trust that this will be the last inquest
and post-mortem examination which will have to be reported during the
present voyage.
Divine Service was held in the saloon on Sunday morning last, and
was numerously attended by the passengers. Captain Gibbs read the
morning service ; and the Rev. James Henry, late of Stewartfield,
Aberdeenshire, preached a short sermon, taking as his subject “ The
precious Blood of Christ.” Mr. Alfred Moul officiated at the harmonium.
We are informed that Dr. Cairns, of Melbourne, will preach next Sun-
day morning, and the Rev. Mr. Henry in the evening.
Off the Line.— When our vessel was nearing the island of Madeira,
the other day, two gentlemen who were leaving the smoking-room were
accosted by a venerable Scot, who inquired if the land seen in the
distance was the “ Line.” He was told, “ Yes, the coast-line.”
We are requested to notify to the passengers generally that the chief
officer is the proper person to apply to in case anyone wishes to commu-
nicate with the crew; otherwise irregularities may occur.
CAPTAIN’S REPORT.
LOG OF S.S. “ KENT,” TO THURSDAY, 2nd NOVEMBER, 1876.
Date. Day. Lat. Long. Course. Dist. Remarks.
1876. Miles.
Oct. 26 Thursday 48° 25' N. 6° 37' W. S., 41° W. 151 151 miles from Breakwater.
Wind S.E., moderate and
fine.
„ 27 Friday 45° 28' 10° 19' S., 40° W. 232 Wind—S.S.E., South, S.W.,
West, rainy.
~ 28 Saturday 42° 10' 12° 27' S., 25° W. 219 N.W. and North. Wind light
and calm.
„ 29 Sunday 39° 24' 14° 21' S., 28° E. 188 Calm. Stopped engine five
hours—heated piston rod.
30 Monday 35° 58' 16° 4' S., 22° W. 223 Light East breeze.
~ 31 Tuesday 33° 10' 17° 20' S., 20° W. 180 Sighted Madeira'at 10 a.m.
Strong head winds, with
heavy rain.
Nov. 1 Wednesday 29* 37' 18° 7' S., 11° W. 217 Strong headwind till 8 p.m.;
then hauled to West, with
fine weather.
Distance from Plymouth Breakwater on Ist November, at noon, 1410 miles.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Found.—A lady’s Comb. The owner can have it on application to Mr. Kingscote.
Lost. —On board, between London and Plymouth, a Binocular Field Glass,
marked “ Steward, Optician, Strand.” The finder is requested to return the same
to the Editors.
Clje %\tnt Argus.
Thursday, 9th November, 1876.
No. 2.
It is with much regret that we feel called upon to draw atten-
tion to the rise and fall of the “ Kent Ice Company (Limited),”
a more detailed account of which will be found in another
column. This Company was promoted to supply an obvious
want, under the most promising auspices, and everything bid
fair to make it a splendid success, when all at once it most
ignorainiously collapsed. There must have been something un-
doubtedly very rotten in the whole thing from the beginning, nor
need we be surprised at that, for it is a well-known fact, that
5
THE KENT ARGUS.


nothing is so liable to get rotten as ice. It shall be our task
then to sift this whole matter to the bottom, and discover, if
possible, the causes of the failure.
The Company was promoted by a man of proved ability and
integrity, the direction was placed in the hands of men of
character and position, and although the broker’s lack of energy
made the subscription for shares hang fire for a time, yet in the
end the Company received the support of the consuming public
generally. The broker, who was also appointed Secretary, examined
the machinery and expressed himself perfectly satisfied with the
same, and the Directors had every reason to place confidence in
the opinion of a man who professed to have seen the process
“ many times before.’ 1 But alas for human nature, how often is
trust reposed in, and the capital of the too confiding public en-
trusted to the hands of, incompetent pretenders! The machinery
was, we understand, put in motion ; the raw materials were pur-
chased at no little cost, and the shareholders were for a day or two
dazzled with some object having a very distant resemblance to ice
which the Secretary produced as a specimen (in a crude state),
manufactured by the process patented by Mr. Miles. This, how-
ever, turned out to be nothing more or less than washing soda,
which had been borrowed by some tool of the Secretary’s for
the purpose of deceiving his employers. His plans have been
thwarted however, and it must be a matter of congratulation to
us all, that on the capital subscribed, no call was to be made till
the ice itself was placed on the dinner table. The subsequent
conduct of the Secretary shows that his intentions were not the
most honest. When the fraud was detected, he threw the soda
he had borrowed right overboard, tore the papers of the Company
into pieces and cast them to the North-east Trades, hoping thus to
destroy all traces of his evil intentions and all damning evidence
of the fraud. Nemesis, however slow, is sure, and (though we
dare not comment on the case of the Directors against their late
Secretary, as it is still sub judice ) we feel certain that the man in
question, who, notwithstanding his baseness, is of great ability
and good family, will ere long reap the reward of his doings.
OUR MILE STONES.
THE CANARIES.
I should have given a short account of the island of Palma, which was
passed on the afternoon of Wednesday, the Ist of November, but space
would not admit of more than the mention made of Madeira.
The Island of Palma is the westernmost of the group of Canaries, and
is composed almost entirely of hard basaltic rock, towering up to a gx'eat
height in the centre. It can be seen on a clear day at a distance of 60
miles. The oxily town is Santa Cruz de la Palma, on the east side of the
islaxxd, before which is a small roadstead, whex-e vessels cast axxchor in 20
fathoxxxs of water. The tx-ade of this island is not a large oxxe : the
inhabitants are mostly poor and cxxltivate xxo more than is xxecessaxy for
their owxi sxxbsistence. Thex’e are several small villages in the hollows
of the diffex-ent valleys, all of which are almost isolated from each other,
except by naxTow passes cut out of the sides of the rocky mountains.
There is one large chux’ch in the town of Santa Cruz, and xxear it is a
large foxxntain fed by a mountaixx stream, which sxxpplies the inhabitants
with water : wells are xxnknown.
The appearance of the island at sunset, when six miles distant, was
very grand, the base being shroxxded ixx comparative darkxxess, and the
-upper paid of the mountains resplendent with the rays of the setting sun.
The Island of Fexro, one of the smallest and the most southern of the
group, was passed at a distance of 12 miles at 10 the same evening. This
island is not wox'thy of much mention ; there is no anchorage or port of
any sort, and but few inhabitants. The foliage of this island is abundant
and varied, so that bees and honey are plentiful. The centre of the is-
laxxd is an uneven plateau, 4900 feet above the level of the sea.
Befox’e proceeding with an account of the Cape de Verde Islands,
which I intend doing in our next issue, a few remarks on the beautiful
island of Tenexiffe, also one of the Canaries, may be here admissible.
It is one of the largest and most fertile of the group, and is remark-
able for its peak in the centre, which is 12,176 feet above the level of
the sea. Santa Cruz is the name of the chief town here also ;itis of
considerable size, and has a large roadstead, which can accommodate at
least 500 sail. The land at the back of the town is very fexdile, and is
principally used for the culture of grapes, from which excellent wine, the
chief produce of the island, is made.
The aspect of Santa Cruz is gloomy, and the heat commonly exces-
sive. On a narrow and sandy beach houses of dazzling whiteness, with
flat roofs, are built against a wall of black perpendicular rocks bare of
vegetation, A fine mole, built of freestone, and the public walk planted
with poplars, are the only objects which break the sameness of the land-
scape, The Peak of Teneriffe was discernable from the deck of the
Kent at 2 p.m., though distant 68 miles.
Nauticus.
THE EDDYSTONE LIGHT.
The lighthouse being such an important feature in the direction and
safety of all sea-going vessels, I think I shall not be out of place in
relating a few facts connected with the erection of the most important
of our beacons, the “ Eddystone Lighthouse.”
That famous light off the coast of Cornwall, was first built of wood, in
a most fanciful manner, by a most eccentric gentleman, Mr. Winstanley,
whom some people say, was not only a gentleman, but a “ Man of
Letters.” He certainly was self-conceited; for on the outside of his
structure he painted various boastful inscriptions, and when he ascended
its balcony he used boldly to defy the storm, crying out in joyful glee
“ Blow, O ye Winds! ” “ Rise, O Ocean ! ” “ Break forth, ye Elements,
and try my handiwork ! ” But, alas, the boaster and his structure came
to gi’ief, for in one night the sea swallowed up the lighthouse and
its maker.
The next attempt was made by a Mr, Rugard, or Rudgard, who
designed a very good tower, but built it of stone and wood, and its
failure consisted in the wood giving the elements an amount of hold, for
both the building and its builder perished by fire.
When the third and last attempt was made, the old proverb came
true, that there’s luck in the third trial, for the great Smeaton’s light-
house still remains, a permanent success. Mr. Smeaton commenced his
“ Cone ” by dovetailing and rivetting its foundation to the very rock on
which the superstructure was raised. He carved no boastful inscriptions
like those of Winstanley, but he wrote on the lowest circle of the
building, “ Except the Lord build the House, they labour in vain that
build itand on the highest stone, the stone that is called the keystone,
he placed this inscription, “ Laus Deo.” This tower still stands, a
monument of science and energy, casting its brilliant light over the
mighty deep, warning the storm-tossed mariner of his proximity to
the rocks.
T. S.
TO THE LADIES.
We have been requested to thank the ladies generally for the great (?)
interest they have all shown in the efforts which have been made to
arrange a musical entertainment. It is, of coui’se, superfluous to say
that they are well aware of the great importance of their countenance
and co-operation in such matters ; but such knowledge only adds an
additional grace to the value of their interest; and it is indeed a
pleasure to the promoters of amusement on board, to find their efforts
so well seconded by the fair sex.
NOTES FROM EXPERIENCE.
The north-east trade winds usually blow from the south-east.
It sometimes rains in the tropics.
Taking miss at 100 does not pay a lee- tie bit.
Fowls which die a natural death on board are pinkish in colour if
cooked.
At sea one’s health does not materially suffer from having precious
little to eat at lunch.
6
THE KENT ARGUS.


POETRY.
LOST FOR LOYE.
(A Tale of the “ Kent.”)
My tale is a ’Varsity man,
Who took a good degree ;
A talented dog, but one who was
Too awfully fond of a spree.
He was a fellow'of Trin. Coll,, Cam.,
Who all his money had spent,
And he sailed unto Australia
On board the good ship Kent.
On land he had a propensity
To fall in love at sight,
Indeed he’d rather indulge this taste
Than drink, or swear, or fight.
There was a lovely girl on board,
So young and debonnair,
She stole that fellow’s heart away,
He followed her everywhere.
He urged his suit with ardent words;
Alas, he urged in vain,
She told him ne’er to see her more,
He gave her needless pain.
Love lightly rates such checks as these,
He urged his suit still more ;
She had to use still harder words
Than she had used before.
At last she asked her father’s help
(That man his word ne’er broke),
Pa said he’d throw him overboard
If to the girl he spoke.
The fellow then was in despair ;
To see her every day,
And not to be allowed to speak
Was awful, every way.
At last the fellow’s heart it broke,
He gazed out on the tide,
He leaped from off the vessel’s stern,
Committing suicide.
Love makes strange metamorphoses,
In this we all agree,
It made ilois fellow of Trin. Coll., Cam.,
Become a felo de se.
ALPHABETICAL PERSONALITIES.
A, is for Appleton, who clearly must be
The first to find place in this Kent ABC.
B, is for Block, who ne’er went to leeward,
Who’s a caution at once to the cook and the steward.
C, the next letter, stands for Mr. Clough,
Of whom many passengers don’t know enough.
D, is for Dougharty, somewhat over ten stone,
Brimful of kindness, good nature and fun.
E, is for Evans, a Welshman ’tis clear,
Promoter of bubbles and ice engineer.
G, is for Goodall, with countenance bronzed,
A quiet young man, but good all around.
H, is for Hollingsworth, colonist long,
A knowing old file if the writer’s not wrong.
K, is for Kingscote, owner of stock,
Whose Bertie’s a chip of the ancient block,
L, is for Loughnan, andL is for Lee,
Who share the same cabin, and with 100 agree.
M, is a literary musical Moul,
The Editor’s sub and a jolly good soul.
M, too for Mclntyre, without whose aid
The present Kent Argus would not have been made.
O, is O’Stevenson, always in motion,
Of how to keep quiet he has’nt a notion.
P, Pearce, his companion, much more retiring,
Has great latent talent, which only needs firing.
R, is for Richards, a native of Wales,
’Twill never be his fault if fun on board fails.
S, is for Smith, who will not take a hint,
On a subject referred to before in this print.
S, is for him, under badinage blyth,
Who now is Carmichael, but lately was Smyth.
T, is for Ticehurst, whom nobody blames,
For liking the children and sharing their games.
W, is Wilson, a thorough-bred Scot,
Who’ll ne’er want for friends, whate’er be his lot.
Y, is for Yeo, than whom no man surely
Can chaff with more tact, or yarn more demurely.
MOONLIGHT AT SEA.
Sonnet.
Calmly we glide o’er ocean’s heaving breast,
Our motion and our thoughts in unison,
When the day’s heat and blazing sun are gone,
And the night’s goddess fills our souls with rest,
We look around.—The undulating sea
Silvered with light and with no breakers riven,
Speaks of the love which beauty gives to earth,
And makes our globe an antitype of Heaven,
Our eyes turn upward, and on Him we dwell,
Whose glories, all too bright for human eyes,
Were erst revealed by the reflected light
Of His own Son. In scenes like these we quell
All thoughts discordant to repose of soul:
We gaze, are ravished, and we love the whole.
THE RIDDLER.
BURIED CITIES.
1. Last night, while sailing on the water, I pondered long and deeply on the
beauty of the scene.
2. He had in his garden a bed for dahlias, and one for roses.
3. His fury delights the heart of his calm deceitful foe.
4. He has cut a rib of beef so badly, it had to be taken from him.
5. Have you seen a book by Macadam, “Aids to Necromancy.? ”
6. Which is the way, right or left, to Timbuctoo ?
Answers will be given in our next issue.
DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
An island in Scotland.
A well-known northern town in Scotland.
A continental city famous for a great battle.
An Austrian province.
A Swiss province.
A seaport town in Scotland.
A sea-bathing town in England.
The finals show where due homage is paid
To him whose name the initials have made.
Answers signed with sender’s initials to be sent in to the Editors.
CONUNDRUM.
Old Music Mistress to Child : —Why are two crotchets like the least
musical quantity 1 Answer :—Because they’re a minimum—(Minim
ma’am.)
ON BOARD THE CITY OF BERLIN.
Old Lady :—“ How many miles is it to Bosting, Capting 1 ” “ Seven,
ma’am.” “ Seving ! good heaving ! I thought it was eleving.”
NOTES AND QUERIES.
The man who was requested to tell his story to the marines, has been seen
wandering for days about the forecastle in search of them.
Quite Natubal. — A ribbon was seen to drop from a lady’s dress on the poop.
She was heard to remark, “ I don’t like losing my beaux ! ”
Why is the baker like the ship ? Because he gives us heavy rolls.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
A New South Wales Man. —Owing to the length of this number, we have been
compelled to reserve your contribution for our next.
Divine Service was conducted on board last Sunday, by the Rev.
Dr. Cairns, in the morning, on the poop, who preached from the first
two verses of the 23rd Psalm. In the evening, the Rev. Mr. Henry
addressed the passengers from the main deck, taking for his text a verse
from the Ist chapter Timothy, “This is a faithful saying, and worthy of
all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into'the world to save sinners.”
We have received a suggestion that weekly offertories be made at the
Sunday services on board, in aid of some one of the many charities
carried on for the benefit of seamen. As this is a good suggestion, we
hope to see its adoption next Sunday morning, and trust it will receive
the hearty support of all passengers.
7
THE KENT ARGUS.


SHIP’S NOTES.
Friday.— First appearance of the Kent Argus. The first number of
this journal was read aloud on the poop by Mr. Loughnan, to a most
appreciative audience, in the evening, and at the close of the reading a
few very complimentary remarks on the contents of the number were
made by Dr. Cairns, who wished the editor and his friends all the
support and success which the undertaking deserved. The first game of
cricket was played, and ten balls played overboard. Thanks to the
ladies, we hear this loss is being made up by the manufacture of a new
set. First meeting of the Kent Ice Company took place.
Saturday.— Continuance of fine weather. First appearance of quoits.
Sunday.— Divine service morning and evening. Weather sultry.
Monday.— Very hot all day. A grampus and a shoal of porpoises
were observed. An African woodpecker was captured from the
rigging in the afternoon. Evidently driven from the coast, the bird had
travelled nearly 100 miles before it first alighted on the ship.
Tuesday.— Words completely fail in describing the nature of this
day’s weather. Suffice it to say that it rained from about 4 a.m. until
4 p.m., producing a most depressing effect upon the spirits of the
passengers. The evening was sufficiently fine to allow the deck to be
visited, and this was taken advantage of by all.
Wednesday. —A return to fine weather, with a continuance of the
head winds.
THE KENT ICE COMPANY.
A meeting was held on Friday last for the purpose of forming an Ice
Company, to supply ice to the passengers at a fixed cost. The meeting
was numerously attended, and the proposal for the company met with
the most hearty approval. A board of directors, with the usual officers
of a company, were elected, and ice was promised in a day or two by the
engineer of the company. A subsequent meeting was held at the request
of numerous shareholders, to inquire into the conduct of the secretaxy
and broker. Vax-ious offences wei'e alleged against him in connection
with the working of the company, the most serious being the evident
want of intex-est displayed by liim in the placing of the shares.
The Chairman, after making some very appropriate remax-ks on the
necessity for the heax-t to be in the work, again adjourned the meeting,
which again met the same afternoon to receive the secretaxy’s report, and
to view a specimen of the ice. The former appeax-ed to give satisfaction,
and the secretaxy was complimented on the result of his laboxxx-s; but,
upon the ice being handed up for exaxnination, it was at once apparent
that the whole affair was a swindle, as the specimen piece was proved to
be xxothing more than common soda. The exposure and consequent
failux’e of the project, was a source of bitter disappoixxtment to some of
the ladies oxx boax-d, who had beexx waiting in eager anticipation for
the promised ice.
NON POSSTJMUS.
Two men shooting opossums in the bush, had for a neighbour an old
wood-cutter. Occasionally they hung up, near their hut, a carcass for
the dogs. This carcass used to disappear in some mystex-ioxxs manner,
and at length they suspected their neighbour of the theft, and deter-
mined to pay him out. A tom-cat, which was x-ather aged, served their
purpose : they shot the cat and hung it up ixxstead of the opossxxnx. In
the nxoxming the cat had also disappeared. About the old man’s dinner
time, they px-oceeded to nail xxp the cat’s skin to a tree opposite his door.
The old fellow perceiving them said, halloa ! mates, what are you nailing
up thex-e 1 “ Our poor old torn cat’s skin, and some confoxxnded thief ran
off with thecax-case last night.” The old man laid down his knife and
fork, axxd was heard to observe, “ Well, I’m blowed ! if that’s cat, cat is
good.”
CAUTION TO SMOKERS.
An incident occux-red last xxight which renders this caution a matter
of very grave necessity. A lighted fusee, thrown oxx the deck, suddenly
ignited a lady’s dress ; axxd though we axm enabled to state that beyond
a few scorches, axxd the total destrxxction of the dress, no further harm
was occasioxxed, still we sincex-ely hope that this will be a tixxxely
warxxixxg against carelessless ixx the use of fusees.
CORRESPONDENCE.
(to THE EDITOR OF THE KENT ARGUS.)
Mr. Editor.—Sir, —lt may interest you to know that I have in a
great measure recovered fx'om the distressing effects of pitching and
tossing, and have also (I flatter myself) completely caught the true aud
orthodox manner of pacing the deck. Being most anxious to excel in
this difficult accomplishment, I have naiTowly observed the move-
ments of all on boax-d, and have taken (after careful study) one
individxxal as my model. Payixxg dxxe attention to yoxxr note on pex-son-
alities, I shall refx-ain from mentionixxg the name of this person, neither
shall I specify for obvious motives the sex of the party in question,
whose gx'aceful yet digxxified fx-ee and easy carriage has so impx-essed me.
But, sir, the object of my letter mxxst be now alluded to. Yoxxrs is a
powex-fxxl journal, sir, and a passenger’s wx-ongs will, I feel cex-tain, be
x-edx-essed thx-ough sxxclx an influexxtial medixxm. Havixxg received from
Mr. Frank Buckland (shox-tly before my leaving England) some valuable
hints for the captxxre of oysters, I proceeded the other night to cai'iy
them out, axxd for that pux-pose made fast to the stern of the vessel six
long lines, each baited with one of the plump well-fed capons that appear
daily at oxxr dixxner table. To the uninitiated my bait may appear
unxxecessarily extx-avagant, bxxt one of my hints advised me on this
point. Imagine xxxy disgxxst and anxxoyance, sir, when, the xxext morning,
I foxxnd every line but one had been toxm away evidently by some huge
monster of the deep. I was proceeding to haxxl in the only x-emaixxing
line whexx I received a violent blow fx'om the officer of the watch, who
had been watching me, accompaxxied by a stexm demand as to what I
meant by pulling in the log. I at once proceeded to enlighten his
ignorance by explainixxg that what he imagined was a log attached to a
string was my oyster lixxe, bxxt I was met with a volley of abxxse and
further threats, which caused my x-apid descent fx-om the deck to the
shelter of my own bex-th. I sxxbseqxxently leax-nt that shortly after I had
fixed my lines the engines were foxxnd to be diminishing their speed with
no appax-exxt caxxse, but on the chief engineer px'oceeding to the stern of
the vessel to examine the screw he discovered a hxxge dax-k mass floating
round it. A closer examination showed this mass to be a countless
shoal of oysters attracted by my lines. They had torn away the
temptixxg baits and were evidently bent on making their way to the-
chief steward’s quarters thx-ough the screw txxnnel. Steps were at once
taken to secixre them, but after about four dozen had been captured the
remainder (evidently taking a timely hint from one of the captives),,
made a rapid exit from the vessel’s stex-xx. The four dozen which wex-e
taken, having been tx-axxsfex-red to the officer’s qxxax-tex-s, were served up
axxd pronounced to be most excellent eating by a small but select party,
I consider, Mr. Editor, that a most mean advantage was taken of me in
the secxxx’ing of these oysters ixx my absence, and the subseqxxent feasting
on them, and I entii'ely fail to see the faix’ixess of the ox-der given to-
prohibit any passenger from fishing for oystex-s at the vessel’s stexm. It
has been explained to me that this prohibition is with a view to px*event-
ing any accident to the scx-ew, but I notice that the captain or that
obnoxioxxs officer of the watch still has his own px-ivate oyster line
hanging fx-om the stexm night axxd day. This letter, sir, is loxxger than I
intended, but it is as well that the passengex-s should know of the well
meant though fruitless endeavoxxrs to procure oysters for the dinner or
sxxpper table by
Youx’S txmly,
A Emerald Horn.
EXTRAORDINARY VITALITY OF A SHARK.
(to THE EDITOR OF THE KENT ARGUS.)
Sir, — The following incident which came under the observation of
one of our fellow passengers on a former voyage, may be of intex-est to
your x-eaders.
Oxx the outward voyage of the Dunbar Castle, ixx 1873, from Loxxdon
to Melbourne, sonxe of the passengers betook themselves to shax-k-fishiixg r
to begxxile the tedixxm of the days.
They were successful in catching sevex-al, which were hauled on
boax-d, cut xxp, and eaten by the sailox-s, whether from love or hatx-ed I
do not know. Having disposed of the fix-st two or three in this way, and
surfeited themselves with boiled shark, it was decided xxot to puil any
more oxx boax-d. Accox-dingly the next oxxe that took the bait was simply
8
THE KENT ARGUS


hauled up to the bulwarks, his head cut off, and the carcass allowed to
drop in the sea again. Imagine the amazement and horror of all on
boai'd at seeing the headless trunk of the monster continue to follow in
the wake of the ship, calmly swimming, as though its head was in
the proper place and not a hundred yards from its shoulders. The
lady who related this story assured me that for more than twenty
minutes she and the rest of the passengers watched the thing following
the ship, and described it as one of the most ghastly and uncanny sights
that could be imagined. She said that she had been so accustomed to
have this story received with incredulity that she hardly expected to
have it believed; but, nevertheless, having been an eye witness, was
prepared to vouch for the truth of it.
Yours etc,,
H. M. B.
SPECIAL TELEGRAM.
(by special wire.)
“Melbourne, 9th November, 1876.
“ Look out for Russian cruisers off the Cape. They expect to capture
* Northumberland ’ and ‘ Kent.’ Russians landed at Southampton, were
warmly received by Lord Elcho, commanding the Volunteers. Three
Russian ironclads at London Bridge. Tower, Monument, and St. Paul’s
blown up. Queen at Balmoral as usual. Melbourne Cup-Day.—
Newminster first, Dilke second ; splendid race ; 120,000 people present,
including Sir George Bowen and suite, Sir Hercules Robinson and
suite, Joe Thompson, and others of the elite. ‘Kent’ expected 17th
December.”
CAPTAIN’S REPORT.
Date. Day. Lat. Long. Course. Dist. Remarks.
1876. Miles.
Nov. 2 Thursday 25° 41' N. 18° 32'W. S., 5° W. 237 Calm and light North winds.
5 p.m.—Abreast of Palma.
10 p.m.—Passed Ferro.
„ 3 Friday 21° 45' N. 19° 14' W. 8.. 10° W. 237 Calm and light wind and
weather. 6 a.m. —Trade
breeze waking; made all
sail.
4 Saturday 17° 51' N. 19° 23' W. 8., 1° W, 237 Light N.E. wind; canvas of
no help.
5 Sunday 13° 47'N. 19° 4'W. 8., 4° E. 245 Light N.E. wind; sail of
little help.
6 Monday 9° 43' N. 18° 0' W. 8., 14° E. 252 First part light trade. At
6 a.m. heavy E.N.E. squall
with rain, decreasing to-
wards noon.
7 Tuesday 6° 19' N. 17° 19' W. 8., 11° E. 208 Wind a-head; blowing strong
with heavy rain, head sea,
impeding the ship’s pro-
gress.
8 Wednesday 3° 25' N. 16° 25' W. 8., 17° E. 182 Steady Southerly winds, with
less head sea, and fine
weather.
Distance run during the week, 1,598 miles.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
LOST,
On Sunday, on the poop, a small, round, inexhaustible inkstand; also, the
photograph of a gentleman, out of a locket.
On Saturday last, a pair of ladies’ gloves ; colour, drab.
Please return to the Editors.
(L h c K\ cn t gUgus.
Thursday, 16th November, 1876.
No. 3.
Steady progress is being made towards the land we are bound
for, and due credit must be given to the steaming qualifications
of our good ship, without which we should scarcely have arrived
at our present position in the ocean. In fact, without steam we
should probably have been much the other side of the Line, We
are blessed with fine weather and a pleasant breeze, which at the
time we are writing only needs to be abeam to be all that could
be desired. However, the breeze will come, and possibly consi-
derably more than a breeze, before we again see the land. If
under favourable winds the Kent proves her capacity for sailing
as she has done in steaming, we shall not have much cause to
grumble when we arrive at the journey’s end.
Talking of grumbling,—we fear that we have just cause to do
so in our editorial capacity. The Kent Argus has not received
the quantum of practical support which the promises at the pre-
liminary meeting led us to look forward to. We are not greedy,
but there has certainly been up to the present a great paucity of
contribution, and this, if continued, will place the editors in an
awkward predicament. Editorial notes alone would never suffice
to keep a journal going, so we trust that this appeal will be
quickly responded to, and our apprehensions allayed.
The occupations of passengers during a voyage afford subject
matter of great interest to the careful observer. They are widely
different in their aims, and perhaps it is as well that this should be
so. For instance, if every male passenger on board were to devote
himself exclusively to the holding of skeins of cotton or wool, to
be wound off his hands by the fair one enchaining him, life would
become somewhat more monotonous than it is ; and there is
doubtless a certain monotony always prevalent on board ship
which all seek to dispel for themselves according as their fancy or
taste directs them.
What would the ladies be without their work and their never-
failing powers of observation and criticism, so often combined (we
are compelled to add) with the truly feminine proclivity to gossip
verging on the domain of petty scandal ?
And what would the men be without their cigars, their cards,
and the Bull Board ? We fail to be able to realise what such con-
sequences would result in, but console ourselves that such a state
of things is never likely to happen.
But we are sorry to have to notice that the efforts made in
several directions for providing entertainments for the passengers
generally have not met with that success which mainly depends
on the support and co-operation of the ladies. It is a well-known
fact that concerts, private theatricals, and charades are an almost
invariable feature of life on board such ships as the Kent.
The gentlemen, we are aware, are perfectly ready to assist in
such performances, and we are certain that the ladies possess more
than the necessary ability to take their share, if they had also the
requisite inclination. It is very much to be regretted that these
amusements should fail for lack of adequate support.
Monotony during a voyage is a disease which should be un-
ceasingly guarded against individually, each one doing his or her
best to contribute to the general harmony which must then
assuredly prevail, bearing its fruit of amusement and instruction
for all.
OUR MILE STONES.
CAPE DE VERDE ISLANDS,
The Cape de Verde Islands are the next group of which mention will
be made. They consist of ten islands, inhabited, and several small
detached rocks, and derive their name from the westernmost cape of the
continent of Africa. They were discovered in 1450 by Antonio Noli, a
Genoese in the service of Portugal, and are under the government of
that country.
St. lago, or more commonly called St. Jago, is the largest; the chief
town of which, Porto Pray a, is the seat of government, and contains
85,000 inhabitants. The bay can accommodate a large fleet of vessels.
At each side are large forts of great strength, cut out of the rock, and
strongly garrisoned, which is thought by many to be an unnecessary
addition to the island, as the inhabitants, who are generally poor, are
heavily taxed by government for the maintenance of their troops.
Salt is the principal article of commerce, and is produced in large
quantities from salt ponds that abound amongst the islands, principally
in the island of Sal, which takes its name from this mineral production.
The general feature of this group is exceeding barrenness, there being no
trees or verdure, and only a few small stunted shrubs.
9
THE KENT ARGUS.


St. Jago is one of the highest of this group, the peak of San Antonio
being 4720 feet high. Cocoanuts abound in the valleys; oranges,
grapes, bananas, pines and figs are also largely cultivated. The heat is
intense generally, though the climate is more healthy than would be
expected in consequence. The rainy season is in December and January,
during which time it falls incessantly, filling all the wells and cavities of
the rocks, which, with the occasional fogs, supply the inhabitants with
water throughout the year. Fish are very numerous, and are the prin-
cipal article of food amongst the poorer inhabitants. A peculiar feature
of the bays of these islands is that the water is so clear that the bottom
is plainly seen at a great depth, and trading vessels, by this means, pick
out a clear place in which to drop their anchors.
San Vincente, or St. Vincent, is not a large island, but is of some
importance, as a large coaling station is established there, where steamers
of all companies, including this, coal. The island is only eleven miles
long and six broad. It has two chains of mountains which form a
central valley that terminates in the bay called Porto Grande, on the
north-west side of the island.
Porto Grande is the largest and best bay in the group, and is capable
of holding 300 sail of large ships, well sheltered under the high lands,
and to seawax-d by the Island of San Antonio. One of the passengers
at present on board was lately ashoi-e on the island, and he describes it
as an enonnous mass of barren rock, completely destitute of vegetation
in any shape or form. Food is obtained from the neighboux-ing island
of San Antonio, whilst water is got from lax-ge public wells cut out of
the solid rock. Telegraphic communication with Lisbon by submarine
cable is maintained from here, and this is an additional incentive for
ships to coal at this port. Notwithstanding the eager desix-e of passen-
gers to get ashore on the occasion above referred to, everyone, after a
short excursion, was exceedingly glad to rejoin the ship, though the dis-
agreeable opex-ation of coaling was going on, as the heat was so fearful.
HUNTING REMINISCENCES.
By a Very Old Bushman,
No. I.
Somewhat diffidently, because of dreading the fate of countless
rejected addresses, I sit dowxx to pen an account of my early recollections
of some hunting I had in Australia and ixx Exxgland, and trust that it
will be deemed worthy of a place ixx that pleasaxxt “ olla podx-ida,” the
Kent Argus.
I began my hunting career under the auspices of Mr. Dax-by, of New
Englaxxd, the first gentleman, as well as I x-exxxember, to intx-oduce a pack
of foxhounds into Axxstx-alia. Darby was the beaxx ideal of axx English
squire—bluff, hearty and genial. The idle life and good cheer on board
ship had ixxcx-eased his corpulexxcy axxd made him flabby. I shall xxot sooxx
forget, shortly after his arrival in 1839, starting fx-om Maitland with him
and sonxe others for Liverpool Plaixxs. Darby was nxoxxxxted oxx a hot-
headed washy bay nag, possessing a strong dash of the Valparaiso blood,
fresh from a Sydney livex-y stable, full of corn, capering and curvetting,
shying at everything until his rider px-esented a face like a boiled lobster,
his cabbage-tx-ee hat coxxstaxxtly comixxg off, axxd his uxxmentioxxables up to
his kxxees, the new saddle tellixxg sorely xxpoxx him. Compassionatixxg
him, I exchanged a steady plodding “ Maxxx’selle ” for his “ Dancing
Dervish.” Nixxe stone axxd sweet seventeen, in gix-l’s parlance, I detex--
mined to have a spurt with the bay, so I touched him with the Latch-
ford’s. Away he sprang ; for aboxxt ten xniles it was a x-eal Johxx Gilpin
ride, and he only came to a halt immex-sed in the big lagoon near
Singleton. Next morning, before leavixxg the hotel, then kept by the
jolly old landlox-d whose name the town now bears, my black boy, who
revelled in the euphonious name of “ Yarramunbah,” almost changed
colour and turned white, as on climbing into his saddle, clutching, as is
their wont, the hox-se’s foreleg with his toes, when lo ! perched oxx the
cantle, gx-inning ghastly the while, was old Ben Singleton’s big monkey,
an animal “ Yax-ramunbah ” had xxever seen before. The poor boy
fainted with fright, but some burnt cock’s feathers applied to his nose
qxxickly restox-ed him.
The next hunting I enjoyed was with a few couples of good hounds,
dingo cxxb-hunting. They were the property of my esteemed friend
Robert Wilkixx, then of Ganxmoxx Plaixxs, now of Christchurch. Our
companion was the village Esculapius. Oh, for the pencil of a John
Leech, to pom-tray that rollicking Irishman, Dr. McCarthy to wit. Huge
in bulk, like a second Falstaff, his beaming countenance, the twinkling
roguish black eye, redolent of fun ; the rosy cheeks garnished with crisp,
black curls ; his jetty locks fringing a vast table-land of crown, smooth,
white, and shining like a billiard ball; like “ a jolly monk of the olden,
time." Away he’d go, astride upon a horse of the build for a brewer’s
dray, whose head was like a sarcophagus, and his tail like a pump
handle, devoid of hair, which that roguish old Medico vowed dropped off
from a fever brought on by riding twenty miles within the hour to save
a patient’s life. With a bit of an alpen, aided by his rich, round, oily
brogue chevying him, it was hard work to get six miles in the same time
out of Blunderbush, as he called him. May the jolly old doctor rest in
peace.
SHIP’S NOTES;
Thursday, the 9th inst.—The head wind continued to blow. In the
evening the second number of the Kent Argus was read aloud in the
saloon.
Friday.— Fine weather and head wind.
Saturday.— Fine all day ; in the evening several sports were intro-
duced on the poop, one or two of which created much amusement. The
woodpecker, which we mentioned in our last as having been captured,
has ended its short life on board ship. An entire change of food,
coupled with unnatural confinement, doubtless brought about its unfor-
tunate death.
Sunday. —Morning and evening services were held, and a collection
made in aid of the Merchant Seamen’s Orphan Home.
Monday.—A continuance of delightful weather.
Tuesday.— Cricket match in the evening—Upper Saloon v. Lower
Saloon. Won easily by the fox-mer.
Wednesday. —Lovely weather and a pleasant favoux-able breeze. The
return cx-icket xnatch was played in the evexxing between the Upper and
Lower Saloons. The Upper Salooxx again won the match.
SPORTING NOTES.
The continuation of fxxxe weather has been made xxse of to the utmost
advantage by the male passengers in the enjoyment of such sports as
the limited space which the deck affords will admit of. Cx-icket and the
bxxll boax-d are the two games most in vogue. On Satux-day last a sex-ies
of athletic pastimes was indxxlged in, affox-dixxg enjoymexxt to all who
took pax-t ixx them, and creating mxxch amusement to the spectatox-s. A
cricket match between the Upper and Lower Saloons was played on
Tuesday evexxing. The result proved the sxxperiox-ity of the Upper
Saloon. Messrs. Goodall and Wilson played vex-y steady ixxnings, con-
tribxxting lax-gely to the victory of their side. Mr. Brock’s style at the
wicket called fox-tlx mxxch admix-ation, though he succumbed somewhat
eax-ly to the capital bowling of Mr. Evaxxs, Mr. Loughnan was the
only bowler for the Upper Saloon, and twelve wickets fell to his clever
bowling.
We xxxxdex-stand that Mr. Cax-michael Smyth has undertaken the en-
gagement to walk sixty miles in ten houx-s for a stake of £5OO. This is
to be pex-fox-med oxx arrival at Melboux-ne. We are enabled to state that
several of the gentlemen on board have subscribed the necessary fxxnds,
and it is reported that Mr, Smyth is goixxg ixxto immediate tx-aining,
under the clever supervisioxx of Mr, Yeo.
ANECDOTE.
The endeavoxxr of a J.P. ixx the old days of the colony to administer
justice. His first time on the bench. Case befox-e the Coux-t: Regina v.
Smith. —Upon the case beixxg called Smith stood up. The J.P. waited
a short time, axxd thexx staxxding xxp, said:—“Now then, whex-e’s Regina?
If Regina does xxot step forwax-d I shall dismiss the case ; I can’t have
my valuable time wasted ixx this maxxner.” The clerk of the court here
informed the J.P. that Regixxa meaxxt the whole country. The J.P,,
having the scales of jxxstice before his eyes, said : —“The whole country
against one maxx! No, hang it; I caxx’t stand that; that’s not fair-.
Let him go.”
10
THE KENT ARGUS


POETRY.
THE BELLS OF “ THE KENT.”
’Tis a terrible thing when sailing o’er sea,
Almost, too awful to tell,
To have no rest from morning to night,
On account of a dreadful bell.
’Tis not the ship’s own bell which pains,
That rings with no accents fell,
’Tis the one that to the stewards pertains,
The grating meal time bell.
At early morn the sleepers attempt,
In their narrow crowded cells,
In vain to deaden or miss the sound
Of the couple of breakfast bells.
We may try to read through the forenoon,
Or on pleasant thoughts to dwell;
But, ah ! we are always at noon disturbed
By the needless luncheon bell.
And shortly after the children rush
Into the cuddy pell mell,
Called in their hunger to appease i
By another tuneless bell.
The half-hour chimes and the four o’clock
Which dressing and dinner foretell,
Again make us wish we were out of reach
Of that melancholy bell.
At children’s tea and adults’ tea,
Which meals few folks love well,
We next are annoyed, and are wont to swear
At that vile incessant bell.
Oh, would I had authority
Those awful sounds to quell,
I vow never more should the stewards bore
The passengers with that bell.
There is a fair one on the ship
All others doth excel;
Her tones are always sweet to me,
I truly love that belle.
A LAMENT.
She is fair, is my beautiful love,
Is perfect in form and in feature ;
Her eyes are like eyes of a dove,
And tender and dovelike her nature.
But why should I thus praise her charms ?
Why not my affection quite smother ?
Alas ! she ne’er comes to my arms,
Because she is wed to another.
A HEART-BENDING CASE.
I paced the deck alone one moonlight night,
My wayward fancy ranged from earth to heaven ;
I gazed entranced upon the wondrous sight
That to my eyes above, beneath, was given.
Over my head the broad expanse was decked
With countless gems in fairest beauty bright;
The restless ocean round the ship was flecked
With flashing phosphorescent gleams of light.
I thought of dear ones I had left at home,
And as our barque unvesting onward moved
It left behind a silvery trail of foam
Which seemed a shining path to those I loved,
O’er which my fancy sped with flying feet
Scorning the limits both of time and space,
And looked into bright eyes which seemed to meet
My own, and answer to me face to face.
Thus wrapt in thought I leant upon my arm
Rocked up and down upon my ocean bed—
A sudden sound behind me broke the charm
I turned and saw what filled my soul with dread,
A ghastly form from the companion rose—
I see it still, and shudder as I write,
What desperate, what unutterable woes
Clouded the face of that unhappy wight.
A death-like pallor overspread his face,
His glassy eyes a moment on me bent;
He crossed the deck with hurried eager pace
Like to a man on desperate deed intent.
“ Rash man,” I cried, and sprang with hasty motion,
“ Take not thy life.” He groaned in deep emotion,
And as I grasped his arm, in tones scarce human,
Bowing his head he murmured “ Oh! that pickled salmon.”
CORRESPONDENCE.
THE LAND WE ARE BOUND FOR.
(to THE EDITOR OF THE KENT ARGUS.)
Dear Sir, —Would you kindly allow me a little space in your
journal for a few remarks on the above subject. Doubtless many of our
fellow voyagers are Australians returning. Some have been to the
mother country on business, some on pleasure. My remarks may apply
only to a minority of my fellow passengers, but I shall feel well pleased
if they prove of the slightest information to any. First then, the fact
that so many of us are returning to Australia, pi’oves that it is a good
country to live in and in which to find a home ; then, again, the
many instances of persons who from small beginnings have amassed
wealth, and have risen to honorable positions in their adopted country,
with no other influence beyond their own merits, proves the wide scope
there is for industrious ambition. Again, the greater portion of
Australia is very healthy, and the large extent of territory, embracing as
it does so many different climates, secures to it almost every description
of the fruits of the earth suitable for the food of man. The coast is also
well supplied with a large variety of fish, and you need not be told that
it is the great country for roast beef. Seeing, therefore, that there are
so many comforts within reach, you may ask, How are they to be
acquired and enjoyed 1 ? I reply, first, by indefatigable industxy and
assiduity to whatever business you are intending or best suited to follow.
If you have some capital at your disposal so much the better ; here you
will find a better return for judicious outlay than in many other parts of
the world. Next, I would take the liberty of stating that intemperance
is to be specially guarded against, seeing that it has been the ruin of
thousands who otherwise might have done well therfe. The climate
being warm, acts as an incentive to the too frequent use of alcohol, and
just in the same proportion its destructive action is quicker on the
physical and mental faculties. Self-reliance is also very essential in
Australia; you have not the same amount of influence and assistance
from friends as you might have had in the old country, so that you
require to a great extent to depend on yourself. I have rarely met with
any instance where genuine perseverance has been entirely unsuccessful.
Skilled labour is better paid than in the mother country, and the cost of
living is no greater. I trust these few remarks will be of some service
to your readers, and beg to remain,
Yours respectfully,
A New South Wales Man.
Mr. Editor.—Sir, — l would have you know that I smoke ; more-
over, that lam a very careful smoker. These two remarks ai’e I think,
somewhat d propos. First, inasmuch, that if you (at any time) have
good cigars getting out of order, as they will sometimes on board ship,
for want of being smoked, you have merely to hand them to me to save
yourself any further trouble in looking after them. Secondly, that lam
a careful smoker, is necessary to clear my character. Through the
medium of your paper, sir, I wish to at once contradict the report that
it was I who set alight a lady’s dress the other night. This contradic-
tion is all the more necessary ; that hints are being constantly thrown at
me about the cost of a new silk dress to be defrayed by the guilty party,
likewise his prohibition from smoking during the voyage, and other
minor penalties, which, though perfectly justifiable for the guilty, are
not exactly pleasant for an innocent party to have to undergo. The
subject of smoking, sir, reminds me of a complaint I have to make. Why
can’t they get the vessel, and keep it when they have got it, in such a
position that the wind will not have the unpleasant effect of tilting it all
on one side. As I write this letter, sir, lam momentarily expecting to
be violently hurled from one side of the vessel to the other. I have ex-
perienced this already several times, and I do not like it, neither have
the passengers any right to be inconvenienced in this manner. After
with difficulty succeeding in the art of walking the deck when tolerably
level, now, to avoid dreadful accident, one has to adopt a slantingdicular
position, which I find particularly disagreeable and provocative of most
unpleasant sensations. This defect must be remedied sir, and that
quickly. Again, at the table the inconvenience of this tilting is pain-
fully apparent. On more than one occasion I have been on the point
of death : I say point advisedly, because carving knives when falling off
dishes held over one’s head by staggering stewards, are apt to come
11
THE KENT AKGUS.


down in a severely perpendicular direction. I have noticed sir, that
the mustai'd and pepper pots adopt a very sensible plan. When
deprived of their natui’al suppoi’t, the cruet stand, they invariably lie
down wherever they ai'e placed and refuse to support themselves. This
shows they are well seasoned. (Please pause after the word seasoned, as
it is a joke.) As I write sir on the deck, an infant attempting to
perform the difficult feat of learning to walk, with its light thumb
gracefully inserted in its mouth, is staggering towards me. Bets are
freely offered that it will succeed in reaching my chair. It does not
succeed six’, bxxt has collapsed ixx a chubby heap on the deck, axxd is
glaring around, uncertain whether to x'aise a howl of pain or a shout of
delight. It decides on the latter, and a mexry grin spreads over the
little face as it again tries (and this time successfully), to retxxm to the
arms outstretched to x’eceive it. This is a little stxxdy of human nature
sir, which, though in digression, will, I hope, be excused. lam pleased
to see the constant dropping in of contributions to the editor’s box, I
caught a little boy yesterday in the act of filling it with nrxt shells, and
was proceeding to chastise him, but his forcible kicks x-estraixxed me
from fxxrther ixxterference. Rest assured sir of the respectful sympathy
of Yours tx’xxly,
A Emerald Horn,
THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF LOO.
By a Philosopher,
Of course when one speaks of 100 he speaks of 100 unlimited. It is
only a man of very limited ideas indeed who plays at any other sort.
Unlimited 100 is a game so theoretically simple that the youngest child
can play it as well as the oldest man. In practice, however, there is a
difference. The yoxmgest child is genei’ally led to discover the exroneous-
ness of his theory, and the conseqxxent lightness of his pockets is a not
unfrequent x-esult of his effoxls to have light tin-own on the game. When
the player is unlucky he is said to be looed, which epithet is not derived
from the Latin Indus, and accordingly does not indicate any desix-e on
the part of the other’s to make game of him. Thex’e is one pex’son who
usually plays in this game who is always a lady, and indeed though she
is called “ miss,” she is entirely put out when the game is single. People
who take miss are not unnaturally sometimes disgusted with her;
bxxt, as in married life, they always discover their mVtake too late. The
game is played upon a table in the centi’e of which is a pool, and the
highest delight of the players in hot weather is to make inroads upon
this pool. This is also the case ixx cold weather. It is astonishing how
a dip in this pool sxxits all people in every sort of climate. Some people
are so gx’eedy that they take it all away. But the recxxpei’ative power of
the pool is so great that immediately on its being emptied by some one
greedy person the others are so anxious to refill it that it is often two or
three times as gi’eat as befoi’e. The game of 100 is based upon the
mathematical doctrine of probability. We fox’get exactly the equation to
the game, bxxt rather think it is ( a + b) 2 =a? + 2 ah b 2. At any rate
unless all the players be square it is x-ather a risky game for novices. Loo
can be played as a game of chance, or as one mainly depending on calcxxla-
tion. If all play the former game, thex-e is mox’e fun and more moxxey
changes hands. If they play the latter, the game has the character and
concomitant monotony of a commercial transaction. But the result is,
however, difiex-ent, when one player plays one game and the rest
another. Then all the money in the long run goes into the pockets of the
commercial man. Loo is a game of some antiqxxity. The first authentic
notice of it occxxrs in an old Scotch song where a young lady declares
that “ Young Jamie loo’d me week” There is reason to believe that on
accoxxnt of the libations usual over the battles of cards at this game, the
name is derived from the celebrated Waterloo, or more likely still
whiskey-and-watex’-100.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Clericus. —Your riddle about the clergyman being a “ lame-un ” (layman) is
too “ parsonal ” for admission.
Tadpole.—lt may be as you say, but we have so seldom seen yonr features in a
state of repose that we are unable to pass any opinion on the photograph.
Lady. —As you say, you can never get to the piano during the day, on account of
its being so constantly engaged, we would suggest that each lady pianist has
half-an hour allotted to her for practice, and a list of the names placed on
the piano. We hope to see this suggestion adopted.
RELIGIOUS INTELLIGENCE.
On Sunday morning divine service was held in the saloon. Captain
Gibbs read the prayers, and the Rev. Mr. Henry preached an excellent
discourse from the words “ My grace is sufficient for thee ;” connecting
the subject with the claims of the Merchant Seamen’s Orphan Asylum,
for which a collection was made. We are happy to say this amounted
to £9 10s. 6d.
In the evening a service was conducted by the Rev. Dr, Cairns, who
took as his text “ For God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son,” &c. From these words he preached a most eloquent
discourse, especially dwelling on the Christian doctrine of substitution,
Bible classes are held on Sunday afternoon in the saloon, for the
young people on hoax’d, under the kind supeiwision of Mrs. Selwyn and
he Rev. Mr. Henry.
We are pleased to be enabled to state that a strike, which at one time
sei-iously thi’eatened to intei'fere with the amusements of the passengers,
has happily been avei’ted.
We ai’e x'equested to thank the ladies who have kindly conti’ibuted
their cast-off gai’ments to the cricket ball factory.
Last Week’s Acrostics, &c.— As we have received no answers xxp
to date, we withhold the correct solutioxxs till next week, in hopes that
some replies may yet be sent in.
CAPTAIN’S REPORT.
Date. Day. Lat. Long. Course. Dist. Remarks.
X 876. Miles.
Nov. 9 Thursday X mile N. 16° 32' W. S., 2° W. 204 Fresh S. winds and fine. No
sail.
10 Friday 3° 47'S. 17° 13'W. S., 10° W. 232 Steady trades, and fine. No
sail.
11 Saturday 7° 19' S. 17° 21' W. S., 2° W. 212 Fresh trades. No sail.
12 Sunday li° 19' S. 17° 51' W. S., 7° W. 242 Moderate trade, and fine. All
fore and aft sail set.
13 Monday 15° 22' S. 17° 61' W. S. 243 Fresh and unsteady weather,
gloomy; square sails set
forward.
14 Tuesday 19° 8' S. 17° 8' W. S., 10° E. 230 Wind unsteady. All sail set
fourteen hours.
15 Wednesday 22° 48' S. 15° 21' W. S., 24° E. 241 Light airs and calm. Sails
clewed up.
Distance run for the week, 1604 miles.
Note.— On the present voyage, the Kent was at noon on Wednesday forty-eight miles ahead of her
sister ship the Durham, in the same time from Plymouth, on her fastest passage of 48 days 2 hours to
Cape Otway. This speaks well for our getting out under the 50 days.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Lost,— About the 6th inst., a Telescope, with patent leather caps and strap. Any
one having found above will oblige by returning it to the owner, Richard W.
Barney.
Lost. — On Tuesday evening, in the saloon, two yards of Scarlet Flannel. The
finder will oblige by delivering the same to the editors.
Reward.— Some person or persons having removed a pack of cards from cabin
5 on the lower saloon deck, an adequate reward will be given for such information
as will lead to the discovery of the said person or persons.
Cju JLent llrgws.
Thursday, 23rd November, 1876.
No. 4.
Our ship’s notes for the week are a fair reflection of the
monotony which has existed since our last issue. The absence of
fair winds is now a perpetual subject of regret, and we have
decidedly lost the relative advantage in distance gained over the
Durham, which we mentioned last week.
The weather, the last two or three days, has been' decidedly
cool, and warm wraps in the shape of rugs, jackets, and overcoats,
have made their appeai’ance on deck. A continuance of cold
weather must now be expected, until shortly before our arrival
at Melbourne, and we may reasonably look for the early approach
of those fair winds which usually prevail in these latitudes.
We have been somewhat quizzed for the (apparent) incongruity
12
THE KENT ARGUS.


which existed between our editorial grumbles about lack of
support, and the voluminous nature of the number which con-
tained them ; but we nevertheless are still compelled to hold
that our remarks were, and indeed still are justifiable, though
our warmest thanks are due to the few kind friends who have
assisted us with contributions. Much labour would, however, be
saved us, if all matter intended for the week’s journal be delivered
to us before Tuesday evening, as in the absence of any material
when that evening arrives, we are compelled to fall back upon
our own very limited resources.
On Wednesday evening last week, dancing was introduced on
the poop, and was greatly enjoyed by the few who cared to avail
themselves of the excellent music provided by Captain Gibbs and
Mr. Monk The versatile talent of our Captain was once more
shown to advantage on the violin, and his merry strains at length
found sufficient dancers for .the lancers, which was accordingly
formed and gone through, though the valse and galop found the
most favour amongst those dancing. We venture to express the
hope that on the next occasion of dancing, a few more of the
passengers will be induced to take part in this amusement.
OUR MILE STONES.
ASCENSION AND ST. HELENA,
The next on our list is the island of Ascension, which is about eight
miles long by six broad. It is of volcanic origin, as many as 40 extinct
craters being visible from the summit of Green Mountain, its highest
peak.
The climate is, perhaps, as healthy as any in the world, the reason
being the constancy of the trade wind, which ever blows in a moderate
breeze. The island is chiefly remarkable for the enormous number of
turtle that visit it annually, between Christmas and midsummer, to
deposit their eggs, coming it is supposed several hundred leagues for
this purpose. Their weight, when caught at this time, varies from 400
to 700 K). The man-of-war bird is a great enemy to young tui'tle, hover-
ing over the nests, to intercept them on their way to the sea. Excellent
fish are to be caught on the coast, such as rock-cod, conger, cavalhos, &c. ;
they are so plentiful that a boat’s crew may easily supply enough for a
large ship’s company.
All kinds of domestic animals are easily reared, and the insect tribes
are dreadfully annoying ; flies, ants, and mosquitoes innumerable, with
scoi-pions, centipedes, large spidei’s and ci’ickets. The eggs of the “ wide-
awake” furnish an important article of food, 10,000 dozen being often
taken in one week during the season ; though the bird is small, the egg is
neaidy as large as that of the common fowl. The most remai’kable of the
birds of the island is the beautiful man-of-war bird, black, with a white
breast and a stripe of white across each wing, which measure seven feet
from tip to tip. Whilst Napoleon was confined on St. Helena, the
island was taken possession of by the British Government, and when
first occupied it was purely a mass of barrenness. As cultivation
increased the rainfall, which formerly was most insignificant, has .con-
stantly and gradually increased, and many pax’ts of the island are now
most productive.
St. Helena, which we passed also some days since, was discovered by
the Portuguese in 1502, and owes its impoi’tance, as does Ascension, to
the fact of its lying on the great homeward thoieughfare from the Indian
Ocean, The coast line is most precipitous, varying in height from 1000
to 1800 feet, and landingc an only be effected on the N.W. side. The
only landing places are at Rupert’s and James’ valleys. Rupert’s Valley
is strongly fortified, but uninhabitable, because there is no water. J ames
Town stands at the entrance of James Valley, which is defined by a fine
line of batteries and flanked by othei’S on high inaccessible rocks, called
mundens, close under which all ships must pass that anchor before the
town. James Town is situated between rocky precipices 1000 feet
high, the white buildings, with the gxeen foliage of the neighbourhood,
giving a pleasing effect to the scene.
The water that supplies the garrison and shipping is conveyed by
leaden pipes from a spring in the valley, distant more than a mile from
the sea. Trees and shrubs from all parts of the world flourish luxu-
riantly. Red-legged partridges and pheasants frequent the covers on
the higher ridges. The “ wire bird,” indigenous to the island, and doves,
java sparrows, and canaries, inhabit the gardens.
As at Ascension, fish abound, and the climate too is magnificent.
Nauticus.
HUNTING REMINISCENCES.
By a Very Old Bushman.
No. 11.
Next, when located on the Murray, little Tootle and myself hunted a
small pack with great ardour, making much slaughter amongst the
native dogs. Dear old Tootle, in his neat leather integuments, scarlet
shirt, and horn slung at saddle bow. What Melbourne man of the
olden time who has galloped behind George Watson’s “sweet-noted
ones” but will remember little T., a true sportsman and a good fellow %
About 1850, little Jamie Henderson began with a scratch pack, and my
first run with them ending in the Worryal taking refuge in old Liardet’s
kitchen of the inn at Sandridge ; in dash the beauties, amid such a
rumpus and a rioting, crashing of crockery, and loud above all, the cook
and Mrs. L. screaming and scolding, at which the latter was indeed an.
adept, I can tell you. A year or two thereafter I became a resident
of Melbourne, and frequently went with Mr, Watson’s hounds. My
hunter was a well known chesnut gelding, a determined buck jumper,
called the “ Master of the Rolls.” Alternately he had been the property
of the quondam Chief Secretary, Mr. Foster, and the present respected
Chief Justice of Victoria, both men who could stick to the pigskin. But
the “ Master ” floored them so often that he was sent in for sale, and
became mine for £6. I saw him land Tom Hayes, the best horseman in
those days we had, fairly bucking him, saddle and all, over his head,
without breaking strap or girth. He never threw me, however, simply
because I always mounted him after the saddle was on some time, —the
girths quite slack, a loose rein, and never asked him to move until he
did so of his own accord, which he would do so gingerly—real cat on hot
bricks fashion. I never yet saw the most confirmed buck-jumper attempt
to spill his rider under such precautions, and sincerely recommend
their adoption by all new chums. One day returning from a blank
draw round Brighton and St. Kilda, then nearly all bush and heath, I
must needs go larking the old chesnut over the first cricket-ground
fenced in on the Yarra. The “ Master ” never attempted to rise, but
came down a real cropper upon the top of me. When caught and re-
mounted, I cruelly and madly jumped him at every fence before and
around, and so abused the noble animal in my wild passion that when
reason resumed its sway I resolved never again to go hunting, for fear I
might once more give way to such brutal violence. For twenty years I
had kept this resolution, when I was invited by a friend to go down into
the Pytchley Quorn and North Warwickshire country, and see the
hounds meet on an opening day. In my next I shall narrate my first
and last day’s sport in old England, as concisely as my adventure will
admit of.
SHIP’S NOTES,
Thursday, 16th November. —Third number of the Kent Argus was
read by Messrs. Mclntyre and Loughnan, in the saloon. A series of
squalls commenced about 8 p.m., and continued throughout the night,
causing no small discomfort to all.
Friday. —Wet and unpleasant in the early part of the day. The
first albatross was seen.
Saturday,—An infant was heard to cry.
Sunday.— Divine Service was held in the morning and evening, and
a children’s class in the afternoon. Weather fine.
Monday. Very enjoyable weather. Procession of the “Dead Horse ”
in the evening.
Tuesday.—Fine, but cold. Boxing was introduced in the evening,
and was extensively patronised.
Wednesday, —Fine and calm, but very cold.
13
THE KENT AEGUS.


GRAND CONCERT.
The saloon passengers of the male persuasion, and of a practical turn
of mind, having been unable to secure the co-operation of the ladies in
getting up a concert, resolved to carry out their purpose of having a
grand musical entertainment of their own. In order to show their dis-
approbation of the ladies’ conduct, they resolved also that only gentle-
men should be present, and in order to make sure of the exclusion of (in
this case) the unfair sex, it was arranged to hold the concert on the poop
after the lights were turned out, and as a consequence the ladies had
retired. The affair came off on Monday night, and the audience con-
sisted of the elite of the passengers. The first piece on the programme
was the good old song “ The Old Cart Wheel,” arranged as a solo, duet,
and chorus. This was admirably rendered by two gentlemen, whom it
would be invidious to name, but whose pathetic rendering of the sixth
verse in particular, showed what an amount of feeling could be thrown
into the simplest language by those skilled in the musical art. The
rollicking chorus, which relates the daring deeds of the famous Duke
of York, with his small but highly trained army, followed, and found
much favour with the audience. This was succeeded by the narrative
of the pilgrimage to Jerusalem, undertaken by three celebrated Hebrews,
which was of course a success, A doleful melody was the next piece,
and sad as is the “ Horrible Tale” of the whole family who came to
untimely ends, it afforded some relief to the chorus, who had hitherto
been somewhat taxed. A comic song, which sang of the loves of a
costermonger and Susan Jane, dispelled the gloom occasioned by the
previous lugubrious ditty. We were not prepared to find such comic
talent as the singer of that song displayed. The well-known account of
Cock Robin’s Funeral was next performed. This piece is so well known
that it is unnecessary to point out its many beauties, but it is only right
to say, that the magnificent rendering of the diminuendo and crescendo
effect in the last chorus actually brought tears into the eyes of the
bystanders, while the final Amen reminded us of the singing of the
Foundling Hospital Choir. The concert was brought to a close most
fittingly with the ever popular legend of the much admired married man,
who was so unfortunate in his matrimonial attempts, and who constantly
compares unfavourably his lot with that of the fox and the hare, the
badger and the bear. Altogether the concert was a splendid success,
and we feel sure that when the next soiree musicale comes on, unless the
time and place are kept a profound secret, the concert room will be
crowded with ladies who won’t work themselves, but have no objection
to reap the fruits of others labours.
THE DEAD HORSE.
Monday being the thirtieth day after the signing of articles by the
seamen, the occasion was celebrated by the sailors in the usual manner. A
model of a horse of a somewhat unnatural description was made out of
canvas by the men, and about eight o’clock in the evening a procession
of sailors marched from the forecastle, dragging this strange animal, which
-was ridden by a man in uniform, and preceded by a company of musicians.
On arrival before the poop the animal was put up to auction, and then,
for reasons best known to themselves, the men hoisted the horse to the
main yard-arm and let him drop into the sea, amid great cheering and
with livid accompaniments of blue-lights. There is an allegorical
meaning attached to the ceremony, but as we are deficient in nautical
lore, we shall not attempt to dive into such mysteries.
SPORTING NOTES.
A novelty was introduced on Tuesday evening in the shape of a set of
boxing gloves, which had been cleverly manufactured on board. They
-were speedily put into use, and a series of short encounters took place,
which caused intense amusement to the onlookers, though in one or two
instances those engaged in the sport received most convincing proofs of
its practical nature. Most of the form displayed was decidedly amateurish,
but here and there some knowledge of the science was shown. The
junior portion of the community also entered the lists with great spirit,
and we may safely look to further events under this heading during the
"voyage.
POETRY.
I wonder if she will ever think
Of the happy days gone by ;
Those long delightful evenings,
How quickly they would fly.
Ah me ! I sigh, whene’er I think,
How happy we used to be ;
I sigh, and ask myself again—
Will she ever think of me ?
I remember well the happy time,
Those bright and peaceful days ;
How much, how much, I loved her,
And her pleasant winning ways.
How I long to hear her voice again,
And will that ever be ?
But ’twill make me happy just to know
That she sometimes thinks of me.
A HAPPY ESCAPE.
They said she had money ; my friends advised
Me with Emma Smith to wed,
So I tried to love her, but could not, because
Her hands were red.
“ No matter,” they told me, “ accomplished is she.
“ She can play, can sing, can valse,”
I tried to love her once more, but found
Her teeth were false.
“ ’Tis of little account,” they told me again,
“ To quarrel with faults like those,”
But how could I always live with a wife
With upturned nose ?
I got over that with an effort great,
Much helped by the thought of tanners ;
But still I could not propose to a girl
Of vulgar manners.
So I gave it up, and my friends upbraid,
Because they find I’ve a will;
But I’m glad to say, I am to this day
A bachelor still.
EPITAPH.
Beneath this ocean lies a horse
That only once was ridden,
His outwards were of canvas coarse,
His inwards all were hidden.
His life was short, his death was hard,
From men he’d no forbearance;
They hoisted him to the main yard,
Which was his last appearance
Save one, when in the sea he fell,
Amidst a host of cheering,
The horse is gone, where who can tell ?
His virtues told are herein.
Note.—We have been looking out for one of the milestones mentioned in The
Argus, from week to week, to fix this epitaph to, but as yet have been unsuccessful.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Spobtsman. —You must be mistaken. Mr. M. C. S. has not yet taken out one of
the horses on board for exercise. What you saw must have been the riding of
the dead horse.
Cook. — Curry is a mystery we have not been able to solve.
Music.—We are ignorant of the firm which published the song “ Give us time to
blow a man down.” Perhaps the boatswain can inform you.
Guiltv Conscience. —We are informed that no such meeting was held in the
ladies’ saloon, and no such reflections were made on your behaviour as you
refer to.
WANTED.
The following persons are wanted by the authorities on board: —
The gentleman who took a broom to bed with him on Sunday night.
The gentleman who took the bottles off the racks to place in another gentleman’s
berth.
The lady who sewed up the sleeves of the gentleman’s robe de nuit so neatly.
The young man who disturbed the denizens of the lower saloon by turning
somersaults at half-past eleven at night.
The man who lashes the unsophisticated to the rigging.
The man who gave the bedroom steward so much trouble in sorting the boots on
Tuesday morning.
14
THE KENT ARGUS


THE RIDDLER.
There is a noun of plural number
Foe to peace and tranquil slumber ;
Most other nouns you choose to take,
By adding S, you plural make.
Biit if you add an S to this,
Strange is the metamorphosis ;
The plural is plural now no more,
And sweet what bitter was before.
She was young and beautiful. He loved her devoutly, almost devouringly. But
she hated him—nay, almost feared him—but, woman-like, she did her best to catch
him. Who is he ?
SQUARE WORD.
1. Another word for want
2. Having capacity.
8. A Highland tribe.
4. The ship we are in.
ANSWERS TO ACROSTICS, &c. IN No. 11.
Buried Cities.
1. Ripon. 2. Bedford. 3. Ryde, *4. Scutari. 5. Maidstone. 6. Ayr.
Acrostic.
N orth wes T
E dinburg H
P ragu E
T yro L
U r I
N air N
E astbourn E
Correct answers have been received from G. 0. S. H. Violet.
GASTRONOMICAL COLUMN.
Motto suggested by the dish called Country Captain, “ In union (onion) is
strength.”
The appearance of a saddle of mutton the other day was quite rid(e)iculous.
Why is the salt fish at breakfast like the man who brings it to you ?—Because
it’s too hard (steward).
What is the difference between the tripe at dinner and a three-legged stool ?
■One is odd tripe, the other, tripod.
Are sardines alone sufficient for lunch ? No, sardinely (certainly) not.
CORRESPONDENCE.
(to THE EDITOR OF THE KENT ARGUS.)
Mr. Editor. —Sir, —Each week as it passes brings us nearer to the
much longed-for port we are bound for, I say much longed-for, because,
sir, lam rapidly getting unhappy on board this vessel. My unfortunate
carcass at this moment presents a mass of bruises of the most beautiful
hues. You will naturally say to yourself, or think to yourself, if you
don’t say it, “ But why, how, when and whence, these bruises T I will
reply to the four, sir, as briefly as possible.
You will, perhaps, remember that I wrote to you a few days ago on
the tilting of the vessel being uncomfortable, inconvenient, and most
unnecessaiy. (I may here say that I have received on all sides the
warmest thanks for the interest I have taken for the comfort of the
passengers.) Well, sir! On Thursday evening, about 10.30 p.m., the
weather was slightly tempestuous, and after anxious consideration I had
■ determined to retire to my cabin for the night. As if in revenge for my
complaining, the ship was rolling about from side to side in such a
disgraceful manner that I was nearly choked whilst attempting to swallow
the humble repast which the liberality of the commissariat on board
supplies at an advanced hour of the evening to any one wishing to appease
the pangs of hunger. I proceeded to my cabin, and after intense
difficulty succeeded in undressing ; my whole energies were then directed
towards the fearful leap which is necessary even on ordinary occasions to
gain admittance to an upper berth, but which on this occasion necessitated
much more than the usual calculation and energy. At last after some violent
blows on my head against the roof, and nearly biting my tongue in two,
I succeeded in hoisting myself into bed, and lay for some time listening
to the peaceful murmuring of the waves, the gentle patter of the rain
drops, and above all the confidential whispers of the officers on deck to
the crew. How long I lay listening I know not, sir, but suddenly
without a moment of warning, without a second for reflection, I found
myself hurled into mid-air, and as suddenly pitched on to the floor of the
cabin amongst dancing boxes, chairs, water-bottles, and cabin furniture
generally, which were all playfully disporting themselves, utterly reckless
of the consequences of their gambols. I staggered maimed and breath-
less to my feet only to be hurled out of the cabin into the saloon, where
I lay for hours bruised, and well nigh expiring. A compassionate
steward, about 4 a.m., seeing me prostrate on the ground, kindly assisted
me once more to my elevated resting place in the cabin.
This little incident, sir, will, I think, satisfactorily account for the
how, when, where and whence of my bruises, and so trusting I have
excited your kind sympathy and interest in this gi’ievous wrong,
Believe me, dear Sir, ever yours truly,
A Emerald Horn.
(to THE EDITOR OF THE KENT ARGUS.)
Sir, —As it is through your valuable journal that our joys and sorrows
are to be communicated, I beg to make known that I have lost a packet
of hair pins.
Although to the world in general my loss may seem unimportant, yet
to me it is most serious; for you must know, Mr. Editor, that Dame
Nature, in one of her freaks, has been pleased to try her hand in making
my head a phrenological study, somewhat resembling the hills and
valleys of this our mother earth; and were there any scientific gentleman,
on board, I would with gi-eat pleasure place it in his hands for the benefit
of society at large.
Some time ago (it matters not how long) I was the possessor of most
luxuriant tresses; but Time, who neither spares beauty nor tresses, has
used his scythe so vigorously that my once beautiful locks have now
vanished into thin hair ; and consequently, to appear in the costume of
the day, and to compete with juveniles, I have to borrow, Avhat once I
could have spared for others.
Do not think, because I make so much ado about hair pins, that I am
entirely without them; but the lost ones are what are termed elastic,
and, as you may imagine, just suited my peculiar wants ; and I am sure,
Mr. Editor, it will enlist your sympathy when I tell you that all that
remains for me, in order to perform a most elaborate toilet, are a few
which the manufacturer calls patent, but which I call destructive, requiring,
when used, to be pressed by finger and thumb, and the moment they get
their liberty, away they fly, carrying with them at least half-a-dozen of
my diminished treasures, to say nothing of an aching head, and the fear
of losing the last remnant of departed beauty. Hoping that, through
the columns of the journal, some assistance may be rendered in this my
great trouble,
I am, Sir, your distressed contributor,
Amelia Ann.
(to THE EDITOR OF THE KENT ARGUS.)
Sir, — I am a cuddy servant, and have a grievance, which I wish made
public through the columns of your valuable paper. In addition to
being a steward, I am an orphan. I was not born with a silver spoon
in my mouth, but unfortunately had to be fed with a plated one. I have
always had an antipathy to spoons ; and when informed, upon signing
articles, that we poor, ill-paid, hard-worked servants, would have to pay
for all spoons missing, I could have thrown pen, inkstand, and articles at
the shipping-master’s head. However, I was hard up, and signed my
name like a man; but I hate spoons, and always shall. When a
passenger asks me for a spoon, I feel inclined to throw it at him. But
lam digressing. The object of my letter is to crave the kind assistance
of the passengers, on behalf of the cuddy servants, in not allowing any
spoons on the poop after dark. You may have noticed one of our
number, with a lantern, going about the poop after 10 p.m. looking for
any spoons that may be found there. I would suggest, also, that the
main deck may be searched, too, as I have seen many (some of very
antique pattern), about there at night. I dare not report this to our
chief steward, but he may take the hint when he reads this in the
columns of the paper. Apologising for trespassing so much,
I am, Sir, yours obediently,
S. T. Eward,
P.S.—One of my mates, a facetious fellow, remarked to me the other
day, with a knowing grin, that we should lose several spoons, on our
arrival at Melbourne, that we should not have to pay for ; but I failed
to see the joke. Can you enlighten a poor fellow 1
15
THE KENT ARGUS


CAPTAIN’S REPORT.
Date. Da}’. Lat. Long. Course. Dist. Remarks.
1876. Miles.
Nov. io Thursday 26° 19' S. 12° 47' W. S., 34° E. 254 Light North winds, weather
overcast; noon, squally,
with rain.
17 Friday 28° 14' 8. 9° 24' W. S., 57° E. 215 Moderate North wind, at 8
p.m. shifting to S.E. ; half
a gale, with rain.
18 Saturday 30° 67' S. 6° 25'>V. S., 44° E. 226 Calm, wind making from
N.W., with rain. Sudden
shift at 8 p.m. to S. and S.
E. with fine weather.
19 Sunday 33° 38' 8. 2° 50' W. S., 49° E. ' 242 Light W.N.W. winds, and
fine.
20 Monday 36° 30' S. 0° 24' E. S., 43° B. 235 Light airs, and fine.
21 Tuesday 38° 5y S. 3° 56'E. 8., 48° E. 226 Moderate S.E. head wind.
Fine.
22 Wednesday 40° 57' S. S° 9' E. 8., 59° E. 229 Moderate S.E. head winds,
and fine.
Distance run for the week, 1627 miles.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
LOST.
A copy of German Songs (Peters’ edition), bound in limp cloth.
A Two-bladed Penknife, with white fluted handle.
On Monday, a small Ivory Brooch ; and on Wednesday, on the poop, a Silver
Pencil Case. " As it is greatly valued by the owner, the finder is earnestly requested
to return the same to the editors.
Cbe fUut JUgtis.
Thursday, November 5, 1876.
No. 5.
We are now five weeks from Plymouth, and our good ship has
done very well under most unfavourable circumstances. After
a good passage across the Bay of Biscay, with the drawback of a
strong head wind, we arrived off Madeira in a fairly short time.
Here we should have had the N.E. Trades to help us along; instead
of these we were favoured with little wind, and what there was
was of a contrary nature. Notwithstanding these drawbacks, we
managed to cross the Line in as few days as the Durham, which
has hitherto been considered this company’s crack ship. We had
the S.E. Trades of course, probably because they would not help
us much, and we have in consequence had to take a more westerly
course than we intended. More recently, when we expected the
prevailing winds in about 45° South, they came not for a long time.
We have hitherto, therefore, been rather unfortunate in these
respects, but on the other hand we have had little or no bad
weather. We begin to find the voyage a great bore, and on
account of our utter incapacity to get up an entertainment, in
which all can participate, have had to resort to various amuse-
ments of a petty kind. Some of us have developed a remarkable
talent for practical joking—some for gaming—some for scandal;
and some have been so afflicted by the cacoethes scribendi, that
our editorial box has this week been filled with contributions from
all sorts and conditions of men and women. Indeed, if we had
accepted all this week’s contributions we should have had the
paper of four times its usual size. Remembering the great trouble
we were put to in the paper’s infancy to find copy, we were heard
this morning to utter a cry of thankfulness that our labours were
at last purely editorial, and that we had now only to select and
separate the wheat from the chaff.
OUR MILESTONES
TRISTAN D’ACUNHA.
In our last isssue mention was made of the islands of Ascension and
St. Helena. Next in turn comes the Island of Tristan d’Acunha, which
group we were nearest to on the 18th of November. This island was
many years ago discovered by the Portuguese, but no notice was taken
of it till explored by the Dutch in 1643, and afterwards by the French
in 1767. It is at present the domain of an interesting community of
English people, whose manners, simplicity, and excellence of character
remind us strongly of the somewhat similarly placed family upon
Pitcairn Island, in the Pacific, the retreat of the mutineers of the Bounty.
Tristan d’Acunha is a large, barren, rockly islet, about 15 miles in
circumference, 1000 feet high, and has the appearance at a distance of a
huge pyramid. It can be seen in clear weather at a distance of seventy
miles. A very small portion of the island is capable of cultivation,
skirting a small bay on the N. W. side, where the inhabitants reside in
small detached houses built of stone and rock. There are no trees on the
island, only small shrubs, which are not sufficient to supply fuel for all
during the winter months. Seaweed is therefore collected in large quan-
tities during the summer and dried and stacked for this purpose. Wheat,
barley, and oats are grown, also all vegetables, but not many fruits.
Sheep, cattle, and poultry, in small numbers, are kept, and many vessels
calling there have been supplied with all requisites in exchange for
wearing apparel, books, blankets, &c. The Duke of Edinburgh, when in-
command of the Galatea, called there, and all the children, some forty or
fifty, were christened by his chaplain. Mention is made of this chaplain
explaining to the young unmarried couples there what a chance they were
throwing away. The young female portion were but too willing, but
none of the young men could pluck up the necessary courage. The
originator of this interesting little community was an Englishman of the
name of Glass, formerly a corporal in the artillery, who emigrated here
in the year 1815, with his wife and family and some others. He was
elected by them as their chief in 1821, and was always afterwards called
Governor Glass. The young men and women partake of the Mulatto*
caste; the latter are spoken of as handsome brunettes, with very fine
figures. Large quantities of oil used to be collected by the islanders,
from the sea elephants and occasional whales that were captured, also
seal skins in great numbers; but during the last ten years these
creatures have almost entirely left the island, and the resources of the
islanders are therefore much reduced. Sea birds in great numbers.
frequent the island during the breeding season, but confine themselves to
parts that are inaccessible. There are two small islands near Tristan
d’Acunha, viz., Inaccessible and Nightingale Islands; they are not
inhabited, and form only a refuge for sea birds and some seals ; they are
situated a few miles from each other, and are composed of nothing but
barren rock. The ship Blendon Hall, from London to Bombay, was
totally lost on Inaccessible Island on the 23rd July, 1821. The
commander, Captain Greig, with his officers and passengers, got safe on
shore, but eight of the crew were drowned. They remained on the island
four months, suffering greatly; they managed after that time to reach
Tristan dAcunha, where they were afterwards taken by a passing ship
and landed safely at the Cape of Good Hope on the 18th January of
the ensuing year.
THE “ KENT.”
The keel of the Kent was laid down in December, 1875, and a
gang of about 150 shipwrights and artisans of all classes were daily
employed, till the date of her launch, which was on the ,Bth July of this
year. She was drafted by Mr. Clifford Wigram, one of the owners, and
is much like her sister ship, the Durham, with improvements, one of
which is, that though her tonnage is nearly the same, she is built with
more beam and finer entrance and run. The launch, as before stated,
took place at 3 p.m. on the Bth of July, and at the time appointed, the
dogshore was knocked away, and without a hitch this noble vessel glided
into the river, having been christened in the orthodox manner by Miss
Wigram, eldest daughter of Mr. Robert Wigram. She was then towed
to Deptford, and lay for a month under Messrs. Humphrey and Tennant’s
large crane, taking in her engines, which having been fitted, she pro-
ceeded to Millwall Dock to have her masts, which are of steel,,
lower mast and topmast in one, shipped. This only occupied two days,
after which she returned to Blackwall yard dry dock to have the work
of fitting up, furnishing, rigging, &c,, Ac., continued. She took in her
supply of coal at the South West India Dock, on the 20th of September,
and on the same day her noble rival, the St, Osyth, steamed down the
river, from the same dock, bound for Melbourne. The Kent having
coaled, ran her trial trip to the Nore and back, and fully answered the
expectations of hex’ buildei's and engine makers, a speed of 11 knots
being accomplished on the measured mile with 58 involutions. Them
16
THE KENT ARGUS.


Captain Gibbs, and five mates and surgeon
... 7
Petty officers, stewards, stewardess, and seamen ...
... 67
Four engineers and sixteen firemen
... 20
were no heated bearings, and the engines worked as easily as if they had
already been tried before. They have been entrusted to the care of Mr.
G. A. Miles, who is well and favourably known to many Australian
voyagers, having served in the capacity of chief engineer in the
Northumberland, of the same line.
The Kent is barque-rigged, of 1662 tons register, and 2304 tons
burthen, and is fitted with two vertical compound engines of 300 horse
power nominal, capable of working up to 1,500 horse power: her extreme
length overall is 300 feet beam, amidships 39 £ feet, and length of poop
deck 114 feet.
Mr. Hill, the chief steward, has in his possession lithograph drawings
of the ship for sale, both coloured and plain, which may be had on
application. The crew of the Kent consists of—
Making a total on the articles of ... 94
HUNTING REMINISCENCES.
By a Very Old Bushman.
No. 111.
Starting one fine morning from King’s Cross, in due time I reached
the ancient seat of' learning, Rugby, from whence I was driven by my
entertainer to the Lodge, some three miles off. My host conducted me
over his snug little estate, which he farms himself, but like all gentle-
men farmers, as a rule, at a loss. After inspecting the denizens of the
homestead we hied away to the stable to see the hunters; a gallant
grey was selected to carry me to meet the hounds in the morning.
When I found my host and his fair daughters at breakfast, his eye
glanced over me with an ill-concealed look of surprise and disgust,
exclaiming, “ Where the deuce is your hunting toggery?” Hunting
toggery had I none, being rigged in baggy nether habiliments of stout
tweed, a black coat, crowned by a Lincoln and Bennett hat. Mildly I
deprecated his sneer by promising I would keep well in the background,
out of view of his swell acquaintances, and hie home as soon as the
hounds drew off.
Arriving at the rendezvous, how pleasant it was to see many a well-
appointed baron and squire and knight of the shire ride up, accompanied
by bright young beauties, radiant and fx-esh, bonny English roses. It
was a great gathering, numbering two hundred or more well-appointed
and well moxxnted men and women. Foremost in the throng was the
county magnate, Lord Leigh, with him was Eaxl Spencer, quondam
ruler of Ireland, smiling courteously and blandly to the master, to
whom many a kindly welcome was given.
Away went the hounds to di’aw cover, followed by the gay and
dashing cavalcade. With a view to scan the dashing throng more in
detail, I trotted towards a gate by which the huntsman and hounds had
entered, but in my awkwardness the gate swung back too quickly, and
caught my horse by the neck. Anxioxxs to save my friend’s valued
steed, I sharply reined him back upon the narrow footbridge ; his hind
feet slipped over the edge, and souse we went into a deep ditch brimful
of slimy mud and water. You can fancy the pictxire my London coat
and Lincoln and Bennett made. Fx-om the charming Lady Coventry to
the master sweep from Rugby, mounted upon his jackass, everybody
laughed.
I was stung to the quick by the chaff and banter, and suddenly
resolved, at all hazards, to be amongst them, and with luck, show them
that I was not the man they took me for. As the hounds broke cover
I was with them, and neither brook, hedge, nor double ditch stopped
my flight that day; whei’e the foremost man rode, there rode I, straight
as an aiTOw. After a shai’p burst, it took the sight nearly from my
friend’s eyes, as he hesitated to negotiate a x*asper and yawner combined ;
over the gallant grey flew like a bird, whilst I screeched “ Come on! ”
Receiving with becoming modesty such compliments as were paid me
on my straight going, and ignoring the comments on my outre rig, I
returned home, and many days elapsed ere the pain went oxxt of my
back qr the stiffness fi’om my limbs, obtained by showing the Pytchley
Huixt that there was life in the old dog yet.
THE EUREKA STOCKADE RIOTS.
Recollections of the Outbreak at Ballarat, Dec. 3rd, 1854,
KNOWN AS THE “EUREKA RIOT.”
Many of our fellow-passengers may not have heard of this remarkable
occurrence, and a brief account of it may be interesting.
In 1854 Sir Charles Hotham (then Governor of Victoria) paid a visit
to Ballarat, meeting with a very enthusiastic reception. On his return
to Melbourne, impressed with the wealth of the gold-fields, and what he
considered the smallness of the revenue derived from them, he gave orders
that the license-fee, which was a tax on the diggers of £2 per quarter,,
should be rigidly collected. After the receipt of these orders, companies
of armed police scoured the diggings in all directions, and any unfortu-
nate person who could not instantly produce his license was at once
marched to gaol, and sometimes tied to a log in the burning sun. On
the arrival of a magistrate he was either fined or imprisoned. The result
of this overbearing conduct was that a monster meeting was held on
Bakery Hill; the miners burnt their licenses, and passed a resolution
not to obtain others until their wrongs should be redressed. After these
proceedings they began to arm and drill, work being for the time entirely
suspended. Mr. Peter Lalor (now a Member of the Victorian Parlia-
ment), was elected leader. On the 2nd December an encampment was
formed on the Eureka Lead, afterwards known as the Eureka Stockadq.
In the evening several hundreds of men assembled, but most of them,
after inspection, wex-e sent home. About 200 however remained under
arms; sentinels were appointed, and a large camp fire lighted, round
which many of the poor fellows told their last stories. Many of the men
went to bed in the tents within the enclosing. During the night several
false alarms were raised that the soldiers wei’e coming, as it was known
that large numbers had arrived from Melbourne. Just before Sunday,
the 3rd December, another alarm was given, and, sure enoxxgh, soldiers,
foot police, and troopers were seen four or five hundred yards oft', advanc-
ing up Free Trade Gully, and spread out in open column. A few shots
were fired first by the diggers, and it is said that the Riot Act was then
read by Commissioner Reed (a very xxnpopular official). The soldiex's
began to fire regular volleys, which were feebly returned by those within
the enclosure, and then advanced with a cheer, charging with the bayonet.
They received a slight check at the stockade, but a general stampede of
the diggers soon took place. Leaving the troops in possession, they set
fire to the tents, in which many had fled for safety ; the troopers cut down
all they could come across, and the loss on the side of the diggers was
very great. Amongst the casualties of this unfortunate affair may be
mentioned the death of Capt. Wise, of the 40th Regiment; Mr. Lalor
was wounded above the elbow (necessitating the subsequent amputation
of the arm), and about 20 of the diggers’ bodies wei’e found upon the
ground. It is said that several of the wounded were earned away by
their mates and died, without the knowledge of the authorities. In all
about 70 prisoners were taken.
( To be continued in our next.)
PARTINGTONIAN.
A passenger lately observed to another that thei’e was a sail on the
starboai’d bow. In answer, he was asked, what ai’e they going to sell ?
Perhaps some choice water fi’ontages, said number one, humouring this
exhibition of simple ignorance, or Mrs. Partington's representative on
boax-d the Kent. Very likely, said the latter, I never could undei’stand
why they wanted a Torrents Act, unless they meant to cut up the ocean
into allotments.
[The Torrens’ Act above referred to is an Act for the conveyance of
land and property.]
During the past week the passengei’s have been canvassed, with a
view to ascertain whether a sufficient number of subsci’ibei's coxxld be
obtained to wai’rant the printing of the Kent Argus on our arrival. We
are enabled to state that about 250 copies have been subscribed for, and
our publisher believes that the cost of each copy will be about 2s. or
2s. 6d. We have evexy confidence that the pi’inting of the series will
be executed with the gx-eatest regal'd to economy, and tnxst the volume
will prove a pleasing memento of the voyage, both for ourselves and our
friends. Names and addi’esses of subscribers will be applied for dining
the ensuing week.
17
THE KENT AEGUS


THE RIDDLER.
POETRY.
ON SIGHING.
Enigma.
You are my first.
I am the third.
You are my second.
The nation is the fourth.
A sigh is but a breath of wind
Proceeding from the heart;
But what a depth of hidden grief
It often may impart.
It may denote that some fair maid
Has lost a faithless lover.
From such a little woe as that
And my whole is murder.
ANSWEES TO BIDDLES, &0., in No. 111.
Biddles.
1. Cares, Caress. 2. A flea.
Square Word.
She doubtless will recover.
LACK
ABLE
CLAN
KENT
It might point out a man who tried
His lot in life to soften,
By loving one who jilted him :
A case that happens often.
’Tis sometimes heard at dead of night,
When things are weird and dreary ;
From one who waits a husband drunk,
And of her watch is weary.
Correct answers have been received from not a soul on board,
CONUNDRUMS.
Why is the butcher on board such a favourite with the ladies ? Because he is such
a killing man.
I know no sigh which anguish shows
In any human sinner,
So much, as that which comes from one,
Who’s eaten too much dinner.
Why is the engineer the most fortunate man on the ship ? Because he has had
his screw raised two or three times within the last week.
Why is a man who has received a legacy like a bird flying towards the setting
sun ? Because he has got his beak west (bequest!)
THE WAIL OF A SECOND-CLASS PASSENGEE.
Out on the ocean, far from land,
On the Kent for Melbourne bound;
We have a fine vessel with everything new,
And all her fittings well found.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Mao. —Entirely your own fault; you should have been more careful.
Music. —There are no moles in the colony; arrangements have been made to
import one.
Just one month out, fair progress made
Towards our journey’s end ;
Had all things else been done so well,
These lines I had not penn’d.
Noscitur a Sociis. —Your intentions and Latin are doubtless good, but your
method of expressing yourself in English, though forcible, is scarcely so intel-
ligible as that of another, whose complaint on a similar subject we publish
to-day.
Confectioner. — We are immensely fond of toffee , and will receive the offered
contribution with pleasure.
My wail is not about the ship,
Her captain, or her crew ;
In these we could not better get—
This must be plain to you.
But what I most complain about,
Far more important stands ;
I cannot satisfy on board
My hunger’s keen demands.
While on this good ship Kent I’ve been,
I’ve lost at least a stone ;
“ The food! the food ! ” that is the word
CORRESPONDENCE.
(to THE EDITOR OF THE KENT ARGUS.)
Sir, — We have heard lately a great deal about the rights of women. I
myself am a firm believer in the rights of women ; the right to love and
to be loved, the right to have all due respect from the other sex, and
the right to courtesy.
But it is not the rights of women I wish to speak about, but the
wrongs; the wrongs we suffer on board this ship, more especially shown
in the very uncomplimentary remarks made in the Argus. The week
before last we were assailed by sarcasm; we treated that as we thought
it deserved—with silent contempt. However, the trodden worm will turn
at last, and last week again, allusion was made to the ladies, in the
most bitter manner. The chief complaint is, that the ladies will not
co-operate with the musical efforts of the gentlemen. Whose fault is
that 1 Who can deny that some of the ladies, about three weeks ago,
professed themselves quite ready to help in any concert, to the best of
their abilities 1 Why was not this readiness better taken advantage of 1
Sir, it is too evident that the gentlemen, considering their own talents
of so far higher an order, have chosen to ignore our smaller powers and
more modest pretensions.
Again, sir, what fruits have we reaped of the labours of others 1
Concerts in the dark, at such an hour, and of such a nature, as the one
reported in your last issue, are not calculated to add much to the
amusement of the fair sex, who do, as one of their women’s rights,
expect to have the tedium of a long voyage lightened by the exertions
of the other and more talented sex.
My mind so dwells upon.
Fresh mutton once a week, I’m sure,
Is scarcely just the thing;
But still that would not be so bad,
If ’twere the only sting.
I can’t complain of quantity—
Though more than I require
Is often placed before my gaze—
Its looks I don’t admire.
Perhaps I am particular,
Too much I may expect;
But salt beef like mahogany
I do not think correct.
Of fresh potatoes next I’ll speak,
These are a rarity ;
I see them only once a week—
Can you not pity me ?
And, last of all, the staff of life—
The bread our baker bakes :
He surely fears some Eussian fleet,
So leaden bullets makes.
Heartburn and indigestion
Are things I do not prize ;
Yet these are illnesses we get
From bread that does not rise.
Of better things in store for us,
I hear with glad surprise ;
Just now I find it whispered round,
We’re promised gooseberry pies.
I’m also told our baker has
The “ Old Cart Wheel ” and the “ Cock Robin Chorus,” are, without
doubt, very touching ; but the sorrows of “ Mar-y Jane” and other similar
ditties, albeit sung with “ such unlooked-for comic talent,” can scarcely
be expected to attract the crowd of ladies, supposed to wish to be present,
at the next midnight performance.
Sir, I feel like Mr. Pickwick, when he said, “ I will be calm,” but he
foamed at the mouth; but surely it is just anger, and needs no apology
from one who subscribes herself,
One of the Much-abused Ladies.
Been by our sorrows moved ;
And better bread for us awaits,
As well as meat improved.
Perhaps I should not grumble so,
While in this vessel pent;
But, oh ! it lightens sorrow’s load,
[We admire the ex parte way in which our fair correspondent defends
her sex, but we cannot by any means endorse her opinions.—Ed. Kent
To give one’s feelings vent.
Argus.']
N.S.W.M.
18
THE KENT ARGUS


(to THE EDITOR OF THE KENT ARGUS.)
Sir, — I wish to seek the following information :—What is the
difference between the relative distances by the two routes from London
to Melbourne: first, that by the route we are now traversing, and secondly,
that by the Suez Canal; in both cases the most practicable course to be
steered; also, what are the dues on the register tonnage of steamers
passing through the Canal I —Yours truly, N.S.W.M.
(to THE EDITOR OF THE KENT ARGUS.)
Dear Sir, —As you were kind enough in your last impression to insert
a letter from one of us, I venture again to intrude on your kindness.
Have you noticed, Sir, with what extreme punctuality some of the gen-
tlemen arrive daily at the dinner table at the hour of 4 p.m. 1 It some-
times happens, Sir, that the dinner is not quite ready. They immediately
pull out their watches, as a gentle hint that the stewards are behindhand
with their work. But it also sometimes happens, Sir, that some of the
gentlemen, when asked to give up the tables for the laying of the cloth,
are by no means prompt to comply with this reasonable request, hence the
delay in the serving of dinner. Will you use your kind influence in our
behalf, Sir 1 By inserting this letter you will, doubtless, enable us to be
punctual for the remainder of the voyage.
Dear Sir, I remain your obedient servant, A Steward.
SHIP’S NOTES.
Thursday, 23rd Nov.— On reaching deck at 6 a.m., found the screw
being lifted; of course it was. soon dropped. Cricket in the evening.
Journal read.
Friday.— As before, screw lifted and soon dropped.
Saturday. —Weather very cold. The game of the “ Tug of war” was
introduced. The Kent A rgus was nearly coming to grief, on account of
the pressure brought to bear on the editor.
Sunday,— Divine service was held both morning and evening—the
Rev. Mr. Henry preached at the former, and Dr. Cairns at the latter.
A gentleman was seen on the main deck wearing a bell-topper.
Monday. —Regular November fog. The piano was tuned, exem-
plifying the loving kindness of the captain. Subscriptions towards the
printing of the Kent Argus were obtained.
Tuesday. —A valuable article of lady’s toilet was found ; it can be had
on application to the editors. A lady declared she saw a donkey on
board. We have seen many. The Kent had her first love affair—she
kept company with a ship all day. The ship was observed making
advances to her at night; its name was the Blairgowrie. Screw raised
at 8 a.m.
Wednesday.— People were ax’oused early in the morning awakened by
the sound of falling objects. School of Cookery introduced in the saloon ;
intending students must apply at the stove.
SPORTING NOTES.
We witnessed on Monday a rather interesting trial. We have
referred in a previous number to the match proposed to be walked by
Mr. Smyth against time on our arrival at Melbourne. On Monday he had
his trial; and Mr. Smyth, under the excellent coaching of Mr. Kingscote,
walked a measured mile in the space of 9f minutes. We understand
Mr. Smyth was in no way fatigued after his effort, and expressed himself as
confident of success. Betting is now 2to 1 on Smyth. Various games have
of late been instituted in order to keep up the supply of animal heat on
board, and to tell the truth, our own staff have been rather unfortunate
in these games. One of them was nearly killed against the wheel-house
playing at “ tug of war;” another was all but knocked over the break
of the poop whilst officiating as the post at “ high cock-a-lorum whilst
a third, whose services we esteem highly, has had his ears most unmer-
cifully pulled and boxed at a game, the name of which we do not know.
Altogether, we prefer to look on.
The cricketing community request us to return their grateful thanks
to all those who have so generously contributed material and labour in
the manufacture of cricket balls.
Shakesperian motto for certain grumblers: —
“Rather bear the (H)ills we have
Than fly to others that we know not of.”
CAPTAIN’S REPORT.
Date. Day. Lat. Long. Course. Dist. Remarks.
1876. Miles.
Nov. 23 Thursday 42° 14' S. 13° 14' E, S., 71° B. 241 Light winds and overcast.
7 a.m., up screw ; noon,
down, screw.
„ 24 Friday 43° 7' S. 18° 45' E. S., 78° B. 250 Light, N.W. ; weather rainy.
7 a.m., lifted screw ; made
„ 25 Saturday 44° 8' S. 24° 10'E. S., 76° B. 240 Steady West wind till 9.30
a.m., then lighter ; down
screw.
26 Sunday 44° 39' S. 29° 39' E. S., 82° E. 239 Light airs, calms, and mode-
rate head winds.
27 Monday 44° 52'S. 35° 7'E. S., 86° E. 232 Fresh N.E. winds, hauling to
N. and N.N.W, ; noon,
light, and hauling ahead.
28 Tuesday 44° 46' S. 40° 59' E. N., 88J° E. 250 First part, head wind; mid-
night, fair; 8 a.m., up
screw.
29 Wednesday 44° 40' S. 46° 00' E. N., 89° E. 216 Fair wind; no steam.
Distance run for the week, 1668 miles. Passed, on Tuesday morning, the 28th inst., English ship
Blairgowrie, of Glasgow, 1560 tons, in ballast, from Rio Janeiro to Calcutta, 30 days out.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Lost.
A Brown and Grey Rug, slightly torn at one of the comers. Anyone finding
same please return to G. P. Wilson.
A Silver Thimble.
A two-bladed, steel-handled Knife, with corkscrew and wire breaker.
A young gentleman, of great personal attractions and good position, wishes to
correspond with a sensible young lady on board, with a view to matrimony. One
of medium height and some beauty preferred. Address, enclosing carte, to A.8.C.,
care of the Editors.
Wanted. —A bottle of Mrs. Winslow’s Soothing Syrup, to quiet an infant in the
saloon. Address, Mater, care of the Editor, Kent Argtis.
Contributions of Corks will be thankfully received by W. A. Kingscote, Esq., on
behalf of the Kent Cricket Ball Manufactory.
Cju Jlcnt llrgtis.
Thursday, 7th December, 1876.
No. 6.
We have received a letter from a gentleman, who signs himself a
“ Second-Class Passenger,” complaining of a letter in our last issue,
headed “Life in the Second Cabin.” We beg to say that that
letter formed no part of our issue, and we consider that it had no
business to be read in the Second Cabin as part of it. It is.espe-
cially annoying to have ourselves blamed for the reflections that it
contained, as we actually rejected the letter in question, with the
remark that it was much too personal to be suitable.
We confess to have spoken rather strongly of the part the ladies
have not taken in providing amusements for all on board. We are
sorry to have had to be silent for a whole week, whilst the wrathful
vials of “ One of the much-abused Ladies ” were being still poured
on us; but what we said before we hold to, viz., that the ladies have
not contributed their share in the getting up of such entertain-
ments, That we are not without sympathy on the subject will
be seen from a letter we publish in another column.
We understand that a duel, which had been arranged to take
place at daybreak last Monday, has happily been averted, and an
amicable understanding arrived at.
OUR MILESTONES.
PRINCE EDWARD ISLANDS AND THE CROZETS.
On the evening of the 27th of November we passed, at a distance
of about 95 miles, a group of islands called Prince Edward Islands.
They were first discovered by M. Marion du Fresne, commander of the
French expedition, on 13th January, 1772. The largest is named
Max-ion Island, after this discovex-er. It is about 45 miles ixx circuit,
and composed of hard bax’ren rock with no vegetatioxx whatever; its
hills, or mountaixxs, x-ise to a great height, which has never been
determined coxTectly, from their peaks being always enveloped ixx mist.
This gx’oup was visited by Captain Cook in his last voyage, who named
the smaller island Prince Edward Island, after the thexx young Duke of
Kent, father of oixr gx-acious Queen.
Penguixxs and seals abound in lax-ge quantities, and sea bix’ds of every
19
THE KENT ARGUS


description, from the lordly albatross to the interesting little Mother
Cary’s chicken, which build their nests here. There is no anchorage
spoken of, though enterprising whalers call here sometimes for trying
down their oil, and obtaining seals and sea-elephants ; the latter giving
(from their huge size) a considerable quantity of this useful article.
Visiting this group at any time of the year must be a dangerous
undertaking, as it is either blowing gales of wind or the islands are
enveloped in fog and mist.
As we journeyed on in due course, we arrived, on the 30th of
November, in the vicinity of the Crozet Islands, of which so much
mention has lately been made, in our English papers, from the fact of
the late wreck of the ship Strathmore, bound to Melbourne, whose
survivors lived for so long a period on these islands before they
were rescued by an American whaler. I shall, therefore, confine
myself to a short sketch only of the general feature of this group.
They were, like Prince Edward Islands, discovered by Marion,
commander of the French expedition, on the 24th of January, 1772,
and were named after Crozet, his second in command. In a geographical
sense, these islands are very uninteresting ; they have no production
but the seals and other animals, for which they are frequented ; not,
therefore, having any other resources they are more to be avoided than
approached, lying in the great eastern highway, and many a tale of
horror may be told by those cruel rocks that abound near the coast,
of the desti’uction of some noble ship bound, most probably, to some of
our Australian colonies, and being some miles out in her reckoning
from days of misty and rainy weather, which, during the winter months,
lasts frequently over the period of a week. The group is composed of
about six islands, and innumerable rocks of all sizes and shapes. One
of these is called Hog Island, from the number of these animals on it;
they were first placed there by a Captain Dawson in 1834. These
animals are now, however, become excessively wild and fierce ; their
flesh is unpalatable, from their subsisting principally on dead penguins.
Possession Island, the largest, is a perfect mountain of volcanic rock ;
its shores bold and precipitous, with many projecting rocks, which seem
to have been formed by the increasing action of the waves cutting away
the softer parts, and, with the exception of a single beach of some
extent on the north-east part of the island, affords no place where
either a habitation could be built or a boat landed.
East Island is the smallest of the group, being only about.three or
four miles in circumference, but its highest pinnacle attains the great
height of 4000 feet. There is a vegetable much resembling a cabbage
which grows on the larger islands, and though rather bitter in taste, is
rendered eatable by boiling for three or four hours. This plant is found
in great abundance on the islands of Kerguelen, of which mention will
be made in our next issue.
THE EUREKA STOCKADE RIOTS.
No. 11.
The prisoners mentioned in the last number were handcuffed and sent
to the camp; they were then carefully searched and deprived of all
monies and gold-dust, nothing being allowed them except a part of their
clothes ; everything else was treated as the spoils of war.
About 60 diggers were placed in a small log lock-up, in which there
was not sufficient room either to lie down or to sit, the day was intensely
hot, and their misery was also increased by being in the company of
some thieves and a lunatic, the latter having to be gagged to be kept quiet.
In the evening most of the rioters were placed in a large store-room,
with sentinels who had orders to fire on them if they attempted to
escape. The two following days they had to be paraded on what is now
known as Soldiers Hill, for identification, six being selected and sent to
Melbourne for trial for high treason. The remainder were brought
before the magistrates on the following Saturday and acquitted. In
the meantime martial law had been proclaimed in Ballarat, and rewards
of £2OO each offered for Mr. Lalor and one or two others of the ring-
leaders. Early in the following week, Sir Robert Nickle, commander
of the forces, with about 800 soldiers and blue-jackets arrived in Ballarat,
and by his judicious conduct soon restored order, and work was again
resumed. Government appointed a commission, consisting of Sir Jno.
O’Shanassy and the late J, P. Fawkner, to inquire into the miners’
grievances. Evidence was taken in Ballarat at daily sittings. The
result of their inquiries was a recommendation to abolish the license fee
and to allow any one to settle on the gold-fields for the small sum of
20s. per annum, and place an export duty of 2s. 6d. per ounce on gold.
(The new Gold-fields Act of 1865 farther reduced the license to ss. per
annum, and abolished the export duty. This registration fee also gave
the holder the right to vote at elections for members of Parliament.)
Fi’om this time digger-hunting ceased. A new constitution was shortly
after granted to Victoria, the Queen reserving the right of appointing
the Governor, and vetoing any bills sent home. The gold-fields districts
now returned members to Parliament, and the lands which had been
almost entirely held by squatters were thrown open to selection. Manhood
suffrage, vote by ballot, and triennial Parliaments have successively
become law.
I will now briefly refer to the State prisoners. They were arraigned
for high treason, the Attorney-General prosecuting, the prisoners being
defended gratuitously by the most eminent barristers in Melbourne.
After a most interesting trial, lasting several days, they were acquitted,
the verdict being received with great demonstrations of joy all over the
country.
Visitors to Ballarat Cemetery will see a handsome monument erected
to the memory of those who fell in the Eureka Stockade, which for
many years was annually visited and draped in black by their friends in
Ballarat.
VOICES FROM THE SEA.
The following is an account of the rescue of eleven hands, cast away
at sea from a burning ship on 4th January, 1876 :
The English barque San Rafael, of Liverpool, of 960 tons register,
left that port on the 18th September, 1875, bound to Valparaiso with
coals. Her crew consisted of Captain M‘Adarns, who had his wife with
him, and twenty seamen, all told. All went well till the 2nd January,
1876, when about a day’s sail round the Horn, the coals were found to
have ignited, and in spite of the most strenuous efforts of the crew for
two days, the fire burst through the decks, and the ship was soon a mass
of flames. Recourse was had to the boats on the afternoon of the 4th
January. The captain, his wife, the carpenter, four able seamen, and
three boys, occupied the long boat; whilst the dingy and cutter con-
tained the rest of the crew, twelve in number. When morning broke,
the long boat was nowhere to be seen. The occupants of the other two
effected a landing on one of a group of islands that had been sighted,
which however being rocky and covered with snow, afforded no shelter.
Limpets and mussels were collected, the poor castaways refusing to touch
the small stock of provisions that had been saved. In this state these
poor fellows lived from the 6th to 29th January, making during the
time several fruitless attempts to get out to sea, in the hopes of being
picked up by a passing vessel. On the 29th, however, having lost one
of their number, and the little food they had left nearly exhausted, they
determined to make one more effort to get out to sea, or perish in the
attempt. We are furnished by Captain Gibbs, then of the Yorkshire
(now commander of this ship), bound from Melbourne to London, with
an account of the rescue :
“ At 6.30 a.m. on the morning of the 31st of January I was called
by my chief officer, Mr. Sladden, who said we were being passed by the
John Buthie, the ship that was on our port quarter the previous evening,
bound from Sydney to London, the same number of days out as our-
selves, Some of my remarks may appear unnecessary, but they will
afterwards tend to show the wonderful interposition of Providence. As
I before said, the John Duihie was on our port quarter the previous
evening, both steering the same course and sailing equally fast ; her
position would have been the same on the following day had I not
altered the course at 4 a.m., steering a point more towards the land,
being by my reckoning in a position to be able to do so. This gave the
John Duthie an advantage, as she had the wind more on the side, and
therefore came up to us, I was asked by Mr. Sladden if I would alter
the course and prevent her passing us, but I refused to do so. I went
on deck at a quarter before 7, which is earlier than my usual custom,
and found a tine fresh wind blowing, and the John Duthie on our
starboard quarter about half-a-mile distant, slowly drawing by us. All
the crew and passengers were leaning over the starboard side looking at
this fine ship, which, under a cloud of canvas was a noble sight. I
happened, however, to cast my eye down to leeward, as I thought I
might perhaps see the island of Diego Ramaries, some thirty miles
distant, when I observed something on the horizon which I first thought
was only the wing of a bird turning in its flight, but seeing it directly
again, I took up my telescope and discovered a boat with men making
20
THE KENT ARGUS


signals to attract our attention. The Yorkshire was going at the time
eleven knots, and had I not fortunately seen it when I did, in five
minutes we should have been out of sight of this boat, which was then
abaft the port beam. Sail was soon shortened down to lower topsails
only, and as we neared the boat another was discovered beyond her. The
old Yorkshire, as if knowing what was required of her, lay too like a
duck, and though a high sea was running it was quite smooth to leeward,
and the boats, one after the other, were enabled to come alongside, and
in about the space of half an hour all were safely on board: one only, the
second mate, Mr. M‘Leod, was able to get up the side without assistance ;
the others had all to be lifted on board, being perfectly helpless. Their
condition was most pitiable, being covered with sores, their limbs stiff
and frost-bitten, and their clothes wet, their normal condition for days,
i need hardly say that passengers and crew all vied with one another in
being of assistance, and each gave some article of clothing, so that in a
few days all were in a fair way of recovery. One boy, however, had to
have some of his toes amputated to save his life; but before the voyage
was over he stumped about as well as the rest. The crew rescued con-
sisted of the first, second, and third mates, sailmaker, the steward, five
able seamen, and one boy. Mr. Kilgour, the chief mate, was of opinion
that the boats could not have lived much longer, as they had that
morning been twice nearly swamped, and the wind and sea rose so high
after they were on board, that the Yorkshire's dead lights had to be
closed. I may state that in running down to pick up the boats we were
nearing the land, and at 8 o’clock the islands of Diego Ramaries were
plainly visible.
In the English papers, about the end of September, appeared a
paragraph stating the bodies of Captain M ‘Adams, his wife, and eight
seamen had been found by the crew of a small missionary schooner
cruizing among the islands to the South of Cape Horn.
LAW INTELLIGENCE.
TICEHURST V. SMYTH.
(From Our Special Reporter.)
On the morning of the Ist inst., an important case was submitted for
arbitration on board. It arose from a claim for compensation made by
Mr. Edward Ticehurst against Mr. Carmichael Smyth, in that a dog
belonging to the latter had caused grievous bodily injury in a fight to a
dog of his (Mr. Ticehurst’s). There was a cross claim entered by Mr.
Smyth of a similar nature against Mr. Ticehurst. The two cases were
heard together ; the arbitrators for Mr. Ticehurst being Messrs. Loughnan
and Evans; while Messrs. Yeo and Richards sat for Mr. Smyth. The
referee was G. P. Wilson, Esq., and eminent counsel were engaged on
both sides. Mr. John MTntyre, Q.C., appeared for the plaintiff Tice-
hurst, and Mr. Alfred Moul, a rising young barrister, was retained on
behalf of the defendant. The court was densely crowded with pas-
sengers interested in the case. Proceedings were commenced by Mr.
MTntyre, who gave a brief detail of the respective claims, and then
summoned and examined several witnesses, who all testified to the
injuries which the plaintiff’s dog had received. The witnesses were all in
turn cross-examined at great length by the defendant’s counsel, and one
or two who had given most direct testimony in favor of the plaintiff
completely broke down under Mr. Monks severe cross-examination. The
case which had at the onset appeared to be greatly in favour of the
plaintiff now assumed a totally different aspect.
After all witnesses had been examined and cross-examined, an
adjournment took place until the following morning, when the hearing
was again resumed. Mr. MTntyre rose to address the court on behalf
of the plaintiff. He carefully reviewed the evidence which had been
heard, and delivered a most able argument on the case, which was
received with marked attention by the whole Court. At the conclusion
Mr. Moul rose to reply for the defendant, and in an eloquent speech
appealed to the Court for a verdict in his client’s favor. He sharply
criticised many of the observations made by the learned counsel for the
plaintiff, and argued with considerable force on the unreliable nature of
the testimony which had been given throughout the case. At the
conclusion of his address the case was adjourned for lunch, after which the
arbitrators retired, with their referee, to deliberate. At 2.30 p.m.
passengers were assembled on the poop by the loud summons of a bell, to
hear the decision of the court. The referee, Mr. Wilson, read the
same, announcing a verdict for the defendant, and condemning the
plaintiff in all costs. The result was received with hearty cheering,
and the sympathies expressed with the defendant at last took a decidedly
practical turn. A pole was obtained, Mr. Smyth was hoisted thereon,
and, nolens volens carried round the poop several times preceded by
the bellman, Mr. Stevenson, and followed by an enthusiastic rabble.
With a generosity that does him infinite credit, Mr. Smyth has decided
not to proceed in his cross action against Mr. Ticehurst, but is content
to rest on the laurels which the case has gained for him.
SHIP’S NOTES.
Thursday, 30th Nov.— Projected School of Cookery was given up,
Argus read. Speech by Dr. Cairns at conclusion of the reading.
Friday. —Case of Ticehurst v. Smyth in the smoking room.
Saturday.— Ticehurst v. Smyth (part heard) concluded. Weather
freshening.
Sunday.— Divine service twice in saloon, once in Second-class Cabin.
A noticeable absence of parties at breakfast; perhaps, because ;
but we refrain !!
Monday. —Numbers of birds following the ship. One Molly-hawk
caught. Brutal murder by strychnine on the forecastle.
Tuesday. —Ship rolling heavily. Another Molly-hawk captured.
Wednesday.— Screw up for 24 consecutive hours. Cricket in thd
evening. Berth-curtains in a saloon cabin discovered to be on fire at
7.45 p.m. At once put out, without further damage.
RELIGIOUS INTELLIGENCE.
Last Sunday services were held on board as follows: —In the morning
prayers were read by Dr. Cairns, and the Rev. Mr. Henry preached an
instructive discourse from Mark x. 17, and following verses. In the
evening Dr. Cairns conducted service, and preached a comprehensive
discourse from John xiv, 1. In the afternoon Mr. Silver delivered
an address from Proverbs i. 33, in the second class cabin, and Mr.
Henry engaged in prayer. A similar service will be held there next
Sunday afternoon. On Sunday morning next a collection will be made
on behalf of the Merchant Seamen’s Orphan Home, to which, we hope,
the passengers will respond liberally.
CAPTURE OF A MOLLYHAWK.
Since we have passed the Cape some small birds have been caught by
the passengers on board, by means of lines trailed over the stern. On
Monday last, however, Mr. Moran effected the capture of the first sea
bird, of any size, by the same means. It was a large Mollyhawk, of
the size of a goose, with wings which measured about 7 feet from tip to
tip ; the body of the bird is white ; the wings are mixed grey and
white, and the plumage very rich. After the bird was safely landed on
board it was carried forward to the butcher’s quarters, where it was put
to death by strychnine. For a quarter of an hour the bird was in
agony, and its dying struggles were witnessed by a crowd of idlers.
We cannot protest in too strong terms against the needless cruelty of
such a death. There is no lack of means to ensure a painless death,
and one which will not spoil the plumage in such eases, and we do feel
that a great amount of blame is due to those who allowed a young man
to exercise his talents in the art of poisoning on board ship, in a way
which would have secured him some week’s imprisonment at home.
PRINTING OF THE KENT ARGUS.
Regarding the subscription list for the printing of the Kent Argus, we
have received requisitions for nearly 300 copies, and as the paper is
rather a voluminous one, we find that it cannot be done at a less cost
than 2s. fid. per copy, which will also cover postage. As it will be
holiday time in Melbourne when we arrive, the paper will probably not
be ready for issue for a fortnight or three weeks. People subscribing
who are as yet uncertain of their destination, can, before leaving
Melbourne, by asking for Mr. May, at The Argus Office, Collins-street
east, leave instructions with him as to the disposal of their copies, or
write to him from their various addresses.
Should there be any surplus, which we imagine will be very unlikely,
it will be handed over to the Merchant Seamen’s Orphan Asylum box,
on board this ship.
The subscription list can be seen in the saloon and second cabin, so
that subscribers may verify the number of copies assigned to each and
their addresses.
21
THE KENT ARGUS


POETRY.
THE DISAPPOINTED MAN.
I am an even-tempered man,
With heart and step elastic ;
Do all I try, I never can,
Become enthusiastic.
I started in the Kent to sea,
Sea sickness “ I don’t moind it,”
As Irish say, but ever since
I have been disappointed.
I thought to see the ocean rough
And navigation risky,
The first three days ; instead of which
Like glass was Bay of Biscay.
I hoped to see some passing ships
And them by flags have spoken;
We’ve seen but two : my moderate hopes
Have thus again been broken.
When to Madeira’s isle we came,
I thought to have a trade wind;
But ev’ry wind we met with there
Was nothing hut a head Avind.
I thought the Southern Cross would be
A splendid constellation;
’Tis paltry to the Southern Cross
Of my anticipation.
Australia is a place immense,
According to my notion ;
But when I see it ’twill not seem
So, after so much ocean.
I think the people there are rich,
That every one’s a squatter ;
Of course when I get there I’ll find
It quite another matter.
I hoped to land at Sandridge pier
In fifty days from London ;
If we’re not sixty days at least
May I be —well —be undone.
I know these lines are aAvful bosh,
The language is disjointed ;
I try to please you, hut of course
I shall he disappointed.
A RHYME FROM EARLY VERSE FOR SOLUTION.
’TAvas not o’er Alpine’s snoAvy heights,
But homely English ground ;
Excelsior Avas their device,
But sad the fate they found.
They did not climb for love or fame,
But folloAved duty’s call;
They were united in their aim,
But parted in their fall.
E. P.
THE RIDDLER.
Answer to “ You are my first, &c.,” in our last issue—Ass-ass-i-nation.
What reason have we to suspect dishonest persons on board ? Because the
officers are continually being relieved of their Avatches.
Why is a wicked young woman like everything else belonging to a sailor?
Because she is naughty gal!! (nautical.)
SPORTING NOTES.
As it will no doubt be interesting to many of our readers, especially
those connected Avith stock in the colonies, to know something of the
horses which are on board, we, this week, give their pedigrees and
some notes of their performances. The brown horse on the port side is
named Prince Leopold, and is 15 hands 3 inches high, on short legs
with great muscular development, deep ribs, well grown down, short
back, Avith grand long hind-quarters. He is by Maccaroni, winner of
the Derby, the Two Thousand Guineas, Doncaster, and York Cups, and
other great races, out of Mystery, Avinner of the Champagne Stakes at
Doncaster. Maccaroni is by Sweetmeat out of Jocose. Sweetmeat is the
sire of Mincemeat and Mincepie, winners of the Oaks, and Sweetmeat,
winner of the Goodwood Cup. Mystery is by Augur out of Electro, by
Touchstone. Augur is by Irish Birdcatcher, the sire of Daniel O’Rourke,
winner of the Derby, and Songstress, winner of the Oaks, and of Knight
of St. George, Warlock, and The Baron, winners of the St. Leger. The
Baron was the sire of the noted horse Stockwell. Touchstone was the sire
of Cotherstone, Orlando, and Surplice, winners of the Derby, and of
Blue Bonnet, Surplice, and Newminster, winners of the St. Leger. It
will be seen from the above pedigree that Prince Leopold possesses such
a combination of the best and most fashionable blood as can rarely be
found. Prince Leopold has taken several first prizes at the Royal and
Agricultural shows; amongst others he Avon first prize at Bury, first at
Middleton, first at Rochdale, &c. It might be mentioned that Prince
Leopold was once the property of the notorious Tichborne claimant.
The bay hoi'se on the starboard side is named Odd Trick, and is by
King of Trumps out of Hesperethusa. Hesperethusa is the dam of
Hesper, sold at the last Newmarket races for £2500, and the only
three-year-old that has beaten the celebrated Lowlander at weight for
age. Odd Trick has been one of the most successful steeplechase and
hurdle race horses in England, having won over forty races, at all
weights and distances. When the property of Mr. Staples, Odd Trick
earned 13 stone to hounds, and won several matches for him.
He also won for Mr, Jarvis, in stakes and matches, over £5OOO, and was
well known with the old Berkshire hounds. Mr. Yeo, the genial
owner of both horses, will be most happy to give any of the passengers
full pai'ticulars of the horses’ performances.
CORRESPONDENCE.
(to THE EDITOR OF THE KENT ARGUS.)
Sir, —I have read Avith intense amazement the letter in your last
from “ One of the much-abused Ladies.” I am of too courteous a
disposition to term it a piece of feminine effrontery, but I do think it a
little too hard upon the sterner sex, and if the statements in it are in
all cases verbally true, they are set forth in a manner which shoAVS an
uncalled-for bias. I maintain that the ladies have not been willing to
assist the gentlemen, as our fair correspondent says. The amount of
assistance the gentlemen were promised was simply this : Two ladies
made a conditional offer to play a duet, which neither of them professed
to know. It is of course all very Avell for the ladies to turn round upon
the gentlemen now that the voyage is drawing to a close, and to offer
any amount of services in the concert way, when they know the weather
is such that they cannot be accepted. I know enough of the fair sex to
be sure that had the ladies been very anxious to have a concert, and
been very willing to give their services, there would have been a
concert; indeed, there would have been a number of successful concerts.
But the only willingness they have shown seems to me to be like that
of the late Mr. Barkis, avlio liked much to dangle after the other sex,
and make all the unattached feel envious. Excuse my being outspoken,
but when I find my sex libelled by the other sex, I am riled consi-
derably, and speak the language of my heart rather than the euphemisms
in which one is apt to express his distaste for the deliberate wrong-
doings of women. Trusting I have not trespassed too much on your
space, I am, dear Sir, An Old Bachelor.
(to THE EDITOR OF THE KENT ARGUS.)
Sir, —Replying to your corpespondent upon the relative distance of
the tAvo routes to Melbourne, that via the Suez Canal, compared Avith this
being taken by the Kent, I beg to state the distance from London via
the Canal, following the course as taken monthly by the P. and O.
Company’s mail steamers, and touching at Point de Galle, is—to Port Said
3250 miles; through the Canal, 98 ; thence to Galle, 3442; and from
there to Melbourne, 4822 ; making a total of 11,612 miles. The course
being taken by the Kent, from London, will comprise about 12,582
miles ; difference, 970.
The fixed tariff in canal charges (last year), and we know of no
alteration, on British ships is at the rate of 10 francs, or Bs., per ton
on the registered tonnage, with an extra charge, about 13s. per head for
passengers not part of a ship’s company ; but a special contract exists for
British troops.— I am, yours, &c., C. A.
(to THE EDITOR OF THE KENT ARGUS.)
Sir, —As there are many amongst us who are going out to Noav
Zealand for the first time, perhaps you will be able to find space in your
valuable journal for the following facts concerning the interesting
natives of the above colony. Forty years ago the. natives numbered
100,000. From various causes they have rapidly decreased to 40,000,
37,000 of whom are in the North, the remaining 3000 being found
in the Middle Island. The natives themselves date their rapid decrease
from the introduction of the Gospel and European clothing. They say
that when they Avore their own native dress, i.e. flax mats, they never
knew sickness, but when they bought blankets, trousers, etc., then came
22
THE KENT ARGUS.


the bad spirit, “ Rewha Rewha,” catarrh, ending in inflammation of the
lungs, which carried off their young men and children by the score.
The Middle Island natives are spread over an immense extent of country,
living in groups of a few families on the reserves made for them with a
wise forethought by the Government. They differ widely from their
brethren in the north in habits, language, and physique ; in fact, if one
may apply the term, they have lost caste, being the descendants of those
who in former years were driven across the straits, and forced to fly for
refuge to the south, where they have remained, and it is only of late
years that they have recovered from the dread of their northern brethren.
The North Island natives are divided into several different tribes, and
are scattered over an area of 45,000 square miles, the six principal
being the Bay of Islands, the East Cape, the Bay of Plenty, Hawke’s
Bay, Taranaki, and Wanganui tribes ; each tribe taking its native name
from the canoe which brought their ancestors across from Hawaiika, the
place from which, according to tradition, the Maories originally came;
although Hawaiika is not known by that name, yet supposed to be one
of the islands of the Malay Peninsula, A gi’eat deal has been said and
written about the proclivities of the Maori, and strangers, reading
accounts of past troubles, and knowing little or nothing of the actual
condition of the race, have accepted it as a fact that perpetual strife
exists between the colonists and the natives. Such is not the case.
Only a small section of the native population has ever at any one time
been in rebellion against the Government, the most powerful tribes
having always espoused the cause of the Europeans against their
rebellious brethren ; not from any love to their white-skinned neigh-
bours, but rather for the sake of pay, food, clothing, and high-sounding
titles, which were and are lavished upon them. In fact, the wise policy
of letting the natives decimate themselves by fighting against each other
has been carried out of late years.
The natives have no doubt many grievances which can never be
redressed, and no doubt have great cause, I am sorry to say, to regard
us as a nation in the light of usurpers, but of real bona-fide settlers they
have little to complain.
{To he continued in our next.)
CAPTAIN’S REPORT.
LOG OP S.S. “KENT,” TO THURSDAY, 7th DECEMBER, 1876.
Date. Day. Lat. Long. Course. Dist. Remarks.
1876. Miles.
Nov. 30 Thursday 44° 39' S. 50° 40' E. East. 200 Moderate fair wind. Screw
down at 4 a.m.
Dec. 1 Friday 45° 00' 55° 58' S., 84° E. 228 Light head Winds.
~ 2 Saturday 45° 6' 61° 51' S., 89° E. 254 Moderate head wind.
„ 3 Sunday 45° 20' 68° 4' 8., 73° E. 264 Moderate N.W. wind. Screw
up at 5.15 a.m. "
4 Monday 45° 17' 73° 57' N., 89° E. 250 Steady fair wind. Screw
down 7 p.m., up at 5 a.m.
5 Tuesday 45° 14' 79° 39' N., 89° E. 240 Steidy fair wind
6 Wednesday 45° 34' 85° 12' S., 85° E. 236 Steady to moderate W.S.W.
winds. Screw down at
Total distance for the week, 1672 miles. 1.15 p.m.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Music. —No ! Molly-hawk is no relation to Minnie Hawk; neither is Albatross first
cousin to Alhani.
Adonis. —We shall be happy to tell you in private whom we consider the prettiest
woman on board, hut if we did so in public the other ladies would never
forgive us.
Anxious Inquirer.— Don’t be alarmed. It is a well-known fact that editors of
journals are frequently indisposed on the morning of publication.
ADVERTISEMENT.
Lost.
From a swing tray, a small pair of Scissors. Anyone having the same will
kindly return to Mrs. Selwyn.
Clje |Unt
No. 7. Thursday, 16th December, 1876.
We issue to-day the 7th, and last number of the Kent Argus , and
in so doing bid an editorial farewell to our readers. If we dwell
for a moment on what has been done, it is but to try and reassure
ourselves. Doubts and misgivings assail us on all sides, and we
look in vain for the convincing proofs that we have succeeded in our
undertaking. One thing alone bids us take comfort, and that is
the honest conviction within us that we have tried to do our little
best; all the rest we leave to you. Our voyage has not been a very
eventful one, but still it has not been without some interest. The
time on board has passed somehow, and whether it has been spent
profitably or killed, must be for individual reflection and decision.
We honestly confess we have endeavoured to kill it, but who has
ever succeeded in killing Time? For countless ages it has been
dying a lingering death, and will to eternity. But we are getting
prosy, while there is much yet to speak of. Our warmest thanks
are here given to all our kind contributors and supporters. A
friend in need is a friend indeed, and the saying has often been
proved by us when compiling our weekly task ; and yet not task,
for it has been with us purely a labour of love. The fruits of such
labours should surely claim indulgent criticism; and we seek such
as a sanctuary where we may safely hope to rest.
The question has been asked us—“ Has the voyage been a
comfortable one ? ” It is not easy to answer, and yet it ought to be
replied to. Comfort on board ship is very comparative. Tastes and
ideas so widely differ, that what is one person’s notion of comfort
is to another great discomfort. As a rule, too much.is looked for by
passengers on board ship. The provision made for eating, drinking
and sleeping, is often unduly criticised. To a great extent this
criticism must be expected, when it is taken into consideration
that the three conditions before named form the main portion of
a passenger’s existence; but we feel we really can say that each
and every head of a department on board the Kent has done his
best to promote the general comfort. In another column we
publish the passengers’ expression of opinion on this subject,
relating to our captain and his officers. We most heartily endorse
every word contained in those expressions, and are pleased beyond
measure that our columns should contain them.
Talking of eating and drinking reminds us that a word of praise
is fairly due to the chief steward, Mr. James Hill, who has filled
an important post with unfailing courtesy and kindness. The
gastronomic wants of a numerous body of passengers require no
ordinary tact to be properly attended to ; and it must, therefore,
be assumed that Mr. Hill is no ordinary man, when it is acknow-
ledged on all sides that he has done his very utmost to please' each
and all, and that he has right well succeeded.
Peccavi ! Peccavi / We have done that which we ought not to
have done. We have expressed opinions somewhat adverse to the
ladies on board, and we have allowed “An Old Bachelor ” to trespass
upon our space. We have drawn down upon our head the anger
of womanhood, and the dire sarcasm of sympathetic man. We
have been in doubt and perplexity for a week as to whether our.
views on the subject were accurate, or the reverse ; but the letter
of another “ Old Bachelor,” which we publish to-day, has con-
vinced us that we are in error. Confession of a fault is the great
step towards being forgiven, and we hasten to acknowledge our
sins in full. The ladies are perfection ; the gentlemen have been
entirely to blame for the lack of entertainments. We are now
convinced that the ladies have been only too willing to help, and
we have been stupidly blind not to have seen it. Our corre-
spondent is too true when he accuses the young bachelors on the
poop of indulging in smoking, gambling, cricket, cock-a-lorum, ear-
pulling, leapfrog, and midnight burlesque concerts. We now see
plainly that had they indulged in the fascinating and health-giving
exercise of the promenade, as performed daily on the main deck
(which, by-the-bye, reminds us of the procession into Noah’s Ark),
the ladies would not have complained of their want of desire to
make the voyage pleasant to all, and their sympathetic friends
would not have had to objurgate so fiercely. The poop has not
had the same fortune as the main-deck, and we feel all the more
deeply touched that the rebuke we have received from the ladies'
first-class champion is from a second-class passenger. As we have
now confessed our errors, and humbly apologised, we hope for
forgiveness, and we promise faithfully not to do it again!
23
THE KENT ARGUS.


Mr. Ticehurst, c Goodall, b Loughnan
0
b Goodall..
.. 0
Capt Gibbs, b Loughnan ..
0
ball overboard ..
.. 1
Mr. R. Brock, b Dougharty, jun...
0
c Loughnan
.. 0
Mr. A. Dyke, b Goodall
0
b Goodall..
.. 0
Mr. G. Miles, ball overboard
0
b Dougharty, jun.
.. 2
Dr. Lawrence, b Goodall ..
0
ball overboard ,.
.. 0
Mr. Marshall, b Loughnan
0
b Goodall ..
.. 0
Mr. Woodcock runout ..
0
b Loughnan
.. 0
Mr. Harvey, ball overboard
••
0
b Loughnan
.. 0
Passengers.
0
3
Mr. Goodall, ball overboard ..
2
Mr. Morrison, sen., b Brock
.. 2
Mr. Loughnan, b Marshall
0
Mr. Evans, b Woodcock
.. o
Mr. Smith, b Brock
1
Mr. Dougharty, jun., c Brock
Mr. Morrison, jun., hit wicket
.. 0
Mr. Kingscote, ball overboard
7
.. 0
OUR MILESTONES.
KERGUELEN ISLAND.
Tins inhospitable island and its surrounding groups are very little
known, and consequently little can be said about them. The group is
interesting only to the sealer's who occasionally visit its shores, or to the
passing ship which may have the ill-fortune to require shelter or
refitting.
It was discovered by Lieutenant Yves Joseph Kerguelen-Trimarec in
1772, on the same day that Marion discovered the islands to the west-
ward, viz., the Crozets. The object of this voyage was to determine
the existence of the great Southern Continent, which was then argued
to be necessary to preserve the balance of the earth. The very cursory
view obtained by Kerguelen led him to give a very exaggerated account
of his discovery, and he was despatched in the following year in
command of another expedition. After landing on some of the smaller
islands, and also on Kerguelen itself for a short time, they were driven
away by westerly gales, and unable to make them again. Captain Cook
also sighted these islands, and applied different names to places that had
already been christened by Kerguelen, and hence some confusion in the
nomenclature arose.
The principal island is about 90 miles long, running generally north
and south. The shores of Christmas Harbour, which was discovered and
named by Captain Cook on Christmas Day, 1777, are steep, and rise in a
succession of terraces to the height of more than 1000 feet. The summit
of Table Mount, the highest peak, is a very distinctly formed oval-shaped
crater, about 100 feet across its major axis. On the north side of this
hill are some perfect basaltic columns, very beautifully arranged.
On the south side of the harbour is an extraordinary rock, consisting
of an immense mass of basalt, of much more recent formation than the
rock on which it rests, and through which it seems to have burst in a
semi-fluid state. It is upwards of 500 feet thick, and rests upon the
older rock at an elevation of 600 feet above the sea. Under this basalt
some remarkable fossil-trees were formed, and, what is more singular,
numerous beds of coal, varying irr thickness from a few inches to four
feet, were discovered in the trap rock.
Of the other parts of this inhospitable island we have no accounts
that would interest the reader. It has been brought more into public
notice from the fact that a new survey was made by Captain Nares, of
the Challenger, stopping two months orr the island for this purpose, and
also from its having been choserr as one of the sites from which the
transit of Yenus was observed, by one of the numerous British expedi-
tions that were sent abroad to further the ends of science.
SPORTING NOTES.
On Tuesday evening a cricket match was played between the officers
of the ship and the passengers. The latter won the toss, and went to
the wickets. Amongst the passengers the most resolute defence was
made by Mr. Goodall, who played a long and careful innings for his two
runs. Mr. Kingscote played a very bold and lucky game, and was
loudly cheered as he retired from the wicket with seven runs to his score.
Mr. Morrison also played well for his two runs. The officers were very
unfortunate in batting, the whole of them being put out for nothing.
They followed their innings, and Mr. Miles made a careful two, and the
captain a single. The bowling of Messrs. Dougharty, jun., Goodall, and
Loughnan, for the passengers, and of Capt. Gibbs, Messrs. Brock and
"Woodcock for the officers, was remarkably good. We append the score :
Officers.
Won by the passengers in one innings ; total, 12 runs.
POETRY.
PARTING MUSINGS.
Here within my little cabin will I muse awhile alone,
On the many joys and sorrows of the two months that have flown.
Ah! my memory takes me backwards to a loving mother’s tears,
As she heard the words of farewell, which might be for many years.
When two dearest sisters sadly placed their lips against my cheek;
Kissed their brother, and while sobbing, kissed the words they could not speak.
And, ’twas but a few hours after, when upon the vessel’s poop
In the midst of mustering sailors, and of many a tearful group,
That I grasped two kind and trusty brothers’ hands, and turned my face
Fearing lest too great emotion might unman me in that place.
Sorrow may not last forever ; soon there comes a joyous time,
When one revels in new friendships, in new scenes, in balmy clime.
Day by day acquaintance ripens into friendship’s lasting ties ;
Better knowledge is the secret which in loving better lies.
So the voyage passes, prospers ; so the days and weeks go by,
And with friendships widening, no one feels its dull monotony.
Then I loved a beauteous maiden, loved her from my inmost heart.
Though in mood fantastic oft I bade her from my mind depart.
Gently, like a northern twilight, over me her beauty stole,
And a sense of all-pervading rapture crept into my soul.
Oh ! her face before me rises, whilst I in my cabin muse,
And myself of cowardice and arrant folly I accuse.
Wherefore did I, loving truly, feel afraid to tell my love ;
Wherefore did I ne’er endeavour pity in the maid to move ?
Too soon ends the peaceful voyage; easily acquaintance ends ;
But ’tis hard to part with those one learns to look upon as friends.
Harder still that other parting with the one to whom is given
All one’s love ; the heart is broken, all the finest feelings riven.
But it cannot be avoided, ’tis ordained so by fate ;
Had I only spoken sooner ! speaking now is all too late.
Oh ! my gentle Cora, pity words that from my anguish fall;
Better I had never loved thee ! never seen thy face at all.
LAND AHEAD.
How welcome the sound of the mariner’s cry,
As with keen eyes he gazes afar,
And tracks out the land from the sea and the sky.
While we join in his hearty hurrah.
There is joy in the Kent from stem to stern,
As we eagerly look o’er the main,
The land ! the land ! for which all of us yearn ;
Look ahead ! there’s the land again.
Our friends are waiting to welcome us there,
And to talk of their old island home ;
They’ve heard our loud shouts, and an answering cheer
Down Port Phillip will joyfully come.
Up, up with the signal! the pilot bears down !
There’s his boat like a speck on the sea,
Australia the hopeful, the land of renown,
Is now looming out at last on our lee.
THE RIDDLER.
Answer to Early Verse.—Jack and Gill.
CONUNDRUMS.
Why will the Melbourne people on board just before entering Port Phillip be fit
candidates for a lunatic asylum ? Because they will be off their Heads.
"Why is Captain Gibbs a chronological curiosity ? Because his present time is
past.
Why are all our riddles like some of the passengers at an early part of the
voyage ? Because they are sic-sic. (For explanation see Latin Dictionary.)
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
S. T. B.—We have inserted one of your poems.
Head Winds.— We have no Jonah, but we have a Profit on board; this may
account for our long passage.
Frightened.— Do not be alarmed, there is really no danger now.
Quiz. —The initials M.C.S. on his luggage mean “ Member College Surgeons.”
He is a veterinary surgeon by profession.
Distant Relation.— We regret to hear that the firm of Messrs Jenkins, Morgan,
and Jones, who for the last seven weeks have been trying to make a joke, have
failed.
RELIGIOUS INTELLIGENCE.
Prayers were read by the Captain, both in the forenoon and evening,
last Sunday, and the Rev. Mr. Henry preached at both services. In the
morning a collection was made on behalf of the Merchant Seamen’s
Orphan Asylum, A service was also held in the second class cabin in
the afternoon.
THE KENT AEGUS


CORRESPONDENCE,
NEW ZEALAND.
No. 11.
According to the ideas of the natives, we (the Europeans) are all
intruder’s, and have gone there for the pur-pose of taking their land
away or to cheat them in some manner, and the settlers have had to
answer for many a sin committed by unprincipled people who have taken
advantage of the natives in former years. To give an instance :
A chief of high rank, of the Ngatiporoxx tribe, related the following facts
to me: —His tribe had sxxffex-ed severely from the incursions of a war-party
from the Bay of Islands, who had attacked them and killed some of
their principal warriors. The Ngatiporoxx, anxious to obtain “ utu” (i.e.
payment) for their defeat, commissioned the captain of one of the
whaling ships to procure him a supply of guns and powder. The Yankee
saw a good thing was to be made of it, so sixggested that it woxxld be
better to bring him some powder seed, and he coxxld then be always sxxre
of having a supply. The chief, highly delighted, promised the skipper
to load his vessel with pigs when he brought the seed; in the meantime
he could get the land prepared ready for it. The Yankee stood out to
sea, and the chief set all his slaves to work clearing a piece of land
for the seed. In a fortnight, to the chief’s great delight, a vessel w<q
descx-ied in the offing, which px-oved to be the whaler. The chief,
accompanied by several of the eldex-s of the tribe, went off to the vessel
in his canoe, axxd sxxre enoxxgh the skipper had been as good as his word,
for he had broxxght two barrels of seed with him. The chief returned,
taking the captain and the precioixs seed to the native settlement, and
pigs wexe driven in and large bundles of dressed flax given in payment.
The seed was sowxx with gxeat care, i-elays of old men and women were
placed to watch the paddock by night and day lest any pig should find
its way in. After many days of anxious watching the seed came xxp, and
proved on examixxation to be nothing bxxt dock-weed. Anathemas both
loxxd and deep were hux-led at the deceitfxxlness of the Pakeha, and it is
needless to say that never again did that skipper approach the shoi’es of
Anaura Bay; had he done so his vessel woxxld undoubtedly have been
seized and perhaps his life would have been in danger, so enraged were
they at the trick played xxpon them. Can we then blame the natives for
their reprisals ? No doxxbt they have committed in several instances the
most horrible atrocities, bxxt then they did so thinking they wex’e obtaining
x’edress for some wrong, either real or imaginary. They are excitable and
sxxpex’stitious; easily led by anyone who can influence them, while at
other times they are obstinate and self-willed. They are brave, bxxt
liable to groxxndless panics, and have a pecxxliar mode of fighting, avoid-
ing, if possible, a hand to hand encounter, and regarding a man as a
fool who does not avail himself of the shelter of a tree when one is
handy. The last few yeai’s, however, have made a vexy gx-eat difference
in the beax-ing of the natives towards the Europeans. They see it is
better to side with us, and that they can get a bag of flour from the
whites with mxxch less labour than they grow a sack of potatoes for
themselves. They are not nearly so industrioixs as of yore, and ai’e
becoming more and more apathetic ; still it is a comfort to a colonist to
know that he can go now in places in the Nox-thern Island without
being in danger of his life, which was mox-e than could be said six years
ago. Maxiy intending emigrants have been deterx-ed from going to New
Zealand because of what they have heard of the hostile natives, losing
sight of the fact, that it is in only one unsettled pari of the Northern
Island that the Queen’s authority is not recognised, and it is believed
that the day is not far distant when the King natives, as they style
themselves, will come forward and take the oath of allegiance.
I am, Sir, yours &c., Pakeha.
(TO THE EDITOR OF THE KENT ARGUS.)
Sir, —I have read with mxxch astonishment the letter of “ Old
Bachelor in yoxxr issxxe of last Thxxx-sday, I am of too coui’teous
disposition to tex-m it a piece of masculine impex-tinence, bxxt I do think
it is too hard xxpon the gentler sex. Even if the statements are trxxe,
they ax-e set forth with sxxch xxncalled for want of courtesy (to give it
a vexy mild term) as precludes the reply of axxy lady. Had I been
a father, husband, or brother of any of the ladies libelled by yoxxr
coxxespondent I shoxxld have made no excuse for being mxxch mox’e oxxt-
spoken than I have been. Should this Mi*. Bax’kis ever find himself
ready, may no lady ever have the misfortune to reply, “ I, too, am ready.”
Surely, if tlie writer is an “ Old Bachelor,” he cannot have forgotten that
in our youth gentlemen were expected to he kind and at all times
courteous and attentive to the ladies, making it their first study to
contribute towards their enjoyments ; but I fear he has outlived all
these generous sentiments, and now exists as a poor decrepit, querulous
body, selfish to the very core. Perhaps I myself am getting antiquated,
and in the march of civilization all such views are changed. I am
rather afraid this is so when I watch the young bachelors on the poop
whose only enjoyments appear to. consist in smoking, gambling, cricket,
cock-a-lorum, ear-pulling, leap frog, and midnight burlesque concerts,
whilst the ladies are left to take their exercise singly or in pairs, and to
find amusements for themselves as they best can. To their credit be it
said they have kept aloof from joining the gentlemen in these their
enjoyments. I trust you will give this a place in your little journal,
and not let it go forth to the world that the men on board the s.s. Kent,
on her first voyage to Axxstralxa, were such a poor cowardly set of
creatures that not one of them had the spii'it to stand up in defence of
the maligned and insxxlted fair sex.—l am, Sir,
December 14, 1876, 2nd cabin. Another Old Bachelor.
(to THE EDITOR OF THE KENT ARGUS.)
Sir, —I wish, on behalf of the saloon passengei’s and myself, to pxxbiicly
thank Mr. Alfred Moul for his untiring effbx-ts in contribxxting so much
to oxxr amxxsement dxxring the voyage, by the exex-cise of his great talent
as a musician axxd composer, also for his presiding at the harmoniixm
during divine services on Sxxnday. We heartily trxxst his xhost sangxxine
wishes may be gx-anted by the fulfilment of his views relative to his
fxxtxxi’e prosperity in the Axxstralian colonies, and trxxst that health and
strength may be spared him for many years to come, and that his name
may be soon one of the first amongst oxxr English composers.
I am, yours faithfrxlly,
16th December, 1876. George F. Gibbs, (Capt. s.s. Kent.)
PRESENTATIONS.
On Monday, the 11th inst., a meeting was held in the saloon; J. G.
Dougharty, Esq., in the chaix-.
It was resolved, on the motion of Mr. G. P. Wilson, that an address
be presented to Captain Gibbs, congratulating him upon the happy termi-
nation of the voyage, and thanking him and the officers for their atten-
tion to the passengers, and that the address should be accompanied by a
more substantial testimonial. A committee was appointed to make the
necesssaxy axTangements and to collect subscriptions. At a meeting on
Wednesday, Mr. Dougharty again in the chair, the committee submitted
the form of address, which had been prepared, to those present. It was
approved of unanimously, and a discusion then took place upon the
form the testimonial should take. It was ultimately resolved that the
money sxxbscx-ibed should be handed over to the captain to purchase
some ax-tide of plate, which is to be inscribed with a suitable inscription.
On Monday last also, at a meeting held in the smoking-room (Mr. G.
P. Wilson in the chair), it was resolved to present to Mr. Ticehurst, the
first officer, and Mr. Miles, the chief engineer, with an addx-ess and
testimonial. A committee was appointed to make the necessary arx-ange-
ments.
The presentations of the addx’esses and testimonials took place on
Friday afternoon. Mr. Doxxgharty again presided, and in presenting
the adxlress to the captain, remarked that doing so was one of the most
pleasant dxxties he had ever been called xxpon to perform. Dr. Cairns
then px-esented, ixx the name of the sxxbscx-ibei’s, a pui’se containing 55
spvex-eigns, accompanying the presentation with a highly exxlogistic
address. Captaixi Gibbs I’espouded in fitting terms, allxxding to the very
xxneventfxxl natxxre of the voyage, which oxx the principle that “ Happy
is that coxxntry which has no annals,” was all the more pleasant on that
account.
Mr. G. P. Wilson then presented Messx\s. Ticehui’st and Miles with
congratxxlatory addx-esses from the passengex-s, each of which was accom-
panied by a substantial soxxvenir of the voyage. Messrs. Ticehxxrst,
Miles, and Dr. Lawrence each responded, thanking all present for their
considex-ation. Dr. Cairns, ixx the name of the passengex-s and officers,
read an address to the conductors of the Kent Argus, Messx-s. MTxxtyre,
Moxxl, and Loughnan, thankixxg them for the trouble they had taken in
px-oviding entex-taiixment for evexyone, and congratulatixxg them on the
25
THE KENT AKGUS


ability which had been displayed throughout the publication. Mr.
M'lntyre, in reply, acknowledged the great services which had been
rendered by the contributors and transcribers, and referred especially to
the valuable assistance given by Mr. May (of the Melbourne Argus).
A few toasts were then drunk, and the proceedings terminated. We
understand that Captain Gibbs intends to purchase a piece of plate in
Melbourne with the money presented to him, for which the subscribers
have furnished a suitable inscription. The addresses are as follows :
“To G. F. Gibbs, Esq,, and the Officers of the steam-ship Kent.
“We, the saloon passengers of the s.s. Kent, on this her first passage
to Melbourne, on approaching the termination of our voyage, feel
bound to acknowledge by this public address our deep sense of your
merits, both as commander of the ship and as a gentleman who has done
his utmost to alleviate our cares, to enhance our comforts, and to meet
and gratify our wishes.
“We have seen with admiration your untiring vigilance in attending
to the navigation of the vessel, your anxiety being increased by the
unusual prevalence of adverse winds, and also the manner in which you
have contributed to the enjoyment of your numerous passengers. Your
studied courtesy and unfailing considerate kindness are appreciated by
all and will never be forgotten.
“ To Mr. Ticehurst and his brother officers, to Mr. Miles and his
staff of engineers, our grateful acknowledgments are due. They have
won not only our respect but our warmest esteem, by their invariable
attention to their duties and our wants, and their endeavour to make
pleasant to us our daily life on ship board.
“ We cannot conclude without bearing testimony to the gentlemanly
conduct of Dr. Lawrence, whose services, fortunately, have seldom been
required : but whose gentleness and assiduity, in every case of indis-
position, entitle him to this expression of our cordial respect.
“ That God may spare you all for many years, and greatly bless you
in all the relations of life, is the heartfelt prayer of the subscribers.”
(Here follow the signatures).
“ To George A. Miles, Esq., Chief Engineer s.s. Kent.
“ Dear Sir, — Before leaving, we are desirous of expressing our admira-
tion of the very able manner in which you have discharged your onerous
duties.
“ Being the first passage of the Kent, we must congratulate you upon
the very satisfactory working of the machinery under your supervision.
Begging your acceptance of the accompanying souvenir, as a slight token
of our sincere esteem and regard, and wishing you every success in your
profession, We remain, yours very faithfully,
(On behalf of the subscribers.)
“ G. P. Wilson 'j
“ William R. Evans [ n ... „
“ Alfred May
“ W, A. Kingscote )
“S.S. Kent, 15th December, 1876.”
“ To Robert Ticehurst, Esq., Chief Officer, s.s. Kent.
“ Dear Sir, —We, saloon passengers of the s.s. Kent, before leaving
beg to express our sincere esteem of your many true sailor-like qualities
displayed during this, the first passage of the good ship Kent from
London to Melbourne, We beg your acceptance of the accompanying
souvenir in testimony of our respect. Wishing you every success in
your future career.
“We remain (on behalf of the subscribei’s), yours sincerely,”
(Signed by the above Committee.)
“To Messrs. MTntyre, Moul, and Loughnan, conductors of the
Kent Argus.
“ Gentlemen, —The saloon passengers of the s.s. Kent, being desirous
of testifying their appreciation of your untiring zeal and energy in
conducting the weekly journal, beg to tender their most sincere thanks
for bringing to a successful issue such a difficult matter as the publication
of a newspaper on shipboard.
“ Begging your acceptance of the accompanying souvenir, which, we
hope, will remind you of the many pleasant hours we have spent
together, and wishing you every success in life,
“We remain, gentlemen, your sincere well-wishers.”
(Signed by the above Committee.)
FAREWELL BANQUET.
On Thursday night the captain gave an entertainment to the saloon
passengers in the cuddy. Supper was served at nine o’clock, and the
viands and arrangement of the table were such as not only did credit to
Mr. Hill, the chief steward, but would have done honour to a first-class
London restaurant. After supper, Dr. Cairns, in eloquent terms, pro-
posed the health of Captain Gibbs, as the representative of Messrs.
Money Wigram and Sons. He referred to his kindness to the passengers
during the voyage, and offered some valuable suggestions ag to the masting
of ships. Captain Gibbs replied at some length, and mentioned that
this voyage was one of the most pleasant in the course of his experience.
In conclusion, he proposed the health of Mr. Alfred Moul, who had
contributed so much to the pleasure of the passengers, by his admirable
performances on the piano, and expressed a hope for his success in the
colony. Both toasts were received with enthusiasm, and after a few
songs from the Captain, and Messrs. Loughnan, Sheets, Block, and
Kingscote, the party broke up, somewhat late for hours on shipboard.
SHIP’S NOTES.
Thursday.— Journal read. Head winds.
Friday. —Screw up at 10 a.m. Blowing hard.
Saturday. —Notable for the longest run during the voyage, and
under sail.
Sunday. —Divine service morning and evening.
Monday, —Rather warmer, but wet. Meeting for the drawing of the
pilot sweepstake. Meeting for address to the captain and officers.
Tuesday.— Cricket match, Passengers v. Officers.
Wednesday.— Meeting for address to the captain. Another good
run, 274 miles.
Thursday.— Entertainment in the saloon, given by the Captain.
Friday. —Presentations to Captain Gibbs, Messrs. Ticehurst and
Miles, and the conductors of the Kent Argus.
ACCIDENT.
On Wednesday last, at an early hour, a child of about ten years of
age, named Parry, was running down the ladder of the main hatch, and
on coming near the foot, swung himself off. The main hold happening
to be open, which escaped his notice, he fell down, knocking his head
against a cask. He received an ugly scalp wound, which was imme-
diately attended to by Dr. Lawrence. We understand that the boy is in
no danger, and that the wound is rapidly healing.
CAPTAIN’S REPORT.
Date. Day. Lat. Long. Course. Dist. Remarks.
1876. Miles.
Dec 7 Thursday 45° 48' 8. 89° 23' E. 8., 86° E. 181 Strong head wind.
8 Friday 45° 22'8. 94° 55'E. N„ 84° E. 237 Fair wind; screw up.
” 9 Saturday 44° 24'8. 101° 34'E. N., 79° E. 291 Gale of wind, fair; no steam.
” 10 Sunday 44° 14' 8. 107° 35' B. N., 88° B. 261 Down screw at 6 p.m.; un-
steady breeze.
11 Monday 43° 49'8. 113° 49' E. N., 85° E. 270 Fair wind; steam and sail.
” 12 Tuesday 43° 'B'B. 119° 50'E. N., 81° E. 266 Fair wind; steam and sail.
” 13 Wednesday 42° 46' 8. 126° 3'E. N., 85° E. 274 Fair wind; steam and sail.
” 14 Thursday 41° 51'8. 130° 54'E. N., 76° E. 222 Head wind; much rain.
” 15 Friday 40° 00' 8. 135° 20' E. N., 61° E. 229 First twelve hours head wind,
” last twelve fair.
16 Saturday 39° 32' 8. 141° 1' B. N., 84“ E. 264 Steady fair wind; steam and
sail. Beautiful weather.
Total distance for ten days, 2495 miles.
BULL WE Ll AND KNIGHT, PRINTERS, COLLINS SIEEEX EAST, MELBOURNE.
26
THE KENT ARGUS.
