



SB
<4P\ ~:




t i ?C*
M-&.#






AUSTRALIAN
SKETCH BOOK,
JAMES MARTIN,
AN EX-STUDENT OF THE SYDNEY COLLEGE.
SYBWEY:
PUBLISHED BY JAMES TEGG, GEORGE STREET.
MDCCCXXXVIII.


% and Co. Printers.


GEORGE ROBERT NICHOLS, ESQ.
THIS SMALL VOLUME
is DEDICATED,
AS AM HUMBLE TESTIMONY
OF THE
admiration and regard
THE AUTHOR.




INTRODUCTION.
Deference to a long-established rule renders
it necessary that I should say something by way
of introduction to the following pages. A few
circumstances connected with their histoiy may
not be unacceptable to the reader.
Having a short time since met with a copy of
Washington Irving’s Sketch Book, I perused it
with the most intense delight, and conceived at
once a high opinion of the talents of that amiable
and distinguished author. I pored repeatedly
over his pages——l dwelt upon the simple philo-
sophy of his sentiments, and admired the beauty
of his expressions. The more frequently I studied
the more sincerely did I like him; until, at
length, I formed the determination of following
in his footsteps. The path which he had marked
out, I at once perceived, was eminently fitted tor
a youthful aspirant to literary fame, and was
beset by few of those obstructions which nothing
but long experience can overcome. It is certainly
true, that my materials were of a less valuable
description than Irving’s, but still I entertained


strong hopes of laying before the public a work,
which, while it would be almost wholly colonial,
would in some degree be similar to the finished
production of the eminent man whom I took as
an example. Whether I have accomplished my
design or not, it remains for others to determine.
There will, I have no doubt, be discovered many
errors and absurdities in the following series of
sketches. The circumstances under which they
originated, necessarily rendered them liable to
numerous imperfections. Every page was placed
m the hands of the compositor almost as soon as
)t was written, and then, printed from the original
draft, without having been either copied or cor-
rected. That this was an injudicious course of
proceeding, I am ready to admit; but the nature
of my daily avocations, combined with a desire to
terminate my work with the greatest possible
dispatch, prevented me from adopting a plan •
more tedious, careful, and beneficial.
In consequence of the advice of a friend, 1
had determined that the Australian Sketch Book
should be published anonymously ; but my name
having, since the work was announced, become
well known to the public, I was compelled to


Ay cAjtfWtS SsCs'?-
vii -*♦'
.st/ s f '~
relinquish my original intention, and openly avow
myself as the author. In doing so, I feel that I
shall have little to dread from the attacks of
criticism. There are too many circumstances in
my favor to render my position either irksome
or disagreeable. I have now but just attained
my eighteenth year ; and youth, and consequent
inexperience, will plead strongly in palliation of
whatever errors and inaccuracies may be dis-
covered in my compositions. The fact, also, of
this work being the first literary production that
has ever emanated from the pen of an individual
educated in Australia, ought to be a powerful
recommendation. However, imperfect as it mani-
festly is, it has been written for the amusement
and encouragement of my fellow-countrymen ;
and my anxious wish is, that it will prove to be
the immediate precursor of many, more valuable
colonial productions, I have led the way, and it
now remains for the talented and ambitious among
Australia’s sons, to follow my example. If this
book meets with liberal support, I shall, in all
probability, lay before the public a second volume
on the next Anniversary of the Colony.
Sydney, 10</t August, 1838.




CONTENTS.
THE SUBLIME IN NATURE 1
A VISIT TO THE SCENES OF YOUTH.. 13
THE THUNDER STORM 31
BOTANY BAY 43
THE COLOSSEUM AT ROME r . 9
THE STEAM BOAT ••• or
GENIUS
THE OLD FARMER 107
A CHURCH YARD REVERIE I*l
THE PSEUDO POETS 1«
BONDI BAY 177
WAR... 137
SUNRISE ••••• 239
SUN SET 249
CHRISTMAS IN AUSTRALIA 2*5


''j
I


ERRATA.
(•ajt 8 line 15, for convusion, read convulsion. H
~ 34 „ 9, for shubbery, read shrubbery. H
~ 57 ~ 9, for unbroken, read broken. I|
„ 79 „ 27, for aver, read avert.
„ 84 „ 0, for dwell, read dwelt. : H
~132 „ 5, for enshrine, read enshrines. |
~ 140 ~ 5, for chastisment, read chastisement. H
„ 142 ~ 15, for tequiesat, read requiescat. ||
„ 149 ~ 10, for master of spirits, read master spirits. ' : ||
„ 172 ~ 15, for warning, read warned. II




SUBLIME IN NATURE.




SUBLIME IN NATURE.
Welcome ye shades I ye bowery thickets, hail!
Ye lofty pines! ye venerable oaks!
Ye ashes wild, resounding o’er the steep !
Delicious is your shelter to the soul,
As to the hunted hart the sallying spring,
Or stream full flowing, that his swelling sides
Laves, as he floats along the herbag’d brink.
Cool, through the nerves, your pleasing comfort glides;
The heart beats glad; the fresh expanded eye
And ear resume their watch; the sinews knit;
And life shoots swift through all the lighten’d limbs.
Thompson.
What an endless fund of instruction! what an
exhaustless source of gratification is to be found
by a meditative character in the contemplation
of nature’s innumerable beauties! Before her
dazzling grandeur how do the tawdry perishable
productions of art sink into insignificance ! The
latter may please the imagination, and cause a
transient feeling of delight; but the former alone
can elevate the soul above surrounding objects;


raise it beyond the level of ordinary affairs, and
render it truly worthy of its Creator. The mag-
nificence of nature, when viewed by the eye of
intelligence, causes the mind to become insensible
for the moment of the occurrences of life, and
fills it with ideas the most praisevyorthy and
exalted. Worthless must be that man’s intellect;
unenviable must be his disposition; rude and
uncultivated must be his character; and unrefined
must be his feelings, who could look with indif-
ference on the beauties which nature in a thousand
forms and in a thousand places presents to instruct
and gratify mankind. The barren heath; the
uncultivated waste; the sandy desert; the
expanse of waters, as well as the flowery meads
the haunts of peaceful herds ; the verdant fields,
teeming with vegetation; the tall majestic cliffs,
reared amid the clouds to brave the elements;
and the valley, destined to be the abode of rustic
felicity, all contain something to allure and to
instruct. Even in the most common and appa-
rently uninteresting, nay, unpleasing objects, can
the microscopic eye of intelligence, like the rays
of the mid-day sun penetrating through a cloud,
find something lovely—fascinating— something to
remind the wondering mortal of the all-seeing
wisdom of Providence, and the sublimity and


power of his Creator. Eloquently and truly says
the moralist,
we can
Find tongues in trees, books in the running brooks ;
Sermons in stones, and good in every thing.
Every plant that grows hath its virtues; every
animal that is formed; every reptile that crawls
on the surface of the earth hath its destined uses,
nothing how insignificant soever it may appear,
has been created without a purpose. The wan-
dering Arab, when harrassed and pexsecuted by
his enemies, finds in the parched and dieaiy
solitudes of the deserts his only refuge—a refuge,
to him equally dear as his native mountains are
to the hardy Swiss. The buzzing and torment-
ing fly, which to some appears as though created
for no useful purpose, is formed to sustain and
become the ordinary food of the spider and the
bat, while they in their turn have their task in
life allotted them to perform. The viper, whose
bite is death, is created for the purpose of
clearing the earth of reptiles which might other-
wise become too numerous and noxious to society.
Though the ordinary objects presented to our
view may not attract the attention of all, yet no
one, unless he be totally destitute of reason, can
look upon the sublime and grand without emotion


—without the idea involuntarily occurring to his
thoughts, that he is looking upon the work of an
Almighty Universal Architect. Let any one
behold the falls of Niagara, the abundance of its
waters, the depth which they descend, the mists
and foam which they create, and hear the cata-
ract’s deafening roar, and then if he be neither
more nor less than mortal—if he be possessed of
the ordinary feelings of our nature, he cannot but
feel a sensation which no words can describe, and
of which even tl . imagination, unless assisted by
experience, can afford no adequate and satis-
factory idea. There is something grand and
irresistibly astonishing in the contemplation of so
gigantic an object, which astonishment is still
further increased by the conviction that when
none, save the Indian, traversed the western
world, before Columbus, directed by the hand of
Providence, gave to mankind another continent—
when barbarism spread her sable mantle over the
face of the earth ; aye, and even when Rome was
in the zenith of her power; when her conquering
legions held every nation in subjection, the falls
of Niagara then flowed on in the same majestic
manner as at the present period, and excited in
the minds of the untutored savage, feelings
similar to those which actuate the civilized being


of this enlightened age. But the temples of the
heathen ; the trophies of Roman greatness; the
marbled halls, the sculptured bust, have fallen
into dust; even Rome itself has lost its ancient
greatness, and at this day is but the wreck of
what it once could boast; but Niagara is still the
same; is still that magnificent object which it
was two thousand years since; and will so con-
tinue until that day when the last dread trump
shall sound—when
The cloud-capp’d towers, the gorgeous palaces.
The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
Yea, all which it inherit shall dissolve;
And like the baseless fabric of a vision,
Leave no wreck behind !
I was revolving these ideas thoughtfully in my
mind as I was riding with a friend up the side of
a lofty hill. We had been sometime silent, but
when we arrived at the brow of the eminence, the
splendour of the prospect, and the feelings which
actuated me at the moment, rendered it impos-
sible for me to remain any longer a silent spec-
tator. Influenced by some simultaneous impulse,
we both reined in our horses.
“ What a scene” said I “for one who is an
ardent admirer of the beauties of nature. In
every thing which we now behold how plainly do


the workings of an Almighty Architect appear.
In every hill, in every vale, in every stream, can
we behold his wisdom and his power. Yon cliff
that rises so abruptly from the meandering stream
below, and lifts its weather-beaten summit to the
clouds, to buffet, (as it were) with every storm,
exalts me by its sublimity, and lifts me in thought,
above every surrounding object. The largest of
Egypt’s far-famed pyramids, which to this day
astonish and delight the traveller, when compared
with that gigantic precipice is but a pigmy; and
though the former may have occupied hundreds
of men years in constructing, yet the latter was
the production of an instant—caused by some
mighty cohvusion of nature, dependent on the
omnipotent will of Providence.”
I stopped and looked on in silent meditation.
“ Yes,” said my friend, “ the scene which is
now presented to our view is eminently calculated
to inspire us with the most dignified ideas. I
have often passed this spot, even from my infancy
has it been familiar to my sight, yet every time
that my eyes have rested on it, it appeared
to me to be possessed of fresh charms, and I
invariably found new objects to attract my
attention, and improve my understanding. And
yet how many alas! even among the higher


ranks of mankind are accustomed to contemplate
such objects with the eye of vulgar curiosity,
unconnected with the sublime and philosophick
feelings which in men of intelligence and wisdom
they infallibly create. Of the hundreds, who, in
the ordinary pursuits of life are continually pass-
ing this spot, how few are there who, gratified
for the moment, do more than take a transient
glance and pass on, regardless of what they had
seen the moment before.”
The truth of these observations struck me
forcibly at the time, and I could not but inwardly
lament the degeneracy of our nature, when I
reflected on the total indifterence with which the
greater portion of mankind regard objects in
themselves the most beautiful and instructing.
“ But,” said 1 aloud, after a moment’s conside-
ration, “ all men’s powers of comprehension, it is
natural to suppose, (and daily experience con-
firms the supposition) are not equally vigorous.
All men’s feelings are not susceptible of those
exquisitely fine impressions which actuate and
thrill through the truly sensitive individual.
That which would inevitably fill some few with
ecstacies, might possess but few charms to attract
the many. It is the will of Providence it is
one of the fundamental principles of our nature,


that some should be superior to, and exalted far
above the rest: and it is not surely to be
wondered at, that all should not be capable of
penetrating with equal success into the beautiful
mysteries of the Creation. But I feel convinced
there is a height of grandeur—an extent of
sublimity which must enrapture any one, how
indifferent soever may be his feelings, in wonder
and astonishment, and strike him with unmingled
admiration. There are sights which it is impos-
sible for human eyes to behold and remain
unmoved. An untutored Indian could scarcely
pass the snowy tops of Chimborazo or Cotopaxi,
in the Andes, or stand on the summit of the
White Cliff, in the Hymalayan Mountains, with-
out feeling an almost indescribable emotion thrill
within his breast, and being fully convinced of
■ the existence of a Great First Cause—an Almighty
Power, which created and directs the universe.
When we see ourselves placed in the centre of a
parched, an uninhabited, and a dreary desert, we
are oppressed by the aridity, displeased by the
solitude, and grieved at the barrenness, but awed
by the grandeur of the scene. When we are
tossed about on the tumultuous billows of a bound-
less unfathomable ocean, where danger in a
thousand shapes surrounds us, where naught but


a plank divides us from eternity; although we
may tremble at our position, we cannot but
venerate the prospect. When we are placed upon
the summit of a lofty mountain, elevated above
the rest of mankind, with the clouds below us,
and all around serenely clear, while the vivid
lightnings flash, and the thunders roar far
beneath our feet, we are filled with enthusiastic
raptures; our thoughts become abstracted—
almost bewildered, and we are made thoroughly
sensible of the inferiority of ourselves, and the
majesty and power of our Creator. Could the
infidel even in thought, ascend through the
forests of the snow-clad Etna, and survey for an
instant the dazzling prospect around, and then
look into the gaping mouth of that dread abyss,
and behold the horrors which would be there
presented to his view, how rapidly must his
fallacious tenets fall prostrate before the train of
argument and reason which the sight would pre-
sent to his imagination.”
As soon as I had concluded my observations,
we both proceeded on our journey, pleased with
what we had seen, and highly gratified with the
remarks we had made. One thing which I learnt
from the above was, that scarcely a day of our


existence could pass without some incident occur*
ring, the relation of which, by a skilful and
observing individual, would prove useful and
interesting to mankind.


A VISIT TO THE SCENES
OF YOUTH.


flli


A VISIT
TO THE SCENES OF YOUTH.
.< Here, as with doubtful, pensive steps I range,
Trace every scene, and wonder at the change.
Remembrance wakes with all her busy train,
Swells at my breast, and turns the past to pain.
Goldsmith.
It was ten years since I had before visited the
spot; and I approached my native home the
home of my intant years—with a feeling amount-
ing almost to reverential awe. As I passed through
the town, every stone, every stump, aye, eveiy
tree was familiar to my view, and no object ap-
peared but what was coupled with some pleasing
recollections. The ancient-looking,double-steepled
church—the school-house—the green, capacious
play-ground—the river, in which our hours ot
recreation were chiefly passed—all seemed like
ancient friends, from which I had long been
separated, but which absence had served but to


endear. There was the well known narrow path-
way, on which many an interesting game of
marbles was played, and where taws and com-
moners were wont to fly about with the rapidity
of lightning, fit emblems of the buoyancy of their
owners’ dispositions. Here was the level green,
where juvenile cricketers used once to assemble,
to display their skill in the performance of that
manly game. Even after the lapse of ten long
years could I remember distinctly the air of im-
portance which the bowler would assume, and the
crafty look of the batman, as he prepared to
annihilate the ball when it came flying to his
wicket. Before me lay the clear pellucid stream,
where many a luckless wight, untaught to swim,
was often ducked by his more skilful companions
as a punishment for his ignorance. These and
manymore ideas presented themselves to mymind,
as the coach drew up at the door of an inn, built
upon ground which, when I was at school, was a
verdant meadow, teeming with all the beauties of
vegetation. For some time I walked down the
street, without meeting a single individual with
whom I was acquainted ; and looking, as I went
along, with astonishment, at the change that had
taken place during my years of absence. Con-
flicting emotions confused my understanding; and


I walked slowly along, half conscious and half
abstracted, until I arrived opposite a bookseller’s
shop. Here 1 instinctively stopped, and gazed
for some time on the books which were exposed
for sale in the window. Inside, at the countei,
examining some works, stood a tall young man,
of whose countenance I thought I had some vague,
indistinct recollection. I looked at him for some
considerable time, and in a few moments his eyes
caught mine : we both gazed at each other, as it
were, half distrustful of our vision—we looked
we pondered—we recollected, and in a second
firmly grasped each other’s hand. He was an old
school-fellow, who from my infancy had been my
most intimate companion. He had been my rival
in every class; he had been my partner in all my
recreations ; we were almost inseparable; we were
the repositories of each other’s secrets, and were
bound to each other by that sincere—almost
romantic affection, which none but youth can
feel. Ever since our separation we had regularly
corresponded whenever opportunity permitted;
and though an envious distance intervened, we
always in thought enjoyed the pleasure of each
other’s company. Friendship—that link which
binds man to man, and, like a ministering angel,
comforts one in affliction, and pleases in pro-


sperity; which, like the dew-drop on the flower,
brightens and invigorates— prevented our mental
separation, and preserved us united.
Our meeting was mutually gratifying; and
placing his arm within mine, my friend and I
immediately began to talk of our adventures.
Bless me! said he, u how you have grown !
It is really astonishing how I could possibly have
recognised you. Well, what a change a few years
make in the appearance of an individual!” “ Ay,”
said I, “ and what an alteration a few years create
in the appearance of things. On what side soever
I look, what a variety of new objects greet my
sight!” While we were talking, we imperceptibly
approached that sacred pile, where our young
ideas had been taught to shoot—where our youth-
fid follies had oftentimes been corrected—where
wisdom and morality were endeavoured to be in-
stilled into our minds—and where we received
that instruction which was to prepare us for the
theatre of life. School hours were just over, and
a whole host of joyful faces, beaming with the
smile of heartfelt pleasure, produced by liberation
from their daily restraint, appeared in the play-
ground adjacent to the building. The sight was
gratifying to behold : to us it was affecting. I
thought at the moment of the many, very many,


happy hours I had spent with my companions, on
the spot where I then stood, when I was like the
youth before me, and could scarcely refrain from
dropping a sympathising tear. We entered the
school-room after all the scholars had withdrawn
to their respective homes. I looked eagerly
around to see if I could discover any thing to
remind me of former days. I was not disap-
pointed in my search. In a corner of the room,
in the identical position in which it was when I
last saw it, was standing the desk at which my
hours of study were principally whiled away. I
approached it with an instinctive feeling, amount-
ing almost to respect; and when I saw the marks
and notches with which in my idle moods (which,
by the bye, were rather frequent) I carved upon
it with my pen-knife, I could scarcely avoid giving
vent to the violence of my emotions. There is a
charm always connected with our youthful re-
miniscences, a kind of romantic interest surround-
ing every object that used to be familiar to our
boyish minds, which neither time nor the various
vicissitudes of life can efface from our recollection,
or cause us to behold with indifference. Even
long after we have been tossed about on the
billows of a stormy life, will our schoolboy feats
and pleasures occasionally recur with vivid force


to our imaginations, and make us think with
fondness on that happiness which we enjoyed in
the days of innocence and inexperience. A few
yards from me was the identical nail on which in
former days I was accustomed to hang my slate,
and beneath it, written on a small slip of paper,
in a plain schoolboy hand, was pasted my own
name. This sight was pleasing in the extreme ;
and I gazed upon the paper for some minutes
with a feeling of mute enjoyment. From the
walls I turned my eyes until they fell upon the
lofty two-armed easy chair, which I at once dis-
tinguished as the dictatorial seat of that important
character, who ruled with stern illimitable sway
the rising generation of Australia—those who, in
all probability were yet to become the statesmen
and legislators of their country. I could not but
think at the moment of the many sly and wistful
glances which I had often cast towards that
ominous spot, when I was perhaps engaged in
an earnest and interesting conversation with some
idler at ray side, or playing the beautiful and
philosophic game of puzzle ought, instead of
solving the question that was before me.
Our master, when I was at school, was what
many persons might be induced to call an eccen-
tric character. Be that as it may, it was evident


that there were many very peculiar traits in his
disposition, that rendered him totally different
from any individual with whom it was ever my
fortune to be acquainted. He was a man rather
above the ordinary height; his body could be
called neither stout nor thin; his complexion
was extremely sallow, and his forehead was broad
and expanded, in a manner which would induce
a phrenologist at once to pronounce its owner to
be a man possessed of extraordinary talents. Nor
was his appearance at all such as was in any way
calculated to mislead the observer. His acquire-
ments were such as a view of his countenance
would induce one to suppose. With the classics
he was well acquainted, and a better mathe-
matician was never in the colony. Astronomy,
geography, mineralogy, natural history, geology,
and every other branch of philosophy and science,
formed his constant amusement. Nor was his
knowledge of his own language by any means of
an indifferent description. It was even rumoured
that some beautifully written articles, which ap-
peared at one time in one of the colonial periodi-
cals, and which caused considerable excitement
at that period, emanated from his pen. An ar-
dent admirer of science himself, he was naturally
eager to instil it into the minds of his pupils; and


while the studious and clever were certain of his
affection and applause, the idle and inattentive
always received that chastisement which he
deemed necessary for their advancement in learn-
ing-. Botany was one of his most favorite studies;
and every Saturday, if the weather was propitious,
he used to select those youths who preferred a
ramble, to remaining at home in useless inactivity,
and, placing himself at their head, sally forth to
a romantic part of the country in the vicinity of
the town, where, until the sun would sink below
the western hills, he would wander about with his
troop of merry, though tiring followers, up and
down the labyiinth of picturesque and lonely
glens, picking up at every step some natural
curiosity, with loads of which he always freighted
the party on their return. It was amusing some-
times to see him carrying a large block of curious
stone; one of his pupils borne down by an im-
mense bundle of warrataws , or colonial tulips;
another with an armful of the fragrant native
rose; more carrying Christmas bushes, and every
one bearing some trifle or other, which was
deemed worthy to be transported to the museum
or the garden of the academy. Although he was
so intently devoted to scientific research, he en-
couraged all sorts of athletic exercises amongst


his scholars, in their hours of recreation ; and
during the summer months, at seven every morn-
ing, he led his boarders to the river at the rear of
his garden, to enjoy the pleasures of the bath.
On these occasions, every tub and bucket in the
kitchen and laundry were put in requisition, and
dragged down to the water side, for the purpose
of bringing stone from the opposite shore, to
construct a wharf for the accommodation of the
bathers. There was something irresistibly amusing
in the sight of perhaps a dozen individuals, each
pushing his bucket or his tub across the stream,
and evincing the utmost anxiety to be first on
land with the precious cargo. Our master was
an excellent swimmer, and to his instruction are
many in this colony indebted for a knowledge of
that pleasing and necessary art. In fact, like
the ancient Romans, he thought, that to be ig-
norant of both reading and swimming was the
maximum of ignorance and imbecility.
One morning after we had all been seated at
our desks, in that order and silence which fear of
punishment invariably creates, he came into the
room with a quadrant and a variety of other
mathematical instruments, with the names and
uses of which we were totally unacquainted, and
immediately commenced arranging them in order


for an observation. Of course, every eye was
bent towards him, and all evinced in their looks
that air of surprise and astonishment which any
unusual circumstance creates in the mind of the
inexperienced youth. Our surprise was still
further augmented, when we received directions
to look about the yard for all the pieces of broken
glass that we could meet with, and hold them
over lighted candles until they became darkened
by the smoke. When this operation had been
performed, and every lad, from the child of eight
to the youth of sixteen years of age, was fur-
nished with a piece, we were directed to look
towards the sun, and there behold, for the first
time in our lives, the wonders of a solar eclipse.
This was a novel and pleasing spectacle to us,
and many were the scientific remarks which the
youthful sages made to each other on the cir-
cumstance. An incident so unusual as this, and
so gratifying to our philosophical tutor, was of
course the signal for a holiday ; and after we had
received a lecture from him, in which he en-
deavoured to make us acquainted with the nature
of centripetal and centrifugal attraction, and the
causes of partial, total, and annular eclipses,
with all the succedanea necessarily belonging to
lecture so abstruse, he dismissed us for the day,


kindly desiring us to remember, and inwardly
digest, the topics of his interesting discourse.
From these traits of character, one would be in-
duced to imagine he was a man of a very retired
and elevated description, incapable of descending
to aught that could compromise the dignity of his
vocation, or lessen him in the estimation of man-
kind. But his nature was made up of such
opposite extremes, apparently so utterly impos-
sible to exist in the same individual, that after
spending an hour in some intellectual pursuit, or
punishing an unfortunate urchin for attending
more to his play than to his book, he would,
without the least hesitation, partake with childish
zeal in the pleasures of a game of marbles or
rounders, or some such juvenile amusement.
The game called three-holes was the one which
he particularly enjoyed, and luckless was the
fate of those who were so unskilful as to subject
themselves to his knucks. To fire a dozen
times at the knuckles of as many of his pupils,
with all his might, (and that was by no means to
be despised —hand inexperto loquor) seemed to
afford him more heartfelt gratification than the
solution of a difficult mathematical proposition.
This some of the most wily amongst us were by
no means backward in observing, and special


care was taken that he might be permitted to
come off successful, for then it almost invariably
happened that he became totally engaged with
the play, and either forgot or did not feel inclined
to call ns in, sometimes during the course of a
whole evening. But if, through any indiscretion
or personal spite on the part of the scholars, he
became subjected to the knucks, his brow at once
became clouded, his vivacity forsook him, our
pleasure vanished, and we were called into our
lessons even before the ordinary time.
I have thus far been minute in describing the
character of my old schoolmaster, or rather one of
my old schoolmasters, (for I have had many in
my time) because I considered the eccentricity
of his disposition worthy of being recorded. But
in pursuit of my object, I have wandered from
my narrative, and, I fear, trespassed on the
patience of my readers. However, I shall now
endeavour to make up for my digression, and go
on in that even manner in which, when I first set
out it was my intention to have proceeded.
After my companion and I had examined every
thing connected with our ancient schoolroom,
with that degree of interest and attention which
long absence from familiar objects always creates,
we strolled idly along the banks of the well known


river, almost every turn of which recalled some
schoolboy incident to our recollection. There,
in its ancient grandeur, stood the tall and mur-
muring swamp oak,* from the branches of which
we had often plunged into the briny element
beneath. Another set of individuals were now
climbing and descending from its limbs, little
dreaming of the many persons that had preceded
them in their amusement. A few short years,
considered I, and they who are now gambolling
before us will rise into manhood, and be suc-
ceeded by others as gay and thoughtless as them-
selves. Thus it is, one generation passes away,
another begins to fall into the sere and yellow
leaf, and a third buds forth in full and youthful
beauty.
Like leaves on trees the race of man is found,
Now green in youth, now withering on the ground ;
Another race the following spring supplies ;
They fall successive, and successive rise ;
So generations in their course decay,
So flourish these, when those are passed away.
* Any one who has had occasion to navigate any of the rivers ot
Australia, must have noticed the whistling sound which the wind
rustling through these oaks invariably produces. It is highly pleasing
to sit at the stern of a sailing Jboat, and while the breeze is impelling
the bark gently over the yielding waters, to listen to this sound. It
is perfectly in accordance with the place, and, as you glide alon,
it seems to sweep over the tops of the trees, and accompany jou m
your course.


On a green mound jutting out into the water,
stood, rod in hand, patiently waiting for a nibble,
an old man, who in former times used to accom-
pany us in our boating excursions down the river,
on which occasions he always acted as master of
the ceremonies, and controlled us in all our
movements. We recognised him at once, though
it was some time before he could recall to his
mind our altered countenances; but when he did
recognise us, his visage became enlivened, his
brow expanded, and his whole person partook of
a degree of pleasure almost beyond the power of
words to express. There is something highly
gratifying and affecting in witnessing the generous
and spontaneous emotions of an honest heart,
uncorrupted by guile, or untainted by the com-
monplace occurrences of life. An honest man,
though clothed in rags and sunk in poverty, is
the noblest type of his Creator. Like a gigantic
oak, which, though shorn by the wintry blast of
its foliage, retains its impenetrable soundness,
and is still the noblest ornament and pride of the
surrounding forest; he is, though despised by
the profligate and thoughtless multitude, looked
upon by the wise as the boast and honour of his
nature—as the most glorious and perfect work
which the Almighty has placed on this terrestrial


sphere. This humble angler was an honest,
kind-hearted individual, and as such was be-
loved by all the youthful striplings, to whose
amusements he had so often ministered. Hours
would he sit after school was over, on the bank
of the stream, surrounded by perhaps a dozen
eager and attentive faces, and there recount the
many adventures and hapless misfortunes which
befel him in his journey through life. Often
would tea-time be forgotten in the witchery of
the old man’s tale; and the pale moon would be
shining brilliantly o’er the surrounding landscape
before his hearers with reluctant footsteps pro-
ceeded to their homes. Many a time since, when
my recolleption carried me back to the old and
cheerful story-teller, would I involuntarily ex-
claim, “ Happy man! thy pleasures lie within a
narrow compass —thy wants and wishes are but
few, but yet those few are all supplied thee.
Having crossed a small meadow, we approached
a dark grove, composed of that almost endless
variety of plants and trees with which the Aus-
tralian scenery always delights the traveller, and
wraps the prying naturalist in thoughtful medi-
tation. Every step I took increased my anxiety,
for the earth I trod on was hallowed by the
freaks of infancy and childhood. We crossed a
d 3


small rustic bridge, thrown clumsily o’er a mur-
muring rivulet, turned an- angle of the road,
ascended an eminence clothed with nature’s ver-
dant carpet, and before me stood, unaltered and
undecayed, presenting the same appearance as
when I last gazed on it—that spot which I have
been accustomed to consider as my much-loved
native home. By those who, after having been
absent many years from the home where the
scenes of their earliest recollections lay—where
the spring-time of life was passed in uncontami-
nated innocence, have returned once more to
that sacred spot, my feelings at that moment may
be imagined, but it is impossible for me to de-
scribe them with accuracy and effect. As soon
as my eye rested on the well-known dwelling, I
instinctively stopped—gazed eagerly on every
surrounding object—contemplated the scene in
silence for a few seconds—rushed forward with
more than my ordinary speed—stopped and hesi-
tated at the door—walked in, almost bursting
with contending emotions, and found myself once
more in that sheltered haven, in which, before I
commenced my career, I had been safely pro-
tected from the storms and buffetings of life.


THUNDER STORM.




THE THUNDER STORM.
’Tis lingering fear, and dumb amazement all:
When to the startled cje, the sudden glance
Appears far South, eruptive through the cloud ;
And following slower, in explosion vast,
The thunder raises his tremendous voice.
At first, heard solemn o'er the verge of heaven,
The tempest growls ; but as it nearer comes.
And rolls its awful burden on the wind,
The lightnings flash a larger curve, and more
The noise astounds : till over head a sheet
Of livid flame discloses wide ; then shuts,
And opens wider; shuts and opens still
Expansive, wrapping ether in a blaze.
Follows the loosen’d aggravated roar.
Enlarging, deepening, mingling; peal on peal
Crush'd horrible, convulsing heaven and earth.
Thompson.
The day had been unusually sultry, and as the
shades of evening began to draw near, I strolled
forth from the busy scenes of life, and directed
niy footsteps towards a lonely glen, situated a
few miles from the village. The solitudes of
nature, even from my childhood possessed charms
for me, which often allured me from mankind to


pass a few hours in lonely contemplation. The
happiest moments of my life were passed in some
romantic spot, perhaps seated on a lofty pre-
cipice, or strolling along the banks of some
classic or gently murmuring stream, the gurgling
of whose tranquil waters always sounded like the
most enchanting music on my ears. My way in
the present instance led partly through a verdant
and ever-green shubbery, and partly through a
thick and lofty forest, until I came to the entrance
of a long deep glen, surrounded by hills, which
even to their summits were covered with trees
that had seen many winters, and outlived many a
storm. The path lay along the banks of a mean-
dering rivulet, which in many places was nearly
arched over with the drooping acacia, the black
wattle, or a tree resembling the weeping willow
in its foliage. After having proceeded up the
valley about three quarters of a mile, through an
endless variety of shrubs unknown in Europe, I
suddenly arrived at the entrance of a natural
meadow, covered with the most luxuriant vege-
tation. Here and there scattered about in various
parts of the grass lay a flock of sheep, whose full
round sides proved the excellence of their fare.
At a short distance, seated on a stone, beneath
the shade -of a small cluster of trees, was the


shepherd, and beside him lay his watchful dog.
A scene so truly characteristic of the pristine sim-
plicity of our forefathers, at once struck me with
admiration. I had never before contemplated
the beauties of pastoral life, and I at once be-
came captivated with the scene, and charmed
with the surrounding landscape. The bleating
of the lambs, and their playful gambolling
through the grass, combined with the innocence
and meekness of their appearance attracted my
particular attention.
Around the adjoining brcok, that purls along
The vocal grove, now fretting o’er a rock.
Now scarcely moving through a reedy pool.
Now starting to a sudden stream ; and now.
Gently diffused into a limpid plain ;
A various group the herds and flocks compose.
Rural confusion! on the grassy bank
Some ruminating lie; while others stand
Half in the flood, and often bending sip
The circling surface.
I passed on through the timid flock, and proceed-
ing to the extremity of the vale, ascended the
the hill which here formed a natural amphitheatre
of the most picturesque description. When I
had reached the summit, I seated myself on a
loose fragment of rock, beneath a spreading gum
tree of the mimosa genus, which then was in full
bloom, and diffused a most refreshing fragrance


around. Here I determined to wait and behold
the setting' of the sun below the thick fleecy
clouds that gilded the western horizon. The
atmosphere, though warm, was every where clear
except towards the west, and there a few clouds
might be discovered rising, as it were from a thin
mist which rested on the horizon. As I gazed
the clouds began gradually to accumulate ; they
became more dense, and more extensive, and in
a quarter of an hour the sun was obscured from
my sight. Shortly I beheld a faint flash of
lightning, which was succeeded after the lapse
of some minutes by an almost inaudible roll of
thunder. The dense mass became wider and
wider with increasing rapidity, and before long
one half of the sky was covered with it. I could
not forbear at the moment drawing a comparison
between the coming tempest and the French
revolution : that great event, which, spreading
like a contagion, set the world in one continued
blaze. I pictured to myself the impression which
was gradually but indelibly imprinted on the
minds of thirty millions of individuals, by the
tyranny and injustice of an aristocratic few. I
saw the first vague and indefinite spirit of discon-
tent which pervaded the people—l watched the
degrees by which this spirit of discontent spread


wider, and seemed to absorb all other feelings in
its influence. I beheld how from citizen to
citizen, from family to family, from province to
province it extended, drawing every thing within
its vortex; and when it arose to such a degree
that it could no longer be restrained within mode-
rate bounds, I saw the first faint glimmei of
awakening violence —I saw the bright gleam that
succeeded ; and lastly, I beheld it burst out with
an almost overwhelming crash, subverting the
whole course of things by its resistless fury—over-
turning nobles, princes, kings, and empires, and
producing a chaotic mass, from the midst of
which rose some of the greatest geniuses, and
proceeded some of the most astonishing events
recorded in the annals of the world. In the midst
of this reverie I was startled by a violent clap of
thunder, which echoed and re-echoed along the
surrounding glens for some minutes, until at
length it seemed gradually to die away in the
distance. This was succeeded by another, and
another, and each one approaching with fearful
rapidity nearer to the spot where I was seated.
Those clouds which but an hour before were
almost imperceptible in the distance, now spread
a dark and gloomy mantle on every side, which
the forked lightnings occasionally illumed. I


felt that it would be madness to move from my
position, and I resolved to await the issue of the
storm with patience ; though not totally destitute
of apprehension. I sat silently gazing on the
tioubled sky, and fancied that I could occasion-
ally perceive the workings of the electric fluid,
even before combustion took place. About half
a mile from me,floating on the air, was a large, and
apparently a very powerful eagle hawk, looking
around him with his piercing eyes for some luck-
less bird, on which he might pounce with fatal
and resistless fury. Even the warring of the
elements did not divert him from his purpose ;
amid thunder of the most deafening, and lightning-
of the most vivid description, did he still continue
to search for his prey with unabated assiduity.
He towered majestically aloft; and the proud
and dauntless manner in which he gazed around
him, showed how fully he was convinced of his
own superiority, and how greatly he gloried in
his strength. A small thrush flying slyly along
the ground attracted his attention ; he paused,
as it were to consider what course he should
adopt; the pause was momentary, in an instant
his wings were drawn to his sides, and down he
came with inconceivable rapidity on his miserable
victim. But short-lived was his triumph, and


unavailing was his strength; just as he was bear-
ing off his prey, a fearful flash struck both the
pursuer and the pursued, and hurled them
scorched and lifeless to the earth. In this dis _
pensation of Providence, I perceived that innate
wisdom which is the peculiar attribute of the Om-
niscient Being who directs and governs the
universe. 1 immediately drew a moral from this
circumstance, which, if acted upon by mankind,
would either materially diminish, or totally avert
wars, enmities, and commotions of every des-
cription, and establish firmly, in this terrestial
sphere, the sacred seeds of Christian charity and
universal peace. The bird, which but a moment
before, conscious of his physical superiority,
looked down with contempt upon the rest of the
feathered tribe, and considered them all indis-
criminately as objects of his prey, was even in
the moment of his triumph, when he was proudly
bearing away the object of his vengeance in his
talons, struck by the resistless hand of a mightier
power, and in an instant reduced to the condition
of his lifeless prey. Thus it is one nation glory-
ing in its strength, makes war upon another
weaker and less able to maintain the conflict,
carries death and desolation in its bloodstained
track; destroys the fair face of nature; annihilates


one part and enslaves the remainder of a whole
community, during this destructive career; not
considering that there is a power above which
can exalt the lowly and abash the proud. My
reflections were at this moment interrupted by a
tremendous crash, apparently not far distant, and
on turning my head to observe the cause, I per-
ceived a tall and majestic iron bark, which for
years had been the ornament of the surrounding
forest, and a proud memorial of by-gone days,
shivered and splintered even to its very roots into
a thousand atoms, and its branches strewed
around in every direction, blasted and destroyed
by the devouring fluid. While I was contem-
plating this fallen giant with astonishment, I felt
an almost indescribable sensation creep over me;
I fancied that I was surrounded with a thin cov-
ering of gauze, that my vision was partially
obstructed, and the air around I felt convinced
was impregnated with some subtle fluid, which
rendered it different from what it usually is, and
caused it to operate most strangely upon the
senses. These symptoms at once convinced me
that I was in danger. I instinctively started from
my seat and rushed forward with all the velocity
which a sense of impending danger, and a desire
to escape it invariably produce. I had scarcely


proceeded forty yards from the spot, when the
tree under which I had been sitting was levelled to
the ground, and the stone beneath it was broken
into innumerable fragments, and scattered in
every direction with the most astonishing celeiity
and force. The rain now began to pour down in
torrents, and having no place to shelter myself
from the fury of the storm, I began to retrace my
footsteps to the village with all possible speed.
The rivulet which but an hour before I had
stepped across with the greatest ease, was rapidly
swollen into an impetuous torrent, and it was
not without considerable difficulty that I crossed
it on my return. After having been saturated to
the skin, I at length reached the inn at which I
was stopping, just as the storm began to abate,
and the setting sun peered cheeringly through a
passing cloud, darting his declining rays on the
fading landscape, and forming a beautiful and
pleasing contrast to the preceding gloom and
conflict of the elements. Wet as I was I could
not but feel grateful for the refreshing shower
that had fallen, for the sultry warmth of the
atmosphere was totally dispelled by the cooling
rain, and the air, instead of being oppressive, was
rendered as invigorating as though all the per-
fumes of Arabia were wafted through it on (he


Zephyr’s wings. This was not the only instance
which convinced me that it is after a thunder
storm, on a warm day, that the salubrity of the
Australian climate evinces itself in the most strik-
ing manner, and causes one to feel grateful to
Providence for the many blessings He has liberally
showered down upon this happy land.


BOTANY BAY.




BOTANY BAY.
These are the haunts of Meditation, these
The scenes where ancient bards the inspiring breath
Extatic, felt; and, from this world retir’d.
Convers’d with angels, and immortal forms,
On gracious errands bent.
Thompson.
I had long been anxious to visit Botany Bay, as
much on account of the magnificence of its
scenery as in consequence of its being the place
where the immortal Cook first landed on our
southern shores. I am naturally a lover of the
picturesque, and even from that period when rea-
son began to assume her sway over my infant
mind, have I ever been desirous of viewing the
beauties of nature, and contemplating those orna-
ments which bountiful Providence heaps together
more or less profusely in every part of the cre-
ation. But when some historical incident is
intimately connected with a beautiful and romantic
spot, the surrounding scenery acquires additional


interest in my estimation, and, when it is in my
power, I never fail to gratify my cariosity at the
earliest opportunity. Australia can boast of many
scenes of the most lovely description—the ma-
jestic cliff, rising from the vale in frowning gran-
deur; the meandering stream, winding through
richly cultivated fields and lofty hills; the silvery
lake, reflecting like a polished mirror the varied
objects which surround its shores; the dark and
ancient forest; the lonely and romantic glen ; all
can be seen interspersed in pleasing variety over
its wide extent, objects of heartfelt delight, both
to the traveller and to the peasant. But in no
place throughout this Colony, save Botany Bay*
is there a single spot hallowed by the memorable
incidents of by-gone days, and rendered sacred
by the transactions of illustrious men. Much as
this place is mentioned, often as it is alluded to
in every quarter of the world, both in writing and
in conversation, I am convinced there is no re-
markable spot in Australia with which our Colo-
nial public is less intimately acquainted, or which
is not more frequently visited by the lovers of the
picturesque and grand. Whether this is to be
attributed to a want of taste, or an habitual care-
lessness of disposition I shall not take upon myself
to determine.


Sometime since an opportunity was afforded
me to visit this remarkable Bay, and in company
with a friend, I set out on horseback on one of
those cloudless, cool, and bracing mornings in
May, which so frequently delight the traveller in
this country. Half an hour’s ride from Sydney,
brought us to the beach, which extends four or
five miles along the northern boundary of the Bay,
and being at low water by no means one of the
least remarkable and interesting objects to be seen
in this quarter of the world. The appearance
which the water presented at our first view was
beautiful in the extreme, and excited in me at
once feelings of unbounded pleasure. The broad
bosom of the deep, placid as a sleeping infant,
without a ruffle on its surface, without a breath
of wind to agitate it, reflecting the morning sun
with scrupulous exactness, unbroken and undis-
torted ; the balmy freshness of the atmosphere;
the dewy fragrance of the shrubs around; the
solemn stillness of the place; and the harmony
of every surrounding object were circumstances
sufficient to captivate the attention of the least
sensitive individual, and cause the most vitiated
and artificial taste to acknowledge the genuine
majesty of nature. The time and place, I felt,
were eminently calculated to refresh the senses


and invigorate the mind ; improve both the mental
and bodily energies, and wrap the understanding
in thoughtful meditation.
After gazingfor some minutes on the splendid
scene before us, we rode along the beach as far as
its termination, and then turned into an open
forest, through which the remainder of our journey
lay. After proceeding along •a. cart track about
two miles, we arrived at a plain stone tomb, which
contained the mouldering relics of a fellow
creature. The latin inscription engraved on the
stone, stated him to have been the chaplain of
one of the unfortunate La Perouse’s vessels.
The spot where he is interred, when I last saw it,
was nearly surrounded by a thick grove of trees,
which closing over it on the top, gave it a very
classic appearance. I could not but admire the
good fortune of this individual, whose lot it was
to die at a distance from his home, his family,
and his friends, and be interred in this lonely spot,
far away at that time from every portion of the
civilized world. Had he returned to his native
land in safety, and lived there to a glorious old
age, his name would perhaps, ere this, have been
forgotten in the solitudes of the grave ; his birth
would have been unknown; and he would have
fallen into obscurity, together with the many


remnants of mortality by which he would be sur-
rounded. But his fate has now rendered him one
of the objects of curiosity to those who visit this
enchanting spot. He is now inseparably united
with the surrounding scenery, and if he be not
revered, he will at least be remembered by many
future generations. The passing traveller will
drop a sympathetic tear upon his humble monu-
ment, and while he mourns over his melancholy
end, he will rejoice in that fate which consigned
the body of the wandering navigator to this memo-
rable spot. His countrymen, when they visit our
shores, will view with reverential awe, that hal-
lowed place which contains the mouldering ashes
of this ill-fated, yet in some respects fortunate
individual. They will cluster fondly round his
tomb in thoughtful silence, shed tears of mingled
pain and pleasure upon the spot, and pray sin-
cerely from the inmost recesses of their hearts, for
the soul of the departed. Time, instead of
obscuring his memory, and lessening their respect,
will but implant the history of his life more firmly
in their breasts, and cause them to cherish the
remembrance of his fate with increasing fondness
and veneration.
When we had turned an angle of the road, a
few yards from the tomb, the monument erected


to the memory of La Perouse, burst at once
abruptly on our sight. Situated as it is, on a
green plot, elevated above the adjoining land on
its north, it has a striking effect when presented
so suddenly to the eye. It is a plain circular
column about twenty feet in height, constructed
on a square pedestal, and surmounted by a brazen
sphere, emblematical of the vocation of the man
whom it is intended to commemorate. On the
sides of the pedestal are inscriptions recording the
birth, principal known adventures, and supposed
fate of the French navigator. The whole is sur-
rounded by a neat low quadrangular parapet,
which considerably enhances the beauty of the
monument. How gratifying it is to behold a tri-
bute of national affection and popular regard,
when erected to the memory of the truly great
and deserving! How pleasing it is to reflect that
those illustrious men, who having spent their lives
in endeavouring to promote, not the interests of
themselves nor of their country only, but of all
mankind; and having fallen a sacrifice to the
benevolent enthusiasm of their feelings, have
received from a grateful people that applause and
veneration, to which the disinterestedness of their
conduct, the extent of their researches, and the
magnitude of their labours, render them so emi-


nently entitled. The cold and ostentatious display
of sculptured marble, and the ridiculously exagge-
rated epitaphs, eulogies, and inscriptions, which
figure on the monuments of the undistinguished
great, the senseless puppets of opulence and rank,
cannot but excite the contempt of every just and
discerning individual. The monument upon
which are emblazoned the heroic exploits of the
warrior or the conqueror, while it excites our
admiration of the abilities of the man, cannot but
create in our breasts a melancholy feeling, when
we contemplate the scenes of slaughter, bloodshed,
and devastation, through which he waded to glory
and renown. But when we gaze upon the tribute
of affection and applause that has been raised to
a person, who, doing no injury to any of his fellow-
creatures, has spent, and even sacrificed his life
in endeavouring to benefit the whole of the human
race; then is it that the tears of sympathy and
admiration will glide gently down the cheeks of
the beholder, and fill him with mingled feelings
of melancholy and regret.
La Perouse’s monument, simple though it is,
is a structure which will always remain endeared
to the man of taste and information. The affect-
ing reminiscences connected with it, will, instead
of being diminished by time, be more firmly


engraven on, and create stronger emotions in the
heart of the beholder. My feelings on viewing it,
were such as it would be scarcely possible for me
to describe. As I gazed silently, upon it, the
history of La Perouse was presented in vivid
colours to my imagination. I saw him in thought
take the last farewell of his wife and family; sail
from the shores of his country, from which he was
decreed to be separated for ever, pursue his
voyage over the trackless paths of ocean—land at
the spot where I then stood—again set sail, and
become lost for ever to the world. The manner
of his death to this day is but indistinctly known,
and the resting place of his bones cannot be dis-
covered. How much more appropriate thought I
is this spot for the erection of a testimonial of the
regard entertained for the great navigator, than
the cloisters of an abbey, or the area of a city
square. Here, the beauty and solitude of the
place, the waters of the great Pacific foaming
and dashing on the adjacent rocks, and the inci-
dents connected with the surrounding scenery,
captivate one’s attention, and remind us of the
vocation, exploits, and fate of the individual on
whose monument we are gazing.
But La Perouse and his companions are not
the only individuals who have added to the


charms of Botany Bay. They are not the only
persons whose connexion with this enchanting
spot tends to enhance the beauty of the surround-
ing scenery. The illustrious Cook—that orna-
ment of his country and his race—that friend and
benefactor of mankind—that first of navigators
and discoverers—the explorer of the great Pacific
—the instrument in the hands of Providence for
extending the benefits of civilization to countless
multitudes immersed in ignorance and barbarism
—the founder, as I may say, of this germ of an
empire—pervades this spot, and casts around it
an air of sanctity and veneration. It is now more
than fifty years since he visited our shores; when
the kangaroo and the emu bounded fearlessly
through our forests; and when the savage in his
most rude and uncultivate state, ruled undisturbed
over those lands which now smile in verdant
majesty, clothed with all the beauties of vegeta-
tion, and teeming with the wealth and produce
created by the exertions of an industrious and
enterprising people. Even after the lapse of so
long a time do I see in imagination the plain,
forbearing, and compassionate commander, land
from his barge, regardless of the demonstrations
of hostility manifested by two of the original
sovereigns of the soil. The spot on which his


foot first rested is now pointed out to the eager
eye of the traveller, by a small brass plate fixed
into the stone. This frail memorial, humble and
unworthy as it is, of so great a man, is looked
upon by the visitor with enthusiastic veneration.
To stand in the identical position, and on the
same rock on which Cook stood half a century
since, is certainly sufficient to elevate the soul,
and withdraw the mind from a contemplation of
the affairs of the present to a recollection of the
dazzling occurrences of the past. An almost in-
describable sensation seems to thrill and vibrate
through every portion of the frame, and fill the
soul with mingled feelings of astonishment and
admiration.
The scenes of any of the principal incidents in
the life of a truly great and illustrious man in-
variably possess an electric influence over the
human mind. They elevate the beholder, as it
were, above himself—dispel for a time the grosser
attributes of his nature, and render his feelings
sensitive and refined. Ido not envy the feelings
of that man who could behold with indifference
the many beauties of this enchanting bay, or
think those beauties unimproved by the endearing
reminiscences with which they arc so closely in-
terwoven, Such a man must be totally destitute


of the ordinary sympathies of our nature; every
idea of taste, and every love of virtue and of
knowledge, must be banished from his dis-
position.
While I gazed upon the humble and rapidly
corroding plate, which at present remains the
sole monument on our shores—the only recoid of
the virtues of one of the most signal benefactors
of mankind, of him to whom this magnificent and
rapidly advancing colony is indebted for its ex-
istence ; I could not but lament the listlessness
of our Australian youth—the shameful, the worse
than barbarous inattention that in this instance
they have betrayed. Will Providence always
ordain —is it ever to be the case —that the sordid
desire of accumulating wealth should occupy the
whole attention of our youth, and blunt those
finer feelings which set off and give an air of
elegance and dignity to the more rigid particles
of our nature ? Perish the thought! A more
refined and a more intelligent race of individuals
are now rapidly rising up amongst us, and will
shortly emerge from the vale of youth, and take
their destined places, in full and vigorous ma-
turity, among the ranks of their fellow citizens
and their fellow countrymen. Let us trust let
us hope, that they, ever mindful of the dignity


and reputation of their native land, and con-
sidering attentively what will be expected from
them as an opulent and enlightened community,
will wipe off this stain upon their national honor,
and erect to the memory of this first of navigators
a tribute of affection and respect, in every way
worthy of his life, his virtues, and his discoveries.
Let it not be left in the power of an indignant
posterity to say, that while the monument of .La
Perouse rose triumphantly from our shores, the
name of Cook was almost unhonored and un-
known. A magnificent and a lasting column
should be erected on this memorable spot, where
looking down, as it were, upon the ocean that he
subdued, its base would be laved by each bois-
terous and returning wave.
It is not because monuments are not already
raised to the memory of Cook, that I recom-
mend this tribute to be erected. A niche has
been alloted to him in the cloisters of Westminster,
among the illustrious dead of the British empire ;
his eulogy and his epitaph have been inscribed
within that hallowed and magnificent mausoleum.
But, let me ask, is this a fitting place to contain
the monument of such a man ? The time must
yet arrive, when this Abbey, the pride of England
and admiration of the world-the repository of


the mortal remains of the first of heroes, legislators,
philosophers, and statesmen—will fall prostrate
with the earth, and cover with its ruins the frail
memorials of the dead; “ when,” as Irving beauti-
fully expresses himself, “ its gilded vaults, which
now spring so loftily, shall lie in rubbish beneath
the feet—when, instead of the sound of melody
and praise, the wind shall whistle through the
unbroken arches, and the owl hoot from the
shattered tower —when the garish sunbeam shall
break into these gloomy mansions of death, and
the ivy twine round the fallen column, and the
foxglove hang its blossoms about the nameless
urn, as if in mockery of the dead.” What, then,
amid the many ruined records of such a multitude
of illustrious men, will remain to connect the
name of Cook with the mouldering ruins around ?
Will he not be overwhelmed in the general
wreck ? Will he not fall into oblivion together
with the many that now lie entombed beside
him ? No inscription will be left to the prying
antiquary, which may record his merits, or denote
the spot that contains his remains. But with
Botany Bay he is, and will ever be, indissolubly
connected : his name is, as it were, engraven on
every part of the surrounding scenery ; and
whether the traveller gaze on a monument or a


ruin, that name will still be fresh in his memory,
and every circumstance relating to it will recur
with vivid force to the imagination.
Although we started early on our journey, the
sun was rapidly sinking below the western horizon
before we prepared to return, so charmed were
we by the objects we had seen, and the ideas
those objects had suggested to us. I lingered
some time, to gaze upon the setting luminary.
A more dazzling or brilliant sight I had never
seen than that presented by its rays magnified by,
and spread over, the whole surface of the slightly
agitated waters of the bay. I fancied myself to
be for the moment in a land of enchantment; nor
was the spell which bound me broken until the
sun had sank below theT'distant hills. We then
reluctantly bade adieu to the fascinating spot,
and left it with that kind of feeling which might
be supposed to exist in the breast of an individual,
who, having revelled for a time in luxury and
ease, descended suddenly into the vale of misery
and want. We had enjoyed a delicious inter-
course with some of the master spirits of former
ages, secluded from the din and bustle of the
world ; and we felt a pang in returning to the
commonplace occurrences of life.


COLOSSEUM AT ROME.




COLOSSEUM AT ROME.
Immortal glories in my mind revive.
And in my sonl a thousand passions strive.
When Rome’s exalted beauties I descry.
Magnificent, in piles of ruins lie.
An amphitheatre's amazing height
Here fills my eye with terror and delight.
That, on its public shows, unpeopled Rome,
And held, uncrowded, nations in its womb.
Addison.
Of all the mouldering ruins—of all the stupen-
dous and magnificent relics of antiquity that are
scattered in every direction in and around modern
Rome, none are so eminently calculated as the
Colosseum to fill the mind of the beholder with a
perfect idea of the vastness and opulence of the
Roman empire. Nothing enables one to distin-
guish more clearly the genius, energy, and cha-
racter of that people, whose conquering legions
once held every portion of the then known world
,n subjection, and whose poets, orators, philo-
sophers, and statesmen have been the delight of


every succeeding generation. The traveller, in
wandering through its decaying arches, now
darkened by the storms of centuries, and over-
grown with moss and ivy, will perceive in its
ruins the skeleton of what once was the pride and
glory of the lords and conquerors of mankind.
There will he tread upon ground which was often-
times the scene of wanton bloodshed, murder, and
barbarity, and reflect upon the savage customs
which habit and fashion can render familiar and
pleasing to a people the most civilized and intelli-
gent in the universe. There will he ponder over
the mingled greatness and littleness of empire,
and see a lamentable instance of the imperfection
of the human mind. Each shrub that he sees,
each stone that he looks upon, he will consider
as stained with the blood of some miserable vic-
tim sacrificed for the amusement of his fellow men.
Even in thought will he hear the agonizing shriek
of the falling gladiator, mingled with the exulting
and applauding shouts of thousands of individuals
glorying in the success of, and encouraging, the
murderer of their fellow creature. He will, in
imagination, see even females, having thrown off
the softer feelings of their nature, lift up their
hands in approbation, and join in the wild tu-
multuous shout of popular applause.


Yet these circumstances, revolting as they are
to humanity and to nature, are evidences of the
warlike character of the persons by whom they
were transacted. They demonstrate the habitual
love of the Roman people for martial deeds, and
exhibitions of valour and of skill. War was their
natural trade ; and even in peace they could not
refrain from exercising their arms, and displaying
their courage and their prowess.
Under the influence of reflections similar to
these, a friend of mine once bent his steps, un-
to the vast and magnificent luins
of this wonderful amphitheatre. “ I approached
the stupendous pile,” said he, in relating the
circumstance to me some short time since, “ with
a feeling of mingled astonishment and veneration.
I gazed silently and thoughtfully upon its arches,
piled one above another in gloomy grandeur,
frowning, as it were, solemnly over the surround-
ing scenery. Each vine of ivy, each mouldering
stone, each wild luxuriant weed, I contemplated
with reverential awe. As I wandered through the
lonely and deserted ruins, the flutter of an owl,
or the echo of my footsteps sounded almost super-
naturally upon my ears, for when I visited them
the sun had set, and the full moon shone bril-
liantlv in a clear and cloudless sky. While I


stood examining the spot, I was not only se-
parated, in thought, from the world, but every
thing connected with the present vanished from
my imagination, and fancy carried me back
through the mists of time, and placed me among
the senators and heroes of ancient Rome. Never
can I forget the emotions that thrilled through
my frame at that moment, while I stood upon
a spot which had been the scene of so many
eventful transactions. The history of the vast
amphitheatre, in the centre of which I was then
standing, recurred vividly to my imagination;
its rise, its progress, and its decay, were all
clearly exposed to view. This gigantic monu-
ment of the skill and genius of man, said I in-
voluntarily to myself, originated in the luxury
and opulence of a people puffed up by success,
and rendered arrogant by conscious power. After
every portion of the world had been conquered
by their arms, when all their provinces were re-
duced to a state of quietude and peace; when
the stern hardihood of their legions was softened
and subdued by inactivity and plenty; when
their governors and their nobles had amassed
countless hoards, by extortion and injustice;
when the riches of the earth flowed to Rome as
to a common centre; the unbending virtues of


earth’s haughty masters became subdued, and
this building was raised to perpetuate their great-
ness and their folly. Here exhibitions of the
most barbarous description were made to glut the
desire of tyrannizing emperors and a corrupt and
wicked people. This was the accursed spot on
which Nero—that man whose name pollutes the
pages of history, and at the mention of whose
deeds humanity recoils —often appeared to combat
with the gladiator, and glory and riot in the blood
he shed, and boast of the many murders he com-
mitted. This is the place where the trembling
culprit used once to be exposed to the fury of the
enraged and hungry lion, as the only alternative
by which he might escape the punishment awarded
by his country’s laws. Were these men, con-
tinued I worthy to rule over every nation —to hold
the balance of the world, when they could thus
rejoice in the torture of their fellow citizens ( The
humblers of Carthage; the conquerors of Africa ;
the masters of Europe and Asia; the preservers
and promoters of literature and science; all
vanished before my imagination, when 1
contemplated the cruelty and depravity of their
dispositions. I could not but rejoice in the down-
fall of this fabric, when I considered the scenes
that it had witnessed and produced. Yet I would


not wish to see it totally annihilated ; I would
like some vestige of it to remain as a useful and
instructive lesson to each passing traveller, and
as a monument to remind the Christian of the
superior benevolence and charity of his religion.
After I had occupied two hours in examining
the ruins, I left them, both disgusted with, and
admiring the people by whom they were erected.”
No man of true taste and understanding could
ever visit this spot but feelings similar to these
would actuate him while he gazed around. The
recollection of past events would at once rush
upon his memory, and fill his mind with both
pleasing and disagreeable sensations. And on
leaving the mouldering arches, he might con-
scientiously say
I do rejoice to see the briars spreading
Over the sockets of each wither’d seat.
To see below the goat and goatherd treading
Where man once lay beneath the tiger’s feet.
Who would behold the circus walls complete?
Restore the marble benches to their place ?
Though beauty’s self should rise again to greet
The gladiator’s form, where is the face
Could smile on such a scene, nor lose its every grace?


STEAM-BOAT,




THE STEAM BOAT.
1 said that at sea all is vacancy ; I should correct the expression.
To one given to day-dreaming, and fond of losing himself in reveries,
a sea voyage is full of subjects for meditation ; but then they are the
wonders of the deep, and of the air, and rather tend to abstract the
mind from worldly themes. I delighted to 101 l over the quarter
railing, or climb to the main top, of a calm day, and muse for hours
together on the tranquil bosom of a summer’s sea; to gaze upon the
piles of golden clouds just peering above the horizon, fancy them
some fairy realms, and people them with a creation of my own—
to watch the gentle undulating billows, rolling their silver volumes,
as if to die away on those happy shores.
Washington Irving.
To those who have never been in a steam-boat, a
trip to Maitland would certainly afford ample
gratification, though accompanied with some slight
inconvenience. Of all modern inventions, steam
is undoubtedly the most wonderful, and demon-
strates the capacity of the human mind in the
most conclusive and satisfactory manner. Hence,
every man of information, every lover of science
and encourager of art, should make himself per-
sonally acquainted with its nature and advan-


tages. How gratifying it is, to contemplate a
steam-vessel moving along the smooth surface of
the waters like “ a thing of life,” like a huge
monster endowed with all the powers of vitality !
While gazing on such an object, the immense
power which man possesses over matter becomes
singularly striking to the observer. He who, by
the power of the elements, could construct an
engine so complicated in its machinery, and so
wonderful in its operation, must be gifted with
almost divine faculties by his beneficent Creator.
When we examine such an object, we cannot but
feel convinced how much more exalted, how in-
finitely more perfect we are than the rest of the
creation, and how deeply we are indebted to the
Almighty for the many favours he has bestowed
upon us.
In May last, I embarked on board one of the
steam-vessels bound for Maitland. The boat did
not leave the wharf until seven in the evening,
after the sun had set some time below the western
horizon. The atmosphere was unusually clear,
and the full moon shone brilliantly in the heavens,
giving an almost magical appearance to the smooth
unruffled waters of the harbour. As the evening
was so fine, I preferred seating myself on the
deck, to going below in the cabin. While we


were gliding rapidly down the harbour, 1 was
delighted with the beautiful appearance that the
town, variegated with innumerable lamps, pre-
sented to my sight, as it seemed to recede m the
distance. My eye wandered from one object to
another with inconceivable delight, and w i e
contemplated the buildings, the shipping, the
forests, and varied scenery around, I fell into a
deep reverie, which was unintenupted, save now
and then by the footsteps of a passing sailor, or
an occasional remark from the seaman at the
helm. 1 reflected on the romantic and lonely
appearance that, fifty years since, Port Jackson
presented to the original founders of the colony,
and when I contrasted it with the magnificence,
the commerce, the wealth, and the population,
with which it teems at the present period, I could
not but be astonished. When I considered the
vast change that had been effected in so short a
time, at such an immense distance from the seat
of civilization and improvement, and by indivi
duals so peculiarly situated, I could not but
entertain a most exalted idea of the gigantic
resources of this country, and the extraordinary
fitness of the British people for successful and
extensive colonization. Surely, thought I, n
community that has advanced so rapidly a* this


has, is yet destined by Providence to become
powerful and extensive, and be ranked high
among the most important nations of the earth.
Australia, I felt convinced, infantile as it yet is,
was the germ of a brilliant empire.
As we approached the Heads, I began to feel
qualmish, and proceeded below to partake of
some refreshment. The passengers in the cabin
consisted of five or six individuals, one of whom
having been a long time accustomed to the sea,
appeared perfectly at home; the others, being
landsmen, seemed oppressed.with a kind of lan-
guor which they could not overcome, and which
was rapidly producing within them that peculiar
sensation generally termed “ sea sickness.” I was
not free from this disagreeable affection myself,
and felt that unless some preventive means were
adopted, I would inevitably be deprived of all
comfort during the remainder of the voyage.
Having frequently heard, that by laying on one’s
back, a person might neutralize the effect of the
undulating motion of the vessel, I stretched my-
self along one of the seats, and recommended my
fellow passengers to follow my example. I could
not but remark the leer of ridicule and conscious
superiority that pervaded the features of the old
seaman and the captain of the steam-vessel, as I


made this suggestion. However, it had the de-
sired effect, for the symptoms of nausea gradually
diminished ; and in half an hour our spirits were
revived, and we were enabled to sit up with a
tolerable degree of comfort, if not with pleasure
and enjoyment. Scarcely, however, had we
recovered from the state of langdor into which we
had been thrown, when a hoarse voice from the
helm warned us of the near approach of a coming
storm. It is by no means uncommon in this
country, after a fine day, for a strong southerly
wind to spring up and blow for some hours with
the most astonishing fury. Frequently have I
seen the sky become suddenly overcast with
clouds, and the heavens obscured from sight by
the immense quantity of dust borne along by the
wind. On these occasions, all those persons
sailing about the harbour, invariably take down
their sails at once, and pull for land with all
possible rapidity.
As soon as the helmsman had given the alarm,
we all rushed on deck. Towards the south, we
perceived a great quantity of dark watery clouds,
flying (as it were) across the sea, with inconceiv-
able rapidity. About a quarter of a mile from
us, the waves appeared all to be converted into a
white foam, which, sparkling in the clear moon-


light, presented a very beautiful appearance. I
had scarcely time to contemplate the scene before
me, whert the tempest reached the vessel. In an
instant the moon became obscured, and the light
sails becoming filled with wind, we were literally
carried along the surface of the water. Each
moment the sea became more boisterous, and the
waves increased with astonishing rapidity. In a
shoit tune, such was the magnitude of the watery
mountains, that the paddle-wheels became useless,
and it being dangerous to make use of our canvass,
we ran before the wind, as the seamen term it,
“ scudding under bare poles.”
This was a novel position for me to be placed
in, and I contemplated the troubled scene in
attentive silence. Each lurch that the vessel
gave, convinced me how great and numerous are
the dangers that continually surround those whose
lives are past in traversing the trackless paths of
ocean. At one time, the frail bark would seem to
hang on the summit of a wave, in a moment after,
it would glide down into an immense yawning
gulf, opening as though it were ready to over-
whelm it, and hurl us all into eternity. None
but a practised and experienced seaman could
gaze upon such a prospect without an involuntary
shudder. Even many of those who have been


bred up among the billows, and have passed their
infancy and boyhood amidst storms and dangers
of the most trying description, would almost look
aghast at a sight so eminently calculated to
create ideas of terror in the human mind. There
is an extent of danger, which even the most reso-
lute cannot behold unmoved —which even those
who have braved the cannon’s roar, and seen with-
out dread the glittering array of serried bayonets
ready for bloodshed and destruction, could not
look upon without feeling a tremor vibrate through
their frame. And such was the scene upon which
I then gazed.
When I again went below, 1 found all the pas-
sengers clustered round the table, at the head ot
which was placed the old seaman who was just
preparing to relate an account of a shipwreck
which he once witnessed. I have always observed
it to be the case, that when a number of persons
are in a position which exposes them to instant
danger, they discourse of and relate the mishaps
of individuals that have been similarly situated.
This cannot be for the purpose of enlivening their
dispositions, and banishing from their thoughts the
apprehensions that their situation tends to excite.
The mind, in this instance, is evidently influenced
by external circumstances, and either finds it im-


possible to contemplate any thing but what the
surrounding objects suggest, or takes pleasure in
musing on those circumstances which in them-
selves are calculated to awaken the most disa-
greeable sensations. I have many times been
travelling along a lonely road in company with
others, and the only topics of conversation would
invariably be robberies, assaults, and murders. I
have actually seen some so startled by the ac-
counts they themselves have related, as to shrink
at the approach of every footstep, and fancy every
hedge and shrub peopled with robbers, ready to
pounce down upon them and deprive them at once
of both property and existence. The most timor-
ous man on these occasions pays the greatest
attention to, and appears to take the greatest de-
light in, tales of horror and of bloodshed. His
whole soul seems wrapped up in such occurrences*
and though he would shudder at the sight of a
single man; he would listen with interest and
anxiety to a recital of the atrocities of the most
determined bushranger.
“ We were once” said the old seaman “ sailing
smartly through the boisterous bay of Biscay, with
every stitch of canvas set, and a fine breeze blow-
ing directly on our quarter. Of all positions, such
a one as this to a seaman, is by far the most gra-


tifying. It is then that he takes delight m his
vocation, and feels that his condition would be but
ill exchanged for the quietude and comforts of
the land. The breeze had for the space of two
days been carrying us directly to our destination,
and while we were scudding gaily before the win ,
every care was banished and eveiy heart e t joy
ful. But like the generality of human pleasures,
our happiness in this instance, proved but fleeting.
Towards the close of the second day, clouds began
to gather on the distant horizon, artd the sun san
gloomily beneath the world of waters. The expe
rienced eye of the Captain, detected at once in t e
foreboding appearance of the sky, the approac i o
a violent storm. When the shades of night began
to thicken around the vessel, and the dark clouds
had spread themselves throughout the atmosphere,
the order to shorten sail was given by the Cap-
tain. At once the men bounded from the deck
and were aloft in an instant. The loosened sai s
fluttered in the breeze, and were furled and fas-
tened on the yards with that alaciity an ex
actness, which are so peculiarly the attributes o
British seamen. Every thing being arranged with
a due regard to our safety, we remained in anx-
ious, though fearless, expectation of a momentary
change. We were not disappointed. A itt c


before midnight, we were taken aback by a violent
gale, which, had not due precaution been already
taken, would inevitably have hurled us at once
into eternity. All hands were on deck at the
first alarm, and before we bad time to consider
what course we should adopt, we were literally
flying in a contrary direction ; before one of the
most tremendous gales, that during the whole
course of my experience, I had ever witnessed.
The sailors almost looked aghast, and gazed at
each other in mute astonishment. Sturdy and
courageous as they were, they found it impossible
to witness such a dreadful commotion of the ele-
ments unmoved—without feeling both awed and
astonished at the resistless power of Providence.
Before many minutes, the ocean was lashed into a
dreadful foam, and the waves were like gigantic
precipices over the wide waste of waters. The
vessel was hurled about like an atom in the waves.
Onwards it flew with astonishing celerity, though
naught but a single sail was set, and even that,
was left unfurled for the purpose only of preserv-
ing the ship steady in her course. Never shall
1 forget the impression made upon my mind, by
the dreadful objects presented to my sight in every
direction, as I gazed around. The night was
darker than I had ever before witnessed, and


nothing could be discerned except by the vivid
flashes of lightning which at intervals illumed the
atmosphere. Then indeed could we see the dan-
gers that surrounded us-then could we contem-
plate for a moment the dreadful nature of our
position; and again, in an instant all would be im-
mersed in worse than Cimmerian darkness. The
wind atone time would whistle mournfully through
the rigging as though lamenting our condition; at
another, every sound would be overcome by the
pealing thunder, or the dreadful roaring of ocean s
boisterous waves. Now the vessel would be as-
cending an awful eminence, and immediately it
would descend into a dreadful gulf with the most
frightful rapidity. First the larboard and then
the starboard yards would be buried in the briny
element; and each moment we expected would
consign us to a watery grave. These are moments
when the uncertainty of human life rushes with
resistless force upon the imagination, and fills the
terror-stricken mortal with a true idea o is
weakness and insignificance. He stan s as
were between this world and the world to come—-
between time and eternity—between life and
death; and his fate depends upon the stability or
destruction of the frail bark that supports him. A
few fragile planks is all that enables him to aver


the fury of the elements, and if any one of them
starts from its position, if a single seam be opened,
the tenure of his life becomes uncertain, and the
limit of his existence may be determined by each
passing wave. The fell monster prowls around
like a wolf seeking for his prey, and the most
trivial accident might create an opening for him
to enter.
Thus we ran before the gale until it was nearly
daylight. A violent blast then blew furiously
against the ship, lessened the masts, and imme-
diately after the hold began to fill in the most
frightful manner. All the exertions of the crew
to diminish the quantity of water proved totally
unavailing ; and every hope of saving the vessel
was shortly abandoned. The day broke upon us
while in this miserable condition. As far as the
eye could reach nothing but foam could be dis-
cerned ; nothing but gigantic billows could be
seen. The boats were ordered to be launched,
and what provision and water could be found in
the hurry of the moment, were thrown on board
them with all possible rapidity. I was fortunate
enough to gain the first boat that cleared the
sinking vessel. When we had proceeded about
a quarter of a mile, a sight of the most shocking
description was presented to our view. The other


boats, from the careless manner in which they had
been launched, were all destroyed by the immense
waves dashing them on the vessel and shattering
them into a thousand atoms. Then could we
discern the forlorn individuals clustering together
on the poop; bereft of every hope, death staring
them in the face, and the yawning ocean opening
to receive them. There stood a sturdy seaman
with a look of calm despair, gazing intently on
what was shortly to be his grave; here sat clinging
wildly to a hen coop, a timid maiden, whose lover
had but a moment before been dashed overboard
and covered by the foaming billows. Shrieks,
cries, prayers and lamentations, all uniting with
the roaring of the waves and whistling of the
winds, sounded terrifically upon our ears. Some
shuddering at the contemplation of the fate that
awaited them, rushed madly to the bulwarks,
paused as though doubting what course they
should adopt, bounded high into the air and fall-
ing, sank amidst the world of waters, to rise alas!
no more. Others in their anxiety to prolong their
life, climbed to the summit of the giddy mast, fondly
imagining that there they might escape the dan-
gers of the unfathomable deep. Transient were
their hopes and futile were their expectations!
The fate of these must have been by far more


terrible than that of their companions below; for
there could they see their friends, their relatives,
and their fellow passengers, engulphed before them,
and behold the horrors that awaited them. The
most affecting circumstance connected with this
dreadful catastrophe remains yet to be told. When
we were leaving the vessel, an old gentleman was
uiged into the boat by a friend, as the only means
of preservation afforded him. His daughter was
left behind in the confusion, and once away, it was
impossible for us to return for her to the ship.
There being three other boats, and the crew and
passengers not being numerous, the fond father
expected that his child might yet be saved. Long
and eagerly did he look towards the spot where
she stood, and many and fervent were the prayers
that he sent up to heaven, beseeching the Almighty
to protect her, and save so much youth, innocence
and beauty from destruction. But when the frail
barks, upon which her safety alone depended, were
shattered and destroyed, the shriek of sorrow and
paternal affection that burst from him, was heart-
rending in the extreme. A dreadful blow was at
once struck at his happiness, and he appeared to be
almost bereft of every particle of reason. Eagerly
did he beseech us to return and take her with us,
often did he urge upon us the cruelty of leaving


her to sach a dreadful fate; not once considering
the utter impossibility of our adopting his sugges-
tions. When he saw that his tears, his entreaties
and remonstrances were fruitless, he made one
desperate effort to jump into the waves and swim
to her across the heaving mountains. ‘ I must and
will* said he ‘bringher from that dreadful place;
God will assist me in my endeavours to rescue
from impending destruction my loved—my only
daughter.’ His efforts were fruitless, he was held
firmly in his seat by two of his friends, who while
they sympathised with him in his misfortunes, saw
the necessity of preventing him from rushing head-
long into the jaws of death.
“ Judge what a spectacle this must have been,
for men whose hearts were not steeled against all
those tender impressions, which belong to, and are
interwoven with our nature. It is scarcely pos-
sible to conceive how greatly we were affected by
s© sad a scene; how much we grieved while con-
templating such misery and affection. The most
amiable attributes of the human mind were, in this
instance, displayed in the most striking manner.
The father who had nurtured, educated and pro-
tected his daughter from infancy to womanhood ;
who had watched over her childish years, smiled
at her innocent diversions, and laughed at her


prattling; who had chided her for her trivial fol-
lies—praised her for her goodness—and loved her
for her innocence and virtue; when he saw her
on the verge of eternity, brought to mind all the
various reminiscences by which she was endeared
to him ; and dwell on them with augmented at-
tachment and veneration. Never until the mo-
ment when she was about to be separated from
him for ever, was she so dearly beloved by him
never until then did he attach so high a value
to her virtue, beauty and accomplishments. Thus
it always is, when the object of our regard is in
danger of being taken from us, our affection in-
creases, and sorrow banishes every other feeling
from our minds, and renders us melancholy and
disconsolate. In these circumstances, paternal
love augments so considerably, as frequently to
render the parent frantic while he beholds the
misery and misfortunes of his child. There is
nothing so truly affecting as the sight of a fond
father giving utterance to his fruitless lamenta-
tions, while his daughter is perishing before him,
and he unable to render assistance or participate
in her fate.
“The vessel did not float many minutes after the
boats had been destroyed. By degrees she sank
deeper and deeper, and in a short time the hold


was nearly full of water. All was tranquil for an
instant like the sea before a coming storm, the
waters then closed gently over the deck, the vessel
began to sink amidst the waves, and was descend-
ing in a whirlpool to the bottom of the ocean.
Then rose from sea to sky the wild farewell;
Then shriek’d the timid, and stood still the brave;
Then some leap’d overboard with dreadful yell,
As eager to anticipate their grave:
And the sea yawn’d around her like a hell.
And down she suck’d with her the whirling wave.
Like one who grapples with his enemy,
And strives to strangle him before he die.
And first one universal shriek there rush’d,
Louder than the loud ocean, like a crash.
Of echoing thunder; and then all was hush’d.
Save the wild wind and the remorseless dash
Of billows; but at intervals there gush’d.
Accompanied with a convulsive splash,
A solitary shreik, the bubbling cry
Of some strong swimmer in his agony.
« I turned my head in horror from the scene,
and miserable as was my own condition, I could
not but pity the unfortunate individuals that had
just been summoned to their last account. It
was heart-rending to think that so many of out
fellow-creatures had perished so close to us,
without our being able to render them any
assistance. But on these occasions, all ideas
save those of self-preservation, vanish from the


mind, and charity and benevolence seem to give
way to selfishness, which absorbs every amiable
feeling, and steels the heart against all tender
impressions.
“ We were on the summit of a wave when the
ship sank, and as soon as the old father saw the
sad catastrophe, his head drooped listlessly on
his bosom, and he fell into a swoon, from which
he did not recover for several hours afterwards.
In the mean time, we were running before the
wind with the utmost rapidity, though it was not
without the greatest exertion that we could keep
the boat dry by incessantly bailing, so boisterous
was the sea. For six hours we continued in the
same direction, during the whole of which time
the wind continued to blow with unabated fury.
At the expiration of this period, the storm began
gradually to cease, and when the sun had set, the
wind had almost totally died away, although the
waves did not diminish, until midnight. Relieved
of our anxiety, we continued to sail along pretty
comfortably until the next morning, when we
perceived a vessel in the distance. Signals of
distress were immediately made, which, fortu-
nately for us were observed, and in a short time
we found ourselves all safe on board a British
ship of war.”


The narrator here rather abruptly closed his
story, and drawing himself up to his full height,
looked deliberately around at each of his auditors,
with an air of expression which denoted how fully
sensible he was of his own superiority in nautical
affairs. The steam boat just at this moment
shipped an immense sea, which caused every
portion of it to vibrate as though it had struck
violently on a rock. The passengers looked at
each other in amazement, and maintained foi
some seconds an uninterrupted silence. The
breathless anxiety that pervaded their features,
and the fixed attention evinced in their looks,
clearly demonstrated how apprehensive they were
of their safety, and how greatly they dreaded the
position in which they were then placed. When
the cause of the shock was made known to them,
it was amusing in the extreme, to listen to the
ludicrous suggestions that they offered, for the
purpose of preventing the vessel from being over-
whelmed in the waves. One was so dreadfully
frightened, that he would not on any account be
persuaded to retire to his birth for the night, until
the captain promised him that all the hatches
should be closed, and rendered impervious to the
water. This individual, in particular, I could not
but pity. To such a person thought I, life


must be a misery, when accompanied with incon-
venience, or threatened with even the most distant
approach of danger. His very fears magnify
every trivial into a deadly peril, and create those
dangers which he is so anxious to avoid. He
suiveys objects, not with the eyes of calmness
and of reason, but through an artificial medium,
which distorts every thing that he beholds, and
makes it horrible to his sight. Thus does he
render himself miserable without a cause; he
becomes unable to enjoy his existence, as well as
the majority of his fellow-creatures, and makes
himself a laughing-stock to the more courageous
and rational portion of mankind. Such men as
these, instead of being creditable to themselves
and useful to society, are generally a disgrace to
their country and their species; and while they
are irksome to themselves, they are disagreeable
to their acquaintance.
When I awoke in the morning I found that we
had passed Newcastle, and were proceeding ra-
pidly up the Hunter. Every breath of wind had
died away, and the sun was shining brilliantly on
the silvery stream and the surrounding hills. The
morning air was balmy and refreshing, and nothing
seemed to break the stillness of Nature, but the
monotonous sound produced by the revolving of


the paddles through the water. It delighted me
to behold the unruffled surface of the river, before
it was disturbed by the rapid vessel that was
gliding along its surface. For some time I sat
still and gazed upon the streaks which diverged
from the prow of the boat on each side in equal
angles, and which spreading to each shore seemed
to follow us as we went along. Now and then
would we pass a richly cultivated farm, with a neat
and comfortable house erected on it; and see
cattle grazing in meadows luxuriantly green, and
fattening on the verdant and spontaneous herbage
of the fields around. Opulence and content, the
children of temperance and industry, seemed to
have made many of the delightful spots that we
passed, their constant abode. While I contem-
plated these pleasing scenes, the following lines of
the poet struck forcibly on my mind.
O fortunatos nimiiim, sua si bona norint.
Agricolas ! qnibus ipsa, procul discordibiis armis,
Pundit humo facilem victum justissima tellus.
O happy, if he knew his happy stale,
The swain, who, free from business and debate.
Receives his easy food from Nature’s hand.
And just returns of cultivated land I
If there is a spot in this wide world, where apart
from the din and bustle of mankind 1 could wish


to pass through life in ease and retirement, unin-
fluenced by avarice, or undisturbed by ambition, it
certainly is in one of the many sheltered and luxu-
riant vales which abound so much on the banks of
the Hawkesbury and the Hunter. There could I
Pass each day amid the solitudes of Nature, gazing
on the grand and imposing objects around, and
holding free and unrestrained converse with the
learned and illustrious men of former ages. While
poring over Virgil s Georgies, I might fancy myself
transported back to the Augustan period, and
become a contemporary of the poet; I might
people in imagination the lands around with hardy
Romans, and fancy my own fields part of the
genial soil of Italy. But these are Utopian,
visionary schemes, and such as have never yet
been realized. Man is influenced in all his
proceedings by external circumstances, and
cannot tell what condition of life would suit
him best, until he has been convinced by ex-
perience.
When we drew near the Green Hills, at which
place the boatwas to stop, all the passengers came
on deck and made preparations to disembark.
The wharf was crowded with individuals, some
attracted by curiosity, some to receive packages
from their friends and agents in Sydney, and others


to welcome their relatives on their return. The
paddles stopped for a moment, revolved back-
wards two or three times, and then entirely ceased.
In a few moments we all found ourselves safe on
terra jirma, surrounded by a whole host of idlers
that had come expressly to witness our arrival.
In this particular, steam boats are similar to mail
coaches, and the same interest which the appear-
ance of the latter creates among the heroes of an
inn yard, is excited among the loungers at the
wharf, by the arrival of the former at its desti-
nation. Many and exaggerated were the accounts
of the storm given by my fellow passengers to the
friends that clustered round them on their arrival.
And various were the exclamations of surprise and
astonishment that dropped from thelips of the atten-
tive auditors, when they heard such horrors related,
and contemplated how miraculously the adventu-
rous voyagers had escaped a watery grave. Some
were so struck with the account, that they vowed
upon the spot never to trust their precious lives in
such a frail conveyance, and fearlessly exclaimed,
that they would much rather proceed to the
metropolis by land fifty times, than go there once
by water. Whether these vows were kept or not
I shall not undertake to determine.


As soon as my baggage was landed I proceeded
to an inn, and there enjoyed for the remainder of
the day, those comforts for which the principal
houses of entertainment in all the Australian towns
are proverbial.


genius.




genius.
It is interesting to notice how some minds seem almost to create
themselves, springing up under every disadvantage, and workmg
their solitary but irresistible way through a thousand ototacto.
Nature seems to delight in disappointing the ass.dmt.es of art, w. h
which it would rear legitimate dnlnes. to maturity, andl to, glojy m
the vigour and luxuriance of her chance productions. She scatters
the seeds of genius to the winds, and though -me may perish among
the stony places of the world, and some be choked by he thorn
and brambles of early adversity; yet others will now and then strike
root even in the clefts of the rock, struggle bravely up into sunshine,
and spread over their sterile birth-place allthe beautiesof vegetation.
v Washington Irving,
In looking over the long list of illustrious men,
whose names are recorded in the annals of the
world, as being eminent for their talents, their
writings,and their acquirements; how many will
we meet with, who, neglected by fortune and bowed
down by poverty, have by the force of that genius
which Nature had implanted within them, risen
superior to their condition, broken through the
mists of ignorance and obscurity, and become
creditable to themselves and useful to mankind !


Some of the most brilliant ornaments of our na-
ture—men whose gigantic minds we can scarcely
contemplate without an involuntary feeling of
mingled admiration and respect, have been ob-
structed in their career by some of the most dis-
heartening obstacles that can possibly be thrown
before the human mind. Those obstructions
which to men of intellects less extensive would
be totally insurmountable, to them seem as mole
hills, which it scarcely costs them an effort to over-
come. We find it impossible to withold our ad-
miration from such individuals: the brilliancy of
their career attracts our attention, and the won-
derful nature of their exploits invariably com-
mands our respect.
It is a circumstance gratifying to our nature,
and one which eminently shows forth the wisdom
and impartial munificence of Providence; that the
most exalted geniuses in every age have sprung
up not in the palace of a prince or the mansion
of a noble, but more frequently in the halls of a
squire, or the cottage of a peasant. The Almighty
thus, while he bestows riches, rank and power
upon a few, occasionally raises up from the vulgar
crowd, men, the vigour of whose mental faculties
exalts them far above all their fellow creatures,
and exacts alike from persons in every grade of


life, from the highest to the lowest, that ap-
plause and veneration which none but those who
dread, and those who envy expanding genius and
superior talent, can possibly withold. It is to
this wise dispensation that we are principally
indebted, for the gradual increase of civil and
religious freedom in every portion of the world
where the seeds of science have been scattered
with a liberal hand, and nurtured carefully up to
a vigorous maturity. To what must the people of
England attribute the freedom and liberality of
their institutions, and the unrivalled splendour of
their position in the catalogue of nations ? Is it
to the extent of their resources, and the superior
valour of their soldiers and their seamen? No ! It
is to the number of men endowed with far more
than ordinary talent, that have sprung up from
amongst the lower and middle classes of society,
and devoted their gigantic energies to the preser-
vation of their innate freedom, and the destruction
of tyrrany and oppression. The feeling which ani-
mated them to exertion spread rapidly through all
their fellow citizens, and in a short time even me-
chanics became reflecting and intelligent. It is
almost impossible to conceive the immense power
that even one man of genius and virtue can exer-
cise over thousands of his fellow-men, when he


stands forth in defence of the true dignity of his
nature. Two of our best poets express themselves
beautifully on this important point. Goldsmith in
speaking of the British nation says :
Stern o’er each bosom reason holds her state,
With daring aims irregularly great.
Pride in their port, defiance in their eye,
I see the lords of human kind pass by;
Intent on high designs a thoughtful band.
By forms unfashion’d, fresh from nature’s hand.
Fierce in their native hardiness of soul.
True to imagined right above controul.
While e’en the peasant boasts these rights to scan,
And learns to venerate himself as man.
Thompson the philosopher and poet—the bard
of nature, and lover of his country—the man
whose name will ever remain an honor to the land
of his nativity; beautifully apostrophizes Britannia
thus:
Bold, firm, and graceful, are thy generous youth.
By hardships sinew’d, and by danger fir’d;
Scattering the nations where they go; and first
Or on the listed plain, cr stormy seas.
Mild are thy glories too, as o’er the plans
Of thriving peace thy thoughtful sires preside ;
In genius, and substantial learning, high ;
For every virtue, every worth, renown’d:
Sincere, plain-hearted, hospitable, kind;
Yet like the mustering thunder when provok’d,
The dread of tyrants and the sole resource
Of those that under grim oppression groan.
Let us examine the life and history of Benjamin


Franklin, the great American Philosopher, and we
shall see what a man of genius is capable of per-
forming though restrained by the most disheart-
ening circumstances. The son of an humble
mechanic, brought up in ignorance and obscurity,
intended by his parents to fill a situation no higher
in society than that of tradesman ; he entered the
world as a journeyman printer, destitute of money
and unrefined by education. For a time he strug-
gled onwards at the commencement of his eventful
career, in the same manner as the majority of those
individuals whose condition in life was similar to
his own. But the latent energies which were
placed within his breast, could not lie dormant long;
they could not be confined for ever by the exter-
nal circumstances which had originally prevented
them from bursting forth in all their native splen-
dour, and shedding at once a halo of glory around
the head of their illustrious possessor. But like
the sun which though buried for a time below the
horizon, yet at his allotted period begins to tinge
the eastern hills with his roseate rays, and filling
the atmosphere with light, gradually dispels the
gloomy darkness around, and at length bursts
forth from his hiding place and shines brilliantly
on the face of nature; his mental faculties, though
obscured by poverty and want of cultivation, at


length burst the bonds that confined them, and
emerging gradually from their pristine insignifi-
cance, they shed an intense illumination around,
not only himself, but all mankind. Naturally
of a studious disposition, he read every work that
he had the means of procuring, and instead of, (like
most young men) wasting his time in pleasure,
extravagance and dissipation, his leisure hours
were continually employed in storing his mind
with that fund of intellectual information, which
in after years he applied to such praiseworthy and
exalted purposes. Uninfluenced by the frivolous
pursuits of less thoughtful individuals, he advanced
slowly, but surely, on the road to happiness and
renown; and many years had not elapsed before
he had risen to a height of greatness that few
have attained, and to which even the most eminent
might be ambitious of being exalted. The jour-
neyman printer, unaided by patronage or wealth,
impelled himself forward on the road to eminence
and fame by hiyceaseless exertions; until finally
he placed himself in the foremost ranks of those
memorable patriots of America, who, disdaining to
submit to the tyranny and injustice of a corrupt
and wicked government, fought for, and gained
their political independence. The rifle, used as it
was with dauntless courage and deadly dexterity,


would never have been sufficient to have erected
the Colonies into a seperate empire, were there not
men like Franklin at the helm of state, to direct
the frail and youthful vessel through the many
shoals and quicksands that surrounded it, until
they steered it safely into the haven of a stout and
vigorous maturity. His whole life he devoted to
his country’s good, at a time when his exertions
were most required ; and when the want of that
firmness and dignity which belonged so peculiarly
to his character, might have been severely felt by
his fellow countrymen, and have tended materially
to prejudice their cause.
But we should consider Franklin not merely as
one of the liberators and guardians of his native
land, but also as a philosopher and a moralist.
We should look at him gazing thoughtfully at the
sublime spectacle of the heavens riven by the
lightning, and disturbed by the echoing thunder;
and forming one of the most daring schemes ever
contemplated by the human mind. We should
in imagination see him draw the dangerous and
destructive fluid from the clouds, and thus trium-
phantly prove how vast and astonishing is the
power that man possesses over every portion of the
creation. Then would we almost consider him as
a being of a superior order, endowed with energies
k 3


all but divine, and applying those energies to
the improvement and permanent advantage of his
species.
In contemplating the life and character of
Franklin, we cannot but admire the wisdom of
the Almighty, in thus raising up from obscurity at
the most critical period of America’s existence, a
man, who by his unaided exertions drew down and
concentrated on himself the applause of senates
and of kings—the thanks of his countrymen and
the admiration of mankind. The name of the
plain and lowly mechanic is now closely inter-
woven with the history of his Country. He is
now ranked high among the most distinguished
moralists and philosophers of every age; and while
the heroes of the American revolution are remem-
bered, he can never be forgotten.
I shall now turn to a genius of a different
description—one at the mention of whose name
the blood of every educated Briton warms with
enthusiasm ; and one who is the delight of every
person that is competent to understand the English
language. That man is Shakspeare, the bard of
nature and the child of genius, he of whom Lucien
Buonaparte wrote elegantly thus:
The eye of Genius glistens to admire.
How memory hails the sound of Shakspcare’s lyre.


One tear I’ll shed to form a crystal shrine,
Of all that’s grand, immortal and d‘vinc-
i .. Princes o’er their subject kingdoms rule,
£ Scare’s province to command ‘h*£* ‘
To add one leaf, Oh, Shakspearel to thy hay
How vain the effort and how mean my >
Im mortalShaksp r e^^PX sage .
Age becomes taught, and y
Born at a period when "
middle ages was butbCg '™' “ and scienee-
by the rays of reviving literature a
educated but in an inferior manne moralg; a „d
illiterate period— neglected as n; heyet
careless and improvident in his i P this
gave to the world pro Llctl ™ s lhe im ; t ation
Augustan age are held up a unfa .
and prevent it
to t -r„ a<ili H e eTose e supetior to every difficulty,
generation. He os 1 admire . but few
and set an exarop e 1 a height has his
S even our -st writers
have considered it honorable to icco
mentators, and draw upon themselves a sin.


portion of the glory that surrounds him. Dr
stupendous m “ d
Writers ranked first amongst the J age of
‘o improve the writi2 X aV ’ COntnbllted
‘he poet’s fame The ° f f and extend
»f British crZ gave ,he "? “ ost P-—&S
to fho productions of^he^mm^rtal^barcf of 6
remembered by an enlightened posterity.
sufficient for my purpose. Thev sb
tmctly that where true genius exists, it wdlTneviT
rnig it before the world in all
£n o land, it was and is, I believe even af f
1-iesent day, considered honorable by’ the wealthy


nobility and gentry to patronise those, whose
talents elevate them above the ordinary level ot
mankind, and do their utmost to place them in
that position which nature originally intended tor
them. The greatest ornaments of the bar, the senate
and the pulpit, were indebted to the patronage ot
some discerning individual for their rapid elevation
above the greater portion of their fellow citizens.
Curran, Chatham, Sheridan and Canning—men
who with their enchanting and resistless eloquence
filled listening senates with enthusiasm, and en-
tranced their auditors by their magic power—who,
possessing an almost unlimited sway over tle
passions of mankind, could, when they wished,,
excite pity, indigoation and contempt, in the most
callous breasts; were brought forward on the
theatre of life, by persons who perceived their
latent energies, and foresaw the halo of glory
that would in after times surround them.
There is nothing that I can conceive more
pleasing to the man of genuine taste and infor-
mation, than to reflect that one of the most illus-
trious and celebrated of his species was in some,
how slight soever may be the degree, indebted to
him for his prosperity and success. Wealth and
power can never be applied to a nobler purpose
than in the cultivation of the human mind, when


the ' s sucl ‘ as »*'• revive and cherish luxu-
riantly the seeds that are implanted in it
Australia is now rapidly approaching that state
evil and political importance, which will render
it an ample field for the display of talents of
y description, both natural and acquired
raters, philosophers and statesmen, will here at
no distant period, meet with that encouragement
which the more ancient, and populoufTm
unities of Europe they now receivl P Exper,“„”
d sense point to our native youth, as the indi-
viduals from whom should be selected those who
are to become the magistrates, legislators and
statesmen of their country. There will be many
doubt not, rise up amongst us, whose genius will
render them fit objects for the attention and assis-
tance of the opulent. For such as these, should the
Australians who are already placed in prosperous
circumstances, search with unwearied assiduity
and they may rest assured that the pains they
take w,|, be amply and satisfactorily requited
Let them consider how great will be their boast
when in after times they can say they benefited
their native land, by contributing to enrich it with
one of its most talented patriots and defenders.
Accumulated hoards will never afford them one*
t.the of the gratification, that the reflection of a
deed like this would produce.


OLD FARMER.




THE OLD FARMER.
O blest retirement, friend to life’s decline.
Retreats from care, that never must be mine:
How blest is he who crowns, in shades like these,
A youth of labour with an age of ease ;
Who quits a world where strong temptations try.
And, since ’tis hard to combat learns to fly 1
For him no wretches, born to work and weep,
Explore the mine,or tempt the dangerous deep;
No surly porter stands in guilty state,
To spurn imploring famine from the gate:
But on he moves to meet his latter end,
Angels around befriending virtue’s friend.
Sinks to the grave with unperceived decay,
While resignation gently slopes the way;
And all his prospects brightening to the last,
His heaven commences ere the world be past.
Goldsmith.
Almost every one who is an admirer of the pic-
turesque, has seen the Parramatta river, and gazed
on the beautiful scenery that surrounds its shores,
and sets off and gives an air of grandeur to that
splendid stream. Its numerous inlets, and the
shady groves and romantic forests, cultivated
fields, smiling cottages, and stately mansions that
adorn its banks; have now become objects of at-
tention and admiration, to the many who, led by


business or by pleasure, are continually traversing
its surface. The increased facilities of navigation
of late years, has rendered it easy for a lover of
nature’s beauties to gratify his taste, and extend
his information by visiting the most romantic and
magnificent places in Australia. The Parramatta
i iver in particular, having now become the common
thoroughfare between the town from which it
derives its name, and the metropolis; is almost
universally known to every portion of the Colo-
nists, from the humble mechanic to the inde-
pendent gentleman. Unlike most pleasing spots,
it is in the power of almost every individual at a
very trifling expense, to witness the splendour of
its scenes, and the varied prospects it presents to
the eye of the beholder. And of all those that have
seen and examined it, [ think I may safely affirm,
that there is not a single individual who has not
felt the most heartfelt gratification while gazing
on its beauties, and who would not wish to visit
it once more. It is a place that will bear the
most minute investigation, and time, instead of
rendering it less endearing, while it makes it more
familiar, will but augment the many charms it
possesses, and cause it to become more pleasing
to the man of genius, taste, and sensibility.
A few weeks since, at the commencement of


the present winter, I, in company with a party of
friends, rowed up the river. The day was un-
usually beautiful—the air was temperate and
refreshing, and the water was as smooth as a
polished mirror. Not a breath of wind not even
a zephyr agitated the face of nature, and all
around seemed buried in silence and in solitude.
The heavens were covered with that equivocal
description of clouds, partaking of the nature of
both the fleecy-white and dark moist exhalations
of the atmosphere ; and while one spot exhibited
a murky appearance, another would be adorned
with all the fantastic wreathings and different
hues, with which a creative fancy might fill the
enchanting abodes of the faries, decked out in all
their fabulous magnificence.
We moved gaily along the surface of the
stream, and every rocky islet, jutting promontory r
or sheltered cove that we passed, we examined
with the most attentive curiosity. The more
romantic the place, and the less it exhibited of
the traces of man, the more striking did it appear,
and the more pleasing was it to our excited ima-
ginations. A short distance above Bedlam Point,
we arrived directly opposite a bay, which extended
some hundreds of yards into the land. It was
surrounded by a tall, thick, and luxuriant forest.


which, rising majestically from the shores, in all
its pristine magnificence, gave an air of grandeur
to the scene. We rested on our oars for some
minutes to gaze upon the splendid spectacle. In
one part could be discovered, jutting out into the
middle of the river, a narrow ridge of rocks, form-
ing a natural wharf of the most commodious
description; and in another, a long narrow beach,
covered with the stumps of the dark and thick-
leaved mangroves, which trees had long since
fallen a sacrifice to the woodman’s axe, and of
which these, decaying roots were the sole and
solitary remains.
We pulled in towards the shore, and landed
at a wharf, roughly constructed of loose stones,
and which bore strong evidences of being used as
a landing-place for many preceding years. The
green grass growing thickly over and around it,
gave it an air of antiquity and veneration, which
rendered it pleasing to behold. A narrow foot-
path led directly from it, through an adjacent
clump of trees, composed partly of the ancient
giants of the forest, and partly of a youthful
shrubbery, but just springing up towards maturity.
Along this path we directed our footsteps, until
we arrived at the borders of what appeared to be
a cultivated farm. In the centre of it was erected


a small roughly constructed building, the roof of
which in the distance, was but just visible over
the tops, and through the branches, of the peach
and fig trees that surrounded it. The blue smoke
ascended perpendicularly from the chimney in
the midst of the grove, and imparted an air of
cheerfulness and comfort, to the quiet and shel-
tered haven whence it emanated, in silent but
majestic grandeur.
The road which led down towards the cottage,
conducted us through an avenue of decaying fruit
trees, whose mossy trunks, and overgrown leafless
branches, demonstrated either the negligence of
their owner, or the little value that he placed upon
them. Here and there might be discerned a
luxuriant tree, flourishing in all the vigour of
maturity, and bearing strong evidences of the
attention payed to it by the careful farmer. Those
that were neglected, appeared to be the wild
spontaneous productions of nature, aided by the
assiduities of art. Most of the ancient orchards
in this Colony present strange specimens of
mingled carefulness and neglect, and while in one
spot, we can see fruit drooping from the loaded
and luxuriant branches, in another will we behold
naught but sterility and decay.
The loud barking of a lazy mastiff, that was


standing loose at the threshold of the door, an-
nounced our approach. A single word from his
master was sufficient to allay the tumult raised
by the watchful animal ; and with the customary
assurance that the dog would not injure us, we
were invited to enter the dwelling. In the bush,
the rules of etiquette and politeness, are by no
means rigidly enforced, and without any ceremony
we at once accepted the invitation. The room
to which we were thus introduced, was neither
flagged nor floored, and the only carpet that
adorned it, was the bare cold earth, pounded down
by years of trampling to a stone-like consistency.
But humble, and naked as it was, it was swept
with a degree of care and neatness, of which much
loftier buildings might be proud. No heaps of
filth drawn up in corners, or scattered over the
surface, displeased the eye, or caused the beholder
to become fully sensible of the lowliness of the
place. Every thing in the apartment had an air
of neatness, and of cheerfulness, and while I gazed
around, I could not but think, that happiness and
content, which so frequently refuse to enter the
portals of the opulent and great, dwelt in this
humble abode. The immense fire place which
occupied nearly the whole of one side of the
room, was filled with gigantic logs piled one upon


another, which blazed with a degiee of intensity,
such, that while it was astonishing to us, who had
been accustomed to the paltry ms.gmficant fires
used within the precincts of a town, dtffused a
generous warmth throughout every por ion
apartment. A small table, the leaf of which was
supported by legs arranged cross-wise, a er
manner of a stretcher, together with five o n
rush-bottomed chairs, and a three-leggec ,
composed the principal furniture in the room
Various shelves were arranged around on th
walls, cut out, and nailed up, m the most ure-
gular and fantastic manner. On one were placed
smoothing irons, and other instruments of that
description ; another contained a variety of cups,
saucers, a*d plates of all sorts, sizes, and patterns,
promiscuously mingled together; a third was bur-
thened with glasses, decanters, blacking bottles,
and other articles of domestic utility; and m
short no spot was left ungraced with something
adapted either for ornament or advantage.
The owners of this dwelling were an antiquated
couple, whose very appearance indicated that
they were English. The old man was a low sized,
sturdy, cheerful-looking individual, and his coun-
tenance beamed with an expression of ease, am
prosperity, that was really delightful to behold.


Ithe1 the old farmer.
His grey locks, whitened by the influence of
seventy winters, together with his ruddy face,
combined to represent one of the most pleasing
specimens I had ever beheld, of a comfortable and
happy old age. His wife, though much younger
than himself, was yet, far advanced into the sere,
and yellow leaf of life, but age, instead of ren-
dering her weak and helpless, appeared to possess
but little influence over her mental, or her bodily
faculties. Like the majority of her country-
women in this Colony, she was strongly imbued
with that spirit of restless activity, which cannot
endure the thoughts of being idle for an instant.
There was always something for her to perform,
something that rendered it necessary for her to
exert herself, and abstain from that state of useless
inactivity which she found so utterly uncongenial
to her disposition.
Scarcely had we been seated when we were
presented with fruit of the most delicious de-
scription, and importuned to partake of it with a
degree of earnestness that rendered it impossible
for us to refuse. It was gratifying in the extreme,
to witness the humble generosity and simple kind-
hearted manners of the old couple, during the
whole of the time that we remained. lam
naturally an ardent admirer of kindness and sim-


plicity in cottage life. Willingly would I sit for
hours together and contemplate the many beauties
of innocence and virtue, when adorned and set
off by experience and age. How difficult is it to
meet with individuals, who, after having spent
their lives with pleasure to themselves, and ad-
vantage to society, have sank into the vale of
years, happy and contented; injuring no one,
and pleased with themselves and all mankind.
The opulent and great —the gaudy puppets of
a vain and transitory world, are but indifferently
acquainted with the invaluable comforts of an
humble and a virtuous life. They little know
how happy is the man, who, apart from the cares
and anxieties of a public career, lives without
repining at his lot; ignorant of luxury, though
possessing all that nature can reasonably desire.
I was anxious to become acquainted with the
old farmer’s history. His countenance pre-
possessed me in his favour, and the more I
contemplated, the more was I pleased with him.
He, surely, thought I, cannot have been one of
the depraved and unprincipled outcasts of society,
with whom this smiling country has already been
overburdened. He, I felt convinced, was never
ranked among that class of individuals, who, lost
to every sense of justice and shame, think it their


duty to prey upon the vitals of society, despising
alike the laws of their fellow-men, and the Com-
mandments of their Creator. I was not wrong
in my conjectures. Before we departed, he re-
lated his little history with an air of diffidence
and unaffected simplicity, that, of itself, was
sufficient to endear him to every man of taste
and feeling. What few errors he had been guilty
of, he neither endeavoured to conceal, from false
shame, nor did he attempt to magnify them, for
the sake of exhibiting his hardihood. Confirmed
logues always seem to delight in exaggerating
their depredations, and making themselves appear
far more culpable in the eyes of their auditors
than they really are. An honest man, though
truth forbids him to suppress what he has actually
committed, never tries to blacken his character
for the purpose of creating astonishment, or draw-
ing on himself the applause and admiration of
the worthless.
1 would willingly give the old man’s tale, plain
and unvarnished as it is, for it would be far more
characteristic and affecting than any thing that I
can substitute in its place. But by so doing, I
would trespass too long on the patience of°my
readers.
He was the only son of a poor and industrious,


though virtuous couple, who, by hard struggling,
were enabled to maintain themselves and their
offspring, in a state of tolerable comfort. Their
child, as soon as reason began to assume its
sway over his infant mind, they placed under the
direction of the school-master of the village where
t hey resided. There he remained, until it was
judged by his parents, (who certainly were not of
a literary cast) that he had advanced far enough
into the labyrinths of science. At the age of
twelve, his studies were completed, and he was
taken from the flowery groves of learning, to be
employed in some useful and industrious occu-
pation. From his infancy, the seeds of honesty
were endeavoured to be rirmly implanted in his
mind; and at home he continually had a virtuous
example set before him. Thus he grew up to
manhood, in the path of virtue, and became the
delight of his parents, when age, with rapid
strides, came upon them. For a time, he con-
tinued to be the sole support of their declining
years. He ministered to their wants —cheered
them by his presence —and watched over them
with filial attention and respect. He considered
this as the happiest portion of his life, and dwelt
on it with a degree of attachment and veneration,
that spoke volumes for his filial piety. While


relating to us the history of this period of his
existence, the tears forced themselves into his
eyes, and fell sparkling down the furrows of his
aged cheeks. His voice became almost inaudible,
and it was with the greatest difficulty that he
could overcome the violence of his emotions. I
was greatly affected by his manner, and could
not but sympathize with his feelings. To see a
man, who, having passed through the various
vicissitudes of a chequered life, remember fondly,
at the distance of half a century, the parents who
had nurtured, protected and educated him from
infancy to manhood—who had instructed him
when ignorant, and guarded him when helpless,
was a sight as unusual as it was affecting
He had attained his twenty-third year, when
he was deprived, almost simultaneously, of both
his parents, and was thus left alone in the world,
without a friend to assist him. Thrown entirely
upon his own resources, penniless and unknown,
after the last sad rights had been performed to
the remains of the departed ; being naturally of
an adventurous and restless disposition, he packed
up his little all, and directed his footsteps to the
great Metropolis. He had not been long in this
sink of infamy and vice—this grand emporium for
all the depravity of mankind, when he became


like most young men, when left to their own
direction, acquainted with a number of individuals
of equal age, and moving in a sphere of life similar
to his own. But London, it is well known, is by
no means the place where virtuous characters can
be found with readiness, in any circle of society;
and it was his misfortune to be thrown at once
amongst a set of the most dissolute, immoral, and
unprincipled reprobates in existence. Time passed
rapidly on, and with it, his morality began to dis-
sipate like mists, by the rays of the mid-day sun.
The situation which he obtained on his arrival,
shortly became insufficient to enable him to keep
pace with his acquaintance, in their career of folly
and intemperance. He took to gaming, for the
purpose of replenishing his scanty resources, and
became one of a gang, whose constant employment
was to delude and cheat the many infatuated
youths of fortune, who are so frequently allured
to their destruction, by the fancied charms of the
gambling table. It was this, that shortly after-
wards led to his transportation. A few weeks
after he had commenced this course of life, one of
his friends and associates was detected in some
flagrant piece of roguery, which led to the exposure
of all their proceedings, and the consequence was,
that they were all expelled from their country, in


justice to the offended laws of society, and sent
to this distant, and at that time, comparatively
unknown land.
During his long voyage, he had full time to
meditate upon his folly, and neither the jeers nor
encouragements of his hardened companions, could
induce him to glory in, and look with indifference
upon his lamentable, and degraded situation. And,
consequently, when he arrived upon these southern
shores, he was an altered and a regenerated cha-
racter. Macquarie was at that time the ruler of
Australia, and according to the custom of those
days, the reformed,, and exemplary convict was
shortly after his arrival, rewarded with a con-
ditional grant of the land upon which he now
resided, and presented with stock and implements,
foi the purpose of enabling him to commence his
farming operations. His land at that remote pe-
riod, was covered with a thick and gloomy forest,
in which the sound of the woodman’s axe, had
never been heard echoing through its recesses,
and disturbing the tenants which nature had
originally placed there. The emu and the kan-
garoo, reposed in its fastnesses undisturbed, and
the birds of the air rested fearlessly in the verdant
foliage of the trees around. The majestic stream
which floated silently before it, was but seldom


traversed by the bark of the civilized being, and
the canoe of the savage floated frequently along
its surface. Civilization and improvement have
since that period, advanced with rapid strides, and
swept away many of the indications of pristine
wildness, and stamped upon the surrounding
scenery, the impress of cultivation and pros-
perity. The lowly and untutored Aborigine, now
no more seeks his prey amongst the woods, nor
searches the waters for his sustenance. His race
have become almost extinct, or have retired into
the interior before the advance of the European.
The degraded convict on being promoted to
the situation of a landholder, immediately applied
himself with unwearied assiduity, to the improve-
ment of the ground entrusted to his care. By
degrees his stock increased, and his farm began
to assume a rich and luxuriant appearance, and in
the course of a few months he had the satisfaction
of reaping its produce, for his own emolument and
advantage. When his affairs became prosperous, he
married a country woman of taste and habits similar
to his own, and resolved to remain for life on that
spot, where a generous and discerning governor
had located him. Since then he has continued to
pass through life, happy and contented, pleased
with his condition, and beloved by all around him.


lliis is but a brief and imperfect sketch of the
history of the old farmer, and is nothing more
than a mere outline of the narrative, which he
himself related. He is one of a class of beings,
who once were numerous in this Colony, but who
are rapidly dwindling away, and of whom a few
years hence, scarcely a vestige will be left. All
the ancient freeholders who arrived in Australia
prior to, and during the government of Macquarie,
are almost a distinct order of beings, differing
materially in their habits and characters from the
mass of society, and possessing attributes peculiar
to themselves. It is easy to distinguish them from
any other set of individuals. If you enter the
house of one of them, the name of their benefactor
will invariably be mentioned by them, with fond
remembrance, and filial veneration. Macquarie,
they all look upon with a degree of respect amoun-
ting almost to reverential awe; and the praises,
and blessings of hundreds, are continually coupled
with his name. The children are taught to lisp
the whole catalogue of his virtues, and unite their
youthful voices in lauding him to the skies. The
recollection of his deeds, is still fresh in their
memories, and time instead of diminishing, serves
but to augment their respect.
While I listened to the old man eulogizing the


departed representative of royalty—the ancient ruler
of the realm, his simple, hut earnest and impressive
manner attracted my attention, and commanded
niv applause. His heartfelt gratitude, rendered
him eloquent, and gave an air of majesty to his
expressions, the effects which even while I write
seem to vibrate through my frame, and fill my
mind with contending emotions. I could not but
consider, how much more to be desired is the
unaffected, and spontaneous applause of an hones
and an humble man, than the supercilious, and
too often hypocritical commendations of a fickle
and a thoughtless world. Fame flies on the
pinions of a changeful blast, which every opposing
wind can dissipate, but that renown which is based
on sincerity and truth, remains firm as a gigantic
rock, amidst the waves of ocean. The wars o
conflicting elements, and the storms which agitate
the deep, though they may beat against it with
their utmost fury, make but a transient impression,
and when a calm succeeds, it still frowns aloft m
all its native majesty, a monument which nothing
can destroy. Thus it is that the praises of the lowly ,
though despised by the ignorant, and disregarded
by the proud and artificial, are always respected
by the discerning and intelligent, and must even
lually be appreciated in the manner they deserve.
M 3


The old man had but one circumstance to com-
plain of, he had descended into the vale of years
without offspring; without having a child to cheer
Um . h,s dec,ine - But he was well contented
with his lot, and submitted cheerfully to the de-
crees of Providence. It was not in his nature
to repine at his condition, and nothing could
disturb the equanimity of his mind, or diminish the
pleasures of his retired and easy life. He had
when young, entered the wilderness for his live-
lihood; separated himself (as it were) from his
fellow men; toiled industriously to improve his
circumstances; changed the wild aspect of his
farm to a cheerful appearance, and in the meridian
ot his existence, acquired a competence to support
um to the grave. I could not but envy him many
of the gratifications he had enjoyed. It must
have been delightful to have beheld the splendid
scenes, which twenty years since, the prospect
around his dwelling afforded to the beholder. The
murmuring oak, the luxuriant wattle, the tall
iron-bark, the gigantic gum, and all the various
shrubs, with which the Australian forests abound,
mingled together in gloomy grandeur, must have*
presented a scene, worthy the contemplation of
every man of genuine taste, and understanding.
The undisturbed solitudes of nature are always


grand, but when the surrounding spots are beau-
tiful in the extreme, nothing can be more imposing.
To witness the gradual change, from a lonely
forest to a cultivated field —from a desert and un-
inhabited, to a thickly populated country, must to
a man of a reflecting disposition be inexpressibly
delightful.
The ancient farmer has nearly run his earthly
course, and in all probability before many years,
perhaps months can elapse, he will be gathered
to his fathers. His downward journey is easy and
imperceptible; nothing but flowers beset his path,
the thorns of adversity, have been plucked from
before him; and he will glide gently and cheerfully
into “ that bourne from which no traveller returns.
Undisturbed by worldly cares, he will journey on
his road, and like travelling towards a distant
home, the nearer he approaches his destination,
the more will he desire to be at rest.
To the reader I would say, “ let the character
of this man be engraven upon your mind, reflect
upon his life, his exploits, and his virtues, con-
template his declining years, and when (if God
grants that you live long in the land of your fore-
fathers) age begins to imprint its marks upon your
frame, endeavour to imitate his example.




CHURCH-YARD REVERIE.




A CHURCH YARD REVERIE.
So peaceful rests, without a stone, a name,
What once had beauty, titles, wealth, and fame.
How lov’d, how honour’d once, avails thee not.
To whom related or by whom begot:
A heap of dust alone remains of thee;
’Tis all thou art, and all the proud shall be 1 Pope.
Thus man passes away; his name perishes from record and recol-
lection; his history is as a tale that is told, and bit very monument
Washington Irving.
■becomes a ruin.
■Nothing can be more instructing to a man of
sensibility and feeling, than a stroll through a
grave-yard, among the peaceful repositories of the
•dead. While gazing on the silent, and sad me-
mentoes of mortality, he learns how to appreciate
his own condition, and reflect upon, and sympa-
thize with, the fate of those who have departed
before him. He sees while conning over some
exaggerated eulogy, engraved by friendship or
affection, on the mouldering stone, the vanity of
human exploits, and cannot but reflect thatbefoie
a century will have passed away, every vestige of
what lies before him will be gone; and not even
a decaying particle of a monument will remain.


Time will sweep relentlessly over every portion of
the burial ground, and the ashes of friends and
enemies—of the opulent and poor—of the proud
and lowly—of the parent and child—will become
mingled with the dust which enshrine them, and
their resting place will be undistinguished and
unknown.
I once walked through the burial grounds on
the Surrey Hills, in the commencement of spring,
just as the flowers were beginning to bloom forth
in all their beauty. It was early in the morning
when I commenced rambling amongst the tombs,
the dew had not yet been dissipated by the genial
rays of the invigorating luminary, and the cool
fragrance of the atmosphere had not yet given way
to the noon-day heat. In short, it was exactly
such an hour as an imaginative, or sensitive being
would delight to rove about, and lose himself in
the regions of fancy.
I directed my footsteps to a cluster of tombs
on an eminence, which was thickly covered with
green and blooming geraniums. lat first almost
forgot the ravages of the grave, in contemplating
the enchanting appearance of the place. My eyes
wandered from one object to another, with a degree
of mingled melancholy and satisfaction; and I
could not but applaud the taste of the individuals


who had contributed, by planting the fragrant
evergreens around, to diminish the unpleasant
feelings which a grave-yard is calculated to excite
in the human mind. Irving says, “ the natural
effect of sorrow over the dead, is to refine and
elevate the mind; and we have a proof of it in
the purity of sentiment, and the unaffected ele-
gance of thought which pervaded the whole of
these funeral observances: thus, it was an especial
precaution, that none but sweet-scented ever-
greens, and flowers should be employed. The
intention seems to have been, to soften the horrors
of the tomb, to beguile the mind from brooding
over the disgraces of perishing mortality, and to
associate the memory of the deceased, with the
most delicate, and beautiful objects in nature.
There is a dismal process going on in the grave,
ere dust can return to its kindred dust, which the
imagination shrinks from contemplating; and we
seek still to think of the form we have loved, with
those refined associations which it awakened when
blooming before us, in youth and beauty.
It is certainly one of the most beautiful tiaits
in English rural, character, which induces the
bereft individuals to adorn the last home of thcii
departed relatives. Such conduct evinces a feeling
of tender sympathy, and shows how fine is the


sensibility of even the most humble persons in
society. Those who can be so tremblingly awake
to the recollections of departed worth, must also
be moral and religious in themselves; they must
have formed a proper estimate of the ravages of
death, and have adopted this appropriate method,
to alleviate his terrors. Sculptured effigies, marble
monuments, and laudatory inscriptions, are by
no means so apt to draw the attention from the
humiliating frailty of human life, and wrap the
mind in pleasing reveries, as a lowly turf-clad
grave, adorned by simple nature, unaided by the
hand of Art. The ostentatious display of orna-
ment on the proud mausoleums of the titled great,
awaken neither sympathy not regard, and the
beholder turns from them with indifference.
I had placed myself in the centre of the group
of tombs which I have just mentioned. I sat
down on the cold stones, and contemplated in
attentive silence, the different scenes presented to
my view as I gazed around. On one side, was
the thickly populated metropolis of Australia,
teeming with inhabitants, busily intent on the
affairs of a transient world; while on another, forests
and groves appeared, which in a few years are
destined to give way to the habitations of man-
kind, and the marts of opulence and commerce.


There was the gothic Church with its lofty spire,
towering majestically over the tops of the surroun-
ding buildings; here the extensive manufactory,
filled with thoughtless, and industrious mortals;
and in the distance could be seen the tapering
masts of many vessels, destined to convey oui
colonial produce to the ports of every mercantile
nation in the world. The residence of the citizen,
the mansion of the merchant, the hall of the in-
dependent gentleman, the cottage of the gaidener,
the shop of the trader, and all the haunts of man,
in every grade of society, met my wandering eye.
I could not but rejoice in the dawning grandeur —
the awakening magnificence of my country, while
I contemplated the indications of its extensive
wealth —the many evidences of its gigantic re-
sources, and the proofs of its astonishing, and
unparalleled advancement towards national re-
nown. My imagination became excited, and
fancy pictured vividly before me, the splendid
empire of which this Colony is the infant germ ,
and I could not but think that many of its sons,
are at some future period, destined to become
famous in the annals of the world. Poets, phi-
losophers and statesmen, all flitted rapidly before
my mind, and penetrating in thought, through the
mists of the future, I saw the embryo Homers,


Platos and Ciceros, of the Southern Hemisphere.
While occupied in these reflections, my eyes fell
upon the adjacent graves. In an instant, the
visionary prospect which I had created, vanished,
and a sense of the vanity of human greatness,
forced itself upon my understanding. To think
that the many individuals who were now in
existence, and the many who may hereafter suc-
ceed them, how celebrated or illustrious soever
they may be, must all be reduced to the same
condition as the dust around, was sufficient to
render me fully sensible of the manifest imper-
fection of our nature, and the impotency of our most
strenuous exertions. Xerxes the most powerful,
and absolute monarch of his time, when he saw
the immense numbers of his soldiers—when he
beheld the sea covered with his squadrons, and
the plains darkened with his legions, is reported
to have wept, while he involuntarily exclaimed
“ alas of all the innumerable host that I now see,
not one will be in existence a century from this
present period!” The haughty tyrant, bred up
in luxury, and taught from his earliest years, to
consider himself endowed with the powers and
attributes of divinity, could not but acknowledge
his insignificance, when compared with the majesty
of the Creator, and Ruler of the Universe. His


overwhelming armament, powerful as it was, when
arrayed against the grim king of terrors, was im-
becile as a pigmy.
Contiguous to the burial ground, is erected the
Benevolent Asylum, a structure which is creditable
to its originators, and honorable to Australia.
While I looked upon its extensive dimensions, and
neat and comfortable appearance, I could not but
feel happy, that even in this land of crime—this
emporium of wickedness and depravity, there was
found benevolence, and virtue sufficient to support
an institution, of which the most moral community
of either ancient or modern times, might well be
proud. This charitable place where,
Age and want sit smiling at the gate,
has now become the last resort of those whom
poverty, misery and misfortune, have thrown
penniless, and friendless on the world. Here while
the flickering light of existence glimmers in the
socket, the aged pass the last hours of their life
in comparative comfort, and when the soul sepa-
rates from its earthly tenement, the body is con-
signed to its parent clay, but a few yards from the
spot where it expired. Thus, with the emblems of
mortality continually before their eyes, the inmates
of the Asylum are warned of their approaching end,
and learn how to prepare themselves for eternity.


The tomb on which I was seated, covered the
remains of an individual with whom, when in life,
I was slightly acquainted. A few yards from him
was deposited the body of a person who, in con-
sequence of some family difference, was always
his avowed and determined enemy. Their mutual
hostility extended to the grave, but here it was
compelled to cease, beyond this, the will of mor-
tals cannot reach. The dull cold earth puts a
final termination to the resentments and passions,
and prejudices of man, and proves clearly, but
mournfully, the littleness of his conceptions. I
could not at the time, but repeat to myself the
beautiful lines written by Scott, on the monuments
of Fox and Pitt, in Westminster Abbey.
Where—taming thought to human pride I
The mighty chiefs sleep side by side.
Drop upon Fox’s grave the tear.
’T will trickle to his rival’s bier.
O'er Pitt’s the mournful requiem sound.
And Fox’s shall the notes rebound.
The solemn echo seems to cry—
‘Here let their discord with them die ;
Speak not for those a separate doom,
Whom fate made brothers in the tomb;
But search the land of living men
Where wilt thou find their like again!’
Lord Byron in the following excellent lines, also
comments upon this circumstance. In the vigorous


and majestic style, for which he was so justly
renowned, he exclaims;
But where are they—the rivals! a few feet
Of sullen earth divide each winding sheet.
How peaceful and how powerful is the grave,
Which hushes all ! a calm, unstorjny wave.
Which oversweeps the world. The theme is cld
Of “dust to dust;" but half its tale untold:
Time tempers not its terrors—still the worm
Winds its cold folds, the tomb preserves its form.
Varied above but still alike below;
The urn may shine, the ashes will not glow;
Though Cleopatra’s mummy cross the sea
O’er which from empire she lured Anthony;
Though Alexander’s urn a show be grown,
On shores he wept to conquer, though unknown—
How vain, how worse than vain at length appear
The madman’s wish, the Macedonian’s tear!
He wept for world’s to conquer—half the earth
Knows not his name, or but his death, and birth,
And desolation; while his native Greece
Hath all of desolation, save it’s peace.
He “wept for world’s to conquer!” he who ne’er
Conceived the globe, he panted not to spare!
With even the busy Northern Isle unknown,
Which holds his urn, and never knew his throne.
The grave—how thrilling is the sound! What
emotions does it awaken in the human breast!
Who is there so callous, or so dull, as not to feel
moved when he hears it seriously mentioned!
Before its gloomy appearance love, hatred and
revenge, alike become impotent, and at once fall
prostrate, and sink into obscurity and insignifi-
cance. Thus far, and no farther does the weak


and transient power of man extend, and here is
the limit of his exertions—the termination of his
projects. The crimes of the culprit, the offences
of the foe, the affection of the friend, are all
forgotten when the objects of punishment, ofchas-
tisment or regard, are consigned to the cold
recesses, the damps, the worms and darkness of
the grave. The Almighty here interposes his
supreme authority, and tacitly, but fearfully pro-
claims the insignificance of his creatures. In the
tomb, rank and riches find an end to all their
vanities, and the turf-clad soil is the home—the
last sad refuge of the poor. Here pomp and
haughty wealth find a punishment, and humility
and poverty a safe retreat. All distinctions become
levelled, and the prince is placed upon an equality
with the peasant. The worm preys upon the
remains of the one, as readily as it devours the
body of the other.
The solicitude evinced by some individuals to
adorn to the utmost of their power the graves of
their departed relatives or friends, leads them
frequently into excesses, which a fastidious indi-
vidual would be induced at once to condemn.
Marble tombs and sculptured urns, surrounded
with wreaths, and devices of the most fantastic,
and in some instances, beautiful description, often


meet the eye of the observer while gazing on,
the solemn, silent repositories of the dead.* The
philosopher, and the moralist may despise this
custom —they may ridicule the imbecility of those
whom affection induces to erect mementoes, which
though to day they may boast of their beauty and
stability, will on the morrow be mouldered and
destroyed, and converted into a chaotic mass of
ruins. But vain and transient as are these erec-
tions, they shew rather amiable than ridiculous
traits in human character; they betray sympathy
and a degree of taste, which every one susceptible
of tender impressions, cannot but admire. How
much more affecting, how much more congenial
is it to our nature, to ornament the last resting
place of those we love, than to suffer it to remain
untouched and undistinguished. Though we
cannot hope in this world for any of our labours
to exist through all the mists of the future, suc-
* The Greeks called a burying-ground by the soothing term of
Cocmetrion, or, “ the sleeping-placethe Jews, who had no horrors
of the grave, by Bethaim, or, “ the house of the living the Ger-
mans, with religious simplicity; “God’s field.” The Scriptures had
only noticed that celestial being, “the Angel of Death,” —graceful,
solemn, and sacred ! Whence, then, originated that stalking skele-
ton, suggesting so many false and scphulchral ideas, and which for
ns has so long served as the image of death 1
D Israeli's Curiosities of Literature^


cessfully resisting the encroachments of time, yet
they will in all probability live until we ourselves
may be summoned by our Creator. Thus will our
aim be gratified, our wish accomplished; what we
caused to be erected will remain as long as we
ourselves are permitted to behold it, and when it
begins to moulder into dust, we ourselves will be
resting amongst our fathers.
Nearly all the tombs which I examined, were
covered with inscriptions extolling the piety, and
virtue of the earth which they contained. Were
it a place in which one could indulge in such
feelings, I might have been disgusted with the
many exaggerated epitaphs that I beheld. But
when I read the “ requiesat in pace ’ with which
or some similar inscription most of them were
concluded, the simple and affecting words attrac-
ted my attention, and I could do no more than
fervently repeat them.
I remember once, having seen carved on a
simple head stone, by a husband the words
“ She was a good woman."
And no epitaph or eulogy, either before or since,
struck me so forcibly or caused me to entertain
so favourable an opinion of the departed being
for whom it was composed. There is something
affecting in these few words, which even the most


callous must acknowledge; something which con-
vinces the reader of their truth ; and causes him
to admire both the virtue of the wife and the
attachment of the husband.
I cannot conclude more aptly, than by saying,
in the words of Irving,—“ Ay, go to the grave of
buried love, and meditate ! There settle the ac-
count with thy conscience for every past benefit
unrequited—every past endearment unregarded,
of that departed being, who can never—never-
never return, to be soothed by thy contrition.
“ If thou art a child, and hast ever added a
sorrow to the soul, or a furrow to the silvered
brow of an affectionate parent —if thou art a
husband, and hast ever caused the fond bosom
that ventured its whole happiness in thy arms, to
doubt one moment of thy kindness, or thy truth
—if thou art a friend, and hast ever wronged, in
thought, or word, or deed, the spirit that gene-
rously confided in thee —if thou art a lover, and
hast ever given one unmerited pang to that true
heart, which now lies cold and still beneath thy
feet ;—then be sure that every unkind look, every
ungracious word, every ungentle action, will come
thronging back upon thy memory, and knocking
dolefully at thy soul;—then be sure that thou
wilt lie down sorrowing and repentant on the


grave, and utter the unheard groan, and pour the
unavailing tear, more deep, more bitter, because
unheard and unavailing. Then weave thy chap-
let of flowers, and strew the beauties of nature
about the grave; console thy broken spirit, if
thou canst, with these tender, yet futile tributes
of regret; but take warning by the bitterness of
this thy contrite affliction over the dead, and
henceforth be more faithful and affectionate to
the living.”


THE PSEUDO-POETS.




THE PSEUDO-POETS.
Such is the force of wit! but not belong
To me the arrows of satiric song;
The royal vices of our age demand,
A keener weapon and a mightier hand.
Still there arc follies, e’en for me to chase,
And yield at least amusement in the race;
Laugh when I laugh, I seek no other fame ; ■
The cry is up and scribblers are my game. BvßOtf.
Where is the man of taste, who is not fond of
poetry, when it is written with elegance, melody,
and fire? What gentleman of education, could
look with indifference upon the lofty strains, and
sublime, heart-thrilling exclamations of poetic
genius?* In polite society to acknowledge oneself
* D’lsraeli says “In all ages there has existed an anti-poetical
party. This faction consists of those frigid intellects, incapable of
that glowing expansion, so necessary to feel the charms of an art
which only addresses Itself to the imagination; or of writers who
having proved unsuccessful in their court to the muses, revenge
themselves by reviling them, and also of those religious minds, who
consider the ardent effusions of poetry, as dangerous to the morals
and peace of society.
“ Plato among the ancients, is the model of those moderns, who
profess themselves to be anti-poetical.”
Curiosities of Literature ,


inimical to poetry, would be considered closely
akin to vulgarity. Like music, it charms and
elevates the soul, and fills it with a degree of
enthusiasm, which scarcely any thing else can
excite. The melodious lines—the tender pathos—
the sublime imagery—the vivid descriptions—the
beautiful similies which abound in the productions
of some writers, possesses an influence over the
mind improved by education, of which the frigid
stoic, or the unimaginative pedant, cannot form
even the most distant idea. How often have I
perused for hours, over and over again, the many
splendid passages which adorn, and give an air
of grandeur to British poetry! The affecting pathos
of Gray’s Elegy—the elegant simplicity of Gold-
smith’s Deserted Village; or the philosophic dig-
nity of Thompson, have tended more to my
gratification, than almost any other description of
writing, that I have perused. In every passage
of these productions, the genius of the writer
shines forth with a brilliant lustre, and gives the
reader a* vivid idea of what elevated heights, the
imaginations of some men are permitted to soar.
The wonderful powers of a Milton, or a Shak-
speare, astonish and delight, and barbarous must
be the taste of that individual, who could feel
uninterested by their productions.


Although it is proper, and natural to admire
the beauties of poetic composition, many persons
are frequently led into unaccountable excesses,
by the intensity of their respect. Some there are,
who filled with a glow of enthusiastic ardour, fancy
themselves elevated with the divine inspiration,
and in endeavouring to ascend the height of
Parnassus, fall into the abyss of obscurity and
contempt, to the inexpressible delight, and amuse-
ment of every beholder. It is almost impossible
to account for the infatuated presumption of men,
who, destitute of every spark of talent, imagine
themselves endowed with colossal faculties, and
strive with a degree of earnestness, but equalled
by their stupidity, to place themselves upon a par
with the master of spirits of mankind. Repeated
failures neither deter them from continuing in their
course, nor convince them of the meanness ol
their abilities. From absurdity to absurdity —from
folly to folly, they heedlessly hurry on; not once
perceiving that the further they proceed, the less
is their chance of acquiring literary renown. One
of these men I should compare to a snarling,
diminutive whelp, possessing more assurance and
impudence than a mastiff, but not one tenth of
his strength and dignity.
Australia unfortunately, is not entirely free from


characters of this description. Some of these
would-be poets, flourish in this genial dime—a
ciicumstance but little I must acknowledge, to the
glory of our literature. Any one, who takes the
trouble to peruse the scraps, that occasionally
appear in our colonial periodicals, will at once
perceive, how unmercifully we are inundated with
ridiculous and unmeaning trash, emanating from
the pens of persons, who in the words of a cele-
biated writer “possess the melancholy madness
of poetry, without the inspiration.” It is a remark-
able thing, and one well worthy of observation,
that love is the principal—almost the only topic,
on which their productions are composed. These
tender-hearted, love-sick swains, pour forth their
inmost souls in fancied melody, and while they
endeavour to laud the fortunate object of their
affections, they think to immortalize their names.
Irving’s, Mustapha Rub-a-dub Keli Khan,ob-
serves in writing to his friend: “ I should, perhaps,
inform thee that there are but nine Christian
muses, who were formerly Pagans, but have since
been converted, and that in this country we never
hear of a tenth, unless some crazy poet, wishes to
pay an hyperbolical compliment to his mistress;
on which occasion it goes hard, but she figures as
a tenth muse, or fourth grace, even though she


should be more illiterate than a Hottentot, and more
ungraceful than a dancing bear! Since my arrival
in this country, I have met not less than a hundred
ofthese supernumerary muses and graces, and may
Allah preserve me from ever meeting any more!”
Had Mustapha visited our shores, he would
have had a more curious tale to have told to his
friend Assem Hachem, principal slave driver to
his highness the Bashaw of Tripoli. Not only
would he have seen muses and graces without
number, invoked in language without parallel,
but he would also have had the singular felicity
of perusing literary fragments —sober tragedies
didactic poems —and fugitive pieces of every des-
cription, written by amateurs, whose minds were
almost as innocent of every refinement, (speaking
in a poetic point of view), as the poor, naked savage
who daily saunters through our streets—an object
of bodily misery and mental degradation, pitiable
to behold. Untrammeled by the rules of grammar,
and unvitiated by taste, they give to the world
productions, which bear legibly stamped upon
them the impress of originality. Were Ito give
a detailed account of these writers, and their
writings, although it might be the means of amus-
ing many of my readers, it would occupy far too
much of my invaluable space.


Canning the great orator and statesman, in one
of his juvenile productions, very humorously un-
dertakes to prove, that the following ballad is
written strictly according to the rules of epic com-
position, and that it is no less an epic poem, than
the iEneid, or the Iliad.
The Queen of hearts,
She made some tails.
All on a snimner’s day.
The knave of hearts.
He stole those tarts.
And took them quite away.
The king of hearts
Call’d for those tarts.
And beat the knave full sore !
The knave of hearts
Brought back those tarts.
And vow’d he’d steal no more!
“ The epic poem,” observes Canning, with refer-
ence to this splendid effusion, “ on which I shall
ground my present critique, has for its chief
characteristics, brevity and simplicity. The
author, whose name I lament that I am, in some
degree, prevented from consecrating to immortal
fame, by not knowing what it is—the author, I
say, has not branched his poem into excrescences
of episode, or prolixities of digression; it is neither


variegated with diversity of unmeaning similitudes,
nor glaring with the varnish of unnatural metaphor.
The whole is plain and uniform; so much so,
indeed, that I should hardly be surprised if some
morose readers were to conjecture, that the poet
had been thus simple, rather from necessity than
choice; that he had been restrained not so much
by chastity of judgment, as sterility of imagi-
nation.”
And in order to prove that the writer, of whom
he has become the commentator, is entitled to be
ranked among the highest order of the votaries ot
the muses, he adduces a variety of reasons, com-
mencing his criticism thus:
“First, it is universally agreed, that an epic
poem should have three component parts; a,
beginning, a middle, and an end; secondly, it is
allowed, that it should have one grand action, or
main design, to the forwarding of which, all the
parts of it should directly or indirectly tend; and
that this design, should be in some measure con-
sonant with, and conductive to, the purposes of
morality; —and thirdly, it is indisputably settled,
that it shall have a hero. I trust, that in none of
these points, the poem before us will be found
deficient. There are other inferior properties,
which I shall consider in due order.”


Now whether this immortal epic, possesses all
these attributes or not, I trust my readers will
have sufficient ingenuity, at once to determine
for themselves. Although when they have read,
and attentively considered the poem, I am appre-
hensive that they will unanimously be of opinion,
that the commentator failed in his intended object,
and that the author was restrained not so much
by chastity of judgment, as sterility of imagination.
Their impression, I think, I may venture to assert,
without the fear of contradiction, will be that
the production so far from being equal to the
Iliad, is nothing more than a ballad of the lowest,
and most unimaginative description; and that its
author, instead of being a rival of Homer, is in no
respect superior to a common ballad-monger.
But notwithstanding the many particulars, in
which it might be condemned by a fastidious
public, it must nevertheless upon a comparison,
be universally allowed to surpass the many odes
to, and panegyrics on, the Clios, Cselias, and other
divinities which already abound, even in this infant
community. The former has at least, some defi-
nite object in view, viz: the reformation of the
thief that stole the tarts; but the latter, lam
sorry to acknowledge, are not only destitute of
both sense and object, but are also unadorned


even by harmony of the most indifferent des-
cription. How any person can have the impu-
dence, to dignify these effusions by the name of
poetry, I am utterly unable to determine.
For the particular edification of these pseudo-
authors, I shall relate a tale which I have extracted
from an ancient manuscript, but lately discovered
in the ruins of Herculaneum, and never yet pub-
lished in modern times. And I would recommend
them to study it attentively, and profit if they can,
by the wholesome truths that it contains. There
are suggestions in it, which if properly attended
to, will enable them to avoid the censure and
contempt, of a fastidious, and a criticising world.
The following is a literal translation:
When Greece was the only civilized country
on the Earth, and many years before Rome began
to ascend the summit of social and political renown,
all the towns, both in Attica, and the Pelopon-
nesus, became so completely overstocked with
aspirants to poetic fame, that it was judged expe-
dient to petition Apollo, to determine precisely
those who were entitled to assume the name of
poets, and those who ought forthwith to give up
all pretensions to literary distinction. This pro-
position, as was expected, met with the most
vehement opposition, and many a stanza was


written, to dissuade the Grecians from adopting
such a course of proceeding. The absurdity of
the thing, was endeavoured to be shewn by a series
of logical deductions, seldom equalled, but (in a
poetic sense) never surpassed. And as is cus-
tomary on all such occasions, those who antici-
pated the greatest injury, gave the most violent
opposition, and endeavoured to prove that the
pernicious effects of such a measure would be
felt, not by them alone, but by every inhabitant
of Greece—not by the present age only—but
by many succeeding generations. Unfortunately
however, public opinion prevailed against the
opposition, who, as is frequently the case, were
in a startling, and almost overwhelming minority.
Seven of the wisest men in Athens and in Sparta,
were appointed to draw up the petition, and when
it was finished, it was signed by many thousands
of individuals of all ages, sexes, and conditions.
The deputation nominated to present it, proceeded
immediately to Delphi, at which place Apollo
was at that time, most likely to be found. It
happened fortunately, that when they had reached
the sacred city, the illustrious god had just ar-
rived, and with the greatest imaginable politeness,
he seated himself at once in the temple, for the
purpose of receiving the petition, and that he


might not detain the petitioners any longer than
was necessary, in a state of anxious expectation.
He was reclining majestically on a golden throne,
which was richly ornamented with wreaths, and
devises of the most beautiful description, and
above him in glittering letters, were inscribed the
words “ medicine, music, poetry, and eloquence.”
When the gentlemen of the deputation entered,
they reverently saluted the illustrious divinity,
and were received by him with the most kind-
hearted affability. They then read the following
petition:
“ To the wise, beautiful, and magnificent son of
J upiter and Latona—the great Apollo; god
of music, medicine, poetry and eloquence,
who enlighteneth the celestial regions with his
radiance, and filleth the earth with his glory;
and who watches and presides with paternal
care over the education and _ literature of
mankind, &c., &c., &c.
“ We, the sages, philosophers, magis-
trates, orators, statesmen, and other free citizens,
of the various independent states of Greece,
humbly approaching your divine person, within
the precincts of your sacred temple, with proper


and becoming deference ; beg to state, that of
late years, that poetry, which you first invented
and introduced amongst us, and which once so
essentially contributed to civilize mankind, and
soften the rigid particles of our nature; has become
greatly vitiated by the shameful and uninspired
effusions of persons, who, without the aid of learn-
ing or genius, or your divine assistance, have had
the unparalleled audacity to thrust themselves
prominently before the notice of an insulted, and
an indignant public. The lofty strains of Hesiod
and of Homer, have degenerated .into ballads and
love ditties, of the most senseless, and miserable
description; taste is daily becoming more and
more vitiated; epic composition seems totally to
have deserted us, and to sum up all, unless some
effective measures be taken—unless some pre-
ventive means be employed, genius will spread
forth its angel wings, and soar aloft from this
degenerate land, and leave us in a state of impe-
netrable mental darkness. The rays of literature
and science, will no longer irradiate our country—
and this nurse of all those arts, which cultivate
and humanize mankind, will be reduced to the
same condition as the surrounding states, and her
citizens will alas! become barbarians. Greece,
which has so long been the repository of learning,


the land of patriots, bards and sages, will be
visited with a curse, which will sweep over, and
desolate its surface.
“ In order to avert a calamity so direful, we
now implore you to direct your attention to this
momentous affair, and humbly beg, that taking
into consideration the powerful motives, which
induced us to address you, you will appoint a
certain day for the attendance at some allotted
place, of all those who have any pretensions to
poetic fame, in order that these pretensions
may be examined, and that it may henceforth be
known who are, and who are not to be ranked
amongst our standard authors. And bearing your
generosity in enduring remembrance, we shall
sacrifice a whole hecatomb to your immortal
honor,” (here follow signatures.)
The great Apollo, having listened attentively
to the petition, reclined his head a short time in
thoughtful silence, and after a momentary pause,
delivered the following reply.
“ Sages, philosophers, and citizens of Greece, it
is not without the most heartfelt anguish, that I
have beheld how shamefully my sacred fanes have
been violated, and how grossly my honor has been
insulted. It is not without sorrow, you may rest
assured, that I have witnessed the many puerile


effusions which have emanated from the pens of
individuals, who so far from having drank of the
waters of the soul-inspiring spring, are not even
aware of its locality, and are totally ignorant of
its name. I have borne for a long space of time,
the insults that have been heaped upon me, but
the time has at length arrived, when I feel it my
imperative duty to avenge the wrongs of myself,
and you, my votaries and petitioners. The hour
of vengeance now draws near, and woe be unto
the culprits who may have incurred my just—my
merited resentment. I will, you may rest assured,
purge the ranks of poetry of the wild, and useless
weeds with which it is entangled, and once more
do I expect to see an age of classic taste, and
classic learning.
“In order to accomplish an object so desirable,
I now appoint this day month, at this my temple
at Delphi, for the general meeting which you
have requested. And in conclusion, let me assure
you, that no pains shall be spared on my part to
promote your interests, when by so doing, I shall
either vindicate my own honor, or cause no incon-
venience to myself,”
Having delivered himself of this highly eloquent,
and exceedingly disinterested reply, the god of
the silver bow immediately ascended to the celes-


tlal regions, to the inexpressible admiration and
delight, of the much honored deputation. Pleased
and happy, these favoured individuals returned
from Delphi, and proclaimed throughout Athens
and Sparta, and the various other cities through
which they passed, the successful termination of
their mission. The news, as might be anticipated,
created a wonderful sensation throughout the lite-
rary circles of Greece, and while it gave pleasure
to some, it was highly offensive to a great number
of the aspiring poets. Some rather, than submit
to the dreaded scrutiny, withdrew precipitately
from the public gaze, and forthwith modestly gave
up every pretension to the name of poet. But
others, with a degree of boldness, which spoke
volumes for their confidence and valour, deter-
mined to brave every danger, and obtain if
possible, the sanction and applause of Apollo.
Books, and writings of every description, were
assiduously referred to, for the purpose of ren-
dering the candidates capable of undergoing the
examination.
The day—the dreaded day at length arrived,
and presented a scene of bustle and confusion,
till then, unequalled in the annals of the world.
At an early hour, the cities of Athens,
Argos, Mycene, Thebes, and almost every other


town and village in Greece, began to pour forth
the immense crowds of poetic characters with
which they were inundated, and the city gates
were scarcely wide enough to permit their egress.
The road to Delphi was never before so thickly
crowded, and it became a doubtful question,
whether or not, the sacred city would be ample
enough to contain one tenth of the individuals,
who were to meet there, on this important day.
Some of the anxious pedestrians presented a very
amusing spectacle to the beholder. One was
almost borne down by an immense volume which
he was carrying, and ever and anon, peeping into
as he trudged along, and which, upon inspection,
proved to be a folio copy of Homer’s Iliad.
Another, sat down for the space of a quarter of
an hour by the road side, and began to peruse
attentively the writings of Hesiod. A third, more
industrious, lounged against a tree, and in thought-
ful silence began to alter, and improve his own
compositions, in order that they might be more
worthy of undergoing the inspection of the divinity.
In short, every one was occupied in a different
way, and sorrow, and joy, sobs, and lamentations,
alternately attracted the beholders attention.
The hour at length drew near, and it was
proclaimed aloud, that Apollo was prepared to


proceed with the inspection. The proclamation
created a great commotion in the crowd, and no
one appeared anxious to be the first to undergo
the examination. After a pause, a low, swarthy,
brazen-faced individual, stepped forward from the
midst of the dense multitude, and heroically, and
confidently approached the temple. This person
was a statuary from Rhodes, who was much famed
for ornamenting urns and monuments, and carving
upon them his own original compositions. He was
also well known as a writer of fragments in rhyme,
an innumerable number of which hehad composed,
and upon which it was rumoured he had determined
to found his literary reputation.
When he entered the temple, Apollo, who was
seated on a lofty and gorgeous throne, looked at
him for a second with an air of evident astonish-
ment, and after he had surveyed his person, he
curled up his lips with an air of ridicule and con-
tempt, which of itself would have been sufficient
to annihilate at once, the hopes of any more modest
individual. But the statuary was by no means
discouraged by the glance which was bestowed
upon him, and he approached the foot of the
throne, with a firm and majestic step, and pre-
sented his compositions to the divinity, with an
air of the most undaunted assurance. Apollo


took the book, and glanced hastily over its con-
tents, and at each successive page that he perused,
it was clearly apparent that his dislike was rapidly
augmenting. When he had waded half way
through it, disgust was strongly depicted on his
features, and closing the volume abruptly, he
hurled it furiously to the ground.
“ Sir,” said he, addressing the luckless and dis-
comfited author, “ I cannot but feel astonished at
your unparalleled audacity—your head-strong
stupidity, in placing in my hands a production,
which so far from being calculated to delight and
instruct, is capable of exciting naught but indig-
nation and contempt. You most assuredly must
entertain a very mean idea of my understanding
and discrimination, to think for an instant, that
you could impose upon me by an effusion so
utterly destitute of merit—so infinitely below
mediocrity. Were it not for your absolute insig-
nificance, you may be assured I would inflict
upon you that chastisement, which literary fools
deserve. Nothing else let me tell you, withholds
me from amply avenging my insulted honor.
Hence idiot—pollute my temple no longer with
thy presence; gather up thy trash, and as soon
as you enter your home, commit it to the flames.
And mark me: henceforward let me see no more


of your productions given to the world, for the
purpose of vitiating public taste, and subverting
the understanding and judgment of the people.
There is not one spark of intelligence in your
composition, and you are destitute of abilities,
both natural and acquired. Nature never intended
you to become a shining character, and all your
efforts, it matters not how strenuous or incessant,
will be fruitless and unavailing. For the future,
keep to thy mallet and thy chisel, and attempt
not at thy peril, even to carve on thy marble,
verses that have not been written by an abler
hand.
“ If you in any particular, break through my
commands —if you again attempt to climb the
sides of Parnassus, the fate of Marsyas shall not
be accounted more severe than yours*.”
Having delivered himself of this oration, he
motioned his auditor to depart; and with a down-
cast look, and faltering step, the statuary hastened
from the presence of the god, and hurried impa-
tiently through the crowd, not pausing once, until
* It will be unnecessary to inform tbe Greek scholar who has
perused Xenophon’s Anabasis, that Maisyas was a musician, who,
contending with Apollo in music, was overcome by him, and slain
for his arrogance. The god is reported then to have flayed the
unfortunate individual, and have hung up his skin in the cave from
which the river Marsyas flows.


he had escaped from the gaze of the assembled
multitude.
The next person that stepped forward, was a
tall, genteel-looking young man, with rather an
amatory cast of countenance, and who was a
secretary in one of the principal public offices of
the Athenian state.
Apollo when he first beheld him, seemed inclined
to be partial, and was evidently prepossessed in
his favour; and he took the book which the author
presented to him for inspection, with a degree of
affability which alone, was sufficient to inspire him
with confidence.
He perused the whole of its contents with care
and attention, and seemed to doubt for a few
seconds after he had finished, what verdict he
should declare.
“ Young man,” said he, at length breaking from
his reverie, “you were not intended for a poet.
Your writings in some places are tolerable, but
generally speaking, they show neither knowledge
nor ability, and the best of them are but mode-
rately good. Your reading appears not to have
been sufficiently extensive, and your native talent
is but of an ordinary description. Upon reflection,
I do not feel myself justified in granting you a
license, you can never become great, and it will


be better for you to remain in your original ob-
scurity, than thrust yourself prominently before a
people by whom you will never be admired.”
The next person that came to be examined, was
a middle-sized young gentleman, with a coun-
tenance rather classically delineated, and who was
also in the employment of the Athenian state.
When he entered the temple, he walked towards
his august examiner, in a manner which showed
that he was fully confident of success.
The writings which he presented for inspection,
were principally fugitive pieces, written off at
various times, without having been carefully re-
vised and corrected. The subjects were generally
speaking, badly selected, and the author could
scarcely have taken a more improper method to
set his talents in a favourable point of view.
The god read the effusions, and seemed rather
pleased with some of v them, but his pleasure was
slight and transient.
“These papers,” said he, when he had gone
through them, “betray sparks of hidden fire, which
if properly nourished, will at some future period
burst into a flame, which will irradiate your
country, and immortalize your name. But lam
sorry to say, you are now wasting your talents,
and applying them to a useless, and unworthy


purpose. You should, instead of writing such
senseless, and ephemeral productions, labour stren-
uously to mature your understanding, and store
your mind with a fund of information, which will
render your observations on men and manners,
more just, and cause you to be ranked high in
the catalogue of poets. Vanity you should avoid
as an insidious Siren, which is continually en-
deavouring to allure you to your destruction. A
modest confidence in your own powers, and a
sincere desire to improve your taste, and enlarge
your mind, by attending to the sayings, and
writings of others, should form the predominating
features in your character. Your friends and
admirers, I doubt not, take every opportunity of
informing you, that you have already advanced
far on the road to perfection —and that it will
require but little exertion on your part, to place
yourself on the summit of Parnassus. But I
warn you to distrust such barefaced flattery, and
despise those, who by such false representations,
would thwart your further progress, and retain
you in your present position, or cause you to
retrograde, and fall again into your original insig-
nificance. Go to your study, and there correct
and embellish the ideas, which a vivid imagination
may create, and as you value your fame, let no


considerations induce you to use your talents
in endeavouring to dignify subjects, which in
themselves are common-place, and totally unsus-
ceptible of embellishment.
“The time has not yet arrived, when I can
admit you into the calendar, but if you obey my
instructions, I will at no distant period, adorn your
brows with the poet’s wreath.”
After this last individual had retired, a tall,
blear-eyed, pert-looking, cockscombish person,
strutted boldly forth, and walked consequentially
towards the temple. This candidate not only
inwardly considered, but openly avowed, that he
had far greater pretensions, than any other of his
contemporaries, to the literary wreath which was
to adorn the poet’s brow. His writings were of a
more elevated description than those of any of his
countrymen, and he vainly imagined that nothing
could prevent him from being placed at the head
of the republic of letters. The vanity of this
man was beyond all conception: “ Homer,” he
was accustomed to say, “had genius and fire,
and Hesiod, had harmony and ease, but all those
qualities, are blended in me—l have the majesty
of the one, combined with the beauty of the
other.” , .
The principal production upon which this worthy


founded his reputation, was a dramatic piece,
written on an entirely new plan, and entitled
“The Thieves of Attica, or the Depredations of a
Robber.” This piece he imagined, was one of the
most sublime, and gigantic effusions of the human
mind, and he expected that as soon as Apollo
perused it, he would be seized with the most en-
thusiastic raptures.
He presented his “tragedy” as he designated
it, to his august examiner, with a degree of arro-
gance which surprized, and almost offended the
deity.
Apollo read the contents of the papers, and
when he had reached the end, he could scarcely
refrain from giving vent to a most violent fit of
laughter. But he quickly checked the rising
smile, and assumed a grave and determined air.
“ Sir,” said he, addressing himself to the would-
be leader of the drama; “you must be deeply
sunk in ignorance, and lamentably led away by
presumption, to think this ridiculous effusion
worthy of aught but the most unqualified con-
tempt. So far from being a sensible and elegant,
it is both a coarse and ridiculous production, and
one which I cannot contemplate, without abhor-
rence and disgust. Your conduct in thus offering
me an insult, so gratuitous and uncalled for,


deserves condign punishment, and were 1 to give
way to my feelings, I would chastise you in a
manner that would be both wholesome, and satis-
factory. But I perceive it is your absolute igno-
rance, that has led you into error, and for that
reason I feel myself induced to forgive you. Your
mind is rude and uncultivated, and the cheering
rays of literature and science, have not yet dawned
upon your soul. Go, Sir, from my presence, and
presume not to take up your pen before your
understanding is improved, and until ah acquain-
tance with the works of the illustrious sages ol
antiquity, has familiarized you with the intricacies,
and windings of the human heart, and rendered
you more capable of taking a lofty and enlarged
view of yourself and your fellow creatures. You
may have innate genius, I dispute it not —you
may have a talent for poetic composition, but that
talent, let me inform you, is useless without proper
cultivation. It is like the diamond in its natural
state, rough and uncouth, before it is smoothed
and polished by the artist. What learning does
for one, the hand of the mechanic performs for
the other. The more you strive in your present
state of mental darkness, the more will you render
yourself obnoxious and despised.”
The dramatist, after receiving this severe rebuke,


hurried chop-fallen and disconcerted, from the
sacred presence, and immediately disappeared
amidst the multitude. And, furthermore, it has
not yet been clearly ascertained, whether he fol-
lowed the suggestions that were given him by
Apollo, or relinquished all claims to fame, and
committed suicide, to escape the jeers and mock-
eries of an unfeeling, a fastidious and a criticising
world.
The fate of all the other candidates may be
related in a few words.
After they had all shewn their productions,
Apollo called them together and severely rebuked
them for their folly, and in a short and appropriate
speech, warning them to beware of offending the
muses for the future.
Thus ended this great examination, without
a single individual having obtained that wreath,
which thousands so anxiously expected.
Here ends the account of this ludicrous trans-
action, and it now remains for those who would
be poets to apply it to their own condition, and if
any one of them should find himself in a situation
similar to that of any of the worthies that were
arraigned before the tribunal of Apollo, let him
read, and inwardly digest, the advice of the
divinity. To those who are continually inun-


dating our newspapers with their senseless tiash,
I would particularly recommend this appropriate
account. I am naturally a lover of good poetry,
but I cannot contemplate bad verse without dis-
gust. Poetry of an elevated cast, is a kind of
literature which is eminently calculated to soften
and improve the human mind, and those who
attempt to render themselves proficient in it, are
doubtless deserving of our encouragement. Every
literary aspirant at the commencement of his
career, must necessarily be imperfect in many
particulars—a long time must unavoidably inter-
vene, before he can attain a style at once sensible*
and classically harmonious. But still it is easy,
for a discerning individual, to distinguish how
small, or how great is the chance of an author,
acquiring any degree of distinction. There is
always something, even in the primitive efforts of
genius, which indicates the talent of the writer-
something, which shows that he will at some future
period burst from the clouds of obscurity and
insignificance that surround him, and rise into the
sunshine of prosperity and renown. Those who
are naturally dull, will continue in one undevia-
ting career, without improving themselves, or
benefitting society—no rays of light, will by any
chance be reflected from their compositions, and


every tiling around their literary horizon, will be
dreary, dark and desolate.
Whenever I take up a Colonial periodical, and
gaze on the poet’s corner, I am almost invariably
annoyed by the rubbish that I there behold; and
I certainly form but a mean idea of the taste of
the individuals who caused such ridiculous non-
sense to be inserted. A good writer will never
place his productions in the frail columns of a daily
or weekly periodical; it is none but such as the
heroes of the Dunciad who will endeavour thus
to immortalize their names, and benefit mankind.
We have in Australia, a great number of foolish
persons, who fancying themselves inspired, occa-
sionally forget the cares and bustle of the world,
and lose themselves in lofty reveries, which neither
they, nor those on whom they inflict the task of
perusing them, can possibly understand. And it
may be worthy of remark, that love is the god at
whose shrine they always offer up their prayers.
If there is a lady whom they admire, and whom
they wish to gratify, they immediately sit down,
compose a certain number of stanzas in rhyme,
praising her beauty, her virtue, and her accom-
plishments, and thus imagine that this is the sure
passport to her affection and regard. If the babe
of a female friend becomes ill or dies, a lament


or an eulogy, is written by some kind, obsequious
acquaintance—and the sorrows of the parent, the
regard of the writer, the virtues of the child, are
all simultaneously transmitted to posterity through
the columns of a journal, which in the transient
period of twelve short months, may perhaps be
buried in oblivion. If a loved mistress be sum-
moned by her Creator to her last account —the
lonely and disconsolate lover mourns in rhyme,
for the departed object of his affections—upbraids
fate for the rigour of its decrees—informs the
public that the dear being that has been separated
from him, is in heaven above the stars, and, finally
concludes, by expressing a wish, that when he
departs from this life, he will join her in the
celestial regions, in the world to come.
But there i§ enough of this nonsense; I will
not sully my pages with giving an account of any
more such writings. In conclusion, I will in con-
fidence seriously inform such authors as these, that
they can never become admired, and that the
more they strive to attain distinction, the deeper
will they sink into the shades of obscurity and
contempt.




BONDI BAY.




BONDI BAY.
Then haste thee to thy sullen Isle,
And gaze upon the sea;
That clement may meet thy smile—
It ne’er was ruled by thee!
Or trace with thine all idle hand,
In loitering mood upon the sand,
That Earth is now as free I
That Corinth’s pedagogue hath now
Transferr’d his by-word to thy brow. BruoN.
I once saw a very splendid print of the great
Napoleon—standing on the shore of Elba in a
contemplative mood, with the above lines en-
graved beneath it. The conqueror of empires—
the humbler of kings—the child of fortune, gazing
thoughtfully upon an element which all his power
gigantic, unparalleled as it was, could not sub-
due —was a sight which I could not behold without
emotion. He who looked upon mankind as his
servants, and earth as his inheritance he
Whose games were empires, and whose stakes were thrones
Whose table earth—whose dice were human bones,
Standing on the verge of that ocean which his


most strenuous exertions could not overcome, and
on which his mighty armaments invariably proved
fruitless and unavailing, presented a clear and
instructive type of the vanity of human power.
He who seemed a demi-god—an almost super-
natural individual, when gazing on the heaving
billows, saw that which was the means of checking
his progress to almost universal power.
The bay, on the shores of which he was repre-
sented to be standing, brought vividly to my
mind a scene which I myself have often beheld
with delight. That scene is Bondi Bay—a place
that amongst all the splendid natural beauties of
which Australia can boast, is certainly unsur-
passed. England, Ireland, America, and many
other countries, can justly boast of their lakes,
their mountains, their rivers and their bays, but
there is not one amongst them, but would feel
proud of the possession of a spot, so picturesque
and enchanting as Bondi. This is by no means
the language of partiality, prompted by a patriotic
love of my country, but it is the result of a feeling
the force of which upon inspection, not only those
who claim this as their adopted, but also those
who claim it as their native soil, must equally
acknowledge. If there be among the number
my readers, any who may be predisposed to seep-


ticism, to them I would recommend the propriety
of immediately examining for themselves, and
satisfying at once their remaining doubts.
I shall now give a short account ot my first
visit to this beautiful spot, and I will endeavour to
delineate as faithfully as possible the impressions
which the sight produced upon my mind. The
narration, though it may not prove highly instruc-
ting, may at least be the means of giving infor-
mation to some, and if it should induce but one
single individual to examine the spot, I shall
consider myself amply rewarded for my pains.
And I feel convinced, that whoever takes the
trouble to satisfy himself by personal observation,
will at once acknowledge the truth of my asser-
tions, and his testimony will but confirm my
remarks.
Some considerable time since, when I was at
school, after having'been liberated from study on
a Saturday (as was customary) at noon, and not
having any thing particular to perform, a few ol
my school-fellows and I determined to proceed
on the South Head road, for the very classical
purpose of storing our pockets with Jive corners .
With light steps, and lighter hearts, away we
tramped over the hills with all that degree of
enthusiastic pleasure, which similar excursions


invariably produce within the youthful mind.
The sea breeze blew freshly from the East, and
the mid-day sun shone brightly in the clear au-
tumnal sky of our Southern land. After walking
about four miles along a hard winding road, we
arrived on an eminence from which we obtained
a splendid view of the great South Pacific Ocean.
I never before then, formed any distinct idea of
the mighty deep, for when I first saw it, the shades
of infancy overclouded my faculties, and the
wonders of the sea left no impression on my mind.
It would perhaps be difficult for me to convey to
the reader, any adequate idea of the sensation
which thrilled through my frame, when I saw the
dark blue expanse which lay extended before me,
seemingly united to the sky. Robertson says of
Balboa; “As soon as he beheld the South Sea
stretching in endless prospect below him, he fell
on his knees, and, lifting up his hands to heaven,
returned thanks to God, who had conducted him
to a discovery so beneficial to his country, and
so honorable to himself. His followers, observing
his transports of joy, rushed forward to join in his
wonder, exultation and gratitude. They held on
their course to the shore with great alacrity, when
Balboa, advancing up to the middle in the waves,
with liis buckler and sword, took possession of


that ocean in the name of the king his mster,
and vowed to defend it, with these arms, against
all his enemies.”
Although my raptures were not so great as those
of Balboa, on beholding the great Pacific for the
first time, yet, I did not gaze upon the noble sight
that was thus suddenly presented to my view,
without considerable emotion. The indefinite
and crude ideas which I had before formed of
the sea, now appeared to be inexpressibly ridi-
culous, and as on all similar occasions, it appeared
strange how I could possibly conceive it to be
any other, than it actually was'. I stopped almost
involuntarily, and looked on for some moments
in attentive silence. So pleased was I, that it
was some considerable time before I broke from
the contemplative trance into which I was thrown,
when I first attained the summit of the eminence.
The roaring of the breakers, and the voices of
my companions, aroused me from my reverie, and
we immediately descended towards the shore. A
small cart track winding through the shrubs, led
us to the beach, upon which we suddenly found
ourselves, after having emerged from a thick grove
of trees, with which, in one part, the water is
bordered. I had never before seen an object so
eminently beautiful, as that which was then


presented to my sight. The tide was out, and the
long snowy beach appeared like a broad level
pathway bordering the ocean. Not a rock, or
stone was there to break its evenness—all seemed
as smooth as though it had been levelled with the
most assiduous care. Nature had indeed per-
formed much for this enchanting spot, and it was
questionable whether art could do anything to
augment its charms.
It was at the southern extremity of the beach
that we emerged from the copse, and we had
thence a fine view of the gigantic precipices, by
which its northern boundary is terminated. The
beach itself is nearly in the form of a half moon,
and for the distance of a quarter of a mile, winds
beautifully round, and ever and anon, receives
the heaving billows, which come bounding on its
surface.
If, of all the places I have seen, there is one
spot more proper for meditation than another—
one spot more eminently calculated to inspire the
mind with lofty sentiments, and to call forth the
latent energies of genius, Bondi Bay is certainly
that favoured situation. Here might the poet,
rushing from the haunts of man, the marts of
commerce, and the din and bustle of a busy
world, seat himself on some wave-worn stone.


which has been washed for centuries by the ocean,
draw inspiration from the scene before him, and
leave to posterity the lofty sentiments which his
excited imagination would create. Here might
he stay the live-long day, without being tired
with the monotony of the surrounding objects—
idea upon idea, would crowd upon his fancy,
and the longer he beheld, the longer would he
desire to remain. Byron in his glorious Ode
(as Jeffrey designates it) on the aspiration of
Greece after Liberty, makes the Grecian bard
exclaim;
Place me on Sunium’s marbled steep,
Where nothing, save the waves and I,
May hear our mutual murmurs sweep;
There, swan-like, let me sing and die :
A land of slaves shall ne’er be mine—
Dash down yon cup of Samian wine 1
Sunium, or Helicon, or Parnassus, many doubt-
less possess many charms to captivate a poetic
mind, but Bondi I feel convinced could for natu-
ral scenery, dispute the palm with any of them.
It is in such a spot as this, that one might imagine
Cowper to be situated, when he wrote the exquisite
lines supposed to be spoken by Alexandei Sel-
kirk, in the desert Island of Juan Fernandez.
Apart from mankind—exquisitely sensible of the
impressions which the scene around might produce
n 3


upon him—his eyes resting upon the silent soli-
tudes of nature—and his idea of loneliness, aug-
mented by the expanse of ocean before him, and
the murmuring of its billows as they rolled in
successively, and dashed in spray among the
locks, or covered the extended'beach with one
unbroken line of silvery foam; the poet might
form a vivid idea of the situation of the man, whose
lament he endeavours to relate. It may be under
circumstances similar to these, that the splendid
piece which Selkirk is made to speak, was pro-
duced; and it is very probably to the inspiration
caused by a scene like Bondi, that we are indebted
for this classic effusion of poetic genius.
But it is not to the poet alone that Bondi is
valuable—it is not to the sons and votaries of song
alone, that it is endearing—the philosopher—the
moralist—the orator-, each could find something
to interest and instruct him in the beauties with
which it abounds. Demosthenes, when he first
conceived the design of becoming a public speaker,
having naturally a weak, defective voice, is re-
ported, for the purpose of strengthening his lungs,
and rendering his enunciation more distinct and
audible, to have gone frequently to the sea shore,
and there, with pebbles in his mouth, while the
waves came dashing and roaring to his feet, to


have declaimed for hours together to the senseless
ocean, with the same degree of earnestness and
animation as though he were addressing the
assembled sages and legislators of his countiy.
Those who are accustomed to conceive everything
uncommon as verging upon the ridiculous, might
be inclined to look with contempt upon this pro-
ceeding of the prince of orators; but they who
think seriously, and scrutinize minutely the ad-
vances of true genius, must admire the ingenuity
and perseverance of a man, who blessed in no
extraordinary degree by nature, and labouring
under calamities, which in some respects placed
him below many of his fellow creatures, invented
an expedient, which, for its simplicity, many would
be inclined to disregard; and exerted himself in
a manner, which few would be possessed ot
sufficient energy to imitate, until at length he
placed himself on a height of grandeur, from which
,he could look down, not only on the most dis-
tinguished gf his con temporaries, but also on the
most eminent men of every succeeding generation.
* Domenichino, the painter, was accustomed to act the characters
of all the figures he would represent on his canvas, and to speak
aloud whatever the passion he meant to describe could prompt.
Painting the Martyrdom of St. Andrew, Carracci one day caught
him in a violent passion, speaking in a terrible and menacing tone.
He was at that moment employed on a soldier, who was threatening


Some future Demosthenes of Australia, may yet
derive advantage from imitating the conduct of
the great master of eloquence. And should there
ever be any inclined to follow his example, Bondi
is the spot they should choose for their rostrum.
There standing on a jutting rock, might the embryo
statesman fancy to himself, that he was about to
address the assembled legislators of his country,
on a subject which involved the welfare, not of
individuals, nor of parties of individuals, but of
every portion of the community. There might
he give vent to all the various sentiments which
tyranny, oppression, justice or virtue in the rulers
of his land would be supposed to create. There
might he thunder forth with all the vehemence of
passion, denouncement against the oppressor and
the tyrant; and with heartfelt gratitude extol the
virtues, and laud the conduct of the patriot.
There might he in a strain of eloquent and per-
suasive oratory, endeavour to impress upon the
the saint. When this fit of enthusiastic abstraction had passed,
Carracci ran and embraced him, acknowledging that Domenichino
had been that day his master; and that he had learnt from him the
true manner to succeed in catching the expression—that great pride
of the painter’s art.
Thus different are the sentiments of the intelligent, and the unin-
telligent on the same subject. A Carracci embraced a kindred genius
for what a Le Clcrc, or a Selden, would have ridiculed. D'lsraeli s
Curiosities of Literature,


minds of his supposed auditors, the propriety or
impropriety of adopting any parliculai regu-
lation—and, finally, there might he learn how to
watch over and protect the interests of his native
soil, and successfully repel the encroachments ot
those, who dead alike to every sense of justice
and of shame, would endeavour to convert it into
a land of slavery and meanness—to chase away
every thing that contributes to exalt or ennoble
mankind, and involve Australia in an abyss of
barbarism and ignorance, of the most humiliating
and debasing description. The bubbling and
murmuring of the billows as they came rolling in
quick succession towards the shore, he might
conceive to be the excitement and whisper of
approbation produced by his address; and the
loud roar caused by the long wave breaking upon
the beach, he might imagine to be the simulta-
neous burst of applause which was to reward for
former, and stimulate him to future exertions.
Each succeeding wave as it rolled towards his
feet, and broke in foam upon the shore, might
add to his enthusiasm, until at length he would
be worked up to that degree of animation which
is the true, and only source of the sublime. This
feeling he would carry with him amongst his fellow
men the recollection of it would excite his ardour


on every occasion, and instead of the cold, heartless
declamation—the somniferous oratory with which
we are now pestered, we would have something
worthy of being left for the imitation of our
posterity, %
Any person who has a'few hours to spare, could
not spend them more profitably or more delight-
fidly, than by visiting Bondi. If he is a lover of
solitude, he will find the place sufficiently lonely
for his purpose; if he is an admirer of beautiful
romantic scenery, he will there be gratified ;if he
loves the ceaseless murmuring of the world of
waters, he will be pleased, perhaps beyond his
most sanguine expectations. In short, it will not
be too much for me to assert, that any individual,
whatever may be his disposition, whether he be
lively or morose—happy or melancholy—whether
he be young or old—ignorant or learned, will be
able to discover something in this charming re-
treat, which will be capable of affording him the
most heartfelt gratification. It is one of those
peculiar spots on the surface of the globe, which,
in the hey-day of youth, we can behold with
enjoyment, and in manhood and old age, with
unabated pleasure. There are many places, which,
though beautiful in some degree, yet lose their
influence upon the mind, when it has a longtime


been accustomed to % them; and when years have
familiarized them to the imagination. But Bondi
is certainly not to be classed amongst that number.
To those who prefer spending their leisure
hours in extravagance and dissipation, and who
in the whole course of their existence have never
experienced the enjoyment afforded by gazing
attentively upon the beauty and sublimity of
nature, I would earnestly recommend a walk
along the South Head road, to the shores of the
Pacific. Intemperance and folly, rioting and
drunkenness, how gratifying soever they may be
to their votaries at the moment, invariably leave
a sting, which is ten times greater than the tran-
sient pleasure they afford. They throw a dark
and dreary cloud over the innate majesty of man,
and insensibly and gradually deprive him of the
glory of his nature. But the delightful sensations
created by the beautiful objects which Providence
with a liberal hand has formed for the enjoyment
of his creatures, neither vitiate nor cloy—the more
they are observed, the greater pleasure do they
afford —and even the recollection of them is
sufficient to excite the imagination, and cause the
wondering mortal to raise up his voice to heaven
in thanksgiving to his Creator for his innumerable
bounties.


Let the bacchanalian go and seat himself on
the lonely shore, and meditate—let him, if it be
but for a few moments in his life, for once enjoy
the freshening breeze—pure and untainted as the
ocean over which it gently sweeps; and contrast
his situation then with the scenes of luxury in
which he is accustomed to destroy by degrees the
blooming flower of existence—let him look atten-
tively upon the deep blue sea, and contemplate
its purity, and contrast that purity with his
grossness—let him look around him, and survey
and admire the calmness of nature, and then let
him consider the tumult which rages within his
soul—let him gaze upon the budding beauties
of each wild, luxuriant flower—the blooming
appearance of each vigorous shrub, and then let
him reflect upon his own haggard, care-worn
appearance —and, lastly, let him consider that it is
not yet too late to reform his condition, and that
though the period of reformation has been long
deferred, he may yet, having bade a last, a
final adieu to his former habits, live temperately,
and contentedly, and pass the remainder of his
days in prosperity and peace.
The last time that I visited Bondi, I seated
myself on a small tuft of grass, a few yards from
the beach; and I shall never forget the ideas that


then crowded vividly upon my mind. It was
early in the morning, and a light breeze was
blowing across the waters, the surface of which
was barely agitated by a gentle rippling. The
undulating swell from which the ocean is never
entirely free, had a peculiarly serene and beauti-
ful appearance. In the distance I could barely
discern an object, which I conjectured to be the
sails of some vessel that was plodding its way
across the unfathomable deep. By degrees it
began to assume a more distinct appearance, and
in the space of an hour, the white sails were clearly
visible, and in a short time afterwards, the hull
could be discerned. There are few objects that
are capable of exciting one more, than the
appearance of a large vessel just emerging from
the horizon’s verge, and breaking gradually upon
the sight. The beholder looks upon the object
before him as a lonely wanderer that has just
escaped from a trackless labyrinth in which he
had been involved, and who is at length returning
to enjoy once more the pleasures of society. He
pictures to himself the various sensations which agi-
tate the minds of the voyagers, upon first beholding
theirplace of destination. All on board he considers
arelookingeagerly towardsthe shore, and scrutiniz-
ing minutely the land which they are about to visit.


I looked upon the gallant ship with admiration,
and inwardly rejoiced in this symptom of our
rapidly increasing importance. She was but one
of the many—very many, who were perhaps at
that moment sailing across the Atlantic, or the
Indian Ocean, fraught with the produce of every
clime upon the surface of the Globe. The spot
where I then stood, half a century since, was
deserted and untrodden, but now the luxuries of
every clime, from the tropics to the poles—from
the western to the eastern hemisphere, are wafted
past it by every passing breeze. What though
Australia may not produce in abundance every
thing to satisfy the numerous, and daily increasing-
wants of its inhabitants! The extensive commerce
which the wealth and enterprise of her citizens
has established, will more than supply every
deficiency, and furnish us with all those luxuries
without which, experience and history convince
us, no truly enlightened community can possibly
exist.
Should any patriotic individual at some future
period, stand at Bondi and watch the approach
of some vessel from a foreign clime, while he
rejoices in the increasing trade of his country,
let him raise up his thoughts to the Great Disposer
of events, and implore Him to avert from this


smiling land, the horrors which luxury, when it
passes a certain point/ invariably draws down
upon that community where it takes up its abode—
let him repeat the lines of the poet:
O luxury! tlion curst by Heaven’s decree,
How ill exchanged are things like these for thee!
How do thy potions, with insidious joy.
Diffuse their pleasures only to destroy!
Kingdoms by thee to sickly greatness grown,
Boast of a florid vigour not their own :
At every draught more large and large they grow,
A bloated mass of rank unweildy woe,
Till sapp’d their strength, and every part unsound,
Down, down they sink, and spread a ruin round.




WAR.




WAR.
Hark ! through the silence of the cold, dull night.
The hum of armies gathering rank on rank !
Lo! dusky masses steal in dubious sight
Along the leaguer’d wall and bristling bank
Of the arm’d river, while with straggling light,
The stars peep through the vapours dim ami dank,
Which curl in curious wreaths;—how soon the smoke
Of Hell shall pall them in a deeper cloak !
Here pause we for the present—as even then
That awful pause, dividing life from death.
Struck for an instant on the hearts of men.
Thousands of whom were drawing the last breath .
A moment—and all will be life again!
The march! the charge 1 the shouts of either faith
Hurrah! and Allah! and—one moment more-
The death-cry drowning in the battle’s roar. Byron,
The subject which I have now chosen for my
present sketch is one on which I might expatiate
for an almost unlimited length—and which would
still furnish fresh matter for my imagination to
dwell upon. The subject is exhaustless—it is one
on which the poet, the philosopher, and the
moralist, might display their wisdom and their
philanthropy, and show forth in glaring colours,
the folly and cruelty of their fellow creatures.
There is hardly any period of the worlds


existence, when mankind can be said to have been
exempt from warfare. If we search the records of
the most remote ages—if we look through the
dim vistas of antiquity—if we read the histories
of the most ancient monarchies and empires, we
shall still find that there never was a period, at
which the human race were not acquainted with
the art of injuring and annihilating each other.
No community, how virtuous soever it may have
been, can be said to have been ignorant of the
method commonly practised for the purpose of
avenging and repelling, the supposed or actual
insults, and encroachments of any other body of
individuals. The sacred writings furnish us with
numerous instances of war and bloodshed, and
even the chosen people of the Almighty, possessed
amongst their number, some of the greatest war-
riors mentioned in the pages of history. The Jews
and the Philistines—the Persians and the Medes—
the Assyrians and the Chaldeans, besides many
other nations have frequently as warriors been
brought prominently before our notice.
It might be a matter of curious investigation,
for one to trace the various refinements which the
ingenuity of man has been gradually making in
the art of war. Irving says; “ The first conflict
between man and man, was the mere exertion of


physical force, unaided by auxiliary weapons
his arm was his buckler, his fist was his mace,
and a broken head the catastrophe of his encoun-
ters. The battle of unassisted strength was suc-
ceeded by the more rugged one of stones and clubs,
and war assumed a sanguinary aspect. As man
advanced in refinement, as his faculties expanded,
and his sensibilities became more exquisite, he
grew rapidly more ingenious, and experienced in
the art of murdering his fellow beings. He in-
vented a thousand devices to defend and to
assault—the helmet, the cuirass, and the bucklei,
the sword, the dart, and the javelin, prepared him
to elude the wound, as well as to launch the blow.
Still urging on, in the brilliant and philanthropic
career of invention, he enlarges and heightens his
powers of defence and injury.—The aries, the
scorpio, the balista, and the catapulta, give a
horror and sublimity to war; and magnify its glory
by increasing its desolation. Still insatiable,
though armed with machinery that seemed to reach
the limits of destructive invention, and to yield a
power of injury, commensurate even with the desiie
of revenge—still deeper researches must be made
in the diabolical arcana. With furious zeal he
dives into the bowels of the earth ; he toils midst
poisonous minerals and deadly salts—the sublime


discovery of gunpowder blazes upon the world—
and, finally, the dreadful art of fighting by pro-
clamation seems to endow the demon of war with
übiquity and omnipotence.
“ This, indeed is grand !—this, indeed, marks
the powers of mind, and bespeaks that divine
endowment of reason which distinguishes us from
the animals, our inferiors. The unenlightened
brutes content themselves with the native force
which Providence has assigned them. The angry
bull butts with his horns, as did his progenitors
before him ; the lion, the leopard and the tiger,
seek only with their talons and their fangs, to
gratify their sanguinary fury; and even the subtle
serpent darts the same venom, and uses the same
w'iles, as did his sire before the flood. Man alone,
blessed with the inventive mind, goes on from
discovery to discovery; enlarges and multiplies
his powers of destruction; arrogates the tremen-
dous weapons of Deity itself, and tasks creation
to assist him in murdering his brother worm !”
The sentiments here so eloquently and beau-
tifully expressed, must agree with the ideas which
every philanthropic individual forms of war—its
cruelties and its devastation. Is there within the
whole range of God’s creation a man, who blessed
with intelligence, and avowing any pretensions to


be ranked amongst the adherents of humanity,
does not at once admit, that warfare is an unna-
tural employment—fit only for fiends and demons,
and infinitely beneath the dignity of manhood?
We who have been placed by our Creator on this
terrestrial sphere, and gifted with supreme com-
mand over every creature which inhabits it
constituted sole and undisputed lords of nature
without a single animated being capable of ofteiing
resistance to our power; act contrary to all the
dictates of reason in endeavouring to exteiminate
our fellow-men. We shew a degree of obstinate
stupidity and innate depravity, which no circum-
stances however urgent and plausible can palliate.
Let us for an instant enquire into a few of those
causes which induce some men to raise the deadly
weapon, for the purpose of hurling destruction
upon those whom they choose to call their enemies.
Let us examine those circumstances, which dis-
pelling like vapours the Godlike particles of our
nature, implant within us a spirit of annihilation,
which causes us to arise like infuriated demons,
and spread over the fair face of nature, ruin,
bloodshed and devastation. Let us look into the
inmost recesses of the human mind, and examine
with a microscopic eye those fatal springs of action,
which stimulate the man to the performance of


deeds, which in moments of reflection he can
scarcely contemplate without a shudder.
The human mind in its original state, is prone
more to acts of benevolence than cruelty, and
nothing but a perverse education, strengthened by
example, can induce a man to become a wanton
persecutor of his race. Constituted as societies
now are, mankind are accustomed to consider
certain acts, on the parts of individuals belonging
to different communities, as deserving of resent-
ment, and loudly calling for the severest chas-
tisment, and most implacable revenge. The
infringement of some senseless point of etiquette—
an imaginary insult to the honor of a nation, and
sometimes even a supposed grievance of the most
trivial description, is sufficient to unbar the gates
of the temple of Janus, break asunder the sacred
bonds of amity and peace, and loosen the insatiate
blood-hounds of murder and destruction. The
nice distinctions which refinement introduces oc-
casionally into the system of international policy,
is continually augmenting the causes of hostility,
and in modern limes even the most ridiculous
reasons are adduced, to impress upon the public
mind, the necessity of letting “slip the dogs of
war.” Those who are entrusted with the govern-
ment of a people, and who by their position are


empowered either to declare war or proclaim
peace, if they think they can thereby gratify any
private animosity, or benefit themselves in any
manner, hesitate not for a single instant, to rake
up a whole catalogue of imaginary grievances—
make a showy parade of those grievances before
an astonished, a credulous, and too often, a sen-
sitive and irascible people—detail in the most
pompous and impressive manner, the many insults
and indignities, that have been wantonly, and
gratuitously heaped upon them—awaken by their
misrepresentations, all the evil passions of the
human mind, and finally, involve their country in
an unnecessary and devastating warfare. If, upon
reading of all the dreadful battles that have
occurred to the eternal disgrace of our nature,
we were to examine the causes from which they
originated; they could for the most part (I had
almost said invariably) be traced to the malicious,
and interested motives of some one individual, or
body of individuals, who looking forward only to
their own aggrandizement, cared not how severe
and insufferable were the miseries which they
inflicted upon their fellow creatures. The hapless
beings whom they made the instruments, by means
of which they executed their projects of aggres-
sion or revenge, might be doomed to undergo


every species of fatigue and injury, but they,
being themselves secure, looked with indiffe-
rence upon the dreadful carnage they pro-
duced.
Nor is the untutored savage free from this
pernicious practice. Bred up under the fixed
impression that certain communities are to be
considered his hereditary enemies, the sole purpose
of his life, next to providing sustenance for his
body, seems to be the extermination of his foes.
During the whole course of his existence, he never,
in one solitary instance, deviates from the line of
life which has been marked out for him by his
forefathers. Ever restless, ever on the alert, no
opportunities are overlooked, no means are disre-
garded, whereby he can hope to annihilate the
hapless objects of his vengeance. Uninfluenced
by the tender sympathies which naturally belong
to the human race, he feels not for the miseries,
and commiserates not the condition of the pros-
trate foe. With fiendish exultation he triumphs
over his fallen adversary, and death itself does
not release the body of the sufferer from his grasp—
the grave itself is no refuge—no resting place for
his remains. Even when the lamp of existence
has ceased to burn, the same implacable fury rages
within the breast of the savage, and the inanimate


clay is made to experience the demoniac rage of
the exulting conqueror. His heart seems to be
encased in an adamantine covering, which com-
pletely excludes every thing that may tend to
soften and improve.
To assert that these cruelties arise from an
innate propensity, would be a gross and unfounded
libel upon mankind. Nothing but practice can
render the heart callous, and enable an individual
to gaze unmoved upon scenes of slaughter and of
bloodshed. A man who has never served in the
serried ranks of battle ; who has never seen its
“ magnificently stern array; who has nevei
beheld the shattered limb, the decapitated body,
the falling comrade and the expiring warrior, who
has never heard the shouts of conflicting armies,
and the shrieks and groans of the dying; who has
never seen the earth streaming with purple gore;
must naturally be horror-stricken when first ini-
tiated into the mysteries and barbarities of warfare.
Nothing but habit can render such sights familiar
to his eye, and cause him to behold them with
indifference. It is war itself that brutalizes the
mind, and sinks it below its ordinary level. To
prove the truth of this, I might adduce many
facts: the following will be sufficient. “War is
by no means a school of humanity, nor drawmg-
t 2


room pastime. It tends to harden the heart, and
render men callous to the sufferings of their fellow-
creatures. When the French army, says M. Miot,
was about to move from Tentoura, there remained
in the huts on the sea-shore wretches who waited
to be removed. Among them was a soldier afflicted
with the plague, who, in the delirium which mostly
accompanies it, imagined, on perceiving the army
in motion, that he was about to be abandoned.
Ilis mind at once pourtrayed to him the frightful
extent of his misfortune; and the horror of falling
into the hands of the Arabs, so strongly affected
his feelings, that he attempted following the troops
on foot. Seizing for this purpose his knapsack,
on which his head had rested, he twice essayed
to walk; at the third effort, he sunk down near
the water’s edge, and became rivetted to the spot
which fate had destined him for a tomb. The
reader will perhaps imagine, that this poor soldier’s
comrades stopped to help him, and support his
tottering steps—no such thingl On the contrary,
he was only an object of disgust and derision to
them. They shrunk from him as from the blast
of the desert, and indulged in brutal mirth at
his reeling motions, which resembled those of a
drunken person. ‘He has got his quarters ,’
exclaimed one, ‘He will not go far,' exclaimed


another: and when the hapless wretch fell for the
last time, some had the barbarity to add, ‘ He has
made good,his lodgment!’
“ In the retreat of Sir John Moore from Spain,
< I have seen’ says the journal of a soldier of the
71st regiment, ‘officers of the guards and others,
worth thousands, with pieces of old blanket
wrapped round their feet and legs —the men
pointing to them with a malicious satisfaction,
saying ‘There goes three thousand a year’ or
‘There goes the prodigal son, on his return to his
father, cured of his wanderings!’ Even in the midst
of all our sorrows, there was a bitterness of spirit,
a savageness of wit, that made a jest of its‘own
sufferings.”
Persons who have never witnessed the effects
of war, may perhaps find it difficult to give
credence to anecdotes like these. Judging by
their own feelings, they can scarcely imagine it
to be possible that any one human being could
display such heartless indifference to the miseries
of another. Dreadful indeed must be those cir-
cumstances, which thus so effectually steel the
heart of a rational individual. Horrible must be
those scenes, which can thus render a human being
asfierce and unfeeling as the wildest tigerthat saun-
ters' through Numidia’s parched and dreary plains.


In times of peace, the glorious pageantry of
a review; the shining epaulettes and nodding
plumes, the prancing steed, and glittering steel,
strike with almost resistless effect upon the facul-
ties of those inexperienced youth, who form their
ideas of things by their external surface. Judging
of a military life from the gay and thoughtless
manner in which a soldier passes away his days
during the “piping times of peace,” they look
not through the dim perspective of the future,
and picture not to their imaginations even the
faintest idea of the horrors of a battle. Youths
who have just escaped from the precincts of Alma
Mater, eager for adventure, and allured by the
fascinating bait, which the army presents to their
delighted vision, rush headlong into the arms of
Mars, and discover not their mistake until, called
out to fight the battles of their country, they hear
the death-fraught shot whistling mournfully round
their ears, see their boon companions fall lifeless
by their side, and know not, but every moment
the direful instrument may be on its way, which
is to send themselves “ to sleep with their fore-
fathers.”
But it is not only on the field of battle that the
soldier is doomed to undergo the miseries inci-
dental to ins profession. There is another time—


another hour as painful to his feelings. lhat
hour is the one in which he is doomed to part,
perhaps for ever, from his home, his family, his
relatives and his friends —from all that he is
accustomed to hold dear to him in this woild
from all the beloved scenes in which his infancy
and boyhood were passed—from every thing which
can bind and entwine itself firmly and fondly
round the heart. It may be questionable whether
the roaring of artillery, the clash of arms, and
the groans of the dying, are so much to be
dreaded—so formidable to the warrior as the
parting scene.
When the grim mandate is issued, commanding
a regiment to prepare for departure to a foreign
land, the bustle and confusion which ensues may
perhaps be imagined, but they cannot be des-
cribed. The lover hastens to his mistress, and
details to her in mournful strains his hapless lot,
tears choke the utterance of the lovely burden
that hangs listlessly on the youthful soldier’s arm-
sobs and lamentations from the one—consolation
and soothing from the other—tender looksof regard
and words expressive of affection from both, serve
to fill up the short period which is permitted to
intervene between then and the hour of departure.
The moment of separation at length arrives, the


unpropitious instant can no longer be deferred
the embryo hero takes the last embrace; breaks
violently from the lovely object of his affections ;
rushes abruptly from her presence; hurries heed-
lessly and half-distractedly onwards; looks back
when the spot which contains her is almost
invisible in the distance; discerns the waving
handkerchief fluttering gently in the breeze, waves
a similarly impressive adieu, and wends his way
to death or glory. The only son of a loving father
and a doating mother, upon hearing the dreadful
summons which is to tear him from his country,,
leaves his companions precipitately, rushes to the
home of his childhood, receives amidst tears and
sorrowing, the blessing and caresses of his parents,
and bids what may perhaps be a final farewell to
those who watched over his infancy and boyhood
with pleasure and exultation, and beheld with joy
his opening beauties, as the flower-bud of youth
expanded into a vigorous and full-blown maturity.
.The affectionate father of a blooming family, the
doating husband when called suddenly to mingle
in the ranks of war, with a heavy heart prepares
to obey the commands of his superiors, and leaves,
perhaps for ever, all that can be dear to him in
this world. He lingers with his wife and children
until the troops are on their way, and he can


remain no longer. Then his blooming offspring
gather round with tears in their eyes, and each
receives the parting kiss over and over again,
until the decisive moment at length draws near.
This would be the moment for a painter to sketch
a portrait. The warrior decked in his regimentals,
with an infant smiling in his arms, unconscious
of what is passing, two or three bewildered chil-
dren clustering round and clinging to him with
their little hands, and a lovely burden leaning
mournfully on his arm, would altogether present
a scene well worthy the pencil of a Reubens or a
Raphael. The final embrace having been given,
he mounts his steed, casts one look on the dejected
group, and hurries from his home to a foreign
land—from peace and happiness—to carnage and
desolation.
Even when on the bosom of the deep, the soldier
looks fondly towards his native land, and watches
it until the distance buries it in obscurity.
The horrors produced by a sudden call to battle,
from the midst of friends, relatives and acquain-
tance, are heart-rending in the extreme. The
evening preceding the battle of Quatre Bras,
furnishes us with a lamentable instance. Lord
Byron’s description of this, is so beautiful and
sublime, and so scrupulously true, that 1 feel it


unnecessary to offer any apology for transcribing
Uat full length. Wherever such a piece is placed
it must be an ornament.
There was a sound of revelry by night.
And Belgium’s capital had gather’d then
Her beauty and her chivalry, and bright
Jhe lamps shone o’er fair women and brave mettp
A thousand hearts beat happily ; and when
Music arose with its voluptuous swell,
.Soft eyes look’d love to eyes which spake again.
And all went merry as a marriage bell;
Sat hush I bark! a deep sound strikes like a rising knell E
Did ye not hear it?—No; ’twas but the wind.
Or the car rattling o’er the stony street;
On with the dance ! let joy be tinconfmed;
No sleep till morn, when youth and pleasure meet
To cha ethe glowing hours with flying feet—
But hark! that heavy sound breaks in once more.
As it the clouds its echo would repeat;
And nearer, clearer, deadlier than before.
Arm 1 arm! it ij —it is—the cannon’s opening roar!
Within a window’d niche of that high hall
Sate Brunswick’s fated chieftan, he did hear
That sound the first amidst the festival.
And caught its tone with death’s prophetic ear.
And when they smiled because he deem’d it near.
His heart more truly knew that peal too well
Which stretch’d.his father on a bloody bier.
And roused the vengeance blood alone could quc-IU
He rush’d into the field, and, foremost fighting, fell.
Ah ! then and there was hurrying to and fro.
And gathering tears and tremblings of distress,.
And cheeks all pale which but an hour ago
Blush'd at the praise of their own loveliness-


Ami tliere were sudden partings, such as press
The life from out young hearts, and choking sighs
Whicli ne’er might be repeated ; who could guess
If ever more should meet those mutual eyes,
Since upon night so sweet such awful morn could rise!
And there was mounting in hot haste: the steed,
The mustering squadron, and the clattering car.
Went pouring forward with impetuous speed.
And swiftly forming in the ranks of war;
And the deep thunder, peal on peal afar;
And near the beat of the alarming drum,
Roused up the soldier ere the morning star;
While throng’d the citizens with terror dumb,
Or whispering, with white Kps-» The foe! they come! they come!”
And wild and high the “ Cameron’s gathering” rose!
The war-note of Lochiel, which Albyn’s hills
Have heard, and heard, too, have her Saxon foes
How in the noon of night that pilbroch thrills,
Savage and shrill! But with the breath which fills
Their mountain-pipe, so fill the mountaineers,
With the fierce native daring which instills
The stirring memory of a thousand years.
And Evan’s, Donald’s fame rings in each clansman’s ears!
And Ardennes waves above them her green leaves,
Dewy with nature’s tear-drops, as they pass,
Grieving, if aught inanimate e’er grieves,
Over the unreturning brave—alas!
Ere evening to be trodden like the grass
Which now beneath them, but above shall grow
In its next verdure, when this fiery mass
Of living valour, rolling-on the foe,
And burning with high hope, shall moulder cold and low.
East noon beheld them full of lusty life,
Last eve in Beauty’s circle proudly gay,
The midnight brought the signal-sound of strife.
The morn the marshalling in arms—the day
Battle’s magnificently-stcrn array!


The thunder-clouds dose o’er it, which when rent
The earth is cover’d thick with other clay,
Which her own clay shall cover, heap'd and pent.
Rider and horse,—friend, foe, —in one red burial blent 1
How many a wife was deprived of her hus-
band—how many children were thrown fatherless
upon the world—how many loved and only sons
were slain in consequence of the glorious battle
of Waterloo! What a scene did the eventful field
present, after the infatuated mortals had satiated
their vengeance by slaughtering each other! In
the small space of a few square miles, how many
lifeless mangled bodies that a few hours before
enjoyed health and vigour, were strewed around,
the prey of the vulture and the crow ! How many
who a short time since gloried in their youth and
beauty, whose nodding plumes waved gracefully
over their manly foreheads, and whose warlike
chargers pranced gaily beneath them, were levelled
with the dust, covered with dirt and gore, and
forgotten or disregarded amidst the general car-
nage by which they were surrounded! The foot-
soldier and the horseman—the private and his
commander—the Briton and his foe, all lay
mingled together in one confused and ghastly
mass, undistinguished by aught but the tattered
and disfigured garments that enveloped them.
The angel of death brooded triumphantly over the


Held of battle, and nothing but putrifying car-
casses and broken weapons met the eye of the
beholder, as he gazed upon the scene of slaughter.
That land which but a few hours before, gloried
in all the beauties of ripening vegetation, was
then trampled upon and disfigured; the ripe and
golden corn was destroyed, the smiling face of
nature was tarnished, and the plains of Waterloo
instead of teeming with the support of life, were
thickly covered with the emblems of destruction.
The snorting charger, the deadly cannon and the
fatal ball, had torn up what had once been opened
by the plough; and the flying bullet and the
bristling steel, had done what the sickle was to
have performed. Waterloo! how many even to
this day tremble at the sound! how shrink
with terror when they hear it mentioned! how
many sicken at the name! Upwards of twenty
years have elapsed, and yet its miseries have not
been forgotten; a quarter of a century has passed
away, and there are many from whose minds the
remembrance of the deeds that were enacted upon
it, are not yet, and in all probability will never
be erased. There are numbers from whose memory
the grave alone will separate it—from whose recol-
lection death alone, will cause it to be removed.
Many thoughtless individuals are apt, too apt


to rejoice at the glorious victory that was gained
at Waterloo, and the laurels which the British
soldiers so gallantly obtained. But to such let
me say, that if a single child was left fatherless;
if a single mother was deprived of a son that
supported her; if a single wife was bereft of a
loving husband (aad there were hundreds such
os these): that glory is indelibly tarnished, and
instead of indulging in exultation we should be
filled with pity and unaffected sorrow. A victory
even at the expense of one solitary individual, is
dearly purchased; and should excite in the phi-
lanthropic breast no feelings of rejoicing.
Perhaps there is no instance, either in ancient
or modern times, which shews the flimsy pretexts
upon which some nations engage in war, more
clearly than Buonaparte’s disastrous expedition
to Moscow. For a long time this insatiate con-
queror had turned his longing eyes towards Russia,
and he felt that in order to accomplish his plan of
subduing the whole world under his domination,
it was necessary for him to humble the haughty
tyrant of the North, and reduce his gigantic
empire into the condition of a subject province.
Noted for his decision (than which in a military
commander there is no more necessary attribute)
no sooner had he resolved, than he took decisive


measures for the purpose of putting his plans in
immediate execution. Conscripts were raised in
every direction, the son was torn from his mother,
the husband from his wife, the father from his
children, and in a short time an army was collected,
which in numbers surpassed every thing since the
days of Xerxes. Placing himself at the head of-
this enormous band of murderers and cut-throats,
he set out on his famous expedition towards the
walls of Moscow. The bosoms of himself and his
followers beat high with hope, and honor and
plunder were eagerly looked forward to, by even
the meanest soldier in the ranks. Victory, they
fondly imagined, spread her wings gaily and
triumphantly above their heads, and hovered
exultingly over them, as they advanced on their
journey of death and desolation. Little thought
the great warrior how many of his legions were
fated never to return, how many thousands of those
who tramped gaily along from their native land,
were in a short time to be trampled in the dust,
by barbarians, and become the prey of the
ravenous wolf amidst the howling wilderness! How
many, when France began to dwindle in the
distance, took their last fond look at their country,
and parted from it for ever! Onwards they w r ent,
resistless as an impetuous torrent, bearing down


every thing before them; cold and snow, and all
the miseries of winter proved no obstacle; their
hopes were great, and nothing could oppose them.
At length they arrived opposite the ancient me-
tropolis of Russia, and fondly imagined that their
labours and dangers were terminated for a time,
and that a sheltering haven was before them.
Vain were those hopes and futile were their expec-
tations, scarcely had they obtained a glimpse of
the towers and minarets of Moscow, when it was
enveloped in one mass of fire; palaces, hovels
and churches, which might have stood for centuries
were covered by the devouring element, and the
dark angel of destruction spread his dismal wings
around. Dark smoke and livid flames struck
horribly on their sight, and gave them at once,
an idea of the terrors of their condition.
The half barbaric Moscow’s minarets
Gleam in the sun, but ’tis a sun that sets!
Moscow 1 thou limit of his long career,
For which rude Charles had wept his frozen tear
To see in vain— he saw thee—how? with spire
And palace fuel to one common fire:
Jo this the soldier lent his kindling match.
To this the peasant gave his cottage thatch.
To this the merchant flung his hoarded store,
Tiie prince his hall—and Moscow was no more I
Sublimes* of volcanos! Etna’s flame
Pales before thine, and quenchless Hecla’s tame;
Vesuvius shows his blaze, an usual sight
For gaping tourists, from his hackney’d height;


Thou stand's! alone unrivalTd, till the tire
To come, in which all empiies shall expire!
It was then that Napoleon’s heart gave way,
it was then, he saw that his power was not resist-
less, and that he was likely to be conquered, not
by the arms of man, but by the war of elements.
One last, one desperate, struggle was to be made,
onwards they pushed, and charged with dauntless
bravery amidst the flames. Columns of grenadiers
might then be seen rushing along the deserted
streets; with sheets of roaring flame on every
side; and fruitlessly exerting themselves to extin-
guish the raging element, and save at least some
portion of the city from destruction. All their
efforts were unavailing, and when they expected
to be lodged comfortably in a populous city, they
found themselves destitute of shelter, deprived of
provisions and exposed to the fury of a rigorous
winter. A few half burnt buildings, were all that
remained for the accommodation of nearly a million
of individuals. Nor were the miseries of the in-
habitants of a less startling description. Called
upon by the voice of their country and of Europe,
to sacrifice their homes for the peace and pros-
perity of mankind, they applied the match to their
dwellings, and went forth houseless wanderers
amidst the snow. The lord and the peasant, the


freeman and the slave, the father and the child,
were all compelled to witness the destruction of
their houses and property, and leave their beloved
city, to wander in the wilderness. No person
who has not witnessed could adequately describe
the terrifying scene which characterized the
abandonment of Moscow. The weepings and
wailings of some; the exertions of others to save
a portion of their property from the flames; the
shouts of soldiers and the roaring of the fire must
have been terrible in the extreme.
The period at length arrived, when Napoleon,
subdued and outwitted, was compelled to retrace
his footsteps, and mourn inwardly over that head-
strong folly which induced him to engage in an
undertaking, at a time when reason might have
told him it would be impossible to succeed. The
thousands that had so lately been elated with
confidence, and had revelled in dreams of future
glory, were suddenly and unexpectedly reduced
to a most deplorable condition; and all the
visions tvhich fancy had created, were dissipated
in a moment. With heavy hearts they com-
menced their dreary retreat across the waste of
snow, destitute of provisions, destitute of fuel,
unable to protect themselves, and a barbarous
enemy harassing their rear. Numbers were


frozen to death by the cold—some expired from
starvation —thousands were slain by the merciless
Cossacks, that followed them like a scourge-
many were deserted by their companions, and
left to be devoured by the wolves, and death in a
thousand shapes hovered triumphantly around
them.
Thou other element! as strong and stern,
To teach a lesson conquerors will not learn! —
Whose Icy wing flapp’d o’er the faltering foe,
Till fell a hero with each flake of snow ;
How did thy numbing beak and silent fang
Pierce, till hosts perished with a single pang!
In vain shall Seine look up along his banks
For the gay thousands of his dashing ranks 1
In vain shall France recall beneath her vines
Her youth—their blood flows faster than her wines;
Or stagnant in theirTiuman ice remains,
In frozen mummies on the Polar plains.
In vain will Italy’s broad sun awaken
Her offspring chill’d ; its beams are now forsaken.
Of all the trophies gathered from the war.
What shall return?—the conqueror’s broken car!
Napoleon -himself, the cause of all this nTisery,
as soon as he saw that fortune had deserted him,
left his soldiers to the command of his generals,
hurried from the scene of disaster, and appeared
again in his usurped kingdom for the purpose of
plotting fresh campaigns, and devising new
schemes whereby he might make himself sole and
undisputed master of mankind. The mere in-


struments by which he endeavoured to execute
his projects, he left to escape as well as they pos-
sibly could from the dangers in which he had
involved them. The discipline for which they
were famed—the celebrated generals by whom
their movements were directed—and their innate
activity and courage, all combined with the feel-
ing which many successive victories had created,
were insufficient to enable them to surmount the
difficulties by which they were surrounded. At
every step their numbers rapidly diminished, and
they were being continually vanquished and
destroyed, by individuals, whom under more
favourable circumstances, they would have des-
pised. At some places, so great was the carnage,
that even ravines and rivers were blocked up by
the bodies of the slain, and roads and bridges
were rendered almost impassable. Thirty thou-
sand are said to have been sacrificed to the
vengeance of their pursuers, at the crossing of a
small rivulet; and many other encounters nearly
as terrible are reported to have taken place. The
Russians pursued the fugitives even as far as the
borders of France, and left them not until they
had almost annihilated the invaders of their
country.
How different from their setting out was the


return of this once gigantic army! Of the eight
hundred thousand individuals who marched for
Moscow, no more than the mere remnant of forty
thousand returned to their native land. Probably
history does not record a single instance fit to be
compared with this. Then was weeping and
wailing, and cries and lamentations of distress
then fell the tear of love, of friendship, and of
maternal affection—then was heard the deep and
unavailing sigh of the destitute wife, and the
bereaved friend —the weeping mother and the
afflicted orphan —sorrow stalked mournfully
through the land, and scarcely a breast was
unmoved, but that of the individual who was the
principle and sole cause of such unheard of
desolation. France, from one end to the other,
might be said to have been steeped in tears, and
humanity wept and trembled at the recital of so
horrible a tale.
Can the most strenuous advocate for war fur-
nish us with even one solitary, plausible pretext
by which this transaction might be defended?
Did Napoleon go into the wilds of Russia to
avenge an insult or an injury—to protect his
native land from aggression, and punish its in-
vaders? No! He went there for the purpose of
satiating his boundless ambition, and subjecting


to his sway, an empire, over which he had no
light to exercise control. He went there in pur-
suit of an object, to the attainment of which his
whole life was devoted, and reckless of the laws
of God and man—of justice and propriety, he
rushed on in his infatuated career, stimulated by
ambition, and blinded by success, until a mightier
power humbled his pride, and laid low his count-
less legions.
In this one campaign, upwards of a million of
his fellow creatures fell beneath the sword, while
he who caused their death, remained unhurt.
Thousands who had no cause to war against their
fellow creatures, were hurried prematurely to
their last account, in endeavouring to promote
the plans of a self-constituted and ambitious
potentate. To satisfy the boundless cravings of
a man who had already subverted empires and
dethroned kings—individuals were dragged from
their homes and their families, and compelled to
be instrumental in carrying carnage and deso-
lation into a land on which they had no right to
intrude, and amongst a people against whom
they had no cause nor pretext for hostility. In
fact, the whole of Napoleon’s dazzling, but blood-
stained career, teemed with nothing but ambition
of the most insatiate, and injustice of the most


unheard of description.. To subdue the world,
he collected legions ; and to protect themselves,
other nations were hurried into the vortex of
warfare and destruction.
The horrors of war have been frequently and
powerfully delineated ; one instance may not be
inappropriate. Alison, in speaking of the battle
of Eylau, says, “ Never was spectacle so dreadful
as the field of battle presented on the following
morning. About fifty thousand men lay in the
space of two leagues, weltering in blood. The
wounds were, for the most part, of the severest
kind, from the extraordinary quantity of cannon
balls which had been discharged during the
action, and the close proximity of the contending
masses to the deadly batteries, which spread
grape at half-musket shot through their ranks.
Though stretched on the cold snow, and exposed
to the severity of an arctic winter, they were
burning with thirst, and piteous ciies were heard
on all sides for water, or assistance to extricate
the wounded men from beneath the heap of slain,
or load of horses by which they were crushed.
Ten thousand of these noble animals encumbered
the field, or maddened with pain, were shrieking
aloud, amidst the stifled groans of the wounded.
Subdued by loss of blood, tamed by cold, ex-


hausted by hunger, the foemen lay side by side,
amidst the general wreck. The Cossack was to
be seen beside the Italian; the gay vine-dresser,
from the smiling banks of the Garonne, lay
athwart the stern peasant from the plains of
Ukraine. The extremity of suffering had extin-
guished alike the fiercest and the tnost generous
passions. After his usual custom, Napoleon, in
the afternoon, rode through the dreadful field,
accompanied by his generals and staff, while the
still burning piles of Serpallan and Saussgarten
sent volumes of black smoke over the scene of
death.”
This account awakens in the tender mind the
most painful ideas ; but terrible as it undoubtedly
is, it is equalled, if not surpassed, by the narra-
tives of many other modern encounters. Leipsic
and Waterloo will ever remain upon the tablets
of history, as grim and faithful monuments of the
brutal and devastating effects of warfare. And
if we search among the less civilized nations, we
shall perhaps find something even more terrible
than either of these memorable battles. Who
has ever read of the siege of Ismail without a shud-
der ? Campbell, in speaking of Byron’s des-
cription, says, “ It would be absurd to attempt,
in prose, even a feeble outline of the varied


horrors which marked that celebrated scene of
ruthless and indiscriminate carnage; the noble
writer has depicted them with all that vivid and
appalling fidelity, which, on such a theme, might
be expected from his powerful muse ; and, if any
thing can add to the shuddering sensation we
experience in reading these terrific details, it is
the consideration that poetry, in this instance,
instead of dealing in fiction, must necessarily
relate a tale that falls short of the truth.”
At the storming and capture of Ismail, all the
fierce and unrelenting passions of the human
mind seem to Tiave been let loose, and have
operated in the most terrific manner. On this
occasion, humanity was absent from the scene of
slaughter, and nothing but fiendlike vengeance
seemed to actuate the conquerors. A protracted
siege had rendered more ferocious than usual the
tempers of the invading thousands of Russians,
and the brave defence of the garrison served but
to exasperate the northern barbarians. The
inhabitants of Ismail, probably foreseeing the
dreadful miseries which would inevitably be in-
flicted upon them as soon as the town came into
the possession of their enemies, made a gallant
resistance, and nothing but numbers overpowered
them. They fought until they could fight no


longer—until resistance was fruitless, and the
best and bravest of their ranks had fallen. Then
came the dreadful moment—Suwarrow, when his
cannon had battered down the ramparts, and
thinned the numbers of the beseiged, led his
exasperated soldiers through the breaches into
the town, to secure his victory and complete the
work of desolation which had already been com-
menced. Like wolves, eager to pounce upon,
and devour their prey, onwards they rushed and
bore down all before them, converting every
thing that opposed them into ruin, and causing
the streets to flow with the blood of the hapless
citizens that were endeavouring to defend them.
Sexual distinctions were forgotten; age and
youth were alike disregarded; and a fierce, hor-
rible, and indiscriminate slaughter ensued, and
was continued until Ismail was almost reduced to
ruins, and its former masters were all but exter-
minated, and brought to the very brink of total
annihilation. The tears of the orphan; the
entreaties of the mother; the helplessness of the
aged; and the miseries of the sick and wounded,
averted not the deadly thrust of the Russian
bayonet. Death and plunder was what the con-
querors sought; and in the pursuit of those
objects, all human sympathy was banished—every


tender feeling was forgotten. Fierce and insatiate
they murdered, plundered, ravaged and des-
troyed, and seemed to glory and riot amidst the
purple streams that flowed copiously around
them. Fatal as the deadly simoon in the sandy
desert; withering as the vivid flash which divides
the darkened heavens; and dreadful as the
echoing thunder which rumbles dismally along
the air, and re-echoes loudly through the hills
and vallies, was the revengeful, unpitying arm of
the ruthless Cossack, as at every step he plunged
the steel into the bosom of a fellow creature.
“No man,” says Dr. Laurence, “could describe
the horrors which ensued. The ferocious victors,
instead of being struck with admiration or respect
for the noble defence of the brave garrison, were
so enraged at the great slaughter of their fellows
which had taken place, that no bounds could be
prescribed to the excess of their fury. All order
and command seem to have been entirely at an
end during the horrors of that terrible night; the
officers could neither restrain the slaughter nor
prevent the general plunder, made by the lawless
and ferocious soldiers. Thousands of the Turks,
incapable of enduring the sight of the horrid
scenes of destruction, in which all that was dear
to them was involved, rushed desperately upon


the bayonets of the enemy, in order to shorten
their misery, while those who could reach the
Danube, threw themselves headlong into it for
the same purpose. The streets and passages were
so choked by the heaps of dead and dying bodies
which lay in them, as considerably to impede the
progress of the victors in their eager search for
plunder.”
It is such scenes as these that prove the empti-
ness of all the pleasures and enjoyments which,
persons are but too apt to imagine, belong to a
military life. The gaudy trappings, and gay, and
apparently happy, disposition of the soldier in
time of peace, attract the attention of the thought-
less, and cause them to forget the horrors and
miseries of war. The recital of such an incident
as Buonaparte’s passage of the bridge of Lodi,
possesses a magic influence over some minds, and
causes them to swell with a degree of enthusiastic
ardour, which induces them to become warriors
in imagination, and fills them with an unconquer-
able desire to follow the example of such a leader.
In fact, few men, even of the most peaceful
.description, could contemplate such an exploit
without admiration of the bravery and decision of
the man by whom it was performed. No one,
perhaps, but the practised philosopher could feel


WAR.
unmoved at the mention of a circumstance so
unusual and impressive.
The Spartan mothers considered it one of the
most essential parts of their duty to their offspring,
to instil into their youthful minds a lofty contempt
of death and danger, and to make them look
upon war as a state of life more fit for them than
inactivity. And there have not been wanting
even in later times persons, who have stood for-
ward as the advocates of such a course of pro-
ceeding. That such conduct in mothers was
improper and injudicious, reason forbids us to
deny-and principles of such a description,
Christianity commands us to abhor.
In deprecating warfare in general terms,
would not wish it to be understood, that I do not
think there is a time when it is proper and ex-
pedient, when it is the duty of every member m
a community to unsheath the sword in defence ot
himself and his country. That time comes when
injury and oppression from abroad threatens to
subvert and annihilate the liberties of a nation
and reduce it to a state of abject slavery and
dependence. It was an emergency of this kind
that induced Washington to join in the ranks ot
battle and fight against his country’s enemies until
he had succeeded in achieving for her a glorious


independence. Leonidas, when the Persian my-
riads were marching to overwhelm his country,
was justified in proceeding to Thermopylae to stop
the barbarous invaders. The heroism of himself
and his followers at this important pass, must ever
remain an object of admiration to all who are
acquainted with the history of ancient Greece.
It was not a love of murder or of conquest that
caused him to hurry from his home and battle
with the enemies of his native land. It was a
desire to save his family and friends from insult
and injury—their homes from slavery and de-
solation—that induced him on this occasion, to
become a warrior.
Yet, while we admire the characters and con-
duct of Washington and Leonidas, we cannot
but deplore the necessity that compelled them to
forsake a life of peace and tranquility and raise
the weapon of death and vengeance against their
fellow-men. We cannot but lament the cause
while we rejoice in the effect.
Probably it may now be beyond the reach of
human ingenuity to devise any practical plan, by
which warfare may be abandoned, and the dis-
putes of different communities may be settled in
a less ferocious and inhuman manner. In this
state of things it should be the constant cndea-


vour of parents and instructors, while they hold
up the conduct of true heroes to the admiration
of the children entrusted to their care, to impress
upon their minds the benefits and virtues of peace,
and teach them to venerate the maxim of one o
the greatest of orators and statesmen which have
instructed and adorned mankind—
Iniquissimam pacem jnsti»iimo bello antefero.
Were a course like this universally adopted,
then might the glorious sight be realised, of com-
munities of human beings solicitous to assist,
instead of to destroy, their fellow creatures, and
anxious to become famous in the arts of peace,
while they despised and abhorred the cruelties
and stratagems of war. Then, indeed, might we
have the happiness to live in a golden age an
age when nothing but charity and benevolence
would actuate the human heart, and when the
master-spirits of mankind would devote all their
energies to cultivate and improve those arts which
tend to augment the knowledge and exalt the
condition of man, and render him more worthy
of those benefits which a bountiful Providence
has conferred upon him. Where there is peace
there is happiness and content; and when wars
agitate not the human mind, industry and morality
increase, and shed an invigorating ray around their


fortunate habitation. Buonaparte himself, whose
life was passed amidst wars and victories, con-
sidered his name would become more famous for
his laws than for his conquests. “ You saw,” says
Lord Brougham, “ the greatest warrior of the
age—conqueror of Italy—humbler of Germany—
terror of the north—saw him account all his
matchless victories poor, compared with the
triumph you are now in a condition to win—saw
him contemn the fickleness of fortune, while, in
despite of her, he could pronounce his memorable
boast, ‘ I shall go down to posterity with the
code in my hands !’ You have vanquished him
m the field, strive now to rival him in the sacred
arts of peace ! outstrip him as a lawgiver, whom in
arms you overcame.”
May the Almighty, in the plentifude of his
wisdom and benevolence, looking with compas-
sion upon our numerous errors and imperfections,
mstil into the hearts of all his creatures a firm
desire to live on peaceful and amicable terms
with each other; and convince those of a warlike
disposition, of the folly and cruelty of endeavour-
ing to shorten the existence of individuals, who
flourish for a moment and then perish as did their
forefathers before them. Fading as the flower
which blooms for a day—frail as the moth that


flourishes vigorously for an hour, and feeble as
the worm that crawls upon the earth is man, the
lord of the creation. How much more congenial
then to his disposition ! how much more in ac-
cordance with the ends for which he was created-
is it for him to employ the few moments of his
brief career in promoting the happiness and wel-
fare of himself and his fellow creatures, than in
entailing misery and disaster upon mankind!




SUN-R 1 SE.




SUNRISE.
Morn dawns ; and with it stern Albania’s hills,
Dark Suli’s rocks, and Pindus’ inland peak,
Robed half in mist, bedew’d with snowy rills,
Arrayed in mafly a dun and purple streak
Arise; and, as the clouds along them break.
Disclose the dwelling of the mountaineer:
Here roams the wolf, the eagle whets his beak.
Birds, beasts of prey, and wilder men appear,
And gathering storms around convulse the closing year.
Byron.
How beautiful and pleasing is it to watch the sun
rising from below the eastern horizon, and dispell-
ing gradually by his animating rays, the gloomy
darkness of the night! Perhaps there is no period
at which nature puts on a more romantic and im-
posing appearance, than when the glorious orb of
day is about to burst resplendently on the sight of
the wondering beholder. Then, is the hour when the
poet can draw inspiration from the scene around
him, elevate his soul above the contemplation of
lowly affairs, and soar majestically aloft on the
pinions of the inspired and heavenly wings of genius.
Then may the ardent admirer of nature’s beauties
gratify his desire, by looking on the grandest sight
which human eyes are permitted to behold.


In every age the enchanting influence of this
lonely, silent hour, when the cheerfulness and
vivacity of returning day are about to appear again
and chase away the dark vapours of the night,
has been (I may almost say universally) acknow-
ledged. The savage and the civilised individual,
have both been accustomed to look upon this
moment with pleasure and veneration. So great
is its influence on some minds, uninformed by
science and unenlightened by revelation, that
they look upon the vivifying luminary as a God,
and make it an essential part of their duty to
greet and worship it daily, as it emerges from
obscurity and throws its rays around. At the
approach of morn the Arab of the desert prepares
for his journey across the sandy waste—the Indian
sets out on his hunting expedition amongst the
trackless forests—the birds of air leave their
resting-place —the lark sings his morning hymn—
and nature, calm and peaceful as a sleeping
infant, bears a fresh and delightful aspect. The
animated world is then put in motion—the silence
which had reigned during the preceding darkness
is broken in upon by a thousand conflicting noises,
and the fairy dreams which the haze of morn had
awakened give way to the realities of life.
In modern civilised life, there are numbers who,


vitiated by refinement and enervated by luxury,
so far from admiring, have never in the whole
course of their lives had the gratification of wit-
nessing the sun in all its splendour emerge
gloriously from the eastern horizon. Slothful and
enfeebled they rise not from their slumbers until
the morning has passed away, and the beauty
and tranquility of the dawning day has vanished.
I know not whether to pity or despise such
individuals as these. Little do they think, that
while they are heedlessly losing the best hours
of existence, they are diminishing its enjoyments
and shortening its duration. Let the sluggard
for once in his life endeavour to overcome his
habitual laziness of disposition, and walk forth
from his couch as soon as “ the cock’s shrill
clarion” reverberates through the silent atmosphere
announcing joyfully the approach of morn —let
him continue a course of conduct like this for a
certain period, and then if he do not feel himself
refreshed both inbodyand mind, if he do not enjoy
a degree of gratification superior to what he has
hitherto experienced—he must certainly be con-
firmed in indolence and unsusceptible of refined
and elevated impressions.
Having heard a great deal of the beauties of
sun-rise, as seen from the light-house at South


Head, I determined some fine morning to gratify
my inclination by beholding it. An opportunity
occurred in the delightful month of September,
and mounting my horse at four in the morning,
I and another set out on our early expedition.
There was something pleasing and romantic in
the idea of entering on such a journey at such a
time, its very novelty had a strange effect on my
mind. The twinkling of the stars—the crowing
of the cocks—the occasional bark of a watchful
house-dog—the grey tints of the eastern sky—
the curling vapours rising from the harbour, and
occasionally enveloping us as we trotted along its
margin—all combined with the hour and the
almost uninterrupted silence and solitude that
reigned around, filled me with a series of in-
describable emotions.
We arrived at the light-house just as the
lamps were about to be extinguished, and were
in time to view the entire transition from dark-
ness to light. We ascended to the lantern,
and there elevated at least three hundred feet
above the level of the ocean that rolled almost
immediately beneath us, we awaited the rising
of the sun. The stars shone brilliantly in a
cloudless sky, not a breath of wind disturbed
the tranquility of the scene. Well might I have


said in the words of a distinguished writer in this
Colony: —
Lovely and holy is this hour’s emotion ;
How still yon shore; scarce calmer Eden’s own,
When, side by side in slumber or devotion,
Sleep hushed the breath, or prayer subdued the tone
Of earth’s first pair, embosomed there alone !
And ocean too—all mute and moveless, save
Where, by its light, some distant oar is shown.
Disturbing, only to illume the wave,
As shall the Seraph’s hand that opes the good man’s grave.
Towards the east a kind of twilight began
gradually to appear, and Lucifer, brilliant as a
diamond, rose above the waters. There was
something inexpressibly delightful in beholding
the bright forerunner ot day as he emeiged from
the deep and appeared like a gem upon the
ocean. The atmosphere by degrees became en-
lightened, the darkness was dissipated, and a
rosy tint upon the sky foretold the near approach
of the resplendent luminary. This was succeded
by a yellow golden colour, which heightened as
the sun come nearer to the horizon. The stais
then began to “ hide their diminished heads,” and
Lucifer himself emitted but a feeble ray. At
length every surrounding object was rendered
distinctly visible—the dark mantle of night had
vanished, and day was about to dawn upon the
land. In a short time a light, as of a glowing


flame, seemed to rest upon the waters: gradually
it increased in magnitude until finally the whole
disk of the sun had risen, as it were, from its rest-
ing, place to enter again upon its diurnal avoca-
tions :
The dawn of morn—how gloriously wakes
The fire-god here! no clouds obscure his rise ;
At once he from his ruby chamber breaks.
And with the first smile of his glowing eyes
Turns all they beam upon to Paradise 1
Never shall I forgetthe magnificent view which
at that moment met my eye. All the ideas which
I had before formed of fairy realms and fairy
grandeur, were then infinitely surpassed by the
reality before me. The blue ocean seemed as
though it were a “ sea of glory,” and the bril-
liance of its appearance was such as I could, not
gaze upon without giving vent to an exclamation
of astonishment and delight. I contemplated the
scene until my vision was dimmed by the glitter-
ing rays; and when I prepared to depart, I found
it difficult to tear myself away. I had never
experienced more heartfelt enjoyment, and I felt
that I could sit for hours and contemplate a sight
so glorious as that which I had just witnessed.
As we returned, everything appeared gay and
blooming, and the sparkling of the dew-drops in
the trees, and the chirping of the feathered tribe


together with the balmy freshness of the atmos-
phere, diffused through my frame a thrilling and
delightful sensation.
The midnight reveller, or the dreamy sluggard,
would do well to undertake a journey similar to
the one I have described; whatever inconvenience
or trouble it may cost, will be amply [requited by
the pleasure it will afford him.




SUN-SET.




SUN-SET.
And now they change; a paler shadow strews
Its mantle o’er the mountains ; parting day
Dies like the dolphin, whom each pang imbues
With a new colour as it gasps away,
The last still loveliest, till—’tis gone—and all is grey.
Btron.
Having in my last sketch given an account of
sun-rise, as seen from South Head, it may not be
inappropriate here to describe the appearance of
sun-set as I once saw it, from the same position.
Having been out one remarkably fine day,
visiting the Lighthouse and its vicinity, as the
sun was declining towards the western horizon, the
heavens presented such a beautiful appearance,
that I determined to wait and contemplate the ap-
proach of an Australian sun-set. The sky was
slightly covered with a mixture of dark and fleecy
clouds, which, contrasted with the deep blue of the
atmosphere, afforded a very picturesque appear-
ance. Italy, I felt convinced, with all her charms,
her orange groves, her balmy breezes, and her splen-
did skies, might well be proud of such an evening.
When the sun had almost sank below a light
strata of clouds that skirted the horizon, the


sight that it presented was exceedingly beautiful.
The various picturesque tints which its rays gave
to the vapoury screens, which seemed to envelope
it, had a delightful effect. Far inland could I
discern the blue mountains rising high above the
surrounding lands, and appearing at different
places like a sea in the distance. Here and there
a conical hill reared aloft into the atmosphere,
looked like a dense azure cloud resting upon the
mountains. Intervening between this and the
spot where I was standing lay the splendid har-
bour of Port Jackson, bearing on its tranquil
bosom ships and boats of every description. The
masts and rigging of the vessels appeared like a
splendid forest amidst the waters, and the mo-
notonous noise of oars conveyed along the surface
of the deep, sounded musically upon the ear. A
portion of Sydney, in the form of an amphitheatre,
was visible over an intervening headland, at the
extremity of which was built the picturesque and
frowning battery of Fort Macquarie. In short,
everything that I gazed upon was eminently
calculated to enliven the scene, and envelope it
in a mantle of magic splendour. No spot could
present a much neater view than that which I
then beheld, slightly dimmed as it was by the
approaching shades of night.


The sun at length was beginning to disappear
below a cloud and twilight was rapidly approach-
ing. A bright golden tint overspread the whole
face of nature—the sky—the land—the water—
the shipping and the buildings —all partook of
the brilliant rays of the departing luminary. The
portion of the harbour intervening in a direct line
beween me and the sun looked like a sea of
molten gold ; and wherever a boat passed across
it, my fancy pictured to me some joyful ferryman,
urging his light skiff gaily along in the regions of
the blest. Happy land, ejaculated I, how little
do youi* thoughtless inhabitants appreciate the
beauties which nature has liberally bestowed upon
you. Alas! that England should make you the
repository to which all her excess of crime and
depravity is sent—to which the refuse of her people
—the outcasts of society—are transported !
In a few minutes the sun was entirely hidden
from my sight, but still its influence had not de-
parted. By degrees the vivid tints which its rays
had shortly before given to everything around
became less brilliant—the golden colour changed
to a yellow—the yellow to a red—the red to a
blue—the blue to a dun—until finally twilight
had begun to reign. The various and rapidly
changing tints becoming gradually more beautiful


until they were all gone, had an enchanting in-
fluence upon the senses.
When the objects before me were almost en-
veloped in the shades of darkness, I was still
lingering on the spot whence I had beheld the
setting of the sun. My eyes were still turned
longingly towards the west, and although night
began to settle upon the mountains, I yet gazed
as though the golden scene were still before me.
The charm which bound me to the place was not
broken until night had advanced, and the silver
moon, brilliant and beautiful, had arisen to assume
her sway. The pale orb and the twinkling stars
aroused me from the slight and transient lethargy
into which I had fallen, and warned me that it
was time to retire.
Were it possible, I would gladly spend every
day of my existence in witnessing a sight so
glorious as the one which I had just beheld.
Continual enjoyment instead of cloying would but
augment my desire.
To those who have never witnessed an “Austra-
lian sun-set” in spring, the foregoing account may
appear highly coloured and greatly exaggerated ;
but, instead of exceeding it, in my opinion, falls
short of the truth. However, let those who have
an opportunity judge for themselves.


CHRISTMAS
AUSTRALIA.




CHRISTMAS IN AUSTRALIA.
It is a beautiful arrangement, also, derived from days of yore,
that this festival, which commemorates the announcement of the
religion of peace and love, has been made the season for gathering
together of family connections, and drawing closer again those bands
of kindred hearts which the cares and pleasures and sorrows of the
world are continually operating to cast loose; of calling back the
children of a family, who have launched forth in life and wandered
widely asunder, once more to assemble about the paternal hearth,
that rallying place of the affections, there to grow young and loving
again among the endearing mementoes of childhood.
Washington Irving.
Many and excellent writers have given us de-
scriptions of Christmas in our “ father land its
merry gambols and animated parties, together
with the pleasure and excitement which its arrival
invariably creates, have been eulogized by some
of the most distinguised writers of modern times.
In prose and in poetry have its praises been
composed, and the humblest as well as the most
classic author has endeavoured to endear it to
mankind. The accomplised Irving, in his grace-
ful and harmonious style, the resistless Boz, in
his humorous manner, and the renowned Peter
Parley, in his simple and easy diction, has each
given us a vivid idea of the way in which our
z 3


British brethren celebrate a season, which, wher-
ever Christianity flourishes, is the harbinger of
happiness and peace. Hitherto, however, no one
has attempted to give us a sketch of an “ Austra-
lian Christmas.” This festive season, in our
country, has not yet been described, and in order
to make up for a deficiency so glaring, I shall
endeavour to convey to the reader unacquainted
with our genial clime, an idea of the twenty-fifth
of December in this portion of the Southern
Hemisphere. In a country which has been in-
habited by the same race of people for many
centuries, it almost invariably happens that cus-
tom firmly unites many peculiar practices with
the soil, and causes them to be observed by
various generations with a degree of attachment
which civilization itself cannot subdue. Customs
which may have originated in the dark days of
tyranny and superstition, however ridiculous and
unmeaning they may appear when rationally in-
vestigated, possess an innate charm for, and have
an unaccountable influence over, the human
mind. That which has been venerated for cen-
turies by our ancestors we find it almost im-
possible to disregard, and seem to take a childish
delight in following exactly in the footsteps of our
forefathers.


In England the “misletoe bough, ’ the “yule
clog,” and a great variety of other things con-
nected with Christmas, are remnants of the feudal
ages ; and although the Britons have attained a
degree of refinement unexampled in the history of
nations, there are many of them who even to this
day take pleasure in observing minutely these
ancient ceremonies. What originated, perhaps,
in superstition, is now converted into innocent
diversion ; and rites, which may have been
established by the Druids, are now fondly prac-
tised (though from different motives) by the
Christians.
Still we cannot but admire those long estab-
lished customs which age seems to have sanctified
and continual habit to have endeared. That
rigid philosophy which would deprecate their
observance is certainly repulsive to our nature,
and although it might be difficult for us to assign
a satisfactory reason for so doing, we always
continue to venerate those rites which our ances-
tors have established.
The English more than any other people upon
the face of the globe, are marked by a gieat
variety of peculiar customs, which eminently
display their innate cheerfulness and humanity.
Among: these customs, those which they observe
O


at Christmas are not the least distinguished. At
this particular period of the year a ray of hap-
piness seems to light up the features of society :
the prince and the peasant—the palace and the
cottage—all partake of the delight which the
anniversary of our Saviour’s birth-day contributes
to throw around. The houseless wanderer forgets
his destitution—the beggar disregards his miser-
able condition—the independent gentleman breaks
through the cold formality, which, during the rest
of the year, separates him from a great portion of
his fellow creatures—every one is rejoiced—those
that have not, receive from those that have—and
universal plenty and universal happiness reign
over the smiling land with undisputed sway.
“ Shorn, however, as it is,” says Irving, “of
its ancient and festive honours, Christmas is still
a period of delightful excitement in England. It
is gratifying to see that home feeling completely
aroused, which seems to hold so powerful a place
in every English bosom. The preparations making
on every side for the social board that is again to
invite friends and kindred ; the presents of good
cheer passing and repassing—those tokens of
regard and quickeners of kind feelings; the
evergreens distributed about houses and churches
—emblems of peace and gladness ; all these have


the most pleasing effect in producing fond asso-
ciations, and kindling benevolent sympathies.
Even the sound of the waits, rude as may be
their minstrelsy, breaks upon the mid-watches of
a winter night with the effect of perfect harmony.
As I have been awakened by them in that still
and solemn hour, * when deep sleep falleth upon
man/ I have listened with a hushed delight, and,
connecting them with the sacred and joyous
occasion, have almost fancied them into another
celestial choir, announcing peace and good-will
to mankind.”
The inhabitants of this colony have adopted a
great many of these customs of their ancestors ;
and the Australians look forward to the arrival of
Christmas with the same degree of fondness and
veneration as a Briton. Variation in the mode of
living, and a difference of soil and climate, may
cause this season to be celebrated with less pre-
cision and minuteness here than in England,
We certainly have not the same associations of
antiquity to instigate us, and fill us with any
degree of enthusiastic ardour, yet love of
Christmas is by no means of an ordinary desciip-
tion. Well do I remember, when at school, the
many anxious wishes hand my companions have
expressed for the arrival of that auspicious period,


when apart from study, we might indulge in
innocent enjoyment in the bosom of our families,
and amongst our friends and acquaintance.
During the many weary hours which we were
constrained to spend over our books, our boyish
minds would fondly turn to the future and dwell
with delight upon the pleasure which we already
experienced in anticipation. As the end of the
year approached, our animation increased in pro-
portion ; and it would be difficult to describe the
exultation with which we hailed the day that was
to usher us from the halls of science and conduct
us to our respective homes, full of spirits and gay
and thoughtless as grasshoppers basking in a
genial sun.
It is indeed one of the most beautiful charac-
teristics of Christmas, that its arrival is hailed as
the signal for the gathering together once more
around the family hearth individuals, who, during
the rest of the year, may be separated from each
other. The business of life calls upon us to tear
ourselves away from what we hold most dear to
us in this world, but returning Christmas, like a
comforting angel, conducts us again to the scenes
of childhood and of youth.
There is besides, a holy charm about Christmas,
which, independent of the other enjoyments it


affords, endears it to the soul. The anniversary
of our Saviour’s appearance upon earth is a
period which we cannot contemplate with in-
difference. The day upon which our Creator
descended amongst us to expiate our sms, has
strong claims upon our veneration. It is a day
fraught with “peace and good will to all men,
and its sanctity should not be violated or despised.
Like the olive and-the palm, it extends to us the
virtues of happiness and peace, and ought to
banish from our minds every sordid, selfish con-
sideration.
Australia, in consequence of the peculiar nature
of its population, has long been considered a land
of depravity and crime ; and even at the present
day, there have not been wanting individuals who
have endeavoured to cast the foulest aspersions
upon its character.' Hence, persons unacquainted
with us, may imagine that a festival, which in all
other Christian countries is scrupulously observed,
is by us totally overlooked. To remove impres-
sions such as these, let facts be submitted to a
discerning and a candid world.
During the week immediately preceding the
twenty-fifth of December, every family in the
whole colony appears to be thrown into a state of
bustle and activity. The farmer hurries to the


metropolis with his eggs, his poultry, and the
produce of his lands, and purchases an ample
supply of Christmas dainties for the due celebra-
tion of the approaching holiday. Plums, currants,
wines, spirits, and a large variety of other niceties,
which it would be impossible for me to enumerate,
are obtained by the active housewife to adorn and
set off the Christmas dinner. Every one is em-
ployed in providing for the eventful day, and the
ordinary avocations of society seem to be almost
forgotten. Christmas-eve at length arrives, and
the scene which it presents both in town and
country is of a very peculiar and pleasing de-
scription. The aborigines themselves seem in-
fluenced by the day, and may be seen in crowds
strolling through the town, bearing “ Christmas
bushes,”* for the purpose of adorning the houses
on the morrow. Carts and wheelbarrows, loaded
• These “ Christmas bushes” are plucked from a beautiful tree
which is now becoming very scarce in the vicinity of our towns.—
This tree usually attains the height of about twenty feet, and when
in full bloom has a very picturesque appearance. The bark is
smooth and frequently mottled, the leaves vary from two to three
inches in length, are rather narrow, and terminate in a point, have
the edges indented like a saw, and are of a glossy dark-green colour.
The flowers are of the cruciform species, similar in shape to a
cabbage blossom, and when in full vigour are of a fine red colour*
Indeed, I think the whole vegetable kingdom could scarcely furnish
a more appropriate shrub than this for the purpose of adorning our
houses on a Christmas day.


with evergreens of all sorts fill the streets, and
all persons seem to be intent in providing for the
ensuing day. Some there are among the lower
orders, who, instead of indulging in innocent and
harmless festivity, give way to riot and intem-
perance, and convert the period which is intended
for enjoyment into one of excessive dissipation.
But this will not be surprising when it comes to
be understood that drunkenness is the prevailing
crime amongst us, and that it is the curse which
seems to brood over and desolate the land. Yet,
notwithstanding this circumstance, Christmas-eve
is a season of happiness and enjoyment through-
out Australia, and with few exceptions, peace
and contentment dwell with every family.
The momentous day at lengh arrives, and
nature seems to smile at its approach. Almost
every house is decorated with boughs, and neat-
ness seems to reign triumphantly around. The
half-closed shop-windows, the comparatively silent
streets, and the smartly dressed inhabitants ever
and anon demanding Christmas boxes from the
friends they meet with, are characteristic of this
joyous day, and contribute to charm the senses of
the observer.
When the hour of prayer arrives, the streets
become filled with individuals directing their


footsteps to the various places of worship in
the metropolis. Almost every habitation is de-
serted, and the praises of the Almighty are sung
by thousands of individuals of all ages, persua-
sions, and conditions. There is certainly some-
thing more fascinating in divine worship on a
Christmas day than at any other period of the
year. The music of the choir sounds har-
moniously on the ear and breathes a kind of
heavenly inspiration into the soul of the Christian
The impressive voice of the clergyman as he pro-
claims aloud the importance of the day and the
sensations it should awaken in our breasts, irre
sistably fixes our attention and commands our
respect. A beam of cheerfulness seems to light
up every countenance, and heartfelt pleasure
animates every bosom.
After divine service each person proceeds to
partake of his Christmas dinner with all his family
around him. Nothing, perhaps, can be more
grateful to a benevolent or a sensitive mind, than
to see a host of smiling striplings and their fond
and doting parents, gathered round the table on
an occasion like this. The heart of a philan-
thropic individual naturally expands at such a
sight, and while he gazes on the happy scene
before him, he is insensibly but irresistably


affected with a sympathetic glow of animation.
All other feelings became absorbed in those to
which the happiness of every one around gives
rise, and he forgets for a time his own condition
in the heartfelt enjoyment of his companions.
** Stranger and sojourner as I am in the land,
says Irving, <c though for me no social hearth
may blaze, no hospitable roof throw open its
doors, nor the warm grasp of friendship welcome
me at the threshold—yet I feel the influence of
the season beaming into my soul from the happy
looks of those .around me. Surely happiness is
reflective, like the light of heaven ; and every
countenance, bright with smiles, and glowing
with innocent enjoyment, is a mirror transmitting
to others the rays of a supreme and ever-shining
benevolence. He who can turn churlishly away
from contemplating the felicity of his fellow-
beingS, and sit down darkling and repining in
his loneliness when all around is joyful, may
have his moments of strong excitement and
selfish gratification, but he wants the genial and
social sympathies which constitute the charm of
a merry Christmas.”
It is frequently mentioned as a proof of the
fond regard entertained for Christmas by the
English, that notwithstanding the dreary aspect
2 a 2


of the season—the leafless forest and snow-clad
ground—nothing can be seen but pleasure and
animation. The wintry blast appears to possess
no influence upon the mind of either the peer or
the peasant, and spring with all its blooming
charms could not excite more delightful sensa-
tions than this frigid period of the year. Clustered
round a blazing fire, in every farm-house, a cheer-
ful group may be seen listening attentively to
some wondrous and oft-told tale, carrying back
the attention of the auditors to the days of
romance and superstition. In other places the
sound of music responded to by the feet of the
dancers as they tread the mazes of the light
qua rille, or trip nimbly down the room in the
simple country dance, sounds sweetly on the ear
and carries a spark of animation to every heart.
Here, in the capacious hall, may be discerned a
host of children amusing themselves with blind
man’s buff, snap-dragon, or some other equally ex-
citing amusement. In short, no one is inactive—
every habitation from the palace to the cot is enli-
vened by enjoyment, and the prince and the beggar
both participate in the pleasures of the season.
In Australia the difference of climate causes
the scene to bear a different and less animating
aspect. Instead of the cool breezes and snow


storms of an English winter, the sultry winds of
summer and the scorching rays of an almost
vertical sun, effectually put a stop to all sorts of
amusement. In the towns, clouds of dust occa-
sionally darken the atmosphere and render the
weather peculiarly disagreeable. Under these
circumstances every one is constrained to rest
quietly within his doors, and wait patiently until
the approach of night may in some degree mode-
rate the oppressive blast. Even then there is a
warmth in the air—a calm, sultry heat, which
renders it totally impossible for any one to arouse
himself to exertion. Instead of blazing fires
glowing in each hearth, every fire-place is orna-
mented with evergreens ; and instead of sitting
opposite the burning “ yule clog,” the peasant
seats himself quietly in the open air on the out-
side of his humble cottage.
I well remember the pleasant manner in which
I once spent the Christmas holidays with a school-
fellow, to whose residence in the country I had
received an invitation. The incidents which oc-
curred are so strongly characteristic of Christmas,
that I feel convinced it will not be deemed super-
fluous to give my readers a short account of my
adventures during the three weeks that I was
liberated from my school.
2 a 3


As the holidays approached, I was continually
pondering with delight on the forthcoming plea-
sures which fancy conjured before me in dim but
gratifying perspective. , Guns and fishing-tackle
—horses and boats—floated before my imagination
in vivid colours and occupied my thoughts more
frequently than my studies ; I looked forward to
the annual examination with delight, not so much
on account of the applause which I expected to
gain for my literary attainments, as because it
was the day on which my thraldom would expire
and I would be launched forth into a sea of un-
restrained enjoyment. This day at length arrived,
and by its arrival, the fears, anxieties, and plea-
sures of the inhabitants of the miniature w T orld of
which I was a citizen, were alternately excited.
Those whom conscience warned of their past mis-
conduct and their present ignorance, dwelt with
gloomy foreboding on the coming events of the
important day ; while others, in whom close ap-
plication and consequent success had implanted
a feeling of confidence, with animated spirits
awaited the examination.
A school-room on such a day as this would
present a scene well worth any one’s contempla-
tion. The youths neatly dressed—the room in
which they were assembled carefully arranged


and filled partly with chairs for the expected
company, combined with the anxious appearance
of the boys and their masters, might clearly in-
dicate that something of more than common
importance was about to take place. Like,' a
great army on the eve of an engagement, nothing
but the ceaseless din and bustle of preparation
could be heard, and every one would appear
eager to be in readiness to undergo the approach-
ing trial. Lessons oft repeated would be re-
turned to once more ; and even the most studious
and accomplished might be discerned conning
again over that by which they expected to draw
upon themselves the applause and admiration of
the public.
When the examiners began to make their ap-
pearance, the classes were formed with all the
precision and regularity of disciplined troops
about to undergo a review. After the usual dis-
play of studied learning on the part of the
examined, and silent attention and nodding ap-
proval* on that of the examiners, the time for
distributing the prizes at length arrived. This
• 1 cannot here resist the temptation of relating an anecdote of a
certain wiseacre who once came to our annual examination to form
an idea of the state of colonial education. With a degree of mo-
desty which I would particularly recommend to the notice of


was a moment of suspense and anxiety among
the pupils, which created an uninterrupted and
a death-like silence. With due solemnity the
names of the fortunate individuals were then
loudly proclaimed, and after an appropriate ad-
dress had been delivered on the merits of each,
the prizes were awarded. Then finished the ex-
hibition and the time for departure was at hand.
The elder youths clustered affectionately round
their tutor to bid a short adieu. It must have
been extremely pleasing to him to witness the
enjoyment of his pupils and receive their cordial
embrace prior to their departure for their respec-
tive homes. All past animosities, which his
necessary severity might have caused, at this
moment were forgotten, and the stern aspect
which discipline during the rest of the year com-
pelled him to assume, gave way to a benevolent
smile of friendship and cordiality. Often as I
examiners in general, he did not aspire to investigate the produc-
tions of any youth beyond the age of ten, and in looking attentively
and solemnly over a juvenile theme he met with the word which,
spelt according to the orthography which I have here adopted. This
not exactly suiting his profound taste, and being totally at variance
with his erudite notions of propriety, he sagely altered with a stroke
of the pen to wich— observing at the same time, that with the ex-
ception of that one word the theme was beautifully written, —thus
establishing his fame as a skilful critic beyond every possibility of
dispute.


had incurred his resentment, I could not but
envy him the gratification which at that moment
he appeared to enjoy.
To those youths who, having like myself, spent
the greater part of their lives within the precincts
of a town, the pleasure which a trip into the
country afforded me may be easily imagined.
Light-hearted and joyous, I lost no time in making
preparations to be in readiness for the evening
mail. Everything at length being satisfactorily
arranged, after having taken leave of my family,
my companion-and I proceeded to the vehicle
which was to conduct us to our destination. The
coach was just on the point of starting, and the
inn-yard where it was, presented a lively scene of
bustle and activity. That anomalous kind of
being, who in this colony, is generally termed
“ the guard” (for what reason I am utterly at a
loss to understand) was perched on the box
receiving luggage from the passengers and cram-
ming it into the vehicle, pell mell, without any
regard to the materials of which it might be
composed. Everything having at length been
arranged, the order to mount was given and
instantly responded to. The coachman having
enquired if all was right, gave reins to his horses
•and away we dashed, to the extreme gratification


of an admiring 1 throng of grooms, shoe-boys, and
stable-yard loungers, that had gathered to witness
our departure. The wheels rattled loudly along
the stony streets, the whip cracked smartly, the
horses dashed rapidly onwards, and the spirits of
every one seemed excited. Animation beamed
joyfully in every countenance, and like a gleam
of sunshine peering brightly through a cloud,
gave an air of happiness to the scene. Naturally
of a gay disposition, the lively appearance of
surrounding objects augmented my vivacity and
seemed to possess an enchanting influence upon
my nerves.
The inside of the coach contained a smiling
little girl and two chubby young urchins, to-
gether with their mother, who was taking them
home to enjoy the Christmas vacation. Bundles
of toys had been purchased for them, cakes and
sweetmeats had been given to them, and in their
estimation, nothing more was wanting to complete
the measure of their happiness. Their shouts of
merriment and innocent enjoyment as they were
occasionally heard above the rattling of the
wheels, came like delightful music to my ears,
and by listening to, I seemed to participate in,
their felicity.
Every habitation that we passed on the road


side bore strong evidence of the approach of
Christmas. The whitened or newly painted walls,
the cleaned yards, the neatly raked gardens, and
the joyous appearance of everything around, were
evidently characteristic of the coming season of
festivity. The very smoke as it rose perpen-
dicularly into the clear blue atmosphere seemed
to be more beautiful than usual, and fancy en-
veloped it in a mantle of fairy grandeur.
Just as the sun was sinking below the distant
range of blue mountains in the west, we stopped
to change horses at a neat inn situated in the
centre of a small village. While the grooms
were liberating the jaded animals and placing
others to the vehicle, my school-fellow and I took
a short stroll to witness the operations of the
humble villagers around. Before the door of one
small habitation were congregated a knot of old
farmers discussing some weighty affair, which, as
we drew nearer, we found to be the merits of a
fine fat pig which one of them had just slain for
the Christmas dinner. The owner, instead of
churlishly keeping the whole of it to himself, was
arranging the manner in which it was to be
among his friends. Almost every person
in the neighbourhood was to receive a piece, and
instead of being private it appeared to be public


property. This is a trait in our rural life which
surpasses anything that is to be met with in a city
where all are absorbed in one great undertaking
the acquisition of money and independence.
Every person in this small community seemed to
be a member of one common family, and the gra-
tification of any one was invariably shared by the
whole circle of his acquaintance. A state of
things so similar to the patriarchal days of old—
so eminently calculated to awaken delightful
sensations in the breast of the observer, caused
my bosom to thrill with pleasure and admiration.
The contrast between this little and apparently
happy village and the metropolis which I had
just left, brought the following lines of Goldsmith
to my mind—
If to the city sped—what waits him there?
To see profusion that he must not share ;
To see ten thousand baneful arts combined.
To pamper luxury and thin mankind ;
To see each joy the sons of pleasure know,
Extorted from his fellow-creature’s wo.
While contemplating the happiness that smiled
around me I insensibly fell into a pleasing reverie,
from which I was aroused by the departure of the
coach again on its journey. Another half hour,
and we would be at our destination—the scene of
our holiday sports was now but a few miles before


us. Every mile-stone that we passed contributed
to increase the joy of my companion, and when
we had arrived at the place where we were to be
' set down, he was evidently in an ecstacy of de-
light. Having bade good night to our fellow-
passengers, we proceeded with our bundles along
a winding avenue which led us about three
quarters of a mile from the main road. The
moon had risen some time and shone brilliantly
in a cloudless sky, dimming the twinkling stars
by her clear and vivid lustre. In a few moments
the habitation to which we were directing our
footsteps lay before us, and by the rays of the
bright luminary above us, we discerned some of
the family seated under the verandah enjoying a
gentle breeze which at the approach of night had
set in from the east. A verdant lawn lay between
us and the mansion, and scarcely had we emerged
from the grove through which we had just passed,
when a whole host of children ran across the
green to meet us and welcome us to the country.
I envied my companion the pleasure he expe-
rienced when he embraced each of his youthful
sisters and brothers as they came crowding fondly
around him, and evinced in their very looks the
warmest and most fraternal affection. A feeling
of loneliness began to creep over me when I con-


sidered how different was my own situation and
how much less cheering was my reception. My
school-fellow now found himself in the bosom of
his family, and I away from my home, was, com-
paratively speaking, among a set of strangers.
Any unpleasant sensations, however, to which
this train of thoughts might have given rise were
soon dispelled by the frankness and cordiality of
the parents. As soon as they had embraced their
son they welcomed me in a manner which drove
for the moment all thoughts of home from my
remembrance, and made me at once happy and
contented. Refreshments were quickly provided
for us to invigorate our frames after the tedium
of the journey, and an hour at least was occupied
in replying to all the various queries that were
put to us by every member of the family, relative
to the juvenile community from which we had
just been liberated.
My companion had received a medal at the
examination as a reward for his improvement in
learning, and when he drew it forth and exhibited
it to the gaze of his admiring relatives, the smile of
joy and exultation that beamed on their respective
features was really heart-thrilling to behold. The
mother, as she gazed upon this trophy of her
son’s exertions, looked upon him with maternal


pride, and her features lighted up with a vivid
glow of animation. The father, although his
pleasure was not so visible, still evinced by his
appearance a degree of delight which showed
how much he inwardly rejoiced. The children
themselves were pleased with the circumstance
and felt happy at their brother’s signal success.
There was something in this little domestic scene
of pure and rational felicity which struck me
forcibly at the time, and as I had not long
before been an actor in a similar one, I was well
able to appreciate its value.
The succeeding day was the twenty-fourth, and
as it was determined that a pigeon or a parrot pie
would not be an unacceptable addition to the nu-
merous other dainties prepared for the Christmas
dinner, we devoted the whole of the day to a
shooting excursion amidst the lofty mountains and
verdant vallies around. The place was delight-
fully situated for such sport, and remaining in
the bush until the shades of evening began to
thicken, we had collected a quantity of game far
exceedingourmost sanguine expectations. When
we returned we found the place a scene of bustle
and activity, every person in the neighbourhood
seemed to be employed. The extensive prepara-
tions that were being made foretold the approach
2 b 2


of some important festival. As is customary on
a Christmas eve. the glass circulated rather freely
among the servants, and the members of the
family themselves indulged in a little innocent
festivity. The old gentleman was of a very be-
nevolent disposition and always took a delight in
seeing every one happy around him—the most
humble individual in the vicinity shared his re-
gard, and it seemed to disturb him whenever he
he saw even the meanest of his domestics dis-
contented. Under the roof of such a t peison
nothing but universal happiness could be ex-
pected to reign at such a season, and surely no
house could present a scene of greater harmony
and felicity than did his on this important occa-
sion. We remained up much later than usual
this evening, and midnight had gone by some
time before we retired to our slumbers.
The grey tints of approaching morn had scarcely
coloured the distant horizon when I awoke and rose
from my couch to walk forth among the hills and
enjoy the morning breeze in all its purity and
freshness. The lawn was wet with dew when 1
strolled forth, and the atmosphere was cool and
invigorating. I directed my footsteps towards
a steep eminence which commanded a splendid
view of all the surrounding country. My walk


was solitary, but the train of ideas which the day
presented to my mind banished every feeling of
loneliness and wrapped me in pleasing contem-
plation. The cocks as they crew their accus-
tomed matins, seemed to me to perform their
ordinary duty with unusual joy, and a thrill of
delight appeared to run through their little,
feathered frames as they announced the approach
of dawn. The morning star, I thought, looked
more brilliant; the azure vault above more clear;
and 'the whole scenery more enchanting than I
had ever before observed it. The very silence of
the woods possessed a sacred charm over the
imagination, and was strictly in keeping with the
serene solemnity of the coming of our Saviour
upon earth.
In a quarter of an hour I had arrived at the
summit of the hill, and the sun was just on the
point of breaking forth in all his splendour, and
cheering and invigorating the face of nature with
his brilliant rays and vivifying influence. I
gazed with intense delight upon the view which
then burst upon my sight. On one side could be
discerned a large village situated on a sloping
hill and surrounded by fields teeming with ripen-
ing vegetation. The ornamented steeple rising
proudly above the surrounding buildings looked
2 b 3


beautiful in the distance. On my right nothing
but valleys, mountains, and forests met my wan-
dering eye. These formed a fine contrast to the
cheering symptoms of cultivation that were gra-
dually encroaching upon their hitherto undis-
turbed dominion.
When the great luminary rose above the hori-
zon, his rays seemed to have acquired unusual
brilliance to do honor to the happy day. Fancy
even imagined that a joyous smile played on his
radiant disc, as though inanimate objects them-
selves were capable of being influenced by the
anniversary of the most signal gift ever bestowed
by the Creator upon His creature —the birth of a
Redeemer and a Saviour. Let atheism laugh and
folly smile—he who could not see any charms in
a moment such as this, is ignorant of a pleasure,
which conscious security and unrestrained in-
dulgence would never enable him to enjoy.
I returned in time for breakfast, and gave an
account of my morning walk to the assembled
family. The hour for devotion soon drew near,
and we all prepared ourselves to proceed to divine
worship in the adjacent village. As we ap-
proached the church we saw that it was fancifully
ornamented with evergreens, in the arrangement
and selection of which great pains had evidently


been taken. The farmers and villagers, dressed
out in finery provided expressly for the occasion,
presented a picturesque and pleasing sight, and
the happiness that glowed in their countenances
while it animated themselves captivated the be-
holder. The church being small was crowded to
excess; but notwithstanding the numbers every
one was serious and attentive, and while the
clergyman was delivering his sermon an unbroken
stillness reigned throughout the audience. When
prayers were over, and all were proceeding to
their homes, I could not resist the temptation
of gazing for a few moments on the moving
multitude before me. In each countenance that
I scrutinized there did not appear the least in-
dication of discontent —all seemed to he equally
happy.
When we returned we found the dining table
laid out in the most sumptuous manner. The
old gentleman was not one of those individuals
w T ho, bending implicitly to the most senseless
dictates of fashion, show themselves so far care-
less of the ordinances of nature as to partake of
their principal meal when it is time to indulge
the body in peaceful slumbers. For this reason
his Christmas dinner was ready early in the after-
noon, and the sun had not long passed the


meridian when we were all seated at the table.
I shall never forget the air of heartfelt delight
with which the parents beheld their assembled
offspring thus gathered together once more in
the house of their infancy. It will be unnecessary
for me to give a lengthened detail of all the de-
licacies that were prepared on this occasion, it
will be sufficient to say, that the fattest of meat
and the mellowest of wine crowned the smiling
board, and that those truly national dishes of Old
England—roast beef and plum-pudding—were
not wanting.
For a week after this there was nothing but re-
joicing, and the season of festivity did not ter-
minate until another year had passed away.
Whenever I think of this happy period of my
life I cannot but lament that it was doomed to be
of such short duration. Through the dim vista
of years passed by, I look fondly back upon these
delightful holidays, and frequently endeavour to
chase away the dullness of the present by a re-
collection of the brilliancy of the past.
I'INIS.


PRINTED BY J« TEGCj AND CO.


n l *if J&n,/A t-A > t X' //£ A yrf /Art A*/ss . A•* As 'As A*«A
yA ,) 7'" / /C Cf&t~e oAs tf/b
y /? t( cuAi
me AAArto a, ACs * /s^d*Ai\&sO
; *JrtAy &?*C/Af<f> Ay Ji A?AA. AA- t *jf*. SCr *\S X y£&/?Cese*~
! /t, as*S**e~~S~
*rfe*nk*4&( •*&& y ■
• •■ VA S :rr A < V X* • - *
',. ~ , s '' , /<: X. /r A-S>^
\ * * *'-' 'J S"' AU/
I *> /■ s/f/
I u-■ ✓/■
.// *<?, K:' // A/'W/
Pcs sc AA/'X < is ,/A* fA *.
/A cutest -fsC '''s-rrsi P. AA /t/ ?s// s' A V %AA
A A A
A' Ss/ Ai r /Ai tf At so AA At) V i
*Asa A*s~b~-M \\ cA<t*jjPs ApAc A/t fas A |
AAAAAAV AAs^Acs^e)/***■ Aj lArs* /A jArs- s 't tss i
sAcAtsxAft c **s < TcAt. At */* A. s,. sT(, sA* ** "f f ■*—
'AAn * SC S tSi S' AA'■C*A+ * S't * L S J Ap X
A ASI P A*/, ssCrC Vt/ t O "4i /<-*s’ Ss ')
y?c c - '■■,, /ji ' & 1
"y>, >
'AfasAjptJ A?i,e s<A )&c * 's'
L i




