

THE CULTIVATION OF THE OLIVE TREE.
This was first inserted in the Press-a Sydney
Paper-the h[?]pes aftenvards set up m 8[?]-for the
sp[?]ally to the Memlers of the Kiama agn culten[?]
[?]storticultural Sa[?]ety- J.W.
It is important for all proprietors of land of
recent acquisition in a new country like
this, to consider carefully, in what way
they can reap the greatest return from the
cultivation of it, and that in the most
lasting manner and degree. In this class
of objects of attention, are to be reckoned
fruit trees, which if judicously selected,
carefully planted, and fostered for a time,
improve every year in produce, requiring
little regular labour, and interfering little
with other articles of planting and sowing
on the ground. Among these stand pri-
marily and prominently worthy of notice,
the Olive Tree, peculiarly adapted for this
climate, and distinguished by its valuable
product of fine oil as well as entire
fruit, equally fitted for domestic use, or
general sale and exportation to Europe.
It is now several years since I first
attempted to turn the attention of the public
to this subject, by an article in one of the
leading newspaper s of Sydney, and as
I have good reason to believe, not alto-
gether without effect ; both in respect of
the increased cultivation of the plants at
the adjoining nurseries, and the specimens
of very fine oil shewn at the Sydney
Annual Exhibitions since that time.
In the present statement, I have em-
bodied the substance of what I formerly
wrote, with the addition, in its proper
place, of information since obtained, in
reference to the subject*—.The antiquity
of the Olive Tree, and its early use must
be familiar to all who are conversant with
the Old Testament Scriptures. The first
notice of its existence on the face of the
world, is when Noah was preparing to
leave the Ark, and his messenger dove
returned with an olive leaf in her mouth,
“ pluckt off,” shewing that it had been a
common, and well grown tree, befoie the
overwhelming calamity of the general
flood over the earth.
The Olive was originally a native of
Asia, and is extensively referred to in the
history of the Jews, by whom it was
largely cultivated, both for the use of the
oil in the public sanctuary service, an
private usages and comforts of the peop e.
It is one of the advantages and enjoy-
ments divinely promised them in the land
of Canaan, described in Deuteronomy viu,
78. “For the Loid thy God bringet 1
thee into a good land, a land of w lent
and barley, and vines, and fig trees, an
pomegranates; aland of oil-* olive, and
honey.” It was always considered an
inseparable adjunct of the vine , vine
yards and oliveyards are constantly men-
tioned in the old testament in connection,
as well as their produce, wine and oil.
In one of the Psalms, children are com-
pared to olive plants round the table,
proving how familiar these were as ob-
jects of national culture. The name o
the Mount of Olives, overlooking J eru '
salem, is well known to every reader o
the New Testament. In the parable ot
the unjust steward, in the gospel by St.
Luke, chapter xvh% Olive oil appears to
bave been one of the necessaries of life m
Judea, as it forms one of the legu ai
articles furnished as rent in kind, by the
tenants on the estate, to the proprietor, as




wel - u>e tamily
and «uTrrent, as called for by the
steward.
The next place we hear of the Olive
Tree is at Athens, in Greece, to which it
w!as supposed to have been carried by
Cadmus, from Canaan, who fled from that
country at the invasion by Joshpa.
At Athens, it was immediately culti-
vated with great energy, and quickly be-
came an article of export to a large ex-
tent, which, by the reports of recent tra-
vellers, it continues to be to this day.
From Greece, after some time, it was
transplanted to Italy, and in the reign of
Augustus, its fruit was celebrated by the
poet Horace as a luxury, next, to Sicily,
Spain, South of France, and all places of
similar temperature, where it soon ob-
tained a footing, Being early planted in
Tuscany in Italy, and the oil shipped from
its port of Florence, it got the name of
Florence Oil, which it still relains. At
present, the cultivation of it is carried on
to a great extent, in Palestine, Syria,
Greece, all the islands in the Mediteranean,
Archipelago, the lonian Islands, a group(
betwixt Greece and Italy, belonging to
Great Britain, and in all the countries
bordering on the Mediter^anian.
The quantity annually made in these
places is enormous, as is the demand. In
the small island of Corfu alone, one of
the above mentioned lonian group, 50
miles long, and 25 broad, with 60,000
inhabitants, (about the population of
the annual export of Olive Oil
is to the value of half a million sterling,
or £500,000, about as much as the wool
of this colony.
The harbour of Gallipoli, in the South
of Italy, is the shipping place for that
neighbourhood, the district of Calabria,
in which port, a recent traveller mentions
having seen in one week, loading oil, 9
English vessels, 3 American, 4 French,
and 6 Genevese, besides a number of
small craft.
In 183W4,158,000. gallons Olive Oil
were imported into England, nearly one
half of which was retained for home con-
sumption, the other exported. It is there
extensively used in the arts and manu-
factures, cookery, cosmetics, and other
purposes, such as fine lamps, and ma-
chinery. Such being the early history
and present state in Europe, of the pro-
duction and sale of Olives, and especially
of the oil ; a history of the plant, and the
manner of obtaining the product, falls
now shortly to be given.
The Olive Tree is an evergreen, and
rarely exceeds the height of thirty-feet,
its trunk is knotty, its bark smooth, and
of an ash colour, its leaves are oblong,
something resembling the willow, dark
green colour, and whitish beneath. In
the month of June, (in Europe) December
in New South Wales, it puts forth its
blossoms, which are small, yellow, then
white, delicate, and beautiful, Its wood
is solid, yellowish, and takes a fine gloss.
In the temple of Solomon, it was used for
the doors and carvings of the holy place.
The moderns make it into boxes and
trinkets.
A temperate climate is best adapted for
its successful cultivation, and from the
experience of the countries in Europe and
Asia, where it is chiefly reared, we find
that we enjoy in this colony, and this
part of it particularly, that very tempera-
ture in respect of the corresponding
latitude, which is most favourable for its
growth. This tree is not difficult, in
regard to the nature of the soil, for it will
grow in any, evea barren, with the excep-
tion of a marshy one, bnt it succeeds
equally well in calcareous and sandy
ground.
Olive Trees are multiplied either from
seeds or shoots. The following is the
plan for seeds, observed in France. Take
the stones of very ripe olives, in the
month of March (September) sow them in
furrows half a foot-apart, and two or
three inches deep, in ground, trenched
three feet deep, and well manured, the
plants will appear in October (April)
when they are sheltered by small green
branches from the cold in winter. In
March again (September) they can be
taken up and replanted. Trees raised in
this way require four or five years "lt>
bring them to maturity, but they are more


perfect plants than when raised from
shoots.
Few trees however, possess such easy
means of multiplication as the olive. Its
boughs and branches, cut into sprigs of a
certain length, easily take root. These
cuttings are made three feet in length.
In planting, make holes three feet square,
by four in depth, insert the cuttings per-
pendicularly, so as onethird shall be
above ground. If the earth is dry, water
immediately. In France, this is done in
March (September here). The roots of
an olive tree, when planted in ground
properly prepared, divide into small por-
tions, and send forth new plants. The
very bark, when cut into fragments, and
put in like sow'ings, produces also young
stalks. The old trees produce at their
roots, numerous shoots or suckers, which
being moved and planted apart, serve as
another means of multiplication. As a
proof of the easiness with which the tree
is reared, Jackson, in his account of the
Empire of Morocco, mentions having seen
a plantation of olives, which had grown
up merely from wooden pegs cut from
neighbouring olive trees, which had been
driven into the ground, to picket the
horses of a detachment of cavalry encamped
there for a short time.
As to the mode of planting out, in
temperate climates, and very favourable
situations, 30 or 40 feet are not too much
between two trees, in less fruitful soil,
about 20 feet apart; after they attain a
certain length, they are very little*,trouble.
In favourable climates, as the countries
all round the Mediterranean, the trees grow
in clefts of rocks, roadside, or anywhere,
but in colder climates they are manured
and pruned, and the ground stirred round
them. Those reared from cuttings or
suckers, do not require the earth so much
worked, as those from seeds which should
have it deeper. All kinds of manure suit
them, but the hotter the more preferable;
pigeon, pig, sheep dung are best; not
forgetting if it can conveniently be
procured, guano, which is now found in a
great accumulation on the coast of West
Australia, and vessels from England
coming out for it ; next horse and cow
(lung, used in lime and clay ground.
Shreds of old linen, scrapings of horns or
leather, answer well.
The produce is increased by manure,
hut not the quality of the fruit—manured
trees stand the drought better—it should
be applied once a year. In France some-
times twice, in end of autumn, and be-
ginning of vvinter. Pruning is used in
France, with advantage, done carefully,
so as to leave the useful branches, cutting
off the dead and feeble ones, and dangle
or bushy ones, that exclude air and light.
This is done there, in February and
March (August and September here).
Such being the statement of the plant-
ing and treatment of the tree, its produce
falls now to be considered, and the
manner of obtaining it.
The olive bears a stone fruit of an oval
form, first of a greenish colour, then pale,
and lastly black. The stone or kernel,
is covered with a fleshy pulp, containing
the oil in minute cells. The gathering of
ihe fruit should be, when it is on the eve
of maturity ; if delayed too long, the next
crop is prevented, and can only be ob-
tained each alternate year. It should be
carefully plucked by the hand, and the
harvest completed, if possible, in a day.
Often long poles are used to beat down the
fruit, but these are apt to injure the branches.
First, the entire olives, for family use,
or sale for the table. The best and
soundest fruit are carefully chosen. The
most approved plan of treatment is putting
the dives, after they have been gathered,
into a lye made of one part of quick lime,
to six parts of ashes of young wood sifted.
After being half a day in this lye, they
are taken out, and put into fresh water,
where they remain eight days, the water
being carefully changed every twenty-
four hours ; after this, a brine is made,
of a sufficient quantity of sea salt, dis-
solved in water, to which are added some
aromatic plants; in this way, they may
be preserved for a year or more. A great
quantity of olives thus prepared, are con-
sumed in the countries in the south of
Europe, and an emu mo us quantity is an-
nually sent to Constantinople in bottles,
for the Jews, Armenians, and Greeks.


They are also exported from the Mediter-
ranean to the northern parts of Europe
and there consumed at table.
Second, the great and important product
of the olive fruit is the oil obtained from
it, which is done as follows :—At an
early period it was manufactured into oil,
by pounding it in a mortar, as referred to,
in Exodus°xxvii. 20. “Pure oil olive,
beaten for the light.” In process of time,
however, machinery was employed to mash
the fruit, and a screw or other press to
extract the oil. Ihe fruit, after being
pulled, should be spread out for two or
three days, in beds three inches deep, pre -
paratory to pressing. The machine now
generally employed for the crushing is an
edge stone mill, driven round by a horse
or other power, after which the mash is
put into bags of coarse grass or bulrush,
and subjected to the action of a screw
press —being laid one above another, to
the number of eighteen ; and the oil being
received into a vessel below. What comes
off first—with a slight pressure and cold,
is the purest, called virgin oil, of a green-
ish colour.
The remaining stuff is then taken out,
immersed in boiling water, replaced in
bags, and again put under the press-, the
heat assists the extraction of the oil, and
this is also of good quality ; it is received
into vessels with water, and skimmed off,
after standing the usual time. This plan
is repeatedly followed, till the whole oil
is extracted, every succeeding operation
producing a coarser quality. The last,
which is allowed to ferment, being only
fit for soaps and coarse manufactures ;
when completely prepared by a regular
process, the oil is transferred to casks for
home consumption, or exportation, in
some places to a very large extent as I
have already alluded to.
Although an Olive Tree takes four or
five years to reach maturity, it is a very
permanent one, when once fairly reared,
so much so, that an author well acquainted
with its nature and value progressive,
emphatically announces his opinion, by
saying, that if a man wants to leave a
legacy to his family, he short Id plant an
Olive Tree.
Mrs. Graham, an authoress of the
highest respectability, in her narrative of
three months passed in Italy east of Rome,
states “ that the young Olive Plant bears
at two years oldyn sfx, begins to repay
the expense of cultivation, even if the
ground between the |rees were not other-
wise cropped. After that period, in good
years, the produce is the surest source of
wealth to the farmer, and the tree rivals
the oak in longevity. There is an old
one near Gericomo —which last year
yielded 240 English quarts of oil.”
M. d’Candolle mentions large aged
trees near Genoa and at Hieres, one
producing 280 lbs. of oil, and another 55
imperial gallons.
As a strong, undoubted, and satisfactory
evidence in favour of cultivating this
Tree, I beg in this place to insert an ad-
dress delivered some years ago, of which
I was fortunate enough to obtain a printed
copyj to the Agricultural Society of
Charleston, the capital of South Carolina,
by the Hon. Thomas Jefferson, of that
State, and Chairman of the Society, and
formerly President of the United States
of America, .What makes it specially in-
teresting to us is, that Charleston in the
above State, is exactly in the correspond-
ing degree north latitude to that of
Sydney, south, viz. 35 —so that the advice
and encouragement comes to us, with a
truth and force, as if originally directed
to ourselves, it is as follows :
“ The Olive is a Tree, the least known
here, and yet the most worthy of being
all the gifts of Heaven to man,
it is next to the most if not the
most precious. Perhaps it may claim a
preference even to bread —because theie
is such an infinitude of vegetables, which
itmakes a proper and comfortable nourish-
ment. In passes of the Alps, at the Col
de Tende where there are mere masses of
rocks, wherever there happens to be a little
soil, there are a number of Olive Trees,
and a village supported by them. Take
away these trees, and the same ground in
corn, could not support a single family.
A pound of oil, which can be got for 3d.
or dd. sterling, is equivalent to many
pounds of flesh, by the quantity of veg't-


prepare, and render fit and
comfortable food. Without this, the
country of Provence, and territory of
Genoa, could not support one-half, per-
haps not a third of their present in-
habitants. The nature of the soil is of
little consequence, if it be dry. The
trees are planted from fifteen to twenty
feet apart, and when tolerably good-will
yield fifteen to twenty pounds of oil
yearly, with another —there are trees
which yield much more. w
“ In Italy there are trees 200 years old.
They afford an easy, but constant employ-
ment through the year, and require so?
little nourishment, that if the soil be fit
for any other product, it may be cultivated
among the Olive Trees without injuring
them. We find them in 45 ° latitude
near the Alps. Wherever the Orange
will stand at all, experience shows the
olive will stand well, being a hardier tree.
Notwithstanding the great quantity of oil
made in France, they have not enough for
their own consumption, and therefore
import from other countries. This is an
article, the consumption of which will
always keep with its production.
Raise it, and it begets its own demand.
Having been myself an eye witness to the
blessings which this tree sheds on the
poor, I never had my wishes so kindled,
for the introduction of any article of new
culture, into our own country, South
Carolina. ~
“ (Signed.) Thomas
The actual consumpt of Olive Qil by
the nations of Europe, is stated Iby Guy
in his Cyclopedia, to be almost incredible.
Notwithstanding the quantity, he observes,
France produces within itself, it imports
largely ; the same remark applies to Spain*
nor is this wonderful, it enters so univer-
sally into all cookery, and supplies the
place of butter. Besides the countries
which produce the article, the use of it all
over the other parts of the continent of
Europe is excessive, where all required,
must be imported. In Russia in parti-
cular, where the Greek Church is the
Established Religion, there are numerous
fasts enjoined, during which, I have been
informed by a gentleman long resident in
that country, the use of animal fat is
prohibited, but Olive Oil permitted as a
substitute. Hence they must import very
largely and chiefly through London.
From all which 1 have stated, it must
be obvious that the advantages to be
derived from the general introduction of
the Olive Tree into this colony, cannot
fail to be great. First, It would add.
much to the domestic comfort and means
of support of the populat’on at large*
by its capability of mixing with all
vegetables. Secondly it would furnish an
article for sale in the colony, and particu-
larly for sure and extensive and almost
unlimited export, rivalling the other great
sources of our wealth,- in commercial
value.
In proof of the practicability of its
production, and the skilfulness of its
preparation in this colony, I beg here to
mention, that Mr. Macarthur of Camden,
whose family has so long been distin-
guished for public spirited exertions, has
prepared this oil for many years. Of
this, the quality is so excellent, that Mr.
Delassert a Frenchman, who visited this
part of the colony in 1845, and after-
wards published an account of his travels
among us, mentions his having been a
guest of Mr. Macarthur at Camden, at
whose table among other excellent things,
he was particularly pleased with the Salad
Oil, which he eulogises, and of which it
will be allowed he must have been a good
judge. Iu reference to his.
remarks on it,Mrs. M. told him, he says,
that it was produced from Olive Trees
imported from France some years before.
He also highly praised the wine from the
Camden vineyards. This incident, in
answer to my afterwards con-
firmed to me by Mr. Macarthur himself.
In further illustration of this fact of
productions, I beg to insert here a short
notice from the Maitland Mercury of a
meeting of that active and patriotic body,
the “Hunter River Vineyard Association,”
during last year.
“ Mr. Edwin Hickey, of Osterley, stated
that he had this year made a small quan-
tity of Olive Oil—some of his Olive Trees
of the large Florence kind, having for the


first year come into bearing. He farther
stated that the trees were grown in the
garden at Osterley, and were nine years
old, but that in other places, they had
been known to bear fruit at seven years
old—this is earlier than they are said to
bear fruit in Spain —but that the olive
was found to come earlier into bearing in
this colony than in most of the countries
of Europe. It appears that Mr. Hickey
and other members had also (Hive Trees
in bearing, of the small round black sort, ,
but that no attempt had been made to
express oil from the fruit, the opinions
prevailing, that they possessed little or no
oil —yet it was said that in Portugal, that
kind is commonly used for expressing oil
from.”
In a meeting during this year, a speci-
men was shown also.
It has already been remarked by Pre-
sident Jefferson, that the oil is adapted
to mix with vegetables, for which purpose
it will become an object for all classes
in the country to cultivate kitchen gardens,
—but it is likewise fitted for mixing with
flour in baking, adding to the salubrity
and richness of the bread, an experiment
which I have made myself. We read in
Exodus and Deuteronomy, of unleavened
cakes of wheaten flour, mingled with oil,
as choice articles of food, also of wafers,
anointed with oil.
I am quite aware, that it would require
a little trouble in the management of the
crop at first, though the apparatus is
aimprT enough and easy of construction
by any ordinary engineer, but this would
soon be got over.
The harvest of this fruit is an operation,
great part of which can be performed by
all the members of a family, old and
young. In this way the plantation of
olive yards throughout the country, would
have the same good effect judiciously at-
tributed to the cultivation of cotton, that
of concentrating families, and creating
villages, as a counterpoise to pastoral
Waugh Hope, Kiama, May 1851.
Yhm ulsf
w*-*, which necessarily separate families
so far fiom each other, and scatter them
so thinly over the land. This event may
be long of taking place ; but it is pleasing
and consolatory in the prospect, if only
once exemplified and established.
I find I cannot conclude, without asking
permission to allude sitaply to two other
articles which may surely be raised in
this colony—first, figs—chiefly raised
near, and exported from, Smyrna in the
Slediterrc.T*in —i*» ?. ~cald#r
'than ours; and secondly, currants at pre-
sent got from the lonian . Islands in a
climate, from one of which
75,000 cwt. are annually * exportedUo the
value of £56,000 sterling ought we not
to supply at least the colonial consumption
of these two 1
I am afraid I have dilated at too great
length on this subject, but it is one of the
many of this class and description, which
I delight to indulge in contemplating in
my mind’s eye, as uniting, when carried
out, to form and realize the future splendid
prospects of this colony. For be it re-
membered, that it extends with regular
gradations of temperature, from 10 to 40
degrees of latitude, embracing “ Hill,
dales/shady wood, and sunny plain, ’
thus possessing advantages which no
country has on the face of the earth,_
under one government, in consequence of
which, its varied natural appropriate pro-
ductions are alone sufficient to create a
large and profitable internal trade
th*' -hout its whole extent, in addition
to, and irrespective of foreign commerce,
I abstain on this point from doing more
than simply to mention the Colonial
Mineral Treasures in the process of con-
tinual development, of which it is im-
possible to form any probable estimate.
N. B.—Olive Tree plants are to be had
in the Nurseries near Sydney, and the
season is near for putting them into the
ground. %
W. Nation, Printer, Harrington-street, Sydney.
e/cwWi- ff/ AA*?.* (’‘/'A
Aravc/uJ fof
