

jTT r 0
O) A r
is. [ / j
The Ambassador-General of Empire
OLIVER BAINBRIDGE,
AUTHOR OP
“India To-day,” “England’s Arch-Enemy: The Kaiser,” “War Letters,”
“John Strange Winter,” “Rambles in Thoughtland,” “Little Stories From
Other Wars,” “The Truth About Britain in India,” “The Balkan Tangle,”
“The Lesson of the Anglo-American Peace Centenary,” “Every Day With
Another Mind,” “The Heart of China,” “Our Ally, Japan,” Etc., Etc.
“Daily Argus” Print, Grafton.




OLIVER BAIN
The following extracts and appreciations, which are taken from
many hundreds of a like nature, show that Mr. Bainbridge has established
for himself a reputation as remarkable as it is, unique.
THE AMBASSADOR-GENERAL OF EMPIRE,
“Mr. Oliver Bainbridge has been many times’ round the world during
the last twenty-five years, and in particular has visited every part of th*»
British Empire. His books and his lectures dealing with his travels have
won him high 'praise.
“He has been referred to as an Ambassador of the Empire; I think he
should be known as the Ambassador-General of the Empire, because he is
not merely accredited to any particular part of the Empire, but visits and
knows the British Empire and its Dominions as no other man does, and the
object of his life is to knit more closely together the various parts of our
Empire, to get them to know each other better by his books and his lectures.
“With this end in view he is at present collecting data for a large
illustrated work to be entitled “Britain in the Southern Seas,” which he is
dedicating to His Majesty the King. I have no doubt this book will be
widely read both in the Old Country and the Dominions.
“It is the patriotic devotion of men like Mr. Bainbridge that maintains
the grandeur and solidarity of our Empire.”
—ALDERMAN W. W. CABENA, Lord Mayor of Melbourne (who presided
at Mr. Bainbridge’s lecture in the Town Hall, Melbourne.)
THE IMPERIAL TIE.
“In these days of unrest and discontent one welcomes anything that
tends to strengthen the' Imperial Tie, and as that is Mr. Bainbridge’s object,
I hope that great success will attend his laudable efforts.”
—COLONEL SIR HENRY GALWAY, K.C.M.G., C.M.G., D. 5.0.,
Governor of South Australia.
EMPIRE EDUCATION.
“I am very glajd to hear that your literary labors—they are also, r think,
pleasures —are culminating in the completion of ‘Britain in the Southern
Seas.’ We need to extend the frontiers of Empire education and to develop
our boundless resources.”
—SIR WALTER DAVIDSON, K.C.M.G., C.M.G
Governor of New South Wales.
A CHRISTMAS LECTURE.
“I am sure that all present are pleased with the able and
lecture to which they have listened. Personally it is of special interest to
me, as I have had the opportunity of visiting most of the islands described
by Mr. Bainbridge.”
“Mr. Bainbridge is well kpown as a lecturer, arid his thorough knowledge
of the different parts of the Empire fits him for the educational work he
is doing, and I wish there were more/ men like hiimi who would speak i,n
different parts of the Empire to make the inhabitants of each part better
acquainted with the other parts.”
-—THU HON. JOHN G. JENKINS, formerly Premier of South Australia,
who presided at Mr. Bainbridge’s Christmas lecture before the Royal
Colonial Institute on Friday, December 29th, 1916.
THE RT. HON. D. LLOYD GEORGE, P.C., M.P., Prime Minister of
England, In giving the heartiest endorsement to the design of Mr. Bain-
brjdge’s work, says:
“We have been taught by the W°r the real value of the Empire, and one
of the first duties of statesmanship the future will he to take all measures


which are necessary to aid in the development of the stupendous resources
of the Empire. That ought to be our special care and special pride, as it
will be undoubtedly our special security.
“In future we have decided that it .is the business of statesmanship in
Great Britain, as well as in the lands beyond the seas, to unite the Empire
in closer bonds of interest, of trade, of commerce, of business, and of
general intercourse, in conference.
“This great Empire has infinite resources of wealth in minerals, food
production, and timber, and in every commodity needful for the aid of man,
and it is obvious that it is an advantage not merely to the particular countries
where these products come from, but to every other part of the Empire,
including the United Kingdom, that these commddities should be developed
to the utmost. It enriches, it strengthens, and it binds together the Empire
as a whole.”
THE BAINBRIDGE MEDAL.
“The gold medal presented by Mr. Oliver Bainbridge for the best essay
by one of his audience on his lecture on ‘The Savage South Seas,’ before the
Royal Colonial Institute, on December 29, 1916, has been won by Victor J.
Wilmoth, of 13a Emanuel Road, Balham, aged nine. The closing sentence
of the medallist’s essay ran: ‘The South Sea Islanders, although they are
supposed to be savage, could teach the Germans a lesson in kindness’
—“THE TIMES,” London.
KING EDWARD.
“The late King-Emperor sent a special messenger to Mr. Bainbridge
(before his departure from London) with his autographed photograph, so that
it may be used as a fronticepiece to the book Mr. Bainbridge is writing on
India. King Edward exhibited keen interest in the work.”
—“THE EMPIRE,” Calcutta, India.
A PRIZE ESSAYIST.
“The gold medal presented by Mr. Oliver Bainbridge for the best essay
by one of his audience on his lecture entitled ‘Outposts of Empire,’ before the
Royal Colonial Institute on December 21, 1917, has been won by Julian Hall,
aged 11, of 177, Ashley Gardens, Westminster. The following extracts are
taken from the essay:
“‘One .curious little thing about the Maoris is that the ladies propose,
which to bashful gentlemen is, of course, very convenient.’
“ ‘The Canadians are very nearly the most loyal and enthusiastic
supporters of the Mother Country, and the Maple Leaf is dreaded by
the Bodies almost as much as the Rose and the Thistle.’ ”
“THE TIMES,” London.
THE COMING GENERATION.
“I have been told of the presentation by you of a gold medal to the boy
who wrote the best essay on the subject of your Christmas Lecture, and
have been most interested in hearing of it.
“May I, as Chairman of the Council, thank you for this kindly and most
useful action on your part, stimulating the interest of the coming generation
in our Overseas Empire. It is a pleasure to read that the Royal Colonial
Institute' was the scene of the presentation, and that the generous donor
has been lecturing in our name and on our behalf.
“I hope your expedition to the Southern Seas will be successful.”
—SIR CHARLES LUCAS, K.C.M.G., K.C.8., C.B.
(Chairman of the Council of the Royal Colonial Institute.)
“I should like every child in the British Empire to hear Mr. Bainbridge’s
lecture and catch a spark from the fire of his enthusiasm.”
—LADY FITZROY.
“I am much interested in your splendid work.”
GENERAL SIR GRANVILLE RYRXE, M.P S


CIVIC RECEPTION TO MR. BAINBRIDGE.
“Mr. Oliver Bainbridge, who is leading a scientific expedition to the
South Seas, was given a civic reception by the Lord Mayor at the Town Hall
yesterday.
“The Lord Mayor, in proposing the health of Mr. Bainbridge, explained
that the latter had, during the last 20 years, accomplished journeys around
the world totalling upwards of 300,000 miles.
‘‘Aid. R. W. Richards .said that the object of Mr. Bainbridge’s visit was
to assist in the development of Australia’s stupendous resources. He was
sincerely desirous of drawing firmer and closer the bonds of Empire.
“Aid. R. D. Meagher also referred to the lecturer’s public spirit, and
expressed the hope that his expedition would prove of benefit to the Empire.
“In reply, Mr. Bainbridge said he proposed to visit Papua and the
various islands in the Pacific. He considered that the sacrifices already made
by the Allies would be made in vain if those islands previously owned by
Germany were returned to her. ((Applause).
“Before setting out on his expedition, Mr. Bainbridge will deliver several
lectures on behalf of the Lord Mayor’s Fund.”
—“THE DAILY TELEGRAPH,” Sydney, Australia.
“Mr. Oliver Bainbridge visited several of the schools in this city and so
captivated the pupils that there was a unanimous appeal to have him give
a public address on his travels, the lands he had seen, and the peoples he
bald met. Mr. Bainbridge kindly consented to do so, and the result was
that miore children sought to hear him than any hall in the city could
accommodate, and Mr. Bainbridge had to deliver his lecture twice, each time
to an overflowing audience in the large assembly hall of the Provincial
Normal School. At these addresses Mr. Bainbridge delighted his audiences
with the views which he exhibited of scenes in Japan, China, and the islands
of the South Seas, and held them spellbound by the eloquence of his descriptions
and the vigor and vividness of the portrayal of many incidents or nis travels,
so much so that every teacher and child who heard him enthusiastically
declared that he would willingly listen to him: for hours longer. If Mr.
Bainbridge ever returns to Ottawa he will certainly meet with a royally
enthusiastic reception.”
—J. C. GLASHAN, L L.D., P.R.S.C., Inspector of Schools, Ottawa, Canada.
“A few weeks ago Mr. Oliver Bainbridge visited some of our classes in
the High Schools and aroused so much interest by his matter and manner
that I made a request to have him deliver an illustrated lecture to our schools
on March 6. This lecture took place yesterday before an audience of about
700 pupils of all school ages. From: the beginning of the lecture to its close
Mr. Bainbridge was able to command the slosest attention of his audience.
His views, his clear and well-trained voice, his occasional outburst of
eloquence, and his good judgment in making his remarks appropriate to
the pictures shown and in keeping within the time at his disposal, combine
to produce a lecture of surpassing interest. Should Mr. Bainbridge again
visit our schools he will be sure to meet with a hearty reception.”
—WELLINGTON DIXON, 8.A.,
Rector of the High School, Montreal, Canada.
“Mr. Oliver Bainbridge gave a very interesting lecture, under the auspices
of the Collegiate Institute. He is a very brilliant man, and is deserving of
the consideration and patronage of educational institutions.’*
—S. J. RADCLIFFE, Prncipal, Collegiate Institute,
London, Ontario, Canada.
“I thank you for your address on India, with its manly and outspoken
corrective of so many calumnies and fictions.”
—THE RT. HON. EARL CURZON OF KEDLESTON, K.G., G.C.5.1.,
G.C.1.E., M.A., P.C., F.R.S., D.C.L., LL.D., J.P., D.L., ex-Viceroy of
India, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Chancellor of
Oxford University.


“An interesting address.'*
—THE RT. HON. A. J. BALFOUR, P.C., F.R.S., 0.M.. M.P., cx-Prime
Minister of England, Chancellor of Edinburgh University,
“You made Bulgaria live before your audience.”
—THE RT. HON. LORD RUSSELL, Editor of the Liverpool “Daily Post.”
‘An excellent address.”—THE RT. HON. LORD AVEBURY.
“My good will and best wishes are with you in your good work. Go on,
and you must succeed.”
—THE REV. DR. ALEXANDER WHYTE, D.D., LL.D.,
Principal, New College, Edinburgh.
“My pleasure was enhanced when Mr. Bainbridge described those rare
and unique scenes of life so vividly.”
—S. A. KOPADIA, M.D., LL.D., L.R.C.P., London University.
“I have derived both pleasure and profit from Mr. Bainbridge’s Interesting
lectures.”
—SIR MARTIN CONWAY, M.A., F.S.A., F.R.G.S., Cambridge University.
"1 listened with much interest to Oliver Bainbridge, the great traveller
to savage States, who has just returned after visiting the few jews left in
China and the black Jews of Papua.”
—F. J. FULNIVALL, M.A., Ph.D., LL.D., Cambridge University,
“Mr. Bainbridge’s aspirations appeal to every man of good sense who
cares at all for the betterment of humanity.”
—THE RT. HON. LORD LOREBURN, G.C.M.G., J.P., D.C.L.,
Late Lord Chancellor of England,
“Mr. Bainbridge, who is at present engaged in collecting information for
a book on ‘Britain in the Southern Seas,’ has written and lectured extensively
on subjects relating to the resources and future development of the outlying
parts of the Empirt.”
—THE HON. SIR WILLIAM CULLEN,
Chief Justice and Chancellor of Sydney University,
“I beg to thank you for the amusing and instructive address you gave
to my pupils on ‘A Ramble Through the South Seas.’ You aroused and
sustained the interest of your hearers from beginning to end. The pictures
you exhibited were most interesting.”
—LUCY A. GARVIN, Headmistress, Girls’ High School, Sydney.
“The reason I am here to-night is because Mr. Bainbridge’s lectures are
of great benefit to the educational world.”
—THE HON. HENRY DOBSON, ex-Premier of Tasmania, who presided
at Mr. Bainbridge’s lectures.
“I can only admire, without attempting to emulate at my time of life,
the enormous energy which seems to be your special gift in your world-
wide interests. I was glad to see that you had an excellent reception at the
Town Hall, Melbourne.
—THE HON. SIR WILLIAM McMILLAN. K.C.M.G.


A DIFFICULT TASK.
“I think I should be wanting in my duty as Minister of Public Instruction
if I did not write to thank you for the fine lecture you gave to the senior
children of the Melbourne schools last night upon ‘Our Ally, Japan.’
“You had what would be to my mind a difficult task in addressing an
audience composed of young children and adults, but the matter and the
method of your lecture were so admirable that I am sure every one present
enjoyed it to the full. Many experienced teachers present envied you your
power of holding the interest of the youngsters. The views you showed on
the screen were most informative, and I hope that you will have a very
good response in your essay competition.
“I trust that your stay in Australia may be a very pleasant one, and
that your proposed book, ‘Britain in the Southern Seas,’ may do much to
increase amongst the people of the Motherland and of the Dominions a
knowledge of the resources of this great Commonwealth.”
—THE HON. W. HUTCHINSON,
Minister of Public Instruction, Melbourne.
AN EMPIRE BUILDER.
“Mr. Bainbridge is an Empire builder, for he is devoting his time and
energies to diffusing among all who live under the British flag a better
appreciation of what the Empire means and stands for. Work such as that
in which Mr. Bainbridge is engaged is especially necessary in the outlying
parts of the Empire and the people of Australia and New Zealand should
feel grateful to him for his visit and for his interesting and informative
addresses.”
—ALEXANDER DEEPER, M.A., LL.D.,
Warden of Trinity College, Melbourne University.
“I wish that every citizen of the Empire could hear Mr. Bainbridge’s
inspiring lectures.”
—THE LADY HELEN MUNRO-FERGUSON.
“I have noted your return to Australia and your continued and continuous
work on behalf of the British Empire with great and pleasurable interest.
“I feel, as an Australian, that your efforts on behalf of Empire co-
operation in respect of the integral units that make up a World Realm
greater than that of ancient Rome have a most direct and salutary influence
on the welfare of the Commonwealth of which I am a native, a citizen, and
a legislator.
“Your extensive travels have made in truth an Imperial philosopher of
your good self and withal a most practical one, for many of your suggestions
in regard to the Eastern races and nations that are part of the web of the
British Empire fabric are of the most valuable character. Your work is
that of a long-visioned and while your endeavors may not at once bear
fruit they are valuable to a superlative degree in regard to that Imperial
structure, the building of which is not yet completed and cannot escape the
observer.
“Wishing you that success which, valuable though it may be tq.you in
a personal sense, is still more valuable to Australia and the British Empire,
of which our Commonwealth is one of the most important Dominions.”
—SENATOR THOMAS J. R. BAKHAP, Melbourne.
“In thanking you for the pleasure your lectures gave me, may I say that I
consider them the most instructive, interesting and thought-compelling
lectures I have ever heard. The remembrance of India and Japan will always
be an exquisite memory.
“For the future, with all its potentialities, your lectures should be a
lesson, a warning, and a preparation.”
—THE HON. W. A. MALONEY, M.D., M.P., Melbourne.


“You certainly are a man of marvellous Industry and energy. I wish
that we had more such citizens.”
—THE HON. EDMUND JOWETT, M.P., Melbourne.
H.R.H. THE PRINCE OF WALES.
During his visit to Australia H.R.H. the Prince of Wales very graciously
presented Mr. Bainbridge with an autographed photograph which he will
publish in his book entitled “Britain in the Southern Seas,” dedicated to
His Majesty the King.
DIFFICULT PROBLEMS OF EMPIRE.
“We have to thank Mr. Bainbridge for his excellent lecture. His
manner is all that could be wished for, and every person in this large
audience has heard every word he said. The views shown are all good,
many of them more than good, and some quite remarkable; and to these
two attractions he added a knowledge of his subject which helped to make
us understand one of the most difficult problems of the British Empire.
India must play such an important part in it that we ought to study its
history far more than we do. Particularly is this so just now, when the
Montagu-Chelmsford report must very soon be seriously considered. Aus-
tralia, from her proximity, has directly an interest in the solution of the
problem which Mr. Bainbridge is helping to solve.”
—THE HON. MR. JUSTICE BACKHOUSE.
“May I take this opportunity to say how very greatly pleased every one,
children and teachers, were with your brilliant and witty lecture last night.”
—H. MARSTON ANDREWS, Principal, Woodstock College,
Mussoorie, India.
“Mr. Bainbridge gave the students of this College a most interesting-
lecture on his travels in the Southern Pacific, illustrated by excellent
lantern pictures. The life of those living in far-away regions is little
known, and lectures of the sort we heard are calculated to widen our human
interest. I am grateful to Mr. Bainbridge for giving us an enjoyable evening.”
—S. K. RUDIA, Principal, St; Stephen’s College, Delhi, India.
“We cannot let you leave Simla without writing to thank you for your
.most interesting and instructing lecture on ‘Native Life and Customs in the
Southern Seas.’ My girls say they wish they could hear it all again. New
Zealand, the Fiji Islands, Solomon Islands, Bismarck Archipelago, and
Papua will no longer be mere names to them, but places they can now
remember, after your wonderful word-painting of them last evening. Accept,
please, our grateful thanks for the real intellectual treat you have given us.”
—MISS B. BIRRELL, Principal, Ayrcliff High School, Simla, India.
OUR ALLY, JAPAN.
“I am sure that every one present will agree with me that we owe very
hearty thanks to Mr. Bainbridge for the splendid lecture to which we have
just listened.
—THE HON. G. F. EARP, C.8.E., M.L.C.,
President of the Empire Literature Society, Sydney.
“Mr. Bainbridge almost overwhelmed his audience with a succession of
ideas, all of them worthy of discussion and deep thought.
—PROFESSOR LOGEMAN, the University, Capetown.
“Mr. Bainbridge has been kind enough to give a short address to the
pupils and teachers of this school, and though the hearers varied greatly in
age, every one thoroughly enjoyed his lecture, and would gladly have had it
longer.”
—MISS E. MORTON, Principal, Good Hope Seminary, Capetown.


“I thank you for the pleasure your visa gave to the sisters and to the
pupils of our schools. We were all very much charmed with your short
though pithy account of your wanderings, and now we already look forward
with eagerness to .a repetition of your visit in the near future.”
—SISTER M. COLUMBA McAULIFFB, Principal,
Sacred Heart Convent, Capetown.
“Permit me again to extend to you our thanks and appreciation for your
excellent lecture given yesterday afternoon.”
K. E. PEASE, Principal, Anglo-Chinese School, Singapore.
“BRITAIN IN THE SOUTHERN SEAS”
“There exists an urgent need for popular education on the subject of
the Empire, and I am sure that every patriotic Britisher is ready to read
with eagerness the story of ‘Britain in the Southen Seas,’ which will help
to preserve intact a heritage for future generations.
“Who can calculate the good your book will do when it is taken into
the life blood of the new generation ? It must be placed on the shelves
of every school library in the Empire.”
—LADY HEWITT.
AN APOSTLE OF EMPIRE
“In your name I express our thanks to Mr. Oliver Bainbridge for his
splendid address, so effective and so well timed, especially at this juncture.
Mr. Bainbridge is one of the Apostles of Empire, and as such one of the
pillars of Empire. It is men like himself, who have travelled and observed,
end can record and express their experiences, who consolidate the Empire
as they speak in different centres. We are proud to think he is an Australian.
The chief burden of his message to-day is that Germany, our unsuspected
enemy before the war, is the enemy still, and that we must be on our guard
against her. Though she has apparently sheathed the sword, it is but to
pursue a yet more persistent attack on us, all the more perilous because it
is subtle and underground. He has called us to hear, be alert, and wide
awake, and his call must be heard, as we value the Empire for which our
sons have died.”
—HIS GRACE THE LORD ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY, Primate of
Australia, who proposed the vote of thanks to Mr. Bainbridge for
his address, entitled “German Intrigues,” to the members of the
Millions Club, Sydney.
“Mr. Bainbridge is in the very vanguard of the British Empire.”
—COLONEL THE RT. HON. LORD WILLOUGHBY DE BROKE.
“I am proud to be associated with so great a patriot as Mr. Bainbridge.”
—THE RT. HON. VISCOUNT TEMPLETOWN.
HAVE YOU READ ANY OF THE FOLLOWING BOOKS BY
OLIVER BAINBRIDGE?
“INDIA TO-DAY.”
“MR. BAINBRIDGE’S book, which has the merit of dealing with India
in rather a different way fromi the conventional tone of travel, contains a
great deal of valuable information and offers a splendid testimonial to
British rule.”—THE RT. HON. EARL CURZON OF KEDLESTON, G.C.5.1.,
G.C.I.E.
“It is the best book on India of th ■* current moment known to me.” —
SIR GEORGE BIRDWOOD, K.C.5.1., C. 3.1., M.A., M.D.
“RAMBLES IN THOUGHTLAND.”
“They are rather moral maxims and distinctly good of their kind.” —
“THE TIMES,” LONDON.
Jm Thoughtland’ contains much wisdom.” r— LORD
SYDENHAM, G.C.M.G., F.R.S.


“THE LESSON OF THE ANGLO-AMERICAN PEACE CENTENARY.”
“I thank you for your book with its just reflections on the happily
prevailing concord between the English-speaking nations in the American
continent.”—HlS GRACE THE DUKE OF ARGYLL.
“I have received and read, and thank you very much for your book,
‘The Lessons of the Anglo-American Peace Centenary,’ which I think you
have taught admirably.”—THE HON. JOSEPH H. CHOATE.
“THE HEART OP CHINA.”
“I have read ‘The Heart of China’ with exceptional interest, because it
treats of various points on which I myself have written, and represents
much of which I had pghsonal cognisance during my sojourn in China.
“I am able to confirm emphatically from my own experience much of
what Mr. Bainbridge has stated, and would that I had an opportunity of
refuting still more emphatically the stupid statements made by one of his
critics who spent twenty-seven blind years in China.” —COLONEL SIR
HENRY KNOLLYS, K.C.V.O.
“ ‘The Heart of China’ is very interesting and I have derived both pleasure
and profit from reading it. What Mr. Bainbridge gays about Jews in China
is quite new to me, and will be a surprise to many.—’’Slß MARTIN CONWAY,
M.A., P.S.A., F.R.G.S.
“ENGLAND’S ARCH-ENEMY; THE KAISER.”
“A stirring pamphlet—so forceful and so true.” —THE ARCHBISHOP
OP ARMAGH.
“A very vigorous pamphlet, which I have read with interest.” —SIR
HENRY CRAIK, M.P.
“It is a concise and masterly exposure of the bloodthirsty monster, the
greatest enemy of humanity the world has ever known.” —GENERAL SIR
ALFRED TURNER, K.C.8., C.B.
“JOHN STRANGE WINTER.”
(WHh a Foreword by General Sir Alfred Turner, K.C.8., C. 8.)
“A well written biography.”—YOßKSHlßE “POST.”
“A beautiful memoir.” —SIR WILLIAM CROOKES, 0.M., F.R.S.
“There are some interesting letters by John Ruskin In a pleasant
personal life of John Strange Winter, which her friend, Mr. Oliver Bainbridge,
has written.”—“DAlLY CHRONICLE, LONDON.
“WAR LETTERS.”
“I have read ‘War Letters’ with intense interest. Mr. Bainbridge’s
eloquent words on pages 103-4 remind me of Meissonier’s wonderful picture
of Napoleon, with the devil alongside, visiting the dead of a battlefield.”—
FIELD MARSHAL SIR EVELYN WOOD, V.C., G.C.M.G.
“Mr. Bainbridge’s views on our Foreign Politics are very sound. His
‘War Letters’ are full of splendid language.”—GENEßAL SIR ALFRED
GASELEE, G.C.1.E., K.C.B.
“PEACE.”
“What strikes me above all is the amount of common sense that Mr.
Bainbridge has put into his arguments.”—H.H. PRINCE DE CASSANO, ROME
“It cannot fall to do good.”—THE RT. HON. LORD AVEBURY.
“LITTLE STORIES FROM OTHER WARS.”
(With a Foreword by Colonel the Lord Willoughby de Broke.)
“Every story is a gem.”—ADMIRAL LORD BERESFORD.
“A stirring and fascinating little book.” —LORD DE MORLEY.
“Mr. Bainbridge’s description of a battlefield is vivid and realistic,
“THE ATHENAEUM,” LONDON.
“It is full of interest and the book itself is worth reading.—C
BPvVNSDEN FLETCHER, Editor, “Sydney Mcr..ing Ileivld.”


* ■


