









CENTRO DE ESTUDOS HISTORICOS ULTRAMARINOS
PORTUGAL
The beginnings of printing at Macao
BY J. M. BRAGA
(Separata de STVDIA — Revista Semestral— N.° 12-Julho 1963)
LISBOA








The beginnings of printing at Macao
BY J. M. BRAGA
INTRODUCTION
«It is the glory of European genius, newly awakened from
its thousand years of sleep», Dr. T. F. Carter reminds us, «that
it was able to make printing the basis of a civilisation of
which the discoverers themselves could never have dreamed».
The invention of printing by the Chinese spread to Europe,
probably through the Arabs; yet the earliest European printed
reference to Chinese books seems to be by Jovis, an Italian,
in A. D. 1550, who mentions that such a present was sent as
a gift from the King of Portugal to the Pope. Perhaps carried
by Portuguese traders from China to Goa, the volumes had
probably been sent from the Far East to Lisbon as curious
and fascinating objects, certain to be of particular interest (‘).
The clerical institutions were, in Europe, still the reposi-
tories of learning and it was the members of the Portuguese
(») One of these might have been book seen by Michel de Montaigne
in the Vatican Library in 1581, to which he refers in his Journal du
Voyage: «J’y vis do remercable un livre de Chine, le characters sauvage,
les feuilles de certene matiere beaucoup plus tendre & pellucide que notre
papier; & parce que elle ne pent souffrir la teinture de I’ancre, il n'est
escrit que d’un cote de la feuille, & les feuilles sont toutes doubles & pli6es
par le bout de dehors ou elles se tienent». E. J. Trenchmann, The Diary
of Montaigne’s Journey to Italy in 1580 and 1581. London, 1929, pp. 142-3.


Christian Missions who re-introduced the use of movable type
to China, the land of its invention. This took place in 1588
when the Jesuits set up, at Macao, the printing press in the
College of the Mother of God. The press had been carried from
Portugal by the four Japanese envoys who had gone to Europe
in 1582, as delegates of the Christian communities in Japan, to
pay homage to the Pope as the spiritual father of Christendom.
In Europe their voyage had been a great success. There seemed
to be good cause for optimism,, and it was felt that Christianity
in Japan would enjoy even greater favour than it had up to
then. The setting up of a printing press as an adjunct in their
work was felt by the missionaries to be a distinct need.
At Macao two, possibly three, books were printed and the
press was then sent to Japan where it ivas kept busy during
twenty-three years. It ivas returned to Macao in 161\\, or ear-
lier, because of the persecutions raging in Japan, the printing
press being subsequently sold in Manila ( 2 ). It was not until two
hundred years later that printing again began at Macao, save
for a few books produced by the xylographic process from
whole blocks cut in ivood by Chinese artisans, and printed and
bound in the Chinese style. On the second occasion printing
began in 1815.
There were, thus, two beginnings of printing at Macao,
both of which make interesting contributions to the story of
Western printing in the Far East, an activity which has since
grown to such proportions in our own time.
THE EARLY JESUIT PRESS
A printing press, still by no means common in Europe,
with its complete font of metal types and matrices of Japanese
characters, for the purpose of printing in Japan, was among
(2) There are two schools of thought about the subsequent destination
of the press. See infra note 17.
SO
2
Bkaga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


the things ordered from Europe by Father Alessandro Valig-
nano, S. J., the energetic and far-sighted Visitor of the Society
of Jesus in the Far East. It had been at his suggestion that
the Japanese legation had been sent to Rome and he considered
that the printing press would be a useful adjunct to missionary
work in the Land of the Rising Sun.
On their way back the Japanese envoys found it necessary
to spend some time at Goa before sailing for Macao ( s ). In
Portuguese India, Martinho Hara, one of the four young Japa-
nese nobles, delivered an address in very graceful Latin, and
it was thought fitting to print the text of his speech at Goa,
on the very press which was being carried to Japan. The little
book bore the title:
Oratio Habita d fara D. Martino laponio, suo
& socioru nomine, cum ab Europa rediret, and Patre
Alexandra Valignanu Visitatore Societatis IESV,
Goae in D. Pauli Collegia, pridie non. lunij, Anno
Domini 1587.
This little book was published at Goa in 1588. The printer
was a young Japanese, who had been christened Constantinus
Douratus and who had learned, with Brother Jorge de Loyola,
(a) They sailed from Goa on April 22, 1588, in the ship of Ayres
Gongalves de Miranda. The voyage to Malacca took seventy days and
after a short stay at the Malayan city they left for Macao, landing there
on August 11 of the same year. A description of this embassy (1582-1586)
was written by Father Luis Frois, Tratado dos Embaixadores Japdes
que fordo de Japdo a Roma no anno de 1582, excellently edited and anno-
tated by J. A. Abranches Pinto, Yoshitomo Okamoto and Henri Bernard,
S. J., La premiere Ambassade du Japon en Europe, Tokyo, 1942. A trans-
cript, now believed lost, was in a codex in the Sarda Collection at Tou-
louse (ff. 1-114). An account of the return to Japan (1586-1592), also
by Father Frois, is to be found in various sections of Codex 49-IV-57,
in the Library of the Ajuda Palace, Lisbon. An edition by Mr. Abranches
Pinto, Mr. Okamoto and Father Bernard-Maitre has been projected.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


S. J., in Portugal, how to print and how to make matrices
for typecasting. Only two copies of this book are known to
exist ( 4 ).
This was not the first book to be printed in Portuguese
India. The printing press had been introduced there a quarter
of a century earlier and among the first to see light was one
in 1563, when a book of considerable scientific value appeared.
Written by Garcia de Horta, a physician, the book was entitled:
Coloquios dos simples, e drogas he cousas medi-
cinais da India, e asst dalguds frutas achadas nella
onde se tratam alguds cousas tocantes a medicina,
pratica, e outras cousas boas pera saber, &c.
It was printed at Goa by Joannes de Endem ( 5 ).
During the quarter of a century which followed several
other books were printed in the same city, all of the utmost
rarity now.
From Goa, the Japanese party sailed for Macao on the
penultimate part of their itinerary, and at this little Portu-
guese settlement on the China coast they found that it was
necessary to wait, not only for the next season, but also for
a reply and an assurance of safe conduct from Hideyoshi, the
(•») One copy is in the Spanish embassy to the Vatican and the other
in the Jesuit Archives at Rome. ( Cfr . Father J. Laures, S. J., Kirishitan
Bunko, Tokyo, 1940, p. 8 and Supplement to Kirishitan Bunko, Tokyo.
1941, pp. 1-2). Cfr. Letter by Father Lenis, S. J., mentioned by Father
Valignano, S. J., written at Cochin, on Dec. 22, 1586, cited in Archivum
Romanum Societatis Jesu, IX, 1940, p. 271,
(s) Introduced by the Jesuits, the printing press in Goa started work
in 1556 with a catechism by St. Francis Xavier. Religious tracts and
pamphlets followed. (Jos6 Nicolau da Fonseca, An Historical and Ar-
chaeological Sketch of the City of Goa, Bombay, 1878, pp. 58-59; C. G6mez
Rodeles, S. J., Imprentas de los antiguos Jesuitas en las missiones de
lev ante, Madrid, 1912, pp. 5-7, apud Francisco Rodrigues, S. J., A forma-
cdo Intellectual do Jesuita, Porto. 1917, pp. 507-508.)
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Probably the oldest known rough outline map of Macao, by John Speed, the English cartographer, dated 1626. copied from
an earlier sketch which does not seem to have survived.
(From the author’s collection)
MACAO in 1626


Title-page of xylographic book by Father Michele Ruggieri, S. J., printed at
Macao in 1585. Macao's first printed book.
(Courtesy of the Archives of the Society of Jesus, Rome)


Japanese Chief Administrator, to whom Father Valignano had
written stating that the Viceroy of India had appointed him
as his envoy. This was considered expedient because a govern-
mental order had been issued on July 24, 1587 proscribing
Christianity and imposing restrictions on foreigners, especially
missionaries. It would not have been prudent to rush to Japan
in the face of such a situation and Father Valignano, with
the envoys and their entourage, had perforce to stay in the
Jesuit college and headquarters in «the City of the Name of
God of Amacao».
Here the new arrivals found that printing had already
commenced before the arrival of the printing press they had
brought with them. In 1584, Father Michele Ruggieri, S. J.,
had produced, from xylographic blocks, cut by the laborious
Chinese process, his book in Chinese, apparently the very first
book in Chinese to be published by a European ( 6 ). A document
in the Lisbon archives tells us that «at Macao Father Ruggieri
prepared a catechism which was then written in Chinese
characters by a Chinese scholar ... Father Ruggieri printed
this Catechism in Chinese characters and then distributed it
in China*. Bibliographers, not familiar with this old Lisbon
document, have been under the impression that this book was
printed in China not Macao ( 7 ).
Father Ruggieri had also begun to compile a Latin-Chinese
vocabulary, an early version of which had been printed, also
at Macao, in 1585, on Father Valignano’s instructions. But
Father Ruggieri was at work on something more ambitious,
(e) Unless the Franciscan friars in the Yuan dynasty (A. D. 1280-
-1367) had done printing, particulars of which are not recorded.
(7) See ms. in the Ajuda library at Lisbon, Codex 49-X-3, f. 3 v.,
«Pontos do que me alembra> [by Father Francisco Fires, S. J.] This
catechism was entitled («True Account of God>) two copies being sent
to the Vatican, one printed on silk. Two copies may also be seen in the
Jesuit Archives at Rome. (Vide Father Pasquale D’Elia, S. J., Fonti Ric-
ciane, Roma, 1942, Vol. I. pp. 197-198).
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


in which Father Ricci had collaborated with him: a translation
of the Chinese classic, The Four Books. Both the Vocabulary
and Translation have remained in manuscript and may now
be seen in the Jesuit archives at Rome ( 8 ).
The missionaries came to see that block-printing was
peculiarly adapted to Chinese books, in which an attempt was
often made to reproduce the beauty of the calligraphy of the
author’s original. For books in which a European text was
used, however, the alphabet determined that movable types
were required ( 9 ). During the period of enforced idleness at
Macao, while waiting for the final stage of their journey to
Japan, the priests decided to put the printing press to good use.
The first book was a reprint, with some modifications, of
a work on Christian education (first published at Salamanca
in 1575 followed by an edition at Burgos), by Father Giovanni
Bonifacio, S. J. The Macao version bears the date of 1588 and
is entitled:
Christiani Pveri Institvtio, Adolescentiaeqve per-
fugium: autore loanne Bonifacio Societdtis lesv. cum
libri unius, & reru accessione plurimaru: Cum facul-
tate Superiorum: Apud Sinas, in Portu Macaensi: in
Domo Societatis lesv.: Anno 1588.
A small book of 252 leaves, it was edited by Father Valig-
nano. Only one copy of this book has survived; it may be seen
in the Library of the Ajuda Palace, Lisbon ( 10 ).
(s) Father D’Elia, Fonti Ricciane, pp. 13; 16; 43; 148; 250 passim.
(9) For comments on the comparative advantages see Estimate of
the proportinate expense of xylography, lithography, and typography, as
applied to Chinese printing; view of the advantages and disadvantages
of each. Article by «Typographus Sinensis* [W. H. Medhurst] in The
Chinese Repository, Vol. 111, Oct. 1834, pp. 246-252.
(10) Jordilo de Freitas, A imprensa de tipos moveis em Macau e no
Japdo nos fins do seculo XVI in Anais das Bihliotecas e Arquivos de Por-
tugal, Coimbra, 1915, Vol. I, No, 5, pp. 211, //. Father J. Laures, S. J.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


The next book printed at Macao was an important one,
an original work describing, in Latin, the journey undertaken
by the Japanese envoys, and telling how they had been given
the very warmest and most enthusiastic welcomes wherever
they had travelled in Europe, with fine descriptions of the
cities and places they visited. At Rome they had been given
a splendid reception and they took part in a number of im-
portant functions at St. Peter’s and elsewhere in the Holy
City, all of which are recounted in this book. The title of the
volume gives an indication of its contents:
De Missione Legatorvm laponensium ad Roma-
nam curiam, rebusq; in Europa, ac toto itinere ani-
maduersis dialogvs: ex ephemeride ipsorvm legatorvm
collectvs, & in sermonem latinvm versvs: ab Eduardo
de Sande Sacerdote Societatis lesv: In Macaensi portu
Sinici regni in domo Societatis lESV cum facultate
ordinarij, & Superiorum. Anno 1590 ( u ).
Twelve copies of this book have survived.
At least one more book seems to have been printed in
Macao at the China coast. It is believed to have been a work
entitled «Sanazario emendato» and is mentioned by Father
Lorenzo Mexia, S. J., but no copy has come to light in modem
times ( 12 ).
mentions (Second Supplement to Kirishitan Bunko, Tokyo, 1951, p. 4)
that Father P. Humbertclaude has pointed out that a copy of this book
is mentioned in «ikf. Augusti Beyeri Memoriale Historico-Criticae Libro-
rum RariorumDresdae et Lipsiae, apud Fredericum Hekel, p. 106.
(11) Cfr. Father J. Laures, Kirishitan Bunko, Tokyo, 1940, p. 12 and
Arquivos de Macao, 2. a s£rie, p. 100. A facsimile edition was produced
in Japan, in 1935, from Prof. Koda’s copy, with a Japanese translation.
A summary by A. J. de Figueiredo appeared in Archivo Pittoresco, Lis-
boa, Vol. VI, 1862; and an annotated reprint by Father Benjamin Videira,
S. J., and J. M. Braga, Macao, 1960.
(12) Cfr. Father Joseph Schutte, S. J. Christliche japanische Lite-
ratur, Bilder und Druckblatter in einem unbekannten vatikanischen Codex
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Meanwhile word had been received at Macao from the
Japanese authorities extending to Father Valignano, as am-
bassador from the Viceroy of India, a welcome to Japan. He
landed at Nagasaki in July, 1590, with a rich assortment of
presents, and in due course was received by Hideyoshi at
Kyoto, on March 3, 1591. The Letter from the Viceroy of India,
a magnificently illuminated document on vellum, still preserved
in Japan at the Temple of Myohoin, at Kyoto, was presented
to the Japanese ruler as well as the presents which Valignano
brought and, «thanks to Valignano’s exemplary tact, aided by
the exceptional linguistic skill of the Portuguese Jesuit, Joao
Rodrigues, nicknamed Tcuzzu, or interpreter, to distinguish
him from colleagues of the same name, everything passed off
as merrily as the proverbial marriage bell» ( 1S ).
In Japan no time was lost in putting the printing press
to work and the first book from the Portuguese Mission press
in that country was produced at Katsusa in 1591:
Sanctos no Gosagyo-no uchi Nuhigaki
This was a «Compendium of the Acts of the Saints»,
a popular account of the twelve apostles and some of the
Christian saints and martyrs. From Katsusa, the press was
transferred to Amakusa a year later and then, in 1598, to
Nagasaki ( 14 ).
At least fifty-four books, possibly over eighty, were printed
by the Jesuits in Japan. Of these, copies have been found of
ans dem Jahre 1951 in Archivum Historicum Societatis Jesus, Vol. IX,
fasc. 2, Rome, 1940, p. 271,
(is) Prof. C. R. Boxer, The Christian Century in Japan, Berkeley,
pp. 153-4; J, Murdoch and I. Yamagata, A History of Japan, Vol. 11, pp.
263-264; Father R. Kleiser, Monumenta Nipponica, Vol. I (1938), pp. 82-88.
(i*) Father Johannes Laures, S. J., Kirishitan Bunko, Tokyo, 1940,
pp. 5-6.
BRAGA, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Title-page of one the earliest books printed at Macao. Compiled by Father
Alessandro Valignano, the Jesuit Visitor, and written in Latin by Father
Duarte Sande, S. J., this book describes the voyage of the Japanese envoys
to the Pope in the 16th century.
(Courtesy of the Tenri Library , Japan)


Mural painting in the Vatican Library, depicting th e arrival of the Japanese Christian envoys to Rome on March 21, 1585.
(Courtesy of the Vatican authorities)


only twenty-nine, not counting fragments of others, all of them
of the utmost rarity ( 15 ).
When Christianity was banned in Japan in 1614, the
printing press was returned to Macao where it remained
inactive for a few years. In 1620 there appeared at Macao:
Arte Breve da Lingoa lapoa tirada da Arte Grande
da mesma lingoa, pera os que comegam a aprender os
(is) One of the first of the Orientalists to be intrigued by the subject
of the old Jesuit printing press was Leon Pages, attache of the French
legation, who published at Paris, in 1859, Bibliographic Japonaise ou
Catalogue des ouvrages relatifs au Japan qui ont 6t6 publics depuis le XVe
sidcle jusqu’d nos jours. He was followed by Sir Ernest Satow, H. B. M.
Ambassador to Japan, whose The Jesuit Mission Press in Japan, 1591-
1610, the fruit of painstaking research in the principal libraries of Europe
and Japan, in 1888, was a masterly piece of work. Japanese scholars then
embarked upon a study of the subject, and the names of Naojiro Mura-
kami, Michio Takahashi, Izuru Shinmura, Masaharu Anesaki, Mikinosuke
Ishida. Yelsaburo Ikeda, Sakuzo Yoshino, Shigetomo Koda, Fukaya To-
kuro, Tadao Doi, Muraoka Noritsugu, M. Tominage and Yoshitomo Oka-
moto figure among those who have dedicated themselves to this task.
The important bibliographies: H. Cordier’s Bibliotheca Japonica, Paris,
1912; O. Nachod’s Bibliographic von Japan, Leipzig; R. Streit’s Bibliotheca
Missionum, Aachen, all refer to these publications. Father Johannes Laures,
S, J., whose Kirishitan Bunko first appeared in 1940, was another enthu-
siast who took an interest in this subject. He was given another excellent
support by fellow Jesuits at Sophia University, Tokyo, and others. The
catalogues of the Tenri Central Library also treat of the subject in
great detail.
See Prof. C. R. Boxer’s, The Christian Century in Japan, Berkeley,
1951, pp. 190-200; 475-477 for a scholarly resume of the value of the books
that were printed. He divides them into three groups: (a) those translated
from a European language into Japanese; (b) works adapted from
Japanese originals; (c) linguistic works, consisting of grammars and
dictionaries. He points out that the Jesuits also printed Church calendars,
catechisms, prayers (on single sheets) and pictures from wood blocks and
engravings on metal.
For a list of the titles of the books copies of which have been found
in modem times see Appendix I.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


primeiros principles della ... Em Amacao no Collegio
da Madre de Deos da Companhia de lesv. Anno
M.DC.XX. in-4, 4 ff. nc. 96 ff. ( M ).
For a long time modem historians were intrigued as to
the fate of the old Jesuit printing press, for Father Rodrigues’
book on Japanese grammar, printed at Macao, was the last to
bear the Jesuit imprint, the energetic members of the Society
of Jesus not being men who would have left such a useful
adjunct to missionary work idle for any length of time. It is
now known that the printing press was sold to the Augustinians
at Manila, as the Jesuits who were already concentrating their
attention on China felt that the European type would not be
needed ( 17 ).
In the year 1644 a tentative list of important books in
Chinese published by the Jesuits or under their auspices, at
various places in China, was drawn up at Macao. 124 titles
were given but the compiler admitted that the total actually
(is) Only 100 copies were printed. Four copies have been recorded
in modem times: respectively in the Marsden Library of King’s College,
London (now in the School of Oriental and African Studies), the Library
of the Ajuda Palace, Lisbon, the archives of the Santo Domingo Convent,
Manila, and the Universidad de Santo Tomas of the same city, (see Prof.
C. R. Boxer, Padre Jodo Rodriguez Tcuzu, S. J. and his Japanese Gram-
mars of 160 If and 1620, Lisbon, 1950),
(i 7) The printing press and equipment were stored in the houses of
Andr6 Botto and Manuel Ovello in Macao until 1620. Father Rodeles states
that the Jesuit press was sold to the Augustinians in Manila, but Father
Schilling doubts the evidence furnished by Father Rodeles. (Cod. 49-V-6,
ff. 200 of the «Jesultas na Asia», collection of the Macao transcripts in the
Ajuda Palace Library; Father C. Gdmez Rodeles, S. J., Imprentas de los
antlguos Jesuitas en Europa, America y Filipinos durante los siglos XVI
al XVII, Madrid, 1910, pp. 29-30 and Frey D. Schilling, O. F, M., Vorges-
chichte des Typendrucks auf den Philippinen, in «Gutenberg-Jahrbuch,
1937», Mainz, 1937, p. 392, apud Father Johannes Laures, S. J., Kirishitan
Bunko, 3rd edition, Tokyo, 1957, pp. 24-26).
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Reproduction of the letter sent by the Viceroy of Portuguese India to Hideyoshi. Written and illuminated on vellum, this
document is preserved in the Temple of Myohoin, Kyoto.
(From T. Ngayama, Collection of Historical Materials, Nagasaki, 1924)


Title-page of Father Joao Rodrigues’ Arte Breve da Lingoa Japoa, printed
at Macao in 1620.
(Courtesy of the Library of the Ajuda Palace. Lisbon)


printed was much greater. Eventually hundreds of books in
the Chinese medium were published in a number of places in
China ( 18 ).
BOOKS PRINTED XYLOGRAPHICALLy IN CHINA
Of books printed xylographically by the Jesuits of the
Portuguese missions in China or by others, some eighteen
works have been listed by Paul Pelliot in 1924 (See T’oung
Pao, Leiden, Vol. XXIII, pp. 356-360). Based on this study
and the earlier attempt by Henri Cordier, in L’lmprimerie
Sino-Europeenne en Chine, Paris, 1901, to go into this subject,
Prof. C. R. Boxer has discussed eleven titles of books, which
are printed wholly or mainly in a European language, in the
xylographic form, omitting those with the text in Chinese
characters even though the title page might have been in Latin.
Prof. Boxer’s list includes:
Sapientia Sinica by Fathers Ignacio da Costa,
S. J., and Prosper Intorcetta, S. J., printed at Kien-
-chang, in Kiangsi Province, anno 1662. (Four com-
plete copies and one incomplete copy have been
recorded by Cordier).
Sinarum Scientia Politico-Moralis edited by Fa-
ther Prospero Intorcetta, S. J., printed partly at
(is) This is given in Ajuda Codex 49-V-11, ff. 519v.-521v. A study
of this subject has yet to be made, but see Father L. Pfister, S. J. Notices
Biogrnphiques et Bibliographiques de tons les memhres de la C.ie de
Jesus qui out vicu en Chine, & c., Chang-hai, 1868-1875, in 2 vols.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Canton in 1667 and completed at Goa in 1669. (Seven
copies have been recorded in various libraries).
Innocentia Victrix, probably by Father Antonio
de Gouvea, S. J., published at Canton in 1671. (Seven-
teen copies of this book are known to exist).
Epistola P. Ferdinandi Verbiest, Peking, 1678.
(Eight copies).
Relatio Sepulturas, Peking, 1700 by Father Gas-
par Castner, S. J. (Fifteen recorded copies).
Brevis Relatio, Peking, 1701 (Pelliot shows that
another edition was printed at Canton, 1702, and
Boxer records that at least eighteen copies have been
noted).
Arte de la Lengua Mandarina, Canton, 1703 based
on the work by Frey Francisco Varo, O. P. (Foochow,
1682) and published by Frey Pedro de la Pinuela,
O. F. M. at Canton (1703). (Fifteen copies listed).
Exemplar Epistolae, Peking, 1704. (The only
known copy is in Prof. Boxer’s library, A facsimile,
in a limited edition, with notes by Prof. Boxer, was
published at Macao in 1947).
Relation Sincera y Verdadera, Heungshan (but
probably at Macao), 1712. (Prof. Boxer has traced
three copies. Another copy in the library of the Vis-
conde de Esperanga at Manisola, near Evora, since
acquired by the Government of Portugal, and yet
another in the Arquivo Historico Ultramarino, Lis-
bon).
Informatio pro Veritate, Peking, 1717, edited
most probably by Father Kilian Stumpf, S. J. (Seven
copies recorded by Boxer).
Jornada que o Senhor Antonio de Albuquerque
Coelho ... fez de Goa athe chegar a ditta Cide e
[de Macao ] by Joao Tavares de Velles Guerreiro,
Heungshan (probably Macao) 1718. (Boxer records
Braga, J. M. —* The beginnings of printing at Macao


Title-page of a book reproduced by the xylographic process, probably at Macao,
in 1718 describing the adventurous voyage of the Governor, Antonio de Albu-
querque Coelho, from Goa to Macao.
(Courtesy of Prof. C. R. Boxer)


Chinese conception of the Macao Senate Building, in the middle of the 18th century, as depicted in a Chinese book.
(Reproduced from the Ao-Men Chi-luck, in the author’s collection)


six copies, to which should be added one copy in the
Manisola library) ( 19 ).
Then came an interregnum when no books were printed
in Macao or, for that matter, in any of the Portuguese over-
seas provinces, due to the prohibitions by the authorities and
the promulgation in Portugal, in 1736, of a law, forbidding
under severe penalties printing in any form whatseover. This
explains why no books or other publications are to be found
bearing the imprint of Macao on the title page, after the
promising start at the end of the 16th and the beginning of
the 17th centuries.
FOREIGN TRADERS AT MACAO
It was not until early in the 19th century that the second
phase of printing began at Macao, and it was a strange begin-
ning. Already during the closing years of the preceding century,
when the French Revolution stirred Europe to its depths, and
upheavals in the name of «liberty» struck at the very roots
of the social structure of the nations, Macao in common with
the other Portuguese overseas territories could not participate
in the polemics which raged through the medium of the printed
page. In 1820 the legislators at Lisbon, during the short-lived
liberal movement which broke out in Portugal, decided to lift
(is) See T’oung Pao, Leiden, 1924, Vol. XXHI, pp. 356-360; Prof.
C. R. Boxer, Some Sino-European Xylographic Works, 1662-1718 published
in Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland.
London, 1947, Year 1947, Parts 3-4, pp. 199-215, and the authorities
quoted. ( Cfr . Appendix 11, reproduced infra, with acknowledgments, from
the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society).
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


the ban. This was followed by the appearance in most of the
Portuguese overseas provinces of newspapers, books and other
printed matter. But, it is important to note, with the liberty
to print, the authorities required that everything had first to be
submitted to censorship. Writers were perforce prepared to
accept this condition because the hunger of many to express
themselves in public print was an active force which accepted
the censorship regulations with little open demur. Macao had
to wait, however, until 1822 before a new Portuguese printing
press and fonts of type arrived to enable printing in Portuguese
to be carried out in earnest ( 20 ).
Curiously enough, the restoration of that right at Macao
was anticipated, unofficially, by several years. And it was not
the Portuguese who were permitted to print; they allowed it
to be done by the British, for although the law did not counte-
nance printing, the Portuguese authorities at Macao were
prepared to condone what their British friends wanted to do.
For a long time this subject has not merited the attention of
students of history and it has been only in very recent times
that anything has been written about it ( 21 ).
The special circumstances of this little known phase of
Macao’s activities should be better known, for too much is
taken for granted in all the privileges which many have
enjoyed in this little Portuguese possession, with little credit
given for the benefits received by those who were able to live
there (”).
(20) The first publication officially approved was a weekly news-
paper, A Abelha da China (1822-1823). See infra pp. 68-71.
(21) Cfr. J. M. Braga, Printing Press of the East India Company,
in Renascimento, Macao, 1944, Vol. 111, pp. 520-529; 614-622 and Georges
Bonnant, The Honorable East India Co.’s Press. Une imprimirie britannique
a Macao (181Irl8Slf) in Arquivo de Bibliografia Portuguesa, Coimbra, 1958.
(22) This aspect of Macao’s contribution to privileges received by
many has yet to be written, and the only writer to touch upon this subject
seems to have been C. A. Montalto de Jesus, Historic Macao, Ist ed.,
Hong Kong, 1902; 2nd ed., Macao, 1926.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


When in the 18th century the English East India Company
succeeded in obtaining permission to trade at Canton they had
to accept many restrictions imposed by the Chinese, the con-
ditions of their sojourn at Canton being subject to many
stipulations. Among the regulations promulgated by the Chi-
nese officials was one which ruled that foreigners could not
establish domicile in China. The traders were limited, therefore,
to a stay of several months only each year, approximately from
October to March, in houses erected for them in an area by
the riverside, contiguous to the Chinese city, and known to
the foreigners as «the Factories» ( 23 ). At the end of each
trading season they had to sail with their ships. This con-
dition must have irked many of the traders and eventually
it seems to have occurred to some of them that they might
get permission to reside at Macao during the summer months,
and return to Canton at the beginning of the next trading
season.
However, this was easier said than done. The Portuguese
were also subject to their laws. Foreigners were not permitted
to live in any Portuguese territory, without the written au-
thority of the Government in Lisbon, nor might they carry
on trade in any of the Portuguese overseas provinces. This
permission from Portugal was extremely difficult to obtain
and was given only in very exceptional cases, such as, for
instance, when a ship had met with some misadventure. The
Crown and the Viceroy at Goa reminded the authorities at
Macao repeatedly of the need for the observance of this law ( 24 ).
(23) The terms factory and factor were adopted from the Portu-
guese feitoria and feitor respectively, having come from the Venetians.
They were used as early as 1500 by the Portuguese when «a trading
establishment at a foreign port> [of Calicut] was set up at the western
coast of India. (H. Yule & A. C. Burnell, Hobson-J obson: A glossary of
colloquial Anglo-Indian words and phrases, London, 1903, pp. 345-347).
(24) Cfr. Livro das Ordens Regias do Leal Senado, Macau, ff. 48-49
(1742); Register No. 50 of the Macao Senate, ff. 178 V.-181 (1746); Regis-
ter No. 52 of the Macao Senate, ff. 18-18 v. (1747), and other entries
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


The recapture of Calcutta by the English in 1757, after
it had been wrested from them by Sirajuddaullah, the Nawab
of Bengal, was followed by a remarkable trade expansion in
the direction of China. Among those who decided to try their
hand at the new business were some Portuguese and Goans,
two or three of whom moved from Calcutta to Macao, while
associates of theirs, Britons and others not employees of the
East India Company, made their way by ship to Canton ( 23 ).
The English Company classified these British nationals as
«interlopers», and issued injunctions for them to leave China at
once, as their presence was an infringement of the monopoly
which the Company enjoyed from the British Crown for
trading in China. When one of these men managed to evade
the regulations about leaving the China coast and proceeded
to Macao, where he ostensibly entered the employ of a Por-
tuguese associate from Calcutta, the Select Committee stormed
and raged, at what they considered a breach of their privi-
leges ( 26 ). One of the «interlopers*, Capt. Robert Jackson even
went so far as to proceed to Goa where he applied for Portu-
guese citizenship and, as a Portuguese subject, he reached
South China in 1761. Three years later he took up residence
at Macao ( 2T ).
The success of this stratagem led the President of the
Compagnie des Indes Orientates, French East India Company,
covering a long period of years. See also documents in the Arquivo His-
toric© Ultramarine, Lisbon, especially Order from the Council at Goa,
dated April 22, 1757, addressed to the Governor of Macao, «not to admit
any foreigner without express licence> issued by the Government at Goa.
(25) The gaps in the Portuguese records at Macao make it impos-
sible to verify the dates of these permissions, so many of the old documents
have succumbed to the ravages of insects and the humid climate.
(26) Hosea Ballou Morse, The Chronicles of the East India Com-
pany trading to China, 1635-1834, Oxford, 1929, Vol. V. pp. 102-103, 108,
162, 172, 180, 191, passim.
(27) See Register No. 68 of the Macao Senate, ff. 340-340 v.; Morse,
Chronicles, Vol. V, pp. 102-103.
Braga, J. M. The "beginnings of printing at Macao


to feel that some arrangement could be made in his favour,
and in this he was successful for in 1765 he obtained the
authorisation of the Portuguese Viceroy at Goa to lease a
residence at Macao in which to live during the summer months,
between the trading seasons at Canton.
It was not until seven years later, however, that the
English East India Company succeeded in following the ex-
ample if its French counterpart and, invoking most probably
the old Anglo-Portuguese Alliance, they were able in 1772
to obtain permission for the members of their Select Com-
mittee to rent Portuguese houses and to spend their summers
in Macao ( 28 ). They leased a fine mansion on the Praia Grande
and a spacious and stately residence with a fine garden, the
latter near the Church of St. Lawrence, both belonging to a
Mr. Antonio Jose da Costa ( 29 ).
The chartered companies of other countries tried to follow
suit and eventually the same permission was given to others
in similar positions, for the traditional hospitality of the people
of Macao, always evident, did not fail them and by the use of
the names of Portuguese gentleman it became possible for
the foreigners to reside at Macao. In many cases they were
even able to trade in the name of their Portuguese sponsors.
They were permitted, in this way, to stay at Macao all through
the spring and summer each year. Their numbers did not
increase very rapidly, and there could not have been more
than a dozen of these men when the English Company obtained
permission to rent property at Macao, in 1772.
Some of the ecclesiastics strongly resented the newcomers,
for those were times when rivalry between Catholicism and
(28) The surviving archives at Macao are silent about this; one
would probably have to make a study of the archives at Goa for infor-
mation from Portuguese sources.
(29) H. B. Morse, Chronicles, Vol. 11, pp. 172-173. Antdnio Jos6 da
Costa held the post of Controller of Customs at Macao for several years.
He was appointed Governor of Macao in 1780 and took office, but died
on November 3, 1781 before completing his term.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Protestantism in Europe and America was very evident ( 80 ).
It may be fair to presume that although the senior members
and writers of the big chartered companies were generally
cultured gentlemen of good standing, the same cannot always
be said for all the foreigners who succeeded in getting per-
mission to live at Macao. The English Company was able to
maintain establishments which were, from a social viewpoint,
of considerable importance. As the volume of trade between
China and Britain grew so did the Company’s prestige mount,
and the senior members came to spend more and more lavishly
on their homes at Macao. They set a pattern which was nothing
inferior to that maintained in the mansions of men of means
in Europe at the time ( 31 ).
ARRIVAL OF ROBERT MORRISON
By the end of the 18th century, the name of Macao was
being mentioned with greater frequency in all sorts of circles
in Europe. In England, the London Missionary Society con-
sidered the time opportune to despatch a missionary to China.
They felt that it would be quite in order for their missionary
to reside at Macao.
(so) in 1732 it was reported that the Chinese Government was
thinking of making Macao the centre of China’s foreign trade. This might
have led to Macao’s trade expansion, but the ecclesiastical authorities
succeeded in getting the Portuguese administration to oppose the idea.
(Cfr. Arquivos de Macau, Vol. I, p. 253). When the Portuguese authorities
decided to permit foreigners to reside at Macao after 1761, the bishops
again came forward to object but they were not successful on this occa-
sion.
(si) Not very much has been written about this subject, but see
W. C. Hunter, Bits of Old Chirm, London, 1885; Miss Katharine Hillard,
My mother’s Journal: A young lady’s diary... from 1829-183Jf, Boston,
1900 (of which a revox copy may be seen in the Hong Kong University
Library); C. A. Montalto de Jesus, Historic Macao, Macao, 1926; J. P.
Braga, The Portuguese in Macao and China, Macao, 1944.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


This was not the first suggestion that had been made for
the Protestants to endeavour to carry out evangelisation in
the Middle Kingdom. Well over a century earlier no less a
figure than Gottfried Leibnitz had put forward the idea that
it was about time that the Protestant communities of Europe
should follow in the footsteps of the Catholics and he mentioned
specifically the work of the Jesuits, for whom he had the
greatest admiration ( 32 ).
But it was not until the early years of the 19th century
that the first move was made by an English Society to send
a Protestant missionary to China. Mr. Robert Morrison was
selected for the task and, commenting on this, his widow, his
second wife, later explained that Morrison justified his hopes
of accomplishing something in China because «Roman Catholic
missionaries had persevered amidst almost unparalleled diffi-
culties and cruel oppressions, and had but partially succeeded
in imposing popery ( 33 ) upon China ... where hundreds of
millions of her people are still ‘wholly given to idolatry’ ( 34 ).
He applied to the East India Company in London for
passage to China but the Directors of the Honourable Company,
concerned as they were with the problems that were constantly
besetting their Select Committee engaged in trade at Canton,
wanted no new involvements. They felt that the appearance
of a British missionary, keen on studying Chinese and on
preaching, both of which would have been contrary to the
regulations governing the admittance of the Westerners, would
certainly lead to complications with the officials at Canton.
(32) As set forth in the Preface to his compilation Novissima Sinica,
1697. The latest study on this work by Leibnitz is Donald F. Lach’s The
Preface to Leibnitz ’ «Novissima Sinica*, Honolulu, 1957.
(33) The derogatory implication of this term, used by a person who
enjoyed the hospitality of Macao during many years, would not have
endeared Mrs. Morrison to her Portuguese hosts.
(34) Mrs. Eliza Morrison, Memoirs of the Life and Labours of
Robert Morrison, D.D., London, 1839, Vol. I, p. 86.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


His request for passage on one of the Company’s ships was
refused. The young missionary was not to be thwarted in his
intention and early in 1807 he went to America hoping to make
some arrangement there. He reached New York on April 20,
1807 and there he made many friends who gave him every
encouragement so much so that he sailed from New York in
the Trident on May 13 of the same year. He landed at Macao,
113 days later, on August 30, 1807 ( S 3).
Morrison lost no time in making his way to Canton and
upon his arrival there he wrote to his principals in London,
explaining that he had been given accommodation with the
American merchants. «It would be impossible*, he explained
in a letter, «for me to dwell amidst the princely grandeur of
the English who reside here*. He added, «I hope the Company’s
servants will not feel it their duty to put any stumbling block
in the way of my continuance* ( 36 ).
The letters sent by him at this period are full of imagined
hindrances and obstacles, but time was to prove that Morri-
son’s pessimism was unfounded. That he had difficulties no
one will deny, just as there were for everybody else, at such
a great distance from home, in a trying climate and among
a foreign people including a Chinese officialdom whose opinions
and treatment of Westerners could at times make life unbe-
arable. From Morrison’s later letters one reads that the persons
he imagined to be likely creators of difficulties proved to be
his greatest benefactors.
For instance, the Hon. John Fullarton Elphinstone, mem-
ber of the Company’s Select Committee gave him a manuscript
Latin-Chinese dictionary, compiled years before by a Catholic
priest, which Morrison himself valued at £ 50 in his own
(35) Morrison’s Memoirs, pp. 106-152.
(36) Letter from Robert Morrison to Mr. Hardcastle, Treasurer of
the London Missionary Society, dated at Canton, Sept. 7, 1807, quoted
in Mrs. Eliza Morrison, Memoirs of the Life and Labours of Robert Mor-
rison. D.D., &c. - London, 1839, Vol. I, p. 153-4.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


day ( S 7). Sir George Thomas Staunton, Bart, Supercargo and
soon to join the Select Committee, himself a student of the
Chinese language of no mean ability, presented him with many
of the Chinese books he would need in his studies and even
engaged instructors for him, at extremely moderate wages.
The principal of these tutors was a Catholic Chinese, for
others at that stage might have been afraid to teach their
language to a foreigner, this being against the regulations.
Mr. Samuel Ball, the Company’s Senior Tea Inspector, gave
him a Chinese grammar in Spanish, probably Father Francisco
Varo’s Arte de la Lengua Mandarina, a book printed by the
xylographic process at Canton in 1703, and not an easy book
to buy ( 38 ). Dr. Alexander Pearson, the Company’s physician,
also gave him much help and good advice.
Mr. John William Roberts, the Chief of the Company’s
Select Committee in China, helped Morrison most of all. He
began by using his influence at Canton and at Macao to get
a residence for the newcomer, at Canton valued at that time
at f 150 a year, and encouraged him in his studies to the
extent not only of approving of his intention to compile a
dictionary, but by promising the Company’s assistance ( 39 ).
Without telling Morrison, Roberts wrote also to the Di-
rectors of the Company proposing an appointment for the
young missionary on the Company’s staff in China. The Di-
rectors in London approved the suggestion and Morrison was
given a post and an official status and received financial
assistance, probably very much greater than anything which
any other person in similar circumstances has ever obtained.
Sir George Staunton was able to inform Robert Morrison
that, as a member of the Company’s staff, he would be paid
(37) Memoirs, p. 196.
(38) Extracts from Morrison’s journal quoted in Memoirs, p. 206.
For a reference to this grammar see supra p. 37.
(so) Morrison’s letter to his father, Macao, Aug. 4, 1808, Memoirs,
p. 222.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


£ 500 a year. This was increased later to £ 1,000 and sub-
sequently to £1,300. Such an appointment represented not
merely the salary shown, but included quarters and other
privileges. The salary he received at the end was much more
than that of the Company’s Writers ( 40 ).
In spite of Morrison’s early fears, most of which proved
groundless, but which, in his letter, he did not hesitate to
express frequently, and although, to quote Morrison, «the
Portuguese are ordered from their own court to admit no
persons but such as are connected with some of the European
factories» a difficulty which was removed as soon as Roberts
secured an appointment for Morrison on the Company’s staff
«my chief place of residence is at Macao». He also admits
that once when his landlord declined to renew the lease of
his house, two Portuguese gentlemen were good enough to
speak to the Governor and he was allowed to take another
house ( 41 ).
On one occasion Morrison even wrote to the Select Com-
mittee of the E. I. Company pointing out to them that «the
Duties of Chinese Translator are attended with considerable
personal hazard. I cannot help feeling an apprehension that
writing or translating a Letter to His Majesty the Emperor
of China, which will of course contain an impeachment of the
local Government of this Province, will subject me to personal
suffering from the Chinese even long after the present differ-
ence shall be arranged». The Committee in their reply to
Morrison assured him that they alone would be responsible
(40) From Robert Morrison’s letter to his father, dated at Macao,
Feb. 23, .1809, Memoirs, p. 251; H. B. Morse, Chronicles, Vol. 111, pp. 72
and 165. For the Company’s salary scale at the time cfr. H. B. Morse,
op. cit., pp. 176-177. In order to arrive at the present-day equivalent of
the amount paid to Robert Morrison it would be necessary to multiply
the figures by about twenty to twenty-five.
(41) Morrison’s letters to the Missionary Society in London, written
at Macao respectively on Dec. 9, 1809 and Dec. 22, 1812, Memoirs, pp. 285
and 356.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


for anything written by him in the prosecution of his duties
on their instructions ( 42 ). The fact remains that at no time
did the mandarins make any charges against Morrison for
carrying out his work as translator for the Company,
INTEREST IN CHINA
Within four or five years the young missionary felt that
he had made sufficient progress in his studies and that he
knew enough on the subject to be able to write. He sent the
manuscript of a short work to the London Missionary Society
and the Directors decided to have it printed. It appeared at
London in 1812, with the title: HORAE SINICAE: Trans-
lations from the popular literature of the Chinese, Printed for
Black and Parry, 1812, pp. vi. 21 ( 43 ).
Morrison had meanwhile arranged with a Chinese printer
to bring out, carved from wooden blocks in the time-honoured
xylographic manner, a translation of the Acts of the Apostles
(based on an old Catholic manuscript in the British Museum
Library and a ms. Latin and Chinese Dictionary, in the Royal
Society, which Morrison had, with the help of a Chinese
assistant, Yong Sam-tak, in England, transcribed before coming
out to China) ( 44 ) and a religious Tract and a Chinese Cate-
chism, all in Chinese ( 45 ). This occurred at a time when the
Portuguese themselves, respecting their laws, did not do any
printing at Macao.
(42) H. B. Morse, The Chronicles of the East India Company trading
to China, 1635-1834. Oxford, 1926, Vol. 111, pp. 210-211.
(43) A second edition was published, also at London, in 1817, Mor-
rison, who was born in 1782, was only thirty years old when his first book
was published.
(44) Morrison’s Memoirs, Vol. I, pp. 77-78.
(43) Letter to a friend from Macao on Dec. 19, 1811, p. 302, and to
the London Missionary Society on various dates, cfr., Memoirs, Vol. I,
pp. 310, 311 and 298, passim.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


In spite of all the help which Morrison received and the
courtesies extended to him at Macao, we find him writing to
the headquarters of his Society beginning: «From this inhos-
pitable land I again address you ...». This was an unfortunate
phrase, for it has led many a later writer to believe that
Morrison was obstructed if not persecuted in Macao, whereas
the very opposite was the case ( 46 ).
At this period in Europe a veritable revival in matters
relating to China and the Chinese had already commenced.
There had existed in intellectual circles there for a number
of years a steadily growing respect for Chinese culture and
language, in place of the half-century or so of incredulity
which had grown in the latter part of the 18th century. The
foreign traders who had appeared in China during the 17th
and 18th centuries, concerned as they were with commerce
and its fruits, gave little thought, if any, to the real values
of China. The Chinese they met were not the type to stimulate
interest in China’s intellectual and cultural traditions; for that
matter the European sailors were not, by any stretch of the
imagination, any better.
During the 16th and 17th centuries, when learning in
Europe was still restricted mainly to the ecclesiastics, the books
and letters written by the missionaries in the Portuguese
Missions in the Far East, Portuguese priests and those of other
European countries working in these missions, found only a
limited public. They wrote enthusiastically of martyrdoms and
evangelisation, and only more prosaically of the history and
background of China and its civilisation; it was the edifying
that they stressed. By the end of the 17th century, however,
after the French Jesuits had been sent to Peking and when,
thanks to the benefits of books, education and knowledge was
steadily advancing among the middle classes in Europe, the
enthusiasm which greeted the French publications, made a
(4c) Letter to the London Missionary Society, dated Jan. 7, 1811,
quoted in Memoirs, p. 309.
BRAGA, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


perceptible impression on the minds of European scholars and
gentry alike. The liberal philosophers of France and Germany
were particularly pleased with the superior Confucian morality
and the ideal government which the administration of China
seemed, at least in theory, to possess.
This was followed by the period of Chinoiserie, a fad
among the wealthy of Europe, principally in France and
England, which influenced furniture and gardens to a marked
extent and established the pattern for European conceptions
of China and the Chinese for the next three or four generations,
until the drawings of William Alexander, who accompanied
the Earl of Macartney to China, at the end of the 18th century,
helped to correct the illusions.
French Sinology suffered, too, from the excessive adu-
lation which writers, early in the eighteen century, heaped
on China and its government. Voltaire, Montesquieu, D’Argens,
D’Alenzon and others soon made use of the thought to ridicule
the governments of Europe, and the decline in the interest in
things Chinese set in. To a great extent this was set off by
the disparaging remarks recorded by Commodore Anson on the
literature and art of China and to an even greater extent, on
the weak, dilatory and venal officials of this country. The
observations carried back to England by the merchants of the
East Indian Company, who, like Anson, had dealings with the
lowest members of the social scale, served to confirm the view.
Books by Hickey, Captain King and others helped to spread
the impression ( 47 ).
But scholarship was being taken more seriously as learn-
ing spread and, at first principally in France and Germany,
(47) This subject has not a large bibliography but see V. Pinot,
La Chine et la formation de I’esprit philosophique en France 1640-1740,
Paris, 1932; A. Reichwin, China and Europe: Intellectual and Artistic con-
tacts in the eighteenth century, New York, 1925; H. Cordier, La Chine
en France au XVIII* sidcle, Paris, 1910; and, more recently, W. VV. Apple-
ton, A Cycle of Cathay, New York, 1951 and H. Honour, Chinoiserie:
The vision of Cathay, London, 1961.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


scholars like Jean-Pierre Abel-Remusat and Heinrich Julius
Klaproth were delving into Oriental studies and were writing
learned books, while the embassy of the Earl of Macartney
to Peking, in 1792, had been followed by several interest-
ing books about the country. All this served to draw attention
to China. Among others, Joseph Hager compiled An explana-
tion of the elementary characters of the Chinese , London,
1801; and M. Raper A Dictionary of Chinese and English
carefully compiled from many others. Translated from the
Latin Macao Dictionary. In If. volumes, London, 1807; Johann
Christoph Adelung had begun printing at Berlin, in 1806,
the first of his four volumes Mithridates oder allegmeine
Sprachenkunde mit dem Vater Unser als Sprachprobe in hey
nahe funfhundert Sprachen und Mundarten; Joseph de Guignes
had published at Paris, in 1807, Reflexions sur la langue chi-
noise; Antonio Montucci published at London, in 1808, De
studiis sinicis in imperiali Athenaeo Petropolitano; Jean-Pierre
Abel-Remusat published at Paris, in 1811, Essai sur la Langue
et la Litterature Chinoise. Avec cinq Planches, contenante des
Textes Chinois, accompagnes de traductions, de remarques et
d’un commentaire litteraire et grammatical, to be followed
three years later, in 1814, by his Plan d’un dictionnaire chinois,
avec des notices de plusieurs dictionnaires Chinois mss. et des
reflexions sur les travaux executes jusqu’d ce jour par les
Europeens pour faciliter Vetude de la langue chinoise ( 48 ).
The Directors of the London Missionary Society had
already felt that something should be done by themselves, for
Mr. Joshua Marshman of the English Baptist Mission was
hard at work in Serampore on the study of Chinese. He
published at the same place, in 1809, his Dissertation on the
Character and Sounds of the Chinese language. When the
London Missionary Society began its activities in 1795 and
(<s) For titles and particulars of these and similar publications
see H. Cordler, Bibliotheca Sinica, Vol. ITT, Cols. 1639, 1710, 1711, 1712,
passim.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


launched its programme of missionary endeavour in many
places, the Directors realised, just as the Catholic missions
had felt centuries earlier, how eminentiy desirable it was that
the printed word should be an important factor in the spread
of the Message to the world they were hoping to convert.
However, owing to the difficulties attending the introduc-
tion of a printing press at Canton where Morrison found, on
his own admission, that it was impossible to show that he
was engaged in missionary work, the Society considered the
convenience of setting up a printery at some place not too far
distant from China. For instance, the work being carried out
at Serampore was noted for the volume of printing in Chinese
done there. Marshman had published his Clavis Sinica in 1813,
a work which met with the approbation of Orientalists in
Europe. He also announced that he was preparing a transla-
tion of the Bible in Chinese. But the London Missionary
Society and the Baptist elders in England felt that the rivalry
between Marshman and Morrison had to stop. They decided in
favour of Morrison ( 49 ). The London Mission Society thereupon
decided to set up a small printing press at Malacca.
Meanwhile Morrison at Macao was busily engaged in his
studies and translations. In 1814 he ordered from a Chinese
printer at Macao 2,000 copies of the New Testament (at a cost
of $3,818). This work was based in part on the early Chinese
version by a Catholic missionary, which Morrison had seen in
London and of which he had had a transcription made ( 50 ).
He also ordered from the Macao Chinese printer 10,000 tracts
and 5,000 copies of the Catechism he had compiled ( 51 ).
(49) This is Dr. G. Bonnant’s conclusion, cfr. G. Bonnant, op. cit. p. 7
see also. Cordier, Bibliotheca Svnica, Vol. IH. Col. 1662.
(oo) See supra p. 47. See L. Ride, Robert Morrison: The scholar and
the man. Hong Kong, University Press, pp. 45-48, where some informat-
ion is given of Morrison’s original transcript, now in the Hong Kong
University Library.
(si) Entry in Morrison’s Journal forwarded to the Missionary Society
in 1814, Memoirs, Vol. T, pp. 375-6.
BRAGA, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


THE BRITISH PRINTING PRESS
The senior members of the East India Company's staff in
China decided that they, too, might give further tangible
assistance to Robert Morrison, and proposals were sent by
Mr. Roberts, in 1812, to the Directors in London to send out
a whole printing outfit, with a competent printer to run it,
so that Morrison might have, in Macao, the benefit of this
printing press to further his work. The Court of Directors
acceded to the request and in 1813 a printer named Peter
Perring Thoms, with a press and fonts of type and all the
necessary equipment, was sent from England to Macao. The
Court in London did not hesitate to support the Committee
in China who felt that the work on the dicionary, on which
Morrison was working so assiduously, justified the expense ( 52 ).
Morrison himself felt that «the expenditure to be incurred by
the printing of the Dictionary was more than a religious
society without ample means could encompass, the Honourable
East India Company at length undertook the work, and
determined to conduct the enterprise with the liberality for
which that influential body is so eminently distinguished* ( 53 ).
The Chinese authorities at Canton were strict to the point
of fanaticism in all that represented the introduction of new
thought into China. They might not have opposed the introduc-
tion of Christianity, as a religion, but what they feared was
the introduction of the new ideas which were part of this reli-
gion— ideas that would have conflicted with all the age-old
traditions, the classical system of learning and their customs
and usages, so closely associated with their system of gov-
ernment. Thus, they would never, at that time, have permitted
a printing press run by foreigners at Canton or elsewhere in
Chinese territory, and it was kept therefore at Macao. Owing
to the friendly relations subsisting between the senior members
(52) Morse, Chronicles, Vol. 111, pp. 178-9; 209 and 240
(53) Morrinson’s Memoirs, Vol. I, pp. 382-3
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


of the East India Company’s staff and the Portuguese officials
at Macao, the latter decided to behave generously and to close
an eye, since they could not give their formal consent, all
printing in the Portuguese overseas territories being, as
has been shown, absolutely prohibited. The Company rented
premises for the printing press, and for Mr. Thoms ( M ).
Although the Portuguese were not able to enjoy the bless-
ings of printing themselves at Macao, they did, nevertheless,
make up their minds to be agreeable to their British friends.
By not preventing Morrison’s work in the printing of books,
therefore, the Portuguese assisted, by winking at the laws in
force, although the Portuguese clergy must have deprecated his
presence in Macao. In this way the Macao authorities helped
Protestantism at Macao, at a time when Catholicism was the
state religion of the Portuguese nation.
The value and importance of this friendly gesture should
be appreciated, not by the standards and liberal ideas of more
recent times, but by the narrow provincialisms and prejudices
which prevailed all over Europe and the West at that time.
The Gordon Riots in London against Catholicism had taken
place not so long before (1780) and the causes of that
disturbance were still fresh in men’s minds. Nevertheless, here
in Macao Catholic officials were giving liberal assistance to a
Protestant missionary by allowing the setting up of a printing
press which the members of the British community wished to
use at Macao.
The Catholic clergy could not have viewed the printing
press with any favour, but they did not obstruct it. They might
very easily have opposed it, and the law would have been on
their side. In their personal relations with Morrison some of
them were quite friendly and the Protestant missionary
(54) No record seems to have been kept of the address of the prin-
tery. It seems, from references in the Macao archives, to have been at
one time just off Rua Central, in a house owned by Mr. Goncalo da Sil-
veira.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


mentioned, in later letters, that he had made the acquaintance
of a Catholic priest, who had called on him and with whom he
got on well. And considering that the press set out to assist
a Protestant missionary in a field which the Catholics had for
two and a half centuries considered their own, it speaks volumes
for the tolerance of the officials that no active steps were
taken to stop it.
Further help was available from the people of Macao. In
the early stages it seems that an attempt was made to employ
only Chinese assistants in the printery, but when this proved
to be impracticable a number of Portuguese were engaged to
help in the cutting of the matrices for the Chinese characters
and cast the types for use in the new press. Two or three young
Portuguese were also taught typesetting. Unfortunately the
names of these assistants do not seem to have been recorded ( 53 ),
With all these encouraging signs it is not surprising that
the London Missionary Society thought of sending somebody
from London to assist Robert Morrison. Without first verifying
whether this was a practical idea they made their decision
and Morrison was surprised to find that Mr. William Milne,
accompanied by his wife, had turned up one day at Macao,
Morrison was pleased with the prospect but he must have
known that there would be fresh problems. He thought, pos-
sibly, that the East India Company might be willing to help
Milne; but he was quickly disillusioned.
The Governor of Macao, Senhor Bernardo Aleixo de Lemos
Faria, asked Morrison to call to see him and told him that it
would not be possible for Milne to stay in Macao. Morrison
pleaded with the Governor but Senhor Lemos Faria told him,
to use Morrison’s own words: «I have been appealed to against
you, for publishing books in Chinese at Macao, but from
motives of friendship I forbore...» The Governor went to
(as) The same may be said with regard to the Portuguese person-
nel of the East India Company and those of the dozens of foreign business-
men at Macao and Canton,
BRAGA, J, M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


explain that it was not for want of friendship, therefore, that
he could not allow Milne to live in Macao, for he had been
ordered by his own Government in Portugal [at the request
of the British authorities], not to admit any Europeans in
Macao excepting those connected with the Companies, and
that the Directors of the English East India Company had
themselves requested the Government of Portugal not to allow
any Englishman in Macao but those employed by the Company.
He concluded by saying that the Macao Senate had addressed
him reminding him of these conditions and that the Bishop
had drawn his attention to the arrival of William Milne ( M ).
Robert Morrison then called upon Mr, J. W. Roberts, the
Superintendent of the Company’s Select Committee, and asked
him to do something, hoping possibly that the Company would
give Milne an appointment on the staff, as they had previously
done in his case. Roberts expressed his regrets, confessing that
he had not the power to do as Morrison requested. It become
necessary for Milne to proceed to Canton, where accommoda-
tion was provided for him in one of the buildings of the Foreign
Factories ( 57 ).
In their Report for the year 1814, the Directors of the
London Missionary Society commented on the situation at
Macao and after announcing that «the East India Company
had sent out a suitable person to print it [the Dictionary]
at their expense» went on to statet that Milne had arrived at
Macao and that Robert Morrison had rejoiced at the prospect
of having a companion but that at «the instigation of the
Roman Catholic clergy, the Portuguese government ordered
(50) Extract from Morrison’s Journal, entry for July 9, 1813, cf.
Morrison’s Memoirs, pp. 365-6.
(57) Memoirs, pp. 366-8, passim. The Chinese authorities declined
to let Milne remain in Canton and he settled at Malacca. Here he founded
the Anglo-Chlnese College and set up a printing press, bringing out two
magazines, one in English and one in Chinese. Death claimed him seven
years later (1822). His biography was written by Morrison and published
at Malacca in 1824.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Milne to quit [Macao] in ten days.» ( 58 ) The report also
mentioned that as the Chinese did not permit European women
to reside at Canton, Mrs. Milne had been allowed to stay at
Macao, Mr. Milne had therefore «been separated from his
wife». The Report added that «the Society cannot sufficiently
lament the wretched bigotry which should render this removal
unavoidable.» ( 59 ) Had the Society taken the trouble to make
inquiries they would have ascertained the difficulties and they
could have spared Milne the vexations to which he had been
subjected. Not one word about the real circumstances or the
difficulties facing the Portuguese authorities at Macao!
FIRST BOOKS FROM THE E. I. COMPANY PRESS
It did not take long for Thoms to begin printing, and early
in 1815 the first fruits of his efforts at the new press were
ready for distribution. In the case of the English Company’s
press the Portuguese did not enforce either the press law or the
censorship regulations, and the East India Company and,
subsequently, other British and American printers, when these
followed, enjoyed a privileged immunity against all the
restrictions to which the subjects of the King of Portugal had
invariably to submit ( 60 ).
The East India Company’s servants, seeking to relieve
their hosts at Macao of any inconveniences, often, especially
in the early stages, omitted the name «MACAO» from the
title-pages of their books printed there, but Morrison was not
( ss) Extract from Report for 1814 of the London Missionary Society,
quoted in Memoirs, p. 392.
(so) Memoirs, p. 393.
(oo) The value of this privilege was not a small thing, but it never
seems to have been appreciated by those: who received it. The only writer
to mention the friendliness shown by the Portuguese was Rev. Walter
Henry Medhurst. (See note 81 infra).
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Chinese illustration depicting printing by the xylographic process and the binding of books.
(From an ancient Chinese work , in the author’s collection)


Picture showing the offices of the English East India Company on the Praia Grande, Macao.
(From Views in India & China by Robert Elliott, London, 1834)


so considerate, regardless of the serious difficulties which
might have been created in Portugal for the officials at Macao
who did not prevent this printing by the foreigners in contra-
vention of the royal decrees. The very first books printed at
Macao by Mr. Thoms for his employers show how this happened
to be the case. Later, when Portugal had been apprised of the
situation there was no longer any need for this precaution.
To John Francis Davis, a member of the East India
Company’s staff ( 61 ), goes the credit for the first book that
came from the press:
San Yu-Low: or the Three Dedicated Rooms.
A tale translated from the Chinese . By J. F. Davis ( 62 ).
The paper used for the books produced at Macao was
generally bought in China, for it was found that a quality
could be obtained locally which was quite serviceable. Copies
of the books which have survived are now showing signs of
their age, but the paper used at the time filled a distinct need.
The little book written by Mr. Davis was followed by a
short work by Robert Morrison, entitled:
Translations of extracts from the Peking Gazette,
from the original Chinese with notes. By Robert
Morrison.
Morrison made progress meanwhile on his dictionary and
the Select Committee in China were soon able to report to
the Directors of the East India Company in London that a
(01) Later, as Sir John Davis, he was Governor of Hong Kong
from 1844 to 1848. He had a distinguished cai'eer in the service of the
East India Company, and was a good Chinese scholar. The last book
completed by the E. I. Company’s printing press, printed in 1834, was by
Mr. Davis. (See infra p. 108.
(02) For full titles of this book and the other products of the East
India Company’s press at Macao see Appendix 111.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


beginning had been made with the printing. Late in the year
1815 the printer announced the completion of the first volume,
and it must have been a proud Mr. Thoms who handed the
finished product to his superiors and to Robert Morrison. The
book was a bulky one, containing the strange signs of the
Chinese characters side by side with the English text.
The East India Company’s officials in China reported to
their head office that they were sending «six hundred copies to
London ( 83 ).
Particulars of the book which has been given such a high
place in the story of Protestant endeavour in China have
appeared in a number of works:
A DICTIONARY OF THE CHINESE LAN-
GUAGE, in three parts. Part the first, containing
Chinese and English, arranged according to the
Radicals. By the Rev. Robert Morrison. Vol. I. Part. I.
Macao: printed at the Honourable East India Com-
pany's Press, by P. P. Thoms, 1815, in-4.°, XVIII,
930 pp. ( 04 ).
The enthusiasm of all those who were in any way
connected with the production of the book must have been
considerable. One admirer has gone so far as to exclaim that
«there is no finer monument of human perserverance than the
dictionary of Dr. Morrison.» ( 65 ).
The East India Company did not stint in the matter of the
dictionary or, for that matter, of the printing press. The com-
pany’s accounts show that they disbursed £l2O a month on
(03) M. B. Morse, Chronicles, Vol. 111, p. 240.
(64) Cfr. H. Cordier, Bibliotheca Sinica, Vol. 111, Cols. 1592-94.
(65) Cfr. E. H. Hayes, Robert Morrison: China’s Pioneer, London,
1925, p. 87. Adulation of their hero has not been so extravagently expressed
by other writers, but it is curious to observe that Protestant writers, until
recent years, have practically ignored the pioneering work of the members
of the Portuguese mission in China.
Braga, J, M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Title-page of the first volume of Robert Morrison’s Dictionary, printed at Macao in 18.
(Courtesy of the University of Hong Kong)




running the printery, besides Mr. Thom's salary (£3OO a year)
to which has to be added the cost of production, including
paper, new materials and type from London, the cutting of
matrices for casting the Chinese characters at Macao, trav-
elling and other expenses.
By this time, on the instructions of the British authorities
in India, only Portuguese and Bengalis were employed at the
printery ( 66 ). A huge sum was laid out before the dictionary
was completed; close on £15,000, according to one authority.
(The present-day equivalent of this sura would probably be
between £300,000 and £400,000). Yet the Company has been
accused of giving meagre assistance to evangelisation. One
prominent modern writer has even stated that the Company
did little else as a body during its long life to help the cause
of civilisation in China, but had put every obstacle in the path
of missionary enterprise in the country! ( 67 )
As for Macao's part, Macao’s generous part, one looks in
vain for any acknowledgement. That Robert Morrison was
permitted to publish books in the Portuguese settlement,
in contravention of Portuguese law, without having to be
subjected to censorship, and in opposition to Chinese decrees
against Christian evangelisation, thereby prejudicing Macao
trade, if not its very existence, if the Chinese officials had
chosen to adopt an aggressive view, is completely ignored.
On the other hand much has subsequently been made of
passages in Morrison’s letters criticising the Portuguese. In one
of his early letters, for instance, he says, «the Romish clergy
at Macao are considerably alarmed by my coming out. There
is every reason to fear that their influence will be exerted
(ee) Morse, Chronicles, Vol. 111, p. 327, Vol. IV, p. 98 passim.
(67) f. Wells Williams, The Life and Letters of Samuel Wells
Williams, New York, 1889, p. 73. This expression by the son of the great
American missionary, who spent many years in Macao and who was very
moderate in his language, is all the more remarkable for this very reason.
(es) Morrison’s Memoirs, Letter to Dr. Waugh, dated at Canton,
Jan. 5, 1808, Vol. I, p. 214,
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


against me.» ( 6S ) This was a strange presumption for nothing
happened. Not long after the earlier letter, he admitted, «the
do negatively what they can against me.» ( 69 ) No evidence can
be found anywhere in any records to bear out this assertion
by Morrison. Passages such as those have, unfortunately,
misled later writers into exclaiming that, in Macao, «Morrison
was surrounded by Roman Catholic hostility.»
Dr, W. W. Cadbury and Miss M. H. Jones, writing at
Canton, seem to be the only ones to have noticed «Macao’s
historical importances in this connection. «She was,» they
observe, «the bridge to the almost hermetically sealed city of
Canton. Had Macao not belonged to a foreign country, it is
safe to say that Christianity and western medicine would not
have come into China until a much later date. Because Macao
had enjoyed the benefits of medicine for two centuries, western
doctors and dispensaries were permitted; Christianity was not
stamped out as a barbarian religion and foreigners were not
treated as uncivilized creatures. Canton has proved to be the
commercial gateway of China but Macao has been the back
door at which have stood Pearson who introduced vaccination
into China, Morrison who was the first Protestant missionary
to the Chinese and the first translator of the Bible into their
language, and Colledge, who started an ophthalmic dispensary
first in Macao and then in Canton, and who became president
of the Medical Missionary Society, the first medical missionary
society in the world.
«These three men would not have been able to start their
work in Canton which was open for commerce and nothing
more... But Macao provided a place where these men could
stand while they were knocking at the gate of China. It opened
a little way for them, and once started it could never be barred
again.» ( 70 )
(go) Letter to «a friends, presumably in England, dated Dec. 9.
Memoirs, p. 285.
(70) w. W. Cadbury and M. H. Jones, At the Point of a Lancet,
Shanghai, 1935, pp. 6-7.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


TRUCULENT MANDARINS
During this period there occurred a revival of anti-Catholic
movements in China, leading to persecutions in several places,
and although there had not yet been anything tangible which
might lead to a clash, growing antagonisms were seeping
slowly into Sino-foreign relations. Against Morrison’s work
too, there was a directive condemning it ( 71 ). But the juniors
among the Chinese officials knew that as these produced no
material benefits to the mandarins concerned in carrying out
anti-Christian measures, especially at Canton, such restrictions
would not last long. Nevertheless the Court of Directors of
the East India Company in London considered that the reports
were ominous enough and they took alarm; they gave instruc-
tions to the Select Committee in China to dispense with
Morrison’s services for carrying on Christian evangelisation.
The Company’s Committee in China knew, however, that the
anti-Christian movement was only ephemeral and they did not
put the order into effect. They withdrew Morrison’s name, it
is true, for a time from the Company’s books as an employee,
but his salary was paid and there was no diminution in the
help which had already been promised to him ( 72 ).
Here was a case in which the experience of the men on
the spot enabled them to understand the true situation of
affairs, as far as they could observe it. The European traders
had dealings with the merchants; they had nothing in common
with the cultured classes in the country. Nor had the conduct
of some of the Europeans much in it calculated to arouse
feelings of friendliness among the Chinese. The subordinate
officials had, however, come to learn that pressure brought
(71) In a letter to the London Missionary Society, Robert Morrison
referred to a new edict against Christianity in which Europeans were
expressly forbidden to print books «in order to pervert the multitude*.
Memoirs, Vol. I, pp. 334-337, quoting letter dated Apiil 2, 1812.
(72) Morse, Chronicles, Vol. 111, pp. 134-35.
Braga, J. M. - The beginnings of pnnting at Macao


to bear upon the foreigners, for any infractions of the regula-
tions, could be made a fruitful source of income.
It was in the activities of the Company’s printery at
Macao that the Chinese officials saw an opportunity for
obtaining perquisites and, by invoking the regulations which
prohibited the preaching of Christianity and those regarding
the teaching of Chinese to any foreigner, they sent men to
carry out a search of the shop in which the metal types for
the Chinese characters were being made. The workmen were
detained, but no charge seems to have been laid against them,
for «the application of a douceur to the clerks in the office»
was sufficient to secure their release, and a local settlement
was made, satisfactory to the mandarins. The Company’s
linguist was punished as the scapegoat and transported to
Kansu province ( 7S ).
An incident took place not long afterwards which might
have been more serious. It appears that a quarrel had broken
out among Morrison’s Chinese workmen, one of whom to
revenge himself on some of his colleagues among the type-
cutters sent a sheet of the Dictionary, then being printed, to
the District Magistrate, who had thereupon to transmit the
matter to his superiors in Canton. This was the Kunming Fu
at Canton ( 74 ) who was, fortunately for the British, more
interested in the maintenance of trade relations than in
carrying out the imperial regulations in what seemed to him
to be a purely local matter. He sent word confidentially to
the members of the Co-Hong, the group of merchants permitted
to trade with the foreigners at Canton, that a search was
about to be made of the printery, presumably with the hint
(73) h. B. Morse, Chronicles, Vol. 111, pp. 240-241. The Company
paid some compensation to the man and, we may presume, to his family.
(74) Kunming Fu appears in Morrison’s original, but it has not been
possible to trace the term in available reference books. From the context
this must have been one of the judiciary officers in Canton. In his own
View of China, Macao, 1817, Robert Morrison does not seem to have listed
an officer with this title.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


that precautions should be taken and more discretion exercised.
In due course, some weeks later, after the wheels of justice
had ground along, about twenty-five Chinese soldiers appeared
at the East India Company’s printery at Macao declaring that
«they came with the authority of the Tso-tang [the District
Magistrate]». They took away some printed sheets and some
specimens of the Chinese type and they arrested one of the
Chinese employed at the Press ( 75 ).
The Viceroy at Canton could not ignore the matter entirely.
The Portuguese complained to the Chinese authorities of the
violation of Portuguese territory, a complaint which was
ignored, and the Select Committee of the Company appealed
to the Viceroy for clemency, their plea being granted and the
prisoner released. The charge must have been squashed
for the Viceroy seems to have treated the affair lightly.
Nevertheless he must have hinted, through the Chinese mer-
chants, that the Company should avoid any semblance of
infraction against the law that prohibited the teaching of the
Chinese language to foreigners, for the Company was breaking
the law by printing books in Chinese. This led the Select
Committee to decide to replace the Chinese workmen by Por-
tuguese assistants to go on with the work, a ready solution to
the difficulty. But the Company also decided to get Bengalis
from Serampore, men who had had some experience in cutting
Chinese types at the Mission press there. They wrote to Lord
Moira, the Governor-general of Bengal, and he acceded to the
request, sending four of the men who had been doing this
work in India, and the Company obtained permission from the
Portuguese for them to stay in Macao ( 78 ).
And what were Macao’s feelings in the matter? Unfor-
tunately for the Portuguese authorities, here was a case in
which Chinese workmen were helping a British concern to do
(75) Morrison’s letter to Dr. Waugh, Feb. 24, 1817, Memoirs, pp.
473-474.
(76) h. B. Morse, Chronicles, Vol. 111, pp. 251-252.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


something against the Chinese law. This was being done in
Portuguese territory, however, and the authorities must have
felt most embarrassed by the conduct of the mandarins, even
though these men acted on an accusation lodged by disgruntled
members of Morrison’s staff against their own colleagues.
They had long realised, just as the Select Committee of the
English Company knew when they agreed to «the application
of a douceur to the clerks in the office», that the only thing
to do was to try to avoid unpleasant incidents, and principally
by the avoidance of any act which might lead to any cause
for action by the mandarins ( 77 ).
It was an unfortunate method, but to understand the
reason why it prevailed one must appreciate the great gulf
between the European and the Oriental viewpoints of life and
morals during that period of international relations. Most
important it is necessary to remember the methods adopted
by the materialistically-minded officials of the Chinese admin-
istrative system and the growing volume of corruption with
which the Chinese civil service was saddled, a terrible plague
of peculation which was undermining the country and which
brought such disaster to the nation. For many years, Macac
had had to accept the inevitable and bow before the force
which the Chinese officials could bring to bear. Far from
help, or even the hope of help, at a time when the Portu-
guese monarchy was absent in Brazil and a British military
junta ruled the country following the Napoleonic wars, Macao
had, all too often, to knuckle down before the corrupt man-
darinate, always on the look out for some means of exploiting
their positions to make money ( 78 ).
(77) The old records of the office of the Procurator of Macao, the
official in charge of dealings with the Chinese, disappeared long ago, eaten
by bookworms and white ants, which explains many of the gaps in
Macao’s history of its relations with the mandarins.
(78) c. A. Montalto de Jesus stresses this repeatedly in his Histoi-ic
Macao, Macao, 1926, pp. 41-3; 50; 52; 76; 117-18; 122; 124-5; 174; 179-80,
passim. A serious study of this subject has yet to be undertaken, Foreign
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Excepting for this incident the East India Company’s
printery had no trouble in the matter of printing at Macao,
and the work went on steadily and without interruption for
another twenty years. This was an advantage which the
English enjoyed ( 79 ).
The Portuguese ecclesiastical authorities now asked that
they should also be given permission to print and they were
allowed, without official authorisation, to publish books in
Chinese for evangelical purposes. This was done at St. Joseph’s
College where, in 1815, a collection of the lives of the Saints
in 24 volumes was printed. This was followed by a number of
books of an apologetic nature, in Chinese, all printed xylograph-
ically from wooden blocks. Even for this the authorities at
Macao felt that it would be well to obtain the King’s approval.
Letters were sent therefore to Rio de Janeiro, the capital in
exile of Portugal during the Napoleonic invasions and for
several years after, and formal permission was granted in 1819.
sources contain many references to the extortions practised by the man-
darins, and H. B Morse, The Chronicles of the East India Company tra-
ding to China, 1635-183 4, Oxford, 1926-1929 (5 vols.) gives many instances
of reports sent by the Select Committee in China to the Court of Directors
in London. See also R. Montgomery Martin, China: Political, Commercial
and Social, London, Vol. I, pp. 129-30; S. Wells Williams, The Middle
Kingdom, New York, 1883, Vol. I, pp. 294-5; A. Krausse, China in Decay,
London, 1900, pp. 57-69; E. H. Parker, China: Her History, Diplomacy and
Commerce, London, 1917, pp. 207-9; to name only a few references by
foreign students of Chinese history. Macao was particularly vulnerable
to the rapaciousness of the mandarins and the archives, depleted though
they have become, contain abundant evidence of a long succession of
demands made by the Chinese officials. See Archives de Macau, Macau,
1929-30 (3 volumes); A. F. Marques Pereira, As Alfandegas Chineses de
Macau, Macau, 1870; Bento de Franga, Subsidies para a Histdria de
Macau, Lisboa, 1888; Eudore de Colomban, Histoire Abregee de Macau,
Pekin, 1928, etc.
(70) In due course, after printing had been officially authorised in
1822, others were also permitted to do printing at Macao, among them
private individuals not only Portuguese but other British and American
missionaries.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


It was not until 1828, however, that Portuguese books were
printed at St. Joseph’s College in Macao ( 80 ).
The Portuguese had to submit their books and newspapers
for approval by the censors, but the foreigners were not
compelled to do the same. By this time the Chinese officials
had got used to seeing the Portuguese and foreign printeries
at work, and what had once been an innovation which was
against their laws, especially when Chinese books and pam-
phlets circulated among the Chinese people, became common-
place. Foreign books and even Chinese books printed by
foreigners came, in time, to be ignored, and printing at Macao
was not the object of their self-righteous zeal. Protestant
missionaries enjoyed, therefore, in the little Portuguese set-
tlement considerable freedom of action in this connection ( 81 ).
(so) The Chinese Repository, Macao, 1933, p. 504. These booklets
and others printed then at Macao are all now extremely rare.
For the correspondence on the subject of permission for printing to
he carried out at St. Joseph’s College see Appendix IV.
(si) Rev. Walter Henry Medhurst was one of the missionary authors
whose books were so printed, and from him came acknowledgment of the
benefits they enjoyed at Macao. He was Morrison’s successor as lexico-
grapher in China and, writing in 1838, he comments on the advantages
which residence at Macao offered: «The houses all belong to the Portu-
guese* ; into the dwellings of Europeans, the Chinese never enter, not even
to apprehend offenders of their own nation. Thus, a foreigner has only
to rent the dwelling of a Portuguese citizen, and that house is his castle,
where he may print books, in any quantities, without danger of interefe-
rence from the mandarins; he may even have a Chinese school, and retain
a number of writers and teachers about him, so long as these do not put
themselves in the way of the native police. A missionary who intends
carrying on Chinese printing, in Macao, should be somewhat acquainted
with the language and employ principally foreign servants, so that no
natives may be implicated in vexatious proceedings, on his account. He
may then open his doors to any poor or enquiring Chinese, who may come
to him for relief or advice, while he shuts them against all police officers,
who are, in China, the least respectable part of the population*. W. H.
Medhurst, China: Its State and Prospects, London, 1838, p. 283.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


The publication of the first volume of Morrison's dic-
tionary was followed by energetic efforts on the succeeding
volumes. While this work went on, Morrison plodded away
enthusiastically with his Chinese assistants as translators,
while Mr. Thoms with his Portuguese and Bengali assistants
was able to devote a little time to the printing of other books.
Some, if not all of these, have been recorded in the standard
bibliographies of China, and are occasionally met with in
booksellers’ catalogues.
One of these was by Robert Morrison:
Dialogues and Detached Sentences in the Chinese
Languages: with a free and verbal translation in
English.
The book was brought out under the supervision of Mr.
James Bannerman, a member of the staff of the East India
Company and a student of Chinese ( 82 ). This was necessary
as Robert Morrison with other members of the Company’s staff
in China was absent from Macao, accompanying Lord Amherst,
H. B. M. Ambassador, on his embassy to the Emperor of China.
Among the others, also in the capacity of interpreters, were
Messrs. Francis Hastings Toone, John Francis Davis and
Thomas Manning. Mr. Samuel Ball, senior Tea Inspector, also
joined the entourage of Lord Amherst ( S 3).
As a result of the embassy several books were written.
One of these was by Robert Morrison, but it was published at
(82) cfr. Preface; William Milne, A retrospect of the first ten years
of the Protestant Mission to China, Malacca, 1820, p. 186.
(83) Morse, Chronicles, p. 295.
Enthusiasts in London soon begun to display considerable interest
in China and the rest of the Far East, and a monthly publication, the
Asiatic Journal was launched at London, in 1816. It appeared regularly
until 1843.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


London ( 84 ). One, a pamphlet, by Samuel Ball was printed on
the Company’s press at Macao:
Observatiotis on the Expediency of opening a
Second Port in China.
Dated July 2, 1816 the booklet contains an observation
that it was «Written on the occasion of Lord Amherst’s
Embassy to Pekin». A few copies were printed at the Com-
pany’s Press at Macao, early in the year 1817, for private
circulation only ( 85 ),
In the same year Mr, Thoms decided to issue a prospectus
calling the attention of those who might be interested to the
value of Robert Morrison’s Chinese Dictionary:
The public are hereby respectfully informed that
there is now published at Macao, in China, a Dic-
tionary of the Chinese Language; to consist of three
parts...
( 84 ) Morrison’s book describing the Embassy was entitled A Memoir
of the Principal Occurrences during an Embassy from the British Gov-
ernment to the Court of China in the year 1816. London, 1819, in-8,
pp. 68. This was followed by an edition in 1820, also published at London,
while one by Sir G. T. Staunton appeared in 1824, and one by J. F. Davis
was undated. The account by Henry Ellis appeared in 1817, that by
Clarke Abel in 1818, that by J. Wolcott in 1817. One by W. A. Kentish
was undated.
(ss) In his booklet Mr. Ball urges the advantages of trading at
a port closer to the Chinese tea-producing districts and he suggested
that the Company should endeavour to make arrangements to set up
establishments at Fukien. The Select Commitee commented on the idea
and felt it was a good one, but since the Chinese authorities at Canton
would have opposed any change in the commercial set-up in Kwangtung
nothing was done to press the point. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,
Vol. VI, pp. 182-221; Morse, Chronicles, Vol. 111, pp. 313-314.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


The Author of the above work, the Rev. R. Morri-
son, has directed his attention to the collection of
materials for it during the last ten years...
Printed by P. Thoms, Macao, 1817 ( S 6).
Robert Morrison also decided to publish separately some
material which he had gathered, of an informative nature, on
the history, geography, administration and aspects of Chinese
culture and philosophy, or connected with China, which he had
originally intended incorporating in his dictionary. He felt
that this could very well be used as a short work of reference,
with this information carefully set out, and that it would be
welcomed by those keen on obtaining a vade-mecum of this
nature. He decided, therefore, to ask the Select Committee to
approve the idea, and the book appeared in 1817:
A View of China, for Philological Purposes;
containing a Sketch of Chinese Chronology, Geog-
raphy, Government, Religion & Customs. Designed
for the use of persons who study the Chinese Lan-
guage.
The book proved to be popular and there was an instant
demand for copies in the United Kingdom, the U. S. A., and
elsewhere ( 87 ).
(so) According to Henri Cordier a copy of this Prospectus, which
also contains a list of the subscribers, may be seen in the Vatican Library.
(H. Cordier, Bibliotheca Sinica, Col. 3901). A notice concerning the
publication of the Dictionary also appeared in The East India Register
and Directory for 1817 a facsimile of which appears in L, Ride, Robert
Morrison: the Scholar and the Man, Hong Kong, 1957, p. 14.
( 8 ') In London, Antonio Montucci, an Italian Orientalist who, like
Morrison, was interested in compiling a Chinese dictionary, published a
study to which he gave the title: [ Urh-Chih-Tsze-Teen-Se-Yin-Pe-Keaou ];
being a Parallel drawn between the two Intended Chinese Dictionaries:
by the Rev. Robert Morrison, and Antonio Montucci, LL, D. ... together
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Another little book appeared in 1818. It was written by
Robert Morrison and although some bibliographers have stated
that it was printed at Macao, there is good reason to believe
that it was printed at Malacca:
Familiar Lectures on the Philippians, delivered
at Macao hy Robert Morrison, [n.p,, n.d.] in-12, pp.
v. 280.
Morrison went on steadily with his Dictionary and Thoms
was kept busy at the printing press with the material which
was turned over to him. In 1819, the first volume of Part II
of the Dictionary appeared. It was somewhat bulkier than
Part I, and bore the litle:
A Dictionary of the Chinese Language, in Three
Parts. Part the Second. Chinese and English, arranged
phonetically.
Like its predecessor this book was accepted as an impor-
tant contribution to the study of Chinese. The author was
encouraged to greater efforts and had the satisfaction of
with Morrison’s Horae Sinicae, a new edition, with the Text to the Popular
Chinese Primer San-Tsi-King. London: printed for the Author ... 1817.
This book does not seem to have created a stir among scholars, and
Montucci’s projected dictionary was probably never completed.
A small book by J. F. Davis, of the East India Company’s estab-
lishment in China, appeared at London, (Lao Sing Urh): «An heir in his
old age». A Chinese drama, translated from the original Chinese: to
which is prefixed a brief view of the Chinese drama and of their theatrical
exhibitions, London, 1817 in-8, pp. 164.
This year (1817) also saw the beginning of the Indo-Chinese Gleaner,
edited by Wm. Milne and printed at Malacca. It appeared irregularly
until 1822, 20 numbers in all. Milne and Morrison were the principal
contributors. Many of its papers were reprinted in The Chinese Repository
(see pp. 96-97 infra).
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


seeing the second volume of this part completed a year later.
The printer kept pace with the author’s assiduity and the new
book appeared in the same year ( 88 ).
In order to be able to carry out his work more effectively
Mr. Thoms had himself been taking an interest in the study
of Chinese and had made such progress that he was able
to translate a Chinese story into English. This he did so
commendably that the book proved to be quite popular at the
time among those interested in the subject:
The Affectionate Pair, or the History of Sun-
kin. A Chinese tale. Translated from the Chinese by
P. P. Thoms.
This little book was printed at Macao.
Five years had elapsed since the first volume of the
Chinese Dictionary had appeared and thirteen years since
Robert Morrison had arrived in China. From 1817 all those
connected with the publication of the Dictionary had been
concentrating wholeheartedly on the work, and Thoms had
the satisfaction of finishing the last three volumes during the
years 1822 and 1823, thus completing the six-volume set of the
Dictionary ( 89 ).
MACAO’S FIRST NEWSPAPERS
Late in 1821 word reached Macao that changes had taken
place in Portugal and that the British High Command, which
had been governing the country during the Napoleonic War
(ss) a reprint of the Second Part of Morrison’s Dictionary was
made by the London Mission Press, at Shanghai in 1865, in 2 vols.
(89) a short book of a different nature appeared at London in 1820.
By John Slade, it was entitled, Notices on the British Trade to the Port
of Canton, in-8, pp 104.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of -printing at Macao


and for over a decade after its conclusion, had had to relin-
quish control of Portugal. A Portuguese contitutional assembly
was convoked and provision was made for a monarchy with
only suspensory powers, while reforms of many kinds were
announced. Among these was the right to print not only in
the Mother Country but in all the overseas provinces as well.
The tussle for power dragged on, however, and finally
there emerged two parties: the Constitutionalists (Conserv-
atives) , who favoured the restoration of the old King John VI
and his son Pedro, and the Absolutists, who were on the side
of the anti-British Prince Miguel, the younger son of King
John. The latter party was also known as the Miguelistas.
At Macao the Conservatives were turned out of office by
the adherents of the Absolutist party, under Major Paulino da
Silva Barbosa, and they maintained themselves at the head of
affairs for about a year.
Under this party the first newspaper in Macao was
published. It went under the name of:
A ABELHA DA CHINA ( 90).
The first number appeared on Thursday, Sept, 12, 1822,
and it was bom, like its sponsors, in an atmosphere of political
disquiet, its career being punctuated by quarrels involving the
people of Macao. The members of the group which ran this
(90) Translated literally this would read: «The Bee of China*. No
reason seems to have been given as to why this title was chosen, but
there was a newspaper with a similar name in Portuguese India. It has
been suggested somewhat sarcastically by C. A. Montalto de Jesus,
Historic Macao, Macao, 1926. p. 279: that this newspaper went buzzing
with the characteristic turbulence of that [the Dominican] monastic
order, the Abelha proved a veritable wasp for the conservative party*.
There is nothing to show, however, that the idea of stinging their oppo-
nents to anger motivated the choice of the title, the bee being noted also
for its industry.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


One of the issues of Macao’s first newspaper, A Abelha da China, 1822-1823.
(From the author’s collection)


Title-page of an early product of the English East India Company’s
printing press at Macao.
(From the author's collection)


paper attempted, through its columns, to impose upon the
people of Macao the opinions and feelings of the men who
sought to rule the little settlement in those days.
Published weekly, A Ahelha da China was generally of
4 pages. In size it was a quarto sheet, printed in small type
on Chinese-made paper and, owing to the quality of the paper
used, it is surprising that any copies have survived. It had for
editor the hot-tempered prior of the Dominican order at Macao,
Frey Antonio de S. Gonzaga de Amarante.
This journal printed not only the views and orders of the
political party in power but, when short of material, also
reproduced a number of contemporary documents, including
Chinese documents in Portuguese translation. When there was
lack of material a few older documents and miscellaneous
information also appeared in its columns. So far as it has been
possible to ascertain complete collections of this paper are
not known to exist now in any library ( 91 ).
Among articles of interest published in A Abelha da China,
during the short-lived existence of this journal, may be
mentioned:
Notes and Information sent hy the Secretary of
State for Overseas * Affairs in connection with instruc-
tions to he drawn up at Goa for the guidance of the
of the Bishop of Peking as regards dealings with the
Chinese respecting Macao.
This document had been sent by the Viceroy to the
Governor of Macao, Senhor Bernardo Aleixo de Lemos
(9i) A complete collection was to be found, with other early Macao
newspapers, in the Macao Club Library. Another complete collection was
in the office of the Procurator of Macao, and Mr. Aureolano Jorge, Macao,
is reported to have had a collection which was believed to be almost
complete. These collections have disappeared, having fallen victims to
white ants and other insects. An incomplete collections is said to exist in
the Biblioteca Nacional de Lisboa, at Lisbon.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Faria, in 1784. The Macao original has not survived but
a copy may be seen at Lisbon,
View on Counsellor Miguel de Arriaga Brum da
Silveira and the state of his affairs.
A scathing attack on the judge, who, leader of the
Conservative party, had escaped to Canton. It held up the
Judge to ridicule for engaging in business and for the
sorry results which followed. It was written by Francisco
Jose da Paiva and appeared on November 14, 1822.
Letter from the Governor of Portuguese India to
the Leal Senado (the Municipal Government) of
Macao.
These letters were dated at Goa April 11, 1823, April
20, 1823 and April 24, 1823, respectively. They were
published on June 26, 1823.
Supplement to «A Abelha da China» } dated July
io, ms.
contains correspondence exchanged with the Chinese
authorities regarding the presence of the Portuguese fri-
gate Salamandra, transcriptions of documents connected
with a public meeting held at the Leal Senado on June 16,
1823, and extracts from the «Gazeta de Goa», dated March
1, 1823 and April 12,1823, regarding the political situation
at Macao.
Letters exchanged between the Leal Senado and
several citizens.
Among the letters published were those by Baron
S. Joao do Porto Alegre, Counsellor Manoel Pereira,
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Domingos Pio Marques, Rev. Father Jose Joaquim Pereira
de Miranda, Rafael Bottado d’Almeida, Claudio Adriano
da Costa, Ludgero Joaquim da Faria Neves and others.
Minutes of Council Meetings and correspondence
on the political situation at Macao.
Published on July 24, 1823.
Letters from the Governor-General of Goa, dated
April 21f } 1823 and various papers hearing on the
situation at Macao and in Portugal .
Published on August 21, 1823.
Extracts [so-called] from newspapers published
at Paris, London and New York on the political
situation in Portugal and other matters.
Published on August, 28, 1823.
Every issue of A Ahelha da China, bore the words:
«Visado pela censura» (Passed by the censorship), or «Printed
at the Government Printery». This requirement in the case
of every Portuguese and Chinese publication at Macao has
been maintained to the present day ( 02 ). As has been stated
repeatedly, the foreigners at Macao were not required, until
modem times, to get prior approval for their books and news-
papers, although censorship was, and still is, the law in Por-
tugal and its provinces overseas.
(92) Excepting for a short period from August 11, 1842, when the
Government Council at Macao abolished the Board of Censors, until 1844,
when Governor Jos6 Gregorio Pegado, on instructions from Lisbon,
reintroduced it, and after the establishment of th© Portuguese Republic,
1910, for a short time.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


When the «absolutist party was overthrown, the editor
and others connected with this journal escaped to Canton
(Sept. 23, 1823) and thence to India. The newspaper then
became the organ of the «Conservatives;-), with Mr. Antonio
Jose da Rocha nominated as editor ( 03 ).
The Conservative party, when it returned to power, called
the newspaper «an aggressive journal», although Robert
Morrison, then living at Macao, and without knowing much
about the political background, called it «a liberal attempt
which the restoration of legitimate power has suppressed.» ( 04 )
The last number appeared on Dec. 27, 1823, when it was
replaced by the more moderate,
GAZETA DE MACAO
the first number of which appeared on Jan. 3, 1824, the last
number on Dec. 30, 1826.
Printed at the Senate, this paper was of a semi-official
character, but it contained social news and other material of
a serious nature. The nominal editor was Antonio Jose da
Rocha but the paper was directed by Frey Jose da Conceigao,
prior of the Augustinian monastery, where the editorial office
was situated.
This newspaper served as the vehicle for the publication
of governmental orders and important news from Portugal,
and Portuguese translations of correspondence exchanged with
the Chinese officials, on subjects like the foreign traders
(principally British) at Canton, on the anchoring of foreign
ships at Lintin Island, the opium traffic, &c.
(os) Frey S. Gonzalo de Amarante with Domingos Jos6 Gomes and
J 05,0 Nepomuceno Maher managed to get away to Canton where they
took ship for Calcutta some months later. The «aggressive> number,
dated August 28, 1823, was, by order of the Court, burned at the gate of
the Provincial Court of Justice.
(94) Morrison’s Memoirs, Vol. 11, p. 383,
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


The subject of trade at Macao was also favoured in
this paper’s early days. An important item of news was the
reference to the arrivals and departures of ships, with the
names of their captains and often those of the passengers and
particulars of some of the goods carried. Beginning with the
issue of March 20, 1824, price lists of merchandise on sale at
Canton were published. Particulars of goods listed in the
Macao Customs were also given.
Correspondence between the authorities and some of
Macao’s citizens was published. Among these were Counsellor
Miguel Arriaga, Simao Vicente da Roza, Barao de S. Joao de
Porto Alegre and Joao de Deus de Castro.
When material of local interest was difficult to get, long
extracts from European newspapers, from places like Lisbon,
Madrid, Paris, London, Barcelona, St. Petersburg, Rome, and
even Trieste, Odessa, Cadiz, Bayonne, Gibraltar and other
places found their way into the columns of Gazeta de Macao.
News items from the United States of America and South
American countries were also published in the Macao news-
paper. Among articles of historical interest were some about
the Portuguese in Japan and Burma, but these were few and
far between.
The editors seem to have run out of material of local
interest by the end of 1825 and this newspaper was generally
filled with extracts from newspapers from places all over the
world. It is not surprising that the public lost interest and the
newspaper closed down for want of support.
The printing press was subsequently lent to the College
of St. Joseph, where it did very useful work in the printing
of several books and for training Portuguese lads as printers
and compositors. This training stood the young men in good
stead, later, in Hong IKong, where for many years the only
printers and compositors were Portuguese from Macao.
With the closure of the Gazeta de Macao, the Portuguese
reading public at Macao were left without a newspaper in
Portuguese published locally for nearly eight years.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Mention must also be made of a number of small publica-
tions, and in Robert Morrison’s Memoirs may be seen references
to several other papers, some being transcribed in extenso.
But as it is not clear whether they were in manuscript form
or from printed copies, these are not included in the present
list of titles of books published at the East India Company’s
printing press at Macao ( 95 ).
Among the books which were certainly published at Macao
may be mentioned:
A Grammar of the English Language. For the
use of the Anglo-Chinese College. By Rev. Robert
Morrison ( 06 ).
CHien Wun Shoo) Chinese Moral Maxims, with
a free and verbal translation; affording examples of
the Grammatical Structure of the Language. Compiled
by J. F. Davis.
(95) Morrison, Memoirs, Vol. 11. Appendix, pp. 7-10; 11-32; 33-39;
39-42; S. Kidd, Critical Notices of Dr. Morrison’s Literary Labours, as
an appendix in Memoirs, Vol. 11.
(96) As the title indicates, this was a small textbook, and should
not be confused with an earlier work by Morrison, A Grammar of the
Chinese Language by the Rev. Robert Morrison. Printed at the Mission
Press, Serampore, 1815, in-4, pp. vi, 280. (Sent by the East India Com-
pany’s Select Committee to India in 1811, publication did not take place
until 1815). According to H. Cordier, Bibliotheca Sinica, Vol. 111, Col.
1661-2, the original manuscript was to be found [in October, 1873] among
the books in the Hong Kong City Hall Library, a copy book of 168 pp.,
signed: «Macao, April 2nd, 1811». It is not known if this manuscript was
still in the City Hall Library when formal authorisation was given in 1914
for this library to be transferred to the custody of the Hong Kong Uni-
versity; it is not in the University Library now.
A little spate of books appeared at London in 1822/23, when the
following are recorded: J. F. Davis, Chinese Novels, Proverbs, etc.;
London, 1822; G. T. Staunton, Miscellaneous Notices of China, London,
1822; G. T. Staunton, Corrected Speeches on the China Trade, London,
1822; Peter Dobell, Narrative of a residence in China, London, 1823.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


With the completion of the Chinese-English Dictionary,
Mr. Thoms’ agreement with the Honourable East India Com-
pany ended, and the Select Committee, having received instruc-
tions from the Directors in London to limit their expenditure
on the printing press to not more than 1,500 taels (about £450)
a year, had no alterantive but to inform Mr. Thoms that he
should return to England by one of the ships leaving for
England in 1823. This gentleman asked, however, to be
permitted to remain in China for another year, undertaking
to run the printing press for the sum to which the Company
had been restricted ( 97 ).
There are quite a number of references in the records of
the East India Company to the printing press and its work,
as well as to P. P. Thoms. From these references it can be
seen that the expenses generally amounted annually to:
Mr. Thoms’ salary $1,250
House rent 125
Other expenditure (average) 5,253
which was not low, for in endeavouring to arrive at its modern
equivalent we have to multiply this by about twenty to twenty-
five. It is obvious that the sums indicated do not include other
(97) H. B. Morse, Chronicles, Vol. 111, pp. 209, 240, 251-2, 313, 327,
343 passim.
The publication by F. Kelly of Oriental Meteorology at London, in
1822, and by John White of History of a voyage in the China Sea at Boston,
In 1823, served to draw the attention of many to what was going on at
the South China coast, of useful work by a small group of enthusiasts.
Further evidence of this came from a small book, printed at the Mission
Press, Malacca, lauding the services of William Milne and written by
Robert Morrison: Memoirs of the Rev. William Milne, late Missionary
to China and Principal of the Anglo-Chinese College: compiled from
Documents written by the Deceased; to which are added occasional
Remarks Malacca, 1824. A short sketch based on this work appeared
at Dublin in 1825: Memoir of Rev. W. Milne, late missionary at Malacca.
(See note 57 supra).
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


expenses in England, passages and other items which must
have been lumped together with other disbursements ( 98 ).
Mr. Thoms brought out two more books before leaving
the Far East:
A Vocabulary containing Chinese words and
phrases peculiar to Canton and Macao and to the
Trade of those Places; together with the titles and
address of all the Officers of Government, Hong
Merchants, etc., etc. Alphabetically arranged, and
intended as an Aid to Correspondence and Conversa-
tion in the Native Language.
The author’s name does not appear in the book but it is
known that it was written by J. F. Davis. This was a useful
little work, and has served as the model for later books on
the same lines (").
Another book by Mr. Thoms himself completes this
printer’s direct connection with printing at Macao:
Hwa Tsien (the Flower's Leaf), Chinese Court-
ship. In verse. To which is added an Appendix treating
of the Revenue of China, etc., etc. By Peter Perring
Thoms.
The printed story is accompanied by the text, and although
it is written in heptameters in the original, it is a very prosaic
composition. An appendix of forty pages contains many notices
of the revenue of China and other matters ( 10 °).
(os) Morse, Chronicles, Vol. IV, pp. 89 and 98.
(99) H. Cordier, Bibliotheca Sinica, Vol. 111, cols. 1595-6.
(100) in London several books about China were published in 1824.
Robert Morrison was the author of a book which was published, entitled
Translation of a Singular Proclamation issued by the Fooyuen of Canton,
London, in-4. Other books appearing in the same year were M. Breton’s
84
56
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


A WIDENING HORIZON
From the East India Company’s records, so painstakingly
edited by H. B. Morse, it can be seen that «Mr. Thoms, the
printer, returned to England by the Company’s ship London
in March, 1825». As he sailed from the Pearl River, Thoms
must have stood at the railing as the vessel swept past Macao,
and as he took his last look at the place where he had spent
some of the best years of his life, the printer might have given
a thought to his contribution, albeit an important one, to
a chapter in Macao’s and the Western impact on the Far
East ( 101 ).
In this humble printer, Morrison had a loyal hero-wor-
shipper, for Thoms’ interest in Robert Morrison’s work did
not cease with his departure from Macao. After the mis-
sionary’s death, when Mrs. Eliza Morrison Robert Morrison’s
second wife, who did not know a very great deal about the
details of his early career at Macao was compiling the
Memoirs, she turned to Thoms not only to print the book but
also for information for the commentaries on the letters and
other papers in her task ( 102 ).
China, its Costumes, Arts, dc., in four volumes and China: Dialogues
between a Father and his two children concerning the history and present
state of that country. By an Anglo-Chinese, [Robert Morrison] in-24,
pp. 120.
(101) Morse, Chronicles, Vol. IV, p. 98.
(102) The book appeared at London, in 1839, in two volumes, printed
by «P. P. Thoms, at 12, Warwick Square*. The full title of this book
reads:
MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE AND LABOURS OF ROBERT
MORRISON, D, D. F. R. S., M. R. A. S., Member of the Society
Asiatique of Paris, dc. dc. compiled by his widow; with
critical notices of his Chinese works, by Samuel Kidd, and
An Appendix containing Original Documents, («He being
dead yet speaketh » — Heb., XII, 4), in two volumes. London:
London: Longman, Orme, Brown, Green, and Longmans.
MDCCCXXXIX.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


With the departure of Mr. Thoms there appears to have
been a slackening of interest in the Honourable Company’s
printing press for a few years, although it is possible that
books were actually printed but have not been recorded in the
standard bibliographies of early Western printing in the Far
East ( 103 ).
The year 1824 marks yet another important event in the
story of the bibliography of Macao by the publication at Lis-
bon of a book dealing exclusively with Macao after a silence
of nearly two centuries. The last recorded book having to do
with a subject solely about Macao and published was Father
Joao Marques Moreira’s Relagdo da magestosa, misteriosa, e
notavel acclamagam, que se fez a Magestade d’El Rey Dom
Joam o IV nosso Senhor na Cidade do nome de Deos do grande
Imperio da China, & festas que se fizerdo pelos Senhores do
Govemo publico, & outras pessoas particulars. Lisboa, Domin-
gos Lopes Rosa, 1644. Other books published had contained
references to Macao, including xylographic works printed in
China, but these were passing references.
(103) After completing the Dictionary Robert Morrison visited
Malacca and then returning to Macao he sailed for England. He arrived
there early in 1824. His reputation had been made and he had already in
1818, been made a Doctor of Divinity. In England the Royal Society
elected him a Fellow and he spent two years in the country, preaching,
attending meetings of learned societies, consulted by many, and writing
a great deal about China. A book, started during his voyage home, China:
Dialogues, dc. (See p. 81 supra) was published soon after arrival, and
in 1826 another book by the same writer appeared: A Parting Memorial:
consisting of Miscellaneous Discourses, written and preached in China;
at Singapore; on board Ship at Sea, in the Indian Ocean; at the Cape
of Good Hope; and in England. With Remarks on the Missions, dc., dc.
By Robert Morrison, D. D., F. R. 8., M. R. A. S., President of the Anglo-
-Chinese College; Member of the Soctete Asiatique of Paris; Author of a
Chinese Dictionary; Translator of the Sacred, Scriptures dc., London,
W. Simpkin d Marshall, 1826.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Written by Jose Ignacio Andrade, a merchant trading
between Macao and British India, the new book was entitled:
Memoria sobre a destruigdo dos piratas da China,
de que era chefe o celebre Cam Pau sai; e o desem-
barque dos Inglezes na cidade de Macao e sua reti-
rada. Impressdo Regia, Lisboa, 1824. 83 pp. ( 104 ).
It appeared first as an article, written anonymously, which
appeared in Mnemosine Lusitana, Lisbon, 1817, Vol. 11, N.° 4.
This book gave to the Judge, Senhor Miguel de Arriaga,
the credit for the arrangements with the Chinese authorities
which led to the surrender of the pirates under the leadership
of Cheung Pao-tsai. This band of miscreants had terrorized
the South China seas, operating out of Hong Kong and Lantao
waters for nearly a generation, and the Chinese had approached
the Portuguese for their co-operation in carrying out a naval
operation. This operation had proved successful, but a dispute
had raged at Macao over the circustances of the operations.
The Governor, Senhor Lucas Alvarenga, felt slighted over
Andrade’s book and published his own version of the matter
in a book which appeared in Brazil:
Memoria sobre a expedigdo do governo de Macao
em 1809, e 1810, em socorro ao Imperio da China
contra os insurgentes piratas chinezes, principiada, e
concluido em seis mezes pelo Governador e capitdo
general daquela cidade, Lucas Jose Alvarenga, auten-
ticada com documentos justificativos. Escrita por
Lucas Jose Alvarenga em Dezembro de 1827. Rio de
Janeiro, 1828.
(104) a new edition, greatly expanded, was published, also at Lisbon,
in 1835.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


One of the first books, if not the first, to appear since
Father Rodrigues’ book in 1620, printed at Macao appears to
have been a peculiar pamphlet, published in 1827. It bears no
title, name of author or date of publication, but from internal
evidence it can be seen that it was printed in 1827:
Questdo entre dois hoticdrios, iii, 10 pp. and iv,
10 pp.
Curiously enough, it appeared in Portuguese and English.
The subject, at this distance of time, does not seem important,
but to the protagonists of the dispute beween the contending
parties, over the right to operate a pharmacy, it appears to
have been a matter of moment.
Meanwhile the number of foreigners in China and Macao
increased, as more and more private merchants, looking for
trade opportunities in South China, got permission to live in
Macao. It was left to one of the private merchants to think of
bringing out another printing press, and to Mr. Alexander
Matheson, brother of Mr, James Matheson, and like the latter
a partner of Magniac & Co., the foreign community was
indebted for the facilities which led to the setting up, in 1827,
of the first newspaper in English,
This was a weekly known as
THE CANTON REGISTER
the first number of which appeared on November 8, 1827.
Started at Canton, this newspaper removed to Macao when the
foreign merchants had to leave at the end of each trading
season. It was printed, thus, at Canton for six months of the
year and at Macao during the other six. When there were
difficulties with the mandarins at Canton, however, the
printing press remained at Macao.
For editor, the paper had Mr. W. W. Wood, an American
from Philadelphia, «son of the famous tragedian of that city».
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


He arrived in 1825 and «was quite equal to Chinnery in wit
and metaphor, while over their mutual disfigurement each one
insisted that he was the most marked of the two.» ( 105 ) He was
not only editor but also compositor. The paper was of a
commercial and social character, publishing in addition to
important references to the occurrences of the time, articles
on China and the Chinese, and even at times on Macao and
the Portuguese ( 10(i ).
Robert Morrison was asked to write for the paper, being
paid £75 a year for his contributions «to be bestowed on any
benevolent institution he chose.» «To-day», commented Morri-
son, «I have written about three sheets for the Canton Register.
Mr. Wood and Mr. ... have no knowledge of Chinese; nor do
they seem to have any talent in collecting information from
the natives. I have nothing to do with the paper beyond sending
a paragraph. I think it right to encourage the thing.» ( 107 )
«In addition to a full register of the mercantile transac-
tions of Canton, it contains a great variety of notices of the
manners, customs, etc. of the Chinese and other eastern
nations. Almost every page of the Register has been filled with
original matter; and it is this which has given it particular
value abroad, where it has done much to direct public attention
to the Chinese.» ( 10S ).
(los) William C. Hunter, Bits of old China, 1911, pp. 270-1, where
Wood is described as being «awfully pock-marked; his face resembled
a pine cone, but his expression was one of very good humour and full
of intelligence. He was besides well educated and a most gentlemanly
fellow».
(ioc) The Macao issues of the paper were printed at the office of
Magniac & 00., to be known after 1832 as Jardine, Matheson & Co., at
No. 1, Rua do Hospital. The house was a fine one and could be seen until
1944 when it was pulled down to avoid collapse.
(ioi) H. Cordier, Bibliotheca Sinica, Vol. HI, cols. 2285-6; Morrison’s
Memoirs, Vol. 11, p. 384.
(los) The Chinese Repository, Vol. 11, 1833, pp. 6-7.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of 'printing at Macao


In 1831, Wood resigned from the Register to join Russell
& Co. Printers’ ink was in his blood, however, and he started
the Chinese Courier and Canton Gazette the first number of
which appeared on July 28, 1831 ( 109 ). Mr. John Slade joined
The Canton Register as editor in succession to Mr. Wood,
staying with the paper as its editor until 1843.
The Canton Register had a commercial supplement known
as the Canton General Price Current, which began in 1833 and
appeared at intervals ( 110 ).
At Canton the Chinese officials ignored the printing press,
which was turning out a newspaper for the British and other
foreigners. This opened the way for other presses when these
came to be set up. In Macao the Portuguese authorities also
chose to look the other way, nor did they require the publishers
of these foreign newspapers to toe the line in the matter of
the censorship regulations. It was, thus, after the E. I. Com-
pany’s printery, the second foreign printing press to carry on
printing freely at Macao.
By this time the Portuguese priests were busy with their
printing at St. Joseph’s Seminary, on the press which had
been lent to them early in 1827 after the Gazeta de Macao
closed down. Among the priests at the Seminary was Father
Joaquim Afonso Gongalves, who had dedicated himself to the
study of Chinese. He was no longer a young man when he
reached Macao, but by dint of careful attention to the subject
(109) The Courier came out subsequently every Saturday. A few
copies for the year 1833 may be seen in the Hong Kong University Library.
(See p. 93 infra).
(no) The Canton Register continued with this name until it was
transferred from Macao to Hong Kong when the paper was changed to
THE HONG KONG late CANTON REGISTER, appearing on June 20,
1843 with Mr. John Cairns as its publisher and editor. The last number
appeared on Dec. 31, 1859 when Mr. Robert Strachan was editor. The
supplement was known as Hong Kong Register: The Overland Register
and Price Current, which began on August 30, 1815. (Cordier, Bibliotheca
Sinica, Vol. 111, Cols. 2285-6).
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


and very hard work he made steady progress and gained
considerable proficiency. He set himself the task of producing
text-books in Chinese for Portuguese students, with the object
of encouraging young men to take up the study of the lan-
guage. In this he was successful and several young Portuguese
learned to be good interpreters.
The first of Father Gonsalves’ books to appear was:
Grammatica Latina, ad usum Sinensium Juvenum post
longam experientiam redacta, a J. A. Gongalves
Congregationis Missionis preshytero post longam
experientiam redacta et Macao in regalo collegio
Sancti Joseph Facultate regia typis mandata. Tipo-
grafia do Semindrio, Macao, 1828 in-8, pp. 232,
This was followed by an excellent book by the same priest:
Arte China, constante de alphabeto e grammatica,
comprehendendo modelos das differentes composi-
goes, composta por J. A. Gongalves. Sacerdote da
Congregagdo da Missdo. Impressa com licenga regia
real collegio de S. Jose, Macao, Anno de 1829 ( m ).
Meanwhile arrangements were made to give new life to
the East India Company’s printing press. H. B. Morse makes
no mention of this in the Chronicles but on at least five title-
pages there appear the names «G. J. Steyn and Brother» as
working at the East-India Company’s Press. The names of
these two printers do not figure in any lists of foreign
(in) A version in French of the second of these two books appeared
at Paris in 1876, while a Franco-Ohinese book of dialogue based on the
same book was published in 1878, also at Paris.
In both these books the words, respectively, «Facultate Regia»
and «com licenga regia» indicate that they had been approved by the
censorship.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


residents having to do with that period which we have been
able to consult. Several other books and pamphlets bearing
no printers’ names have also been recorded.
Thus, after an interval of four years, the East India Com-
pany’s printing press came to life again, and we find:
Vocabulary of the Canton Dialect, By R. Morri-
son. Part I English and Chinese; Part II Chinese
and English; Part 111 Chinese words and phrases.
Macao, China. Printed at the Honourable East India
Company's Press by G. J. Steyn and Brother.
An interesting little book about Macao appeared in Por-
tugal in 1828, Memoria sobre Macao, written by Colonel Jose
de Aquino Guimaraes e Freitas; it was published at Coimbra.
This officer had served in the garrison at Macao from 1815 to
1822 and had taken sufficient interest in the place to make notes
of much that he had observed. His book is not a comprehensive
work but it possesses the merit of being one of the earliest
of its kind to deal with the little Portuguese outpost in the Far
East ( 112 ).
There is another silence for three years, both at the East
India Company’s press and St. Joseph’s Seminary, for bibliog-
raphers do not seem to have recorded any new publications as
appearing until 1831.
(112) A second edition followed in the same year.
Interest in China’s trade had been growing steadily in Britain and
an important little book appeared at London in 1829: Facts relating to
Chinese Commerce in a Letter from a British Resident in China to his
friend in England. London, J. M. Richardson, 1829, in-8, pp. viii, 66.
In London, too, there appeared J. F. Davis’ The Fortunate Union. Trans-
lated from the Chinese, 2 vols., London, 1829, in-8; and On the poetry of
the Chinese, by the same author, London, 1829: Sir G. T. Staunton’s Mis-
cellaneous Notices of China, Part 11, London, 1828; Sir G. T. Staunton’s
Remarks on the British Relations with China and the Proposed Plans
for improving them, London, 1830, in-8, pp. 43. W. W. Wood's Sketches
of China, Philadelphia, 1830, in-12, pp. 250 should also be mentioned.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Father Gongalves published another work in this year:
Dicciondrio Portuguez-China, no estylo vulgar
mandarim, e cldssico geral, composto por J. A. Gongal-
ves, Sacerdote da Congregagdo da Missdo, M. R. A. S.
A book made its appearance at Rio de Janeiro in 1831,
describing the grounding at Balabak Island, in the East Indies,
of a Macao ship, the Nova Aurora, on her way from Batavia
to Macao, on September 23, 1827. The vessel was attacked by
some 200 Malays in sixteen praus, but the crew managed to
beat off the attempted boardings. Eventually the officers and
men escaped in the ship’s boats and, after various adventures,
reached Singapore, not before several of them succumbed to
their injuries and privations. The author of this little tome
was Bartholomeu Antonio Tavares, one of the officers ( 113 ).
The East India Company’s printing press was also busy
and produced, in 1831, one book, a few pamphlets, and began
the publication of a very interesting magazine. The book:
The Anglo-Chinese Kalendar and Register, for
the year of the Christian AEra 1831, corresponding
with the Twenty-eighth year of the Chinese cycle of
sixty years. Printed at the East India Company’s
Press, by G. J. Steyn and Brother, Macao, China,
1831. in-8.
The compiler of this book, John Robert Morrison, son of
Robert Morrison, was only seventeen years old when he brought
out this effort. He had returned to Macao after seven years
(ns) Historia do naufragio accontecido em 1827 ao navio portuguez
NOVA AURORA da praca de Macao do proprietario e capitdo Vicente
Francisco Baptista. Aventuras dos naufragos, e outros successes que
experimentarido em onze mezes, e dezoito dias ate chegarem a Sincapora.
Rio de Janeiro, na Typografia Nacional, 1831,
65
65


of schooling in England and, under the guidance of his father,
he began at an early age a short but useful career in Macao,
Canton and, later, Hong Kong ( 114 ).
The preface to the book reads: «A comparative English,
Chinese and Malayan Kalendar was contemplated by the late
Dr. Milne of the Anglo-Chinese College, a short period previous
to his death, but no individual of that institution has, since
that much lamented event, fulfilled his intention. The work
now published was commenced some months back with a view
merely to private distribution; but Mr. Marjoribanks, the
President of the Select Committee of the British Factory,
having liberally offered the use of the Honourable Company’s
Press, it is now printed for more general circulation, in the
hope that, imperfect as it is, it may prove useful to those who
visit the Ports of the Eastern Archipelago and of China.»
A number of notifications came from the Company’s press
at this time, among them:
NOTICE. Com. ce : «Several recent acts of the Chi-
nese Government have compelled the President...»
(Sd.) «R. Hudleston, Secretary,
British Factory,
Macao, 20th May, 1831» ( 115 )
RESOLUTIONS
of the
British Merchants of Canton
Canton, 30th May, 1831 ( 116 )
(114) Young Morrison learned Chinese quickly and, upon his father’s
death, this young man became Interpreter to the H. B. M. Superintendent
of Trade in China, continuing to serve the British authorities when Hong
Kong was established. His untimely death at Hong Kong on August, 29,
1843, brought to an end a life full of promise.
(ns) Reproduced by H. B. Morse, Chronicles, Vol. IV, pp. 301-303.
(no) Reproduced by H. B. Morse, ibid., pp. 310-312.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


NOTICE. Com. 06 «The President, etc., Select
Committee on the 20th Ultimo gave public notice...»
(Sd.) «H. H. Lindsay, Secretary,
British Factory,
Macao, June 10th, 1831.» ( m )
The magazine brought out at the East India Company’s
press was a monthly effort and was entitled
THE CANTON MISCELLANY
The first number appeared in June, 1831 and the last was
dated May, 1832; there were ten numbers in all. In appearance
it was a booklet, of about 80 pages octavo, and each number
was finely bound in silk. The prime mover was Mr. C. Marjori-
banks, President of the Company’s Select Committee in China,
ably seconded by Mr. J. F. Davis.
This journal was of quite a good literary standard, but
the contributions were all anonymous. The articles were varied
in nature, including verse as well as prose. Among the articles
of special interest to Macao were «Brief Notice of Early
Foreign Intercourse with China» and «Of the Portuguese
Settlements in China, principally of Macao.» Though unsigned
it is clear from internal evidence that these were written by
Andrew Ljungsetdt, Chief of the Swedish East India Com-
pany, because, somewhat enlarged, they were subsequently
published at Canton in the form of a small book, in 1832, with
Ljungstedt’s name as the author ( 118 ).
(U 7) Reproduced by H. B. Morse, ibid., pp. 312-313.
Young Morrison had a book published at London, under his name,
Chinese Charms, Talismans, &c., London, 1831, in-4, while C. F, Neumann
published, also at London, History of the Pirates who infested the China
Sea, from 1807 to 1810, London, 1831.
(ns) See p. 94 supra.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Other articles of interest included: «Extracts from an
Unpublished Journal of the Last Embassy [Lord Amherst’s]
to Peking in 1816»; «Sketches of the Court of Solo»; «Analysis
of the Geography of the Province of Canton»; «Observations
on the Meaou-tsze Mountaineers»; «Reflections on India»;
«A Writer’s Farewell to China» (verse); «The Boatman of
Macao» (verse), etc.
The local periodical press was added to by the appearance
of a weekly which bore the name of:
CHINESE COURIER AND CANTON GAZETTE
It made its debut on Thursday, July 28, 1831, with Mr. W.
W. Wood of Russell & Company, an American concern, as its
editor. The newcomer was greeted by the community with
interest for it provided some entertainment, with its witty
comments on people and events. «The Courier has pursued a
course different from that of its ‘contemporary’ [The Canton
Register]. Its pages have been occupied partly with European
intelligence, and partly with local news and notices of
mechanical arts, manufactures, and such like, among the Chi-
nese.» ( 119 ).
On April 14, 1832 the name was changed to THE CHI-
NESE COURIER, with no change in the tone of the paper.
The last number appeared on September 23, 1833 ( 12 °).
(119) The Chinese Repository, Vol. 11, 1833, p. 7.
(120) «The Canton Courier had rather a short life. It criticised some-
what severely certain measures of the East India Company, upon which
the Company stopped taking the 24 copies for which it had subscribed,
and the Courier collapsed. For, in those days, there were few or no adver-
tisements to supplement the income from subscriptions*. (S. W. Williams’
Recollections of China in «Joumal, North China Branch of the Royal
Asiatic Society, New Series*, No. VIII, p. 17),
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


The activity of the printeries continued, thus, into 1832
and several books have been recorded. Among these was a
booklet:
A Catalogue of the Library of the British Factory at
Canton. Macao, 1832, the contents of which are indicated by
the title. The library, a splendid and costly one, had been got
together and maintained at the expense of the East India
Company for the convenience of its staff and their friends.
It has been frequently referred to. Upon the closure of the
Company’s establishment in China, in 1834, the books were
dispersed ( 121 ).
The Anglo-Chinese Kalendar and Register, for the
year of the Christian AEra 1832. Corresponding with
the Twenty-ninth year of the Chinese Cycle of Sixty
Years, which 29th year commences on the 2d. of
February, 1833. With a Companion Macao, China:
Printed at the East-India Company's Press, by G. J.
Steyn and Brother.
Like its predecessor, it was compiled by young Morrison.
That for the year 1833 was also printed at the Company’s
press ( 122 ).
(121) A short description of the library and its contents is to be found
in The Chinese Repositoi'y, Vol. IV, June, 1835, p. 97.
(122) The Chinese Repository commented on this publication: «This
work, the first of the kind ever printed in China, has appeared regularly
for three successive years; but the number of Copies being small they
were all soon disposed of» (Vol. 111, May, 1834, p. 44; H. Cordier, Biblio-
theca Sinica, Cols. 564-5).
There were subsequent editions of the «Kalendar» and its «Com-
paniom. That of 1834 was printed at Morrison’s Albion Press, to be fol-
lowed by editions printed by the Canton Register, compiled by the editor
of this newspaper. Beginning in 1842 it was brought out by The Chinese
Repository until 1855.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Another little book which appeared in the same year was:
Companion to the Anglo-Chinese Calendar } 1832.
It was a supplement to The Anglo-Chinese Kalendar , and
took the form of a booklet in-12.
From the Company’s printing press a book of particular
interest to the Portuguese appeared:
Contribution to an Historical Sketch of the Por-
tuguese Settlements in China, principally of Macao,
of the Portuguese Envoys and Ambassadors to China,
of the Roman Catholic Missions in China and of the
Papal Legates to China. By A. L., Kt., Macao, 1832.
in-8, pp. xiv, 174.
The initials are those of Andrew Ljungstedt and the initial
«Kt.» refers to a decoration «of the Swedish order of Wasa»
which had been conferred on him by his government. The
book was an expansion of the articles, already referred to,
contributed by this writer to The Canton Miscellany. Only 100
copies of this book were printed ( 123 ).
(123) Two years later this book was split into two and, with some
modifications, appeared as articles in The Chinese Repository from which
reprints were made: Portuguese in China: a Contribution to an Historical
Sketch of the Roman Catholic Church at Macao; and The Domestic and
Foreign Relations of Macao, Canton, 1834, This was a continuation of
the earlier book printed at Macao (See The Chinese Repository, Vol. 111,
pp. 289 ff.). A second print appeared, also at Canton. Subsequently a
new and greatly revised edition was published at Boston entitled:
An Historical Sketch of the Portuguese Settlements in China, and
of the Roman Catholic Church and Mission in China. By Sir Andrew
Ljungstedt, Knight of the Swedish Royal Order of Wasa. Boston:
James Munroe & Co., 1836.
Portions of The Historical Sketch were printed at Macao but the
book was completed, after Ljungstedt’s death, at Boston. This book Is
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


A more important work was:
A Dictionary of the Hok-keen Dialect of the Chi-
nese Language, according to the reading and collo-
quial idioms: containing about 12,000 characters, the
sounds and tones of which are accurately marked;
and various examples of their use, taken generally
from approved Chinese authors. Accompanied by a
short historical and statistical account of Hok-keen:
a Treatise on the Orthography of the Hok-keen
Dialect; the necessary indexes, &c. By W. H. Medhurst,
Batavia. Printed at the Honourable East India Com-
pany’s Press, by G. J. Steyn and Brother, Macao
1832. in-4, in 2 columns, pp. 1, xiv, 860.
The printing of this book began under the auspices of the
East India Company’s press, the title-page being printed at
the same time, but work stopped when some 320 pages had
already been finished, as the Company’s offices were closed
down in April, 1834. The second half of the book was completed
at the expense of Messrs. Olyphant & Company, at The Chi-
nese Repository press. Dr. S, Wells Williams directed, at Macao,
the publication of the second stage of this book, and it was
completed by him on «lst June, 1837» ( 124 ).
The year 1832 was notable for the inauguration of
most unfair to Macao and the Portuguese. Montalto de Jesus adds, «to
a great extent the Historical Sketch is the outcome of painstaking re-
searches on the part of two Portuguese scholars. From Professor Miranda
e Lima, who once projected writing a history of Macao himself, Ljungstedt
obtained valuable papers; and from Bishop Saralva, access to a mass of
documents of great historic interest*. (C. A. Montalto de Jesus. Historic
Macao, Hong Kong, 1902, pp. 22-3; Cordier Bibliotheca Sinica, Vol. 3,
Cols. 2310-11).
(124) Cordier, Bibliotheca Sinica, Vol. 111, Cols. 1596-97.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


THE CHINESE REPOSITORY
one of the «most valuable serials ever published in China».
The founder and first editor was the Rev. Elijah Coleman
Bridgman, first American missionary to China, through the
help and financial support of the American merchant Mr. D. W.
C. Olyphant, who provided premises and paid for the press
and equipment, at Canton, and guaranteed the publication
against loss ( 125 ).
The first number appeared in May, 1832, printed at its own
press. «This famous periodical had as its purpose the dissemina-
tion among foreigners not only of missionary news but of
information concerning the laws, customs, history, literature
and current events of the [Chinese] Empire. It performed the
useful task of interpreting China to Westerners who lived
within her gates and who were all to often grossly and con-
temptuously ignorant of her » ( 126 ).
It was a repository, therefore, not only of events
connected with Protestant missionary work but was «a me-
dium of information in matters relating to the extreme East»
while it served the purpose of «enlightening those who are
the patrons of the great work.» In terms of dollars and cents
The Chinese Repository was far from being a success but «its
value as a contemporary chronicle of an important period in
China’s external relations cannot be disputed.»
Begun at Canton this paper and its printery were moved
to Macao in 1835, owing to threats from Chinese rowdies. As
with the printing presses of other foreigners, the Portuguese
authorities did not require its registration; in the same way
the censorship regulations were not enforced in its case.
(123) Olyphant was an enthusiastic supporter of the Protestant
missionaries in China. He it was who provided Morrison with a passage
from New York to Macao, in one of his ships, in 1807. (See p. 46 supra).
(i 26) k. S. Latourette, A History of Christian Missions in China,
New York, 1932.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Dr. Samuel Wells Williams joined the paper in 1833 and
edited it until its closure in 1851 (the year in which Mr. Oly-
phant died), while Mr. Bridgman helped to manage the paper
till 1847. The contributors included several Orientalists, among
them Robert Morrison, Sir G. Staunton, J. F. Davis, James
Legge, John Bowring and others ( m ).
When conditions were favourable, the printing press of
the Repository, went to Canton, and it was there that it closed
down. The stock of the Repository, a large one, was destroyed
in the fire in the Foreign Factories (December 14, 1856). The
final number contained a complete index covering the whole
series of 20 volumes ( 128 ).
Father Gongalves had been working very assiduously on
his dictionaries and in 1833 the printing press of St. Joseph’s
Seminary published:
Dicciondrio China-Portuguez, composto por J. A.
Gongdlves, Sacerdote da Congregaqdo da Missdo.
as the complement of the Portuguese-Chinese dictionary
compiled by the same priest in 1831 ( 12e ),
(127) it is interesting to record that during the year 1838, for several
months, the Boletim do Govemo de Macao was printed at the «Typogra-
phia Macaense». This was the name adopted by Dr. Wells Williams for
the printing press at Macao, to give it legal statu®, with M. M. D. Pegado
as the nominal manager of the establishment. The name of the Boletim
was then absorbed into the Gazeta de Macao, (which used the same title
as its earlier namesake) the first 22 numbers of which, in 1838-39, were
printed at Dr. Wells Williams’ printery.
(128) a reprint of The Chinese Repository was made by the Maruzen
Co., Ltd. of Tokyo, with a Japanese translation. Unfortunately the stock
was destroyed when the publishers’ premises were bombed during the
recent. War. Vols. 1 to 15 have survived as reprints.
(129) This priest continued to work on books of a similar nature
and among his published works printed subsequently were Vocabularium
Latino-Sinicum (1836), Lexicon Manuals Latino-Sinicum (1839), Lexicon
Magnum Latino-Sinicum (18^1)• He left, in manuscript, a Diccionario
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


THE AFFAIR OF «THE ALBION PRESS»
For nearly twenty years, the printery of the Honourable
E. I. Company went on doing its good work. News of the
impending closure of the Company’s office in China had
already, in September, 1832, been received but no instructions
had been issued by the Company’s Select Committee with
regard to the printing press. Nevertheless, Robert Morrison felt
that it would be prudent to acquire a complete printing outfit
from England, and this he did in the same year. Unfortunately
nobody seems to have warned him that the Macao authorities
were giving the foreigners a very special concession to allow
them to do printing at Macao, and he seems to have taken it
for granted that no permission was required. In fact Morrison
was so badly informed about the position that when, in 1822,
the Portuguese authorities at Lisbon decided to permit printing
in the overseas provinces and A Ahelha da China started in
Macao, Morrison reported to London that «the Honourable
Company’s press at Macao has emboldened the New Portuguese
Government to establish a press, and they venture to print and
publish Chinese news».
To justify the inauguration of his new printery, Robert
Morrison wrote, in association with Bridgman, for distribution
in Europe and America, a short review of the first twenty-five
years of the Chinese Mission, pointing out the value of printing
as an aid to evangelical work: «The London Missionary
Society’s press, at the Anglo-Chinese College, Malacca, and
Mr. Medhurst’s at Java, have sent forth millions of pages,
containing the truths of the everlasting Gospel... The Hon.
E. I. Company’s press, to print Dr. Morrison’s Dictionary, was
the first [non-Catholic foreign printery in China]; and now,
both English and Americans endeavour, by the press, to draw
attention to China, and give information concerning it and the
Sinico-Latino and a Versdo do novo testamento em lingua china. Both
these mms. were kept at St. Joseph’s Seminary College at Macao.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


surrounding nations... Preachers, and teachers, and writers,
and printers, in much larger numbers are wanted...»
The importance of printing as the means for spreading
Christian truths is referred to in several places in the sketch:
«...the Scripture Lessons... were printed in China... extracts
from Morrison and Milne’s Chinese version of the Bible...
were carried through the press, Christian Protestant merchants
in China subscribing the necessary funds... Leang-Afa has
printed nine tracts... Kew-Agang has printed Scripture sheet
tracts...» etc. ( 130 ).
Robert Morrison decided also to commence the publication
of a journal, and to this he gave the name of
EVANGELIST AND MISCELLANEA SINICA
to be published at indefinite periods. He stated that he was
of bringing before the Christian [Protestant] commu-
nity, in China, principles of a more decidedly evangelical
character than he considered either [The Canton Register or
The Chinese Repository] was calculated to convey.»
To the printing press was given the name Morrison Albion
Press and, besides the «Evangelist», Morrison printed several
books, pamphlets, prayers and hymns in Chinese, for «as
facilities increased for distributing Christian books among the
natives, by means of European ships going along the coast,
he eagerly availed himself of this means...».
The English missionary reprinted as a tract:
A Sermon preached on hoard the American ship
«Morrison» Macao, 1833.
The «Evangelist and Miscellanea Sinica» was started in
May, 1833, with the name of young J. R. Morrison as editor.
(iso) Morrison’s Memoirs, Vol. 11, pp. 470-474.
Braga, J. M, The beginnings of printing at Macao


Unfortunately the paper published references to the Catholic
faith which the Reverend Capitulary Vicar at Macao held to
be inconvenient, when he was informed of the nature of the
contents of the «Sermon», as well as the «Evangelist». He
wrote to the Governor, Senhor Joao Cabral de Estifique,
pointing out to him that inasmuch as Catholicism was the
state religion of Portugal it would be desirable to suppress the
printing press in a Portuguese possession, since it had not
been authorised.
Dated May 25, 1833, the Vicar’s letter pointed out to the
Governor of Macao that
«an Englishman Robert Morrison, a member and
preacher of one of the various anti-Catholic sects
that exist in England, has for many years past lived
in Macao, residing in one of the houses of Gongalo
da Silveira, where he uses an unregistered printing
press, without obtaining any permission from any
competent authority. Here he publishes, by means of
this press, among other works, some that are opposed
to the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and manifestly
heretical, for they attack the most essential dogmas
of our Religion, with evident contumely of the laws
of Portugal and of the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Authorities of this Territory. This is also in complete
disregard of the prohibition recently issued by the
Directors, in London, of the Honourable Company, to
their employees in China, among which number he
belongs, as an Interpreter of the Chinese language.
«As Capitulary Vicar of this Diocese, I am
compelled in this capacity to protect the Lord’s Flock
from feeding on Doctrines of a pernicious nature and
as such condemned by the Holy Councils and Beliefs
of the Universal Church. I have also to prevent, as
far as possible, the scandal which would be caused
to good Catholics to see, in this Dominion of His Most
10k
76
Braga, J, M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Faithful Majesty, a foreigner who, in promoting his
religion, owns an unregistered printing press; and who
makes use of it with impunity to dogmatise and attack
the Apostolic Roman Catholic Religion (to which the
Portuguese nation belongs exclusively). And I have a
document in my possession to show this.
«I bring to Your Excellency’s knowledge the
enormity of this attack [on our religion], so that as
Governor of this City, you may be pleased to make
use, without delay, of the Authority which has been
confided in you to remedy [the situation], which the
Laws so strictly prohibit and proscribe, for I am
certain that Your Excellency is so filled with zeal to
please such a pious and orthodox Sovereign, as His
Majesty our sovereign is, that I shall have the consola-
tion of knowing that your good offices will be used
to the extent that is to be expected from a Portuguese
governor.
«May God guard Your Excellency for many years.
«(Signed) Ignacio da Silva,
«Capitulary Vicar.
«Macao, May 24, 1833.
«To His Excellency the Governor and Captain
General.» ( 131 )
The Governor seems to have mentioned the matter to the
Select Committee of the East India Company, but Morrison
paid no attention to the warning and brought out another
number of the «Evangelist». This caused Father Ignacio da
(i3i) Register of Communications and Letters from 1838 to 1831/.
Codex 84 of the Macao Senate Archives, ff. 14-14 v.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Silva to write on this occasion to the Senate, and in the course
of his letter he stated:
«It has come to my attention that an English
preacher named Morrison has caused Antichristian
Doctrines to be published, by means of an English
printing press, in this City and Bishopric. This is
undoubtedly against our Country’s laws, and he is not
impeded [from so doing]. On the 25th day of May I
wrote to Their Honours the Governor and the Chief
Justice in accordance with the Royal Orders relating
to similar abuses, for the purpose of bringing about
the measures wished for, which is the cessation and
suppression of such publications.
«I now also make the same request of Your
Honours, as the Authority possessing the obligation
to supervise the foreigners, and I trust that the well
known zeal which Your Honours have in the service
of God and His Majesty will lead you to act, to
suppress as quickly as possible such publications so
that from now onwards this preacher will not practice
the said abuses, nor may any other printery which
may be permitted here do the same.» ( IS2 )
This letter was dated June 1, 1833. The Senate deliberated
on it and decided to move in the matter. They wrote to Father
Ignacio da Silva in the following formal terms;
«To the Illustrious and Most Reverend
Capitulary Vicar, Ignacio da Silva.
«The Loyal Senate has received the communica-
tion written by Your Honour on the Ist of June and,
(132) Codex No. 84 of the Macao Senate Archives: Register of Com-
munications and Letters from 1832 to 1837, if. 15-15 v.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


having taken note of its contents, will take the
measures which are considered necessary.
«May God guard Your Honour for many years.
«Written in Macao, at a Meeting of the Aldermen,
June 8, 1833.
«I, Jose Joaquim Barros, Recorder of the Muni-
cipal Council, have ordered this to be written,
«(Signed) Antdnio Severino Vidigal de Almeida
Claudio Ignacio da Silva
Antonio Joaquim Cortella
Francisco Jose de Paiva
Jose Baptists de Miranda e Lima
«(Sd.) Jos6 Joaquim Barros.» ( IS3 )
There must have been verbal discussions among the
various Portuguese authorities and the English Company’s
afficers, but the archives are silent as to what steps, if any,
were being taken to put the Vicar’s protests into effect. It is
from the records of the East India Company that one is able
to read that the Governor of Macao wrote to the Committee,
on June 20, in the following terms:
«I am informed by the Most Reverend Capitulary Vicar
of this Diocese that Mr. R. Morrison has in his house of this
City, a Press which he uses for the Publication of certain
Works contrary to the Doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church.
But as the use of the Press is prohibited in the Portuguese
Territories, within which it cannot be made use of without
the Royal sanction of his Most Faithful Majesty and under the
restrictions of a previous censorship; I have therefore to
request that as Chief of the British Factory in China, to which
the said Mr. Morrison belongs, you will direct him to abstain
(133) codex No. 84 of the Macao Senate Archives; Register of Com-
munications and Letters from 18S2 to 1831, ff. 15 v.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


from all further use of the above mentioned Press is this
City.» C 13 4)
Mr. Morse adds that the Committee had no wish to oppose
the censorship of the Bishop or of the Governor and on June
20, 1833 instructed their Secretary to inform Mr. Morrison of
their views. A letter was accordingly sent to Dr. Morrison.
A copy of this letter was returned by Dr. Morrison to the
Company, to which he added his own caustic observations.
It is reproduced in Memoirs of the Life and Labours of Robert
Morrison, with his «comments on its several paragraphs...
which he appended to the Committee’s letter»:
«I am directed by the President, and Select Committee, to
transmit to you the enclosed copy of a letter, which has been
addressed to the President by the governor of Macao, from the
contents of which you will perceive he has been informed, by
the vicar general of this diocese, that you possess a printing
press at your house, at which certain works are published
contrary to the doctrines of the Roman Catholic church ( a ), and
that as the use of a printing-press is prohibited in the Por-
tuguese territories ( b ) by the royal authorities, except under the
restriction of a previous censorship ( c ), his Excellency requests
you may be directed to discontinue the employment of your
press in this city.
«In conformity with these regulations of the Portuguese
government, 1 have received instructions from the President
and Select Committee to desire ( d ) that you will suspend the
issue of any further publications from the printing press in
your house at Macao.
«I have the honour to be, Sir,
«Your most obedient servant,
(Sd.) «H. H. Lindsay, Sec.»
(134) h. B. Morse, Chronicles, Vol. IV, pp. 346-347
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


( a ) «Certainly the doctrines of my sermon were not
conformable to those of the Romish Church but they
contained no attack upon it; nor did the Evangelist.
( b ) «It has been fully proved that Macao belongs to
China, and is no part of the territories of the king of Por-
tugal; the claim therefore is usurpation.
(°) «The English Company has had for nearly twenty
years, and still has, a press in Macao, at which whatever
they please to print is issued in Macao, without any pre-
vious censorship.
( d ) «In what capacity do the President and Committee
desire this? regarding me simply as a British subject, or
as in the Company’s employ? Conformity to these regula-
tions would require a censorship, not a discontinuance.
Do the Committee mean to submit their press to censorship
or to discontinue it? Neither.
«I therefore protest against the whole proceeding, as
an act of usurped authority, tyranny and oppression, on
the part of both Portuguese and English, at the bidding
of a Popish priest.
R. Morrison* ( ISS )
«June 20th, 1833.*
Robert Morrison decided to remove the offending printery
to Canton and there he brought out two more numbers of the
Evangelist. This printing press was also used for producing
the Anglo-Chinese Calendar for 1834 and its supplement, the
Companion, as well as the first Commercial Guide, the work
of J. R. Morrison ( 138 ). Various tracts in Chinese were also
printed at this press.
Not satisfied with having to remove his printery to Can-
ton, Robert Morrison contributed an article to the Canton
Register in which he set out his views on censorship generally
(135) Memoirs , Vol. 11, pp. 479-480.
(iso) see supra, pp. 85-86.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


and the liberty of the press. In the course of this article he
observed: «If the Portuguese have not this taste; if they
choose to defer to their priests or vicars-general, whether they
shall read or not, let them do so. But, on the other hand, they
have no right to interdict the production of books or news-
paper for that numerous class frequenting China (and Macao
is an integral part of the Chinese empire) who read the English
language.* ( 137 ).
This article must have come to the notice of the Portu-
guese authorities, although no reference seems to exist in the
Macao archives, but they did not make any other move against
the English missionary, nor did they interfere with his residence
at Macao. He continued to come and go without hindrance.
Nevertheless, in a letter to the Secretary of the Religious
Tract Society in London, Morrison mentions the incident:
«Last year I procured from England, at my own
expense, a good press for the use of my son, Mr. John
R. Morrison; and this season, I have gone to very
considerable expense in cutting Chinese moveable
types for the printing of small tracts. Our first effort
was small sheet tracts, containing passages of Scrip-
ture, which an officer on board one of the Merchant-
men distributes extensively among the Chinese who
visit the ship...
«...! printed also in English a sermon I preached
to seamen, on board the American ship Morrison , at
Whampoa, as a small tract, and four numbers of
a religious newspaper, called ‘The Evangelist and
Miscellanea Sinica’. It consisted chiefly of extracts.
The Sermons and the Evangelist were brought by
somebody to the notice of the Roman Catholic Vicar-
General of Macao, an old man who cannot read
(137) Morrison’s Memoirs, Vol. 11, pp. 481-2
Braga, J. M, The beginnings of printing at Macao


English. He wrote against me and the publications,
saying they were not conformable to the doctrines of
the Romish church. The Governor wrote to the Com-
pany’s Committee requiring the suppression of these
publications, with which I was compelled to comply.
Although the English Company has had a press here
for twenty years without the Portuguese interfering,
they now assail the Albion Press which put forth
these publications. The continuance of the press in
Canton is also very precarious. ...
«...! have long abstained, but it appears to me
now necessary to show the Chinese that the traditions
and usages of the Romish church, are not scriptural
Christianity. ...» ( 138 )
It is difficult for us, so far removed in time from the events
which took place at Macao in 1833, to get a proper perspective
of the conflicting emotions that led to the removal of the
Albion Press from Macao. The Catholic clergy could not at
any time have been happy over Morrison’s presence in Macao;
the stand they took when Milne tried to join Morrison in 1813
shows how they felt. Morrison, on the other hand, took a firm
stand in the matter of scriptural interpretation. These were
the principal moods prevailing at the period. Morrison gave
the Macao clergy the opportunity to protest again his activ-
ities, when he printed, at Macao, without registering his
printing press and by not complying with the censorship regula-
tions, books and other publications of a non-Catholic religious
nature. So long as the foreign printing presses did not openly
publish religious propaganda they were left alone, both before
and after the Albion Press was interdicted, but when Morrison
began to invade what the Catholics had for so long considered
their own, they took steps to stop his printing at Macao.
(i3B) Morrisons’s Memoirs, pp. 491-494, transcribing letter written
at Canton on October 10, 1833.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


In the matter of Portuguese sovereignty, Morrison based
his views on the shameful distortion by Ljungstedt of the
facts, which this Swedish writer had written into the history
he had culled from the manuscript material gathered by Mi-
randa e Lima and Bishop Saraiva over a period of a number
of years. This acceptance by Morrison of Ljungstedt’s mis-
representation of Macao’s rights was a most unfortunate stand
to take, and must have served to antagonise the Portuguese
all the more.
One must not be too critical of Morrison. He was already
getting on in years, living under a strain, in an unpleasant
climate, with all sorts of irritations connected with his work
as translator for the East India Company, when tempers could
be easily frayed. The Company’s days were ending and the
uncertainity with regard to his future for no provision had
been made for him by the Company must have worried him
not a little ( 139 ). He did what he felt was right; the Vicar-
General also felt it his duty to do as he did. Such a conflict
was bound to bring unpleasantness. If Morrison had refrained
from printing religious matter the affair would probably have
been allowed to die down; but that would have been against
his principles.
In less than a year. Dr. Morrison was dead and the Albion
Press was acquired by Dr. Wells Williams and merged into
that belonging to The Chinese Repository. This journal has
provided us with some particulars of the foreign printing
presses at Macao and Canton. Referring to the year 1833 it
states that:
«There are now five English presses in China;
two are in Macao, and three in Canton. Three of these
(130) When Lord Napier arrived in China as Chief Superintendent
of British Trade he appointed Robert Morrison to his staff in July, 1834,
relieving him thereby of the need to worry about financial matters, for he
was paid a salary of £ 2,000 a year.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


presses are from England, and two are from America.
The Honourable E. I. Company’s press with a printer
arrived in China in 1814 ( 140 ). Morrison’s Dictionary
of the Chinese language, his Vocabulary of the Canton
dialect, and his View of China; the translation of a
novel by Mr. Thoms; and the Canton Miscellany, in
a series of numbers published in 1831 are the
principal works which have appeared from that press.
A Chinese dictionary of the Fukkeen dialect by Mr.
Medhurst of Batavia, is now being printed. The next
press arrived here in 1825; from which the first
number of the Canton Register appeared in November,
1827. We have before us a complete series of this
paper up to the present time. A third press arrived
in 1831, and a second periodical, the Chinese Courier,
appeared shortly after. The two other presses [The
Chinese Repository and the Albion Press] reached
China during the last year. All these presses are in
operation and are supported solely by foreigners.» ( 141 )
A year later there was a further reference to the same
subject, in the course of which it was mentioned that:
«With respect to the foreign presses in China,
but few changes worthy of notice have taken place
during the last twelve months. The Honorable Com-
pany’s press continues in operation at Macao, being
chiefly employed, we believe, with Mr. Medhurst’s
Dictionary of the Fukkeen dialect ( 142 ). The Albion
Press, which was interdicted last June by Portuguese
(140) As we have seen P. P. Thoms arrived in 1814 and left in 1825.
His place was taken by G. J. Steyn and his brother, in 1828.
(141) The Chinese Repository, Vol. 11, 1833, pp. 6-7.
(142) gee p. 87 supra.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


authority, has been removed to Canton, and is at
present employed on a commercial guide. The oldest
press in Canton, which has sent forth six volumes of
the Register, has not only maintained its own ground,
but has united with itself that of the late Courier.
This latter paper was discontinued early last summer;
and the Register, since the commencement of the
current year, has appeared every week, instead of
semimonthly as formerly. Our own establishment
continues in statu quo, except some small additions
to the fonts of type, which in Chinese words will
enable us to mark the intonations, etc. Thus in the
course of the year five printing establishments have
been reduced to four, one of which is in Macao, and
three in Canton. There are also two lithographic
presses in Canton. At Macao, and connected with the
College of St. Joseph, there is also a Portuguese
Press, which is furnished with a font of Chinese
moveable types. From these presses several small
publications have been issued during the year» ( 143 ).
During the year the printing press of the East India
Company closed down ( 144 ). Before ending its life of usefulness,
however, it brought out one more book, a short tome by J. F.
Davis:
(Poeseos Sinensis Commentaru) On the Poetry
of the Chinese (from the Royal Asiatic Transactions)
to which are added, translations and detached pieces.
By J. F. Davis ( 145 ).
(143) The Chinese Repository, Vol. 111, May, 1834, pp 43-4.
(144) Like the Albion Press, the East India Company s printery,
type and equipment were acquired by The Chinese Repository.
(145) a reprint, with additions, of the book, On the Poetry of the
Chinese, published at London in 1829 see supra p. 81.
m
86
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


So it happened that the first and the last of the books
printed by the Press should have been by the same person, as
it wound up its activities and disappeared.
In the same year, John Robert Morrison published at
Canton the first edition of
A Chinese Commercial Guide consisting of a
Collection of Details respecting foreign trade in China.
By J. R. Morrison. Printed at the Albion Press, and
sold at the Canton Register Office, 4, Danish Hong,
Canton, 1834. in-8, pp. xii, 116 ( 146 ).
Interest in the affairs of China and the Far East was
growing in Britain, and several books were published at London
and elsewhere. Among these books were, Observations on the
China Trade, by Sir J. B. Urmston, London, George Woodfall,
1833, in-8, pp. 149; Notices concerning China and the Port of
Canton, the affair of the frigate«Topaze», and the fire of
Canton, by Robert Morrison, Malacca, 1833, in-8, pp. 97;
Letter to the Rt.-Hon. Charles Grant, on the present state of
British Intercourse with China, by C. Marjoribanks, London,
1833, in-8, pp. 66; Remarks on British Relations and Inter-
course with China, by «An American Merchants London, 1834;
and A Sketch of Chinese History, ancient and modem, com-
prising a retrospect of the foreign intercourse and trade with
China, London, 1834 (in 2 vols.) and Three voyages along the
coasts of China in 1831-32-3lf, London, 1834, both by Rev. C.
Gutzlaff; Journal of a Residence in China and the Neighbouring
Countries, from 1829 to 1833, by David Abeel, Boston, Crocker
& Brewster, 1834.
(i 46) This book was intended to be a supplement to the Anglo-Chi-
nese Calendar. A second edition appeared in 1844 revised by S. Wells
Williams who also directed other editions in 1848, 1856 and 1863. The
last mentioned was quite a large book.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


With the closure of the East Company’s printing press
we may be permitted to bring to an end the story of this
phase of printing at Macao. The story of the part played by
this press in the bibliography of Macao is a commendable one,
and it is to be hoped that in the record of this printery’s contri-
bution to the spread of Western civilisation in the Far East,
Macao’s liberality to the foreigners who sought to reside at
the little Portuguese outpost at the coast of China, and who
were made welcome by the people of Macao, will not be easily
forgotten.
APPENDIX I
BOOKS PRINTED IN MACAO AND JAPAN BY THE JESUIT PRESS
The following are the titles of the books of which printed copies
have been found in modem times:
1 ORATIO HABIT A & fara D, Martino laponio, suo & socioru nomine,
cum ab Europa rediret, ad Patre Alexadru Valignanu Visita-
tore Societatis lesv, Goae in D. Pauli Collegio, pridie Non.
lunij, Anno Domini, 1587. Cvm Facvltate Inquisitoru &, Superio-
rum Goae Excudebat Constatinus Dourat 0 laponius in aedibus
Societatis lesv. 1588.
(An address by Martin Kara, at Goa. The printer was a
Japanese christened Constantino Dourado).
The only surving copies are in the Spanish Embassy to the
Vatican and in the archives of the Society of Jesus in Rome.
2 CHRISTIANI PVERI INSTITVTIO, Adolescentiae qve persugium:
autore loanne Bonifacio Societatis lesv. cum libri unius, & reru
accessione plurimaru. Cum facultate Superiorum Apud Sinas,
in Portu Macaensi in Domo Societatis lesv. Anno 1588.
(A new edition of Joao Bonifacio’s book on Christian edu-
cation, first published at Salamanca in 1575, followed by
an edition at Burgos in 1586).
Only one copy has survived. It is in the Ajuda Palace
Library, Lisbon.
3 DE MISSSIONE LEGATORVM lAPONESIUM AD ROMAN AM
CURIAM, REBUSQ; in Europa, ac toto itinere animadversis
Dialogvs ex Ephemeride Ipsorvm Legatorvm Collectvs, & in
116
88
BRAGA, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Sermonem Latlnvm Versvs ab Eduardo de Sande Sacerdote
Societatis lesv. In Macaensi portu Sinici regni in domo Socie-
tatis lesv cum facultate Ordinarij, & Superiorum, Anno 1590.
(An account, in dialogue form?, of the experiences of the
Japanese envoys on their journey from Japan to Rome
and back).
Copies of this book have been recorded at the Biblioteca
Nacionai de Lisboa (2 copies); the archives of the Torre
do Tombo, Lisbon; the Library of th e Ajuda Palace, Lis-
bon; the fivora Public Library, fivora, Portugal; the British
Museum Library, London; the Bibliotheca Casanatense,
Rome; the Library of the University of Seville; the Pei
fang Library, Peking; the Oliveira Lima Collection of the
Catholic University of America (Washington, D. C.); the
Library of the late Prof. Shigetomo Koda, and an incom-
plete copy (dated 1589) in the Coimbra University Library.
Coimbra, Portugal.
4 SANCTOS NO GOSAGVEO-NO VCHI NVQIGAQI quan dal ichi,
Fiienno Cvni Tacacvno Gvn lesvs no Companhiano Collegio
Gazzusa ni voite Superiores no von yuruxi uo comuri core uo
fan to nasu mono nari. Goxuxxe irai MDLXXXI.
'S K A *) % <f)
(Compendium of the Acts of the Saints, volume the first.
Printed at Katsusa, 1591).
The only known copy of the original is in the Bodleian Library,
Oxford.
® FIDES NO DON.ITO xite P. L. Luis de Granada amaretaru xo
no riacu. Core uo Companhia no Superiores no go faicacu vomotte
Nippon no cotoba ni vasu. lesvs no Companhia no Collegio Ama-
cusa ni voite Superiores no go men qio toxite core uo fan ni
qizamu mono nari. Go xuxxe yori MDLXXXXII.
f" K V ffp
(An adaptation of Frey Luis de Granada’s Quinta parte de la
Introduction del Symbolo de la Fe in Japanese translation.
Printed at Amacusa, 1592)
The only known copy is In the Library of Leyden University.
6 NIPPON NO lESVB no Companhia no Superior yori Christan ni
soto no cotouari uo tagaino mondo no gotoqu xidai uo vacachi
tamo Doctrina. lesvs no Companhia no Collegio Amacusa ni
117
89
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


voite Superiores no von yuru xi uo comuri, core uo fan to nasu
mono nari. Toqini go xuxxe no Nenqi, 1592.
V '-r '] f • * ') v
(This is known as Doctrina Christian, the earliest of these to
the printed in Japan. Printed at Amakusa, 1592).
This book was discovered in 1903 by Naojiro Murakami in the
Passes Manuel Lyceum, Lisbon. Later it was lost, to turn up in
a Spanish booksellers’ catalogue. In 1917 it was acquired by
Baron Iwasaki for the Toyo Bunko (Oriental Library), Tokyo,
where a facsimile reproduction was made.
7 DOCHIRIN A KIRI SHIT AN
(This is the earliest book of Christian Doctrine in Japanese
characters. The title page is missing. It has been dated 1592,
and is believed to have been printed at Amakusa, 1592).
Sir Ernest Satow discovered the only known printed copy in the
Biblioteca Barberini (Vatican Library).
s- if ) i <r> »r * i
(neither the title nor the date has survived, but the first heading
of the books indicates that it gives «salutary advice on the
method of administering Baptism and exhorting the sick to
receive the Sacrament of Penance. It is said that this book
must have been published at Amakusa in 1593).
Said to have been at one time in the Passes Manuel Lyceum,
Lisbon, this book was acquired at London by Chozo Ito. It is
now in the Tenri Central Library, No other copy is known to
exist.
9 THE NEXT VOLUME CONSISTS OF THREE BOOKS:
NIFON NO OOTOBA TO. Historia no narai xiran to fossvrv
fito no tameni xeva ni yavaragvetarv Feiqe no Monogatari.
lesvs no Companhia no Collegio Amacusa ni voite Superiores
no go menqio to xite core uo fan ni qizamu mono nari. Go xuxxe
yori MDLXXXXII
a
(Feiqe Monogatari a Japanese historical classic explained
in colloquial for the study of the language and history of Japan).
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


ESOPO NO FABVLAS. Latinuo vaxite Nippon no cuchito nasu
mono nari lesvs no Companhia no Collegio Amacusani voite
Superiores no gomenqiotoxite coreuo fanni qizamu mono nari.
Goxuxxe yori MDLXXXXIII.
if M
(Aesop’s Falles, translated from Latin into Japanese. 1953),
followed by a new title: Xixo Xixxo nadono vchiyori nuqi idaxi,
quincuxuto nasu mono nari. Vocata soresoreni chusuru mono
nari.
** %
(A collection of proverbs extracted from the Four Books and
the Seven Books, etc).
This volume is in the British Museum Library. In recent years
several editions have been published in Japan.
10 - - EMMANVELIS ALVARI E SOCIETATE lESV DE INSTITV-
TIONE GRAMMATICA, Libri Tres. Coniugationibus accessit
interpretatio lapponica. In Collegio Amacvsensi Societatis lesv,
Cvm Facultate Svperiorvm. Anno MDXCIIII.
T %
(Father Manuel Alvares’ celebrated Latin grammar, in an
abridged form, adapted to the needs of students in Japan).
One copy in the Biblioteca Angelica, Rome, and one in the Evora
Public Library.
11 DICTIONARIVM LATINO LVSITANICVM, AC lAPONICVM, ex
Ambrosii Calepini volumine depromptum: in quo omissis nomi-
nibus proprijs tarn locorum, qu&m hominum, ac quibusdam alijs
minus vsitatis, omnes vocabuloru significationes, elegantioresq;
dicendi modi apponuntur: in vsum, & gratiam laponicae iuven-
tutis, quae Latino idiomati operam nauat, nec non Europaeoru,
qui laponicu sermonem addiscunt. In Amacvsa in Collegio
laponico Societatis lesv cum facultate Superiorum. Anno
MDXCV.
ii. $ vs rl -^
(Based on Ambrosio Calepino’s Latin dictionary).
Copies have been found in the Biblioth&jue de ITnstitut, Paris;
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


the Bodleian Library, Oxford; the Library of the University of
Leyden; the British Museum Library; the Marsden Library at
King’s College (now the School of Oriental and African Studies);
the Pei-t’ang Library, Peking (2 copies); and one contemporary
transcript in the Ajuda Palace Library, Lisbon.
12 CONTEMPTVS MUNDI JENBU. Core yo vo itoi, lesv Christono
gocoxeqiuo manabi tatematguru michiuo voxiyuru qio. Nippon
lesvsno Companhia no Collegio nite Superiores no goguegiuo
motte coreuo fanni firaqu mono nari. Toqini goxuxxeno nenqi,
1596.
3 v f y "/ a • a yf"
(A Japanese translation of The Imitation of Christ by
Thomas a’Kempis. According to Japanese scholars the
idiom makes it one of the best pieces «of religious literature
in Japan, both Christian and non-Christian>),
One copy in the Bodleian Library, Oxford and another in
the Bibliotheca Ambrosiana, Milan.
13 —EXERCITIA SPIRITVALIA IGNAT IJ DE LOYOLA. Cum Facultate
Superiorum. In Amacvsa in Collegio laponesi Societatis lesu.
MDXCVI.
(This book is the so-called versio vulgata, in Latin, of the
Spanish original).
The only known copy is in the possession of Count Oppersdoff,
Oberglogau, Upper Silesia, Germany.
14 COMPENDIVM SPIRITVALIS DOCTRINAE ex varijs Sanctorum
Patrum sententijs magn§. ex parte collectum: Avtore Reveren-
diss. P. F. Bartholomeu de Martyribus, Archiepiscopo Bracha-
rensi, & Hispaniarum Primate. In Collegio laponico Societatis
lesu cum facultate Ordinarij, & Superiorum. Anno 1596.
(A work on the spiritual life, written by the Venerable
Frey Bartolomeu dos Martires, Archbishop of Braga, first
published at Braga, Portugal, in 1564. It was a popular
work and several editions were printed in various places
in Europe).
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


For a king time the very existence of this book was not known
to scholars until a copy was found in the old Portuguese
Mission’s library at Peking, the Pei-t’ang Library. Another
copy was found soon after at the Augustinian Convent, Manila
(not destroyed during World War II as it was sent to the
Convent of the order in Valladolid) and a copy was offered for
sale by a New York bookseller in 1949, to be acquired eventually
by the Tenri Library, Japan.
15 SALVATOR MVNDI: Confessionarivm in Collegio laponico Socle-
tatis lesv. Cum facultate Superlorum. MDXLVIII.
»!/ V i' - • A V fjr
(A work on confession, in cursive Chinese characters and
hiragana symbols).
A copy, the only one known, is in the Biblioteca Casanatense,
Rome.
16 RACVYOXV. In Collegio laponico Societatis lesv. Cum facultate
Superiorum. Anno MDXCVIII.
f. %
(A dictionary in three parts, containing Chinese characters in
the first part, with the Japanese kana syllabary in the second.
These two parts are dated 1598. A third part, published in 1599,
classifies the characters according to their radicals with on
and kun readings).
The only copy to contain the three parts is in the British
Museum, while copies with the first two parts are to be found in
the Leyden University Library; the Bibliothfique Nationale,
Paris and the Archives of the Society of Jesus in Rome.
17 CrVIA DO PECADOR. In Collegio laponico Societatis lesv. Cum
facultate Ordinarij, & Superiorum. Anno MDXCIX.
. a? ip 3
(An abridged version in Japanese of the well known work by
the Dominican Frey Luis de Granada, of which a large number
of editions have appeared in several European languages. It
appears that a later edition was printed in 1602).
Quite a number of copies are known to exist, some, however,
as fragments, which makes it difficult to tell whether they are
from the 1599 or 1602 edition. Copies have been recorded at
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


the British Museum, Library, London; the Escorial Library,
Spain; the Biblioth&que Nationale, Paris; the Bibliotheca Bar-
rini (Vatican Library), Rome; the Library of King Manuel,
Vila ViQOsa, Portugal; the archives of the Society of Jesus, Rome;
the Biblioteca Nacional de Lisboa, Portugal; the Tenri Central
Library, Japan; and the library of Prof. C. R. Boxer.
18 DOCTRINA CHRIST AN. In Collegio laponlco Societatis lesv. Cum
facultate Ordinarij & Superiorum. Anno 1600.
V '-r y t • ■> ; >
(This is an enlarged edition of the early book printed in 1592,
in Latin j.
Only one copy of this book is known to exist, it is in the library
of the Marquis Tokugawa, at Mito, Japan.
19 DOCTRINA CHRIST AN. Nagasaqvi ex Officina Goto Thome Soin
typographi Societatis lesv. Cum Facultate Ordinarij, & Supe-
riorum. Anno 1600.
y -5 v a •
(Another edition of the Dochirina Kirishitan, 1592. The
name of Goto Thomas Soin appears at the printer, and
bears out the reported change mentioned by Father Gabriel
de Matos, in 1603, that the Jesuit press began working in
two separate departments, one for books in Latin and the
other for Japanese texts).
The only known copy in Biblioteca Casanatense, Rome.
20 ROYEI-ZAFITSU. In Collegio laponico Societatis lesv. Cum facul-
tate Ordinarij, & Superiorum. Anno 1600.
# : A tji Ok
(An anthology of poems for recital, on subjects such as
the perishableness of human life, on Japanese heroes and
various prayers).
Only one copy, in the Escorial, Spain.
21 DOCTRINJE CHRISTIANJE RUDIMENT A, cum alijs pijs Oratio-
nibus. Nagasaqvi ex Officina Goto Thome Soin typographi
Societatis lesv. cum facultate Ordinarij, & Superiorum, 1600.
%• h l <* R,
(A prayer book and catechism in Japanese and Latin),
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


The only known copy was acquired by the Tenri Central Library,
Tambaichi, Japan, in 1941.
22 APHORISMI CONFESSARIORVM EX DOCTORUM SENTENTIJS
COLLECTI. Avtore Emanvele Sa Doctore Theologo Societatis
lesv. In Collegio laponico elusdem Societatis, cum facultate
Ordinarij, & Superiorum. Anno Domini, 1603.
IC &
(A reprint of the book on theology by Father Manuel
Sa, S. J., the first edition of which was published at Venice
in 1595. The Japanese edition was an exact reprint of the
Manila edition of 1600.
The only copy was discovered by Father Henri Bernard-Maitre,
S. J., in the Pei-t’ang Library, Peking, in 1936.
23 VOCABVLARIO DA LINGO A DE I ARAM com a declaragao em
Portugues, feito por algvns Padres, e Irmaos da Companhia
de lesv. Com licenga do Ordinario, & Superiores em Nangasaqui
no Collegio de lapam da Companhia de lesvs. Anno MDCIII.
« fl t f
(A Japanese-Portuguese dictionary containing about 30,000
words, based on the Latin-Portuguese-Japanese Dictionary
of 1595).
Only five copies have been found in modern times: Bodleian
Library, Oxford; the Bibliothfeque Nationale, Paris; the British
Museum Library, London; the Biblioteca Piiblica de Evora,
Evora, Portugal; and the Dominican Convent, Manila, A han-
-written contemporary copy in the Ajuda Palace Library, Lisbon.
24 ARTE DA LINGO A DE I ARAM composta pello Padre Rodriguez
Portugues da Copanhia de lesv diuidida em tres Livros. Com
licenca do Ordinario, e Svperiores em Nangasaqui no Collegio
de lapao da Companhia de lesv. Anno 1604.
(Printing began In 1604 but was completed in 1608, accord-
ing to the colophon).
m
95
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Two copies have survived, one in the Bodleian Library, Oxford
and the other in the library of the Earl of Crawford.
25- Kfic
26 MANY ALE AD SACRAMENT A ECCLESIJE MINISTRAND A.
D. Ludouici Cerqueira laponensis Episcopi opera ad vsum sui
cleri ordinatum. Cvm Approbatione, et Facvltate. Nangasaquij,
in Collegio laponico Societatis lesv. Anno Domini, MDCV.
1 't / v I*
(A ritual in Latin adapted to the needs of the churches
in Japan).
Copies are to be found in the archives of the Society of Jesus,
Rome; the British Museum, London; the Toyo Bunko (East
Asiatic Library), Tokyo; the Library of Sophia University,
Tokyo; the Public Library of Toulouse, France; three copies
in the Pei-t’ang Library, Peking.
27 SPIRITVAL XVGVIO NO T AMEN I YERABI ATQUMURU XU-
QUANNO MANUAL. Core lesvsno Companhia ni voite ami-
tatquru mono nari. Svperioriesto, Ordinariono yuruxino comuri,
Nagasaqi lesvsno Companhiano Collegioni voite fanni firaqu
mono nari. 1607.
SC, X? ') "/ 7 •«/ %Of
(A manual of meditations, in three parts, chosen with
regard to the Spiritual Exercises).
One copy has survived in the Cathedral of Nagasaki, and
another copy was discovered in the Franciscan Convent at
Manila, in 1941 (but was lost during the War), before the war.
Another copy was sent to the Franciscan College in Valladolid.
28 FLOSCVLI EX VETERIB, AC NOVI TESTAMENTI, S. Doctorvm,
et Insignivm Philosophorvm Floribvs Selecti. Per Emanuelem
Barretum Lusitanum, presbyterum Societatis lesv. Cum facul-
m
96
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


tate Ordinarij, & Superiorum. Nangasaqvij. In Collegio lapanico
eiusdem Societatis. Anno Domini MDCX.
(An anthology, compiled from the Bible and the Christian
philosophers and other, on the virtues and vices, written
by Father Manuel Barreto).
One copy in the Toyo Bunko (East Asiatic Library), Tokyo and
one purchased after the War by Paul C. Blum in Italy. A third
copy is to be seen in the Biblioteca Publica in Oporto, Portugal.
29 CONTEMPTVS MVNDI. Miaci ex Officina Farada Antonii. Cum
facultate ordinary, et Superiorum. Anno 1610.
A, t tof • fc 0&-
(A shortened edition of the earlier edition of 1596, by
Thomas a Kempis, in Latin and Japanese. The printer
seems to have been a Japanese Christian layman).
The only surviving copy was in the hands of Mr. Ikenaga before
the war, but has been acquired by the Tenri Central Library in
Japan.
30 FIDES NO QVIO. Nagasaqvi ex Officina Goto Thomae Soin Typo-
graphy Societatis lesv. Cum facultate Superiorum, & Ordinary.
Anno Domini 1611.
(A 'C 0)
(A version in Japanese and Latin of Frey Luis do Granada’s
Introduction del Symbol© de la Fe, first published at Sala-
manca in 1582. It differs from the earlier book printed in
Japanese in 1599).
The only known copy was reported to be in private hands in
the U. S. A.
si-
-32 ARTE BREVE DA LINGO A lAPOA tirada da Arte Grande da
mesma lingoa, pera os que comegam a aprender os primeiros
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


principios della. Pello Padre loam Rodrigves da Companhia de
lesv Portuguez do Bispado de Lamiego. Diuidida em tres Livros.
Com licenga do Ordinario, & Superiores. Em Amacao no Collegio
da Madre de Decs da Companhia de lesv. Anno MDCXV.
(This is an abridgement of the large grammar of 1604-08).
Copies in the School of African and Oriental Studies, London
University and the Library of the Ajuda Palace, Lisbon; and a
contemporary manuscript copy in the Bibliotheque Nationale.
Paris.
Besides these books, of which copies are known to exist, Father
Johannes Laures, S. J., cities at least 37 titles of books and sheets which
are believed to have been printed, according to contemporary writers,
but have not been traced. Besides these, old manuscript transcripts of
over 30 books and documents have been found. All these have been listed
and described in full by Father Johannes Laures, S. J., in Kirishitan
Bunko, Tokyo, 1940; Supplement to Kirishitan Bunko, Tokyo, 1951, and
the 3rd, revised, edition of the same book, published at Tokyo in 1959,
quoting earlier authorities and newer sources.
APPENDIX II
The following is a list of the fuller titles of the xylographic works
printed at Macao or in China, referred to and described by Prof. C. R.
Boxer in his article in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1947,
Parts 3 & 4, pp. 199-215, with acknowledgements to the author and the
Committee of the Royal Asiatic Society.
1. Sapientia Sinica, Exponente P. Ignacio a Costa Lusitano Soc.
Ics. a P. Prospero Intorcetta Siculo eiusd. Soc. orbi proposita. Kien cham
in urbe Sinaru Provinciae Kiam Si. 1662. Superiorum permissu. [Kien-
chang 1662].
Boxer quotes Cordier to list copies in:
British Museum, London
Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris
Imperial Library (former), Vienna
National Library, Palermo, Italy
Siccawei Jesuit College, Shangal (incomplete copy)
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


2. Sinarum Scientia Politico-Moralis... P. Prospero Intorcetta Sicvlo
Societatis lesu in Lucem edita. [Canton, 1667 Goa, 1669].
According to Cordier and Pelliot copies in:
Nationale, Paris
National Library, Palermo, Italy
Imperial Library (former), Vienna
School of Oriental Studies, London
Vatican Library, Rome
Academia de la Historia, Madrid
and Boxer saw a copy in:
National Library, Peking
3. Innocentia Victrix sive Sententia Comitiorum Imperij Sinici pro
Innocentia Christianas Religionis Lata Juridice per Annum 1669. Ivssu
R. P. Antonij de Govvea Soc is lesw, Ibidem V. Provincialis Sinico-Latine
exposita In Quam cheu metropoli provinciae Quam turn in Regno Sinarum.
Anno Salvatis Hvmanae MDCLXXI. [Canton, 1671].
According to Cordier and Pelliot copies in:
Vatican Library, Rome (4 copies)
Biblioth£que Nationale, Paris (3 copies)
Academia de la Historia, Madrid (2 copies)
School of Oriental Studies, London
British Museum, London
University Library, Munich
Copy sold by Quaritch, London, in 1898
Copy in the library of Sir Leicester-Harmsworth
and Boxer records copies as follows:
Lenox Collection of the New York Public Library
Bibliotheca Lindesiana
Copy in Boxer’s library
Imperfect copy disposed of by Boxer
4. Epistola P. Ferdinandi Verbiest Vice-Provincialis Missionis Sinen-
sis, anno 1678 die 15 augusti, ex Curia Pekinensi in Europam ad Socios
missa. [Peking, 1678].
m
99
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


According to Cordier and Pelliot copies at:
Brussels (2 copies)
Vatican Library, Rome (2 copies)
Siccawei Jesuit Library
and Boxer records copies in:
Bollandist’s Library
Jesuit Archives, Rome
National Library, Peking
5, Relatio Sepvltvrae Magno Orientis Apostolo S. Francisco Xaverio
erecte in Insula Sanciano anno saeculari MDCC. [? Peking, 1700].
According to Cordier and Pelliot copies at:
Brussels (3 copies)
School of Oriental Studies, London
British Museum, London
Toyo Bunko, Tokyo
Cordier’s copy
Pelliot’s copy
Copies offered in Maggs Bros, catalogues (2 copies)
Truncated copy of Mr. Norris
Acquired at Paris by the Japanese in 1922
Academia de la Historia, Madrid
Boxer records:
National Library, Peking
Bodleian Library, Oxford
Mensing Collection in the Scheepvaart Museum, Amsterdam
6. Brevis Relatio eoru, quae spectant ad Declarationem Sinaru Im-
peratoris Kam Hi circa Caeli, Cumfucij, et Auoru, cultu, dalam anno 1700.
Accedunt Primatu, Doctissimoruq. viroru, et antiquissimae Traditionis
testimonia. Opera PP. Societ. Jesu Pekini pro Euangelij propagatione
laborantium. [Peking, 1701; and Canton, 1702].
According to Cordier and Pelliot copies at;
Blbliotheque Nationale, Paris (2 copies)
Academia de la Historia, Madrid (2 copies)
British Museum, London
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Vatican Library, Rome
National Library, Palermo, Italy
Bollandist Library
University of Petrograd
Pelliot’s copy
Offered by Hierseman, Leipzig
Maggs Brothers, London
Boxer records:
University Library of Gottingen
Scheepvaart Museum, Amsterdam
Maggs Brothers sold in 1946
Boxer’s copy
Bodleian Library, Oxford (4 copies)
7. Arte de la Lengua Mandarin a compuesto por el M. R°, P e , Fr.
Francisco Varo de la sagrada Orden de N. P. S. Domlgo, acrecentado, y
reducido a major forma, por N°, H°, Fr. Pedro de la Pinueia P or y Comis-
sario Prov. de la Mission Serafica de China. Anadiose un Confesionario
muy util, y provechoso para alivio de los nuevos Ministros. Impreso en
Canton anode 1703. [Canton, 1703],
According to Cordier and Pelliot (apud Boxer) the following have
been recorded:
Montucci-Klaproth copy sold by Hiersemann, Leipzig
Father J. B. d’llliceto-Fourmont
De Guignes-Landresse
University of Munich
University of Kazan
Asiatic Museum, Leningrad
Vatican Library (2 copies)
Imperial Library (former), Vienna
Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris
School of Oriental Studies, London
Bibliotheca Lindesiana (Lord Crawford’s copy)
Offered by Quaritch in 1886
Offered by Maggs Brothers in 1931
8. Exemplar Epistolae R- P- Fr. Dominici Navarrete sacri Ordhiis
Piaedicatorum data Cantone 29 Septembris anni 1669. Ad R. P. Antonium
de Gouvea Societatis Jesu. Vice Promncialem V. Prouinciae Sinensis.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


Juxta Originate, quod asseruatur Pekini in Collegia eiusdem Societatis.
(Peking. 1704].
The only recorded copy is in Boxer’s collection; a facsimile limited
edition at Macao in 1947.
9. Relacion sincere, y verdadera De la justa defenskm De las Rega-
lias, y privilegios de la Corona de Portugal En la Ciudad de Macao, Escrita
Por el Doctor D. Felix Leal de Castro, en la misma Ciudad A if de Febrero
de 1112. Impressa en Hiang Xan con las Licencias necessaries. [Heungshan,
1712].
Based on Pelliot, Boxer records:
Sir Leicester Harmsworth (sold in 1946)
Sold by Maggs Brothers in 1921 to Japan
Pelliot’s copy
to which should be added:
Manisola Library of Visconde de Esperanga
Library of Arquivo Histdrico Ultramarino, Lisbon
10. Informatio pro Veritate contra iniquiorem famam sparsam per
Sinas cum calumnia in PP. Soc. Jesu, & Detrimento Missionis. Comunicata
Missionariis in Imperio Sinensi. Anno 1717. (Peking, 1718].
Boxer, based on Cordier and Pelliot, records;
British Museum, London (2 copies)
Vatican Library, Rome (2 copies)
National Library, Palermo
Bibliotheca Corsali, Rome
Maggs Brothers catalogue in 1921
Boxer’s library
11. Jornada, que o senhor Antonio de Albuquerque Coelho Gover-
nadtor, e Capitam Geral Da Cidade do Nome de Deos de Macao na China,
Fes de Goa athe chegar a ditta Cid 0 Dividida em duos partes. Offerees
esta obra a Sua Senhoria O Capitam Joam Tavares de Velles Guerreyro
Seo menor Servidor. {? Heungshan, 1718].
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


According to Boxer:
Biblioteca Nacional, Lisbon
Torre do Tombo, Lisbon
Library of the Ajuda Palace, Lisbon (2 copies)
British Museum, London
Boxer’s library
and a copy in:
Manisola Library of Visconde de Esperanga.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Henri Cordier. L’lmprimerie Sino-Europeenne en Chine. Bibliographic des
ouvrages publics en Chine par les Europeans an XVII et an XVIII siAcle
(Paris, Imprimerie National©, 1901).
Bibliotheca Sinica. Dictionnaire Bibliographique des ouvrages relatifs d
VEmpire Chinois. Deuociime edition, revue, corrigGe. et consldcrablernent
augmentte, 5 vols. (Paris, 1904-1924).
3. Paul Pelliot. Articles in T’oung Poo. Archives concernant VHistoire, les langues.
la Geographic et Vethnographic de VAsie Orientate. Vol. XXIII, No. 5.
pp. 355-372 (Leiden, 1924) and Vol. XXVI, p. 48 (Leiden, 1927).
4. R. Streit and J. Dindinger. Bibliotheca Missionum, Vol. V (Aachen, 1929) and
Vol. VII (Aachen, 1931).
5. Bibliotheca Lindesiana. Catalogue of Chinese Books and Manuscripts (privately
printed: Aberdeen University Press, 1895).
6. Maggs Bros., Ltd. Sale Catalogues Nos. 403 [1921]; 452 [1924]; 521 [1929]; and
555 [1931] (London, 1921-1931).
APPENDIX III
Books published at Macao from 1815 to 1834. Those with an (*)
were printed at the printing- press of the English East India Company.
1. San Yu-Low; or the Three Dedicated Rooms. A tale translated
from the Chinese, By J. F. Davis, Esq. of the Honble. Company’s China
Establishment, Canton, China. Printed by order of the Select Committee;
at the Honourable East India Company’s Press, by P. P. Thoms, 1815. pp.
56, in-B°.
2. Translations of extracts from the Peking Gazette, from the ori-
ginal Chinese with notes. By Robert Morrison, Canton, China. Printed by
order of the Select Committee at the Honourable East India Company’s
Press, by P. P. Thoms. Macao. 1815, pp. 42 in-B°.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


* 3. A DICTIONARY OF THE CHINESE LANGUAGE, in three
parts. Part the first, containing Chinese and English, arranged according
to the Radicals. By the Rev. Robert Morrison, Vol. I. Part I. Macao:
printed at the Honourable East India Company’s Press, by P. P. Thoms,
1815, in-4°, XVHI, 930 pp.
* 4. Dialogues and Detached Sentences in the Chinese Language;
with a free and verbal translation in English. Collected from various
sources. Designed as an initiary work for the use of students of Chinese.
By Rev. Robert Morrison. Printed at the Honourable East India Com-
pany’s Press, by P. P. Thoms, Macao, 1816 in-B°, pp. viii, 262.
* 5. Observations on the Expediency of opening a Second Port in
China, addressed to the President and Select Committee of Supracargoes
for the Management of the Affairs of the Honourable Bast India Company
in China. —lBl7, in-B°, pp. 42.
* 6. The public are hereby respectfully informed that there is now
published at Macao, in China, a Dictionary of the Chinese Language; to
consist of three parts... The Author of the above work, the Rev. R.
Morrison, has directed his attention to the collection of materials for it
during the last ten years... Printed by P. Thoms, Macao 1817.
* 7. A View of China, for Philological Purposes; containing a Sketch
of Chinese Chronology, Geography, Government, Religion & Customs.
Designed for the use of persons who study the Chinese Language. By the
Rev. R. Morrison. Macao. Printed at the Honourable East India
Company’s Press, by P. P. Thoms. Published and sold by Black, Parbury
and Allen, Booksellers to the Honourable East India Company, London.
1817. in-4, pp. vi. 141.
* 8. A Dictionary of the Chinese Language, in Three Parts. Part the
Second. Chinese and English, arranged phonetically. Vol. I. By the Rev.
Robert Morrison. Printed at the Hon. East India Company’s Press by
P. P. Thoms, Macao, 1819. in-4, pp. xx, 1,090.
* 9. The Affectionate Pair, or the History of Sun-kin. A Chinese
tale. Translated from the Chinese by P. P. Thoms. Printed in the service
of the Hon. East India Company, China. Printed for Black, Parbury,
and Allen, London, 1820. in-12, pp. iv, 104.
10. A ABELHA DA CHINA. The first number of this journal
appeared on Thursday, Sept. 12, 1822.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


11. GAZETA DE MACAO, the first number of which appeared on
Jan. 3, 1824, the last number on Dec. 30, 1826.
12. A Grammar of the English Language, For the use of the
Anglo-Chinese College. By Rev. Robert Morrison. Printed at the Honou-
rable East India Company’s Press, by P. P. Thoms, Macao, 1823, in-8,
pp. 97.
13. (Hien Wun Shoo) —Chinese Moral Maxims, with a free and
verbal translation; affording examples of the Grammatical Structure of
the Language. Compiled by J. F. Davis Printed at the Honourable Com-
pany’s Press, by P. P. Thoms, Macao, 1823. in-8, pp. viii, 199.
14. A Vocabulary containing Chinese words and phrases peculiar to
Canton and Macao and to the Trade of those Places; together with the
titles and address of all the Officers of Government, Hong Merchants, etc.,
etc. Alphabetically arranged, and intended as an Aid to Correspondence
and Conversation in the Native Language. Printed at the Honourable
Company’s Press by P. P. Thoms, Macao, China, 1824. in-8, pp. 77.
15. Hwa Tsien (the Flower’s Deaf), Chinese Courtship. In verse.
To which is added an Appendix treating of the Revenue of China, etc.,
etc., by Peter Perring Thoms, London, Parbury, Allen & Kingsbury; Macao,
Printed at the Honourable East India Company’s Press, 1824, in-8, pp.
XVI 339.
16. Questao entre dois boticarios, n.p., Macao; n.d. 1827, in-8, pp. iii,
10 and iv, 10.
17. THE CANTON REGISTER. The first number appeared on
November 8, 1827. Started at Canton, this newspaper removed to Macao
when the foreign merchants had to leave at the end of each trading season.
It was printed, thus, at Canton for six months of the year and at Macao
during the other six When there were difficulties at Canton, the printing
press remained at Macao.
18. Grammatica Latina, ad usum Sinensium Juvenum post longam
experientiam redacta, a J. A. Gonsalves Congregationis Missionis presby-
tero post longam experientiam redacta et Macao in regali collegio Sancti
Joseph Facultate regia typis mandate. Tipografia do Semlnario, Macao,
1828. in-8, pp. 232.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


19. Arte China, constante de alphabet© e grammatlca, compre-
hendendo modelos das differentes composigSes, composta por J. A. Gon-
Qalves. Sacerdote da Congregagao da Missao. Impressa com licenga regia
no real collegio de S. Jose, Macao, Anno de 1929. in-4, pp. viii, 503, 48.
Indice, corregoes e addigoes.
* 20. Vocabulary of the Canton Dialect. By R. Morrison. Part I
English and Chinese; Part II —Chinese and English; Part 111 —Chinese
words and phrases. Macao, China. Printed at the Honourable East India
Company’s press by G. J. Steyn and Brother, 1828. in-8, pp. 138.
21. Diccionario Portuguez-China, no estylo vulgar mandarim, e clas-
sico geral, composto por J. A. Gongalves, Sacerdote da Congregagao da
Missao, M. R. A. S. Impresso com licenga regia no Collegio de S. Jose,
Macao, Anno de 1831. in-4, 2 cols. pp. iii, 872.
* 22. The Anglo-Chinese Kalendar and Register, for the year of the
Christian AEra 1831, corresponding with the Twenty-eighth year of the
Chinese cycle of sixty years. Printed at the East India Company’s Press,
by G. J. Steyn and Brother, Macao, China, 1831. in-8.
* 23. NOTICE. Com. ce : «Several recent acts of the Chinese Govern-
ment have compelled the President...». R. Hudleston, Secretary, British
Factory, Macao, 29th May, 1831.
* 24. RESOLUTIONS of the British Merchants of Canton, Canton,
30th May, 1831.
* 25. NOTICE. Com. 0 *: «The President, etc., Select Committee on the
20th Ultimo gave public notice...». H. H. Lindsay. Secretary, British
Factory, Macao, June 10th, 1831.
* 26. THE CANTON MISCELLANY. The first number appeared in
June, 1831 and the last was dated May, 1832.
27. CHINESE COURIER AND CANTON GAZETTE.
* 28. A Catalogue of the Library of the British Factory at Canton.
Macao, 1832.
* 29. The Anglo-Chinese and Kalendar Register, for the year of the
Christian AEra 1832. Corresponding with the Twenty-ninth year of the
Chinese Cycle of Sixty Years, which 29th year commences on the 2d. of
February, 1832. With a Companion Macao, China: Printed at the East-
India Company’s Press, by G. J. Steyn and Brother.
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


* 30. Companion to the Anglo-Chinese Calendar, 1832.
31. Contribution to an Historical Sketch of the Portuguese Settle-
ments in China, principally of Macao, of the Portuguese Envoys and
Ambassadors to China, of the Roman Catholic Missions in China and of
the Papal Legates to China. By A. L. Kt. Macao, 1832. in-8, pp. xiv, 174.
32. A Dictionary of the Hok-keen Dialect of the Chinese Language,
according to the reading and colloquial idioms: containing about 12,000
characters, the sounds and tones of which are accurately marked; and
various examples of their use, taken generally from approved Chinese
authors. Accompanied by a short historical and statistical account of
Hok-keen: a Treatise on the Orthography of the Hok-keen Dialect; the
necessary indexes, &c. By W. H. Medhurst, Batavia. Printed at the Monou-
rable East India Company’s Press, by G. J. Steyn and Brother, Macao,
China, 1832. in-4, in 2 columns, pp. 1, xiv, 860.
33. THE CHINESE REPOSITORY.
34. Diccionario China-Portuguez, composto por J. A. Gongalves,
Sacerdote da Congregagao da Missao. Impress© com licenga regia no Real
Collegio de S. Jose, Macao, Anno de 1833. in-4, 2 cols. pp. iii, 1026,
2 and 126.
35. Evangelist and Miscellanea Sinica.
36. A Sermon preached on board the American ship «Morrison»
Macao, 1833.
37. (Poeseos Sinensis Commentaru) —On the Poetry of the Chinese
(from the Royal Asiatic Transactions) to which are added, translations
and detached pieces. By J. F. Davis. Printed at the Honourable East India
Company’s Press, by G. J. Steyn and Brothers. Macao, China, 1934. in-8,
pp. 199,
APPENDIX IV
Copies of the correspondence authorising the setting up of the
printing press at the Seminario de S. Jos6 may be seen in «LIVRO da
Copia legal dos Alvaros, Avizos, Cartas Regias, &" e mais papeis perten-
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


centes a Camara Episcopal de Macao > in the Ecclesiastical Archives at
Macao, ff. 90-94, (kindly furnished by Father B. Videira):
«To His Excellency Joze Joaquim da Silva Freitas,
illustrious and Excellent Sir,
«December 29, 1818.
is a Copy of the representation made by the
new Superior of the Royal College of St. Joseph, in continuation
of that of his predecessor, which showed how difficult it is
not to have the services of a printing press for translations
of Chinese Books needed for the work of the missionaries. A
request was made that permission be granted in this College,
where Father Joaquim Affongo Gonsalves, who is sufficiently
(only sufficiently) able to undertake this work, with the help
of manuscripts (old manuscripts, among them possibly the
dictionary, still inedited, of the Jesuit Father Semedo) which
should be availed of.
«It seems to me that this proposal is all the more inte-
resting because it will not be a charge on the Royal Exchequer,
as the Royal College has undertaken to take this upon it self
as well as the supervision of the work, for they have more
than one person capable of undertaking its proper supervision
and I do not hesitate to bring this to your Honour’s attention
to convey to the Royal Presence of His Majesty, in expectation
that he will instruct as His Royal Intelligence decides for the
protection, preservation and improvement of his Royal Patro-
nage of Missionary Services.
«May God preserve you for many years,
«(Sd) Miguel de Arriaga Brum da Silveira
« Macao, December 29, 1818;»
* * *
«ROYAL NOTIFICATION REGARDING ST. JOSEPH’S PRINTERY
«1819 October, 1
«Most Excellent and Most Reverend Sir,
«The communication from the Chief Justice of the City
of Macao enclosing Your Honour’s letter was presented to
His Majesty and His Majesty has designed to grant the per-
Braga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao


mission asked for, on the terms of the reply given to the said
Chief Justice, copy of which I also forward to Your Honour,
to show that His Majesty being desirous of promoting, by every
means, the healthy objectives of the Missions, has not wished
to prevent the success of your work and has permitted the
use of the printing press, the supervision of which His Majesty
commits to your zeal and care.
«May God guard Your Honour,
«(Sd) Conde dos Arcos
«at the Palace of Rio de Janeiro.
«October 1, 1819
«To the Bishop of Macao
* * *
«Honoured Sir,
«Your communication of December 29 of last year was
presented to His Majesty and he has approved the request made
by the Priests of the College of St. Joseph, and permits the
use of the printing press for the papers and books needed in
their missionary work. His Majesty has considered fit to
approve the request, and orders that this be entrusted to this
institution, in the care and under the direction of the priests
of the said College, exclusively for the purposes mentioned,
and under the supervision of the Diocesan Prelate. This is
transmitted to Your Honour for your information.
«May God guard Your Honour,
«(Sd.) Joze Joaquim da Silva Freitas
«Conde dos Arcos, Secretary of State,
«At the Palace of Rio de Janeiro, October 1, 1819.
«To Senhor Miguel de Arriaga Brum da Silveira.»
Bkaga, J. M. The beginnings of printing at Macao




Tip. Silvas, Lda.










