

The Trial and Sentence of
John Tawell
For the Murder of Sarah Hart at Salt Hill
At Avlesburv. Btiekinglu«m«’iirr, nn 1 n«-
dav a true bill was found aaaiu*: .b>hn • awcll.
charged with the wilful murder of So ah Hart,
nt 'althill. neor Slough, on the Ist nl.lamiar ;
and during the dry his wife applied lo the hieli
sheriff for five seat* in the court, fin lietsHf and
friends,
Ihe trial took place on edne*d*y. Ihe
rush for seats, at the opening of ih- court was
of the most riotous character
Ihe gnsotiej. John I avvell Hoed HI. was
■tt-ired ii the ga hot the 'ocietv of Kiiends
notwithstanding bis expu's on from that laxly
many t ears ago.
Mr Sergeant By'es and P endergns' app* ar-
ed for the prosecution; Mr h it*rny Ke'ly, Mr
o Mailer, and Gunning, for the defence
I he prisoner challenged 'hi teen ot tl e ju-
ro s. under the diiection ot Mr O Mailer.
*ke I( rei Brles traced the ronnecti oof'he
ptisoner and the deceas'd - from her 'nuance
u[ (on his service .her departure in the family
way...and 'h.ir subsequent intercourse r.. the
day of her death Witnesses wte 'hen call'd
Mary Ann Ashley ; ' live in Bath place.
Sal hill' On the Ist of January. Saudi Hart
was living next door to me 1 saw the p'is«-
n. r that day go into her house b.twen tour
and five in the evening. I heard a stifled set
of scream between six and seven o'clock. I
look the candle and opened 'be door . I saw
the prisoner roming out of Mrs Hart s house
There is a little garden in front ot each bouse,
seven yards long. 1 went to Mis Hart s gate
befort the prisoner got out. He nppea r ed ruti-
lated, and could not open the „atc T here
was a small button whidh "ns bard to op-n.
I said nothing to him about what 1 beard when
1 w 'ii~ opening the gate lot hun. I had made
a ternark before Directly I went out I said
•I am afraid rav neighbour i« il. I sboti'd
think I spoke lend e«> ugh to be he» r d by the
prisoner. He was in the pathway r niing
down, about six or seven yards from me No
repiv was made ; not a word. ben I got
to Mrs Hart’s gate I conldhear her still, whilst
1 was opening the gale It "as the same sti-
fled sort sc earn still. Mlun I opened the
gate I mer» ly said to tbs prisoner, *• I ' 9 a
little button sir; allow me to open it. He
mad# no reply. He was agitated. Mia Harts
door was shut when 1 got lo it I opened the
door and "eul in I saw her lying with hpr
head near the door Her dress was disordered
Her pettieoats were up nea lv to h*r knees,
and one of her stockings down and torn, and
her loft shoe off Her limbs were not moving,
1 took her hands and raised her, and said, Oh,
Mrs Hart, what is matter? She made no reply
Kroth came from the corners oflier m*>uth Her
eyes being fixed 1 thought she was d> ing 1
saw on the table a bottle & a glass, with s >me
porter, little more than ball lull. T here was
a glass at each side of the table lr. one glass
tberere was porter, there was only a little froth
in the other. Mrs Burrell, whom 1 called in,
used the empty one to get some water for Mrs
Hart She could not drink any 1 suit one of
Mrs Bnanett’s apprentices to Dr Champney's
Catherine White 1 am barmaid at the VN ind-
jnill, at Salthill. 1 knew Sarah Hart. She came
to our house on Wednesdav, the first dav "f this
year, abont half-past six, for a boide of Guin-
nes s stout. She borrowed a corkscrew also. Mie
stayed about ten minuites, aud was in conver-
sation with me. Nothing was the matter with
her at all. She was neither agitated nor ill. The
bottle and screw were to have been returned in
the morning.
William Bariew; 1 am gardener to Mr. Stew-
ard, of Salthill 1 met Sarah Hart between her
house and the windmill on,the evening of (he
first of Januaiy. She said to me, ‘'Ah, Bail vv,
is it yon ? She appeared in good spirits—quite
eheerfull.
* Mr Charr.pneys, one of the surge ns who
conducted the pots mortem examination, was
examined and ctoss examined at gmaf length.
1 he conclusion to which he came was that de-
ceased bad died from prussic acid
On thursdav, Mr Cooper, analytical chemist
deposed to his conviction that death was the in-
sult of prussic acid
Mr J oseph Cooper, son of the piecreding
witness, corroborated Ins testimony
Charlotte Howard, servant to Mrs,
Gilbert deposed that she saw the prisoner
twice at the house wf the deceased iu tl e
aturun o! 184.*5 In ?ep!enju«i, 1814,
M'j ness was liearlr a foitnigh’ at »’e
eeasei.'s. *>ii 11 e•O' 11 I! e iu>'ii It i ) t*.
primmer ml led . at Ms u' ~ «»’ i lock in il K
evening D>caused m-c -iv*“«4 (• i'.» in ti •
trout room, wi'r>ss was in th*- li.t k
IVrea>ed s> ill Iter l> rr a b ,t'b ni poir r.
It was taken f'om witness n h- 'im ;
ro< m bv ti m iln’en-eil- who w s , .
•\
whim* a quarter ot an In ur v jili tin >ii«.
ti.>er I) r<H <' I then o> ered lie ■■ i p| i»
door aid C' 'll |t lined o' leme re, \ i
•''lie had t een w•- :| h i t.e 11 . y h I, r
I'be ■ptis"ller was gone when I, ,-ex.-e 1
t»|i* netl II eih or. Silo was s.c* and •
plained ni'her read Sue threw heive l"
Ui ii >u the I eh A ill n seeineil easier • it c
soon became sick Hgain, and te'. he I hi
v* * n ied. dip sai<l tli* porte> ni.nlt; .*• •
head l>ad diier’ly she d unk it a> d sh •
d"llht rl she lil l iHken t 0!! Ilfli. w. -
ness fhi ew awav ih** per-- rth r renmi -
eI in the ; lasses What remained in the
bntMp sh“ thank in the morning, atth i-:
ditl not make her ill Deceased was het-
t r in the ni<• idag, ant! did not womplahi
of in r throat.
Mr. \imlhlU' 1 . pt'lifi med 'he I s ini j
nr «‘f Mpssis. Ciiampneys in ('toner-
a til s»iil sis'', hat Ie- syo'ptt ni'.ies
©riled hv tl ewo a i How hi e. Were pi, _
eiselv tlio-e of a ten* 'll who had ta pn .i
dose o' pi 11'" r n-'tl, hill not Stifluienliy
large t'' I'KIl te t!i a II
Mi P.i kering surgeon gave corrobor-
ative r vidf pee.
Kt7.ii.h Aardme Wasliei wo man, de-
posed to having tepeatedlv seen the p is-
oner at the house of the deceased. Up
whs th.ip ' title «30ih oI Pet-ember 1811,
Mr I lu map, formerly shojirr.an lo Mr.
Huges chemist 8h Bishopgate Street l on-
don (now dead) deposed that Hie | rigo-
ner on the Ist ot h nuarr 18-Jo, hetweejj
12 and 2 o’clock in the day anti bought a
bottle of prussic acid.
Other evidence, comparatlvlv unimpnrf-
ant closed ihe cuse for the piosi cution ;Sc
the court reitrcd for the purpose of m-
Ireshment;
Mr Kelly in his nddnss to the jury
said they must lie convinced before they
convicted the prisoner not nnlv that the
deceased had <ii«*«l from poison, but UiHt
lie it was by whom it was administered
He contendi d thateven the first allegation
was not proved;—there was no proof
that the woman tlied frvm poison. The
medical witnesses founded their conc'u-
sions chiefly on hooks ; iliev confessed
they were without peismtal experience in
cases of |toisoning by prussic icid. they
bad found that poisin in the stomach hut
ilia very small quantity. They had found
also some undigested appleand it Was no-
torious that that the apple pip vielded a
considerable quantity of prussic acid.
Might it not (heie ore, fie from this secure
that the acid was derived ? As to the vi-»
it of the prisoner to Herschel House, he had prob-
ably gone to see the famous telescope, and his be-
nisi of having been at Slough no doubt arose from
his wish to conceal his connection with the deceas-
ed.
The learned counsel called several witnesses to
charecter, and the eourt adjourned to Friday.
Baron Parke summed up the evidence on Fri-
day morning ; and the jury uft«r an absence of half
an hour, returned with a verdict ot guilty. The
judge then procetde to pass the awful eenter.ee A
death upon the ptisoner. He told them he had
been found guilty, by a jury of his own count! emeu
upon evidence which had perfectly satisfied [Barnu
Parkejand them, and he thought eveiy fair and
reasonable p< rson wdo heatd a that he he had
committed a most neneuus, diala lira!, cowardlv,
murder upon his unfortunate victim he then cas-
ed the sentence ot death in the nsuai manner, or -
dering that his body, after mcutioi shoo d le her
ied within the pit-tints of the gaol, 'the unhappy
man recieved the sentence with en extraoidiiiiuv
degrte ot firmness ; and be\< lid the utrvuusuvs*
which he manifested throughout he cellared vet v
litlie emotion, although nuiinn of |sersott> I.*
court Were iu tears gud some of the female, sohoed
a oud.
f t w, 1* int, r, flat—Land
