

“The ‘Orvieto’
Journal.”
Orient Line, R.M.S. “ORVIETO.” 12130 Tons, 14000 H.P.
A Record of Events between Sydney and Naples.
April 12th to May 18th, 1911.
Edited by A. F. BARRELL.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.




“The ‘Orvicto’
Journal.”
A Record of Events between Sydney and Naples,
April 12th to May 18th, 1911.
Edited by A. F. HARRELL.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.


Foreword.
This Journal is the outcome of a suggestion made by a
passenger, and consists of a collection of articles, after the
style of a daily newspaper, containing news of the doings on
board ship, and records of thoughts and puns, made at
passengers’ or the ship’s expense.
The first Journal was edited and read on the evening of
May 3rd, and proved so popular that a second was prepared
and read on Friday the 12th. At the request of a large number
of passengers I volunteered to have as much of the Journals
printed as possible and posted to the addresses of subscibers,
and with the short resume of the voyage appearing in other
columns, it is hoped that in its present form, the Journal will
be valued as a memento of a very pleasant trip. Owing to
the cost of production some articles have had to be curtailed,
A. F. BARRELL,
Editor,
221 Durham Street.
Christchurch,
New Zealand.
NOTE —Extra copies may be had on application to me.
The Journey, Sydney to Naples.
A. F. B.
When friends had been farewelled again and again,
and the cargo had been stowed away, the big steamer removed
her shackles and steamed slowly away from the wharf to the
accompaniment of cheers and the waving of hankerchiefs and
umbrellas. Before long everyone settled down, and began to
make acquaintances. As the weather proved to be
cold for some time, the small music-room and the smoke-room
were well patronised, and many a pleasant hour was spent in
music, song and games.
On the morning of April 13th, the sea became trouble-
some, and many who were just beginning to feel confident,
discovered that they had not found their sea-legs yet. The


two and a half days’ stay in Hobart was thoroughly enjoyed, and
the journey was continued at 12.30. a.m. on Sunday the 16th,
cold weather still prevailing. As the sea was much calmer,
the day was passed pleasantly, an evening service being
conducted by Mr. A F Barrel!.
Melbourne was reached at midday on Easter Monday
the 17th, and after a short stay of two days, of which most
people took full advantage to see the city, another farewell
scene was witnessed on the wharf, where a large gathering of
friends assembled to *wish bon voyage to the excursionists.
During the journey to Adelaides concert and dance were held,
a goodly number participating; the programme was arranged
by a Committee which was elected before arriving at
Melbourne.
The Committee, which subdivided into smaller
groups to manage sports, and entertainments, held office
during the whole of the voyage, and did invaluable work in
providing amusement for the passengers. Its officers were
Mr. Me. Ilveen, Chairman; Mr. C. Davis, Secretary and
latterly Mr. Carter; Mr. Moss, Treasurer; the other members,
Mesdames Moss,Spiro,&Husband, Misses Carter ,and Lyster,
and Messrs. Gill, Plunkett, Cullimore, Brown, Foster,
Husband, Barrell and Blacklea.
The Australian Bight kept well up to its reputation,
and the great ship rolled and tossed on the billows, to the
discomfort of a number of new passengers; consequently not
many concerts or meetings took place. Fremantle was
reached on Tuesday April 25 at 7.30. a.m., and at 4 p.m, the
journey was once more resumed, the farewell on this occasion
being accompanied by a sharp shower of rain, which continued
through the evening, vivid lightning flashing at intervals.
For the next eight days, everyone settled down for
enjoyment; as we neared the tropics, lighter clothing gradually
superseded the ordinary garments On Saturday nights the
ship’s orchestra dispensed music on the upper deck, and on
Sundays, services were conducted in the same place by the
Rev. P. Griffiths, and once by Messrs. Bristo and Stone; both
of the latter conducted a Sunday-school as well
The concerts were always enjoyable, and it was really
surprising what excellent talent was available, the items
consisting of songs, recitations and instrumental music. On


one occasion a meeting was held to hear impromptu speeches,
various passengers essaying to speak at a moment’s notice on
•uch subjects as “Are men more sentimental than women and
why?”; “Why work?”; Why is the sea wet?” etc.
At another time, a debate was held on the question
“Do animals reason?’’ Mr. Carter opened in the affirmative,
Mr. A. F. Barrell taking the negative side. The evening was
very enjoyable, and a large number of people took a keen
interest in the argument. A vote on the question showed
that the audience were equally divided on the question.
Mr. E. Bannerman was chairman. One night a gathering
was held for the purpose of telling stories; Mr. Moss acted
as chairman, and amusing stories were told for a full hour.
On the suggestion of a passenger a journal was
prepared and read one night, contributed to by various
people. This paper is the result of that and a second one,
read a week later,
The Sports Committee, by subscriptions and entrance
fees, received a little over £\7 to spend in trophies for various
sports events. The whole Committee is to be heartily
congratulated on the success of its work, for the sports events
did much to while away the time. Cock-fighting
pillow-fighting, taking coins out of tank, potato race,
and tug-of-war were enjoyable events, and the winners well
deserved their prizes.
A daily newspaper called the “Orvieto’ Times” made
its appearance for a week and then disappeared. It was to
be a daily record of events on the voyage, and contained
a few Marconigrams received by the ship’s operator, but as
the small size of the paper prevented much being said about
the doings of each class, it became unpopular.
As the vessel neared Colombo, blankets and matti esses
were taken on deck by those whose cabins were badly
ventilated. Not much sleep was obtained the first night,
and many facetious remarks, interspersed by merry peals of
laughter, interrupted the first few-nights’ rest.
Colombo was reached by Thursday May 4th at
daybreak. For a whole day most passengers enjoyed
themselves thoroughly. The varied and animated life was
entrancing, and rickshaw and bullock carts were in much
demand. The most interesting part of the journey had now


begun, and though the sports were still continued, the
greatest interest seemed to be centred on the coast Ikies of
Africa & Arabia,which presented no very attractive appearance
Telescopes and field glasses were continually brought to bear
upon passing ships and the coastline and a good view of
Perim Island was obtained. When Suez was reached on the
night of Saturday May 13th, the loquacious natives scrambled
on board to dispose of their wares. The moonlight night was
favourable for seeing a little of Suez and the entrance to the
canal, so many remained on dec k for the greater part of the
night. Though steaming through the canal was slow, the trip
was very enjoyable, and the native boys running along the
the banks for fruit and pence supplied plenty of amusement
Madama, the Bitter Lakes, Serapeum, Ismailia, and Kantara
were all passed in due time, and Port Said was reached on
Sunday at 4 p.m, A service had been held in the morning,
and nothing could be greater than the contrast of that quiet
hour and this busy, bustling town with its laughing and
singing natives. The coaling took but a few hours, and when
passengers with their baskets of oranges had returned, the
journey was again resumed at 8 p.m. Cooler weather now
prevailed, and warmer garments were donned.
The Sea became somewhat rough compelling a few
passengers to gaze intently over the side,listening the while
to “Yip-I-Addy” whistled by their comrades. Several con-
certs were held during the next few days, at one of which
the Sports prizes were presented. Everyone was keenly
interested in gazing at the ruined city of Messina which
seemed quite close, and also at the well cultivated slopes of
the Italian mountains. Stromboli too, came in for its share
of attention, and the miniature upheavals of the molten lava
in the crater caused many exclamations of delight.
The Island of Capri was passed at 5.30 a.m. on
Thursday May 18th, and a few hours later could be seen
historic Vesuvius and the beautiful Bay of Naples. Here
a number of passengers left the Ship to continue the journey
to England by land, and many happy friendships terminated
in hearty hands hakes upon the deck. Few sea-trips could
be more thorouhly enjoyed as this was, and it will be long
before the incidents on the voyage are entirely forgotten.


Sleeping on Deck.
Our cabins were so "dreadful hot”
We longed to sleep on deck.
And boasted proudly that we would,
If permission we could get.
“Hurrah!” we cried "they say we may
If we stay up till ten”
This thought it cheered us all the day;
‘‘We ll sleep in coolness then’’
“Oh, Husbands, brothers, fathers dear,
Please bring our chairs and lugs.
How pleasant it will be up here
Goodbye to Pills and Drills ”
Alas for hopes, our sleep was scant,
And some were daunted quite
But others said, “We’ll not give in,
We’ll bivouac to-night,’’
The deck was strewn with mattresses.
Though some on chairs did stay,
And peace and quiet settled down,
Under slumber’s gentle sway.
‘T’m getting soaked," The clarion cry
Aroused the sleeping forms;
And some were wet. and most not dry,
They looked around with qualms.
Then such commotion in the camp,
And startled ghosts rushed round,
Dragging, pushing, carrying things,
And searching for dry ground.
Cinderella cried “I must go down,
But who has stol’u my shoe?
I cannot cross the watery deck,
I don’t know what to do”
Under a wandering mattress near
The missing shoe was found.
And we all found room on the Isle
With the wet deck all around.
And all arrangements had been made,
When an old man hove in sight,
“Go down, go down,” the ladies cried,
"You can’t stay here to-night.’’
He groped about and found a chair
Also a sheltered nook,
And made himself so cosy there,
But he had to "take his hook’’


When glorious morning wakened us,
We rose up in delight,
Oh, we have had a dreadful time,
But —we’ll sleep up here to-night.
GRANNIE.
A day’s Experience in the Tropics on
board H.M.S. Orvieto.
I sleep among the lambs on our spacious upper deck;
I rise about 5 o’clock, and after a scramble around to get
my things together and find my boots, I make a desperate
effort to get across the deck and down the staircase I wend
my way through about thirty sleeping beauties, and so
charming do they look, that I nearly drop my bed to laugh.
Then I descend the stairs to the lower regions, and dump
my bed into the bunk, and make for the bathroom, only to
find Mrs. Snooks, Mrs Jones and Miss Squirrel before me.
After a great deal of waiting and knocking and talking, the
crowd has reached large dimensions, and we manage to* call
Mrs Snooks out. After hearing “Don’t keep us waiting,”
I get in, and when I have had my splash, I make my way
to the wash-houses, where there are 50 women and children
(more or less) some washing, others hairdressing, and
pushing and hustling one another. With a face as red as
a turkey and the perspiration dropping off me, I get out
and while dressing, the breakfast bell goes. We have
barley, porridge, bacon and chips; then we get our
gentlemen friends to get us a corner for deck-chairs, and
pass the morning pleasantly.
After dinner we are quite overcome and need a rest;
we see the gentlemen snoozing in their chairs and they
rouse up suddenly, no matter how quiet you may try to be,
for they hear the cups rattle and smell the cake—-it is
strange how they sleep with one eye open.
Soon the call goes for tea, and wc go down to zero.
Afterwards we promenade the deck with some difficulty, and i
see some of the most attentive husbands I ever saw, and
some of the most devout young men.


In the evening after a most enjoyable entertainment
by the ship’s band we retire to our spacious bed-rooms
which have neither windows nor doors. We get the
hammocks and chairs arranged by the help of our friend the
police, and get comfortably settled and fast asleep, when
there is an alarm—a man is upstairs, and all the women go
lor him and he soon vanishes.
E.J.
Has the Age of Chivalry passed away.?
Orvieto, May 3rd J9ll.
The above question becomes very pertinent to the
person who has left the quiet, and regular routine of his home
and become a passenger on a large ocean-going steamer
whereon are congregated people of various nationalities, creeds
and political opinions, who are compelled by circumstances
over which they have no control, to live very closely
together for a lengthy period, during which personal
convenience and privilege are subservient to rigid and well-
defined limits which require personal discipline, common sense
and tact in order that harmony and good-will may prevail
and the greatest good accrue to all. I exceedingly regret that
my personal experience compels me to state, that
courtesy and self-abnegation appear to be the exception
rather than the rule, and a general spirit of No 1 is observed
on all sides, which would make it appear that unless a person
is self-assertive he would not get those things he is justly
entitled to. That such a state of things should exist in our
midst to-day is a lucid proof, that with all the intellectual
advancement of our modern civilisation, there is a serious
lack of something in our national character, which robs it of
its sweetness, beauty and power.
It behoves all true men and women to use their best
endeavours to find the remedy that will remove this blight.
Emerson says in one of his beautiful essays that all men are
corrigible, which means that all men are capable of improve,
ment in manners and conduct at least, but unfortunately only
a few men seem to desire to cultivate these graces, and one is
led to think that there is something wrong with the primary
principles of Society.


. Presonally I believe the essential principles ot a true
society are ftistice, Equity, Tiuth, and when they are recog-
nised, and generally observed, there will be no need for any-
one to ask ‘Has the age of Chivalry passed away,?”
JOHN OAKES,
N. S. W.
Editorial.
In introducing this journal to the 3rd class passengers,
lor the first time, we wish it to be understood that the
contents refer mainly to subjects within the knowledge of all,
and that its success is entirely dependent upon its contributors
•* n ?. t 'r” lean j n way t 0 run in opposition to the
Orvieto Times, for while that is a record of the doings on
board, our Journal is to be a record of sayings and reflections
inspired by our living together.
We do not hesitate for one moment to predict success-
tor our venture from the start, and we offer our cordial thanks
to the Committee and others responsible for inaugurating this
venture, and to those who have come forward so generously to
give their support by writing articles or canvassing for
contributions. 5
hince we left Sydney, the time has been most pleasant
iy and profitably passed, and the enjoyment derived is attribut
able m no small degree to the general committee, to which the
thanks of the passengers are due. When we reflect that we are
a mixed company consisting of all nationalities, and represent-
mg a great variety of opinions, we are very gratified that such
courtesy, tact and good-will have been generally exhibited that
«;° r u anc * str^e has in the main been conspicuously absent.
v\ e fail to agree with our correspondent who writes to us in
pessimistic vein complaining of chivalry being absent. For our
selves we must speak as we have already had experience and
t at has certainly inclined us to take the opposite view to that
of our contributor.
We are glad that the favourite topic of sea-sickness has
been dropped,but it seems to have been superseded by that of
‘home-sickness” and the prevailing high temperature, and
latterly on the question ‘‘Do animals reason?’’ We wish success
to those who are still puzzling over this question.


With these few introductory remarks we present our-
selves to our patrons, and with feelings of gratitude for our
safe and speedy journey so far, and with hopes that it will
continue so to the end, we have pleasure in launching this our
first Journal.
Quips.
Nobles in their palaces may dwell and talk of things divine,
But they who sojourn here can tell a tale or two that would outshine.
The fairy tales of Hans Andersen,
For here you’ll find the keenest wit, smart repartee,
That never fails to make the sides with laughter split,
From the woman with the voice, The Agitator and the Cook,
The d—l himself would take his hook’
Mark Two.
Children’s Column.
R.M.S. Orvieto,
May 3rd. 1911.
Dear Mr. Editor,
I am only a little girl, but would like to write you a
few lines I was very ill for a few days when we started, but
am now enjoying myself very much. I tried to win some of
the prizes, but only succeeded partly. I am going to try and
win one after we leave Colombo.
T *
I remain,
V. R.
Orvieto,
May 3rd
Dear Mr. Editor
I want to tell you a little about my trip so far as we
have been. I left Brisbane April sth. I have never been on a
boat before. It has been a lovely trip so far but I must say,
I have been sick a time or two, but the sports have helped
me to forget it. The best praise I can give this boat is to
say that I want to come back in it. That will show you how
much I have liked it.
Yours truly,
ETHEL CUMES.


Poetry Column.
“ Lost ’
I am looking for someone
To love me
Someone to call me their own
Someone to put their arms
Around me
And take me the longest way home.
Mack.
Open to all young ladies travelling by S. S, “Orvieto’'.
Application to be addressed
Care Music Room Steward.
Lost,
LOST my pride by cadging for note paper from the Music
a retailer
Finder rewarded by returning same to
Civilization.
LOST, between Dining table and Pantry a small steward; last seen,
carrying 6 teapots in his hands, and a plate between his teeth
Finder well rewarded. Apply, A Hungry Diner.
Wanteds.
WANTED a cook; one who can boil water without burning it,
Apply to Anti Salt.
WANTED KNOWN. Turkish baths may be had every day in the
two berth cabins down below. Admission free.
WANTED KNOWN. Orvieto milk has never suffered from the
much dreaded drought
WANTED. An energetic and intelligent young lady as assistant
Editor. No single lady need apply as we wish to double our present
circulation.
Answers to Correspondents.
Seasick Billy. Yes we can understand how miserable you
must feel but it must be some consolation for you to know
that your sweetheart whom you left behind in Melbourne feels
ill in sympathy with you, and we would strongly advise you
never to wear your best clothes while on board, and to shave as
rarely as possible so that the transformation will be all the
greater when you go ashore. We hope the seasickness will not
return.


Answers to Correspondence
Georgie of the Gloty Hole, asks why the Rhubarb
Tart was a failure on a recent Sunday We were curious
ourselves and happened to ask the Heavy Weight Stewar
who feeds the lions at the Kelly gang Restaurant. He
laughingly replied that if the cook were to give away his
good recipes to all who would like them that he would
never be able to give us a treat, but he knew that the cook
spent a long time waxing his moustache on that particular
morning and he thought that some of the grease intended
for the toilet must have landed in the pastry and that being
rather hurried at the last moment the rhubarb forgot to
cook.
Answers to Correspondents.
“Cleanliness’ The canvas door you mention was washed the
other day. No census was taken of its inhabitants.
“Inquirer” The person refuses to be weighed.
‘‘Weary’’ No, the ships officers do not reglate the traffic on deck.
You may place the heel of your left foot in the hollow of j our
neighbours right eye, and your chair can remain in the same place
until your fellow passenger recovers.
Local and General News.
We understand that the gentleman who expressed the
opinion that ladies were more sentimental than men, is now
out of the doctor’s hands and is progressing as favourably
as can be expected. He lias been placed for safety in the
men’s quarters.
Some passengers are still wondering why the sea is
wet.
It is not true that the gentleman who advocates that
ladies should wear harem skirts the other night, is a draper.
The question has been asked “What would be done
if the electric light failed?” We hope the stewards will have
oil lamps ready to see.
On Saturday a fire alarm was sounded just at tea
time as usual without any warning. The stewards rushing
hither and thither almost caused a panic which was fortun-
ately avoided by the timely advice tendered by an
experienced passenger to “shut up and sit down.” The good
advice had the desired effect.


Amusements.
Under the patronage of Capt. S. H. Elford R.N.R.
The Southern Cross Comedy Company (Limited) will make
their first appearance on the briny Wednesday 10th May at
9 p.m. in the third class bar with a strong cast of characters.
“Sweet Smell of Old Breweiy.”
Silvery Tenor H. Moore will sing
“Boose! Boose! Glorious Boose.”
Signor Foster Conductor of Orchestra
Admission by Silver coin to all parts.
Note:- Those who cannot ‘walk the line’* not admitted.
Airoplanes, Motors, and Unicycles at 10 p.m.
Matrimonial.
Pushing young man (Good Sport. Pillow-fight Expert) desires
to meet Lady with means (view to double harness)
Apply
Davis,
Acting Secretary (Orvieto).
Matrimonial.
Lady, young, of awful appearance and possessing
extraordinary eating capacities would like to meet on top
deck of “Orvieto” at 9p m to-night, 3rd.inst, a young man
of stainless character. Must be good pillow fighter aud
willing to enter for all high jumps. View to matrimony
before “Orvieto” reaches London. All replies to
On the Shelf.
Matrimonial.
Young lady of prepossessing and refined appearance,
(not half) musically and artistically declined, wishes to add
to her wonderful records of proposals; applicant must
possess like brilliant qualities and must also have an income
of ,£lO 000 per annum, or possessing landed interest* in
Kalgoorlie district, age immaterial; advertiser has no
objection to becoming a bird in a gilded cage. Dress in
confidence; not tropical attire.
Miss Fortune.
c/o Music Room Steward,
R.M.S. “Orvieto”.


Advertisement Column.
Tourists are reminded that our Air-man will make a flight into
oblivion from Naples on the 20th. inst. Mr Barrell will givean
exhibition showing where in another sphere “ Animals do reason ”,
Mr Foster has kindly consented to present sufficient gas for the trip.
Fares reasonable to those who wish to go higher and have not par-
taken of Orvieto “Pud".
For Sale and to Let.
FOR SALE. Three old and seasoned bachelois; they are rich
and submissive and are highly recommended. Also one sleek, tall and
argumentative young bachelor.
Prices to suit all comers.
FOR SALE. Cabin copper wash bowls suitable for fountain
drinking cups.
Apply early as the supplv is limited.
FOR SALE. A set of Coits guaranteed to entertain 700
passengers; thoroughly reliable; never known to have been tight
although the bar is open three times a day.
AUCTION SALE. On 4th May at 12 noon, at our spacious
premises the Music Room. All that beautiful peaceful expanse of
ocean visible from the ‘Orvieto,’ together with all contents absolutely
without reserve, a good opportunity for anyone wishing to acquire a
well-watered farm. A real liquid asset.
To Let.
Space for use as incubators;
Apply to stewards of lower regions.
TO LET. A spacious room used for dining purposes, Suitable
for steam-cooking restaurant company or laundry.
Wit and Wisdom.
Discussion on debate
Do animals reason?
It was decided conclusively that
If there’s any' difference they’re both alike.
Wit and Wisdom.
In the dining room;" Let’s get out of this oven” exclaimed one
who had satisfied the inner man. "You can’t go out till you’re done”
remarked his table mate.
News.
It is not generally known that deck-chairs are
somnambulists, for in the mornings they are never seen in
the place where they weie deposited the night before.
One gentleman when asked to sing declared that he
sang only low Baiitone songs. We hope that the vulgar
element will not enter into our concerts.


Marconigrams.
, Per Press Associations
N. S. W. Backblocks.
Kelly gang escaped. Supposed to be on Orvieto,
Enquire closely.
(On enquiries being made by our reporter, it was
found that the notorious Kell}' gang are actually on board
travelling under assumed names. Steps are quickly being
taken to secure their arrest. —Ed. O. J.)
The S. S. Orvieto
The S. S. “Orvieto” is a grand old boat,
And as she rocks and rolls would have you note,
That ships like men do always reel,
When crossing the bar with uneven keel.
The “Orvieto’’ is notin the slightest, proud.
Is the same in all weathers, su shine, or cloud,
She follows her compass, obeys her chart,
And ploughs the seas with a strong brave heart.
The “Orvieto” has fought'with the wind and the storm,
And the wild waves have ofttimes enveloped her form,
And have swayed her with anger from stem to stern.
As if they would have her some great lesson learn.
The “Orvieto’’ is built upon the right plan,
And this selfsame principle applies to man,
The “ Orvieto’’ is going tc carry us through,
Because the “Orvieto ’, is strong, and true.
J OAKES.
Sunny New South Wales.
May 3rd 19H.
The Romance of a deck chair.
by F.P.W.
There is nothing about me very attractive just a few
slats of timber and a yard or so of canvas; in fact I am any-
thing but romantic, to look at ami yet I seem to have become
imbued with the sentiments of my master, which are strict-
ly romantic, and when I feel him sink into my arms and
give one of those long deep sighs. I seem to feel that I have
a very real existance. I know I comfort him, and I know he
is graceful; but my master loves a lady; I’ve heard him tell
her, often, and he does it in a nice way too, of course you
never hear him, he doesn’t even want you to, but he trusts
me implicitly. I should like to tell yon that I’m not one of
those common ship-owned chairs with a common-place


number on my back; no Sir! I’m a privately owned concern
built of the best Australian hard wood, real canvas backed,
well got up. and capable at a pinch of accomodating two
full grown persons, one of each sex preferred, as two men
are just a little too heavy. That reminds me I got lost the
other day and a lady of about 24 stone sat on me, and I
thought that my career as a serviceable chair had ended, I
groaned, squeaked and creaked, but the damsel would not
move, and I was bordering on a state of collapse when my
gallant master rescued me from my perilous position.
“ The Lost Slippers ’
by BURRA REE.
On the good ship Orvieto was a young man from the
land of the Roley Poley grass named “Coo-roo-le-bah”
Holding fast to the old saying ‘‘That Cleanliness was next
to Godliness,” he took his morning bath. On one particular
morning, being rather absent minded, he left his slippers in
the bath room. Later on realizing that his feet were bare
and being naturally very modest he went back for the
slippers but found them not. At the table he related his
severe loss to his friends and the steward overhearing him,
Said “Do not despair, I found them and put them up on
the beam out of the way, Come and 1 will give them to
you,’’Coo-roo-le-bah full of joy; followed him,but alas! only
to be plunged into deeper distress for the slippers had
vanished. But the following morning, going early on deck
to draw in the invigorating draughts of the crisp morning
air, he saw lying before him a pair of slippers of the same
size and almost the same pattern as his lost ones. It did not
take Coo-roo-le-bah long to try them on and finding them
such a good fit, said within himself,“Surely the person who
took mine must have left these for me”, and as they proved
so comfortable he used them for several days until he
became quite attached to them But alas! while basking in
the beautiful sunshine a few days atier. a savage looking
Warrior named Yab-00-Ragoo came along and seeing the
beautiful number thirteens basking in the sun, stopped and
demanded of Coo-roo-le-bah “Where you get my slippers?’’
Tremblingly Coo-roo-le-bah said, “Are they yours? Surely I'
will at once take them off and deliver them to you, I was
only taking care of them for you”. So poor Coo-roo-le-bah
is disconsolate and is watching the feet of all the young
braves to see if they are wearing his beautifu slippers.


SECOND JOURNAL.
“ Is the British race degenerating?'*
This question was discussed at a Medical Conference
held in Australia a few years ago, and according to the
evidence that was given, and the opinions that were
expressed by these medical gentlemen, the race is without a
doubt deteriorating physically. The facts and figures that
were adduced placed the matter beyond the realm of doubt
and debate The statistics of the British and American War
Office are a revelation in themselves to those who care to
read the height? chest measurement and physical stamina
are much below the average of a few generations ago.
Thousands of British and American boys who desired to
enter the navy, failed to pass the medical test through
having developed tobacco heart and nervous disorders. The
American fleet visited Australia a few years ago, and the
men marched in procession through the streets of the
chief Cities, and without the slightest discourtesy I must
say that their physique was most disappointing,and I could
not help feeling a little anxious for the prestige of the stars
and stripes. This is a problem that concerns all true patriots,
anti should be faced with a dogged determination that will
not rest until satisfactorily solved.
The doctors tell us that our habits and modes of
living are responsible tor the mischief, which may be true
but this is only one phase of the question ; physical
degeneracy is preceded by moral degeneracy and a
repudiation of Natural laws. Dr. Victor Horsley says that
nature never forgives, and we read in the grand old Book,
that whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap, also that
righteousness, or right doing exalteth a nation. The destiny
of a nation is in the people’s hands, and that is where the
work of regeneration will have to begin, with a recognition
of the principle, that no nation can be truly great, unless
she be truly good
JOHN OAKES
New South Wales,
May 10th 1911.


Washing Day.
It is always washing day. At any hour of the day
or night a sudden inspiration to wash comes to an Orvieto
passenger, and away she or he goes with a bundle in one
hand and a piece of soap in the other.
On arriving at the wash-house, the wash-lady or
gentleman usually finds that the same inspiration has
seized a number of others, and all the places are taken ; but
on the whole the utmost good humour prevails and a
catastrophe that at first causes a grumble, in the end pro-
duces jokes and laughter.
Sometimes there is no hot water ; sometimes there is
no cold ; sometimes the bowls are full to overflowing, and
nothing will induce the water to subside ; and at others
the pipe begins to leak and flood the floor, spraying those
venturesome enough to go near.
The tub is the best place, but there one is constantly
interrupted by people coming for hot w T ater and their
buckets sometimes get entangled in the plug and the nice
soapy water disappears.
A few r are proud possessors of a blue bag or an iron,
and they will sometimes lend these articles to a poorer
travelling companion.
When the washing is done, the question of drying
becomes serious. The air of the wash-house possesses a
strange quality. It appears to be a solvent of certain
articles, which mysteriously disappear from human gaze.
Even such hard substances as wood, glass, bone, and silver
can be dissolved by this wonderful atmosphere. It is
impossible, under the circumstances, to make the clothes a
good colour, and one does not wish to exhibit the drab-
coloured articles on deck though it is the best place for
drying and airing. A string or rope across the cabin is the
method adopted by many, and when one sleeps on deck it
is not a bad plan.
Quite a number of the sterner sex have discovered
that they have a talent for this interesting profession, and
should they lose their billets through too much sight-seeing,
will find it very convenient on their return, to be able to
earn an honest living, and at the same time help the
harassed housewives of Australia and New Zealand with
the washing and ironing.
GRANNIE


Poetry.
What ho! this Coronation crush
Everybody thinks they are in the front
Crammed on board the P. and O.
Also on the Orvieto.
People fat, and people thin,
Crammed like sardines in a tin.
From Australia’s sunny land,
Also from the Maori land,
Everybody thinks their land the best,
I myself think mine the best,
From the land of milk and honey
We’ll sure return and make more money.
Australia’s sons and daughters roam
Towards the land they still call home,
Wide and deep though roll the seaS,
Hot the sun which is chilled by the breeze.
Oh ! this Coronation day,
Loud the cheer from shore to shore
Britain lives for evermore,
With one prayer the Heaven rings,
God Bless George, Our Empire King!
F. YATES.
Constant working from dawn till late,
Had made me wretched, weak and weary:
So, I saw the doctor, who lived near me ;
* Ah!’ said he “ A holiday you must take.”
So the shipping office I did get to,
And booked a berth by the Orvieto
And here I am in this Red Sea,
So very red as all can see.
In the Bight we were pitching and tossing
And then for a change we did some rocking;
And some declared they felt better ashore,
And of Bights they'd had enough, and wanted no more.
At Colombo we had a delightful day,
And would much have liked to prolong our stay,
When we came back, alas and alack!
We found the boat delightfully coal-black.
My cabin-mate in mournful numbers,
Informs me he lightly slumbers,
But there comes a noise like thunder,
From the clothes he’s sleeping under.
Well, this must be the end of my rhyme,
For I hear the editor calling—Time !
To conclude, let me, with the rest of us, sing,
Hurrah ! Hurrah ! for George,our new King.


“ The Menu.”
Did you Mr. Editor ever try some of our rice ?
Served up you will agree all very nice,
Rut when you taste it, also the figs,
. You’ll be ready no doubt to call for the pigs.
Did you Mr. Editor ever try our brown bread ?
Passed on from the 2nd class so it is said,
If it didn't affect either you or your head,
I guess you will never be given up for dead.
If you pass the doctor, and reach Port Said,
With your cheeks puffed out and the color of red,
You need fear nothing, but a dose of lead,
Or a big blow out of our brown bread.
SHAKESPEARE.
Marconigrams.
Per Press Association, London,
King George had an interview torday with Sir
Joseph Ward, premier of N Z. and the latter has given his
consent and patronage to the Coronation procession.
Marconigrams.
A Marconigram has been received from the R.M.S,
Orontes, stating that on passing the Equator they discovered
that the Line had disappeared. • They allege that some of
the “ Orvieto ” passengers have taken the“Z,*«*” to hang
out their washing with. Anyone knowing whereabouts of
same please return to Music Room Steward.
Marconigrams.
Per Press Associations.
Colombo May Bth,
Natives on the spree enjoying money squeezed from
Orvieto passengers, and the change which they didn’t
return. They await the return of the gulls.
A Strange Marriage.
Some weeks ago a new Chum coming out from
Ireland went to visit his sister, who he heard was married to
an Australian Native in the country, and while being driven
out through the bush a Kangaroo hopped across the track
“What’s that?” asked the son of ould Ireland. “Oh, that’s
an Australian native,” replied the driver. “Then for the love
of heaven turn back; I’ll go no farther; my sister is married
to wan o’ them/’ said Pat sadly.
W. COOK.


Wit & Wisdom.
Mr. A. was trying to cut new bread with a blunt
knife, when his table mate yelled impatiently, "Here, give
it to me, you were not ’bred’ to ‘loat”.
Wit and Wisdom
While I was seated alone the other day I overheard
a dispute between an apparently affectionate young couple.
The young lady was reminding her ardent admirer that he
had not sat with her in the morning but instead had been
amusing two other young ladies, of which behaviour the
young lady highly disapproved, where upon he quoted to
her the lines of a spring Poet of Cumberland;-
"My heart is like the cabbage
It’s nearly broke in two,
The leaves I give to others.
But the heart I give to you”
She was indignant and told him he could keep the
heart for somebody else, and now I see that poor young man
wandering listlessly about looking for someone on whom he
may bestow it, or perhaps he is endeavouring to gather the
leaves together, to offer a whole heart to his indignant
young lady.
Wit and Wisdom.
Two rather ‘ jolly” fellows the other night were seen
(I heard) squabbling under one of the many jetted lights
on the deck of the“Orvieto”,one declaring it was“full moon”
"the other the “rising sun” presently a third “joll) ” fellow
appeared on the scene who was promptly appealed to by
J. F No 1. “Sh.. Sh .. . Shay mate, sh ... disdesh .. sh shun
or de m . . m . . . moon?” J. F. No. 3. (staring unsteadily at
the light for a few moments) “Sk. Sk . . . skuse me friens, I
reely don’t know, lon.. ny k . . kem . , kem . board a a
at K K Klombo, shsho’m stranger in d. . d . . dish boat”.
How Tim kept cool in the Tropics.
‘‘How did you manage it Tim?” asked his friend;
“there was such a crowd on board the “Orvieto” that trip
just before the Coronation”. “Oh, it was just a trick of the
delightful iced drinks they provided you with, I would sit on


the deck allotted to the 3rd class passengers, and imagine
that the ashes and soot falling in a perpetual shower
was a fall of snow. It did not matter if you got as black as a
digger, because, if anyone told you so, it was only a case of
the kettle calling the pot black.”
Advertisements.
Best Ceylon Cigars 10 for one penny. Guaranteed to
annoy 20 passengers at one whiff. All agents.
Wanted lady with good strong voice to interrupt meetings.
Personal attractions unnecessary.
Wanted to Sell.
A Second-Hand Telescope or would exchange for Deck Chair.
Apply to Gas Bag,
or Music Room Steward,
WANTED, a few more ventilator shafts on the upper deck
Apply baggage-master.
WANTED KNOWN. The dining room will be made more
■comfortable in future, by the use of electric heaters.
Correspondence Column
Mr. Editor,
I submit the following solutions of the conundrum
in last issue.
If a boy has 19 patches on his trousers what time is it. ?
Time he got a new pair.
Hard time.
Stitch in time.
Time to change ’em.
Mean time
Rent time.
Yours etc.
FAS.
Correspondence Column.
K.M.S. Orvieto,
May Bth, 1911.
Dear Sir,
In your last Journal I saw in the Lost and Found
■Column that a small steward was lost. I may say I found
him the next day, standing on his head in the rubbish box,
where he had fallen while descending the safe stairs. The


plate between his teeth was intact, and when he first
recovered, he asked “Where’s me plates?” I have him on
the chain, and will deliver him to the owner if expenses are
paid.
Yours etc.
Mother-in-law.
R.M.S, Orvieto,
May 7th, 1911 -
Dear Sir,
I noticed by last issue that a tall, sleek, argumentative
youth was for sale. I have this day viewed the same
through my telescope, and have joy in offering my 30 year-
old daughter in exchange.
Yours very truly,
Anxious Mother.
Correspondence Column.
Mr Editor
In reply to your advertisement in last issue I beg to
apply for the position of assistant Editor, although I cannot
quite comply with the stated conditions in as much as I am a
single young lady, but, dear Mr Editor, I believe you will not
be so unkind as to ignore my other qualifications. Being of a
retiring disposition like yourself, I have come to the conclusion
that we would go well in double harness, and make a success
of the “Double-Barrelled Editorship”
My appearance, I make bold to state, is at the least
fetching, being the proud possessor of a pair of dark black eyes
and an auburn termination, which as you are no doubt aware,
denote firmness of character so essential for the position.
Amongst some of my literary productions I may
mention “The superiority of women”, “Single life is bliss”,
“How we took China with a wet sack”, also that favourite song
aboard the Orvieto as sung by Mr Carter “Slumbers on the
top deck” accompanied by the Editor.
I shall be pleased to have a personal interview,.
Thanking you in anticipation,
Yours obediently,
ISABEL.


Answers to Correspondents.
Yes “Dyspepsia” it is quite right, potatoes should be
cooked with a little salt, it not, they become as unpalatable
as an egg without seasoning, or a kiss without a moustache
Any further information on the subject may be obtained
from any of the 3rd Saloon Cooks.
Children’s Column.
Oh, R. M. S. Orvieto.
What a lot we owe to you,
For the pleasant trip you're taking us
To home and friends so true,
With sunny skies above us
And the sea below us blue,
I never have enjoyed myself,
So much before,—'tis true,
We have had a really jolly time,
With Music, Song and Dance,
And running, jumping, skipping.
For everyone a chance,
And pleasant little friends to play
I’m sure its good to be
On the R. M. S, Orvieto,
Sailing on the summer Sea.
ADDIE,
R.M.S. Orvieto,
May 9th, 1911.
Dear Mi Editor
I suppose you didn’t think you had a very explosive
character on board, but you have. In fact it is a wonder
they alio we Ime on board. I can just stand the heat. If it
was hotu ■ there would be an explosion. Then the song
would be “ Anybody here seen the Orvieto ?” The voyage
has been very good so far and what else could it be on the
Orvieto? Colombo is a good deal different from New
Zealand towns is’nt it ? I didn’t go ashore at Colombo but
stayed t<> watch the coaling operations and in about a
quarter of an hour was as black as the coal itself. I can’t
say any more, so wishing the ‘Journal’ every success.
I remain,
Yours truly,
GELIGNITE


Amusements.
A Grand Art Union and Bazaar will be held,
Saturday, 20th May, on the upper deck at moon rise.
Tickets 2 Roupees including admittance and a chance
in the Grand Art Union.
First Prize. A young man of matrimonial tendencies
beautiful to look upon, and refined habits, perfectly
obedient, to be given away with a pound of Tipton’s Tea.
Second Prize. A real work of Art. A lady of good
appearance and perfect colour, guaranteed to wash.
Third Prize. A Sea-scape taken at 6a m, from the upper
deck “ Nature in all her loveliness” unadorned except for
the mantle of white, the twelve apostles in the background.
by Holman Hint.
Fourth Prize. A water colour scene in lower dining
saloon entitled “ Pass the salt please ” the centre figure
seen in a defiant attitude with lovely dark tresses waving
in the still cool air.
by Gilmour.
Fifth Prize. A view of Pyjamas by moon-light perfect in
perspective and rich in tone, by Longfellow.
Twenty other prizes each one unique and a treasure.
Satisfaction guaranteed or no money returned.
Grand March in fancy costumes “Ye Old Colombo.’'
Some costumes have already been exhibited on the clothes
lines aft, brilliant in colour and original in design.
“Scotland Yet” decked in his rusty whiskers will
lead the Grand March and will chant“Fal-da-^a^’“Fal-da-ra^ ,
“Fal-da-ral’’.
On the sound of ship’s whistle, Father Neptune will
declare the Bar open when all who have earned their living
by the sweat of the brow can be supplied with refreshments
at their own expense.
Early doors at the Music-room port hole.


Schoolboy s definition of what a ship is.
A Ship is the same shape as a large beer cask split
down the middle. This of course would make two ships.
There are two tails at one end and nothing at the other.
When the tails go round, the ship goes through the water
and when they stop she don’t. Sometimes the ship rolls and
jumps. I don’t like this; it kind of makes me feel that “I
don’t care what becomes of me” and I wish the ship won’t
do it again. The other day I was seasick and my sister
brought me up some dinner to eat; I told her to put it over
the side right away as this would save me a lot of trouble.
The Orvieto is a big ship; there are two men to look after
her, one is the captain and the other is the crew I think
there is a lot of him (I mean the crew). You can always tell
the captain, because he looks like it, and wears some gold
lace; I’m going to be him some day. I live down the Glory
Hole; it’s a long way from here and Dad says there ought to
be trams to it. 1 asked him why they called it the Glory
Hole and he said it was because those who came out alive.
got all the glory.
European Education in India-
Dear Mr. Editor,
I feel pleasure in being able to contribute, through
the medium of your column, enlightenment, for those, and
I trust the number is very small, who are so ignorant of the
standard of English Education in India and of the scholas-
tic attainments of people who hail therefrom. My endeavour
is the outcome of an astonishing question “ Can you read
English?” that I heard put to a young man from that
country by one of the passengers from the New Continent
and an exclamation of unsuppressed surprise from another
that “Indians are well educated!”
We are all living in an advanced age in which light
and learning flood the world. We surely know that India
has been under English rule for nearly 200 years and it
should follow from this fact alone that the blood of English
commerce, Industry, Education, etc, has flowed, is flowing
and will always flow through the veins of India’s great body.
The standard of English education in India is a cognisable
factor in the Motherland. In that vast empire there are


different grades of schools and the curriculum of studies
corresponds with that at home. European schools are
staffed with teachers either graduates or trained people,
and even for specialisation men or women specially qualified
only are employed on very liberal salaries. Why! in some of
the colleges, English graduates from Oxon and Cambridge
solely comprise the staffs Each Province has a Director "of
Public Instruction in receipt ot a monthly salary of nearly
/200 who controls education in that province. Under this
official are employed Inspectors of schools who are also
thoroughly qualified men from the best modern English
universities and whose educational attainment can be
gauged from the monthly salaries they receive ranging from
£4O to In addition to this system of assured sound
English Education, the Government give large grants to-
wards the improvement of school staffs, the equipment of
laboratories, the extension or alteration of buildings, etc. It
will thus be readily seen, I hope, that India and her people
are not behind in the important matter of education.
This is but a brief on the subject of English education
in India and much could be said, but as the subject is not
always a favourite or interesting one with all people. I shall
close Mr Editor, with my best thanks to you for affording
me space in your columns and to those who have lent a
ready ear in listening to me.
Yours
T.A.G
How to be Happy on board Ship.
Don’t be in a hurry to make friends, but look
well around you, speak pleasantly to all who
approach you, listen interestingly to all stories told to you,
laughable or sad; repeat little of what you hear, put a bright
side to the complaining ones, and make light of the discom-
forts When hearing of complaints of the food provided for the
inner man, call to mind the temperature of the Galley,
the hundreds of mouths to be fed, four times per day; put your-
self in spirit, as King of the Galley, or house-maid of the
Glory Hole and we will not lie idly in a deck chair, leaving
undone what we can do, to make life on board ship happy
for all.
MARY WILSON,
New Zealand.


A Cosy Corner on board the Orvieto, in the
Red Sea.
We have a good time in our cosy corner. We each
one do our part to make things pleasant, and try to keep
each other in a good humour.
We take a walk into the highway sometimes and
witness a tug of war or a cock-fight, potato race, skipping
competition walking race, &c. &c.
We have afternoon tea presided over by two young
ladies, and the young gents come and join our party, and we
think this the best meal of the day.
We have some distinguished people amongst us, a
doctor, a premier, and an ex-mayor who kindly contributes
to the pleasures on board. Sometimes we get a visit from
Governor George, and occasionally our premier favours us
with a short address,and though our furniture is upholstered
with canvas, and our curtains and blankets too, we have a
very enjoyable time at this entrance to our corner. We
have two fine brass pedestals on which sit two figures ;
one represents the fine city of Edinburgh, the other the
noted city of Dublin.
E. J.
N. Z.
The Tribulations of a stranger in London
The season had been good and Bill Travers decided
after perusing that intensely comic production, “The guide
to the Orient Steamships’’, that he would go to the Old
Country and, accordingly, in his innocence parted up a
percentage of his acquired wealth in securing a passage, and
was duly enstalled in his cubicle, misnamed a berth. He
had not been long at sea ere he began to consider there was
something wrong; he thought it should be the winter season
coming on, but gradually he dispensed with his garments.
His coat was added to his 7 years gathering in his swag,
quickly followed by his waistcoat; finally his underwear was
dispensed with.and-not knowing what else he could abandon,
he approached a kindly steward, and enquired what sort ot
rig the natives adopted in these parts. Brimming with
information, the latter replied the only thing required, was
a loin cloth for men, and a few beads thrown in for women ;
the traveller retired to consider the position.


After ruminating over the froth of a sixpenny stout,
he philosophically concluded to make the best of things, at
the same time considering what sort of a reception he
would give to the compiler of the “Orient Guide,” if he
could only entice him on to his selection.
However the passage ended, and Bill stepped ashore
2 stone lighter in weight, and £5 lighter in pocket, the
amount invested in liquid refreshments to reduce his
temperature on the voyage.
Arriving at the Kingsland Road, he stood on the
footpath and looked hopelessly around, not knowing
which way to turn to reach the required haven of rest, a
quiet lodgng house. But depended on his own
resources for many years he was not going to be beaten, so
as a muffin man approached, Bill saluted him with; “I say
mate, wdiere can I get lodgings?” “How the hanover do I
know, do you take me for an advance agent,? I sells muffins
Ido not Cook’s coupons,” and he passed on. But Bill’s face
brightened as he observed a cat’s meat merchant approaching
him, from whom he obtained much useful information
for a pot of four-half.
Approaching the area railing of a house, which had a
front window adorned with a placard announcing “Single
Men taken in and done for,’ ’ Bill boldly rushed at the door
which after an interval was opened by a young woman of
dwarfed appearance; in one hand she brandished a black lead
brush,the other hand was on her hip; her face was strangely
embellished with streaks of black, and her hair would
require a horse rake to straighten it out. “Please Ma’am
are you the Misses,?’’‘‘No I ain’t she’s in the kitchen having
it out with the butcher, who wants his money, and she aint
got none; you come in and hear 'em ain’t they going it just,
but I’ll back the butcher ’cause he treated me to a steamboat
last Sunday to Putney,“But” said the astonished Bill “I want
lodgings”, “ Have you got any splosh?” enquired the girl
“if so, come in, wipe your feet on the mat and sit in the
parlor, till the Misses comes, only don’t sit on the table,
because one of the legs is groggy.” With this, the damsel
retired and subsequently the altercation having ceased
below he concluded the butcher had been worsted in the
wordy encounter.


A few moments later a lady of ample dimensions
sailed into the apartment, and volubly de.'-cribed the
advantage of her lodgings above all others in the
neighbourhood. Bill booked on for a week and paid cash in
advance and was introduced to his apartments. After
dumping his swag in a corner, he washed, and adjourned to
the parlour to await tea. Shortly after, the maid approached
him, “Well old’un, what cher going to have for tea?’’ “Well,
what have you got? ’’ replied Bill,“Well, there’s watercress
a treat, and there’s shrimps, and yer can have as many door
steps as yer wants. Yer can have shrimps and watercress or
shrimps without the watercress or watercress without the
shrimps, but if you have watercress, the shrimps will be
extra, and if you has shrimps the watercress will be extra,
and the doorsteps are a brown a time, fer breakfast yer can
have a soldier, but you take my tip, and feed up, you look
as if you’d been fed on skilly lately, say (as an afterthought)
yer ain’t just been let out of quod have yer?” Bill, now in
an exhausted condition, sank down on a sofa, and weakly
exclaimed, “Tea, shrimps, doorsteps,” “Right oh,’'
exclaimed the girl, who promptly retired and left the
bewildered Bill to his own reflections.
That night Bill dreamt of his farm and a 20 bushel
harvest and of the dam that would be finished on his return
to Australia and on awaking he became homesick, and after
breakfasting off a soldier and an egg which had been laid
by a hen that had not enjoyed good health, he sallied forth
to the shipping office and booked his passage by the next
boat, remarking, “Australia’s good enough for Bill”. Rita.
Editorial.
We have much pleasure in presenting to our fellow-
passengers, this our second and last Journal. We are much
indebted to those who have helped to make the Journal so
popular —their efforts have done good to themselves and
others, besides helping to pass the time with some pleasure
and benefit.
Since writing in our last issue, we have had the
keen pleasures accruing from a visit to Colombo. Most
of us will not readily forget the animated scenes we witness-
ed there. One confiding lad, staking his whole trust in our


alleged prepossessing appearance, planted himself firmly in
front of us, and presented us with a note certifying that he
was starving, at the same time vigorously beating himself
over the supposed empty portion of his body, to produce
the hollow sound which ought to be consequent thereupon
but we failed to detect any hollowness whatsoever, and
concluded from the fulness of his cheeks, that he had
breakfasted well.
But though this sort of thing has its humorous side
we cannot help regretting the environment in which these
poor children are placed. Their chances of becoming use-
ful and good citizens are very limited, and we can only
hope for the good time when every child shall have at least
as good a chance as his more fortunate Australasian brothers
We believe the visit to Colombo was productive of good,
for we have gained, by personal experience, a more intimate
knowledge of oriental life, and clearer ideas' of the appear-
ance of the banyan, india-rubber, rice, tea, bread-fruit and
mango plants.
Very little of importance has happened on board for
the last week, and though our numbers have lately increased
by threescore, we are glad . that the spirit of goodfellow-
ship still prevails. Only a short time now remains before
we all separate, some perhaps for ever ; we believe that our
associating together has been productive of good. For our-
selves, we are grateful for pleasant companionships,
interesting conversations, and the good influence of certain
of the passengers upon us. Many have formed friendships
which will remain unbroken through life, and when we have
finished travelling, we shall still look back upon the
pleasure and experience gained on the trip, and remember
those with whom we lived so happily. With these parting
words, we wish our patrons much pleasure during the
remainder of their holiday.
FINIS






