

COMMON ORIGrII OF THE OCEANIC LAN&HA&ES.
%xiA.naJ pd f (.’'tv Ja~e*-&£y
* l/rf I/. d AC (. nut. /SjC,.


THE COMMON ORIGIN OF THE OCEANIC
LANGUAGES.
Sidney H. Ray, South Hackney, London.
IN noticing the inter-relationship of the various branches of the
Oceanic Family of Languages it is convenient to distinguish four
main divisions ;—•
1. Indonesian: Comprising the languages of Malacca, Madagascar,
Sumatra, Java, the south-eastern Sunda Isles, Borneo, Celebes, the
Philippines, and Formosa.
2. Micronesian: Comprising the languages of the Palau, Caroline,
Marshall, and Gilbert Groups in the North Pacific.
3. Melanesian : Comprising the languages of the Bismarck Archi-
pelago, portions of south-east New Guinea, the Solomon, Fiji, and
Banks’ Islands, New Hebrides Groups, the Loyalty Islands, and New
Caledonia.
4. Polynesian : Comprising the languages of the Eastern Pacific,
from Hawaii and Easter Islands to Samoa, Tonga, and New Zealand.
Though these names are mainly geographical, they will be found
convenient for philological use, as each division has its own charac-
teristics by which it may be differentiated from the others.
Certain exceptional areas are found in each region (except Micro-
nesia) which seem to present evidence of another type of language
having formerly been spoken in them, but which has now become
considerably mixed with Oceanic words. These exceptional areas are
(1) The Moluccas in the Indonesian region ; (2) the northern Solomon
Islands and Santa Cruz in the Melanesian region; (3) Paumotu in
the Polynesian region.
Four propositions may be made as to the relationship of the proper
Oceanic languages to one another :
1. That the vocabulary shows evidence of a common origin.
2. That apparent differences in the grammar are modifications of
the same method rather than actual differences of structure.


3. That the principal constructive particles are the same.
4. That the languages are in varicnus stages, of which the Poly-
nesian is the latest.
I.—The Evidence of a Common Obigin of Vocabulary.
A comparison of two or more lists cof names for common objects,
qualities, or actions, brought together fmom even widely different parts
of Oceania rarely fails to show some evidence of agreement.* In
many instances the agreement is of such a nature as to entirely preclude
the possibility of the words being tlhe same through accident or
commerce.
It is, for example, inconceivable thatt the Malagasy word havitra (a
hook), which is kawit in Malay, kait iin the Philippines, and kaj in
Micronesia, has reached Mota and the Mew Hebrides in the forms gau
and ngau, Loyalty Islands ge, by meams of trade intercourse. That
there is no mere accidental resemblance iis seen by taking the Malagasy
word ravina (a leaf), which is of similair form to havitra , and under-
goes precisely the same kind of changes. This becomes in Malay
dawun, Philippines dahon , Micronesian ra, Mota naui, New Hebrides
and Polynesia ran, Loyalty Islands do.
Another example is the word for 1 ffathom,’ the natural measure of
the outstretched arms : Malagasy refy, Malay and Javan depa, Sumatra
dopa, Borneo depe, Philippines dopa , diipa, Celebes repa, depa , Dutch
New Guinea rof, British New Guinea doha, Caroline Is. ngap, ngaf,
Solomon Is. ha-ngava, Mota rova, New Hebrides ngafa, Loyalty Is.
hnapan, epan, ndha, Polynesia ngafa.
It is to be noticed also that the wordls which are most widely spread
are not always found to be those in most constant use, such as names
of trade articles, fruits, and animals, or numerals, though the majority
of these are of identical origin, but theme are also a very large number
of common words which are the names cof the most insignificant things,
so insignificant that they often fail to fund a place even in the dictionary
of a language.
The following words are good examples of these :
1. Moss, seaweed, and especially tthe green growth on anything
damp : Malagasy lumutra, Malay andl Javan Iv/rnut, Sumatra limut,
Borneo lumut, Philippines lomot, Celelbes lumu, Dutch New Guinea
rumek, New Britain limut, Mota lumutta, Polynesian limu, rimu.
‘I. The wax of the ear : Malay and Javan tuli, Philippines tutuli,
atuli, Dutch New Guinea keruru, New Britain tula, Fiji tule, Mota
tul, New Hebrides tula, Polynesia tatum.
* Compare, for example, the vocabularies iin the following works ; (1) Wallace;
Malay Archipelago. 1872. (2) Oodringtom: Melanesian Languages. 1885.
(3) Gabelentz and Meyer: Melanesian Sprarcnen. 1883. (4) Tregear: Maori-
Polynesian Comparative Dictionary. 1891. (5) Bay; Languages of the New
Hebrides. Proo. Boy. goo., N.S. Wales. 18(93. (6) Bay: Languages of British
New Guinea. S.P.C.K. 1895.


3. Pith of a tree, marrow of a bone: Malay utak, Javan utek,
Borneo untek, Philippines utak, utok, Celebes antog, uta, oto, Fiji uto,
Mota utoi, Polynesian uso or uho.
2. — Apparent Differences in Grammar are Modifications
of the Same Methods.
A complete proof of this proposition would be entirely beyond the
scope of the present notice, but as examples I may select two important
grammatical features which will clearly indicate both the agreement
and distinction in the four divisions of the language. These are :
(a) The method of indicating the relations of possessor and
possessed.
(b) The predication of a quality or action.
(a) Relations of Possessor and Possessed :—
In the Indonesian languages possession is usually indicated by
suffixing a pronoun to the noun. These suffixes are, for the three
persons of the singular number, always some form of the syllables ku,
mu, na. They are used with all classes of nouns, for parts of the
body, names of relationships, implements, and actions. In only a few
languages a possessive word is sometimes used with things possessed.
These appear with the suffixes thus :
Dayak (Borneo) aju- ngku, aju- m, aju-e ; ai-ngku, aai m, ai.
Macassar (Celebes) anu- ngku, anu- nu, anu- na. Holontalo (Celebes)
ola- u, cJe-mu, oli-o ; wola-a, wole- mu, woli-o. Malagasy a-hu, a-nao,
a- zy.
The grammars usually state these words to be equivalent to ‘mine,’
‘thine,’ ‘his’; but they are plainly the same as the Melanesian possessive
nouns. In Malagasy they take the article, ny ahy, the (thing of)
mine; ny anao, the (thing of) thine; ny azy, the (thing of) his.
The following are examples of Indonesian nouns with suffixes :
‘My blood.’ Malay darah-ku, Batak mudar-hu, Malagasy ra-ko,
Dayak daha-nyku, Sangir raha-ku, Pangasinan (Philippines) dala-c.
‘ Thy father.’ Malay bapa-mu, Batak ama-mu, Malagasy rai-nao,
Dayak bapa-m, Sangir jama-ngu, Pangasinan a-mam.
‘ His eye.’ Malay mata-na, Batak mata-nai, Malagasy maso-ny,
Dayak mata-e, Sangir mata-ne, Pangasinan mata-to.
‘My disciple.’ Malay murid-ku, Batak sisehang-ku , Malagasy
hihinana-ko, Dayak murid-ku, Sangir murit-ku, Pangasinan hina-
ngatan-co.
‘ Thy way.’ Malay jalan-mu, Batak dalan-mu,, Malagasy lala-noa,
Dayak djalan-ajum , Sangir horo-nu, Pangasinan dalan-mo.
‘ His bed.’ Malay tilam-na, Batak poboman-nai, Malagasy
fandria-ny , Dayak kaleka-e, Sangir kama-ne, Pangasinan docolan-to.


In Melanesia and Micronesia the use of a separate possessive noun,
which is exceptional in Malayan languages, becomes the rule for all
nouns which are not the names of things inseparable from their
possessor. Only names of parts of the body, of relationships, and a
few others take a suffixed pronoun as in the Malayan division. With
other names various possessive nouns are used, which denote the degree
in which the thing possessed is related to its possessor, or the nature of
the thing possessed. There are always at least two of these nouns, one
indicating simple possession, and the other a closer relationship; but
the number and application of the words vary in different languages,
and according to the native idea of the relationship. In Mota there
are four of these possessives— no, ga, mo, ma. The greatest variety is
found in the language of lai, the Melanesian portion of Uvea in the
Loyalty Islands, where there is an extensive classification of nouns,
each headed by its appropriate possessive, thus ;
1. Parts of the body and relations, take the suffixed pronoun bo-k,
my head ; kamb-k, my father.
2. Food, ha; haok kumara, my sweet potato.
3. Weapons, anyi ; anyik hele, my knife.
4. Things containing juice or liquid, beli ; helik wanu, my drinking
coco-nut.
5. Animals, hale ; halek buaka, my pig (as property),
6. Things carried, d, bk buaka, my pig.
7. Lands, fields, i, ga ; ik nyei, yak nyei, my field.
8. Roads, de ; dek gethen, my way.
9. Bags, boxes, baskets, tang; tanguk tang, my bag.
10. Seats, tab ; tahuk tap, my seat.
11. Dwellings and caves, um; umuk uma, my house; umuk op,
my cave.
12. Words, hwa ; hwak hofuj, my saying.
The following are Melanesian and Micronesian examples of pos.
sessive expressions ; —•
‘My blood.’ New Guinea—■ Motu rara-gu, Keapara lala-gu.
Louisiades saria-u. New Britain nggapu, - nggu. Solomon Is.—
Florida gabu-nggu. Mota nara-k. Fiji nonggu dra. New Hebrides
—Efate tra-ngu, Tasiko ta-u, Espiritu Santo dai-ku, Malekula rie-ngk,
Tanna nete-k. Loyalty Is.—lai dro-k. Micronesia-—Caroline Is.—
Ponape int-ai, Kusaie sa’-k. Mortlock Is. ra-ai. Marshall Is. dra-d.
Gilbert Is. rara-u.
‘Thy father.’ New Guinea—Motu tama-mu, Keapara ama-mu.
Louisiades tama-m. New Britain tama-m. Solomon Is.—-Florida
tama-mu. Mota tama-ma. Fiji tama-mu. New Hebrides—Efate
tema-ma, Tasiko arimo-ma, Espiritu Santo tama-m, Malekula teme-m,
Tanna rema-m. Loyalty Is.—lai kdmo-m. Micronesia —Caroline Is.
—Ponape jamo-m, Kusaie tumo-m. Mortlock Is. jamo-m. Mar-
shall Is. jemo-m. Gilbert Is. tama-m.


! His eye.’ Hew Guinea Motu mata-na, Keapara md-na.
Louisiades mata-na. New Britain mata-na. Solomon Is.—Florida
mata-na. Mota mata-na. Fiji mata-na. New Hebrides —Efate
meta-na, Tasiko komara-na, Espiritu Santo meta-na, Malekula mete-n,
Tanna nanime-m. Loyalty Is.—lai maka-n. Micronesia —Caroline Is.
—Ponape majd, Kusaie muta-l. Mortlock Is. masa-n. Marshall Is.
meje-n. Gilbert Is. mata-na.
‘My disciple.’ New Guinea—Motu lauegu hadibaia-mero, Keapara
augegu vaharipa-melo. Louisiades aroa-u. New Britain kaunggu
tenawarotoro. Solomon Is.—Florida nigua na vaovarongo. Mota
tinggoro anak. Fiji nonggu tisaipeli. New Hebrides- Efate natamole
anginau, Tasiko sau naisapianena, Espiritu Santo noku tasorasora,
Malekula surenti ligeni tukunu. Loyalty Is.—lai latd-k. Micronesia
—Caroline Is.—Ponape ai uarok, Kusaie met tumuk lutlut. Mortlock
Is. nao ranafalafal. Gilbert Is. au reirei.
‘Thy way.’ New Guinea —Motu oiemu dala, Keapara oigemu
laopara. Louisiades wain kamasa. New Britain kaum ga. Solomon
Is,—Florida halautu- mu. Mota matesala- ma. Fiji nomu sola. New
Hebrides —Efate hua anago, Espiritu Santo sala-m, Malekula havila
tahengko, Tanna swatuk mik. Loyalty Is.—lai dem gethen. Micro-
nesia—Caroline Is.—Ponape om al, Kusaie inek lom. Mortlock Is.
al om. Marshall Is. am ial. Gilbert Is. kawai va.
‘His bed.’ New Guinea—Motu Lena geda, Keapara iagena gepa.
Louisiades wana abakenu. New Britain kana waiva. Solomon Is.—
Florida sape- na. Mota tanoepa- na. Fiji nona imodhemodhe. New
Hebrides—Efate ol anena, Tasiko sona togi, Espiritu Santo zara- na,
Malekula mili- n, Tanna kamapani savani. Loyalty Is.—lai ne-n.
Micronesia—Caroline Is.—Ponape ki-e, Kusaie kulus kiel. Mortlock
Is. an kiakai. Marshall Is. kinie- n. Gilbert Is. nena ni wene.
In Polynesia the use of the suffixed pronoun with parts of the body
and names of relationships has wholly disappeared, though they are
still affixed to the words which are called possessive pronouns. These
are formed exactly on the model of the Melanesian possessive nouns.
The words are a and o, which, with the article te, le, se, or he prefixed,
and the suffixes, appear as—
akn, au, ana oku, ou, ona
taku, tau, tana toku, tou, tona
l‘au, lau, lana l‘ou, lou, lona
s‘au, sau, sana s‘ou, sou, sona
haku, hau, hana hoku, hou, hona
The words no, na, mo, ma are used in some of the languages in a
similar way, though they are called prepositions in the grammars.
The following examples correspond to the Malayan, Melanesian,
and Micronesian already given :


‘My blood.’ Samoa lo‘u toto, Niue haku a toto, Tonga hoku toto,
Aniwa jaku toto, Maori toku toto, Rarotonga toku toto, Tahiti tau toto,
Hawaii kou koko.
1 Thy father.’ Samoa lou tamd, Niue ham a matuatane, Tonga hoo
tamai, Aniwa jou ta mana, Maori tou papm or matuatane, Rarotonga
to metuatane, Tahiti to metuatane, Hawaii Ikou makuakane.
‘ His eye.’ Samoa lona mata, Niue hania mala, Tonga hono mata,
Aniwa jana foimata, Maori tona kanohi, Rarotonga tona mata, Tahiti
tana mata, Hawaii kona maka.
‘My disciple.’ Samoa mo‘u soo, Niue tutaki haku, Tonga eku
akonga, Aniwa niaku tangata, Maori akonga noku, Rarotonga pipi
naku, Tahiti pipi na‘u, Hawaii kau haumanm.
‘ Thy way.’ Samoa lou ala, Niue hau a Aala, Tonga ho hala, Aniwa
jau retu, Maori tou ara, Rarotonga toou am, Tahiti to oe e‘a, Hawaii
alanui nou.
1 His bed.’ Samoa lona mohenga, Niue liana mohenga, Tonga hono
mohenga, Aniwa jana potu, Maori tona moenga, Rarotonga tona roi,
Tahiti tana roi, Hawaii kona wahimoe.
(b) The Predication of a Quality or Action :
In all the Oceanic languages a word is. distinctly pointed out as a
verb by means of preceding particles. Of these there are three kinds—
(l) Those which simply indicate that the word is a verb : (2) Those
which express the tense and make no change for person and number;
(3) Those which express number, person, amd tense.
Probably the commonest particle of the first kind is the syllable ma.
In the Indonesian languages ma is generally used to express the
simplest verbal idea. It appears prefixed to tlje verb, modifying the
initial consonant of the root. In Malay;, ma, many, mam, man;
Malagasy, m; Sumatra ma, many, mar, man, mam; Borneo m, ma;
Celebes m, mo, ma; Sangir, ma, many, mam, man, me, men, meng;
Philippines, na nag, um, ungm.
In Melanesia the same particle is not. so commonly used. It is
found chiefly in the New Hebrides: EspMtu Santo, mo, mu; Pente-
cost Is., ma, me; Ambrym, ma; Lepers’ Is. and Aurora, mo; Epi, m,
mi; Mota, me; Tanna, am, um; Loyalty Islands, me. The tense
signification agrees with the Indonesian inn being usually indefinite,
sometimes preterite, very rarely present.
In Micronesia me is used as an affirmative particle almost equivalent
to a substantive verb, and is also frequently used as a prefix to
adjectives. In this latter use the syllable ma is very commonly used,
not only in Indonesian and Melanesian, brat also in Polynesian. The
particle ma is not found with verbs in Polynesian.
The second class of particles, varying with the tense, are found
throughout Oceania, and there are a gneat variety of forms often
corresponding in distant regions.


The third class are found only in certain languages of the New
Hebrides, Solomon Islands, and New Guinea. They may in all cases
be shown to have resulted from the combination of an abbreviated
pronoun with the tense, particle.
The following table indicates the verbal aspect in each division.
1. Indonesian : Particles of all kinds are combined into one prefix.
2. Melanesian: Particles are usually separated from the verb and
express—
(a) Time only;
(b) Time, person, and number of agents.
3. Micronesian :■ Prefixes rarely used. In one language (Mar-
shall Is.) a tense particle is added to the pronoun.
4. Polynesian: Particles are separated and express tense only.
3.—Common CoNSTEuefivE Particles.
These may be indicated thus :
1. Personal or Personifying Article : Malay, Javan, Philippine, si;
Celebes, Borneo, Madagascar, New Hebrides, Mota, i; Solomon
Islands, New Zealand, a.
2. Demonstrative Article: Malagasy, ny; New Hebrides, Fiji,
Mota, Solomon Is., na ; Loyalty Islands, la, re.
3. Suffix to Verbal Noun: Malagasy, ana; Malay, Javan, Sumatra,
an; Celebes, ang; New Britain, New Guinea, na ; Solomon Islands,
nga, na; New Hebrides, ana, ena, na; Polynesian, nga.
4. Suffixed Pronouns: These are sufficiently illustrated in the
preceding section of this paper.
5. Personal Pronouns: In these the distinction between the
inclusive and exclusive forms in the plural is hardly observed in some
of the Malayan languages, though the inclusive word kita and the
exclusive kami are both in use. In other Malayan languages the
distinction is clear. In Micronesia the use is indefinite, but is most
clearly distinct in Melanesia and Polynesia. The following illustrates
the distribution of personal pronouns ;
‘l.’ Malay aku. Malagasy aho. Sumatra—Batak au. Borneo
—Dayak aku. Celebes—Macassar a, ku, Holontalo uau. Sangir ia.
Philippines—Tagala aku. New Guinea—Motu lau. New Britain
iau. Caroline Is.—Ponape i, ngai. Marshall Is. i. Gilbert Is. i,
ngai. Solomon Is.—Florida inau. Mota inau, na. New Hebrides
—Efate kinau, Tanna iau. Loyalty Is.—lai inya, in, Lifu ini.
Samoan a‘u. Maori ahau.
1 Thou.’ Malay angkau. Malagasy hianao. Sumatra—Batak ho.
Borneo Dayak ikau. Celebes Macassar ki, ko, Holontalo io.


Sangir ikau, Philippines—Tagala ikam. New Guinea—Motu oi.
New Britain u. Caroline Is.-—Ponape Iko, kom. Marshall Is. kwo.
Gilbert Is. ngkoe, ko. Solomon Is.—Florida igoe. Mota iniko. New
Hebrides—Efate nago, Tanna ik. Loyalty Is.'—lai u, Lifu eo.
Samoan ‘oe. Maori koe.
‘ He.’ Malay iya. Malagasy izy. Sumatra Batak ibana.
Borneo—Dayak id. Celebes Macassair a, i, iya , Holontalo tio.
Sangir isie. Philippines—Tagala sia. New Guinea —Motu ia. New
Britain i, ia. Caroline Is, — Ponape i, a. Marshall Is. e. Gilbert Is-
e. Solomon Is. — Florida anggaia. Motta ineia. New Hebrides —
Efate nai, Tanna in. Loyalty Is.—lai e, Lifu nyene. Samoan ia.
Maori ia.
‘We.’ Malay kita, kami. Malagasy izika, izahay. Sumatra—
Batak hita, hami. Borneo—Dayak ita, ikai. Celebes—Macassar ki,
kang; ta, mang ; Holontalo ito, ami. Sangir ikite, ikami. Philip-
pines—Tagala kita, kami. New Guinea—Motu ita, ai. New Britain
datal, mital. Caroline Is.—Ponape kit, hitail. Marshall Is. kij, kim.
Solomon Is.—Florida igita, igami. Mota inina, ikamam. New
Hebrides—Efate ningita, kinami, Tanna Jkifa‘, iti ‘ma. Loyalty Is. —
Tai otin, omun, Lifu she, hun. Samoan tdtou, matou. Maori tatou,
matou.
‘You.’ Malay kamu. Malagasy Ihianareo. Sumatra — Batak
hamu. Borneo—Dayak keton. Celebes-—Macassar ki, ko, Holontalo
timongolo. Sangir ikamene. Philippines Tagala kayu. New
Guinea—Motu umui. New Britain mmtal. Caroline Is.—Ponape
komail. Marshall Is. kom. Gilbert Is. mgkami, kam. Solomon Is.—
Florida igamu. Mota ikamiu. New Hebrides —Efate kumu, Tanna
itu ‘ma‘. Loyalty Is.—lai ohun, Lifu nyii/pe. Samoan ‘outou. Maori
koutou.
‘ They.’ Malay dia. Malagasy izyi. Sumatra—Batak nasida.
Borneo—Dayak dwen. Celebes—Macastsar hi, na, iya, Holontalo
timongolio. Sangir isire. Philippines—-Tagala sila. New Guinea—
Motu idia. New Britain dital. Carcoline Is.—Ponape ir, trail.
Marshall Is. ir. Gilbert Is. nakai. Solomon Is.—Florida ra. Mota
ineira. New Hebrides—Efate nara, Tamna ila‘. Loyalty Is.—lai
odrin, Lifu nyuden. Samoan latou. Maori ratou.
6. Interrogative Pronouns : The interrogative ‘ who ’ is nearly
always some form of sei, and ‘what’ sawa. In some cases the latter
word with the personal article is used for “ who.’
‘Who?’ Malay siapa, Malagasy iza, Batak ise, siaha, Dayak awe.
Macassar nai, inai, Holontalo tita, Sangir isai, Philippines (Panga-
sinan) opa, Motu dai-ka, New Britain ooi, to ia, Ponape ij, Marshall
Is. won, Gilbert Is. antai, Florida aheii, Mota isei, Efate sei, fei,
Tanna ha, sin, lai id, ie, Lifu dei, Samoa <ai, Maori wai.
‘ What ? ’ Malay ag>a, Malagasy inoma, Batak aha, Dayak narai,
Macassar apa, Holontalo ta, Sangir ayia, Philippines (Pangasinan) anto


Motu daha-ka, New Britain ia, aua, Ponape et, ta, Marshall Is. ta,
Gilbert Is. ra, Florida hava, Mota sava, sa, Elate sofa, sa, Tanna nak,
nuje, lai ieu, Lifu nemen, Samoa a, Maori aha.
7. Causative Prefix to Verbs : va, ka, vaka.
In some of the Indonesian languages this prefix is obscured by
being compounded with the verbal particles, and is then frequently
termed an infix. It thus appears in Malagasy m-aha, m-amp; Dayak
mamp, mampa. Simply prefixed the particle is widespread in the
whole Oceanic region.
Indonesian : Batak paha ; Dayak pa, paha, haiigka; Macassar
paka, pi, pa ; Holontalo po.
Micronesian: Caroline Is. ak, ka ; Gilbert Is. ka.
Melanesian: New Guiriea ha, vaka, vaha; New Britain wa, va;
Solomon Is. haa, faga, va; Louisiade Is. pa; Fiji vaka; Banks’ Is.
vaga, va; New Hebrides haka, vaka, vaga, va; Loyalty Is. a, o.
Polynesian: Maori whaka; Samoan, &c.,faka.
8. Reciprocal Prefix: There are two forms of this, which are found
widely scattered.
‘Vei.’ Malagasy if; Dayak h, ha; New Guinea he, ve; New
Britain we; Solomon Is. hai, fai, he, vei; Fiji vei; New Hebrides vei,
vui; Loyalty Is. i, e; Samoan and Tongan fe.
‘Bar.' Malay bar; Dayak bara; Macassar para; New Britain
war a; Mota var.
A peculiar use of the reciprocal as a kind of plural denoting a
number of things mutually related is found in Dayak, Fiji, and
Loyalty Islands. In Samoan a similar plural of verbs is also expressed
by the same particle.
Verbal Suffixes: In Indonesian, Micronesian, and Melanesian the
action of a verb is rendered definite by means of a suffix. If neuter it
becomes transitive, if already transitive it has its action determined
upon some definite object. Examples of such suffixes are found in the
Malay kan, i; Javan i, ni, ake; Macassar i; Ponape i. In Melanesia
there is a great variety of terminations, but a very general agreement
in their use. In Polynesia these suffixes are not found as transitives,
except in Tongan, which has i, aki, hia. These terminations will be
further noticed in the next section.
4.—Stages of Development in the Oceanic Languages.
On examining the vocabularies and grammars of the principal
languages of each division, it soon becomes evident that though there
is a great deal of agreement in the fundamental material of the
languages, this material is employed more fully in some languages than
in others. In the Indonesian, words are as a rule longer than in the
other divisions, and many ideas are compounded into one expression.


In the southern part of Melanesia (Tanma and Eromanga) there is also
a tendency (or survival) of the same kiind, but in Melanesia generally
the language is less complex and the expression of ideas simpler.
Words also appear without the terminatiions which are affixed to them
in the Indonesian languages, e.g., langitt becomes langi; limak, lima;
witung, vitu; mangang, manga; niug„ niu; ran. ran, &c. If the
termination is retained it conveys Sonne special meaning, as in the
Mota panel, vitui, mangai, nauii Im Polynesia the simplification
proceeds still further, till in some cases words are hardly recognisable
as connected with Indonesian until we have the intermediate forms.
In Micronesia the languages are transitional, those in the south of the
Caroline Islands being more like the Indonesian and Melanesian than
those in the Gilbert Islands. The latteer in many respects approach
the Polynesian. In grammar we find the same progression. Com-
plexity is the rule in Indonesian, the exception in Melanesian, whilst
the grammar of Polynesian is remarkablte for its simplicity.
It has been already shown how vairiety in the classification of
nouns and the use of the possessive suffiixes has been lost in the Poly-
nesian. Another illustration of the later* stage of the same division may
be shown in the transformation of the tiransitive suffixes of Melanesia
into signs of a passive voice. The likemess of the Melanesian transi-
tive suffixes to the Polynesian passive has been pointed
out by Dr. Codrington (“Melanesian Languages,” p. 152), but their
identity may be more particularly illusttrated. In Mota the suffixes
consist of the consonants g, ng, n, r, s, t, v, either alone or combined
with the syllable ag, but in other pairts of Melanesia the vowel i
commonly forms part of the suffix. Im Fiji alone the vowel is a. In
Mota the i sometimes appears with the suffix.
If we use as examples words in Mehanesian and Polynesian which
are derived from the same roots, the llikeness between the transitive
and passive is very plain. The root and the suffix are the same.
For example :• —•
Root tangi, cry. Mota tangis; Elfate tangisi; Florida tangihi,
cry for something ; Samoan tangisia; Mlaori tangihia, be cried.
Root wono, punu, close. Mota womot; Efate bonoti, hunuti, to
shut something ; Samoan punitia, be shrat.
Root anu, spit. Mota anus, to spit something out; Samoan
anusia, be spit out.
Root ma/a, heavy. Mota mavat, tto be heavy upon something ;
Samoan mafatia, to be weighed down.
Root tanu, bury. Efate tanumi, to:i bury something; Samoan and
Maori tanumia, to be buried.
In all these oases the Polynesian wcord is followed by the letter a,
and it is very remarkable that all the Melanesian examples may also
be followed by a, or, in the case of M®ta, by ia. But in Melanesian
this a is the pronoun of the third person singular, and tangisia,


punitia, anusia, &c., would be read by a Melanesian as ‘ weep for him,’
‘ close it,’ ‘ spit it out,’ &o.
A further step in the explanation of the Polynesian passive is
afforded by considering an impersonal use of the active verb in some
Melanesian languages. ‘He is beaten ’ would be expressed in Florida
by tar a ramusia, literally 1 they beat him,’ the verbal particle tar a
being used impersonally. Similarly tara kisua tua na vale, ‘ the house
is built.’ Comparing the latter with the Samoan ua na faia le Jale, in
which faia is the passive of fai, to make, kua the tense sign, and na
the pronoun of third person singular, we may read (though such a
reading is not recognized in the grammar) ‘he makes it the house,’ as
in Florida ‘they build it the house,’ both equivalent to ‘the house is
built or made.’
The fact that the final in Polynesian is always a, and never a
plural pronoun presents little difficulty, as in some Melanesian
languages the singular objective pronoun is used when the object is
plural.
The identity of passive and transitive is strengthened by the fact
that the Polynesian passive is used when the action is emphatic rather
than the agent, and hence is more frequently used in the case of
transitive verbs than the active form.
It should be noted also that, in Samoan, verbs may be formed from
nouns or adjectives by means of suffixes i, ti, fi, si, ni, &c. For
example— Pulu, glue; pnluti, to stick. Mamala, name of a tree;
malasi, to have a bad taste through that tree. Lua, a hole; luai* to
spit out. Pala, rotten, over-ripe; palasi, to drop because over-ripe.
Pola, plaited coco-nut leaf; polani, to carry in such a leaf. In some
cases we find an active transitive verb formed from another verb by
means of similar terminations, e.g., po, to slap; po'i, to kill flies by
slapping. Lolo, to be in abundance, overflow; lolofi, to flock towards.
Samoan verb terminations in ma‘i, ta‘i, may also be compared with
the similar endings in Melanesian. Pulupulu, to cover; pulupuluta‘i,
to cover up. Sulu, to thrust; sulumaH, to thrust into.
* We differ from Mr. Bay here, unless indeed Mr. Bay includes H in the
Samoan i. Luai is the equivalent of the Maori word ruaki, to spit out, or be
sick, and has, we think, a different root from rua. — Editors.
