

The
Thread of Gold
PRICE THREEPENCE
ISSUED TO COMMEMORATE
AUSTRALIA**
GULDEN ELEECE
EXHIBITION
Held at David Jones’,
April 7 th-17 th, 1930
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE
MINISTER FOR PUBLIC HEALTH


&
X/
r 0
THE foundations of what is now Dalgety & Company
Limited were laid in 1846 ... in the days when
the markets were a long, long way from the primary
producers and present facilities for quickly turning the
golden fleece into golden coin were never thought of.
To-day, the great house of Dalgety, whose ramifications
extend over half the world, sells more than half a million
bales of wool every year on behalf of growers throughout
Australasia far more than any other selling brokers in
the Southern Hemisphere ... a proof of the growers’
confidence in the stability, integrity, and efficiency of
this great organisation.
Dalgcty's arc advisers extra-ordinary to the man on the
land showing him how to increase his returns —selling
his produce supplying his requirements helping him
financially finding new markets for him and generally
acting as 44 guide, philosopher and friend ” to the man
who rules Australia's destiny, the primary producer.
DALGETY & COMPANY LIMITED
The Premier Wool Selling House of Australasia*


JAEGER
THE NAME THAT MADE
AUSTRALIAN WOOL
FAMOUS
Your Minister of Health says:—"l am a firm
believer in the value of wool. It is important that the
trunk of the body, where the vital organs are, is well
covered with wool next the skin.”
To get the finest Empire wool buy Jaeger. Its
superior heat-insulating capacity affords protection
from the sun, safeguards against chills, and allows the
maximum penetration of health-giving ultra-violet
rays. These properties, together with the delicious
comfort which exists in first-class wool, render it
Nature’s own solution of the clothing problem.
Consider also the exquisite designs and attractive
colourings of Jaeger and you have ideal garments of
incomparable loveliness.
IMPORTANT ANNOUNCEMENT
Jaeger Underwear for Ladies, Men and Child-
ren, is now made up in our own Factory in Australia,
resulting in substantial reductions in price, while the
quality and excellence of workmanship and material
are in every respect equal, if not superior, to the
English goods.
Do not forget that the name Jaeger can be
clearly seen on everything: Rugs, Dressing Gowns,
Socks, Hose, Cardigans, Pullovers, Blankets, Shirts,
Pyjamas, etc., etc.
The JAEGER C°IP
A


Assist your country by using more
Woollens.
Protect your family and your estate
by ensuring your life with the
A.M.P. SOCIETY
ASSETS £78,000,000
Remember, in difficult times the
values of shares and investments generally are
apt to decline. On the other hand a life policy
with the Society INCREASES IN VALUE
EACH YEAR.
Large Annual Bonuses. The
whole of the surplus is distributed amongst
the participating members.
Enquiries Invited
H. W. APPERLY, General Manager
Head Office :
87 PITT STREET, SYDNEY
Offices in the leading Country towns throughout the State.


AUSTRALIA'S
GOLDEN FLEECE
EXHIBITION
Under the Patronage of
The Right Hon. His Excellency Lord Stonehaven, P.C., G.C.M.G., D. 5.0.,
Governor-General.
Admiral Sir Dudley de Chair, K.C.8., Governor of New South Wales.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
The Hon. Richard Arthur, M.L.A.
(Minister for Health).
Sir Henry Braddon.
D. T. Bradford, Esq.
C. M. Buck, Esq. (Graziers’ Associa-
tion).
Professor Charteris.
K. de L. Cudmore, Esq. (Wool Brokers'
Association).
Professor Davies (Professor of Physio-
logy at Sydney University).
F. B. Fleming, Esq. (Sheepbreeders’
Association).
C. J. Goode, Esq. (Railway Commis-
sioners).
D. Gilligan, Esq. (Stock Journal News-
papers).
F. P. Griffin, Esq. (Advertising Agents'
Association).
F. W. Hughes, Esq. (Chamber of
Manufactures).
The Hon. A. E. Hunt (Farmers' and
Settlers’ Association).
C. Lloyd Jones.
Mrs. Muscio (President National Coun-
cil of Women).
Miss Janet Mitchell (Director of Thrift,
Government Savings Bank).
A. H. E. McDonald (Director of Agri-
culture).
Robert Vicars (Textile Manufacturers).
S. H. Smith (Director of Education).
F. H. Tout (Graziers' Association).
H. Thomas (Hosiers' Association).
A. A. Watson (Director of Marketing).
A. G. White (Publicity Officer, Depart-
ment of Health).
Thanks are hereby tendered to the Committee whose voluntary assist-
ance has made possible the “Golden Fleece Exhibition"; to the advertisers
who have greatly helped with the production of “The Thread of Gold,”
and to Messrs. Griffin, Shave & Co., Pty., Ltd., for preparing this Booklet.


PRACTICE
MAKES PERFECT
WE HAVE SHORN
38,000,000 SHEEP
IN TEN YEARS
WE SHOULD KNOW HOW
TO SHEAR A SHEEP
THE GRAZIERS CO-OPERATIVE
SHEARING COY. LTD.
HEAD OFFICE: 23-25 Macquarie Place, SYDNEY ,
Victorian Branch: 129 William Street, Melbourne k
ROBT. C. WILSON,
General Manager


FOREWORD
I put forward the proposal to hold a Wool Exhibition and
Conference because I felt that an attempt at some definite
action was needed to make the people of Australia realise what
wool meant to them.
The whole economic life of the Commonwealth is inextric-
ably bound up with the prosperity of the wool industry. This
prosperity can only be ensured by inducing those who have
substituted other clothing materials for wool to return to the
wearing of woollen garments, and thus to increase the demand
for our great national product. To do this we must prove to
the world that wool is the natural covering for the human
frame, and that woollen clothing is an important factor in the
preservation of health at all ages.
For Australia we must go further and convince her people
that their possession of the necessaries and comforts of life
depends greatly on the price of wool, that their standard of
living rests to a considerable degree on the back of the sheep.
We must recognise that this increased use of wool and a
corresponding increase in price is far more vital to us than to
the rest of the world. To them it is a question of deciding
whether they will favour the use of substitutes even though this
will be done at the expense of their health; to us it is a matter
of bread and butter as well.
We cannot justify urging other peoples, “Do as we tell
you” while we fail ourselves to follow the advice we give. A
campaign to wear more wool must start here in Australia
and an auspicious beginning is being made by the “Australia’s
Golden Fleece Exhibition” which, though modest, could, I am
convinced, become a torch to kindle a flame which would
sweep round the world if the wool producers and manufac-
turers moved to that end.
I would urge all to read this booklet carefully from cover
to cover, with special attention to the article by a distinguished
medical authority Professor Davies, of the University of
Sydney —on the health aspect of wool. I would also ask pur-
chasers to forward copies of the booklet to friends in other
parts of the world and so extend the influence of this exhibi-
tion and render a valuable service both to themselves and to
their country.
(Sgd.) RICHARD ARTHUR, M.D.
31st March, 1930. Minister for Public Health.


*6URA*3
THE
SOUTH BRITISH
INSURANCE CO. LTD.
LEADING AUSTRALASIAN COMPANY
ESTABLISHED 1872
CAPITAL £2,000,000
Fire, Marine, Motor Car
Workers' Compensation
Personal Accident and Sickness
Public Risk Plate Glass
Burglary, etc.
Wool from sheeps back to store
insured against fire, flood, and rain
water damage.
Agencies in all towns throughout the State
New South Wales Branch:
Cor. O'Connell & Hunter Streets, Sydney
F. W. WALTON, Manager
Newcastle Sub-Branch:
B. B. ROOD, Local Manager


INTRODUCTION
From the dawn of recorded time
up to the day of writing, wool has
been in turn the wealth of kings,
the sinews of war and the weft of
Empire ♦ Wool glitters like a thread
of gold in the cloth of mankind's story
it shines with a beacon light in the
annals of Australia ♦ So that you
may know the extent of your heritage
from the past, and the part wool has
played in it, so that you may under-
stand — to you, our Australian readers,
we dedicate this short outline of wool's
romantic history ♦


w
w.
rm
/K:
S 3
w
A USTRALIA owes much to Gregory
* “ Blaxland, who, by his early explor-
ation, opened up vast areas of fertile
sheep-raising country. To-day his great
grandson, Mr. A, C. Blaxland, Manag-
ing Director of Vita-Lick Ltd., is serv-
ing the pastoral industry, his company
producing, in Vita-Lick, a definite
means of greatly improving the quality
of both sheep and wool.
Highly magnified
section of sheep skin,
showing growth of
wool.


SECTION ONE
THE SHEPHERD KINGS
“And Abel was a keeper of sheep but Cain was a tiller of the
ground. And in process of time it came to pass that Cain
brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the Lord.
And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the
fat thereof. And the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his
offering. But unto Cain and to his offering He had not
respect
. . . Genesis 4-3.
""IB HE story of wool takes us back to the dawn of time. For
during many thousands of years of which we have some
record but for which there is no accurate chronology,
the story of wool was the story of mankind. The first humans,
our unimaginable forefathers, were nomads. Flocks furnished
their coinage, their clothing, and their food supply. The search
for new pastures carried them from place to place as it docs
the remaining nomads in Persia, Syria, and Arabia to-day. Thus
they discovered in fertile valleys here and there the two essen-
tials of civilisation, a constant water supply and plenty of sun-
warmth. Some of them settled and formed agricultural com-
munities. In this way the race of men was early divided into
two categories those who wandered and had medicine men
of minor importance compared to their leaders; those who
settled and built temples. The first civilisations, that of
Sumeria along the fertile valley of the Tigris, that of Egypt
along the Nile, were ridden by religion. The priest was the
supreme authority and the doctor of both body and soul, for
men learned to cure their souls long before they had the faint-
est ideas about physiology.
Meanwhile the Semitic tribes who travelled from winter
to summer pasturage in the deserts of Syria and Arabia grew
proportionately more hardy and self-reliant, as the Sumerians
grew more indolent and superstitious. Through their acquaint-
ance with mountains they discovered metals and the manner of
working them. They discovered the way to smelt iron and
they kept this discovery to themselves while they traded wool
to the less energetic Sumerians who wove it into the garments
with which every Sumerian was clad. About 2750 B.C. they
produced a Napoleon, Sargon by name, who conquered all
Sumeria’s separate city states and welded them into an empire.
Five or six hundred years later another wave of Semitic nomads
swept across Mesopotamia and Hammurabi set up his capital
B


To London by Orient Line
THE Royal Mail Steamers of the Orient Line follow
the best of all routes to England, calling at
Ceylon, Egypt, Naples, Toulon, Gibraltar and
either Plymouth or Southampton before reaching
London.
The Special Ceylon Excursion, from Australian
Ports to Colombo, costs only £65 return. Tickets
are available for I 00 days.
ORIENT LINE
2-4-6 SPRING STREET-- SYDNEY
c


in Babylon. He gave his subjects the first recorded code of
laws and he invaded Egypt. Thus began the Dynasty of
Hyskos, the Shepherd Kings.
Another thousand years goes by and a king called David
is ruling a small and politically unimportant tribe of nomads,
the descendents of one, Abraham. David was a shepherd and
under his rule the Hebrew people became prosperous. But
after the death of Solomon, they were crushed between the
mighty empires that hedged them round. It was during the
Babylonian captivity that many chapters were written of the
Book which has had such an amazing influence upon the world.
The Bible abounds in references to sheep and to the weaving
of wool. It gives most practical evidence of the importance
of the golden thread, an importance which was later symbol-
ised by the Greeks in their legend of Jason and the Golden
Fleece.
By the beginning of the Christian era, wool was no longer
the greatest source of wealth. But it was an asset that had set
Semitic kings upon a throne they were too weak to hold, and
that was destined in the fulness of time to bring opulence and
tremendous power to a Nordic race then setting up its tents in
the infrequent forest clearings of a savage and relatively
unpopulated Europe.
A medical writer in a handbook of hygiene says : —** A
woollen garment next the skin is most desirable in hot as in
cold climates. The garment may be thicker to protect against
external cold, but the necessity for protection against chill is
every bit as great in hot as in cold climates.”
44 Wool is difficult to ignite, and its flame is easily extin-
guished. This consideration is one which all mothers of
young children should keep in mind to prevent possible tragedies,"
Hon Richard Arthur M.D.
44 There is a great reaction in favour of wool as far as women's
dresses are concerned. During the past five months more
material has been made into tweed for women’s dresses than
in the past five years."
— Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Emanuel Hoyle,
Governing Director of Joseph Hoyle,
Woollen Manufacturers, Huddersfield, Eng.


mmm
'w
4
m
ym
mm.
J
m
f 'Mi*
EEeeeeFeeeFe
mm
C
J
[
N
m
n
n
is
P'l w
HOSPITALITY COMFORT SERVICE
for Country, Interstate and Overseas Visitors
ACCOMMODATION FOR 525 GUESTS
Largest and most up-to-date
licensed hostelry in Australia.
Rooms with and without private
Bathrooms and Telephones are
available.
Trams to Railway, Surfing Beaches,
Ferries, all Theatres and Leading
Shops pass the door.
Unexcelled cuisine. Table d'hote,
a la carte, grill room and banquet
room.
Rooms only from 7/- per night
American Style Tariff Reservation of Accommodation Advisable
Hotel Metropole
Bent, Phillip and Young Streets
SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA
Telephones: BW 2061 (9 lines) Telegrams, Cables and Wireless:
B 6363 (4 lines) "Metropole," Sydney.


SECTION TWO
THE ARTS OF PEACE
“The ribs of all people throughout the world
are kept warm by the fleeces of English wool.”
Mathew Paris circa 1220
“"HI HROUGH the unglazed window comes the drowsy hum
of many insects and the soft cooing of doves, murmurous
voices of summer in the pleasant county of Hertford,
England. Inside the bare, whitewashed cell cool peace reigns,
broken only by the scratching of a quill. Mathew Paris, the
monk historian of St. Albans is at work upon his Chronicles.
Called Verulamium by the Roman invaders, the old town with
its Gothic Abbey had witnessed by the year 1220, many vicissi-
tudes during the stirring times which Mathew strove so ably to
record for posterity. Among other things it had noted the
coming of the golden thread, for at that time the manufacture
of wool was chiefly conducted in the cloister.
It came about in this way. When the Roman legionaries
swept in a glittering tide across the south of Britain, they
showed the skin-clad savages who fled before them ‘the might
of Roman discipline and the magic of Roman civilisation.’ At
Winchester they set up a factory for the making of woollen
cloth, an art in which they were thoroughly versed. This
factory for many years supplied the legions with the cloaks
and warm tunics which the notorious climate of Britain made
so necessary. It lasted in fact until they were recalled to
defend Rome. Then followed periodical raids by the blonde
barbarians of Saxony who unlike the Romans knew only
the arts of war. That is perhaps why we know so little of
them which is certainly as much as they deserve. The factory
was razed to the ground and remained in this state until
Norman William, seeking a larger field of action, crossed the
narrow sea and initiated Britain’s monarchy and England’s
real history. The spinning and weaving of the golden thread
was thus resumed. It passed largely into the control of the
monasteries whose benevolent activities were thus supported
in a practical business-like fashion. The extent to which the
trade prospered may be judged from the words of worthy
Mathew Paris, a partial observer, perhaps, but not a propa-
gandist.
Although it is recorded that Henry 111, visiting Witney, in
1221, spent £2O upon his royal wardrobe, far more wool was


9
\r'
&
e
POWER behind
this vital load
By making petroleum products available even
to the most remote wool producer, the Atlantic
Union Oil Co. Ltd. plays its part in the
operation of Australia's greatest industry.
Transport is vital. Atlantic Union products
reduce transport costs and increase transport
efficiency.
ATLANTIC
UNION
petroleum products


being exported than was locally manufactured. In fact a levy
of 6/8 on every sack that left the kingdom provided Edward
the First with his out-of-pocket expenses during the invasion of
Wales. And fifty years after the establishment of the woollen
guilds in 1 300, and thirty after the invention by one, Thomas
Blanket, of the humble but useful article that bears his name,
we find no less than 11,500,000 lbs. of ‘wooll’ valued at
£lBO,OOO exported in a single year. ‘‘The king and state,”
wrote Fuller, ‘‘began to grow sensible of the great gain the
Netherlands got by our English wooll. In memory thereof the
Duke of Burgundy not long after instituted the order of the
Golden Fleece, wherein indeed the fleece was ours, the golden
theirs, so vast their emolument from the trade of clothing.”
The king referred to was Edward 111, whose wife was
named Philippa, a Dutchwoman. It was the king who pro-
posed an embargo on the export of wool but we have to
thank Philippa’s womanly commonsense for the more practical
suggestion “Bring Mahomet to the mountain” that is,
Flemish weavers to England. The inducements held out to the
unimaginative, and unduly prosperous Netherlandish burghers
must have been very powerful ones. More substantial surely
than the ‘fat beef and beauteous women of England’ which,
we are told, were the baits used by the king’s recruiters. Leave,
at any rate, they did but only to the number of half a hundred
or so, and they were well enough liked by their new neigh-
bours. We are much in their debt, whatever they were paid,
for they founded the industry upon which much of England's
and the Empire’s greatness has been built. They brought so
much revenue to their adopted land that the Lord Chancellor
decided to sit for the future upon a ‘wool-sack’ stuffed with
wool, for other reasons than the purely physiological, as indeed
he still does to this day. And by means of the apprentice
system which was then instituted, the benefits of their skill and
experience were multiplied and spread throughout the length
and breadth of England.
This was the first influx of Flemish settlers. The second
of two centuries later was on a much greater scale and it cost
England nothing but kindness as we shall see.
41 The comparative low density of wool as compared with other
fibres indicates that wool is the lightest of the textile materials,
and affords an excellent medium for providing lightness and
durability combined."
Hon. Richard Arthur M.D.


LONDON&
LANCASHIRE
INSURANCE COMPANY .
' I™
SECURITY
£13,606,358
FIRE
LOSS OF PROFITS
ACCIDENT
BURGLARY
WORKERS' COMPENSATION
MOTOR CARS
PUBLIC RISK
MARINE
RATES LOWEST CURRENT.
SETTLEMENTS PROMPT.
NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH:
9S Pitt Street, Sydney
ROBERT KERR, T. O. McCRBADIE ( Assistant
Manager for New South Wales. H. V. REYNOLDS | Managers


SECTION THREE
THE GREAT MIGRATION
44 Hops, Reformation, Bays and Beer
Came to England all in one year."
Rhyme of the Times circa 1370.
NOW the thread of gold is given a queer twist, and the
hand is the hand of a Spanish Grandee, favourite general
of His Most Noble and Most Catholic Majesty, Phillip
11, King of Spain. Fernando Alvarez de Toledo, Duke of
Alva, is engaged in the congenial task of stamping out heresy
in the Netherlands. A kind of ‘War without Tears’ for a pro-
fessional soldier like Alva, since the stolid Hollanders, then as
now, were far more interested in flowers than in fighting.
Alva is seated in his tent which flies the black and gold ensign
of his noble family. He is writing to his King: —"I will
drown heresy in its own blood in the Netherlands”— a formid-
able threat, which he went far towards executing, and so
proved himself the best of recruiting agents for the English
Wool Industry. The Walloon weavers fled in thousands to the
hospitable shores of England where, by Queen Elizabeth’s
express command, they were received with open arms, if not
with joy. In the Netherlands, heresy was stamped out but
so was the weaving industry.
The Mayor of Deal, the Mayor of Sandwich, the Mayors
of many other seaport towns had received explicit instructions
from Elizabeth, and they acted upon them. So it happened
that a gratifying sight met the eyes of the Virgin Queen when
she paid her royal visit to Sandwich in 15 73. ‘‘Against the
school-house,” says the contemporary reporter, ‘‘upon the new
turfed wall, and upon a scaffold made upon the wall of the
school-house yard were divers children to the number of a
hundred or six score, all spinning of fine bag yarn, a thing
well-liked both of Her Majesty and of the Nobility and
Ladies.”
It may have been a pretty sight, even a moral one, to
watch those industrious children but some feeling deeper than
that must have made the far-seeing Queen’s face brighten. By
this time the annual export value of English woollen goods had
topped the million mark, and was steadily rising. Less than a
hundred years later it totalled eight figures.
Not only did the Flemings bring supremacy in the woollen
field to England, they also introduced the cultivation of the
hop. While opinions may be divided on the desirability of


— P & O-"SUTLEI" —
Gone are the gallant little ships of 80 years ago — P. & O. Pioneers
of the Pacific — which first brought British people and British sheep
to Australia. Now, we have great 21,000-ton liners of the P. & O.
Fleet providing our passenger service and carrying our cargoes of
wool . . . still linking the Old Country and the New.


beer, there can be no question whatever that it meant a new
source of wealth to agricultural communities and employment
for many thousands of hands.
Now the thread of gold glints in every fibre of the fabric
of England’s history. Passing rapidly through the seventeenth
century we may note Charles li’s experiment in applied eco-
nomics, when he enacted that every person, no matter what
their degree, should be buried in a woollen shroud. Entering
the eighteenth we find every second cottage a miniature textile
mill, five hundred spinning wheels for every spinet, and the
distaff as the symbol of a woman’s worldy consequence.
The humid climate of Yorkshire was found particularly
suitable for the weaving of textiles. Daniel Defoe, who, if he
had lived a couple of centuries later, would undoubtedly have
earned a princely salary as a feature-writer, mentions in his
“Grand Tour” that he noticed at Huddersfield, “Houses full
of lusty fellows, some at the Dye-vat, some at the Loom, others
dressing the Cloth . . . not a beggar to be seen, not an idle
Person.”
By the year 1722 in which Defoe was travelling with an
open notebook through the highways and byways of Merrie
England, the manufacture of cloth had acquired the rudiments
of organisation. What was known as the “putting-out” system
had come into vogue. A “factor” would leave raw wool at
the cottages for the villagers to spin in their spare time. The
completed yarn he would pay for, and then take it to the cot-
tage of a family which had a loom and contract for the finished
cloth. When the factor persuaded a number of people to come
and work in his own central shop, it became naturally enough,
a “factory.” But it was not until the Spring of 1 765, when
James Watt walked over Glasgow green towards the
Golf House thinking of a steam condenser, that the indus-
trial age was really born. Watt took out his first patent in
1 769 and his first really successful engine was not running until
1 776, long after “factories” had come into existence but this
part of our story belongs to a subsequent chapter.
44 If the people of New South Wales would only purchase
goods including even a few pounds of wool annually it would
considerably help the situation and support this industry, which
means so much to them and to Australia"
Sir Dudley de Chair.


Just looking ahead is easy.
There is always inspiration
in contemplation of the
future, for the least
imaginative can dream.
A
9
It is the planning and the doing that
demand sincerity of purpose and practical
application.
Do your planning with the Savings
Account make your idle money work and
earn for you, not only the benefit of money
saved but the profit of interest earned.
All of us have funds, even if small, that
for the moment we do not need, but there is
no reason why they should remain idle.
Not to hoard as the miser hoards—for
wise spending is as necessary as wise saving
but to hold against the day of greater
need, and to pay interest on the holding
meantime, is the mission of the Savings
Account.
COMMONWEALTH
SAVINGS BANK OFAUST


SECTION FOUR
THE COMING OF
THE ROBOT
“ At present the velocity, violence, magnitude and horrible
noise of the engine give universal satisfaction to all beholders,
believers or not. I have once or twice trimmed the engine to
end its stroke gently, and make less noise, but Mr. B cannot
sleep unless it seems quite furious, so I have left it to the engine-
man.”
Private Correspondence of James Watt, circa 1780.
IB T is good for human conceit to ponder occasionally upon
the number of accidents that have led to discoveries of
world-wide importance. There is the classic instance of
Newton and the apple and there is the clumsiness of Mr.
James Hargreaves, of Blackburn. Mr. Hargreaves knocked over
the Saxony spinning-wheel of his wife, Elizabeth. Because he
happened to be a carpenter with a fair knowledge of weaving
and a carpenter in those days was the equivalent of a
modern mechanic it occurred to him that a spindle set verti-
cally might be adapted to work upon the manifold system.
Hargreaves’ first spinning jenny produced in 1764 operated
eight spindles, his fifth, in 1 766, one hundred. He was mobbed
by the outraged spinners for his pains.
The jenny was followed by the roller spinning-frame attri-
buted, we hope with justice, to Arkwright, one of the most
enterprising mechanical thieves that ever lived. Since the
frame was driven by water power, the operatives were forced
out of the cottage into the factory and the word “spinster”
lost its economic meaning. Ten years later came the spinning-
mule, a combination of the jenny and the frame, invented by
Crompton. The weavers could no longer keep pace with the
spinners. So invention swung back to the loom. Dr. Edmund
Cartwright, a Kentish clergyman with a mechanical bent,
devised the machine loom driven by water power. This was
a clumsy contraption, but it was rapidly improved. Shortly
afterwards, Samuel Cunliffe Lister produced his wool-combing
machine and the circle between raw product and finished cloth
was complete. Iron hands had taken over each operation in
turn. When they were finally yoked in 1785 to the "furious
engine” of James Watt, the tempo of production passed
instantly from adagio to allegro. The industrial revolution had
begun I


CALLING at Colombo, Suez, Port Said and
Malta —ports of romance, where the change-
less East reveals itself in all its vivid colours and
mysterious charm.
You see them all when travelling by Aberdeen
& Commonwealth Line “Bay” Steamers.
These fine ships are one class only. The food is
excellent—so are the cabins, while the saloons,
music, writing and smoke rooms arc for the use
of all* There are no unnecessary restrictions,
but many comforts*
And it costs less than one penny a mile—“ board
and lodging” included—for the wonderful trip,
with dear old England waiting to welcome you
at the end.
FULL PARTICULARS, ILLUSTRATED BOOKLETS
SENT AND PASSAGES ARRANGED BY
Dalgety & Co. Ltd.
2 O’Connell Street, Sydney
AND
Aberdeen & Commonwealth
Line
17 O’Connell Street, Sydney


The tapping of vast reservoirs of power in coal, oil and
finally electricity seems to have released a similar flood of
mental energy. Or perhaps it was the engines which by turn-
ing looms and spindles set men’s minds thinking along mechani-
cal lines and laid the foundations of our present infinitely
complex civilisation. A machine, it is well to remember,
represents a gradual progression rather than the work of a
single genius. Thus the automatic woollen spinning-mule,
considered by modern engineers the height of mechanical
ingenuity, relieving the weaver “even of the responsibility of
seeing that the shuttles contain yarn” is a compound of more
than one thousand separate inventions.
Miles of cloth streamed from the machine-driven looms.
Multitudes of men, and women too, forgot the old handi-
crafts to become tenders of machines. Wages were
reasonably good, living conditions improved and the birth-rate
curved steeply upward. It is recorded about this time that
workers “began to indulge upon many occasions with the
wheaten loaf.” Gradually the machines were being perfected,
were becoming more independent of human supervision. And
meanwhile something else had happened. The English corn-
fields could no longer support England’s rapidly-growing
population.
The mills were calling for more and still more raw
material. The workers had to be fed. So we find the
machines which had summoned the man-power from the vil-
lages, sending it forth again to the ends of the earth, to
Canada, Africa and Australia, in order to supply the raw
material that is the life of machines. James Watt and his
clanking monsters were responsible for the era of intensive
colonisation that has resulted in Australia becoming the fore-
most wool-producing country in the world, and has turned the
golden thread into a golden web spanning the seven seas.
Acknowledgment must be made to “Men and Machines,” by
Stuart Chase, for much of the material in this chapter.
A striking testimony to wool is to be found in the 44 Hints to
Travellers," issued by the Royal Geographical Society (7th ed.),
which declares 44 woollen goods are to be preferred for all coun-
tries and for all climates."
44 All Australia must combine in an assault against substitutes
and tell the world that wool is not a luxury but a necessity"
Sir William Glasgow.


From an old photograph of a sale at the “ Black Wall " — the first] wool store
in Sydney —on Circular Quay.
It'* a long hark back to the early days of Australian wool sales
when the bell-toppered auctioneer led his buyers from bale to
bale on the ill-lit and wool-cumbered store floor.
Proud of its reputation as the oldest pastoral institution in the
State, and ever developing service ahead of the times,
A. M. L. 6c F. look forward to-day to increased prosperity for
the Golden Fleece greatest source of Australia’s national
wealth.
Australian Mercantile Land
& Finance Co. Ltd.
{lncorporated July 4th, 1863)
4 BLIGH STREET, SYDNEY
London* Buenos Aires. Melbourne. Brisbane.


SECTION FIVE
AUSTRALIA —
THE MODERN COLCHIS
44 The introduction of a breed of Spanish sheep into the flock
of individuals has so much improved the fleeces that
there is a promising appearance of a great quantity of wool
being produced in a few years."
Correspondence of Governor King —l Boo
n«“HIS chapter is dedicated to one man, a Scottish gentle-
man, a soldier by profession and a naturalist by inclina-
tion, a visionary who combined unbounded faith in
Australia’s future with a romantic heart and the sound practical
sense of his race Colonel John Macarthur. More than any
man, more than any ten men you may care to name, Macarthur
is to be thanked for such prosperity as we enjoy to-day. For
he founded the sheep industry in Australia, he fought and
conquered every conceivable obstacle, whether its origin was
fate or human nature, and he first laid down the lines of the
scientific breeding that has produced the Australian merino
with the longest staple and the silkiest fibre the world has ever
seen. Any festival in Australia that celebrates wool must pay
homage to Macarthur’s memory.
In the year 1803, in the reign of King George IV,
Macarthur, a colonel in name only, for he had resigned his
commission to devote the rest of his life to raising sheep in
Australia, came to England with specimens of the wool that
he had grown. He talked to anyone who would listen to him
about Australia and Australia’s flocks that were yet to be.
Now there was a very important personage in England at
that time Sir Joseph Banks by name. As adviser to His
Majesty’s Government on matters Australian, he had more than
Privy Council standing without the official rank which he had
so often refused. The words “Do not concur J. 8.” scribbled
carelessly on the margin of a State document had put an
abrupt end to more than one promising proposal from the
infant Colony of New South Wales. Equally famous as a
botanist, naturalist, and explorer he had first met Macarthur
in Australia. Returning to England, where he became, for
every practical purpose, the sole repository of all knowledge


r~. r\r\r\C\ D Jr Vy
0.
m
sJ‘
S&
91
ocaaaa
■RKi ■. .w;<r "
lieu
The Natural Port
for the Bradford Area
Importation through HULL means SAVING in COSTS.
Unified control of both PORT and RAIL makes for
efficiency. Modern warehouses electrically equipped
throughout for quick handling of Wool.
WOOL SHEDS STORING CAPACITY 200,000
BALES
Eleven Modern Docks entirely owned and
managed by
LONDON & NORTH-EASTERN
RAILWAY
For full particulars apply:—
BURNS, PHILP & CO., LTD., 7 Bridge St., & Branches.
Agents throughout Australia.


concerning that far distant land, he was forced to the conclu-
sion that Macarthur was trying in an amateurish way to steal
his thunder. For Macarthur, an Australian enthusiast, and
himself a man of no mean culture, had taken to sending speci-
mens of Australian flora to England because he was interested
in them and thought others might be also. He had a way too
of writing glowing reports on the pastoral possibilities of this
great continent, thus usurping the prerogative of His Majesty’s
adviser extraordinary. At least so it appeared to Banks and a
clash became inevitable. So when Macarthur, on resigning his
commission, in order to indulge his fancy, secured a grant of
1 0,000 acres at the Cow Pastures (later re-named Camden, for
reasons which will appear in due course), it was quickly con-
verted into 5,000 by the simple expedient of a pen-stroke and
those magic initials “J. 8.”
At the disposal of the Royal Stud at Kew, Macarthur
bought nine rams and one ewe. He bought the pick of the
very fine sheep offered in that sale, and he bought them right
under the nose of Sir Joseph Banks, who wanted them for his
English estate. At Tilbury Docks he put them aboard his
ship, which he had named the “Argo” and whose figurehead,
with a fine romantic imagery, he had replaced by a golden
fleece. So it becomes plain that the second round must be
awarded to the gallant Colonel.
Now the scene changes to the Thames’ waterfront on a
cold, grey winter's morning in 1805. The ’’Argo’s” deck is a
bustle of activity, for she is sailing with the tide to the
Antipodes. A man in the uniform of the Excise Department
approaches the tall muffled figure pacing in military fashion
up and down the dock.
“Mr. Macarthur?”
“At your service!”
“1 am instructed to tell you that the clearance granted
your ship has been recalled.”
“Recalled!”
“The export of sheep from England is prohibited under
severe penalty. If your honour will read this paper I have in
my hand, you will know the reason why!”
Round three to Sir Joseph, who had resurrected in
masterly fashion this musty edict of King Edward the Third.


The Liverpool
and London
and Globe
INSURANCE CO., LTD.
“Known round the World ”
TOTAL INCOME nearly £13,000,000
CLAIMS PAID exceed £147,500,000
FUNDS exceed £23,000,000
Fire «■ - Motors - - Accident
Workers* Compensation - Baggage
All Risks - Marine - etc., etc.
World wide service at your disposal
in the satisfactory arrangement of
your insurances
APPLY TO:
SYDNEY HEAD OFFICE
62 Pitt Street.
Manager: JOS. H. GOSLING
Asst. Manager: O. HARGRAVE


A hurried trip to Downing Street, an unexpected meeting
with Banks, who expressed his most profound regret at the
irritating legality that had materialised at the eleventh hour to
forestall Macarthur’s plans, an interview with Lord Camden,
and the victory was Macarthur’s.
He reached Port Jackson with his precious cargo success-
fully on the seventh of June, 1 805. It is pleasant to relate that
after this encounter, Banks either recognised Macarthur’s qual-
ity, or realised the hopelessness of trying to suppress a Scot,
and they became thereafter good friends. So he readily
approved the warrant that made Macarthur Governor of New
South Wales.
There is nothing in the subsequent history of wool in
Australia to compare with this dramatic incident. It is a record
of constant progress both in the production and the manufac-
ture of wool which began almost concurrently with the real
start of sheep-breeding at the outset of the 1 9th century, thanks
to the indomitable enthusiasm of Colonel John Macarthur.
Fortunately, the history of Australia is a peaceful one
and the rise to world-power status has come about entirely
through economic reasons, with a lustre added by Australia’s
record in the Great War of 191 4. So it is to economic facts
that we must turn for a fitting finale i o the story of the thread
of gold.
Australia runs the most merino sheep, produces the finest
wool in the world. Scientific breeding and flock management
and the preparation of raw wool for the market have reached
their highest development in Australia. Older countries come
to learn from one of the youngest countries the finer points of
the wool game.
Wool-buyers of a dozen nationalities from all over the
world bid for the Australian wool clip, which cannot be said
of any other Australian industry.
The value of the annual wool cheque represents more
than half the value of Australia’s exports. For better and for
worse her prosperity is inextricably bound up with the price
of wool.
Therefore, when wool is threatened by the competition
of artificial substitutes, or from any other cause, it is the duty
of all true Australians to do everything that lies in their power
to increase the use of wool, as at all times it should be their
pride.


TWO bales of wool were sold by Thomas Sutcliffe Mort
in the year 1843, the modest beginnings of a lifetime’s
successful endeavour to foster the commerce of Australia.
The firm of GOLDSEROUGH MORT AND CO. LIMITED,
which he helped to found, has always occupied a foremost
place in the pastoral industry and willingly lends its sup-
port to the vital movement — "Use More Wool.”


SECTION SIX
WOOL AND PROSPERITY
BY
J. B. BRIGDEN M.A.
Late Professor of Economics in the University of Tasmania.
/A AUSTRALIANS spend about £100,000,000 a year on
clothing. Rather less than 1 0 per cent, of this is for the
raw materials, and only one-third of that amount is spent
on wool. House furnishings and other uses for textiles are not
included in these figures.
The influence of Australian demand upon the world’s use
of wool is certainly not great. We consume only about 2 per
cent, of the world’s production and about 8 per cent, of our
own. But even in Australia a 25 per cent, increase in the use
of woollen clothing would mean that £1,000,000 more wool
would be required. If Australians were to substitute woollen
garments for about one-sixth of their cotton and silk garments,
they would be spending £1,000,000 more in Australia than
for cotton and silk products in other countries.
A 25 per cent, additional demand for woollen goods in
Australia would ultimately increase production, and provide
for the employment not only of the people producing the wool,
but for the many others dependent upon them in our second-
ary and other industries.
Every individual has a personal responsibility in this
respect. It is often a matter of indifference whether a garment
be woollen, cotton, or silk. But every time an article is pur-
chased it is an order for the reproduction of one of these
products. The most powerful control is in the hands of the
women who hold the household purse, and it is they who must
say whether another sheep is to be reared in Australia, or more
cotton is to be grown in America.
In the exercise of this control the women of Australia must
consider many factors over and above their own immediate
inclinations. If, for the moment, for a certain purpose, they
imagine that only silk or cotton will meet their requirements,
let them hesitate before purchasing something that will do a
National injustice let them first satisfy themselves as to
whether there is not a woollen fabric, or a woollen garment,


a
E
We have on record instances where the expenditure of sums of from
£5O to £l5O in normal seasons on
MEGGITT'S LINSEED SHEEP NUTS
have shown net profits ranging from £lOO to £3OO by reason of increased
wool-growth, improved wool quality, better lambing percentages and
improved constitution. We will gladly answer enquiries.
cAte.§£ctt JZimitecL
HEAD OFFICE ASBESTOS HOUSE.YORKi BARRACK ST*
SYDNEY. • BOX I Kit OP.Q
Worhs - . foiT.inietto.NSW MPtt>ounw.Vic. ttort AJgloidp. S.A.


which will serve their purpose. If there be such, there can be
no question of their duty. For their own immediate financial
benefit they must select the material which will give the
longest and best service wool. And for the sake of
Australia and the national welfare, they must make their
contribution to the national wealth again, that means wool.
Wool is the financial backbone of Australia. On the
prosperity of this great industry depends the prosperity of
every individual in the Commonwealth. A flourishing wool
industry is reflected in the free circulation of money, lighter
taxation, more employment, better wages and conditions in
industries apparently entirely dissociated from wool. A con-
tinued apathy on the part of women, a neglect of their personal
and national obligations, resulting in a decline in the demand
for wool and consequent lower prices, means national financial
stringency. Somehow or other the national budget must be
balanced. If wool money is not circulating in Australia, if big
sums are going into the pockets of overseas producers of sub-
stitutes, Australia is the poorer, and compensating revenue
must be sought in other directions. Increased taxation, lack
of credit, unemployment, higher cost of living all these
things, in ways mysterious to the average woman, are the result
of falling prices to the wool grower. And so in the hands of
the women who buy the family requirements is the welfare of
the whole community.
A better sense of national obligations, a greater apprecia-
tion of personal welfare, a sounder knowledge of the virtues of
woollen fabrics, a keener sense of economy domestic and
national, will soon be reflected in an increased demand for
wool. It only requires that Australian women should look at
this matter in a sensible light, and do their individual part
towards keeping Australian money circulating in Australia and
towards upholding our credit in the markets of the world.
“ It is a peculiar thing that most Australians wear less wool
than people of other countries. The climate here is more change-
able and subject to sudden variations of temperature, which
produce such widespread ills as rheumatism, etc. No better
protection than woollen clothing can be found against ihese
climatic changes."
Mr. J. Bailey
President, A.W.U., Central Branch.


THE long life of woollen garments, which makes them so
economical, depends entirely upon how they are washed.
The safest and easiest way to wash woollens is with LUX
which, when used according to the simple directions, prevents
shrinking and does not affect the most delicate colours of
fabrics.


SECTION SEVEN
WOOL AN ID ECONOMY
BY
R. J. VICARS ESQ.
Director of John Vicars & Co. Ltd.
IrNOMESTIC economy is of vital interest to everyone but
I ) most particularly to the mothers of families. The cloth-
ing of boys and girls, no less than the dressing of their
parents, presents a problem in the average household which
demands the very closest consideration and the most careful
thought.
The wise mother chooses wool wherever it is possible.
Only the thoughtless parent would be deceived by the appar-
ently lower cost of cottons and other fabrics, for a moment’s
thought or a single trial will be sufficient to prove that
"shoddy” materials, though attractively low in price, are the
most expensive means of clothing a family.
Wool outlasts any other fabric. Therefore, in addition
to the other cogent reason for its use, the undeniable economy
of this long-wearing, comfortable, smart and sensible material
should make it first choice for clothing in every home.
It is recognised generally that the greatest strain on a
garment comes from body friction and perspiration. Under-
clothing is therefore subject to much greater stress under nor-
mal conditions than such garments as shirts. The results of
experiments made in the durability under actual wearing con-
ditions of silk and poplin shirts and woollen underwear are
most impressive as indicated by the convincing facts which
were brought to light. After 19-20 washings and ordinary
wear, the silk shirts had to be discarded. The same unwear-
able condition was reached by the poplin shirts after 36-39
washings. But the woollen undervests, even when worn
throughout the heat of Summer under conditions that fre-
quently conduced to heavy perspiration, survived from 44-50
washings.
This practical test has been endorsed by experiments
carried out by the British Research Association for the Wool
and Worsted Industries, in which many interesting and con-
clusive facts were disclosed. It was proved that it takes 1920
hours of exposure to sunlight to reduce the strength of chrome


The Union Trustee
Company
of Australia, Limited
One of the Oldest and Strongest Trustee Companies
in Australia
Capital—Subscribed, £250,000. Paid-up, £125,000
Reserve and Guarantee Funds, £116,000
Established in
NEW SOUTH WALES, VICTORIA and
QUEENSLAND
ACTS AS
EXECUTOR TRUSTEE
ADMINISTRATOR ATTORNEY
or AGENT
EXPERT MANAGEMENT CONTINUITY OF CONTROL
AMPLE SECURITY MINIMUM COST
Directors, N.S.W.
F. E. BRYANT (Chairman)
Hon. Sir HENRY BRADDON, k.b.e., m.1.c.;
(Vice-Chairman),
W. H. MACKAY JAS. KIDD
Hon. JAS. ASHTON, m.l.c. R. M. PITT
A. E. NORDEN, f.f.i.a., a.c.i.s. (eng.), Manager
J. G. H. SHIPWAY, Assistant Manager
WRITE FOR FREE BOOKLET
No* 2 O'Connell Street, Sydney


wool to one-half its initial value, and raw wool 1 200, as against
940 hours for cotton, 900 hours for artificial silk, and only
200 hours for silk. Thus it was shown that wool has more
than twice the wearing quality of either cotton or artificial silk
and nearly ten times that of silk.
The tensile strength of wool was demonstrated to be 17
tons per square inch, equal to that of a gold wire of the same
diameter. The diameter of fine wool fibre is approximately
1-2000th of an inch, and the weight of a mile of such fibre
would weigh only 1-1 00th of an ounce. In other words, one
ounce of fine wool fibre would extend to 1 00 miles in length.
In these tests a wool fibre eight inches long and of diameter only
two ten-thousandths of an inch was stretched wet until its
length was increased by one-third. The stretching force was
removed and the fibre returned exactly to its original length in
50 hours. The elasticity of wool permits it to stretch and
return, and a garment made of wool therefore retains its make
and shape. No other fabric possesses this quality of elasticity
to any extent. Once “baggy,” other fabrics remain baggy.
In all these experiments lies food for thought on the part
of women who have the responsibility of clothing families.
Low first cost is a delusion and a snare. Long service is the
only true test of value. Wool guarantees long service and if
for no other reason and they are legion than that of eco-
nomy, wool should be the first choice of wise parents for their
own and their families’ wear.
44 Wool is easily first and best of all materials for clothing
the human body. No other material, however its excellencies may
be advertised for the purpose, has the same desirable qualities.
44 The advantages of wool are :
1. Its high non-conductivity.
2. Its hygroscopic qualities.
3. Its elasticity.
4. Its lightness and durability.
6. Its non-inflammability."
Hon. Richard Arthur M.D.
44 The future of wool depends on the realisation of the
hygienic value of wool next to the skin. Wool is superior to
other fabrics, because it is non-conducting of heat and cold and
is non-inflammable"
Dr. Cameron
Victorian Director of Agriculture.


A National Service
The Vacuum Oil Company Pty. Ltd,
have developed two famous pro-
ducts which are helping the wool
grower made in Australia by Austral-
ians, to suit Australian conditions.
VACDIP
The Scientific Oil and Arsenical
Sheep Dip
Vacmark
Sheep-Branding Fluid
VACUUM OIL COMPANY
PTY. LTD.


SECTION EIGHT
WOOL AND HEALTH
BY
H. WHITRIDGR DAVES
Professor of Physiology in the University of Sydney.
LOTHES may be worn for a variety of reasons protec-
Uj tion from minor mechanical injuries, insect bites, wet,
cold and radiant heat. In addition they afford means
for personal display clever dressing emphasising good points
and camouflaging defects.
The psychology of clothes is a study of great human
interest and has been dealt with by many able writers with
bitter cynicism by Thomas Carlyle in “Sartor Resartus” and
with whimsical humour by Anatole France in “Penguin Island.”
But although the psychological effects of clothes may some-
times lead to interesting physiological consequences yet it is
with certain more directly physiological aspects of clothing that
we are at the moment concerned.
The purpose of this article is to indicate how under all
circumstances colld or hot, wet or dry, calm or storm the
best and most suitable of clothing fabrics are those derived
from Australia’s most important natural product, wool.
The problem of clothing varies markedly in different cli-
mates. In cold damp climates it is necessary to protect the
body against undue loss of its heat energy. This energy comes
from the slow oxidation or burning in the muscles and other
parts of the body, of substance ultimately derived from food.
So that economy in the matter of warm clothing is false eco-
nomy as it leads to considerably increased food bills. In
addition, in cold climates, poor slum dwellers who can afford
neither adequate clothing nor adequate food are, for the sake
of warmth, obliged to huddle closely together in small ill-
ventilated rooms and so are very much more liable to tuber-
culosis and other forms of lung disease. Seeing that in cold
climates the temperature of the body must be maintained at a
degree considerably higher than that of its surroundings, the
problem is largely one of insulation. Just as an ice box for hot
climates must be insulated against heat gain, so must the body
in cold climates be insulated against heat loss.
One of the best of practicable heat insulators is dry, still
air, and, for that reason, a loosely woven garment containing
much air in its meshes is not only lighter but conserves the
bodily warmth more efficiently than does a closely woven


□nrtXL* !XE
:Vv
h
ny
r
,-vJ
m
'M
‘y>.>
««K
5-ton Leyland Lorry and Trailer, owned by Colonial Combing, Spinning
& Weaving Co., Ltd., loaded with 74 bales of wool, weighing
approximately 12 tons.
LEYLAND for WOOL TRANSPORT
unjun. uses
M'S
Far out beyond the railheads, LEYLAND is doing
daily service in the transport of wool and wheat.
The mighty strength and stamina of LEYLAND
make light of the most gigantic loads.
LEYLAND is always in action, because, on the
rare occasions when new parts are needed, they
can be drawn immediately from LEYLAND’S
£60,000 stock of spares.
CHASSIS NOW AVAILABLE
2J-ton “Badger”! 3J-ton "Beaver"; Six-wheel
“Terrier"; also 4-ton and 6-ton Models.
ev
o
an
Head Office:
24 GROSVENOR STREET,
SYDNEY.
Telephones: B 7951. B 7952
ENGLAND
Service Station:
AUSTRALIA STREET.
CAMPERDOWN.
Telegrams: “Leymotors,” Sydney


material. Of course such a garment would need an outer wind-
resisting garment of more closely woven material. But, apart
from the air in the meshes of the fabric, the substance of the
wool fibre itself is three times as efficient as silk and five times
as efficient as linen as a heat insulator.
In addition to its properties as a heat insulator a woollen
fabric possesses other valuable properties enabling it to assist
in the conservation of bodily warmth. Owing to the nature
of its surface it lacks the undesirable clinging properties of silk,
cotton or linen fabrics, and so preserves next to the skin a heat-
insulating layer of air. It is important that this layer of air
should be dry, and the moisture absorbing properties of wool
are important in this respect. A dry, well-aired woollen fabric
can, without becoming perceptibly damp, absorb more mois-
ture than can any other kind of material.
In cold weather very little moisture is given off by the
skin, but such as does come off is readily absorbed by
wool and it is remarkable that its absorption by wool causes
the production of a considerable quantity of heat. Dr. S. G.
Barker, of Leeds, has calculated that when one pound of dry
wool is completely wetted it gives off sufficient heat to raise the
temperature of one pound of water forty-three degrees Faren-
heit. He said: “This property, therefore, is a source of advan-
tage to the wearer of wool next to the skin, in that the absorp-
tion of moisture from the body actually creates warmth and
prevents cold or chill.”
Considering all the above facts it can readily be seen that
the ideal combination of garments for cold weather consists in
soft thick loosely-woven undergarments protected by closely
woven wind- and rain-proof outer garments. The possible
objections of roughness and irritation to the skin and liability
to shrinkage have been largely overcome by scientific study
and the consequent introduction of modern methods of selec-
tion, treating and weaving of wool.
It may seem somewhat paradoxical that the material most
suitable for garments that conserve body heat in cold surround-
ings should be not unsuitable in temperate and also in hot and
humid climates. In order to unravel this paradox it is necessary
to consider as briefly as possible some physiological facts con-
cerning temperature regulation in the body. The proper
functioning of the living human body can only continue when
its temperature is maintained within somewhat narrow normal
limits. In other words, heat loss from the body must, in the
long run, be equal to the constant heat production resulting
from normal muscular and glandular activity. In hot surround


e
WEAR WOOL, ALL
WOOL, and KEEP WELL
It always pays to get the best Wool for Knitted Garments,
and Patons and Baldwins’ Wools have been famous for over
a century for the even texture, flawless finish and durability
that makes Woollep Garments of charm and service.
Patons & Baldwins’
Knitting Wools
COMFORT
for DURABILITY
ECONOMY
It is our pride to say that Patons and Baldwins' Wools are
"Always the Same, Skein after Skein," and Knitters can, in
happy contentment, knit garments for wearers of all ages
that will assuredly give much satisfaction in wear and in the
wash. Our Leading All-Wool Qualities include:—
Paton’s Super Scotch Fingering. Beehive Scotch Fingering.
Paton’s Rose Fingering. Beehive Lady Betty Wool.
Wlldflower Fingering Wool.
Pansy Fingering Wool.
Patons and Baldwins' Knitting Wools are stocked by leading Drapers and
Stores throughout Australasia.
ENTIRELY SPUN, DYED and FINISHED BY
Patons & Baldwins Ltd.
Alloa, Scotland. LAUNCESTON, TASMANIA. Halifax, England
Please Address Trade Enquiries to:
Patons & Baldwins (A/sia.) Ltd.
232 Flinders Lane, MELBOURNE, Cl; 181 Clarence Street, SYDNEY


ings if the heat loss were inadequate the body temperature
would rise and with this rise the slow combination of substances
within the body would be speeded up and result in greater heat
production and a consequent further rise in body temperature.
Fortunately, however, the body possesses a means of combat-
ing this tendency. This is by the evaporation of sweat. Where
the sweat evaporating mechanism is inadequate, hampered or
fails, heat stroke supervenes and the body temperature, unless
drastically controlled by such means as icepacks, etc., goes
steadily up and up until it reaches a point incompatable with
life.
The evaporation of sweat cools the body. This cooling is
explained by the same simple physical laws as explain why
water in a canvas water bag or in a porous jar, placed in a
free current of air, is considerably cooler than surrounding
objects. Hence, apart from such considerations as protection
from insects, dust and radiant heat, and the preservation of
common decency, the essential physiological attributes of
tropical clothing are the freest possible ventilation and the
minimum interference with the normal evaporation of sweat.
Garments of silk, cotton or linen which tend to become sodden
and to cling closely to the skin fail in these important respects.
We have already seen that, owing to their texture and to the
nature of the fibre, woollen fabrics have less tendency to cling
to the skin than other materials. Moreover their greater capa-
city for the absorption of water enables them to take up greater
quantities of superfluous sweat and so less readily to become
sodden.
The maximum ventilation of all parts of the body surface
is attained by having garments loosely fitting and of loosely
woven texture. There is no reason why this should not be
done with wool as well as with any other material. Further, a
loosely-woven texture affords a greater and more efficient sur-
face for cooling evaporation.
There still remain three reasons why suitably woven
woollen fabrics are the most satisfactory in hot climates. Firstly,
their superior heat-insulating capacity affords the best protec-
tion from the radiant heat of the sun. Secondly, this same
capacity affords the best safeguard against chills in case of
sudden changes of temperature. Thirdly, of all textile material
wool allows the maximum penetration of health-giving ultra-
violet rays.
In conclusion one may reasonably state that the above-
mentioned facts comprise only a fraction of the large body of
scientific evidence which amply justifies the slogan WEAR
WOOL AND KEEP HEALTHY.


JANTZEN
the trim . , smart . .
healthful swimming
the trim . . smart . .
TIGHTLY knitted by the elastic
Jantzen stitch ... a Jantzen fits
lightly ... smoothly ... without a
wrinkle. In or out of the water ... it
retains its shape permanently. And on
the beach between swims ... it is a
healthful swimming suit . . . because
. . . made from pure Australian wool it
is a non-conductor of heat and protects
against cold. Even when a smart breeze
is blowing . . . and your suit is still wet
... its perfect fit prevents the air from
circulating under the suit and retains
the natural warmth of the body.
The World’s Favourite
Swimming Suit
♦ ♦ ♦♦ ♦♦ ♦♦


SECTION NINE
WOOL AND FASHION
BY
H. M. MACKEN ESQ.
President of the Retail Traders Assn, of N.S.W.
nHPHIS will be a woollen winter! Fashion has focussed her
spotlight on woollen materials, and gained the world’s
attention by endowing them with new beauty in patterns
and weaves.
Fashion decrees wool for day wear, and with her usual
thoroughness, promptly makes available woollen fabrics in a
wondrous range to suit every occasion, every purpose, every
purse.
No longer is choice restricted . . . for the woman who
imagines that the range of smart woollens has narrow limitations
there is a grand surprise in store. This winter, Fashion sets
out an array extending from feathery wool lace to weighty coat
velours.
Outstanding in prominence are tweeds. Fine or rough in
texture, gossamer light or mannishly sturdy, neatly checked
or harmoniously blended there they are in all their glory!
Irish Donegals, Gossamer Tweeds, String Weave Tweeds, Jer-
sey Tweeds, Bird’s-eye Tweeds, Tweeds in light and medium
weights show themselves proudly as the most correct materials
for winter suits.
But Fashion did not exhaust her imagination in providing
suitable textures for costumes. The surprising new styles for
frocks demand special materials to give them their essentially
soft, graceful lines. So, Wool Crepe-de-Chine comes into the
limelight. Fine and soft quite as sleek as its summer sister,
yet infinitely more cosy Wool Crepe-de-Chine receives a
large measure of approval for its adaptability, its beauty and
its colorings. Nor it is the only fabric for winter frocks. Wool
Popline, Wool Crepe, Kasha, Charmelaine, Repp, Kremaline
and a host of Jersey and Flannel effects all have been
adroitly woven to prove that winter apparel need not be thick,
clumsy and stodgy. These and numerous exquisite new fabrics
supply the richness, the trimness, the daintiness previously
associated only with summer wear, and whilst they provide the
necessary warmth, they manage in some miraculous way to


■ ; V :;
\criT.r«flr.;
S/
M
\v
XV.'
&
g
The World’s Finest Wool
W ONG-FIBRED . . . thoroughly shrunk before weaving . . . the pick of
Australia’s best wool is used in Challenge Blankets. They have a
luxurious fleeciness unimpaired by frequent laundering. Woven by the
most modern methods, they are amazingly snug and durable. Challenge
Blankets are guaranteed against shrinkage and loss of weight or shape.
Obtainable in all sizes, shades and colorings. The Dyes used are
guaranteed fast.
CHALLENGE BLANKETS
M<x d e in Australia
FOR BABY . . . Why purchase a Foreign Cotton Blanket when you can obtain
an all-wool article made in Australia, which will render treble the service. The
selection is varied in Fancy designs and Plain colors and the edges are bound
with silk ribbon or mercerised silk. Sire, 30in. x 40in.
All leading stores stock them ... be sure and ask for Challenge.


remain pleasurably light in weight. Even Delaine emerges from
long obscurity and charms the eye with its freshness, its quaint
patterns, floral, striped and checked.
Plain woollens, shaggy woollens, reversible velours, heavy
but transparent tweeds, cheviots and twills offer fascinating
possibilities in fashioning a winter coat. And nothing more
luxurious and cosy could be wished for than a style carried out
in Duvetyn, Sedan or Suede Cloth.
Wool! Fashion says wool and there is an immediate
response! Coats, costumes, frocks of wool; scarves of wool,
rugs of wool, wool tapestry cushions even pictures embroid-
ered in wool are charming feminine hearts. So it is little
wonder that the mode extends to the important field of under-
wear. Nothing softer, nothing cosier could be imagined than
the delicate Shetland Wool underthings now available. Slips,
vests, knickers, nightdresses, jackets the range is complete
and already heartily approved by those women who will sacri-
fice neither comfort nor style. Dressing gowns, as ever, must
be woollen to be really restful and comfortable. Ripple Cloth
stands ready to serve; Molletan follows the trend towards
check patterns; and Pyrennese Cloth appears with a thick,
almost unbelievably fleecy pile.
Woollens are so definitely to be the mode this winter
that women everywhere are already discussing them, examining
their newest forms, revelling in the wonderful range of colours,
the intriguing designs, the inimitably soft, comfortable feel of
woollen fabrics and delighting in the new vistas of smart frock-
ing that Fashion has made possible by her latest decree.
Above all, women are awakening to a realisation that
woollen fabrics cost less than those of fragile ephemeral silk,
and very little more than those of unsatisfying substitutes.
When they have weighed up all that they gain in longer service,
greater comfort, and improved health by wearing wool they
will wonder why they were weaned away from it to the detri-
ment of Australia’s prosperity and their own. Knowing that
they need make no sacrifices of personal appearance because
of the new beauties that woollen fabrics have taken to them-
selves, knowing that they need make no sacrifice of pocket
because of the undoubted economy of woollen garments, the
women of this country can be relied upon, in all their common-
sense and loyalty, to support wholeheartedly Australia’s
Woollen Renaissance.


Panfc of i?eto Hs>outf) Wales:
WITH WHICH IS AMALGAMATED
Cj)E ®Be£tfern 2lu£traUan ?@anfc Itb.
Paid up Capital
Reserve Fund
Reserve Liability
ESTABLISHED
1817
677. J/7
rsji
£7,500,000
£6,150,000
£7,500,000
£21,150,000
Aggregate Assets, 30th Sept., 1929, £90,806,297
THE OLDEST & LARGEST
BANK IN AUSTRALASIA
General Manager : ALFRED CHARLES DAVIDSON
Head Office: 341 GEORGE STREET , SYDNEY
London Office: .. 29 Threadneedle Street , E.C. 2.
592 Branches & Agencies in the Australian States,
Federal Territory New Zealand, Fiji, Papua,
Mandated Territory of New Guinea and London
Agents and Correspondents throughout the World
Every Description of Banking Business Transacted
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by John Sands Ltd., Sydney


V.
m
- 'r
V
ft
NV
k
a.
&
NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
</-'h
Travelling Rugs and
High-class Worsted and
Woollen Cloths for
Men’s & Women’s Wear
JOHN VICARS & CO. Ltd.
Woollen Mills, Marrickville


m
*
/ n /'/
A
m
mi
s
Be Wise - Wear Wool
HPHE value of our Wool-clip is the index ot our pros-
perity. Anything that you do personally to increase
the use of Wool directly benefits your country and
yourself. The man on the land has done his share. We
will do ours by securing the highest possible price for
the raw Wool entrusted to our care. Will you do yours ?
New Zealand Loan & Mercantile
Agency Co. Ltd.
Sydney.
