

no. 3-vol. xxii. SATURDAY, MARCH 14,1885- SSKSSMSSS»
THK WUNCITAI OKFICEBS lit TUB NEW SOUTH WALES COMTIHOEXT TO EOVPI.


WITH OUR APRIL NUMBER
WILL BE GIVEN A
Large Coloured Supplement
ILLUSTRATING THE
Departure of Troops
FOR THE SOUDAN.
QIBBB, SHALUftD, & CO.,
CHROMO-LITHOGRAPHIC & LETTERPRESS
PRINTERS.
ACCOUNT 300 K MAKERS.
MANUFACTURING STATIONERS,
ARTISTS, E SIC RAVERS. ELECTROITPERS, STEREOTTPERS
4c.. 4c., 4c.,
TO Pitt St., Myduay.
All communications for this journal and ex-
ohan (w should bo addressed to the Editor at
Messrs Oibbe, Shallard. St Go’s. Pitt Street.
Sydney.
ADOTTEKXISXTTO KATES
Tlie Sydney Jsfewd.
POUR COLUMNS OK A FAGR.
One Inoh of Single Column ... ... Bs.
Per additional Inoh 3e
Doable Column Matter twioe theao rates.
Double the above ratee for Advertisement* on
coteide ot Cover.
Advertisements in reading matter Columns, and
on Cover pages adjoining same, one and a
half the abovo rates.
Dieooant of Ten per oent. on Advertisement*
given for Twelve Months.
SATURDAY, MARCH 14, 1885.
"Our Army.'*
WBAT*m differences of opinion may prevail in re-
gard to th« wisdom or otherwise of Rending a Nee ’
South Wales contingent of troops to the Soudan, the
erect has now to be reckoned in the category of ac-
complished fact The men hare l«en found, clothed,
and armed, and the troopship# are now speeding
across the ocean to their destination on the hot
shore# of the Rod Soil Whether for good or evil,
the important step has been taken, the debt incurred,
and the next thing to be done is to pay the bill and
look as pleasant os may be under the circumstances.
The responsibility, the fame, cr the infamy, will
hare to be fixed aud apportioned hereafter. If we
> Lars not acted wisely in taking this step it was
at least a generous thing to do. It is a practical and
splendid example of our loyalty to the mother
country, and shows that the bond of race, of blood,
of kindred, and patriotism, is atill firm and true, and
that oar hearts beat in unison with those of the
grand old country whence most of us bare sprung.
Whether it wm necessary that we should make
such a sacrifice as the step we bare taken inrolves—
whether our loyalty would not have been as genuine
and aa generally accepted by the people of England
without such an expenditure of treasure, and pos-
sibly of blood—is not a matter for discussion just
? now. Our men are gone, and we bare to look the
matter squarely in the face and make the
best cf it. On the 3rd March our heroic history
commenced, aud the day will ever be remembered j
shores from a foreign foe, or to repel an invader of
our territory. On the contrary, we have sent an
invading force to a distant country, and have made
the quarrel of another our own. When, however,
that other is England, under whoso mighty wings
wo have so long enjoyed the blessings of peace, who
shall condemn, the generous impulses which have
induced us to stretch forth a hoi plug band 1 It is
not seriously argued that England needs our help
in quelling the wiid warriors of the desert. But
it ia churned that the movement is an unmistakable
and practical exhibition of our loyalty, of gratitude
1 for past services, and of will and ability to
render substantial aid whenever or wherever the
circumstances may arise. It is in this spirit that
the offer of New South Wales has been ac-
cepted. As such it has been regarded and spoken
of by the great statesmen of England of both parties
in the House of Commons and in the House of
, Lords; aud we are told that the event has created a
’ profound impression even at Berlin. It is a proof
that the Australian Colonies aro fast getting out of
their babyhood, and that in their young and vigorous
life they form an element which must be considered
and reckoned with in any complications in which
England may be involved. To send away a contin-
gent of soni" 750 men may seem a very small thing
in comparison with the vast amiss of the great
military nations of the world, but the rulers of the
continental countries will not fail to understand
that a country that could make such a parade at a
moment’s notice would be capable of something
greater and more difficult to deal with if tho dire
necessity, say of defending ourselves, should arise.
If it has done nothing else, the dispatch of our
troops has brought upon ns the eyes of Surope. We
have learnt that we could easily have sent
twice or three times the number of men had it been
necessary or desirable ; and it has been proved
beyond the possibility of question that a united
Australia could, without a very great effort, have
sent to Suakim a force of ten thousand men.
Sydney has seen no more imposing sight than that
presen cod on Tuesday, the 3rd instant. The
enthusiasm and wild excitement pass descrip-
tion. And as the little baud of devoted meu
marched through the crowded streets, their arms
glistening in the nun, the hearty cheers from the
assembled thousands must have gladdened their hearts
and shown them that they leave behind them those
who w’ll rejoice in their victories, and who will
lament them should misfortune attend their brave
enterprise. In all human probability some of that
heroic bond which we saw an that memorable
Tuesday of March, gaily marching past with
bounding hearts, have taken their last glance of
Sydney. Some may find a lonely grave in the
desert waste of the Soudan, victims to the climate
and African diseases ; others may find the fierce joy
the warrior feels in some deadly conflict with the
dusky Arab ; but there is not one of that little band
whose name will not hereafter be written in the
history of hix country, and find a lasting record as
one who fought iu the battles of the dear old
country which all loyal Australians love so
well.
Th* Patriotic Fund.
The birth and growth of the patriotic fund have
been spontaneous. No sooner was it known that
the services of a contingent of New South Wales
troopa had been offered ar.d accepted, than the fund
was initiated. Money was offered to the Govern-
ment in sums of a thousand pounds at a time. In
sereral—in fad in nearly all cases—the same sum ia
promised annually as long as the services of the men
are required in Egypt The fund now amounts to
some £30.000, and subscriptions are still coming in,
so that there is fair reason to hope that it will
shortly reach £50,000. If this amount were
£lOO,OOO it would be none too much for the occasion.
The brave follows who have risked their lives in snob
a patriotic manner—to fight the battles of England
in the Soudan—deserve something at our hands.
We can do little for them; but we can take care
that the widows and orphans, should it happen—ax
it will inevitably hapjien—that there should be any,
are not left to want and misery. This question of
subscription to the patriotic fund is not one that can
be dealt with by the cold method of considering
whether the sacrifice made was required or not. The
die is cast; the evil—if eril it be—has been done,
and the sacrifice has been offered up. It is for us to
take the consequences. It is. perhaps, a mere question
of sentiment; but it is one that does honor to our
heart*, end can bring no discredit to our heads. So
much of the great business of the world ; eo many
j of its noblest events—event* that make us aa de-
i scendants and an integral portion of the great British
, race, proud of our history—have been wrought by
1 the feeling of sentiment that we have no need to be
, ashamed of it in this instance. The nature oftheoall
* now made upon us appeals to our hearts, aud we have
f had too frequent proof of the heartiness and good
i will of the people of Now South Wale* to have any
i grave misgiving as to the result of the appeal now
, going on. Many of the subscriptions, the largest
i m amount, in iket, have been given by those who
i aro not reckless and lavish iu their giving. These are
: the men who carefully consider the matter before
i they unloose their parse strings; and that they have
i subscribed so liberally shows that the coolest, most
, cautious, and most careful members of the community
i have keen deeply moved by the occasion, aud have
; felt themselves called upon to take their fair share
> of the public burdens, and to give of their means for
I the protection aud preservation from want of the
; widows and orphans of those who havo not hesitated
to risk and sacrifice their lives iu what they rightly
i or wrongly believe to be the j»ath of duty. The fund
i is a noble monument to the patriotism and generous
f feeling of the people of New booth Wales, and will
i endure a* long .is history is written. It is one to
: which every man should subscribe according to his
’ means, aud feei ail the bettor for the experience.
General Gordon.
Wax* it was learned that the hereto soul of Charles
George Gordon had passed into the future amidst cir-
cumstances of treachery, a thrill of sorrow and disgust
prevailed in the public miud throughout the colonies.
Sorrow at the sacrifice of this dauntless hero -disgust
at the characteristic tardiness and cruel procrastination
1 of the Britiah Cabinet in sending to his rescue. After
months of fierce denunciation from the English press,
the Government at last moved, .but lost valuable time
jn deliberating ou- the choioo of a route- -whether to
send an expedition by the Nile, or across 'he desert
from Suakim to Berber. The waits for no man,
as Lord WolseJey now discovers to his cost, or rsther to
the cost of others. No sooner had the expedition to
Gordon started than tho Nile began to fall, and the
cataracts became almost impassable. As regards
General Gordon himself, be died as a brave soldier
desires to die, striving fur a good cause, with every
assurance of a reward elsewhere. The public voice seeks
to honour iu him the pure knightly seal, the unfailing
Christian faith, tbs self-sacrificing tenderness of a
burning philosophy, the heroic artfulness of an uu-
| tarnished soldier's life, in camp and in council, in field
; and in fight, in many climes, against desperate odds and
| hazards. Such a life aa this was Gordon’s. One that
I will shed a lustre on the page of English history for
j ever. One of Gordon’s last dispatches to the British
| Cabinet, written in October last year, contains these
! remarkable words :—“ We will defend ourselves to the
last; 1 will not leave Khartoum ; 1 will try and per-
Isuade the Europeans to escape ; and I am still sanguine,
by means not clear, that God will give us the issue."
The fear of death had long since died out in Gordon’s
breast, for when the King of Abyssinia seised his person
and threatened to take his life, Gordon’s reply, with a
laugh, was, that he would rather thank anyone who
relieved him of that responsibility. Australians can
appreciate that mournful cartoon in London /‘wnrii,
which depicted the gallant Gordon scanning tho horixon
from the rampartsal Khartoum, and exclaiming —“ When
will help come V' Had the help been sent by the more
practicable route, viz., Suakim, El Mahdi would have
been too lato. The life of Gordon has been compared in
its parity to Sir Galahad’s. May we hope that iu hia last
days at Khartoum, he saw the visions Sir Galahad saw,
and heard the voice the maiden knight heard :
“ Oh, Jut sad faithful knight of Ood,
Bide on, the prise is won."
The Late Major-General Cordon, C.B.
Gasenat OoxoOH was betrayed and killed at Khartoum
or. the Anniversary day of our colony, after having been
shut up in that place for just a year and a few days
By his death the valour of England has lost a soldier
not surpassed in this or in fact any age. “ Chinese
Gordon ” the world-famed General was familiarly
designated ever since his suppression of the Tsipmg
rebellion. A correspondent of the Pall Mail Gazette,
speaking of him, says : " He was slightly built,
•■•••mwhat below the average height, with a cb ild-like


simplicity of speech and manners. Notwithstanding i
his fifty veers, his face is almost boyish in its youth- i
fulness, his step is light, and his inurements as lithe as t
the leopard. Although ho is still excitable and i
vehement, those who know him best say that he has t
under much firmer control thoee volcanic fires which f
blared out with fiercest fury in his younger days.. But g
there is that in his face even now that contrasts strangely <
with the sweetness of his smile or the radiance which r
lights up hi* face when discoursing on his favourite t
author and the choice texts of the ‘ imitation,' which, i
for the present, seems to have superseded bis old j
favourite. * Watson on Contentment.
The General baa been regarded by the English t
speaking race of every class snd party, and the news of \
his dafcth has created such a wide spread feeling of
sorrow throughout the antipodes, that we believe our (
readers will gladly accept for the supplement of this f
month's publication a coloured portrait in the most 1
finished style. The portraiture of the face is from a j v
photograph taken in London just prior to his departure ' »
tor Khartoum, and is pronounced the best that has J
been taken, the costume being that of the gorgeous j c
Egyptian uniform worn by “Gordon Pasha,” as j i
Governor-General of the Soudan, is from a photograph i e
taken at Khartoum. ' 1
It is sufficient here to repeat 5 few dates and I *
facts of biographical importance, and to notice the *
antecedent* of his late mission to Khartoum. | r
Charles George, Gordon was born at Woolwich, j I
January 28, 1833 ; was fourth soil of the late Lieu- j c
t flip Hi Gun in si Henry William Gordon, R.A., one j j
of an old Highland family who had been distinguished t
soldiers for four generations. His mother waa
daughter of the late Mr. Samuel Euderby,of Blackheath, {
a London merchant and shipowner, who was extensively i
concerned in the South Sea whaling enterprise, and in I
the discovery of the Auckland Isles and similar geo- J I
graphical explorations. Charles Gordon waa educated : c
at Taunton, and at tho Royal Military Academy, j c
• Woolwich : he entered the Royal Engineers in 18T4, and ' t
served at the siege of Sebastopol, at the capture of Kin- j i
bun, and in the engineering operations for the demoli-11
tiou of the Russian naval docks. He was engaged from i
May, 1856, in assisting to lay down tho new frontier of a
Bessarabia, and from April, 1867, to the end of 1858, in 1
similar work on the Armenian frontier. In July. 18‘>0, <
he was sent to China, and took jiart in the siege of Pekin, 1
after which Major Gordon remained as commander of 1
the Royal Engineers at Tion-Tain, and was also (
employed in the survey of the country around Shanghai. <
The T>i-Ping rebellion in China, which had first broken i
out in 1861, became in 1860 threatening to the safety of 1
' Shanghai and other ports of foreign commence. After 1
several years of desnltory warfare, the Chinese Govern- c
moot requested the aid of the British Government to r
supply n competent officer for the work of organising
ana dir acting the Imperial forces against the rebela
Major Gordon was selected for this service, and waa
furnished by Li-Hung-Chang, Governor General of the
Kiang i»r«>viiioea (who is now Prime Minister of the *’
Chinese Empire), with the requisite powers. In 1863 2
and 1864, Gordon performed wonders of rapid military I
preparation, drilling and training a small but efficient a
Chinese army, and of daring, skilful and victorious s
action, capturing the towns of Tai-Tsan, Quin-San, and ii
Soo-Chow, and other places of importance, which soon s
led to the recovery of Nankin and the suppression of the d
Tai-Ping rebellion. Colonel Gordon’s services were
heartily applauded not only hy the Chinese Government j
but also by the British and other European mercantile ,
people in China. He returned to England at the end of j
1804, and was appointed to the command of the Royal
Engineers nf. Gravesend, sod employed in the construe- T
tion of the Thames fortifications till 1871, when he was U
sent to Galatz, and to the months of the Danube, aa *
British Commissioner, for the improvement of the ir
navigation of that river. b
We are now to speak of Colonel Gordon's first mission ai
to the Soudan. Early in the year 1874, haring met di
No bar Pasha. Prime Minister of Egypt, he was invited tl
to succeed Sir Samuel Baker as Governor of the Eqoa- le
toriai Lake province* of the Upper Nile, with a view to at
suppressing the slave trade. He went thither, arriving 9
at B hartomn on March 12, and proceeding to Gondokoro, A
then the seat of his government, rthere he arrived on M
September 4, haring spent much time in visiting the M
district* of the Seabst river and Bshr-el-Ghasel, R
tributaries o' the White Nile. Gordon’s first period of L
Soudan administration, which was from 1874 to the end | at
of 1876. was limited to the line of (he White Nile and I G
the shores of Lake Albert Nyansa, and Victoria Nyarns. ! ne
with the assistance of RomoloGessi,sn Italian, his second j to
in command. He undoubtedy performed great things at i R
this period, establishing a series of military stations along | a :
the line, subduing the unruly negro chiefs, deposing i an
and punishing official malefactors, and Iocs) rulers who dt
abused their {tower, and delivering hundreds of people di
from the slave trad era. But the second jieriod of hi* fo:
government, in the year 1877 to the end of 1879, waa an
attended with far leas satisfactory results He had Ti
returned from a visit to England, and had boon invested Sc
with mneh mors extensive powers, os Governor-General j tot
of the whole of the Soudan provinces, including Kordufan I foi
and Darfonr, with Khartoum for the centre of this vast i in
dominion. He had no longer to deal simply with the 1 th:
mere savages of the White Nile and the Lake region, Ju
but with the fierce and warlike Mussulman tribes of the j St
Arab race, with Zebehr Pasha sod hi* powerful faction, tei
and with the corrupt Egyptian officials who were in I by
league with them, and who were interested in | ba
maintaining the slave trade. It must be con'eased that | nw
General Gordon’s efforts to contend against those foes of up
dviluation proved an utter failure, and after two mi
yaars and a half of terrible conflict, he threw up Li* | ws
office m diegust At that time th* Khedive of Egypt, ! ck
whom he served, waa still in the possession <4 a large an
army and a considerable revenue ; and if the restoration ho
of order in the Soudan was then found imjraoticaMe, miu
it must now be more hopelessly impossible Wo ought | chi
; not, therefore, to fee! surprised that General Gordon |
was obliged, when again at Khartoum, with the m*re
i nominal title of Gorornor-General, and without any j
i military force, to stu-rondcr Darfour and all that region i ,
i to the Mahdi, to proclaim the toleration of slavery, and, ''
i finally, to propose the admission of Znbehr, his former [ i
; great enemy, as the only peraon capable of ruling the ! i
’ central districts of the Soudan. It is a signal practical 1 <
i refutation of all the well-meaning but fallacious projects : 1
i that have been entertained for the subjection of those
immense territories, with their barbarous and rcatless '
i population, tc the dominion of a civilised government. ]
The sooner this fact is recognised, and the remnant of <
the Egyptian garrisons withdrawn in peace, the better ■
' will it be for Egypt and for England.
These views are fully supported by the study of 1
• General (Jordon’s interesting private letters from the
i Soudan, published in a volume edited by Dr. Birlfbeck !
12ill, entitled “Colon*! Gordon in Centra! Africa," •
> i which appeared in 1881, and some extracts from which I
; are included »n Mr A. Egmunt Hake's volume, “The .
i Story of Chinese Gordon. General Gordon's deliberate j i
i 1 conviction, from his five years’experience u? the Soudan, j!
11 is recorded to the effect that the slave trade can only be i
i effectually checked by cloeing the market for alav.a in j
1 Egypt and the Asiatic provinces of the Turkish Empire, ' j
I especially by guarding tbo Red Sea ports; and that to j 1
1 \ attempt its forcible suppression in the Soudan is to do j <
j more harm than good. The British Government wvuid j
| have been wiae to have acted upon this opinion—follow- i
j cd a course prescribed by true humanity aa well aa by j !
I justice and prudence—that of leaving the interior of''
the Soudan to its own people.
— i:
j Lieutenant-Colonel Fred. Wells,
j Ltkctkxakt-Colokbl Frct>. Wnu, well kuown in the ;,
: civil service of this colony, is equally well known as I
( displaying a warm hearted interest in the promotion of j
11 the cause of the volunteer artillery of the.colony, lie !.
j was born on the 6th August, 1837, at Hull, Yorks, Bng-
l land, and wav educated at Kingston College, and sub-
i seounntly at a private academy Woolwich. His military ,
service began in 1868, when he joined the No. 1 Battery
i Volunteer Artillery, and beoame Lieut.-Commanding
,oa the 15th March, 1869. He was made captain on the
, 2t)th October. 1870 ; was made Major, on the 16th
F November, TBB4 ; he was raised lotbo standing of Lieut. -
i Colonel Commanding the New South Wales Artillery
on she 19th December, 1881. His last appointment was
; made to the New South Wales Infantry a few days
before the departure of the Ibtrta. Lieut-Colonel
1 Wells carries with him the good wishes of a large circle ;
of Sydney friends. The portrait is from a photograph
recently taken by Freeman Bros.
The Flowers' Revenge.
“The scent of the dowers has killed her.” So runs
Freiligrath’s popular German ballad of theFlowers’
Revenge." A sleeping beauty baa inhaled the poisonous ,
and deadly scent of the gathered bunch of flowers, which i
stands near the couch. To better interpret the artist's ,
idea Gustav Wertheimer has represented a serpent j
springing from among the flowers, about fir dartj its 1
deadly venom on the unconscious sleeper. |
i'
| Banquet to Mr. T. M. Slattery, M L.A., |*
at Burrowa. !
Thk Electorate of Burrowa haring determined to enter I j
tain their member, Mr. T. M. Slattery, at a banquet, j,
selected a Committee to make the necessary arrange- ' ]
irents Accordingly, invitations were issued to mem- |,
bers of the Ministry and of the Legislative Assembly, j {
and to many other*, for a banquet at Burrows, on Rator- j r
day, the 14th February last On lYiday. 13th ultimo, , s
the guests from Sydney, to the number of about forty, j (
left Radfarn Station in two special carriages which, well ' a
stocked with creature comforts, wore attached to the * {,
9p m. train for the south. The party included the j{,
Acting Colonial Secretary, the Colonial Trcasuror, the „
Minister for Mines, Mr. Coder Secretary Walker, the ! q
Mayor of Sydney, Messrs. Slattery, John Sutherland, i a
K. H. D. White, Targett, and Harman Tarrant, Mi. £
L. several frionds of Mr. Slattery’s, and represent- Jtl
I stives of the Press. At about-6.16 a.m., on Saturday | p
I Galong platform waa reached, and here a drag and ,
1 several buggies were in attendance to convey the party I
Ito Galong House, the seat of the Hon. Jno. Nagle '
Ryan, M.L. A.,about four mileadistant. At Galong House ; 8
a most sumptuous breakfast was provided, and the guests , b
amused themselves according to their various inclinations ; R
during the morning, concluding with a banquet luncheon, I tu
dispensed with prodigal hospitality During the jfc
forenoon, the party had received several additions, ; F
among whom were Meesra F. W. Hume, J.P., of i N
Tarengo Station, E. Gillespie, Mayor of Gonlbum, Ir<
Solomon Mcarce, J.l*., of Goniburn, and A. I) Middle- tr
ton, of Kalungla Station. After lunch a start was made 1 T
for Burrows, thenoe about 16 milos distant, and resulted fl,
in a rather dusty, yet very enjoyable drive, alternately in
through bush, roadway, erasing, and cultivated lamf, tl
Just • y the bridge at Bslfyrgan (near which ie Tarengo *t
Station), and about 3 miles from Burrowa, the minis- vi
to rial party were .net, and thence escorted into town si
by a band, the local Lodge of Oddfellows in scarfs and
badges, and by a cavalcade of apparently very well- p«
mounted horsemen. The latter must, as at first drawn m
up by the roadside, have numbered about 160, but so ri
mart)' more joined at every comer, that at laat nothing
was visible to those in the buggies but a vast moving m
cloud of dost—whence issued occasionally 60 or 60 hats, G
and an indescribable din of clattering, galloping, panting th
horses, the rattle of can oVr the sometimes stony street,
and a sound as of everyone talking, laughing, and J.
cheering at once.
11 Burrowa was reached about 4.10 p-m., and after a
e progress round the town, the party proceeded to the
j j Mechanics’ Institute, where an address was read by
i ; Mr. F. W. Hume, and responded to by Messrs. Dailey,
, * Dibb«, and Abbott, as Ministers, and Messrs. Blattegy
r [ and Playfair for the guests. After cheers for the Queen,
b : the Parliament, ana tho Member guest, the ritniMgg
I ! dispersed, and the strangers retired to their various
b hostalries to real
» At 7.30 p.m. the banquet commenced at Young's
s Royal Hotel, and there must have been about 14D
. prescut, in addition to tho arrivals from Sydney The
f chair was taken by the Hon. John Nagle Ryan, on
r wh>ae immediate right hand sat Messrs. Slattery, G R
Dibl»«, John Sutherland, Critchett, Walker, and
f R. H. D. White, and on bis left Meaara. W. B. Haifa*.
» W. P. Abbott, Playfair, Vaughan, and Dr. Tarrant
f Msasm. F, W. Hume and A. D. Middleton acting as
’ vise-chairmen. Apologise for non attendance were read
i from Sir John Robertson, Sir 6 Strickland, Bit Patrick
e Jennings, and tho Hon. George Thornton; and after
" . the excellent banquet had been enjoyed, the usual
, j loyal toasts were given with musical honours.
b i Mr Nicholson proposed “ the Ministry.” to which
i j Mcssrg, Dailey, Dibbe, and Abbott replied. The fifst
, ; going at some length into colonial politics, especially
» j *be New Guinea qneriiun, and the Minister for Mines
0 I dwelling on the merits of the new Land Act. * ' 3 ‘
II Mr. A. D. Middleton proposed “ the Parliament."
- and this toast was suitably replied to by Messrs W. B
y j Dailey, Sutherland, Tarrant, Targett, White, and
f ! Vaughan
Mr. Hume then pru)*taed tlie health of the guest of
j the evening . and, in replying, Mr Slattery referred U
the assistance he had received in regard to the Burrowa
j Railway ; announced that Mr. Faruell had promised the
l town £3OO for the Reserves; and. after touching ou the
f ■' subject of the Land Bill, and sundry local improve
■ j menu, expressed his appreciation of the honour ebr-
f j ferred on him by the electorate, in giving his friends
• ' and himself such an oration.
The toasts “oar Visitors," “the Ladies,” “the
- Press,” and “ the Chairman,”—the latter very humour-
-7 ously given by Mr. Dailey—brought the proceCYiinjpi to
V a close at midnight.
& Beds and breakfast haring been provided for the
« party from Sydney, at Burrowa, a start thence >as
h made for Galong soon after 11 on Sunday morning.
- At Tarengo the party made a halt to partake of the
Y hospitality of Mr. F. N. Hume, its owner, and while!
• there, a trooper rode up with a despatch for the Acting
E Colonial Secretary, who, after consultation, read to
il those assembled, tho telegram announcing the accept
• auce of New South Wales troops for Soudan service
k by the Imperial Government. This evoked great
| enthusiasm, and Mr. C. Huenerbein, who happened to
j He at the piano, appropriately struck up “ Halo Britan-
■ nia," and sundry patriotic songs and music. Afiel l
I “ Auld Lang Syne " being sung, all joining hoods, the
party were obliged to hasten off for Galong Bonn*.
» where they arrived about three, and were again the
' recipient* of Mr. Ryan’* princely hospitality Rome
s <1 lately after luncheon, Mr. Slattery, and thoee returning
» to Sydney, made their adieu to their late host, and
8 drove to Galong platform, where they arrived about
t 6 p.m. on Sunday, and a special train, telegraphed, for
• by Mr. Dailey, Waa in waiting. Leaving Galong plat-
form at 6.30, and stopping twice, the Ministers and
guests arrived at Red fern about 12.20 am, on Monday
j morning, the 16th ultimo ; and considering that the
[ distance is about 220 miles, very good time
Burrowa, although a fair aired town, ie not a cAmici-
j pelity. It is the epntre of the old Lachlan (I) country,
| is in a wool and wine growing district, and is situated
. [ about midway between Yam and Young, on the river
■ j Burrowa. The town will soon be oonuectod by railway
- I with the Southern lino, and a vote of £144,000 has
; been made for this purpose. In the vicinity there are
I many signs of good cultivation, good building, and
) general prosperity. The town {>oaeemea a fine Roman
I Catholic church, schools and convent, an English chinch
: and schools, and a Weeloyan chapel, &c., a now opart
I house, poet office, two banka, and several very fair
! hotels. There are two newspapers, which, however,’do
j not seem to flourish very well, and many good stores.
I The Roman Catholic church has some line stained glass,
! and cos:window was placed at the expense of Mr, John
Nagle Rffsn. The two large reserve* in the middle of
; the U>mt at present look ratimr desolate ; but, thanks
|to Mr. Faniell's offer of £9OO for improvements, they
, will probably soon brighten up.
Suakim.
1 Slaciw and MaMOwait are the only two ports connected
I by practicable caravan routes with the interior of the
; Soudan. The tom of Suakim ie built on a madrepore
j coral island, and connected with the mainland by a
I fortified bridge. It b 390 mile* N.E. from Khartoum.
' From Suakim start* the desert road to Berber ou Uve
• Nile, about two hundred and eighty miles, and slab the
road to Kassel a Both roads am not only used by
; traders, but abo by pilgrims on their way io Mecca
The terrain for some distance from the coast is low and
flat, until it rises gradually towards tho niooutains,
intersected by oasy sloping ravines, which are thickly
studded with umbrella-shaped mimosa, crowing to an
an average height of Bft to fift. Some of the bills-are
very steep, and have hardly any mimosas on their
sides, though their bases are surrounded by them.
Suakim was the starting point for tho English ex-
pedition to relieve Tokar. a smell town end penal settle
meal abont forty five miles distant from Suakim, and
situated in the Dhuru and Dokbn producing .district
A late telegram says ; -The British (Jorernmenf ere
sending a ruuforcement of 8000 men to Egypt under
General Newdigate, who will proceed to Suakim and
thence to Berber.
Our view of Suakim ie fmm a sketch by the Hon
J. Col borne, late colonel ou Hicks Pacha's stuff.
f4W MNuAr of fw WV *"■/


‘‘UK “KLOWKKS KKVESUK


Tut. tut, girl, what nonsense yon are talking; I always gar© you credit for plenty of sens©, but this is foolery.'—Chapter xl».
“RETRIBUTION.’ By SILVER LEAF.
Author of “The Whtel of Life," "All Aboard," <fc., «Ce.
Author'* rhjht* Rnortnt.
CHAPTER XLV
A Rash Act.
Days passed thus -days of pain and heart-weariness to the
young couple. The time was one of sadness ; it bore the
hardest upon Edith, for Keggie bad bis business cares and
pleasures -the bustling active life of a man to help him to
bear his homo worries, and he had morn than usual on his
shoulders, owing to Mr. Broughton's being laid up with
his temporary illness. Whilst the wife had the greater part
of the day to brood over her wrongs and sorrows, and, if
truth must !>e told—to nurse proud, hot, passionate anger
and resentment against the youngJiusband who was yearning
for reconciliation and renewed affection.
Edith, as my readers are well aware, was by no means a
perfect character. Hbe was very, very faulty—quick to love,
quick to hate, passionate to reseut, and sensitive to feel.
She had required, from her eariieet childhood, the moat jn-
dicious management, to mould her into the glorious, gene-
rous. high-souled woman the was capable of becoming. She,
who knew Edith beat, and had the greatest influence over
her for good, was Miss (iray. Perhaps in her youth Both ,
may have hail aa hot a tamper, and as impulsive a nature,
anil having overcome them could better sympathise with her ,
beautiful pupil; but now Edith was tormented aa with a
legion of evil spirits, and there was no voice to exorcise
them. Her feet were straying from the sweet domestic I
paths of wifely love and duty, and there was no hand to
gently lead her back. The aky wat darkening with blackest
thunder clouds, but there was no voice to counsel her to
avail herself of the shelter of her young husband'* tender
If I‘iiggie had been skilled at reading faces he would have 1
seen one morning that With bad Uken some fixed resolve,
and that some change was impending, but he only saw that
the beautiful eye# he loved to look noon bad a darker gloom
in their depths, that ths proud month had a sterner curve, i 1
and ths lithe willowy figure a greater erectneas ; and he 1
sighed a* he gased, a bitter hekrt aching sigh, that ought to 1
have melted the kindness in her heart, and have moved her
to pity , but her anger waa too deep, her pension too hot
for other thoughts to intrude. When l.'eggie had gone
she went to her room end packed a small travelling bag
with a few necaaaariet : she went to a drawer and exs- j
mined a handsome puts* that had beta one of bar wadding
gift# from her father Before Ilia daughter s marriage he
bad spoken to Reggie on the subject of a marriage portion
for Kditb.
"Reggie," ho said, "you take Kditb without any for*
time. lam generally supposed to bo a rich rnau, and per-
haps I am. What 1 have t have worked for; and when I
married my wife I had to support her, and you will have
to do the same. I have no idea of young people beginning
where their parents leave off. Vou will have a comfort-
able income from the business, and what y°" r vr «fe has she
will owe to you. I have made my will, and I m.iy aa well
tell you that I have left equal portions to each of m»
children, so Kdith will get her share then, and not till
Reggie was satisfied and delighted ; who would not have
been, to obtain tho hand of the loveliest girl in Sydney ?
and he rejoiced to think that he would be the medium to
supply his adored Edith with everything to make her life
pleasant and her home happy.
Mr. Broughton's old-fashioned notion* did not prevent bis
giving Kdith the purse, with tea i.’IO crisp new bank
notes snugly reposing in it Hitherto she had only spent
one of the notes in a gift to Reggie on his birth-daV. A
handsome Albert chain, with locket attacked, the latter
containing a charming likeness of herself.
She now took this purse, and placed it in the pocket of
the plain morning dress she wore, she then sat down to
write a note—it »s* a* follows : “ The life we are leading,
if pleasant to you is intolerable to in*. Igo to the home I
bitterly regret I ever left. We have made a mistake, and
the best way to rectify it is to relieve each other of the
presence that is so galling. I never wish to see you again,
and I suppose the wish is mutual. "
She added not another word, not a syllable of sorrow or
regret. She we* blinded by her mail passion, irritated by
what she thought Reggie’s insensibility and indifference. If
she could have dipped her pen into gall to have lb *^ e
overmastered reason, and all the really good and noble quali-
tie* the possessed.
Sbs gave the order* for their evening meal as usual,
taking care that Reggie s taate* and wishes were humoured ;
the then told the servants she was going to her father's, and
to give the note to Mr. Brayliegh when he returned, and
pawed out of the house, carrying her travelling bag. She
never oast a glance back, but walkad on. resolutely, deeps-
I rately. She took a cab and gave drcvtione to the driver to
take her to Dove's Nest.
She had formed no plans, bad determined upon nothing,
but ending the dreadful life of estranged affection In her
heart she hoped that thin decisive etep of her* would
bring matter* to a oritia ; that Reggie would com© posting
after her—that they would have it all out, and kiss and l>e
friends again, forgive and forget, and end this trouble.
Mr Broughton was in no good humour that morning. His
rheumatic pains were worse than uansl; he had mislaid hi*
spectacles, and was trying hia eye* by endeavouring to
read with a pair that did not suit hie sight ; be bad just
hoard of the failure of a house that owed their firm a large
sum of money ; in fact, a good many of the rose leaves were
crumpled on hi* luxurious bed. He was still further put
out by getting a letter from Norsk to say that they had
been obliged to postpone their departure for a week. He
was disappointed, for be loved hie gentle delicate wife with
the deepest strongest lov# ; and it nad been no light trial
to him to endure the comparative solitude of Doves Neat
Ha was therefore in anything but au amiable frame of mind
this particular Saturday morning that Edith left her own
home for that of her childhood. A* she entered hi* sanc-
tum h# looked up with a glance of pleasure which wav
quickly succeeded by one of apprehension whan he saw her
few. for he knew that Kdith waa in one of her tantrums.
"Why, Kditb, my dear, you are quite a stranger; but
what is the matter ?"
•‘Father," said Edith, with what he called her tragedy
air, Reggie and Ido not agree, and I have come home ; I
have lefthim for ever."
■Tut, tut. girl, what nonsense you arc talking ; I always
gave you credit for plenty of sense, but this is foolery."
"It is truth, and sober earnest," said Edith, her feoe
while sod drawu.
•• Edith Brayliegh. if I really believnd you meant what
yon were saying 1 should he seriously angry with you : hut
you cannot know what you are saying. Du you know what
notoriety aud calumny yon would bring upon yourself and
your buaband by separating yourself fuui him . sod for
iiume little foolish quarrel, eome little boy and girl till. Oo
home, ray girl, and be a good wife to your husband and
don't Ist me eee yon agaiu till you oome with him. ll jvn
are such a fool a* to quarrel with your husband this u oo
homo for you."


ESsi^fSSSH
••Yea.” aaid Bdith, “wave tattled it,” in a low voice,
a^^Sp^SSiß
SinriS;«-fir- h '“-“
aSSH:~S^;S
lujlrt'.ltotot ff b'i'.VJ hir “.1.'“."
SSSHJSfSSraSS
more >w one ao long aa their live. Uaud.
” ,w
CHAPTER XLVI.
£SSHSs
SSS'S«;
Sr^SSSBi
ffifflffulu tT“t InT.'totm inlim ff'“h.'wouM '
j
SSS^SSSSpi
to him, and that her love waa dead for over. Tho
worda aha had written aaemed to burn into hia heart and *
WMMMImMi
JlSsssE—i j
zr d .ftriff :
SSS'fe* a
haunt ion The wrviuiU, thinking he had gone to Dova’a w
: ??Ss‘SsSi : sii r,r:
•g it men/
s
>y (e«l the elfecta of hi. exhau.Ung walk.
i w afflutaiß
«, Ho »m 111 UO mood to criticiae, and at tirat be only
I SSSSSSS
te it waa too late that night, hut he would *iek her ua the
;; "" m»»n-l to got to tho
x with him.
»' day/andV s7 airntlj I * *\valtcd* wm« < !li 1 10, *»u id* tile
: P " u
* js ass
whoo aba oH.no, but .he put n.« out. ao 1 told her to go
in home and make it up with you.' 1
l
gsapftrfisf^ArA%c
'iSssfli
• ? ®smSSS:HSkS
I
■ S^STHHSaTSH;
3sULS -“iWtt ffTtSi
coining for her ! Both her huahand and aon-indaw dreaded
: ££rSs SSsCKsstS
, and -he ought t» have axarciaed more control ovar Kil.th
whan .he waa a child. She alao blamed Keggia-he ahouhl
~~=SS~SH=
ii
|
tri-jßitfiaxrascir,
wJraffistKt,
SEHSSi
*. w i
C w “i sfis»a t £tss :
IpMSSSfi
SEHaSaSSSaC:
“ !!,Ar':- “" "• , 1 ‘ h ""‘ l m,u l,k ° “ u " *
mmimfsm
5 TffSff £*£ CStfUffS Sff
m stasis
- “*
f^Ss©^^ 22
CHAPTER XLVII.
! SSS«3!SSaSr3.at3SSi:
igSaSSr-
>• In the tinieat cottage of tbia little village lived an old
:SSS?SrS3£w
isaS&:HV£SK
I sSSS^ £:WJSW,,a
iiliilSsgs
: .u.
;
i-ssse;"
i after the coach accident (for thin waa in the good old coach-
-1 slHr^
' one an fair and youthful ahouhl have no one belonging to
-»is mOszs Vszi‘£r~£ Cl" 2
..tot '
stssjas.«sx« ,r ss
ssasirA 2f4‘3tt«ffi rff i=
increaaed the fever of her l>raie At length her youth an.)
SSL? AJSrJS s
.try, but, I,to, to Mill. 11., fuiut l.ruulh tbu
£1“ fftSaffitt ffth“ '• otir.
£iltlpi£=


»b s^ssvssirfZJt
isiiSils—
E.H?~ ' rr ”« sr ns!
sSS&ar«£afeSsSl
=S“H2£HS?i“|
erafHSi^SvS
S£SS£SK!3wI5 1
flswss:
imiMiii
ifimili
VMiKUV
IMJ± AJgK 5
SSSSSSsSiSS i
I
2Sfi3=E=J=M»Swt*Js 5
cfS^£HSiK^2 : S£si s
§H*S?lSslai
•
6 *\Vhen^ihe'told the kindly old Scotch woman the Watery ™
tt SSZZZXL&
rt — ■
gu.d " Why they did at an* time. but the boy. .re that big
ipe.t and onmannerly that it takea a man, and >nt wi a laug and
■ old ••iVlie* T"SSl !l |nSlß||» them, aaid Edith, “If 1
■tu, doctor Hill. t.a<l attcnrlcd her, byukingir the might refer to
.h.
tllßSMS^~x=s
SgtslsMis l
“ SBsr’raJirctaftVi'tutt j
ssl3KHsS*KSli
s es&&}'kxassts*s! !
; sss£sms^=
s 2U3iWJLi25Ji , ss stoewfl«
5 |p| I
■ SiSoSSHStSsfi j
imi&mmm:
: SS?»o-K:
i*«ei
: *
: “l&=ia£:
: "•
;IsSSSkww|S 3
:sgs~fs,-rc:r:::
a tirSSsJSSSssfvfS
■■ s?asss=ssE
w J&:zzs£ts, sra as m
s “*
CHAPTER XLVIII.
:
!irSS§Epili
3ft!lssi
ilpiiiSsp
Isplptslp
<
11SH rs&Masrjisci
i
; i^E||S=|if
'
s i “ r ‘ - i,ry ta,d ”'
ipjlliiSHS
kwmi sc* -" *• w " u - 1
f M£K^mJS£Wtf*J:
* “ Tben’hea do dead T ’• aaid Jan at, *hoae quick ear bad
IlSlips
s^iSaSSSSSS
ah- fouud th. y »ld woman back, and aLo heard aounda of
3tßiMrt;6aftiS. , BS=


MINISTERIAL VISIT TO BURROWA.


ARTILLERY HORSES FOR EGYPT IN TRAINING AT MOORE PARK.


(C.*;*« •! /row pagt 7.)
parsfizsfti *»-*-«-—“w-
-ttwbii'7. ■
asiSs&SKSisKtSS
T^t-^SSSsBESB
MOB
SSfßtwa&S, s*’ 5 *’
S;Ktt£3SSSt;H
e.|ffiSgg||S3
ra^^rr& , ='£SS£3
"Ah, Janet; iUs easy for you, at threescore, to feel
iIiES
ye can comfort the living."
ipiifei
wmmmm. \
SfPBw?CSS£S=--“‘;
iSt4z*i i£lP« i
£is?iSr=.aHSw i
iHlalsili
OL’lt ILL CUT It.t TIOX3- CmUiauM/ro«* J.
1 Khartoum.
the great Nubian Desert to Snakim and the Red Sea.
: "‘%x/.z!r*z d . ssetsssgsiz
rugs, hardware, soap, and sweetmeats being in the
greatest request, and fetching enormous price* Dusty
an<l dirty in it. major portion, like the poorer ouarter
of some Egyptian towii^Khartoum^ yet wears rather an
• i« “ 'in “.rten I "»™‘.d n’JUJue
aSSfSS
element is recruited for soldiers or ivory hunters for the
interior of Africa by the ivory merchants, who arm,
SSvHSri;SS"S
about the middle of July and last till the middle of
September. The unhealthy season is during the months
begins About the middle of December, and lasts till the
dimmed .1 30,000 lo 65,1.10 aonle, of which two-third.
“on* view ef Khnrtmnn ie efler . .ketch by the Hen,
J. Colbome, Inte eolenol on Hick. Peehe'. ,t»lf.
I
Da Vos Lkm»k\kku> has made an examination of the j
!^^«.n™., th o”.nH,nSn'ol rte°h"hd .‘fcrjfon j
Under the first head ho point, out that the peak. 1
which was snpooaod to bo the highest and on which the
jarrrm , £rx^it£f'fi£s:
3,^^r£^£ng^.:
ki,b lednTon'th.Tiuiin rinmdM .M„'n,7ci'“k°' °SSt
‘."hr,,, £ (
highest point of the Alps, which forms an undulating
tT£*tt^isrssX7^%
“™„“in .'enemy “end U.e'd!«w7>Tnta emXtThn'j
the greater part of the plateau. It contains a great ,
deal of water oven in lime of drought. It conveys ,
83,000 cubic feet of water down per minute at a height c
er of about 300 U feet, and whoa it is tiiyph the quantity of
to water » estimated to be a million cubic feet. The ad-
r. vantages which may be derived from this river for
i
Z !mp.*t7 ’Zm'iliim; u Tv47‘ n ,°'
below that in the zone between 4,000 ami S.otiO feet
the timber reaches its best growth. There the doctor
found the most beautiful timber he has yet seen in
Australia The stems of the mountain ash and boa are
exceedingly atraijjht and long, and by utilising the
- sss
- IEHarSHS
" beauty, and Dr. Lendenfeld collected 25 species, which
Daron Mueller has identified as of the Alpine species.
1
2 ‘SS&3SS
in very great harm to the slice].. Though horses are there
t ss L-i.'Ciss
‘I i. that » ifreat dmi ~f mra.tnr. ~ condoned. Th.
i SLS E"S r SS*f*l
»
y witnessed a glacial period such as has been observed in
b New Zealand, Patagonia. South Africa, and in the
Southern Hemisphere. No one had ever been near the
“I” \V h wer?“ifTutS
W n«m AdLlJuuT AIT nrifflUu i. indinjd u."oon*
SSIHCSmS
erratics brought from Wilkesland, at the South Pole,
B&n&’CS&a
feet, polished off by the action of pre-historic glaciers.
! It is evident, he says, that an ice stream moving slowly
SH“t==2?£
likely that all the valley, in that height wore filled by
glacier, which derived their ice from neve, covering
1 £ astjss-zi £y i=? ir- 1 - i
• i^rr.» «£■£
j a terminal moraine in that valley, but he expects that
such traces very likely may lx- found by future visitors.
The glmn.l pi.ri.nl in Autnlin, I, v ihe.e ,m-
-doubted remain., be cnclndc, ... peob.bly .imnl-
“K»o. With the period in N„, Ul.nd.
The Mahdi.
Mauombo Aohmkt, the Mahdi, is a native of the
province of Dongola, and his father was by trade a
carpenter. As a boy he was apprenticed to his uncle
a boatboilder, but having received a Inviting, ran
away to Khartoum, and joined the free school attached
t(. the tomb of Sheikh lioghali, the patron saint of
Khartoum. Here Maho.ncd Achnint remained for some
time studying religion, without making any mark amongst
the other pupils. Afterwards he wont to ilorber to join
another free school, likewise attached to a shrine greatly
venerated by the natives I lore ho remained si* months
completing his religions education, and in 1«7» became


a disciple of anothsfr faki (learned man), who snbse- ;
quently ordained him a sheikh and teacher of religion, j
Ultimately the Mahdi took ui> his home in the island of \
Abba, near Kana, on the White Nile. He began by j
making a subterranean retreat, into which he retired
for prayers, accompanied by fasting and iiicense-buriniig.
His fame and sanctity by degrees spread far and wide,
and Mahomed Achmet became wealthy, collected dis- j
ciples, and married several wives, all of whom he took
care to select from among the daughters of the most,
influential sheiks and other notables. To keep within |
the number (four) legalised by tho Koian, ho was in the
habit of divorcing the surplus and taking them on again
according to his fancy. About tho end of May, 1881, j
he began to write to his brother fakis that he was tho j
Mahdi foretold by Mahomet the Prophet, and that ho j
had a divine mission to reform Islam, to establish i
universal equality, a universal law, and a community of j
goods ; also, that all who did not believe in him should |
bo destroyed, be they Christians, Mohammedans, or I
Pagans. 'Among others, he wrote to Mahomet Saleh, a |
very learned and influential faki of Dongola, directing |
him to collect his dervishes and friends, and to join him J
at Abba. This sheikh, instead of complying with his |
request, informed the Government, declaring the man ■
must be mad. In July, 1881, the Mahdi proclaimed i
open rebellion and commenced operations, but was (
defeated in the south of Senaar in the winter of 1681-82.
Since then tho False Prophet has kept the Soudan in a
constant ferment, alternately defeating tho Egyptian |
troops under Abdel Kader and being defeated by them, .
until the crushing disaster of Hicks Pasha, near Obeid, in '
Kordofau, in the battle of Kasgill, on Nov. 5, 1883,
awoke tho world to the serious dangers arising from the
strife in the Soudan to Egypt proper. In person tho ,
Mahdi is tall and slim, with \ black board and light j
brown complexion. Ho evidently possesses considerable j
natural ability and tact, or ho would not have been able ,
to unite the usually discordant Soudanese tribes to u
common purpose. The biographical facta about the
Mahdi are taken from an account drawn up by tho late ,
Lieut.-Col. Stewart.
Departure of New South Wales Troops
for Egypt.
The departure of the little army from our shores to |
tho aid of the mother country is, perhaps, not a great |
deal in view of tho tens of thousands she has under
command ; but is a vary significant mark of the loyalty
wo bear, and indicates that if the old country really was ,
in danger, she hss wealthy colonics who are over ready j
to buckle on the armour and do their share of the |
fighting. Thore is no gainsaying the fact that the I
Australia* are rising to the greatness of their opportuni-
ties and destinies with a confidence and success iu all j
they undertake, and seeming to exclaim-
u Sweep on ! »wv»p on ! mysterious a-. Mibliiue,
Yc never resting waves of change aud time.”
From early morning, on the 3rd of March, the
Victorian Barracks presented a scene of activity and
excitement—soldiers, volunteers, and friends thronged
the place. Those destined for the Soudan were in the |,
highest spirits, and those who remained behind were j (
fired with such military ardour, that, if one “Soudan J,
man " had remained behind, a hundred wore ready on , ,
the spot to fill the vacancy. Pathetic scenes were there t j
in abundance, as wives, mothers, sisters, snd sweet- j
hearts took a last farewell. The scene was heightened
as a detachment of some 560 marines and blue jackets |
marched up, headed by their band, playing a popular air. |
Two tJardincr, two field, and two Gattling guns were .
brought with them. The next feature, aud a novel one, ; ,
was tho arrival of the newly-formed cavalry corps, some ( (
50 in all, splendidly mounted and marshalled by their |
Agamemnon, Captain Macdonald. Then came Captain J
Batty and his mounted troopers. Hu Excellency and (
suite, accompanied by the Hon. )V, B. Dailey and (
Rear-Admiral Tryon, and General Scratchley. Ihe
roll-call having been completed, the men formed hvc
deep, and, in an instant, amidst loud cheering, waving
of handkerchiefs, Inspiring music, the march from the (
barracks commenced, os follows : ,
Mounted Trooper*- <
Root Police, i
Sydney bight Horae. ,
{(is Excolli-uc) the Governor and suite. J
Sjdney Light Horse.
Hear-Admiral Tryon. I
Mounted Troopm*.
Members of the Ministry. ,
Blue-jacket* Irom Shii«a of Wsr.
.Marine Artillery,
Marine Light Infantry.
Penuausut Artillery Band. '
Acting Commandant Hubert a. ,
CMumaadaut KlcUanUou.
'Ilu: Contingent. ,
Foot Police. (
From crowded balconies, parapits, and thronged path- ,
ways went up a great shout, os the procession w ith difli- j
culty, owing to tho density of tho crowd, moved on. ,
Tho scone in Oxford-strest was bewildering, long hues (
of flags intersected tho street, and every coigns of van- <
tag.-, was pocked with spectators, many of whom cast t
bouquets of flowers on tho moving column. The Son-
dan boys were especially marked iu the matter of floral
favours, and touching scenes of parting were visible on
all sides. As the procession entered College street s|«o-
tators, in tens of thousands massed in Hyde Bark. Bo- j
noath’ the gaze of tho great circumnavigator's effigy tho ,
throng was yet more dense, and will never be forgotten t
by those who witnessed it. Mottos of various and fit- t
tiug kind were displayed among theui—“ For England, t
Home, and Gordon.'' “ Well don., N. 8 W.” 11,0 <
column moved along Park, George, and Hunter Streets t
and Mac.marie Place. The men of tho contingent bore t
the parting aeraBKKUM very well, although more l|
than one bravo fellow's voice grew husky as he L
took a farewell embrace of some loved friend. In j
this manner the procession passed on to the place of ].
-1 embarkation. At a few minutes inul one o'clock the I
, I military |<ageaut began to enter the enclosure at the
P j Quay. It comprised the following branches of the j
’ j service ; Volunteer Artillery, "07; Engineer Corps,
1! 41 ; Torpedo Corps, 42; Ist Regiment Volunteer
1 Infantry, 202 ; 2nd Regiment V. 1., 22U ; 3rd (Wes-
, tern) Regiment, V. 1., 240 ; 4th (Northern) Regiment I
• V.l. 252; Public School Cadets, 270; f ennui Boys)
; ' (four Companies), 210. Naval Volunteer Artillery, 118 ; j
; Naval Brigade, 200, The Naval Volunteer Artillery had |
i ’ the honourable distinction of carrying the colours, a blue j
i ! ensign, having in the upper left hand corner the Union
i | Jack, and in the lower right hand comer a white 1 disc, !
{ traversed by a cross bearing a lion and the Southern I
i Cross. The battalion was under the command of Lien-
i ■ tenant-Coloiiel Raymond, the Volunteer Artillery was )
i i directed by Major Owen, the Engineer Corps by Lieut.-
j Cansdell, the Torpedo Corps by Captain Walker, the j
j Ist Regiment V.l. by Major Richards, the 2nd Regi-
( ment V.L, by Lieutenant-Colonel Gfbodlet, the 3rd
( Regiment by Captain Byrnes, the 4th Regiment by ,
Lieutenant-Colonel Wilkinson, the Public School Cadets j
by Captain Strong, the Verwm boys by Captain Neiten-
' stein, R.N., the Naval Volunteer Artillery by Lieu-
tenant Lee, and the Naval Brigade by Captain Hixson,
i H is Excellency the Governor said, infer a'ici, “Soldiers]
of Now South Wales : For tho first time in the great I
j history of the British Empire a distant colony is sending, 1 ]
at her own cost, a completely equipped contingent of 1 '
I troops, who have volunteered with an enthusiasm of 1 1
j which only we who have witnessed it can judge, to J (
assist the Imperial forces in a bitter struggle for the
■ suppression of unspeakable cruelty, and for tho estnb-, 1
I lishmenl of order and justice in a misgoverned country, j '
You will be greeted in Egy pt by the hearty welcome of 1 ]
thousands of chivalrous soldiers who have never yet,
! looked upon such an action as yours—(cheers)—the j
j eyes of your gracious Queen will be bent upon your j j
1 exertions—and in every part of the world where our
flag floats men and women ami children will eagerly I '
. read of your exploits and pray for your success, j
Soldiers, you carry in your keeping the honour of this j *
j great colony, which has made such splendid sacrifices to j'
( send you to the front with an equipment of which ■
j nations most practised in war might have been proud ;
and you will nave the glorious privilege of helping to
I maintain the honour of the Empire. Soldiers, you
I leave us amidst tho acclamations of your fellow-citizens, _
whose hearts will be with you in your camps and your
conflicts—amidst an enthusiasm of admiration and saci i- ,
I fice unexampled—with the sympathies of every true ,
j citizen of tho Empire—with our earnest hope that it t
' may be your glorious privilege to share in the triumph j
as in the service, and to come back to ns crowned with ,
I England’s gratitude, as you are now eiicomposscd with (
her sympathies. Soldiers, On the part of your fellow- j
citizens, I now say to you—-Farewell ! and may God j
ever have you in His holy keeping.” (Loud and pm-
longed cheering.)
The Commandant (Colonel Richardson) sainted his
Excellency, and made a brief and suitable reply.
The Iberia, with the infantry, and tho Aattralasiau,
with the horses and some two hundred of the artillery, 1
' making in all 750 men, moved away from tho Quay c
I simultaneously, and was accompanied down the liar- I
| hour by an immense flotilla. Fort Maoiuarie sent forth t
I a parting salute, and 11.M.5. JVI Isvu thundered out a r
{ similar compliment. f
f
Colonel Richardson.
‘ The command of the Now South Wales forces which t
have just departed to the aid of England in tho Soudan t
campaign has been well and wisely deputed to Colonel d
I J. T. Richardson, who has had a prolonged and creditable
career as a military man ; while in this colony he has *•
discharged his responsibilities with efficiency and satis- a
faction. He has, by dint of tactic management, sue- q
ceeded in maintaining a friendly feeling between the
regular and volunteer forces ; a work of no small difli- h
cultv has it been to disperse imtty jealousies. Beyond A
doubt the Colonel has done a lot in raising the standing h
of the Volunteer force. Colouel Richardson was cdu- n
cated at Rugby, and, in November, 1864, ho entered ti
the army as ensign of the 72nd Highlanders, with whom s
he fought in tho Crimean campaign, and was present ii
with them at the siege of Scba«tt>po|. For his services si
there he received the Crimean modal and clasp in 1857. j p
Ho then exchanged to tho 12th Regiment, and with | ti
that body came out to the colony. Shortly after his “
arrival hero he became adjutant, and in 18U3 was promoted a
to a captaincy. Laic in the same year ho proceeded 1 :
with his regiment to Now Zealand, and was engaged in n
active service there till tho termination of the Maori b
war. He again visited this colony in 1805, and received o<
the appointment from tho Government of this colony
to the command of the Volunteer forces, with tho rank o
of Uentonaiit-culonel. In (In' following year, on the V
formation of the new military force, he received tho tl
rank of Colonel, and was made commandant of tho q
forces of tho Colony. Hie portrait which we give in t
our present issue is from n photograph by Boyd, now e:
the firm of Johnson, O’Shannassy, A- Co. a;
Major Airey.
Majok Guoxcr. J. Aiken, the second in command ss
regards the artillery of the Now South Wales troops for
the Soudan, like his immediate superior oiliccr, was at
one lime an officer of marines, and indeed wo believe
that he also passed a great portion of his service in that
capacity on board the same ship us Lieutenant-Colonel *>
Spalding, viz., the '%all<aij- i. Major O. J. Airey is an j b
officer of wide experience, and has at various times, and , d
(hi distant lands, seen a good den) of active service. Major 1 t<
Airey was the first officer apitofatml to take charge of i si
, tho New South Wales 'rtillory, on its formation in In
I August, 1871. I tl
0 I Lieutenant-Colonel Spalding.
u J Bum - Lieut. - Colonel Spalding, now appointed
L ‘ j Lieutenant-Colonel in tho artillery of the expeditionary
. force, was originally an officer of Marines, and we fie-
ri lieve served on board H.M.S. Challenger in that oapa-
• city, previously to her memorable cruise. He took an
t I active part in the bombardment of Yokohama, which
s j was the most important demonstration in connection
: with the opening up to general trade of the most beau-
-1 I tiful of all inland seas, that of Japan. Lieutenant-
i j Colonel Spalding was appointed to the New South Woles
‘ Artillery st tho time of its establishment, August,
, | Map of the Soudan.
’ * Oc» readers will find on page seventeen of this issue an
• J authentic map of the seat of war iu the Soudan, and
some of the surrounding country. By this the locale of
I the British forces on the Nile can bo traced, and also
’ 1 the route by which the New South Wales contingent
1 j will proceed from Suakim.
■ Artillery Horses In Training.
I As the Selection Committee appointed by the Govern-
ment to purchase suitable horses for Artillery work iu
• the Soudan made their purchases, they forwarded them
II to tho Agricultural Ground, Moore Park, where they
, i were comfortably housed, in charge of warrant officer
Green. As much hard training for field work as time
permitted was carried out daily. Sometimes tho Agri-
j «uluirul Ground was selected for tho manoeuvres ;at
1 other times the more spacious ground of Moore Park.
The exercise guns were the sixteen-iiounders, which,
: however, have been discarded for the expedition, in
j preference to the lighter ones of the Gattling and
Gardiner type. Large crowds visited the parks and
I watched with eager interest the doings of tno various
teams of “ greys," “bays," and “chesnuts.” Theyore
I a very fine lot of animals, strongly built, and potseating
I all the requisites of an Artillery horse, except efficient
training ; this will have to be given them after they are
landed at Suakim. One sketch depicts an incident in
the (raining on the Moore Park ground.
The Horses on board the “Australasian.”
Ox (he day prior to the departure of the troops, the
whole of the artillery horses were shipped on board the
transports, without a single hitch or accident of any
kind. The A lutrnlatian took 200 on board, 'nd tho
lUria 26. The sketch of our artist accuratel) 'hows
the 'tween decks of the Australasian, and the i. rses
in their close-packed stalls, in which position they will
have to stand until their arrival at Suakim.
Circular Notes.
The year 1885 opens with the roll of drums, and people
differ in opinion as tj> why drums should roll at all.
Is there not plenty of wine, and gold, and corn upon
the earth f Everybody says, “Yes, there never was so
much." Why, then, is there so mnch talk of war and
fighting ? Why don’t people sit down and eat, or walk
out in tho sunshine, and when the day’s work is over
forget the worry and the strife, and spend their leisure
in pleasing their children or talking over. beautiful
things, and in entertaining friends ? Life is so short a
tiling ; the troubles so inevitable ; why cannot we throw
trouble over for a while, and sink to rest as tho animals
do—thinking of nothing at all I
Why don't people remember the saying of Pascal,
u I have discovered that all the misfortunes of man
arise from one thing only—that tiiey are unable to stay
quietly in their own chambers ?”
I’ll toll you why. Nobody ever said that tho world
hadn't enough for all ; but, from the days of Cain r.
Abol, there has been a bitter old lawsuit ponding as to
how much each man should have. Then it came to how
much each family should have; next, how much each
tribe should have ; and at last, how much each nation
should have. The first case was settled by Cain smash-
ing Abel's skull. Tho tribes settled their troubles by
smashing one another ; and, with all our talk about
progress of the species, it seems that the nations arc no
j farther ahead. As tho stern old Scot, Carlyle, put it—
“ The ultimate question between man and man, nation
and nation, is, * shall 1 kill thee, or thou kill me I 1 ” The
British are fighting now, and wo boys at this end of the
world have resolved to ho “in it." We have sent forth
by the Iberia a sample of the sort of people that will
Come by the thousand -when wanted.
By-thc-bye, why do recruits, and especially married
ones, go to war so willingly 1 Are our New South
Wales volunteers influenced by til' l reasons that affected
the Yankee volunteers, chronicled by Thackeray IHe
quotes ill his ballad the saying of a surgeon of the
United States army, “that nine-tenths of the men
enlisted on account of tuine female difficulty,” and he
apostrophises them as—
" Deuel tern from the realm
\VIh-iv tyrant Venus reign-',
You Her wicked chains, •
Fled mid emt-ran her—
And now with H"ord and holm
I Vti.nl 11 the -lrl|«- and star
Kmlmiidcr'd Iwimsr."
“ Tliis Now South Wales contingent is an absurdity,"
says a well-known politician, whoso eyes ace nothing
I but absurdity in any pn>]>wsal of tho Ministry of the
day. “Thia is a glorious opportunity for the colonies
I to assert the unity of the Empire," says the Government
, supporter. “ What do we want with w«r growls the
| man who thumps down a batten between the blocks
1 that are newly paving’Sydney streets, whilst the solar


UM ™ ln.l «._! H«„ ,0 00. .«• w» , .... !-»*>• • *■*“■ "»■ “
♦. —A Sauao at Daiu.. s— Mm ItwailT, Wrmiit, ash Aor.
RECRUITING FOR THE SOUDAN.


THE SCENE AT THE CIBCULAU QUAY -THE EMBARKATION OF THE TROOPS.


ray scores 87 in the shade. “ I hear you’re going to
the Soudan,” says the tram conductor to a burly ml-
eoatrd son of Grin's Isle. “ Faith, am I,” he replied,
“I can honld'a bayenitt with here an’ there a one.
Wasn't 1 in the Zulu affair I What d’ye call this medal ?”
“This'll have a fearful effect on business,” said the im-
porter of jewellery, “everybody will have to economise.”
“Gou bless the war," say the frozen meat men, and the
boot factories men, and the hat sellers, who have re-
painted old helmets with the legend, “Real Soudan
Pith Helmets. ”
But it’s great to be in.the newspaper offices at such a
time. The editor sits with a pile of papers a foot high
before him ; and within him is exasperation enough to,
head a charge of the Light Brigade, for be has been
“ fired at by shot and shell,” in the shape of applications
for war correspondency. The applicants come person-
ally ; and what a throng! Old scholars, who, at their
best, were good writers, but who now, alas! have looked
too long upon the wine when it is red. Then younger,
plucky fellows, just admitted to a reportership, and
flushed with tho success of their first reports of a local
fire or public meeting. Old dead-beats, that can't spell,
but who can talk by the yard about tho Crimea and the
war ia China. Another man has reported a great rifle
match at Wimbledon, and brings certificates from tho
editor of e West of England paper, to show that his de-
scription displayed considerable dash—which may mean
an editor’s way of avoiding profanity. And then, to
bring up the rear, comes a scarred old veteran, tattooed
with powder that never came from a gun-shot, but might
have come by a quarry accident.
A stroll through the Paddington Barracks just a da)’
or so before they set out, throws a little light on the
feelings of the men who are going to fight. Just as
before any great undertaking that involves immense
risk, men become confidential, so these me«j, many of
whom never smelt powder in the real senso, and who
know the chances that many of them will never see
their country again, speak very freely. There are the
reckless fellows, who never had a serious thought in
their lives, and who, having been brought up to rough-
ing it in the country, look upon it as a sort of relief
from monotony. “Might be shot,’’says one fellow;
“ don’t want to bo, but if I can only have a peg or two
at the beggars, I can go down as well os any other man. ”
“Well, you’ll see, now,” says an old six-foot school-
fellow, “ you’ll see if we’re behind in this little game.
Dash it, hav’nt we licked everything in cricketing I
How about our boating f Whatever news comes back,
you’ll find the boys ready for anything going. I don’t
believe there’s a man in the whole crew would show his
foci- back in Sydney if we didn’t prove that we can do a
bit of lead-hunting as well as the other fellows did the
leather-hunting.” So far, the pluck and the joke ; but I
now I meet another man, a reader and a thinker. “Pm •
anything but gay over this matter,” he says. “ The ‘
plain duty of this young community is to stick to its j
work. The blare of trumpets, the roll of drums, and |
the glitter of bayonets, have, in all times, enticed the
young. Except for liberty, there is nothing in the
world worth fighting for. Tho liberty of Britain is not ;
in danger; therefore we have no business to fight.” |,
" But it strikes us,” we said, “that you forget tho many-1 t
sidedness of life. An industrious population, settling ( !
down to tho systematic pursuit of wealth, and neglecting 1 !
to cultivate those impulses for display and grandeur, , ‘
which are also apart of our nature, really invites aggros- *
sion. An unarmed and rich country is a temptation to | 1
the armed and unscrupulous. Possibly an outbreak of
tho military spirit may be the thing wo want. Any- J
thing is better than stagnation.” To this he replied : ! 1
“ We are not stagnant, but the reverse. You have only I *
to look at our Cup days, our Regattas, our mining j *
speculations, and our political contests, to see that wo f
have ample outlet, in healthy ways, for our surplus!
energy. What I complain of in this matter is that only j "
one side of the affair is presented. We have excitement. *
strange scenes, fame on one side. The other is not *
apparent. From those healthy faces, now flushed with 1
hope and courage, I turn to a day when many a blanched 1
and up-tumed face shall with its silent death-appeal to *
heaven, ask ‘ Why am I thus here !’ What demon drew
mo from scenes of quiet and plenty, to grapple in a If
death-struggle with men ia whoso affairs I had no busi- tt
ness to meddle?’ I see the yellow sands dyed red, *
horse piled on horae, and man on man,—the broken “
spear, the shattered rifle, the mangled corpses ; and I ■
hoar tho helpless moan of the wounded. No, the thing J*
ia not wanted.”
Whether the thing ia wanted or not, wo are pledged *|
to it. And, a* m«*< go on now, let us go for it with tj
a vengeance.
Mr Stuart, Premier of New South Wales, has been fi
away at the most crucial time of our history. It is tl
through no fault of his ; the paralysis that struck him n
down was undoubtedly brought on by excessive work. «
in Mr. Dailey, as Acting Colonial Secretary, he has tl
left a man of undoubted ability and capacity for endless j)
work. It fell to his lot to have to deal with a knotty n
problem, and, whether wisely or not, ho “greatly t'
dared ” at the right moment, and is, at the present c
day. thoenvied by every Premier in Australia. s
Lot us cliaoge the topic. Tho other day we met a good v
natiirud charcteristic Australian—the man who makes 8
fortunes for others, but who never seems to do any a
go<al for himsolf. It ia on record that his “ ideas" a
have secured a fortune to some of tho leading c
men in Australia, and that when he propounds a scheme a
they leap at it and leave him out. This time, howovor, ii
ho determined to keep tho good thing to himself.
“ |*.ok hero, friend, he said, drawing us into a side I I
room in the Exchange, “ I’ve dropped on it this time, t
See this." lie then unrolled a package and displayed )
some »f tin- finest specimens of opals wo had over seen, t
Wo said “we are not tho best judges of these tilings, but I
if thorn's tho quantity you say you ought to make a c
fortune. ” A Mosaic friend crop|icd up at tho time and c
insisted upon christening tho find. Conversation i
followed, the locality was shown on a well-thumbed map
Poor Tom out iu the cold again : for our Mosaic friend
got a lease of the ground while Tom went round talking
about it.
Thisreminds us of the story of starting the only PhikH.
A well known London newspaper projector and proprietor
had an idea brought to him by a man who was not rich
enough to bring the paper out himself. Almost all
discoverers and inventors lack the capital to develop |
their projects ; so our poor projector tried his capital :
idea on the capitalist with all the determination he i
could, but the man with the money required time to i
think and feel the pulse of the public. Would the 1
public care for a comic paper I Would there be enough I
people to buy it ! Would there be enough comic talent
to support it ? All these problems took a long time to ,
solve, but, being solved in the affirmative, the projector ]
hurried along the Strand to Stationers’ Hall to register ,
the paper, when to his utter dismay he met a “sand- ]
wich man ” placard—“ Punch, a new comic serial, to .
bo published every week.” That was tho publication
ho wished to register, but it had passed out of his hands (
Mr. Froude, the historian, has been iu Sydney at an |
eventful time of our history. We venture to predict that ,
what he heard will be embodied in a Short Study, and >
that he will have learnt something on the spot that will t
throw a blaze of light on the movement a foot in f
America over 100 years ago, when blundering c
officialdom lost the empire a nation. But there is little f
doubt that that lesson was well learnt in 1770, and
that officialdom will be held well in hand. At that a
time, history tells us, a young nation began to f]
feel its muscles, and John Bull's ad/isers thought it ii
about the right thing to use compulsion. John had 0
European complications, and John wanted money. ]j
Instead of trying to find out what the colonies wanted, fc
he tried to levy taxes on them, and they resented it.
Now, here we have shown that it is not penurionsness j
that is the matter with us, as is shown by our Soudan
expedition. But when we discuss proposals about New
Guinea and Polynesia, we don't want everything re-
lating to it accompanied by a demand for money, over
the control of which none but British officials have their
say. We'll find anything for a purpose directly affecting g
colonial interest* or im{>erial interests But that is a
different thing from placing thoitaands under the control l
of officials who care neither for the one nor the other,
but only how to stand well with Downing Street. J
Thk seasonable showers of the past month, coupled with
the somewhat oppressive heat usual to this season, has
brightened and improved every branch of horticulture,
besides stimulating both amateur and professional
gardeners. No time should now be lost in getting in
seeds of crops for the winter use.
tCiTciißir Garden.—Plant potatoes in trenches two
feet apart, six inches deep, in heavy land ; sand and
lime are good. Late Rose, Snowflake, and Cambridge
Kidney are the best for this season of the year. Lettuce.
Sow in drills for succession. This useful vegetable is
grown largely in the old country, and served at table as
“ Stewed Lettuce,” Mr. Luokhurst writes in the
Journal of Horiiodtnrt: 44 Tho lettuces are to be care-
fully washed and reduced in size to be just large enough
when cooked to be taken upon a tabic spoon ; strip off
the leaves, and tie them in small bundles, and cook
them in water the same way as a cabbage. When done,
strain and press them gently to extract the water, and
then let them simmer gently for ten minutes in clear
gravy in a stewpan. They are then to be untied,
arranged tastefully in layers in a vegetable dish, and
served with some of the gravy around them. The
lettuces should come to table a bright green colour, and
with the gravy around them, form an attractive and
novel dish, alike pleasing -to the eye and delicious to
the palate." Plant out cabbage and cauliflower plants
in lines two feet apart; water them of an evening ; look
sharp after caterpillars, as these pests are very destruc-
tive to this family of plants. Eschallots should be
K‘«d largely. Sow a large bed of onions in drills
n inches apart ; this allows the hoe to bo worked
through them, the ground to bo a-ell manured, and tho
manure dug in spado deep. Sow a crop of peas ; well
water tho drills, if the weather prove dry, beforo sowing
tho seed, and press the soil firmly on them after covering
In. French Beans ; Continue to sow for a crop of this
most useful vegetable ; give good supplies of water to
the crop* in bearing and in blossom. A few hills of .
Cucumbers may bo sown for a lato crop. Tomatoes
should bo well looked over for caterpillars; they are
very destructive t« the fruit as well as the foliage.
Slides or supports should bo plsoed around the plants,
and the lateral shoots pinched off, so that the sun and
air can get to tho fruit; bright, well-coloured omit will
command a far better price, and the flavour is finer,
and much to b« preferred to the half-green rubbish that.
is hawked about.
Fri IT Garden and Orc hard.—Where now plant*. ,
lions of strawberries are required, lose no time in getting j
the ground in order, by trenching and manuring. |
Where rotten manure ia not to be had, use bone-dust;
or lime ; work this well into tho trenched land, and ,
leave until tho first shower ; plant immediately, j
choosing tho strongest plants. Some recommend j
only tlm first plant from the parent, as the lateral* ,
are sometimes barren. riant in beds of three
> lines each, eighteen inches apart, line from line,
.I and the plants fifteen inches in the line ; make an alley
g of two feet between each bed. The fruit, by this
method, will be easily and expeditiously gathered, an<*
i. plenty of room for mulching in the summer. If planted
>r now, a season will be gained, and tine fruit will be
h gathered next summer. Orange and lemon trees will
11 require looking over, and if the scale is troublesome,
p paint the trees with the Gishurst compound ; or, if this.
il is not convenient, paint the stems and branches with,
e good strong lime. Budded trees should be looked over,
o those buds that are growing should bo loosened, and
e the growths tied securely to stakes, to prevent them
h from being blown out by the wind,
t Flo wan Oxana*.—Dahlias will want tying up an I
° mulching Plant out from seed boxes Phlox Drum-
r mondii. Amaranthus, Tagetes. Balsams, Zinnias, Arc. ;
r shade and water them well Chrysanthemums should'
I- have some attention bestowed upon them now. Two
0 very beautiful bulbs are in bloom at this time,
11 Vallotu f»irj»irr.a and Pam-nvt'on rvtotum ; the former
■ adapts itself well to cultivation in pots or deep-
pans ; it is an evergreen bulb, and should not bo
1 allowed to die down; it is very impatient of stagnant
t water at the roots. When once established, they
1 will (lower for years without dividing the bulbs ;
1 re-pot after dowering ; use a pot similar to those used
1 for Aohimenes, drain well, and pot them firmly. Tho
i offshoots should be removed and grown on to form
® flowering bulbs. Pancrratum rotation should be in all
‘ gardens, its beautiful pure while flowers, each with five-
-1 streamers, render it at once one of tho most chaste
> flowers in cultivation. In the neighbourhood of Sydney
t it grows to a large plant in the open air ; it is a nativo
I of Carolina, and belongs to the natural order of Amaryl-
lids. Tea and Noisette roses should not be shortened
> back at this season.
Gubushocsb.— Achimsnes will now be coming inb»
1 flower ; give plenty of air. and do not water them ovjp
\ head. Pot on Gesueriss, and encourage the growth of
the plants with liquid manure ; they will come in late-
\ in the autumn to make the greenhouse gay. Pelar-
goniums that have been cut back should be re-potted,
but not over-potted ; all plants that will not make good
1 specimens should be planted out in the border, to
furnish cuttings fur future use. Fuchsias should be cut
back to two or three eyes, and allowed to break beforo
potting them. Sow Cinerarias, Calceolarias, and Pri-
mulas in seed-pans ; place them in a cold frame or
greenhouse, shade them from the midday sun. Re-pot
iasl year's Chinese Primulas, and place them in a frame ;
do not allow them to have much water, and shade them
until they can bear the sun ; keep the syringe going in
the plant-houses, and give plenty of air.
The Month.
The flying fox pest is fast becoming a matter requiring
serious consideration in the Kiama district. Everything
in the shape of fruit disappears long before it has »
chance to ripen ; and notwitstanding the number that
are destroyed they seem to increase every year.
On the night of the Cootamundra railway accident at ,
the acene of the dead and wounded a lady passenger was
in great distress about her dog, exclaiming, “Oh I
where—oh, where’s my dog ?" She has got her answer
now, as the body of the dog has been unearthed from
the debrit in the creek.
Mr, O. Fishbnrn’s tender of £240,615 is the lowest for
the line from Young to Cowra.
The property of the late Sir John O’Shannassy in
New South Wales has been proved at over £74,000.
Probate to (he will was granted.
Miss MaudDibbe, daughter of the Hon. 6. R. Dibbs,
was married on February 11, to Mr. Geo. Waldon, in
St. Paul’s Church, Emu Plains. Sir John and Lady
Robinson, and some members of the ministry wero
present.
A destructive fire occurred on the 15th inst. at Rose-
mount Villa, North Waratah, the residence of Alderman
S. Chapman, J.P., the coroner of the District Tho
flames spread with such great rapidity that the family
had barely time to escape with their lives. Tho placo
was uninsured, and Mr. Chapman's loaaia about £2OOO.
William Beach has been presented with a gold medal
by the residents of Rockhampton, in honor of his victory
over Hanlan.
Mr. J. A. froiule and his son, accompanied by Lon?
Elphinstone, arrived from Melbourne on February 12Jh.
His lordship, the Bishop of Riverina, Dr. Linton, i»
a passenger to Melbourne by the R.M.S. Parramatta.
Mr. F. Trollope, who is at Wilcannia as chairman of
the new Lands Act, is the son of tho late eminent no-
vellist and writer, Mr. Anthony Trollope, and it ia a
singular coincidence that Mr. E. B. L. Dickens, son of
the late distinguished novelist, resides in this small out
of the way place.
Sir John Roberleon has an interesting letter in tho
Herald of tho Oth ultimo. In 1875, at the time being
a minister of the Crown, he suggested taking possession
of New Guinea and adjacent islands, but neither Lord
Carnarvon nor Sir Hercules Robinson could see it.
Tho Duke of Manchester has visted tho mining claims
at Lucknow : ho fired the first shot in the Reform Mine,
and turned a bonanza, value £2OOO.
The Hon. W. B. Dailey advises the Engineer-in-Chu f
of Harbours to treat with contempt tho libellous attacks
in an evening paper made on him.
The tender for the manufacture of 180,000 tons steel
mils for the colony extended to March 10th.
A cedar-getter has just returned to Cook Town from
tho groat Anglo German-Dutch island, where he mea-
sured 800,000 feet of cedar for the Sydney market.
“ There is plenty of codar there,” said he, “and tho
natives are a« quiet as lambs,”
, Mr. Dailey has ordered the erection of eight or ten
cottage homes for delicate children, to bo under the
management of the State Children's Relief Board.


Dr. Scott, new Professor of Classics for the Sydney
University, arrived in Sydney.
Probate was granted of the will of Edward Lord, late
City Treasurer, at £113,000 ; of Peter Curtis, late clerk
of the Supreme Court at £4,700 ; and of Henry New-
comer, at £117,000.
During a thunder-storm on Fob. 14, a cab-driver,
named Bedford, and his horse were struck by light-
ning at liandwick, and both killed instantly. Two gen-
tlemen, who were inside the vehicle, escaped unhurt.
The University cricket match between New South
Wales and Victoria was won by the former in one (un-
successful balloon ascents have been made at Mel-
bourne and Ballarat by Hendon.
The deposits in the New South Wales Savings Bsuk
at the close of the last year was £1,887,340, being an
increase of £65,030.
Archbishop Moran, on the London dynamite out-
rages, said “such fiendish men were not trained in
religious schools."
The charter money of the Iberia and A Httnl,ulan
amounts to nearly £l!», 00.
The various Australian Life Insurance offices have
.announced that the fact of enlisting for the Soudan does
not vitiate members' policies, neither are Die old policy
holders charged any extra premium.
The Wagga Turf Club are to the front with a first-
class programme, to be decided on the 22nd and 23rd
April.
The Hon. James White has returned from New Zea-
land, and will be present at the next Victorian Racing
Club Meeting.
The weather for the past month has been extremely
sultry in the metropolis, notwithstanding the passing of
several thunder-storms, accompanied with smart falls of
rain. On two occasions heavy hailstones fell a little to
the westward of Sydney, damaging fruit trees to a con-
siderable extent
A German, named Gustave Heinston, was stabbed in
the neck to death on the night of February 7, iu Kent-
street, by a man named John Gwynne Bailey.
A proclamation has been issued calling Parliament
together on the 17th instant, with a view of confirming
the action of the Government in sending troops to the
Soudan.
On the top of Mount Kosciusko Dr. Lendonfeld dis-
covered and photographed unmistakable traces of pre-
Thu Now South Wale* Canary Society have issued
their schedule for the show of the current year, to be
held on tho 22nd, 23rd, and 24th April. It comprises
56 classes, and special prizes are given, viz., £lO 10s.
for the best Belgian in tho show, and other valuable
In the forthcoming intercolonial boat-race at Sydney,
Melbourne, Queensland, Tasmania, and Sydney are
likely to be represented.
Canon Alwood lias resigned the incumbency of Bt.
James's, Sydney, after 40 years of service.
The British troops in the Soudan are delighted at being
assisted by Australians.
QuEßjmbAiro Items.
A painfully sudden death from the bite of a deaf
odder took place near Canal-Creek Station. It appears
that a number of bullock-drivers were seated in the
shade of a tree wheq the dogs belonging to a party ;
hunted a deaf adder out of the adjoining scrub, and in !
running away from the animals the adder went in the
direction of tho men. Seeing the reptile coming, James
Brindle (a young man about 24 years of age) moved his
arm in order, as lie thought, to avoid the adder ; but
the reptile collided with his arm mid bit him on one of
the sub-arteries through two thick shirts. The adder
also passed over tho legs of two of Brindle’s mates, but i
fortunately without inflicting any injury. He then •
made a “ stand," but was promptly despatched. Every)
attention was shown U> Brindle ; the bitten part was
cut and sucked, brandy was administered, but all to
no purpose. Jn about an hour after the fatal puncture
deceased was seized with convulsions, and died in about
two hours after receiving the bite.
Tho commissioner appointed to inquire into alleged
irregularities in the labour trade have visited Ingham,
Townsville, Charters Towers, and the Burdokin Planta-
Th* Pandora sugar estate has been sold for £6OOO to
Mr. F. Knott, of Bund.tberg.
The Day Dawn Gold Mining Company, Charters
Towers, pays regular fortnightly dividends, aggregating
£lOO,OOO per annum, and the company has many
years work of equal prospects.
Dr. G. R. Lloyd, travelling Medical Examiner for the
Colonial Mutual Life, died suddenly at Normanton on
January f>, from the effects of drink.
The cricket match of the English Eleven and the
Queensland Twenty-Two, terminated on February 4th,
in favour of the Englishmen, by !> wickets and 4 run*.
Mr. Fitzgerald's plantation at Inuisfail, Johnston
Hivor, is Shortly to be closed. Notice has been given
to all the employes that at an early date their services
will be dispensed with, and the only work which will
continue to be prosecuted will be jierformod by a small
number of Kanakas, whose term of service is as yet
incomplete, and these men will be supervised by one of l
Mr. Fitzgerald's sons At the rate at which those con- f
tractions are now proceeding, in two years time the sugar
industry will have ceased to exist altogether in North
Queensland.
In the Queensland National Bank a dividend of fif
teen per cent, was declared, and £42,000 carried to the
reserve fund, which now amounts to £300,000, or 45
per cent, of the paid-up capital; £652,300. It is calcu-
lated that the value of the ground upon which the now
bank has been built is worth as much os the building has
cost, it having been purchased before the groat rise took !
place in property.
A lad named Kelly, while bathing at Roe* Island, \ ■
Townsville, was so severely slung with jelly fish that he ,
died in a few minutes.
OUR SPECIAL WAR ARTISTS.
' We have much pleasure in being able to
announce to the public that we have
made most efficient arrangements for
illustrating the military engagements in
the Soudan campaign. Our principal
artist is Dr. Doyle Glanville, who has
; seen some very active service both as a
soldier and a pressman.
During the Zulu war he contributed to
j the London Graphic a large number of
! excellent war and other sketches. Our
! constituents will thus see that the Illus-
| trated Sydney News will have an able
j representative in the front to depict the
doings of the British forces and Aus-
tralian contingent in Egypt.
Dr. Glanville was attached to Colonel
Durnford's column of 2.000 men, the
whole of \Vhom, including Colonel Durn-
ford and the rst 24th Regiment was
| slaughtered. Dr. Glanville escaped with
j some 30 others, having been ordered to
' march the night previously with a party
of reconnaissance, and was 3 miles
away from camp when the Zulus swarmed
down. His assistant (Dr. Brice) was
killed. Dr. Glanville was then placed on
the medical staff of General Woods
i column, .and served with the dying
; column, and was present at the battle of
! Ulundi, when he was mentioned in Sir
j Evelyn Wood's despatches for distin-
j guished services. After the battle of
I Ulundi the column was disbanded, and
II Dr. Glanville was attached to the Ist
j King’s Dragoon Guards, Lord Wolseley’s
military escort, and proceeded with them
j through the Transvaal. He was present
1 when the body of the Prince Imperial
was found in Zululand.
j Sergeant Murray, of the Infantry con-
tingent, a clever draftsman, has also been
i retained as sketcher to this journal. We
| expect at an early date to produce some
illustrations from his pencil.
Sporting.
The long looked for contest between Edward Haitian
and Thomas Clifford was decided in the most un-
equivocal manner on the Parramatta River on the ,
prescribed date, February 7th. The plucky Canadian
was the favourite in the betting to the extent of C to 4, .
! but we do not think a great deal of money changed ,
' hands. The day was an unpleasant one, as both j,
| immediately before and after Die race heavy rain fell, ,
but there was no wind to speak of to impede the race. (,
The daily press has estimated the spectators numeri- i.
cally at 50,000 to 00,000, but we think these figures 1 .
will stand a considerable amount of discounting. That I
many steamers wore dangerously overladen with j,
passengers is a fact, and those that had the liberty to I,
follow the race exercised that privilege to a disgraceful
extent. They pressed close upon the scullers, and |
yawed about the river in a most unnautical fashion,
when half way down the course a steamer deliberately j
“washed" the men by crossing the river in front of j
them. As usual, the course was from Charity Point j
to the Brothers rocks, about 3J miles. When the men i'
drew up to the start their rowing was eagerly scanned, ''
Clifford in particular was an object of scrutiny to !!
critical and experienced eyes, but the impression ( !
created was not a good one : at any rate, in view of the j 1
master piece of work displayed by Haitian in a ; ’
preliminary row. In due course the scullers got off, 1
Clifford on the south side, and rowing the fastest stroke I (
by 2 or 3 a minute. The pace was keen, but not so j I
severe as marked the beginning of the Beach-1 Tallinn ; t
race. Nearing Thr’s Point, nearly a quarter of a mile I
below the start, Haitian began visibly to creep ahead, j <
and when fairly level with the point he had got the best ! 1
of the struggle hy half a length. In the next 100 i«
yards he was a length ahead, rowing strong and eyeing I i
r bis man carefully A hard race followed to the Mile 11
Point, and Clifford’was a bit out in his course. The
]>oint, which is about 100 yards over a mile from the C
start, was passed by Uanlsn leading by a trifle more c
than a length, as near os could be judged, as Clifford e
was rather far out in the stream, and not an fail in his f
steering As the men got towards Putney Point, or 1
over the next half-mile, their pace decreased, and t
it appeared to us Hanlan could hsve got mnoh further p
away had he so chosen. He contented himself with J
being 2 or 3 lengths ahead at the end of a mile and a '
half. By this time the betting had reached long odds
on the Canadian ; still, the interest of the spectators so li
far was undiminished. From this point llanlau wont u
away as ho pleased, passing the Hon and Chickens’ h
Point leading by 4 or 5 lengths, improved still
further off Gladesville, and on to the finish rowed
, slowly by a flotilla of rowing and sailing boats, which
caused both the rowers to ease up two or three times to
■ avoid collision. Hanlan won by some six lengths.
■ Time 21 min. 5 sec., with a favourable tide. The victor
was accorded cheer after cheer by the occupants of the
1 steamboats, and indeed the win appeared a very popular
one. For days prior to the race erroneous reports
were circulated of extraordinary time trials performed
by Oli fiord, with the apparent object of bolstering him
up in the betting. The race was simply a conquest of
skill over strength, and in our opinion Clifford suffers
considerably by comparison with either Trickett or
[ Laycock in their palmy days. The scene on the river
after the contest was one of indescribable confusion ;
steamers came tearing down, and jostling one another
like a foot ball team. Accidents were averted by the
merest chance. The Commotion, Clifford’s steamer,
with some 400 passengers on board, dashed against the
atone abutment of the river bridge, as she passed through
the opening. The paddle box was crushed to pieces,
and fell into the river ; and the arms of the wheel,
were bent and broken. Three passengers were knocked
overboard and badly bruised, but no lives were lost.
The Commotion- managed to reach Sydney by the use
of one wheel.
A parliamentary cricket match between Victoria and
New South Wales was won by the representatives of
the latter colony by 5 wickets.
The names of the New South Wales representative
“eight, ” selected to represent the colony on the 25th
, April next, are Messrs. E. A. Bros, T. H. Martin,
J. E. H. Kennedy. J. A. Brodie, G. Seale, R. Moppett.
E. H. Simpson, Johnson ;R. Bonrke, emergency.
; Victoria, Brisbane, and Hobart will also send crows.
The president of the N.B.W. Rowing As'iciation, the
Hon. George Thornton, M.L.C., has signified hie in-
tention of presenting trophies to the winning crew.
R. S. Fuller, of .Melbourne, has been entrusted with
the order for building the “eight."
The sailing craft of Sydney Harbour, from the stately
yacht downwards, were successully manoeuvred to-
- gether in Sydney Harbour on the 21st ultimo, and
made up a picture of a pleasing and interesting nature.
’ It was the first meeting of the kind that has ever taken
place, and from the success that waited on it there is no
. doubt that frequent displays of the same nature will be
made. There was represented yachts from the Royal
Sydney Yacht Squadron, Prince Alfred Yacht Club, the
Sydney Amateur Sailing Club, Double Bay Sailing Club,
and the Amateur Canvas Dinghy Club. Prominent
, among the yachts was the Htd Gauntlet, once the pro-
perty of a Mr. Balfour, who brought her from the old
country. Then the Marti'-, owned by Mr. J. R. Fair-
: fax, and Mr, Milson's yacht, Waitanqi. Evolutions
were moat creditably carried out under the direction of
the commodore ; and the yachts having viaited Double
Bay they were then photographed, and parted company.
The annual cricketing contest between the “ Tortoise "
and the “ Hare," or New South VValesand Victoria, hae
once more been decided, this lime in favour of the “ Tor-
toise " after s very good match, which took place on
the Association Grounds, Moore Park. The Victorians
went first to the wickeU, and run up 223 runs for the
innings. McShane was top, 47, not out. and Tommy
Horan came next, with 44. New South Wales made
221, being onljr 2 behind. The lion’s share of the runs
fell to the credit of Charley Bannerman—hie 79 not out
is considered one of the beat displays of batting seen
in the colony. Garrett made 38, and Spofforth 36.
Victoria’s second innings was 206, earned by a splendid
average scoring. In the second innings of New South
Wales 211 runs were obtained with the loss of eight
wickets, thus the match was won by 3 wickets and 3
runs. A. Bannerman, in the second innings, carried
| out his bat for the splendid total of 96. Bonnor appears
to have been opening his shoulders, one big hit re-
| suited in the ball landing on the other side of the pa-
{ vilion. Massie, Garrett, and Spofforth, also distin-
?iished themselves on the winning aide, whilst for
ictoria Tommy Horan's and McShano's were the most
I noteworthy performances, although several of the othen
1 reached double figures.
The race between Beach and Clifford was won easily
by Beach.
Beach and Hanlan row on the 28th instant.
Lieut.-Colonel Cuveuy, who was killed in the recent
i engagement with the Mahdi's force* at Buka Island,
; was the sou of the late Robert Ooveny, a well-known
1 Sydney wholesale grocer. He was one of the famous
‘ Black Watch, and served in the Ashantee war, and in
• the Egyptian war till the battle of Tel-el-Keber, at
i which ho was wounded, and for which he obtained his
; brevot-lieuleuant-coionelcy. He was also in the on-
| gagonieiit at El-Teb. Colonel Coveny was unmarried ;
| lie has left one brother and four sisters, who are rosi-
i dents of Sydney.
j A warrant has been issued in Victoria for the arrest
I of Joachim F. Hagen, latelv of the firm of Hagen and
1 McCnlUh, storekeepers, Coflingwood. The absconding
i one is supposed to have gone to Europe by the last
I mail, and taken some £1,500, the entire assets of the
Probate was granted Mi February 12, in the Equity
Court, Melbourne, to the will of the late Mr. Gillbee,
of Collms-street. The deceased makes a large number
of bequests of pictures and money to relatives and
fnonds, including £lOOO to the trustees of the Public
Library, on condition that they shall employ a compe-
tent artist in London to paint an Australian historical
picture, treating of either Captain Cook's visit to
Australia or an incident In the expedition of Bourke and
Wills, The rains of the property was sworn at £30,327.
Convict Barnes, the Mlf-oonfeMod murderer of the
late J. B. Slack, of Victoria, remain* in Melbourne
under medical supervision. The Government evmoe
hesitancy about sending him to trial.


VIEW OF KHARTOUM.
VIEW OF BCAKIM.


I' ME MAXI> I.


The Death cf General Cordon.
Tw*s wbeu Khartoum was token
Oni gallant Gordon fell,
And England did awaken
The rebel (oroe to quell.
Betrayed by crafty pa*ba>.
Who let the Mahtliles iu.
And sold the life of Gordon,
Some sordid gain to win.
“ On ! Stewart, to the gates !” ha cried,
“ We’ll meet them man to man
But as he spoke the crimeou tide
Down ell hie vesture ran—
He quivered 'ueath the fatal shot,
They heard not what he said ;
There's not a man within the van
But mourns their General -dead.
Heard ye the fearful clamor ?
Caught yon his dying breath ?
Oh, wsep aod tell the listening world .
He now lie* still in death.
Twa* coming from the palace,
To rally op his men.
The rebels slew brave Gordon ;
He’ll never fight again.
No more bis voice inspiring.
Fresh courage to the weak ;
His scattered troop* retiring
With pallor on their cheek.
No, baste ye, General Vlolseley,
And gaze upon the slain ;
Too late the rescue eoutelh,
He'll never speak again.
00, tell the tale to Beauty,
And see the shadow there.
Our Gordon's love and duty
Were maxims of the fair.
He died as dies a soldier.
Be like him those who eon ;
Ob, weep, for faithful Gordon
No longer heads the van.
Hankab Pishxh.
The Railway Disaster.
A DescaiPTivg Namatitx.
Ths ocean gave bird.** the wat’ry sprite,
Who rose from it’s miAts in grandaur and might,
And marshalling his forces in snowy array
Onwards and landwards careered on Lis way ;
His mission an errand of blessing and peace,
To oomfort the thirsty, tbs herbage increase .
To sodden the ground that is parching and dry.
An angel of mercy he comes from the sky.
All the earth now is glad, and nature prorides
Deep gullies and creeks for his eddies and tides ;
So, dashing along his impetuona way,
He aptosses aloft his load biasing spray,
And swifter, more swiftly, he merrily flees,
As be seeks for hie home the far distant seas,
And woe be to that which would eheok his career,
For he brooks not delay, bis way must be clear ;
He over all obstacles madly will sweep,
That dare to oppose his free course to the deep.
The water-sprite leaped down his old beaten track,
But a railway embankment now holds him back.
With a hole in it only fit for a drain,
And not fora deluge of tropical rain
The water-sprite angry, he frets and he fames,
And tosses tree-branches as though they were plumes;
Galls to his aid mightier torrents of rain.
Charges the obstacles again and again.
At last he succeeds, his fierce passions find vent,
Anil man's puny earthwork ia suddenly rent,
And so. clearing all off, 'twixl eaoh roeky shore
Bound* through the rast chasm with ferribla roar ;
Tho sleepers and rails, like a thin apidor tbraad,
Hang in airy suspension far overhead j
But oh ! fearful fact, that the lime's drawing nigh.
For the overlsni mail to swiftly flit by :
No message eleetric, or telephone sound
Can flash, for the wires are prone on the ground.
But stay, can no horseman be galloping sent ?
Which yewns like e monster awaiting his prey,
Araidht the dull hues of tine rainy day,
Bo onward the train in the darkening gloom
Bushes forward to meet her terrible doom ;
No notice receiving, no light's gleam blood ied
Gives warning that danger and death are ahead ;
So fa«t she approaches sidown the incline.
Till close on the debris that strew* ell the line.
Too late then the brake* ! or to shut off the steam .’
The train i* eugnlphed in the turbulent stream,
For no human power her progress conld check-
in the horrid abyss site now lies a wreck,
Midst crashing of timber and victims' shrill scream,
Thu gurgling of waters, the hissing of steam ;
Some of those that escaped, undaunted and brave,
Strive with vigorous effort their fellows to save.
They rescue some few from the grasp of the tide,
Who, but for aseistauoe, hod otherwise died ;
And Hawke, who hint striven, but striven in vain
To stay the swift course of ths fast running train.
To town takes the news of the fatal mishap
That just had occurred at a place near the Gap.
No tuna to U» lost, for the spot they must gain,
Threugh deluge of water and hard pouring ram ;
The toad is impassable, creeks bold them hack ;
O'er rocks and through swamps they must now find a
track ;
And mauy there were in a terrible plight,
While groping their way in the darkness of night.
When arrived at the scene in grief and amaze
Th* great shattered wreck meets their horrified gas* ;
| They rescue the living they heal out the deed,
Who elee bed been swept down the creek * rocky bed.
Of those who were wounded end those who were lu"l
Two railway official* died el their post—
Two, scalded and hart by the volume* of steeiu,
I And one almost drowned in the swift rushing stream.
Bv persistence at length the whole are conveyed
To hotela In the town, iu beds gently laid i
The doctors mean time doing all (hat they can
To lessen the anguish of each wounded roan,
This event clearly proves that we should provide
Sufficient escape for the storm-swollen tide.
The hypocrite need not tax Providence then
With what is the fault of improvident men.
Coolamuridnt Jltrjld. E. Au.kv.nk
The Golden Shower.
Wxex Jove came down to earth of old,
The helpless Danail wooing.
He round him poured a shower of gold,
And wrought the niaid'a undoing ;
The glist'ning beams of golden light,
Fell on the guards' too ready sight,
And 'ueatb their blinding ray.
Their eyes were dimmed, their thoughts were dazed,
With vacant look they round them gazed,
But gazed another way.
The portress, old, bar apron raised,
To shade her from the shining,
Before her (aoe, and looked amaxed—
It bad a golden lioiug ;
A golden key was in the lock—
The bolts flew back with sudden shock,
The door wide open swung ;
The wondering band-maids stood aghast-
For, round their feel, so thick and fast,
The ruddy metal rung.
And e'en the maiden woe not coy,
When gold was cast around her.
But smiled and sighed, and pressed with joy
The golden chain that bound her—
The golden zone that round her waist,
In rapturous love her form embraced
Within its shining fold
With so much wealth around her spilt,
Her yielding bliss seemed less of guilt
Though deeply tinged with gold-.
To bide the blushes of her cheek.
She drew her robe around her—
Alas, how conld a maiden, weak
Besist such wealthy lover ?
While round her fell the golden shower.
How frail was virtue to ite power,
When, with her pleasure bent.
A golden abaft winged swift its flight
And pierced poor Virtue's stole of white
And love slipped tbiough the rent.
Thus, thua it was the good red gold,
Inalouds around him shedding,
The mighty Jove, in days of old,
Kept first a golden wedding.
And thne, as in ibe Eastern talc,
A golden parte will never fail
To thrust all else aeide.
Who highest pay t the piper's pains
Is sure to win the bride.
Oh, never need a lover bold
To lady's window clamber.
But get a key of massive sold,
'Twill soon unlock her chamber
Or, would he woo that virtuous dame
By mortals known as Mistress Fame,
‘But bring the metal blight-
Though in his head hs has not half
The brains of Aaron's golden oalf,
Poor Fame i« ravished quite.
The meanest side of common clay,
So, wealth it ia not scant in,
Shines forth in this our golden day—
A work eheyselephantin*-
But all 100 true the poet hath told
That “ every door ia bar'd with gold.
Though hard he may have striven.
The poor may toil from day to day—
The golden rule holds good alway
To him that hath it given—
But, oh ! alas, how oft a draught
From golden goblele steaming
To poison turns as soon as quaffed
And pleasea but in seeming,
How off a dame with vice s taint
Wore golden glory like saint,
While wealth around her rolled-
Bnt when the golden noon ia passed,
She finds too snrely ' * All#” et
That glitters is not gold.
Oh, aad Tis when the oold cold earth
Has hid from those that lovo it
All that ia left of true heart's worth,
And In the mound above it
The golden flowers that deck the grace—
The sunlight's gold are all it has
Of earth, bnl still there grows on high
A rest which gold can never buy,—
Where, freed from stain of sorrow—
The Jaat,' the noble, weak, and poor.
Mav meet upon the gulden floor.
Wbm bra*. th. widen moree*.
The Martyrs of Polynesia.
tin.
Br A. W. MURRAY.
(OmMm*/****}*.)
The pure tv‘ig party were aoon cloae upon thp Miasiun
ary'a boat, and the man in command, a young chief who
had some time before attempted an attack upon two
other missionaries, ordered tho mission party to lower
their sail, as be wished to converse with them. This
Mr. Baker declined to do, and requested that they should
lower their sail, and he and his people would go along-
side their boat Thu they did, ami the boat and oanoo
wore soon side by tide. Mr. Baker asked whet the
chief end hi* party wanted. They replied that they
hod only come to aoe who was iu tho boat, but Mr. B. \
and his people saw clearly that that woaoniy an evasion.
Mr, B. tried to engage them in conversation, hut was
met with abuse ; they charged him and his teachers as
being the cause of a war that was raging nt the time on
anua C«vu. The crew of the canoe begged the chief,
in the hearing of Mr. Hakor, that he am) his in-oph
might be bound. Had the chief consented they would,
doubtless, have been all murdered, but ho hesitated ;
“ they tried hard," says Mr. Baker, “ to excite them-
selves so that they might get courage enough to lay
.hands upon ua ; hut no, they could not, for we kept
ourselves quiet and endured all things, and so w.. wciv
saved from their bloody hands. The chief told 11*.
with hellish glee, that he “ had just returned from kill-
ing two men at Bud." The chief tried to draw Mr.
Baker into a dispute by asking him to pass a judgment
on his conduct. Mr. B. was too wary, however, to
commit himself in that fashion, so he evaded the ques-
tion. At length the chief said they might go, *>, with
glad hearts, they hoisted their sail and were soon at a
safe distance from the blood-thirsty savages, who would
fain hare despatched them had not an unseen hand re-
strained them. Mr. B. afterwards learned that they
had been sent by an old chief with orders that all, both
white and black, were to be bound and taken hack to
him for hit food ; and that when they returned without
having carried out his orders, they told him that they
could not do anything with the Christian party—they
were so quiet In the month of January, 1867, Mr.
Baker wrote a detailed account of his efforts to induce
the heathen tribes, who wore his sjiecial charge, to em-
brace Christianity. Uis experiences were similar to
those through which other missionsries hsd passed
in the prosecution of the same kind of work, and his
success had been encouraging, os the following extract
will show : “ After a pleasant pull we reached home a
little before noon, and were cheered to find all toler-
ably well. The effects of this visit have been, nume-
rically, an increase in the number of those who now
profess Christianity, including one whoie district, Sol-
vira ; and that wo .now send fourteen teachers to ss
many towns that are willing to be instructed, and
thereby have placed the means of light and salvation
within the reach of thousands ; and, spiritually, a means
of grace to my own soul, with an increase of confidence
in the God of Missions.” The journey referred to iu
the above extract was made in October, 1806, and the
record from which the extract was token is the last that
appears in the “Missionary Notices” from Mr. Baker's
hand till we come to the letters he wrote in connection
with the sad journey from which he never returned.
With reference to that the Rev. Jesse Carey wrote,
under date August 6th, 1867, as follows : “ A few days
ago I was thinking a)tout sending you a few facts re-
specting the work of Ood in this circuit, when suddenly
my mind was disturbed and my heart wounded hy news
of one of the moat dreadful calamities that has ever
happened in the history of missions. It is now my
painful duty to tell you the sail story of a tragic dsed of
darkness which hss sent a thrill of horror through the
heart of every missionary and white settler in these
islands. The laborious and useful life of my esteemed
late colleague has been prematurely brought to a close
by the oarage act of a cannibal tribe of an inland dis- #
triot about forty milea from this station.
“On Saturday, July 13th, Mr. Baker loft his home
to visit some inland tribes who had recently abandoned
heathenism, and had Christian teachers stationed among
them, those I suppose referred to in the extract given
above. Whilst he kept among these of course he was
safe. but. he had set his mind on pushing his way
farther inland among tribes into whose dark regions the
light of the goepel hsd not yst penetrated. The fol
lowing affecting letters, the last he wrote, reveal the
plans and purposes which occupied his mind, and in
the attempt to carry out which his fife and labours came
to an untimely end—untimely as it seems to ns, but
not so doubtless in reality. Hia work on earth was
done, and the time for transference to a higher sphere
had come. The first of the letters referred to was writ
ten to his fellow-labourer Mr. Carey. It is dated July
19th, and is at follows • 14 My dear brother, we got thus
far. and I feel a dislike to return, ss I am now about
half way across the land. At any rate lam past Namosi.
To-morrow wo start for Navosa, a district at the head
of the Nadroga river, and this I expect will be the
only difficulty I shall meet with. But if they will allow
ns we shall go right on to Buds, and return by way of
Nadroga I have written Mr*. Baker, and I'
may get another chance before I return, if Navoso
should become Christian. People all turning from hea-
thenism, and I think Navosa is the last district we shall
have to try. Hope you will continue to pray for me.
I do not fear the natives, and we hope to do them good.
We are all well and strong."
The other letter we have to give is to Mrs. Baker,
and is remarkable and especially interesting from the
circumstances under which it wse written. It is also
dated July 19th “I am here at a place called Da-
warau,” writes Mr. Baker, “ and have been here two
days now. We have had very wet weather until
to-day, which ha* hindered us. I find we are about
midway across the land, and have resolved to go all
the way now I am so tar in. 1 had thought of
this before I left you, hut did not name it because I knew
you OOUId not endure the thought of my going away for
so long s time. Bnt I have only decided this eroning
to go : and I do—because, first, I want to do the people
flood; second, because I believe there is no great oh
tacle in the way : and, third, because, if I do not go
now. I shall nover go. (He was expecting to visit the
Australian colonies, and after remaining there a short
time to return and occupy some other station.) When
you :ct this I shall he at or near Buda, and shall com*'
bach l»> wsy of Nadroga, and np the coast. In this way
1 shall not require a boat to go for me. You muet cheer
m. and pray for me. lam in ray Master’s work, and
He will take care of me and mine. We are all in good
spirits, and our feet are sound. We have preached twice


here —l did so yesterday, and Shadrach has preached
to-day. People are becoming Christians all round, and
there is only here and there a town that is not
fof't (Christian). We start early in fho morning for
Navosa. 1 expect no difficulty except in that place. If
they do not lotn, I believe they will not venture to kill
me. I think much almnt you and our little ones, es-
pecially Alice. If Navosa should lotn 1 will send
another letter on by Nadroga, or any other way that
may oiler. It may i>e home by tomorrow week. July
27th. I have found the people very kind, so far. We
hope to reach Navosa to-morrow. and if they lotn, to
spend Sunday there. There is no li-.diting any whore now,
so I feel the const is all clear. Kiss the children for
me—all of them, and tell them to pray for nic. On
Saturday, the 27th, let the boat l*o sent to Rewa, «» I
hope to meet her there then. Good night, my dear
wife, and God bless you all. Your devoted husband,”
&c.
<fn hr )
HOME LIFE in ENGLAND, 11V A LONDON LADY.
A Country Hoi'hk —Gooh-iivk to Si Mur.n. —Corxmr
Visitors.—A Tkii* ixTuHvrroLK.—A ituch. Kiiiston
Putins. - Pui’it at Bheakvaht. A Pen-intent
Daisy.—A Tabu Dbuoration.—Brrrirm.— Khakb-
hpeke Menu Caros.—Scitahi.i; Mottoes.—A Con-
■ -f.KT.—Want or Fokktiiocmiit is Abra.nobyiknt.
Pkksbstatios or Certificate*. Visits to all
Retainers. —Wosdkritl Mats. A Promised
Pkmknt.—Old liniwkih.—Tbe White Hor-k and
Mr. Pickwick.—The Irewicu Moshm.—Typical
C< U.l. NOTIONS.
Thews are many worse things than to say good-bye to
summer in a country house filled with pleasant friends,
where the welcome fires and cosy chat* within doors,
and the autumnal, almost fire-like brilliant tiuts of tho
trees without, reconcile one to the deporting glories of
an exceptionally beautiful season. London ta just now
full of excursionists, and (lie dying gasps of th«
Hoaltherius were witnessed by an unwonted number of
country folk from all parts of the kingdom, so we,
whoso home is in the great metropolis, are somewhat
disturbed by this invasion of unknown multitudes, who
evidently have no part or lot in the matter, and who
contrive to take up aa much space in Regent-streot and
Piccadilly as though they were on their native heath or
fertile plains, with no one to dispute elbow-room with
them but the sheep and the cows peacefully grazing.
Keeling thns rather </e trop in London, I accepted an
invitation to spend a few days last week near the old
town of Ipswich, in a hospitable country home. As my
readers know, 1 always endeavour to make myself pretty
well acquainted with any locality in which 1 am
quartered. So, after having walked through gardens,
greenhouses, plantations, and meadows ; having paid
my respects to the living dependents of the establish-
iiient, equine, bovine, and human, and having thoroughly 1
appreciated and admired the lovely view of the nvor
Grwell through tho autumnal trues from tho pretty 1
trollisod verandah, 1 was driven by my hostess to tho *
neighbouring old town of Ipswich, which is remarkable 1
from many points of view, and has ita own historical 1
and geological interests for all who care to inquire
Tho weather was dull and cold, and die breakfast ‘
table we left pleasant and cheery enough to tempt us to I
linger over it, especially as dishes of ripe, good fruit 1
formed a final course at this early meal. The days of *
my youth came back to me with the lint bite of a juicy, 1
crisp, Hibston pippin, so seldom do we over get that 1
king of applos in these degenerate times ; and yet I f
think there is no product of the orchard to compare with 1
it. Rich, ripe nears are excellent, but, to my taste, do *
not equal a really line Hibston or an American New J
Town Pippin, uiibruiood and untainted by close packing, 1
which proviso considerably limits the quantity of Trans- *
ntlanlic apples to bo consumed in London. Our native 1
fruit, however, is, 1 think, something to be proud of, 1
and all growers of orchard produce are great on the *
varieties of applos. NV*hen I hear of the endless number '
of pippins with queer names which are now grown, 1 u
feel that these newcomers have greatly taken tho place v
of tho dear, juicy old Kibstons and Golden Pippins of 0
my childhood, and 1 am sorry for it; I think «ve may *
indeed “go further and fare worse." 1 believe my *'
favourite apple took its name from Uibston, a place iu u
Yorkshire, where Sir Henry UoodHohe planted three •
pips obtained from Rouun, in Normandy. Two died, *
but one survived to become the parent of all the Ribston "
apples in England, a goodly and at one time, a numerous i>
progeny, now, 1 fefcr, gradually dying out. Well! such 1
apples, pears, and fine black and white grapes are an f
excellent termination to breakfast. 1 don't understand 1
the gastronomic law which says that '“ fruit is gold in *
the morning, silver at noon, and load at night,” neither
do I quite believe it, for I think fresh, ripe fruit is good *
at any and all tiinos of the day, when it is fancied, and h
in many of onr long, country drives, we found a basket “
of sneb refreshing delicacies very welcome at any hour, h
On the lawn of this sclf-samu place I saw a mag-
nificent Marguerite daisy iu full flower, it was quite a
large bush covered with ita pretty, white stars, growing P
and flourishing in a huge garden -|iot under a spreading 11
tree. My friend told me she brought it two years ago
from Pans, where it had brightened her hotel diambor ll
for several weeks ; a little market plant purchased for a K
franc. When she left Paris it still looked so lively and *
well, that'she oould not bear to desert it, so she took it
icd out of its little pot, shook the earth from it* root*, and
,nd packed it in her portmanteau. After ton day* travelling
iot about, she gave it to her gardener at home, who cut it
for down, replanted it, and aa it grateful for tranaplauation
If to British auil, tin* little Gallic daiay ha* in two yean
till grown into a splendid and beautiful bush, delighting
ea- all beholders, and furnishing many a pretty flower for
nd the decoration of it* mistress's table or toilette from
lat June to October.
ily What lovely berries of all kind* are now to lie found
Ve in every country garden for table decoration, and with
to good taste how well they adapt themselves to the present
nv, style of flat ornamontion. Wo had a dinner parly one
for evening, invited to partake of a haunch of Royal veni-
l >n sou from Windsor Groat Park, and although connoisseurs
i 1 pronounced it excellent, I rather devoted my attention
• H r to other dishes and to die pretty (able itself. Dowd
I," the centre of the white damask cloth ran a strip of rich
crimson velvet, cut into large scallops at the edge and
neatly finished. All aljuig this edge 1 saw my hostess
placing bunches of white yew and cotoneastee berries
with their leaves. The undulations of the velvet edge
prevented any appearance of si illness ; then at each
Eg corner slio put a large spray of arbutus with its red
«trawl>erry like fruit. The whole floral wreath was
N . kept in its place by I*iug slightly tacked to the velvet
H strip. Opal glasses of different sorts looked specially
U lovely on this deep rich red ground, and glass dishes of
K| w hite eucharis lilies, with maiden's nair ferns alternated
BJ with the dessert fruits, and ipianit nunm, of which
□ indeed 1 took particular notice. Both name cards and
were of original design, being simply elegant, and
Y. ornamental cards bearing a suitably'selected quotation
KV from .Shakespeare. Whenever does the immortal bard
aN forsake ns or lad to provide a couplet for any occasion ?
N ‘ T It would be an amusing exercise fur a student u(
e Shakespeare to try and And a number of such lines as
N , were adapted by my fnend to her hospitable purposes.
She selected her name cards somewhat appropriately to
LL her guests, and i should say that the name and the
SD written menu were merely inscribed on a piece of paper,
iD and slipped into the two little slits provided for them
VL on the ornamental card, in front of a gonial, story
telling parson, was placed Ins name on a card bearing
tu (his motto,
s, " A merrier man williin the limit of Incoming mirth
8 I never sjwul an hoar s talk w ithal.”— Lvtr* LiOmin Lori.
le A young barrister had this hint :
of •• We will not stun.l to prate,
w W« come to use our hands awl not onr tongue*. " —RieUaM ///. ,
An old friend of the family read this line ;
** So on for the twelve guesU seated round that pretty
table, eauli had his or her suggestive little text; and at
j the top of the six mtnm, which were placed at iiiUirvalo,
such words wore emblazoned m coloured ornamental
letters as these ;
a “ Be patient till the last. "—Julim (iw<-,
“ Small chvvr awl grv.il welcome make a merry feast.”
,| tWwrfjf of Kmiu.
,y But those who wish to take my hint and to do like-
ly wise, will easily discover oilier mid as appropriate words
iu the mine ot wealth left by the great poet of all time.
g> The pern»*tetic visits uue is sure to make whilst staying
iJ in a cuentry home to the various retainers in their neat
little cottages scattered about the grounds on the park,
ly often leave a pleasant remembrance. The coachman's
. r wife loves to have her dear little ones admired, and to
y tell Johnnie to “ repeat his verses to the lady,” the
10 gardener is sure to have some specially lovely geranium
l u >'i his window, a delightful and uncommon creeper
,1 hanging over his door, and is glad to present a cutting,
with directions how to treat it, to a friend of the house, '
,t or the laundress will often consent to give her ex-
-0 penonco* as to the best method of starching a shirt or '
it getting up fine lace, and i am always eager to profit by 1
,f a him iroui practical people. But, until now, what may 1
r f be called fancy work lias not entered into the specialities
lt which 1 have tuuud in such unpremeditated calls. The 1
1 good Suffolk laundress with whom 1 made acquaintance
h in my friend's domain, not only sends up to “ me house ” 1
„ the wliiteat of linen and daintiest of lace, but she takes 1
v her relaxation ui making strong, might, almost elegant 1
.' foot mat* out of shreds of coloured woollen cloth which J
1- she collects from all who know her, and weaves or knits 1
e them with very strong twine into wonderful hearth rugs
f, *> r door mats, Having geometrical pattern* for the centre 1
e and pretty borders round them. Tins good woman has J
r bad tier troubles in hie, and has lost those nearest and 1
I dearest to her, but slie is never idle, and when not
c washing or ironing, nursing a stray kitten or puppy, '
| or waiting on her crippled brother, who lives with her, *
y- "fie u busy constructing a handsome mat for some 1
Y favoured friend, or, perliaps, for sale. 1 believe the art 1
n of making these mats is a nautical uue, for 1 have seen *
0 similar ones made by sailors daring long voyages. 1
, I’urhape, as Ipswich u somewhat of a seafaring town, *
1 *ith ita navigable river and its proximity to Harwich, 1
I good Mrs. Uamhain may have thus learnt the secret 1
i Be it as it may, slio has promised me one of her beauti-
i ful mats as a present before Christmas, and 1 shall hope
j to put my feet upon it under my writing table for many '
, a long day. i
r 1 could say a good deal about old Ipswich, with its »
I ancient charter granted by King John, and its quaint t
i houses, many of which have stood fur hundreds of years o
t m ssfety. Wo cannot forget that Cardinal Wolsey was i
barn hero, and that he did a good doal fur his native *.
. town. Amongst other things he founded l college, the n
i foundation stone of which wits inaugurated by a grand I
j procession in winch King Henry Vlll. toqk part. There *
[ )• abundance of old oak carving, bearing dales from t
, 1600 to 1000, to lie seen in Ipswich, still untouched m e
. the plsous for which it was originally designed. Our
i great novelist Dickens has immortalised an old inn, as
| well as certain Janes and streets in this quaint town.
I Mention is made in old records of tho “ White Horse” «
Tavern as early at 1628, and its courtyard indicates its
antiquity, but it was here that more recently the con-
fiding Mr. Pickwick is supposed to have taken up his
abode during his stay in Ipswich, and it was here that
ha wandered into tho wrong bedroom and was confronted
by the “ lady in yellow curl papers. ” Dickens describes
the hotel as an overgrown tavern, having for iu sign “ a
stone statue of some rampacious animal, with flowing mane
and tail, distantly resembling an insane cart-horse.'’
When 1 saw it the other day 1 am bound to say that a
noble grey steed pranced over the door.
One great feature of interest to me in this Eastern
county's chief town, is, and always has been, its beauti-
ful and typical Museum. The collections are of great
local importance, and are most beautifully arranged and
catalogued by Dr. J. E. Taylor, F.L.8.-, the curator of
the Museum. 1 wish J hud space to describe it fully,
for it has always seemed to me that such a Museum
should exist in all our large country towns, one at least
in every county to illustrate chiefly the fauna, flora,
historical antiquities and geological features of the
district. For simply educational purposes, a very email
extra collection would suflice, but it is moat important,
os well as most interesting, to be able to see arranged,
wwith scientific accuracy, the past and present records of
the spot on which we dwell, written, as they ore, un-
erringly in the strata of the earth, and the fossils beneath
our feet ; tbe vestige of prehistoric times, or the existing
creations from which we learn our lessons as to the
future.
The An of Needlework.
Tux art of needlework is extremely ancient , it was iu
(act the earliest occupation undertaken by our first
parents after the Fail, though of oonrae their achievement
was necessarily of the simplest and most primitive kind.
The art, however, made considerable progress, as may
be gathered from the description of the hangings for
the Tabernacle and the vestments for Aaron, which
were commanded to be ” embroidered and wrought with
needlework. ’ The an was also practised by the Assy-
rians and the Babylonians; and, indeed, most of the
Eastern nations have excelled in needlework, and up to
the present time some of the most beautiful embroideries
come from India and Ohiua. But to poos on to the in-
troduction of tapestry into Europe. That form of needle-
work is extremiy ancient, but we hear little about it till
the tune of the Saracens, who revived it and brought
it into use. it was at that time so generally attributed
to them that it was called Sarrazmuis. The Flemings
were the first to use it aa a covering f»r walls, and it was
introduced into France in 1000, by Henry IV., who en-
gaged Flemish artists to teach it. The oldest piece still
in existence is the celebrated Bayense Tapestry, other-
wise called “ lot Tapestibre de la Heine Mathilda.” It
was the work ot Mathilda of Flanders, wife of William
the Conqueror, and her ladies, and is the greatest
example of royal industry still extant. It is only 19
niche* wide, but is upwards of 07 yards in length, and is
in foot a great historical picture, comprising the events
of some years, from the visit of Ban.id to the Court of
Normandy till his deatli in 1000. The work is still
preserved in tho Cathedral of Bayeux. During the
last few years there have been tapestry works estab-
lished at Old Windsor, where old tapestry may be
renovated. Some of the new designs are very beauti-
fully executed. iTie late lamented Prince Leopold was
patron of the industry, and took great interest m the
work. Since his duuth the Prince of Wales has become
the patron.
Embroidery, as before stated, was also brought from
tbe osst, but is now carried to great perfection iu Europe,
noth by hand and lu.vcluuory. There are now embroi-
deries on all kinds of materials, iit cotton, silk, che-
nille, gold, and silver, thread, Ac. Lace, which is now
so great an industry, was, it is believed, with the ex-
ception of gold lace, unknown to the ancients ; nor, is
it certainly known when this art came into practice in
Europe. It is believed that point lace, the oldest variety
known, was made by nuns during the latter half of the
Utii and beginning of the 16th centuries. The inven-
tion of pillow lace is claimed by Beckmann for one of
his countrywomen, by name Barbara, wile of Christo-
pher Ulliuonn, at St. Aunaberg, 16U1. The celebrated
Point d'Aleupou was introduced by Colbert, chief min-
ister of Louis XIV., in the middle of the 17th cemuuty.
We now have lace in every form of design, colour, and
texture, the machine-made lace is in foot so beautiful,
yet may lie had so cheaply, that there is little demand
for handmade laces.
Although the pathetic story so graphically drawn by
Hood, in ins famous ' • Song of the Shirt," is, alas ! only
too often true, still the needle has been the source of
much solace and pleasure to many. Koyai ladies espe-
cially seem to have excelled in needlework. Besides the
historical achievement of Mathilda of Flanders, already
alluded to, ve find that 3largarat of Anjou, the unfor-
tunate Hod Hoee queen, and wife of Henry VI., is cele-
brated for hor needlework as well as for her warlike
talents ; there is still an old couplet which runs thus ;
“ fflowd I* M.irgaivt, yu«m ol Angim,
For she taught our Ibinfcnulimi Web.ter te sow.”
A somewhat remarkable fact to be chronicled of the
luckless queen ; it would sown more iu accordance with
what is generally known of her character to find her
teaching tbe bourne Soot* the use of the sword. The
celebrated Catherine de Medicis also took great interest
in the art of loco-making. The unfortunate Mary
*jue«u of Soots beguiled many weary hours in plying
ner need to and the Princess Sophia, daughter of George
111., worked some beautiful em oroide ties in chouille, ou
satin, of thakindnowkiioWn as Arrascene work; whilst,
to come to our own time, Princess Lomas, Marchioness
of Lome, is a very skilful auibroidervas.
Mr. Gladstone contemplates closing hia political career
with the parliament which expires this year.


MOUNT KOSCUISKO PLATEAU.


Tho North Shore Tramway.
Tuk residents of North Shore may at
length congratulate themselves that the
first portion of their wire Tramway
system ia about to be proceeded with
immediately. This contract has been
undertaken by the firm of Messrs. Carson,
Woods, A' Cm., of this city, and will
extend from Milson’s Point, near
steamers’ wharf, to Ridge Street, St.
Leonards. The total length < f such
tramway being one mile, and Uiirty-one-
and-a-half chains. The contractors in-
form us that they have been carefully
studying, during the last four years,
cable construction in its several details,
and have pnrehoaed Parkes Hunt's aqd
Terry's new ami improved system, both
under the Holiday Patent ; yet, as these
new systems have nut Ween sufficiently
proved, they have recommended the
Haliday Patent, reserving the right to
adopt any desirable approved improve-
ments, or that which is in general known
as Duncan’s improved Haliday System.
The contract specifies that the work
shall be completed in October next. The
oentre portion between rads, and for a
distance of four feet on each side of the
rails shall be laid in the moat approved
manner, utilising concrete foundations
and wooden blocks. It is, also, one of
the conditions that where permanent
levels are not decided upon, the con-
tractor shall bring such streets to the
Cuanenl levels, and in such case will
l to reform the whole of such por-
tions whose levels are not fixe*). The
nils to be used arc the ordinary Barlow
or guard rails, as utilised by our present
Sydney Steam Tramway Sendee. The
Kailway Department ia considering the
adoption of the M 'flowan rail, at mifd iu
all the latest tramway systems in Great
Britain. It it open for question, conse-
quent, on the roiling stock that will be
employed on this portion of the North
Shore Tramway Service being of a much
lighter description than the Sydney pas-
senger lines, ami that no motor will be
wanted, whether a lighter section of
rails might not have been need with
greater advantage. The main tunnel
will be formed of concrete, carrying cast
•ton blocks, supporting the longitudinal
sleeper rails. Brackets will be placed
every forty feet for carrying the tube,
X ORTH SHORE CAB L E T R OIWAV-TIIE LEVER GRI P.
tension on the cable ..t any suddei
change that may occur in the grades
Direction pulleys will be placed in posi
won ao as to prevent any disarrange
inent of the cable. Switching site* <>
the latest description will be provided a
each end, in order to allow can to pas
from one line to another, and at om
end carriage sheds of neat design will la
provided with all requirements for re
pairs or safe housing. - The dummy ca
will be provided withal) necessary grip
ping attachment as so successfully use.
in San Francisco, Chicago, New York
and the heaviest grade of the Nortl
Shore line is one in fourteen, bm tin
majority of the grades are considerably
less.
Messrs Carson and Woods are anxious
to proceed without delay, and theii
engineer, Mr. 0. 8. Duncan, will have th*
chief supervision of the engineering
portion. This gentleman is the inventoi
of the system of turning corners with
the gripping attachment still holding
the cable. He is also engineer for the
extensive cable tramways about being
erected in Melbourne, viz., a distance
of thirty-three miles. We can only
wish Messrs. Carson and Woods and
their staff a successful finish to theii
contract, and we feel certain the North
shore residents will be pleased when
the contract is completed and the tram-
way opened. Messrs Carson and Woods
have alao undertaken to keep the tram-
way in repair for a period of six months,
and make any alteration that may be
required to bring it to a complete and
By referring to otir engravings, the
system will bo more clearly understood.
Figure 1 shows the description of grip
proposed to be used. Figure gis a side
view of road and car and dummy the
tube is in longitudinal section, and
shows the arrangement of the rope, the
upper pulleys, for keeping the rope down
where the grade changes upwards, and
the lower supporting pulley, also the
gripping device attached to the dummy
and to the rope. Figure ;i: By this
engraving it will be seen that th« slot of
the tube ia on one side of a vertical line
drawn through the centre of the tube.
The gripping attachment projects on one
side, giving it an L. »hape, enabling the
north shore cable tiumwav.-car and dummy, wmh cninriN.- attachment, carle, and sir.;, section of tube.
Cl leys, etc., and iioccesary provision
lug made by manholes, with proper
covers, for examination and oiling. The
centre opening will ran the whole length
of each tube, haring a slot three-quarter*
of an inch wide. This slot is not innne
diately over the centre of the tube, in
order to prevent sand or grit from fall-
ing on the rope, and allowing the grip-
ping attach must to grip more securely.
The rope is to be ono-and-sn-eighth
inches in diameter, spliced at intervals
(sneh splicing shall not be lees than
twenty feet long) and so form one
endless cable. This rope shall by
actuated by a pair of -10 H. I’. N.
engines, fitted with Corlis’s latest im-
proved valve motion, and, with thoir
toilers, will be erected in a neatly
designed engine and boiler house, on
whatever site the Government may
eventually decide upon. The terminals
will be fitted with compensating ma-
chines. placed in pita, and actuated by
weights beneath the roadway ; and pro
vision will be made at intermediate
points along the line for keeping an even
CROSS SECTION* OF TUBE, ULT.BYS. Ao.
jaws to pass under and over the rope
•heaves in the tube. In order to stop
the car the jaws of the gripping attach-
ment are opened slightly when they re-
lease the rope, the guide sheaves take it,
and the oar stops.
Fall of a Verandah.
Fatal results attended the fall of A
verandah attached to the promises lately
occupied by Mr. John Hardy and Messrs.
•I. ’• Hanks, in the most populous
part of George Street, Sydney. Tho
accident was caused by a cart coming
out >of a. right-of-way and shifting one
of the supports of the verandah The
structure, measuring 40 feet in length,
fell iijkiii the pavement and injured
a number of persons. William A.
Howell, a draper, w«a crushed to such
sn extent that he only survived a few
hours. A number of other persona
were (cut and bruised but have since
recovered.


WILCOX AND GIBBS'
AUTOMATIC SILENT
SEWING MACHINES
w&nrera.
£4 10b.
MANGLE AND WRINGER,
K A MOLES,
WASHING
MACHINES.
CHURNS,
Corc-shellers.
TOBACCO
OUTTISB,
Walnut W®od.
HEBBLEWHITE 4 CO..
410 GEORGE ST. 1
I
PRIZE SEWING
BROOK’S^COHONS
TRADE MARK
XO S3D HAD O3T ,
ALL RESPECTABLE DRAPERS.
THE SYDNEY PERMANENT
Freehold Land & Building
Society.
B»TABiiU»HKD 1876.
RESERVE FUND, £56 000.
OFFICES—SIS PITT STREET, BYDREY.
Chairman . JOSEPH
*M» 8 T. WHIDDON.
PW4-i* 4U.390.
I { Rmut. Tina, XSS.OOC.
a. UU). £215.044 12. 64.
Uiout twine iy Mtmwen (itnni). £!ICJS9 S« Jd.
Unit of 7bkU Land U Cc«t. X7S.COJ to. 54
SAVIKOS BAKU OKPARTMRirr OPEN DAILY
I Pitt ETnBET. SYDNEY.
IS THE TUIILIC VErUICT ON
S MITH .&.MMI LL ' s SHIRTS
.. rKrv have Hood the test of Public Opinion for more than a Quarter of a Century, and in the face of all Oppoaition "
They have stood the teut oi PRK-EMIMENT FOR FIT AND VALUE.
Smith * Mannell’s Celebrated White Shirts,
Made to Measure or rattern—a Perfect Fit (.uarantoed,
80. eO»„ snet 70*. tM©
j„ b,«torihdU.—(—*,m,-r«>v»Modal), d SO. Msir-M.
298* GEORGE*" STREET. SYDHEY (One Door South of Hunter Street).
NATIONAL, PERMANENT
Building Land, and Investment Society and Savings Bank.
61 office- ao roll. Btroot. ardn. r .
ALBERT BLKIMOTOM.
ALoniuK JPHN YOUNG. Chain*
THOMAS MAOOREOOE.
JOHN BROOM FIELD.
L B KIOBARWWN
I 0 HLAXLAHD.
ZjtMnsod Bflrrejror;
I H. f.AYCOCR, S7l OaM«« 8
Jut I , Mt _p A n» or carnal. eu.u« it. re*erve roan. *n.»o» i«*. m.
Filed Deposits Received t hlphesl our rent r.l« .Hewed. Adv.nce. made on Freehold RroperUei
The Value of City Property.
For some years past the people of Sydney have veeog- -
nised that their buildings ware totally inadequate in I
size snd deficient in Appearance for their rajndly- -
growing city. Sites for banking houses, insurant oOom,
warehouses, and chambers, have been eagerly sought
after for some time past, and, as a natural consequence,
the value of city laud has enhanced astoundmgly. As
the improvements proceed yet higher price* ere , certs-m i
to rule. The condemning of city "rookeries by the <
Msvor has done much to remove “ eyesores from our
streets, snd has moreover been the means of bringing
some valuable blocks of land under the auctioneers
hammer : notably, we mention the at the
corner of Hunter and George street, which, sold by tho
George-street frra.uge realised the fsbulous prme ol
£BOO per foot, the depth being only 42 feet. The
United Fire and Marin* Insurance Company
purchaser*, and they purpose putting s stately building
on the ground. The adjoining block of Undjn
Hunter-street brought £460 per foot. The total pro-
ceeds of the sale for the 4 allotments was £49,880. In
York-street, close to King-street, s block of land, mea-
suring 87 feet 6 inches, was purchased on * 8 n
lease sod realised the handsome rental of £l9BO P° r
annum Th* lessors, Messrs. Warns and Reads, are
to erect upon the ait* a building of the value of
£ There has been leased by private contract, on account
of Sir George Innea, that block of city property, having
38 feet 6 inches frontage to York-street, *ndettc»ding
through to Clarence-street, occupied by Eldndge and
Co., dyers, and other tenants, for a period of 21 years
st a yearly rental of £l,BOO, with a building covenant
of £lO,OOO. and with the right to purchase the freehold
for the sum of £32,900. The lessees arc the Anglo
Australian Investment Company (Limited). Kn '
gUsh capitalists have secured an important site,
as Swan's-buildings, at the corner of Hunter and Bhgb-
streets, vis., 75 feet to Bligh-street, and 36 (evt to Hun-
ter-atreet—price, £lB,OOO.
To on * Castoe Oxu—The French method of ad-
ministering castor oil to children is to pour the oil Into
a nan over a moderate fire, break an •gg mto it, and
stir up ; when it is done flavour with a little or
sugar, or currant jelly.
rereflw " Bot-hv-pslba.' At plwgfiwi
Moms, Mess A Co.. Sydney. Agenu.
TO ADVERTISERS.
New flqolb Wotoo and Queeaaiaud
Newspaper DlteoUuy,
Alstrt - Border hewi Ww/om^A
-Rimrint Breeder. Weekly. Circulates tfcroWfhout
U.. whale of the Kh trine dtetrlct AdvenietmeoU moderate
R it r *»r. - Wetter-t hidtpftultnt. Delly GMMi lAroagheet
* l> Bsoa*—Weekly AdvertWns Hum t» M ««* ’•<*■ ** 61 •
eeet. lueh Liberal dwronst rm eterdlnfedvtrtl»*««ile.
B fOA—Uonderd Weekly leJl* '
VZS? Weekly” VlreitleGf term*. «. But liwfc
, %t*aSeew.^Sbe»^ ! - Twi ' s * * we « k - tSrwsbovi th«
Tons* rn'l enryoundin* petiore' dlitrieU
..... -Chruiurls atilt RUmnau snd Cewrs OstWto.—Weekly.
C*«iXo ~Mkkmmul Rinrr Ktprw end Tvttd Adeerfurr. Weekly
Coo*An*lUSeA*.-Bh)/l Watchman. Weekly. AdrerUelny te.m* |
aa&TKSs Si i
’■ft*.!* o™a_ ... » I
WStrict Advert *mr teme. mo&mU
DSs»lMB<.l«.— Palaral Tim**. Weekly I
SSEfjSCt* ittSiotow
moderate. ||)t
[-f£Z‘*U Miniwto'ni. WmWy. Oltrelsls*
tbe Blend end ferhlen DU'Hct*.
OvKVAOf Ton». week-
bJrptmlw*. Weekly. Advertlrfas Uiwe. U. j i
“■an.isss.'si **—. —.^*».
Q.urm ...1; ia —-■
Ti*M. -Ml. tK.-.u.h
th. Coes* Oleti >U. AUvertistn« tense leedereU
Oa*s«r.-LiVn/J. Twice » ernk. aicoiett* over tbe «»rroan.Uiw
h »■- 1
*r. “w^kly.
T(KTUiriKi.B.— W-weekly. AdreMdn* teme. ilbenL
**Witc4S*ie. —Time*. Weekly. AdverOwnieeta. Si flm '■**. la. fd *
Weekly. three**** Ike Mee-
wji-,
trtet. Adverb eenenu, 'e per lack .verkly for (Undiny. Be •ivtlnol..
’ Urn,-cn I View Weekly Ofi*UUe Uxroo.kset the
gertbwn end We*,,n W.1.-W. e..d U- *w* »>«J*Os»oj£a
BovSiV**” -Rnruiahern ond Mount Prrty Wail. Weekly A»*»r-
“sasriS^Erii;s*«&.
■
*Ooor^^-//ereM S *Weekly. Clr«iUU. U>ro««k tU wholeet IteriA-
era Q«»enele»id Advriittn* Wliue. ItVrel
H«Nr«to« Bi *«.k!» He* a fenweJ dmsl«*»e.
R*', SMW A ,'tm. Weekly. Clrcslelee
W.*laire-A^-;iw^j*d^iX n, Bil^^J-kly. - AdeertUre Ur ** I
Recovery from Snake Bite.
- A case of snake bite was successfully treated at ;
n Halim* by Dr. J. H. Tennant, by means of ammonia. ,
- The sufferer was a young man named Msaney, wh» was .
bitten by a green snake or. the index finger while ,
t working among sugar care. A ligature was put above ,
i, the wrist, and another round the bend of the elbow.
s The doctor, after giving drain doses of spirits ammonia ,
a aromatic us, proceeded to give hypodermia injections of
e the liquor ammonia fortior, in the proportion of C
r minima to 20 of water. First injection right above j
g wound ; second, in median cephalic vein at bond of
s elbow. He afterwards out down to the bottom of the '
e wound and extracted one of the fangs that had been
e left there. The epidermis was subsequently thinned by
>f the sealpel around the wound, and hot poultices
o applied evary quarter of an hour. After removal of ,
e ligatures the patient was ordered one ounce of brandy ;
a every quarter of an hour, and to counteract the
n drowsy tcehng that was ever and anon stealing over
him. he was ou no account to give way to it, but to
n keep moving about so long as he felt this overpowering
sensation.
Heart Beats.
Djl N. B. Rk MAIUfeOX. of Ijondon. **y*he vu rcc«ntly
ehle to convey & considerable amount of conviction to-
ad intelligent scholar by a simple experiment. The
scholar was singing the praises of tho “ ruddy bumper,”
and saying he could not got through the day without it r
when Dr. Richardson said to him : “ Will you be good
enough to feel my pulse sa I stand here ?'* Be did to.
I said, “ Count it carefully ; what does it say 1” “ Your
pulse says 74. ” I then sal down in a chair, and asked
him to count it again. He did so, and said, “Your
£u l*o has gone down to 70. ” I then lay down on the
mnge, and said, “ Will-you take it again r* Ho replied:
“ Why, it is orly 64 ; what an extraordinary thing 1” I
then said : t'Mn yon lie down at night, that is the
way nature gives your heart rest. You know nothing
about it, but that beating organ in resting to that extent
and if you reckon it up it in a great deal of rest, because
in lying down the heart is doing ten strokes less a min •
ute. Multiply that by sixty, aud it is six hundred;
multiply it by eight hours, and within a fraction it is five
thousand strokes different; and as the heart is throwing
six ounces of blood at ovary stroke, it makes a difference
of thirty thousand ounces of lifting during night. When
I lie down at night without any alcohol, that is the rest
my heart gets But when you take your wine or grog
yon do not allow that rest, for the influence of alcohol
is to increase the number of strokes, and instead of
getting this rest, you nut on something like fifteen
thousand extra strokes, and the result is, you rise up
very seedy and unlit for tho next day’s work till you
have taken a little more of the 4 ruddy bumper,' which
you say is the soul of man below.” —GaillartTx Journal.
A Splendid Aerolite Secured.
I The TtUyraph reports that an aerolite fell on the farm
of C. Francois, st Chateau Richer, a short distance
from Quebec, tt ‘6 a.m., on Saturday, December, IS.
1884. It wn* dug from the ground, in which it had
embedded itself, snd was found to measure about a foot
in diameter. The people were so startled by the in-
tense light that many rushed out of their bouses to as-
certain its cause. They say that the falling meteor pre-
suntod the appearance of a huge ball of fire, which
lighted up the whole country tide almost with the bril-
liancy of the noonday sun.


■QMVION3 ‘ O M ‘NOONOT ‘OMVUJLB 901
‘*°3 IIISiOK 'KVJ.JTONIANO3 »qx
ssaaaav - p*n<Mn«
11i sHdvaooiOHd 11 SHdyaooiOHd
Hark pw »»!*•», Ih* crown Wlou Mibruiticreti In rm bud*.
brim, with rosebud* in centre. ParailiM (. a’.lxr*.
ROSALIE, LLOYD, & CO.,
Milliners, Slovers, and Laoemen,
354 CEORCE ST., SYDNEY.
V?U-
T'. •i .
C “C*<T .'-•’i>
I
BREST
Ail
Dirt and
CJeanseE
ve
mg
«S
Ext
fact of S
-
oap
u^ARD
m\
%
Us
C UOJ|
fejy
use
OPINION!
QUOTATIONS from the HOUSEHOLD PRESS as to
the merits of
HUDSON’S
EXTRACT
OF SOAP.
“Poaseaact irondcrfu! power* of transforming Dirt into
Fnnty."— ffHUfJuU Jbfffiw flrUt’J.
“Hudson's Extract cf Soap acta quickly. removing hut with
but little labour, and in other respect* ia extremely naiis/actorr.”
—IV Qi*m.
“My maids arc loud in praise of Hudson's Extract of Soap,
“ “ * “ ' * For Washing and all Laundry
“Hudson's Extract of Soau ia extremely oarful for Scrubbing
Floors, Cleaning Tins, and other artielaa. Lnd.rt Trtotnry.
‘'l'uequalled as a saf* and thorough Cleanser of Linen,
Wood. Silver, in fact, everything.”—TV JUcear.
Every Englishwoman will remember
how useful HUDSON’S EXTRACT of SOAP
was in the OLD COUNTRY for Washing,
Cleaning and Scouring
Everything.
You can obtain a \ib. packet froi
every Storekeeper in the Colony
*r ASK FOR IT.
A Fine Old Irish Gentleman.
proposing the health of the Hon. J. N T . Ryan,
Chairman of the banquet given to Mr. Slattery, Mr.
Dailey said —Ladies and gentlemen,—You have no
•doubt frequently heard young and unpractised after-
dinner speakers endeavouring to inspire sympathy with
their efforts by informing the company that they have
been entrusted with “the toast of the evening.’’
That is precisely ray position now. 1 have to propose
to you the final toast, and to assure yon that is i«,
though the last, the most deserving of • hearty reception
at your hands of all that have been proposed. It is the
health of the single-minded, generous, aud noble country (
gentleman—cheers—whoso hospitality we escaped mi- 1
noulously with our lives to-day—laughter-and the
(Writs of whose entertainments we shall have again to !
encounter, and I trust to survive on our way back to-
morrow. (Continued laughter). Gentlemen, I said to- I
night, referring to our Chairman, that there are come j
men who best aud most effectually serve the country by •
living in it, aud giving society the benefit of the example j
•of a life spent in peace and sympathy with all that is i
good, in a generous employment of their means, and in i
upholding high principles of conduct (Loud cheers.) j
Such heroes are far nobler, far more, beneficial to society, 1
■and, 1 need hardly say, far happier, than those which i
*re passed in public positions by men who are uncon- •
eoioos of thoir responsibilities, and fail in generous »ym-!
pathies. ( Cheers.) There are sums men who are too j
good for public life—too modest and retiring to be in -1
fluential (cheers)—too generous and high principled to
lind any pleasure in its rivalries and suspicions and in-
triguer. (Loud cheers.) Such a man is our chairman.
<Ch«ers). His qualities sre the finer domestic ones of
honour, tenderness, and liberality. (Cheers.) I have
•said this is the toast of the evening ; and it is in this
sense that you know and admire and esteem its object
mote than you can possibly know or admire either
-Ministers or Parliament. Him toast differs from these in
this respect, that the more you know him the stronger
is your admiration. (Cheers.) Permit me modestly to
•ay that with regard to the other two toasts, a longer
and more intimate knowledge might not increase your
respect and esteem. (Loud laughter.) Gentlemen,
there has been tome talk this evening of the statistics
•of traffic on a line of railway about to be consfructed
from the southern line to Burrowa. A facetious remark
was quoted, made by a gentleman in Parliament who
•oppoeed this line when it was proposed and unani-
mously carried. 1 shall nut refer to the remark, nor
to the estimate upon which it was based. Jiut 1 think I
may say that the mere carriage of the materials of the
I hospitalities of ray friend the chairman would havs
themselves justified the construction of a line from the
main Southern line to Galong. (Laughter.) While, if,
I i«as has been intimated, he intends to build another
residences).*' Kallyryan," the troth o created by his house-
keeping would make that line a splendidly successful
one. (Hoars of laughter.) This would bring this paying
line »f railway to tne borders of Burrowa. There «u
no greater infliction oould be imposed on Mr. Ryan
than to ask him to make a speech in reply. Those pre-
sent would take it for granted that a splendid oration
had been delivered by the Chairman. Gentlemen, I
' shall not detain you any longer, but propose to you the
I health of one who seems to find his only pleasure in
making use of the moans which heaven has given to
\ him to give as much happiness tc his fellow creatures as
1 the abundance of those means and hi» generous >uo of
I them could confer. I give you the health of “ John
j Nagle Ryan.” (Loud and prolonged cheering.)
I Far, far better fur you than beer, ale or porter, and
i free from the intoxicating effects, is Hop Bitters. Read.
! “ Pocsh w» Cons*."—Ask (er Writs' " Bough on.Conu." quick
i rnlief, eoni|4ctc. iwruuntnl curs. Coro*, W«rU, Beiitona Hum*,
The Government Statist of Victoria has calculated
that the population of Australia will in 30 years be
10,000,000, and in 50 years 50,000,000.


Frys MALTED COCOA!
uo
> I -
OaA
COCOA POD CUT OPEN'sHOWING THE NUTS.
TO BE HAD OF ALL CHEMISTS. GROCERS, AND STOREKEEPERS.
J. S. FRY & SONS,
CHOCOLATE AND COCOA MANUFACTURERS
BOND STREET. SYDNEY; and at BRISTOL & LONDON.
MARBLE. GRANITE, OR STONE.
Th# osi7 PrlM for Monamoats and Statnoi at Sjdtioj
Exhibition, 1879, was awardad to J. HANSON.
»11ere Send fi*r llvNigiia ui.l Photo*., ilia/ «ra poat fra*.
HANSON, LEWIS, & CO.’S
MONUMENTAL WORKS,
■eminently suited for Ladies' Indoor and Outdoor Costumes,
Boys' Suits and Children's Dress.
flit rtahvNt, softest, nml IxeominK lubi o ever invented fur
%“Nonpqreil” I
JHyhnxt AwardAiiitlrrdrtii' M
Velveteen*
lliyhexl A 'card A m
M( ' Exhibition ]HK\.
(/old M-dn! Amdr.
t nU de Fmnr
IKB4.
iteuil of iv
‘•lf the NoMixir. il Velveteen won, made n
imilil h. culled velvet awl i.rohnhly Hold i
wi, tin; soft velvety touch, tlic rich hrilliau
nl ixrfectly even and regular make, jrivinjf those HHi hlcmlowh wli»
ily to 1* wen in velvet, and I will defy anyone not in the weret to d-fe
fterene. Nm txir. il Velveteen suit* old and youn(t, boy* mid jfi'N hn.l
arx nmv /*- »-..««« dot* H'4 esi.l fhi-m Hit lofty fnln-lc fill uni hour. 1
i rita th< name • Nonpareil’ for it km no «l«id in ttraeo Mini l«*«ty."
* Al.ridK.al fr.Hu Jfym * Ji
* QUALITIES a
1 QUARTER THE f
*
is*
it wl'il
*
*
*
; BURK IT. COIUI.KV * CO., »
W. H. PALING & CO. (LIMITED).
COTTAGE,
UPRIGHT-GRAND,
SEMI-GRAND,
CONCERT-GRAND
PIANOS
Rfntwaeii lakers
WORLD.
* BILL * CO.,
nun «rut €•.,
l|||F STOKV i CO.
THK X.AKGCBT
BEST SELECTED STOCK
la the ColoniM.
LOW KMT PKK’KN lor < ANII, «»r on KAMI IKK.TIN.
W. H. PALING & CO., (Limited)
356 GEORGE STREET
Opposite IZInnU Now South W Mies.
HYDIVKY.
PHOTOLITHOORAPHED BV GIBBS. SHALI.ARDgr? .
A . TcZli.l.l It., writes : -
" It will be remembered by some of your readers that
of two miles ere assistance Cf.uld be procured. From
the etffcte of fl at bite she quickly recovered ; butUMuck
whwgeUiSg h t . r s^ U ioid f f»r thJ following nforning’i
places before she could extricate herself from her
perilous position ; and in releasing its fang, from the
second bite the snake tore away a piece of Mesh, making
iSSSaiS
(hi tu say, .... ill efforts hare appeared, end It is only
loeauiiahlo 10 si M .|a.so that .11 danger is now |«el."
asraa's
wonderfully good. leaving a plentiful supply of ra-
Huiuu a. 1,.- Miesed. with Ih. u.li.r. .1 In. pert,, Mr
j.lored area of OW miles without a pack-horse, for the
sraisaiaariKScaiss:
wind*. Asa pastoral .listrict, Mr. Stoekdale. who has 1
had great experience, says ho has it. equal j
~Z:*Z *1lu i«t Jd'by 1 R^ittle C tiru.'.wJ. nC |
Mk. Francis ()nuond,^M.L. C. of wake* the |
SSfSHEISSS?^ 3^
TiiKentbui.ia.mtf our tvofini'nwnble .'»rd of March,
jM.rt quarter buinnod against the starboard Iww «f the
■zrxjr s tssrsrn
into the fo.fca.ll. deck, on which tu stationed a dense
■mum of people, who naturally became panic atricken, and
"r afsr« *JS:^S
contingent mi hoard the H-ri.., and, at the moment of
I collision, she was standing holding up the child to its
father, and waving a last farewell. The husband had tied
I a white band around his arm. and the wife had a red
lowing day four boatloads of men were landed, win. took
possession of that land where the king reside. They
erected a flagstaff and built a sham redoubt. Herr Web-
la* set the coloured labourers to do the work, posting
Div ovkkv ok Coai-—Mr. U. Minto, late manager of
under the railway into Mr. .1. A. Cuneens land at
saved. There is also a bed of pure limestone on Mr.
Cunoen’s land.
Read ami bclievt.
