

The Immediate
Responsibility t or
The War
G. A. WOOD, M.A. (O xon.)
Challis Professor of History at the
University of Sydney.
BEING AN ADDRESS DELIVERED
BEFORE THE SYDNEY UNIVERSITY
CHRISTIAN UNION
Sold in Aid of the Red Cross Fund.
Price —Sixpence.


i
. ■■ i


The Immediate
Responsibility For
The War
G. A. WOOD. M.A. (Oxon.)
Challis Professor of History at the
University of Sydney.
BEING AN ADDRESS DELIVERED
BEFORE IHE SYDNEY UNIVERSITY
CHRISTIAN UNION
Reprinted, by arrangement with the Editor,
from “Hermesthe Magazine of the
University of Sydney, and now published by
the Sydney University Christian Union, with
the co-operation of the Undergraduates'
Association.
Sold in Aid of the Red Cross Fund.
August, 1916.


This address was given to
students of Sydney University.
It is printed as it was spoken,
with a few verbal alterations.
G.A. W.


Immediate Responsibility for
i he War
in respect to the war, there are two
duties; to understand, to fight. I put
understanding in the first place, because
I am one of those who think that to kill
men in an unjust war is a deadly sin. If
the British Government enters upon an
unjust war, it is the duty of British citi-
zens not to fight in that war, but to fight
against that war until it is ended. There-
fore, I say, the first duty is to understand
the war; to understand it sufficiently to be
able to form a reasoned opinion on the
question, is it a just war, or an unjust
war, a war in which we fight for God, or
a war in which we fight for the Devil? In
the case of this war not much study was
necessary in order to obtain this degree
of understanding. Never has the British
Government waged a war so evidently
just. From the first we understood the
war sufficiently well to know that the
duty of the day was to fight.


That is the duty which our heroes do
for us this day. We cannot enough wor-
ship their glorious manhood. How little,
in comparison, seems any duty that we,
who do not fight, can do! Yet there are
things that we can do, and we must do
them. And the especial duty of those
University students who do not fight is
to understand. We understood from the
first well enough to know that it is a
just war, and that our first object is to
“ crush German militarism.” But that
understanding does not suffice. Sup-
pose our heart’s desire is satisfied, and
the allied armies enter Berlin in triumph.
Does anyone suppose that will end our
troubles? If a man §uppo§e§ that, I call
that man a Prussian; for he believes that
military force will do that which military
force cannot do. Military force is a
necessary weapon against those who use
military force. But in relation to spiri-
tual problems it is, as Burke says, “ a
feeble instrument.” When military force
has done ail that military force can do,
the insistent question will remain, What
next? Certainly not the millennium!
Never in the history of the world have
there been such huge and complicated
spiritual problems—problems insoluble
by force—as those which will then face
our statesmen, and face them with threats
of utter ruin. If our arms are triumphant


• . **l®% beyond our most golden dreams, there
, : ]'>*&* w iH still remain fear lest our heroes may
L /wU i nM H Hi A/4 111 Trn IllPOC'ffll*
have fought and died in vain. Disaster,
more dreadful than loss of battles, may
be caused by sheer lack of understanding.
Some will say, “Leave these problems
of statesmanship to statesmen. They
have fulness of knowledge, and fulness of
experience. Who are we that we should
offer advice to Sir Edward Grey? The
best help we can give him is to remain
silent.”
Now, I am one of those who rejoice in
the belief that our present rulers a're
among the most capable and most hon-
ourable Ministers who have ever ruled
our Empire. I have especially in mind
Mr. Asquith, Sir Edward Grey, and Mr.
Lloyd George; and the greatest of these
three is Mr. Lloyd George. I am en-
tirely glad that, in this supreme crisis, our
Empire is represented by these great,
wise, and noble statesmen. And yet I
hold the opinion that it is the duty of
British citizens not only to support these
statesmen, but also to criticise them.
British Ministers hold power as repre-
sentatives; representatives of the British
Empire, the British democracies, the Bri-
tish ideals. And the greatness of our
Empiie is largely based upon the fact
that our rulers are both strengthened and


guided by what I may call the critical
support of millions of citizens who know
that, in the sphere of practical politics,
they are ignorant and inexperienced, but
who know, too, that their whole lives
are ennobled by active participation in
our national ideals, and who are prepared
to make the last sacrifice in order that
these ideals may be maintained pure and
triumphant. And the most independent
and most strong-willed of our statesmen
gladly recognise that they draw their
strength from this critical support of the
Sir Edward Greyi has been
blamed for taking our democracies too
little into his confidence. Whether that
blame is just or not Ido not know. It
may be that our national policy would
have been more strongly conceived, and
more strongly conducted, had he spoken
to us more frankly about our dangers and
the necessity of arming ourselves to meet
them. At all events, it is agreed, I think,
that if Sir Edward Grey has erred at all,
he has erred in the way of excessive re-
serve. And yet it was this most inde-
pendent, most strong-willed statesman,
who in the very crisis of the negotiations
told the German Ambassador that “ our
attitude would be determined largely by
public opinion here.”
The responsibility, then, for our en-
trance into war rests, not on our Minis-


ters, but on “public opinion/ 5 And we may
be sure that the responsibility for peace,
when peace arrives, will also rest on pub-
lic opinion. Public opinion, in this con-
text, means the publicly expressed
opinions of British citizens all over the
world. In the formation and expression
of that public opinion each one of us in
some very small measure takes part. And
I say it is the duty of each one of us to
make sure, so far as his opportunities per-
mit, that the opinions he expresses are at
least founded on careful study, and built
by careful thought.
Our first concern must be to study
what, in distinction from the deeper
causes, we may call the immediate re-
sponsibility for the war, Why did war
break out in August, 1914? Our primary
materials for the study of this question
are books of many colours published by
the various Governments in explanation
and justification of their conduct. They
have been collected into a single volume,
which can be bought in the Sydney shops
for 1/6, under the title “Collected Dip-
lomatic Documents Relating to the Out-
break of the European War.”
These documents can be read, and read
with deepest interest, by any citizen,
without the assistance of a commentary.


Most of us, I suppose, did so read them,
simply because the text was published
before the commentaries, with the ex-
ception of the speeches of Sir Edward
Grey and Mr. Asquith. And I think it
a great advantage that I got my first im-
pression on mind uninfluenced by elo-
quent argument. When, however, we
have read the documents, we shall do
well to read some of the best of the com-
mentaries. Many of them are written by
men who are very highly qualified to act
as interpreters. Mr. Holland Rose
is perhaps the English scholar who
writes with greatest authority on the
history of modern Europe from the time
of Napoleon. Dr. Dillon is a writer
who has singularly extensive and inti-
mate knowledge of modern European
politics. Among other books of this
nature I would mention those by Mr.
Beck, the American lawyer, by Mr. Hart,
the American historian, by Mr. Gibson,
an American student who writes with
special knowledge of the Balkans, and by
my old college friend, J. W, Allen.
Just thirty years ago Allen beat me for
the Balliol Scholarship. I had at the time
some slight doubt as to the insight of the
examiners. After reading Allen’s book
the last vestige of that doubt ha's dis-
appeared. I am inclined to think it the
ablest of the books I have mentioned.


What are the main facts we learn from
our study of these documents? I will
speak in a frankly personal way, and
will tell you the main facts which I
learnt from my study of them. And as
a historian’s interpretation of documents
is inevitably affected by the bias of the
historian’s mind, I will first tell you the
prejudices which I brought with me to
the study.
(1.) I felt a profound distrust in re-
spect of the Government of Servia. I
had in mind the fact that the King of
Servia owed his crown to a most das-
tardly murder; and I thought the Ser-
vians shared the cruel characteristics
which history—this at least was my
opinion—has made common to all the
Balkan peoples. There seemed to me
nothing incredible in the Austrian state-
ment that the murder of the Archduke
and Archduchess was the work of a Gov-
ernment founded on the murder of a
King and a Queen. It seemed to me
likely enough that the Servians had, as
the Austrian Government stated, engaged
in schemes which aimed at the disruption
of the Austrian Empire.
(2.) Further, I distrusted the Govern-
ment of Russia. It was the government
of an autocrat, one who possessed abso-
lute power, and who had used absolute


power cruelly to suppress all endeavors
to win for Russian citizens some small
measure of the liberties that are to Bri-
tish citizens the daily bread of the spiri-
tual life. One thought of Poland, and
of Finland, of “ Red Sunday,” and of the
Dumas; one thought also of Siberia.
And there were recollections of unscru-
pulous actions in the Balkans, of robbery
of Roumania, of insolence towards Bul-
garia, of “aggressions” in Manchuria, of
designs against our Indian Empire. Was
it not likely that Russia was backing Ser-
via in order to push her own plans in the
Balkans?
(3.) In respect to France, the preju-
dices in mind were of a very different
nature. How can one think without
emotions of admiration and of affection
of the glorious nation that risked every-
thing for aff ideal of humanity, the nation
that by its gospel of liberty, equality,
fraternity inspired every people in the
world to noble effort for the uplifting of
mankind, the nation to which even the
German statesman of to-day bears testi-
mony that its “ peculiarity” is that it
“ places spiritual needs above material
ones”? And yet lovers of France have
felt that in modern French politics, the
inevitable contrast between the ideal and
the actual has been peculiarly sad. One


thought of political “ scandals’' that seem-
ed to show not only a corruption of
morals, but also an absence of efficiency.
One thought of the French as a nation
possessing splendid and lovable qualities,
but qualities so different from the charac-
teristic qualities of Englishmen that there
must always be danger of misunderstand-
ing and collision. For hundreds of years
the hostile rivalry of France and Eng-
land had continued, broken only by short
intervals of peace. And was not France’s
present friendliness due more to French
hatred of Germany than to French love
of Englaffd? The words printed on the
hearts of all Frenchmen are Alsace,
Lorraine, Was it not likely that French
statesmen were working for a war of
revenge ?
(4.) In respect to Austria the domin-
ant feeling in July 1914, was a feeling of
sympathy with an empire the heir to
whose throne had been murdered in
brutal and senseless way. The public
opinion of the whole world was ready to
back Austria 1 in any demand for the pun-
ishment of the crime, for the prevention
of the recurrence of such crimes, and for
measures necessary to secure the safety
of the empire against Slavonic ambitions.
It became evident, indeed, that Austria
wa*s making demands that aimed much


further than this, demands of an entirely
unjustifiable character, that would have
made Servia a vassal State. But while
condemning these demands, it was still
easy to believe that they were the out-
come not of deliberate policy, but of the
hot anger of the moment, and of
genuine and not unreasonable fear of
Slavonic aggression. Austria acted, so
I thought, in a moment of just though
blind indignation, and the whole world
was anxious to make all possible allow-
ance for action taken in these circum-
stances.
(5.) As to Germany, I shared the
opinion, expressed by Mr. Chamberlain
in a: famous speech delivered in 1899, that
there was a natural affinity between the
kindred Teutonic peoples in England, in
America, and in Germany, and that this
natural affinity should lead to permanent
alliance. That was, lam sure, the preva-
lent feeling in England in the ’SC’s and
’9o’s; and it was a feeling I shared with
special heartiness. Thirty years ago it
was the way of Oxford students to spend
their vacations in Germany. We walked
and climbed in the Harz Mountains, and
the Thuringen Wald; we lived with Ger-
man families in the University towns;
we attended the lectures of learned pro-
fessors; we fell in love with gra'cious


frauleins. I had in those days so much
reason to believe that Germans are
mostly human beings, that the belief still
sticks in my mind in spite of all evidence
apparently pointing to a contrary con-
clusion. I well remember that in the
summer of ’B9 the talk of my German
friends was that their young Emperor
had declared, in one of his famous
speeches, that the German army and the
British navy would, in close alliance,
maintain the peace of the world. I re-
member how we English students re-
joiced with our friends in the exploits
of their race, their heroic “ war of libera-
tion,” their glorious achievement of na-
tional unity. We shared in their joys
and in their hopes. We sang with them
“ Deutschland, Deutschland, über alles,
über alles in der Welt!” Germany was to
be supreme over everything in the world;
yet Britannia was to “ rule the waves”;
and there was to be firm and everlasting
friendship between the two great Teu-
tonic peoples!
It all seems so strange now! Yet let
us remember that only k year ago Prince
Bulow’s statement was true: “ Ger-
many and England are probably the only
two great European Powers who have
never shed each other’s bloody” For cen-
turies there had in the main been enmity


between England and France; for cen-
turies there had in the main been friend-
ship between England and Germany.
And surely we were not altogether wrong
in thinking that this permanent friend-
ship must be based on essential simi-
larity in respect to some of the most
fundamental ideas.
And why, one might have asked,
should not this permanent alliance
continue? There seemed no obvious
reason why the new commercial rivalry
of England and Germany should not
be of an entirely friendly character.
There was no inevitable collision of terri-
torial interests like that which all but
caused war between England and
Russia in the ’Bo’s, or like that
which all but caused war between
England and France in the ’9o’s.
When Bulow published his book in 1913
there seemed nothing obviously untrue in
his statements that “ Of all nations in the
world the Germans are the people that
have most rarely set out to attack and
conquer,” that “ never in the course
of history has any Power, possesssing
such superior military strength as the
Germans, served the cause of peace in
an equal measure.” Since 1870, Rus-
sia, France, England, Italy had en-
gaged in wars, generally considered by
the world to be wars of aggression. Ger-


many alone of the Great Powers hid
maintained an unbroken peace tor
forty-three years! And those Eng-
lishmen who knew Germany best
believed that Germany was perman-
ently wedded to Peace. “There is,
wrote Mr. Dawson in 1908, “ no more
pacific nation in Europe than the Ger-
mans. No wilful disturbance of the
world’s peace need be apprehended from
them.”
With these prejudices in mind, I inter-
preted German conduct in August, 1914.
I believed that Germany went to war
unwillingly, owing to the binding obliga-
tion of the treaty with her ally; that un-
willingly she declared war against Russia.,
that unwillingly she recognised that war
against Russia inevitably meant war
against France; unwillingly perceived
that the easiest way to France was
through Belgium, and concluded that
military necessity compelled the commis-
sion of what the German Chancellor con-
fessed to be “a wrong.”
(6.) In respect to Great Britain, I had
trust in the British Government, in their
wisdom, their honour, their patriotism,
their hatred of war. But I greatly feared
lest their work for peace should be
thwarted by those in England who love
war. I feared especially lest newspapers


owned by wealthy individuals or wealthy
syndicates, should stimulate and organise
Public Opinion” in such a way that the
Government might be compelled to de-
clare a war which its own judgment con-
demned. I considered that Great Britain
ought not to make war on behalf of Ser-
via, nor on behalf of Russia, nor even
(though here there were doubts) on be-
half of France. The invasion of Belgium
seemed to me aft that time the only just
cause of war. Till that catastrophe took
place I heartily hoped that the British
Government would maintain its neutral-
!ty. Now, it was, I think, impossible to
understand from the newspaper cable-
grams the course which as a matter of
fact the British Government had taken.
It was evident, indeed, after the invasion
of Belgium, that the war declared by the
British Government was a just and neces-
sary war. But there remained in my
mind the suspicion that the British Gov-
ernment had been influenced by those
who regard war as a good thing, and that
it had not made every effort to attain
some peaceful solution.
I recall the opinions I entertained in
July and August, 1914, not because I think
they were right opinions, but because I
am. suie that in some respects they were
wrong opinions. And I recall them es-


pecially in order to show how immensely
important is the study of the documents
we have now in hand. My opinions were
wrong opinions, but I do not think they
were unreasonable opinions, in view of
the knowledge which at that time I pos-
sessed. The British White Book did
not, I think, arrive in Sydney till about
two months after the war had begun.
During those two months our knowledge
came solely from brief and mangled
cables provided by private enterprise.
It seems to me a great pity that the Bri-
tish Government did not cable every word
of the White Book the moment it was
published. For when the White Book
did arrive—two months later! —it came as
a revelation; —a revelation of facts that
should have been told to every British
citizen at the first possible moment. In
my own case, the reading of the White
Book caused me to change my opinion in
a very radical way. For the first time
I was fully convinced that not only
the war “ just and necessary,” but that
it was a war which had most truly been
“forced” on the British Government;
that it wa's a war in which the British
Government was fighting, not for Servia,
not for Russia, not for France, not even
for Belgium, but for the British Empire
and for the ideals that are our spiritual
life. In other words, it was in reading


these documents that I found the clue
to what had seemed the huge chaotic
mystery of European politics. The rea-
son of my mistake was that I had not
understood the mind of the German Gov-
ernment. As I read the documents I
had at first the feeling that all the Gov-
ernments of Europe, all wishing peace,
were being hurried into war by an unseen
impelling Fate. As I read further, the
suspicion grew to certainty that this un-
seen power was not Fate, but was the
will of the German Government. The
war happened in August, 1914, because
the German Government willed that it
should then happen.
Let me state the facts, clearly estab-
lished by the documents, that point to
this conclusion.
(1.) The Government of Servia was
anxious in the very highest degree to
avoid war. Though the Austrian accusa-
tion remained utterly unproved, the Ser-
vian Government was prepared to buy
peace by making every concession that
could possibly be reconciled with the
maintenance of independent sovereignty.
I was amazed to read to what a depth
of humiliation Servia was prepared to
go rather than wage war. The Servian
reply, said Sir Edwafrd Grey. “ involved


the greatest humiliation to Servia that I
have ever seen a country undergo.”
(2.) The Government of Russia show-
ed itself very anxious to avoid war.
Again I was amazed to find how very far
the Russian Government had been pre-
pared to go on the path of concession.
The Russian advice to Servia was to
consent to any humiliation that could, in
the opinion of the Great Powers, be recon-
ciled with sovereignty. Russia was pre-
pared to risk in a very serious way her
prestige among the Balkan States. The
Russian Minister justly claimed that he
had accepted every suggestion made with
a view to a peaceful solution of the dis-
pute. Russia’s record in the negotiations
is beyond reproach.
(3.) The same must be said of France.
One’s suspicion was that France, even if
she had not worked for a war of revenge
in alliance with Russia andJSreat Britain,
might at least welcome the opportunity
of such a war. One cannot read the
documents without seeing that this sus-
picion was unfounded. All Frenchmen
have thought always of Alsace-Lorraine.
There have been times, I think, when
France would have welcomed war, in al-
liance with Russia *and Great Britain
against Germany. But it was not so in
1914. The German Secretary himself


admitted that “ he knew France did not
want war.” The tone of France was
heartily pacific. She was unprepared for
war, shamefully unprepared. She was
afraid of war, and she had good reason
to be afraid. There is something tragic
in the story told by the documents of the
French Yellow Book, the story that
reaches climax in the astonished despair-
ing cry of the French Ambassador, as the
German Minister rejected proposal after
proposal that pointed to peace: “Do vou
WISH for war?”
(4.) The British Government made
perhaps the most earnest and most skil-
ful fight for peace that has ever been
fought. And when their efforts to secure
peace were defeated, they fought to the
last ditch to maintain British neutrality.
The White Book shows how they fought
the fight for peace, inch by inch, holding
to each position to the very last moment
at which it could be held with honour.
Grey made it perfectly clear that the
British Government would not go to war
for Servia, nor for Russia. So far as
Great Britain was concerned, Slav and
Teuton would have been left to fight out
their fight, unhelped, unhindered. Grey
made it perfectly clear again that the
British Government was prepared to work
for some permanent arrangement that


should guarantee all nations, including
Germany, against aggression. “If,” he
wrote in words that cannot be too
strongly underlined, “If the peace of
Europe can be preserved, and the pre-
sent crisis safely passed, my own endea-
vour will be to promote some arrange-
ment, to which Germany can be a party,
by which she could be assured that no ag-
gression or hostile policy could be pursued
against her or her allies by France, Russia,
and ourselves, jointly or separately.”
When Germany rejected proposal after
proposal, Grey told the German Ambas-
sador that if Germany could get any rea-
sonable proposal put forward which made
it clear that Germany and Austria were
striving to preserve European peace, and
that Russia and France would be unrea-
sonable if they rejected it, he “would sup-
port it at St. Petersburg and Paris, and
go the length of saying that if Russia
and France would not accept it His Ma-
jesty’s Government would have nothing
more to do with the consequences.” The
British Government, that is, went the
length of incurring very grave danger
of alienating her own allies. Even when
it became evident that France would be
drawn into the war, Grey again and again
refused to promise assistance. It was
not till it became evident that Germany,
refusing even to put forward any reason-


able proposal, would seek to crush France
to the ground, that Sir Edward Grey
warned Germany that “we should be
drawn in”. From that moment it was
inevitable that Great Britain should enter
the war. It is true that Great Britain
was “ free from engagement” to help
France. But it seems evident that the
prevailing party in the British Cabinet
had come to the conclusion that Great
Britain was bound, in regard for her own
safety, to do so. And I think there are
few Englishmen, knowing what the Bri-
tish Cabinet knew, who would have come
to a different decision. Yet even now
so strong was the feeling that Great Bri-
tain should maintain neutrality, that the
Government went no father than a pro-
mise to protect the French coast and
French shipping. It was not till the
Germans violated Belgium that the Bri-
tish Government received that whole-
hearted support from “ Public Opinion”
for which it seems they deliberately wait-
ed. I say, then, the British Government
and the British nation were dragged intD
war inch by inch by a compelling neces-
sity.
(5.) The documents prove that the ob-
ject of Austria was not to make sure that
murderers should be punished, and that
future outrages should be prevented.


Had that been her aim, it could have been
easily achieved. The universal public
opinion of Europe would have backed the
Austrian demand. Austria had only to
produce the evidence, which she declared
she possessed, before the conference Sir
Edward Grey proposed, and she would
have obtained all redress desired. Grey’s
suggestion was that the Powers should
guarantee satisfaction to Austria.
But Austria rejected the proposed con-
ference. She did not even publish the
evidence. And there are reasons for re-
garding an unsupported Austrian accusa-
tion as unworthy of acceptance. It
is clear that the object of Austria was to
treat Servia in 1914 as she had treated
Bosnia in 1909. This conclusion could
be deduced from our documents. It
is made a certainty by Giolitti’s revela-
tion of the fact that in August, 1913,
nearly a year before the murder of the
Archduke, Austria communicated to Italy
and to Germany “ her intention of taking
action against Servia.”
Whether Austria thought that she
would be able to work her will on Servia
without war with Russia cannot, I think,
be determined with certainty. In 1909
Austria had annexed Bosnia, and Russia,
yielding to a German threat of war, had
acquiesced. It seems possible that Aus-


tria expected that 1914 would exactly re-
peat 1909. The German Ambassador at
Vienna stated that “ Russia neither want-
ed, nor was in a position to make war,”
and that France also was “ not in condi-
tion to face war.” It seems to me pro-
bable that both Austria and Germany
really believed this, and expected to get
what they wanted without fighting.
When it became evident that Russia, who
had not dared to fight for Bosnia, would
fight for Servia, the Austrian Govern-
ment at the eleventh hour showed an in-
clination to reconsider matters; and it
seems certain that, if the dispute had been
a dispute between Austria and Russia
only, peace would have been maintained.
At this point the German Government
declared war against Russia. Austria
had called on Germany to rattle the sword
in the scabbard. Germany rattled the
sword; and when Russia remaining un-
terrified, took guard, Germany drew the
sword, and Austria had to do the same.
(6.) Thus our study leads to the con-
clusion that the clue to the great tragedy
is to be found in the mind of the rulers
of Germany. As one reads the docu-
ments the terrible conviction grows that
all efforts made to secure peace failed be-
cause the rulers of Germany had pre-
determined that all efforts should fail, that


war should be. My first belief was that
the immediate responsibility was with
Austria, and that Germany had unwill-
ingly been drawn into war by fidelity
to Austria, as France by fidelity to Rus-
sia. And this was the view insisted on
by German Ministers in the course of the
negotiations during the critical week.
Again and again it was declared that the
German Ministers had not even seen the
Austrian ultimatum before it was deliver-
ed to Servia. The German Secretary of
State admitted, further, that he “ thought
the Note left much to be desired as a
diplomatic document,” and that Servia
“ could not swallow certain of the Aus-
tro-Hungarian demands.” The Ger-
man Chancellor declared that he was
continually urging the Austrian Gov-
ernment to show moderation, and
I am inclined to think it possible
that he wa's sincere in his statement that
“he was most anxious that Germany
should work together with England for
maintenance of general peace, as they had
done successfully in the last great Euro-
pean crisis.” And yet the conviction re-
mains unshaken that the German Govern-
ment willed war. The German Govern-
ment is not the Chancellor nor the Secre-
tary of State. The German Government
is the Kaiser, a'cting with whatever ad-
visers he chooses to consult. That the


Kaiser saw the Austrian ultimatum be-
fore it was sent seems to me a thing cer-
tain, That some German officials, e.g., the
German Ambassador at Vienna, saw it
and approved it, is no less certain. Any
truth there may be in German professions
of ignorance is truth of the nature of a
childish and clumsy quibble. It is pos-
sible that some particular officials may
not have seen some particular document.
The fact of importance is the fact,
stated in the German White Book itself,
that Germany promised Austria that she
would approve “ any action considered
necessa'ry.” In view of this statement it
is impossible to believe that the Austrian
ultimatum was not shown to the Kaiser
before it was sent. It seems to me in
the highest degree probable that the
Kaiser assisted in its preparation, and
inserted those demands which as
the German Secretary of State admitted,
“ Servia could not swallow.” If the
German Chancellor urged moderation at
Vienna —and no scrap of evidence has
been produced in support of his statement
—his advice must have counted for noth-
ing with those who knew the mind of the
Kaiser, and knew that Germany was
pledged to Approve “ any action consider-
ed necessary.” As soon as the Austrian
Government did show an inclination to
moderation—an inclination so strong that


peace between Russia and Austria would
have been inevitable, if Russia and Aus-
tria alone had been concerned—at that
moment Germany declared war on Rus-
sia .
The conclusion, then, to which our
study has led us is that war broke out
in August, 1914, because the German
Government willed that war should then
break out. A peaceful solution of the
dispute was practicable, and Germany
deliberately rejected a peaceful solution,
deliberately acted in a way that forced
war on Servia, Russia, France, Belgium,
and Great Britain. And when we realise
this fact we survey the whole story from
a new point of view. A Great Power
that deliberately chooses war, a war of
this gigantic and frightful nature, is a
Power whose triumph would mean a huge
retrogression in the history of civilisa-
tion. It would mean the defeat of that
principle of progress which slowly—how
slowly!—has been raising the human
race to a perception that Right is to be
preferred to Force. If Germany won,
naked brute force would reign in the
world.
Let us be careful to recognise that Ger-
many is not the only nation that has
preferred Force to Right. There is no


nation in the world that has not done so.
Our present Allies have done so again
and again. We ourselves have done so
again and again. But the criminal of to-day
is the Kaiser. He to-day is the champion
of Might against Right. And the duty
of our day is to fight him, to fight him
not only in the cause of our Allies, not
only in the cause of our Empire, but in
the cause of the Right; and to fight with
determination that in the days when we
triumph we will ourselves be true to the
cause for which now we fight.
If we take as proved the fact that Ger-
many willed war, we shall be led on to
undertake further studies. Why did
Germany will war? In order to be able
to answer this question, we should have
to undertake some considerable study of
the German mind. And, for myself, I
should have to face the problem, How are
we to reconcile two facts that seem to
be certain: the fact that the German
people possess qualities that we recognise
to be most admirable, qualities that have
made them our friends for centuries; and
the fact that the German Government
has willed this great crime, and appar-
ently with the consent of the German
people?
