

PRICE OUB SHILLIRTG-.
UTILISATION OF WATER
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
By GEORGE CHAMIER, M.lnst.C.E.
Jlbelatcie ;
PUBLISHED BY GEO. ROBERTSON & CO.,
103, KING WILLIAM STREET.
]. H. SHERRING & CO., PRINTERS, 27, CURRIE STREET,




UTILISATIOH OF WATER
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
By GEORGE CHAMIEE, M.lnst.C.E.
PUBLISHED BY GEO. ROBERTSON & CO.,
103, KING WILLIAM STREET.
J. H. SHERRING & CO., PRINTERS, 27, CURRIE STREET.




m /FSorc
s-s-rr
THE UTILISATION OE WATER IN SOUTH
AUSTRALIA.
Preliminary.
The question of conserving and utilising water is with us the
question of the day. The subject has for several years past been
kept prominently before the public, and has been made the
topic of important discussions, both in and out of Parliament,
but beyond partial and disconnected attempts by different
Governments to deal with the matter in some of its minor
phases only, it must be admitted that very little has been done,
and the results hitherto obtained have been quite inadequate to
reach the great public interest involved ; and now it is generally
recognised that the time has come for the adoption of some
systematic and comprehensive plan of operations, and for some
definite action on the part of the Government. This necessity
has been forced upon the colony by the stern visitation of hard
times, by the repeated failure of harvests, by the fearful
destruction of stock through drought, and from the consequences
of faulty and careless methods of cultivation.
There is no difficulty in tracing these disastrous effects from
their natural causes, but it is unfortunately the rule that
Governments and communities are only wise after the event, and
that remedial measures are generally the outcome of sore
misfortunes.
It required two terrible visitations of cholera to bring about
sanitary reform of London, and to give birth to the deep
drainage system ; and it was the appalling effects of the great
Indian famine, with its million of victims, that gave the main
impulse for the undertaking of that extensive system of irrigation
that now contributes in so marked a degree to the productiveness
and prosperity of that vast dominion.
There is no disguising the fact that in this colony the progress
of settlement has been much more rapid than safe. In their
excessive eagerness to embrace huge areas, the settlers have
exceeded their capabilities and their capital, and have neglected
the most necessary precautions against the natural vicissitudes
of climate and markets. Where the cultivation of land has been
concerned it has essentially been a question of “ quantity not


quality.” The very magnitude of the national estate, and the
cheapness of the land have contributed to its ruin, as every
principle of sound farming has been sacrificed to the greed for
cropping big allotments. Where a4O acre block, under good
cultivation and with a limited supply of water, could be made to
support a family in comfort, a square mile under the present
system has not sufficed, and the settlers have placed themselves
absolutely at the mercy of the seasons. Under present con-
ditions a succession of dry years means wide-spread ruin. The
policy of our Governments during past years has followed the
popular impulse, and every effort has been directed to opening
up a vast extent of country, and towards affording facilities of
communication. The rage for railways has been the “ruling
passion” of the colony.
At present the means of transit are surely ample enough, and
beyond the great scheme for piercing the mighty interior—a work
of time and, possibly, of the future—there are not many more
lines that could be constructed with any reasonable prospect of
proving reproductive. The question, therefore, of developing
the national resources, about which so much is said, is no
longer narrowed down as heretofore to the opening out of new
areas. There is no lack of land as it is ; the object must be to
increase its productiveness, and to turn it to some more useful
account. This can only be effected in a general way by a
different system of cultivation, depending to a great extent on
the utilisation of water, which at present runs unheeded to
waste. The question is of paramount importance, and I need
offer no excuse for inviting attention to its consideration.
There is a great deal to be done ; but in my opinion there is also
a great deal that people are clamoring for that had better be left
undone.
The subject will naturally divide itself in two principal parts
—The question of public policy involved; and, secondly, its
practical application, comprising points of hydraulic engineering
on which I trust to be able to afford some useful suggestions.
With reference to the first part I have no intention of trenching
on politics, or of reviewing the present Government Bill ;■ but it
will be necessary to consider how far State action in the matter
is justifiable or required by the conditions of the colony.
Legislation on Riparian Rights.
In the first place there is the question of Legislation to be
dealt with. The English common law with regard to riparian
rights has everywhere proved itself a stumbling-block in the
way of the utilisation of water for irrigation or other public
purposes. In America the legal aspect of the matter has lately
engrossed public attention, and the gravest issues are found to


be dependent upon it. It is therefore absolutely necessary,
unless water utilisation is only to bring grist to the lawyers, that
■any water conservation Act should place that question on a
■clear and definite footing. This has been fully recognised by the
Governments of Victoria and New South Wales. In the Bill
of the last-named colony this important point has been defined
in a simple and conclusive manner, establishing the principle
That all rivers and streams flowing in natural courses, and all
lakes and natural collections of water, belong to the State, and
may be utilized for public purposes.
The riparian owners retain, of course, a right to the use of the
streams for domestic purposes, and for watering stock, and they
retain the sole right to the water from springs and to all the
rainfall on their lands. However, it is not necessary to enter
into the details of the matter here.
Government Control of Waterworks.
The necessity for the Government taking a leading part in
the initiation, construction, and management of any system of
water utilisation is by no means due to the character of the
question involved, but simply to the present conditions and
usages of the colony. The necessity, if it exists, is much to be
deplored. In most countries individual energy and private
enterprise are the main factors in the carrying out of public
works. In America nearly all important works have been
accomplished by private enterprise, and there capital is always
.available for investment in remunerative undertakings. There
the State is seldom called upon to assist unless it is by means of
permissive legislation, by concessions of land or grants of
monopolies. In the great irrigation works of the Western
•States the Government has taken no part, and all that the sturdy
pioneers in those lands demanded from the administration was
to be let alone, to be allowed an unrestricted field for their
energies, and to be unhampered by pernicious legislation. New
countries progress, as a rule, not through the agency of laws,
but in spite of them. But it is not so here. With us private
.capital has only to a very limited extent been turned into the
channel of public works. With the exception of the Adelaide
tramways, a few short lines of suburban railways, some -wharves,
and minor undertakings, nearly every work of development and
public utility has been carried out by State agency. It is some-
what strange, and not at all commendable, that, while such an
enormous demand has been made on the Government, there has
been a corresponding disinclination on the part of the State to
promote and facilitate private enterprise of any description.
Concessions and grants-in-aid, which are so liberally given to
private companies in other countries for works of public utility,


Lave been most begrudgingly yielded by our Government, and
in most cases Lave been altogether withheld. Local bodies have
certainly not been trained in the school of self-help. Even such
a moderate measure as the Local Loans Bill, which -would have
authorised the Government to borrow money and lend it to
Corporations and District Councils at a low rate of interest on the
security of the rates, was twice thrown out by the Legislative
Council, and has not yet become law. In the financial conditions
that now obtain in the colony local bodies are almost debarred
from doing anything for the advancement of their material
interests. In this respect the colony is far behind the con-
servative Mother Country, where a State organisation has for
many years existed for the encouragement of local an.d private
enterprise. Colonists are generally quite astonished to learn
that in England many millions of pounds have been advanced by
the State to private individuals on landed security, for the
encouragement of agriculture, for drainage, irrigation, sanitary
works, and improvements of various descriptions. But beyond
lending a helping hand, the English Government will not
interfere. Here the Government is expected to do everything —
not only to furnish the funds, but to do the work. The Govern-
ment is called upon to bring in population and to settle it on the
ground; to built jetties ; to dredge out harbors and rivers; to
make railways, and provide all means of communication; to
educate the youth, from the infant school to the finishing
university; to contribute to all the requirements and attractions
of country towns; to subsidise institutes, libraries, pleasure-
grounds, &c., &c.; to attend to the sick; to nurse the destitute;
to feed the hungry ; to find work for the unemployed; and
generally to minister to all the wants, material and spiritual
(religion excepted), of the people. Happy country! to be thus
coddled and spoon-fed on Government pap.
The only sphere of action left for the development of personal
energy is that of “agitation.” Persons of an active turn of
mind may hold indignation meetings and form themselves into a
deputation. These are the safety valves for letting otf the steam
of concentrated energies. Whether this state of things is good
or bad it is not necessary to discuss. It exists, and it is not
likely to be departed from just at present. It is quite certain
therefore, that if anything is to be done for water conservation
in a general way it must be initiated by the action of the
Government. It is best to accept that fact at once. At the
same time —as it will be absolutely necessary for the Governmentto
draw the line somewhere- —it will be well to endeavor to discriminate
between the limits where in water utilisation the public work
must end and local enterprise must begin. I think that I will
be generally supported in the assertion that as far as possible a wide
field should be left for individual energy and local management.


Government to Advance Funds Required.
In whatever way the works for collecting and distributing
water may have to be carried out, the Government will have to
find the money. That fact will not, I am sure, be disputed.
There are certain propositions on which we are all agreed in this
colony, and that is one of them. Under these circumstances it
will be apparent that the Government must take a leading part
in the financial management of the whole concern. There must
he a central organisation, and all the works should be carried out
under one general and systematic plan of operations. The
ramifications will he extensive, but they should all emanate from
one head. The Grovernment could not wisely adopt the practice
of advancing public funds indiscriminately for the performance
of various schemes that might prove to be faulty or objectionable
in themselves, that might clash with one another, or from which
no adequate return was reasonably to be expected. It appears,
therefore, imperative that the supreme control should be vested
either in a Commission with a permanent head, or else in the
Government Hydraulic Department, properly reconstructed for
the direction of such a comprehensive field of operations. But
it by no means follows that all the works throughout the country
should be designed and carried out by public officers under one
huge State organisation.
Limitation of State Action.
There are many valid reasons for considering any system of
universal Government control, not only bad in principle, but
likely to prove highly unsatisfactory and enormously expensive
in practice. In the first place it is of vital importance that local
bodies and landed proprietors interested should be made to rely
to some extent on their own exertions, and to realise their
individual and collective responsibilities. However much the
Government might undertake to'do, there would always remain
a large extent of work for the settlers to accomplish, and it is
only by the exertions of the landowners that any system of
irrigation or of water utilisation can ever be turned to good
account. Self-help must be its mainstay. The great storage
reservoirs and the principal arteries of supply will have to be
undertaken by the Government, but the wide network of
subsidiary channels, impounding tanks, and distribution outlets
are essentially works for the people interested to construct and
to manage. Even in India, where the conditions of the country,
the poverty, ignorance, and utter dependence of the bulk of the
population has necessitated the utmost paternal control on the
part of the State, yet the Government is endeavoring to place
the management of water distribution works under the charge


of the village communities benefited by them. But apart from
the principles of policy involved, there would be the most serious
practical objections to the proposal that the Government should
undertake the construction of all the waterworks in the colony.
The task would be stupendous, and if carried out on “ the
Government stroke,” its cost would be enormous. Any such
attempt would necessitate the maintenance of a public depart-
ment on a scale of magnitude and expense that would soon be
objected to, and which would inevitably lead to serious abuses.
An office of this sort would also of necessity be amenable to
political influences. Something similar took place in our
neighboring colony when the Victorian Water Supply Depart-
ment was first started, and unfortunately history has a tendency
to repeat itself.
Example of Victorian TVater Supply Department.
That establishment was founded on a grand scale, and with
a great political flourish. Its organisation was most extensive, its
ramifications far reaching, its band of officers legion, its cost
incredible, and its results most unsatisfactory. The department
was to do everything, and everything was to be done at once.
An army of district engineers, assistants, surveyors, and inspec-
tors was scattered over the country. Schemes innumerable were
proposed, surveys made all over the country, and several under-
takings started. They were planned on a magnificent scale, and
the designs —on paper —were works of art. The expenses of the
office grew out of all proportion to results obtained, and soon
Parliament got alarmed and cried out to stop. Then came the
reaction, and a period of reports, and counter reports, official
enquiries, Select and Royal Commissions, and the rest. If all
this consideration had been given to the subject before operations
had been started it might have done some good. As it was the
country obtained a lot of advice and information after it was no
longer of any use. Then the department was reorganised, and
the attempt was made to lick this chaos into some sort of shape,
and eventually a few of the schemes, shorn of much of their
former grandeur, were partially carried out. It was then discovered
that in most cases the works were not wanted at all. Por while
the Government had been blundering for years over these
comprehensive schemes for a grand distribution of water, the
local bodies had taken the matter in hand, and had obtained
district supplies which mostly met all their requirements. The
big works, so tardily carried out, were almost useless to the
eommuuities for which they were intended. Most of the country
towns of Victoria are now well supplied through their individual
exertions, and this is as it should be.
When we look back on the evil fate that befell the early


career of the Victorian Water Supply Department it is not
difficult to trace the causes that brought about such deplorable
results. Political influence in the constitution of the office, and
ignorance and undue haste in its practical working, were at the
bottom of all its failures. The first cause corrupted the heart,
and the latter ones paralysed the efforts of the whole body. The
principle of action seemed to be to do the work first, and investi-
gate into its conditions and merits afterwards. Grand schemes
were started without scientific data ; streams were impounded
before they had been properly gauged; reservoirs were made
that had not sufficient supplies ; and canals were commenced to
lead where not wanted.* All this became quite apparent after-
wards. As Laurence Sterne remarks somewhere, “ Experience
is the devil; ” and in hydraulic undertakings this demon would
appear to exhibit rather more than the ordinary share of
“ cussedness.”f
We must hope that the Government undertakings of this
colony will be attended with better fortune, but there is no
denying the fact that all public works are carried out on a
system that is extremely expensive.
Lavish Expenditure on Public Works.
Both in design and construction Government Works are of
the most costly type. There is no medium; everything must
be perfect. The materials must be the best of their respective
kind ; the workmanship must be of the highest quality. All
works to be first-class; all according to stereotyped specifica-
tions ; all to be carried out under the most stringent super-
vision, and often under the most useless and vexatious restric-
tions.
Now, while some works of great importance are best carried
out on this system, there are other fields where it is essential to
go in for simplicity, cheapness, and dispatch. The cumbersome
and costly methods of the Government departments are then
not only useless but absolutely pernicious. This is especially
the case where the smaller works for the conservation and
* The above remarks must be understood to apply to the Yictorian
Water Supply Department as it -was first instituted only. When the
office was reconstructed under Mr. G. Gordon, M.lnst.C.E., much
successful work was done, and an able effort made to turn former blunders
to the best account possible.
f The Victorian Government has not been at all singular in this
respect. Nowhere have the lessons of experience been more accurately
felt and more dearly paid for than in India. The present high state of
efficiency of the Indian Hydraulic Department is the result of many years
of experience, and of numberless experiments. Many of the finest works in
that country are the outcome of a succession of previous failures.


distribution of water are concerned. There, every available
natural feature should be taken advantage of; all local
supplies and materials should be utilised as far as possible.
Makeshifts, which are never countenanced by the Government
departments, are often extremely useful and answer admirably.
Thus the trunk of a tree thrown across a small creek bed and
backed up with stones and debris, may suffice to check the
stream and turn it into an irrigating channel, where a properly
designed dam might cost several hundreds of pounds. The
Victorian irrigation Commissioners, who lately visited the
Western States of America, and whose valuable report I have
before me, were much struck with these facts, and make special
mention of the extraordinary ingenuity displayed by the
American engineers in adopting simple and inexpensive
expedients for impounding and distributing water. Many of
their works are marvels of economy. The structures erected
are often of a temporary character, and not designed to with-
stand exceptionally heavy floods, but they are extremely
serviceable nevertheless. The massive works that would be
proof against all the forces of nature could only be constructed
at an enormous cost, and it pays much better under these
circumstances to keep putting up useful makeshifts than to
build a work that would stand for all time. It is a question of
the interest on the outlay. In many parts of India the natives
obtain their water supply by throwing earthen dams across the
beds of torrents for impounding the summer flow. The winter
floods wash away these banks, which have thus to be rebuilt
every year. The work is never-ending, but the expense is small,
whereas the interest alone on the capital required for permanent
works would be very heavy. But temporary works of any
description can never be adopted by a Government department;
that would be against all the rules. With Government, money
is no object; perfection alone is sought for. The aim is high,
but it requires a big purse. This is the reason why public
works rarely pay, and why Governments can never compete
successfully against private enterprise. I might give many
instances of the startling manner in which public funds have
been squandered on this principle of “ the best of its kind,”
but have no wish to indulge in such criticisms, and, in most
cases, it has been the system that was to blame.
Government Procrastination
In addition to the great expense of works carried out by the
Government, there is the inevitable delay and waste of time
involved. The officers are so bound up with red-tape that they
are hampered at every move. Everything must be done in a
certain routine, and go through the Circumlocution office. Our


Bailway Department is well conducted, nevertheless it takes
longer to make the permanent survey of a railway in this colony
than in America it would occupy to complete the whole under-
taking and open it for traffic.*
Political Influence .
There is a still greater objection to the policy of universal
State control of public works, which arises from the pernicious
effect of political influence, which insinuates itself everywhere,
and is everywhere detrimental to the public interest. South
Australians are rather given to boasting that patronage and
political log-rolling are not evils we suffer from to any extent.
It may be so, but one has only to look at the long array of
unproductive public works throughout the colony —jetties that
were not wanted and are hardly ever used; railways that
compete against one another in a ruinous manner; grand
stations and other public buildings where there is no population—
to conclude that even in South Australia political influences
have not always been of a beneficial character.
Action of Local Bodies.
To apply this system of Grovernment control to all the
hydraulic works of the colony would therefore be a fatal
mistake. Local bodies should be taught to help themselves, and
all minor works for the supply of country towns, and for the
distribution of water in districts, should be left to local enter-
prise under the direction of shire councils or water trusts.
These bodies will need assistance from the State, and money
will have to be advanced to them on the security of the rates,
for they are powerless to raise capital otherwise. The local
bodies interested, on whose intelligence and energies some
reliance must be placed if any good results are to be obtained,
should also receive assistance and advice from the Hydraulic
Department; their schemes for water conservation should be
subject to approval, and some general supervision might be
exercised by the Grovernment, but without interference wi«th
local responsibilities. I am aware that it has been objected to
* It has, I believe, been officially reported that it would take at least
ten years to make the permanent survey of the proposed Transcontinental
Kail way. Now, that great scheme, if undertaken by an enterprising
contracting Company, could be finished, and opened for through traffic to
Port Darwin in much less time. Persons, who discourse a lot of platitudes
about the advantage of all works of public utility being carried out by
the State, either do not comprehend, or else wilfully shut their eyes to
the radical difference existing, in time and money, between Government
work and the action of private enterprise.


this proposal that the local bodies do not possess either the
experience or the organisation required for the carrying out of
works of any magnitude. They are said to be anxious to spend
money in their respective districts, but they are hardly fit to be
entrusted with its expenditure. Also, that these shire councils
may not be able or willing to secure the services of competent
men, and that in all probability those wretchedly-paid and hardly-
used individuals called district clerks, who often combine the
duties of engineer with those of board secretaries, rate
collectors, inspectors of nuisances, forest rangers, registrar of
dogs, and a few other useful occupations—these universally-
qualified persons —may be called upon to control a large expen-
diture of public money on work concerning which, notwith-
standing their varied acquirements, they cannot be supposed to
know anything whatever. There is some force in this objection,
but of two evils one must choose the least, and it might easily be
provided in the Act that only properly-qualified officers should
be employed on the supervision of the works. There is such a
qualification in Victoria, where shire engineers have to pass a
very stiff: examination before being allowed to practice.
No doubt mistakes will be made in any case, and this country
will have to buy its experience as other countries have had to
do. Nevertheless, it is surely better for local bodies to accept
at once the duties and responsibilities which eventually they
must have to bear, than to waste their energies in clamoring for
Grovernment assistance and thronging every Ministerial door
with deputations.
11.
Examples from other Countries.
Before dealing with the practical application of the subject
under consideration to the requirements of this colony, it may
be well to take a cursory glance at the most striking effects that
have been realized in some other countries, with a view to
forming some idea of the capabilities of this land for similar
treatment. Unfortunately there is much difficulty in establishing
comparisons under circumstances that will be found to vary in
the most essential particulars, and it will be necessary to
exercise considerable caution in drawing conclusions from
results that may have been obtained under conditions differing
materially from our own.


Irrigation in France,
Irrigation in the South of Prance has been carried to great
perfection, and forms a prominent feature in that wonderfully
fertile land. The sources are derived from numerous rivers and
rivulets that meander through the country in all directions and
discharge a never failing flow.
Water being abundant, it is only a question of distribution,
which is done by means of a complete network of canals, some of
them of large dimensions, and which embrace wide agricultural
districts. The farms that abut against these distributing
channels obtain their supplies through sluices that are opened
in rotation along the line, for regulated periods, and at fixed
intervals. The laud owners, therefore, have to take their turn
it comes, attend to the proper distribution of the water, and
make the best use of it they can.
Prance is blessed with a bright climate and a plentiful rainfall,
and consequently the necessity for artificial watering is not so
marked as in less favored countries, yet the results of irrigation
have been highly remunerative.
The quantity of water is not stinted, and the supplies afforded
are probably largely in excess of requirements. The allowance
fixed by the administration is generally 6,000 tons of liquid per
acre irrigated, for the summer months, which is more than
required for rice cultivation in India. One tenth of this allow-
ance has been found sufficient for the irrigation of cereals in
some countries. The charge for water supply varies greatly in
different localities, but may be taken to average about £1 per
acre per annum. Several of the largest irrigating canals have
been constructed by private Companies, and others have been
carried out by the State. The general control of the vast
irrigation system is in the hands of a Grovernment Department,
but the works of distribution are under the management of
Communes interested, much on the same plan as proposed for
the Water Trusts in this Colony.
An interesting feature in the river engineering of Prance
relates to the system of moveable weirs adopted. The country
is much subjected to floods, and at such times the whole carrying
capacities of the rivers are fully required to prevent inundations.
Permanent obstructions in the courses of the streams would
therefore be attended with considerable danger, and it is
necessary that the weirs should be of a type that admit of being
raised or depressed according to requirements, and with great
rapidity of action. These conditions have brought about some
striking innovations in the construction of moveable weirs, which
have been successfully applied to large rivers and to powerful
torrents. Streams that were quite ungovernable before, and the
frequent cause of widespread disaster, are now entirely under


control and even rendered available for inland navigation. By*
means of these moveable weirs the water level in rivers can be
raised from Bto 13 feet above its nominal height, and the stream
thus rendered available for supplying irrigating channels, working
locks, and for motive power. I feel convinced that this system
could be successfully applied to the Eiver Murray, and be made
the means of solving the difficult problem of its navigation at
all times. The fall of that river is so slight that a moveable
weir situated near the lakes would give a navigable depth of
water for two hundred miles or more, and the cost of such works
is comparatively small.
In the North of Italy irrigation is extensively adopted, and
follows very much the same lines as in France, There are
56 main canals in Piedmont, drawing their supplies from twelve
i ivers, and irrigating about 3| millions of acres.
In Lombardy the area irrigated is nearly the same.
Spain.
In Spain the physical conditions are different, and resemble
much more nearly those of this colony. With a dry soil, a hot
climate, and a scanty rainfall, the country is poorly productive
without artificial watering, but has been made to afford splendid
returns under irrigation.
Unfortunately, ignorance and want of enterprise in the people
have restricted these benefits to a comparatively small area,
and the principal irrigation schemes in operation have been
designed by English engineers and carried out by British capital.
Marvellous as the effect of irrigation is in Spain, and notwith-
standing the well-known fact that it has caused the land irrigated
to rise from ten to twenty times its former value, yet it is
reckoned that not five per cent, of the cultivated land is
artificially watered. The principal water supply is obtained
from rivers, but a small extent of land is also irrigated from
reservoirs, of which there are some remarkable specimens to be
seen. The cost of water varies greatly, from a few shillings to
several pounds per acre, according to locality. On the Benares
Canal —to quote a statement of Mr. Bateman’s, the distinguished
Engineer of the works —“ the rate paid for water distributed
was 28s. an acre. For that the tenants were entitled to twelve
irrigations in a year, each irrigation amounting to 2 % inches in
depth of water, or a total of 30 inches in the course of the year.
The rate was cheerfully paid, as well it might be, because the
increased value of the land was at least sevenfold —or nearer the.
average to say tenfold; for land sold for £6 per acre before
irrigation would sell for £6O after it was irrigated.”
This was in 1868. Since then, however, through the constant
impoverishment of the soil by bad farming, and the absence of'


fertilising restoratives, the returns fell olf to such an extent that
the undertaking ceased to be remunerative, and brought about
the failure of the Company. This result would go to prove
that, however beneficial the application of water may be, yet
the land can only sustain its increased productiveness under a
system of good farming.
The capital expended on canals and waterworks in Spain
represents an average cost of about £5 per acre irrigated, and
the value of a flow of water, equal to a discharge of one cubic
foot per second, was fixed by the Grovernment for the Benares
Canal at £375 per annum, which is not much above the average
value in some other countries.
Although the results of irrigation in Spain have in most cases
well repaid the labor expended upon it, yet as speculative
undertakings these works have rarely proved remunerative.
The same results occurred in India, where, instead of the
magnificent returns anticipated, only very moderate interest on
the capital expended has hitherto been realised. The benefits
are reaped by the cultivators of the soil, and the increased
prosperity of the country bears witness to the immense
advantages received; but the actual return on the outlay
incurred has generally been small.
Spain is distinguished by possessing some of the most remark-
able masonry dams in the world.
These works, of which several are of considerable antiquity,
are mostly of enormous bulk, but have not provedto be correspond-
ingly strong, and several instances of failure have occurred. In
1802 the huge dam De Puentes was washed away, causing great
devastation.
India.
The example of Indian irrigation is often quoted, but there is
really so little in common between the conditions of that part of
the world and South Australia, that the subject is almost foreign
to our enquiry. There is very little to be learnt from India that
has any practical application to our requirements. The climate
and features of the country are quite different; the products of
cultivation, the style of agriculture, the tenure of land, the
condition of the people, and the prices of labor are altogether
foreign to our ideas and circumstances.
Irrigation of some sort is indispensable for the cultivation of
the soil in most parts of India, and we find that the utilisation
of water, by means of tanks and distribution channels, was of
great antiquity there. Although carried out in a primitive
manner, yet the remains of immense works for water conserva-
tion give evidence of the magnitude of the ancient development.
The great modern works have mostly been undertaken by the
G-overnment, or by Companies on the State guarantee system.


They consist, for the most part, in large navigable canals, that
have their source in mighty rivers, and afford copious irrigation
to an area estimated at over ten millions of acres.
As the Imperial Government is, practically, the universal
landlord of the country, it is evident that public works are
simply a means of improving the State property, and the indirect
benefits and revenue derived from them, do far more than
compensate for any deficiency in the actual return on capital
expended.* Besides, it was cheaper to irrigate the land than to
have to support millions of a starving population every few
years. But apart from the State irrigation works, the bulk of
the cultivators obtain a sufficiency of water from wells; raising
and distributing the liquid by hand labor.
Water is also conserved throughout many districts in shallow
tanks, of which there are enormous numbers. In some localities
the dams are studded about so thickly that they appear to
occupy nearly as much space as the cultivated land, and it is no
great exaggeration to state that these shallow tanks do little
more than irrigate the extent of their own water surfaces.
Some storage reservoirs of great capacity have also been
constructed by the Indian Government, but the extent of land
irrigated by them is comparatively small. The remains of
ancient works, however, would go to prove that in old times, the
system of tank irrigation was carried out on an immense scale.
The celebrated “ Ponairy ” tank, in Trichinopoly, is described as
having had an embankment of 30 miles in length, and a probable
water area of 60 to 80 square miles. It has been reckoned that
previous to the British Eule there were, in a portion of the
Madras Presidency alone, at least 30,000 miles of reservoir
embankments, and not less than 300,000 separate masonry
works. But labor was cheap in those days, on the exceptional
occasions when it was paid for at all.
Western America.
Attention has lately been drawn to the extraordinary develop-
ment of irrigation in the Western States of North America, by
the interesting report published by the Victorian Eoyal Com-
mission on water supply.
* From an official return published in 1876, it appeared that the Indian
Government had expended on irrigation works, up to that date, a total sum
of £15,562,655. The total annual receipts then were £1,228,993, and the
working expenses £396,750, thus returning to the state 5.33 per cent,
interest on the capital outlay. But this includes both direct and indirect
revenue. In other words, the Indian Government credits the Irrigation
Department with the additional taxation received in consequence of the
increased value of the land affected. If such a system could be adopted
here it might put a very different face on the revenue returns from Public
Works.


Immense tracks of land, subject like our own to a deficient
and variable rainfall, and incapable under natural conditions of
supporting reproductive cultivation, have been turned into fertile
districts, where plenty abounds, and where farming of a high
order can be carried out with safety and profit.
Truly the conditions are highly favorable, for the country is
watered by numerous rivers of perennial flow, that are fed by the
snowfields of the Eocky Mountains. Thus the source is abundant
and never-failing, and the enterprise of the settlers was not long in
turning this advantage to useful account. The progress of
settlement has been wonderful to behold, and the benefits of
irrigation have nowhere been exhibited with such rapid and
magical effect; for it may truly be said that wherever the
application of artificial watering has taken place, the whole face
of the land has been altered.
What was evidently no slight cause of astonishment to the
Victorian Commissioners was the startling fact that these
marvellous results had been brought about by private enterprise,
unaided and alone. Eoads, railways, canals, flourishing town-
ships, and thriving industries have sprung up throughout the
land by the intelligence and energies of the people, without
State aid, without Q-overnment control or pettifogging official
interference. All that the settlers have requested from the
State was a little legislation, mainly to relieve them from the
pernicious effect of old standing laws on riparian rights, that are
not applicable to their present circumstances. This modest
request, however, they are not likely to get without serious
trouble, and at the present time the legal imbroglio is a standing
menace to the further progress of the country. The community
is in the hands of the lawyers, and under those circumstances it
may well be imagined that its prospects are not lively.
One useful lesson to be learnt from the effects of irrigation
in the Western States is the benefit to be derived from small
holdings under a high state of cultivation. The cropping of
large areas, although remunerative, is gradually giving way
before “ intense culture,” comprising the far more profitable
production of root crops, fodder plants, lucerne paddocks, and
extensive vineyards and orchards. The settlers are turning their
attention from the everlasting wheat to growing beef and pork,
to fruit-raising, wine-making, and to numerous small industries,
from which a sure and paying revenue can be derived.
Lucerne fields can be made to fatten from 10 to 20 head of
sheep to the acre, and the profits from orchards are said to
average £4O to £5O per acre. Under proper management, and
with the advantage of water supply, a small holding of 10 acres
is considered sufficient to afford the means of support to an in-
dustrious family, and a 50 acre allotment constitutes a large farm,
requiring both capital and hired labor to be worked to advantage.


It is truly remarked that “ with irrigation there are no had
seasons,” hut even with that inestimable benefit the ground
requires careful tillage, a rotation of crops, and a liberal supply
of manure, in order to maintain good returns. The secret of the
American farmers’ success in the Western States lies to a large
extent in the variety of production, and the knowledge displayed
in turning the land to the most profitable uses. The prices paid
for water vary greatly according to circumstances and localities.
In many cases the land is taken up by Companies in large blocks
and retailed to the settlers in small allotments with water rights
attached. In other cases a number of farmers will combine to
undertake the necessary works for tapping some river in the
vicinity and irrigating their lands. As a rule, the main sources
are provided by Water Companies, in whose hands are the
principal irrigating canals, and who, in consequence of the
abundance of the supply and the magnitude of the demand, are
enabled to furnish the requirements of the cultivators at very
low rates. In some instances an almost unlimited quantity of
water is supplied for 7s. per acre per annum, but the average
yearly rate charged approximates nearer to 15s. per acre. Land,
which in its arid state only brings £1 per acre, rises to a value
of from £lO to £l5 per acre when brought within reach of
irrigation.
Algeria.
The natural conditions and requirements of many parts of
Algeria bear a remarkable similarity to those of this colony, and
there is probably more to be learnt from the experience obtained
in that country than from any of the foregoing examples. The
elevated table lands of Algeria mostly comprise dry and arid
plains, of which large portions form a veritable desert, and
others, although capable of cultivation, can only yield light
and precarious crops without artificial watering. The rivers,
although numerous, are mostly mountain torrents which are
swollen by winter rains, but run almost dry during the summer
months. The rainfall only averages 15 inches per annum, and
the soil is so thirsty that it has been calculated only one-thirty-
seventh of the precipitation appears in the streams, whereas in
France the annual volume carried away by the watercourses
varies from one-half to one-fourth of the rainfall.
Under these circumstances, the importance of adopting some
method of water conservation for irrigation purposes was early
recognized by the French G-overnment, and as the only practical
way was by means of large impounding reservoirs, this plan has
been adopted and tried on a scale of great magnitude. The
construction of huge masonry dams in the beds of torrential
streams is, however, attended with great expense and serious
risk ; and notwithstanding the fact that French engineers have


made quite a specialty in this class of building, and have
achieved some works of great renown, yet there is also a long
record of failures to chronicle. Within the last five years three
of the largest Algerian dams have hurst. The greatest of these,
the Habra Reservoir, was considered one of the finest structures
of the kind in the world. The weir was 1,608 feet in length and
116 feet in height; it was built with random rubble in hydraulic
mortar, and the design of the work was considered perfect.
The capacity of the Reservoir was 6,600,000,000 gallons, and it
was estimated that after allowing for losses by evaporation and
soakage, there would be sufficient water for the irrigation of over
30,000 acres. The construction of the dam was commenced in
1865 and finished in 1871, and it was built by a Company in
return for large concessions of land from the Government.
In 1885 a tremendous flood, caused by a rainfall of 6| inches,
within a very short space of time, washed over the top of the
dam and occasioned its failure, involving the destruction of
several native villages and the loss of some hundreds of lives.
Besides the sources derived from large reservoirs, an immense
quantity of water available for irrigation has been obtained by
means of artesian wells. The subteranian supplies have been
tapped in innumerable places, and the flow from these borings
has already produced a marked improvement in the aspect of
these arid regions, and caused many an oasis to spring up in the
desert.
The example of irrigation in Algeria from subterranean sources
should prove very valuable to this colony, where it seems
probable that similar physical conditions exist. But the infor-
mation possessed on this subject is very limited, and will have to
be derived from future developments.
111.
Water Supply for JPastoral Districts.
In dealing with the practical aspect of the question, as
applied to this colony, it will evidently have to be considered
under widely different conditions, and for a variety of purposes.
In the outlying pastoral districts the demand for water
conservation is mainly confined to the requirements of stock,
whereas, within the cultivated areas, the necessity for more
abundant supplies for farming wants and domestic purposes are
urgently felt, and the broader question of utilizing water for


irrigation assumes great importance. With reference to the
first-named requirements it is not necessary to say much.
The squatters have shown considerable enterprise in obtaining
water by means of wells and tanks, and it has been estimated
that about two millions of pounds have already been expended
in the colony out of private capital in this direction. The
possibility of obtaining abundant supplies by means of artesian
wells has been proved in a few instances, and a wide field for
future development may arise from this source, and produce
results similar to those already realised in Algeria.
The G-overnment is called upon to provide Water Conservation
for travelling stock on the main roads, and on new areas that it
is proposed to settle, and undoubtedly public funds could
advantageously be expended in seeking for water by deep boring.
Nevertheless it would appear that private enterprise is quite
willing and quite capable of engaging in this work without State
aid, providing that fixity of tenure is given, and the squatters are
duly secured the value of their improvements.
With reference to the system of tank excavation that has been
adopted, although successfully carried out in many districts, yet
it is a most restricted and costly method of conserving water. A
yard of earth has to be taken out for every yard of water
impounded. More attention should have been given to the
selection of suitable sites for storage reservoirs, where dams
could be made to retain large bodies of water at a comparatively
small cost. Such dams need not be built in creek beds, which
are generally quite unsuitable for the purpose, but in hollows
and depressions on falling ground. They should be fed by means
of outstretching catchment channels, that may be made to extend
for considerable distances, tapping the creeks, and gathering the
drainage of many square miles. It is surprising how little
attention this subject has received, and what a lot of
money must have been wasted through ignorance of the most
rudimentary principles of hydraulic engineering.
Supply for Settled Districts
Turning now to Water Conservation in the more settled
districts, we find as a rule that much ignorance, neglect, and
improvidence prevails. Where the Government has not stepped
in to make some provision, little or nothing has been done, and
not even the simplest precautions have been taken for preserving
water. The so-called tanks are merely holes, containing quite
inadequate supplies, and in which the water frequently becomes
so contaminated as to be utterly unfit for consumption.
The picture is a melancholy one, and at times it displays
features that are positively revolting.
The reports published some years ago by the late Hydraulic


Engineer (Mr. Oswald Brown) on the water supplies of Yorke’s
Peninsula revealed a deplorable state of things. To the utter
absence of every reasonable provision was added a culpable
neglect of the few works constructed by the Government and
intrusted to the care of the District authorities. The inhabitants
of the towns would appear to depend mostly on the rain water
collected from the roofs, and stored in underground tanks.
When this precarious supply runs short it is replenished from
the offscourings of the roads, and it is quite a common thing
for the flow of the street gutters to be diverted into the house
tanks. This shocking pollution might alone account for much
of the fever that has prevailed in these localities, and it would
be quite sufficient to bring about a fatal epidemic.
A pure water supply is essential to every condition of public
health; it is the first and foremost of all sanitary considerations,
and what the neglect of these necessary precautions may have
cost the country in human lives it would be difficult to estimate.
But the difficulty has been to obtain water at all, and the
question of its purity has been deemed quite a secondary matter.
In the hills, the practice of obtaining water from shallow
wells is decidedly bad, and considered dangerous in England,
where it is strongly denounced by the Health authorities.
Requirements of Agricultural Areas.
In the farming districts the settlers are constantly driven to
great straits for water, and much of their time is spent in con-
veying it for considerable distances. The yearly expenditure
in time, labor, and money incurred throughout the colony in
carting water must represent a very large amount—an amount
which would go a long way towards paying the interest on the
whole outlay required for a system of Water Conservation over
the length and breadth of the agricultural portions of this
country. But the fatal dependence on the Government for all
public needs has stifled every feeling of self-reliance, and has
left the settlers for the greater part in want and helplessness.
There has been no organization for carrying out works of
public utility. In the agricultural areas reservoirs are rarely
seen; wells and natural waterholes are mainly relied upon for
a scanty and often unwholesome supply, and when these fail
the settlers have no resource left but to make piteous appeals
to the Government for help to save them from actual water
famine.
Now, although some portions of the settled districts are not
favorably situated for Water Conservation on a large scale, and
afford great difficulties in the way of irrigation, yet, for the
limited supplies needed for domestic uses, watering stock, and
farming purposes, there are generally ample resources available.


Sites for Reservoirs.
Suitable sites for small reservoirs are plentiful; but they
would need to be selected with judgment, and after a careful
examination of the surrounding levels and features of the
country.
Indeed, the Surveyor’s level may be said to be the principal
arbiter in all such matters. It alone can establish the feasibility
of any scheme, or afford the necessary data for any reliable
conclusions. As before stated, the creek beds and river courses
in this country rarely offer favorable conditions for the formation
of storage reservoirs. They are mostly narrow and tortuous,
and of very small capacity within the limits of their banks.
These creeks, which run dry in summer, are yet often flooded
during the rainy season. At such times they resemble swollen
torrents, and bring down immense quantities of water. They
are, therefore, difficult to deal with, as any permanent weirs
across their beds need to be works of great strength, and pro-
vided with ample sluices and extensive by-washes. Moreover,
the quantity of water that would be impounded by such means
would, in the great majority of cases, be comparatively small.
Under these circumstances, fixed weirs in the river beds are not
to be recommended for water conservation purposes, and the
plan to be adopted is to seek for reservoir sites away from the
creeks, in natural depressions of the ground or small valleys.
In such situations earthen dams will be found most suitable for
impounding large quantities of water.
Earthen Earns.
These works, when of moderate dimensions, are very easily
and cheaply constructed, but when the depth of water exceeds
from 30 to 40 feet, they need to be carried out with many
precautions. Small dams should have a top width of not less
than 6 feet, and side slopes of about 2 to 1; but for large
structures it is usual to give as flat a slope as 3 to 1 for the
insida, and it is also quite necessary to protect that slope with
pitching or rough stone metalling against the ripple of the water.
Earthen dams should be built up in the layers thoroughly
beaten down and consolidated, and when these precautions are
taken puddling is not always required, but for large works a
puddle wall is essential. In most cases the bottom surface of
the reservoir had better be left intact.
Cost of Impounding Water.
Works of this description could be constructed at a very
small cost, as the necessary materials are everywhere met with,


and they afford the simplest and cheapest method of conserving
water. It is, of course, impossible in a general outline of this
sort, to arrive at any reliable estimate as to the cost of
impounding water, but some guidance is afforded by taking the
average outlay incurred in countries similarly situated. The
cost of storing water in Victoria, taking the general average of
the principal Q-overnment reservoirs, has been given as £35 per
million gallons, and I see no reason why this amount should be
exceeded for properly constructed works in this colony.* We
have next to consider the sources of supply. These, I believe,
are to be found in the numberless creeks which intersect the
country districts in all directions, and from which water could
easily be diverted, and conveyed into the reservoirs. To effect
this purpose, temporary obstructions, in the shape of moveable
weirs, would have to be built in the creek beds, by which means
the streams could be dammed back and raised to the level of the
banks, and diverted into artificial channels.
System of Local Works.
Such a system as here indicated could be very generally
adopted throughout the country and would be found to meet all
the requirements of water supply for the agricultural districts.
There are, of course, exceptional localities, where these methods
would not apply, and where other means would have to be
adopted, but as a rule I am convinced that the principle of local
storage reservoirs, fed from local sources, is the correct one, and
would prove to be far preferable and much less expensive than
any attempt at dealing with the question on a comprehensive
and extended scheme of water supply. This has been fully
exemplified by the experience of our neighbours in Victoria,
For while a “ National ” undertaking, like the great Coliban
scheme, with its big reservoir and its 60 miles of main channel,
is a costly failure, and only pays about 1 per cent, interest on
the capital 63 pended on its construction, yet on the other hand
the numerous smaller works carried out by Town Councils and
local bodies 1 ave proved to be very successful and have given
highly remunerative results.
In his great speech on the introduction of the present Water
Supply and Irrigation Bill, before the Victorian Legislative
Assembly, the Hon. Mr. Deakin made the following remarks on the
* This amount may appear excessive, but the early works of this
description by the Victorians were carried out in a scale of great extrava-
gance. Several of the large impounding reservoirs that it is now proposed
to construct in Victoria, are estimated to cost only about 083 per million
gallons stored. This is a great come down. In India, where labor is very
cheap, the average cost of a large number of storage reservoirs has only
been about £2 per million gallons.


success which has attended the water policy o£ domestic supply
in the country districts of Victoria. He said —“ I would like to
show how successful it has been. There are, at the present time,
under these domestic "Water Supply Acts twenty-three trusts in
existence. To these twenty-three trusts a sum of £478,000 has been
advanced, and, besides this, there have been further grants
towards head works of £57,000. These twenty-three trusts have
accomplised a work in this Colony which I believe is not exactly
paralelled in any other country in the world . . . Nowhere
can we find any trace of such a scheme as we have in Victoria, a
scheme which is conspicuously successful . . . for a State
expenditure of little over half a million, we have it on the best
authority that those districs have reaped a value of more than a
million and a half. We have, of course, the additional produce,
and all the additional conveniences of life that can be gained by
this expenditure; but we have also the fact that in borrowing
this money we have done what any private person would feel
bound to do in regard to his own property. By judicious
borrowing we have trebled, if not quadrupled, in the value so
secured the amount of money advanced .”
The splendid returns obtained in Victoria are not due, in any
way, to exceptionally favourable conditions, but entirely to the
system adopted, which is founded on the principle of independent
local supply, obtained through local agencies—the principle for
which lam contending. Underja similar system there is no reason
for supposing that this Colony mightfnot be able to reap equally
favorable results.
No doubt, the physical conditions of the two countries differ
considerably in some respects, and with relation to irrigation on a
large scale we do not command the resources of our neighbour, but
for themuch more limited supply requiredfor domestic andfarming
purposes the circumstances are much about the same. I can speak
with some certainty on that point, having been professionally
engaged for several years on Hydraulic Works in Victoria.
Economy of Local Works.
To those persons who have not given much attention to this
subject, or who have formed their conceptions from the massive,
elaborate, and costly G-overnment undertakings, it may appear
almost incredible in what a simple and inexpensive manner the
necessary works for conserving and distributing water may be
carried out.
I will further on describe one of the most useful and
economical types of moveable weir, which I believe might be
extensively adopted in this colony for damming back the water
in the creeks, and diverting the streams into catchwater and
irrigating channels. With reference to the latter, they need only


be simple ditches that are made to follow the contour of the
country, with sufficient fall to cause a steady flow. Many
circumstances have to be taken into consideration in determining
the inclination to be given to these channels, so as to prevent
scouring on the one hand or silting up on the other. In most
cases the fall will depend on the dimensions of the conduit and
the nature of the ground traversed; thus, for large canals a fall
of fifteen inches to the mile is sufficient to cause a good current,
while for small ditches inclinations of from eight to ten feet to
the mile are generally found most suitable.
The quantity of water that can be conveyed in a good-sized
ditch would astonish persons who have not given the subject
special attention, and the great distance to which water may be
carried by such means is equally surprising. Thus a ditch 3 feet
wide at the bottom, 3 feet deep, with side slopes of 1 to 1, and a
fall of 8 feet to the mile, may be calculated to discharge over
40,000,000 gallons in 24 hours ; and I have known cases where
little ditches no larger than street gutters have been made to
carry water for distances of over twenty miles. Earthern channels,
as a rule, leak considerably at first, and lose a great deal by
absorption, but after a time they generally become watertight.
Example of Economical Work.
As an example of the extreme simplicity and economy with
which works of this character may be constructed and made to
answer their purpose, I will briefly describe the water supply of
a small country town in Victoria, upon which I was called upon
to report. The storage reservoir had been located in a flat gully
distant about 12 miles from the town in a hilly and wooded
district. It was fed by several catchwater drains that skirted
the surrounding hills, and collected the drainage of a sufficiently
wide gathering ground.
The dam was of earth, about 30 feet high, some 10 feet wide
at the top, and with side slopes as steep as to 1. The whole
thing had been done in a rough and ready way, but the bank had
been well puddled and it held tight. The outlet was simply a
12-inch earthenware pipe through the dam, and the appliances
for working it merely a sluiceboard at the end of a long pole
that could be raised or lowered from a timber staging. The
supply conduit was a little ditch that had been cut at the cost of
a few shillings per chain, and that went contouring about the
country for some twenty miles, rounding spurs and heading
gullies, crossing rocky ground and cultivated fields until it
reached the high land opposite the township, where it dis-
charged into a small service tank. The whole cost of the
undertaking was a mere trifle, but it had answered its purpose
fairly well, and kept the town supplied with water. Now a


scheme of this kind, had it been carried out by the Grovernment
in the usual orthodox style, with massive headworks and iron
mains, would probably have run into some £30,000 or more, and
necessitated a heavy tax on the ratepayers to pay the interest
alone.
It is not to he understood that I am advocating the “ cheap
and nasty ” style of work, or that I believe in waterworks being
carried out in a trumpery manner. I have given the above
instance as one of extreme economy, as a contrast to the lavish
extravagance of the Grovernment waterworks. But there is a
happy medium in all things. Between an earthenware pipe to
cost about £5 and a “ horse-shoe tunnel ” with iron mains, as at
the Kapunda Reservoir, to cost some £3,000, there is surely
plenty of room for a practical engineer to design a substantial
work at a reasonable expense.
IV.
National Works
I am convinced that the greater part of the settled districts
of this colony admit of being fairly well supplied with water at
no great outlay, provided the matter he taken up in a proper
spirit, and suitable methods adopted with a view to economy.
But it is open to serious doubt whether there is much room for
the application of the “bold and comprehensive” principle in
water supply, or for what they term in Victoria “ national
works.” W e are met here at the outset with a very great
difficulty, and one largely affecting the question of cost —the
scarcity ot‘ water. In order to establish any extensive scheme
of water distribution, it is necessary to draw from great sources,
such as afforded by the perennial flow of rivers, or to depend on
storage reservoirs of immense capacity. The former resource is
denied to this country, as “ our only river ” —the Murray —is
unfortunately cut off from the most important settlements of
the colony by a high dividing range. The latter resource is to
some extent within our means, but it is attended with great
difficulties, and it also requires natural configurations of the
ground which are very rarely available.
Large Storage Reservoirs.
In one respect, indeed, there are decided advantages to be
gained from reservoirs of very large dimensions, for, as a rule


the greater their capacity, the smaller becomes the cost of
impounding water. The proportionate losses from evaporation
and absorption are also much less in deep reservoirs than in
shallow ones. But on the other hand, the construction of dams
of great magnitude involves a very heavy outlay, and these
undertakings are beset with dangers and uncertainties.
•Suitable sites for artificial lakes are seldom to be found, and.
even where favorable conditions do obtain, there are many other
essential points to be considered.
Risk of Percolation.
The impermeable character of the ground has first to be
ascertained, and that fact can rarely be established with certainty
before trial. Many important works have failed through this
cause, and the liability to percolation increases very much with
the depth of water.
The leakage of the Hope Yalley Reservoir is an example close
at hand, that involved much trouble and heavy expense, yet in
that instance the extent of basin was comparatively limited. In
the case of large storage reservoirs it would be impracticable to
attempt puddling the whole of the water-bearing surface.
Sufficiency of Supply.
The next most important consideration relates to the extent
and description of the catchment area to ensure a sufficient
supply, and on this question much uncertainty exists. It
involves an estimate of the quantity of rainfall to be relied
upon; and I need hardly remark that in this country all such
calculations must be based on doubtful assumptions. It is
necessary to take into account, not the yearly rainfall only, but
the precipitation at different periods of the year, taking the
average results of a long period of time. In England it is usual
to accept the mean of the three successive driest years, but it is
doubtful how far that principle would apply here. But that is
not all. Griven a stipulated rainfall over a well defined gathering
ground, it remains to be ascertained what proportion of such
downpour will flow off the surface and be available for storage
purposes. On this point there is unfortunately very little
reliable data to be obtained, and it would be almost impossible
to strike an average with any degree of certainty. Under these
circumstances, reliance can only be placed on the tabulated
results of careful gaugings of all the influent streams, wherever
it is proposed to erect large works for impounding water, and
such gaugings would need to extend over periods of several
years.
I am not aware that any systematic series of observations


have as jet been taken in reference to this matter. Indeed, the
whole subject has hitherto with us been treated with utter
neglect, and now that popular feeling is tending towards Water
Conservation there is a lamentable want of information to draw
upon. The drainage areas have to be mapped out, the water
districts to be defined, reservoir sites to be explored, water
bearing strata to be examined, and streams to be gauged.
I have said that careful enquiries are needed with reference
to the sufficiency the of sources of supply; but it must also
be borne in mind that the opposite effect has to be guarded
against—there may be too great an inflow.
Danger of Floods.
This is a very serious danger, and the cause of the destruc-
tion of many important works. It is also a danger that is
always imminent. Sudden and violent floods will often surpass
all reasonable calculations founded on the experience of the
past. High masonry dams are generally built across rock gorges,
or in the beds of rivers, and are, therefore, specially liable to the
destructive effects of violent floods. Such works need, there-
fore to be enormously strong, and to be provided with large
by-washes, but even after every reasonable precaution has been
taken, there is always a certain amount of risk to be apprehended.
Silting Up.
Then there is another difficulty to contend against, arising
from the large amount of solid material brought down by
mountain torrents, and deposited in still water. This silting up
of large reservoirs has given much trouble in Algeria, where the
system of storage dams has been extensively adopted. The
great “Habra ” reservoir is said to have silted up to the extent
of 1,222,000 cubic yards in five years.
All the other dams in that country are affected in the same
manner. Here the “ Torrens ” dam is an instance in point.
Fresent Government Schemes.
What with the risk of percolation, the uncertainty of a sufficient
supply from available rainfall, the danger of great floods, and the
liability of silting up, it will be seen that the design and
construction of huge dams is not to be rashly undertaken. And
without storage works of enormous capacity it would be quite
useless to attempt the carrying out of any “ national ” scheme
of water distribution, I am not in a position to offer an
opinion on any of the water schemes that have lately been
placed before the public, or that are, at the present time, under


consideration in this colony. I have never visited any of the
proposed sites, or been called upon to investigate into their
respective merits. The Beetaloo Work will soon be un fait
accompli , and a strong case would appear to have been made out
in favor of the Barossa scheme. It is not disputed that excellent
sites may be found for works of this description, and all I am
contending for is that the Government should proceed with
extreme caution in matters of this kind.
Want of Reliable Information.
All available scientific data bearing on the subject should be
collected, and the fullest investigation made into all the physical
conditions of every individual case The great importance of
such a course of preliminary enquiry has been fully recognised
in the neighboring colonies of late years. In New South Wales
the whole subject of water utilisation has been fully investigated
by a Commission of Enquiry, and the valuable results of its
labors has paved the way for useful legislation, and for the
introduction of a new and complete organisation, from which
great benefits may be expected. In Victoria, the work done by
the Eoyal Commission on Water Supply has been of the most
valuable kind. It has instilled new life into the whole subject,
and brought it prominently before Parliament, as the most
important question of the day.
The Commissioners made it their business to personally inspect
all water works of any importance throughout that colony;
they have collected a great number of useful facts, tabulated
returns from all parts of the country, investigated into the
merits of numerous schemes for water distribution, and obtained
a vast amount of scientific data, including systematic gaugings
of the principal rivers and water courses. In fact, they have
prepared the ground plan on which an extensive and national
system of water works can be designed, and by affording the
necessary information they have enabled the Legislature to deal
with this important subject. Nothing of the kind has been done
here —nothing but talk! Last year it was publicly announced
that the Government proposed appointing a Eoyal Commission
to investigate and report, but the matter was allowed to drop;
and this year the intention has never even been revived.
At present there is really not sufficient information available
to allow of any general scheme for water distribution being
fairly discussed. It is evident that any important works of
this description would, of necessity, have to be undertaken by
the Government, and it is also apparent that all Government
Water Works should be under one responsible management, and
not split up and parcelled out under four distinct departments,
in the absurd way that now exists.


Irrigation.
I now come to the important question of irrigation. It is
obvious that the same causes that militate against the carrying
out of any extended plan of water supply, must tell with over-
whelming force against the feasibility of effecting irrigation on
a comprehensive scale.
The want of water is insuperable.
In countries where irrigation is practised in a large way, not
only are works of great magnitude required, but it needs the
flow of big rivers to keep them going. The Ganges canal for
instance is nearly 1,000 miles in length, with about 5,000 miles of
distributaries, and its full supply is 11,000 cubic feet per second,
which volume represents from twice to four times the average
flow of the Murray Elver.
This canal is supposed to be capable "Of irrigating 2,000,000
acres. It will, therefore, be seen that if, in defiance of the laws
of gravitation, the dreams of some visionaries could be realized, and
the Murray be brought to Adelaide, all the water of that river
would barely suffice to irrigate one million of acres, while during
some seasons it would hardly water one third of that area.
But there is irrigation and irrigation.
j ßesources Available.
A great deal may be done in a small way. There are a great
many favored localities which admit of being watered artificially,
and would be made to give excellent returns. The supplies might
be drawn from storage reservoirs, both great and small, and also
from wells. The latter source alone might be made available
over considerable tracks of country, and under proper manage-
ment might be rendered highly remunerative.
Where the lift does not exceed from 30 to 40 feet, the cost
of pumping, with good machinery, is well within paying limits.
By this means meadow lands and lucerne paddocks could be
irrigated at a cost for pumping of from 12s. to 15s. per acre per
annum. Eor mixed crops much less water is required, and the
expense would be correspondingly reduced. Now the splendid
returns obtained from irrigated lands, especially in the neighbour-
hood of towns, would go to prove that double and even treble
that price might profitably be paid for water, while for orchards,
vineyards, and the more valuable products of “ intense culture,”
a still higher rate can be afforded. An example of the profitable
application of water by pumping from shallow wells is afforded
in the irrigated farms at Woodville, and it is probably no
exaggeration to state that fhe greater part of the environs of
Adelaide on the plains might by this means be artificially
watered and brought under a high state of culture —green
meadows and fields of lucerne taking the place of barren stretches
denuded of all vegetation during half the year, that now prevail


Irrigation from Dams.
Irrigation from storage reservoirs is quite feasible, and under
favorable conditions might be made to pay well, but I much doubt
whether it admits of being carried out extensively. It is not,
however, necessary that this should be the case in order that
great benefit may be derived therefrom. One of the principal
advantages to be obtained from irrigation in this country will be
in the growth of lucerne and the raising of fodder crops, by
which means the preservation of stock throughout periods of
drought can be ensured. This object could be effected by the
cultivation of comparatively small plots of land in the pastoral
districts. The New South Wales Commission give it as their
opinion “That under average circumstances the irrigation of 100
acres of lucerne for every 20,000 acres of pastoral land would
afford complete protection against drought.” If such be the
case, it will be readily seen what an immense advantage it would
be to this country if irrigation could be practised even in a very
small way, in favored situations only, where water could be
obtained either from storage reservoirs or out of wells.
Profitable Irrigation.
It appears probable, however, that irrigation, where it is
practicable, will have to be applied to the production of those
articles of consumption that do not thrive well under natural
conditions.
It might pay to grow wheat under irrigation, but it cannot
be doubted that it would pay far better to grow other produce,
such as root crops, fodder plants, vegetables, artificial grasses,
fruit trees, and vineyards. In California it is found to be highly
profitable to grow Australian gumtrees, whereas here, not only
have our plains been almost denuded of timber, but beyond the
work done by the Forest Department hardly any effort is being
made at systematic tree planting.
Strange anomaly! That in such a magnificently wooded
country as North America millions of Australian trees are being
carefully raised, while in South Australia the little timber that
remains is being ruthlessly destroyed, and tree culture is almost
unknown.
With reference to irrigation generally, it must be borne in
mind that the cost of providing and distributing water is by
no means the only expense that has to be incurred. The
preparation of the land for artificial watering is often a costly
process, and will generally necessitate an outlay of at least £3
per acre. In some cases, however, ten times that amount has
been expended on preliminary operations.


Thorough Cultivation required.
Where constant and heavy irrigation is practised it is also
generally found necessary to adopt some system of drainage,
and in all such cases the manuring of the land becomes
indispensable. This fact should be clearly understood. Irriga-
tion implies good farming. The application of water to the
land will increase its productiveness to a wonderful extent,
providing the fertilising elements are present in the soil; failing
these, irrigation can only produce utter exhaustion. Thus, if
any sort of irrigation is to be attempted in this colony it can
only be profitably carried out under an entirely different system
of cultivation to that generally practised at the present time.
Victorian Scheme.
In Victoria a very extensive scheme of irrigation is at present
under consideration. It has been elaborated by the Eoyal
Commission on Water Supply, and has been designed on broad
lines, and on a scale of national grandeur. All the elements of
this great scheme are highly interesting and well deserving of
public attention; but it is, of course, open to question whether
it rightly devolves upon the State to accomplish this immense
undertaking, and whether such a work is likely to prove repro-
ductive. These are points which it is not necessary to discuss
here.
It would be quite out of the question for this Colony to
endeavour to emulate Victoria in this respect, as the physical
conditions of the two countries are different, and Victoria
possesses resources of water supply that are altogether absent
here. Great as those resources are represented to be, it is
nevertheless doubtful whether they are capable of realising all
that is expected from therm
The National Scheme recommended by the Victorian Eoyal
Commission is estimated to command over 3,000,000 of acres, and
it is reckoned that by the proposed works an area of 1,000,000
acres could be watered each year. The average price which it is
proposed to charge for winter irrigation, 10 inches deep, is 6s.
4fd. per acre ; and for summer irrigation, 15 inches deep, the
average rate charged is to be about 11s. per acre. The total
outlay which the Victorian Government would have to expend
on the works of this scheme is estimated at close upon
£4,000,000 sterling; but this is exclusive of the whole system
of subsidiary channels and distribution works which would have
to be carried out by the landowners interested. As stated in
the Official Eeport ; —“ Besides the public part of these
undertakings, a vast amount of labour must be expended in
preparation of land, in the construction of farm and field
ditches, and in providing areas of lucerne, fruit trees, vines, and
other perennial plants.”


Winter Flooding.
It only remains to consider in what manner water may be
utilised beyond the methods of conservation and distribution
already alluded to ; and here I believe a system may be developed
which admits of more general application, and from which good
results might be obtained, not in isolated and favored localities
only, as with irrigation, but over a wide expanse of country, and
on a comprehensive scale. I allude to what may be termed
Winter Blooding,
The average rainfall over the agricultural areas of this colony
is not only small in quantity, but it is also generally restricted
to a short period' of the year. The precipitation is often heavy
while it lasts, but owing to the peculiar character of the country,
a large proportion of the water drains rapidly off the land, which
it frequently hardly penetrates, ans flows away in numberless
creets and river courses to the sea.
After a heavy downpour hundreds of millions of tons of
water thus run to waste, carrying with them great quantities of
fertilising matter in suspension. To impound even a very small
portion of these flood waters, would necessitate works of an
immense size, and which only admit of being constructed in
exceptional localities.
The quantity that might be stored in reservoirs and tanks will
never exceed an infinitesimal proportion of the great mass that
flows to waste. But what cannot be conserved may yet to a
considerable extent be utilised. By checking the flow in the
creeks that intersect the country in all directions, these flood
waters might be diverted and made to inundate the surrounding
land. This process takes place, naturally, on occasions of extra-
ordinary floods, and most of the alluvial plains have been
gradually formed through long periods of time in this manner.
Benefits of Flooding.
It is a well known fact that lauds that are subjected to
periodical floodings of this sort derive an immense amount of
benefit from them. I have been informed by experienced
farmers in this colony, that an occasional flooding of their fields
from the overflow of creeks, has generally more than doubled
the ordinary return from the land, and that the beneficial effect
on the ground was apparent for a couple of seasons following.
Everybody knows that the Garden of Antiquity—the land of
Egypt—owes nearly all its marvellous fertility to the annual
inundations of the Nile.


Of course, we cannot expect any such striking results from
flood waters in this country, because they are rarely charged
with the same amount of fertilising ingredients. Nevertheless,
the mere fact of putting the land under water, and assuring it
a thorough soaking, could not fail to he productive of an immense
amount of good.
It is not so in all countries. In Europe, as a rule, floods are
dreaded. The object there is, generally, to drain the land of its
surplus humidity, especially in winter ; and irrigation has to he
carried out hand in hand with drainage. In England much of
the objection that exists against sewage farming arises from this
fact. The drainage from the sewage works has to he applied to
the ground at all seasons throughout the year, and at certain
times the land, already saturated with the winter rains, is not in
a fit state to receive it. One may have too much of a good thing,
and even the fertilising ingredients of sewage irrigation, if
applied in excess, may become noxious. But in South Australia
very different conditions exist. Here the land cannot get water
enough; it is never satisfied ; and like Oliver, ever “ asking for
more.” The rain, especially in the Northern areas, rarely
penetrates to any depth, and consequently the advantages to be
derived from a thorough saturation of subsoil would be very
considerable.
Practical Applications.
Now this advantage is within easy reach. It is not a question
of national works on a gigantic scale and involving a large
expenditure of public money. The process to be adopted is
simple in principle, and under ordinary circumstances it might
be carried into practice without difficulty.
Indeed, Nature herself may be said to indicate the method to
be adopted in the first instance. A tree falls across a water-
course and forms an obstruction which soon becomes choked up
with rubbish and deposit until it impedes the flow of the creek.
The water then rises to the level of the banks, overflows them
and floods the adjacent land. This is the first step ; but under
natural circumstances no great benefit might be derived from
the overflow, as the flood, instead of spreading equally over the
surface, soon gravitates into hollows and along undulations of
the ground, forming a number of little rills that generally
combine into a single stream, which works out a fresh channel.
Moreover, if the flood is considerable the effect of damming up
the natural watercourse may bring about a violent scour and
occasion wide-spread damage to the surrounding country. In
artificial flooding it is necessary to guard against such conse-
quences, The streams must be under control, and the quantity
of flood waters to be applied to the land must be regulated


according to requirements. And thus we are brought to the
“Barrage,” or moveable weir system, to which allusion has
already been made, and which has come greatly into use of late
years, especially on the Continent of Europe and in India.
There are numerous types of moveable weirs, varying from
rough appliances of timber to machines of great power and of
automatic action, capable of regulating the flow of large rivers.
In the case under consideration, however, it will not be necessary
to describe the latter sort, as we only have to deal with water-
courses of small dimensions.
The Needle TNeir.
The kind of structure best suited under these circumstances
will, I believe, be found in the adoption of the “ needle weir ”
principle, which, although a very complicated arrangement in
many examples, yet admits of being reduced to a very simple
form. The most elementary expression of the “ needle weir ”
might be described as consisting of a row of upright posts or
supports spaced a few feet apart across the river bed. The posts
are fitted to a horizontal ground-sill, and they have to be
strongly strutted against the flow of the stream; they carry an
overway foot-bridge. The space between the ground-sill and
the foot-bridge is boarded up with narrow planks called needles ,
which fit closely together, thus forming a complete barrier
across the stream. The uprights are generally spaced from
three to four feet apart, and in large weirs of this description
they take the shape of massive frames that are hinged at the
base and admit of being let down flat into the river bed. But
for the small creeks with which we have to deal I consider that
timber piles, spaced from eight to ten feet apart, would meet
all requirements. The height of the weir generally ranges
from ten to twelve feet, and this elevation will, as a rule, be
found quite sufficient. The “needles” are usually formed of
2\ in. x 2i in. deals, with the top ends rounded like the handle
of an oar, so as to allow of their being easily managed from the
foot-bridge. When all the needles are in position the river
course is closed, and, although considerable leakage will take
place between the planks, yet in time of flood that is of little
consequence. When any of the needles are removed an opening
is formed for the passage of the water, and by this means the
height of the flow can be regulated at will.
In the best examples of these weirs all parts of the structure
are removable, the bridge takes up, and the frames fold down,
and not a vestige remains to impede the current; but for the
small works required in this country no such elaborate machinery
would be needed. Simple works of this kind could be constructed
at small expense, and, although the cost would vary much in


different localities and under different conditions, yet, as a rough
estimate, from £3 to £5 per lineal foot of weir would probably
be found sufficient.
Distribution Works.
Haying described the simplest type of moveable weir to be
adopted, the next consideration will apply to the distribution of
the flood "waters over the land. This is a matter that might
fairly be left to intelligent land owners to carry out themselves,
and practical experience would soon indicate what steps would
have to be taken to make the water spread pretty evenly over
the ground. Where the land is flat very little would need doing.
On undulating country more work would be required, inequali-
ties would have to be removed, hollows filled up, and contour
ditches cut. Irrigation by flooding is, how r ever, by far the
simplest and cheapest method that can be adopted, and the
expense of preparation would by this plan be reduced to the
smallest amount possible.
Winter flooding admits of being practised in a great variety
of circumstances. In most eases the system could be carried
out on a very limited scale by the land owners, singly. Many a
private estate might thus be irrigated without interference with
outside interests. In the case of a larger watercourse to be
diverted, the undertaking would probably embrace a number of
holdings, and the flood waters might be conveyed and distributed
over considerable areas, on the same plan as ordinary irrigation
works, by the Local Trusts. In many places the same weirs and
channels required for district and domestic water supply might
be utilized for winter flooding.
Extent of Supplies.
The amount of water available for this purpose is much
greater than generally imagined. Thom some gaugings I took
at the Werocata Dam, in June, 1884, during a flood in the Elver
Wakefield, I calculated that the discharge was over one million
gallons per minute, and this flow lasted for several days. How,
if only half of the discharge could have been utilized at the
time, and allowing one thousand tons of water to the acre, that
freshet would have sufficed for flooding ten thousand acres.
Fertilising Effect.
The water was also very much discolored, it emitted a strong
odour, and was evidently thickly charged with surface offscourings;
for wherever the stream overflowed its banks a layer of black
sediment was deposited, which was equal to a dressing of manure.


In all these flooded places, I was afterwards informed, the gras*
sprang up in great abundance, making an astonishing contrast
to the bare and arid plains around.
I have heard the opinion expressed by competent authorities,
that on land subjected to a periodical flooding it would be
practicable to establish lucerne, without summer irrigation, and
if such be the case, I need hardly dwell upon the extent of
benefit which might be reaped from this system of water
utilisation.
The JBelvidere Dam
Winter flooding has not, to my knowledge, been attempted in
many places in this colony. The only work specially designed
for this purpose, that I have ever been engaged upon, is the
weir on Mr. Mathew Eankine’s estate, near Belvidere.
The Eiver Angas is here confined to a narrow and tortuous
channel. It looks quite a small creek, and runs nearly dry in
summer, but it is capable of discharging a large body of water
during freshets. At such times the stream used, occasionally,
to overflow its banks and flood the low-lying fields.
Mr. Eankine having observed the marked benefit which the
land derived from these exceptional floodings determined to
effect an overflow by artificial means, and I was called upon in
1883 to design a dam for this object. The circumstances were
rather peculiar, necessitating heavier works than what under
ordinary conditions would probably be needed. Owing to the
fact that during floods big trees and masses of debris were
frequently swept down the river, it was not thought advisable
to place any obstructions in the way of the overflow at the dam,
and consequently a simple form of “ needle weir ” could not be
adopted. The plan carried out consists of a massive concrete
wall, seventy feet long, sixteen feet thick at the base, and
tapering to four feet at the top. The dam is nineteen feet high.
It has an opening at the top twenty feet wide by eight feet in
depth, which can be closed by means of an iron sluice-gate
fitting into a recess in the lower part of the weir and raised by
machinery.
There is also a sluice-pipe in the bottom of the dam to prevent
silting up. The discharging capacity of the opening in the weir
is rather more than half a million of gallons per minute, and
this was believed to be ample, although it afterwards proved to
be inadequate, as before the works were quite finished a violent
flood came down and overflowed the banks, causing a breach in
the bank at one side of the dam. Mr. Eankine has had this
breach closed by means of a wooden barrier, on the “ needle
weir ” principle. The work has only been in operation for a
couple of years and it is therefore too soon yet to arrive at any


definite conclusions as to its capabilities, but it affords the
promise o£ becoming a financial success. During tbe last season
the returns obtained from the flooded land were much in excess
of the yield from the adjoining but unirrigated fields.*
Moderate Hesults obtainable.
In conclusion, I have only to remark that no extravagant
claims are put forward in support of this proposal for the
utilisation of flood waters ; it is not held up as a panacea for all
the ills we suffer from, or as the one true remedy for the present
depression.
The system has its weak points, because there are wet seasons
when the rainfall is sufficient for the growth of ordinary crops,
and when the land may not need flooding; there are also 9
exceptionally dry seasons, when the rainfall is insufficient to
make the creeks run, and when flooding could not be generally
carried out for want of water. These are, however, extreme
cases. We must deal with the average conditions of the colony.
That much of the flood waters that now flow to waste might be
utilized with a large measure of advantage, and at a small cost
in works and in management, is a fact that hardly admits of
being disputed, and my purpose has been to direct public
attention to the only method of irrigation which I believe to
be available for extended application to the agricultural areas.
Winter flooding can make no pretence to great results ; it can
hold out none of the splendid prospects of complete irrigation,
with absolute security against the vicissitudes of seasons ; it is
but a half-measure. Nevertheless, half a loaf is better than
none. The system might be made the means of effecting general
improvement; it would allow of more varied production; it
would bring about a more careful and thorough method of
cultivation. And it has also this one great advantage over many
of the grander and more brilliant schemes that are so often
dilated upon in glowing language—it admits of being realised.
* Mr. Mathew Eankine has kindly furnished me with the following
information ■ the area of land that would he flooded hy means of the
dam is about 700 acres ; the approximate cost of preparing the land for
winter flooding, so that the water may spread evenly over the surface,
is ten shillings per acre; the increased yield throng’h flooding, with an
average rainfall of fourteen to fifteen inches, may he reckoned at from
50 to 100 per cent. Mr. Eankine adds—“l am quite satisfied that the
plan I have adopted (winter flooding) is the only feasible way of
irrigating the wheat and other white crops in this colony.”


1508
01808042


