

The Fisher Lass












THE NOVELS OF
BJORNSTJERNE BJORNSON
VOLUME IV


THE HOVELS OF
BJORNSTJERNE BJORNSON
Edited by EDMUHD GOSSE
Fcap, 8vo, clo , 3 net
Synnbve Solbakken
A rne
A Happy Boy
The Fisher Lass
The Bridal March
Magnhild
Captain Mans ana
A bsalonPs Hair
And other Short Stories and Novelettes
LONDON
WILLIAM HEINEMANN
21 Bedford Street, W.C,


THE
FISHER LASS
BY
BJÖRNSTJERNE BJÖRNSON
[Translated from the Norwegian)
LONDON
WILLIAM HEINEMANN
1896


All rights reserved


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
[The Fisher Lass was first published , under
the title of u Fiskerjenten,” at ,in April
7868. The greater part of the hook was composed at
Sogne Parsonage , in Norway , hut it was finished in
Copenhagen. Three editions of the original were sold
out in as many months,
Four or five nearly simultaneous German transla-
tions were issued in the year of publication, and the
book appeared in 1869 both in Swedish and Finnish.
The earliest English version was published in 7870 ,
but there had been an American translation issued in
New York as early as 1869,
E. G.]




THE FISHER LASS
CHAPTER I
On those spots on the coast, towards which
the herring has for a considerable time regularly
made its way, a town gradually springs up, pro-
vided, that is, that other conditions are favour-
able. Not only may it be said of such towns
that they are cast up by the sea, but, from a
great distance, they actually resemble washed-
up timber and wreckage, or a number of keeled
boats overturned by fishermen for shelter on a
stormy night. A nearer view shows how casu-
ally the whole thing has arisen; a rock lies in
the middle of the main street, or the place itself
is divided by water into three or four parts,
while the streets wind and creep at will. One
feature only is common to them all—there is
shelter in the harbour for the largest ships; it


is as quiet there as in a tea-cup, and these land-
locked bays are consequently very welcome to
ships which, with ragged sails and battered bul-
warks, come driving in from the open sea for a
moment’s respite.
It is very quiet in a little town of this kind ;
all the noise is consigned to the quays, where
the peasants’ boats are made fast, and the ships
load and unload. In the little town of which
we speak the only street runs alongside the
quays; red and white houses, one and two
stories high, line it on the opposite side, not,
however, wall to wall, but separated from one
another by pretty gardens. It is thus a long,
broad street, which smells, moreover, of what is
on the quays when the wind blows in from the
sea. The inhabitants are very orderly—not
from fear of the police, for, as a rule, there is
none-—but from fear of being talked about, as
everybody is known to everybody else. If you
go down the street, you must raise your hat at
almost every window, and there is usually an
old lady sitting there to return your bow.
Further, you must greet every one you meet;
for all these quiet people go about reflecting as
THE FISHER LASS


to what is fitting for the world in general and
themselves in particular. Whoever oversteps
the bounds prescribed by his rank or calling
loses his good name; for his father, and his
grandfather too, are known as well as he is
himself, and every leaning towards the unseemly
which has previously displayed itself in the
family, is brought to light.
To this quiet town there came, many years
ago, a worthy man of the name of Per Olsen.
He came from the country, where he had gained
his livelihood as a pedlar and a fiddler. In the
town he opened a shop for his old customers,
where, besides petty wares, he sold spirits and
bread ; and there he might be heard walking up
and down in the “ apartment ” behind the shop,
playing country dances and wedding marches.
Every time he passed the door, he peeped
through the glass pane, and, if a customer had
come in, he ended what he was playing with a
shake, and went into the shop. His business
prospered, he married and had a son whom he
called after himself; not, however, Per, but
Peter.
Little Peter was to be what Per felt he
THE FISHER LASS


was not, an educated man, and to this end the
boy was sent to the Grammar School. And
when those who should have been his comrades
thrashed him home from their games because
he was the son of Per Olsen, Per Olsen thrashed
him out to them again, for the boy could not be
educated in any other way. Little Peter con-
sequently felt forsaken at school ; he grew idle,
and gradually so indifferent to everything that
his father could knock neither smiles nor tears
out of him. So Per gave up the thrashings and
took him into the shop. How great was his
surprise when he saw the boy serve each cus-
tomer with what he asked for, never giving a
grain too much, never eating a plum himself,
but weighing, reckoning and entering accounts,
without changing countenance, preferably also
without speaking, and very slowly, but with
unimpeachable accuracy. His father’s hopes of
him revived, and he was sent to Hamburg in a
herring smack to attend a commercial school
and acquire genteel manners. He was away
for eight months —that was surely long enough.
When he returned, he had provided himself with
six new suits of clothes and, on landing, wore
THE FISHER LASS


one suit over the other, u for what you have
on your back pays no duty.” But, his girth
excepted, he cut much the same figure on
appearing in the street the following day. He
walked stiffly and erectly, with his hands at his
side; he raised his hat with a sudden jerk and
bowed as if he were jointless, only to grow
rigid again immediately ; he had become polite-
ness in person, but it was all done without
uttering a word and in an abrupt and somewhat
shamefaced manner. He spelled his name no
longer Olsen, but Ohlsen, and this gave the wit
of the town the opportunity for the following
conundrum : “ How far did Peter Olsen get in
Hamburg?” Answer: “To the first letter.”
He also meditated calling himself Pedro, but,
as he endured so much annoyance on the score
of the “ h,” he gave this idea up and signed him-
self “ P. Ohlsen.”
He enlarged his father's business and, before
he was twenty-two, married a red-handed shop-
girl, to have some one to keep house for him ;
for his father had just been left a widower and
it was safer to have a wife than a housekeeper.
On the anniversary of their wedding she had a


son who, a week later, received the name of
Pedro.
Now that worthy Per Olsen had become a
grandfather, he seemed to feel an inner call to
grow old. He therefore resigned the business
to his son, took up his seat on a bench before
the door and smoked plug tobacco in a short
pipe. And beginning, one day, to find time
hang heavy on his hands, the wish for a speedy
death arose in him ; and, just as all his other
wishes had quietly been fulfilled, so was this
last one too.
Now if his son Peter had inherited exclusively
the one-half of his natural ability, namely, his com-
mercial sharpness, his grandson Pedro seemed,
on the other hand, to have inherited exclusively
the other, his talent for music. He learnt to
read very late, but to sing very early ; he played
the flute so well that it could not but attract
attention; he was of a delicate build and a
yielding disposition. But all this was only a
source of annoyance to his father, for his own
restless precision was to be cultivated in the
boy. Whenever the latter forgot anything, he
was not abused and thrashed as his father had
THE FISHER LASS


been, but he was pinched. It was done quite
quietly, in a friendly, indeed, one might almost
say, a polite way, but it was done on the slight-
est provocation. His mother counted the black-
and-blue marks of an evening when she un-
dressed him, and kissed them, but she offered
no resistance, for she was pinched herself. For
every rent in his clothes—they were made from
his father’s Hamburg suits-—for every smudge
on his school-books, she was called to account.
Hence it was always : “ Don’t do that, Pedro ! ”
“Take care, Pedro ! ” (( Remember, Pedro ! ” He
feared his father and grew indifferent towards
his mother. Among his companions he had not
much to put up with, as he instantly began to
cry and beg them to spare his clothes; he was
nicknamed “ Old Woman ” and taken no further
notice of. He resembled a sickly, unfledged
duckling, which waddled about everywhere after
the others, and ran a long way off with the
morsel it managed to snatch for itself. Nobody
shared with him, and so he, too, shared with
nobody.
But he soon discovered that it was different
among the poorer children of the town ; they
THE FISHER LASS


made allowances for him, because he was finer
than themselves. A tall, strong girl who ruled
over the whole band, took him under her charge.
He was never tired of looking at her. She had
raven-black hair, which was very curly and never
combed except with her fingers ; she had dark
blue eyes and a low forehead, and her whole face
seemed to concentrate itself in one point, so to
speak, and to fly straight at you. She was
always either at work or on the move; in summer
bare-legged, bare-armed, and brown with the
sun ; in winter, clad as other children were in
summer. Her father was a pilot and a fisher-
man. She flew about selling 1 his fish, she held
his boat steady for him against wind and tide,
and when he was out on pilot duty, she carried
on the fishing business by herself. No one who
met her could help turning and looking at her—
there was such an air of independence about her.
Her name was Gunlaug, but she was called the
“Fisher Lass,” a title which she accepted as hers
by right. In their games she always played on
the weaker side; it was a necessity to her to
take care of some one, and now she took charge
of this delicate boy.
THE FISHER LASS


In her boat he might play his flute, which had
been prohibited at home, as it was believed it
took his thoughts off his lessons. She rowed
him out on to the fjord, she took him with her
on her long fishing expeditions, and very soon
he accompanied her on the night expeditions
too. In this case, they rowed out at sunset into
the clear summer stillness. He played his flute,
or listened to her as she told him all she knew
about mermen and bogies, wrecks, foreign lands
and black people—things that sailors had told
her. She shared her food with him as she shared
her knowledge, and he accepted everything, with-
out giving anything in return ; for he brought
neither food with him from home nor imagination
from school. They rowed on until the sun went
down behind the snowy mountains, then landed
at an island and made a fire—that is to say, she
gathered a heap of twigs and branches ; he sat
and looked on. She always brought a seaman’s
jacket of her father’s and a blanket with her for
him, and in these he was wrapped up. She
watched the fire and he went to sleep ; she kept
herself awake with snatches of songs and hymns,
singing in a loud, clear voice until he fell asleep,
9


and then in a lower tone. When the sun rose
again on the opposite side of the sky and shed a
cold, yellowish streak of light over the mountains
to herald its coming, she awakened him. The
wood was still black and the meadow dark, but
they soon began to turn a reddish brown, and
then to gleam, until the crest of the mountain
glowed, and all the colours of the sunrise burst
forth. Then they pushed their boat into the
water again—it left a streak in the dark morning
breeze—and were soon ashore with other fisher-
men.
When winter came and the expeditions ceased,
he sought her out in her home. He went re-
peatedly and watched her as she worked, but
neither of them spoke much; it seemed as if they
were sitting waiting for the summer. When it
came, this new prospect of life was also, unfortu-
nately, taken from him. Gunlaug’s father died
and she left the town, and on the advice of his
teacher, the boy was put into the shop. There
he stood at his mother’s side ; for his father,
who had gradually turned the colour of the groats
he weighed, had been obliged to take to his bed
in the back room. From this position he would


still, however, take part in everything that went
on, insisting on being told what each of them
sold, and pretending not to hear until he got
them close enough to pinch them. And one
night, when the wick of this little lamp had grown
quite dry, the light went out. His wife wept
without exactly knowing why, but his son could
not squeeze out a tear. As they had money
enough to live upon, they gave up the business,
effaced every recollection of the past and turned
the shop into a parlour. Here his mother sat
at the window and knitted stockings, while Pedro
sat in the room on the opposite side of the
passage and played his flute. But as soon as
summer came, he bought a small, light sailing
boat, and, crossing over to the island, stretched
himself on the spot where Gunlaug had lain.
And one day, as he was lying there among
the heather, he saw a boat steering straight
towards him ; it lay-to alongside of his, and
Gunlaug stepped out. She was just the same
as of old, except that she was quite grown up
and taller than other women. But, on catching
sight of him, she drew slowly back ; it had not
occurred to her that he would be grown up too.


This pale, thin face was unfamiliar to her ; it
was no longer sickly and refined—it was simply
obtuse. But at the sight of her, a quiet light
from the old dreams came into his eyes. She
drew nearer again, and for every step she took,
a year seemed to fall away from him, and when
she stood beside him on the spot from which he
had sprung up, he laughed and talked like a
child: the old-looking face was but the mask
that concealed a child ; he was older, it is true,
but he had not grown up.
Yet—it was just this child she sought, and
now that she had found it again she did not
know what to do next; she laughed and blushed.
Involuntarily, and for the first time in his life,
he felt possessed of something like power, and
in this instant he grew beautiful; it may only
have lasted for a moment, but in that moment
she was vanquished.
Hers was one of those natures which can
only love what is weak, what they have tenderly
cared for. She had intended to stay two days
in the town ; she remained for two months. In
these two months he developed more than at
any other period of his youth. He was raised
12


so high above his dreamy indolence that he even
made plans ; he would go out into the world,
he would be a musician! But one day as he
was repeating this intention of his, she grew
pale, and said :
“ Yes—but we must marry first.”
He looked at her. She returned his glance
without wavering. They both grew crimson, and
then he said :
“ What would people say to that ? ”
Gunlaug had never imagined that he could
have any other will than hers, for the simple
reason that she had never any will but his. But
now she saw straight into his soul, and she
realised that he had never for an instant thought
of sharing with her anything but what she gave.
She discovered in one moment that it had been
thus all their lives. She had begun with com-
passion and ended with love for the object of
her own kindness. If she had only preserved
her composure for a little while ! For, seeing
her wrath blazing up, he grew frightened, and
cried:
“ I will! ”
She heard him, but her anger at her own
13


stupidity and his despicableness, at her own
shame and his cowardice, rose in fierce haste
to boiling-point—and never did a love, begun
in childhood and the sunset glow, cradled by
waves and moonlight, accompanied by flute and
soft singing, end more pitifully; for, seizing
him with both hands, she lifted him up and
thrashed him with all her might. Whereupon,
she rowed back to the town, and forthwith
crossed the mountains.
He had sailed out as a love-sick youth who
was on the high-road to the conquest of his
manhood ; he rowed home like an old man
who had never known what manhood was. His
life possessed but one memory, and that his
own folly had lost him; there was only one
spot in the world that he cared to go back to,
and he dared return to it no more. As he
brooded over his own wretchedness, and how it
had all been brought about, his spirit of enter-
prise sank as into a marsh, and never rose
again. The small boys of the place, who had
been struck by his oddity, soon began to tease
him, and, as he was rather a mysterious person
in the eyes of the town, no one knowing rightly
14


how he lived or what he did, it did not occur to
any one to take his part. Soon he dared not
even go out —not, at least, into the street. His
whole existence became a battle with the street-
boys, who, however, were perhaps of the same
service as gnats in the heat of summer—without
them he would have sunk into a state of unbroken
drowsiness.
Nine years afterwards Gunlaug returned to
the town as unexpectedly as she had left it.
She was accompanied by a little girl of about
eight years old, who was just like what she
herself used to be, except that everything about
her was more refined and seemed as if over-
shadowed by a dream. Gunlaug had been
married, it was said, had inherited some money,
and returned to the town to set up a tavern for
sailors.
This she conducted in such a way that mer-
chants and skippers repaired to her house to
engage hands, sailors to be engaged. Further,
the whole town ordered its fish there. She
never took a farthing for these negotiations, but
she made a despotic use of the power they gave
her. Although she was a woman, and although
15


she never left her house, she was undoubtedly
the most influential u man ”in the town. She
was called u Fisher Gunlaug,” or “ Gunlaug of
the Hill, M the title of “ Fisher Lass ” descending
to her daughter, who ran about at the head of
all the small boys in the town.
It is her story that is to be told here. She
had something of her mother's natural force of
character, and she had many opportunities of
exerting it.
16


CHAPTER II
The many pretty gardens of the town, now in
blossom for the second and third time, were
fragrant after a shower of rain. The sun was
sinking behind the eternal snow-clad mountains,
filling the sky around it with fire and flame, and
the snowy peaks shone with a subdued reflec-
tion. The mountains nearer at hand were in
shadow, but they, too, were lighted up by the
rich autumn colouring of their forests. The
little islands out in the fjord, which followed one
another in single file, looking exactly as if they
were rowing towards the shore, afforded, with
their dense wooding, a still richer play of colour
than the mountains, for the reason that they
were more in the foreground. The sea was as
smooth as glass, and a large ship was being
towed into the harbour. People were sitting
out on their wooden steps, half-buried on both


sides by rose-bushes. They talked across to one
another as they sat, and sometimes, too, ran over
for a little, or exchanged greetings with the
passers-by, who were bound for the long shady
roads outside the town. A piano might occa-
sionally be heard from an open window, but
otherwise hardly a sound mingled with the con-
versation. The last rays of the sun upon the
sea increased the general sense of peace.
Suddenly in the middle of the town arose such
a terrible noise that one would have thought the
place was being stormed. Boys screamed, girls
shrieked, other boys shouted “ Hurrah! ” old
women scolded and gave orders, the police-
man’s big dog barked, and all the curs in the
town replied. Everybody who was indoors had
to come out. The uproar grew so great that
even the sheriff could not help turning on his
steps and letting fall the words:
“ There must be something the matter ! ”
“ What is it ? ” was the question with which
the people standing on their steps were assailed
by those coming from the country roads.
u Yes, what is it?” they answered from the
steps.
18


“ What is it, pray ? ” was now the general
question when any one came from the centre of
the town.
But as this town lies in the form of a half-
moon on the shores of a gently curving bay, it
was a long time before every one at both ends
heard the answer:
“ It is only the ‘ Fisher Lass.’ ”
This enterprising young person, who was
screened by a formidable mother, and could
depend on the protection of all the sailors in the
place—for in such a case they always got a free
drink from the mother—had, at the head of her
army of small boys, made a raid upon a large
apple tree in Pedro Ohlsen’s orchard.
The plan of attack was as follows: some of
the boys were to attract Pedro to the front of
the house by rattling the rose-bushes against
the window-panes; meanwhile, one of them was
to shake the tree which stood in the middle of
the garden, while the others threw the apples
over the fence in all directions —not to steal
them —oh, dear no !-—but just for fun. This
ingenious plan had been hatched that same
evening behind Pedro’s garden. But as luck
19


would have it, Pedro was sitting on the other side
of the fence and heard every word. Shortly before
the appointed time, therefore, he took the drunken
policeman of the town and his large dog into
his back room, where he regaled them both.
For a while, he allowed the young rascals in
front of the house to rattle his rose-bushes as
much as they liked ; even when the “ Fisher
Lass’s” curly head appeared above the palings, and
a number of small faces simultaneously peeped
over all round, he waited quietly in the back
room. But when all those who had got into the
garden had gathered very quietly round the tree,
and the “ Fisher Lass,” with bare feet and torn
clothes, had climbed up to shake it, the back door
flew open and Pedro and the policeman rushed
out, armed with sticks and followed by the big
dog. A cry of dismay went up from the boys; a
number of little girls, who in all innocence were
playing “tig” outside the fence, believing that
some one was being murdered inside the garden,
began to scream at the top of their voices; the
boys who had escaped shouted “ Hurrah I ” those
who still hung on the palings cried under the
rain of sticks, and, to complete the concert, some
THE FISHER LASS


old women—as always happens when boys cry
—appeared on the scene and cried with the rest.
Pedro and the policeman grew frightened them-
selves, and were obliged to parley with the old
women. In the meantime the boys ran away.
The dog, of which they were most afraid, gave
chase over the fence —this was something for
him ! And off they flew like wild ducks—boys,
girls, the dog and the screams —away over the
whole town.
Meanwhile the u Fisher Lass” sat perfectly quiet
in the tree, imagining that no one had noticed
her. Crouched on one of the highest branches,
she watched the course of the fray through the
leaves. But when the enraged policeman had
gone out to speak to the women, and Pedro
Ohlsen was left alone in the garden, he
went straight to the tree, and, looking up,
cried:
“ Come down with you, this moment, you
scapegrace ! ”
There was not a sound in the tree.
‘ l Will you come down, I say! I know you
are there.”
Perfect silence.
21


6i I shall go in and fetch my gun and shoot
you, that’s what I’ll do ! ”
He made a pretence of going.
u Hu—hu—hu ! ” began up in the tree.
“Yes, howl as much as you like! You’ll
get a whole charge of shot in you, I can tell
you! ”
u Uhu—hu—huhu ! ” came the owl-like re-
sponse. “lam so frightened ! ”
“ Oh, the devil’s in you ! You’re the worst
young rascal of the whole lot! But I’ve got you
now! ”
“ Oh, dear, good, kind gentleman, I’ll never
do it again ! ” At the same moment she flung a
rotten apple straight at his nose, and followed it
with a ringing peal of laughter! The apple
spread over his face like a pancake, and while
he was wiping it off she slid to the ground.
Before he could reach her she was on the fence,
and would have swung herself over had she not
been so afraid he was behind her that she let go
instead of quietly climbing over.
But as he took hold of her she gave a scream,
a shrill, piercing scream. He grew frightened,
and loosened his grasp. At her signal of terror
THE FISHER LASS


a number of people collected outside the fence,
and, hearing this, she immediately took courage.
“ Let me go or Til tell mother,” she threatened
flaring into a passion.
Then he recognised her face, and cried :
“Your mother ! —Who is your mother ? ”
u Gunlaug of the Hill —Fisher Gunlaug,”
repeated the child triumphantly. She saw he
was afraid.
Owing to his short-sightedness he had never
noticed the girl before. He was the only person
in the place who did not know who she was.
He did not even know that Gunlaug was in the
town. As if possessed, he cried :
“ What is your name ? ”
“ Petra! ” she retorted, still more loudly.
l( Petra ! ” shrieked Pedro ; and, turning, fled
into the house as if he had been conversing with
the devil.
But as the pallor of extreme fear is exactly
like that of extreme wrath, she believed that he
had rushed in for his gun. Terror seized her;
in fancy she could feel the shot in her back, and
as at this moment the garden-gate was broken
open from the outside, she darted through it into
23


the street. She was the picture of fear: her
dark hair streamed behind her, her eyes shot
fire, the dog, which she happened to meet, turned
and followed her, barking loudly—and thus she
threw herself upon her mother, who happened
to be just coming from the kitchen with a tureen
of soup. The child fell into the soup, the soup
fell to the floor, and a “Confound you!” followed
them both. Still lying in the soup, she cried :
“He’s going to shoot me, mother; he’s going
to shoot me ! ”
“Who’s going to shoot you, you little imp ? ”
“ Pedro Ohlsen—we were taking his apples.”
She never dared to tell anything but the truth.
“Whom are you talking about, child ? ”
“ Pedro Ohlsen, he is after me with a big
gun ; he’s going to shoot me.”
“ Pedro Ohlsen ! ” cried her mother wildly,
and laughed. She seemed to have grown taller.
The child began to cry, and was going to run
away. But her mother sprang upon her, her
white teeth glittering like a beast of prey’s, and,
seizing her by the shoulders, lifted her off her
feet.
“ Did you tell him who you were ? ”
THE FISHER LASS


“ Yes, yes, oh yes ! ” The child held up her
hands imploringly. Her mother drew herself up
to her full height.
“So he knows now, does he ? . . . • What
did he say ? ”
“ He ran in for a gun ; he was going to shoot
me.”
“ He shoot you ! ” she laughed scornfully.
The frightened, soup-bespattered child had
crept into a corner, where she was standing
drying herself and crying, when her mother went
over to her again.
“If you ever go near him again,” she said,
seizing the child and shaking her, “or speak to
him, or listen to him, may God have mercy on
you both 1 Tell him that from me,” she repeated
in a threatening tone, as the child did not answer
at once.
“ Yes, yes ! ”
“ Tell him that from me ! ” she repeated once
more as she went away, but this time more softly
and with a nod at each word.
The child washed herself and changed her
things, and sat down in her Sunday clothes
upon the steps before the house. But as she
THE FISHER LASS


thought of the fright she had been in, her con-
vulsive sobs began afresh,
4i What are you crying for, child?” asked a
voice in kinder tones than she had ever heard
before.
She looked up; before her stood a slenderly
built man who wore spectacles and had an
impressive face. She stood up at once, for it
was Hans Oedegaard, a young man before whom
the whole town rose.
“ What are you crying for, child ? ”
She looked at him, and said that she and
“ some other boys 99 had been going to take
apples from Pedro Ohlsen’s orchard, but then
Pedro and the policeman had come, and
then She remembered that her mother
had made her doubtful about the shooting, so
did not venture to mention it, but in its place
heaved a long sigh.
“Is it possible,” he said, “ that a child
of your age could take part in so great a
• JJ
sin ?
Petra looked at him. She had known very
well that it was a sin, but she had always heard
it announced in the following manner: “ You
THE FISHER LASS


imp of darkness, you curly-headed Satan!”
Now she felt ashamed of herself.
“ I am astonished that you do not go to
school and learn God’s commandments as to
good and evil.”
She stood stroking her dress, and replied that
her mother did not wish her to go to school.
“ Perhaps you cannot even read ? ”
Yes, she could read.
He drew out a little book and gave it to her.
She looked into it, then turned it over and
looked at the cover.
“ I can’t read such small writing,” she said.
But he insisted, whereupon she immediately
became intensely stupid; her eyes and mouth
drooped and all her limbs relaxed.
« T—h—e, the, L—o—r—d G—o—d,
Lord God, s—a —i, said, the Lord God said to
M—M
“ Bless my soul, you cannot read yet! And
you are a child of ten or twelve years old.
Should you not like to learn to read ? ”
She managed to get out that she would.
u Then come with me, we must set to work at
once ! ”
27


She made a movement, but only to look into
the house.
u Yes, tell your mother,” he said.
Her mother happened to be passing the door,
and seeing the child talking to a stranger, came
out on to the steps.
“He wants to teach me to read,” said the
child dubiously, with her eyes on her mother.
The latter did not answer, but stood with her
arms akimbo and looked at Oedegaard.
“ Your child is very ignorant,” he said.
“ You cannot justify yourself before God or man
for letting her grow up in this way.”
“ Who are you ? ” asked Gunlaug sharply.
V
“ Hans Oedegaard, your pastor’s son.
Her face cleared a little; she had heard
nothing but good of him. He began again:
“ Whenever I have been at home, I have
noticed this child. She must not be allowed to
occupy her mind only with what is evil.”
The expression of the mother’s face said
plainly enough : “ What is that to you ? ” But
he asked quietly :
“ Surely she is to learn something ? ”
“ No.”
28


A faint flush overspread his face.
“ Why not? ”
“ Are people who have learnt something any
the better for it ? ”
She had only had one experience, but to this
she held fast.
n I am surprised that any one can ask such a
question.”
“Yes, of course—l know they are none the
better.”
She went down the steps to put an end to
such idle talk. But he put himself straight in
her way.
“ This is a duty which you shall not evade.
You are a senseless mother.”
Gunlaug measured him from top to toe.
“ Who has told you what I am ? ” she said as
she went past him.
“ You yourself, and this very moment; for
otherwise, you would have seen that the child is
being ruined.”
Gunlaug turned and their eyes met; she
saw that he really meant what he had said
and she was afraid. Her only intercourse
hitherto had been with seamen and trades-
29


people; a language like this she had never
heard.
“ What do you want with the child ? ” she
asked.
“To teach her what is needful for her soul's
salvation, and then see what can be made of
her.”
“My child shall not be anything but what I
wish her to be.”
“ I beg your pardon, she must be what God
chooses.”
Gunlaug was nonplussed.
“ What do you mean by that ? ” she said,
drawing nearer to him.
“ I mean that she is to cultivate such abilities
as she possesses ; to this end God has given
them to her.”
At this Gunlaug went close up to him.
“ And am I, her mother, to have no control
over her ? ” she asked, as if really desiring the
information.
“ Certainly, but you must respect the advice
of other people who know better ; you must
respect God's will.”
Gunlaug was silent for a moment.
30


“What if she learns too much?” she said.
“ A child of poor people,” she added, looking
tenderly at her daughter.
“If she learns too much for her own station,
she has thereby reached a higher one.”
She grasped his meaning at once, but, looking
more and more pensively at the child, said, as if
to herself:
“ That is dangerous.”
“That is not the question,” he said mildly;
“ we are only concerned with what is right.”
A strange expression came into her keen eyes;
she gave him another piercing glance, but there
was something so sincere in his voice, his words
and his face, that Gunlaug was vanquished.
She went over to the child and laid her hands
upon its head, but could not speak.
“ I shall give her lessons from now on until
she is confirmed,” he said, as if to assist her.
“ I wish to take the child under my charge.”
“ And so you will take her from me ? ”
He started and looked inquiringly at her.
“ You certainly understand it better than I
do,” she said with an effort, “ but if it weren’t
that you used God’s name . . . .” She paused;
31


she had smoothed back her daughters hair, and
now, taking the handkerchief from her own neck,
she tied it round the child’s. In no other way
did she give her consent to Petra going with
him, but she hastened away round the house, as
if she did not wish to see her go.
At this behaviour of Gunlaug’s he felt suddenly
afraid of what, in his youthful zeal, he had taken
upon himself to do. The child, too, felt afraid
of the first person who had got the better of her
mother, and thus, with fears on both sides, they
proceeded to their first lesson.
From day to day, however, it seemed to him
that she grew in wisdom and knowledge, and his
conversations with her would sometimes of their
own accord take a very curious turn. He would
often bring before her characters from Biblical
and profane history, and draw her attention to
the calling which God had given them. He
dwelt upon Saul and his dissolute life, and upon
the boy David, who watched his father’s flock,
until Samuel came and laid the hand of the Lord
upon them. But the highest calling ever vouch-
safed to man was when the Lord Himself walked
upon earth, and, pausing at the fishing village,
32


called the fishermen to be His followers. And
the poor fishermen arose and followed Him—-unto
suffering and unto death, but always with joyful
hearts , for the feeling that we possess a calling
supports us under all misfortunes.
This thought haunted her, and, being able to
bear it no longer, she asked him about her own
calling. He looked at her until she flushed,
then answered that it is by means of work that
we arrive at our calling ; it may be modest and
small, but nobody is without one. At this a
gieat zeal took possession of herj it impelled
her to work with the energy of a grown person,
it entered into her games and made her grow
pale and thin. She became filled with romantic
longings—to cut off her hair, to dress herself as
a boy, to go forth into the world and fight!
But as one day her teacher said to her that her
hair was very pretty, if she would only take
care of it, she grew fond of it, and, for the sake
of this long hair, sacrificed a heroic name.
Since that day, being a girl meant more to
her than it had ever meant before, and her work
progressed more steadily, illumined by the glow
of ever-changing dreams.
c
33


CHAPTER III
As a young man Hans Oedegaard’s father had
left his home in Oedegaard, a parish in the
diocese of Bergen. People hao interested them-
selves in him, and he had become a learned man
and an austere preacher. He was, moreover,
an overbearing man, but this less in words than
in deeds, for he “had a good memory,” as people
said. This man who, by dogged determination,
had carried all his plans through, was, however,
fated to be baffled in a quarter where he least
expected it, and where it pained him most.
He had three daughters and one son. The
son, Hans, was the pride of the school; his
father himself assisted him to prepare his lessons,
and took a daily pleasure in doing it. Hans
had a friend who, with his help, gained the
place next him in the school, and who in con-
sequence loved him, after his mother, more than


anything in the world. They went to school
together, and to the university together; they
passed their two first examinations together, and
were thereupon to begin their preparation for
the same career. But one day, as they were
going gaily down the stairs after having dis-
cussed their future plans of work, Hans in a
burst of good spirits leapt upon his companion's
back; in so doing he gave the latter a fall which,
a few days later, caused his death. As the
young fellow was dying, he begged his mother,
who was a widow and about to lose in him her
only child, to fulfil his last wish and adopt Hans in
his stead. The mother died almost immediately
after her son, but, according to her will, her very
considerable fortune fell to Hans Oedegaard.
It was a very long time before Hans recovered
from the shock of these events. A prolonged
journey abroad so far restored him as to enable
him to carry his theological studies to their close,
but he could not be prevailed on to make any
use of his examination.
All his father s hopes had been set on seeing
him his assistant in the parish, but, as it was,
he could not be induced to ascend the pulpit
35


even a single time; the answer he gave was
always the same —he felt no call. This was
such a bitter disappointment to his father that
it made him look many years older. He had
come to his duties late in life —he was an old
man now —and had worked hard, always with
the one object in view. And now his son lived
above him in the same house, occupying many
handsomely furnished rooms, while down below,
in the little study, the old pastor worked un-
ceasingly by the light of the lamp which shone
into the night of his old age. After this dis-
appointment he neither would nor could accept
help from a stranger, nor would he comply with
his son’s wish and retire. He consequently
knew no rest, summer or winter; but his son
went abroad for some time every year. When
the latter was at home, he associated with no one
except in so far as he dined every day more or
less silently at his father’s table. But any one
who opened a conversation with him was con-
fronted with an extraordinary clearness of vision
and a zeal for the truth which invariably ren-
dered the conversation uncomfortable. He never
went to church, but he gave away more than
36


half his income for charitable purposes, and
always with the most precise instructions for its
employment.
This unbounded beneficence was so different
from the close practices of the little town that
every one was overwhelmed. If to this be
added his reserve, his constant journeys abroad,
and the general reluctance to talk to him, it will
easily be understood that he was regarded as
rather a mysterious personage to whom people
ascribed all imaginable gifts, as well as their
own favourable opinions of him. When this man
condescended to make the “ Fisher Lass ” his
daily care, she rose in every one’s estimation.
Others now began to interest themselves in
her too, especially women. She came to him
one day clad in all the colours of the rainbow ;
she had put on all her presents, believing she
would thus be quite to his taste, as he always
liked her to look nice. But he had no sooner
seen her than he forbade her ever to accept
presents from any one again ; he called her vain
and foolish; she set her heart only on worthless
things and took delight in folly. On her coming
to him next morning, her eyes red with crying,
THE FISHER LASS


he took her with him for a walk above the town.
Here he told her of David-—in accordance with
his custom of taking up this or that figure, and
bringing what was already familiar to her into a
new light. First, he depicted him as he was in
his youth, handsome and full of vigour, and un-
shaken in his faith —even before he was a mao
he took part in triumphal processions. From a
shepherd he was called to be a king; he had
dwelt in caves, but he ended by building Jeru-
salem. In rich attire he played before the sick
Saul, but when he himself was a sick king, he
played and sang to himself, clad in the rags of
repentance. When he had achieved his great
work, he sought relaxation in sin; then came
the prophet and the penalty, and he was a child
once more. David, who with his songs of
praise could exalt the whole people of the Lord,
himself lay crushed at the Lord’s feet. Was he
fairer to see when, crowned with victory, he
danced to his own singing before the ark, or
when, in the privacy of his chamber, he begged
for mercy from the hand of the Avenger ?
The night after this conversation she had a
dream, which she remembered all her life. She
38


dreamed that she was riding upon a white horse
in a triumphal procession, but, at the same time,
she seemed to see herself dancing in front of the
horse, in rags.
Some time afterwards, as she was sitting one
evening at the edge of the wood above the town
learning her lessons, Pedro Ohlsen passed
close by her, and, with a strange smile, whis-
pered, “ Good evening ! ” Ever since that day
in the garden he seemed to have been trying to
approach her.
Although a year and more had elapsed, her
mother’s commands not to speak to him were
still so present to her mind that she did not
answer. But day after day he went past her in
the same way and always with the same greet-
ing, until at last she missed him if he did not
happen to come. Soon he asked her some
small question as he passed, before long the one
increased to two, and finally the questions be-
came conversations. One day after a talk of
this kind, he slipped a silver thaler into her lap,
and thereupon hastened away in high glee.
Now it was against her mother’s orders to speak
to him, and against Oedegaard’s to accept
39


presents from any one. The first injunction
she had gradually broken through, but she was
only reminded of it now that it had led to
breaking through the second also. To get rid
of the money she stood treat to the first
friend she met, but, despite all their efforts, it
was impossible to eat quite the whole thaler’s
worth. Afterwards, however, she repented having
squandered the thaler instead of giving it back.
The change which she had left seemed to be
literally burning a hole in her pocket, and she
took it and threw it into the sea. But even
this did not rid her of the thaler. Her very
thoughts were branded with it. If she con-
fessed, her mind would be at rest —she felt
sure it would ; but her mother’s terrible wrath
on the former occasion, and Oedegaard’s deep
and sincere confidence in her were, each in its
way, equally discouraging. Her mother did
not notice anything, but Oedegaard soon per-
ceived that she had something on her mind that
was troubling her. He asked her kindly one
day what it was; instead of answering, she
burst into tears, and he, believing that they
were in distress at home, gave her a ten-thaler
40


note. Now, the fact of receiving money from
him, in spite of her sin against him, made a
deep impression upon her, and as, moreover, it
was money she could openly give to her mother
—honest money—she felt as if she were re-
leased from her guilt, and gave way to unbridled
joy. She took his hand in both of hers, she
thanked him, she laughed, she could not keep
still ; her delight shone through her tears, and
she looked at him as a dog looks at his master
when it is to go out for a walk. He hardly
knew her; she, who usually sat lost in his
r
words, assumed the upper hand. For the first
time he became conscious of a strong and
passionate side to his nature; for the first time
the fountain of life cast its red stream over
him, and he drew back hot and scarlet. But
she flew out of the room and up the hills, to
reach the road that led home. On reaching the
house, she laid the money on the griddle before
her mother and fell upon her neck.
“ Who has been giving you money ? ” said
her mother, growing angry at once.
“ Oedegaard, mother; he is the finest man in
the world I ”
THE FISHER LASS


“ What am I to do with it ? ”
“ L don't know—oh, mother, if you only
knew ■" She threw herself on her mother's
neck again ; now she could and would tell her
everything. But her mother shook her off
impatiently.
“ Would you have me accept alms ? Take
the money back to him at once ! If you made
him think I needed it, you were lying ! "
“ But, mother ! "
“ Take the money back to him at once, I say,
or I'll go to him myself with it and throw it at him,
the man who has taken my child from me!''
Her mother's lips trembled at the last words.
Petra shrank back and grew pale-; then, quietly
opening the door, she stole out of the house.
Before she knew what she was doing, the ten-
thaler note was in pieces between her fingers.
The discovery of this resulted in an outburst of
resentment against her mother. But Oedegaard
must know nothing—yes, he should know every-
thing ! There should be no lying to him !
A moment later she was in his room, telling
him that her mother would not accept money,
and that in her anger at having to bring it back
THE FISHER LASS


to him, she had torn the note to pieces. She
would have said more, but he received her
coldly, and bade her go home again at once,
counselling her at the same time always to show
her mother obedience, even when it was hard to
do so. This seemed to her rather strange, for
she knew well enough that he did not do what
his father most desired.
On the way home her pent-up tears burst
forth, and just at this moment she encountered
Pedro Ohlsen. She had been avoiding him all
this time, and she would have liked to do so now,
for he was the cause of all her unhappiness.
i( Where have you been ? ” he asked, as he
walked at her side. “ Has anything happened
to you ? if
The sea of her emotions ran so high that it
could cast her wherever it listed, and, all things
considered, she could not understand why her
mother should forbid her to have anything to do
with him; it was probably only a whim, like any
other.
“ Do you know what I have done ? ” he said
almost humbly, as she stopped. “ I have bought
a sailing boat for you ; I thought you might
43


sometimes like to go for a sail/ 1 and he
laughed.
His kindness, which savoured of the humble
entreaty of a beggar, was the very thing to
touch her just now. She nodded —and all at
once he grew animated : he told her in an eager
whisper to take the road on the right and go
straight to the large yellow boat-house ; he
would come down behind it and fetch her; no
one could see them there. She went as arranged
and he came shortly after, happy, but respectful
as an old child, and took her out in the boat.
They sailed about for a little in the light breeze
and then made for an island, where they secured
the boat and got out. He had brought all
manner of good things for her, which he handed
to her with a timid joy ; then he took his
flute and played. She forgot her own trouble
for a little on seeing his happiness, and, as there
is something melancholy in the happiness of
weak natures, she all at once found herself
beginning to like him.
From this day on she had a new and constant
secret from her mother, and this soon led to
concealing everything from her. Gunlaug asked
44


no questions ; she had implicit trust in a person
until that trust was shaken, and then she mis-
trusted everything.
But from Oedegaard as well Petra had secrets
from this day on, for she accepted many presents
from Pedro Ohlsen. And Oedegaard asked no
questions either; his whole manner of instruct-
ing her grew more distant day by day. Thus
Petra was now divided between three people;
when with one of them she did not speak of the
others, and she had something to conceal from
each.
But meanwhile she had grown up without
knowing it, and one day Oedegaard announced
to her that she was to be confirmed.
This intelligence filled her with great uneasi-
ness, for she knew that her lessons were to come
to an end with her confirmation, and what was
to happen then ? Her mother was having an
attic built on to the house—after she was con-
firmed, she was to have a room of her own—and
the incessant hammering and knocking reminded
her painfully of what was coming. Oedegaard
observed that she grew quieter every day;
sometimes, too, he saw that she had been crying.
THE FISHER LASS


Under these circumstances his religious instruc-
tion made a deep impression upon her, although
with great tact he avoided everything that was
likely to upset her. For this reason he brought
his instruction to a close about a fortnight before
the confirmation, with the brief announcement
that this would be her last lesson. By this he
meant the last with him; he still intended to
take care of her, but through the medium of
others. She, however, sat motionless ; the colour
left her cheeks and she could not take her eyes
off his face. Touched in spite of himself, he
hastened to give a reason.
“ It is not all young girls, you know, who are
grown up when they are confirmed, but you must
surely feel that this is the case with you.”
If she had been standing in the light of a
large fire, she could not have grown redder than
she did at these words; her breast heaved, her
eyes wavered and filled with tears, and spurred
on he hastened to add :
“ Should you like to go on all the same ? ”
It was only after he had spoken that he realised
what he had proposed. It was not right, he
would take it back; but she had already raised
46


her eyes to his face. She did not say yes with
her lips, and yet, more distinctly it could not
have been said. As a pretext with which to
excuse himself in his own eyes, he asked :
“ There is, perhaps, something to which you
would very much like to devote yourself, some-
thing which you ” —he bent down to her — u feel
to be your calling, Petra ? ”
“ No! ” she answered so quickly that he
reddened and sank back discouraged into the
meditations that had occupied him for so many
years ; her unexpected reply had awakened them
again.
That there was something remarkable about
her he had never doubted since he saw her as a
child, marching singing at the head of troops of
street-boys. But the longer he taught her, the
less able he was to discern wherein her real
talent lay. Every movement was a proof of its
existence ; every thought, every wish was ex-
pressed by mind and body simultaneously, with
a rare power, tempered by a gleam of beauty.
But, put into words, and still more so into
writing, it was simply childishness. She seemed
imagination personified, but he, it must be ad-
47


mitted, regarded it as little more than restless-
ness. She was very industrious, but the object
of her study was less to learn than to get on ;
what was on the next page interested her most.
She was naturally religious, but, as the pastor
expressed it, she had “ no aptitude for a religious
life,” and Oedegaard often felt concerned about
her. At this moment he felt as if he w T ere back
once more at the point from which he had set out;
his thoughts involuntarily flew to the stone steps
where he had agreed to take her as his pupil,
and he heard her mother’s sharp voice laying
the responsibility on him because he used God’s
name. After pacing several times up and down
the room, he collected his thoughts.
u I am going abroad,” he said with a certain
reluctance. u I have asked my sisters to look
after you during my absence, and, when I return,
we shall go into the matter afresh. Good-bye !
—we shall see each other again before Igo ! ”
He went so hastily into the next room that she
had not even time to shake hands with him.
She saw him again where she had least
expected to see him- —in the pastor’s pew beside
the choir. He was exactly opposite to her as
THE FISHER LASS


she stood forth with the other girls to be con-
firmed. This made her so excited that her
thoughts were for some time distracted from the
holy ceremony for which she had prepared her-
self with humble prayer. Yes, even Oedegaard’s
old father paused and gave him a long look on
stepping forward to begin the service. Shortly
after this Petra was to receive another start, for
who should be sitting a little further down the
church, in brand-new clothes, but Pedro Ohlsen !
He was straining his neck to look over the boys’
heads and catch a glimpse of her among the
crowd of girls. He popped down again at once,
but she repeatedly saw his head with its scanty
hair emerge, only to pop down again. This dis-
tracted her attention ; she did not want to look,
and yet she could not help looking. Suddenly,
just as all the others were deeply affected and
many in tears, Petra was dismayed to see Pedro
rise, with mouth and eyes wide open, and stand as
if paralysed with fear, incapable of sitting down
or making a movement; for opposite him stood
Gunlaug, drawn up to her full height. Petra
shuddered at the sight of her mother, for she was
as white as the altar-cloth. Her curly black hair
d
49


seemed literally to stand on end, and there was a
repellent power in her look which seemed to say :
“Away from her! What have you to do with
her ? ” He sank to his seat beneath this glance,
and, a moment later, stole out of the church.
After this Petra was undisturbed, and the
further the service proceeded, the more earnest
was the part she took in it. And when, after
having taken her vow, she turned back and,
through her tears, looked over to Oedegaard as
the person most intimately associated with all
her good resolutions, she vowed in her heart
that she would never put his faith in her to
shame. His kind, steady eyes, as they shone
back at her, seemed to beg for this vow; but
when she had got back to her seat and looked
for him again he had vanished. Soon after she
went home with her mother, who, on the way,
remarked :
“Now I have done my part —may the Lord
do His.”
After they had had dinner—which to-day they
took by themselves—she said as she rose from
the table:
“ Now, I think we had better go to see him
THE FISHER LASS


—the pastor’s son, I mean. Although I don’t
know what will come of all he has done for you,
he has meant it well at any rate. Put on your
things again, my child ! ”
The road to the church, along which they had
so often gone together, led round above the
town. They had never been seen together in
the street before —the mother had hardly set
foot in it since her return to the town. Now,
however, she turned into the street. She wished
to walk the whole length of the street, to walk
along it with her grown-up daughter!
On the afternoon of Confirmation Sunday all
the inhabitants of a little town of this kind are
out of doors, going either from house to house
with congratulations, or walking up and down the
street to see and be seen. At every step they
greet one another, stop, shake hands, and ex-
change good wishes. The poor man’s child
appears in the cast-off clothes of the rich, and
exhibits himself to display his gratitude. The
sailors of the town, decked out in foreign finery,
their caps perched on the side of their heads,
and the dandies of the town —the shop clerks—■
with their greetings for every one, go about in
51


troops. The lads from the Grammar School,
each arm-in-arm with his best friend in the
world, saunter after them, loud in schoolboy
criticism.
But on this particular day all had to admit
that they were thrown into the shade by the
young merchant, Yngve Void, the lion of the
town and its richest man, who had just come
home from Spain, all ready to take over on the
following day his mother’s large fish business.
With a light hat on his fair hair, he was re-
splendent as he passed along the street, and the
young people who had been confirmed were
almost forgotten. Every one bid him welcome ;
he talked to every one, laughed to every one —
first at one corner, then at another, you saw
the light hat on the light hair and heard the
light laughter. When Petra and her mother
came out, he was the first person they stumbled
upon, and it almost seemed as if they had
actually stumbled against him, for at the sight
of Petra, whom he did not recognise, he started
back.
She had grown tall, not so tall as her mother,
but taller than most women. She was graceful,
THE FISHER LASS


refined and sprightly, her mother and not her
mother in alternating flashes. Even the young
merchant, who followed them down the street,
could no longer attract the eyes of the passers-
by ; to see these two, mother and daughter
together, was a more unusual sight. They
walked quickly, bowing to no one, for they were
seldom greeted, except by sailors; but when
they came up the street again they were walking
still more quickly, for they had heard that
Oedegaard had left home for the steamer, which
was just about to start. Petra, in particular,
hastened her steps ; she felt that she must see
him once more before he left to thank him—oh,
it was cruel of him to go away from her like
this! She had no eyes for all the people who
looked at her; all she saw was the smoke of
the steamer above the roofs, and it seemed to
her that it was moving away. When they got
to the quay the steamer was just putting off,
and, choking with sobs, she hastened further
along the road. She ran rather than walked,
and her mother followed her. As the steamer
took some time to turn in the harbour, she was
in time to jump down on to the wet beach, climb
THE FISHER LASS


up on a rock, and wave her handkerchief. Her
mother remained on the road, and would not go
down. Petra waved, waved higher and higher,
but no one waved in return.
Then she could restrain herself no longer,
and cried so bitterly that she was forced to take
the upper road home. Her mother accompanied
her, but in silence.
The attic, which her mother had presented
to her, and where she had slept for the first
time the night before and dressed herself that
morning in her new clothes with so much
pleasure, received her in the evening dissolved
in tears and with no eyes for anything. She
refused to go down among the sailors and other
customers, but took off her confirmation dress
and sat on the edge of her bed till night came.
To be grown up seemed to her to be the most
miserable thing in the world.
54


CHAPTER IV
One day very shortly after the confirmation she
went over to see Oedegaard’s sisters, but she
soon perceived that there must have been some
mistake on Oedegaard’s part; for the pastor took
no notice of her, and his daughters, who were
both older than Oedegaard, were very stiff.
They contented themselves with giving her a
few scant directions from their brother as to how
she was henceforth to occupy herself. The
whole of the forenoon she was to help with the
housework in a house outside the town, and in
the afternoon to go to the sewing school; she
was to sleep as well as take her breakfast and
supper at home. She did as it was arranged,
and got on very well as long as the novelty
lasted, but afterwards, and especially when
summer came, she began to tire of it. At this
time of year she had been in the habit of sitting
55


up by the wood all day long, reading her books,
which she now missed with all her heart, as she
missed Oedegaard, as she missed having some
one to talk to. The consequence was that she
had finally to content herself with such com-
panionship as she could get.
About this time there came to the sewing
school a young girl whose name was Lise Let; or,
rather, Lise, but not Let. Let was the name of
a young cadet who, when at home for the Christ-
mas holidays, had got engaged to her on the ice,
when she was nothing more than a school-girl.
Lise was ready to stake her life that it was not
true, and always began to cry as soon as it was
mentioned ; however, she had been called Lise
Let ever since. Lively, little Lise Let cried as
readily as she laughed, but whether she cried or
laughed, her thoughts ran on love. Strange new
thoughts soon swarmed like bees through the
whole school. If a hand was stretched out for
the reel, it was making a proposal, and the reel
either accepted or declined; the needle was en-
gaged to the thread, and the thread sacrificed
himself stitch by stitch for the unfeeling lady.
Whoever pricked herself shed her heart's blood ;
56


whoever changed her needle was faithless. If
two girls whispered together, it was about some-
thing remarkable that had happened to them;
two others were soon whispering, and then two
more. Every one had her bosom friend, and
there were innumerable secrets ; it was unbear-
able.
One afternoon at dusk, in that fine rain we
call a drizzle, Petra, a large shawl over her head,
was standing outside the house, looking into the
passage, where a young sailor stood whistling a
waltz. She was holding her shawl tightly under
her chin with both hands, and only her nose and
eyes were visible; but the sailor was not slow to
discover that she was beckoning to him, and at
once hurried out to her.
“ Look here, Gunnar, will you go for a
walk ? ”
“ But it’s raining ! ”
u Pooh, what does that matter ? ” and so they
walked to a little house further up the hill.
“ Buy me some cakes —those with whipped
cream.”
“You are always wanting cakes.”
“ Those with whipped cream ! ”
THE FISHER LASS


He went in and bought some; she stretched
out one hand from under her shawl, took the
cakes and ate them as she went along. When
they were on the hill above the town, she gave
him a piece of cake and said :
“Look here, Gunnar, you and I have always
been very fond of each other, haven’t we ? I
have always liked you best of all the boys ! You
don’t believe it ? I assure you it’s true, Gunnar !
And you are second mate now and may soon
have a ship of your own. Well, I think you
ought to be engaged now, Gunnar Are
you not going to eat the cake ? ”
“No, I’ve just begun to chew a quid.”
“Well, what do you say ? ”
“ Oh, there’s no hurry ! ”
“No hurry ! Aren’t you going away the day
after to-morrow ? ”
“Yes, but I’m coming back, I hope.”
“ But it’s very uncertain whether I shall have
time then; you don’t know where I may be.”
“ So it’s you I’m to be engaged to, is it ? ”
“ Yes, Gunnar, you might have understood
that at once; but you are always so stupid—
that’s why you are only a sailor.”
58


“Oh, I’m not sorry for that; it’s a fine thing
to be a sailor.”
“ Yes, for your mother has a ship of her own.
Well, but what do you say to it ? You are such
a slow coach ! ”
- Well, what am I to say ? ”
“ What are you to say ? Ha, ha, ha, per-
haps you don’t want to have me ? ”
“ Oh, Petra, you know very well I do. But I
don’t think I can be sure of you.”
“Yes, indeed, Gunnar, I will be true to you,
oh, so true ”
He stood still for a moment.
“ Let me see your face, Petra ! ”
“ What for ? ”
“ I want to see if you really mean it.”
“ Do you think I am making a fool of you, Gun-
nar ? ” She was angry and raised her shawl.
“Well, Petra, if you are really and truly in
earnest, give me a kiss on it, for every one
knows what that means.”
“Areyou mad?” She closed her shawl again
and went on.
“Wait, Petra, wait a moment! You don’t
understand. If we are sweethearts ”
59


11 Oh, nonsense ! ”
“Well, I think I ought to know what the
custom is, for, as far as worldly experience goes,
I am a good deal your superior. Think of all
I have seen.”
“Oh yes, you’ve seen like a fool and you talk
as you’ve seen ! ”
“ What do you mean by being sweethearts,
eh, Petra ? I should at least like to know that
To run up and down hill after each other is not
much fun ! ”
u No, that’s true enough ! ” She laughed and
paused. “ But now listen, Gunnar ! While we
stop here to take breath —ooh !—l’ll tell you
how sweethearts behave. As long as you are
in the town, you are to wait outside the sewing
school every evening to take me home to our
door, and, if I am anywhere else, you are to
wait for me in the street till I come out. But
when you are away, you are to write to me and
buy things and send them to me. It’s true, we
must give each other rings with your name in
one and mine in the other, and the year and the
day of the month ; but I have no money, so you
will have to buy them both.”
60


“Yes, FII do that, but ”
“ What other ‘ but ’ have you got now ? ”
“ Good gracious ! I only meant that I should
have to get the measure of your finger ! ”
“Well, you can have that at once.” She
pulled a piece of grass, took the measurement
and bit it off. “ There, don’t throw it away! ”
He folded it in a piece of paper and put the
paper in his pocket-book ; she watched until the
pocket-book was safely put away again.
“ Let us go on now ; I’m tired of staying
here any longer,”
“ But I really do. think this is a little bit
shabby, Petra ! ”
“ Well, if you don’t want to, my boy, it will
be exactly the same to me ! ”
“Of course I do. It isn’t that; but may I
not even have your hand ? ”
“ What for ? ”
“To make certain that we are now really
engaged.”
“ What nonsense ! Does taking hands make
it more certain ? However, you may have my
hand if you like ; there it is ! No, thank you,
no squeezing, sir ! ”
61


She drew her hand in under her shawl again,
but suddenly she raised the shawl with both
hands so that he could see her whole face.
“ If you tell any one, Gunnar, I shall say that
it isn't true, so now you know !" She laughed
and went on down the hill again.
A moment after she stopped and said :
“ The sewing school does not close till nine
to-morrow, so you can wait for me behind the
garden—do you hear ? ”
“ All right! ”
“ But now you must go ! ”
“Will you not even give me your hand to
say good-bye ? ”
“ I don’t understand what you are always
wanting with my hand—no, you are not going
to have it. Good-bye! ” she called and ran
away.
The next evening she arranged it so that she
was the last to leave the school. It was almost
ten o’clock when she came out, but, when she
got outside the garden, Gunnar was not there.
She had imagined all sorts of accidents, but not
this ; she was so offended that she waited
herself, if only to have it out with him when he
62


did come. Besides, she was in good company
as she walked up and down behind the garden,
for the Merchants 1 Choral Society had just begun
to practise with open windows in a house close
by. A Spanish song floated out on the mild
evening air and lured her thoughts away, until
she was in Spain and heard her praises sung
from an open balcony. Spain was the land of
her longings ; for, every summer, dark Spanish
ships came into the harbour, Spanish songs were
heard in the streets, and on Oedegaard's walls
hung a row of beautiful pictures from Spain. He
was there again now, perhaps, and she was
with him ! But in a trice she was at home
again ; for there at last, behind the apple-tree,
came Gunnar at full speed. She rushed towards
—not Gunnar, but him of the light hat and the
fair hair, who had come home from Spain.
“ Ha, ha, ha, ha! ” rang out his light
laughter. “ Did you take me for some one
else ? ”
This she at once warmly denied and ran
indignantly away, but he ran after her, talking
incessantly as he ran, with extraordinary volu-
bility, and with that indistinct utterance which
THE FISHER LASS


is common to people who speak several lan-
guages.
“ Oh, I can keep up with you very well, for
I’m an excellent runner —so it's no use. I must
speak to you ; this is the eighth evening Ive
been waiting for you. 11
“ The eighth evening ! ”
“ The eighth evening! Ha, ha, ha, I’d
willingly wait eight more, for you and I are well
suited, aren’t we ? It’s no use, I shan’t let you
r r'j o
go, for now you’re tired, I see.
“No, I’m not.”
“Yes, you are.”
“ No, I’m not.”
“ Yes, you are! Well, speak, if you’re not
tired! ”
“Ha, ha, ha!”
“ Ha, ha, ha, ha ! I don’t call that speaking ! ”
And then they stood still.
They rapidly exchanged a few thrusts, half
in fun and half in earnest ; then he spoke in
glowing terms of Spain, and called up one
picture after another before her, and finally, he
cursed the little town at their feet. To his de-
scriptions Petra listened with sparkling eyes ] the
64


curse whizzed past her ears unheeded, for her
eyes were fixed on a gold chain that he wore
twice round his neck.
“Yes,” he said quickly, drawing out the end
of the chain, to which a gold cross was attached.
“ Look, I took it with me this evening to
show it at the Choral Society; it is from
Spain. I'll tell you its history.” And so he
began:
u When I was in the south of Spain, I went
to a shooting match, and won this prize. It
was presented to me with the following words:
‘ Take it with you to Norway, and pre-
sent it as a token of respectful homage from
Spanish cavaliers to the most beautiful woman
in your native land/ Thereupon, loud shouts
and flourishes of trumpets; banners waved,
the cavaliers applauded, and I received the
prize! ”
“Oh, how splendid!” exclaimed Petra; for
her fancy immediately called up the brilliant
Spanish festival, with its Spanish colours and
Spanish songs, its dark-skinned Spaniards,
standing in the setting sun at the foot of vine-
clad hills, and sending their thoughts to the
E
65


fairest woman in the land of snow. He was a
good-natured young fellow, in spite of his re-
markable officiousness and self-conceit, and there
he stood and talked to her for some time.
With each picture he drew, her longing in-
creased, until, wholly transported to that won-
derful land, she began to hum the Spanish
song she had just heard, and gradually to keep
time to it with her feet.
“ What ? You can dance Spanish dances ! ”
he cried.
“Yes,” she hummed in time with the dance,
snapping her fingers to imitate castanets; for
she had seen Spanish sailors dancing.
“ It is you who deserve the Spanish cavaliers ,
gift I ” he cried, as if struck by a brilliant
thought. “You are the most beautiful woman I
have ever met !”
Before she knew what he was doing, he had
taken the gold chain from his neck and skil-
fully thrown it many times round hers. But
when she realised what he had done, her face
was suffused with the deep blush that was
peculiar to her, and she was on the point of
bursting into tears. Yngye, who had had
66


nothing but one surprise after the other, was
now seized with the greatest embarrassment at
what he had done, and did not know what to
do next; he felt, however, that he had better
go, and he went.
At midnight she was still standing with the
chain in her hands at the open window of the
attic. The summer night lay softly upon town
and fjord and distant mountains. In the street
the Spanish song was to be heard again, for the
Society had accompanied Yngve Void home.
Every word was audible; it was about a beau-
tiful wreath. Only two voices sang the words,
the others imitated with their lips a guitar ac-
companiment :
41 Take thou this wreath, it is for thee,
Take thou this wreath and think of me!
Here is the greenest
Spray for the fairest,
Here is the fullest
Bud for the rarest,
Here is a symbol
That love will endure,
A flower for the gentlest,
A leaf for the pure.
Take thou this wreath, it is for thee,
Take thou this wreath and think of me! ”
67


On opening her eyes next morning it seemed
to her that she had been in a forest, brilliant
with sunshine, where all the trees were what we
know as golden rain,’* or laburnum, from
which hung long, shining clusters that almost
touched her as she passed. She at once re-
membered the chain, and, taking it up, hung it
over her nightdress. Then, however, she put a
black handkerchief over the nightdress, and the
chain over it; for it looked better on black.
Still sitting in bed, she looked at herself in a
small hand-glass. Was she really so pretty ?
She got up to plait her hair, and then looked at
herself in the glass again. But remembering
that her mother as yet knew nothing, she
hastened to dress; she must go down and tell
her all about it. But when she had finished,
and was about to hang the chain round her
neck, she suddenly began to wonder what her
mother would say, what every one would say,
and what answer she would give when asked
why she wore such a valuable chain. This
question was a very natural one, and the longer
she thought of it, the more serious it seemed to
her, until at last looking out a little box, she
68


laid the chain in it and put it in her pocket—and
for the first time in her life knew what it was
to feel poor.
She did not go to her work that morning.
She went up to the place above the town where
she had received the chain, and sat there with it
in her hand for a long time, feeling as if she
had stolen it.
That evening she waited behind the garden
for Yngve Void still longer than she had waited
the preceding evening for Gunnar; she was
going to give him back the chain. But, as the
ship in which Gunnar sailed had unexpectedly
weighed anchor the day before, having been
offered an excellent cargo in the next town, so
Yngve Void, who owned the ship, had been
forced to leave that day on the same errand,
and, as he had a great deal of business to do,
he was away for three weeks.
During these three weeks the chain had
gradually made its way from her pocket to a
drawer, from there into an envelope, and the
envelope again into a secret place. Meanwhile
Petra herself had made one humiliating dis-
covery after another. For the first time she
THE FISHER LASS


became fully aware of the distance that sepa-
rated her from the ladies of the town ; they
might have worn the chain without ever being
asked why they wore it, or where they got it.
But Yngve Void would not have dared to offer
the chain to one of them without offering his
hand along with it; it was only the “ Fisher
Lass 79 whom he dared to treat in this way. If
he had wished to give her something, why
not something that would have been useful to
her ? But he only wished to insult her the
more deeply by giving her something for which
she had not the slightest use. His story about
“ the most beautiful woman ” was probably an
invention, for, if the chain had been meant for
her on that ground, he would not have brought
it to her under cover of darkness. Shame and
annoyance preyed the more persistently upon
her as she had given up the habit of confiding
in any one. No wonder, therefore, that the first
time she met him again—him, round whom all
these angry and indignant thoughts turned she
blushed so deeply that he could not but mis-
construe it, and, feeling this, she grew still
redder.
THE FISHER LASS


Hastening home again, she seized the chain,
and although it was still daylight, seated herself
on the edge of the wood to wait for him; he
should have it back now I She felt certain he
would come; he, too, had grown red on seeing
her, and he had been away all this time. But
these same thoughts soon began to speak in his
favour. He would not have blushed if he had
been indifferent to her; he would have come
before, had he been at home. It began to
grow rather dark, for, in these three weeks,
the days had become considerably shorter. But,
when night falls, a change often comes over our
thoughts.
She sat among the trees, close to the road,
where she could see but not be seen. As
time wore on and he did not come, conflicting
feelings took possession of her. She listened
now in anger, now in fear. She heard the
passers-by long before she saw them, but it was
never he. Birds which, half-asleep, changed
their perches among the leaves, frightened her,
her nerves were at such a strain. Every sound
from the town, every cry attracted her attention.
A large ship was weighing anchor amidst the
THE FISHER LASS


singing of its crew; it was to be towed out that
night to catch the first morning breeze. Oh,
now she longed to be going with it, out to the
open sea! The sailors’ song became her own,
the regular clanging of the capstan, as it raised
the anchor, inspired her soul with power to rise
—but whither, to what end ? . . . . There
was the light hat on the road, just in front of
her. Without more ado, she sprang up and ran
away, but as she was running, she remembered
that this was just what she ought not to have
done ; this was another blunder on her part, and
she stopped short. When he came up to where
she was standing among the trees, she was
breathing so heavily that he heard every breath
she drew; her fear exerted the same fascination
over him to-day as her confident frankness on
that former occasion. He looked very shy, even
confused, and whispered :
11 Don’t be afraid ! ”
But he saw that she was trembling. To give
her confidence, he tried to take her hand, but, at
the first touch, she sprang back as if she were
burnt, and ran away again, leaving him where he
was.
THE FISHER LASS


She did not run far, for she had no breath left;
her temples throbbed and burned, and her breast
heaved wildly. She pressed her hands to it and
listened. She heard steps in the grass, a rustle
among the leaves; he was coming, and straight
towards her. Did he see her ? No, he did not!
Yes, he did! No, he was going past! It was
not that she was afraid; but she was in such a
tumult of excitement that as soon as she felt
safe, her strength forsook her and she sank to
the ground, faint and exhausted.
After some time had elapsed, she rose and
went slowly back, now pausing, now taking a
few steps forward as if she had absolutely no
object in view. When she reached the road
again, he was sitting there waiting patiently for
her. He stood up at her approach. She had
not seen him; she seemed to be in a mist. Not
a word escaped her, nor did she stir ; she only
covered her face with her hands and wept.
Yngve Void was so overcome by this that his
usually busy tongue was silent. Then he said
with peculiar decision :
“ This evening I shall speak to my mother;
to-morrow everything will be arranged, in a few
73


days you will go abroad and then become my
wife.”
He waited for an answer ; he waited at least
for her to look up, but she did not do so. He
interpreted it in his own way :
“ You don't answer? You cannot! Very
well! Rely upon me, for from this moment you
are mine ! Good night! ” And he went.
She remained behind as in a mist; a dim fore-
boding stole into her heart, and seemed for an
instant as if it would bring clearness, but the mist
soon closed over her again.
Yngve Void had occupied such a large share
of her thoughts for three weeks that the way was
smooth for making this new marvel the founda-
tion-stone of a new castle in the air. He was
the richest man in the town and belonged to its
oldest family, and, regardless of these considera-
tions, he was going to raise her to his own posi-
tion. This was something so unexpected and so
different from all that she had been thinking of
late in her trouble and vexation, that it alone was
enough to make her happy. But she grew still
happier when she came to consider in detail the
new and altogether overwhelming prospects. She
74


saw herself every one’s equal and on the point of
realising all her vague desires. First and fore-
most, she saw Yngve Void’s largest ship on their
wedding-day, lying decked out with flags in the
harbour; she saw it receive them on board
after the guns and fireworks had gone off, and
bear them away to Spain, the land of the bridal
sun.
* * * * *
When she awakened the next day, the servant
came up and told her that it was half-past
eleven. Petra was ravenously hungry; she had
some breakfast, and then some more. Her head
ached and she felt very tired, so she turned over
and went to sleep again. When, however, she
wakened again at three o’clock in the afternoon,
she felt quite well. Her mother came up and
said to her that she must certainly have slept
away an approaching illness; she did that some-
times herself. But she must get up now and go
to the sewing school. Petra was sitting up in
bed with her head on her hand ; she answered
without looking up that she was not going to the
sewing school any more. Her mother, thinking
that she was probably still a little dazed with
75


sleep, went downstairs to fetch a parcel and a
letter which a ship-boy had brought. Presents
already! Petra had again lain down, but she
rose in a twinkling, r and, as soon as she was
alone, began to open them with a certain air of
solemnity. First, the parcel; it contained a pair
of French shoes. Somewhat disappointed, she
was about to lay them down, when she felt that
they were heavy at the toes. She put her hand
into one of them and drew out a little packet,
wrapped in tissue-paper—it was a gold bracelet;
in the other there was also a packet, carefully
rolled up—a pair of French gloves—and from
the right glove she drew another little paper
parcel which contained two plain gold rings.
“Already ! ” thought Petra with beating heart.
She looked for the inscription, and there, right
enough, in one of them was u Petra ” with the
year and the day of the month ; in the other—
“ Gunnar.” She grew pale, and throwing the
rings and the whole parcel on the floor, as if it
had burnt her fingers, tore open the letter. It
was dated Calais, and she read :
THE FISHER LASS


“ Dear Petra,
“We have arrived here with a fair wind
from latitude 61 to latitude 54; an( 3 after that a
strong head wind until we got here, which is
unusual even for better craft than ours, which is
a splendid sailer. Now I must tell you that the
whole way I have thought of you and what last
took place between us, and I am vexed that I
could not say good-bye to you properly, for
which reason I went on board in a bad temper,
but have never forgotten you since, except some-
times, now and then, for a seaman has a hard
time of it. But now we have got here, and I
have used all my wages to buy presents for you
as you asked me to ; and the money mother
gave me I used too, so that I have none left.
But if I can get leave, I shall be with you as
soon as the presents ; for so long as it is a
secret, I am not sure of other people, especially
young men, there are so many of them in the
town. But I want it made certain so that no
one will have any excuse and will know that
he has to look out for me. You could easily get
a finer fellow than me, for you could have who-
ever you liked; but you could never get a truer
THE FISHER LASS


one, and that’s what I am. Now I will conclude,
for I have used up two sheets, and my writing is
getting so big ; for this is the hardest thing for
me to do, but I shall do it all the same, if you
want me to. And, in conclusion, I will say that
lam sure it was meant in earnest; for if you were
not in earnest, it was a great sin, and may make
many people unhappy.
“GUNNAR ASK,
‘ 1 Second mate on the brig
“ Norwegian Constitution
A great fear came over her ; she was out of
bed and dressed in a moment. She felt that
she must go out —advice was surely to be had
somewhere; for everything had grown hazy,
uncertain, dangerous. The more she brooded,
the more tangled became the thread of her
thoughts. Some one would have to help her
to unravel it, or she would never be free! But
in whom dare she confide ? It could be in no
one but her mother.
But when, after a long struggle, she was
standing in the kitchen, frightened, tearful, but
with the firm resolve to be perfectly frank in
order to get all the help she needed, her mother
THE FISHER LASS


said without turning, and, therefore, without
noticing Petra’s face:
“He has just been here; he has come home
again.”
“ Who ? ” whispered Petra, keeping a firm
hold on herself; for, if Gunnar had been there
already, there was no more hope for her. She
knew Gunnar ; he was heavy and good-natured,
but, his anger once roused, he lost all control of
himself.
“You were to go up there at once, he
said.”
“Up there! ” said Petra, trembling. She
realised instantly that he had told his mother
everything, and what would happen now ?
“ Yes, to the parsonage,” said her mother.
“To the parsonage? Is it Oedegaard who
has come home ? ”
“ Yes, who else ? ”
“ Oedegaard ! ” cried Petra rapturously, and
the storm of joy cleared the air in a moment.
“ Oedegaard is back ! Good heavens, Oedegaard
is back! ” She was out of the door and across
the fields. She ran, she laughed, she cried
aloud. It was he, he, whom she needed. Had
79


4
A
he been at home the mischief would never have
happened. With him she was safe ; the mere
thought of his calm, impressive face, his gentle
voice, even of the quiet rooms, hung with
pictures, in which he lived, made her mind fall
into a more tranquil rhythm and gave her a
feeling of security. She moderated her pace
and collected her thoughts. The autumn even-
ing was falling, and town and landscape lay
resplendent in the sunset; the fjord, in par-
ticular, was a dazzling sheet of light, and
outside, in the Sound, the smoke of the steamer
in which Oedegaard had returned was slowly
fading away. Oh ! only to know that he was
at home again made her well and whole and
strong. She prayed to God that Oedegaard
might never leave her again. And just as
she was elated with this hope, she saw him
coming towards her with a smile; he had
known the way she would take and had come
to meet her! This touched her, and, running
up to him, she seized both his hands and
kissed them. He felt embarrassed, and, as
he saw some one coming in the distance, he
drew her aside from the road up among the
THE FISHER LASS


trees. He held her hands in his, and all the
way she kept repeating :
“Oh, how glad I am to see you! No, I
cannot believe it is you ! Oh, you must never
go away any more ! Don’t leave me ; oh, don’t
leave me! ”
Here her tears burst forth. He pressed her
head gently to his breast as if to hide them; he
wanted to quiet her, for he felt it necessary that
she should be calm. But she nestled up to him
like a bird that creeps beneath the wing that is
raised for it, and she was unwilling to come out
again. Overcome by this confidingness he put
his arm round her, as if to promise her the
shelter she sought; but she had no sooner felt
it than she raised her tearful face to him, her
eyes met his, and all that a look can say—when
repentance meets love, when gratitude meets the
joy of the giver, when yes meets yes—was said
at this moment. He put his arm round her
neck and pressed his lips to hers. He had lost
his mother early; he kissed for the first time in
his life, and so did Petra. They could not tear
themselves apart, and when they did, it was
only to sink into each other’s arms again. He
F
81


trembled, but she was radiant with happiness.
She threw her arms round his neck; she clung
to him like a child. And when they sat down,
and she might touch his hands, his hair, his
breast-pin, necktie, everything that she had
looked at respectfully from a distance; and
when he begged her to say “ thou ” and not
“ you/’ and she could not; and when he tried
to tell her how rich she had made his poor life
from the first moment, and how long he had
struggled with his love that it might not check
her development, that he might not seem to be
accepting hers as payment —and when he dis-
covered that she was not in a state to grasp or
understand a word of what he was saying, and
when he himself found there was no sense in it;
when she wanted to go home with him at once,
and he had laughingly to beg her to wait for a
few days, when they would go far away from it
all, together—then, as they sat amongst the
trees, with fjord and mountain before them in
the setting sun, while the faint tones of a horn
and distant singing floated up through the even-
ing air—then they felt and said that this was
happiness.
THE FISHER LASS


“ Oh, how sweet is love’s first meeting—
Sweet as song in forest glades,
Sweet as voices on the water
As the glow of evening fades.
Like a horn in distant valley
Is love’s music in our breast,
When we blend with all around us,
And in nature sink to rest.”
THE FISHER LASS


CHAPTER V
The next morning saw Petra sitting in her room
only half dressed, and all day long she could
get no further. Every time she made a fresh
attempt her arms sank into her lap. Her
thoughts swayed and bent like ripe grain, like
rich flower-bells in the meadows. Peace and
confidence, and visions that, wave-like, rose and
fell, shed light upon the shining castles in
which she dwelt. She lived the meeting of the
previous evening through again—every word,
every look, every pressure of the hand, every
kiss. She wished to go through the whole
thing from meeting to parting, but she never
got to the end ; for each single memory faded in
a blue dream-distance and every dream returned
with promise. Sweet as it might be she had to
push it from her, to remember where she had
left off, and she had no sooner remembered


than she was far away again in the land of
wonders.
As she did not come down, her mother thought
that she had begun her lessons again, now that
Oedegaard had returned. Her meals were sent
up to her and she was left undisturbed all day.
Not till evening approached did she rise to make
herself ready; she was going out to meet her
love. She put on the best clothes she had, all
her confirmation finery ; it was not very much,
but she realised that for the first time now. She
had hitherto had little taste for finery, but to-day
it awakened; one thing made the other look
ugly, and even when she got the right things
together, the whole did not please her ! To-day
she would have given much to be the fairest—
at the word a remembrance stole in, but she re-
pulsed it with her hand; nothing, nothing that
might disturb her happiness should approach her
to-day. She even moved softly herself, as she
gently put her room in order here and there, for
it was still not time. She opened the window
and looked out ; warm red clouds lay encamped
upon the mountains, but a cooling breeze blew
in with tidings from the wood hard by. Yes, 1
85


am coming, I am coming ! She went back to
the glass once more to smile greetings at herself
as a betrothed maiden.
Just then she heard Oedegaard downstairs
speaking to her mother, heard him being shown
where her room was—he was coming to fetch
her. A shy joy came over her; she looked
round to see that everything was in order for
him, and then she went to the door,
“ Come in ! f} she answered softly to his gentle
knock, falling back a few steps
The same morning, on ringing for his coffee,
Oedegaard had been told that Yngve Void, the
merchant, had been there twice already to see
him. He felt annoyed that he should have to
come in contact with a stranger just at present,
but a person who sought him out so early, must
surely be on an important errand. And, indeed,
he was hardly dressed before Yngve Void re-
turned.
“ You are probably surprised at my visit ? I
am myself. Good morning ! ”
They bowed, and he put down his light
hat.
“You sleep late, I have been here twice
THE FISHER LASS


before. I have something very important on
my mind, and 1 must speak to you ! ”
“ Please take a seat ! ” Oedegaard himself
sat down in an armchair.
“ Thanks, thanks, I prefer to walk about ; I
cannot sit still, lam too excited. Since the day
before yesterday I have been out of my mind—
downright crazy, neither more nor less. And
you are to blame for it ! ”
“I ? ”
“Yes, you. You dragged the girl to light;
no one would have thought of her, no one would
ever have noticed her, if it had not been for you.
As it is, I have never seen —no, as surely as I
live—l have never seen anything so peerless,
anything so—don’t you think so ? No, in the
whole of Europe I have never seen such a
devilish, little curly-haired marvel —have you?
I could get no peace, I was fascinated ! She
was always and everywhere in my way. I went
away, came back —impossible —isn’t it ? At
first, I didn’t know who she was —the ‘ Fisher
Lass,’ they said —Spaniard, they should have said,
gipsy, witch —all fire, eyes, bosom, hair—eh?
Sparkles, flashes, skips, laughs, trills, blushes—
THE FISHER LASS


Satan's very own! Ran after her, you see,
among the trees in the wood—quiet evening.
She stopped, I stopped, some words, a song, a
dance—and then ?~yes, then I gave her my
chain—a minute before, as sure as I live, I had
not thought of such a thing ! Next time, same
place, same pranks ; she was afraid, and I—
would you believe it ?—I couldn't say a mortal
word, didn’t dare to touch her; but when she
came back again—can you imagine it ?—I pro-
posed to her, although I had not thought of
such a thing a second beforehand ! Now yester-
day I examined myself, wanted to get away
from her, but, upon my word of honour, I’m
mad ! I cannot do it, I must be with her. If
I don’t get her, I’ll shoot myself without thinking
twice about it, that’s the whole story ! I don’t
care a fig for my mother, or for the town either ;
it’s a hole of a place, a wretched little hole, a
hole—she must get out of it, you see, be raised
far above this town, she must become comme il
faut; she must go abroad, France, Paris ! I’ll
pay all expenses, you do the arranging. I could
go with her myself, settle down abroad, not stay
any longer in this hole ; but then, you see, the
THE FISHER LASS


fish! I want to make something out of the
town; it’s half asleep, doesn’t think, doesn’t
speculate, but —the fish! The fish is not properly
looked after; Spain and other countries are
complaining, things must be done in a different
way, a new manner of drying, other methods,
everything different! The town must rise,
business go ahead, the fish must bring in
millions ! . . . . Where did I leave off ? The
c c 0 *:
fish, the ‘ Fisher Lass ’ —go well together, don’t
they ?—fish, * Fisher Lass/ ha, ha ! Very well
then, I pay, you arrange it, she becomes my wife,
and then ”
He got no further; while talking, he had not
noticed Oedegaard, who, deathly pale, had risen,
and now fell upon him with a thin Spanish cane.
The other’s astonishment was beyond descrip-
tion ; he parried the first few strokes.
i{ Take care, you may strike me! ”he said.
“ Yes, I may strike you ! Spanish, Spanish
cane, you see, go well together too 1 ” and the
strokes fell upon shoulders, arms, hands, face —
wherever it was easiest to get at him. Yngve
flew round the room.
“ Are you mad —are you out of your senses ?
89


I am going to marry her, do you hear, marry
her! ”
“ Out with you ! ” cried Oedegaard, as if his
strength were exhausted, and the light-haired
youth flew out of the door, down the stairs,
away from this madman, and was soon in the
street, shouting up for his light hat. It was
thrown out of the window to him, and thereupon
all was still
“ Come in ! v answered Petra that evening in
response to the gentle knock, falling back a few
steps to see her lover better as he entered. It
seemed as if an avalanche had broken over her,
as if the ground were slipping from beneath her
feet, when she saw his face as he opened the
door. She staggered back and caught hold of
the bed-post, but, hurled from one abyss to
another, her thoughts grew dizzy. In less than
a second she was transformed from the happiest
girl in the world to its greatest sinner. She saw
it in letters of fire upon his face ; he could never,
never forgive her !
“ I see it —you are guilty !” he whispered in
a scarcely audible voice. He leaned against the
framework of the door and held fast to the
THE FISHER LASS


handle, as if he could not stand alone. His
voice quivered, and tears rolled down his face,
although it was perfectly calm.
u Do you -know what you have done ? ” and
his eyes seemed to crush her to the ground.
She did not answer—not even with tears; a
complete and hopeless feeling of weakness ren-
dered her powerless.
“ Once before I gave away my soul, and he
to whom I gave it, died through fault of mine.
I could not recover from my grief, unless some
one would take pity on me and give me back a
whole soul again. This you did —or rather, you
made a pretence of doing it.”
He paused ; he tried once or twice to begin
again, but in vain. Then with a sudden burst
of pain he cried :
“ And you could have the heart to overthrow,
as if it were an image of clay, all that I have
been gathering together, thought by thought, in
these long years. Child, child, could you not
understand that in you I was struggling up again?
Now it is all over I” he tried to master his
grief.
" No, you are too young to understand,” he
91


said again; “you do not know what you have
done. But you must, at least, understand that
you have deceived me. Tell me what I have
done to you, that you could be capable of being
so cruel to me. Child, child, if even you had
told me yesterday! Why, why, did you lie so
terribly ? ”
She heard him, and all that he said was true.
He had tottered to a chair which stood at the
window, that he might lean his head on a table
beside it. He rose again, convulsed with sobs;
then he sat down once more and was still.
“ And I—l, who am not fit to help my old
father,” he whispered to himself; “I ,I
feel no calling for it. For this reason no one
may help me, everything I undertake shall come
to nothing, everything . . . •”
He could say no more. His head was resting
on his right hand, and his left hung limply at
his side ; he looked as if he could not move, and
he sat there without speaking. Suddenly he
felt something warm on the hand at his side; he
gave a start —it was Petra’s breath. She was
kneeling beside him with bowed head, and,
folding her hands, she looked up to him with an
THE FISHER LASS


unutterable prayer for mercy. He looked down
at her, and neither avoided the other’s eyes.
But then he raised his hand with a forbidding
gesture, as if at her glance there arose in his
heart a persuasive voice, to which he dared not
listen. Hastily and impetuously stooping for his
hat, which had fallen to the floor, he hurried to
the door. But, quick as he was, she was before
him. Throwing herself at his feet, she clung to
his knees and riveted her eyes on him—all with-
out a sound; but he both saw and felt that she
was fighting for her life. His old love became
too strong for him; he looked full at her once
more with pain in his eyes; he took her head in
both his hands. But there was only a mournful
wailing in his breast—as in an organ, after the
last note has been played, and there is still air,
but no more music. He drew his hands back
and in such a way that she could not but divine
his thoughts : it was for ever.
“ No, no! you can yield to emotion, but you
cannot love ! ” He was overcome. Unhappy
child, what your future will be, I cannot say;
may God forgive you for having laid mine
waste! ”
THE FISHER LASS


He went past her, she did not move ; he
opened the door and shut it again, she said
nothing. She heard him on the stairs; she
heard his last steps on the flagstones, and finally,
they died away in the street. Then the spell was
broken ; she uttered a cry, a single cry, but it
brought her mother.
When Petra recovered consciousness, she found
herself lying in bed, undressed and comfortably
tucked in, but beside her sat her mother with her
elbows on her knees, her head in her hands, and
her fiery eyes fixed upon her daughter.
“ Have you had lessons enough from him
now ? Have you learnt something now ?
What is going to become of you now ? ”
Petra replied with a burst of tears. For a
long, long time her mother sat there and listened
to her, and then she said with a peculiar
solemnity:
u May the Lord curse him ! ”
Her daughter started up.
" Mother, mother, not him, not him, but me,
me —not him.”
“ Oh, I know the lot of them ! I know whose
fault it is ! ”
THE FISHER LASS


u No, mother, he was deceived, and by me!
It was I who deceived him ! ”
Amidst sobs she hurriedly told her the whole
story ; he must not for a moment be misjudged.
She told her about Gunnar, and what she had
asked of him, without properly understanding
what it was; then about Yngve Void’s unlucky
chain, and how it had entangled her, and finally
how, on seeing Oedegaard, she had forgotten
everything. She did not understand how it had
all happened, but this much she understood, that
it was a monstrous sin against them all, and
especially against him who had raised her to
himself, and given her everything that one
mortal can give another. After sitting for a
long time in silence, her mother answered :
“And was this not a sin against me ? Where
have I been all the time, that you have never said
a word to me ? ”
“ Oh, mother, help me, don’t be hard upon
me now; I feel that I shall have to atone for it
all my life; but I shall pray to God, to let me
die soon ! Dear, dear God,” she began at once,
folding her hands in prayer; “dear, dear God,
hear me ! I have spoiled my life ;it has nothing
95


more for me now. I am not fit to live; I do
not understand life. Dear God, let me die ! ”
There was such an affecting sincerity in her
prayer that Gunlaug swallowed the hard words
that had risen to her lips, and laid her hand upon
her daughter’s arm to stop her from praying
thus.
“ Control your thoughts, child; do not tempt
God. We must live, however bitter it is.”
She rose—and never again did she set foot in
the attic.
Oedegaard had been attacked by an illness
which threatened to become dangerous. While
it lasted, his old father moved into his son’s
rooms, and made his study beside him, telling
every one who begged him to spare himself that
it was impossible; his duty was to watch over
his son, whenever the latter lost any one whom
he loved more than his father.
So matters stood when Gunnar came home!
He almost terrified the life out of his mother
by turning up long before the vessel in which he
sailed. She thought it was his ghost. And
with his acquaintances it was not much better.
To all surprised questions, he only gave foolish
96


answers. Soon, however, people got to know
better; for the very day he returned, he was
chased out of Gunlaug’s house, and that by
Gunlaug herself. She called after him from
the steps in a voice that echoed down the
lane:
%
“ Never come here again; we have had enough
of your sort ! ”
He had not gone far before a girl came after
him with a parcel. She had another parcel with
her, and gave him the wrong one ; for in it Gunnar
found a large gold chain. He stood weighing it
and looking at it; he had not understood Gun-
laug’s wrath before, but still less did he now
understand why she should send him a gold
chain. He called the girl back ; she must surely
have made a mistake, so she gave him the other
parcel and asked if that were his. The parcel
turned out to contain his presents to Petra.
Yes, that was all right ; but who was to get
the gold chain ? That was for Herr Void, the
merchant, answered the girl, and went away
with it. Gunnar paused again and thought:
“Yngve Void? Does he give presents?
So it’s he who has stolen her from me ! . . . .
THE FISHER LASS


Yngve Void !.. . . Well, then, he shall ”
His excitement and his anger had to find some
relief; he must lay hands on something—and the
lot fell to Yngve Void.
The unfortunate merchant was once more
unexpectedly attacked, and this time on his own
step. He fled from this madman into his office,
but Gunnar followed him. All the clerks threw
themselves upon the disturber, who, however,
kicked and struck in all directions. Chairs,
tables and desks were overturned ; letters,
papers and invoices flew about like smoke.
Help came at last from Yngve’s wharf, and,
after a desperate struggle, Gunnar was thrown
out into the street. But here it really began in
earnest. Two vessels were lying at the wharf,
a foreign one and a home one, and, as it was
just midday, the sailors were only too glad to
join in the fun. They came to blows at once,
crew against crew, foreigners against natives.
Other crews were summoned, and came running
at double-quick pace; workmen collected, old
women and boys gathered round until at last no
one knew why or against whom he was fighting.
In vain skippers cursed, in vain worthy citizens
98


ordered a message to be sent to the town’s only
policeman— at this moment he was out on the
fjord, fishing. They ran to the magistrate, who
was postmaster as well. But he had shut him-
self up with the mail, which had just arrived,
and answered through the window that he could
not attend ; his assistant was at a funeral and
they would have to wait. But as they could not
put off murdering one another until the mail was
sorted, several among the crowd, especially
frightened women, cried that Arne the smith
should be fetched. This was agreed to by the
worthy citizens, and so his wife went for him,
<f as the police was not at home.” He came—
to the delight of all the school children—and
made a few inroads on the crowd, and,
then picking out an active Spaniard, flung
about indiscriminately with him amongst the
others.
When everything was over, the magistrate
came walking along with a stick. He found
some old women and children talking on the
battlefield. These he sternly ordered to go
home and have dinner, which he also did him-
self.
THE FISHER LASS


But on the following day he began to collect
evidence. This was continued for some time,
although no one had the slightest idea as to who
had been fighting. Only in one point were
all agreed, namely, that Arne the smith had
taken part in it, as they had seen him belabour-
ing the others with a Spaniard. For this
behaviour Arne the smith had to pay a fine of a
thaler, and his wife, who had brought him into
it, got a thrashing on the eleventh Sunday after
Trinity, as she well remembered. This was the
only judicial result of the fight.
But it had other results. The little town
was no longer a quiet town ; the “ Fisher Lass
had set it in an uproar. The strangest reports
were circulated —in the first place, out of angry
jealousy that she had been able to attract the
cleverest man in the town and its two best
matches, and still have “ several ” in reserve ;
for Gunnar gradually became “several young
men.” Soon there arose a general moral storm.
The disgrace of a great street fight and of
having bx*ought trouble into three of the best
families in the town rested upon the shoulders of
the young girl who had only been confirmed six
THE FISHER LASS


months before. Three love affairs at once, and
one with her teacher, her greatest benefactor —
no, indignation boiled over. Had she not been
a scandal to the town since her childhood ?
Had they not, all the same, magnanimously
expected something of her, when Oedegaard
interested himself in her; and had she not
laughed them all to scorn and spoiled his life ?
True to her own nature, she had recklessly
plunged into a course which would only lead to
her becoming an outcast from society, with the
prospect of an old age in the house of correction.
Her mother was doubtless her accomplice; in
the seamen’s tavern, the child had learned her
frivolous ways. The yoke that Gunlaug cast
over the town was no longer to be borne;
neither mother nor daughter could be tolerated
in their midst any longer, and it was agreed to
drive them from the place.
One evening a number of seamen, who owed
Gunlaug money, drunken workmen, for whom
she would not find work, youngsters to whom
she would not give credit, headed by some
persons of the better class, assembled upon the
hill. They whistled, they hooted, they called


for the “ Fisher Lass ” and “ Fisher Gunlaug 99 ;
presently a stone was thrown against the door,
then another through the attic window. It was
past midnight before they dispersed. Behind
the windows all w r as dark and still.
The next day not a single person would enter
Gunlaug’s door, not even a child went past the
house on the hill. But in the evening the
tumult was the same, save that this time all took
part in it without distinction. They trampled
down the garden, they smashed all the windows,
they tore up the fence, uprooted the young fruit-
trees, and then they sang:
“ I’ve hooked a sailor, mother dear!
* Well done, my lass ! ’
I’ve hooked a merchant, mother dear!
* Well done, my lass ! ’
Oh, mother, look, a parson’s mine!
1 Well, draw your line 1 8
Oh, tra la la,
You’ll change your note !
For it’s not much good though the big fish bite,
If you can’t get them into your boat!
11 I’ve lost my sailor, mother dear!
* Indeed, my lass ! 8
I’ve lost my merchant, mother dear
1 Indeed, my lass ? ’
102


Oh, mother, he’s going, this parson mine!
* Well, draw your line S ’
Oh, tra la la,
You’ll change your note!
For it’s not much good though the big fish bite,
If you can’t get them into your boat,”
Gunlaug, in particular, was called for; they
looked forward with malicious glee to an out-
burst of impotent wrath on her part.
And Gunlaug was sitting inside and heard
every word, but she was silent; for a mother
must be able to endure much for the sake of
her child.
THE FISHER LASS


CHAPTER VI
Petra had been in her room when the shouting,
whistling and hooting began on the first evening.
She had sprung up as if the house were on fire,
or as if everything were tumbling about her
ears. She ran wildly about the room as if
lashed by glowing rods; she felt as if her soul
were being scorched and burned. Her thoughts
sought desperately for a means of escape, but
down to her mother she did not dare to go, and
before the only window stood the crowd ! A
stone came flying through and fell upon her
bed ; she gave a scream, and running into a
corner behind a curtain, hid herself among her
old clothes. There she crouched, glowing with
shame and trembling with fear. Visions of un-
known terrors swept past her ; the air was full
of faces, gaping, grinning faces; they came
quite close, surrounded by a rain of fire . . . .


Oho, it was not fire, but eyes—it rained eyes,
large glowing eyes and small twinkling ones—
eyes that stood still, eyes that ran up and down 1
.... Jesus, Jesus save me !
Oh, what a relief it was when the last cry
died away in the night, and it was quite dark
and quite still! She ventured forth from her
hiding-place ; she threw herself on her bed and
buried her face in the pillows, but she could not
escape from her thoughts. Her mother appeared
in them, threatening, enormous—like storm-clouds
gathered above the mountains ; for what must
not her mother be suffering for her sake ! No
sleep fell upon her eyelids, no peace upon her
soul ; da}' came, but it brought no relief. She
walked up and down, up and down, thinking
only of how she could escape, but she dared not
face her mother, she dared not go out as long as
it was daylight, and in the evening they would
come back again ! Even then she would have
to wait, for it would be still more dangerous to
leave the house before midnight. And then,
where should she go ? She had no money, and
the roads were strange to her ; but there were
sure to be merciful people somewhere, just as
105


there was a merciful God. He knew that however
she had sinned, it had not been from wickedness ;
He saw her remorse, He also saw her helpless-
ness. She listened for her mother’s steps below,
but could not hear them; she trembled lest she
should hear her on the stairs, but she did not
come. The girl who did the work had evidently
run away, for no one brought her anything to
eat. She did not venture to go down herself,
nor even to go to the window, for some one
might be standing outside watching for her.
The broken pane let the cold in in the morning,
and when evening came again, it was still worse.
She had made up a little bundle of clothes, and
dressed herself warmly to be ready to start.
But first she must wait for the angry mob, and
patiently endure whatever it might choose to do.
There they were again 1 Whistling, shouting,
throwing stones —worse, far worse than the
previous evening. She crept into her corner,
folded her hands and prayed without ceasing.
If only her mother did not go out to them I If
only they did not break in! Then they began
to sing—it was an ironical song about herself,
and, although every word cut her like a knife,
THE FISHER LASS


she had to listen whether she would or not.
But as soon as she grasped that her mother
was mixed up in it, that they were guilty of
such a shameful injustice, she sprang to her feet
and rushed forward, resolved either to speak to
the cowardly rabble or throw herself down upon
them; but first one stone, then another, and
then a whole hailstorm of stones came in at the
window ; the splinters of glass jingled, the stones
flew about the room, and she crept back into her
corner. She perspired as if she were standing
in the burning sun, but she no longer cried, and
all her fear had vanished.
The noise gradually subsided; she ventured
forth, and as soon as everything was quiet, she
thought she would go to the window to look out.
But she trod on the broken glass and had to go
back; she trod on the stones and dared not
move lest she should be heard, for her object
now was to steal away. After having waited
another good half-hour, she took off her shoes,
picked up her bundle and gently opened the door.
Again she waited for some five minutes and then
went quietly down the stairs. It pained her to
be obliged to leave her mother without saying
107


good-bye, after having caused her all this sorrow
and trouble, but her fears urged her on.
u Good-bye, mother ! Good-bye, mother ! 99
she whispered to herself at every step, as she
went down the stairs. u Good-bye, mother ! 99
She reached the bottom and, drawing one or
two long breaths, crossed to the front door.
Suddenly some one seized her arm from
behind ; she gave a slight scream and turned
round—it was her mother. Gunlaug had heard
her daughter’s door open and, realising at once
what she was going to do, had waited for her
here. Petra felt that she would not get past her
without a struggle. An explanation would be of
no use ; whatever she might say, it would not
be believed. Well then, she would fight for it ;
nothing in the world was worse than the worst,
and the worst she had just come through. Her
mother asked softty:
i{ Where are you going ? 19
She answered just as softly with a beating
heart:
u I am going to run away.”
“ Where to ? ”
“ I don’t know; but I must get away from
108


here!” She pressed her bundle closer to her
and moved towards the door,
“No, come with me I” answered her mother,
holding her by the arm. “ I have looked after
all that,”
Petra at once relaxed her hold upon herself,
as we relax our hold of something that is too
heavy for us j she drew a long breath as after a
struggle, and resigned herself to her mother.
The latter led the way into a small closet behind
the kitchen, where there was no window, and
where a light was burning -here she had sat
concealed during the tumult outside. The closet
was so small that they could hardly move in it.
Gunlaug took out a bundle somewhat smaller
than that which Petra was carrying, and, opening
it, drew out a suit of sailor’s clothes.
“ Put these on,” she whispered.
Petra understood at once why she was to do
this, but she was touched by the fact that her
mother did not mention the reason. She un-
dressed and put on the sailor’s clothes. Gunlaug
helped her and, as she did so, happened to come
near the candle j at this moment Petra caught a
glimpse of her face and it occurred to her for
109


the first time that her mother was old. Had she
grown old during these last few days, or had
Petra not noticed it before ? The child’s tears
trickled down over her mother, but the latter did
not look up, and so nothing was said. A south-
wester was the last thing of all, and when she
had put it on, her mother took her bundle from
her and, blowing out the light, whispered:
“ Now come ! ”
They went into the passage again, but not
out of the front door; Gunlaug opened the door
that led to the yard, and locked it behind them.
They passed through the trampled garden, pick-
ing their steps over the uprooted trees and the
broken fence.
“ Have a look round," said her mother ; “ it
is not likely you will ever be here again."
Petra shuddered, and did not look round.
They went by the upper road which skirted the
wood, the wood where she had spent half her
life, and where she had passed that evening with
Gunnar, those with Yngve Void, and the last
with Oedegaard. They walked through withered
leaves which were now beginning to fall; it was
a cold night, and she shivered in her unusual
THE FISHER LASS


attire. Her mother turned off towards a garden ;
Petra knew it at once, although she had never
seen it from this side since the day she stormed
it as a child; it was Pedro Ohlsen’s garden.
Gunlaug had the key of the gate, and they
went in.
It had cost Gunlaug something to go to him
that morning; it cost her something now to
come to him with the unhappy daughter to
whom she herself could no longer give a home.
But it had to be done, and what had to be done,
Gunlaug could do. She knocked at the back
door, and almost immediately they heard steps
and saw a light. After a little the door was
opened by Pedro, who was in high boots and
travelling clothes, and looked pale and frightened.
He held a tallow candle in his hand, and sighed
as he caught sight of Petra’s face, which was
swollen with crying. She looked at him, but as
he did not dare to recognise her, she did not
recognise him.
“This, man has promised to help you to get
away,” said Gunlaug, without looking at either
of them. She went up the steps leading to the
passage and across to Pedro’s room, leaving the
THE FISHER LASS


others to follow her. The room was small and
low, and had a peculiar close smell which made
Petra feel sick, for she had neither eaten nor
slept for over twenty-four hours. From the
middle of the ceiling hung a cage with a canary
in it; it was necessary to go round it to avoid
knocking against it. The solid old chairs, a
substantial table, a couple of large, old-fashioned
presses, which reached the ceiling, seemed to
crush everything and make the room still
smaller. On the table lay some music and a
flute on the top of it. Pedro Ohlsen shuffled
about in his high boots, as if he were busily
engaged. A weak voice was heard from the
back room, inquiring:
“ Who is it ? Who is in there ? ”
Upon this he bustled about still more quickly,
as he murmured : “ Oh, it’s —h’m, h’m —-it’s —
h’m, h’m,” and then he disappeared to where the
voice came from.
Gunlaug sat at the window with her elbows
on her knees and her head in her hands, gazing
at the sand which was strewn over the floor.
She said nothing, but now and then drew a
deep sigh. Petra stood by the door with her
112


feet together and her hands crossed on her
breast, for she was feeling sick. An old clock
hacked the time to pieces; the tallow candle
began to gutter. Gunlaug, feeling that she
must give some reason for their presence there,
said :
“ I once knew this man.”
Not many words, and no answer. Pedro did
not return ; the candle ran distressingly and the
clock ticked. Petra felt sicker and sicker, and
through it all her mother’s words kept ringing in
her ears :
" I once knew this man.”
The clock caught it up, and began to keep
time with it.
“ I—once—knew—this—man.”
Whenever, in after years, Petra met with a
smell of close, confined air, this room rose
before her, with a recollection of sickness, and
the clock’s “I—once— knew—this—man.”
She never went on board a steamer with its
constant smell of cooking, of machine-oil and
putrid sea-water beneath the cabin floor, but
what she was sea-sick at once, and through her
sea-sickness, by night and by day, she always
H
113


saw this room and heard the clock* s “ I—once
—knew—this—man.”
When Pedro came in again, he was wearing
a woollen cap and a stiff, old-fashioned cloak,
the collar of which was turned up round his
ears.
“ I am ready now,” he said, drawing on his
mittens ; he looked as if he were going out in
the depth of winter.
il ßut we must not forget he turned —
(( the cloak for —for ” He looked at Petra,
and from her to Gunlaug, who, taking a blue
overcoat which hung over the back of a chair,
helped Petra into it. But when the coat was
buttoned up under her nose, she was so over-
powered by the closeness of the room, that she
begged for fresh air. Her mother, seeing that
she was ill, opened the door, and led her quickly
out into the garden. Here she drew several long,
deep breaths of the clear, fresh autumn air.
“ Where am I going?” she asked, as she
began to feel better.
li To Bergen,” replied her mother, as she
helped her to button the coat. “Itis a large
town where no one will know you.”
THE FISHER LASS


When Petra was ready they waited at the
gate.
“You will take a hundred thalers with you;
then, if you do not get on well, you will have
something to fall back on. This man is lending
you the money.”
“Giving, giving,” whispered Pedro, as he
went past them into the street.
“ Lending it to you,” continued Gunlaug, as
if he had not spoken. “ I shall pay him back.”
She took a handkerchief from her neck, and tied
it round her daughter’s, saying: “ You are to
write as soon as you are getting on all right,
but not before.”
“ Mother 1 ”
“ He is going to row you on board the vessel
lying out on the bay.”
“ Oh, mother, mother 1 ”
“ That’s all now. I’m not going any further.”
‘ ‘ Mother, mother ! ”
“ May God bless you 1 Good-bye ! ”
“ Mother, forgive me, mother ! ”
“And don’t take cold on the water!” She
had gently pushed her out of the gate, and now
closed it behind her.
THE FISHER LASS


Petra stood outside and looked at the closed
gate. She felt as lonely and miserable as it is
possible for a human being to feel. But suddenly
from amidst all her wretchedness —her grief, her
sense of banishment, of the injustice that had
been done her- —a firm presentiment arose in her
heart; it was like a dying fire that blazes high
aloft and then sinks down extinguished, but
for one moment lights up all around it. She
raised her eyes, and was once more in utter
darkness.
Along the deserted street of the little town,
past the closed and leafless gardens, past the
houses dark and lifeless, she followed him slowly
and in silence as, with bent shoulders, he trudged
along in his great boots and the cloak that
almost covered his head. They reached the
road outside the town, where again they walked
through withered leaves and where the ghostly
branches of the trees seemed to stretch out to
clutch them as they passed. They crept down
the hill behind the yellow boat-house where the
boat was lying. Pedro set about baling it out.
Then he rowed her out along the land, which
soon shrank into a black mass upon which the
116


sky lay dark and heavy. Everything was effaced
—fields, houses, forest, mountain. There was
nothing more to be seen of what, until yesterday,
she had seen every day since her childhood. Like
the town, like its inhabitants, it had shut itself
up from her in the night. She was cast out,
and without a single farewell.
On the ship, which lay at anchor close to the
shore waiting for the morning breeze, a man
was walking up and down. Directly he caught
sight of them under the ship’s quarter he lowered
the ladder, helped them on board, and informed
the captain, who immediately came on deck.
She knew them and they her, but no questions
were asked and no sympathy was expressed.
Everything she needed to know was told her as
a matter of course—where she was to sleep,
and what she was to do if she wanted anything,
or felt sick. This she did almost as soon as
she went downstairs ; and so directly she had
changed her clothes, she went on deck again.
Here she was met by a familiar smell —oh, it
was chocolate! She began to feel ravenously
hungry ; something seemed to be gnawing and
tearing at her breast. Just then the same man
117


who had received them came out of the cabin
with a large basin of it, and cakes as well. It
was from her mother, he said. While she was
eating, he went on to tell her that a box con-
taining her best clothes and underclothing had
also been sent on board by her mother, besides
eatables and other good things. At this moment
the picture of her mother rose before her mind ;
she saw her in a new and hitherto undreamed-of
light, but the impression was so strong that she
retained it all her life. And before this picture
she made a vow —firm, yet pathetic in its appeal
—one day to give her mother some happi-
ness in return for all the sorrow she had caused
her.
Pedro Ohlsen sat beside her when she sat,
and walked beside her when she walked up and
down, always endeavouring not to get in her
way, and consequently always getting in her
way on the deck already overcrowded with bales.
She could see nothing of his face but his eyes
and his large nose, and these not distinctly;
but he gave her the impression of being weighed
down by something he wanted to say and could
not. He sighed, he sat down, he rose, he
118


walked about and again sat down; but not a
word could he get out. And she, too, was
silent. Finally, he had to give it up. He
dejectedly drew out a monstrous leather pocket-
book, whispering that the hundred thalers were
in it—and a little more. She stretched out her
hand and thanked him, thereby coming so close
to his face that she saw he was gazing at her
with moist eyes. For did not the last remnant
of life that was left to his dying existence
vanish with her ? He would have liked to say
something to her, which would make her think
kindly of him when he was dead and gone, but
that was forbidden to him; and although he
would have said it all the same he could not
find courage to do it, for she gave him no
assistance. Petra was very tired, and just now
she could not get rid of the recollection that it
was he who had caused her to commit her first
sin against her mother. She had had enough of
him, and the longer he sat the worse it grew ;
for when one is tired one soon grows impatient.
The poor fellow saw this. He felt that it was
time to go, and finally drawing his shrivelled
hand out of his mitten, he managed to whisper
119


u Good-bye ! ” She laid her warm hand in his,
and they both rose.
“ Thank you—give mother my love I” she said.
He gave a sigh—or rather a gurgle—which he
repeated more than once, then let go her hand,
and turning, went backwards and in silence down
the ladder. She went to the gunwale ; he was
still looking up, and he waved his hand, then,
sitting down in the boat, rowed slowly away.
She stood watching him until he was darkness
in the darkness. But when she went down-
stairs, she could scarcely stand for tiredness, and,
although she felt sick as soon as she entered the
cabin, she had scarcely laid her head on the
pillow and said two or three of the first
clauses of the Lord’s Prayer, before she was
asleep.
*****
Meanwhile, her mother was sitting up by the
yellow boat-house; she had followed them
slowly the whole way, and sat down behind the
boat-house just as they pushed off from land.
It was the same place from which Pedro Ohlsen
had pushed off with her in days of yore; that
Was a very long time ago, but she could not


help thinking of it now, as he rowed her
daughter away.
As soon as she saw him returning alone, she
rose and went away ; for then she knew that
her daughter had got safely on board. She did
not take the road home, but went further on,
and there in the dark finding the path which led
over the mountains, struck into it. Her house
in the town stood empty and desolate for more
than a month ; she did not mean to go back until
she had had good news from her daughter.
But meanwhile, public feeling against her had
been put to the test. Lower natures of every
kind find a stimulating pleasure in uniting to
persecute stronger ones, but only as long as the
latter can offer resistance ; when it is seen that
they quietly allow themselves to be ill-treated, a
feeling of shame comes over their persecutors, and,
whoever throws another stone, is hissed. In this
case the crowd had looked forward to hearing
Gunlaug’s powerful voice echoing down the lane ;
they had imagined her summoning seamen to her
help and instigating a street fight. When, by
the third evening, she did not appear, the people
grew almost unmanageable; they would go into
THE FISHER LASS


the house after her, they would throw the two
women out into the street, follow them, drive
them out of the town ! The windows that were
broken on the previous night, had not been
repaired ; amid the cheers of the crowd, two men
crept through to open the door —and in rushed
the mob ! They looked in every room, upstairs
and down, they burst open doors, they broke to
pieces whatever was in their way, they searched
in every corner, and finally, in the cellar, for
mother or daughter, but not a soul was to be
found. A momentary silence fell upon the
crowd, as soon as this discovery was made;
those who were in the house came out, one by
one, and hid behind the rest. In a little while
the street before the house was empty.
Before long the opinion came to be expressed
in the town that this had been an unworthy
proceeding against two defenceless women.
What had happened was discussed and talked
over until every one was agreed that whatever
the “ Fisher Lass ” had done, Gunlaug was not
to blame for it, and, consequently, she had been
treated with great injustice. She was sorely
missed in the town ; fights and drunken brawls


began to be the order of the day, for the town
had lost its police. Passers-by missed, too, her
imposing figure in the doorway, and the seamen,
in particular, missed her. No other house was
like hers, they said; for there each one had
been treated according to his merits, had had
his particular place in her confidence, and her
assistance, whatever might happen. Neither
seamen nor skippers, neither employers nor
housewives had realised what she was worth
until now that she was gone.
Therefore a unanimous feeling of joy spread
through the town when she was seen sitting in
her house, roasting and boiling as of old. Every
one had to go up for himself to convince himself
that the window-panes had been restored, that
the door was whole, that the smoke was curling
from the chimney-top. Yes, it was true! There
she sat again ! Some crept up on the opposite
side of the lane to see her better; she was sit-
ting before her griddle, and looked neither up
nor out —her eyes followed her hands, and her
hands were at work; for she had come back to
earn what she had lost, and especially the hun-
dred thalers which she owed Pedro Ohlsen. At
123


first, people were content to look in at her in
this way ; for some time their bad consciences
kept them from going any further. But by de-
grees they came. First, the housewives, those
who were friendly and kind—they had no
chance, however, of talking anything but busi-
ness with her, for Gunlaug would not listen to
anything else. Then came fishermen, then
tradespeople, and skippers to engage new hands
and get their characters; and finally, on the
first Sunday after her return, the sailors. This
had evidently been by agreement; for, later in
the evening, the house suddenly became so
crowded that not only were both rooms occu-
pied, but the tables and chairs, which in summer
stood in the garden, had to be brought out, and
set up in the passage, the kitchen, and the back
room. No one who saw this gathering would
have guessed the mixed feelings with which
these people sat there; for Gunlaug had re-
sumed her silent command over them the
moment they again crossed her threshold, and
the calm assurance with which she gave every
one what he asked for, suppressed every ques-
tion and every attempt at welcome. She was
124


just the same as ever, except that her hair was
no longer black, and her manner was somewhat
quieter. But when the sailors began to grow
merry, they could no longer restrain themselves,
and every time she and the girl were out of the
room, they shouted to Knud, the boatswain, who
had always been her favourite, that he was to
drink her health when she came in again. But
even he could not pluck up courage to do this
until he was a little more warmed up. At length,
however, when she came in to collect empty
bottles and glasses, he rose and said “ that they
were all very glad she had come back. For
they were quite certain —that—that they were
all very glad that she had come back ! ” This
seemed to them well said ; they all rose, and
cried, yes, they were very glad! And those
in the passage, and those in the kitchen, and
those in the other room, rose too, and, joining
in, re-echoed this opinion. The boatswain gave
her a glass, and cried “ Hurrah ! ” and then the
others shouted " Hurrah! ” as though they
would raise the roof to the clouds. Before long
somebody vented the opinion that they had done
her a shameful injustice; thereupon a second
125


took his oath on the same, and soon the whole
house was cursing and damning itself for having
done her a most shameful injustice. When,
finally, silence had been restored—as they
wanted a word from her own lips—Gunlaug
said that she thanked them very much, H but,”
she continued, as she went on piling the empty
glasses and bottles together, “ as long as I don’t
say anything about it, you don’t need to either.”
She went out when she had collected as much
as she could carry, and came in for the rest.
But from this time forth her power over them
was inviolable.
126


CHAPTER VII
It was evening and dark when the ship cast
anchor in the harbour of Bergen. Half stupefied
with sea-sickness, Petra was conveyed in the
captain’s boat through a multitude of ships, both
great and small, to the wharves with their lively
crowds of watermen, and thence into the town
through narrow alleys, thronged with peasants
and street-boys. They paused before a pretty
little house where, at the captain’s request, an old
dame willingly took charge of Petra. She stood
in need of food and sleep, and both these wants
were soon satisfied. She wakened next day at
noon, bright and lively, wakened to new sounds
and a new accent, and, when the blind was
drawn up, to new scenes and surroundings, to
new people and a new town. It seemed to her,
as she stood before the looking-glass, that she
herself had become a new person—this face was
127


not her old one. She could not, to be sure,
explain the difference, for she did not understand
that at her age sorrow and violent emotion have
a refining and spiritualising effect ; at the sight
of herself in the glass, however, she was re-
minded of the past few nights, and as she thought
of them, she trembled. So she hastened to dress
and go downstairs to the new world that was
awaiting her. Here she found her hostess and
several ladies, who first inspected her carefully,
and then promised to look after her; as a be-
ginning, they would take her round the town.
As, at the same time, there were several things
she wanted to buy, she ran upstairs again for
her pocket-book, but, feeling ashamed to take
the thick, clumsy book down, she opened it in
her room to take the money out. She found in
it, not one hundred, but three hundred thalers !
So Pedro Ohlsen again gave her money without
her mother’s knowledge and consent ! She had
so little idea of the value of this money that the
largeness of the sum did not surprise her ; and,
consequently, it did not enter her mind to con-
sider what the reason of such great generosity
might be. Instead of a letter of thanks, over-
128


flowing with delight, and full of questions and
guesses, Pedro Ohlsen received from Gunlaug a
letter which had been written to herself, in which
Petra betrayed her benefactor with ill-concealed
resentment, and asked what she was to do with
the present that had been smuggled into her
purse.
The first thing about the town that impressed
her was its natural scenery. She could not get
rid of the feeling that the mountain was so close
at hand that she must beware of it. A sense of
oppression came over her every time she raised
her eyes, and she felt an impulse to stretch out
her hand and touch it. Sometimes, again, it
seemed as if there were no possible escape from
it. There the mountain stood, gloomy and sun-
forsaken ; the clouds rested upon its summit or
swept across it—wind and rain in unceasing
alternation —from the mountain they came, the
mountain sent them down upon the town. But
the crowd of people around her felt no sense of
oppression. She soon felt happy among them ;
for they went about their business with an air of
freedom and cheerful light-heartedness which was
new to her ; after what she had come through,
I
129


it seemed to her like a smile of welcome. As
next day at dinner she expressed the wish to go
somewhere where she could see a large number
of people, she was told that in that case she had
better go to the theatre; there she would see
several hundred in one building. Yes, she would
like that. A ticket was bought and at the
appointed hour she was taken to the theatre,
which was close at hand, and directed to a seat
in the front row of the balcony. There she sat
in a blaze of light among many hundreds of
happy people; gay colours surrounded her on
every side, and the incessant hum of conversa-
tion about her reminded her of the sound of the
open sea.
What she was going to see there Petra had
not the slightest idea. She knew nothing but
what Oedegaard had taught her or what she had
picked up from those with whom she came in
contact. But about the theatre Oedegaard had
never said a word ; the sailors had only talked
of a theatre where there were wild beasts and
performers on horseback ] and it would never
have entered her playfellows' minds to speak of
a play, even if they had heard of such things at
130


school. The little town had, of course, no
theatre, not even a building which was called by
that name. Travelling menageries, rope-dancers
and clowns either used a shed or performed in
the open field. She was so ignorant that she
did not even know what to ask; she sat there,
happy and content, expecting to see something
remarkable, such as camels or monkeys. Gradu-
ally carried away by this idea, she began to see
animals in all the faces round her—horses, dogs,
foxes, cats, mice—and found it excellent amuse-
ment. Consequently the orchestra assembled
without her noticing it.
Suddenly she started up in alarm, for with a
short, sharp crash of drums, trumpets and
horns, the overture began. She had never
in her life heard more than a couple of violins
and perhaps a flute played at once. This
splendid rush of sound made her turn pale; it
reminded her of a black and stormy sea. She
sat in fear lest what came next should be still
worse, and yet she did not want it to come to
an end. Soon gentler harmonies shed their
light upon the darkness, and now vistas opened
up of which she had never dreamed. Towards
131


these she was borne on waves of melody ; the air
about her was alive with entrancing gaiety, the
whole procession of tone soared upwards with
mighty sweeps. Then it gradually began to
descend ; it concentrated itself in one mighty
stroke, it sank apart in wanton haste —a great
darkness fell and covered everything: it seemed
as if it were whirled away in the roar of a
cataract. Then, above it all rose a single note,
like that of a bird on a moist branch far below;
sadly, timorously, it began, but the air overhead
cleared at its song, the sun peeped forth and
again the long vistas that faded into the blue of
distance, were filled with that wondrous rocking
and flickering behind the sunbeams. When
this had lasted for a little while, it gradually
grew mild and peaceful ; the jubilant hosts
moved further and further off, there was nothing
to be seen but sunbeams, which melted and
diffused in the air; over the whole infinite plain
nothing but sun, everything permeated with light
and perfectly still—and in this ecstasy it faded
away like a dream.
She rose involuntarily to her feet when it was
finished, for she had finished too 1 Then, oh
132


wonder of wonders, the beautiful painted wall
just in front of her went right up to the roof!
She was in a church,* a church with arches and
pillars, a church in festal splendour filled with
the pealing of an organ; and people came towards
her in dresses that she had never seen before,
and they talked —yes, they were talking in the
church, and in a language she did not under-
stand. What ? They were talking behind her too.
“ Sit down! ” they said, but there was nothing
to sit on, so the two people in the church
naturally remained standing; and the longer
she looked at them, the clearer it grew to her
that these dresses were the same as those she
had seen in a picture of St. Olaf—and there,
were they not talking about St. Olaf? ....
a Sit down ! 11 she heard again behind her ;
44 sit down ! ” cried several voices. Perhaps
something is going on behind as well, thought
Petra, turning quickly round. A number of
angry faces, some of them absolutely threatening,
confronted her. There must be something wrong,
she thought, and was on the point of going, but
* The play which Petra witnesses is Oehlenschlager’s
V Axel and Valborg. 8 ’
133


at this moment an old lady, who was sitting
beside her, gently pulled her dress.
“Do sit down, child,” she whispered j * the
people behind you can’t see ! ”
She was in her seat in an instant; for, to be
sure, the theatre is in there, and we are looking
on —yes, of course, the theatre! She repeated
the word as if to remind herself of the fact.
Then she looked into the church again, but, in
spite of all her efforts, she could not undei stand
the person who was speaking. Only when she
perceived that it was a young and handsome
man did she catch a word here and there, but
when she heard that he was talking about love
and was himself in love, she understood nearly
all he was saying. Just then a third peison
entered, who instantly engrossed her whole
attention; for she knew from drawings she had
seen that it must be a monk, and monks she had
always been very anxious to see. The monk
moved softly and was very quiet, yes, he had a
truly pious appearance; he spoke slowly and
clearly, and she could follow every word. But
suddenly he turns away and says the very
opposite of what he has said before Oh,
134


dear, he is a rogue, . . . . Yes, he is a
rogue ! . . . . Why, you can see it in his facel
Oh, why cannot the handsome young man see
it ? He might, at any rate, hear it!
u He is deceiving you ! ” she said in a half-
whisper.
“ Hush ! ” said the old lady.
No, the young man did not hear it; he went
away, suspecting no evil. They all went —
only an old man came in. But what is this ?
When this old man speaks, it is just as if the
young one were speaking, and yet it is the old
man —oh, look, look ! A shining procession of
girls clad in white approaches; slowly and
noiselessly, two by two, they pass through the
church. She saw them long after they had
gone past —and before her mind rose a similar
sight she had seen in her childhood. One
winter she had gone with her mother across the
mountain. As they trudged along in the newly
fallen snow, they inadvertently startled a covey
of ptarmigan, which suddenly rose and filled the
air before them. They were white, the snow was
white, the wood was white—long afterwards all
her thoughts were white, as they swept past
135


her mind, and here for a moment it was the
same.
But one of these white-robed women advances
alone, a wreath in her hands, and sinks to her
knees ; the old man has also knelt down, and she
speaks to him. He has a message for her from
foreign lands. He takes out the letter—you
can see from her face that it is from some one
she loves. Oh, how nice ! Every one is in
love here! She opens it —it is not a letter at
all; why it is full of music—yes, look, look!
He himself is the letter; the old man is the
young man, and it is he whom she loves ! They
embrace —good gracious ! they kiss each other!
Petra felt that she was growing scarlet and hid
her face in her hands, watching, however, to see
what happened next. Listen, he is telling her
that they are to be married immediately, and
she laughingly pulls him by the beard, and says
that he has grown into a barbarian, and he says
she has grown beautiful, and he gives her a ring
and promises her scarlet and velvet, golden shoes
and a golden girdle; then he gaily takes fare-
well of her, and goes to the king to arrange
about the wedding. His betrothed follows him
THE FISHER LASS


with a radiant 100k —but when she turns,
after he has gone, everything seems blank and
empty.
At this moment the wall glides quickly down
again. Is it over? Just as it has begun?
Colouring deeply, she turned to the old lady :
“ Is it over ? ”
u No, no, child ; that is the first act. There
are five like that; yes, indeed, there are,” she
repeated with a sigh, “ five of them.”
“ About the same thing ? ” asked Petra.
“ What do you mean ? ”
“Do the same people come in again and does
the story go on ? ”
“ You have surely never been in a theatre
before, have you ? ”
“ No.”
“Well, well, there are not many places that
have theatres ; they cost so much.”
“ But what does it all mean ? ” asked Petra
excitedly, staring at her neighbour, as if she
could not wait for her answer. a Who are these
people ? ”
“It is Naso’s company, and an excellent
company too; for he is a very able director.”
137


“Isit he who makes it up ? Or how is
it ? Oh, dear, do answer me.”
“ My dear child, do you not know what a play
is ? Where do you come from ? ”
But when Petra remembered her birthplace,
she was also reminded of her disgrace and her
flight. She was silent and did not venture to ask
anything else.
The second act came, and with it the king—
yes, it was the king; so she was to see a king
here too ! She did not hear what he said, she
did not see to whom he spoke, she only saw the
king—his clothes, his gestures and his bearing.
She was only roused from her absorption by the
entrance of the young man, and then they all
went away to fetch the bride Again she
was forced to wait!
In the pause between the acts the old lady
leant over to her.
“ Don’t you think they act very well ? ” she
said.
Petra looked at her in astonishment.
“ Act—what does that mean ? ”
She did not notice that every one about her
was looking at her, and that the old lady
138


was being commissioned to ask her questions ;
she did not hear that people were laughing at
her,
6i But they don't speak as we do ?'' she said,
as she received no answer.
“They are Danes, you see,” answered the
lady, also beginning to laugh.
Then she realised that the friendly lady was
laughing at the number of questions she asked.
She said no more, but sat gazing intently at the
curtain.
When it went up again, she had the great
pleasure of seeing an archbishop. It was the
same now as before : she was so engrossed in
watching him that she did not hear a word of
what he said. But then there was a sound of
music, oh, so soft, so far away, but it was
coming nearer. It was the singing of women's
voices accompanied by flutes and violins and by
an instrument that was not a guitar, and yet
was like many guitars, only softer, richer and
fuller in tone. The whole harmony swept
through the church in long waves, and when
everything had become a rocking sea of colours,
the procession came—soldiers with halberds,
139


choristers with censers, monks with tapers and
the king with a crown upon his head, and at his
side the bridegroom clad in white. Then came
the white-robed women again, scattering roses
and music before the bride, who was in white
silk and wore a red wreath in her hair ; at her
side walked a tall woman in a long purple train,
embroidered with golden crowns, while a small
crown sparkled in her hair —this must be the
queen! The whole church was filled with
colour and singing, and everything that hap-
pened now—from the moment when the bride-
groom led the bride to the altar, where they
knelt down while all their followers knelt down
about them, to the entrance of the archbishop
and his train of monks—was merely a new
winding in the coloured chain of music.
But just as the wedding ceremony was about
to begin, the archbishop raised his staff, and
forbade it: their marriage was contrary to the
laws of the Church, never could they be united
in this life. Oh, Heavenly Father be merciful!
The bride fainted, and Petra, too, fell with a
piercing cry; for in her excitement she had risen
to her feet.
140


“ Water, bring some water!” cried the people
about her.
“ No,” answered the old lady, <( she has not
fainted ; it is not necessary.”
“It isn’t necessary,” was repeated. n Silence!”
“ Silence!” cried a voice in the stalls.
(i Order in the balcony ! ”
“ Order ! ” cried the balcony in reply.
“ You must not take it so much to heart; the
whole thing is only fiction and nonsense,” whis-
pered the old lady ; u but Madame Naso certainly
plays excellently.”
u Hush ! ” cried Petra now, too. She was
absorbed again in the story, for the fiendish
monk had appeared with a sword. The two
lovers had to hold a cloth, and he cut it in
two between them—just as the Church cut
them off* from each other, as pain cuts into the
heart, as the sword above the gate of Paradise
cut off* all return on the first day. Weeping
women took off* the bride’s red wreath, and gave
her a white one ; she was to be bound to the
convent for the rest of her life. He to whom
she belonged for all time and eternity, should
know that she was alive, yet never be able to claim
141


her as his own; know her to be within the
convent walls, but never see her. How heart-
rending was their farewell! Surely there was
no greater sorrow in the world than theirs !
“ Dear, dear!” whispered the old lady, as
the curtain fell, “ don’t be so ridiculous ! Why,
it’s only Madame Naso, the director’s wife.”
Petra opened her eyes wide, and stared at the
good lady; she believed that she was mad, and,
as the lady had long come to the same conclu-
sion about Petra, they continued every now and
again to look suspiciously at each other, but
nothing more was said.
When the curtain rose again, Petra could no
longer follow the play; she saw nothing but
the bride behind the convent walls, and the
bridegroom in despair keeping watch by day
and night outside. She suffered their torments
and prayed their prayers, but what was taking
place before her eyes glided colourlessly past.
Suddenly she became aware that an awe-inspir-
ing silence had fallen upon the scene; the
empty church seemed to grow very large; there
was no sound but the clock striking midnight.
A hollow noise booms through the vaulted
142


aisles, the walls tremble, and St. Olaf, clad in
his shroud, arises from his shrine, mighty and
fearful. He strides forward, spear in hand,
the watchmen fly, the thunder rolls, and the
monk falls, pierced by the outstretched spear;
whereupon all becomes dark again, and the
vision disappears. But the monk lies there,
like a heap of ashes where the lightning has
struck.
Without being conscious of it, Petra had
clung fast to the old lady, who grew rather
frightened under her convulsive clutches, and
now, seeing her grow paler and paler, hastened
to say :
“ God bless you, child ! It’s only Knutsen !
This is the only role he can play, for he has
such a thick voice.”
“ No, no, no! I saw the flames round his
head,” said Petra, “and the church trembled
beneath his tread.”
“Will you be quiet there ? ” cried voices from
several corners. “Put out the person who can’t
keep quiet! ”
“ Order in the balcony ! ” cried the stalls.
“Order !” replied the balcony.
143


Petra had cowered down, as if to hide herself,
but the next moment she forgot all about the
audience, for see, there are the lovers again!
The lightning has broken a way for them, and
they are going to fly! They have found each
other at last —they embrace! Protect them
now, O God in heaven !
Suddenly trumpets sound, and loud shouts
are heard. The hero is torn from his beloved’s
side, he must fight for his country. He is
wounded, and, as he dies, sends a greeting to
his love. Petra does not realise what has hap-
pened until the latter comes quietly walking in—
and sees her lover’s corpse ! Then it seems as
if all the clouds of suffering would collect over a
single point, but a look disperses them; the
bride looks up from her dead lover’s breast, and
prays that she herself may die! At this look,
heaven opens, the lightning flashes, the wedding
hall up there is ready to receive the bride.
Yes, she sees into it already, for from her eyes
streams a peace like that which rests upon high
mountains. Then her eyelids sink ; the battle
had a higher issue, their constancy a nobler
crown ; she is with him now!
144


Petra sat still for a long time; her heart was
lifted up in faith, the power of the sublime
filled her soul. She rose superior to everything
that was small and mean; she rose superior to
fear and pain ; she rose with a smile for all, for
were they not all brothers and sisters ? The evil
that divides men was no more; it lay crushed
beneath the thunder. People smiled back at
her—yes, this was the girl who had been
half mad during the play ! But she only saw
in their smile a reflection of the victory she felt
conscious of in her own heart. In the belief that
they were smiling in sympathy with her, she smiled
radiantly back at them, and they were obliged
to smile with her smile. She walked down the
broad stairs, between two rows of people, who
stepped back as she passed, who reflected the
joy of her joy, and the beauty of the beauty
which shone over her. The light in our souls
sometimes becomes so powerful that we make
everything around us bright and clear, although
we ourselves cannot see. The world has no
greater triumph than this—to be proclaimed, to be
borne, and to be surrounded by our own shining
thoughts.
K
145


When, without exactly knowing how, she had
reached home, she asked what it had all meant.
There were many people here who could under-
stand her, and give her answers that would help
her. And when she had got clear information as
to what a play was, and what great actors were
able to do, she rose, and said :
“ This is the greatest thing in the world, this
is what I will be ! ”
To their surprise she put on her things and
went out again; she felt that she must be alone
and in the open air. She left the town behind
her, and walked out in the strong wind along a
neighbouring point. Below roared the sea, while
on both sides of the bay the town lay in a luminous
haze, in which the innumerable single lights
merged into one another without being able to
do more than shine through the veil they could
not lift. And so it was with her soul. The
great dark element at her feet warned her
back with its heavy roar from an unfathomable
depth. It was a question whether she should
sink down into it or join with those who were
endeavouring to shed light. She asked herself
why she had never had these thoughts before,
146


and she answered herself that it was because
she was always actuated by the impulse of the
moment; but she felt, too, that in these moments
she had power. She saw it all clearly now ;
just as many of these moments would be given
to her as there were lights sparkling over there,
and she prayed to God that she might be able to
do her utmost in them all, that He might have
kindled none of them in vain. She rose, for an
icy wind was blowing. She had not been long
away, but when she got home again, she knew
where her path lay.
& * * * - #
The next day found her standing outside the
director’s door. A violent quarrel was going on
inside. One of the voices seemed to her to
bear a resemblance to that of the heroine of the
previous evening ; it was pitched in a different
key at this moment, it is true, but it still had
power to make Petra tremble. She waited for a
long time, but as it seemed as if the noise were
never going to cease, she knocked at the door.
“ Come in ! ” cried a man’s voice in a very
angry tone.
“Oh 1 ” screamed a woman’s voice, and, as
147


Petra opened the door, she saw a vision of terror
in a nightdress, and with flying hair vanish
through a side door. The director, a tall man
with hard eyes, before which he hastened to put
a pair of gold spectacles, was walking excitedly
up and down. His long nose so dominated the
rest of his face that all his other features seemed
to be there only for its sake. From behind this
rampart his eyes protruded like two gun-barrels,
his mouth was a trench in front of it, and his fore-
head a light bridge thrown across from it to the
forest or “ barricades.”
“ What do you want ? ” —-he stopped abruptly
—“ Is it you who want to be a chorus girl ?”
he asked hurriedly.
“ Chorus girl—what’s that ? ”
(i So you don’t know what that is—h’m, h’m !
What do you want then ? ”
“ I want to be an actor.”
“So that’s what you want- —and you don’t
know what a chorus girl is—h’m, h’m ! But
you speak dialect! ”
“ Dialect, what’s that ? ”
“Well you don’t know what that is either,
and yet you want to be an actress —h’m, h’m !
148


Yes, that’s just like the Norwegians. Dialect
means that you don’t speak as we do.”
“ Yes, but I have been practising it the whole
morning.”
t( Have you indeed ? Well, well, let me
hear! ”
Petra struck an attitude, and said like the
heroine of the previous evening :
“ Ei greet thee, me lov, good mawning ! ”
u Confound your impertinence! Have you
come here to make fun of my wife ? ”
A loud burst of laughter was heard in the
adjoining room ; the director opened the door,
and called in without the slightest recollection
that a moment before they had been quarrelling
to the death :
(i Here is a Norwegian wench who wants
to caricature you ; do come out and hear.”
A lady’s head with uncombed, refractory,
black hair, dark eyes and a large mouth,
looked in, and laughed. But Petra hastened
towards her, for she must surely be the
heroine —no, her mother, she thought as she
drew nearer to her. She looked at the lady,
and said :
149


“ I don’t know .... if it’s you .... or
if you are her mother ! ”
At this the director laughed too. The lady’s
head was withdrawn, but her laughter was heard
from the next room. Petra’s embarrassment
was so strongly depicted in face, attitude and
gestures, that the director observed her more
closely. He looked at her for a little and then,
taking up a book, said as if nothing had hap-
pened :
“ Take this and read it, my girl, but read it
as you speak yourself.”
She did so at once.
u No, no, that’s not right! Look here ! ”
He read the passage to her, she repeat-
ing the words after him exactly as he said
them.
“ No, no, that’s wrong ! Read in Norwegian
—Norwegian, bless my soul! ”
And Petra read again as before.
“No, I tell you ! That is absurd, utterly
absurd Do you not understand what I
mean ? Are you a fool ? ”
He tried again and again, and then gave her
another book.
150


“ See, here is something quite different, it is
comic, read this ! ”
Yes, Petra read again, but the same thing was
repeated, until he grew tired, and cried :
“ No, no, no ! Stop—for heaven’s sake, stop!
.... What do you want on the stage ? What
the deuce do you want to play ? ”
“ I want to play what I saw last night.”
“Oho, of course you do ! Well, and then ? ”
“ Yes,” she said, growing shy, “ last night I
thought it was very beautiful, but to-day I
thought it would be still more beautiful if it
had a happy ending, and I should like to give it
one.”
“ No, would you indeed ? —h’m, h’m ! Well,
there’s nothing in the way. The poet’s dead.
Of course, he is not correct any longer, and you,
who can neither talk nor read, want to re-write
him ! Yes, that’s Norwegian ! ”
Petra did not understand a word of what he
was saying; she only understood that it was
something unfavourable to her and began to grow
afraid.
“ Should I not be allowed ? ” she asked
softly.
151


“ Yes, of course ; there’s nothing in the way,
have no hesitation ! Listen to me,” he said
in an altered tone, crossing straight over to
her. “ You have no more idea of acting than a
cat. And you have talent neither for comedy nor
for tragedy; I have now tried you in both lines.
Because you have a pretty face and a pretty
figure people have made you think that you can
play much better than my wife. Of course!
And then you want to play the biggest role in
the repertory and re-write it into the bargain !
Yes, that is the Norwegians all over; this is
the people to do it ! ”
Petra’s breath had been coming faster and
faster, and she seemed to be struggling to say
something. At last she ventured to whisper :
“ Should I really not be allowed ? ”
He had been standing looking out at the
window under the impression that she had gone,
and now turned round in amazement. But when
he saw her emotion and the wonderful power with
which it was outwardly expressed, he paused for
a moment, and then suddenly seizing a book,
said in a voice and manner in which there was
not a trace of his previous irritation:
152


“ Here, take this piece and read it slowly ; just
let me hear your voice Well, go on ! ”
But she could not read, for she could not see
the letters.
“ Come, don’t be discouraged !”
At length she began to read, but coldly and
colourlessly. He bade her read it again “with
more expression,” but this only made it worse.
»
Thereupon he quietly took the book out of her
hand, saying :
u I have now examined you in every branch ;
more I cannot do. I assure you, my dear
young lady, sending my boot on to the stage
or sending you would make exactly the same
impression, and that an exceedingly remark-
able one. And so the matter must end.”
But as a last attempt, Petra ventured to say
appealingly:
“ I really think I should understand, if I might
only ”
“Of course, of course—every fishing village
understands it better than we do; the Norwegian
public is the most enlightened in the world.
.... Very well, if you don’t go now, I
shall 1 ”
THE FISHER LASS


She turned to the door and burst into tears.
“Look here,” he said, for at this violent
emotion a light flashed across him; “it was
surely not you who made the disturbance in the
theatre last night ? ”
She turned and looked at him, flushing
deeply.
“Yes, of course it was you. Now I know
you—the * Fisher Lass ’ ! After the theatre I
met a gentleman who comes from the same town
as you ; he ‘ knew you well.’ Aha, so that is
why you are so anxious to go on the stage!
You want to try your tricks there—indeed!
Listen to me! My theatre is a respectable
place and I decline any attempts to remodel
it ... . Now go! . . . . Will you go, I
say! ”
And, sobbing aloud, Petra hastened out of the
room, down the stairs and into the street. Still
crying bitterly, she ran along the crowded
thoroughfare, and the sight of a young lady
running crying in broad daylight created, as may
well be imagined, a great sensation. People
stopped, little boys ran after her and soon formed
a small crowd at her heels. In this noise behind
154


her Petra heard once more the dull, rumbling
noises that she had heard after those nights in
the attic ; she remembered the faces in the air
and ran for her life. But the memory of them,
like the noise behind her, grew at every step,
and when she had reached the house and
slammed the street-door, reached her room and
locked herself in, she threw herself into a corner
and warded off the faces that surrounded her.
She beat them back with her hands, with threats,
then, sinking down exhausted, had a quiet cry —
and was saved.
*****
That same afternoon, towards evening, she
left Bergen and turned her face inland. She did
not know herself where she was going, but she
wanted to find some place where she was not
known. She sat in a carriole with her box
strapped on behind and a driver on the top of it.
It was pouring in torrents, and she sat crouching
under a large umbrella, looking timidly up at the
mountain and from the mountain down to the
precipice at her side. The forest that lay in
front was wrapped in brooding mist and seemed
haunted with spectral forms ; another moment
155
THE FISHER LASS


and she would be in it. But always as she
approached it, the mist gave way before her. A
mighty roar, which grew ever louder, increased
the feeling that she was moving in a mysterious
circle, where everything had its own significance,
its own dim connection, and where man was
merely a frightened traveller, whose one con-
sideration was how he could best push forward.
The noise came from many waterfalls, which
during the rainy weather had swelled to giants,
and now dashed wildly from rock to rock with a
deafening roar. The road led over narrow
bridges, and she saw the water seething in the
cauldrons below. Sometimes the way wound and
curved down the sides of the mountain, bringing
here and there into view a spot of cultivated land,
on which stood a few turf-thatched houses, and
again it led up towards the forest and the roar of
the waterfalls. She was wet and cold, but she
meant to go on as long as it was light—on, too,
the next day, always farther inland, until she
found a place where she could feel safe. To
this He would help her, He, the Almighty,
who was now guiding her through storm and
darkness.
156


CHAPTER VIII
Among the sheltered and fertile mountain valleys
in the diocese of Bergen, a mild season may
sometimes bring days that are almost summer
days when autumn is near its close. Then for
a little while in the middle of the day the cattle
are let out into the fields again, even if they
have already been put upon their winter fodder.
The beasts are thus well fed and frolicsome, and
make it lively in the yard when they are taken in
again in the afternoon.
Thus bellowing, bleating, and dancing to the
jingling of their bells, cows, sheep, and goats
were coming down the track that led to a large
farmyard just as Petra was driving past the
house. The weather was fine ; the long, white,
wooden building with all its large windows
shone in the sun, and behind the houses rose
the mountain which was so densely wooded
157


with firs, birches, bird-cherries and mountain
ashes, and, on the more exposed points, with
dog-roses, that it seemed to keep the houses
snug and warm. Before the main building, and
running down to the road, was a garden ; it was
thickly planted with apple and cherry trees, and
along the paths and hedges with red and black
currants and gooseberry bushes, while high
above them all rose some old ash-trees with
broad crowns. From the road the house looked
like a nest hidden among the branches of the
trees and inaccessible to any but the sun. But
the very fact of its seclusion awakened longings
in Petra, and as the sun was shining on the
panes and the bells ringing merrily and tempt-
ingly, and as she heard that it was a parsonage,
she suddenly seized the reins.
“ I must go in here ! ” And, turning off from
the road, she drove in at the side of the
garden.
A couple of Finland dogs flew savagely at her
as she drove into the farmyard. This was a
large square, built in on all sides, opposite the
dwelling-house being the cattle stalls, on the
right a wing of the main building, and on the
THE FISHER LASS


left the wash-house and servants’ accommodation.
The yard was now entirely filled with cattle.
In their midst stood a young lady of slight
build and medium height; she wore a tight-
fitting dress, and had a small silk handkerchief
over her head. Round about her, and even
almost upon her, were goats —white, black,
brown, spotted goats —all wearing little bells
which were tuned in thirds. She had a name
for each of them, and something nice for them
in a dish, which a milkmaid constantly re-
plenished.
On the low steps leading from the main
building to the yard stood the pastor with a
plate of salt in his hand, and in front of the
steps the cows, which licked the salt from his hand
and from the flagstone on which he strewed it.
The pastor was not a tall man, but he was squarely
built, and had a short neck and a low forehead ;
bushy brows projected above a pair of eyes
which rarely looked you straight in the face,
but occasionally shot out side glances of great
brilliancy. His thick, closely-cropped hair was
grey, and stood on end; it was almost as thick
on his neck as on his head. He wore no neck-
THE FISHER LASS


tie, but his shirt was fastened with a stud ; it
was open in front, and his hairy breast was
visible. It was not buttoned at the wrists
either, and the sleeves hung down over his
small, strong hands, which were at present
slimy with giving the animals the salt. Both
hands and arms were likewise covered with hair.
He gave a keen side-glance at the stranger, who
had alighted and made her way through the
goats to his daughter’s side. What passed be-
tween them he could not hear for the cattle, the
dogs, and the bells ; but he saw both girls look
at him, and then, with the goats about them,
come towards the steps. At a sign from the
pastor a herd-boy drove the cows away. Signe,
his daughter, called —and Petra was struck by the
sweetness of her voice—
“ Father, here is a traveller who would like to
rest with us for a day or two.”
“ She is welcome!” said the pastor in reply,
and, giving the plate to a servant, he went into
his room immediately on the right of the door,
presumably to wash and tidy himself. Petra
followed the young lady into the corridor, which
was, properly speaking, a hall, it was so light
160


and roomy. The driver was paid and her
luggage brought in. She herself took off her
things in a room just opposite the study, and,
when she was ready, went out into the corridor
again to be taken into the sitting-room.
What a large, light room! Almost the whole
wall facing the garden was composed of win-
dows, the middle one forming at the same time
the door to the garden. The windows were
broad and high, and almost went down to the
floor; but they were filled with flowers—there
were flowers on high flower-stands, flowers on
the window-sills, and, instead of curtains, ivy
twined down from two small flower-baskets,
which hung high up on the windows. As
there were shrubs and flowers just outside,
as the wall was lined and covered with them,
and they were scattered over the grass plot
in front of the windows, it seemed like stepping
into a conservatory built in the middle of the
garden. And yet you had not been a moment
in the room before the flowers were forgotten ;
you only saw the church, standing on an
eminence to the right, its image reflected in
the bluish water, the shining surface of which
!:■
161


was visible so far away among the mountains
that it was difficult to say whether it was a
lake or an arm of the sea. And then the
mountains themselves! Not a single peak, but
chains of mountains, one mighty ridge rising
behind the other, as if here were the limits
of the habitable earth !
When Petra finally recalled her glance, the
whole room seemed to have become consecrated
by the view outside; everything looked pure
and bright, and formed a frame of flowers
round a magnificent picture. She felt as if
surrounded by something invisible, which was
paying heed to her actions and even to her
thoughts; she unconsciously went round the
room examining and touching the things that
lay about. Suddenly she noticed above the
sofa on the long wall facing the light, the
life-sized portrait of a lady smiling down at
her. Her head was a little to one side and
her hands were folded; her right arm was
resting on a book, the cover of which bore the
legible title, u Prayer Book.” With her light
hair and her clear skin she seemed to shine
down from the wall and to invest everything
162


upon which her glance fell with an atmosphere
of holy calm. Her smile was earnest, but it
was the earnestness of resignation. It seemed
as though she must be able to attract every one
to herself through love; she seemed to under
stand everything because she only saw the
good in it. Her face bore the stamp of weak
health, but this weakness must have been her
strength ; for the person assuredly did not exist
who would have dared to take advantage of it.
There was a wreath of immortelles round the
frame—she was dead.
“That was my mother,” she heard a gentle
voice say behind her, and, turning, saw the
daughter of the house, who had been out of
the room and come in again.
From this moment the whole room was
filled with the portrait; everything led up to
it, everything was lit up by it, everything was
arranged with a view to it, and the daughter
was its peaceful reflection. The latter, how-
ever, seemed somewhat quieter, somewhat more
reserved. The mother’s eyes met every one’s
glance and returned it fully and frankly, the
daughter’s were cast down. But they had the
163


same brightness and gentleness. She was of
the same build as her mother, but had no trace
of the latter’s delicacy; on the contrary, the
bright colours in her tight-fitting dress, in her
apron and the little handkerchief that was
fastened with a Roman pin, gave a certain
freshness to her face, and pointed to a grace
and an appreciation of the graceful which made
her the daughter of the portrait and the good
fairy of the place.
As she moved about among her mother’s
flowers, Petra felt strongly attracted to her;
in the society of this girl and in this house
all the good that was in her would surely
develop. Oh, if she might only stay there!
She became doubly conscious of her desolation ;
her eyes followed Signe intently, as she moved
about the room. Signe felt this and tried to
avoid her gaze, but it was no use, and she
bent down over the flowers to hide her em-
barrassment. Finally Petra became aware of
her impoliteness; she coloured and would have
apologised, but there was something about the
carefully arranged hair, the delicate forehead
and the tight-fitting dress, which warned her
THE FISHER LASS


to be careful. She looked up at the mother;
oh, she could have thrown herself into her
arms before this. Did it not seem as if the
portrait were bidding her welcome ? Oh, could
she venture to believe it! tor no one had
ever looked at her like this before. This look
said that the mother knew everything that had
befallen the wayfarer, and could still forgive
her. She stood in need of sympathy and she
could not turn away from these kindly eyes ;
she put her head on one side like the figure
in the portrait and folded her hands in the
same way, then, turning almost unconsciously
to Signe, said :
li Oh, let me stay here ! ”
Signe raised her head and turned round;
she could not answer for astonishment.
“ Let me stay here! ” begged Petra again,
drawing a step nearer to her, i( It is so nice
here! ” and her eyes filled with tears.
" I will ask father to come,” said the girl.
Petra followed her with her eyes until she
disappeared through the study-door. But she
was no sooner alone than she grew frightened
at what she had done, and when she saw the
165


pastor’s astonished face at the door, she
trembled. He came in somewhat better dressed
than before, and with his pipe in his mouth.
He held it with a firm grasp and removed
the mouthpiece from his lips after each inhala-
tion, blowing out the smoke in three whiffs,
with a little smack of the lips at each. He
repeated this several times, as he stood in
front of Petra in the middle of the room, not
exactly looking at her, but as if waiting for
her to speak. She did not dare to repeat her
request in this man’s presence; he looked so
stern.
“ You want to remain here ? ” he asked,
giving her a long, keen side-glance.
Fear made her voice tremble a little,
“ I have nowhere to go.”
“ Where do you come from ? ”
Petra told him in a low tone her own name
and the name of her native town.
il How did you get here ? ”
“I don’t know .... I am looking for . . . .
I’ll pay for myself .... I —l don’t know.”
She turned away and for a moment could say no
more ; then she took courage again and began :
THE FISHER LASS


“ I will do anything you ask me to—if only I
may stay here, and not have to go any further
—and not have to ask a second time.”
Signe had followed her father into the room, but
had paused by the stove, where she stood with
downcast eyes playing with the rose-leaves that
were spread there to dry. The pastor did not
answer; only the puffing of his pipe was audible,
as he stood looking by turns at her, his daughter
and the portrait. Now, the same thing may
make a different impression on different people;
for, while Petra prayed that the portrait might
make him indulgent towards her, it seemed to
him that it whispered :
“ Protect our child ; take no one whom you
do not know into the house with her! ”
He turned with a sharp side-glance at Petra.
“No ! You cannot stay here !”
Petra grew pale, heaved a deep and vehement
sigh, looked uncertainly about her and rushed
into the adjoining room, the door of which stood
half-open. Here, throwing herself across the
table, she gave full vent to her grief and dis-
appointment.
Father and daughter looked at each other.
THE FISHER LASS


Her want of good breeding in thus coolly rushing
into another room and taking possession of it
was only of a piece with her behaviour in coming
in from the highway, begging to be allowed to
remain there, and then beginning to make a dis-
turbance when her request was refused* The
pastor followed her, not to speak to her, but
simply to close the door behind her. He
returned red in the face and said softly to his
daughter, who was still standing by the stove:
u Did you ever see such a woman ? Who is
she ? What does she want ? ”
Signe did not answer at once ; but when she
did, it was in a still softer tone than her father:
“ She behaves very oddly, but there is some-
thing remarkable about her.”
The pastor walked up and down, looking at
the door ; finally he paused and whispered:
“ She cannot be entirely in her right mind. ,,
And as Signe did not reply, he came closer and
repeated more decidedly :
“ She is mad, Signe, half-witted, that is what’s
remarkable about her.”
He began to walk up and down again, got
into another train of thought and had almost
168


forgotten his last remark, when his daughter at
length replied in a whisper:
“ No, I don’t think so; but I’m sure she is
very unhappy.”
She bent down over the dried roses, with
which she was still playing. Neither in the
tone of her voice nor in this movement would a
stranger have noticed anything unusual, but her
father’s manner changed at once. He walked
up and down several times looking at the por-
trait, and at last said in a very low tone :
“Do you think that because she looks unhappy
-—mother would have asked her to remain ? ”
“ Mother would not have answered for a few
days,” whispered his daughter, bending still lower
over the roses.
The slightest recollection of her whose
portrait hung on the wall could, when called up
in this way by his daughter, make this shaggy
lion as meek as a lamb. He at once perceived
the truth of what she said, and stood like a
schoolboy who has been caught copying; he
forgot either to smoke or to walk, and, after
some time had elapsed, whispered :
“ Should I ask her to remain for a few days ? ”
169


“ But you have given her your answer.”
“ Yes, but it is one thing to have her here
altogether, another to let her stay for a few
days.”
Signe seemed also to be weighing the matter,
and finally said :
“ Do as you think best.”
The pastor seemed to want to consider the
proposal still more carefully, and walked up and
down the room a few times, puffing vigorously.
Finally he paused.
“ Will you go in or shall I ?”
“ It will certainly be best for you to go,” said
his daughter, looking up with a gentle smile.
He was just on the point of turning the
.handle, when a burst of laughter was heard from
within—there was a moment’s silence and then
another long, loud peal. The pastor, who had
started back, hastened to the door with his
daughter behind him—the girl must surely have
been taken ill.
On opening the door, they saw Petra still sitting
in the same place at the table. Before her lay
an open book, over which she had thrown herself
without being aware of it. Her tears had trickled
170


down upon the pages, and seeing this, she was
about to wipe them off, when her eye was caught
by one of those coarse expressions which she
remembered from the days of her street life, but
which she had never believed any book would
venture to take in its mouth. Utterly dumb-
founded, she forgot to cry and sat staring down
at the book. Whatever sort of stuff could it be?
She read on open-mouthed ; it only went from
bad to worse, becoming so coarse and yet so
irresistibly funny that it was impossible to leave
off. She read until she could think of nothing
else; she read until she had forgotten both
sorrow and tears, both time and place—in the
company of old father Holberg; for it was he !
She laughed, she roared with laughter—even
when the pastor and his daughter were standing
over her, she did not see their serious faces, she
did not remember her request; she only laughed
and asked :
“ What is it ? Whatever is it ? ” and turned
back to the title-page herself.
Suddenly she grew pale. She looked up into
their faces and then down again at the book —at
the familiar handwriting There are things
THE FISHER LASS


that strike the heart like a bullet, things that we
believe we have left hundreds of miles behind us
and suddenly see just before us ! . . . . Here on
the first page was written “ Hans Oedegaard.”
With a face like fire, she cried :
"Is the book his ? Is he coming here ? and
she rose.
“He has promised to,” replied Signe. And
then Petra remembered that in the Bergen
diocese there was a pastor’s family with which
he had become acquainted when abroad. She
had only been travelling in a circle, and it had
brought her back to him.
“Is he coming soon, or is he here
already?” In this case she would go on
without delay.
“ No; he is ill, you know,” said Signe.
“Yes, that’s true, he is ill,” said Petra sadly,
sinking into her seat.
“ But tell me,” exclaimed Signe, " you are
surely not ”
“The * Fisher Lass’?” said the pastor, com-
pleting her sentence.
Petra looked up to them imploringly.
“ Yes, I am the 1 Fisher Lass ’,” she said.
172


They both knew her well, for Oedegaard had
talked of nothing else.
“That is another matter,” said the pastor.
He perceived that something was amiss, and
that friendly help was needed.
“Remain here in the meantime,” he said.
Petra looked up, and as she did so she saw
the glance with which Signe thanked him. It
made her so happy that she went up to her,
and taking both her hands in hers —more she
did not dare to do—said with some embarrass-
ment :
“ I will tell you everything as soon as we two
are alone.”
An hour later Signe knew Petra’s whole
history, which she at once communicated to her
father. Upon his advice Signe wrote the same
day to Oedegaard, and continued to do so as
long as Petra was in the house.
Petra lay down to rest that evening in a
large feather bed, in a cheerful room warmed
by a crackling birchwood fire. A New
Testament lay between the two candles on
the snowy table beside her bed, and, taking
the book in her hands, she thanked her
173


God for everything, for the evil as well as
the good.
% * « « *
As a young man endowed with an ardent
spirit and the gift of eloquence, the pastor had
wished to enter the Church. His parents, who
were well-to-do, had been against his choice ;
they would have preferred to see him choose
what they called an independent career. But
their opposition only made his zeal the greater,
and, on finishing his studies at home, he went
abroad to continue them. During a temporary
residence in Denmark he made the acquaintance
of a lady who held views on religious matters
which he did not consider strict enough, and to
which, in consequence, he was bitterly opposed.
He did his best to influence her ; but the way in
which she looked at him and thereby silenced all
his arguments was never absent from his mind
all the time he was abroad. On his return he
at once sought her out. They saw each other
frequently, grew in favour in each other’s eyes,
finally became engaged, and shortly afterwards
married.
Now, however, it appeared that each one had
THE FISHER LASS


had a purpose in the background. He had
resolved to win her over in all her grace and
charm to his sterner doctrines, and she had
been childishly confident of being able to secure
his power and eloquence in the service of the
sect to which she belonged. The first tentative
effort he made was met by an equally tentative
one on her part. He drew back, disappointed
and suspicious. She was not slow to perceive
this, and henceforth he kept a watch upon her
efforts, and she a watch upon his. But neither
of them ever tried again, for they had both
grown afraid. He feared his own passionate
nature, and she was afraid lest an unsuccessful
attempt should destroy her chances of ever
winning him over to her side; for she never
gave up this hope—it became the object of her
life. But it never came to an open struggle, for
where she was, conflict was impossible.
His restless will and restrained passion, how-
ever, had to find a vent, and this happened each
time that he mounted the pulpit and saw her
sitting beneath him. His hearers were drawn
in as into a whirlpool; first he inflamed them,
then they him. She saw this, and her anxious
THE FISHER LASS


heart sought consolation in doing; good and
later on, when she became a mother, she found
it in her daughter, whom she took both literally
and spiritually into her arms and bore into her
hours of silence. Here she gave and here she
received, here she cradled her own childlike soul
in childish innocence, here she held the festival
of love, whence she returned to him, the stern
man, with the twofold gentleness of womanhood
and Christianity. It was impossible for him to
say anything to her that was not kind and
loving. He could not but love her above every-
thing in the world, but it only made him the
more sorrowful, only made his heart bleed the
more, that he could not help her to the salvation
of her soul. With the silent right of a mother
she withdrew the child also from his religious
instruction. The chikTs songs and questions
soon became a new and deep source of grief to
him ; and if sometimes in the pulpit he allowed
himself to be carried away by his powerful
emotions, and to say harsh words, his wife only
received him, as they went home together, with
still greater gentleness. Her eyes spoke, but no
word came from her lips. And his daughter took
176


his hand and looked at him with eyes that were
her mother’s.
Everything was discussed in this house except
that which was the root of all their thoughts.
But so great a strain could not be borne for
ever. She still smiled, indeed, but only because
she did not dare to weep. As the time ap-
proached for her daughter to be prepared for
confirmation, and he thus by the right of his
office could draw her over as quietly to his views
as her mother had hitherto held her fast in hers,
the strain reached its utmost limit. After the
Sunday on which the names of those to be
confirmed were publicly proclaimed, the mother
grew ill—much as a person usually grows tired.
She said with a smile that she was no longer
able to walk about, and then, a few days later,
with the same smile, that now she could not
even sit upright. She always liked to have her
daughter with her; although she could not speak
to her, she could at least see her. And her
daughter knew what pleased her best ; she read
to her from the Book of Life and sang her the
hymns of her childhood, those new, inspiring
hymns of the faith to which she belonged. For
M
177


a long time the pastor did not realise what all
this meant, but when he did realise it, he
seemed to lose all grasp of life : his whole mind
was concentrated in one wish, to hear her speak
to him once more, even if only a few words.
But she was no longer able even to do this ;
she had lost the power of speech. He stood at
the foot of the bed and watched and prayed.
She smiled at him until he fell upon his knees,
and, taking his daughter’s hand, laid it in her
mother’s, as though he would say : “ Here, keep
her —she shall be yours for ever! ” Then she
smiled as she had never smiled before, and in
this smile passed away.
For a long time after this the pastor was
inaccessible to any one ; another was appointed
to carry on his duties. He himself wandered
from room to room, from place to place, as if he
were seeking for something. He moved as
gently as possible, and, when he spoke, it was in
a subdued tone ; it was only by entering wholly
into his hushed ways that his daughter was able
by degrees to become a companion to him. She
began to help him in his search ; every word of
the mother’s was recalled ; what she had wished
178


became the guiding rule of their lives. The life
mother and daughter had lived together, from
which he had been excluded, now became his
life too. From the first moment that the child
could remember, everything was lived through
anew; her hymns were sung, her prayers were
prayed, the sermons that she had liked best were
read through one after another, and her explana-
tions and remarks faithfully borne in mind.
Thus roused to activity, he soon felt a desire to
revisit those places where he had met her, in
order to follow up her traces there in the same
manner. They travelled, and he gradually
recovered, by absorbing wholly and completely
her life into his own. A beginner himself, he
took a lively interest in all the beginnings that
he saw about him, the great national beginnings,
the less important political ones, and these gave
him back something of his own youth. His
powers returned to him in full, and with them
his aspirations—he would proclaim the Word in
such a way that it would not only be a prepara-
tion for death, but for life as well.
Before he again shut himself up in his moun-
tain parish with this, his beloved work, he felt
179


the need of taking a wider view of the outside
world. They therefore extended their travels
still further, and were now rich in the possession
of great memories.
It was with these people that Petra lived.
180


CHAPTER IX
More than two years later, one Friday a few
days before Christmas, the two girls were sitting
together in the twilight ; the pastor had just
come in with his pipe. The day had been spent
like most days during the past two years : a
walk in the morning and, after breakfast, an
hour of playing and singing ; then languages or
some other study, and, finally, a little household
work. The afternoon each spent in her own
room, and on the day in question Signe had been
busy writing to Oedegaard. Petra never inquired
after him, for she did not wish to hear her past
mentioned. Towards evening they had been
toboganning and had now come in to talk or
sing, and, later on, read aloud. It was for this
that the pastor always came in. He read
exceptionally well, and so did his daughter.
Petra acquired their styles of reading, and
181


especially their pronunciation. Signe’s accent
and intonation had a great charm for her and
often rang in her ears when she was alone. On
the whole, Petra had such a high opinion of
Signe that, in a man, a quarter of it would have
passed for passionate love; and, in fact, she
often made Signe blush. As either the pastor
or his daughter read aloud every evening—Petra
could not be induced to join in—they had gone
through the principal poets of Scandinavian
literature, and had gradually made their way
out into the great literature of other nations.
Dramatic works were given the preference.
On this evening, just as they were about to
light the lamps to begin, the kitchen-maid came
in and said that there was some one outside who
had a message for Petra. It turned out to be
a sailor from her native town ; her mother had
enjoined him to seek her out when he was in
that neighbourhood. He had come about seven
miles and had to hurry away again, as his ship
was about to sail. Petra walked part of the way
with him, for she had still much to talk about,
and he was a trustworthy man whom she knew
well. The evening was rather dark; all the
182


windows of the house were dark too, except those
of the wash-house, where they were washing.
There was not a light to be seen on the road ;
indeed, the road itself was hardly visible, until
the moon had managed to climb up behind the
mountains. But she went bravely on with him,
even into the wood, although there were ugly
shadows among the pines.
One piece of news, in particular, had tempted
her to go so far. The sailor had told her that
Pedro Ohlsen’s mother was dead, and that Pedro
had sold his house and moved to Gunlaug’s,
where he was living in Petra’s attic. This
piece of news was almost two years old, but her
mother had never said a word about it. Now,
however, it was clear to Petra who wrote her
mother’s letters for her, a question which she
had often asked her, but always in vain. Every
letter concluded with: “And love from the
writer of the letter.”
The sailor’s errand was to inquire how long
Petra intended to remain at the parsonage, and
what she was going to do afterwards. To the
first of these questions Petra replied that she
did not know, and to the second, that he was to
183


tell her mother that there was only one thing in
the world she wished to do, and if she did not
do it, she would be unhappy all the rest of her
life ; but just at present she could not say what
it was*
While Petra was thus talking to the sailor,
the pastor and Signe were sitting at home talk-
ing about her, and how happy she had made
them. Their conversation was interrupted by
the entrance of the farm steward, who, after
having reported on the day’s work, asked if
either of them knew that the young lady who
lived with them got in and out of her window
at night by means of a rope ladder. He had to
repeat what he said three times before either of
i
them understood what he meant; for he might
just as well have announced that she was in the
habit of going up and down the moonbeams.
The room was dark, and at this it became per-
fectly still; not even the pastor’s pipe was to be
heard. Finally he managed to ask, and there
was a hollow tone in his voice :
u Who has seen her ? ”
“ I have. I was up feeding the horses; it
might be about one o’clock.”
184


“ You saw her going down a rope ladder ? ”
“Yes, and up again/ 1
There was another pause. Petra had the
room upstairs in the corner, facing the drive.
She was alone up there ; for no other room on
that side of the house was occupied except hers.
There could thus be no mistake.
“ It was probably in her sleep,” said the man,
and was about to leave the room.
“But she cannot surely have made a rope
ladder in her sleep,” said the pastor.
“No, that’s what I thought, too ; so I thought
it was best to tell you about it, sir, I haven’t
said anything to any one else.”
“ Has any one seen it besides yourself? ”
“ No, but if you have any doubt, sir, the
rope ladder will surely be a proof; if it is not
upstairs, then I must have make a mistake.”
The pastor rose at once.
“ Father ! ” begged Signe.
“Bring a light!” replied the pastor in a
manner that admitted of no contradiction. Signe
lighted a candle herself.
“ Father! ” she implored once more, as she
handed it to him.
185


“ Yes, I am her father too, as long as she is in
my house. It is my duty to investigate this matter.”
The pastor went first with the light, Signe
and the steward followed him. Everything was
in order in the little room, except that on the
table beside the bed a number of books were
lying open one on the top of the other.
“ Does she read at night ? ”
a I don't know, but she never puts out her
light before one o'clock.”
The pastor and Signe looked at each other;
they always retired for the night at the parsonage
at ten or half-past ten, and met again in the
morning at six or seven.
u Do you know about this ? ”
Signe did not reply. But the steward, who
was on his knees in a corner searching for the
ladder, answered :
“ I don’t think she is alone.”
“ What do you say ? ”
“ No, there is always some one with her,
talking to her, and they often speak very loud.
I have heard her both threatening and begging
for mercy. I am afraid she is in some one's
power, poor thing ! ”
186


Signe turned away; the pastor had grown
deadly pale.
“ And here is the ladder,” continued the
steward, as he drew it forth, and rose to his
feet.
Two clothes-lines were fastened together by a
third, which was knotted first to one rope, then
to the other ; then crossed over again about a
foot lower, and so on until the ladder was made.
It was carefully examined.
“ Was she long away ? ” asked the pastor.
The steward looked at him.
(i Away ? What do you mean ? ”
“ Was she long away after she came down
the ladder ? ”
Signe stood trembling with cold and fear.
“ She didn’t go anywhere ; she just climbed
up again.”
“Up again ? Who went away then ? ”
Signe made a movement, and burst into
tears.
n I don’t think there was any one with her
that evening ; it was only last night.”
“ So there was no one on the ladder except
her ? ”
THE FISHER LASS


" No!”
H And she went down and then immediately
up again ? ”
“ Yes ! ”
u She must only have wanted to try it,” said
the pastor, breathing a little more freely*
n Yes, before she let any one else go up it,”
added the steward.
The pastor looked at him.
“So you think this is not the first time she
has made one ? 9
“ No, or else how could people have got up
to her ? ”
“ Have you known long that somebody is in
the habit of going up to her ? ”
“ Not before this winter, when she began to
use a light ; it did not occur to me to come
down here before.”
“So you have known this the whole winter?
Why have you not told me of it before ? ” asked
the pastor sternly.
“ I thought it was one of the household that
was with her But when I saw her last
night on the ladder, I guessed for the first
time that it was some one else. If I had
THE FISHER LASS


suspected this before, I should have told you
before.”
“ Yes, it is clear enough, she has deceived us
all! ”
Signe looked up imploringly.
“ She ought perhaps not to have slept so far
away from every one else,” suggested the
steward, as he rolled up the ladder.
“She ought not to sleep anywhere in this
house after this,” said the pastor. The others
followed him out of the room.
Downstairs in the sitting-room, when he had
put the light on the table, Signe threw herself
into his arms.
‘ ‘ Yes, my child, this is a bitter disappoint-
ment.”
A few moments later Signe was sitting in the
corner of the sofa with her handkerchief to her
eyes; the pastor had lighted his pipe and was
pacing quickly up and down. Suddenly they
heard a scream from the kitchen, steps on the
stairs, a rush along the passage overhead ; they
both hurried out. Petra’s room was on fire!
A spark from the candle had fallen in the corner
of the room —that had been the origin of the
189


fire. In an instant it had run up the wall-paper
and caught the woodwork round the window,
when it was seen by a passer-by, who at once
ran into the wash-house and gave the alarm.
The fire was soon put out ; but in the country,
where everything pursues its even course from
one year’s end to the other, every break in the
monotony throws people into a great state of
excitement. Fire is their greatest and most
dangerous enemy, and it is never out of their
thoughts. When it does come and, some night,
raises its head from the abyss, hissing and
licking its lips for prey, they tremble and do not
regain their peace of mind for weeks, some,
indeed, never again.
When the pastor and his daughter were in
the sitting-room again after this occurrence, and
had lighted the lamp, they both felt that there
was something ominous in the fact of Petra’s
room being thus immediately wiped out, and
everything that recalled her destroyed. At the
same instant, Petra’s clear voice was heard ex-
claiming and asking questions. She rushed up-
stairs and down again, she ran from her room
down to the hall, and from the hall to the kitchen,
190


and finally, rushing into the sitting-room, still in
her outdoor things, cried :
u Oh, dear, my room is burnt!”
No one answered, but in the same breath she
asked :
“ Who has been up there ? When did it
happen ? What caused the fire ? ”
The pastor replied that it was they who had
been in the room ; they had been looking for
something—and he gave her a keen look. Not
by the slightest sign did Petra show that she
thought this unusual, nor did she betray any-
thing of the nature of fear of what they might
have seen there. Even the fact that Signe did
not look up from her sofa corner, awakened no
misgivings in her; she attributed it to the fright
of the fire, and asked, without a pause, how it
had been discovered and put out, and who had
been first on the spot; and, as she was not
answered quickly enough, rushed out in the
same way as she had come in. Soon she came
running in again—this time with her outdoor
things half off —to tell the pastor and Signe how
it had all happened, and how she herself had
seen the glare, and had run terribly hard, and
191


how glad she was now to find that it had been
no worse. As she spoke, she took off the rest
of her things, carried them out, and, coming in
again, sat down in her place at the table, talking
all the time about what this one had said and
that one done ; the whole house was turned up-
side down, and it was very amusing. As the
others still remained silent, she expressed her
sorrow that it had spoiled their evening. She
had been looking forward so much to a Romeo
and Juliet/ 1 which they were at present reading
aloud; and this very evening she had been
going to get Signe to read through again the
scene which she thought the finest of all:
Romeo’s parting from Juliet on the balcony.
In the midst of this torrent of words one of
the maids came in from the wash-house to say
that they were wanting clothes-lines ; a whole
bundle was missing. Petra instantly grew
scarlet, and sprang to her feet.
u I know where they are; I’ll fetch them.”
She took a few steps forward, but then, remem-
bering the fire, paused and blushed still more
deeply. u Oh dear, they are sure to have been
burnt; they were up in my room ! ”
192


Signe had turned towards her; the pastor
scrutinised her face from the side.
“What do you want clothes-lines for?”
His breath came so quick that he could
scarcely speak. Petra looked at him; his
terrible earnestness almost frightened her at
first, but the next moment it made her laugh.
She struggled with her mirth for a time, but
another look at him made her burst into a
hearty peal of laughter, which, try as she
would, she could not suppress. There was no
more a bad conscience behind such a laugh than
behind the ripple of a brook. Signe realised
this in a moment, and sprang up from the sofa,
crying:
“ What is it ? What is it ? ”
Petra turned away her face, laughed, jumped
aside, ducked, and made for the door. But
Signe was in her way.
“ What is it ? Petra, tell me ! ”
Petra buried her face on Signe’s shoulder, as
if to hide it, but continued to laugh immode-
rately. No, guilt does not behave in this way
—that was now clear to the pastor too.
He whose anger had just risen to its highest
N
193


pitch was suddenly vanquished by laughter.
Signe followed his example, for nothing in the
world is more infectious than laughter, and
especially laughter for which there is absolutely
no reason. The futile efforts which first the
pastor and then Signe made to discover what
they were laughing at, increased the mirth to its
highest pitch. The maid, who was still waiting
for the clothes-lines, was forced at last to join
in the general merriment. She had a curious
hollow laugh, made up of pants and gasps, and,
feeling herself that it was not suitable to such
fine furniture and people, she hurried out of the
room to have it out in the kitchen. She natu-
rally carried the infection with her, and soon a
loud burst of laughter was heard in the kitchen,
where still less was known as to its cause, and
this started the merriment in the sitting-room
afresh.
When finally they were almost exhausted,
Signe made a last attempt to learn the cause of
it all.
“ Now, you must tell me ! ” she cried, holding
Petra's hands fast.
" No, not for anything ! ”
194


“ Yes, but I know what it is ! ”she cried
again.
Petra looked at her, and gave a scream, but
Signe exclaimed :
“ Father knows it too I ”
This time Petra did not scream, she shrieked,
and, tearing herself away, got as far as the
door, but there Signe caught her again. Petra
turned round to free herself from her grasp, for
get away she would at any price. She laughed
as she struggled, but there were tears in her
eyes. Then Signe let go. Petra was out of
the room in an instant, and Signe after her.
Both ran into Signe’s room.
There Signe put her arms round Petra’s necky
and Petra threw her arms round Signe.
“ Oh, dear, do you really know? 11 she
whispered.
And Signe whispered back :
“ Yes, we were up in your room with the
steward ; he had seen you —and we found the
ladder!”
More screams and another attempt at flight,
but this time only as far as the sofa corner,
where she hid her face. Signe was soon
195


beside her, and, half leaning over her, poured
into her ear the whole story of the discovery
and its disastrous results. What a short time
ago had caused her both tears and anxiety, now
seemed to her so amusing that she described
it with a touch of humour. Petra alternately
listened and stopped her ears, looked up and
hid her face. When Signe had finished her
story, and they were both sitting there together
in the dark, Petra whispered :
“ Do you know what it is ? .... I can’t
possibly sleep at ten o’clock when we all go to
our rooms ; what we have been reading has still
too great a hold on me. So I learn by heart all
the best passages. In this way I learn whole
scenes by heart, and then I recite them aloud to
myself. When we came to Romeo and Juliet,’
it seemed to me to be the most beautiful thing
in the world. I was wild about it ; I felt that I
must try the scene with the rope ladder —I had
never thought before that one could go up and
down a rope ladder I got hold of some
clothes-lines .... and then the rogue was
standing down there and saw me ! . . . . It’s
nothing to laugh at, Signe, it is such a tomboyish
196


thing to do. I shall never be anything but a
tomboy ! And now, of course, I shall be the
talk of the whole parish to-morrow.”
But Signe, who had again begun to laugh,
fell upon her with kisses and caresses, and ran
out of the room, exclaiming :
“ Father must know all about it ! ”
“ Are you mad, Signe ? "
And, one after the other, they came flying
into the sitting-room again, as they had left it. At
the door they almost upset the pastor, who was
just going out to see what had become of them.
Signe began to tell him all about it, and Petra
ran out of the room with a scream ; realising,
however, outside the door, that she ought to
have remained in the room to keep Signe from
speaking, she tried to get in again, but the
pastor was holding the door so fast that it was
impossible to open it. She thumped on it with
both hands, sang and stamped her feet to drown
Signe's voice, but Signe merely talked the
louder. When the pastor had heard everything,
and was laughing as heartily and happily as
Signe at this new method of reading the classics,
he opened the door —but then Petra ran away.
197


After supper, at which Petra had been
properly teased by the pastor, she had as
punishment to let them hear what she had
learnt by heart. It turned out that she really
did know the most famous scenes, and not
only a single role, but all of them. She recited
them just as she had heard them read: occa-
sionally she grew warm over her subject, but
she restrained herself at once. As soon as the
pastor observed this, he called for more expres-
sion, but this only made her the more shy. It
went on for hours together without a break. She
knew the comic scenes as well as the tragic, the
humorous as well as the serious ; her memory
awakened both surprise and amusement, and,
joining in the laugh, she begged them to put it
still further to the test.
v>»
“If only poor actors had a quarter of your
memory ! ” said Signe.
“ God forbid that she should ever be an
actress ! ” said the pastor, growing serious all at
once.
“ But, father, you surely don’t think that
Petra has any idea of such a thing ? ” said Signe
with a laugh, “ I only mentioned it, because I
198


always see it asserted that when a person has
been brought up on the poetry of his country,
he has never any desire to go on the stage,
while one who doesn’t know very much about
poetry until he is grown up, is enthusiastic about
it. It is the suddenness of the desire that
leads a person astray.”
“That is undoubtedly true. It is very
seldom that a person of real culture goes on the
stage.”
“ And still more seldom one who has a cul-
tured knowledge of poetry.”
“When it does happen, it is probably due to
a defect of character which allows vanity and
frivolity to get the upper hand. I have met
many actors, both as a student and on my
travels, but I have never known, and have
never heard of any one who did know, an actor
who led a truly Christian life. Some felt
attracted by it —that was clear —but there is
something so disquieting and exciting in their
work that it is impossible for them to discipline
their thoughts, even long after they have left
the stage. When I happened to discuss this
subject with them, they admitted it themselves
199


with regret ; but added, however, ‘We must
console ourselves with the thought that we are
after all no worse than many other people.’ But
that I call a poor consolation. A life which in
no way tends to develop the Christian in us is a
sinful life. May God help those who follow
such a calling, and keep all pure hearts away
from it! ”
* * *
On the following day, a Saturday, the pastor
was up, as usual, before seven. After making
his morning inspection of his workpeople, he
went for a walk and returned as it was growing
light. Just as he was going past the house
into the yard, he saw an open exercise- book, or
something similar, which presumably had been
thrown out of Petra’s window the evening
before, and not noticed, as it was the same
colour as the snow. He picked up the book
and took it into his study with him. On spread-
ing it out to dry it, he saw that it was an old
French exercise-book, in which verses had been
written. It did not occur to him to examine
them, but his eye was caught by the word
u actress,” which was scribbled up and down, all
200


over the pages—it was even in the verses too.
He sat down to examine the book more care-
fully.
Among various attempts which had been
crossed out he found the following rhymes,
which, although full of corrections, were still
legible :
“ Come, my dear one, list to me,
While I tell you what I’ll be.
Mine shall be the actor’s art,
I’ll show the world a woman’s heart,
How she suffers, how she smiles,
Her prayers to Heaven, her gentle wiles,
How she looks when she is winning,
How she looks when she is sinning.
0 God, help me in my task,
This and this alone I ask ! ”
A little further down was the following:
11 May I not Thy handmaid be?
Wilt Thou, O God, remember me?”
Still further down, doubtless as a marginal note
to a poem which they had read a few months
ago :
1 * Oh, to be a fairy sprite,
Fairy sprite,
Dancing in the moon’s pale light,
Moon’s pale light;
201


A cautious peep, and then I’d fly,
Then I’d fly.
Him I’d kill, who dared to spy,
Dared to spy—
No, ’twere a sin, lirum, larum, ba! ”
And, after many alterations and erasures,
sketches and notes of music :
11 Hop, sa, sa —hop, sa, sa!
To dance with them all, but care for none!
Tra, la, la—tra, la, la !
To win all hearts, but never to be won! ”
After this, clear and distinct, the following letter :
“ Beloved Henry,
a Dost thou not think that thou and I
are the cleverest in the whole comoedie ? This
will do us great harm, but that mattereth little.
I engrasse thee to go to the mascarade to-
morrow evening; for I have never been there
yet, and I am longing for some real fun. It
is so quiet and dull in this house.
“ Thou art a great rogue, Henry! What
dost thou now ? Here sits
“Thy
“ PERNILLE.”*
* A reminiscence of Holberg’s comedy, “ Henry and Per-
nille. ’ ’
THE fisher lass


Finally, the following verses were written over
and over again in large, distinct letters; she
had evidently found them somewhere and
wanted to learn them by heart:
** Oh, a mighty dream of Art
Throbs and pulses in my heart.
Thoughts that noble minds rejoice—
Had I but power to give them voice,
The truth in hidden springs to find,
Baldur set free and Loki bind —
Oh, aid my efforts towards this goal,
Thou who hast thus inspired my soul! ”
There were many other things besides, but
the pastor read no more.
So it was to become an actress that she
had come into his house and enjoyed the
instruction of his daughter. It was with this
secret purpose she had listened so eagerly
every evening to them reading aloud, and then
afterwards committed what she had heard to
memory. She had been deceiving them all the
time; even the previous evening, when she ap-
peared to be perfectly frank with them, she was
concealing something—in the midst of all her
laughter, she was lying.
And this secret purpose ! What the pastor
203


had so often condemned in her presence, she
extolled as a divine calling and dared to ask
God to bless! A life of outward show and
vanity, a life full of jealousy and passion, of
sloth, sensuality and lies, of gradual loss of
character—a life, above which the vultures
circled as above carrion—this was what she
longed to devote herself to and besought God
to consecrate! And this was the life towards
which the pastor and his daughter had been
helping her on in the quiet parsonage, under
the stern eye of his discerning flock.
When Signe came in fresh and bright as
the winter morning, to say “ Good morning ”
to her father, she found the study full of
smoke. This was always a sign of mental
agitation, but it was doubly so so early in
the morning. He did not say a word to her,
but handed her the book. She saw at once
that it was Petra’s. A recollection of the
suspicion and grief of the previous evening
flashed through her mind ; she hardly ventured
to look at it, and her heart beat so violently
that she was forced to sit down. But the
same word which had first caught the pastor’s
204


eye, attracted her attention; she could not help
looking at the book again and reading it. Her
first feeling was one of shame —not on Petra’s
account, but that her father should have seen it.
But she soon experienced the deep humilia-
tion that comes from finding ourselves deceived
by a person we love. For a moment he who
has been capable of thus deceiving us seems
to us to be greater, cleverer, more ingenious
than we are —indeed, a certain air of mystery
attaches to him. But the soul soon arises in
indignation; honesty gathers strength from
powers which, although invisible, have nothing
mysterious about them. We feel possessed of
strength enough to crush with one blow a
hundred trumpery inventions; we despise what
but a moment ago humiliated us.
In the sitting-room Petra had seated herself
at the piano, and at this moment they heard
her singing ;
•• A joy is kindled, the day has begun,
Despair’s cloud castle yields to the Sun,
And o’er hills red and bright,
March the hosts of the Light.
Up, up, song-bird wild!
Up, up, merry child S
Up, up, my hopes with the sun ! ”
205


Then a storm swept over the piano, and high
above it rose the following song:
“No warnings for me 1
My boat I’ll guide
In the roar of the sea,
In the sweep of the tide.
And what though I never return to the shore,
I must see what I never have seen before !
Not for pleasure or gain
Thy coast I leave,
I must reach the main,
Where the billows heave,
I must see the keel, when the storm winds blow,
I must see how long and how far I can go ! ”
No, this was too much for the pastor’s patience;
snatching the book from Signe’s hand as he
passed, he rushed out of the room, and this
time she did not hold him back. Bursting in
upon Petra, he threw the book down on the
piano before her, then turned away and walked
to the other end of the room. When he returned
she had risen from her seat; she was pressing
the book to her breast and looking about her
with bewildered eyes. He paused before her to
give her a piece of his mind, but his wrath at
having been made use of for two years by this
crafty young woman, and especially at the
THE FISHER LASS


thought of how his warm-hearted, unselfish
daughter had been imposed upon, was so violent
that he could not all at once find words, and
when he did, he himself felt that they were too
harsh. Again he paced the room, again he
paused before Petra, scarlet in the face, then
turned his back upon her, and without uttering
a syllable walked straight into his study. When
he got there Signe was gone.
For the rest of the day they saw no more of
one another. The pastor dined alone ; neither
of the girls came in. Petra was in the house-
keeper’s room, wdiich, since the fire, had been
assigned to her ; she had sought everywhere,
but in vain, for Signe, to explain things
to her—but Signe was apparently not in the
house.
Petra felt that she was on the verge of a
decisive step. The most secret thoughts of her
life had been torn from her, and they would be
forcibly subjected to an influence to which she
could not submit. She knew well enough that
if she gave up this purpose, she would be at the
mercy of the wind of chance. She could rejoice
with those that rejoiced, confide in those who
207


confided in her, feel sure and confident of herself
under all circumstances, but this only by virtue
of her secret aim, the hope that one day she
would attain the goal to which all her ripening
powers aspired. Confide in any one after her
first unfortunate attempt in Bergen—no, that
she could not do, not even in Oedegaard himself!
She must be alone with her purpose until it had
grown so strong that it could endure the breath
of doubt.
But now all was changed. The pastor’s angry,
red face was always looking down into her
frightened conscience—she must escape from it
somehow ! Her search for Signe grew ever more
hurried and feverish as the day advanced, but
when afternoon came, Signe was still not to be
found. The longer the person we are seeking for
eludes our search, the more important does the
cause of the separation seem to us ; and thus it
happened that Petra at last came to realise that
it had been an act of treachery, secretly to make
use of Signe’s friendship for the furtherance of
an object that was so great a sin in Signe’s
eyes. God, who knows all things, should be
her witness that this view of the case had never
208


before presented itself to her mind; she felt
that she was a great sinner.
Just as before, in her own home, this feeling
suddenly overwhelmed her, although a moment
before she had no thought of such a thing.
The fact of this terrible experience repeating
itself, the consciousness that she had not made
a single step of progress, turned her vague fears
to terrors ; she saw before her nothing but a
future of misery. But the more her own sense
of guilt increased, the more clearly did Signe’s
image stand out in pure and unselfish affection.
Truly, it heaped coals of fire upon her thoughts !
She would throw herself at Signe’s feet, she
would beseech and implore her, and not relax
her hold nor cease to beg until Signe had given
her just one friendly look.
It had grown dark ; wherever she had been,
Signe must be at home now. She ran down
the passage to the wing of the house where
Signe’s room was; it was locked—a sign that
she was there. With beating heart she took
hold of the handle and cried imploringly :
“ Signe, let me speak to you—Signe, I cannot
bear it I ”
o
209


Not a sound from the room. Petra bent down,
listened and knocked.
“Signe, O Signe, you don’t know how un-
happy I am! ”
No answer. Petra listened for a long time,
but there was not a sound. If, under such
circumstances, we receive no answer, we finally
begin to doubt whether there is any one inside,
even although we know to the contrary, and il
it is dark we grow afraid as well.
“ Signe, Signe ! If you are there, have pity
on me, answer me ! Signe ! ”
All was still and remained still. She began to
shiver and tremble. But just then the kitchen
door opened, a flood of light streamed out, and
light, happy steps went across the yard. This
gave her an idea ; she would go out into the
yard herself, she would climb up on to the
ledge formed by the top of the high stone foun-
dation, upon which the wing of the house rested ;
she would walk right round the house on this
ledge to the other side, where it was still further
from the ground. She would look into Signe’s
room !
It was a bright, starlight night. The moun-
210


tain and the buildings stood out in sharp out-
lines, but the outlines alone were visible. The
snow sparkled, the dark paths that had been
made through it only increased its clear bril-
liancy ; from the road came the jingle of sleigh-
bells. This sound and the beauty of the evening
inspirited her; she jumped up on to the ledge.
She tried to hold on to the edges of the wooden
beams which formed the wall of the building,
but she lost her balance and fell down. She
got an empty barrel and rolled it up to the wall,
climbed upon it, and from it on to the ledge.
This time she moved hand and foot along beams
and wall simultaneously, advancing about six
inches at a time. But the strong fingers of a
strong hand were necessary to hold firm ; she
could not get a grasp, for the beams scarcely
projected an inch. She was afraid some one
would see her; it would, of course, be imme-
diately associated with the rope ladder; If only
she could get past the side which faced the yard
and round the end of the house ! But when she
finally got round, there was a fresh danger;
there were no curtains to the windows, and, at
the imminent risk of falling, she was obliged to
211


stoop as she passed each one. At the front of
the wing the foundation was very high, and
right along below it ran a hedge of gooseberry-
bushes on which she would be sure to catch
if she fell. But she was not afraid. Her
fingers tingled, her muscles quivered, her whole
body trembled, but she went bravely on. Only
a few steps more and she would be at the
window.
There was no light in Signed room and the
blinds were not down. The moon was shining
straight in, and she would be able to see into
every corner. This gave her fresh courage.
She gained the window-sill, where she could at
length get a firm hold and take a moment’s rest;
for, now that she had reached her goal, her
heart began to beat so violently that she could
scarcely breathe. But as the longer she waited
the worse it grew, she felt that she must make
haste, and suddenly stood straight up in front of
the window.
There was a loud scream from the room.
Signe, who had been sitting in a corner of the
sofa, sprang into the middle of the floor. For
a moment she stood with arms outstretched,
212


wildly warding off the fearful apparition, then
turned and fled. The figure at the window in
the moonlight, the reckless and shameful audacity
of the act, the flushed and excited face sharply
outlined by the moon —it became clear to Petra
in an instant that this unlucky idea of hers was
in itself enough to make Signe hate her; indeed,
her image would probably henceforth be a con-
stant source of terror to Signe. She lost con-
sciousness, and fell to the ground with a piercing
shriek.
The inmates of the house had hurried out at
Signe’s cry, but could find no one. Now hear-
ing a second cry the whole farm turned out,
and searched and shouted, but in vain ; and it
was purely by chance that the pastor, happening
to look out of the window in Signed room,
caught sight of Petra in the moonlight lying
in among the bushes. A great fear fell upon
them all; it was very difficult to free her and
lift her up. She was carried into Signed room,
as there was no fire in the housekeepers. She
was undressed and laid in the bed, and while
some bathed her hands and neck, which were
badly torn, others made the room bright, com-
213


fortable, and warm. When she had fully re-
covered consciousness and was able to look about
her, she begged to be left alone.
The quiet comfort of the room, the snowy
whiteness of its hangings —curtains, toilet-covers,
bed, and chairs- —brought Signe vividly before
her mind. She recalled her pure, unselfish
nature, her gentle, guileless voice, her fine
feeling for the thoughts of others, her sweet
benevolence. From all this she was now shut
out. She would soon have to leave this room,
just as she would probably have to leave the
house. And whither should she turn ? One
is not picked up a third time from the highway;
and, even if it could be, she had no desire for it,
for it would only end in the same way. No
one could have confidence in her. Whatever
the reason of it might be she felt that it was so.
She had not made a step of progress, and she
never would. Unless some one had confidence
in her, progress was impossible. How she
prayed, how she wept! She tossed and writhed
in the anguish of her soul until she wore herself
out and fell asleep.
214


She was no sooner asleep than everything
became snow-white, and seemed, as she gazed,
to grow lofty and sublime. Never in her life
before had she seen heights like these; never
had she seen the sparkling of so many million
stars.
THE FISHER LASS


CHAPTER X
When she awakened she was still on the heights
of her dreams. The thoughts which daylight
brought in its train were also about to soar
aloft, when they were taken captive and borne
away by something which filled the whole air :
it was the bells on Sunday morning. She
jumped up and dressed herself, got something
to eat in the pantry, and, wrapping herself well
up, hurried to the church. Never before had
she felt such a thirst for the Word of God !
When she arrived the service had just begun
and the door was closed. It was a cold day,
and her fingers tingled as she took hold of the
key to turn it. The pastor was just standing
before the altar. She waited down by the door
until he had finished and his assistant was about
to take off his surplice; then she went up to the
so-called u bishop’s pew,” which was in the
216


chancel and had curtains round it. The proper
pew for the pastor’s household was in the
gallery, but whoever for any reason wished to
be alone and unobserved sat in the bishop’s
pew. When she reached it and stole in she
saw that Signe was already sitting in the furthest
corner. She drew back at once, but just then
the pastor turned to go past from the altar to
the vestry. She hastily stepped back into the
pew, and sat down as near the door as possible.
Signe had let down her veil. This grieved
Petra.
She looked out over the congregation, which
sat packed into the high wooden pews, the men
on the right, the women on the left. Their
breath hung over them like mist; on the windows
was ice an inch thick. The clumsy wooden
images, the drawling, lifeless singing, the muffled-
up people—it was all of a piece; it made a
harsh and foreign impression upon her. She
remembered at this moment her impressions of
Nature the afternoon she left Bergen ; here, too,
she was only a frightened traveller.
The pastor ascended the pulpit; he, too,
looked stern. His prayer was, “ Lead us not
217


into temptation ! ” We knew, he continued,
that the talents with which God had endowed
us, might all be a source of temptation to us,
but he prayed that God might be merciful to us
and not try us beyond our strength. Ihis we
should always remember to pray for. For only
by humbling our talents before Him could they
work out our salvation. In the sermon he went
on to expound the same theme at some length,
discussing the twofold duty laid upon each of us
—that of doing our appointed work according to
our talents and the circumstances in which we
are placed, and that of developing the Christian
in us and in those entrusted to our care. It
behoved us to be careful in the choice of a
vocation, for there were unfortunately vocations
which were sinful in themselves, and others
which might become so for us, either because
they were not suitable to us, or because they were
only too well suited to our foolish desires. And
further : just as surely as each one of us must
endeavour to choose according to his talents, so
surely might a choice, although it was both
right and good, become a temptation to us, if,
because the work appealed to us, we allowed it
218


to occupy all our time and all our thoughts.
The Christian in us must no more be neglected
than our duty as parents towards our children.
We must be able to maintain the harmony of our
souls, that the Holy Spirit may be constantly at
work within us ; we must be able to plant and
foster the good seed in our children. There is
no duty, no pretext, which can release us from
this obligation, however much circumstances may
seem to favour us.
And now he went further —he touched upon
the life-work of those who sat before him, their
homes, their circumstances, their opinions. He
took from other conditions of life and higher
spheres of activity, examples which were fitted
to illustrate his subject. From the moment he
ascended the pulpit, the pastor became a new
man to those who only knew him in daily life.
Even his outward appearance changed: his
powerful, compressed face seemed to soften and
become transparent, revealing the under-current
of his thoughts ; his eyes grew large and looked
straight and steadfastly before him, the bearers
of a great message ; his rough, shaggy head was
now seen to be the head of a lion j his voice
219


pealed forth like thunder, or cut to the heart
with short, incisive strokes; sometimes also
sinking into a gentler tone, only to rise once
more to the heights of eloquence. Truth to tell,
he could only speak in a large room and where
his thoughts had room to expand ; for his voice
had no charm except at its full strength, his
countenance no transparency, his thoughts no
penetrating clearness, until lit up by his fiery
spirit. Not that the subject only presented
itself to him as he spoke—no, earnest meditation
had no less a share than sorrow in filling the
storehouse of his soul. He was a close and
earnest worker. But for ordinary occasions he
was not always prepared ; he could not coin the
thoughts of conversation. He had either to
monopolise the conversation, or at least to walk
rapidly up and down the room. To enter into an
argument with him was almost like falling upon
a defenceless man ; but it was dangerous never-
theless, for bis convictions were immediately
laid down with such force that he had no time
to give his reasons. If, however, he were com-
pelled to state them, one of two things hap-
pened : either he bespattered his opponent in
220


such a way that it went very hard with him, or
else he lapsed into silence, as if he were afraid
of himself. No one could be more easily put
to silence than this strong, eloquent man.
Petra had trembled when the pastor began his
prayer ; for she knew why it was chosen. The
further the sermon advanced, the more apparent
became its reference to herself; she cowered
down in her seat, and she saw that Signe did
the same. But relentlessly the powerful speaker
threw himself across her path ; the lion was
seeking for his prey. She felt that she was
pursued, cut off and shut in on all sides; but,
though strong the grasp, she was held by the
gentle hand of mercy. It seemed to her as if
—without a word of condemnation —she were
laid a captive in the arms of an Infinite Love.
And there she prayed, and there she wept, and
she heard Signe doing the same and loved her
for it!
As the pastor descended from the pulpit to
pass into the vestry, the light still lay upon his
countenance from his communion with a Higher
Power. He gave Petra a straight and searching
glance, but as she looked him full and frankly in
THE FISHER LASS


the face, a milder expression came into his eyes.
He glanced hastily at his daughter in the corner
as he went past.
Signe rose shortly afterwards ; her veil was
down and Petra did not venture to accompany
her. She therefore did not leave the church
until later. Put on this day they all three dined
together once more. The pastor talked a little,
but Signe was quiet and reserved. The pastor
evidently wished to discuss what had happened,
but directly he made the slightest allusion to it,
Signe evaded the subject with so much delicate
tact that he could not but be reminded of her
mother. He grew silent and then dejected. So
little was necessary to make him like this.
Now, there is nothing more painful than an
unsuccessful attempt at reconciliation. They
rose, without being able to look one another
straight in the face. In the sitting-room it at
length became so oppressive that all three would
have been glad to escape, but no one liked to go
first. Petra, for her part, felt that if she went
it would be for ever. She could not bear to see
Signe again if she were not allowed to love her ;
THE FISHER LASS


she could not bear to see the pastor unhappy on
her account. But, if go she must, it must be
without saying good-bye ; for how could she say
good-bye to them ? The mere thought of it
filled her with such emotion that it was only with
the utmost difficulty she could control herself.
Every minute which prolongs an oppressive
silence of this kind, in which we are each wait-
ing for the other to speak, makes it more and
more unbearable. We dare not move, because
we feel that it will be noticed; every breath is
audible; even our very stillness is audible, for
it is felt as harshness. We are at a tension
because nothing is said, and we tremble lest
anything should be said.
Each one felt that this moment would never
return again. The walls we sit raising between
ourselves and others become ever higher; our
own guilt increases, that of the others increases
increases with every breath we draw. At
one moment we are in despair, the next indig-
nant ; for the person who behaves in this way
towards us is merciless, is bad; we cannot bear
it, we will never forgive it S Petra felt that she
223


could stand it no longer; she must either
scream or run away !
Suddenly the jingle of sleigh-bells was heard
from the road, and soon a sleigh, in which before
the driver sat a gentleman in a wolfskin coat,
whizzed past the garden, and turned into the
yard. They all breathed more freely, and
listened for their release I They heard the
visitor in the passage; he took off his top-boots
and his wraps, talking meanwhile to the servant
who assisted him. The pastor rose to go and
meet him, but thought better of it, and remained
in the room, so as not to leave the two girls
alone. The stranger’s voice was again heard
in the passage; and this time close enough at
hand to make all three look up. Petra sprang
from her seat, and riveted her eyes upon the
door. There was a knock.
“ Come in ! ” said the pastor excitedly, and a
bright-faced man in spectacles appeared at the
door. Petra gave a cry and sank back into
her seat —it was Oedegaard !
His arrival was not unexpected for the pastor
and Signe; for he had been invited to the
parsonage for Christmas, although no one had
224


said so to Petra. But that he should have
come just at this moment was, indeed, a dis-
pensation of Providence; they all felt that at
once.
Petra was conscious of nothing until he was
standing before her holding her hand. He con-
tinued to hold it, but said nothing, and neither
did she speak—she could not even rise from
her seat. But as she looked at him, two tears
trickled down her cheeks. He was very pale,
but otherwise his manner was composed and
kind. Letting go her hand, he went across the
room to Signe, who had crept in among her
mother’s flowers in the furthest window.
Petra felt the need of being alone, and with-
drew to her room. Signe had something to do
in the house, and so the pastor and Oedegaard
went to the study to have a glass of wine, which
the traveller needed. Here the pastor briefly
related the events of the past few days. Oede-
gaard grew thoughtful, but said nothing. Sud-
denly they were interrupted in a singular
manner.
*****
Past the windows went two women and three
THE FISHER LASS


men, one after the other. The pastor no sooner
saw them than he sprang to his feet.
“ There they are again ! Now we shall need
all our patience ! ”
In they came —first the women, then the
men, slowly, silently. They ranged themselves
along the wall before the bookshelves, and
exactly opposite the sofa where Oedegaard was
sitting. The pastor placed chairs for them, and
fetched more from the sitting-room. They all
sat down, with the exception of a rather fashion-
ably dressed young man, who declined the offer,
and remained standing by the door. His face
wore a somewhat defiant expression, and he
kept his hands in his pockets.
After a long silence, during which the pastor
filled his pipe, and Oedegaard, who did not
smoke, scrutinised the party, the conversation
was opened by a fair, pale woman of about forty
years of age. Her forehead was somewhat
narrow, her eyes were large, but timid j they
did not seem to know where to look.
“ That was a fine sermon you gave us to-
day, pastor,” she said ; “it just fitted in with
what we were thinking about, for we have been
THE FISHER LASS


talking a great deal about temptation of late up
at Oeygar.”*
She sighed, and a man with a small, narrow
jaw and a high, broad forehead, did the same,
saying :
“Lord, guard our steps! Turn away mine
eyes from beholding vanity ! ”
And Else, the woman who had first spoken,
sighed again, saying:
“ Lord, wherewithal shall the young cleanse
their ways so that they may heed Thy word ? ”
The words sounded somewhat strange in her
mouth, for she was no longer young.
Then a middle-aged man, who was sitting
with his head on one side, and his eyes half
closed, rocking himself to an fro, said, as if half
asleep :
“ From trials and temptations sore
Can no one freedom claim,
Who has a share in Jesu’s death
And bears Christ’s holy name.”
The pastor knew the people he had to deal
with too well not to be aware that this was only
* “ Oeygar,” the local form of “ Oedegaard ” ; the word
means “ desolate farm.”
227


the prelude; he waited, as if nothing had been
said, although another long silence ensued,
broken only by sighs.
A little woman, who seemed still smaller
because she stooped, and who was wrapped up
in such a ridiculous number of shawls that
she looked like a bundle—her face was never
visible —now began to rock and fidget in her
seat, and finally gave vent to a few “ h’m,
h’ms.” The fair woman was roused at once,
and said:
“There is an end to all kinds of playing and
dancing at Oeygar now—but ” she paused
again, whereupon Lars, the man with the large
forehead and narrow jaw, continued :
“But there is one man, namely Hans the
fiddler, who will not give it up .”
As Lars also hesitated to conclude his sentence,
the young man came to the rescue:
“ For he knows that the pastor, too, has a
musical instrument, to which they both sing and
dance at the parsonage.”
“ It surely can’t be a greater sin for him than
for the pastor,” said Lars.
“ The truth is that the pastor’s instrument is
228


really a temptation,” said Else cautiously, as if
to help the conversation along.
But the young man added more emphatically:
"It is an offence to the young. As it is
written : 1 Whoso shall offend one of these little
ones, it were better for him that a millstone
were hanged about his neck and that he were
drowned in the depth of the sea,’ ”
It was now Lars* turn.
“We therefore desire you to send away your
instrument or burn it, so that it may not be an
offence ”
“ To your flock,” added the young man.
The pastor puffed out clouds of smoke and
finally said, with a visible attempt to maintain his
composure :
“To me this instrument is not a temptation ;
to me it is a recreation and relief. Now, you
know that what is able to free our minds from
earthly cares, makes it easier for us to receive
and understand the truth ; therefore I am con-
fident that a thing like this instrument is a help
to me.”
“And I know that there are pastors who,
in accordance with the words of Paul, would
229


renounce it at the request of their parishioners,”
said the young man.
“It is probable that I, too, formerly interpreted
his words in this way,” answered the pastor,
“ but Idoso no longer. A person may renounce
a habit or a luxury, but he should be reluctant
to make himself one-sided and foolish with the
one-sided and foolish. In that case, I should not
only wrong myself, but also those to whom I
should set an example ; for I should be setting
them, you see, a foolish example, an example
contrary to my convictions.”
The pastor was seldom able to explain himself
at such length outside the pulpit. He added :
“ I shall neither give up my instrument nor
burn it. I shall often listen to its music, for I
often feel the need of it, and I could wish that
you, too, would sometimes in all innocence seek
relaxation in singing and playing and dancing;
for I regard these things as good and proper.”
The young man turned away his head.
u Shame ! ” he said, and spat on the floor.
The pastor’s face grew scarlet, and there was
a dead silence. Then the man, who was rocking
himself to and fro, began in a loud voice:
230


** O Lord, on every side I see
It causes pain and care,
To young and old, to rich and poor,
With patience their cross to bear.
For flesh and blood are frail and weak
And yield to the tempter’s snare.”
And thereupon Lars said in a gentle voice:
“So you say that singing and playing and
dancing are proper, do you? Well! .... So
it is right to awaken Satan through our senses ?
Well! . . . . That’s what our pastor says !
well, well, we know it now ! . . . . And so he
says that all such idle and sensual pleasures
elevate and are helpful to us That what
is a source of temptation is right! ”
But here Oedegaard hastened to interpose, for
he saw by the pastor’s face that matters were
growing serious:
“Tell me, my good man, what is there which
is not a source of temptation ? ”
All looked at the person from whom these
«
clear, concise words came. The question was
in itself so unexpected that Lars could not for a
moment think what to answer, and the others
were in the same condition. Then, as from the
depths of a well or a cellar, came the word :
231


“Work!”
The voice came from the bundle of shawls ;
it was Randi, who, for the first time, put in her
word. A smile of triumph passed over Lars 1
narrow face; the fair woman looked at her friend
with implicit confidence ; even the young man by
the door lost for a moment his sarcastic curl of
the lip. Oedegaard understood at once that this
was the head of the party, although it was not
visible. He therefore addressed himself to her:
u lf work is not to be a source of temptation
to us, what kind of work must it be ? ”
She would not answer this question, but the
young man replied in her stead :
il The curse runs : ‘ln the sweat of thy brow
shalt thou eat bread/ The work must conse-
quently be such as will cause us sweat and
/
trouble.”
“ Nothing but sweat and trouble ? Is there
no advantage to be gained, for example ? ”
To this the young man also had nothing to
answer, but now he of the narrow jaw was
inspired :
"Yes, as much advantage as you can get.”
“ So then there must after all lie some tempta-
232


tion in work, the temptation to make too much
by it ? ”
In this dilemma help came from the depths:
“ Then it is the profit that is the temptation
and not the work.”
<( Yes, but what does it mean if work is
carried to excess for the sake of the profit it
brings ? ”
She retired, but Lars came forth :
“What do you mean by carrying work to
excess ? ”
u I mean, when it makes a brute of you, when
it holds you in bondage.”
“ It must hold you in bondage, then,” said he
who had insisted upon the sweat.
“But can work done in the spirit of bondage
lead to God ? ”
“Work is the worship of God,” cried Lars.
“ Dare you say that of your work ? ”
Lars was silent.
“ No, be reasonable, and grant me that for the
sake of profit work may be carried to such an
excess that it becomes the sole object of our
life. Thus there is also a temptation in work.”
“ Yes, my friends, there is temptation in
233


everything—there is temptation in everything ! ”
pronounced the pastor, rising and knocking the
ashes out of his pipe, as if to end the discussion.
There was a sigh from the bundle of shawls, but
no one spoke.
“ Look here ! ” began Oedegaard afresh—and
the pastor filled himself another pipe—“if now
work brings us advantage, that is to say, profit,
it is surely permissible to enjoy this profit ? If
it becomes wealth, it is surely permissible to
enjoy this wealth ? ”
This awakened grave misgivings among his
hearers ; they looked one at the other.
“ I shall answer while you are thinking over
the matter,” he said. “God must have given us
permission to try to change His curse into a
blessing ; for He Himself guided His patriarchs,
guided His whole people to the enjoyment of
wealth.”
“The apostles were to possess nothing,” threw
in the young man triumphantly.
“ Yes, that is true, for He wished to place
them above and beyond all the conditions of
ordinary human life, that their thoughts might
be fixed on God alone —they were called ! ”
234


“ We are all called ! ”
“ But not in the same sense; are you called
to be an apostle ? ”
The young man’s face turned very pale and
his eyes grew dark beneath the wall of forehead
which overhung them ; he must have had some
reason for taking this question so much to heart.
“ But the rich have also to work,” suggested
Lars, u for work is enjoined upon all of us.”
u Certainly they must, although their duties
and their ways of fulfilling them are different;
every one has his own. But tell me, are we to
do nothing but work ? ”
“We must also pray,” interposed the fair
woman, folding her hands, as if suddenly remem-
bering that she had neglected this duty for some
time.
“ Well then, whenever a person is not work-
ing, he ought to be praying ? Can any one do
that ? What kind of prayer and what kind of
work would it be ? Are we not to rest also ? ”
“We must not rest until we can work no
more; for then no wicked thoughts will tempt
us—ah, no wicked thoughts will tempt us! ”
repeated Else, and the psalmist chimed in:
235


** Go, weary mind and frame
And learn in Jesu’s name
To take thy rest in God,
For soon, all sorrow o’er,
Thou’lt sleep to wake no more
In a bed beneath the sod.”
“ Hush, Erik, listen to what is being said,”
said the pastor. But Oedegaard now drew the
knot of his argument tighter:
“You see, then, work brings its profit and
makes a certain amount of rest imperative. Now
with regard to social intercourse, singing, play-
ing and the like, my opinion is that they are not
only the fruit or profit of work, but that they at
the same time afford the mind refreshing rest.”
At this there was disquietude in the camp ;
all looked to Randi, for now was the time for
the principal force to advance. She rocked to
and fro for a little and finally said slowly and
quietly :
“ There is no rest to be found in worldly
songs, or in playing and dancing; for such things
inflame the flesh with sinful desires. And that
can surely not be a fruit of work which weakens
us and makes our work in vain.”
“Ah, there is a great temptation in such
236


things,” said the fair woman with a sigh. This
suggested the verse of a hymn to Erik :
“With growing grief we daily see
How bold and undismayed
Vices and sins of every kind
In Virtue’s dress parade.
They steal their way into our hearts
And boldly raise their heads ’*
*
“Be quiet, Erik,” said the pastor, “ you are
only interrupting us.”
“Oh yes, I daresay I am,” said Erik, and
began again :
“ Heed not the words of evil men,
Nor be thou led astray.
Beware the open path of sin
And keep the narrow way. ’ ’
“ Will you hold your tongue, Erik ! Hymns
are all very well, but there is a time and place
for everything.”
“ Yes, yes, pastor, that is true —a time and
place for everything:
“ In every place and time
To praise Him be thy care,
Let every heart-beat chime,
Like bells that ring to prayer,”
237


“No, no, Erik! Why in that case, prayer,
too, would be a source of temptation; you might
turn Catholic and go into a cloister ! ”
“ God forbid ! ” said Erik, opening his eyes
wide ; then he closed them again and began :
11 As mould and dirt to solid gold
Is the Catholic ”
“ Now listen, Erik, if you cannot keep quiet,
you will have to go outside with the rest of your
hymns .... Where was it we left off?”
But Oedegaard had been following Erik with
great amusement and did not remember. Then
came a peaceful voice from the bundle of
shawls :
“ I was saying that there can be no rest or
profit in that which ”
“ Now I remember—which was a temptation
to us—and then Erik was good enough to prove
to us that prayer can also be a source of tempt-
ation. Let us now see the results of these
conclusions. Have you ever observed that
light-hearted people work better than those
who are melancholy ? What is the reason of
this ? ”
238


Lars perceived where this question was tend-
ing and said :
“It is faith which makes people happy and
light-hearted.”
“ Yes, when it is a cheerful faith; but have
you never observed that there is a religion which
can make everything so gloomy that the world
about us becomes a penitentiary ? ”
The fair woman here heaved such a succession
of sighs that the bundle of shawls began to grow
restless ; Lars looked sharply at the former and
she was silent. Oedegaard continued :
“ Always to be doing the same thing, be it
work, prayer, or play, makes us stupid and
gloomy. You may dig in the ground until you
become an animal, pray until you become a
praying machine, play until you become a joint-
less puppet. But combine all these things!
Variety strengthens heart and soul; your work
will prosper and your faith grow brighter.”
“So we are to make it our business to be
happy ! ” said the young man, and laughed.
«Yes, and in your case it would lead to you
coming into more friendly relations with other
people; for it is only when you are happy that
239


you can see and love the good in others. And
only by loving others can you come to love
God.”
As no one seemed disposed to contradict this
statement, Oedegaard tried once more to clench
his argument by saying :
“ Those things which elevate our minds and
allow the Holy Spirit to do its work within us—
for it cannot work in hearts that are held in
thraldom—those things which are helpful to us
must bear a blessing in them, and this is the
case with the things of which we have been
speaking.”
The pastor rose ; he had another pipeful of
ashes to knock out.
In the ensuing silence, which was unbroken
even by sighs, the bundle of shawls was seen to
move uneasily and at length a gentle voice said:
“ It is written : * Whatsoever ye do, do all to
the glory of God.’ But can worldly singing,
playing, and dancing be to the glory of God ? ”
“ No, not directly; but might not the same
question be asked with regard to eating, sleeping,
and dressing ourselves ? And yet these things
are indispensable to us. Thus the meaning can
240


only be that you are to do nothing that is
sinful.”
“ Yes, but are not these things sinful ? 99
For the first time Oedegaard grew a little
impatient; he therefore contented himself with
answering:
“We read in the Bible that singing, playing
and dancing were all employed.”
“ Yes, to the glory of God.”
“ Very well, then —to the glory of God.
But the reason why the Jews always brought
the name of God into everything was because,
like children, they had not yet learned to make
distinctions. To children every strange man
is { the man.' To the child's question, ' Where
does this or that come from ? 9 we always give
the same answer : 1 From God.' But, as grown
people to grown people, we not only name
the giver, God, but the intermediate source as
well. Thus, for example, a beautiful song may
treat of God or lead to God, although God's
name is not mentioned in it; for much leads
to Him, although not directly. Our dancing,
when enjoyed merely as a healthy and innocent
amusement, is one way—although, perhaps, not
9
241


a direct one —of praising Him who gave us
health and loves the child in our hearts.”
“ Listen to that! Listen to that! ” said the
pastor; he felt in his heart that he had long
misunderstood these things and misinterpreted
them to others.
But Lars had been sitting for some time
deep in thought. He was now ready. The
grain had dropped from his high forehead to
his short, crabbed jaws, where it was crushed
and ground and now fell out:
“Then, are all kinds of tales, stories and
fables, all kinds of poetry and romance, with
which nowadays books are filled—are they allow-
able too ? Is it not written : 1 Every word which
goeth out of thy lips shall be the truth ? ' ”
“ I am very much obliged to you for having
brought up this point. You see it is very
much the same with your thoughts as with
the house you live in. If it were so small
that you could scarcely get your head in or
stretch out your legs, you would be obliged
to enlarge it. And poetry elevates our thoughts
and enlarges our minds. If all those thoughts
which are not absolutely necessary were lies,
242


then those which are most necessary to us
would very soon become lies as well. They
would so hem you in in your earthly house
that you would never reach eternity, and yet
this was to be the goal of your life, and it
was these very thoughts which, by faith, should
bear you thither.”
“ But, then, fiction is about things that have
never existed! Is it thus not simply lies ?
asked Randi thoughtfully.
“No, there is often more truth in it than
in what we actually see before us,” answered
Oedegaard. At this they all looked dubiously
at him, and the young man remarked :
“ I never knew before that the story of
< Askeladd’* had more truth in it than what I
see before my eyes ! v
They all tittered.
« Well, tell me, then, do you always under-
stand the connection in what you see before
your eyes ? ”
“ Fm not learned enough, I suppose.
“ Oh, learned people understand it even less
* 16 Askeladd/’ a Norse fairy tale which bears considerable
resemblance to our Cinderella,
243


than you! I mean those things in our daily
life which cause us sorrow and pain, and over
which we ‘ worry ourselves to death,’ as the
saying is. Do things of this kind not happen
to all of us ? ”
He did not answer, but from the bundle of
shawls came an earnest voice :
“ Yes, very often.”
" But suppose now that you heard a fictitious
story which so much resembled your own that,
as you listened to it, you understood your own.
Would you not say of the story which made
your own life clear to you, which gave you the
consolation and encouragement which comes
from a clear comprehension of facts and causes
—would you not say of this story, there was
more truth in it for you than in your own life ? ”
The fair woman said :
“ I once read a story which was such a help
to me during a great sorrow that what had long
been so hard to bear almost became a pleasure
to me.”
There was a faint cough from the shawls, and
then, in a timid voice, came the words:
“Yes, that is certainly true.”
244


But the young man would not concede this
point.
“ Can the stories about Askeladd be a con-
solation to anybody ?”
“Well, everything has its use. The amus-
ing has a great power over us, and this story
shows in an amusing way that a person of whom
the world thinks slightingly may often become
of great importance; that everything comes
to the assistance of him who has a stout heart,
and that the man who is determined to get on,
does get on. Don’t you think that many chil-
dren profit by being reminded of this, and many
grown people as well ? ”
“ But to believe in witchcraft and goblins is
superstition, isn’t it ? ”
“Who said that you are to believe in them?
It is picture writing.”
“ But we are forbidden to use figures and
images, for all make-believe is of the devil.”
“ Indeed ; where do you find that ? ”
“ In the Bible.”
Here the pastor interposed :
“ No, that is a mistake; for the Bible itself
makes use of images.”
245


Every one looked at him.
u lt uses images on every page, for Oriental
peoples are fond of expressing themselves in
this way. We ourselves use imagery in our
churches, we use imagery in our speech, we
carve images in wood or stone, or paint them
on canvas, and we are unable to imagine the
Deity except by means of an image. Nor is
that all: Jesus uses imagery, and did not even
God Himself assume various forms when He re-
vealed Himself to the prophets ? Did He not
come in the guise of a traveller to Abraham in
Mamre, and eat at his table ? But if the Deity
may assume various forms, and make use of
images, man may do so too.”
They were forced to assent. Oedegaard rose,
and, touching the pastor on the shoulder,
said:
“ Thank you! You have proved from the
Bible in the most convincing way that the
theatre is permissible 1 ”
The pastor stood aghast ; the smoke he had
just inhaled came slowly out of his mouth of its
own accord.
Oedegaard went across the room to the woman
246


in the many shawls, and bent down to catch a
glimpse of her face, but in vain.
“ Is there anything else you would like to
know ? ”he asked ; “ for it seems to me that
you have thought a good deal about one thing
and another.”
“ Ah, but I don’t always think rightly, more’s
the pity! ”
“Yes, just at first, after the grace of con-
version, we are so taken up with its wonders
that everything else seems useless and wrong.
We are like the lover who desires only his
beloved.”
«Yes, but look at the early Christians; we
ought surely to take them as examples.”
“No ; we have other duties ; circumstances
have changed since they were in their difficult
position in the midst of the heathen. It is our
business to bring Christianity to bear upon life
as it is to-day.”
“ But there are so many passages in the Old
Testament which contradict the entire spirit of
what you say,” said the young man, and for the
first time he spoke without bitterness.
“ That may be, but those words are now dead
247


and void ; they are ‘ done away.’ As Paul says :
‘ We are able ministers of the new testament ;
not of the letter, but of the spirit; ’ and further :
'Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.’
Again: ‘ All things are lawful for me,’ says
Paul, but adds, ‘ all things are not expedient.’
Now we are fortunate enough to have before us
a man s life which shows us what Paul meant.
I mean Luther’s. You are, of course, of the
opinion that Luther was a good and enlightened
Christian ? ”
They were.
Luther s faith was a cheerful one, it was
that of the New Testament ! His opinion of a
gloomy faith was that the devil was very apt to
be lurking behind it. With regard to the fear
ot temptation, he thought that he who feared
least was least tempted. He made the most of
all the faculties God had given him, including
his capacity for enjoyment; he grasped life in its
entirety. Would you like to hear some
examples ? The pious Melancthon was once so
busy writing a defence of the pure doctrine that
he begrudged himself the time to eat. Luther
snatched the pen out of his hand. 'We do not
248


serve God by work alone/ he said, ‘but also by
rest and quiet ; for this reason He has given us
the Fourth Commandment and instituted the
Sabbath/ Moreover, in his talk Luther made
use of images and illustrations, jocular as well
as serious, and he was full of good and often
merry jests. He also translated fine old fairy
tales into his own tongue, and in his preface said
that after the Bible he hardly knew anything
more fitted to improve the mind than these. He
played the cithern, as you are perhaps aware,
and sang with his children and friends —not only
hymns, but merry old folk-songs. He was fond
of social games, played chess, and liked to see
young people dancing; he only asked that it
should be done with due propriety. This was
all written down by a simple old disciple of
Luther’s, Pastor Johann Mathesius, and related
to his flock from the pulpit. He prayed that it
might be a guidance to their conduct —and let
us pray the same ! n
The pastor rose.
“Let us end this discussion for to-day, dear
friends.”
All rose.
249


Much has been said for our enlightenment:
may God bless the good seed that has been
sown! You live, dear friends, in remote places;
you live upon the hills where the corn is more
often cut by the frost than the sickle. Such deso-
late mountain tracks ought to be given over again
to grazing cattle and fairy tales. Mental life
flourishes but ill up there and becomes dark-
hued like the plants. Prejudice overshadows
life like the mountains beneath which they grow j
it darkens life, and cuts you off - from one another.
May the Lord unite you, may the Lord give you
light!....! thank you for this day, my
friends ! For me, too, it has been a day of
enlightenment.”
He shook each of them by the hand; even
the young man gave him his in a friendly spirit,
although without looking up.
“ You are going over the mountain—when
will you get home ? ” asked the pastor as they
were about to go.
“ Oh, some time to-night,” replied Lars;
there is a good deal of snow on the ground,
and where it has been blown away, there’s ice
underneath.”
THE FISHER LASS


“ Yes, my friends, it is very praiseworthy of
you to come to church under such conditions.
May you come to no harm on the way home !
Erik answered quietly:
•• Is God, the Lord, upon my side ?
Then let what may befall,
I, with the joy of prayer made strong,
Can overcome it all. 1 *
“That is true, Erik, this time you are
right!"
i( But wait a moment/' said Oedegaard, as
they were just going j 44 it is not remarkable that
you do not know me; but I ought surely to have
relatives at Oedegaard."
They all turned to him, even the pastor, who
had probably been aware of this, but had for-
gotten it.
“My name is Hans Oedegaard. I am the
son of Pastor Knud Hansen Oedegaard, who once
wandered out from among you with his knapsack
on his back."
Then came the voice from the bundle of
shawls :
44 Good gracious ! Why, that is my brother !
They had all paused and no one was capable
the fisher lass


of saying anything. At length Oedegaard
asked:
So it was in your house I stayed; when once,
as a little boy, I went up there with my father ?”
“ Yes, it was in my house.”
“ And in mine too, for a while,” said Lars.
(t Your father and I are cousins.”
But Randi said sadly :
So you are little Hans ! Ah, time flies ! ”
u How is Else ? ” asked Oedegaard.
This is Else,” said Randi, pointing to the
fair woman.
“Are you Else ? ” he exclaimed; “you were
in trouble about some love affair at that time.
You wanted the fiddler of the parish ; did you
get him ? 11
No one answered. Although it was beginning
to glow dusk, he saw Else become very red,
while the men of the party looked down or
turned away their eyes, with the exception of
the young man, who looked fixedly at Else.
Oedegaard perceived that he had asked an un-
fortunate question; the pastor came to his
assistance:
No, Hans the fiddler is not married. Else
252


married Lars’ son ; but now she is free again;
she is a widow.”
Again Else grew scarlet; the young man saw
it, and smiled sarcastically. But Randi said:
“ I suppose you have travelled a great deal,
haven’t you ? You have learned much, I can
see.”
“ Yes, hitherto my time has been spent be-
tween study and travel. But now I intend to
settle down and set to work.”
“ Well, well —so it is ! Some go out into the
world and get light and learning; others stay at
home."
And Lars added:
“ Our native soil is often difficult to turn.
And if we have helped a man on so that he is
an assistance to us, he goes his way.”
“ Our callings are different,” said the pastor ;
“ each must follow his own.”
“And God will bring our work together,” said
Oedegaard. “If God will, you shall yet profit by
ray father’s work.”
“ Ah, yes, we probably shall,” said Randi
gently; “ but it is often difficult to wait, for it
takes so long.”
253


They parted; the pastor stood at one window
and Oedegaard at the other, to watch them as
they went over the mountain. The young man
walked last. Oedegaard learned that he was
from the town, where he had tried his hand at
several things, but had always come to logger-
heads with people. He believed that he was
destined for something great—an apostle, no
doubt—but, strange to say, he had remained up
at Oedegaard, some thought out of love for Else.
He was a man of a fiery temperament, who had
come through many disappointments, and for
whom there were more in store.
By this time they were visible on the mountain-
side ; the roof of the barn no longer hid them
from view. They were making their way slowly
and laboriously; the trees hid them, then they
came into sight again, higher every time. There
was no path in the deep snow; the trees were
their finger-posts in the wilderness, and far away
to the side the snowy peaks pointed out to them
where their home lay.
But from the sitting-room came a few
flourishes by way of prelude, and then the
following song:
254


11 1 give my song to the Spring,
Although it is yet unborn,
I give my song to the Spring —
’Tis the longing of night for the morn !
And the Spring and my song shall combine
To allure the sun to shine,
That winter may yield his hold
And the streams in chorus sing,
While the buds and the leaves unfold.
Old Winter’s knell we’ll ring
With the bells of a thousand flowers I
Oh, I give my song to the Spring I ’ *
255


CHAPTER XI
From this day forward the other members of
the household saw little of the pastor; partly
because the approach of Christmas made many
demands upon him, and partly because he could
not come to a decision as to whether or no the
theatre was a lawful pursuit for a Christian.
The mere sight of Petra was sufficient to throw
him into a reverie.
While the pastor was thus sitting in his
study, either occupied with his sermons or with
a volume of Christian ethics before him, Oede-
gaard spent his time with the girls. It was
impossible to avoid making comparisons between
them. Petra sparkled, and was never the same
for two minutes together; to follow her required
as much mental effort as reading a book. Signe,
on the contrary, made a pleasing impression
with the unvarying cordiality of her manner.


Her movements were never unexpected, for they
reflected her whole nature. Petra’s voice pos-
sessed every degree of intensity, every shade of
colour, from the harshest to the softest. Signed
had a peculiar charm, but lacked variety—ex-
cept to her father, who was a master in the art
of distinguishing its slightest changes. Petra
could never occupy her mind with more than
one thing at a time; if by any chance she did
so, it was only to look on, not to take any active
part. Signe had eyes for everything and every
one, and divided her attentions without it being
noticed. If Oedegaard talked to Petra about
Signe, he seemed to be listening to the com-
plaints of a hopeless lover; but if he talked to
Signe about Petra, Signe had little to say.
Between themselves the girls talked often and
without restraint ; but only of indifferent
things.
Oedegaard owed Signe a great debt of grati-
tude j it was to her he was indebted for what
he called his “new life.” The first letter he
received from Signe in his great sorrow had
seemed like a gentle hand upon his brow. The
discreet way in which she told him how Petra
R
257


had come to them, misunderstood and ill-treated,
the delicacy with which she interpreted her
coming as the result of God's guidance, that
“ nothing might be destroyed," sounded to him
like distant calling in a forest, when one stands
in doubt which way to turn.
Wherever he went, Signe's letters followed
him; they were the threads which held him
fast. She imagined that with every line she
was guiding Petra to his arms, but just the con-
trary was the case ; for in these letters Petra's
artist nature was first clearly revealed to him.
The central point of her abilities, which he him-
self had sought in vain, was always present to
Signe's mind, although she was not aware of
it, and as soon as this was clear to him, he
understood both his own mistake and Petra's,
and it made him a new man.
He scrupulously avoided writing to Signe
about what her letters had taught him. The
first word must not come from Petra's friends,
but from herself, that matters might not be pre-
cipitated. But from the moment that all this
had been clear to him, he had seen ’Petra in a
new light. It was perfectly evident: those
258


moods, which rapidly succeeded one another,
each fully felt, yet each in irreconcilable contra-
diction to the other —what were they, but the
awakening of the artistic temperament ? And
what was now to be done was to gather them
into a compact and rounded whole; otherwise
everything would be patchwoik, and the life
itself merely art. Therefore, above all, not too
early a start upon the path of art! Silence as
long as possible, even opposition!
Occupied in this way with Petra, he was
hardly aware of it before she had again become
the centre of his thoughts; but this time it was
with a view to something that lay outside him-
self. He now began to examine carefully art
and artists, and, of the latter, particularly the
artists of the theatre. He saw much which
could not but dismay a Christian. He saw
monstrous abuses. But were there not similar
abuses to be seen everywhere? Might they
not even be seen in the Church itself ? The
fact of some of its ministers being unworthy
did not make the calling any the less noble and
sublime. If the striving after truth, which was
everywhere in evidence, made its power felt in
259


life and poetry, would it not also reach the
theatre too ?
He had gradually become convinced that he
was right. With satisfaction he saw from
Signe’s letters that Petra was developing fast,
and that Signe was the right person to help her.
He had now returned to see and thank this
good fairy, who did not know herself what she
had been to him.
But he had also come to see Petra again.
What point had she reached ? The word had
been spoken, and he could thus talk freely with
her on the matter. It was a welcome subject
of conversation to them both, for they were thus
able to avoid talking about the past.
However, they were soon interrupted by
visitors from the town, both invited and un-
invited. Matters had, in the meantime, reached
such a point that a single opportunity, turned
to good account, would be enough to put them
straight—and this opportunity the visitors
afforded.
A large party was given in their honour. At
this party, after dinner, when the gentlemen
260


were assembled in the study, the conversation
turned on the theatre; for an assistant from one
of the neighbouring churches had seen a work
on Christian ethics lying open upon the pastor’s
table, and his eye had caught the terrible word
“ theatre.” A warm discussion ensued, in the
midst of which the pastor entered. He had not
been present at dinner, having been called away
to a sick-bed. He was in an earnest frame of
mind; he would not have anything to eat, nor
did he take any part in the conversation. But
he filled his pipe, and listened.
As soon as Oedegaard observed that the
pastor sat silent and followed the argument
attentively, he began to take part in it. But
for a long time he tried in vain to get some
reason into it; for every time that a new link
was about to be added to the chain of the
argument the assistant was sure to exclaim, u I
dispute that!”—he would not say “ deny ”
and, consequently, what was to serve as proof
had first to be proved itself. Thus the dis-
cussion moved backwards, instead of forwards;
from the theatre it had passed to navigation,
261


and, in order to prove something with regard to
navigation, it was on the point of going over to
agriculture.
This would never do. Oedegaard appointed
the pastor chairman. Besides him there were
several other pastors present, as well as a sea
captain—a small, swarthy man with a huge
stomach, supported by a pair of small legs,
which went like two drumsticks.
Oedegaard called upon the assistant first in
order that he might state in a connected form
his objections to the theatre. Accordingly the
assistant began :
“Even virtuous heathens were opposed to the
%
theatre. Plato and Aristotle objected to it on the
ground that it corrupted the morals. Socrates,
it is true, went occasionally to the theatre, but if
any one infers that he approved of it I dispute
it; for we are forced to see many things that we
do not approve of. The early Christians were
persistently warned against the theatre—read
Tertullian ! Since the revival of the drama in
modern times, earnest Christians have spoken
and written against it. I mention such names
as those of Spener and Francke, I refer you to
262


a writer on Christian ethics like Schwarz, I
refer you to Schleiermacher.”
4 ‘Hear, hear! ” cried the captain, for this
name was familiar to him.
“ The two latter concede that dramatic poetry
is permissible. Schleiermacher is even of opinion
that a good play may be represented in private
circles by amateurs, but he condemns actors as
a class. The theatre as a profession is fraught
with so many temptations for a Christian that it
is his duty to avoid it. But is the theatre not
also a temptation for the audience? To be
moved by imaginary suffering, to be elevated
by imaginary virtues- —a danger against which
we can be better on our guard in reading
lures us into the belief that we are what we see
represented. It weakens the will and destroys
our sense of responsibility; it makes us the
slaves of a passion for hearing and seeing, and
leads to a morbid indulgence of the imagination.
Is that not true ? What kind of people go
most to the theatre? Idlers, who seek to be
amused ; voluptuaries, who want to be stimulated;
the vain and frivolous, who want to attract
attention; visionaries, who take refuge there
263


from the realities of life with which they have
not the courage to grapple. Sin behind the
curtain, sin before it! I have never heard
earnest Christians hold any other opinion.”
“ You make me quite afraid,” said the captain.
il lf I have been in such a wolves’ den every
time I have been at the theatre, then may the
devil ”
“ For shame, captain ! ” said a little girl who
had come into the room with them. “ You must
not swear, or you won’t go to heaven! ”
“ Yes, my child, quite right, quite right! ”
But now Oedegaard began to speak:
u Plato had the same objection to poetry as
he had to the theatre, and Aristotle’s opinion is
doubtful. I shall therefore leave them out of
the question. The early Christians were right
in keeping aloof from heathen plays—so I leave
them out also. That earnest Christians in
modern times have also had scruples with
regard to the theatre, although it stands no
longer upon heathen soil, I can understand ; I
have had them myself. But if it be conceded
that it is lawful for a poet to write a drama, it
/
is lawful for an actor to act it. For what else
THE FISHER LASS


does the poet do when he is writing it but act
it—in his thoughts, that is—with fire and
passion, and ‘whosoever looketh on a woman
to lust after her,’ &c. —you know Christ’s own
words. When Schleiertnacher says that the
drama must only be performed in private and
by untrained players, he says, in point of fact,
that the abilities God has given us are to be
neglected, while the intention surely is that they
are to be brought to the highest possible perfec-
tion —for to this end we have received them.
We all act every day of our lives. We act
when we imitate others, or, when in jest or
earnest, we assume opinions that are not our
own. Now, in some people this faculty pre-
dominates, and I should be very much surprised
if, in the event of a person neglecting to cultivate
it, the sinfulness of this neglect were not soon
apparent in him. For he who does not follow
his calling becomes unfit for anything else,
becomes confused and weak of purpose in
short, he falls a far easier prey to temptation
than if he had followed his calling. When
work and inclination go hand in hand much
temptation is avoided. But, it is said, this
265


calling is in itself only too full of temptation.
Well, every one thinks differently. To my
mind that calling is the greatest source of
temptation which deludes a man into believing
that he himself is righteous because he bears
a message, from the All Righteous, into believing
that he himself is a believer because he appeals
to the belief of others ; or, to speak more plainly,
to my mind the clerical calling offers the greatest
temptations of all.”
A great uproar ensued.
“ I dispute it! ”
u Quite right! ”
“ Order! ”
“ I dispute it! ”
“Perfectly true ! ”
u Order! ”
“Well,” said the captain, “I never heard
before that parsons were worse than actors! ”
Laughter from all sides and cries of:
" No, that’s not what he said ! ”
u Yes, it is, and may the devil——”
u Now, captain, he’ll be here in a minute,”
said the little girl.
“ Right, my child, quite right ! ”
266


Oedegaard resumed the thread of what he
was saying:
“ The temptation of being momentarily carried
away, of morbidly indulging our imagination, of
assuming, without any individual effort, the
virtues of others and making them our own—
this temptation is undoubtedly also present in
the Church ! ”
The same terrible uproar.
But the ladies could not hear this noise
without feeling curious to know what was going
on. The door was opened, and when Oedegaard
saw Petra standing there, he continued in a
louder voice :
ai t i s true, there are actors who are easily
moved on the stage, and who go to church,
where they are just as easily moved they
are no better than before. It is true, there are
actors who are little better than speaking-
trumpets, who would have been absolutely use-
less in any other walk in life, whereas in this
calling they are not altogether unserviceable.
But, as a general rule, actors, like sailors, are
often placed in the most difficult situations the
moments, for example, before one steps upon
267


the stage are sometimes terrible—they are often
chosen tools in God’s hand, they are often
brought face to face with the great and unex-
pected , all this fills their hearts with fears and
longings, and a keen sense of unworthiness, and
we know that Christ always preferred the
company of publicans and repentant women,
I concede them no license ] in fact, the greater
their mission to their country—and the great-
ness of this mission is evident from the fact that
a nation produces so few great actors the
greater is their guilt, if they allow themselves to
be carried away by malignant passions, or
degenerate into weak frivolity. But there is no
actor who has not learnt from innumerable dis-
appointments how meaningless are flattery and
applause, although the majority pretend to
believe in them. And thus it is with the most
of their mistakes and defects they may be
obvious enough to us, but we are not clear as to
their own relation to them, and this is, after all,
the important point.”
A number of people sprang to their feet, and
were all beginning to speak at once, when
** Scarce fourteen summers old was I ”
268


was heard on the piano, and they streamed into
the sitting-room. It was Signe who was sing-
ing, and Signe’s Swedish folk-songs were one of
the greatest treats they knew. One song
followed another, and after these folk-songs—the
finest in the world, faithful messengers from the
soul of a great nation —had thrown the audience
into a solemn and expectant frame of mind,
Oedegaard rose and asked Petra to recite a
poem. She had evidently been expecting this,
for she was crimson. But she immediately
stepped forward, although she was trembling so
much that she had to support herself on the
back of a chair. Growing very pale, she began :
11 In vain did he long to be up and away.
His mother was frail and his father was old,
And his duties increased from day to day.
‘ Why must the lad to such journeys aspire ?
Here he has everything heart can desire. 8
18 But the boy’s heart yearned, as the clouds swept by,
For they marched like warriors across the sky,
And the boy’s heart yearned when the bright sun shone,
For the king then seemed to ascend his throne.
He recked not of work and he recked not of play,
As he dreamed of the deeds of a bygone day,
‘ * He sauntered one morning down to the shore
To a rocky point where the sea ran high,
Where the billows broke with the thunder’s roar,
And the spray was scattered against the sky.
269


’Twas a blustering day towards winter’s close,
When loud storm-voices came up from the deep :
1 Arise, old earth, from thy ice-bound sleep ! ’
In his heart a spirit of daring arose,
“ For a galley of war lay at rest in the lea,
Seeking shelter and calm from the stress of the sea.
Her canvas was furled and her moorings made fast,
But she dragged at her cable in constant unrest;
Her sails were impatient and shook at the mast,
And the vessel herself beat the foam with her breast.’
11 The crew were enjoying a well-earned rest,
They slept, or made merry with wine and with jest.
When a voice from the cliffs smote loud on their ear—
And the words seemed to come from the lips of a fool—
-1 Are the billows so high that ye laggards fear ?
Give me the rudder—l long to rule I ’
44 Some glanced at the cliffs in mild surprise,
While others scarce troubled to raise their eyes;
His rest or his pleasure would no one forego,
Until, crash fell a stone, and two men were laid low.
11 From deck and from cabin all sprang to their feet,
They flew to their arms and their cups flung aside.
The arrows whizzed past —with no thought of retreat,
He stood on the cliffs in imperious pride.
* Chieftain, yield me thy ship ! ’ undaunted he cries,
4 Or if thou wouldst rather, we’ll fight for the prize! ’
41 Such words were mere folly; the viking’s reply
Was borne by a spear that whizzed fiercely on high.
44 It missed the young hero ; he quietly said :
4 No one waits for me yet in the halls of the dead ;
But thou must go thither, or haste to thy home,
For abroad on the seas ne’er again shalt thou roam.
THE FISHER LASS


And all thou hast won, thou shalt lay at my feet!
’Tis for me to begin; thy reign is complete.
For me hast thou hoarded; now give me thy throne !
My time has now come, I but ask for my own! *
“ The proud viking laughed ’mid the roar of the sea,
* If thou really desirest a warrior to be,
Thy will shalt thou have. Come serve in my band ! ’
But the voice from the cliffs made reply loud and clear:
* I can never obey, I am born to command;
At the advent of youth, age must tremble and fear 1 ’
“ In vain for an answer the youth strained his ear,
Then, the hillside descending, he cried, drawing near :
* Ye warriors and seamen, a chieftain must show
On whom the War God doth his favour bestow ;
To him, the true warrior alone bends the knee,
The strongest alone can be served by the free! ’
11 An angry flush rose to the chieftain’s face,
He plunged in the sea and swam to the land ;
The youth had come down to the edge of the strand
And lifted him up in his strong embrace 1
“And the chieftain looked into his fearless eye,
Saw his noble brow and his stature high.
4 Ho, weapons 1’ he cried. I No weapons have we!
And thou, youth, if victory lieth with thee,
Mayst say that the sword which delivered the blow
Belonged to the chief whom thy valour brought low. ’
The battle raged fierce on the rocky shore,
And the blows echoed loud and the blows fell fast,
The snort of the dragon was heard in the blast,
But its master would guide it to battle no more 1
“ A wild cry rang out from the viking ship,
Up crowded the warriors with one accord,
They swam through the billows, revenge on each lip,
AnH stood nn the. shore round their dvinsr lord.
THE FISHER LASS


As his life-blood was ebbing, he lifted his hand,
And brokenly uttered his final command:
* A warrior must die when his time has come,
And great be the close of a hero’s song!
Choose him for your chief, ’tis a worthy choice! ’
But pale were his lips as his warrior throng
He blessed in a weak and faltering voice.
At Odin’s great table prepared was his place,
And, breathing his last, he turned thither his face!
“ Majestic and powerful, the young chief stepped forth,
His words, though but few, convinced all of his worth:
* Let us first raise a cairn where your dead leader bleeds,
Nor forget, as we do so, how great were his deeds.
But ere the night falls, we must sweep o’er the wave,
Life’s span is too short to lament round a grave! ’
“ The cairn rose aloft and the wind caught the sail,
Once more o ? er the sea flew the ship ’fore the gale.
A song of lament cleft the air as she sped,
For the hero they left on the isle of the dead.
But the young chief was welcomed with joyous accord,
As he stood at the rudder, their master and lord.
“ Along the wild coastline his ship he will steer,
All stand on the hillside and tremble with fear ;
With wondering amazement, a cry on each lip,
1 We wot not who dares Oeger’s dragon to guide ! ’
As the setting sun throws its red glow on the ship,
They gaze at the hero in tremulous pride.
“ Undaunted and sure the ship yields to its chief,
In terror they cry : I He will strike on the reef! ’
Swift turns he the ship in the scattering foam,
And smiles: ‘ Have I now your permission to roam ?* ”
272


The poem was recited solemnly and without
a trace of affectation, but with a tremor in her
voice. Her hearers stood as if a ray of light had
shot up from their midst, glowing with all the
colours of the rainbow. No one spoke, no one
stirred ; but finally the captain could restrain
himself no longer ; he sprang to his feet, drew a
long breath and, throwing back his head, said :
“ Well, I don’t know how you others feel,
but when I am taken in this way, may the devil
take me if- ”
“ Captain, you are swearing again,” said the
little girl, shaking her finger at him. “ The devil
will be here this minute to carry you off! ”
“Well, it doesn’t matter, my child; let him
come if he will, for now, devil take me, I must
have a patriotic song ! ”
Without any further invitation, Signe seated
herself at the piano and the whole company
joined in the song :
** My land I will defend,
My land I’ll guard and tend,
I will love it in my song and in my prayer.
Its acres I will till,
Its needs I will fulfil,
From the mountains to the sea it is our care.
s
273


“ We have sun enough and rain,
We have fields of ripening grain,
We have love, and love enough, within our breast.
Here is poetry and song
Though labour’s days are long—
Let us raise our nation’s soul to all that’s best.
M In days of long ago
We grappled with the foe,
See the work of Norsemen’s hands on every shore.
Our trusty flag will sway
Ever further day by day,
And will guard a nobler fortune than before.
** New greatness shall come forth
From our ancient threefold North,
Together we shall speak again as one.
All that is thine to give,
Cast away and it will live,
High aloft it shall be borne when thou art gone.
•• Our little land stands fast,
We love it for its past,
We love it as it is and yet shall be.
Love the country of thy birth,
Plant thy love within its earth,
From the seed of love will rise a mighty tree.”
But Signe rose from the piano, and, putting
her arm round Petra’s waist, drew her into the
study, which was empty.
44 Petra, shall we be friends again ? ”
44 Oh, Signe, so you forgive me! ”
274


“ I could do anything now! Petra, do you
love Oedegaard ? ”
“Oh, Signe!”
“Petra ! I have thought so from the very first
—and I thought that he had come at last to—
everything that I have thought and done for you
both in these two and a half years has been
done with a view to this, and father has thought
the same ; I am sure he has spoken to Oede-
gaard about it too.”
u But, Signe ! ”
“Hush!” she laid her hand on Petra’s lips
and ran away ; some one was calling her, for
supper was ready.
There was wine on the table, for the pastor
had not been at home for dinner. But the
pastor, who the whole time had been very
quiet and serious, still sat as if no one were
present, until just as it was time to rise from
the table. Then he tapped on his glass and
said :
“ I have a betrothal to announce ! ”
All eyes were turned on the two girls, who
were sitting together ; they did not know whether
to sink through the floor or keep their seats.
275


" I have a betrothal to announce,” began the
pastor anew, as if he found it difficult to get
fairly started : “I will confess that at first it was
not to my liking.”
All the visitors looked at Oedegaard in amaze-
ment ; it became boundless when they saw how
calmly he sat looking at the pastor.
“ I thought, to be quite candid, that he was
not worthy of her.”
The visitors here became so embarrassed
that none of them ventured to look up, and,
as the girls had not dared to do so for some
time, the pastor had only a single face to talk
to, and that was Oedegaard’s, which, in the
meantime, wore an expression of blissful com-
posure.
“ But now,” continued the pastor, “ now that
I have learnt to know him better, the end
of the matter is that I do not know whether
she is worthy of him, so great does he appear
in my eyes. His name is Art, the great Art
of the theatre, and his betrothed is Petra,
my adopted daughter, my dear child. May
you be happy together! I still tremble at
the thought, but what is destined to be united
276


must not be kept asunder, God be with you,
my daughter! ”
The next moment she had crossed the room
and thrown herself upon his breast.
As no one sat down again, the whole party
left the table. But Petra went over to Oedegaard,
who drew her into the furthest window; he had
something to say to her now, but she had first
to say:
“To you I owe everything! ”
“No, Petra, I have only been a good brother
to you ; it was wrong of me to want to be more;
for had that happened, your whole career would
have been spoiled.”
“ Oedegaard ! n
They were holding each other’s hands, but
did not look at each other. A moment later he
let go her hand and went. But she threw her-
self into a chair and wept.
On the following day Oedegaard left the
house.
# * * * *
One day towards spring Petra received a large
letter bearing a great official seal. She was
quite alarmed by it and took it in to the pastor,
277


who opened it and read it. It was from the
sheriff of her native place and ran as follows :
u Pedro Ohlsen, who yesterday departed this
life, has left a will to the following effect :
u ‘All that I leave, which is accurately set down
in the account-book, which lies in the blue chest,
which stands in my room in Gunlaug Aamunds-
datter’s house here on the hill, and to which the
said Gunlaug has the key, she being the only
person who knows all about it—l herewith
bequeath, provided that she, namely, Gunlaug
Aamundsdatter, gives her consent to it, which
she cannot do unless she permits that one con-
dition which I append is fulfilled, and which she
alone (the only person who knows it) can fulfil
—to Petra, daughter of the aforesaid Gunlaug
Aamundsdatter, that is to say, if the said Petra
will deign to remember a sick old man, to whom
she showed kindness, although she was not
aware of it—which was not to be expected—and
to whom she has been the only joy of his closing
years, for which reason he has thought it proper
to give her some little pleasure in return, which
she must not disdain. God be merciful to me a
sinner!
N
PEDRO OHLSEN.’
278


“ I therefore take the liberty of asking whether
you will yourself apply to your mother with
regard to this matter or whether you wish me
to do so.”
The next post-day brought a letter from her
mother, written by Pastor Oedegaard, the only
person in whom she had dared to confide. Its
contents were to the effect that she gave her
consent and fulfilled the required condition, which
was that she should inform Petra who Pedro
was.
This news and the money threw her into a
curious state of mind. It seemed, on the one
hand, as if everything were now beginning to
come right j on the other, it was one reminder
more of the parting that was before her.
So it was to further her artistic aims that old
Per Ohlsen had fiddled at weddings and at
dances, and that he, his son and his grandson,
had in their various ways toiled and moiled.
The sum, although not large, was sufficient to
enable her to see a little more of the world, and
thereby bring her the nearer to her goal.
But, like the sun, rose the thought in her mind
that now her mother would be able to come and
279


live with her, that every day she would be able
to give her mother some fresh happiness and
make her some return. She wrote a long letter
to her every post-day, and she could hardly wait
for the answer. When it came, it was a great
disappointment; for Gunlaug thanked her, but
thought “ that every one was best in his own
house.”
Then the pastor promised to write, and, when
Gunlaug received his letter, she could no longer
restrain herself; she could not but tell her
sailors and other acquaintances that her daughter
was going to become something great somewhere,
and wished her to live with her. The matter
now became a question of great importance in
the town ; it was discussed on the wharves, in
the boats, and in every kitchen. Gunlaug, who
had hitherto not mentioned her daughter, now
talked of nothing but my daughter Petra,”
just as no one ever spoke of anything else to
her.
But the time for Petra’s departure was draw-
ing nigh, and Gunlaug had still given no reply;
this grieved her daughter very much. On the
other hand, both the pastor and Signe had given
280


her a solemn promise that they would be present
the first time she appeared on the stage.
*****
The snow was beginning to disappear from
the mountains; the pastures were gradually
growing green. The life which at the coming
of spring awakens in secluded spots among the
mountains is as intense as was the longing for
it. People move more briskly, work grows
lighter, and the longing for travel peeps over the
mountains. But Petra, although not free from
longings, had never loved the place and the
things around her as now that she was about to
part from them; indeed, it seemed as if she had
hitherto neglected them, for it was only now that
she was beginning to understand them. She
had only a few days more at the parsonage, and
she and Signe were going round, saying good-
bye to every one and everything—especially to
those places which had been dear to them both.
One day a peasant brought a message to the
effect that Oedegaard was up at Oedegaard, and
that he proposed to come down and see them.
At this news both girls grew very shy and left
off going out.
281


But when Oedegaard came, he was brighter
and happier than they had ever seen him before.
His business at Oedegaard was to found an
advanced school in the parish, and, in the mean-
time, until he had found a teacher, it pleased him
to carry it on himself; later on, he intended to
set other things on foot. In this way, he said,
he paid a part of his father’s debt to the parish,
and his father had promised to come and live
with him as soon as his house was ready.
Signe, as well as the pastor, were exceedingly
pleased at the prospect of having them as
neighbours ; Petra was pleased too, but it seemed
strange to her that he should be settling down
just as she was going away.
It was the pastor’s wish that the day before
Petra’s departure they should partake of the
Holy Sacrament together. This threw an air of
quiet solemnity over the last few days, and,
when they conversed, it was in subdued voices.
The mood imbued everything on which Petra
looked for the last time, and her words were few
and earnest. She passed all that she had come
through in review before her, and felt as if she
were settling accounts with her former self; for
282


until now she had never looked backwards, but
always forwards. Now her whole life rose up
before her from her childhood until the present
moment ; the old Spanish songs with their
alluring melodies rang in her ears once more, the
many errors and vague longings of her childhood
and girlhood were taken up and examined, one
by one, just as we try on old garments. If she
happened to forget anything, some object at her
side was instantly ready to remind her of it;
for at the sight of this object she had once
thought of it, and thing and thought had ever
since been associated in her mind. The piano,
in particular, had so much to remind her of, that
it was almost too much for her. She sat before
it without being able to touch the keys, and, if
Signe played, it was as much as she could do
to remain in the room. She thus liked best to
be alone; Oedegaard and Signe understood this
and kept to themselves. Everybody looked at
her with a mournful kindliness, and in these
days the pastor never went by without stroking
her hair.
At length the day came. It was a dull, cloudy
day; it was thawing on the mountains and the
283


fields were growing green. All four kept their
rooms until it was time to go to church together.
Besides themselves only the sexton and another
pastor were present. The pastor wished to
partake of the Holy Communion himself; but at
the same time intended to give them a short
address, for he had some special words to say to
the traveller. He spoke as if they were sitting
round the table at home on some holy festival
or birthday. Time would soon show, he said,
whether the period, which she this day brought
to a close with a prayer to God for mercy, had
laid a foundation in her life. No one becomes
his truest self until he has found his right work.
The work which she had chosen, was a work of
making known great thoughts, and he who
approached it in a sincere spirit and showed
himself worthy of it, reaped the richest and most
enduring fruits. It was true that God often
made use of those who were unworthy also, just
as in a higher sense we were all unworthy—He
made use of our longings. But there was one
duty which no one could achieve by means of
his longings alone, and this, he was sure, she
would endeavour to accomplish ; all must strive
284


to reach this, the highest goal. He asked her
always to come back to them ; for the meaning
of communion is that it helps and strengthens
those who are bound by a common faith. If
she erred, she would find compassion here rather
than anywhere else, and if she herself did not
understand that she had strayed, no one would
be able to tell her more tenderly than they.
After the holy ceremony they went home
together, as they had come; but for the re-
mainder of the day they kept their rooms. Only
Petra and Signe were together in the former’s
room until late in the night.
The next day was the day of departure. At
the last meal the pastor took an affectionate
farewell of her. He agreed with her friend in
this point, he said, that she must begin just as
she was, and begin alone . In the conflict which
was before her, she would find how good it was
to be aware that somewhere in the world she
had a little group of friends on whom she could
rely. Only to know with certainty that she was
always remembered in their prayers —she would
see what an assistance it would be to her!
After these parting words to Petra he turned
285


and said a few words of welcome to Oedegaard,
To be united in love to one and the same person
was, he said, the best introduction to loving one
another. As he made this toast, the pastor was
certainly not thinking of what in these words
made Signe red, and then Petra; whether
Oedegaard blushed also, they did not know,
for neither dared to look at him.
But when the horses were at the door and the
three friends stood round the young girl, and all
the people of the house round the carriages,
Petra whispered as she embraced Signe for the
last time :
“ I shall soon hear great news from you, I
know. God bless you ! ”
An hour later she could only see the white
peaks which showed where the place lay.
286


CHAPTER XII
One evening shortly before Christmas there was
not a spare seat to be had in the theatre of the
capital. A new actress, of whom great things
were expected, was to make her first appearance.
She belonged to the people, her mother being a
poor fisherwoman. With the help of people
who had recognised her talent, she had reached
her present position, and was said to show great
promise. There were whispers among the
audience before the curtain rose. It was said
that as a child she had been a terrible little
minx, and when grown up, had been engaged to
six persons at once, and had kept it up for six
months. She had thrown the whole town into
a commotion, and had had to be escorted out of
it by the police. It was extraordinary that the
director of the theatre should allow such a person
to appear. Others asserted, on the contrary,


that there was not the slightest truth in this
story ; since she was ten years old, she had
been brought up in a quiet pastor’s family in the
diocese of Bergen. She was a charming and
well-educated girl—they knew her well. She
must be wonderfully talented, she was so pretty.
But there were others sitting there who knew
better. First of all, the wholesale fish-merchant,
Yngve Void, who was known through the whole
country. He happened to be in the town on
business —it was said, to be sure, that his fiery
Spanish wife made it so hot for him at home
that he was obliged to travel to get cool. He
had taken the largest box in the theatre and
invited some of the chance acquaintances he had
made at the hotel table to accompany him to
see “ something devilishly worth seeing.” He
was in excellent spirits until he suddenly caught
sight of —could it really be he ?—in a box on
the second tier, with a whole ship’s crew around
him —no ! —yes !—yes, indeed, it was Gunnar
Ask!
Gunnar Ask, who with the aid of his mother’s
money, had become owner and commander of
the Norwegian Constitution y had, when tacking
288


out of the fjord, come alongside of a ship
which bore the name the Danish .
It seemed to Gunnar that the latter was trying
to pass him, and that was not to be tolerated !
He put on every stitch of canvas he possessed ;
the old Constitution began to creak, and the
consequence was that in trying to reach as long
and as far into the wind as possible, he ran the
vessel aground in a most absurd place. He
was at present detained in the town, contrary
to his intentions, while the Norwegian Consti-
tution was being repaired. He had one day
met Petra on the street. She had overtaken
him and been so exceedingly friendly, both then
and afterwards, that he not only forgot his
grudge against her, but called himself the
greatest ass their common birthplace had ever
produced, for having imagined that he was
worthy of such a girl as Petra. He had this
day bought tickets at raised prices for the whole
of his crew, and was sitting there with the silent
resolve to treat them after every act. The men,
who were all from Petra’s native place, and
welcome guests at her mother’s tavern, that
paradise on earth, felt Petra’s honour to be theirs,
T
289


and sat vowing to each other that they would
clap as had never been clapped before !
Down in the stalls was seen the thick, bushy
hair of the pastor. He was perfectly calm ;he
had entrusted her cause to a Higher Power. At
his side sat Signe, now Signe Oedegaard. She,
her husband and Petra, had just returned from a
three months’ journey abroad. She looked very
happy and sat smiling over at Oedegaard, for
between them was an old lady with snow-white
hair, which encircled her brown face like a
crown. As she sat in her seat, she was taller
than every one about her; she could be seen by
the whole house, and soon all opera-glasses were
directed towards her, for it was said she was
the young actress’s mother. She, whose name
was a man’s, made such a powerful impression
here, too, that it smoothed the way for her
daughter. A young nation is always full of
expectation ; it has faith in the elemental powers
of its nature, and the sight of the mother was
sufficient to awaken this faith.
She herself saw no one and nothing. What
it was all about was a matter of indifference to
* “ Gunlaug ” is properly a man’s name.
290


her ; she was only there to see if the people
would be friendly to her daughter or not.
The time drew near. Conversation died
away in the excitement which gradually began
to come over the spectators and make them feel
kindly disposed.
With a loud burst of drums, trumpets, and
horns the overture began. The play was “Axel
and Valborg,” by Adam Oehlenschlager, and
Petra herself had asked for this overture. She
sat behind one of the wings and listened to it.
But in front of the curtain sat the small fraction
of her countrymen which the house could accom-
modate, trembling for her, as we always tremble
when some one who belongs to us and whom
we dearly love, is for the first time about to
reveal his power. Each one of them felt as if
he, too, were about to face an ordeal. In such
moments, many prayers rise to heaven, even
from hearts which at other times seldom pray.
The overture died away; peace fell upon its
harmonies and they gradually dissolved as in
the sunlight. The overture ceased, an anxious
silence fell.
And then the curtain rose.
THE FISHER LASS


Printed by Ballantyne, Hanson & Co.
London and Edinburgh








