

f= <7/66




THE POSTAL QUESTION,
The celebrated saying of Talleyrand, that “ language was
given to conceal thought,” is by no means the maxim of
Australian diplomacy. In all our negociations the moves
soon become public. A good idea of policy is thought to
be far too good to keep. We do not say we prefer to this
open style, the finesse of the clever diplomatists who
manipulate the destinies of Europe. , But we do say that
the former, to be respectable, should be honest. The states-
man who acts from a questionable motive is expected to veil
the truth, if not the better to serve his purpose, out of
respect for propriety, and in justice to those who will be
called upon to support his measures. There was, indeed, a
period when might was always right, and success the
standard of virtue, but that is past for ever. The growth
of Public Opinion has created an International Conscience,
whose judgments are heard above the strife of armies, and
can abash the pride of Power in the highest ecstacy of its
triumph. The mighty despot, at whose call a million of
soldiers would spring to arms, is as eager to conciliate
applause as the orator of a village circle. This is a
striking proof of the improved moral sentiment of the age.
A fair pretence is now the first anxiety of diplomatists
in all parts of the world. It would appear, however, if we
may judge from the character of its diplomacy on the Postal
Question, that the present Administration in Victoria is a
remarkable exception to the rule, for it would be difficult to
absolve them from the discredit of an intrigue, conducted
without secresy, and the perpetration of a flagrant wrong
without the shadow of a disguise.
The first attempt to steal a march on New South
Wales, was made upon the receipt in Melbourne of Lord
Kimberley’s despatch, (dated 4th September, 1872) which
enclosed a letter from the Lords of the Treasury, em-


bodying proposals for the continuance of the Mail Service
now in existence between the Mother Country and Australia.
The Imperial Government offered to provide for the convey-
ance of Australian Mails between London and Point de Galle,
free of charge ; and to contribute, in addition, a sum not to
exceed £40,000 a-year in aid of a Colonial Service to and from
Galle ; and My Lords invited the Governments of Australia
to consider the premises, ami arrange for that Service “in
combination .” To any one who did not know the arrogant
and grasping spirit which occasionally animates the “ Aus-
tralian ” policy of Victoria, it would be incredible that Mr.
Francis should coolly arrogate the overture to himself,
and telegraph acceptance! Yet that was actually the
course taken by the Chief Secretary of Victoria. Then came
the remarkable despatch addressed by that honourable gentle-
man to the other Governments, which must always endure as
a rare specimen of diplomatic assurance. It was very much
to the following effect;— “We will deal with this matter.
If you wish to join, say so, and we will be 'prepared to let
you knoiu the terms. Reply at once, for we desire to instruct
our Agent-General, if practicable, by next Mail.” No
secret was made of the motive of this extraordinary assump-
tion. Mr. Langton stated in. the Legislative Assembly, when
drawing attention to the Imperial offer, that “of course
Melbourne ivould be the terminus of the route.” Though
we might be irritated by any attempt to wrest from Sydney
her long established and natural right to the terminus, as
the last great port on the line, and the cheapest, we could
scarcely complain, if that attempt were made in a conciliatory
and honourable spirit. But was there ever so blundering, or
so offensive a piece of diplomacy as the transparent
endeavour made by Mr. Francis and Mr. Langton, to
assume the sole management of a matter so obviously com-
mitted to the free deliberation and judgment of the Colonies
as a whole ? The manoeuvre would have been bad enough if
it had been sure to succeed. But what can be said in
palliation of an intrigue so clumsy and impossible ? Even
a child, if wisely he had been let into the secret, could
have predicted it must end in humiliation and retreat.
That was precisely the result. None of the other Govern-
ments would submit to so suspicious and insulting an
initiative, and by common consent, the Ministry of New
South Wales assumed the lead, and convoked a Conference
to assemble in Sydney, for a settlement of the proposed
Service.


THE POSTAL QUESTION.
Few, we may suppose, were prepared for the result of the
deliberations of that distinguished body. We learn from
the published minutes of the proceedings that several days
were occupied in the settlement of the all important question.
No doubt it was respectful to listen to the arguments and
remonstrances of the Representatives of New South
Wales, especially as the delegates had assembled in her
metropolis. But would it not have saved much valuable
time, if Mr. Parkes and Mr. Samuel had been informed, at
once, that the jury in the cause between New South Wales
and Victoria, had brought their verdict into Court, and
were not at all likely to disagree ? How could they
suspect from the previously firm and independent attitude
of Sir Henry Ayers, Mr. Innes, and Mr. Vogel, before
the Conference assembled, that they had since been “ made
safe” by the opposite side? We quite believe that the
honourable gentlemen we have named had no unfriendly
feeling towards New South Wales, and that they were, in the
first instance, prompted by a sincere desire to do full justice
to her claims, and every reasonable man must make large
allowances for the helpless position in which Sir Henry
Ayers and Mr. Innes were placed. But the fact remains
that the decision of the delegates on the Postal Question
whether we consider its character in itself, or the means
used to obtain it, was an outrage upon justice, and inflicted
a serious wrong upon New South Wales. What Mr. Parkes
and Mr. Samuel could do to vindicate our rights appears to
have been done with vigour, ability, and discretion. They
could not hope to overcome the alliance which opposed
them, but they accepted their defeat with firmness and
dignity, conscious they were superior in this, that they had
nothing to conceal, and nothing of which to be ashamed.
How keen was the disappointment of those who had hoped to
date from this meeting of the Representatives of Australasia
the dawn of an era of brighter promise than the past, which
should unite the young nations of this great Continent in
a grand family circle which would leave ample scope for
separate paths of greatness, but none for jealousy or dis-
affection ! It may be that the results of the Conference will
stimulate rivalry, competition, and independence; but it
will, we fear, be a rivalry shorn of the emulation which is its
noblest attribute ; a competition without the courtesy which
springs out of confidence and respect ; and an independence
devoid of a graceful sentiment of mutual regard.


The fate of the Postal Resolutions of the Conference is
well known. It seemed at one moment probable that this
Colony would be restored by Imperial interference to the posi-
tion she had lost. But the hope was dispelled, and as
matters now stand we are probably shut out from a direct
share in the Gralle Service, except upon terms dictated by
our opponents. Some view this result as a victory for
Victoria. We confess our inability to see this. In the first
place, the decided manner in which the Imperial Grovern-
ment set aside the decision of the Conference, is the most
emphatic condemnation of the means by which that decision
was secured, which it is possible to imagine. The Colonial
Office has become so carefully polite to the Australian
Colonies, that Imperial censure could take no stronger form
that it assumed in the marked contempt shewn by Lord
Kimberley for the formal declarations of the Intercolonial
Conference. There could be no more complete vindication
of the Protest made by our Representatives. The Home
Government did nothing in the interest of Victoria. On
the contrary, its policy was strained to a remarkable degree,
in order that New South Wales should have another chance.
The final result was, not that Victoria was to have her
own way, but that the Mother Country would rather have
nothing to do Avith the contract than be a party to her selfish
and unjustifiable pretensions. The Service was left open to
the highest bidder. No doubt it will suit the Government of
Victoria to offer most, for with our line via San Francisco,
and the proposed new route via Torres Straits, we cannot
freely compete for a third line, especially when, as we shall
hope to prove, the two services open to us without an effort
are of all others the most fitted to secure our maritime
ascendancy. It is, we freely concede, worth a sacrifice to
preserve the terminus of the steamers of the Peninsular and
Oriental Company. But if the head quarters should be
transferred from Sydney to Melbourne, the means used by
Mr. Francis to effect tfiat end will make the removal of the
terminus rather a scandal than a distinction, and it can never
afford any lasting or honourable satisfaction to the people of
Victoria.
There is another side to the picture, which Mr. FRANCIS
has probably overlooked. Is Victoria so assured in pre-
eminence that she can safely venture to treat with such
haughty indifference the just demands of New South Wales,
or any other Colony, whose equitable claims may chance to


obstruct her ambition ? We think not. No one will dispute
the surprising growth and prosperity of the sister Colony,
and if the gentlemen at the head of her affairs, pursued
a just and elevated policy, they might easily acquire a marked
and deserved predominance in Australian councils. But is
it not plain that every illustration of a contrary and entirely
selfish policy, enforced in the most overbearing style, must
weaken her moral prestige, and alienate the confidence of
those who might otherwise follow in her train ? A policy
of aggrandizement may be safe and profitable when enforced
by fleets and armies, but when supported only by petty in-
rigues and empty threats, it is alike dangerous and contemp-
tible. To accomplish her stubborn purpose Victoria has
bullied South Australia and Tasmania into a false position.
It may not again be so completely in her power to drag them
through the mire. It is quite possible that very soon Victoria
will find herself in the same fix as that in which she has
placed us. Will she then deserve, or can she expect to re-
ceive better treatment ?
The Ministry of Victoria will find in the disruption of
the Ocean Mail Service of Australia little of which to boast.
The line which they have destroyed had been long established,
and had worked well beyond precedent. The Mails were
carried with unrivalled punctuality. The steamers employed
on the route have conveyed multitudes to all parts of the
world with celerity, safety, and comfort. This truly magnifi-
cent Service, which for a long period the whole of the Colonies
have enjoyed in common, Victoria has scattered to the winds,
in order that she might appropriate a miserable advantage,
or minister to an unworthy ambition. These are not the tactics
which will secure supremacy. This is not a wise or
enlightened policy.
Having reviewed the diplomacy of Victoria, as shewn in
the proceedings which have thrown the Ocean Mail Service
into confusion and uncertainty, we now proceed to inquire
the true policy of New South Wales, in her present position.
Should she outbid Victoria for the Halle Service ? Should
she surrender and accept the terms of Victoria ? Or should
she depend upon the San Francisco Service, and a new Service
via Torres Straits? We do not think the Hovernment can
afford to compete for the Suez line. In the first place it is
pledged to another line, and a second route of far greater
commercial value than that via Bass Straits can be opened
up via Torres Straits, connecting us with the China, India,
and British line of the Peninsular and Oriental Company at


Singapore ; and in the next place, because there is no justi-
fying necessity for a wasteful competition to secure a third
line, which, as we may be able to show, is not at all so valua-
ble a route as either of the lines we have indicated. The
second alternative, surrender to Victoria, is too degrading to
be discussed. We conclude, therefore, that the best course
will be to devote our best and united energies to make the
Services which are accessible complete and efficient.*
The San Francisco route has always been popular in
New South Wales. It brings Sydney into steam communi-
cation with New Zealand, Fiji, and the United States, and
forms an ocean highway of the greatest prospective value.
The line has not been worked well hitherto, because, we
understand, of the unsuitable character of the vessels em-
ployed. But it will be the duty of the Grovernment to stipu-
late for a thorough performance of any contract that may
be accepted, and, judging from the calculations submitted to
the Conference, the course of post will be as rapid from
London to Sydney, via San Francisco, as it will be via dalle.
By means of this route, we shall be restored to the New Zea-
land trade, and, if the expected intention of the present
Administration, to make the Port of Sydney as free as is consis-
tent with our Be venue necessities, can be carried out, it should
enable us to divert the trade almost entirely from Hobson’s
Bay to Port Jackson, its former entrepot. The trade with Fiji,
which is already valuable, and may some day become very
large, will be entirely secured. It is owing to this
San Francisco line that we have seen American buyers in
our wool marts, and that the “ Stars and Stripes” have
become so common in the Port of Newcastle. May we not
hope that these are the germs of a mighty trade which
will do much to unite in the Pacific the two great branches of
the Anglo-Saxon family, in the profitable exchange of their
commodities and wealth ?
The second line open to us, that by way of Torres
Straits, has never attracted the attention it deserves. Its
practicability was once disputed, and by many it was believed
that the passage through the Straits was highly dangerous,
if not impossible with safety. But it has since been
demonstrated by successive navigators that this was a
* We were gratified to find, since the above was written, that this
is the view the Colonial Secretary is inclined to take. Vide reply
of Mr. Parkes to a deputation of the citizens of Sydney, on the 3rd
June, 1873.


delusion. The passage is one of the most safe and tranquil
in the world! Indeed, a high authority states in a descrip-
tion of the route, which we presently give, that the passage
throughout may he designated “a safe and charming
yachting excursion.” The rough weather which frequently
terrifies the nervous passenger by the ocean route is com-
pletely avoided, for the wonderful chain of islands which
stretches from Cape York to the South-eastern extremity of
Asia, forms a succession of inland seas, throughout the
entire distance, ensuring a calm and 'pleasant voyage at all
seasons of the year. Upon arrival at Singapore, passengers
will be able to embark in one of the magnificent steamers of
the P. and 0. Company for England, India, or China. The
course of post to England will probably be not longer than
at present, and in the case of the great ports of the East it
will be reduced, we are assured, thirty days ! As a passenger
and mail route, therefore, this new line offers many striking
advantages. The commercial value of the line may be safely
affirmed to be unequalled. We preserve unimpaired our
steam communication with Europe, and vastly improve that
part of it which unites us with the East. In addition to
this, we open up to Australian enterprise one of the richest
and least developed regions of the globe, and are established
in the most intimate relations with countries hitherto almost
outside the pale of civilization and commerce, which may
become great centres of trade and wealth. May we
not aspire to emulate among the islands of the Eastern
Archipelago that adventurous policy which in earlier times
laid the foundations of the supremacy and grandeur of the
Mother Country ? Some of these wonderful islands such as
New Gfuinea, Borneo, Java, and Sumatra, are the largest in
the world, if we except Australia. They possess a healthy
climate; resources of unsurpassed variety; and they are
watered b_y large and navigable rivers. In their vast forests
there is an inexhaustible supply of valuable timber. In the
vegetable kingdom, they produce sago, camphor, nutmegs,
dye-woods, cinnamon, citrons, betel, pepper, ginger, rice,
grain, yams, cotton, sugar, coffee, indigo, tea, and tobacco.
In minerals, coal (said to be superior to English), antimony,
iron, tin, zinc, copper, sulphur, saltpetre, alum, naphtha,
lead, silver, gold, and diamonds! Java, the Queen of the
Eastern Archipelago, is a Dutch possession, with a population
of 12,000,000. This settlement has made during the past
thirty years wonderful strides. The following statistics of the
trade of Java (the latest available) speak for themselves;—


Imports during the year 1848 ... £2,666,765
„ „ „ 1860 ... 5,894,020
Exports during the year 1848 ... £4,510,472
„ „ „ 1860 ... 8,878,800
The Government of Netherlands India is most anxious
to open a trade with us, as the following extract given to
Mr. Alexander Fraser to assist him in his endeavour to
establish a line between Java and Australia, in 1871-2, will
shew:—
No. 15. (Translation.)
Extract from the Register of Resolutions of the Governor-General oj
Netherlands India.
Read the letters. Tjiparras, 21st May, 1871.
a ., &c., &c.
h. Of the Director of the Internal Government of 16th May,
1871, No. 3,582, intimating that he had made Mr. Fraser verbally
acquainted with the chief contents of the ministerial despatch above
referred to, whereupon that gentleman had come to the resolution of
again proceeding to Australia, entirely at his own expense, for the
purpose of conferring with the several Governments there regarding
the carrying out of a steam communication between Java and Aus-
tralia.
That for the success of his efforts, Mr. Fraser considers as indis-
pensable the possession of a document from the Governor-General,
embracing a communication such as is contained in this resolution.
Heard the Council of Netherlands India.
Is approved and resolved ; To inform Mr. A. Fraser, of Batavia,
that the Indian Government take the greatest interest in the realiza-
tion of the plan proposed by him for a steam communication between
Java and Australia. And that the Minister of Colonies proposes to
open a head in the Budget for the year 1872 for the “ Costs of main-
taining a regular steam communication with Australia.” In order to
prove that the Imperial Government also does not give up the idea of
eventually being able to co-operate in obtaining a steam communica-
tion with Australia.
Extract of this Resolution shall be given to Mr. Fraser for his
information.
Agrees with the above Register.
STORTENBEKER,
Secretary of Government.
Netherlands India offered to contribute at that time a
subsidy of £IO,OOO a-year to the line, if Australia would
provide the Service. After a somewhat protracted corres-
pondence, and a conditional agreement, the Government of
Queensland broke off its negociations with Mr. Fraser, upon
the plea, we believe, of his failure to carry out the under-


taking. In the beginning of this year a new project for the
Service was submitted by Queensland to the Conference, and
a Resolution was adopted by the delegates in favour of the
establishment of a line via Torres Straits.
We are happy to find that the Government of Queens-
land has lost no time in acting upon this decision. An
agreement has been made between that Colony and a com-
pany of influential London capitalists, for a monthly steam
service by way of Torres Straits, between Singapore, Java,
Queensland, and Sydney. The subsidy to be given by
Queensland is £20,000 per annum. We hope that the
Grovernment of New South Wales will cordially join in this
undertaking. The subsidy should be liberally supplemented
by this Colony, in order that the highest rate of speed may
be secured, and the most eligible class of steamers employed.
We are greatly indebted to a highly competent
authority* for the following interesting description of the
winds and weather met with on the new route :
‘ ‘ From April to September the S. E. trade wind will be encountered
on the east coast of Australia, in the latitude of Brisbane, and carried
north, inside the Barrier reefs through Torres Straits, and on to
Singapore or Batavia. They are attended with a mild, pleasant, and
genial atmosphere ; and the passage throughout may be designated
as a safe and charming yachting excursion, with smooth seas, and a
sunny, clear sky. From Singapore to Galle the S. W. monsoon will
be carried.
“ Between September and April the passage to Torres Straits
will be attended with calm and light variable winds and smooth water.
From this station to Singapore the N. W. monsoon will be found
blowing. The characteristics of this wind are, its light and variable
conditions and humidity. Calms of a long duration will also be
encountered up to the end of December. I do not know, however,
that these phenomena offer any obstruction to the progress of a steamer,
rather the contrary, in the absence of strong head winds, she should
make a rapid passage.
“ During the earlier months of the year, January, February, and
March, the monsoon is more decided in its character, blowing tolerably
steady from west and north-west through the Java and Flores seas ; but
as the water will be smooth, a powerful steamer would have no difficulty
in making good headway against it.
‘ ‘ The remainder of the voyage from Singapore on to Galle during
these months would be pleasantly accompanied by the IST. E. monsoon
blowing down the Indian Ocean, being fair, and ensuring a fast run
for this distance. It is described as a ‘ steady moderate breeze, with
settled, clear weather, and a smooth sea.’ ”
* Lieutenant Gowlland, R. N., Admiralty Officer in charge of
Surveys.


To the same obliging source we owe the following Table
Distances of the Main Ocean Mail Routes from Sydney
BOTH NORTH AND SOUTH OF AUSTRALIA.
From Sydney to Galls via King George’s Sound.
MILES.
Sydney to Melbourne ... ... 576
Melbourne to Glenelg ... ... 480
Glenelg to King Gleorge’s Sound ... 1,010
King George’s Sound to Perth ... 350
Perth to Ceylon ... ... ... 3,100
5,516
Sydney to Galle via Torres Straits and Batavia.
MILES.
Sydney to Torres Straits ... ... 1,740
Torres Straits to Timor ... ... 1,110
Timor to Sourabaya ... ... ... 705
Sourabaya to Batavia ... ... 370
Batavia to Galle ... ... ... 1,770
5,695
Sydney to Galle via Torres Straits and Singapore.
MILES.
Sydney to Batavia ... ... ... 3,925
Batavia to Singapore... ... ... 520
Singapore to Galle ... ... ... 1,490
5,935
It appears, therefore, the difference between a route
from Galle, via Perth, King George’s Sound, Glenelg, and
Melbourne, and a route from Galle via Batavia and Torres
Straits is only 179 miles, and via Singapore only 419 miles.
Against this is the set off that 1,500 miles of the latter routes
will be on the long established lines of the Peninsular and
Oriental Company. It is quite possible, too, that the dif-
ference will disappear when the route becomes familiar.
In the letter of the Lords of Her Majesty’s Treasury,
previously referred to, it was stated that the Imperial Govern-
ment would, in the event of a contract being entered into by
Queensland for a route via Torres Straits, convey its corres-


pondence sent by that route, between Singapore and London,
and vice versa , free of charge, by the P. and 0. Company’s
steamers on the China and Indian line. There is not the
slightest doubt that this offer will be extended to New South
Wales, if she join in the contract.
There is, apart from the commercial value of the Torres
Straits route, a grand object to be gained by the adoption
of the Service. It may chance that, in the desire to steal a
march upon us, the Cabinet of Victoria have over-reached
themselves. By this new route we shall, at a less cost than
before, be in direct and rapid communication with the
Mother Country, and that too, over the greater part of the
distance, by means of the splendid steamers of the P. and 0.
Company, without having to contribute a single penny to
their Australian Service, the burden of which will now fall
upon the shoulders of Victoria! Besides this advantage, the
new line will give us a far shorter route to the great markets
of the East. The unfriendly diplomacy of Victoria may,
therefore, have done us good service, and recoil severely upon
her own trade.
We are aware that gentlemen interested in the remit-
tance of specie to Europe, and in a rapid course of post,
would be willing to sacrifice a great deal, to keep Sydney in
connexion with the present route. There is considerable
force in what they urge, although we feel quite certain that,
in some way or other, the P. and 0. Company will manage
to offer facilities to their Sydney customers which are now
perhaps scarcely imagined by our friends in Victoria. But
it must not be overlooked that subsidies from the general
Revenue can only properly be paid for national benefits, and
never to meet the convenience of a particular class. It would
be unfair that the people generally should be put to large
additional expense for the conveyance in a certain way of the
valuable property of individuals who can afford to bear their
own expenses. The same reasoning applies, with less force,
to letters. The great mass of the people have little or no
correspondence beyond the seas. No doubt the Ocean Mail
Service is indirectly a matter of vital importance to the whole
community, and should be carefully maintained by the State.
But the question is, will not the Service via San Francisco
and the proposed Service via Torres Straits, meet every
legitimate demand ? Is the possible difference of one, or two,
or three days, in the course of post, to which mercantile men
would be disposed to attach great weight, of sufficient general
importance to warrant an extra public expenditure of thou-


sands of pounds annually ? We confess, taking a broad view,
we cannot think it is, especially as urgent advices can now be
flashed along the electric wire from Sydney to London, and
from London to Sydney, in a few hours. The postal routes
most valuable to a young country, with large resources, but
remotely situated, are those which create new markets, and
form fresh avenues of trade. That were a truly national
boon. A subsidy in aid of a Service with a prospect of that
kind could fall unjustly upon none, for it would be reproductive
to all.
Upon every account, therefore, we earnestly desire to
impress on public attention the advantage of the two lines
now left open to New South Wales. The route via San
Francisco will connect us with New Zealand, Fiji, and the
United States, and give the command of the Pacific. The
route via Torres Straits, will connect us with Singapore,
India, China, Japan, Java, and the East. Both will unite us
in fortnightly communication with Gfreat Britain, and unlike
the route from Point de Galle, which traverses a desert sea,
the new lines will introduce our merchants to splendid fields
of enterprise.
The aspirations of New South Wales after maritime
supremacy in the Southern seas are justified by the un-
approached extent, the nature, and the solidity of her
resources ; whilst the unrivalled loveliness of the haven of her
trade, in which the navies of the world may ride in peace
and safety, is a bright augury of her future importance. Nor
do the restraints of an antiquated policy, the last relic of the
age of isolation, fetter her ambition. We have been content
to follow the venerable precepts of our illustrious Parent, and
to accept with the genius of her political constitution the
inspirations of her majestic power. We do not desecrate the
soil of freedom with the chains of commercial slavery I We
would rather emulate the glorious policy of England, who,
in diffusing her resources, has developed her strength;
whose argosies speed over every ocean wave, burdened with
the profusion of her wealth, and return with spreading sails
to her distant shore, laden with the rude products of a grate-
ful world, which refresh her myriad energies, only to flow again
into the arteries of her universal commerce, transformed into
the comforts and blessings of civilization !
GIBBS, SHALLAKD, & CO., General Printers, 108 Pitt Street, Sydney.




BtSUO
F$l6C
♦
* ■
