

THE WRECK OF THE
“DUNCAN DUNBAR.”
TEN DAYS ON A CORAL REEF.
A true Story of an Adventure in the Life of
Mrs. Hutton,
BY
E. K. GRACE.
Bolton:
G. S. HEATON & CO., BOWKER'S ROW.


THE WRECK OF THE
“DUNCAN DUNBAR.”
TEN DAYS ON A CORAL REEF.
A true Story of an Adventure in the Life of
Mrs . Hutton,
BY
E. K. GRACE.
$olton:
G. S. Heaton & Co., Bowker’s Row.




Ten Days on a Coral Reef.
yg N October 7th, 1865, the good Ship “ Duncan
Dunbar,” bound for Sydney, was some 2 or 3
degrees below the Equator, with 117 souls on
board. About 70 of these were passengers, 35
at least being ladies and children. Most of the passengers
were returning to their homes in New South Wales, some
taking young wives out with them; some again, going out for
the first time to try their fortunes; and a few—of whom I was
one—taking the voyage for the sake of their health.
We had been driven by light and contrary winds out of
our course, and were now three or four hundred miles to the
East of the Brazils, expecting almost hourly to fall in with the
Trade winds, which were to carry us quickly round the Cape
of Good Hope. So far the voyage had been without any
incidents, and monotonous enough; with no occurrences other
than speaking a passing vessel, and nothing more exciting
than the “Doldrums,” or occasional squalls, which come on at
frequent intervals as one approaches the Line. A sweepstakes,
got up when crossing the Line, had afforded amusement for a
week, and induced an inordinate amount of betting; but even
that excitement had passed over, and our life was as tame and
monotonous as before.
“ I think I shall tack at 8 o’clock this evening, to avoid a
coral reef”—so spoke the Captain at dinner. “What, are we
near a reef”?—said some sitting near him—rather looking
forward to our approaching anything. No one dreamt of
danger, for all had bound-less confidence in our Captain.
From that moment nothing was talked about but the reef we
were so soon to pass.


After tea, which took place soon after 6 o’clock, we
arranged ourselves on deck in our usual groups. We were in
the Tropics, and this was the pleasantest and coolest part of
the day. Flirtation, under the garb of chess, 6cart6, or back-
gammon, was carried on to an unlimited extent, with not
much harm to either side. Earlier in the day it was too hot,
and one concentrated all one’s energies to keep oneself cool.
Singing and music commenced as the darkness came on, and
generally lasted till near ten o’clock, by which time people
began to get confidential, and the flirtation serious. That
night, however, they were destined to be interrupted.
I don’t think we were quite easy; the Captain was not;
for he had sent the officer and a sailor of the watch up aloft to
keep a strict look-out, and since dinner he had resolved not to
tack till ten p.m. Our thoughts would revert to the reef, and
reefs are not pleasant subjects at sea. Our conversation
turned to shipwrecks; and a lady was telling our party what a
narrow escape she and her husband had had in the “ Royal
Standard ” on their voyage to England, when that ship ran
into an iceberg in a fog, and how their escape was almost a
miracle—when in the midst of our chit-chat, the cry was
heard “ Breakers Ahead ! ” Instantly all were on their feet,
all seemed to hold their breath with suspense ; at that moment
a pin might have been heard to drop. At that cry, the Captain
had started up with a shout of “ Hard a Port! ”
At this moment (8-10 p.m.) we heard the roar of the
breakers, and smelt the strange sea-weedy smell always
.prevalent near the shore or rocks. We felt the good ship
slowly paying off, but it was too late. In a few moments we
struck on the reef with a sort of dull heavy bump which nearly
threw us off our legs; and caused the masts to quiver and
strain, and the rigging to tremble. When we struck we were
going at the rate of 7or 8 knots an hour. It would be almost


out of anyone’s power to convey the scenes of the night that
followed.
The first thing was to take the ladies below, and it was
pitiable indeed to see how they depended upon others for
support, and for that hope which it was almost impossible to
give with truth—“ Shall we get off” ?“ Is there any chance
of safety ” ? “ Pray, don’t leave us.”
Some of us soon returned on deck, as shock after shock
succeeded each other. What a scene was there ! All
around us nothing but breakers, the sea lashing itself into
foam on the rocks, and the huge ship rolling to and fro on
them, a helpless mass, quivering, straining, and heaving in her
throes as sea after sea washed her further on the reef. Each
wave as it passed only lifted her up to let her, as it went on,
crash down again with her whole enormous weight. It
seemed impossible to extricate her, but unless that was done,
and quickly, we knew that the “Duncan Dunbar” must
become a wreck, as we had gone on the reef at high tide.
Strange as it may seem, the sailors at first were more con-
fused than alarmed; sometimes even a jest arose from them, and
I heard a bet made as to how soon the vessel would be got off.
In the meantime nothing was left undone to save her,
though rolling as she was it was most difficult to do anything.
The pumps were however manned, and orders given to throw
the cargo overboard. To effect this it was necessary to throw
three horse-boxes overboard, as they were on the main-hatches*
the entrance to the hold.
It was a sad sight! The horses could be seen amidst
the foam first swimming round the vessel, then amidst the
breakers, then back to the vessel, crying fearfully all the time,
until to our horror, we saw them dragged down by the sharks !
Then we asked ourselves what might be our fate ?


After working for some time at the pumps, and throwing
the cargo overboard, we were actually beginning to gain on
the water in the hold, when a heavier sea than any previous
tore away the stern-post and rudder of the vessel; the water
poured in at will, and we were a hopeless wreck.
Pumping was now useless, and we turned our thoughts
to how we could best escape from a wreck which, we then
thought, might break up at any moment. The stewards had
already been told to provision the boats. And what were our
chances of escape ? Two lifeboats almost new, an old cutter,
the captain's gig, and the long-boat. The last-named, which
might have carried sixty people, had been used as a sheep-pen,
and was utterly rotten and worthless : and even if sea-worthy,
could not be got out, so securely was it fixed. The lifeboats at
a pinch might have held fifteen persons each, the cutter and gig
together about 40 more. That is to say, there was just
sufficient accommodation for the ladies, their husbands, the
children, and the boats-crews. For the remainder of us and
the crew there was no apparent hope whatever.
It is no use sentimentalising on what one thought in the
long hours of that night. How sweet life seemed 1 How
hard to die, and what a death 1 How one thought of home,
and what all there would think of our fate, if indeed they should
ever know it! How one looked back on one’s life, and wished
it possible to re-live at least some part of it. Death to many
of us seemed a certainty. One speculated what would be
one’s fate, and almost prayed for drowning as being so much
less painful than the sharks, or the no less cruel reef.
There being no further use for one on deck, we went below
to help to comfort and sustain the women, although they were
so brave as to require little encouragement. It was a relief
to have them to look after, and indeed all the men might well


have taken a lesson from them, for self-control and patience.
The men behaved well enough, but the women with heroism.
Below, the scene was almost worse than on deck. The rolling
and straining of the vessel, besides the staggering shocks when
she struck the reef, had broken all the moveables, the cabins
began to give, and everything to break away that was not
unusually well lashed. The noise was far greater than on
deck. The women were all quiet, most of them reading their
Bibles and praying. Only those who had others depending
on them shewed fear, and their fear was not for themselves.
To show their unselfishness at such a time, they did not forget
to ask if I suffered at all from the bumping (my spine had been
injured by a fall from a horse), and to beg me to lie down. I
can never forget the scene ! All were eager to assist or
comfort. Little children were put in their cots, and in the
midst of the uproar slept almost as peacefully as usual. One
little girl, only thirteen years old, fanned her younger sister*
to sleep, and nursed her the whole of that night, fully alive
to all the peril, and only ceasing occasionally from her
employment to ask how matters were, and if we were soon
to leave in the boats. All the ladies and children had been
got ready for that in the early part of the night.
As the tide went down, the bumping of the vessel
increased. All around the vessel large pieces of planking
floated, torn from her by the rocks. Two or three bumps
would follow in rapid succession, making her quiver from stem
to stern, and then all would be quiet for a few moments, except
for the rolling and the crashing up and down of the huge iron
head of the torn-off rudder, which threatened to penetrate
through the deck and the cabins below.
* These children, Katie and Loui Mort, were returning with their
mother (the wife of Hon. Henry Mort, M.L.C., anti a native of Bolton) to
Sydney. The former nfaxried the wnterTjf the pa£per, and the latter is the
wife of Rev. F. R. C. Hutton.


A few hours more and the “ Duncan Dunbar ” had broken
her back.
The Captain presently assured us that the wreck could
not break up that night; and we availed ourselves of this
reprieve to examine charts, when we found we were 300 miles
from Pernambuco, the nearest port.
So passed that long weary night. The wind whistled
among the rigging, the vessel staggered and strained as it
rolled to and fro; and worst of all, the air was almost deafened
with the shrieks of myriads of sea fowl, which swooped round
and round us, seemingly mocking us with their discordant
cries.
As morning approached and the night became less dark,
we observed a long white streak to windward. At first we
thought it was the white foam on the rocks, but as it became
more light we saw that there was a long sand bank about
600 yards distant. The captain’s gig was lowered and he went
to explore. After rowing about a mile, a landing place was
found. As the sun began to rise we saw them land, and, after
staying a short time, put off again for the wreck. The report
was favorable; the sand bank was not covered at high water,
as we feared might be the case.
Immediately, preparations were made for landing. The
boats were lowered and manned, and the ladies and children
all assembled on deck. They were lowered over the stern by
means of a chair tied to a rope. They were also securely
fastened to the chair. It was no easy operation in a tolerably
rough sea. They were all brave enough over it, especially
one very stout lady, who said she would wait until all the
other ladies had been lowered, as she was afraid of breaking
the chair by her weight, and thus causing delay. It was a
great relief when we saw the first boat with its precious


cargo pass safely through the surf and effect a landing.
So the boats plied to and fro until all the passengers were on
shore in about 2 hours’ time. The men lowered themselves
by a rope into the boats, no easy matter with the latter rocking
about. As we left the wreck, she was lying on her beam
ends at an angle of about 45 0 , slowly lifting and falling again
as each wave passed by.
Once in the boat there was no difficulty in getting to the
reef, so long as care was taken to avoid the broken water.
And now to describe the reef. Picture to yourself a flat white
shoal, only a few feet above the level of the sea at high water,
about one furlong broad and twice as long. About a quarter
of a mile off was another island, rather larger and round.
This we could walk to at low tide ; it was covered with some
long rank grass, but there was no water to be found on it any
more than on the other; and as it offered no greater advantages,
we preferred to remain on the one nearest the wreck.
On our sand bank there were small patches of a green
weed, which was the only vegetation. Countless numbers of
boobies, and other sea birds, swarmed upon it however, tame
from their excessive wildness. These would scarcely get out
of our way, and took hardly any notice of us beyond pecking
our legs as we passed. One could literally not go a step
without treading on their young ones or eggs. We tried a
few of the latter, but they were all too far gone—a chicken
generally appearing when the shell was broken. There were
numerous traces of former wrecks. Part of the keel of one
vessel was cast high up on the reef; and, blown down, was a
beacon, which had been erected some years previously. We
kept up a large fire, entirely from these pieces of wreck; for the
current carried away from the reef the drifting portions of our
own vessel.


As the sun got up the heat was intense, about no 0 . We
all set to work, however, to erect a large tent with sails and
spars brought from the wreck. This was necessary, as there
was no shade whatever. It was hard work, and there was no
water except what was sent from the wreck; and all we each
got that day was a half-pint of water and some sweet biscuits.
The tent we erected afforded shelter to all the passengers, men
and women alike, so long as we were on the reef.
The sea had now subsided, and there was every chance
of the wreck keeping together for some days. The captain’s
gig got damaged and was worthless; but the other three boats
were kept plying to and fro, bringing stores and water from
the wreck. There was great difficulty in getting at the latter,
and for three days we experienced acute thirst, our portion
indeed being only half a pint a day each. This was barely
sufficient, with our hard work and the heat.
Our life each day was the same, and as follows. About
6 a.m. we all rose and bathed, the men on one side of the reef,
the women on the other. Our bathing, however, only con-
sisted in lying down in shallows among the rocks; the open
sea and the deep pools being equally dangerous on account of
the sharks. When we re-assembled, some one, generally the
doctor, read a few prayers just outside the tent. This was
always an affecting scene, if only for the sincerity of the
devotions praying for deliverance from our peril. After this,
breakfast was portioned out. It generally consisted of a small
cup of tea, a small piece of almost tainted meat, a potato, and
some ship biscuit. Thirst, however, often prevented us
from eating. Then all set to work, the boats were manned
and went to and from the wreck, those on the reef unloading
them, and helping to improve the condition of things on the
reef, filling the store, &c. At low water we had to carry
the things (often very heavy) from the end of the reef (about


a furlong) to the store, and this had to be done with the water
sometimes up to our waists, over the sharp coral rock, which
soon cut our boots to pieces, and rendered it most painful
walking. At one o’clock we met again for another meal,
generally consisting of a glass of beer, and some biscuits and
cheese, those on the wreck faring somewhat better, as they
could help themselves. So it went on till supper time at
about 6 p.m., when breakfast was repeated, after which most
of us bathed again. If the bathing did not refresh much, it
at all events partially relieved our thirst.
Then about 8 p.m. the tent was arranged for the night, and
all laid down. In a few days all the women were provided
with mattresses, but the men were obliged to lie on the
loose gritty sand, with what covering they could lay hands on.
Each puff of wind raised a cloud of dust. From this cause,
and on account of the glare in the daytime, we were all obliged
to wear crape bandages, torn from the ladies’ dresses, over our
eyes. From the first day our chief care was to collect all
provisions, water, &c., in a store, for which we put up a small
tent. This store was put under the charge of Mr. Thornton,
late Mayor of Sydney, and he accomplished his duty of appor-
tioning out the meals with great success, although, of course,
an occasional grumble was heard.
Over the store a guard of six, composed of passengers and
crew, armed with revolvers and sticks, kept watch day and
night, so that none could steal, or take more than the share
allotted to them at meal times. This guard was most rigidly
kept. Each watch lasted two hours, and we all took our turn
at it.
All this time the heat was extreme, varying from ioo° to
120°. If a bottle was broken, the edges would be found quite
turned and dulled by the sun in a few hours’ time. We saved


some sheep and pigs, but all the food we could obtain for them
was one truss of mouldy hay. We could give them no water,
and when the tide was out they might be seen burying their
noses in the sand, in the attempt to quench their thirst. Some
were killed in a dying state, but they were nearly all bone and
very tough. The sun, indeed, almost tainted the meat before
it could be cooked and eaten. The rest of them died and
were thrown into the sea. Luckily, we had a quantity of
salted and preserved meats.
The want of water caused us great anxiety for three days.
It could only be got from the wreck with difficulty, and the
only means we had for storing it, and bringing it to the shore,
was in buckets and cans, so that a quantity got lost in transit.
At last, on the evening of the third day, we succeeded in extricat-
ing and floating to shore a large iron water tank, and in this we
stored our water. A few days after that we had brought four
of these tanks to shore, and had collected a supply of water
capable of lasting a month on emergency. Any immediate
anxiety on that score was therefore relieved, and we no longer
suffered-from acute thirst.
As there were only about three brushes and two combs
amongst us, and as long hair soon became matted with sand
and sea water, almost all the ladies cut theirs quite short.
I can convey no idea of the uncivilized state into which
we soon got. A knife was considered a luxury, and was often
passed from hand to hand at meal times. It was almost
painful to see delicate ladies compelled to gnaw their food and
tear the meat with their teeth and fingers. The children,
however, rather enjoyed it.
In the meantime, the captain (who had been on the wreck
each day without intermission) had arranged to leave us, in one
of the lifeboats, to try to make Pernambuco, from whence to


fetch us assistance. For this purpose a mast and sail were
prepared, and the best lifeboat carefully provisioned and
watered for a ten days’ voyage.
On Wednesday morning, October nth, after prayers,
more than usually affecting, had been offered up, praying for
the captain’s safety on his voyage, and our own deliverance
from peril, we all assembled on the shore to see them start.
One noble passenger, Mr. Galloway, who had been foremost
in keeping order and directing all, had volunteered to go with
the captain. There was, besides, a crew of six men. The
boat was launched, all took their places in her, the sail was
set, and with the anxious hopes of all accompanying them,
they started with a fair wind to Pernambuco. We all lingered
until the little craft, dancing over the waves with as much sail
as she could carry, became smaller and smaller—a speck—and
then vanished altogether.
We were now left with two boats, a lifeboat and cutter.
Of these we resolved to save the lifeboat in case of accidents,
and only use the cutter in going to and from the wreck. The
latter was very ricketty, and required constant baling out #
The command now devolved on the chief officer, a brave man
enough, but quite unfit for his post. Of his subordinates, the
second officer (the one on whom the actual blame rested of
placing us on the reef) was incapable; and the third officer, not
only incapable, but bad in every sense of the word.
Before the captain left, he fortunately arranged a “ com-
mittee of management ” consisting of the chief officer, and
four or five of the principal passengers. This committee
undertook the management and control of everything, and
carried out their duties tolerably successfully.
And so our life went on, circumstances bringing out many
noble traits and unselfish acts. The women all behaved


admirably, encouraging all, and doing whatever they could to
relieve the men of a portion of their labours. All profited by
seeing them endure so bravely.
With some few exceptions, the utmost good feeling
prevailed. On Tuesday, October 10th, I went for the first
time in one of the boats to the wreck. She was much twisted,
the after-part of her being quite on one side, the fore-part being
more upright and firmly fixed on the rocks. We climbed her
sides with the aid of a rope. The after-part swung to and
fro, lifted by each wave with sufficient violence to make
us hold on to anything we could. We were in great anxiety
as to whether she might not break in half at any moment.
‘ What a sight it was ! In the deck, which was at an angle
of 45 0 , there was not a plank that was not working. All was
ruin and disorder. Not a single thing (except, by the way,
a crazy old piano in the cuddy) but what was broken or twisted
out of all knowledge. The masts had all gone by the board,
tearing all the rigging with them, and now lay hampered with
their tackle on the larboard side. The groaning and creaking
of the timbers made it almost impossible to hear what anyone
said, even if close to one.
The stench from the dead animals and the caulking, owing
to the heat, was horrible. Two fine horses on deck had, in
their fright, kicked themselves half out of their boxes, and
hanging there lay dead, swollen to twice their natural size,
most ghastly objects. A cow and some sheep were in the
same state, and already putrifying. At times the smell was
almost intolerable.
In the cuddy, on the main deck, most of the cabins had
been broken up, some only retaining their old resemblance by
being jammed up and held together by the debris which filled
the place. On the larboard side at the stern end, and at the


stern cabins, the water poured in and out, having literally
stripped them of all they contained. As the tide got lower,
I was able to descend to the second deck, where my own cabin
had been. The whole of the cabins —woodwork, fittings, in
fact, everything below—had been broken up into firewood, and
jumbled together in one confused mass, swung from one side
to the other according to the motion of the stern. It was
dangerous to remain below, so I determined to cut my visit
short and return to the upper deck. There were, however,
a few canaries flying about, part of a large quantity brought
out by the chief steward on speculation. I easily secured six
of them, put them in a cage, and got back safely. I also
found some seed, which, with the canaries, I persuaded the
sailors to lower into the boat. I brought them all safely back
to England, and the one I kept I have still.
The sailors on board had all along been able to get access
to some wine and spirits; in consequence of which most of
them were more or less drunk, the officers, seemingly, having
no control over them. I never could understand why more
wine, &c., was not sent on shore, where there was real need
of it, and where it would have been out of the way of the
sailors. The voyage back was not very pleasant in an over-
laden boat, with a crew of more than half-drunken men; no
mishap occurred however.
And now about the sailors. Although they have since
been much abused, I don’t think they were a bad set. Their
faults were caused chiefly by the incapacity of the officers; and
they would have been different if stricter discipline had been
enforced. As it was, they felt they were masters, and who
can blame them for exercising their freedom ? Being ignorant,
they made a bad use of it by plundering right and left; breaking
open cases, and appropriating all jewelry and valuables that


they could discover. The men would return to the reef from
the wreck, quite drunk, with lockets round their necks, and
other jewelry. Nevertheless, whenever anything was claimed,
I believe it was invariably given up without a word. One of
the most disorderly among them was “John King,” afterwards
famous in the wreck of the “ London.”
Nearly every sailor too, had his own store of spirits
secreted on the reef; though all the passengers were suffering
from the want of stimulants. But, who can blame them,
when the worst example was shown by the third officer, who
had plundered, and refused to restore property, and, who at the
time of our relief, had six bottles of brandy secreted on shore.
On the voyage home I bought a pair of my own boots back
from one of the stewards; and, though myself wearing clothes
borrowed from others, constantly saw sailors in my garments.
To return to the reef.* At low water there was capital
fishing to be had. A piece of string, fitted with a hook and
baited with anything, let down in the crevices of the reef,
quickly caught all sorts of fish, some of the most beautiful
colors, and of strange shapes. We only ate those we recog-
nised however.
At night we were always much annoyed by large land
crabs, which abounded, and which would crawl all over us.
Shrieks might often be heard, and entreaties from the women
to come and “ Kill this crab which is crawling over me I ” —then
there would be a hunt for it in the dark, and a boot or fist
would soon send the crab to his long account. In the morn-
ing, perhaps as many as a hundred slain would be found. We
had other bed-fellows in the shape of ear-wigs, three inches
long, with numerous legs, which, however, did no harm; and
there were also lice from the sea-fowl, which were our worst
and most repulsive enemies.


The night watches to guard the stores, and to keep the
fire together so as to attract any passing vessel, were the most
wearisome of all our labours. Mine, I remember, was from
2to 4 a.m. In the moonlight it was a weird scene enough.
The white reef with the sea all around, the wreck just
discernible; all deadly still, except for the roar of the surf
in the distance, and the wash of the sea close at hand.
One or two of the watch generally kept moving round the
store and tent to see that all was right; the rest crouched by
the fire to talk of our chances of escape, of the captain’s
perilous voyage, and of how long we might hold out. Those
watches were gloomy work !
Four vessels passed us, but too far off, so that all our
efforts to attract attention failed.
On Thursday, October 12th, I again went out to the wreck.
The scene was worse than on Tuesday, and the after-part of
the vessel was heaving and swinging more than ever. There
was now less drunkenness on board, owing to the sailors being
unable to get at spirits, &c., in the way they had done.
Perhaps there being greater danger on board helped to sober
them. The ruin and smell were much worse than before.
On Sunday, October 15th, we had a day’s rest and a full
service. A vessel passed and vanished; and a large shark
came to within a few feet of the shore, at high tide. These
were the only two events of the day.
We were beginning now to look out for the succour which
the captain hoped to bring us. Already some were getting
despondent and anxious, especially those on whom others
depended. Signs of illness appeared ; and if illness did come,
how were we to resist it, weakened as we were by privation and
exposure ? We dreaded the time, too, when the wreck should
break up and the sailors be left in idleness. Already the


latter began to grumble and refuse to go to the wreck. It
was dangerous, they said, and might break up at any moment.
Why should they do all the work! Some began to talk of
fitting out the other lifeboat and sending it to Pernambuco, in
case any mishap had befallen the captain’s boat.
On Tuesday, October 17th, the wreck could be seen still
holding together. Another passenger and myself determined
to go on board once more. After some difficulty, we were
allowed to go. On our way we were nearly upset through the
carelessness of the third officer, who, having charge of the
boat, steered us into the breakers. By dint of hard rowing,
a few moments saw us safe again. On nearing the wreck we
at once saw that there was a great change in her. The stern
was now swinging and twisting about like a pendulum. Some
of her timbers had parted amidships, and one could see that
she must shortly break in two. It was difficult getting on
board at the bows, but no one was allowed, or indeed well
could, go near the after-part. No sooner was lon board
than I heartily wished myself off again. As each wave rolled
by the whole fabric groaned, and quivered and worked so
fearfully, that we feared she could not keep together many
minutes longer. The danger, however, did not deter the
sailors from playing with some children’s toys they found
amongst the cargo. After staying about an hour we were
glad enough to quit the wreck for the last time. Shortly after
my return to the reef, I was fishing with another man, when
on a sudden, we heard a great shouting. Looking up we
saw a large steamer on the horizon evidently shaping her course
towards us. What an excitement there was amongst us
then 1 What shaking of hands and congratulations all round!
What a ringing of bells, shouting, and cheering there was 1
Everybody made as much noise as he or she could, until
perhaps a thanksgiving arose to the lips or was silently offered.


All those who had anything to pack now made their preparations
for leaving. Mine were soon completed, as my luggage only
consisted of a Colt’s rifle, a pair of field glasses, six canaries,
and an umbrella.
As the steamer was still some distance off, we at once
determined upon a good lunch. What a contrast it was to
our former meals, not only in being allowed to go in carte
blanche at the stores, but, also in the merriment which now
prevailed. In fact, we now rather regarded the whole thing
as a rather severe pic-nic.
At last the steamer stopped close in. She was the
“Oneida,” one of the Royal Mail Steam Packet Co.’s Steamers,
and was commanded by Captain Woolcott. Boats put off
and as they approached the shore, most of us rushed in up to
our waists in water to shake hands with those whom we
regarded as our preservers. In some two hours’ time we were
all safe on the “ Oneida,” meeting with a most warm and
kindly welcome from the captain and officers, who, during the
voyage to England, were unremitting in their good services
and attentions. Lending and giving us every necessary in
the shape of clothes, and showing us every kindness.
We certainly were a most ragged lot when first we got on
board. The ladies cut a pretty good appearance, but the men
were unkempt, unwashed, unshaved, burnt with the sun, some
with their clothes in rags. We should have out-gipsied
gipsies.
It was strange to be civilized again, to sit down at table
and tackle a knife and fork, which, by the way, we did with
great good-will! How we enjoyed that first dinner ! How
we must have surprised the stewards ! By dinner time we
had had time to polish ourselves up, and to be able to chaff
one another about our get-up, and for appearing such swells.


At 6 p.m., on October 17th, we took our last look at “Las
Rocas ” and the wreck as we steamed away. But when, as
we afterwards heard, the captain of the “ Duncan Dunbar ”
arrived next day in another vessel with those to whom he had
sold the wreck, she had broken up and nothing could be saved
from her.
I must tell how it was that the “ Oneida ” came to our
rescue. The wind had changed soon after the lifeboat left
the reef, and there was no prospect of their being able to make
Pernambuco at all, when a vessel fell in with the boat, took all
her crew on board and dropped them fifteen miles outside
Pernambuco. They rowed ashore, and the captain with Mr.
Galloway at once represented our plight to the English Consul,
who then accompanied them on board an American steamer on
the point of starting, and requested her captain to come to our
assistance, at the same time offering him a sum of money for
the job. The American refused. A few hours afterwards
the “ Oneida ” with the English mails on board arrived, and
at once put off to our assistance, steaming the whole distance
in 23 hours.
Except that we were treated with the utmost kindness and
consideration, our voyage home was much as all such voyages
are, and in about three weeks’ time we arrived at Southampton.




