

ALLIED GEOGRAPHICAL SECTION
Southwest Pacific Area
THE
NATIVE CARRIER
Employment and Treatment of
Native Carriers in New Guinea
9th February, 1943




ALLIED GEOGRAPHICAL SECTION
Southwest Pacific Area
THE
NATIVE CARRIER
Employment and Treatment of
Native Carriers in New Guinea
9th February, 1943


G.H.Q., S.W.P.A.,
9th February, 1943
Published (or the information oi all concerned
By command of General MacARTHUR
R. K. SUTHERLAND
Major General, U.S.A.
Chief of Staff
OFFICIAL:
B. M. FITCH,
Colonel, A.G.D.,
Adjutant General


INTRODUCTION
The natives, and the native carriers
above all, are playing a vital part in
the New Guinea campaign. Their
successful handling requires both
sympathy and expert knowledge. It
is the purpose of these notes to pass
on the combined experience of a
number of "old timers"—Administra-
tion officers, planters, miners, etc. —
to members of the Forces who are
new to the country.




The Native Carrier
1. There are hardly any roads in New Guinea and no transport
animals worth mentioning. You get about on foot-tracks, and
the means of transport is the native carrier. The tracks are
mostly very bad. The carrier is good.
2. His endurance and mobility are marvellous. His average
weight is about 112 lbs. He can do a day's march with a
load of 40 lbs.; he can start at a moment's notice; he needs no
baggage; he can build his own house on the road; and he can
go anywhere.
3. He has given willing service to the white man for the lost
50 years, and his help is absolutely vital now. We want
to make the most of it. The way to do so is not to overdrive
him, but to make his path as easy as may be by intelligent
consideration.
OBTAINING CARRIERS
4. It pays best, where you can do it, to gel carriers from village
to village, for one day only. If you have to keep them longer,
try to replace them after a few days. They will be better satisfied
if they do not have to go too far from home, and the problem
of feeding and controlling them will be very much simpler.
5. Apply to the village Policeman, or the Luluai, or the Tul Tul.
He is used to getting carriers. It is one of his most important
duties. You give instructions to him, he gives them to the
villagers.


6. Get these native officials to come along with you. Don't
compel them to carry. That is a disgrace to the uniform. And
you can't expect them to help you control the villagers if you
put loads on their backs.
7. Natives must not refuse to carry, but they often try to dodge
it. The Village Policeman or the Luluai may not have much
authority. You may need to back him up. Take a look through
the village houses to see if anyone Is hiding.
8. The New Guinea village is often small, perhaps with only
half a dozen able-bodied men in it, and these may be all
away in the gardens. Get someone to blow the shell trumpet,
if there is one, and the people will come in from the gardens
and nearby settlements.
9. You may have to wait a long time to collect the number
you want, for the villages may be very scattered. Therefore
send notice at least a day ahead if you can.
10. If you want 20 carriers let your messenger carry a string
with 20 knots in it, or palm branch with 20 leaves left on it.
11. If you are passing back and forth through country with a
good population, don't always get your carriers from the
same villages. Send out to different villages in turn. Try to
treat them all equally.
12. If there are plenty of willing carriers available, don't mind
taking a few extra, provided you can pay and feed them.
They will all be much more cheerful. The extras usually do
their fair share of work.
13. If the women are willing to carry, you can use them too.
They do good work with their string bags. (Don't be too
chivalrous; it is the native woman's lot to carry burdens and
she doesn't object).
14. Youngsters are very keen to help. Give them the pots
and pans and hurricane lamps. They are worth taking if


only to keep you amused. Pay them according to size. They
take it well.
15. Carriers do best in their own kind of country. Coast-dwellers
or plainsmen for the flat country; mountaineers for the moun-
tains; river-men for the rivers. (Don't expect a bunch of moun-
taineers to paddle a canoe).
16. In forward areas native life is disorganised and it will be
impossible to get carriers from village to village. The proper
course, then, is to take a team from the base, where carriers
have been mustered in advance, giving them a definite task.
GENERAL TREATMENT
17. It goes without saying that you will give your carriers good
treatment. Even if they get only 6d. a day they are fellow
workers.
18. There are practical reasons also. If they are overdriven
some of them may break down, some will malinger, and all
will be discontented and sullen. They may not dare to down
loads and go on strike; but next time you or any other soldier
wants them, they may be all away from home, and it will be
no joke finding them.
19. If they are ever really slave-driven, then they may go over
to the enemy—just as carriers, slave-driven by the Japanese,
have come over to us.
20. Carriers can take it all right, but it pays to nurse them along.
Study their welfare as an Officer or N.C.O. should study
the welfare of his men.
21. Try to keep them together and don't have stragglers. If a
man falls behind it is because he is overtaxed. He would
keep up with the rest -if he could. It is a sad thing to see an
undersized carrier panting half a mile in the rear. See that
he gets help or relief from stronger men.


22. On the other hand keep them up to the scratch (they are
not above loafing if they get a chance). You can do this
without nagging them.
23. Watch the cunning ones. There are always some smart
boys who try to get away with the light loads.
24. For indiscipline cut down tobacco or impose fatigue duties
in camp.
25. Should you have women in your line of carriers don't
monkey about with them, and don't let your native offsiders
do any monkeying about. Pay the women full price, and see
that they get it, not their husbands.
26. In hostile country you are responsible for the carriers' pro-
tection. Quite apart from the Japanese, they have some
reason to fear the people of strange tribes, though you have
none. Therefore when you send your carriers back you must
provide an escort. (For short journeys, of course, this is not
necessary, for the carriers are in their own country).
WEIGHT OF LOADS
27. The regulation one-man load in peace-time (Papua) was 40 lbs.
for a day's march. Reduce it to 35 lbs. for long journeys, day-
after-day travelling.
28. For two-man loads, 80 lbs. is the upper limit (short journeys
on flat country); 70 lbs. in rough country; 60 lbs. for long-
term carrying.
29. Make it your rule to keep under these weights if you can
muster enough carriers. You get there quicker, and your
carriers will be happier and fittei.
30. In forward areas they must be able to move quickly. There-
fore, reduce the loads accordingly.


MAKE-UP OF LOADS
31. Apart from weight, the points to observe are: (1) Compact-
ness; (2) comfort; and (3) protection.
32. Compactness: A native cannot stand an awkward, swinging
load. He prefers a heavy neat load to a light clumsy one.
And the load must be bound securely at the beginning of the
day, or it will come undone and you will lose time on the track.
33. Comfort: The carrier must not have a chafed shoulder or
the corner of a bully-beef tin sticking into his rump. It will
become unbearable as the day wears on. Tins of preserved food
must be packed absolutely tight and even.
34. Protection: There is too much rain in New Guinea. Carriers
will do something to protect the loads, but don't expect them
to stop on the track to do so. It is your business to make
provision before you start.
35. Natives can be trusted to tie up loads after a fashion. They
will make a good job with split cane or strips of bark. But
they cannot be trusted to observe the above rules, unless you
tell them how and watch them closely.'
36. Packages, boxes, etc., should be numbered, or otherwise
labelled, so that you can know their contents. It's bad for
temper and the carriers' to undo the wrong load when you
want to get at something,
37. One good way of packing rations is to put all items in each
container in the proper proportions; rice, biscuits, meat,
sugar, tea. You can then use up one load at a time and avoid
the trouble of breaking open a number of packages.
ONE-MAN LOADS
38. The one-man load is recommended, particularly in difficult
country, because the arms are left free for scrambling.
39. The native string bag will surprise you by its size and is
a useful container for odds and ends. The carrier takes the


weight on his forehead and has both arms free. (If you are using
women carriers don't try to tell them what's what. They will
bring their own string bags and use them, and that's all there
is to it). . -
40. Another native method is to tie the load to a pole, bearing
it on the shoulder like a' bricklayer's hod. The carrier can
shift the weight back and forth, change arms as he pleases,
and allow the butt to rest on the ground for a spell.
41. The abovementioned methods are not recommended for
general use. But don't interfere unnecessarily with the
carriers' own way of doing things. If it is a short stage and
you have plenty of men, let them go to it after their own fashion.
42. For a long carrying job it will pay you to make up your
loads carefully in such a way that they can be taken up
by fresh carriers at any stage. A number of different methods
are described in the following sections.
43. Sandbags were chiefly used as containers in the recent New
Guinea campaign and were found very satisfactory: either
two bags loaded with light supplies and fastened to a pole, or
one bag loaded with heavier supplies and carried on the back.
44. The single loads will normally require shoulder-slings if noj
already provided (e.g., leather straps or webbing). These
may be improvised from strips of bark, rolled calico, or rolled
blanket (the best of all). The package has first to be well bound
with split cane or bark, and the blanket made fast to the bind-
ings (i.) towards the centre near the top, (ii.) at each side near
the bottom. The loose ends of the blanket should be fastened
along the inner edge at the bottom where the pack bears against
the carrier's back or rump. Shoulder slings may be thus fitted
to 40 lb. rice-bags, boxes, kerosene tins, etc.
45. The canvas swag bag with ready-made shoulder straps (as
used by the Papuan service) is a good container. Provided
the opening is securely fastened (eyeholes and cord), the bag is
best carried upside-down for protection against the rain.


46. The Australian Army pack will hold 35-40 lbs. of tinned
food. A square of 3-ply should be first inserted on the inner
side to prevent lumpiness. If the webbing shoulder-straps cut
into the carrier's shoulders a rolled blanket may be used instead.
It is laid across the top of the pack and the flap fastened down
over it. The ends are then tied to the web loops at the bottom of
the pack, leaving room for the arms to pass through. Finally
the loose ends are tucked up between the bottom edge and the
carrier's back.
47. An old trick used by the miners is as follows; Cut a copra
sack in two (you can sew up one end of the other half and
make a second sack). Take three slats of deal about 3” wide,
and place them as in Fig. 1. Pack in the tins as in Fig. 2 and
sew up tightly along the open end. Finally turn the bag on
its side, bind with split cane, and attach blanket as in Figs. 3
and 4. This bag will hold almost exactly a 40 lb. load of tinned
meats. The tighter you pack it the better. Use some dry grass if
necessary.
48. A general carrying rack, something after the style of the
Bergen Rucksack, has been suggested (Fig. 5). The purpose
of the web band or strap at the bottom is to keep the load off
the carrier's back. Any suitable articles can be placed in a
bag or tin on the platform at the rear and there made fast.
49. A plain box can be treated similarly. (Fig. 6).
TWO-MAN LOADS
50. The load is lashed to a pole carried on the shoulders. Natives
are thoroughly used to this method of carrying; they use it
for their pigs. It is the usual method for short inter-village
journeys. But for long or difficult journeys it should be used only
where the nature of the load makes it necessary.
51. Disadvantages are: (1) The pole itself adds to the load;
(2) it is liable to chafe the shoulders; (3) only one hand is
left free; (4) the weight is unevenly distributed when climbing


Figure 1
Figure 2


Figure 4
Figure 3
Figure 6
Figure 5


or descending. It has been found by experience that for a long
journey one double load cannot be made up to the weight of
two single loads.
52. Chafing of shoulders is prevented by attention to the
following points;—
(1) The load must be lashed firmly to pole so as to prevent
undue swinging. (2) The pole should be short enough to allow
each carrier to steady the load (in front or behind) with his hand.
(3) Shoulder-pads should be worn, i.g., a pad of soft cloth.
(4) The shoulder pads should be merely laid on the shoulder, not
tied to the pole. (If tied, they tend to turn with the pole and
cause chafing).
53. Each of the two carriers should have a 5-ft. stick with a
forked end. They use these as staffs when on the move.
When halting for a breather they can transfer the load to the
forked sticks.
54. At the end of the stage the load should, if possible, be left
attached to the pole in readiness for next day.
PROTECTION OF LOADS
55. All loads should be packed on the assumption that they
are going to be (1) subjected to an inch of heavy rain daily,
(2) dropped frequently to the ground from a height of 3 ft., and
(3) rifled by carriers if they get a chance.
56. Canvas containers should be painted or oiled to waterproof
them.
57. An inverted tin cut down to suitable size makes a good
cover for open kerosene tins. It may be used as a cooking
or washing tin in camp.
58. When loads are put down on the track or stacked in camp
they must be kept off .the wet ground. (They must also be
kept off the bottom of a canoe).


59. Stack the loads under cover as soon as you can on reaching
camp.
60. The best way to keep the gear dry is to start early and
finish early, thus avoiding the afternoon rains.
61. Breakable stores, like hurricane lamps, should be packed
with proper care. Pick special carriers and tell them that if
they smash the loads they will lose their way.
62. Kerosene tins are liable to get bent and punctured if
unprotected. Then you lose your kerosene and spoil every-
thing that is near it. Warn your carrier not to dump the tin
heavily on the ground. Keep it away from rice. (Use munfz
metal containers if available).
63. The more securely the packages are tied up beforehand the
less risk there is of pilfering. The native is not above thieving.
Don't throw temptation at him. Check in loads at each stage.
64. When camped in or near a village keep edible stores out
of reach of dogs. They will eat your boots.
TIMES AND DISTANCES
65. Travelling Time: Eight hours is the upper limit; seven hours
is a long day; six hours is reasonable. For a long trek, over
a number of days, five hours per day is all you can expect.
66. Rate of Travel: In bad country carriers may do only one
m.p.h., sometimes less. In any country m.p.h. is the
best you are likely to do.
67. Distances; All depends on the nature of the country; in bad
mountains you may be lucky to do five miles; over flat
country 15 miles is a good day. You could do much more than
this yourself, but you would have to change carriers.
68. Carriers cannot do long stages one after another. They will
have to come down to 10-12 miles a day.


ROUTINE
69. Be systematic. It doesn't matter so much what your system
is, but you must have one. Do things in an orderly fashion
or you will soon have confusion, with natives shouting all over
the place. This applies especially at the beginning and end of
the day's stage.
EARLY START
70. Start early, so that you may finish early. You get half the
journey done in the cool hours of the morning, you avoid the
rain (which usually comes in the afternoon); you get time to
make camp properly and give the carriers a rest.
71. Most New Guinea travellers believe in having breakfast
before they start. The cook is then the man of the hour.
He has to be up and doing long before dawn. See that the
rations are issued to him the previous night. Don't make him
carry as well as cook.
72. Some people recommend a start before breakfast. If you
follow that method you should halt at, say, 9 o'clock, allowing
long enough to cook a meal, unless it has been cooked in
advance. The breakfast-first method probably saves time.
73. When you are packed, make the carriers line up by their
loads. See that these are all in order. Take a look round
the camp to see what has been left behind. When everything is
ready give them the word. They like this sort of start; they
will set up a shout and be off like redshanks.
ON THE TRACK
74. Give them spells, about 10 minutes in the hour. Don't go
too precisely by the watch, but pick good places, shady
and cool or sheltered and warm, as the case may be. If the


carriers know the country they will also know the usual places for
spells.
75. Don't .forget the tobacco when they have a spell on the
track. One stick between 20 men will give them a puff or
two each, which is all they want. And remember to keep old
news-sheets for cigarette paper.
76. A European, or at least a good boss-boy, should bring up the
rear. He should have the spare carriers (if there are any)
in order to help the stragglers.
77. The leading carriers should not make the pace too hot. If
they do, give them some of the heavier loads to carry. If
you make the pace too hot yourself you will probably catch cold
waiting for your carriers to come in.
78. If passing through potentially hostile country you should
intersperse soldiers or native police along the line to give
the carriers confidence.
MAKING CAMP
79. Don't let the carriers dump their loads here, there and every-
where on arrival; make up your mind quickly where you
want them put and direct personally.
80. The first thing to think of on arrival is a meal. Your carriers
will have earned it. (This is where the dry biscuit comes in;
see para. 106.) After the meal make camp, and lose no time or
you may make it in the rain.
81. If you are keeping the carriers for some days, divide up the
work of making camp between them so that each group gets
to know its own job. The jobs are clearing the ground; cutting
timber, etc., for tents or shelters; fetching firewood and water;
pitching tents or building shelters; digging latrines.


82.. If they are new carriers you will have to supervise all this
work unless you want confusion. If you have a few per-
manent boys with you, make them responsible, allotting each a
job. They will enjoy bossing the village natives about.
83. When camp is made the carriers have a right to their leisure.
Let them sing by night, but not all night. Silence after
9 o'clock.
CAMP SITES
84. Camp within reach of a village if you can. Your carriers
will like it (provided the village is friendly); you will probably
be able to buy food for them; and the carriers will be able to
sleep in the houses instead of building shelters.
85. When selecting a camp site remember the water, firewood
and timber supply. Avoid low river-flats (you may get caught
overnight in a flood); and avoid old gardens with dead trees
(they have a way of creaking and falling down if the wind gets
up).
SHELTER
86. By sleeping in or near a village you run a greater risk of
malaria. It may be wise, therefore, to keep some distance
away, provided you can make sure of good shelter for the night.
But if not, then by all means use the village houses, where you
will sleep off the ground and under a good roof. The risks are
nothing compared with the dangers of a night in the open.
Pay something for your accommodation.
87. If you are carrying a tent or fly see that someone supervises
the pitching of it. Village natives love to help, but it will
be a poor job if you don't watch them. Dig a drain round it,
under the edge of the flap, or you may get flooded out during
the night. Cover the ground with leaves and twigs unless it is
quite dry. Lay some saplings down to stack your gear on.


88. Unbleached calico makes good fly material, light to carry
and quickly dried; narrow strips 18 feet long, several strips
being used, with overlapping, for one fly. (The best tropical
material is japara silk, which is equally light and really water-
proof. Canvas is too heavy).
89. Natives will make a barrier or screen of branches and leaves
at the end of a fly to keep out the cold wind. They will
probably make one or two fires inside.
90. Natives can make good lean-to shelters in quick time, using
broad leaves, grass, palm leaves, or bark for thatching. They
are not very particular about making them rainproof, but it is
best to let them have their heads. If they make the shelters in
their way they won't mind the leaks. If you make them do it
your way, they will resent the leaks all night. Anyhow, their
way is possibly better than yours.
91. You should carry enough tools to make camp —plenty of
scrub-knives, a number of axes, and, say, one spade for
each 20 men (the spade to be used for trenching).
92. If carrying frequently over the same route it pays to make
more permanent bush shelters at all camping places. It is
probably easier to build a number of small shelters than one
large one, and the boys generally prefer the small ones.
RELAYING
93. When large quantities of cargo have to be moved along a
regular route, the most effective method is to "relay." The
route is divided into stages, with a camp at the beginning of
each stage. Each camp has a team of boys who carry daily
from there to the next camp, returning empty-handed to sleep in
their own. (Alternatively they may carry a full day forward to
the next camp, sleep there, and return next day. But the first
method is recommended).


94. The return journey must be reckoned as part of the carrier's
working time. Stages should be kept short, so that there
and back should not be more than 6 hours altogether.
95. Control and discipline have to be maintained. A good boss-
boy should conduct each party. Loads must be carefully
checked out and in. Checking will be simplified if they are of
standard make-up.
96. The boys know exactly what they have to do each day and
they try to get it done quickly so as to get home and have
some leisure. They should be encouraged to improve the camp
and make it comfortable. If the engagement is a long one they
may even make gardens.
FOOD
97. Carrying is heavy work and ample food should be provided.
It is said also that "the way to a native's heart is through
his stomach." Feed your men as well as you possibly can. It is
poor economy to stint them.
98. If you have to carry food, rice is the most satisfactory kind.
It is comparatively economical and when cooked it swells.
The natives like the feel of a good bellyfull. (Wheatmeal is a
good substitute, though not so popular).
99. A day's ration in rice is 1£ lbs. per man. An empty condensed
milk tin or a Captain (50) cigarette tin will hold about £ lb.
rice, viz., one meal for one man. Find out how much your
pannikin holds and use it as a measure for issuing.
100. But a continuous diet of rice is both uninteresting and
unhealthy. You have to provide some variety to keep your
carriers cheerful and fit.
101. Buy native food as a substitute wherever you can—sweet
potatoes, yams, taro, manioc, bananas, sugarcane, pumpkins,
coconuts, fruit, sago, etc. A day's ration in root vegetables, etc.,
is 7 lbs. per man (gross weight, uncooked, peel, etc., included).
The ration in wet sago is 3 lbs. per man.


102. A rough and ready price list is as follows (more should be
given when the food in question is scarce; also when it is
brought into camp for sale).
Prices are given in tobacco, 3 sticks = 1/- to the native.
Coconuts 5-10 (according to district .... For 1 stick
Bananas .. .... Small bunch .... .... .... ~ 1 ~
Big bunch .... .... Up to 3 sticks
Pineapples .... .... 1-3 (according to size) .... For 1 stick
Oranges .... .... 12 .... .... .... .... „ 1 „
Pawpaws .. .... 3 or 4 (say 12 lbs.) .... .. ~ 1 ~
Taro.... .... .... Small basketful (say 12 lbs.) ~ 1 ~
Sweet Potatoes .... Small basketful (say 12 lbs.) „ 1 ~
Sago . Bundle of about 25 lbs „ 1£ „
103. But if you take a lot of strange carriers through other
people's country, there will not be enough native food to
feed them. You must carry some food at any rate. On regular
routes, where a large number of carriers are employed • per-
manently, feeding arrangements must be independent of local
supplies. The same applies obviously to forward areas, where
native gardens have been destroyed.
104. If you can use local carriers throughout, village to village,
then your feeding problems are largely solved, for the
natives have their own garden supplies. Of course, you do not
get these supplies for nothing. You pay for what your carriers
eat while you employ them. You must have tobacco, salt, shell
or trade goods to do this.
105. Carriers need and expect some meat. Buy a village pig
where you can. Otherwise issue tinned meat. The regulation
issue is 1 tin (12 oz. nett) to 3 men daily. The best way is to
issue it in bulk to the cook and let him mix it with the rice.
106. Natives like hard biscuits, Army pattern. They are useful
for the mid-day meal or for a meal on the track, as no time
is lost in cooking. Issue one 6 oz. packet per man in lieu of
rice at mid-day.


107. Salt, tea and sugar are much appreciated: also molasses
and curry powder and meal essence. By all means supply
these things if you can, particularly when travelling in the moun-
tains. They will help to keep your men warm. Marmite is
valuable to correct the deficiencies of a rice diet.
108. An empty kerosene tin makes a perfectly good utensil for
cooking carriers' meals. If you buy a pig let them cook it
after their own fashion.
CARRYING FOOD
109. For a long carry through unoccupied country, very careful
organisation of food supply is necessary. It should be in
the hands of experts.
110. Consider rice alone, to the exclusion of meat and other
extras. The regulation ration is li lbs. per day, the regula-
tion load 40 lbs. Therefore, if no other food is available and a
full issue is made, a carrier who starts with a 40 lb. sackful
will eat his load in 27 days. Put it another way: one man's
load will feed 27 carriers for 1 day.
You have to feed your carriers for the return journey as well
as the forward journey. Assume that they come back twice as
fast as they go out. Then if you start with 27 men and carry
for two days, you have to feed 27 men for three days; which
means that, at the start, three men out of your 27 must be carrying
rice. In other words, rice will make up 1 /9th or 11.1 per cent,
of your total load for a two-day carry.
The percentages of rice in the total load, for forward journeys
of 1-18 days, are shown in the graph. (Note that for 18 days
you would be carrying rice and nothing else).
The graph will give you the percentage, no matter how many
carriers you are using. (Fig. 7).
111. Several things help however. (1) Carriers can do for a
while on less than li lbs., particularly on the home journey,
when travelling light. (2) You may be able to stop and make


Carrying Days
(FORWARD JOURNEY)
FIGURE 7


sago. (3) You may be able to buy food from villages. It is
obvious that you should use local carriers, village to village, if
you can raise them.
CLOTHING, ETC.
112. Local (i.e., village-to-village) carriers need not be issued
with any clothing.
113. Long-term carriers receive calico or dungaree loincloths,
5 ft. lengths, 30 inches width; also flannel shirts or woollen
sweaters if working in mountains (they are susceptible to colds
and pneumonia).
114. Blankets: One per man on the coast, two per man in the
mountains. If carrying in the mountains is merely from
village to village, with no high altitude camps, then one blanket
should be sufficient. The blanket is used for shoulder-slings
by day.
115. Mosguito nets can be issued if available. They help to
keep out mist and cold as well as mosquitoes. But natives
will often shirk the trouble of putting them up. If worth issuing
they should be used.
116. Natives like to wear all their clothes always. They should
be encouraged to take them off when warm (i.e., generally
by day) and put them on when cold (i.e., by night). In this way
they have a chance of keeping them dry.
MEDICAL ATTENTION
117. The essentials are; (1) To pick fit men; (2) to look after their
food, shelter and clothing; and (3) not to overwork them.
If they then suffer illness it will be due to bad luck, not bad
management.


118. For a big carrying job, the medical side will be attended
to, with hospitals, orderlies, etc. But you may have to be
doctor and nurse to a line of carriers on your own.
119. Hold a stick parade in the afternoon and an inspection
before the morning start. Natives are hardy and will make
light of small injuries; but they will come for treatment if they
know they are going to receive if. Nothing is too trivial for your
attention.
120. Get in early with small cuts, scratches or sore shoulders.
Attend to them on the track when they occur. In New
Guinea you can't afford to let them slide; they may turn into sores
that take months to heal. lodine, lint and adhesive tape can and
should be used on the spot.
121. For attending to cuts, etc., in camp have potassium per-
manganate or lysol, ointment, lint, bandages.
122. For stomach-aches have castor oil or Epsom salts; for colds,
sprains and sore limbs have turpentine liniment; for malaria
(which a carrier can get as well as you) have quinine and
aspirin; for pneumonia have M&8693. Natives have great faith
in all these remedies.
123. Keep a pair of tweezers for pulling out splinters.
124. Keep a thermometer. If a man is running a temperature
at the morning inspection, he should not be made to
carry. When in camp, make him stay under the blankets; let
him lie beside a fire. Don't let him go and sit in the cold water.
125. Know the treatment for snake bite and apply it quickly
and thoroughly.
126. You won't be able to prevent carriers from drinking unboiled
water. But try to pick a safe place for the camp, drawing
water from above the village.


127. You won't be able to train casual carriers to use latrines
either. But you can at least indicate a place to go to. See
it is at some distance and on the slope beneath the camp.
128. If your men get dysentery seek the aid of the Medical
Officer. Do not fail to report if.
129. It’s up to you to do all you can for a disabled carrier,
conveying him, if possible, to a hospital or, if not there, at
least to his village.
PAYMENT
130. If you have to recruit boys for long-term carrying you can
give them a small advance of pay or a preliminary gift.
But apart from this, pay only at the end of the journey, or you
may find yourself left in the lurch.
131. Rates: These are regulated by Standing Orders, which you
have to know. The following are approximations only, and
at any rate are subject to change.
132. Cash: For long-term contracts, 9/- per month (with food,
tobacco and clothing). For village-to-village carrying, 6d.
per day (with food) or 1/- per day (without food). But cash is
not likely to be acceptable unless there are trade stores in the
neighbourhood.
133. Tobacco; For one stage, 2 sticks. You can give 2i or 3
sticks if the stage is a long one. Tobacco is the usual pay
in Papua and in most parts of the Mandated Territory. But it
is not acceptable everywhere.
134. Shell: Tambu (small white shells about i-inch diameter,
ground and pierced for stringing). Highly valued in New
Britain and New Ireland and along the north coast of Mandated
Territory, also in many inland parts. Six to eight would be a
fair day's pay in the interior.


Girigiri (whitish cowries, about long). Much valued
in the interior. Three to four for a day's carry.
Ginn (large white cowries, 2-4 inches long), and Goldlip
(Mother of Pearl) are much sought after in the interior. Only to
be used in paying off long-term carriers or in buying pigs or
large quantities of food. You must learn, by experience in bar-
gaining, what is the local value.
135. Salt: Natives are hungry for salt in the mountains, where it
makes good trade (carried in empty kerosene tins with lids).
A heaped dessertspoonful is equivalent to a stick of tobacco.
TRADE GOODS
136. Small lines are razor blades, matches, fish hooks, fish lines,
beads, handkerchiefs, needles and thread, red and black
"paint" powder.
Larger lines (to be used for paying off long-term carriers)
are hatchets, knives, adze-blades, files, scissors, mirrors, calico,
belts, pouches, mouth organs, etc.
You have to learn by experience how much to give the
casual carrier in the way of small items. The large items should
be given according to their money value.
137. When in doubt about payment or any other subject con-
nected with carrying, ask ANGAU.
