





“. . • , To live by law,
Acting the law we live by without fear ;
And, because right is right, to follow right
Were wisdom in the scorn of consequence.”
SATURDAY,
NOVEMBER
16, 1878.
No. i.
In issuing this the first number of the Shannon
Gazette , the editors desire to say a few words
which may serve to introduce them to their
readers and to represent the opinions to be
promulgated in the following pages. Force of
circumstances has thrown us together, probably
for at least two months more, though that force
may have been due to different causes and is
to be resolved into different resultants. How-
ever, let the future, as the past, be what they
may, the present—understanding by it our
stay on board the Shannon —is common to all.
We have left England from different causes
and with different objects. Some have taken
their passages for the benefit of their healths;
others that they may seek their fortunes in a
new land where hope is still young; a few
return to Australia as the country they have
already adopted for their own. Diversity of
opinion, and character, and associations, and
memories, and hopes, may be found on board;
yet we are bound, one and all, for the present by
the same adamantine chains of necessity. We
are, comparatively speaking, as it were specks
upon a little movable islet adrift on the vast
ocean; as our world itself is, when we come to
think of it, but as a grain of sand sailing in the
infinity of space. But the world and our ship
and ourselves are governed by laws, and for
the present those laws apply equally to all of
us. And here we may remark, parenthetically,
how very punctually the order to put out lights
at 10.30. p.m. is obeyed. It is a fact that
not one of us can escape these laws any more
than we can escape from the ship till we are
safely landed in Melbourne. Further, the
changes of clime and weather affect all in a
greater or less degree. The stoutest, as the
most timid heart, will acknowledge the awful-
ness and the grandeur of a mighty storm; the
most unpoetical soul will discover within itself
an echo responsive to the silent melody with
which the moon’s silver chords play a lullaby
duet with the rippling waves.
Englishmen are, as a rule, slow to acknow-
ledge this communism of sentiment; yet they
are at times a sentimental people, and have,
in this respect, as in others, their national
idiosyncracies. As, a little more than a fort-
night since, the evening shades settled quietly
over England, while its shaggy outline receded
from sight,


“ It may be for years, and it may be for ever,”
we fancy that the unexpressed thought which
welled up from every heart was that of
England’s great poet long ago—
“ My native land, good-night ! ”
We should be sorry to endorse the opinion
which is generally entertained by foreigners,
that the English are very exclusive. At all
events, it is not a universal failing, or, if it is,
travel proves a good antidote for concealing
its most ungenial features. For example, it
was observable on board the Shannon that no
sooner had the fogs and mists of England,
and the unpleasantness arising from the intro-
ductory squall in her channel, disappeared,
than all insular asceticism began to disappear
too, and frowns and grumblings gave place to
smiles and merriment.
It is in this latter spirit that we are the
better able to weigh the pros and cons of life
at sea, and to contrast it not unfavourably
with that on land. It may be urged that we
are shut out from all political and social news
for a space of three months; that England
may be at war with Russia, or Afghanistan
subjugated by British prowess, and that still
we remain in utter ignorance of these events.
True; but if we are unable to have our news-
papers and jolly letters from our friends
awaiting us each morning on the breakfast
table, we can find, even here, a compen-
sation, for we receive no uncomfortable com-
munications such as tailors’ or grocers’ bills,
which might tend to take away our appetites.
In a word, sea life, although at times a stormy
one, may be regarded as a period of exemp-
tion from care. Conversation, too, may be a
medium of news-dispensing; and if language
be a channel of thought, there is no lack of
these channels on board, for we hear conversa-
tions carried on in French, German, and
Spanish.
Leaving aside the novelty of life at sea—
for novel it is to most of us—we may see that,
in a contemplative sense, it will have its
peculiar advantage. It may be that there are
sad recollections of partings with friends;
but even from these Hope weaves a chaplet
and whispers that were there no sad partings
there would be no joyful re-unions. And it is
in a spirit of hope that the Editors address
their readers. They trust that the Shannon
Gazette may answer the expectations of that
public to which it owes its existence, and that
it may tend to enliven the tediousness of the
journey which is before us. While our cor-
respondence columns will be open to the
representation of all shades of public opinion,
our leading articles will be the reflex of
independent thought and judgment the
views resulting from which will be fearlessly
and candidly expressed.
In this, their vos salutant, the Editors trust
that their correspondents will support them
with contributions, so that everything may be
conducted in an amicable spirit, which may
reign till the end of the voyage. Beyond this
horizon the editorial mind cannot gaze; to it,
it will look still with hope—a hope that the
invalids on board will have experienced the
full benefit of the voyage, and that the soldier
of fortune may enter upon his field of labour
with renewed vigour, the sure herald of
success in life.


Original
ODE TO THE GAZETTE.
Shannon Gazette! go forth
To teach our little world
What each one’s mind is worth —
His upper sails unfurled;
For none as yet can tell
The treasures that are stor’d
Within the mental casks
Of those we have on board.
We have a talent each
(Could we but find it out),
Be it to sing or preach,
Or read, or write, or “ spout.”
And as for many days
Our paths together lie,
Surely the duty is
Of every one to try
And help to pass the time
(Which sometimes seems too long)
By cheerful talk, by wit,
By writing, or by song;
Help to amuse the well,
To cheer the sick and weak,
T 0 those who suffer much
A word of comfort speak.
If aught to hurt the minds
Of others you would say,
“ Think well before you leap,”
Then rather, “Oh, belay!”
In other words, perhaps,
My meaning you’ll define—
You’ll cross the Equator,
But do not cross the line.
Our Editors will do
Their best to find you out,
Although at first we may
Feel the effects of Drought.
Yet by some Friend- ly aid
(Though got up rather Has tie),
We’ll make our pages sweet,
Our leaders strong and tasty.
Born in a sunny clime,
Emblem of joy and mirth !
We hail thy advent time ;
Shannon Gazette , go forth !
12th November, 1878. W. R. S.
THE LAUNCH
Of the “ red-letter days” of this year ’7B
The 16th of November looms out, big with
fate;
The slipway is clear, and the tackle all set,
And the craft to be launched is the Shannon
Gazette.
Of turrets, of ironclads, of frigates a host,
Exulting, our glorious navy may boast;
The craft of all crafts, and the cause of least
Is one of the rig of the Shannon Gazette.
Her spars are not stately, nor over-well made,
But her lines are the truest that ever were
laid;
And the motto is ever, “ Hail! fellow, well
met!”
For a right jovial crew has this Shannon
Gazette.
Her mission is peace—her weapon the pen—
To conquer the heart and the conscience of
men;


’Mid foul wind and fair—’tis of no use to bet—
She sticks to her course, does this Shannon
Gazette.
Huzzah ! then, my lads, on this christening
morn,
The bottle is slung and the slip bolt is drawn ;
May the storms of adversity never upset
This gem of all dockyards, the Shannon
Gazette.
13th November, 1878. Z.
LINES TO KATE.
Dear maiden, with those soft grey eyes and
auburn hair,
On thee I gaze, and gently tend my love;
Oft —yes, how oft! —my thoughts are wandering
there,
Born of an instinct given from above.
Oh ! lovely maid, when times are dark and
drear,
And solemn thoughts steal o’er a troubled
mind,
The thought of thee at once dispels despair—
Thy face appears before me, soft and kind.
Dear Kate, I would retire to yonder glade,
To muse on thee, and on thy beauty dwell;
Fanned by soft breezes, ’neath the fir-tree’s
shade,
Such bliss angelic must all joys excel.
Dear maiden, thus I would thy praise extol,
And seek by honest heart to gain thine
hand:
Star of my being! joy of my very soul!
Lamp of my life! oh, pure and mystic
band !
Thus shall our love grow more and more,
Until our pulses cease to play ;
Symbolic vision of that heavenly shore
Where love is perfect as the endless day.
Nov. 10, 1878. R. S.
OUR LOG.
BY A LANDLUBBER.
Shannon, Nov. 15.
I suppose, Messrs. Editors, that those who
have bound themselves up for weal or woe
with the fortunes of the good ship Shannon
will retain, for many a long day, a vivid recol-
lection of the last glimpses of English land-
scape which were disclosed from the windows
of the smoky, dust-begrimed railway carriages
speeding their way from Fenchurch-street to
Tilbury. Many who had been inexperienced
in a parting, destined, it may be, to sever
warm hearts for a lifetime, will also vividly
recall the faces which smiled their farewell
from the old tug-boat as the hour for weighing
anchor drew near, failing wofully, I make no
doubt, to appreciate the sentiment of “ sweet
sorrow ” by which Juliet confessed herself
overcome. Possibly, these and kindred asso-
ciations of our last twenty-four hours in the
fatherland, may have given rise to frequent
vain longings and sharp pangs of regret.
During our tedious navigation of the Channel,
it occurred to me that there was some analogy
between our brief—and yet seemingly long—
martyrdom, and the extra wrench of a dentist
in the case of a refractory tooth. And, to
carry the analogy still further, shall we readily
forget that delicious sense of relief, when, on


the morning of the 31st of October, the skilful
emissary of Trinity House bade us “God
speed!” and left our captain, good soul, to his
own devices. My fortnight’s acquaintance
with the Shannon has been sufficient to make
me feel as much at home as one can expect to
feel when one is so literally “rocked in the
cradle of the deep; ” and I am inclined to
think that this happy state of things is not due
to any special aptitude for adapting myself to
circumstances. True Briton that I am, I am
not invariably taciturn “ amid the changing
scenes of life.” I have not exchanged ideas
with the whole of the living freight of this
Shannon of ours, and am unable to say how
long the process of acclimatization generally
occupies. But I think that those who did not
cast in their lots with the ship in the stedfast
expectation of three months’ enjoyment of the
appliances of a West End mansion, have not
only found leisure to take in the situation, but
are perfectly reconciled to the prospect
which is slowly disclosing itself in what, I
suppose, some would call its hideous naked-
ness. I do not, for a moment, wish to say
that the unfortunate owl, and that companion
of his, the landrail, who took refuge with us
as we rolled across the Bay of Biscay, and
who went (in a very desponding mood) the
way of all flesh, in spite of the unremitting
attention bestowed upon them, should be
included in this generalization; and, perhaps,
those lazy, extra-corpulent blackfish, still
farther on, confronted by ghastly faces which
appeared at intervals along the bulwarks, were
warranted in the conclusion that all of us, at
any rate, were not having beer and skittles.
For my own part, I was quite prepared. I
expected to be—well, very seedy; and I was.
But, from my heart of hearts, I sympathize
with and pity those who have laughed scorn-
fully at the experiences of the author of
“American Notes ”in the earlier days of his
fruitful and interesting travels; and I can also
imagine these same persons smiling contemptu-
ously at the intrepid, but scarcely uncharitable
man, who, in the calm interval beteween
Gravesend and Dungeness, delicately hinted
at sea-sickness. May-be these persons are
mythical; but I doubt it. I am told by
Tommy Eaves, who is generally accurately in-
formed, that Davy Jones had occasion to visit
the disdain of more than one person with
awful punishment. Many ways of resisting
this revengeful onslaught of Davy’s have been
suggested to me. One hears of playful moods
produced through the medium of salt pork
and string; of doses of brandy calculated to
fell a Patagonian ; of all kinds of impracticable
athletics. In theory, excellent; the less said
the better, anent the practice. Surely, I have
said to myself very frequently during the past
few days, Davy is sufficiently potent. What
need to seek a coadjutor in the outfitter?
True, J has been described to me by a
mutual friend as one of the kindest and most
simple-hearted of men. But what can I say to
mine own particular friend when J sells
me a mattress upon which I cannot sleep,
and thrusts pots and pans about my ears, in
comparison with the incessant music of which
the storm-roar without is positively soothing.
In these days of heavy rains, it is easier to
preach that mercy is “ mightiest in the might-
iest,” than to put the preaching into practice;
and for J I neither have, nor am ever


likely to have, any mercy. But out of con-
sideration for you, Messrs. Editors, I forbear,
and will speak no more of a theme so painful,
by reason of its recent application. Adverting
to a topic more interesting, less horrifying, and
upon which my feelings permit of my speak-
ing more rationally, I would say a few words,
which, please understand, are not uttered from
fear, favour, or affection in any degree whatso-
ever, but which, I think, would suggest them-
selves to any one who would conscientiously
put in an enduring form a record of the main
incidents of our journey to the Antipodes. The
sentiment thus amply prefaced is one of grati-
tude at our good fortune in the possession of
officers who are so thoroughly skilled in their
profession, and who maintain, amid the rough
and laborious discipline of their daily lives, the
habits and bearing of gentlemen. Inseparably
wound up with my impressions of the frightful
thunderstorm which crossed our track on Mon-
day night last, will be the feeling of thor oug
confidence inspired by a Brobdignagian form,
which maintained its individuality in spite of
its cosmopolitan attire, and which, I ween, has
battled with many a storm eclipsing that of
Monday in the course of its thirty-four jour-
neys round the world. I can never understand
why, when Jack’s name is mentioned, it is
invariably qualified by the adjective “ poor,”
unless it mean that his generosity frequently
leaves him in possession of means barely
sufficient to keep body and soul together. In
any other sense, I fail to see that Jack is so
unmistakeably pitiable. Brave, if you will;
certainly not poor in the higher sense of the
term, in the sense from which one might infer
that he was incapable of discharging his duty
towards his neighbour, concerning which we
were instructed last Sunday week.
Already, though the voyage be young, we
have seen Jack as he really is—that is to say,
in the experiences which go to make up by
far the larger half of his lifetime, where a cool
head, an iron nerve, and an unfaltering hand
must exercise an undisputed sway, if we set
any value upon our lives. We have seen his
behaviour when the life of a fellow-creature
has been at stake, and he has not been found
wanting. This, I take it, goes a long way
towards showing that his “rule of conduct”
has at least some efficacy. From a nautical
standpoint, I have no doubt that this log of a
landlubber will be full of glaring imperfections
—pregnant with imperfections—which will
materially reduce its value, according to the
generally accepted definition of the term “log.”
I am but poorly versed in the nomenclature of
ship gear; and I felt relieved of a very heavy
responsibility, my dear editors, when I learned
that you had made arrangements with an old
and well-known authority for the contribution
to your invaluable periodical of the techni-
calities of the sciences which come into play
in the navigation of the ship. Against the 27th
Oct., in my diary—the “vaulting ambition”
of which, alas ! met with its natural end—l
find the facts noted that we weighed anchor at
the Nore between six and seven in the morn-
ing, and that on the afternoon of the same day
we dismissed a pilot in the Downs with a well-
furnished letter-bag. Against the 28th of Oct.,
I find the words, “Isle of Wight,” rather
illegibly written; and immediately following
there is a big blot, as though the writer had, for
some weighty reason, peremptorily left his


manuscript to take care of itself. The 29th
and 30th are sad blanks. I remember nothing
of them. I have a dim recollection of being
told something about a second pilot going
away at a time when I was very much con-
cerned to know whether I really belonged to
this world, or whether I was undergoing a
process of gradual absorption into another
sphere. I remember, also, that I more than
once entertained and abandoned the idea of
looking for my diary. It occurred to me at
the time to jot down the circumstance that the
“ native hue of resolution ” was—but perhaps
the context will explain everything unwritten,
and will fully account for the fatal obstacle to
penmanship. On Nov. Ist, I turned over a
fresh leaf, and entered “ fair windbut there
the muse became averse to my dilatory wooing,
and deserted me. On Nov. 2nd, I essayed
again, and I find as the result “ran a long
distance.” Your persuasive eloquence, my
dear editors, in the cause of that great engine
of civilization, the Shannon Gazette , suddenly
imbued me with the Cacoethes scribendi; and
my only fear at present is that your intel-
ligent subscribers may complain of the severe
form in which the Cacoethes has seized me.
But, to return to our mutton, such as may
be found in the fortnight which has elapsed
since the last entry in my brief-lived diary.
When I say that I cannot help grumbling at
the weather, I confidently anticipate that I
shall be in accord with the disposition of your
readers. Surely fair promise was never so
deceptive as that which beguiled us with its
sunshine while the cold, baffling winds of the
Channel were fresh in our memory. Surely,
if misused Biblical language be ever pardon-
able, this is the place and season. “ Better a
thousand times,” says a friend of mine, pre-
disposed to grumbling, and in whom the
affliction is fast becoming chronic—“ better a
thousand times have borne the ills we had
than have flown hither.” He didn’t express
himself in Saxon quite as choice and poetical;
but his meaning, at all events, was unmistak-
able. Said Tommy Eaves to me the other
day, in a confidential whisper, “ The captain’s
bilious.” Now, I know Eaves very well, and
I’m sure it’s not a mistake. Understand, my
dear editors, I do not note the circumstance
in the hope of creating ever so little surprise.
I am surprised that everyone has not a touch
of the same complaint, and that I even am
well enough to give you the information.
Morning after morning, on my road to the
bath-room —with the single exception of that
eventful morning, when, as Eaves tells me, a
man locked himself in the bath-room and
underwent a dreadful punishment until break-
fast time, when Davy Jones was merciful, and
released him by an accidental push of the
door—l say, with the exception of this morn-
ing, I have heard very hard things said of the
south wind. Generally, these remarks have
been to the point, as “ this wind !”
Please don’t infer from the blanks that the
expression was anything like “ Bless this dear
wind,” &c. I have breakfast, tiffin, dinner,
and tea with the same words ringing in my
ears —perhaps I should not say the “same
words” in the case of the m:al-table, or some
of your readers may “sheer off”—l think
that is the correct phrase—under the impres-
sion that there are some dreadfully black sheep
in our midst. Let me add, then, that —out of


deference to the ladies alone, and from no
other consideration whatsoever—the sentiment
was more delicately put. Eaves says he has
heard still more dreadful things whispered,
“ with bated breath; ” but I think I have
already fully accounted for the prevalence of
biliousness. Fickle Boreas and his southern
relative have a very artful way of stealing the
affections of people, and I make bold to say that
their peccadilloes are already forgiven, although
unforgotten, so rapidly do their steady breezes
widen the gulf between the bright blue sky of
the present and the grey canopy astern of us.
Eaves is very encouraging on a kindred topic.
He has boundless faith in the doctrine of com-
pensation ; and he thinks we may hope great
things of it when we reach those uninviting
latitudes where the “ doldrums ” are supreme.
Personally, I am inclined to be satisfied with
the compensation we are daily experiencing
in these delightfully-tempered rays of a sun
which hereabouts is not always so merciful,
when we calmly enjoy our dolce far niente in
our deck-chair, disturbed by naught save the
jangle of that unromantic meal-bell. And
these poetical nights of ours, too, when one is
reluctant to bid farewell for ever so short a
while to —
“ Heaven’s ebon vault,
Studded with stars unutterably bright,
Through which the moon’s unclouded grandeur rolls.”
Or that mystic light—
“That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth,
And ’ere a man hath time to say ‘ Behold ! ’
The jaws of darkness do devour it up.”
But the old French truism is ever intruding
itself. Poor humanity, ever so cautious, can-
not avoid that little step from the sublime to
the ridiculous. One indulges astronomical
zeal at the expense of very dire sublunary
misfortunes. The old Shannon gives one of
her spasmodic lurches, and away goes my
imaginary star-gazer, reeling from his lofty
pedestal of poetic ideas into the humble abode
of cocks and hens, and the most earthy of all
earthy things. But I had near forgotten that
it was my turn to descend from my romantic
flight. Farewell, then, my dear editors, for a
week. As my devoted friend Eaves has said,
on many a like occasion—
“ Farewell! a word that must be, and hath been—
A word that makes us linger, yet * Farewell!”’
Faithfully yours,
Landlubber.
MEDICAL OFFICER’S REPORT.
General State of Health —Good. Ship free
from any epidemic or infectious disease.
(Signed) Wm. Hopkins, M.D.,
Medical Officer.
AFFAIRS NAUTICAL.
Shannon , November 16.
Dear Messrs. Editors, —It affords me great
pleasure to acknowledge the honour you
confer upon me in appointing me your corres-
pondent in “Affairs Nautical.” I am sorry
that circumstances compel me to give you so
unsatisfactory a report of our progress at the
commencement of our voyage. It is very
disheartening, after our delay in the Channel,


to meet with such foul weather in latitudes
where we should be enjoying the full benefit of
the north-east trades. I think, however, that
making allowance for all disadvantages, our
position to-day (Nov. t 6) is as good a one as
could be expected; and better than would
have been attained by the average of vessels in
like circumstances. I think I may fairly con-
gratulate you upon the fact of our already
having passed so many “ outward-bounders,”
and upon the favourable outlook we have for
strong trades. Attached to this brief report is
a table, showing the position of the ship from
day to day since leaving the Channel, together
with the readings of the thermometer and
barometer, which I will gladly furnish from
week to week, and which, I think, your readers
will find interesting, in conjunction with their
own “ logs,” for future reference. Wishing
you every success in your enterprise,
PASSENGERS PER THE “SHANNON.”
Cabin. Second Cabin.
Mr. Bennet
Mrs. Bennet
Mr. Barnard
Mrs. Barnard
Miss Hannaford
Mr. Neu
Miss M. Barnard
Miss B. Barnard
Miss C. Barnard
Mr. Stacpoole
Mr. T. CTooke
Mrs. Neu
Mr. Clegg
Mrs. Clegg
Mr. Clift
Third Class.
Rev. F. King
Mr. A. Philp
Mr. W. Philp
Mr. Scott
Mrs. Mansfield Bitti-
ridge
Mrs. W. Blake
Miss G. Blake
Miss L. Blake
Mr. Johnston
Mr. Lindsay
Mr. Harper
Mr. Thomas
Mr. Gethin
Mr. Brown
Mr. Thompson
Mr. Denton
Mr. Fisher
Mr. Stein
Mr. Bittison
Mr. Sleven
Mr. Mann
Mr. C. Read
Mr. T. Read
Mr. Walton
Mr. Tierney
Mr. A. Mason
Mr. C. Blake
Mr. Simmon
Mrs. Simmon
Mr. Cameron
Mr. Lush
I am, my dear Editors, sincerely yours,
Rev. C. E. Drought
Mr. Friend
Nautilus
Mr. Sutton
Mr. Hardy..',
Mr. Selby
Mr. Cooke
Mr. Cohen
Mr. Edleston
*Ther-
Dis- *Baro-
tance. meter.
Date.
Latitude.
Longitude.
November I
48.0 N. 6.56 w.
Crossing Channel.
191 30.25 56^
~ 2
45.45 10.13
42.17 1 13.26
38.56 I 16.27
35.29 17.46
>» 3
250 30.10 55
„ 4
245 29.90 65
216 29.95 68^
152 29.88 71^
„ 5
„ 6
33-29 I 19-37
31.38 19.45
Rev. D. A. Court
Mr. Hastie
„ 7
„ 8
in 29.95 72^
30.22 19.50
70 30.04 75
86 30.04 75
» 9
29.02 j 20.22
Mr. Nathan
Mr. Coombe
Mr. Hugonin
Mr. Hummel
Mr. Ridley
28.19 20.22
~ 10
43 30-04 75
118 29.95 80
27.16 1 22.15
26.34 t 24.09
25.58 23.22
~ 11
~ 12
13
„ 14
.. 15
~ 16
no 29.90 79^
56 30.08 79 y 2
172 30.08 81^
23.15 24.19
Miss C. Cameron
Miss J. Cameron
Mr. Parsons
20.11 25.40
17.06 26.46
200 30.10 82^
195 30-05 82
* N.B.—
thermometer and barometer
readings
Mr. Cohen
are taken at noon,


LIST OF OFFICERS.
First Mate T. C. Burnside.
Second Mate ... J. F. Anderson.
Third Mate C. W. Batters by.
Fourth Mate T. Chore.
Midshipmen :
W. S. Priedy
W. W. Cooke
C. D. Goldsmith
F. Simpson
A. R. Taylor
V. Forrester
H. E. Easton.
PARADOXES.
The Shannon carries a Mason , although
there is no building done.
There is a Fisher on board, and still we
have had no fresh fish for breakfast.
It is possible to call a very good-tempered
man Hastie.
Although matrimony is a very ancient insti-
tution indeed, there is a Neu one on the
Shannon.
Once upon a time Nathan told David a pretty
story of a lamb. At dinner, yesterday, David
brought Nathan some mutton.
Although there are more Cookes on board
than one, still the broth has not been spoilt.
A King addressed a Court on deck this
morning, and there was no demonstration.
Although there is no dearth of clergymen on
the Shannon, it is certain that there is a
Drought amongst them.
We hear that Clegg is the name of a horse-
fly in Scotland; but on board the Shannon
we have one—a butterfly.
Although the passengers are all amicably
disposed to each other, yet there is one who,
par excellence, is known as Friend to all.
PASSING EVENTS.
Concert.— On Wednesday evening the quarter-
deck was, for the first time this passage—and
we hope it will not be the last —enlivened by
a concert, which the second and third class
passengers, assisted by members of the crew
and several other volunteers, were kind enough
to furnish. The chair was taken at eight
o’clock by Mr. W. R. Selby, who introduced
the entertainment to the notice of a large
audience in a few well-timed and very appro-
priate remarks. The programme opened with
“ The Faded Flower,” by Mr. C. Read, who
was followed by Mr. C. Alfred, the song
chosen being “ The Scamp.” Upon an encore,
Mr. Alfred obliged the audience with “ A
Secret between you and I.” Mr. Blake
responded to the next call from the chair,
singing, with great pathos, “Kitty Wells.” Mr.
F. Harper contributed “The Bonnie Light-
Horseman,” in whom he thoroughly enlisted the
sympathies of all present. Mr. Lindsay very
agreeably filled an interlude in the musical
numbers of the programme, with the “ Spanish
Champion,” which he declaimed very spiritedly.
Mr. G. Wright was vociferously applauded for
his rendering of the “ Men of Merry, Merry
England,” but, with a modesty which his
audience did not fail to appreciate, forbore
making a second appearance. Mr. Auckland


was very pleasing in that flower of Ethiopian
minstrelsy, “ Put me in my Little Bed.” Mr.
Davidson, our veteran chief-engineer, sang,
with a keen appreciation of the sentiment
embodied in the
Sea.” Mr. Lever was very amusing in a ditty,
which recounted the conversation incidental to
matrimony between “ Sally and himself.” Mr.
Armstrong and Mr. Bossard were equally suc-
cessful in their respective songs, “ Allie Reel ”
and “Little Flower Bell.” Mr. D. Williamson,
better known to his audience as “ David,” and
whose forte is evidently in the serio-comic line,
sang the oft-sung misfortunes of the credulous
husband whose domestic happiness was ruined
by “That Daring Young Man of the Flying
Trapeze.” In a loudly-demanded mwr-song,
“My Isabella,” he fairly thought down “ the
house.” The programme was supplemented
by songs from Messrs. Easton and Taylor
(junior officers), and from Mr. Hastie. Mr.
Lindsay having given a very amusing recitation,
the Doctor proposed a vote of thanks to the
chairman, who briefly responded to the com-
pliment. In acknowledgment of three hearty
cheers, the Captain addressed a few remarks,
especially to the crew, urging them not to be
backward in furnishing entertainments during
the voyage, and assuring them that any efforts
in this direction would meet with his coun-
tenance and liberal support. “Auld Lang
Syne” and “God save the Queen” brought a
very enjoyable reunion to a close.
Man Overboard. —On Tuesday morning
last, November 12., at about seven bells, con-
siderable excitement was caused on deck by the
cry of “man overboard”—a report which
proved only too true. It appeared that John
Wicklund, an A. 8., in the starboard watch,
was engaged with another man in making re-
pairs to the fore-tack. The ship was pitching
heavily at the time, and Wicklund’s companion
was slung in a bowline. Wicklund’s position,
however, did not seem to warrant this precau-
tion, which, when the ship gave an ugly lurch,
for which he was wholly unprepared, proved
only too necessary. The poor man was washed
from the position he thought so safe, and on
falling into the wave was struck on the back by
the vessel as she dipped. This injured Wick-
lund so materially, that he found it difficult to
keep afloat. He contrived, however, to keep
tolerably close to the vessel’s side, and suc-
ceeded in catching a rope which was promptly
thrown to him from the break of the poop.
Since the mishap, Wicklund has been on the
sick-list, but we are happy to say there is no
fear of any serious result.
Severe Thunderstorm. —The foul weather
which befel the ship very early this week
reache'd its climax on Tuesday evening, in a
thunderstorm of unusual severity. The thun-
der-clouds were unpleasantly close to the ship,
and the brilliancy of the electric fluid, fol-
lowed, as it was, so sharply by terrific thunder,
caused great alarm among a considerable sec-
tion of the passengers, and startled many of
those to whom the more majestic of nature’s
moods are not strange. The thunder and
lightning were followed by the dirtiest squall of
the passage, for which, fortunately, the ship
was prepared.
A Visitor. —On Wednesday evening last,
shortly after dinner, a stranger was suddenly
descried on the port-main-rigging, and the gene-
ral impression being that the visitor was in


search of a night’s shelter, steps were taken to
invite our newly-discovered refugee to partake
of our hospitality below. On the advance,
however, of our ambassador, Mr. Battersby,
our new acquaintance refused to hold any
communication, but being afterwards convinced
of our amicable intentions, was induced to pay
a visit to the deck. The starling is now living
on the best of terms with the inmates of Mrs.
Stacpoole’s aviary.
Divine Service. — To-morrow (Sunday, Nov.
17), at 10.30 am. and 8 p.m. Preacher,
in the morning, Rev. C. E Drought. Hymns,
morning, 299 —309; evening, 362 —10.
vJTomsponfcmre.
[ The Editors do not hold themselves responsible for the
opinions expressed in the correspondence columns. ]
A TWEEN-DECK GRIEVANCE.
To the Editors of the Shannon Gazette.
Gentlemen, —We, the passengers ’tween
decks, have a grievance we wish to ventilate,
and as I know how limited your valuable
space is, I will endeavour to tell you our
trouble in as few words as possible. Of course,
we are all aware that the ship is divided into
different classes, and one, as represented by
the cuddy, is inaccessible to us at all times,
with the solitary exception of an hour and a
half on Sundays, when church service is being
held. This is the bone of contention. Why,
we ask, should our privacy be completely done
away with ? At all times during the day and
night (our meal-times being seemingly the
favourite visiting hours) are we disturbed by
the entrances and exits of our more favoured
brethren. This proves excessively annoying
to us all, particularly, too, as we have to listen
to such remarks as “ Beastly close, by Jove ! ”
“Not fit for a pig to live in! ” and such like
phrases. Hinc illce lachrymce. lam sure this
hint will have the effect desired, and that the
good taste always so conspicuous in the powers
that be, will induce them to view this mat-
ter in its proper light, and, as much as possible,
caused the unwished-for visits to cease. Should
it be possible that our respective positions be
changed for a day or two, then, indeed, would
this, our grievance, be fully appreciated.—l
am, gentlemen, yours &c., &c.,
Intermediate.
SHANNON ECHOES.
They say that the Shannon is the smartest
craft that ever went afloat.
They say that the gentleman’s pipe that is
said to have been struck by lightning, during
the thunderstorm on Wednesday evening,
should be sent up to the studding-sail boom
for a lightning conductor.
They say that the gentleman in one of the
main-deck cabins, who persistently leaves his
door ajar, is very, very deaf.
They say that one of the bath-room doors
is out of order.
They say that the cocks on the poop are
given to crowing at very unseasonable hours.
They say that the man who takes a consti-
tutional on the poop at 5 a.m. should wear
slippers.
They say that the people who have drawn
the 29th in the Line Sweep stand the best
chance, but that a second draw should tie


Song
- “The Judge’s Song” -
- Mr. Nathan.
Song -
“ Bay of Biscay ”
Mr. Hummel.
Recitation -
- “The Dying Chief” -
Rev. C. E. Drought.
Song -
“ The Blue Alsatian Mountains ’’
Mrs. Clegg.
Song
“ Pat O’Hare ”
Mr. Scott.
Song -
“ Simon the Cellarer ”
Rev. F. King.
Song
“ Hearts of Oak ” -
Mr. Hastie.
Song -
- “ Nancy Lee ”
Mr. Nathan.
Song (by desire)
“Dolly”
“David.”
Reading
“ Misadventures at Margate ”
Mr. Friend.
Song
“ Little Brown Jug ”
Mr. Easton.
Song -
“Thy Voice is Near”
Mrs. Clegg.
Song
“ Dame Margery ”
- Rev. F King.
Recitation
“ Battle of Alma ”
Mr. Hastie.
Song
“ The Obadiahs ”
« Alfred.”
Song -
“ The Tailor and the Crow”
( “ David.”
Song
“ Auld Lang Syne ”
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.
Mr. Selby.
made in the event of the ship crossing the
line after that date.
They say that the landrail and owl, who
departed this life at the latter end of last
week, are deeply lamented.
They say that our dear and respected friend
“Tommy” brought his condensing capabilities
into play at the Concert, on Wednesday even-
ing, and succeeded in effectively condensing
two songs into one.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
The following is the programme of an Entertainment to be given on the poop on Monday
evening next, at 8 o’clock :
7 he Chair will be taken
by the Rev. D. A. Court.
THIS (Saturday) EVENING, weather
permitting, a CONCERT will take
place on the Quarter-deck, at eight o’clock,
for which the following have volunteered their
services : Messrs. Taylor, Ekland, Arm-
strong, Bossard, Lever, Anderson, Walsh,
Harper, Reid, Barnard, Hastie, Blake,
Lindsay, and Williamson,


FOR SALE, a Dolby’s Patent Self-acting
WATER BOTTLE and LIFE-BUOY
combined, as suggested by J , the eminent
outfitter and confidential agent.
Testimonials.
“ Truly useful.”— Spectator.
“Will recommend itself.”— Globe.
“ No one should be without one.”— Times.
“ Exceedingly elegant.” —Court Journal.
“A most promising child of necessity.” —
Nature.
“ Beautifully chased.”— Vanity Fair.
“ Warranted to last a three-months’ voyage.”
— Economist.
No reasonable offer refused.
Apply “ Water Bottle,” office of Shannon
Gazette.
WANTED. —A few parties to take up
Shares in the “ Shannon Water Com-
pany” (Limited). Prospects good. For further
particulars, apply to A. C. L., No. 27 ’tween
Decks.
LOST. —A Gent’s Silk Umbrella. Finder
-v will be rewarded on returning it to the
undersigned; and if found in the possession
of any one after this date, the possessor will
be denounced before the rest of the passengers.
G. Lindsay, 13th Nov., 1878.
LOST. —A Lady’s Heart. If found, apply
to No. i Cabin, where a liberal reward
will be given, and a bottle of “ Fiz,” if
required.
LOST. —A “ Little Wee Dog.” Last seen
with a piece of blue ribbon round his
neck. Answers to the name of “ Don.”
Thought to have fallen overboard. Any one
diving for the same will be liberally rewarded
by the owner. A. Y. Z., office of this paper.
LOST. —Several Games of Chess. Apply
to the Mate, who is said to be fre-
quently endeavouring to gain a Ncu one.
LOST. —A “ Little Brown Jug.” ’Apply to
one of the “ young gentlemen” who is
always ailing.
FOUND on the poop, to the great delight
of the saloon passengers, three little
Ducks, answering to the names of Maude,
Fixie, and Daisy. [We understand that the
ducks advertised are already in possession of
the owners.—Ed. Shannon Gazette.]
WANTED.— Chess Players to send their
names as soon as possible to the
Editors, for a Chess Tournament.


No. 2.
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 23, 1878.
A formidable advertisement in another
column warns our readers that we are ap-
proaching those latitudes which, by fiction—
the origin of which is as mysterious as the
fiction itself is interesting, not to say amusing—
are said to rejoice in the sway of the august
ruler of the fluid elements. We say interesting
fiction, because our scanty knowledge of
heathen mythology had produced the impres-
sion that, whatever virtue might attach to the
rule of Poseidon, belonged exclusively to the
Mediterranean. We search in vain for a line
of Homeric poem gratifying the curiosity of
the pardonably curious as to why these
equatorial seas should have been honoured, in
this the nineteenth century, by such imposing
associations. Maybe our industrious friend
in the forecastle has ascertained, through the
medium of some reliable, though obscure and
unpretentious authority, that old Cronos came
hither expressly to relieve his carnivorous
nature of a potentate, to whom, in such a case,
these lustrous waters might well be possessed
of an irresistible charm. Maybe hereabouts
that momentous lottery was determined which
placed in the hands of Neptunus the reins of
the chariot of the wave. Perhaps the wonted
calm and the welcome presence of the mon-
sters of the deep were attributes of which the
marine deity might well take account in his
bitter strife with the god of the thunder-cloud.
Do not our recent experiences suggest that
many a fraternal battle may have waxed
furious in a domain so fearfully close to the
ill-favoured spot where Zeus never wearies of
venting his ire, where his mighty tegis ever
quivers, where the heavens almost unceasingly
echo his dread commands? Or, who shall
say that Jack, with a keen eye to the romantic
side of things, may not have discovered that,
in this homestead of the dolphin, the trident-
armed deity may have metamorphosed him-
self into a horse, and, having seduced the fair
Amphitrite from the cave of Nereids in
Htgaeum waters, pleaded his suit ’neath these
pellucid waves. But suffice it to say that it is
a duty on the part of visitors to this historical
region—than which, perhaps, few duties are
regarded by Jack as more sacred and inviol-
able —to make their most respectful obeisance
to its majestic monarch, and we have no doubt
that so solemn a responsibility would not have
reached posterity but for some special virtue.
For our own part, we should feel inclined to
respect the ceremonial in deference to Jack’s
veneration alone. In this opinion, however,
some of our readers may differ from us. But,
let the aversion to a personal introduction to
the myrmidons of Neptune be never so strong
and deep-rooted, we trust that Jack, on his
part, will not be backward in the practice of
that virtue which suffereth long and is kind.
PASSING EVENTS.
Concerts. —In our last issue, a concert by
the crew was advertised for Saturday night, at
8 o’clock. At the hour appointed, our gallant
captain took the chair, when it was discovered


that the concert engagement was for Tuesday
evening, and that some of the intending
vocalists had “ turned in.” Of course, this
was very awkward for the chairman. We do
not, however, wish to throw blame on any
one, as it has not yet been decided whether
Mr. Wright was wrong , or Mr. Hastie was too
slow. At the same time, we trust that more
care will be taken in future in the matter of
concert arrangements. We are proud of our
crew, and cannot do without them in these
matters. Volunteers coming promptly for-
ward cleared up the dilemma, and an excel-
lent impromptu concert was organized. Mr.
Taylor, as “The Quack,” elicited loud ap-
plause, and gave “ Blow ye Winds ” for an
encore. The duet following was a marked
success. Mr. Lindsay, as “Jamie,” and Mr.
Williamson (David), as “ Jeanie,” rendered
the well-known Scotch ballad of “ Hunting
Tower,” with great effect, the tender pleading
of the former being only equalled by the
modest blushes of the latter. This was, of
course, encored; but the gentleman alone ap-
peared a second and tastefully sang
“ Jock of Hazeldean,” the lady having retired
to unsex herself, in readiness for another ap-
pearance further on. “Silver Bells” was
given by Mr. Anderson, in a sweet tenor
voice. Mr. Lever obliged with “ Flannigan’s
Ball,” which was so much applauded, that he
once more availed himself of the opportunity
to tell his audience “What he said to Sally,
and what Sally said to him.” Mr. Bossard
gave “Sour Kraut,” very comically, and, in
response to an encore , furnished “Sevens
Out.” Two volunteers of the other sex here
came forward, viz., the Misses Blake, who
kindly sang the “Angel’s Whisper,” and were
vociferouslyrecalled,when they gave that plain-
tive melody “The Gipsy’s Warning.” Mr. King
having rendered “When we were Boys Toge-
ther,” the chairman was called on, and gave
the touching wail of “ The Lost Sheep on the
Rugged Mountain.” Mr. Easton then enter-
tained the audience by recounting sundry dis-
eases with which he had been afflicted; but,
judging from his healthy countenance, the
numerous curatives he has applied have fairly
eradicated all seeds of disorder. Mr. Scott
wound up the programme with “ Rule,
Britannia;” and, after three cheers and a vote
to the chairman (supplemented by three cheers
for Mrs. Stacpoole and one for “Schneider”),
an enjoyable evening was loyally closed with
“ God Save the Queen ! ”
On Monday evening, the 18th instant, the
cuddy passengers gave their first concert.
The Rev. D. A. Court was in the chair. Mr.
Nathan appeared first as “ The Judge,” but
had misjudged his memory, and,' forgetting
the words of his ballad, he retired ; appearing,
however, later on, and singing that popular
sea-song, “Nancy Lee,” very effectively.
Mr. Hummel’s “ Bay of Biscay” was well
rendered ; but the audience could not induce
him to give them a second song. The Rev.
C. E. Drought showed fine elocutionary power
in his recitation, “ The Dying Chief,” The
lady who had kindly volunteered to sing the
next song on the programme—Mrs. Clegg—
was unable to fulfil her engagement on
account of indisposition. We live in the
hope, however, of being favoured at some
future entertainment. Mr. Scott’s “ Pat
O’Hara” was very much appreciated. The


Rev. F. King sang “Simon the Cellarer” in
his usual and characteristic good taste,
“ bringing down the poop.” He was equally
successful in that rare old song, “ Philip, the
Falconer,” and afterwards in “ Uame
Margery.” Mr. Hastie was encored for
“ Hearts of Oak,” and gave particulars of
the misfortunes of “ An Unfortunate Family.”
He also recited “ The Battle of Alma.”
“ David” came to the fore with “ Dolly” and
“ The Tailor and the Crow,” meeting with his
usual success. Mr. Friend having read the
well-known story of the “ Little Vulgar Boy,”
of Margate fame; our popular “ young
gentleman,” Mr. Easton, won very hearty
rounds of applause for “ Little Brown Jug”
and “John Peel.” “ Alfred” then endeavoured
to enlist the sympathies of his audience with
the escapades of the “Obadiahs;” and the
programme, having been prolonged by wel-
come additions on the part of Messrs.
Lindsay, Walton, and Barnard, the entertain-
ment was on the point of closing, when a
strange spectacle presented itself. A man of
herculean proportions, who was evidently
intimate with the “little brown jug,” intro-
duced himself and hiccupped “ My Darling
Old Stick,” to the immense satisfaction of his
audience. The captain afterwards came
forward and said that he had thrown “ that
drunken old chap” overboard, drinking being
only allowed at stated hours of the day, and
regularity being his motto in everything. Mr.
Selby then led off “ Auld Lang Syne;” and
in subsequently proposing a vote of thanks to
the chairman, he said he was sure that he
gave expression to the unanimous feeling of
the passengers when he said that they con-
sidered themselves fortunate in having in
their midst three clergymen who were so
willing to participate in their “ innocent
amusements.” He also expressed the sincere
wish of the passengers to go hand-in-hand
with the crew in any amusement which might
be organized with a view to relieving the
monotony of the voyage. The proceedings
were brought to a close with “ God Save the
Queen.”
A Panic on Board.— An alarming incident
occurred on Sunday evening, which caused an
interruption to divine service, which was being
held on the quarter-deck. The first hymn had
just been sung, when the long screeching whistle
of a steamer was heard on the port side. In
an instant a general stampede took place. The
terrible fate of the Princess Alice and her pas-
sengers is of such recent occurrence that an
impression seemed to prevail that a similar
catastrophe might befall the Shannon. Two
ladies fainted, upon whom, however, the effect
of a bountiful supply of eau de Cologne was
not lost. Such wa§ the eager desire of the
terrified worshippers to reach the poop, that
chairs and books were quickly scattered in dire
confusion on the deck. And, indeed, the fears
excited were far from groundless., A large
steamer, which had been visible at sundown,
had approached the vessel to the distance of
some 300 yards. The apparent danger of the
situation was enhanced from the fact that the
rate of the steamer exceeded that of the
Shannon , which was running at ten knots. The
ship was for a short while put off its course,
the steamer meanwhile passing to starboard.
The excitement caused by this incident having
subsided, reflection suggested a humanitarian


cause for the unusual conduct of the steamer.
The large display of lights necessitated by
service being held on deck, combined with the
smoky emissions of the condensing engine,
probably gave so strange an appearance to the
ship that those in command of the steamer
felt themselves justified in approaching so
close that they might determine the cause.
A Salutation. —On Wednesday morning,
towards six bells, the Shannon being then about
lat. 6°, a small sail was descried on the port
bow, and for some time curiosity was excited
as to its rig and destination, the chances being
that the Shannon would pass her newly-found
acquaintance within easy distance. On a
nearer approach she was found to be a small
schooner, the Louisa , of Boston, on a whaling
expedition. Much to the delight of the
passengers, the schooner’s course permitted
the Shannon to pass within hail of her. In a
brief dialogue with one of her crew, it was
elicited that she had, so far, been unfortunate,
having that morning, for the first time since
leaving port, fallen in with whales. The
carcase of one of these mighty animals was
towing alongside the schooner, and one of
her boats was bringing in a second.
Chess Tournament. — A chess tournament
was commenced on Monday, which lasted
through the week. Twelve players responded
to the advertisement in our last week’s edition.
Notwithstanding this goodly array of com-
batants, there was a most decided opinion
that the closing struggle would be between
Herr Neu and Mr. Burnside, both of whom
had given evidence of being far above the
average as exponents of the noble game. The
tournament was played on the following
terms :—That the winner of two games out of
three should remain in for the second round ;
that in the case of three drawn games, or of
one game each and a draw, between two
players, both should remain in; that in the
case of three players being left, they should
combine each against each. The winner of
the greatest number of games being acknow-
ledged winner of the tournament. Owing to
the propitious state of the weather, the games
were for the most part played on deck. The
twelve names were shaken up in a jug, from
which our little friend, Maude Barnard, drew
them two and two in the order indicated below.
In the match between Mr. Neu and Mr.
Barnard, the former won with comparative
ease. This need not discourage Mr. Barnard,
for a man of average chess powers who may
hold his own with his equals must in general
succumb to the superior ability of a more
accomplished rival. Mr. Friend’s trial with
Mr. Bennett was a long one, the latter
eventually giving way to his more practised
adversary. Mr. Denton managed to wrest
the second game from Mr. Edleston, who,
however, won the third game of the rub,
which proved a very close one. Mr. King
was most unfortunate. In his first game with
Mr. Drought he lost his queen early in the
game, and in the second was unable to make
up for the loss of the services of his bishop,
who had wandered a little too far from his
diocese. Mr. Burnside, as was anticipated,
easily defeated Mr. Thompson. The first
round was brought to a close with the match
between Mr, Court and Mr. Cooke, in which
a drawn game necessitated all three being
played, Mr. Court proving the conqueror.


The following is a tabulated form of the
games, the x indicating a draw :
f Mr. Neu 1, 1.
| Mr. Barnard, o, o.
j Mr. Friend, 1, 1.
( Mr. Bennet, o, o.
( Mr. Edleston, 1,0, 1.
| Mr. Denton, o, 1, o.
f Rev. C. E. Drought, 1,1.
\ Rev. F. King, o, o.
( Mr. Burnside, 1,1.
( Mr. Thompson, o, o.
| Rev. D. A. Court, x, 1, 1.
) Mr. Cooke, x, o, o.
In the second round, Mr. Burnside was
again easily successful, defeating Mr. Court
by two games to none. Herr Neu beat Mr.
Friend in a few minutes in the first game.
The latter might have returned the compli-
ment in the second, but unfortunately made
an oversight. The match between the other
two players was the closest of the round. Mr.
Drought, who was victorious in the first game,
was defeated in the second. After a very
hard fight, a Pouf ranee, the one remaining
representative of the Church managed to keep
in to the final struggle. The tournament
being unfinished at the time of our going to
press, the remaining particulars will be pub-
lished in our next issue.
Divine Service. —Divine service will be
held to-morrow (Sunday), at 10.30 a.m. and
8 p.m. Preacher: Rev. C. E. Drought.
Hymns, morning, 2nd, 146th; evening, 307th,
12 th.
OUR LOG.
(by a landlubber.)
Shannon , Nov. 22, 1878.
Mv dear Editors, —My bosom friend Eaves
suggested that I should, this week, write a
mild sermon, basing my remarks upon the
text, “U ho mine propose , Dieu dispose .” I did
not at first catch his meaning; but when he
afterwards told me that I might consult such
honoured prophets as Norrie and Ridley fruit-
lessly for experiences in the North Atlantic,
like unto those which had, of late, been so
indelibly impressed on my memory; and when,
alas ! he twitted me with my graceful allusion
to Boreas, in the first issue of your invaluable
Gazette —the Boreas specially sent to furnish a
panacea for all our misfortunes—then, and not
till then, did the application of his text dawn
upon me. I relieved myself of the condensed
essence of a month’s suppressed sighs as I
thought of the fairy pictures pertaining to our
journey through these northern tropics—quite
Canaan-like in their fascination—which Eaves’s
eloquent tongue had conjured up in my mind.
It was in that foretaste of “ doldrum” weather
which assisted us to digest our breakfast on
Tuesday morning that this conversation oc-
curred, I standing the while almost literally
clad in a mackintosh, and companion spirits
stalking around me fearfully and wonderfully
arrayed after the same ingenious model (with
the addition of very scanty appendages in the
shape of pyjamas, the civilizing effects of
which, however—presuming that they may
have been intended for the edification of Jack
—were, I think I may safely say, lost). True,
there have been one or two afternoons when
the waters have been- —


“Glassing softest skies,
As cloudless, save with rare and roseate shadows, ”
as I, my dear editors, “ would have thy fate.”
Eaves tells me that there is a tempting prece-
dent on board this ship, which is rapidly
developing into a habit, dictating preparations
on a very grand scale—immediately after
tiffin—for book-reading ; and, hereupon, my
informant bids me note a characteristic pe-
culiar to the Anglo-Saxon—which is, that he
invariably takes his after-luncheon nap apolo-
getically, leaving a bystander to infer that he
has fruitlessly battled against the seductive
wiles of “Nature’s sweet restorer,” the weapon
being a book, with which he would have you
believe he has made the most violent of efforts
to foil his adversary. Eaves says he never
wishes a sweeter lullaby than the delightfully
soothing cadence of the condensing engine,
varied only by occasional striking obligatos
from the occupants of certain pens lashed
unpleasantly close to his head. Presently,
some unlucky person is surprised by a small
shoal of flying fish, routed by a benito; and
he, in his turn, startles the rheumatic hinges of
his chair; but, catching a glimpse of the calm
indifference so legibly written on the faces of
his neighbours, he is at once subdued, and the.
“noonday quiet” continues to exercise its
mystic spell. I don’t know why, but, some-
how, I have always associated the moon with
Eaves’s delusive illustrations of the tropics.
“ But are you not fully compensated,” he
remarks, “ while the tropical waves shimmer
with the lustre of Jupiter; while they reflect
the limpid rays of Syrius and Canopus,
and the glories of Orion ? ” “ And how,” he
adds, presently, “ can the scene be flat, stale,
and unprofitable, when it is enlivened by the
eleva , (or rather, sparkling), conversation
maintained by that mysterious institution which
delights in making itself sung on the gratings
abaft the wheel, at an hour when the ostensibly
sober-minded and staid of our community are
revelling in a vapour-bath below. This insti-
tution of which I speak possesses masonic
emblems of its own, in the which I am so far
uninitiated, or I should be very happy, my dear
Editors, to enlighten your patrons as to its aims
and objects. Moreover, I am by no means
averse, during the “silent hour,” to the society
of Jack on the “ fo’c’s’le’’-head, to hearing
his honest criticism upon men and things,
gazing, the while, at the phosphorescent waters
parting from under the old ship’s bows, “ ever
changing into something rich and strange.”
Thus far, I find redeeming traits in this coun-
terfeit presentment of Eaves’s ; and having gone
thus far, an old maxim of Rochefoucauld’s
comes into my mind, and I find myself saying,
“ Philosophy triumphs easily over past and
future evils,” and adding very emphatically the
disjunctive clause, “ but present evils triumph
over philosophy.”
I like these Sunday services of ours on the
quarter-deck, with naught, save a few loosely-
spread canvas curtains, suggestive of the
“ temple made with hands,” —and even these
conveying the idea of absolute necessity in
proximity to the fierce white light which beats
upon the deck through the small interstices of
canvas, ’neath which the fresh air of heaven
soothingly finds its way. 1 like, for the nonce —
without committing myself to Puritanical
sentiments —the absence of columned aisle, of
exquisitely-adorned chancel, old ivy-clad


walls, and mullioned windows, glowing in
their rich tracery of stained glass, the majestic
music of the organ blending with the voices
of a surpliced choir. How different—how
impressively different—from these grand in-
centives to worship is the plain and, —to we
ocean-tossed voyagers —homely cincture of
sky and water! our simple exhortation from
the unpretentious Union Jack-clad capstan,
our imperfectly-sung chants. While I sat with
Eaves in a corner of the quarter-deck last
Sunday morning, watching our neighbours
ensconcing themselves in their roughly-fur-
nished pews, and picking their way with
admirable caution, lest they might disturb the
Sunday-coil of the ropes, my meditative com-
panion, who has a keen eye for contrasts,
suddenly upset my sedate demeanour by
reminding me how, erstwhile, we had stood
together on that quarter-deck, strewn with a
confusion of loosened tackle, amid the deafen-
ing din of the tempest, and by asking me, in
the hush preliminary to the first words of the
service, whether I could readily imagine those
silently-drawing sails, those quiescent, neatly-
coiled ropes, that bunting-girt capstan, that
still more imposing figure, in the cool amplitude
of tropical raiment, by the side of the preacher,
to be each and all the same confronting us a
few evenings before in so different a garb.
For a time, I think these board-ship Sundays
constitute the very cream of days of rest.
On shore, a man presents himself at
his doorway on Sunday morning, and
he is immediately made aware of the
day of the week, so unmistakably is it
stamped upon the appearance of things. I
laughed at Eaves, a few weeks ago, when he
said—“ Smith, old fellow, there’s no mistaking
Sunday morning on board ship—and espe-
cially on board the Shannon .” But I have
already had occasion to tell Eaves that he was
perfectly right, that I laughed like a jackass,
&c., &c. Eaves never swears; but he assures
me that he can sniff the air of Sunday before
he leaves his bunk. I am not yet sufficiently
well practised, but I “ live in hopes.” Maybe
the fact is communicated in the fantastic coil
of rope, the imposing parade of white ducks
and bright badges; in a certain indefinable air
of precision about everything, which, had it
utterance, would surely say—“ Do likewise.”
We candidly confess that there was once—and
only once—a time when we left our bunk
never doubting ever so little but that it was
Saturday morning; that we attired ourselves
with the laxity which English custom dictates
during the larger half of the week; that, upon
presenting ourselves upon the poop, we have
been—very gradually, it is true, but none the
less effectively —impressed with the circum-
stance that, in some unaccountable way, a
round peg had got into a square hole; that, in
short, things were not quite as they ought to
be, and that it behoved us to retire to our
residence below without standing ever so
little upon the order of our going. We have,
in our mind’s eye, a companion incident, which
very materially affected some arrangements \ve
had inadvertently made for Monday morning;
but the subject is fraught with such painful
reflections, that we forbear mentioning it.
If, unlike Eaves and myself, you remain in
your cot until the tiffin hour, under plea of a
bilious attack, or from some other cause of
paramount import ance; and if, having so


disposed of your morning, you reach the poop
immediately after service, rather confused as
to the exact position of affairs, cast your eye
over the break of the poop. Is not the
tobacco-scented atmosphere of itself enough
to suggest something out of the common?
Could twenty, thirty, forty, any reasonable
number of people, concoct such a cloud with-
out the very material assistance of “ our
young gentlemen ? ” lolling on the deck, as
only “our young gentlemen” know how to
loll; doing the thing thoroughly, as, when
occasion demands, they do their work—with
the single exception of that particular “ young
gentleman ” who is sitting astride one of those
formidable cannons of ours, doing his best to
encourage that mood in which people indulge
in the luxury popularly denominated “ forty
winks.” Side by side with this picture, you
have in your recollection a very warm after-
noon, when the brawny arms, which are now
lying a-kimbo on the deck, were very ener-
getically brought to bear on the mizen-rigging,
and when the owner of the said arms encased
his lower extremities in a covering scarcely so
presentable as the snow-white ducks of to-day,
and carried a great deal of superfluous pitch
about with him. We once had occasion to
revolve these considerations in our own mind,
and we were forced to the conclusion that
Sunday—and Sunday alone —would account
for these otherwise unaccountable phenomena.
I was “ taking it out ” in my bunk on
Sunday evening at a time when, as Eaves
tells me, I should, have been elsewhere, when
methought I heard my respected friend “ En-
gines” supplementing the harmonium accom-
paniment to divine service with a condensed
obligato of his own composition. An ominous
pause, and then a Babel of most unusual
sounds, drowned at short intervals by a sten-
torian “ Port,” “ Starboard,” “ Steady,” and so
forth. “ But why,” above all things, I medi-
tated, “ does that man in the cabin opposite
play such a violent game of football with that
invaluable water-bottle of J ’s?” and, thus
meditating, I tied my pyjamas about my neck,
and endeavoured to thrust my legs into the
sleeves of my night-shirt. Of course, I under-
stood all of these signs of the times when I
afterwards learnt that a steamer had politely
asked permission to cross our bows, and that
Eaves had been endeavouring to console the
ladies, in whose sweet smiles, my dear Editors,
I would fain be basking. Be happy, and try
to forget that irreclaimable outcast who comes
below at night-hours, after sensible people
have been engaged in endeavours to slumber,
and makes the place “hideous” with his not
over-tuneful whistle.
I am, and hope ever to remain, yours, in the
bonds of deep affection,
Landlubber.
MEDICAL OFFICER’S REPORT.
General State of Health —Good. Ship free
from any infectious or epidemic disease.
(Signed) Wm. Hopkins, M.D.,
Medical Officer.


SHERE ALT.
Tune—“ Sally in our Alley.”
Of all our enemies alive,
There’s none like old Shere Ali,
Who holds a place (a sort of dive)
Beyond the Cabul Valley.
Of all the nations that we know
There’s no one like the “ Rooshan ; ”
The continent they overflow,
They are so very pushifig.
And then they go to other lands,
As onward still they sally;
They wish that they could but shake hands
With our old friend Shere Ali.
But Britons surely cannot stand
And see this shilly-shally,
Because we own a mighty land
On t’other side of Valley.
We fear the Russ will India take,
So do not dilly-dally,
But send an embassy to shake
The nerves of old Shere Ali.
Yet though he can beguile the Turk,
And call him our dear ally,
Old Beaconsfield may smile and smirk,
But so does old Shere Ali.
We’ve often had to rue the day
We’ve enter’d in that Valley ;
Our embassy returns to say
“ We cannot gull Shere Ali.”
Ere we reach Melbourne, let us pray
Our Indian troops will rally,
And that the British Lion may
Have trampled on Shere Ali
W. R. S.
November 17, 1878.
ODE TO THE OCEAN.
Oh, sea —oh, dark blue, open, raging sea—
Now thou art quiet, now thy billows roar !
Terror and beauty are combined in thee:
Proudly disporting round old England’s
shore,
Tempestous sea, where’er thy course may lay,
Thy wave in solitary grandeur flows;
Dashing majestically its silver spray,
Resistless in its strength, it onward goes.
Thy face ofttimes is bright and clear,
Sparkling like drops of morning dew
’Neath night’s grim canopy so drear;
Changing, yes, changing oft its lovely hue.
But, restless ocean, soon thy waters foam,
Thy pent-up fury knows no mortal sway;
Dark is thy frown, and sorrowful thy moan,
Enchantress ! in thine ever-varying lay !
Oh, ocean, lovely ocean, still I love thee well
With all thy terrors, I thy praises sing;
Mighty expanse, on thee I love to dwell,
Whence England’s wealth and power and
glory spring,
Nov. 18, 1878.
R. S.
Original


THOUGHTS SUGGESTED BY A RICE
PUDDING.
I saw it once —so freshly fair —
Fresh from a plain and simple moulding,
Erect it stood in steaming air,
New features at each glance unfolding.
Its form it haunts my memory yet,
Majestic as cathedral’s spire,
As if by builder’s plumb-line set —
A bishop could not but admire.
And what can match that snow-white dress,
Tipped by a gloss so soft and tender !
E’en rosebud might that hue caress,
And yet retain its native splendour.
I saw it twice, but fork and knife
That form erect had sadly shattered —
Prey to keen hunger’s ceaseless strife,
Was e’er cathedral spire so shattered ?
The liquor that around its base
Erstwhile embraced it with affection,
And sought to add new grace to grace,
Retreated from the doomed erection.
E’en while I looked, with saddened eye,
All traces of its grandeur vanished;
The roseate tints which met the sky
Had lost their charm, and almost vanished.
I saw it thrice, as in decay
Its ruins in the dish were lying;
In spite of all that I could say,
My neighbours laughed, while I sat sighing.
Methought, if thus Fate’s stern decree
Should doom yon ancient fane to fall,
A bishop might e’en weep with me,
And strive past glories to recall.
A pensiveness which is not grief,
A stillness as of sunset streaming,
O’ercomes me, and in this relief,
I strive to think I have been dreaming.
November 20, 1878.
SHANNON ECHOES.
They say that the visits of the first-class
passengers to the ’tween decks are now dis-
continued, thanks to “ Intermediate’s ” letter.
They say that none of the lost articles
advertised in last week’s Gazette have been
found.
They say that several courting expeditions
have been organized.
They say that our naturalist can vouch for
the Clegg being a butterfly, as he distinctly
saw it coming from its “ grub.”
They say that the passengers who sit at the
projecting portion of the table opposite the
Captain grumble because they have no cruet
stand.
The 1 say that the real reason why Philip,
the Falconer, rose early was to Philipine some-
body or Fill-a-bath.
They say in some quarters Eurydice should
be pronounced Eurydice.
They say that there is a Public Morality
Class on board, but a number of people are
unable to discover where and when it holds
its meetings.


They say that David’s adversary on the fore-
castle the other night was far from being a
Goliath, nor did he strike so much at his
adversary’s forehead as at his eyes.
AFFAIRS NAUTICAL.
Shannon , Nov. 23.
My dear Editors, — In my correspondence
with you this week, I can only say that the
weather we have had is about as bad as it
could possibly have been in these latitudes. I
refrain from an explanation of details, because,
in the first place, I think your readers would
find them frightfully tedious ; and, secondly,
because I have feelings on the subject which
might betray me into the use of language to
which your subscribers are, most probably,
unaccustomed. The following table will tell a
tale of its own :
Latitude.
Date.
November 17
18
14.02 N,
10.30
I am
gltiiKrttsrmnits.
Editorial Notices. —The Editors regret that
they are again compelled to inform their
contributors that they can insert no
T .. . Dis- Baro- Ther '
e. Longitude. . . mo-
-6 tance. meter.
meter.
N. 26.22 W. 186 30.03 82
24.55 229 29.98 83^
23.34 210 29.98 83X
24.11 85 29.95 86
24.54 50 29.96 80
24.15 41 29.96 82
24-33 37 29.94 84
1, my dear Editors,
Yours despondingly,
Nautilus.
matter which is offensively personal in
the columns of this paper.
The original copy of all contributions
will be destroyed a week after their inser-
tion in the Gazette.
It is requested that readers of the
Gazette in the Saloon will replace it on
the cuddy table ; and that readers among
the second and third class passengers,
and in the Forecastle, will return it to the
person in those places who is responsible
for its safe keeping. The custodians in
the ’Tween Decks are Messrs. Lindsay
and Walton ; and in the Forecastle, the
Boatswain.
Shannon, Nov. 22, 1878.
N. &
GENTLEMEN, —Notice is hereby given,
that the parties to whom these lines are
addressed do hold themselves in readiness, on
the day of crossing the Equator, to receive
His Gracious Majesty KING NEPTUNE
and SUITE, and to answer all the questions
put to them in a straightforward and respect-
ful manner; then to undergo the ancient
and honourable rite of Shaving and Bathing
by His Majesty’s Barber in Ordinary, after
which ceremony the parties will be enrolled
Members of King Neptune’s Family. Those
parties who desire to avoid going through the
ceremony may do so by paying a fine (?). To
avoid all unpleasantness, it is hoped that
every one will come forward and perform his
part with as good grace as possible. Those
that intend paying the fine (?) will please


acquaint the Secretary of the same as soon as
possible, so that the necessary documents can
be made out for handing over to King Nep-
tune on his arrival on board the ship
Shannon.
Ladies. —Out of delicacy and respect to
the ladies (for King Neptune is a thorough
ladies’ man!), they are exempt from going
through the general routine ; but, at the same
time, it is hoped they will contribute some-
thing (?) towards filling King Neptune’s
cellars and larders.
P.S.—Those passing through the ceremony
will please put on the oldest clothes they
have.
N.B. —His Majesty King Neptune will
leave the ship precisely at 8 p.m., in a chariot
of fire.
FOR SALE, a Patent Self-acting
BACHELOR’S LAMP, strongly
recommended by J , the well known out-
fitter. Warranted to hold half-a-pint of liquid,
which may easily be heated in one hour and
three-quarters. It is also fitted with a pan,
which is capable of being used for frying
cheese or grilling half the leg of a fowl.
Testimonials.
“ Simplicity and usefulness combined.”—
Weekly Times.
“ Sure to be patronized.”— Morning Post.
“ Within everybody’s reach.”— Daily Tele-
graph.
“An undoubted success.” — United Service
Gazette.
“ Admirably adapted for the country gentle-
man.” — Field.
Apply, X.Y.Z., office of the Shannon Gazette.
WANTED. —To Correspond with a
Young Lady, with a view to Matri-
money. Must be good-looking. Age not to
exceed 63.
Address—A.R.P., care of Medical Officer,
Shannon.
WANTED. —One Dozen Tooth-picks,
to distribute amongst third-class
passengers, the object being to facilitate the
removal of salt meat.
Address—Office of this paper.
THE TOILET.
IBETTISON, Practical Hairdresser, 27
• ’Tween Decks, begs to intimate that he
has OPENED those large and commodious
premises, and, by strict attention to business,
hopes to merit a liberal share of patronage.
N.B. —J. B. waits upon, and contracts for,
schools and private families. A private com-
partment, with lavatory, for ladies only.
FOR SALE. —Eighteen Tins of Salmon,
at gd. per tin. Apply, G. LINDSAY,
27 ’Tween Decks.
CONCERT.
a CONCERT will be given, weather per-
mitting, by the CREW, this (Saturday)
Evening, November 23, of which the following
is the programme :
Song—Mr. Cook, “ The Spotted Cow.”
Song—Mr. Easton, “ The Lion of Old Eng-
land.”


Song —Mr. Anderson, “The Wild Rover.”
Song —Mr. Lever, “ The Skipper and his
Song— Mr. Walsh, “Up with the Standard of
England.”
Song —Mr, Sampson, “ Isle of Beauty.”
Song —Mr. Ackland, “ Swedish Student’s
Boy.”
Song —Mr. Trainer, “ Adam was Father of
All.”
Song.”
Song —Mr. Bossard—“ The Mill Stream.”
Song —Mr. Trainer, “The Rose of Tralee.”
Song —Mr. Taylor, “ Rolling Home.”
Dance —Mr. Hardbread, “Sailor’s Hornpipe.”
Song —Mr. Davidson, “ Nine Cheers lor the
God Save the Queen !
Girl that we Love.”
Song—Mr. Armstrong.
Captain Stacpoole in the Chair.
SATURDAY,
NOVEMBER
3°, 1878.
No. 3.
We have just come to the close of a not
uneventful week. During the past few days
two nautical customs—though ancient, still, to
most of us, novel - have taken place. These
are known by the names of the “ death of the
horse ” and “ the visit of Neptune.” The
commemorations of these customs would
probably take place nearly at the same time,
as the Equator is something about a month’s
fair sail from London. Perhaps there is a
further link to connect these events besides
proximity of time, and that the horse which is
cast into the sea may be regarded as a sacrifice
to Neptune, who was recognized by the
ancient Greeks as the patron deity of the
equine tribe.
We are not amongst those who would have
these old established customs discontinued;
though we rejoice that civilization in its
advance has tempered them, and that a
more lenient method of grafting novices into
Father Neptune’s family has been introduced,
to the exclusion of the somewhat rough usage
once in vogue. Flour and water are undoubt-
edly good substitutes as shaving paste for
grease and tar, and it is pleasant —for the in-
experienced, at all events —to know that they
need not look forward to crossing the line
with terrible forebodings. Jack Tar of to-day,
though a rough fellow, is often very gentle,
and he deals gently with the weak, and so it
is that to all on board Neptune’s visit is the
herald of a pleasant day.
Amongst other of the small benefits which
may accrue from the occurrence of such events
is, that some of us are induced to rub up our
education concerning the myths of long ago,
which had been neglected most probably since
we left school. We had almost forgotten that
the deity of the sea was known as Neptune
to the Romans, and Poseidon to the Greeks ;
that he married Amphitrite, who bore him
three sons, and that he was always quarrelling
with his brother Jupiter. We ask, perhaps,
how it is that the sea-god has strayed so far
from his palace in Euboea, especially as the


99
Neu
9
5
o
99
Edleston
6
3
o
99
Court ...
5
2
I
99
Friend...
4
2
o
Denton
3
I
o
99
Cooke ...
3
O
I
99
King ...
2
O
o
99
Bennet...
2
o
o
Mediterranean, in olden times, embraced the
extreme limits of his domain. Thus we dis-
cover a further relationship existing between
Neptune and England the pride of the
ocean. She, like Neptune, has gradually
extended her influence all over the mighty
main. The little island, away in the West,
has pushed her power from sea to sea, till the
sun never sets upon her flag. Neptune, like-
wise, is no longer content with the sovereignty
of the Mediterranean’s narrow confines. He
has driven his burnished chariot through
Calpe’s gate, though guarded on both sides by
the mighty pillars of Hercules, surmounted by
the flags of two nations ; he presides no longer
as petty tyrant over Euboea’s golden palace;
the girdle of earth must henceforth be the
only limit to his regal sway.
Further, we recall the fact that Neptune was
not only patron of horses, but also of all
athletic sports, and that races were held to his
honour in the Olympian stadium. Yet we
do not imagine that it was in recognition of
this fact that there was such a fine display of
muscular Christianity on the Shannon's quarter-
deck on Thursday last. We prefer to think
that the spirit of their ancestors has far from
died out in Englishmen, and that wherever
they may be, whether on sea or land, they
enter with zest the lists of friendly rivalry in
their national games, endorsing the sentiment
that mens sana may be in corpore sano. Nep-
tune’s visit was on a pleasant day ; he brought
with him no external nor internal squall, and
when he went away, Nox erat it ccdo fulgcbat
luna sereno. Astronomers said there was a
transit of the planet Jupiter across the moon
that evening. Unpoetical astronomers ! Surely
it was something else that the passengers of
the Shannon were regarding so earnestly on
Thursday evening, the 28th Nov., 1878. It
was Zeus, who for the nonce wished to be at
peace with brother Neptune, and was peeping
from behind fair Luna with a glow of fraternal
pride on his departure from the Shannon.
PASSING EVENTS.
Chess. Conclusion of the tournament.
This, the first tournament, was brought to a
conclusion on Monday evening, with the
victory of Mr. Burnside over Mr, Drought.
Contrary to expectation, Herr Neu was
defeated by the latter, by two games to one.
Taking them together, we may say that the
last six games were a series of most closely-
contested fights, in which few mistakes were
made on either side. The result of the
tournament is as follows
Played. Won. Drawn.
Mr. Burnside ... 8 8 o
~ Drought ... 10 6 o
„ Thompson ... 2 o o
„ Barnard
2 0 0
A handicap, based for the most part on the
results of the tournament, is being played, a.
report of which we hope to give in our next
week’s issue. -


Land in Sight.— Terra firma, which had
been lost sight of for nearly four weeks, came
in view for a brief space on Tuesday morning,
November 26. Some birds—boobies, as they
are called by the sailors—hovering round
the ship evidenced the proximity of the
Penado de San Pedro , otherwise known as the
Islets of St. Paul. At 11 a.m. the four highest
pinnacles of these rocks appeared standing out
from the horizon like so many cathedral spires.
The nearest point of the Shannon's course was
about two miles from the penado . Reaching
this point at about 12.30, the group of islets
might have formed material for a pretty sketch
had there been a painter on board. Lying,
as they were, east of the Shannon , two rocks
of conical shape—one on each side and at some
little distance from the inner group—looked
like sentinels on guard. The sea, surging and
gurgling round and through the rocks, threw
its foam in cataracts athwart them, the fleecy
whiteness of these boiling waves contrasting
pleasingly with the dark rocks and the deep
purple of the ocean below. Strange, one
might say, that these cold, unproductive islets
should be placed here, in a latitude so opposite
to their own characteristics. Though fanned
and wooed by genial equatorial breezes—
though kissed by the tropical wavelets rippling
around them—though the sunbeams dance and
the skies shed warm tears of joy,—still those
rocks remain cold, stern, unimpassioned monu-
ments, without on 6 spark of the volcanic
flame which perhaps once glowed deep down
in their bosom. Not stranger this, one might
add, than that, in the great human family, there
are individuals of whom these rocks may be
regarded as types —men who, though thrown
into the genial atmosphere of society, their lot
cast in pleasant places, surrounded by com-
forts and friendships, still keep sternly aloof,
monuments of humanity, retaining little more
than its outer shell, as they wrap themselves
up in the frigid, ungenial garb of repelling
asceticism. According to Admiral Fitzroy,
these islets lie in lat. 55' 30", long. 29 0 22'.
Their extent is a quarter of a mile from N. to S.,
and nearly that from E. to W. There are five
of them altogether, the highest of which is
about 100 feet from sea level. Immense
numbers of birds, chiefly boobies, seek a home
here. The groupars—fish good for eating—
abound in the neighbouring waters, where
sharks also are in abundance.
Passing the Equator. —The equator was
crossed by the Shannon on Tuesday, Nov.
26, at 9 o’clock pm. As no preparations
had been made for his coming, King Neptune
postponed his visit till Thursday, at 10.30 a. m.
The Dead Horse. —Monday evening, the
25th inst, was noted for the “ Death of the
horse.” This custom signifies that the month,
the wages of which had been pre-paid, had
ended, and that consequently the sailors
might from this period look forward to
wages. At eight o’clock, the horse- -a compo-
sition of rags, straw and old sails, with soda-
water bottles for eyes—came from the fore-
castle and crossed the quarter-deck surrounded
by sailors, who not only acted as horses for the
horse, but also cheered his march with songs.
Hardbread, the jockey, got up in jacket, boots,
spurs, cap, sash and whip, rode much better
than we fancy he would have done had he
been astride the favourite for the Derby.
Something like an appearance of life was


thrown into the strange-looking caricature as
it was made to dance and caper, and whisk
its tail. Bateman, the auctioneer, came for-
ward and addressed the passengers in the fol-
lowing terms: —“Ladies and Gentlemen, —This
noble specimen of horseflesh can beat the
fleetest animal that ever existed. In fact, he
has raced with, and beaten, dolphins and
porpoises, and is now to have a match with
“ chain lightning.” This wonderful animal is
Sifton by M‘Dufif, out of Formosa, winner of the
City and Suburban in 1878. He has beaten
Kaleidoscope, the favourite, at 3 to 1, but still
finds few supporters. We now appeal to you,
ladies and gentlemen, that this time, at all
events, he may not be in need of them.” The
sum of jQ 4 1 is.—-previously collected among
the passengers—being bid for the horse and
handed over to the sailors, the animal was
hauled up, rider and all, to the main-yard arm.
From this place, while singing and cheers
arose from the poop and quarter-deck, and
Bengal lights rendered the scene weird and
ghastly, Hardbread cut off the horse, which
fell with a heavy thud into the sea below,
destined as a hard and indigestible supper
for the hungry shark which had been seen in
the ship’s wake.
Visit of King Neptune. —On Thursday
the deck was made the scene of another of
those time-honoured frolics t whose very age
makes them venerable. On the previous
evening a messenger had arrived from King
Neptune to say that he would board the ship
next morning. This messenger also brought
a large letter-bag, containing invitations for all
the passengers to attend the King’s and
Queen’s court, for the purpose of introduction.
His Majesty was enjoying good health, so
said the messenger, though, unfortunately, the
Queen was confined to the house by what he
hoped would only prove a temporary indis-
position ; in fact, she had experienced great
relief before his departure, and he had no
doubt would be well enough to accompany
her royal spouse in his visit on the morrow.
True to his time—for punctuality is the polite-
ness of princes—a sail, which had been hung
across the deck at the cook’s galley, was
drawn aside, and a strange procession entered
on the scenp. First came a body of police,
under command of a sergeant, to clear the
way, but their services were hardly needed, as
his Majesty’s team would have cleared a way
for themselves. The team consisted of four
huge bears, who, snapping and snarling on all
sides and even at each other, and answering
each touch of the coachman’s whip with a
K
howl, drew slowly forward to the quarter-
deck the car on which, under a canopy of
bunting which looked very much like a Union
Jack, sat the King and Queen. The King,
who was arrayed in royal apparel—a scarlet
blanket, a crown, and a few stripes of paint—
looked remarkably well as he sat on the
front of the car, with a “grains” for his
sceptre, and a very fine red herring im-
paled on it. Behind his Majesty sat his
royal partner; she was evidently far from
• well, and the entire want of the bloom
of health on her cheek bore witness to
her recent indisposition, which, perhaps,
was also the cause why she was in simple
morning costume, and wore a thick veil, from
under which, however, her long light-brown
hair fell in large plaits to her waist, so that we


were ’not deprived of the sight of all her
beauties. Following the car came the court,
consisting of the usual motley crowd—doctors
and barbers, cooks and scullions, painted and
powdered ad lib. The- royal pair, preceded
by the bears—under the skilful guidance of
our old friend, Tommy—mounted the poop,
and, after the usual glass of grog with the
captain, returned to the quarter-deck, where
all preparations had been made for the cere-
mony of shaving. Two spars had been laid
across from the deck-house to the bulwarks,
and a sail lashed to them and filled with
water, so that a tank about ten feet broad by
twenty feet long was formed, and the water
kept about four feet deep. All being ready,
the barber and his latherer in their places,
and the bears tumbled over into the tank, the
King and Queen took their seats, and all on
board—passengers or crew —who had not
before passed the Line were called on to be
presented at the Marine Court, and pay the
fees usual. The Rev. F. King, one of the
passengers, was first called, and was marched
off the poop by two policemen and brought,
closely guarded, into court. He was warmly
greeted by the King, who, feeling great
anxiety for his brother monarch’s health,
placed him in the hands of his, physician,
who put him through a careful examination
wanted to draw a tooth, which the reverend
gentleman declined, on the ground that he
had none that did not grind, and could not
spare one; and on his refusal to pay the
“Quack” —for we think we have seen this
individual near the hencoops—a fee for doing
nothing, which was the actual reason assigned
for the claim, was handed over to the tender
mercies of the barber. The barber, like the
doctor, was very inquisitive; but his patient
was too wide-awake to open his mouth, and
the only answer he deigned to give to such
questions as “ How are you, sir?” “Do you
like cheese?” “Would you like much taken
off?” &c., was conveyed by a slight contrac-
tion of the left eyelid. Finding his patient
was dumb, the barber carefully scraped most
of the lather off, and then handed the
reverend patient—or patient reverend —over
the spar, on which he had hitherto been
sitting, to the bears, who soon washed off the
remaining stains, and helped out of the bath,
which combined a plunge with a shower bath;
for the boatswain was sitting on the long-boat
with the nozzle of the fire-hose in his hand,
and turned a fine stream of water on every
occupant of the bath. The reverend gentle-
man was the only member of the saloon
who received the “ Order of the Bath,” as
all the others - some of whom were young
and sturdy preferred paying their dues
in purse rather than in person. Several
others, however, who were introduced to his
Majesty for the first time, went through the
ceremony, and the fun grew fast and furious.
Some gentlemen who had climbed on to the
long-boat to see the bears had to pay the
penalty, for the old boatswain suddenly turned
the full force of the fire engine on them, and
literally washed them off. Then a grand rush
was made by the police after the midshipmen
who were guilty of disrespect to the sergeant;
two of the culprits were caught and popped
into the bath, which by this time was not so
clear as it had been. Then our old friend
Tommy rushed out of the engine-room covered


with soot, and with his cap on fire, which was
soon quenched in the bath (without, however,
putting Tommy out), and then a rush was
made for the barber, but it was no use for the
bobbie to try and catch him; he went up the
main rigging, but before the police had reached
the top, barber was seen at the mizen truck,
from which he refused to descend until he
had received a promise of full pardon from
his Majesty. All having now been presented
to king Neptune, he and his “ Amphi dear,”
after once more visiting the poop, retired with
their court to the privacy of the forecastle,
where they doffed their robes and became
once more subjects of Her Majesty the Queen
of England. One point was most noteworthy,
the perfect good humour that prevailed on all
hands. Some of the passengers were very
nervous, but there was really no occasion, as
Neptune’s officers, in their black coats, were
most gentlemanly blackguards, and all engaged
were simply getting rid of a little superflous
fun which might do harm if corked up too
tightly.
In connection with the visit of Father
Neptune, our crew gave us an excellent
entertainment in the way of athletic sports.
The extraordinary feats of strength of Hard-
bread and Aspinall are especially worthy of
commendation. Their time in ascending and
decending the rigging, as will be seen below,
is astonishing, and is almost, we believe, if not
quite, unprecedented in the annals of maritime
sports. The Rev. F. King officiated as time-
keeper, Mr. Hastie as starter, and Mr.
Selby as umpire.
The following are the results of the
events: —
Up to main truck and hack.
Hardbread and Aspinall, dead heat.
Standing Jump.
1. D. Williamson
2. Kennedy ...
3. Aspinall ...
Starboard Watch v. Port Watch. Starboard
Watch won.
Greasy Pole.
i. Aspinall.
Up main mast, along main yard, and along leech of
mainsail.
m. s.
1. Hardbread
2. Aspinall ..
O 46
o 53i
Running Jump.
ft. in.
1. D. Williamson
2. Aspinall...
i 3 4
13 2
3. Kennedy
12 5
The proceedings closed with diving for
money in a tub of soapy water, the contest
affording great amusement to the bystanders.
In the evening, a concert was given by the
passengers and crew, at which the Rev. F.
King presided. Prior to the commencement
of the programme, Miss Hannaford, in a most
graceful and becoming manner, distributed
the prizes to the successful competitors in the
afternoon’s athletics, her kind remarks to
1. Hard bread
2. Aspinall ..
3. Johnstone


each recipient being much appreciated. Mr.
Walsh was called upon for the first song, and
exhibited a fine baritone voice to advantage in
“My Gum-Tree Canoe ” ; Mr. Bossard, who
is the possessor of a fair tenor voice, essayed
“ Fading Away,” a melody which seemed to
accord with the tastes of his audience ; Messrs.
Taylor and Scott having respectively sung
‘‘The Sea is England’s Glory” and “The
Mulligan Guards,” Miss Georgina Blake
afforded a pleasing diverson in her pathetic
rendering of “ Belle Mahone,” being followed
by her sister in an equally popular song,
“The Fisherman’s Darling”; the boy Brown’s
“Bonnie Jack Tar,” Mr. Priedy’s song, em-
bodying his experiences “ Where the Irish
Praties Grow,” Mr. Davidson’s “Slave’s Dream,”
and Mr. Blake’s “ Meet me in the Lane,” and
Mr. Hummel’s “ Red, White, and Blue,” were
all of them very commendable contributions.
The audience was agreeably surprised at this
stage of the evening’s proceedings by the
appearance of a stranger, with a somewhat
familiar voice, who hicupped, rather than sang,
“ Love, Pleasure, and Relaxation,” who
appeared to have participated largely in the
day’s festivities. His song, however, appeared
to be none the less appreciated from the want
of clear enunciation, and he parted with his
audience on the most excellent terms. A vote
of thanks to the Chair having been carried, on
the motion of Mr. Bennet, three lusty cheers
were given for Miss Hannaford, Chairman,
Captain, and Crew respectively. The evening
was loyally closed with “ God save the Queen.”
Concert by the Crew.-— On Saturday
evening last, the passengers assembled on the
quarter-deck, to hear a concert by the crew,
Captain Stacpoole presiding. A large audi-
ence testified the satisfaction experienced at
the generosity of the entertainers, who
mustered in strong force, and carried out
their engagement. The songs were, for the
most part, well known, and many of them have
been mentioned in our notices of previous
concerts. The men in the forecastle were
strongly supported by the junior officers, and
the musical numbers of the programme were
interspersed by hornpipes, from Tommy and
Hardbread. Several encores were loudly re-
quested, but, owing to the length of the
programme, the performers, with one excep-
tion, merely acknowledged the compliment
with a bow. The entertainment closed with
the customary vote of thanks and cheering.
Divine Service. —To-morrow Sunday (De-
cember i), services will be held in the cuddy,
as follows:—Morning Prayers and Holy Com-
munion, at 10.15; Evening Prayers and
Service, at 8. Preacher —Rev. D. A. Couct.
Hymns—Morning, 37, 204; Evening, 35, 276,
AFFAIRS NAUTICAL.
(by our special.)
Shannon , Nov. 30
My Dear Editors, —I am pleased to be
in a position to congratulate you upon the
welcome change of weather which has pre-
sented itself during the past week. The
contrary winds which baffled us about a
fortnight ago took us much further to the
westward than is usual. Hence, early this
week we sighted St. Paul’s Rocks, in our
passage across the equator. The south-east


trades, from which, I am glad to say, we are
still benefiting, have stood us in good stead
for some days past and although there is only
prospect of moderate wind, I live in hopes
that it will last sufficiently long to take us
down to our next mile-post—the island of
Trinidad. Annexed are my usual weekly
statistics :
Dis- Baro-
tance. meter.
Date. Latitude.
Longitude.
mometer.
November 24 3.55 N
„ 25 3.08
„ 26 00.57
25.36 W
27.11
Bi.oo
102 29.95
106 29.94
174 30.00
246 30.01
226 30.04
219 30.00
215 29.99
83-3°
84.00
83-30
27 2.45 s.
28 6.26
30-50
83-3°
82.00
it 29 10.05
j .. 30 13-34
31-44
80.30
I am, Gentlemen,
Sincerely yours,
Nautilus,
MEDICAL OFFICER’S REPORT.
General state of health —Good. Ship free
from any epidemic or infectious disease.
(Signed) Wm. Hopkins,
Medical Officer.
Original
“THE DEAD HORSE.”
A month had past, a month had gone,
Since we had left the dock;
When from the fok'sle came a shout ;
We folks all ran to see
What all the roaring was about,
What can this shouting be ?
“They say, old man, your ‘horse’ will die,”
And hope so, too, of course;
“They say, old man, your ‘horse’ will die,”
They’re getting very hoarse.
We see approach a gallant horse,
It mov’d with tread so slow
(A manufactur’d steed, of course.
At fourteen knots can’t go.)
Its head it was of noble shape,
On top a pair of horns;
Its hoofs and feet could not escape
Navicular and corns.
I’ll blow them ! if I ever saw
A horse with horns before,
Or with a hoof so like a claw,
Upon old England’s shore.
His eyes they were a “ bottle”* green,
From which tears sod{a)'d flow ;
I really don’t know where he’d been,
If he had far to go.
Its hide was of that dampish hair
Which J his mattress fills,
And drives old Sutton in despair
To poetry and pills.
They say that J is hard to bleed —
Our steed appears the same :
Hard biscuits are its only feed
Hard bread the rider’s name.
We knew “ The Doldrums” were no fun,
The squalls an awful shock.
* Eyes were soda-water bottles.


How wonderfully he does sit !
The horse kicks “ like a mill,”
For bridle it don’t care a bit,
His Hock is never still 1”
Our sailors drag theTirute along,
And it was quite a stud- y
To see their mirth and hear their song;
They place it near the cuddy*
Here, if it spoke, one would suppose
That it would something say;
Yet, though it had both eyes and nose,j
It did not e'en say nay.%
A steameh frighten’d us one night ;
We all turn’d rather pale,
And could not help another fright,
To hear on board a sale.
Bate ?nan began this beast to sell
[Bait horse it should have been);
The, fibs this naughty man did tell
Bate all that I have seen.
He said it had won ev’ry race
Upon our British courses ;
It’s really time, if that’s the case,
To change our race of horses.
Four pounds, four fi v&,four ten —l stand,
’Twas answer’d with a groan;
That this was all the cash in hand
Was “ Four-ten'' -ately known.
“ Twelve pennies more,” cried Mr. Court,
And fumbles in his fob;
The salesman ended up the sport,
And Fob-e d him of his Bob.
* Scotch name for donkey,
f Ayes and Noes. + N
+ Neigh.
(He’s always foremost in our fun) —
We all now stand aloof;
The combat’s o’er, the prize is won,
Or nail'd on his b e-hoof.
Then up aloft go horse and man —
(It seems a little hard);
Full forty feet they had to span
Before they reach’d the yard.
Here, reader, do not think me tight,
For what I say is true ;
Altho’ the wind blew very light,
The lights were very blue —
We see them swinging on a line,
A man aloft cries “ Halt!”
The steed goes splashing in the Brine,
But leaves behind 7 he Salt.
You ask, What can my meaning be ?
Well, then, I will explain;
The horse was floating on the sea,
The man was on The Main.
I trust that you my meaning catch,
And will do when I say,
As Jack is safely through the hatch,
I’m nearly through my lay.
So here’s to you, our gallant crew,
In good ship Shannon's wine ;
I dedicate these lines to you,
My first across the Line.
And, gentle reader, may I ask,
As we together sail,
You will not think I’ve made a task
Out of Our Horse's Tale.
W. R.
November 29, 1878.


ODE TO LOVE.
Love ! what is love ?—a magic spell,
A something which one can’t define;
It draws the tear-drop from its cell,
Or makes the face with joy to shine.
Love makes the cruel heart to bend,
O’er mortal man she has her sway;
Her sovereign presence does descend,
And cheers us on our rugged way.
Love is a mystery which closely binds
The sacred of all social ties ;
In love alone the cheerless finds
Relief from all his griefs and sighs.
Love shows itself in early life;
To old and young it does impart
Ways to avoid all earthly strife —
A simple soul, a loving heart.
Waft on, dear love, from pole to pole!
Long may thy magic power be given:
Bereft of thee, there’d be no soul;
Without a soul, there is no heaven!
SHANNON ECHOES.
They say that, on Thursday evening, a
scratch concert was organized, on account of
the prevalence of prickly heat, and that the
performers were accorded an itch (niche) in
that famous repository of famous doings—the
Shannon Gazette.
They say that, when Mr. Trainer was called
upon to sing on Thursday evening, he refused
to come forward, out of consideration for our
weal (wheel).
Ihey say that one of Neptune’s badges of
office suggests the advertisement of a cele-
brated London clock maker, and that it is
“ Try Dent.”
They s ay that the Shannon will soon be like
a breastpin, as she will be in the bosom of a
“heavy swell.”
They say that certain gentlemen who had
the “ hose” turned on them on Thursday
morning were compelled to change “ stock-
ings.”
OUR LOG,
BY A LANDLUBBER.
Shannon, Nov. 29.
My dear Editors. —The sun is shining as
only a tropical sun can shine, as we turn out
from a lukewarm “dip” on a notable morning
not very long ago. There is just sufficient
wind to ruffle the water, and a few silver
streaks in the sky; otherwise, the sun has it
all his own way. When we return to the
poop an hour afterwards, faint and weary with
the exhaustion incidental to our matutinal
meal, we are thankful to find that the sun’s
rays have lost much of their intensity, and
that the light is a little less blinding in its
glaring brightness, and not very far ahead of
us a cloud, very ominous in its heaviness, is
slowly but surely rising, for which we are not
so very thankful. There is no silvern fringe
to soften the sharply-drawn line of demarcation
between the cerulean blue and the thick
sullen mass of vapour, which from its opaque-
ness might surely portend the envelopment of
everything in an eternal gloom. As the
black canopy slowly diffuses itself there is a
significant lull in the wind, a “ Stand by your


royal halyards! ” and then, simultaneously with
a last longing glance at the bright dancing
waves astern of us, the first of a series of
fitful angry gusts sweeps through the rigging,
and, as we watch this ill-fated messenger
lashing the tropical wavelets into small
billows, everything else is forgotten. We
might almost be passing into Hades, so deep
and absorbing is the sorrow of our adieu to
the fair weather, so completely do we ignore
our dry coats, our chairs, and sundry
other things pertaining to our temporal com-
fort. On rousing from this oblivion, and
confronting the horizon to windward, we find
a sad blank. With painful certainty the
horizon is vanishing—is becoming absorbed
into the gray mist, which has blended sky and
water, and threatens to smother everything in
its hideous pall. The very varnish on our
chairs, on the skylights, on the pens, becomes
infected with the prevailing hue; while we gaze
about, in the forlornness engendered by this
herald of that category of misfortunes which
is so effectively summed up in that mysterious
word—“ doldrums.” Personally, we confess
that our conception of the “ doldrums” had
been very vague. We had, in our mind’s eye,
a conglomeration of discordant elements,
tending to turn everything topsy-turvy. We
had imagined, in occasional hopeful moments,
that the same magical instrument which had
spared our predecessors from various cerebral
derangements—paralysis, St. Vitus’s dance,
&c. —would also afford a merciful deliverance
to us. Consequently, our gratitude, which is,
in kind, Hibernian, and takes full account of
favours to come, would manifest itself, in spite
of our most determined efforts at repression.
In this abandoned condition we found our-
selves, for a small portion of twenty-four
hours, laughing in a very careless, light-
hearted way—almost hysterically—at these
“ doldrums.” We experienced a keen plea-
sure in sporting the waterproof attire which
J , with the consideration which in-
variably characterizes him, had included
in the list of absolute necessaries.”
We even tried to laugh when a certain colos-
sus, which remained beautifully placid, not-
withstanding the boisterous excitement of the
satellites which revolved about it, took us
unawares with a bucket of water —a cata-
strophe we found, sadly to our cost, which
J , with all his foresight, had not antici-
pated. We also essayed to smoke our pipes
with the happy composure and unruffled dig-
nity of the colossus aforesaid, which drew
clouds from its Manilla, and slid about the
decks accommodating everyone with im-
promptu shower-baths, with a zest and enjoy-
ment which it really did one good to behold,
altogether apart from one’s tacitly-avowed
preference for an amphibious state of being.
Altogether, this exposition of our waterproof
wardrobe was a most delightful experience.
At first we thought we could never tire of it;
but very soon we had to confess that increase
of appetite certainly did not grow with what
it fed upon. With the departure of this
inspiriting employment the “ doldrums ” grew
less and less in our favour. We could not say
—that is, gracefully—after all our protesta-
tions, that they were beginning to wear the
complexion of a most wearisome monotony;
but we feared once or twice that our counten-
ances, in spite of our firmly-closed lips, spoke


volumes out of the fulness of our heart.
There were a few dreadful blanks in our life,
when we tired of alternately devouring the
pages of a “ yellow-back,” and watching the
playful rivalry of the rivulets which found their
way down the companion, the changes from
grey to violet and from violet to black of the
dismal mantle of clouds outside. More than
once, after the departure of a tantalizing ray
of sunshine,' our hearts sank woefully. Has it
ever fallen to your lot, my dear editors, to
write half a dozen letters for a “ homeward-
bounder ” that never came near you ? to rise
from your bunk at a most unchristianlike hour
in the morning to see a Russian war frigate on
the port quarter, which was metamorphosed
into a whale in the course of your journey to
the deck ? Have you ever hastened from a
stiff chess-battle or a thrilling novel to see the
shark which proverbially disappears just thirty
seconds before you seize the bulwarks ? Dis-
appointments such as these, my dear editors,
are but faint emblems of the heavy afflictions
which pour thick and fast upon one at the fag
end of the “ doldrums,” when the south-east
trades hourly threaten to deliver you from
your miseries, and, finally, don’t effect the
promised deliverance at all, but leave the
honour and glory to a wind specially organized
for ships bound to the Brazils.
Time was when I used persistently to inquire
into the why and wherefore of the rites and
ceremonials with which Jack gives expression
to his beliefs. Time is, after an interval of
fruitless research, when I think it is best to
take Jack’s guarantee off hand, without any
questioning either as to the fitness or efficacy
of the whole of the mysterious forms in which
those without the pale may involuntarily be
initiated. He has held from time immemorial
that sailing on Friday is, to put it mildly, a
species of temptation to Providence. From a
very remote date in the world’s history he has
venerated Mother Carey’s chickens; and of
equal long standing is his homage to cats
whom Nature has endowed with coats of a
particular colour. Quite as indispensable as
in days of yore is that belief which finds
practical expression in a chalk cross on the
toes of unwary visitors to the forecastle head.
This last article in Jack’s comprehensive creed
has especially been nourished in its pristine
vigour, notwithstanding serious depredations
in other directions. But, upon all cardinal
points, in season and out of season, through
good and evil report, Jack has right loyally
defended the shibboleth of his forefathers.
His genuine and unaffected sincerity in such
a matter as this are, I take it, indicative
of the man; and, accepting literally Mr.
Carlyle's oft-repeated dissertation upon the
value of sincerity, I might be led into saying
very flattering things. When Eaves graciously
invited me, on Monday evening last, to witness
what he was pleased to call “ the dead horse,”
from the maintop, in the profitable society of
his bosom friend Splicem and himself, I went
prepared for anything and everything in the
shape of the marvellous. True, we had an
uncle in the navy, and, not very many years
since, Marryatt’s novels were the only stock
and store of our library; but we had never
remembered anything of special significance
in connection with the term “ dead horse.” But
having groped my way up the rigging in the foot-
steps of my nimble-footed friend, Tommy, his


companion considerately condensed a long
yarn into a few very homely phrases, and I felt
much consoled when Eaves told me that it
was by no means the first time that day
Splicem had had to tell - that story. We per-
fectly comprehended and sympathized with the
eagerness of Jack to signalize the completion
of his month of pre-paid labour with the cheer-
fulness all honest people experience when they
are in a position to wipe out an old standing
debt. We laughed as heartily as anyone at
the fac simile of Old King Cole sitting aside
the old straw-stuffed, chair-legged, bottle-eyed
representation of exhausted horseflesh. We
sung as loudly and as sympathetically as any-
one in the chorus of “ Poor old horse,” and,
had we been so privileged, we would gladly
have marked time with the sinewy arms
cheerily tugging the aforesaid patient for the
veterinary surgeon to the spot of debarkation.
Moreover, we endeavoured to make ourselves
heard from the maintop, when one Bateman,
with elfin locks, who represented himself to be
an auctioneer, endeavoured to find a buyer
for the deformed old carcase, on the strength
of its pedigree, and who had the effrontery to
knock it down for £4 10s. in the face of
unmistakeable preparations for ridding the
ship, not only of the carcase itself, but of the
owner and all his belongings. We were
stupefied with amazement at the placid de-
meanour of the revered purchaser, in con-
templation of his newly-acquired property,
and Old King Cole into the bargain, slowly
wending their way to the main-yard-arm.
We reflected seriously upon the ephemeral
nature of the pomps and vanities of
this wicked world, when, in the ghostly
glare of a blue-light, the subject of our
commiseration was precipitated from the yard-
arm to his long home. But, in the midst of
our solemn reflections, we could scarcely
repress a chuckle at the artful leer of Old
King Cole —whom, in our innocence, we had
imagined inseparably bound up with the
destinies of his charge—when, having disen-
gaged himself from his perilous situation, he
stole along the yard-arm, and asked us, to our
unalloyed satisfaction, to give bon voyage in a
nobbier of rum to the departed companion of
his travels. “ But why,” I asked, in the
course of our subsequent Bacchanalian revels,
“why, of all things, a horse?” But here,
Eaves significantly applied his forefinger to
his nose, and I for once appreciated the hint.
We were lounging on our deck-chair on
Wednesday evening, suffering rather severely
from the effects of a martyrdom we had
recently, and of our own free will, undergone
in the consumption of tea, when—unless our
ears basely deceived us —we were startled by a
report that an emissary from King Neptune
had effected a landing on the Shannon , and
awaited the pleasure of an interview with
“our skipper.” To be very candid, we were
about to ejaculate “Humbug! ” when Eaves—
who has a happy knack of befriending you in
the very nick of time—good-naturedly re-
strained us, and spared us immeasurable
shame and confusion. Ambassador or visitor
of some kind there certainly appeared to be,
and he was, moreover, possessed of a beard
and sundry other figural adornments of some-
what extraordinary proportions. His suite
was enveloped in capacious oilskins, and it
confined its attentions to a very roomy port


manteau, chatting meanwhile to two of our
“ young gentlemen” who had the honour to
form an escort. In an ambitious moment, I
also essayed to establish relations with one of
these functionaries, but I discovered that we
had no common linguistic basis, and the range
of pantomime, I found, was limited. Our
unexpected visitor accosted “ our skipper”
with a degree of cordiality which was certainly
not suggestive of a very new acquaintance. I
do not pretend to have understood one half
of the colloquy which ensued, but I was after-
wards led to suppose that the ambassador —
who had rather a round-about way of putting
things, and impressed me as being a man
strongly addicted to red-tape—had been com-
missioned by his gracious patron to inform
the public of this Shannon of ours that His
Serene Highness would hold a reception on
the quarter-deck on the following morning.
No salaam more courteous and, withal, more
dignified than that with which “ our skipper”
greeted this envoy of the Marine Deity. No
mien more deferential and respectful than that
which “ our skipper ” preserved so studiously
from beginning to end of this portentous
interview. I looked in vain for the slightest
trace of relaxation in the wonted stolidity
of that sun-burnt visage. I confess to
feeling rather awed in this “ full-faced
presence ” of these creatures of Poseidon;
but, awed though I was, I shall ever
cherish the fond belief that I smiled faintly
at the idea of Amphitrite being about to
present her sovereign lord with three—only
three , if you please—-additions to his family.
But “ our skipper,” I thought, seemed rather
grieved to hear of the sad plight of Amphi-
trite ; and I also thought that a near relative
of our skipper’s was painfully surprised to find
that the goddess had not deigned to apprise
her of the troubles incidental to her unfor-
tunate and scarcely enviable condition. But,
I suppose, my dear Editors, that you were very
keenly alive to the iron realities of the situa-
tion on Thursday morning, were you never so
disposed to laugh in your sleeve when Nep-
tune’s missive was placed in your hands on
the preceding evening. I was indebted to
Eaves, on this eventful morning, for what
would, in vulgar parlance, I suppose be called
“a tip.” Said Eaves, in his parting injunction,
“ Whatever you do, Smith, old boy, keep your
mouth and eyes shut.” And I obeyed the
injunction literally. No eyes or mouth were
more firmly closed than Smith’s in that
supreme moment, when he manfully obeyed
the summons to make an obeisance to
Poseidon. Both the medical adviser and
perruquier of His Serene Highness were in-
fluenced, I have no doubt, by the kindest of
motives, in their respective catechisms; and
more than once Smith felt sorry that circum-
stances compelled him to restrict his replies
to a simple and ungracious negative or affirm-
ative. We were fully convinced of the honour
conferred upon us in the august smile of our
royal visitor. We appreciated the delicate
attentions of sundry of His Majesty’s servitors.
We have everlasting cause for thankfulness, in
the consideration with which the four repulsive
creatures, in the garb of sea monsters, contri-
buted their share to the reception. But, for
the life of us, we cannot understand why the
ceremonial of a reception in this quarter of
the globe should necessitate so many personal


attentions on the part of the royal retinue.
We fail utterly to understand what justifies
His Majesty in the presumption that those to
whom he graciously concedes a reception do
not shave with satisfactory regularity, and that
they are without the pale of those civilizing
influences which commend a morning-bath.
But why, we ask, in our helpless confusion —
having thus ministered to His Majesty’s plea-
sure—should we be further taxed with the
maintenance of his subjects? Delusive recep-
tion ; dearly-bought honour ! But here, again,
Eaves says—“ Mum.” Trusting to your abi-
lity to enlighten me, I am, my dear editors,
yours, in a very bewildered frame of mind,
Landlubber.
FOR SALE, a Portable, Well-seasoned
CABIN CHAIR, slightly damaged by
the heavy rains and the somewhat ungenia
rays of a tropical sun. Warranted, when
repaired, to be capable of carrying weight up
to 16 stone.
Apply to Swankey, office of this paper.
Raffle.— a portmanteau to be
RAFFLED. • Tickets, is. each, to
be had of Mr. Walton, ’Tween Decks.
A COCK-FIGHT TOURNAMENT will
take place, on the Poop, on MONDAY
EVENING, Dec. 2, at 7.30. Competitors
are requested to send in their names to Mr.
Denton.
No. 4.
SATURDAY,
DECEMBER
7, 1878.
We venture, without any apology, to bring
under the notice of our readers a few con-
siderations regarding those distant portions
of the British Empire to which we are bound,
and in which many of us will probably be
interested for some years to come. With few
worthy exceptions, those books upon Austral-
asia, of reputed interest to intending colonists,
deal largely in mediocrities, and generalize with
a vagueness which is anything but re-assuring
to the emigrant who is adopting a new home
in the antipodes, with no certain means of
livelihood. There are scores of your “ guides ”
and “ useful hints,” with “ advice by old
Boomerang,” and, we may add, by a number of
people less qualified to give such advice. But
the value of all these treatises is evanescent.
They have been, for the most part, the pro-
ductions of tourists who have been interested
a priori in the manufacture of a marketable
commodity, rather than in a faithful narration
of their colonial experiences. So rapid is the
growth of social and political organisms in
these British colonies in the southern seas,
that the very best of books purporting to give
a description—even Mr. Anthony Trollope’s
“Australasia,” and Sir Charles Dilke’s “Greater
Britain ” —lose much of their intrinsic value.
From the very nature of things, no book of the
kind can possess a permanent interest. The
“ Station Life ” of Lady Mary Barker, and the
“ Two Expeditions ” into the interior of


Southern Australia, by Captain Chas. Sturt,
are written in a very unaffected, pleasing style;
but the days of Lady Barker’s entertainment
are past and gone, giving place to another
kind of hospitality, while the tomahawk and
plough have made havoc in the wilds in which
Captain Sturt met with his adventures. The
decline of gold mining, and battles of squatter-
dom, are matters of general knowledge, and
are no more of primary interest to the
emigrant than are the corollaries to the
questions of federation and separation.
The process of colonial emancipation from
the degrading influences of the convict element
might be of greater importance ; but it cannot,
after all, affect the supremacy of the res angusta
domi . The government being very nearly the
same in all the Australian colonies, the working
of the gold mines, methods of sheep-farming
in its main features, the case of the squatters,
the question of the occupation of land by the
people, the kind of labour most needed, and
the excellent new field offered to British emi-
grants, being much the same in all the colonies,
there is no need to deal with them separately.
Generally, it may be said that, next in
value to the man whose sinews are adapted to
the roughest kind of manual labour, from the
pick and shovel upwards, is the man possessed
of small capital; but even he must recognize
the dignity of labour if his investment is to
yield him payable interest. Above all, both
the labourer and the moderate capitalist must
keep cool, calculating heads upon their shoul-
ders, and they must stubbornly eschew those
vices which are flaunted in their faces at every
street corner. Add to the steady cultivation
of business acumen strict integrity of purpose,
and the emigrant—belong he to any class
whatsoever— will not fail to find a solatium in
commercial prosperity, and happy social con-
ditions for that severance of home ties
necessitated by his search after better fortune.
Of all the illusionary views of Australian life,
there is none fraught with more dangerous
consequences to the “new chum” than that
which dispenses with the necessity of pro-
viding for a rainy day. Sometimes, at the very
outset of his colonial life, he will have to
combat with iron fortune; and he would be
fortunate indeed if—in Victoria, for instance—
many years elapse without one of those
changes of government policy which operate
so disastrously, through the medium of trade
generally, upon all branches of the labour
market. The colonist has a still greater in-
centive to providential habits in that he is
isolated from those friends who would gladly
succour him in the hour of need. Given in-
tegrity, sobriety, and providence, there is no
brighter out-look for the horny-handed son of
toil or the moderate capitalist than a home in
the Australias.
PASSING EVENTS.
Chess Handicap. —The tournament, which
we have already reported in a previous issue,
having been concluded, it was resolved to
initiate a handicap, the limits of which should
be determined by the results of the tourna-
ment. Thirteen names at first appeared on
the list, which number was reduced to eleven
by the indisposition of Mr. Barnard and the
retirement of Mr. Bennet. We are glad to


inform our readers that Mr. Barnard is again
From this table it will be observed that
each player would have to play ten games,
one against each of the others. The handicap,
after lasting for nearly a fortnight, resulted as
follows :
Mr. Burnside 1
. > won 8 games out of 10
„ Drought j
„ Neu „ 7 »
„ Edleston „ 6| „ „
» King |
» Court • „ 5 „ „
„ Cooke )
handicap was that in which Mr. Burnside gave
nanaicap was mai in wmcn mr. dluhmuc gave
Mr. Scott a castle and knight. We append
the handicap and the results. In the case of
a draw, half a game is scored to each com-
petitor. P, pawn; M, move; Kt, knight; C,
castle.
I g. c ■§ S I
rn CUt/3 *fe W 5 W Q rfl ? W C.t/3
ol —<<U K> 0) -2 <U <L> ®4) <U <U
> "O > M > U.> Pn,> U.> Q.>
So W ‘sb u ‘So !_• So .be m .bo
jg- s s s a §
: M
;M
t. P.&M. P.&M
t. P.&M.P.&M.
Kt. Kt. P.&M.P.&M
t. P.&M. P.&M.P.&M. P.&M
t. P.&M. P.&M.P.&M.P.&M. ... P.&M.
;. Bp. Bp, JP.&M. Kt. P.&M. 1 ...
Mr. Denton won 4 games out of 10
~ Scott ~ 3J ~ „
„ Thompson „ 2 „ „
„ Friend „ 1 „ „
Draughts Tournament. —As a variety to
the more serious game of chess, a draughts
tournament was commenced on Wednesday,
and iust concluded. The pairs and rounds
and just concluded. The pairs and rounds
are as follows :
First Round.
Mr. Nathan beat Mr. Sutton
„ Drought „ „ Hummel
convalescent, and that Mr. Bennet’s retiring
disposition has not induced him to withdraw
his felicitous companionship from any of those
intellectual knots which may be seen occasion-
ally on the poop. The extreme limit of the
; 4»
I .'S
IA
C tn
1-4 OJ
3 >
M "5b
4-*
■§)
o w
3
OJ
'Z
Mr. Drought
„ Neu
P.&M.
P.&M.
„ Edleston
» Kin g
Kt,
Kt,
P.&M,
P.&M
P.&M
P.&M
„ Court
„ Friend
„ Cooke
„ Denton
C.
C.
Kt.
Kt.
C.&Kt.
C.
c.
Kt.
Kt.
Kt.
Kt.
„ Thompson...
„ Scott
C&Kt.


Mr. King beat Mr. Cohen
„ Cooke „ Mrs. Barnard
„ Scott „ Mr. Lush
„ Anderson „ „ Denton
„ Selby „ „ Thomas
„ Clegg „ „ Hastie
Second Round.
Mr. Drought beat Mr. Nathan
„ King „ „ Cooke
„ Anderson „ „ Scott
„ Selby „ „ Clegg
Third Round.
Mr. Drought beat Mr. King
„ Selby „ „ Anderson
The game was now reduced to a struggle be-
tween two; and these seemed well matched,
for the two first games resulted in a draw. Mr.
Drought, however, managed to win the third,
and therefore the tournament.
Cock-fight. —This event, which was post-
poned from Monday evening, owing to various
reasons —some said that the moon did not shine
brightly enough, others had their craws too
full, a cynic whispered that some of the cocks
wore white feathers —came off on Tuesday
evening. Mr. Court, who was overturned in
his first essay with Mr. Friend, scored the next
two rounds with his antagonist, and after-
wards defeated Mr. Nathan. Mr. Drought
was bowled over by Mr. Denton twice run-
ning. A long struggle ensued between Mr.
Denton and Mr. Lush, the latter eventually
giving in. Owing to the injuries sustained by
the “ cocks,” who were in a bad state of train-
ing, the tournament was postponed sine die.
Land Again. —On Monday, December 2,
the Shannon passed the rocks of Martin Vaz
and the island of Trinidad. At twelve noon
the said rocks appeared, three in number, lying
some six miles to the west of the ship.
Trinidad was only seen like a little cloud in
the distance. The Martin Vaz rocks are situ-
ated in lat. 20° 28' 32" S., and 28° 51' 46 " W.
No Shadow. —The noon of Monday, Dec.
2, was further remarkable. The Shannon, at
that time, was directly underneath the sun, and
consequently no shadow was cast by objects
standing perpendicularly on deck. How many
there are who, though they stand upright on the
world, still cast shadows ! Nor would we be
without them if, like Peter Schlemil, we could—
for, if we had no shadows, we should fail to
appreciate the light which makes them.
Ship Spoken to. —On Wednesday, the 4th
inst., a vessel came within hail. On inquiry
she was found to be the Ringleader , of Boston,
commanded by Captain Macher, bound from
San Francisco, which port she had left seventy-
one days before.
Divine Service. —Service will be held in
the cuddy to-morrow (Dec. Bth), at 10.30 a.m.
and at 8 p.m.. Preacher in the morning—
Rev. F. King, Hymns—morning, 20, 33;
evening, 142, 274.
«£onTßpnticnfc.
[ The Editors do not hold themselves responsible for the
opinions expressed in the correspondence columns .]
A TIME FOR EVERYTHING.
To the Editors of the Shannon Gazette,
My Dear Sirs, —I regret that my sense of
the fitness of things at the dinner-table com-
pels me to make a request to certain gentle


men, through the medium of your valuable
columns. I presume that the persons lam
addressing were taught, like myself, upon leav-
ing their leading-strings, that there is “ a time
for everything.” lam sorry to find that they
have forgotten to apply this axiom to the
dinner-hour. Whatever may be their own
notions on the subject, I think, to put it in
the mildest way, they exhibit lamentable want
of consideration for their neighbours when,
between the courses, they produce their bet-
ting books, and proceed to business trans-
actions. I hope this blunt reminder of mine
will have the desired effect, and that those to
whom it is addressed will not misunderstand
the spirit in which it is made.
I am, dear Sir,
Cordially yours,
V. Stacpoole.
OUR LOG.
(by a landlubber.)
Shannon , Dec. 6, 1878.
My dear Editors, —Could ye escape for a
brief interval from the thraldom of dignified
composure in your deck-chairs; could you per-
suade yourselves for a short season to restore
to your cabin-shelf that volume of sensational
fiction, ere your appetite for such seductive
mental food be cloyed, and vanish for ever;
could ye, for the nonce, abandon the mental
stimulus of a chess tournament, and substitute
in lieu thereof a boisterous physical excitement;
could ye bring yourselves to relegate to their
normal quiescence those fond memories and
fancies which self-communings in the gloaming
tempt from out the seclusion of those inflated
mental storehouses of yours; could ye find
the courage to turn, just once, a deaf ear to
the oft-told confidences of the friend after your
own hearts, and temporarily relieve overtasked
humanity of the cultivation of artificial
sympathy; could ye, my dear editors, in that
post-prandial hour which is sacred to each one
and all of these engrossing occupations, condes-
cend to the humble amusement of the less
ambitious and more volatile of your species :
Condescending, let me enjoin you to follow me
with meek and lowly hearts, not in any way
puffed up with the hope of high emprise, for
countless are the records of disappointed hopes
and levelled pride in the arena to which I fain
would direct your footsteps. Thrust aside,
if perchance, it should blossom again in these
mature years, the glowing ardour of those
vanished days when your arms wrought such
prodigies with “ the willow.” Maybe your
right arm has lost its prowess; maybe your
sinews are of the consistency of blubber rather
than of iron. But there is balm in Gilead
in spite of these misgivings. The arena is the
deck of the Shannon , in all its innate sim-
plicity, and the fair ones who will greet your
defeat with down-pointed thumbs are nume-
rically— Heaven forbid otherwise!—as the
tailors of Tooley-street. Your discomfiture is
to be averted by the cunning of your feet and
the equilibrium of your hindmost extremities,
and the contest for which the lists stand open
is yclept a “ cock-fight.” Peradventure, your
nethermost garment cries aloud, with its shreds
and patches, at the desertion of the housewife;
likely enough the doubtful friend who binds
your wrists and adjusts the baton beneath your


distorted knees may unwittingly sow the seeds
of incurable complications in that sensitive
portion of the human frame which extends
from the breast to the thigh. But no matter.
Fair Cynthia peeps but timidly at this un-
cavalier-like ambition of the sons of men from
behind a mantle of trade clouds. The light
of her smile is beautifully uncertain and
tremulous. The unseemly rents in your
pantaloons do only, after all, invest the
pattern with a picturesque charm. The care-
worn expression of your countenance, too, is
it not translated into a cast seemingly eloquent
in its nobility ? All honour, I say, to the man
whose ingenuity has conferred such an effec-
tive incitement to rivalry upon humanity,
distraught with ennui; all respect and deference
to the votaries of his invention. Can one but
fondly regret and joyfully anticipate “ dog-
watches” whose hours are beguiled so
sportively ?
The awful fate of “ Don’t Care” was, in my
youthful days—thanks to grand - maternal
surveillance —constantly under my notice; but
the moral was held to be in subservience to
another of still more general application—-to
wit, that the sweets allotted to everyone in this
vale of tears are unavoidably mixed up with
a certain modicum of bitterness. It were
impertinent on my part, my much-beloved
scriveners, to disparage the grand pageant
which, whilom, enlivened our quarter-deck.
But take away Neptune, with his herring-
decked trident, and his graceful spouse, with
her questionably royal apparel, and there is a
dreadful reaction in their wake. As a poet
whose contributions adorn your columns has
it, we are driven pitilessly to the excruciating
extremes of “poetry and pills.” I embrace
the former alternative, with an affection be-
gotten of a long-cherished acquaintance; and
I pray earnestly that the demand upon the
resources of our esteemed friend, Mr. Hop-
kins, stimulated by the latter, may not origi-
nate any complicated question of political
economy. But, putting out of view the dis-
agreeable and torturing alternative, how is it,
I ask, in a genuine spirit of inquiry, that your
columns are not redundant with the flower of
rhetoric and poetry? Can it be that this
Amphitrite of the nineteenth century, bedi-
zened with a regal • investiture of so tawdry a
hue, has already bereft Phyllis of her fickle
Demophon ? Where is the inspiration of the
genial warmth and balmy breezes of Capri-
cornus? Are these grave faces which one
may nightly scan in sundry nooks and corners,
in a fancied and fanciful solitude, up-turned
toward these southern skies, possessed of the
lustre-lacking eyes indicative of a vulgar,
common-place, brown study? The subtle laws
which govern the human imagination are
beyond my feeble discernment. But can it
be that the farewell of those bright lumi-
naries which bedeck the northern heavens
as they sink, night by night, below
the horizon—to be beholden, it may be,
never again by many eyes directed towards
air castles in the southern hemisphere—are
quite unheeded ? Do the eyes which gaze
eagerly from the day’s wagers to the vapour
floating above in its chameleon changes from
cirrus to stratus, and stratus to cumulus, bestow
one thought, I wonder, upon the affinity of the
cloud-disfigured Zodiac, both with yonder
beacons of a bitter and unhappy past, and, on


the other side, with those magnetic harbingers
of a hopeful future? Night after night, Capella,
Vega, Arcturus, and Aldebaran have waned
before the glamour of Syrius, Canopus, Alpha
Centauri, and Crux Australis. Eaves tells
me, however, that he has seen more than one
pathetic though unspoken adieu to the old
loves triumphing over the witchery of the new.
It is a moot question with many as to whether
the pleasures of anticipation exceed those of
retrospection. What anticipations are bom
with that first glance of the Southern Cross !
what a halo of retrospections linger around
that final glimpse of the Polar Star !
Believe me, yours faithfully,
Landlubber.
MEDICAL OFFICER’S REPORT.
General State of Health—Good. Ship free
from any infectious disease or epidemic.
(Signed) Wm. Hopkins,
Medical Officer.
Shannon , Dec. 7
NARLEBUBS.
My dear Editors, —There is an old story of
a Brahmin who was persuaded to look through
a microscope at a drop of water, and was so
disgusted at seeing that what he had hitherto
considered pure was really full of life, that he
instantly destroyed the instrument. We are
to a certain extent in the same state of ignor-
ance, for very few of us, I expect, are at all
aware of the infinite quantity of living organisms
that inhabit the sea, especially that part of it
through which we are now sailing. Though
the sea is to a casual observer merely a vast
aggregate of water, it is no liquid desert. Life
dwells in its bosom, as it does on land, and its
inhabitants are at least as numerous as those
of the solid earth; the sea, which is for man the
region of asphyxia and death, is for millions of
animals the region of life and health. And
what a wonderful variety of life we find, from
the almost invisible algse which serve to nourish
the smaller zoophytes and molluscs to the long
slender algse, reaching sometimes to a length of
five hundred yards. What a contrast between
the gigantic whale and the infusoria, which
we require a microscope to discover ! In our
voyage, thus far, we have had the opportunity
of seeing some of these different inhabitants of
the ocean. We have seen the whale, the shark,
and other kinds of fish; and, passing slowly by
the ship, our attention has often been attracted
by the Physalia, or Portuguese man-of-war.
Now, I dare say we are all contented with
seeing these inhabitants of ocean at a distance,
though perhaps we might like to catch
a shark; the Portuguese man-of-war, how-
ever, is best let alone. In shape it is like
a bladder dilated in the middle, but taper-
ing off at the two ends, with a crest above;
from beneath there depend a crowded mass of
organs, which mostly take the form of long,
slender, and highly contracting threads, which
hang down sometimes many feet, and even
yards, into the sea, and are covered throughout
their whole length with suckers, which enable
it to seize and destroy its prey; for these
suckers have the power of emitting an acrid fluid,
which produces the most fearful sensation of
burning pain, and, for a time, numbs the


victim who has inadvertently or imprudently
come in contact with them. People who have
been stung by them describe the pain as awful.
Nor is this power of stinging lost with life. I
remember hearing of a savant who, in order
to study the physalia at leisure, put one in his
bath. Of course it was thrown away in due
time and all the water with it; one of the fila-
ments, however, stuck to the side of the bath
and escaped notice. Next morning the bath
was filled with fresh sea-water, and the savant
proceeded to enjoy his tub. He had, how-
ever, hardly begun to enjoy it when he felt a
pain like the prick of a red-hot pin on his
shoulder, followed by a series of the same
unpleasant sensations down his back. Of
course he roared for help, and then it was
found that this filament had been washed off
the side of the bath, and was most lovingly
embracing him. It was at once removed, but
the pain continued for several hours.
The captain having kindly rigged out a small
net, we were able, during the calm of Satur-
day, November 23, to catch and examine
some few of the many wonders of the deep.
At every cast the net contained a quantity of
jelly-like substance, which on being placed in
water resolved itself into many specimens of
the salpa. Each individual presented an
oblong perfectly transparent body, so trans-
parent, in fact, that the passage of small
particles of matter through their entire length
was perfectly visible; they were delicately
marked with lines and net-work of a dark blue,
and for some time moved freely about the
bucket in which they were placed. These
curious tunicata often give off a strong
phosphorescent light.
Then we had in the net two specimens of the
velella spirans, one dead and the other living.
It consists of an oval cartilaginous frame, with
a vertical crest running obliquely across its
longer diameter ; the lower surface is slightly
concave, and is surrounded by a number of
free tentacles, of a bright blue colour, which
during the life of the velella are in constant
motion. This species is, like the preceding
one, often found in the Mediterranean. I
have myself picked them up on the shores of
the Atlantic, and on the coast of Devon, in
England.
We also found in the net a single zanthina,
very minute, but still small, as it was hardly
one-eighth of an inch in diameter; it was
furnished with its little raft of spawn. This
exquisite purple shell, so fragile as not to
bear any but the most gentle touch, yet
braves the heaviest storm; for at their will this
curious mollusca, by drawing their heads with-
in their shells, diminish their volume, and,
thus increasing their weight, sink quietly to a
depth, where the raging tempest has no effect
upon them. This species, also, I have found
in the Mediterranean and on the English
coast. We also obtained a small object which
at first sight looked like a shirt button, but a
careful examination has made me conclude it
to be a porpita, though I am very doubtful
about it. Unfortunately, some one taking it
out of the water, where it had been left for a
minute, it got so damaged as to render its
identification impossible. I trust, however,
that we may obtain some more specimens of
this very remarkable physophorida. We had
two or three very minute fish, which through
a strong lens appeared to be marked like a


mackerel; several other living creatures that
darted about like flakes of gold and silver, but
whose nature we could not determine, as un-
fortunately there is no microscope on board;
and one cranyon , better known, perhaps, to us
by the name of shrimp. This last was certainly
a very lively little fellow, translucent, as all his
sort are, and delicately marked with blue lines.
For some time he afforded great amusement
to a large body of spectators as he darted
about his prison, but, alas! he soon became
slower in his movements, and was found next
morning dead, and the orthodox (to our eyes)
colour, bright red. It is not common to find
shrimps in such deep water, as generally they
prefer the coast line.
Thus, Messrs. Editors, I have tried, how-
ever imperfectly, to describe the contents of
our net. If it please you and your readers, I
shall be pleased. If it lead them to a greater
admiration of the works of the Almighty, I
shall not have wasted my time. Should we
be able to have another cast of the net, I hope
to have new wonders to tell you about.
hiyrjrri, Sigene.
AFFAIRS NAUTICAL.
(From our Special Correspondent.)
Shannon , Dec. 7, 1878.
My dear Editors, —It has fortunately
happened that my anticipations of fair weather,
when I was last writing to you, have been fully
realized. Although the S. E. trades continued,
as I expected, very light, they permitted of our
sighting Trinidad and the Martin de Vaz rocks
on Monday last, since when we have made, as
you will see by the table below, some very
good runs. The wind, as I write these lines,
is heading us ; but I am looking for a favour-
able change, in which case we shall most
probably sight Tristan d’Acunha early in the
week. During this month judging from the
phenomena of the heavenly bodies, we may
look for changes of weather ( not necessarily
gales, but atmospheric disturbances) on the
10th and 16th, but more particularly on the
23rd, 24th and 25th, when we may look for
some heavy weather.
Dis- Baro-
tance. meter.
Longitude.
Latitude.
Date.
December 1
30.04
29-21 W.
17.01 s.
20.12
30. o 8
„ 2
„ 3
3°- 16
M 4
21.34
27-44
» 5
6
30.19
30.20
Phases of the moon for December.
First Quarter at i° 4hr. 38m. afternoon
Full Moon „ 9 0 7hr. 50m. „
Last Quarter „ 17 0 3hr. 3m. morning
New Moon „ 23 0 phr. 24m. afternoon
First Quarter „ 31 0 ihr. 57m. „
I am, my dear Editors,
Faithfully yours,
Nautilus.


©riginal Jjloetrg.
BET OR NOT.
By Not a Better.
They tell me that a betting man
Lives more up “ to the letter”
Than he who tries the other plan,
Because he is a better.
Yet seems to me ’tis very strange,
Tho’ far upon the surf,
Our passengers cannot arrange
To leave behind The Turf.
Of course they bet upon the ship,
And very shrewdly snatch
A word, a wink, a little “ tip,”
From officers on watch.
In fact, we never walk the deck
For exercise or fun,
Unless we’re asked to make “ a spec”
Upon the next day’s run.
The very hens upon the poop
Are getting knowing stagers;
To laying eggs they will not stoop,
They’re always laying wagers.
Even the ladies now on board
Their little books do keep,
And very often (on my word)
Have gone in for a sweep.
Why they’re so eager for a sweep
I really cannot tell,
Unless the nearer him they creep
He’s sure to soot them well.
E’en at our meals it is our fate
(When all our bettors meet)
To hear them bet upon a plate ,
Or else upon the heat.
At table, surely, you’d suppose
From betting they’d retire ;
I’ve heard them bet the ivriter's nose
Could set the ship on fire.
Aye, when they to their cabins go,
To rest their weary heads,
They listen to the water’s flow,
And lay upon their beds.
I’ve heard my neighbour say in dreams,
“ We’re going such a rate ;
My book is sure to win, it seems,
So, two to one on Kate.”
But now I must not go too far,
Or else next Satur-day,
Our betting men will go to war,
And lay against my lay.
So take a hint, both great and small
(I do not speak in fun),
You’re better not to bet at all,
I’ll bet you ten to one.
W, R. S.
December 3, 1878.
ODE TO THE MOON.
Beautiful moon, so calm, so soft, so bright,
’Mid star-bespangled sky thou shed’st thy
ra y, . .
Illuminating all things with thy silvery light,
Changing gross darkness into brighest day.


Oh, beauteous moon, thy presence does impart,
Fresh vigour to the soul and memory dear;
Perennial source of comfort to the heart,
How could thy quiet beauty fail to cheer ?
O’er music, poetry, and flowers thou hast thy
sway—
All are identical, a triune power ;
E’en sacred love is guarded by thy ray,
Finding a rest at last in Hymen’s bower.
Oh, lovely moon, on thee I love to gaze—
Thy face is sweetly dear to me;
While still in midnight hour, my eyes I heaven-
ward raise,
I dedicate this simple lay to thee.
R.S.
Dec, 4, 1878.
SHANNON ECHOES.
They say that the man who rode the dead-
horse had very much the appearance of a
Corsair. He says that they must be alluding to
the coarse (h)air and mane of the animal, but
these of course air mistakes.
They say that the person or persons who put
soap in a certain pie the other day, deprived
themselves of an article essential to the comfort
of their neighbours, if not of themselves, and
that they have never heard of the saying to the
effect that “ cleanliness is next to godliness.”
They say that a certain indignant butterfly
has been heard to remark that it is better to
have a horse fly on board than to have the
cow jump over.
They say that Mr. Passenger Cooke spends so
much time aloft that he is getting mizen- thropic.
They say that the Scotch call draughts the
Dam-board, and the losers in the recent tourna-
ment quite agree with him.
They say that one Philp is made of very
good stuff, although he is sandy.
They say that one Clift sketches so well that
he draws General Attention. (Editors —We
are not acquainted with the General, but hope
that Mr. C. will draw him for the Gazette).
They say that No. 7 is a most useful cabin,
as people go there to Sell-buy (by), and
Cook(e), and that the neighbours say it’s Rum
if they do.
TO BE SOLD, at the termination of the
voyage, a PATENT MATTRESS, sup-
posed to contain genuine horsehair. Strongly
recommended by J as being admirably
adapted for invalids, owing to its invigorating
properties. It also has the advantage of being
a substitute for a barometer, being always wet
in rainy weather.
Testimonials.
“ Must be slept on to be appreciated.’’—
Lancet.
‘‘Neat, portable, and useful.”— Globe.
“As a weather-glass, unequalled,” — Ship-
ping Gazette.
Apply, P.P., office of this paper.
Found— a pencil-protector
(Pratt and Farmer). Apply, Sneider,
Port Watch.


No. 5.
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 14, 1878.
The mere mention of the night of December
10 is sufficient to recall an episode, than which
few more sad or mournful could occur in the
course of an ocean voyage. The abrupt ter-
mination of man’s existence, from any cause,
in the bustle and tumult of his daily life, is
always an event productive of sober reflections
in the most frivolous. The most careless and
irrational must needs pause an instant, if only
to apply in its glaring truth the aphorism which
denominates humanity “ such stuff as dreams
are made of.” The more hard and stern the
duty ’neath which a poor mortal succumbs, the
nobler and more impressive the death. The
duty which took poor Bossard to the fore-top-
sail yard on Wednesday morning last, in the
raging of the storm-wind, has enough of hard-
ness and sternness about it in all conscience.
No matter that he had shared it with his
brother seamen, as he had often shared the
same duty before. It does not detract one
iota from the worth of that unobtrusive
heroism which many a night is manifested, not
to the plaudits of crowded galleries of spec-
tators, but to an accompaniment of warring
elements which is simply terrifying to untrained
ears in its awful grandeur. The small sacrifice
of life in the gain of such great ends induces
men to place the avocation in which poor
Bossard died on a level with other employ-
ments of the toiling portion of England’s
population. It is only in the near presence of
such an accident as that of Wednesday last,
that it is possible to realize the frightful odds
against which “ those who go down to the
sea in ships ’’ have to contend. There is far
more of the heroic in the lives of Bossard’s
shipmates than appears on the surface. Need-
less here to narrate the peril and disaster which
beset the brave, honest toil whereby Jack strives
to keep body and soul together, with such a
thrilling instance so fresh in the mind of every-
one. Ours not here to perpetuate the recol-
lection of those unfortunate circumstances,
beyond human control, which nipped in the
vigour of early manhood the life of as sound-
hearted snd high-spirited a tar as ever
trod deck —witness the brine from frank,
honest human eyes which moistened the rough
covering of his remains ere they were con-
signed to their last resting-place beneath the
waves of the South Atlantic. Our sad duty
but to pay the humble tribute of our respect
and esteem for the memory of a man who met
his death in the performance of so noble a
duty—one of many men the courage and forti-
tude of whose daily lives, although finding
little record on the burnished scroll of fame,
are trustworthy indices of a soul fitted for a
lasting reward in the hereafter.
AFFAIRS NAUTICAL.
Shannon , Dec. 14.
My dear Editors, —We were fortunate on
Sunday last in escaping from the calm which
at the time of my writing my last letter to you,
threatened seriously to impede our progress.
The light wind with which we made head-way


on Saturday night freshened steadily through-
out Sunday, and I had hopes that we might
without difficulty fetch Tristan d’Acunha, where
I hoped to take on board a bullock and other
necessaries for the keeping of Christmas-tide
in good old British style. On Tuesday, how-
ever, the dirty weather which I predicted in
last week’s Gazette , set in, and continued
throughout the day, being, if anything, worse
on Wednesday. The wind falling light on
Wednesday night, I still had hopes of reaching
the island, but towards midnight the weather
became very thick, and, as I had already lost
considerable time in steering for Tristan, and
could not well afford to lose more, I
reluctantly altered the ship’s course, and I
regret to say that we shall have to mourn the
absence of roast beef at Noel.
Below are particulars of the week’s running
Longitude. ; T lS '
a ,tance.
Dath.
Latitude.
December 8
16.46 w.j 36
15-44 129
13.14 238
12.09 73
10.27 108
5.48 236
2.00 205
30-59 s.
30-13
32.56
30.00
36.20
~ io
29.92
~ 11
~ 12
» 13
35-29
29.9°
36.38
29.88
30.i0
39-42
Faithfully yours,
Nautilus.
MEDICAL OFFICER’S REPORT.
I am glad to be able to report favourably on
the general state of health; those who have
been indisposed are improving. I regret to
report the death of Richard Bossard, caused
by a fracture of the base of the skull, the
result of a fall; but his death was instant-
aneous and, I should think, painless.
(Signed) Wm, Hopkins,
Medical Officer.
PASSING EVENTS.
A Calm.— On Saturday last, the 7th instant,
a calm set in to such an extent that the
Shannon scarcely mov6d. At 2 o’clock in the
afternoon, while the ship lay in 30° 31' S.,
17° 12' W., the captain kindly consented to
have the boats lowered, and in a short time
the South Atlantic was the scene of a miniature
regatta. A challenge from the poop to the
main deck passengers having been accepted,
the two rival crews pushed out from the ship.
A life-buoy thrown on the waters, at a distance
of half a mile from the ship, indicated the
point round which the boats should be steered.
On the word “ Go” being given, both boats got
well away, the maindeckers, however, showing
in front before a dozen strokes were pulled.
Increasing their advantage at every stroke,
they rounded the buoy quite two lengths in
front of their opponents. Coming home, the
poopites made a desperate effort to reverse
the order, but they only succeeded in slightly
reducing their rivals’ lead. Pulling a longer
and more paying stroke, the maindeckers won
easily by two lengths. The only reasons
which we can assign for this rather hollow
conclusion to the race are, that the main-
deckers had the lighter boat and the better
crew. The crews were as follows: —
MAINDECKERS.
Mr. C. Read (bow), Mr, Stacpoole (2), Mr.
Steen (3), Mr. Walton (4), Mr. Twomey
(stroke), Mr, Blake {cox).


POOPITES.
Mr. Nathan (bow), Mr. Hummel (2), Mr.
Friend (3), Mr. Denton (4), Rev. C. E.
Drought (stroke), Rev. D. A. Court {cox).
The captain courteously took the ladies out
for a row later on, and a very enjoyable day
was brought to a close with a concert, the
programme of which we insert elsewhere. If
any little spirit of wounded pride remained
among the poop crew or of overweening pride
among the maindeckers, such were all washed
down by a friendly glass at 9.30 p.m.
Fatal Accident. —On Wednesday morn-
ing last, December n, a sad occurrence took
place, which cast a gloom over the ship. On
the previous evening rough weather set in,
which increased during the night to a gale.
At about 3 a.m., as some of the sailors were
engaged in taking-in sail, a sudden gust of
wind struck the foremast. Richard Bossard
was unable to maintain his hold on the upper
foretop-sail yard, from which he fell. He
struck against the foretop-sail yard and fell on
to the deck, being taken up quite dead. Poor
Bossard was a German, having been born in
Berlin, He was only 25 years of age. He
was evidently a man of superior education,
was steady, sober, and a favourite among the
crew, many of whom were much affected by
the melancholy occurrence. While the sea
was running high, at 1 p.m. the same day,
in 36° 38' S., io° 27' W., the body was con-
signed to its resting-place amid the troublous
waves. The Rev. F. King read the burial
service, which was attended by the officers in
full uniform, the crew, and nearly all the
passengers. A sudden sense of awe fell upon
each spirit when the words were read—“ We
therefore commit his body to the deep,” &c.,
and the body was launched into the sea. The
hardy frame sleeps in its rough cot —the last
home of many another honest tar —but we
believe the gentle, manly spirit is with Him
who gave it.
Concert. —The third-class passengers gave
a concert on Saturday evening last, which was
well attended, Mr. Stevens occupying the
chair, Mr. T. Davidson, Mr. Lindsay, and
Mr. Williams entertained the audience with
recitations at appropriate intervals. We have
already expressed an opinion upon the merits
of most of the vocal performances included in
the programme. Mrs. Mansfield figured among
the “ first appearances,” her song, “ What’ll
you do, love?” meeting with deserved applause.
The following was the programme:—Song,
“It don’t belong to me,” Mr. C. Reid; Song,
“ The heart that can feel for another,” Mr. C.
Mason ; Song, “ The nursery rhymes,” Mr.
Walton; Recitation, “ Eliza, or, the battle-
field of Mindon,” Mr. Williamson; Song,
“ What’ll you do, love?” Mrs. Mansfield; Song,
“Teddy O’Niel,” Mr. Eckland; Recitation,
“ A dream,” Mr. T. Davidson ; Song, “ Jessie,
the flower of Dunblane,” Mr. G. Lindsay;
Song, “ She wore a wreath of roses,” Mr.
Reid; Song, “ The scamp,” Mr. Walton;
Song, “ The hungry army,” Mr. Williamson;
Recitation, “The old arm chair,” Mr. G.
Lindsay.
Divine Service. —Service will be held in
the cuddy on Sunday, December 15, at 10.30
and 8. Preacher in the morning, Rev. C. E.
Drought, Hymns—morning, 39 —332 ; even-
ing; 175—279.


©riginal soetnj
RICHARD BOSSARD,
Who was killed on the morning of December n, 1878, by a fall from
the upper foretopsail yard.
Oh ! cover him o’er with the flag of the brave,
The boast of all Britons who sail on the wave,
The emblem of freedom, the pride of the sea—
Oh ! cover him o’er, for a brave man was he.
Tho’ not of our nation, his heart was as true
As any that sail ’neath the Red, White, and Blue;
So strong, yet so gentle, so loving and kind ;
His face, like a glass, but reflected his mind.
From the fore-topsail yard, at dead of the night,
Midst the shriek of the storm, his soul took its flight;
He came to the deck, but his spirit was fled,
And word passed around that poor Bossard was dead.
No wife or no mother to lean o’er his breast,
To breathe words of hope or to hush him to rest;
Rough hands, but warm hearts, there were ready to save;
Now all we can do is to weep o’er his grave.
Then bring out the corpse, and toll, toll the deep bell;
A gloom spreads around with his funeral knell:
From crew and from passengers many a tear
Does fall like a shroud o’er his watery bier.
Oh ! Jesus, our Saviour, who died for us all,
Have mercy, and hear us while on Thee we call;
Be with him, and shield him, for is it not true,
In doing his duty, he died for us too ?
Then raise up the plank, breathe gently, speak soft —
The corpse is below, but the spirit’s aloft;
The earth to the earth, and the clod to the clod,
The clay to the sea, but his soul is with God.
W. R. S.


ODE TO “DON.”
Dear little Don, with fleecy, snow-white hair,
With eyes of darkened hue and curly tail;
Sporting and gambolling, now here, now there,
The joy of all who in the Shannon sail.
Precocious Don, bedecked with ribbon bright,
From ever-murmuring river thou tak’st thy
name;
So quiet, so docile, so pleasing to the sight—
Sweet little creature, thou ever art the same.
When weather sets in stern and cold, with
vig’rous chilly blast,
In ulster thickly clad, but little dost thou
care;
The howling wind around thy form may cast —
It cannot penetrate that coat of cloth and
A pretty house of wicker is thy home,
Neat, but not gaudy —on the deck it stands;
While you, dear Don, on snow-white decks do
roam,
While ship is speeding fast to distant lands.
Dear Don, to know thee truly is to love !
When life’s contracted span with thee is o’er,
Surely there’ll be stored up for thee above
A home for snow-white dogs for evermore.
R. S.
Shannon , December 12, 1878.
OUR LOG.
(By a Landlubber).
Shannon, Dec. 13.
My dear Editors,-— We were in the compara-
tively peaceful seclusion of our bunks a night
or two ago. The radiance of one of J ’s
unequalled composites had been extinguished,
and we were ruminating upon the general
habits, but more particularly upon the com-
panionable disposition, of rats, when suddenly
there came a rapping at our chamber door,
not as of “someone gently tapping,” in a
humble, inquisitive spirit, but rather as of one
whose entrance is—in his own mind, at all
events —a foregone conclusion. There was a
decisiveness and peremptoriness about the tap
which caused the invitation to enter to escape
from our lips simultaneously with the jumping
of our hearts into our mouths, albeit both were
unnecessary proceedings. We endeavoured
to assure ourselves that we were never more
at ease, and we were assuming a dignified
posture on the ledge of our bunk in prepara-
tion for a parley with our nocturnal visitor—
and the observance of such formalities as cir-
cumstances might dictate—when his appear-
ance somewhat disconcerted us. That ec-
centric—or, as a friend of mine has it, “ capri-
cious ” —lamp which nightly swings in the gang-
way in the purlieus of our cabin door, quite in
keeping with the anything but cheerful music
of that dyspeptic old mizenmast, leapt up,
Phoenix-like, from its socket, and disclosed a
very attenuated specimen of what we charit-
ably supposed to be indisposed humanity,
clad in the largest and most clerical of white
raiment. “Not the least obeisance made he,
but, with mien of lord or lady,” enthroned
himself —not upon the most exalted piece of
our cabin furniture, or our surprise might have
found vent in a virtuous indignation, but upon
an adjacent step, where his chances of sum-
mary and injurious abasement were reduced
to a minimum. We were pointing mechani


cally to a bottle of Hennessy, when a voice, as
seductive as a sepulchral intonation would
permit, inquired whether we were “ on for a
soft thing.”
Having reflected, we thought we were
perfectly safe in hazarding the remark that
we did not indulge, but we were cut short
with a “ five to one ” hissed in our ears in the
most appalling of stage whispers. Slowly and
by very easy gradations the errand of our
erratic visitor dawned upon our confused in-
tellect.
Surely, we thought, in all the journeys from
Dan to Beersheba on record, man was
never solicited to transact business of such a
nature at such an hour. We had certainly
given publicity to the fact that we had no ob-
jection on saints’ days and holidays to backing
our opinion upon the ship’s run with a modest
shilling, and we had more than once evinced
our appreciation of the offer of odds ; but
heaven forgive our friend with the gorgeous
pocket-book (?) and natty pencil, when he in-
trudes upon the sanctity of our bachelor couch
at the “ witching hour,” and tempts us with
the offer of “five to one that G never
uses his sponge, and ten to one that D s
is bereft of that sense generally supposed to
be located in the nasal organ.” Heaven
forgive my friend also for adverting to strong
adjectives when I told him that the odds were
not good enough. We forthwith abandoned
our speculations upon the social conditions of
rats, and pondered in our minds the breadth
and easy descent of the by-path to Avernus,
upon which we reluctantly concluded our
friend of the midnight wager had commenced
to journey.
I think it is Burns who says ;
“ Pleasures are like poppies spread ;
You see the flower—its bloom is shed ;
Or like the snow-fall in the river
A moment white —then melts for ever.”
What a brief day have most of these
resources of ours for converting the tedium of
the few hours which are not devoted to eating,
drinking, or sleeping, into something akin to
pleasure ! For a while, the changes in the
surface of the dreary waste of waters through
which the old ship toils unceasingly towards
her distant haven, can scarcely fail to be a
source of interesting, not to say terrifying,
speculations. But it must be a vigorous
imaginative faculty which can derive a suffi-
ciency of healthy sustenance in the study of
varying shades of green and blue, and in the
succession of wave upon wavelet, and billow
upon wave.
“ As high as we have mounted in delight,
In our dejection do we sink as low,”
And Jones’s dejection, when the immensity
of the North Atlantic and the appearance
and disappearance of ships have ceased to
command his undivided attention, is a fright-
ful thing to come into contact with. When a
man courts such old and faithful loves as
whist and chess out of sheer desperation, whist
and chess have very hard lines of it. Wear
they what complexion they will, they never
undergo a more severe trial than when Jones
woos their pleasures in such a mood. Do you
wonder that people find cribbage and draughts
devoid of comfort, when your venerable friend,
who has delighted in whist throughout the
exciting scenes of a quarter of a century,
revokes and otherwise violates sacred canons ;


and when your friend of philosophic mind,
who daily courts relaxation from the most in-
tricate of commercial theses in the club chess-
board, is checkmated unawares? In the light
of such extraordinary precedents, Jones, who
trumps his partner’s trick with a grave
simplicity, and who penetrates just sufficiently
into the science of chess to acquire the art
of warding off a fool’s-mate, appears in the
guise of a man greatly to be pitied, if you will,
when he grumbles at everything, animate and
inanimate, but by no means to be reproved or
censured. But perhaps it is better, after all,
that Jones should gruiqble rather than indulge
in stone-throwing at the expense of his own
windows. A very little random stone-throwing,
I find, embroils far more people than they at
whom the stones are directly thrown. In a
spiteful moment Jones casts a good old-
fashioned boulder at Brown’s reputation,
whereupon Brown retorts upon Jones with an
unhewn piece of granite. In the twinkling of
an eye, poor Robinson is pounced upon to
arbitrate. If Robinson be discreet, he will
dole out his sympathy in portions adjusted to
a very nice equality. No man more unfor-
tunate than Robinson, if he be given to
speaking his mind. Woe betide him if, in a
thoughtless moment, he avow a preference for
Jones’s version of the story. Brown is rich
in his missiles of granite, and the award meted
out to poor Robinson is suggestive of a hail-
storm at Cape Horn, contrasted with the
resources brought to bear upon J ones. And
somehow Smith sympathizes with Robinson :
thus it comes about that berths a, b, c, d, and
e become anything but little heavens below.
Better, I say, a thousand times endure Jones’s
revilings of refractory drinking utensils, of
eccentric wearing apparel, of an unruly
mattress, of perambulating boxes —of anything,
in fact, short of yourself rather than his home
thrusts at the shortcomings of the man next
door. If in these allegorical sentences I have
thrown a stone, it has been thrown unwit-
tingly.
I am, my dear Editors,
Devotedly yours,
Landlubber.
MORE “ NARLEBUBS.”
My dear Editors, —Several people have
asked me “What is aNarlebub?” There was
a little boy came to his mother one day and
said, “ Mother, has a plum got legs?” “ No,
my dear,” said his mother. “ Oh, then I’ve
swallowed a Narlebub /” So I have assumed
that name for all the unknown and wonderful
things we find in the sea as we go along. We
have only been able to have one cast of the
net lately, and caught nothing fresh then
except one colony of the lovely blue “Porpita.”
This colony, when first taken out of the net,
resembled a little bit of blue jelly ; but, know-
ing that these bits of jelly are often lovely in
their native element, it was carefully placed in
the bath which does duty as a vivarium, and
in a very few minutes it changed into what
looked like a bunch of very small currant
seeds, all separate, but each connected with
the others by innumerable hairs, like a fine
mildew; from this peculiarity we had no diffi-
culty in at once naming them. The “'disk” is
about the tenth part of an inch in diameter,


without comprising the tentacles which extend
round it to the distance of one-tenth of an
inch more, and are of a bright sky-blue. It is
found in all warm seas, including the Mediter-
ranean, a beautiful object for the microscope,
under a low power, say a two-inch object-
glass.
During the calm the boats were lowered,
and succeeded better than the net; for they
brought on board a specimen of a flying fish,
and also a “ Portuguese man-of-war.”
The flying fish belongs to the order “ Pha-
ryngognatha,” or that order in which the
inferior pharyngeal bones are so completely
coalescent as to form a single bone. The dis-
tinguishing characteristic of the exocetus, or
flying fish, is its pectoral fins, which are nearly
the length of the body. The head is almost
square, being flattened on the top and at the
sides. The eyes are large and protruding;
the mouth round, and furnished with small
pointed teeth. The one that was brought on
board, and which can be seen at any time on
application to the editors, as it has been placed
in spirits, is very small, being only two inches
long; its wings are at first sight exactly like
the wings of a bird, but on looking closely we
see that what we thought feathers are really
scales, which give a beautiful appearance of
mottled black and grey, with a bright gold
spot on the point, which, however, has faded
away. These fins, however, are rather para-
chutes than wings, for no percussion or flap-
ping of these wings has ever been noticed.
They attain the length of a foot, and when
their wings are fully expanded they often
stretch to 2 feet. The wings of the little
specimen before us are each of an inch
long, and even in their present folded-up con-
dition are y 2 an inch wide, so that when
expanded they would furnish the little fellow
with qdite a large surface to resist the air and
support him over the waves. We are not able
to name the species of the flying fish we have
preserved, but it is certainly not the common
“ Exocetus volitans.”
They have been known to rise twenty feet
above the water, and to make a flight of two
hundred yards. The other narlebub brought
on board was a physalia mireculus, or Portu-
guese man-of-war. This was also a small
specimen, not more than three inches long;
but it was a great source of amusement to
many, and the bucket in which it was placed
was for many hours—indeed, throughout the
whole evening and well into the next day —the
great centre of attraction. One enthusiast,
with a very inquiring tone of mind, wished to
make sure about the stinging powers of the
tentacles, and actually, in spite of all warnings,
had about a foot of the bright blue thread-like
substance coiled down on the back of his
hand. He admired the lovely colour and the
muscular contractions ; but, as soon he felt it
begin to sting, he quietly got rid of it. He
described the sensation as being like the sting
of a nettle, but it all passed away in a few min-
utes and left no ill effects behind. This was
probably owing to the fact that the tentacle
had been separated from the physalia for some
time, and had also a very thick skin to pene-
trate. He may think himself very fortunate
in escaping so easily, as those who have been
stung by a large living physalia complain that
the pain is not only very severe, at the part
actually attacked, but extends to some distance.


If, for example, the hand is stung, the pain ex-
tends upwards along the arm,increasing asitgoes,
and can only be compared to a severe rheu-
matic attack. “ For some hours afterwards the
skin displayed white elevations or warts on the
part stung, and during the day a peculiar
numbness was felt.’’ Take warning, then, good
readers, and let the philosopher make his
experiments on himself, and do not handle any-
thing that you see floating about with a lot of
thin-coloured threads hanging from it.
Siyrji'ri.
SHANNON ECHOES.
They say that the Captain is a dry old fish,
because he’ (s) kipper.
They say that the Boatswain’s whistle is like
the heat, because it makes the “ tar ” run
on deck.
2hey say that our friend Bruce, A. 8., can
never feel “ quite at home ” so long as his
“ arm is out.”
They say that No. 7 has been haunted, and
though the inhabitants maintain “ the spirits ”
were good, they have volunteered to give up
the ghost.
They say that a gentlemen cut his stick when
a sea broke through his port the other night.
He says he did not, but we certainly saw
“ chips ” there next day.
They say that several people who walk the
deck after eight at night have rather thick
soles to their slippers.
They say that the sails of the Shannon
ought to be getting very suspicious things as
they are often taken in.
They say that the ropes of the Shannon are
very learned when there is wind, because they
are well taut (taught).
glbbertisement.
FOR SALE. —A season ticket (expiring
Ist May) for Crystal Palace, owner
having gone abroad. Apply Cabin g, Saloon.
No. 6.
SATURDAY,
DECEMBER
21, 1878.
Christmas is again at hand—Christmas, with
its plum puddings, its mince-pies, its reunions ,
its storied memorials, its mistletoe boughs.
Christmas is coming ! Youth’s goal of plea-
sant exemption from work; age’s distant mile-
stone of the memory. Round Christmas Day
hopes, prospects, regrets, or mistakes cluster
more thickly than round any other season of
the year. It is, as it were, the centre-point of
the heart’s diary, as the event which it com-
memorates is the central mystery of Christen-
dom. To Christmas the schoolboy looks
forward, with anticipations of realizing the
words of Horace—
“ Nunc est bibendum, nunc pede libero
Pulsanda tellus.”
Back upon Christmas Day, the grayhaired
man will gaze as he reads, in clearer and


purer type, the records indelibly printed on
the tablets of the heart, and whispers, from the
already-quoted writer—
“Eheu fugaces Postume, Postume,
Labuntur anni.”
Forgive us, gentlemen, if we translate these
two passages—for the ladies. The first means
that Christmas is the time for dancing parties;
the second regrets that our years are gliding
quickly past us. To most of us, this Christ-
mas of 1878 is a novel one. It is the first we
have to spend at sea; the first some of us
have to spend away from our nearest relations.
This Christmas is without the peculiar features
with which we associate the season. We have
no snow-capped hills, no leafless trees; our
skates are rusting, unused, at home. Those
of us who intend to reside in the Antipodes
must expect to have the seasons turned topsy-
turvy, and the sun warm and bright when
in England it withdraws its powers to their
minimum. None of us expect, even borne
upon the wings of the swift-flying albatross, a
Christmas card, with initials modestly con-
cealed by a forget-me-not in the corner. Yet
on the Shannon there will be some of the
principles of Christmas Day recognized.
There will be a recognition of its origin, and
of our duty to go back, in thought, to the first
Christmas Day and its humble cradle. And,
doubtless, heartfelt, though perchance silent,
pledging to the health of absent ones, who, we
know, are pledging ours. In this respect, the
Editors of the Shannon Gazette claim prece-
dence. They take the goblet from Hebe’s
fair hands, and—though a very indifferent
substitute for nectar crowns it—they turn
smilingly towards the captain and Mrs, Stac-
poole, to the officers, crew, and passengers,
and wish them all “A Happy Christmas!”
PASSING EVENTS.
The Death of Bossard. —This sad occur-
rence was the subject of the sermon at the
service of Sunday morning last, the preacher
being the Rev. C. E. Drought. It was gene-
rally known that the rev. gentleman would
make direct allusion to the painful occurrence
in his discourse, and, in anticipation of this
circumstance, the deceased’s shipmates swelled
the large congregation of passengers. The
text of the sermon, of which the following is a
shorthand transcription, was Gen, 4, verse 20 —
“And Adah bare Jabel; he was the father of
such as dwell in tents.” The rev. gentleman
said: If you were to look at the 4th chapter of
Genesis, especially towards the end, you would
perceive that, while the world was still young—
yea, when human life was scarcely more than
a hundred years old, considerable strides had
been made in inventions and in the arts and
sciences of conventional life. We have Cain
building the first city, his descendant, Lamech,
introducing polygamy, and his three sons
adding much to the enlightenment of the
world; and we find, in these very circum-
stances, that, mingling with the curse which
God had imposed upon this lower world on
account of sin, there was a blessing. We find
that our first parents, Adam and Eve, were to
till the earth with the sweat of their brow.
They were henceforward, after the casting out
from Paradise, to be under the stern law of
necessity. But, I say, we find in this very
circumstance a blessing mingling with the


curse, for necessity became the mother of
invention; and we have Tubal Cain, while the
earth was still young, the inventor of many
artifices in brass and iron. Not only have we
these inventions, but we have still left, as it
were, in this lower world, something of that
most beautiful of the principles of Paradise,
viz., music. When our first parents were in
Paradise, there was music there in all
its loveliness. Peace and harmony roamed
beside the rippling rivers there, and the
outer scene was but a response to the
feeling in man’s inner soul. We have a
devout sense of this music left in man, for he
still had within him the spark of immortality.
We have Jubal inventing harps and organs, and
further still we find something more. The
world, at this early date, was increasing; the
population was rapidly growing, and there was
more crowding together in one place, the conse-
quence of which was that people said to one
another—“ We have to go and seek our fortunes
in other lands; we have to push on through
life, and better ourselves in places yet un-
known.” We find that, to facilitate this
migration to other lands, the eldest son of
Lamech introduced tents. These moveable
habitations might be taken up in the early
morning ; those who lived in them might pro-
ceed on their journey through the day, and
when the shades of night were gathering round
they might set up their tents and take their
rest. Our interest in tents is increased when
you remember that early in the Bible history
there are some of the most remarkable of the
patriarchs dwellers in tents. We find Abraham,
on that day when the three angels came to
visit him, sitting in his tent door in the cool
of the evening; and afterwards Deborah, the
Jewess, the woman leader of Israel, under an
oak, doubtless in a tent. The Arabs, too,
those people who are called sometimes by the
name of Scythians, and sometimes Ishmaelites
were known to the ancients as “ dwellers in
tents,” as they roamed from place to place,
seeking new lands. But, brethren, our interest
in tents may be further increased when we
remember those three people who are mentioned
in the New Testament —Aquilla, Priscilla, and
the great apostle Paul, who, it is said, were
by occupation tent-makers. It was said by one
of the ancient fathers, St. Chrysostom, that
St. Paul used to stand at his shop door,
in the heat of the day, stitching hides;
the devils regarding him with fear, and the
angels with love. But now I would turn from
these thoughts—from the thoughts of the
patriarchs of old, and of the Arabs, to one or
two thoughts concerning ourselves. Is it not
the case with us that we are, in one respect,
children of old Jabel —that we are dwellers in
tents ? May not, at least some of us, say —
“ Here, in the body pent,
Absent from Him I roam,
Yet nightly pitch my moving tent
A day’s march nearer home. ”
This world itself, this life which we enjoy, and
we ourselves —when we come to think of it—
are all as tents. This world is a tent, not in
the idea that it is a planet, a wandering star
in the fields of space; but in that other, in
which we say that here we have no continuing
city, but seek one to come. There were towns
and cities, great emporiums of ancient times,
which men thought lasting, and would endure
as long as time endured ; but alas ! they have


passed away. Babylon the great has fallen,
and those ancient churches, Laodicea, and so
on—they also are no more. They were tents
pitched here for a brief day; and the world
itself is but a tent, which will hereafter be cast
down, to lay ruined, burned up, until the day
of the restitution of all things. Your life, and
my life too, when we reflect, are but tents.
We pitch our tents farther on in life each day.
At home in our own country we hear betimes
the tolling of the church bell sounding mon-
otonous through the air—wailing, as it were—
and the tale it tells each time it strikes is that
another tent has been moved and pitched on
the eternal shore. Yes, my brethren,
and this tale has been brought before us
by a circumstance of very recent occurrence,
telling us how very suddenly any one of us
may have to make a change, and pitch our
tent upon that eternal shore.
There is, when we look around us, much to
fill us with thankfulness, and at the same time
with awe. There have been some among us
who came on board this ship with enfeebled
bodies and ruined health, and now, thank God
for his mercies, they are on the road to re-
storation of strength. How can we but feel
thankful in our hearts when we think of these
things ? Away with all complaint; let us
rather experience a feeling of deep gratitude
to Almighty God. But, just now, our minds
ponder upon another circumstance with a
sense of awe. The ways of the Lord are, in-
deed, inscrutable. We cannot fathom them.
We have seen a man in bodily vigour—with
no ill-health, as far as we can know—suddenly
taken away from our very midst. We do not
know why. It is thus that the Lord deals
with us. But when we think of the event,
there is welling up from within us, in spite of
our awe, much hope. If the face be an index
to the heart, then might we say of that one
who was taken away the other day, that his
honest, intelligent face bore evidence of a
great and pure heart beneath ; and this being
so, we might also say of him that, though he
was a stranger and a foreigner, yet there was
One near him who recognizes no difference in
nations, and that, as he passed so suddenly
through “the grave and gate of death,” Jesus
Christ was very, very near him. Ah, my dear
brethren, on the very day of his death, in the
very place and circumstances of his funeral,
the love of God was imaged. The wind was
high, and the waves ran about us; but, as our
departed brother sank far beneath those waves,
there was a stillness and a tranquillity that our
eyes could not see. The storm was upon the
surface; there was peace far below, in the
fathomless depths of the sea. And is it not
so with God’s love? We see His judgment at
times. We are ruffled at times with the storms
of doubt and fear. There are fightings without
and fears within. We see God in all His won-
drous works and power, but if it were allowed us
with the eye of faith to penetrate below the
surface, we should find that there was perfect
peace mingling with perfect love. My breth-
ren, there is a hope breathed out in the words
of our magnificent burial service—a hope that
the time will come when “ the sea shall give up
its dead,” a hope that those who die in Jesus
Christ, who may be taken away by His sudden
messenger, may look forward in that state of
peace to the time when they shall be reclothed
in the eternal tabernacle, in the house not made


with hands. One thought more about tents,
and I shall close. It is written of the taber-
nacle of the Jews, in the Old Testament, that
it was in the shape of a tent; and this tabernacle
prefigured that other tabernacle, even heaven
itself, whither Christ has for us entered. In one
respect, this tabernacle, this eternal haven, is
a moveable tent. It is said in the 3rd of Rev-
elation, in describing it, “ that it cometh down
from heaven.” So that wherever we look
whether upon earth or heaven—we see change-
able things. There stands out, then, from
everything changeable but One unchangeable
—the immutable, the unchangeable God.
The sorrows and sighs, the joys and hopes of
humanity vary; but the new song of Paradise
is for ever the same in the presence of that
immutable One. Towards Him all the faith-
ful move, and the nearer they approach Him,
the nearer will they find that the tent in which
they live is becoming a structure of solid
foundation. It is with such thoughts as these
that we would leave our brother beneath the
wave, brightened with the hope which is
summed up in those beautiful words of the
first lesson of to-day, where we are told that
“He will swallow up death in victory; and
the Lord will wipe away tears from off all
faces,”
“ Such words have power to quiet
The restless pulse of care,
And come like the benediction
That follows after prayer.
“ Thus the night shall be filled with music,
And the cares that infest the day
Shall fold their- tents like the Arabs,
And as silently steal away,”
Concert. —On Wednesday evening last,
the first-class passengers gave an entertain-
ment of music and recitations in the saloon,
which was well attended, and at which the
Rev. C. E. Drought occupied the chair. The
following was the programme : —Song, “ He’s
the Man for Me,” Mr. Hastie; Song, “ South
Carolina,” Mr. Nathan; Recitation, “Vir-
ginia,” Mr. Friend ; Song, “ The Englishman,”
Mr. Hummed; Song, “Nancy Till,” Mr.
Scott; Recitation, “Ellen Mcjones,” Mr.
Selby; Song, “ The Slave Chase,” Mr. Easton;
Songs, “ Free and Easy ” and “ Guy Fawkes,”
Mr. Sutton; Song, “ Bonny Dundee,” Mr.
Hastie ; Songs, “The Good Rhine Wine” and
“ Nancy Lee,” Mr. Nathan ; Song, “ I’ll meet
Thee in the Lane,” Mr. Blake ; Song, “ The
Flying Trapeze,” David; Song, “ Auld Lang
Syne,” Messrs. Selby and Hastie ; “ God save
the Queen,” by the company.
Albatross Fishing. —During the first dog
watch on Thursday evening, as many as
fifteen albatrosses appeared in the wake of the
ship, eagerly devouring refuse from the galley.
A confusing number of fishing lines were soon
cast over the stern, and the game was not
slow to appreciate such delicacy as salt pork.
The bird-anglers, however, although danger-
ously excited by many bites, failed to land any
birds.
Divine Service. — Service will be held on
Sunday, December 22, at 10.30 and 8.
Preacher in the morning—Rev. D. A. Court.
Hymns—Morning, 34, 137 ; Evening, 35, 17.
On Christmas Day, service will be held at
10.30 a.m. Preacher—Rev. D. A. Court.
Hymns—43, 48.


AFFAIRS NAUTICAL.
Shannon, Dec. 21, 1878.
My Dear Editors, — On Saturday last we
passed the meridian of Greenwich, and we
are to-day in our 27th degree of longitude.
The wind has been very light, but now that
we have passed the last angle in our course,
we may safely look forward to better running.
I trust that to-morrow three weeks we shall
be listening to a sermon from His Lordship
the Bishop of Melbourne. Meanwhile, I
wish you, in conjunction with your sub-
scribers, a Merry Christmas. The following
are particulars of the week’s work :
Dis- Baro-
tance. meter.
Longitude.
Date. Latitude.
mometer.
December 15 41.02 s.
„ 16 41.53
» 17 42.57
» 18 43-23
2.28 E.
6.22
55.00
241 30. 10
161 30.15
202 30.00
232 | 29.90
228 29.74
no 29.77
166 29.85
55-Qo
54.00
52.00
19 43-45
54-00
57.00
„ 20 43.03
„ 21 42.55
23-32
27.19
55-oo
Yours faithfully,
Nautilus,
MEDICAL OFFICER’S REPORT.
The general state of health continues satis-
factory. We are free from epidemic and
contagious disease.
(Signed) Wm. Hopkins,
Medical Officer.
orig;inal floetrg.
A JOLLY ROW DOWN SOUTH
The day was hot, the sea was smooth,
And calm as it could be
The Shannon, “ Like a painted ship
Upon a painted sea.”
Our skipper said to us at lunch,
While gnawing at a fig,
“ Altho’ you know the horse is dead,
Yet you can have my^.”
We passengers exclaimed at once,
“Well, here’s a jolly go—
Altho’ with heat we’re like to melt ,
Come let us have a row.”
A challenge quickly went downstairs,
To Seconds and to Thirds,
To pull a race against the Poop—
They came aloft like birds.
And when we see Read take the bow,
We scarce repress a scream ;
He was the very man, you know,
For getting up the steam.
Stacpoole appears as number two,
And next to him comes Stein—
Two hardy sons of Erin’s Isle
As ever there were seen.
Next, Walton, with his form so lithe,
And hair so sleek and damp—
He now appears a perfect swell,
And not a bit “ The Scampi'
We all now look a little grave,
And feel our prospects gloomy,
For in the stroke we see a man
Who’s very name is Twomey.
Their coxswain’s is a sailor’s name,
The same as Admiral Blake.


Our betting men upon this crew
At two to one do stake.
When Nathan came to take our bow,
And off his coat did peel,
To guide a horse , but not a gig,
He was our beau ideal.
Hummel, who always looks so neat,
And does not muscle lack,
Appears as hwn-\Ay as he could,
For Friend was at his back.
And at Friend’s back was Denton bold,
With sinews like Jem Mace—
It would require a pugilist
To hit him on the face.
Strong Lush was also asked to pull,
But said, “ I do decline;
A Yeoman cannot condescend
To go down on the Line!'
Our stroke appears—a mighty man —
Of six feet two about.
We have a calm, great heat, no rain,
And so we have a Drought.
At Cambridge I am told he was
i at ev’ry sport.
Our coxswain gets a hearty cheer,
The Reverend D. A. Court.
I don’t know how it seems to you,
But strange it seems to me
That men who pilot to the sky
Should pilot on the sea.
They’re off! they’re off! the oars splash,
We shriek out —“ Do not fail,
Altho’ you do not reach the buoy,
To bring us back a gale!'
Here listen, all ye betting men,
It is a better plan
To try if you could round a buoy,
Than try to square a man !
They pull, they pull; they tug, they tug;
With many an artful strain,
Until they reach the turning point,
And then come back again.
They near the ship, we shout, we yell,
I really think I swore,
To think such lots of gold was laid
Upon a wooden oar.
They reach the winning post at last,
Arithmetic’s rever’st,
The first men they are number two,
The third and seconds, first.
Our bow came up upon the deck
With many hideous groans,
“ I’m very ill and sick,” he cried,
“ Oh ! where is Mrs. Jones ? ”
One stroke had work’d so very hard,
.We hardly thought he’d rally,
This surely ain’t our Reverend friend,
It must be old Shore Ali.
The other crew were very fresh,
And ’midst our deaf’ning roars,
They coolly paddl’d up and down,
Then rested on their oars.
Here I would laud another crew,
Who tho’ five awful sinners,
Went out to bathe and coming back,
Had nearly beat the winners.
But Lindsay, Sandy, Stevens, Lush,
Are modest men, like me,
And do not wish our feats of arms
To blazen forth, you see.
Suffic’d to say that all the way
We led like very bricks,
Until we reached the Shannon’s bow,
And then we went to sticks.
When safe upon the cuddy floor,
(I’m not afraid to tell),


Our Wanct ring Jew dispens’d that drink,
The which He-brews so well.
At dinner-time, our skipper said—
“ Now, ladies, all get ready,
I’ll take you out, with chosen crew,
My weight will keep you steady.”
So, on the deck they all appeared,
And boldly faced the ladder—
To see their great agility,
It really made me shudder.
First, Mrs. Bennett and her niece—
Miss Hannaford, so true,
And then our charming Mrs. Clegg;
But where was Mrs. Neu?
And last came Mrs. Barnard, who
We all were glad to see.
(The husbands and the little chicks
Were left in charge of me.)
Four fairer forms were never seen
On Southern sea afloat,
The very fishes swarmed around,
And nearly sank the boat.
I saw a very ancient whale,
Whose days of love were o’er,
Stand up and spout a yard or two
Of or more; —
A lovely dolphin, who, you know,
Is Cupid of the sea,
To get a view of them, did show
His great Cupid- i-tie.
To the sublime, from the absurd,
It gave us awful pain
To see them go; so, thank the Lord,
We see them safe again.
For, whether it be north or south,
Or any other parts,
The ladies are the boys to warm
The cockles of our hearts.
My task is done, my yarn is spun ,
But I must finish up,
By saying that at night our crews
Partook a “ loving cup ”
To pledge “ true friendship? for we know
On it all joy depends.
Here’s health and wealth to all of you,
May God be with our friends!
20th December, 1878. W. R. S.
ODE TO SCHNEIDER.
On board the good ship Shannon , in cabin
neat and trim,
Resides a curly pet, with dark sagacious
eye,
Jealously guarding those who go within—
Schneider by name, bred in the Isle of
Skye.
His mistress’ things he does protect with
never-failing care,
And barks with fury loud at steps that may
intrude,
In cabin or on deck old Schnei is every-
where.
Sagacious, kind, and brave, but Schnei is
never rude.
The passengers, indeed, are devoted to old
Schnei;
They love to see him run about and with a
glove to play;
They watch his noble gait, his fawn-like,
softening eye,
And almost wish that he was theirs to bear
and take away.


At morning dawn, at fresh and early day,
When sun is gently rising in the eastern sky,
Gilding the Shannon with its golden ray,
Upon the poop, by chart-house, lies old
Schnei.
Oh, Schneider, noble dog ! when life with thee
is o’er,
When thou no longer on the deck do roam,
Thy memory dear will live for evermore —
Richly-deserving thou of changeless home.
R. S.
December 20, 1878.
OUR LOG.
(by a landlubber.)
Shannon , Dec. 20, 1878.
The typical landsman is never more at sea
than when he essays to unravel and analyze
those complex principles which govern those
institutions intruded upon his walk of life
during a voyage to the antipodes. Perhaps,
my revered and respected literary friends, you
will smile at my hypothesis of the origination
of such things in any source deserving the
name of principle. Hopeless task to discover,
and, having discovered, to propound, the
degree in which the motive of action—to use
no more precise definition—is undeviating
But, in all humility, I venture the opinion
that they are not the progeny of chimerical
tenets. It has often struck me that a certain
imaginary line encircling the terrestrial globe
enjoys an unwarrantable pre-eminence in those
mystifying rites by which the Sea King and
his awe-inspiring minions exercise a species of
terrorism over credulous humanity. Once or
twice in our meridional course, while the past
week was yet in its infancy ; when the breeze,
fresh from the ice-bound pole, was goading
ulster-clad Shannonites to frequent potions of
strong waters, and amazing constitutionals ;
when the hands of that hitherto sober and
rational timepiece in the cuddy nightly
performed their journey from two to four bells
with a celerity which positively damned all
the good in their reputation at once and for
evermore ; —in these antitheses of bygone
experiences, I bethought me of that second
girdle of the earth which has its course through
the poles, and —look kindly on this foible of
my sympathetic heart —I commiserated it in
its sheer destitution of the pompous circum-
stance with which maritime usage invests
its more favoured rival northwards. Surely
it is worthy some monumental tribute,
some observance which should mark, in
the memory of the voyager, that spot at
which he parted with the last scrap of affinity
with his kindred in the daily routine of their
lives. After all, is it not the one oasis in the
desert of waters, in which diurnal pleasures
and duties, in the hour of their enjoyment and
performance, if in nothing else, revive the
drooping memory of the nearest and dearest of
mortal ties in that land which may never more
meet our gaze —the borderland between old
associations and the new, born with Antipo-
dean life. No half-way hostelry, with inviting
doors, in which to drain a bumper to the
great, but withal kind, destroyer. Truly a
lamentable dereliction, an unpardonable blind-
ness to the fitness of things on the part of that
ingenious and very sage board of directors,^


which appoints the time and place in which
it behoves Jack to do honourable service to
those persons and things to whom and which
honour is due. Did not the blasts of the
south-wind last Saturday, in their very chilli-
ness, adumbrate the well-remembered picture
by the home fireside? The glowing sunset
and the long-drawn twilight might mock us
in our endeavours to identify ourselves with
that fireside picture, in their enviable contrast
to a sky sun-deserted some three or four hours
before. But we held our own in spite of it,
and anon, when the golden tints of the
western sky had spent its fascination, giving
place to the undivided dominion of a bright,
pure starlight, no magic could divert us from
the clear vision of the home circle, about
which our brightest imaginings fondly lingered.
Had that lithe figure, which staggered rather
than walked, at my side, under the folds of
winter garments redolent of the staple article
in demand at my friend Jones’s counter down
below—had it a thought beyond its approach-
ing “ nightcap ” and its desirable effects, or
would it wander with me in my fanciful
journeyings to another clime? Often, methinks,
in my childhood’s spirit-land researches, I have
met with father Time. Were his wrinkled brow
and hoary locks to confront me on the ledge of
yonder taffrail, or from some aerial vantage-
ground, I lay under as weighty an obligation to
extend him a distantly respectful greeting as
when, not long since, prudential considerations
dictated it in the presence of the god of the
wave.
The trials which encompass steady peace-
loving bachelorhood must, I think, be at their
zenith, when their victim is located for three
months on an ocean-bound ship. In the
innocent distractions of every-day life he may
stedfastly close his eyes to the manifold
artifices with which womankind embellishes the
family hearth, he may chuckle with his com-
panion spirits in the possession of twenty
buttonless shirts, and in the season of biliary
disturbances he may take comfort in the naked-
ness of pater-familias next door, with his twenty
buttons; he may breathe fervent gratitude at
the vision of his faithful tea-bearing servitor,
upon which, morning after morning, he gazes
from without the modest folds of dimity which
envelop his solitary couch ; he may luxuriate
in the hallowed joys of a reflective cigar, and
a dry-cut Times , in the comfortable warmth of
his dressing-gown ; he may revel in the choice
companionship of the club-house; he may
indulge in those nectarean habitudes which
are alone practicable when the latch-key is in
his fob. But, alas ! for my very near and
closely-related friend habituated to these
privileges, in his ocean-bound state of single
blessedness. I have a sigh from the innermost
depths of my heart of hearts, at the awful
blank in his life, when, in the early morning, the
domestic with the steaming beverage makes
way for the brisk and less deferential—albeit,
not thoughtless—attendant whose offices at
this hour of the day are confined to the
replenishment of the ewer with water of a
temperature calculated to freeze the very mar-
row in one’s bones—to say nothing of the
perpetration of fearful ravages upon the edge
of one’s faithful “ Mechi; ” when the
pleasures of that delicate weed, and that rich
wine, of the wherewithal to manufacture a day’s
chit-chat, are dissipated by “ atmospheric dis


turbances,” which ruin your intimidads, and by
those circumstances which abrogate the con-
ditions essential to the publication of a news-
paper ; when his companionships are governed
by that malicious conspiracy of the most evil
of evil-disposed fates productive of Hobson’s
choice; and when the latch-key is unavailing
in the creation of those nocturnal trivialities
in which bachelorhood, when it is orthodox,
delights. Have such of you, my dear Editors,
who may be bachelors—have ye ever been
overcome by those misgivings which are said
to periodically haunt the bachelor mind, as to
the wisdom of an existence devoid of the com-
forting presence of a gentle helpmeet ? Were
you ever so grievously tempted to violate the
10th Commandment as when you daily observe
the serenity of your Benedictine friend in con-
trast with the perturbation to which you your-
self fall so easy a victim in your copings with
that unvarying law which puts everything in
your cabin in its wrong place, in your bewail-
ings of confusion worse confounded, in your
clumsy attempts to supply the wants of deft
fingers in the ordering of the appointments of
your scantily-furnished habitation ? To make
so sorry a contrast and not to sigh were to
exercise a self-control very nearly akin to the
apostolic. As bachelors, perhaps your make-
shift capabilities are your especial pride, as they
are also mine. You may also be steeled
against the temptation in your present discom-
forts to choose a condition of life hitherto
repugnant to your tastes. Your stoicism, is
creditable. But the Benedict who is the sub-
ject of your envy is Argus-eyed, and I fear me
that he may detect many a flaw in your role of
the stoic. Perhaps he is your vis-cl-vis at the
breakfast table. For the sake of the large
army of your fellow-creatures who have elected
to eschew those feminine relationships which
are avoidable, pray interpose a cruet-stand or a
well-laden swinging tray between that care-
worn face of yours and that shrewd inspection
from opposite, begotten of a desire to procure
your conversion. Wishing you the compli-
ments of the season,
I am, my dear editors,
Faithfully yours,
Landlubber.
OTmTfgpontmup.
[ The Editors do not hold themselves responsible for the
opinions expressed in the correspondence columns .]
“THE WISE MEN.”
( To the Editors of the Shannon Gazette.)
Gentlemen, —Wishing to anticipate that face-
tious correspondent of yours, “ Landlubber,” I
crave space in your valuable columns for a few
remarks ; for I am sure that he (“Landlubber”)
must have been among those who have of late
been peering anxiously into the steering com-
passes, and making such remarks as the
following:—“ By Jove, still steering one of those
pegs nearer south than south-east; ” “I wonder
how much further south the ‘ old man ’ is going
to take us;” “ It surely is cold enough now,
in all conscience; ” “ He (I presume the ‘ old
man ’) must be going to the South Pole ; ”
“ I wonder whether it would be any use ask-
ing him not to go any further south; ” besides
a variety of other remarks which would take
up too much of your valuable space. Let me


inform those “wise men (since passing the
meridian of Greenwich) of the East ” that
though we may by compass be steering a peg
more south than south-east, our true course by
the world is not much more than a “ peg ” to
the south of east, and that the “ old man ” has
no intention whatever of going to the South
Pole; for he is not on an exploring expedition.
In explanation, let me tell them that there are
but few places in the world where the needle, or,
as we call it, the compass, points north. In
different parts of the world it varies in direc-
tion —some places to east of north, and in
others to west of north. Again, this variation
is constantly changing. Take, for instance, our
island home. In England, in the 16th century,
variation was a point —or, perhaps, I had better
stick to the peg —to the east of north; whereas
now it is two “pegs” to the west, but is again
slowly returning to the east. During our voy-
age to Melbourne we pass through the same
variation. In a few days we shall, I hope,
reach the place of its greatest, when steering
south-east will not be making more than an
east' course by the world. Before reach-
ing our destination, however, steering a
“ peg ” north of east will be only making a
true east course. I will not take up more of
your space this week, but will, in your next
issue write more fully on the variation,
deviation, and dip of the needle.
I am, gentlemen, yours faithfully,
(Signed) V. R. C. Stacpoole.
SHANNON ECHOES.
They say that there must be a mine on the
Shannon , from the reports of Tin in the Fore-
castle,
They say that our betting men were delighted
on Thursday last to find Tatter(d) sails on the
poop.
They say that the horse-race game is to be
stopped, as Mr. Edward Clift’s horse wins so
E. C — ly.
They say that sailors always call their doctor
“ Pills.” Our doctor says he “ don’t mind if
they do.”
They say some people are Hardy enough
to object to concerts; and that they must be
Satfon.
They say that “ Loo” is the principal attrac-
tion on the quarter-deck.
They say that the accomplished author of
the “ Ode to Don ” has made the fair owner
of that beautiful little dog justly proud of her
property; but that a certain lady has sur-
passed the gifted poet, and has even suc-
ceeded in making the little dog vain (dog-
vane) itself.
They say that “ taut ” means “tight,” and so
’Tis generally thought;
If so, then those who get most “ tight ”
Must also be best “taught” (taut).
Sto&ertfeements.
Lost —a gold-chain necklet,
with heart-shaped pendant attached,
composed of three carbuncles and pearls.
Ten shillings reward to the finder. Apply,
No. 9 Cabin. December 19, 1878.
WANTED— A TUMBLER, of modest
dimensions. Apply, DOLLINGER,
office of this paper.


No. 7.
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 28, 1878.
Three days hence, and another of those pre-
cious grains will have passed through the
glass which measures the brief span of our
lives. We are so situated that the retrospec-
tion which naturally goes hand in hand with
the dirge, marking the departing moments of
the old year and the anticipations which
accompany the pseans welcoming in the new, are
this year of peculiar interest. Many of us are
on the brink of a new life. On our way to the
country of our adoption, we are scaling a new
height in our life’s journeying, from the summit
of which we may fitly survey the perils and
difficulties which have beset us in our upward
path; and, while our hearts are filled with
gratitude towards a merciful Divinity for the
shaping of our “rough-hewn” ends, may we
not take fresh courage in the resumption of
our pilgrimage ? The more so, in that it is
not presented to our minds in its figurative
sense, but it is invested with so tangible an
entity. Those who will have no fixed abode
upon foreign strands are mostly bound thither
in search of that invigoration which will
permit them—on their return to the old
country —to re-enter the lists in which their
bad health had disabled them, with the aspi-
rations springing from redoubled vigour. Let
none of us despair, though the goal of ambi-
tion be never so distant; but rather let us
take refuge in that sublime confidence in the
wisdom of the Omnipotent which contrasts the
tardy fruition of our most noble efforts with
the slow but sure growth of the stately “forest
king.” The sunlit skies and lengthened days,
which are the precursors of this the first of
our New Year’s Days in the Southern Hemis-
phere, are in themselves impressive of the
realities in the altered circumstances of our
life. Still more palpable is the revolution
effected by our ocean voyage, as we reflect
that the culmination of our “ stage of duty,”
on Tuesday next, will precede, by some hours,
the welcoming of the new and the speeding of
the parting guest in a land where we may rest
confident the bumper drained to the golden
hopes of the new-born year will alone take
precedence of a sentiment dedicated to the
weal of those absent ones slumbering on the
bosom of the deep.
PASSING EVENTS.
Christmas Day.— ln our last week’s leading
article we anticipated a very different Christ-
mas Day to that to which we are accustomed
in England. We allowed our feelings—
doubtless wrought on by recollections of
past festivities—to carry us too far. We pro-
phesied that there would be no snow to throw
its chastening influence upon the outer scene;
no Christmas cards to shed a solace over
voids caused by the absence of now far-distant
though much-loved friends. In both cases
our prophecies turned out to be false ones. A
fall of snow—though a small one—actually
did usher in Christmas Eve, and we are told
that one of the clergy on board was guilty of
throwing a snow-ball at the nose of one of the
other passengers, who was taking a constitu


tional on the poop —“ Duke est Desip ere in
loco." Early on Christmas morning, too, a
knock, as sharp as it was unusual, startled us
from our bunks. It was George, the postman,
with Christmas cards! Thanks, indeed, to
the three little cherubs, Maude, Trixie and
Daisy—or, rather, we might say, to the thought-
fulness of Mr. and Mrs. Barnard—many of
the passengers were thus greeted with the best
wishes of the season. So we acknowledge
that some little ones have pre-anticipated (if
we may use the word) those oracles of antici-
pation—the editors of 9- newspaper. Divine
service was held in the cuddy at 10.30 a.m.
The Rev. D, A. Court preached the sermon
from St. John, i. 1. The subject of the dis-
course was “ The Divine Brotherhood of Our
Lord.” The rev. gentleman concluded a most
impressive address in wishing his hearers a
truly happy Christmas.
Dinner being finished, several toasts were
given. The Rev. C. E. Drought said he had
a pleasing duty assigned him, though one
which he, with his native modesty, could have
wished in better hands—namely, to propose
the health of the Captain and Mrs. Stacpoole.
The passengers would not conceal the fact
that they looked forward to landing at
Melbourne. Still, there were many pleasing
recollections which they would bear with
them, and friendships formed on board the
Shannon which they hoped would not end
with their voyage. Standing out from these
in bold relief was the figure of Captain
Stacpoole, who had throughout the voyage
done everything he could to alleviate the
occasional tediousness of the journey, and to
render the passengers as happy as was
possible. The toast having been most
cordially received, the Captain responded in
a most jocular way on behalf of himself and
Mrs. Stacpoole, who, he said, was better able
to make a speech than he was. The Rev. D.
A. Court next gave “ Absent friends.” Mr.
Court, who was received with loud applause,
said he would not—for he could not—say much
on this subject, which was so dear to them
all. He felt how very tender a subject it was,
as in both England and Australia he had
many and dear relations and friends. The
toast was, of course, drunk with heartfelt
enthusiasm. Mr. Sutton followed with “ The
ladies.” He said—“ I have much pleasure in
undertaking to propose the health of the
ladies. (Hear, hear). Gentlemen, what
could we do without the ladies ? (Applause),
They are essential to all society; they refine
the sternness of our intellectual capacities ;
they soothe the ruffled surface of our cares ;
they dispel melancholy, and temper the sting
of trouble. (Loud cheers). Ladies, fair
ladies, are bright lights in the midst of this
dark world, throwing a halo on all around
them. (Cheers). Who are first and foremost
in any good work, but the ladies, always ready,
as they are, to do any kind act in the cause
of suffering humanity.” (Cheers.) Having
instanced Lady Dundonald and Florence
Nightingale as noble examples of the sex, Mr.
Sutton concluded by saying that he felt sure
that the toast would be duly and cordially
honoured. Mr. Cooke, as youngest bachelor,
gracefully responded to the toast, which had
been drunk with musical honours —“ Here’s a
health to all good lasses ” being the appro-
priate refrain chosen. Mr. Selby next pro


posed “ The health of the officers,” wishing to
include in the toast “ our young gentlemen.”
“We are,” said Mr. Selby, “ proud of them
all, for a finer set of men could nowhere be
found ; and I am sure that we passengers, in
the short time we have been together, have
become much attached to them, and can only
hope that we have shown as friendly and
manly a spirit towards them as they have
towards us.” He coupled the name of Mr.
Burnside, chief officer, with the toast, which
was heartily received. Mr. Burnside, after
replying, gave “ The health of the passengers,”
to which the Rev. D. A. Court responded, as
senior passenger. The passengers, he said,
duly appreciated the kindness of the officers
on the Shannon, and should it be their lot to
return to England they would doubtless
endeavour to make the journey by that ship,
provided, of course, that Captain Stacpoole
commanded her.
A pleasant entertainment having thus come
to a conclusion, preparations were made for a
concert, which was held in the cuddy at 8 p.m.,
and proved to be the most successful of any
yet given. Mr. Selby took the chair, and
made a few appropriate observations on the
harmony which ought to prevail at this season.
We were glad to observe that the fair sex was
represented this time—both the Misses Blake
taking part in the performance. Herr and
Madam Neu also kindly came forward, and
varied the hitherto Anglo-Saxon character of
the concert by giving the very beautiful song
known in English as the “ Mill Wheel.” Mr.
Anderson’s rendering of “ The Cottage by the
Sea,” was deservedly encored, which brought
out “Tom Bowling.” We regret our want of
space admits of our giving but little more than
the programme, which ran thus : —Song, “The
Scamp,” Mr. Walton; song, “ Rocked in the
Cradle of the Deep,” Mr. Hummell; song,
“The Cottage by the Sea,” Mr. Anderson;
song, “The Lost Child,” Rev. D. A. Court;
reading, “ Mr. Pickwick at the White Horse,”
Mr. Friend; song, “ The Cork Leg,” Mr.
Nathan ; song, “ Lord Lovel,” Mr. Sutton;
songs, “Little Brown Jug,” “ South Carolina,”
“The Unfortunate Family,” Messrs. Hastie
and Easton, as niggers; song, “ Under the
Willow,” Miss L. Blake; song, Tommy;
recitation, “ The Battle of Minden,” Mr.
Lindsay; song, “ Put me in my Little Bed,”
Mr. Ecland ; song, “ Battle of Trafalgar,” Mr.
Scott; song, “ The White Squall,” Mr. Ander-
son ; song, “ Still I Love Thee,” Mr. Blake;
song, “ Belle Mahone,” Miss Blake; song,
“ Pat Moloy,” Mr. Taylor ; quartette, “ Das
Miilrad,” Herr and Madam Neu, Captain
Stacpoole, and Rev. C. E. Drought.
Shooting.— Mr. Thompson, after several
unsuccessful attempts, at length managed, on
Monday last, to bring down on the poop a
very fine sooty albatross. It measured about
six feet from wing to wing.
Christmas Eve. —An entertainment was
given by the midshipmen, to which several of
the passengers were invited. Mr. Selby pre-
sided, and a very pleasant reunion was kept up
till about 11 o’clock, when the entertainers
and their guests separated, none the worse,
we are glad to say, for their relaxation.
Divine Service, —Sunday, Dec. 29. —Morn-
ing, at 10.30; evening, at 8. Preacher in
morning, Rev. F. King. Hymns—Morning,
i9°> 3 2 5 i evening, 297, 14.


Original floetrg.
MORE ROWS IN THE SOUTHERN
SEAS.
It seems very funny and awkward for me,
That last week I wrote of a row on the sea;
And immediately after a quarrel should crop
In everyone’s cabin, “ all over the shop; ”
A row in the “ foksle,” a row on the poop,
A row on the deck, and a row at a “ scoop ; ”
A row with the Captain, a row with the Mates:
I feel half inclined to leave all to their fates,
And not interfere, for it seemeth, you see,
As if everybody were down upon me.
I’m not very quarrelsome, as everyone knows,
I look at life calmly, however it goes.
If it rains, then I know, I cannot help that;
If it snows, I stay in, or I would be a flat;
And if it is fine, I go out and rejoice—
To be “ free and easy ” is always my choice ;
Yet everyone comes, and knocksme off my feed
By saying—“ Old fellow, you must intercede ! ”
I expect every day that I’ll be called on
To come out and separate Schneider and Don,
Or to hear that our Nelly, in moment of folly,
Is busy condensing old Tommy’s wee dolly.
Now lads, this is Christmas, when all should
be peace!
So why not let fighting and quarrelling cease ?
Let those who’ve a grievance just state it, and
That insultandgrievanceare gone with the wind;
This life is too short to be always at war,
Oh, try to be peaceful,—’tis better by far!
For when we are old, and our pilgrimage ends,
Wherever we are, we will be among friends.
’ 1 will make us more fit for the dwelling above,
To cover our path with a mantle of love;
Then He who was born on the day that is past
Will welcome us home to that haven at last
Where sickness, and sorrow, and strife will all
cease,
For ever to dwell in a halo of peace !
W. R. S.
Dec. 27, 1878.
[N. B. —A slight spirit of contention seems to
have reigned at the time these lines purport to
have been written. The spirit in question
probably derived its existence from the sudden
transition from extreme heat to dirty cold
weather. — Eds. S. £.]
OUR LOG.
(By a Landlubber).
Shannon , Dec. 27.
My dear Editors, —When I ventured, at the
close of my last week’s dissertation upon
passing events, to wish you “ the compliments
of the season,” I had compunctious visitings
lest you might place an ironical construction
upon words which my carefully-nurtured
regard for seasonable observances had forced
upon me. Bitterly, I thought, my valued
friends, would ye apostrophize the scruples
leading me to resuscitate those “haunting
memories ” of bygone noels, which, if ye be the
possessors of staunch British hearts, must have
a sacred niche in those mental treasuries
specially appointed for the preservation of
fondly-cherished memorials, in which the
sacrilegious hand of Time will be powerless to
harm them. Few relics in those precious gar-
ners can be more valuable than those which


cluster round those landmarks, figured by
Christmas reunions. Few retrospections of
deeper interest, even in theii very sorrowful-
ness, than those which call in their backward
journey so many indelibly-written inscriptions
upon the heart’s tablet. I shudder when I
think of my temerity in my bare-faced court-
ing of your displeasure. How I sigh for the
prescience which might have averted these
empty fears —which might have inspired me
with the courage to exchange the warm greet-
ing which lay concealed in my heart of hearts
—for that insipid formula —that bare reception
of friendly sentiment! Henceforward, be I
feasting upon summer delicacies under the
grateful shade of a “ mi-mi,” or be I carousing
in the good old fashion of my forefathers, with
more snug surroundings, a reminiscence will
present itself of the Christmas of 1878 on
board the Shannon ; and, albeit I may wish
that the joyful season might overtake its crew
in the enjoyment of home comforts, I shall
rest assured that, in less fortunate circum-
stances, the hand of good fellowship which
was, of late, so frankly extended to us, will
be as freely offered to —and, I shall hope, as
eagerly grasped by—others.
To a man endowed with a spontaneity of
seasonable sentiment, it must have been very
refreshing and consoling to witness and par-
take in the cordial hand-shakings and benedic-
tory “ good-nights” around the “ companions ”
on Tuesday evening; to hear the felicitous
vein of conversation in the course of that pro-
tracted journey which some of the less sober-
minded among us made en route to their bunks;
and we will pardon the passive, but sympathiz-
ing spectator if, for once, he forgot the tie
which proverbially binds precept to practice,
and did not turn his head to smile when a cer-
tain wayward friend of his temporarily lost
sight of the fact of all the world being a stage,
and substituted a race-course—the ropes, the
skylights, the companions, so many fences,
hedges, and walls in the grand steeplechase.
No bell or wait to waken the night echoes
with their hymnic melodies. No Santa Claus
to shower souvenirs as freely as elsewhere. Let
us imagine a peacefully-sleeping world was
enfolded in a pure unblemished garment of
white—fit prelude to a day dedicated to the
uninterrupted exercise of the two greatest of
this life’s duties. But, in the cold, starlight
hours which ushered in the great holiday of
Christendom, the mystic influence of peace
and harmony, characteristic of Christmas
mornings, shed its serene ray across the ocean-
track of the old Shannon ; the turbulence of
the heaving waters was, for the nonce, stilled ;
the dissonance of the moaning wind subsided ;
and the outer world lay wrapped in placid
communion with the sleeping thoughts of
humanity exiled in the solitude of the South
Atlantic. Happy welcome, meed for the many
interdicted pleasures of Christmas Eve, that
cheery face which peeped round our door-way,
and imparted its cheerfulness to ourselves, who
lay in our bunks engaged in mutual commisera-
tion—its very smile an earnest of the com-
plaisant mission of its unmistakable owner.
Welcome that merry voice which gave us our
first Noel salutation ; that firm grip of the
hand which assured us that the heart and the
soul of the speaker were in his words!
Sweeter far and more soothing this narcotic
than the outpourings of any phial in our friend


Hopkins’s pharmacopoeia. Infinitely more
effective than any cunningly-mixed stimulant
that reveille of one Wright upon the decrepit
ventilator in my lowly portal. I was on the
verge (my friend S vouches for the fit use
of the word) of strong linguistic demonstra-
tions, when a small missive skimmed through
the air, and mercifully interposed itself between
its bearer and the torrent of a very unchristian-
like adjuration. “ Only a Christmas card, sir!”
Verily, a magic in these words to exorcise the
most deep-rooted of antipathies. Woman-
kind again, turning the inexhaustible fountain
of its pity upon poor forlorn bachelorhood !
Bright dawn, my masters, of a Christmas Day,
celebrated in word and in deed—with but a few
ridiculous exceptions, tending to foster a more
sure regard for the golden rule. The Shannon ,
I noticed, sped away before a freshening
breeze, under a bright sun, as church
was in process of “rigging.” We might have
been in the presence of holly-decked altar and
font, shielded from the blinding snow-drift by
scroll-emblazoned walls, so benumbed were
the fingers which turned the pages of morning
service, and the feet, the perpetual motion
of which alone kept their owner in his ap-
pointed place. In that memorable afternoon
carousal, too, when we had accomplished so
formidable, not to say dangerous, a feat of
manducation, how snugly we closed round the
remnants of good cheer, with our wine-brim-
ming glasses, while the hailstones made music
upon the weather-ports and the skylights. It is
a moot point with me—and Eaves shares the
doubt —as to whether our revelling reached its
climax in that peroration, glittering with the
choicest cullings from the flower-garden of
rhetoric, with which our chivalrous friend S
embellished his toast of the fair sex, or in that
auspicious moment when a venerable friend,
who has a corner in the hearts of us all,
claimed our sympathies in that ambiguous
narrative of maternal affection which finds
poetical expression in the ditty of “ The Lost
Child.” It was whispered to me, however,
that our friend S ’s oratory reached a yet
more lofty pitch of enthusiasm when, it being
the 34th anniversary of his natal day, he, in
the otherwise silent hour, entertained, and was
entertained by, a select circle of bosom friends
in the genial atmosphere of the main-deck. His
warm eulogium upon the prevalent spirit of
bonhommie had a wide application indeed, if,
as Eaves tells me, my jubilant friend was seen
embracing, with affectionate cordiality, some-
thing resembling an iron stancheon; and if,
having scaled the perilous ascent of which it
forms the starting post, he was observed
applying one of J ’s cambrics to his eyes,
ostensibly to stem the violent flood of tears
summoned from their recesses at his farewell
to the “ warm-hearted, simple-souled ” handle
which garnishes the entrance to his virtuous
domicile. But this is entre nous. It is mere
hearsay; and, knowing S’s habits of life
very intimately, I am inclined to accept the
story cum grano sails.
In a seasonable humour,
I am, my dear Editors,
Faithfully yours,
Landlubber.


(tforTOpoufcrnre.
A PROTEST FROM THE FORECASTLE.
Dear Messrs, Editors, —We sailors are much
annoyed to find that a person has taken it upon
himself to collect money for us on Christmas
Day. We wish, gentlemen, through the medium
of your columns, to inform those who sub-
scribed that this has been done entirely without
our sanction. We want it to be shown that
sailors are above being beggars, and that we
afS quite satisfied with what was given to us
on Dead-horse night, and on our crossing the
line.. We have instructed the person who took
it upon himself to make the collection in ques-
tion to return each one his subscription with
thanks, and shall be glad to know that he has
done so. Wishing yourselves and fellow-
passengers, on behalf of myself and mates, the
compliments of the season,
I am,
Yours respectfully,
(Signed)
S. Bruce.
THE VARIATION OF THE COMPASS.
My Dear Editors, —I am sure much of
your space will, this week, be occupied with
very iateresting matter, arising from the cele-
bration of Christmas; and I therefore pur-
pose confining my remarks to the variation of
the compass, leaving the dip and deviation
for your next issue. The variation of the
needle, from the true north, is one of those
problems which are, apparently, insolvable.
Up to the present time no satisfactory theory
has been adduced. Many people think
(having read of the gallant exploits of
Columbus) that he was the first to discover
that the needle did not point directly north.
But it is on record that the Chinese (whose
every toy almost has in it a compass) were
aware of the variation of the needle from the
true north 2,000 years before our Christian
era. This, I think, may be fairly questioned.
Our globe is divided into two hemispheres (if
I may use the word in this sense, through
which you may draw lines like our imaginary
Equator, and call them the “ lines of no
variation.” These lines, however, are not (as
my word “ hemi sphere ” might suggest) anti-
podean to each other, for, in their course,
they are very variable. One of these lines,
which appertains to the Atlantic—the ocean
through which we have just passed—is first
found in 57 0 of south latitude, and in the
neighbourhood of the Sandwich Islands.
From that point, taking an oblique direction,
it comes into the Atlantic in or near that
beautiful harbour Rio Janeiro. Continuing,
as it were, in its course towards the mouth of
the Amazon, and again returning to the west,
it is lost sight of (from want of research) at
the mouth of the Severn, in 56° north lati-
tude. To the east of this line of no variation
the needle gradually varies to the west, until
it reaches its maximum of nearly points in
about our present longitude; when, as we near
the great Australian continent, it rapidly
decreases, and we again come on the other
magnetic equator, called the “Austral-Asiatic”
line of no variation. This line is remarkable
for its great irregularity. Where we cross it,
to the southward of the great Australian


Bight, it runs nearly due north and south,
bisecting the island of Sumla, and, in a most
erratic manner, turning its course due west, it
continues so for nearly 30°, when it again
curves to the north and north-west, and enters
our Indian possessions at Kurrachee, finally
appearing in the White Sea and eastern part of
Lapland. Proceeding on our way east of this
line (say, homward-bound round Cape Horn),
the variation gradually increases, but in the
opposite direction—namely, to the east; and
as we near that cape it is nearly 3 points east.
This variation of the needle is known to be
constantly changing. Professor Lloyd, in his
valuable work, asserts that the magnet under-
goes a daily change, a small movement of the
north end of the magnet to the east during
the morning hours,which reaches its maximum
at about 7 a.m. After that time the north end
moves rapidly to the west, reaching its extreme
westerly position at about 1 p.m , its mean
daily range being 9 0 3." This, of course, is of
no importance in navigation. I only mention
it to show what a sensitive thing a magnet is.
Any of your readers who can solve the
question and give a why and wherefore for
the variation of the needle, I can promise a
country house, with park lands, well-stocked
with deer—luxurious life, in fact, for the re-
mainder of his days. I might write much
more about the variation of the compass, but
I desist out of consideration for the value of
your space, and subscribe myself,
Yours faithfully,
(Signed)
V. R. C. Stacpoole.
AFFAIRS NAUTICAL.
Shannon , Dec. 28.
My Dear Editors, —It affords me much
pleasure to inform you that the atmospherical
disturbances I had prognosticated on certain
days of this month were productive of little
or no inconvenience. The barometer on the
days in question reached very low readings,
plainly indicating that 1 was correct in my
assumption. I see no reason to alter the
opinion I gave you last week, that we should
be in Hob on’s Bay in three weeks’ time from
the 2 r st, although the weather has suddenly
fallen light. I expect to be reported in
Melbourne a fortnight from to-day. Wishing
you a happy new year,
I am, yours cordially,
Nautilus.
Latitude.
Longitude.
Date.
December 22
43.07 s.
43.00
33-49 E.
39-43
50.00
29-33
29.60
.. 23
50.00
46.00
29.80
„ 24
43.00
43.18
„ 25
29-54
~ 26
56.40
43-39.
43-Si
44.29
62.00
„ 2 7
29-49
„ 28
67-13
29-73
Phases of the moon for January , 1879.
Full Moon Jan. 7,23 hr. 47m. morning
Last Quarter „ 14, 23IU*. im. „
New Moon „ 21, 23IU*. 50m. „
First Quarter „ 29, 23hr. 44m. „
Perigee Jan. 14, 4hr.
Apogee „ 28, iBhr.


MEDICAL OFFICER’S REPORT.
Ship free from any epidemic or contagious
disease. General state of health—good.
(Signed) Wm. Hopkins,
Medical Officer.
SHANNON ECHOES.
They say that a square face is one of the
most regular features in the cuddy. We hope
there are no Roundheads among us.
They say that Christmas is a time when all
“ vows ” should be made up. We have seen a
great many “ made up.”
They say that people are wrong to quarrel
with the cook, as his trade is sure to make him
sometimes “ saucy.”
They say that, although the Shannon is a
very dry ship, she is full of creeks.
They say that there is so little salt water on
board the Shannon that any person throwing
it from the poop upon the quarter-deck is
liable to imprisonment.
They say there should be no lack of
vegetables on board, as all the provisions are
Green's.
They say that the call for money on Christ-
mas morning was not nautical , but a naughty
call of a man’s own invention.
They say that the champagne imbibed at
dinner on Christmas Day caused some real
pain in the course of the same night.
Etibmisemmts.
LOST —A BADGE-CAP. Owner left it
in the Cuddy on leaving the Christmas-
Night Entertainment. Address, Mr. Mid-
shipman Cooke, Midshipman’s Berth.
NEW YEAR’S EVE—An ENTER-
TAINMENT will be given on the
’Tween Decks on New Year’s Eve, further
particulars of which will be published on the
3°th.
LOST —On Dec. 27, in the ’Tween Decks,
-j a gentleman’s GOLD RING (Aus-
tralian gold). 12s. Reward. Apply, No. 23
Cabin.
SATURDAY,
JANUARY
4, 1879.
No. 8.
Our task as Editors of the Shannon Gazette is
%
nearly done. This number will, in all proba-
bility, be the last—if we except, perhaps, a
closing supplement. The Shannon Gazette
has lived its allotted time, nearly to the end of
the voyage. Its short span of existence ends
in the beginning of a new year—in the begin-
ning, we might add, of a new phase of life for
many of its readers. We have hopes that our
Gazette has fulfilled the promises with which
it started on its course —namely, that it has
helped to enliven the voyage and to dissemi-
nate the news to all quarters of our little
world —the good ship Shannon. We have


further hopes that the Shannon Gazette will
serve as a diary of the journey to some who
have not had time to keep one of their own.
As such it may be preserved on the book-
shelves of those who will avail themselves of the
privilege of buying a copy, and, perchance, in
future years it may be taken down and perused
with an interest which may not now charac-
terize its pages. As of good wine, so of the
Shannon Gazette , may it be said—
* ‘ Thou growest old ; who does not ? But on earth what
appears
Whose virtues, like thine, [still increase with its
years?”
So that it may aid the memory in recalling
some pleasing episodes in the voyage from
London to Melbourne. Of this voyage it
may be said that on the whole it has been not
only a pleasant, but also a peaceful one. We
have, indeed, seen some squalls, and gales and
high waves, but for the most part the weather
has been delightful and the wind propitious.
And the outer is but a type of the inner scene.
We have had our disputes and differences—they
are as inseparable from humanity as squalls
and gales are from a life on the ocean wave;
but we believe that, considering the compara-
tively small space in which so many people of
different tastes and pursuits have been for
nearly three months thrown together, we have
had a journey of unprecedented harmony, and
that many mere acquaintanceships have
deepened into warm and lasting friendships.
We desire to acknowledge our thanks to
Captain Stacpoole for the kindly aid he has
afforded us as editors, no less than for the
uniform courtesy with which he has treated us
as passengers. Hoping that in future voyages
he may have as exemplary a set of passengers
as he has had this time, we hope, too, that all
his voyages may be as fortunate as the one
just terminated. It remains for us now but to
say to all—captain, officers, crew and fellow-
passengers —in the fulness of the meaning of
the valediction, “ Farewell.”
PASSING EVENTS.
New Year’s Eve. —In celebration of New
Year’s Eve, a concert was given in the ’tween
decks, which was handsomely decorated with
drapings of flags, &c. Mr, Lindsay presided,
and in opening the proceedings commented
upon the duty they owed one to another,
isolated, on an occasion of this kind, from
hearths and homes—a duty, he thought, which
they well fulfilled in their participation in a
festive gathering of that description. From
the coupling of songs in the following, which
was the evening’s programme, it will be seen
that encores were very numerous, the enter-
tainment being one of the most successful of
the many which have been given during the
past few weeks: —Song, Mr. Read, “ She wore
a Wreath of Roses;” Mr. T. Davidson, “The
minute gun at sea ;” Mr. Mason, “ Kathleen
Mavourneen;” Mr. Ecklund, “Teddy O’Niel
Mr. Lever, “ I say nothing to nobody” and
“What I said to Sally;” Mr. Anderson, “Yah,
Yah ” and “Silver Bells;” Miss J. Blake, “Put
me in my Little Bed;” Mr. Easton, “The blar-
ney’s on my tongue ” and “ The Spanish Cava-
lier;”Mr. Hastie, “The Miller” and“Heartsof
Oak ;” Mr. Nathan, “ Nancy Lee;” Mr. John-
stone, “Nae luck about the house;” Mrs. Came-
ron, “Two or three strings to your bow;” Mr.


H.Read, “ Thetemperanceman;” Miss L. Blake,
“ Come home, father ” and “ Under the willow
she’s sleeping;” Mr. Blake, “The mountain
Roseßecitation, Mr. W. R. Selby, “Captain
Reece ;” Boy Brown, “Jeremiah, blow the fire ;”
Mr. Stevens,“Tom Starboard;” Mr. Williamson,
“ The nervous man ;” Mr. Sutton, “ Free and
Easy”and “Lord Lovel;” Mrs. Mansfield, “The
Cottage by the Sea; ” Mr. J. Anderson,“Dublin
Bay ” and “ Tom Bowling. ” Several ladies
and gentlemen volunteering their services as
instrumentalists, all hands were piped to dance,
and the hour elapsing before 12 was thus very
enjoyably spent. Upon 8 bells being struck,
Happy New Years were very freely exchanged
amidst hearty cheers from the crew, who had
assembled on the quarter deck to “ splice the
main brace.”
Death oe Two Cuddy Passengers. —On
Friday morning, January 3, we were pain-
fully shocked to learn that, in the course of the
night, Death had visited two cabins in the
saloon, the deceased being Mr. William
Haig Philp and Mr. Pickering Butterworth
Edleston. In the case of Mr. Philp, the sad
news, was not altogether unexpected, the doc-
tor having for some days previously despaired
of his recovery from the severe pulmonary
disorders which had confined him to his cabin
for many weeks. Mr. Edleston’s case, how-
ever, was of a somewhat different nature, al-
though he was afflicted with the malady to
which Mr. Philp succumbed. The few days’
illness which preceded his decease were caused
more especially by a diseased heart, which
eventually proved the cause of the sudden
termination of his life. Mr. Philp, in his
dying moments, was surrounded by a circle of
attached fellow-countrymen, and the sud-
denness of Mr. Edleston’s death alone de-
prived him of a like attention on the part of a
large number of friends who had given him
their warm sympathy during his indisposition,
and by whom the melancholy event of Friday
last was deeply felt. The affectionate regard in
which the deceased were held was manifested
in the afternoon, when, without exception, the
whole of the passengers and ship’s company
assembled on the quarter-deck to witness
the committal of their remains to a watery
grave. The friends of Mr. Philp, as a last
mark of their respect, bore his corpse from
his cabin to the deck, and members
of the crew, evincing their sympathy with the
passengers in their bereavement, conveyed the
second corpse to its appointed place. The
funeral service was beautifully read by the
Rev. C. E. Drought, who, in the course of his
sermon of the followingSunday,feelingly alluded
to his departed fellow-passengers. The rev.
gentleman, taking for his text the 35th and 36th
verses of the nth chapter of St. John, com-
mented upon the restoration to life of the
daughter of Jairus, the son of the widow of
Nain, and Lazarus of Bethany, and the con-
solation afforded by the Saviour on those
several occasions to those who mourned; and,
adverting to the sad occurrences of two days
previous, he said —“ May there not be a voice
of comfort brought home to the mourners
which shall be of those who have departed from
our midst within the last few days? There may
be a message of consolation in their case as in
that of the widowed mother of Nain. It may
be said that those who departed were called
away at a long distance from their native land.


In one case, there was no mother or sister to
attend at the bedside of the dying; in the
other, there was no wife to heal the wound and
pour in the oil and wine of comfort. But to
these mourners, I say there may be brought
home a message of consolation. There were
kind hearts beating with sympathy at the bed-
side in the one case, there was untiring watch-
fulness, and the most gentle care was taken;
and in the other case, too, there is for the
widow, who is at home in England, a conso-
lation, when she hears that he who has been
taken away from her was prepared for the
great event, and knew his case. He attended
to the calls of religion; he had one of the
clergymen of the ship to constantly pray with
him; and the last words he spoke—were they
not about his wife and children ? We naay
remark, too, that he was amongst the few who
came last month and partook of the Supper
—the communion of our Lord Jesus Christ’s
body and blood, when it was celebrated in
this saloon.”
The Publication and Printing of the
Shannon Gazette. —Out of respect to the
memory of the two passengers who died last
week, the publication of this issue of the
Gazette was postponed from Saturday last until
to-day (Wednesday). With the exeption of a
brief Gazette Extraordinary , this will be the
last issue of the paper. A subscription has
been organized to defray the expenses of print-
ing the Gazette in Melbourne, towards which
the sum of £2l 13s. has already been
guaranteed.


©rujtnal
3£ it t m o r i: a m.
Mr. WILLIAM HAIGH PHILP,
Mr. PICKERING B. EDLESTON,
Died on Board “The Shannon,” 3RD January, 1879.
dedicated to Captai7i and Mrs. Stacpoole, as a slight token
respect , for their kindness to the departed , by The Author.
This time the weak (last time the strong)
Have gone to join the motley throng
Who hover round and overhead—
The wond’rous army of the dead.
No seamen, but two landsmen, they,
Who for their healths had come away;
But, He who’s pleasure ’tis to save,
Had marked them for a wat’ry grave.
Four countrymen in silence keep
A vigil on the mighty deep,
Around a fellow Scotchman’s bed ;
They hold his hands and soothe his head.
Our captain and our doctor had
Done all they knew to save the lad;
His day had come they now well knew—
To ease his pain, all they can do.
Six strong men kneel at early morn,
With heaving chests and looks forlorn ;
They breathe a fervent, silent prayer :
His life was gone—a corpse lay there.
Ah ! Philp, if e’er my lot it be
To die away from home, like thee,
When I am called to join the dead,
May such warm hearts be round my bed.
And chief among the little band
Does strong but gentle “ Sandy ” stand,


Who nurse, and friend, and brother’s been ;
We’ll love his name while raem’ry’s green,
And wish that ev’ry man could be
A staunch and loving friend like thee.
Within another cabin lay
Another senseless form of clay.
None knew the hour he got his call;
More gloom and sorrow spreads o’er all,
When in the morning we are told
“ Poor Edleston is lying cold.”
No friends to whisper in his ears,
To ease his pain or calm his fears,
Tho’ those who watch’d him when in pain
Were willing to have watch’d again ;
And tho’ some others lay close by,
Yet no one thought that he' would die.
Before he cut the thread of life,
They heard him murmur to his wife
And children dear, in accents deep,
But only thought he spoke in sleep.
Oh ! Thou, who hearer art of prayer,
Be at their homes, bring comfort there,
When tidings reach to England’s shore !
Their race is run, their day is o’er.
Two planks, two flags, two fun’ral biers,
Friends cluster round and blend their tears ;
And while we pray our God to save,
Commit their bodies to the wave.
Two corpses floating in the tide,
The “ Rose and Thistle ” side by side ;
Two spirits join’d “ The Great Unknown,”
And kneel before “ The Great White Throne.”
Oh ! Jesus take them to thy breast,
To dwell in everlasting rest.
W. R. S.


These Lines are addressed to those gentle-
men who, by arranging themselves in
watches, day and night, secured constant
attendance at the bedside of Mr. W, H.
Philp during the last days of hils life :
Kind hearts, your work of Christian love is
done,
The wants to which ye ministered are o’er :
Closed are the eyes which looked to you for
The lips are sealed whose parching thirst ye
stayed ;
The brow which ye so gently chafed is cold;
And Philp is “ where the weary are at rest.”
Right well have ye fulfilled the noble task
Which on that day ye nobly undertook,
When ye did range yourselves in companies
To watch beside your dying shipmate’s couch.
And though such offices, to men like you,
Unused to sick-rooms and untrained to nurse,
Must have seemed strange and altogether new;
Yet ye performed them thoroughly and well,
With simple, unaffected charity.
Men that ye are, ye played an angel’s part,
And, following sweet Mercy’s call, became
Mothers and sisters to the sufferer.
And do ye not e’en now find your reward,
When ye remember how he looked to you,
And clung to you and scarce would let you
How, in his lonely helplessness, he turned
To you for comfort —and was comforted ?
If this be not sufficient recompense,
Then think ye further that the God of love
Hath watched your loving labours, and will
bless
You in your hour of need; and when ye hear
The footfall of inevitable death,
“ He, in your sickness, will make all your
bed.”
Yet, more than this—for this is not the end—
When, after death, ye rise again and stand
Before the King of glory on His throne,
Then shall ye hear his voice proclaim aloud ;
“ Come, blessed children of my Father,
come,
“ Receive the Kingdom that hath been pre-
pared
“ For you from the beginning of the world ;
“ For, in that ye have done it unto this
“ My brother, ye have done it unto Me.”
D. A. C.
ODE TO THE ALBATROSS.
Oh, sea bird ! restless, with thy piercing eye,
Skimming so swiftly o’er the storm-tossed
With grand and noble form and thrilling cry,
Tameless and wild, thou art for ever free.
On dangerous rough-bound rocks thou mak’st
thy home,
Dashed by the ocean’s fierce relentless surf;
Thousands of watery miles across the sea
tbou’lt roam,
Quitting betimes that home—those rocks
which gave thee birth.
The sea may roll in fury mountains high,
Her pent-up ire let loose, with mighty winds
may roar;
The albatross, with quickening pace, will fly
Over the stormy billows—high and low he’ll
soar.


Oh ! noble sea bird, as thou wing’st thy flight
And skim’st so gracefully o’er the azure sea;
Though quickly gone, yet dear to memory’s
sight—
Yes, in still midnight hour, who could not
think of thee ?
Fly on, then —on thine eagle course still roam,
In southern latitudes thou’lt always be
Strong on the wing across the ocean’s foam,
Till time is over and there is no sea.
R. S.
Christmas Eve.
SHANNON ECHOES.
They say that an old prize-fighter has turned
up on board as Bendi(d) go and cook another’s
goose.
They say that the dog who worries cats at
night should have his bark taken off for the
benefit of the invalids.
They say that our sheep are likely to escape,
as we have only one Crook(e) among three
Shepherds
They say that though we hear the violin and
concertina down below, we rarely hear the
Read or Harper .
They say that it is curious that if you want
to make a thing whole you have to take it to
“ Chips ” first.
They say that the Shannon should be a good
invalid ship, as she has shown so much of her
heeling powers lately.
tforrespntience.
( 7o the Editors of the Shannon Gazette.)
Gentlemen, — I have heard so much surprise
expressed in various quarters at a certain
passage in the excellent sermon that was
preached to us on Sunday last, that I hope you
will kindly afford me space in your columns
while I endeavour to remove or prevent any
misconception on a subject that must be one
of supreme importance and interest to us all.
The passage I allude to is that in which the
preacher said that the hell to which we assert
in our creed that our Lord descended is the
same as the paradise to which He invited the
dying thief on the cross. That the statement
of so obvious a truth as this should occasion
surprise is indeed most surprising, and argues
a misunderstanding of the two words —hell
and paradise. Let me explain, then, as briefly
as possible, the meaning of these terms as
used, the one in our creed, the other by our
dying Saviour.
Our word “ hell” is most unfortunately used
as the translation of two words bearing in
their own language very different significations:
the one, “ Gehenna,” or the place of torment;
the other, “ Hades,” or the place of departed
spirits. And in the creed it is not to
“ Gehenna,” but to “ Hades,” that our Lord is
affirmed to have descended. And this is in
agreement with the Scriptures, for David says
in the Psalms, “ Thou wilt not leave my soul
in hell” (Hades); and St. Peter, interpreting
the Psalmist’s prophecy, says plainly that he
spake of Christ, “ that His soul was not left in
hell, neither did His flesh see corruption.”


And as hell does not mean the place of tor-
ment, so neither does paradise, in the sense we
are speaking of, mean heaven. For the soul of
Christ did not go to heaven when He “gave up
the ghost;” but, as St. Peter elsewhere expresses
it, “into the lower parts of the earth,” from
whence, and not from heaven, it returned on
the resurrection morning to re-animate His
human body. Nor did His soul enter heaven
till the ascension, when He, as perfect man,
body and soul, ascended up to where He was
before. “ Touch me not,” he said to Mary
Magdalene, “for I am not yet ascended to my
Father.”
The hell, then, to which our Lord descended,
and the paradise to which He invited the thief,
are one and the same, and signify the resting-
place of departed spirits in the interval between
death and the resurrection. To this place,
wherever it is, Christ went, that He might in
all things be like unto those whose nature He
had taken upon Him.
And here let me refer to what I believe to
be a common error. It seems generally sup-
posed that the soul does go to heaven imme-
diately it leaves the body. But, according to
Scripture, this is not so. The soul is said to
enter upon a state of “ sleep.” Death itself is
nearly always called “sleep” by Christ. “Our
friend Lazarus sleepeth: I go to awake him
out of sleep.” And when, at the last, Jesus
comes to earth again, then “ them also that
sleep in Jesus shall God bring with Him.”
If we read Scripture at all carefully, we shall
find that neither body nor soul shall enter
heaven till body and. soul are reunited at the
general resurrection. The intermediate state
is one of peace and rest in God’s keeping—a
state which by no means precludes, but rather
facilitates, a gradual preparation at God’s
hands for the glorious morning of our waken-
ing to enter upon our new and higher state of
existence. With all the disturbing memories
of our past lives, it is difficult to see how such
a state of peace could be secured to us except-
ing under such conditions as those which
Scripture speaks of as “ sleep.”
Apologizing for having trespassed on your
space at greater length than I had intended,
I am, Gentlemen, yours &c.,
D. A. Court,
PALMAM QUI MERUIT FERAT.
To the Editors of the Shannon Gazette.
My Dear Editors, —Permit me in your
columns to give my heartfelt thanks—which I
am sure will be fervently re-echoed by the
friends of Mr. Philp and Mr. Edleston in
Britain—to those fellow-voyagers who gave
such unrelaxing attention to our lately-
deceased friends during their respective ill-
nesses. When so many have devoted them-
selves to these charitable offices, it is difficult,
not to say invidious, to single out any one
person as the special recipient of my thanks.
But I have no hesitation in particularizing in
this instance the services of our friend
“ Sandy,” and I am sure all will endorse my
feeling that the mention of his name is but
due to him. I am confident that this excep-
tion will meet the cordial approval of those
who assisted him in his work of the good
Samaritan.
I am, Gentlemen, faithfully yours,
V. R. C. Stacpoole.


THE DEVIATION AND DIP OF THE
COMPASS.
My dear Editors, —In continuation of my
previous intention of writing on the variation,
dip, and deviation of the compass, I will—
having written on the former —describe, as
shortly as possible, the latter two, namely, dip
and deviation. Like our lines of “ no varia-
tion,” our globe is divided into two —to use
my former term —“magnetic hemispheres” of
lines of “ no dip,” along which the needle rests
in a perfectly horizontal position. These lines
cut our terrestrial equator in two points —not
as my term “ hemisphere ” might lead your
readers to imagine—not equidistant. To par-
ticularize the positions would occupy a greater
space than you would probably care to devote
to such a subject. It is supposed that if, in
our research, we could reach the magnetic
poles, the needle, instead of lying horizontally,
would stand perpendicularly; in fact, one of
our great northern navigators (I think, Sir
James Ross) discovered, or very nearly so, the
equator of “ no dip ” in or about 79 0 north
latitude, where the needle stood almost verti-
cally. It is a strange fact that these lines of
“ no dip ” become more and more unsymmetri-
cal as they approach the magnetic poles, in
consequence (it is supposed) of those poles
not being directly opposite each other, nor
coincident with the poles of the magnetic
equator. Turning to deviation, let me say
that it is more perceptible in iron ships; in
fact, it ought to be termed “ local attraction,”
for it arises principally from that. I, myself,
as chief officer of an iron ship, on her first
voyage, “swinging” for the adjustment of the
compasses at Erith, found them to vary
points; or, in plainer terms, when the ship's
head—by standard compass on shore—was
north, her head was but of a point from
south. On examination we found that this
arose from the steering compass being placed
in too close proximity to some iron. I was
appointed “ general overlooker ” to this same
ship while building.
One day a clergyman came on board and
asked me if I thought the owners would like
to have the magnetism taken out, as he had
just done similar work for some ironclads be-
longing to the French Government. I was
incredulous as to the possibility of his being
able to do so. His term was “to demagnetize
the ship.” However, to convince me, he
produced a powerful magnet, about four
pounds in weight, and a piece of iron of about
one pound weight. With this magnet he drew
the piece of iron about the table. He then
asked if I thought he could take the magnetism
out of such a powerful magnet. I was more
incredulous than ever, when he produced a
small magnet not larger than a Jew’s harp, and
passing it a few times over the other, so took
out the magnetism that the magnet and piece
of iron lay alongside of each other without
the slightest tendency to unite. By a reverse
movement he restored the magnetism.
This deviation alters in the different hemis-
pheres. The same deviation card which applies
in an iron ship to the Northern does not apply
to the Southern Hemisphere. To obviate this
deviation as much as possible, it has been
necessary to lay iron ships with the keel as
near north and south as possible, as they are
then less likely to change. Again, it is. said


that this deviation is intensified by the aurora
borealis and aurora Australis in their respective
hemispheres. The launching will frequently
cause a change in the distribution of magnet-
ism. Another assertion, made on good
authority, is that the re-riveting of a plate will
quite alter the deviation.
Bare- Ther '
meter. m °-
meter.
Date.
Latitude.
Longitude.
December 29
44.56 s.
44-45
72.1? E.
77.04
9 9 30
80. 30
9, 31
January 1
44-55
44-55
29.80
44-40
93-35
29-34
29.56
99 3
44-19
.. 4
105.44
29.36
In my endeavours to condense, I fear your
readers may think that I have not been
sufficiently explicit, but I have been influenced
solely by consideration for your space.
99 5
43-35
ih.45
29.40
~ 6
43-13
I*6. 13
29.70
29.90
» 7
43-03
121.21
„ 8
127.36
42.22
29.90
I am, Gentlemen,
Yours sincerely,
Faithfully yours,
Nautilus,
V. R. C. Stacpoole.
OUR LOG.
MEDICAL OFFICER’S REPORT.
(By a Landlubber.)
The state of health on board the Shannon
is, at the present time, very satisfactory. Two
deaths have occurred since last report, viz. :
Mr. Edleston’s and Mr. Philp’s—the former
from heart disease and syncope ; the latter,
phthisis.
Shannon , January 7.
As I indite these lines, I am very much
exercised in my mind as to the choice of
ground upon which my New Year sympathies
may clasp those of your readers in affectionate
embrace. So conflicting are the divers senti-
ments people cherish regarding the obligations
of mankind at this paradoxical season of con-
trition and festivity, and so vague are my own
views upon the same question, that I am wont
to spend the first few days of the year in
wholesale corn-treading, and to heap coals of
fire upon my head from hour to hour. My
feeble discernment lands me in a sea of
difficulties, in which my trepidation imprisons
me well-nigh over the festive extravagances of
Twelfth Night. So soon as I flatter myself
that I have acquired sufficient perspicuity to
render me confidently sociable, so soon do I
shock the sensitiveness of the man who.
(Signed) Wm. Hopkins,
M.D., M.R.C.S.L., &c.
Shannon , Jan. 7, 1879.
AFFAIRS NAUTICAL.
Shannon , Jan. 8, 1879.
My dear Editors, —The scent of the land is
in my nostrils, and encourages me in the hope
that on Sunday next we may be enjoying the
luxury of roast beef, anticipating which I am
unable to write at my usual length. Since
your last issue, we have been in the way of
very fine wind, as the following table will
show: —


envelopes his inner self in the conventional
vesture of sackcloth and ashes. Again, I
mark a man who my fancy tells me is over-
poweringly redolent of that odour of sanctity
which is, unfortunately, unknown of the
olfactory organ ; and, with sedateness stamped
upon my countenance, I advance with punc-
tilious footsteps—expatiating, perchance, upon
the solemnity of New Year’s resolutions—when,
lo! I stagger, and stand aghast at the
determined repulsion, couched, alas, in terms
which render conciliatory measures a leek far
too strong for my delicate senses. And so I
walk apart in moody solitude, cursing the
“ spite ” which ran me into times so irrepar-
ably disjointed. Seek in this humiliating
confession, my dear Editors, the cue for my
reticence in delivering myself of the senti-
ments born of the season in their pristine
purity.
But, if for no other reason than to fill the void
in my manuscript, and to quell the upbraid-
ings of my rebellious conscience, I must thrust
aside the ascetic garb veiling the heart which
would fain exhibit itself upon my sleeve. The
sympathies, however, which are fitfully irradi-
ated through the aperture are on the face of
them a very maze of inconsistencies. They
will be found, firstly, in full concord with the
man who, while the 31st is still in embryo,
adheres to the even tenor of his way, diverting
it by no anticipatory excitement; they are
ungrudgingly his when, with a countenance
proclaiming an utter indifference to the sub-
traction of another year from his life, he
devotes himself heart and soul for the last two
but one of the fleeting hours of the old year to
a friendly “ rubber; ” they follow him to his
favourite corner on the poop, where, unbe-
holden, he philosophically computes his past
year’s fortunes and misfortunes, and mentally
notes his balance or his deficit with composed
feelings; they haunt him as, with the same
equable mind, he betakes himself to the lower
deck and courts his slumber, heedless of the
absent “joy-bells;” but ray sympathies are
never more unreservedly his than when, with
irrepressible yearning, his last thoughts cleav-
ing to a New Year’s Eve gone by, he craves—
“ The touch of a vanished hand,
Or the sound of a voice that is still.”
But, avaunt, thou unromantic conception of
our New Year’s Eve upon the billows ! —a joy-
illumined picture takes the place of my unim-
aginative creation. All hail to that jovial adieu
to 1878 which rang through the timbers of the
’tween decks ! I can imagine how readily my
friend, who otherwise surrendered himself to
the mild excitement of whist, accepted the
proffered seat in this goodly company; how,
in the profusion of tastefully-displayed bunting,
in the enthusiastic plaudits, in the universal
merriment and hilarity, enthralled by the
enchanting melodies of our friend S , he
lost count of the gold-grained moments of 1878.
Having thus feasted, what ecstatic feelings
were ours to learn that the cup of pleasure had
yet another long and strong draught; that the
musicians were in the orchestra; that the decks
were cleared; that the blushing fair of the
Shannon , under the direction of matrons with
a stern eye to decorum, w'ere peeping timidly
from behind the angles of deck-houses and
companions, awaiting, with exemplary patience,
the advances of swains conscious of terpsi-
chorean graces! Where is my friend of reflec


tive habits to keep his vigil, to soberly cogitate
while the midnight hour strikes ? When my
dear friend S and his ulster to boot, whirl
before my eyes in the giddy waltz ; when, in a
pause suggested by the vagaries of Sutton’s
ulster, I see him shed the dangerous light of
his fascinating eyes upon the fair one whose
waist his arm so tenderly encircles —what can
flesh and blood do but pitch its hesitation over
the taffrail, and plunge into the whirlpool at
the heels of the persevering and good-natured
S . Never, I guess, were eight bells made
with such gusto ; never was the melodious
sound interrupted by so unmelodious a charm.
I had always imagined that Jones threw his
empty biscuit tins overboard. Thoughtful
Jones ! No store of harps and violins, but
of empty biscuit tins enough to enliven a life-
time of New Year’s revels.
Peeping into the cuddy through a skylight
grating to watch the effect of the pandemonium
outside upon its few meditative inmates, I
spied something resembling the meal-bell in
the hands of the august, but not unbenignant,
chief of the powers that be, which he rang
right merrily the while he essayed to sip nectar
from the lips of a generously-disposed, warm-
hearted creature of the other sex. Beholding
this, the bowels of my compassion opened for
the free embracement of my friend S ;
but Jones had forestalled me with one of his
biscuit tins. Once, in the furtive gleam of a
pipe-applied vesta, it was my happy lot to see
his face. “High-souled joy” lit up every
feature as he drank in the music of the biscuit
tin, pausing, now and again, to add his quota
to the unlimited cheering, and not omitting to
contribute them as heartily as ever in the
moment of his own adulation. And then
But while this merry-making crew stands out
vividly in my mind’s eye, while I am endeavour-
ing to recall the very essence of our New Year's
jollity, there are soft footsteps and low whispers
about my cabin door. The bright picture of
New Year’s Eve is to be blotted out by a sad
face which peeps in upon me. Its errand
dawns upon me long ’ere any words are spoken.
No need to tell me that poor Philp’s weary
pilgrimage is at last over. His devoted friend
tells me that in the middle watch the angel of
mercy released him. It was impossible to
gaze upon the careworn face which met mine,
so closely was it allied with my recollections
of him whose spirit had embarked on its
journey to the haven of eternal rest, and,
gazing, to mistake its legibly-written tale of
sorrow. I saw the grief of the manly heart
which, for weeks past, has developed its
sterling character in hours of patient, un-
wearying labour by the bedside of its suffering
countryman.
Mingling with the mourner’s tear, there will
assuredly be a tear of gratitude that the dying
found such trusty Celtic hearts to minister to
his comfort in the hour when he most needed
it, and that they were encouraged in their
office of love by so noble an example of self-
abnegation. Happy, indeed, our lot, if, when
the dread messenger assails us, our pillow be
smoothed by a Sandy Philp—if, as we pass
into the vale of the shadow, we grasp the
hand of such a friend! These crudely-
expressed thoughts of mine are scarcely dry
upon the paper, when another hand is laid
on my shoulder, and I learn, with unspeakable


dismay, that the dread messenger had a two-
fold mission, and that the spirit of our friend
Edleston had been summoned to join that of
poor Philp’s on its road to the “unknown
bourne.” His lifeless clay, they told me, lay
on his couch stamped with that peace which,
we may be confident, is the portion of his
unfettered spirit. The swift, noiseless, unex-
pected despatch of the reaper’s mission is a
heavy chastening to many who would have
esteemed it a privilege to solace with words of
hope and comfort —if such were needed—in
his dying moments one who bore his cross so
meekly. But they have the comforting reflec-
tion, which must also be the consolation of our
dear friend’s mourning relatives, that the last
throbbings of his warm heart were unattended
with pain, and that he tacitly resigned him-
self to the “celestial benediction” which
assumed so dark a guise. In that bright
afternoon’s sunshine, when the thrilling
words, “commit their bodies to the deep,”
rose above the sighing of the wind
in the rigging above us, and the two corpse-
laden biers which jutted through the lee
ports were relieved of their light burdens, one
needed all the resolute strength of Christian
fortitude to check the pent-up tear. But,
gazing on the expanse of dazzling foam which
concealed the dead from its view, fragile
humanity beheld a symbol of a calmness and
purity infinitely beyond the highest ambitions
of its daily life, and prayed that the existence
so beautifully typified might be in store for its
lost friends.
Quite in keeping with the close of the year,
and its mournful evidences of our mortality,
our voyage is fast drawing to a close. Cape
Leeuin is far away on our port quarter, and the
fresh northerly breeze warns me that the
return of another Wednesday will find the
editorial mind of the Shannon Gazette engaged
with other matters; the Gazette will be meta-
morphosed, perchance, into a grumbler , a
growler , or a referee; and new hands will
chronicle the old ship’s doings, and hand down
to posterity the record of her shifting popula-
tion’s best achievements. Years hence, my
dear Editors, we shall perhaps take the Gazette
down from its small nook in the region of
weighty tomes, and, turning over its half-
forgotten pages, after the heat and toil of an
Australian day, the odour of brine will infest
our nostrils, and— I had almost said that our
fancy would transport us to the deck of the
old frigate. But such bliss, I fear, cannot be
ours. The wildly eccentric pitching and roll-
ing to which she is given in her playful
moods, the alternation of divers musical sounds
peculiar to masts and loose cabin furniture—
to such heights our imagination may not soar.
But how easily will it climb to that vantage-
ground, where, despite the hazy distance of
time, the graceful lines and shapely spars of
our old love will ever greet our longing eyes!
Many of the forms which haunt the deck may
be mere phantoms; but there will be many, I
wot, whom, in the intervening years, our hearts
will have grappled with hooks of steel; whose
faces will wear the kindly smile which endeared
them to us in the early days of our acquaint-
ance. May it ever beam npon me from your
countenances!
I am,
Yours hopefully,
Landlubber.


SITUATIONS WANTED.
SITUATION as Coachman, or Groom and
Coachman. Age 35. English. First-
class testimonials as to sobriety and ability.
Address J. 8,, Post Office, Melbourne.
TO MANUFACTURING CONFEC-
TIONERS.
SCOTCHMAN, age 26, having a thorough
knowledge of the trade in all its
branches, is open for engagement. Address
W. J., Post Office, Melbourne,
BUTCHER wishes situation, Shop or
Slaughterhouse. Age 40. English.
References as to integrity and sobriety.
Address A. M., Post Office, Melbourne,
WANTED situation as Storekeeper or
Warehouseman. Age 25. Scotchman.
Home references as to honesty, sobriety, and
ability. Address G. L., Post Office, Mel-
bourne,
TO ARCHITECTS AND SURVEYORS.
WANTED, a situation as Assistant.
Age 26. References as to ability
and character. Apply A. W., Post Office,
Melbourne.
LOST. —A Book of Humorous Poetry;
also, an Aluminium Gold Pencil-case.
Whoever finds the same, and returns them to
the owner, will be suitably rewarded. Apply
Mr. C. Read, 29 ’Tween Decks.
FOUND, on Deck, the Heel of a Lady’s
Shoe. The owner can have it by
applying to Snozzle, Port Watch.
GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY
No. 9.
SATURDAY,
JANUARY
11, 1879.
Original
FAREWELL!
Shannon Gazette ! thy day is nearly o’er,
One little spark of life remains to thee—
To flash a Supplement before our gaze,
Then for a season gently pass away.
But thou, too, hast thy “Hades,” and thou wilt,
After the purifying of “ The Press,”
Appear a volume neatly sewn,
And printed in a good old Roman type;
Then in thy novel form thou’lt find thy way
Into the loving homes we’ve left behind,
And cheer the hearts of many anxious friends
Who we do love most dearly and who watch,
With fever’d brain and palpitating hearts,
The shipping news, to see the joyful words,
“ Our good ship Shannon has got safely out.”
God bless our “absent friends ” we all do pray


Our mothers, fathers, wives, and sisters dear;
Our brothers, children, and all those to whom
We’re bound by that sweet tie called friendship.
A dearer tie than this I do not think
That I could name ! for does it not comprise
All those that we have mentioned?—and, what’s
more,
Should circle round the universe, and clasp
Each fellow-wand'rer by the hand and say—
“ Come, brother, He who died for us hath said,
‘ Each other love ’ and ‘ as ye mete to men,
So shall my grace be measured unto you ! ’ ”
Full well thy little mission thou hast done,
For do not all thy pages breathe of peace,
And happiness, and hope, and joy and song;
Or sorrow for all those who suffer pain—
For those who are bereaved, compassion I
And do not all these words, tho’ different,
When sifted through the riddle of our mind,
Bear the same meaning, and come back to us
In one short heavenly word called “ love" ?
We part in harmony; and now unto all—
Our captain, officers, and noble crew,
We bid a kind farewell! May He who guides
Your vessel safely o’er the raging sea,
Guide you at last to that celestial port
Where cares, and storms, and sorrows are
unknown.
Dear fellow-passengers, before we part,
Let me address a little word to you :
If ere my jingling verses gave offence—
I meant it not; my motto has been “Peace.”
And tho’ on earth, we ne’er may meet again,
There are some friendships made on board this
I would not give for coronets, or gold
In mountains. For would not life be cheerless
Without that tender hand grasp from the heart,
Showing that the two unite in telegraphing
“ love''
True love , true friendship? And may God be
with
And help us where we go, and lead us to that
“ worldf
The older than “ the old,” the brighter than
“ the new ! ’’
Farewell ! I stretch my hand to all of you —
A poor man’s hand, but honest , therefore clean.
Adieu ! W. R. S.
AFFAIRS NAUTICAL.
Shannon, Jan. ii.
My dear Editors, —Having been informed
that a supplement to the Gazette published on
Wednesday last is to be issued when we reach
the Heads, I avail myself of the opportunity
to take a farewell of you, and to send you
particulars of the last three days’ running, the
last, I am, in one sense, glad to say, I shall
have to send you. You will, doubtless,
reciprocate the sentiment. With agreeable an-
ticipations of correspondence of a less public
description in days to come, I bid you heartily
■“ Good-bye.”
Baro- Ther-
meter. mometer.
Longitude.
Latitude.
29-95 5 1'A
30.08 58
30.06 60
January 9
41.575.
41.09
131.44 E.
135-52E-
-139-58e.
„ 10
11
40.02
in joyful adieu,
Gentlemen,
I am,
Yours faithfully,
Nautilus.


PASSING EVENTS.
Farewell and Valedictory.— The ship
being on Saturday evening, January n, very
near her journey’s end, Captain Stacpoole, in
pursuance of an old-established Shannon
custom, entertained the cuddy passengers at
supper. The passengers, without exception,
responded to the invitation, and the well-laden
table having been considerably lightened of its
burden, the Rev. D. A. Court rose, amid loud
and prolonged applause, and announced his
intention, on behalf of his fellow-passengers, of
presenting Captain Stacpoole with an address.
The address ran as follows : —“To Captain V.
R. C. Stacpoole, Ship Shannon, January,
1879. —As our long journey is now drawing to
a close, we, the undersigned passengers of the
Shannon, are desirous of conveying to you
some expression of our esteem and regard. Of
your qualities as a seaman, it would be an
impertinence for us to presume to judge—your
reputation is too firmly established to need any
comment on our part. But courtesy and good
humour are qualities which we can all appre-
ciate, and we desire to express as strongly and
sincerely as possible our sense of the uniform
cheerfulness, kindness, and forbearance which
we have experienced at your hands throughout
the voyage. Not only have your cheerful voice
and genial manners enlivened the deck and
cuddy, but the readiness with which you have
always met us half way has contributed more
than anything else to the success of those
entertainments by which we have from time to
time endeavoured to dispel the bugbears of
tediousness and ennui. Above all, we desire
to record our warm admiration of the unwearied
kindness and attention which you and your
excellent wife have bestowed upon the numer-
ous invalids who took passage on your ship in
search of health; particularly in the case of
those who, after a long and wearisome period
of sickness, have just been taken from us. We
would also take this opportunity of testifying
to the gentlemanly bearing of the officers under
your command, and to the zeal displayed by
them in the discharge of their duties. We
are, sir, yours cordially,”—(Here follow the
names of passengers.)
In making the presentation, he said he
would not affect any regret that, through force
of circumstances, the duty should have fallen
upon his shoulders. He was heartily glad to
be the medium of communication between
those who had been his companions for months
past —and whom he was happy to call his
good friends—and the captain, under whose
auspices they had been brought so far upon
their voyage, whose memory would remain
green among them, he ventured to say, for
many a long year to come, associated with
this pleasant and happy period of their lives.
The address having been read, Captain Stac-
poole, in reply, said that he, in conjunction
with the officers of the ship, had done his best
to please everyone, and he was pleased to
receive such a flattering testimony of his
success in this direction. He was sure that
the officers under him had, so far as ability and
courtesy were concerned, been equal to the
occasion. (Hear, hear.) Mr. Burnside
having responded, on behalf of the officers, to
the amicable sentiments of the passengers
embodied in the address, Captain Stacpoole
proposed the health of the passengers, con


gratulating the company upon the good
feeling which had existed throughout the
voyage, not only between the passengers them-
selves, but between the passengers and the
officers of the ship, who, he felt sure, would
unanimously join him' in wishing them all
success in the various objects for which they
had undertaken the passage. (Hear, hear.)
He was also glad to observe that the distinc-
tion which usually intruded itself between the
cuddy and second class passengers had been
less marked than on former occasions. (Hear,
hear.)
Mr. Sutton, who was much applauded, rose
to respond. He said, —“ Captain Stacpoole and
officers of the Shannon , —I am duly sensible of
the great honour conferred upon me in the
request to respond to this toast. I thank you
from the bottom of my heart for the very kind
manner in which you have been pleased to
drink our healths. We ought indeed to be
thankful to you for bringing the ship so far
safely upon its voyage. I regard the old
Shannon as a bridge which has carried us
across a most capricious ocean. (Hear, and
laughter). I need not say how heartily glad
we are to meet you here at this festive board
(hear, hear), in commemoration of the termina-
tion of our voyage. We see around us those for
whom we care, those who we know thoroughly
well, those who we appreciate—sweet kindred
spirits. (Loud laughter and cheers.) To-morrow,
perhaps, we shall be separated. Some will go
to Tasmania (laughter), some will remain in
Victoria; others, we hope, will return home to
dear old England, the land of their birth.
But, in spite of these partings, the friendships
we have gathered round us in this ship will be
indelible (laughter), and, gentlemen, will be
handed down by the sands of time. (Loud and
prolonged laughter and cheers). I will say to
those who have drunk our healths that, though
absent in the body, we shall be present in the
spirit. (Cheers). We shall always remember
the officers of the Shannon, and shall be only
too glad to meet them in any quarter of the
globe.” (Loud cheers.)
The remaining toasts were —“ Captain and
Mrs. Stacpoole,” proposed by the Rev. F.
King, and responded to by Captain Stacpoole;
“The Editors and Copyist (Mr. Cooke) of
the Shannon Gazette ,” proposed by Captain
Stacpoole, and responded to by the senior
editor; and “The Ladies,” proposed by Mr.
Selby, and responded to by Mr. Chope. A
very pleasant evening was brought to a close
with songs, by Messrs. Sutton, Scott, Selby,
and Herr and Frau Neu.
The Arrival in Port took place at 8.30
p.m., Sunday, 12th January, 1879.
We, the Editors, desire to record our thanks
to Mr. Henry Cooke for the time and trouble
he has taken copying the Shatmon Gazette;
and we are also requested by the clergymen,
captain, and passengers, to express our grati
tudc to the same gentleman for the able
manner in which he has officiated at the
harmonium during divine service.
Walker. May, and Co., Printers, 9 Mackillop Street, Melbourne.


