

“ Make money, my if you can —but make
money.”— Maxim of the Age. '
JPJL.tt'JO X. APRIL, 1878.
' ' » ■ . -
PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR BY
SCRYMGOUR & SONS, 89, KING WILLIAM ST.
1878.




THE
UNSUCCESSFUL COLONIST;
MISFORTUNES; OBSERVATIONS,
AND OPINIONS.
AS RELATED BY HIMSELF.
“ Make money, my son —honestly if you can —but make
money*— Maxim of the Age.
:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED FOR THE AUTHOR BY
SCRYMGOUR & SONS, 89, KING WILLIAM ST.
1878.




DEDICATION.
TO THOSE WHO HAVE CHILDREN IN TRAINING FOR THE
BATTLE OF LIFE : TO THE YOUTH OF THE COLONY
WHO HAVE THAT BATTLE BEFORE THEM AND WHO
MAY BE DISPOSED TO RESENT THE NECESSARY
RESTRAINTS AND GUIDANCE OF THEIR
ELDERS : AND TO THE NUMBER, NOT
A SMALL ONE, WHO HAVE FAILED
IN ACHIEVING AN HONEST INDE-
PENDENCE THROUGH UNTOWARD CIR-
CUMSTANCES OR CONSTITUTIONAL FAILING,
THESE SKETCHES ARE DEDICATED, WITH A
HOPE THAT SOME LITTLE INSTRUCTION AS WELL AS
AMUSEMENT MAY BE DERIVED FROM THEIR PERUSAL.
I*l Hss/r?7/8
ZS-5-77




CHAPTER I.
PREFATORY.
The career of “ The Successful Merchant ” having been
held up as in some sort a pattern for the imitation of the
rising generation, there seems no valid reason why that of
an “ Unsuccessful Colonist ” should not be of some service
in showing what our youth should avoid. In one respect,
at least, I claim to have a decided advantage over the
gushing clerical biographer of the wealthy Bristol trades-
man. My acquaintance with the errors and weaknesses of
the subject of my sketch is far more intimate than his
insight into his hero’s defects —if he had any, which does
not appear—and I believe that I have the courage to point
my moral by their portrayal. At the same time, while I
know that the prosperity of my more successful antitype
was not altogether due to qualities which should commend
themselves to the admiration of his fellows, I venture to
believe that my own worldly failure is not entirely to be
attributed to causes over which I had control. So far,
however, as errors of training, character, or conduct, may
have conduced to the marring of my career or prospects
these pages shall reproduce them for the warning and
instruction of whomsoever it may concern.


My objects in taking up my pen to narrate the principal
events of my past life are various. Imprimis , lam just
now afflicted with a redundancy of spare time: the
cacoethes scribendi is on me, and write I must. Secondly
(and especially), I have a brood of chickens around me,
whose little beaks are ever open for a supply of physical
nourishment, and whose wants generally are various and
unintermittent. Thirdly, my experiences have been of so
varied a nature, and have been spread over so many
countries, and in so many different capacities, that I
cannot but think they may have some interest, especially
for those whose lot has been cast in a more circumscribed
sphere. At the same time, during my twenty-three years’
residence in South Australia, I have been somewhat
intimately mixed up, in my humble way, with the muta-
tions of public events, and the great social changes which
have taken place throughout that time. Various under-
takings, of greater or less importance, have also been
initiated by me, occasionally without my intervention
having been generally known. It is my purpose to inter-
weave these public recollections with the more personal
part of my narrative, recalling men and things as they
may naturally arise. Colonists of more recent advent
may be interested in reading these pictures of an earlier
day, while those who were contemporary with the events
related may in some cases learn something about them of
which they were not previously aware, and at any rate


may find old memories revived, —pleasantly or the reverse,
as the case may be. Gossiping and trivial Ido not
doubt these pages will be considered by many; but, as
life is made up of trivialities, so no accurate picture
either of an individual life, or of a portion of the early
history of a young settlement, could be given, without
recording the little with the great.
I may add, that among the causes of my want of
worldly success, are undoubtedly to be reckoned the keen
interest in political affairs and the eager desire of analyzing
questions affecting public interests, which I have ever felt.
This peculiarity, and some more or less intimate connec-
tion with journalism for some time, has led to my forming
opinions on various matters of general policy, many of
them at variance with received, or at any rate adopted,
views. These opinions I shall not scruple to introduce,
for what they may be worth, in touching on the subjects to
which they refer.
For the benefit of English readers into whose hands
this little book may fall, and who may not unnaturally
wonder at the recital of occurrences to them commonplace,
or at the detail of matters of purely local interest, I
repeat that I write mainly for two classes, —those who
have never visited the old country, and to whom
therefore its manners and customs are strange, and those
who, from lengthened residence in this colony, are par-
tially intimate with the people and events referred to.


I have also had in view a growing evil, which, though not
confined to these young communities, is more noticeable
here than in older countries : the disinclination of parents
and children to the imposition of, and obedience to, those
wholesome restraints appropriate to the early days of life,
which, judiciously applied, tend to curb that restless dis-
position so fatal to success.


CHAPTER IT.
MY ORIGIN AND EARLY DAYS.
“ The family is the earliest school at which we are placed; it is therefore
of the utmost consequence that, before other agencies are brought to bear
upon children, their home education shall improve cheir minds, and incline
them in the right direction. The lessons whieh we receive in the house-
hold, the examples which are there set before us, above all perhaps the
influences to which we are there subjected, and which our spirits take in
almost as unconsciously as our lungs inhale the atmosphere by which wo
are surrounded, have more to do with our after-careers as individuals and
with the future character of the community to which we belong, than we
can possibly estimate.” —Author of “ The Gentle Life.”
Without trenching on the special province or theories of
Darwin, or so much as referring to the great Simian, our
common ancestor, a few words as to my immediate progeni-
tors may not be out of place. In fact, the design of these
sketches would be incomplete were I not to commence even
outside the threshold of my career. The remotest ancestor,
then, of whom I have any personal knowledge, was my
paternal grandfather; though the family tree struck its
roots deep into the earth, and its branches were wide-
spreading. Like the rest of this side of the house my
grandfather was a member of the Society of Friends, or
Quakers, hailing from a small market town in the northern
part of Cornwall. During his lifetime he was largely
engaged in mining pursuits, and I infer that considerable


success had attended his operations, inasmuch as, after his
death, the family mansion, a place of note in the neighbor-
hood, was taken as a residence by Sir William Molesworth,
afterwards well-known as Secretary of State for the Colo-
nies. Of the family of six surviving his decease my father
was the eldest; the younger brothers attained position and
comparative opulence in mercantile and banking pursuits.
My father severed his connection with the religious
body, of which he was a member by birth, by his marriage,
early in life, with a member of another persuasion. In
those days, and until comparatively few years since, such
alien unions necessarily involved loss of membership among
Friends; subject, however, to re-instatement on due peni-
tence for the back-sliding being expressed. As may be
expected, few availed themselves of the opportunity to
re-unite themselves to the body on such terms, and my
father was not among the number. Soon after his
marriage he removed into the adjoining county of Devon-
shire, and settled down at Exeter, where the remainder of
his life was spent, and where a numerous family—l think
thirteen—of sons and daughters were born to him. Some
of these died in infancy, including the only one who
followed me ; so that I was practically the youngest of a
family of eight—three boys and five girls—all of whom
grew up to man and womanhood.
Behold me then, ushered into the world on the 25th of
July, 1837, after an interval of five years since a birth had


occurred in the household, “ the baby,” and naturally the
pet of the large circle, several members of which had by
this time passed the period of youth. During the seven
years which elapsed before the first break in the circle took
place my memory recalls many points of interest. Leav-
ing out the ordinary domestic incidents, as annual sea-side
flittings and the like, I have a vivid recollection of the
excitement of at least one election contest. Party feeling
ran very high in Exeter, then and long after a great head-
quarters of ecclesiastical dignitaries and tory squirearchy,
A large section of the public, however, supported the whig
candidate, and managed for a long time to return him at
the head of the poll. This was Mr. Edward Divett, for
many years a highly respected member of the House of
Commons, and, if I mistake not, a director of the South
Australian Company. At the general election to which I
specially refer, our house broke out into a perfect eruption
of the orange and purple colours of the liberal candidate;
and great was our jubilation, as was natural, at his
being sent back to Parliament, to the discomfiture of the
hated tories. The popular view of the relative merits of
the various aspirants for senatorial honours was embodied
in this touching stanza: —
“ Mr. Divett’s a gentleman ;
Sir John Duckworth’s a fool;
And Lord Lovaine’s a young jackass,
Just escaped from school.”


The young nobleman, whose youthful ambition was thus
rudely checked, is now the wealthy and powerful Duke of
Northumberland, who received the appointment of Lord
Privy Seal in the Conservative administration a few weeks
since.
Another great cause of chronic disturbance in my native
city was the unpopularity of the bishop, the well-known
Dr. Philpotts, and the consequent jealousy exhibited by the
masses of any supposed leaning, by the clergy, to the
Puseyite doctrines which their head notoriously favoured.
So far was this feeling carried that I can well recollect a
serious riot occurring at the church of our parish, the
immediate cause being the popish tendency, displayed by
the rector in preaching in his sun lice. In modern times,
when the lowest of “ Evangelicals ’’ adopts this practice as
a matter of course, this will hardly seem credible; but I
only recently met, in an article on church matters in a
magazine, a reference to the particular disturbances 1 was
an eye witness to. The clergyman had to make his escape
by a back way, under the protection of the police, while
the crowd was hooting and pelting stones in an alarming
manner. Exeter was noted also, in those days, for its
turbulent commemoration of Guy Fawkes’ Day, when gentle
and simple were accustomed to hold high carnival amidst
fireworks and tar-barrels, and the police were not unfre-
quently set at utter defiance during the celebration. The
pope was usually the h'ete noir of the occasion, but I


remember one year when the bishop of the diocese was the
u Guy ” of the day, and his lordship’s effigy was duly com-
mitted to the flames amidst the plaudits of an assembled
multitude. What intensified the dislike, in which this—in
some ways distinguished—prelate was held, was the repu-
tation he had acquired for greed. Having obtained his
own promotion to the see by political services rendered to
the ministry of the day, he seemed determined that as
many good things as possible should be kept in the family.
Sons, sons-in-law, nephews, and so on, were accordingly
presented to all the choice pieces of preferment which came
in the way. It is even said that this chief pastor refused
to induct a clergyman, nominated by the dean and chapter
to a valuable living in their gift, till the expiration of the
period when the right of presentation devolved on himself
by effluxion of time, and that he then quietly put one of
his numerous and fortunate kinsmen into the vacant
benefice. This state of things has fortunately become com-
pletely altered; the present occupant of the see, Dr.
Temple, being as notable an exemplar of devotedness and
disinterestedness as his predecessor was the reverse.
The advent of the iron horse in the western county is
one of the memorabilia of its and my history. It must
have been about 1843 that the Bristol and Exeter Railway
line was completed to the latter city, and great were the
rejoicings thereat. I had often visited the works in pro-
gress prior to the arrival of the first locomotive, and the


smell of tar to this day recalls to my mind the odour which
pervaded the vicinity of the construction operations. On
the day of the opening our family were conveyed to a
meadow adjacent to the line, and held an al fresco enter-
tainment in honour of the occasion. The arrival of the
first train, covered with flowers, and exciting the intense
wonder and admiration of the natives, opened a new world
to my young imagination. In 1844 I had my first and
last experience of the real old-fashioned coaching, under one
of its most favourable aspects. My parents determining to
visit their relatives in their native haunts, I was chosen to
accompany them. We started by a celebrated line of
coaches then running from Exeter into Cornwall, and
which, I believe, was one of the best managed lines in the
kingdom. Leaving Exeter at about 4 o’clock in the after-
noon we arrived at Launceston the same night. On the
following day we proceeded in a postchaise through the
county of Cornwall, passing through Bodmin, where the
execution of a murderer was exciting the populace, to oar
destination, Wadebridge, a quaint market town near
Padstow, the port. My interest was, of course, aroused by
the sight of my father’s birthplace, which occupied a com-
manding position overlooking the town, and which was
visible from our carriage windows long before our arrival.
The old house had by that time passed into the occupation
of strangers, but my father’s sisters still resided in a
pleasant villa residence, surrounded by charming gardens,


which had formed a portion of the paternal domain. The
only special peculiarity I remember about the primi-
tive little town, besides a bridge of some twelve or
thirteen arches, crossing the tidal estuary, was a
unique locomotive line, which had then been in existence
for some years, and which must have preceded most of the
railway systems of the country. Starting from some place
a few miles distant from the town, and with piston rods
alternately rising and falling above the body of the engine,
this curious machine, which never exceeded six or seven
miles an hour, steamed periodically into the market place,
picking up and depositing passengers wherever required.
As may be imagined the little city lad passed an agree-
able six weeks among the romantic sights and sounds of
this semi-rustic retreat. The gardens, with unlimited sup-
plies of peaches, and other, to me, rare fruits ; the fishing-
boats, with their garrulous old salts, and the occasional
excursions I was permitted to take in their company;
indeed everything around was a revelation of wonder and
delight. To complete my felicity we made visits among
my mother’s relatives in still more exclusively rural parts
of the country. My recollections of these relations are
very vague, as no regular family intercourse with them had.
then been, or was at any subsequent time, kept up. I
believe them to have been very worthy farmers, though, of
course, of very different rank in life from my father’s
family; at any rate this, my first induction into the


mysteries of agricultural and pastoral pursuits, added much
to my enjoyment of the trip. Everywhere we went we
were received with the heartiest hospitality and kindness,
reminiscences of my father’s boyish days seeming to teem
among these warm-hearted Cornish people. If the
slightest infusion of bitterness hangs about my memory of
the draught of pleasure I then quaffed it must be credited
to the exorbitant quantities of saffron—or, as they call it,
“ saffern ” —cake, which nolens volens I was compelled to
consume. Cake is not popularly supposed to be an
especially noxious medicine for a healthy child of seven ;
but I often found on these occasions that to avoid giving
grievous offence to old tradesmen and retainers I was even
obliged to put up with “ too much of a good thing,” with
the proverbial result. This excursion, taken mainly, I
suspect, with a view to the improvement of my father’s
health, does not seem to have attained that result, for at a
later period of the same year T was left an orphan by his
death, at the age, I think, of fifty-three.
At this stage it may be convenient to direct attention to
those signs of the hereditary transmission of mental, as
well as physical, peculiarities, which seem to me to have
been at all times insufficiently recognised by the non-pro-
fessional world. My father’s temperament was of a peculi-
arly nervous and sensitive character. As I remember
him in his later time he was manifestly unfit for any of
the business or professional pursuits of life, and a brooding


sense of perpetual mental disquietude probably led to an
undue recourse to stimulants, with a view to its temporary
relief. To what original cause in his early days the failure
of his life story may be attributed I am not in a position to
say. It is quite probable that, as the eldest son of a com-
paratively wealthy family, he may have allowed a naturally
unpractical nature to have undue indulgence ; but I am
quite sure that a radical mistake in his career was the con-
tracting of an uncongenial marriage. My memory of my
mother is that of the kindest and best intentioned of
parents, but I can now clearly see that an utter incompati-
bility of mind and disposition worked havoc on my father’s
peculiar, mental predisposition, Avhile it re-acted most dis-
astrously on the early training of some, at least, of their
offspring. My paternal uncles, in their lifetime, exhibited
similar excitable natures as did their elder brother, but
in their cases the influences of early life, the restraints of
business, and the habits of the religious sect with which they
remained in close connection, neutralized the dangerous
tendency of their mental proclivities. In my own family
the nervous temperament has been displayed in a marked
degree, but only among the male branches. Of the three
sons surviving their parents, the eldest, a young man of
noticeable mental gifts, and of especially austere habits of
life, had his reason unhinged in early manhood, and has
now been, for over one-third of a century, an inmate of the
admirable institution for the mentally afflicted in connec-


tion with the Society of Friends at York. My second
brother, formerly a merchant in large business in Adelaide,
and who was deservedly esteemed by his compeers, suc-
cumbed under financial difficulties which led to the insol-
vency of his firm, and ended his days in the Lunatic
Asylum on the North Park Lands. Myself, the third and
youngest son, still survives as “ an unsuccessful colonist,”
—how and why, the reader, who accompanies me far
enough through these pages, may gather for himself. It is
not my intention at present to enlarge on this topic, or to
draw deductions from the facts here set forth. At a future
point in my narrative it may be necessary to recur to the
subject, when the influence of training and circumstance on
special temperaments, and other considerations, have to be
introduced.
As has been before intimated my father died in 1844,
and in the succeeding year I was left an orphan indeed by
the death of my mother. This event led to the dispersion
of the family, most of whom, with the exception of myself,
had completed the main portion of their education, and had
now to cast about for the means of livelihood. Our
father’s patrimony must have been much reduced during
his lifetime, and though I have never, to this day, enquired
into the particulars of his affairs, it is evident that not
more remained, when divided among the numerous family,
than would suffice for the completion of their education, and
for assistance in entering on such avocations as they might


adopt. As an instance of the slight chances on which the
affairs of life hang I may mention that I was, in my
cradle, designated as the intended heir of a great uncle,
at whose request I received his own Christian and sur-
name, and who was at that time a childless widower of
considerable wealth. From some sudden commercial dis-
asters this relative lost nearly the whole of his property
during my early childhood, sufficient only to provide him
with a life-maintenance being saved from the wreck of his
fortunes. The decease of my parents placed me under the
guardianship of my two paternal uncles and another
relative of the same religious persuasion. The design,
therefore, which I believe was entertained by my father, of
sending me to Christ’s Hospital, the well-known Blue
Coat School, was abandoned. I had at that period
attended for some time at two girls’ schools in our neigh-
bourhood, and was then a pupil at a boys’ day-school in
the city. My guardians made arrangements with some
Friends living in Exeter for my taking up my residence
with them, and continuing for the time my education as
then being carried on. The new home was a very suitable
one as far as kindness and material comfort could make it;
though the sole society of a pair of sedate middle-aged
Quakers, unaccustomed to the care or management of child-
ren, was perhaps hardly the most conducive to the practical
training and guidance of a somewhat irrepressible boy.
On the other hand I can well imagine that I must have


been somewhat of a juvenile “white elephant” in that
peaceful household, to which, nevertheless, I turned for all
that I could call home, till circumstances carried me into
the world of business. Here, too, a few years later, were
assembled round the hospitable board all the scattered
members of our family circle, save the afflicted eldest son ;
and I think the occasion was accompanied by an unspoken
conviction, which proved prophetic, that never again would
that band of brothers and sisters meet on this side of the
eternal shore.
An uneventful period of nearly two years now elapsed,
during which my attendance at the day-school aforesaid, and
my quiet home life, went on with unvarying regularity.
The school was conducted in much the same educational
system —or want of it—which characterized most middle-
class establishments in those days, and which has been to
a great extent handed down to very recent times. My
recollection of any amount of learning I may have derived
from this “ Academy for Young Gentlemen ” is of the
slightest possible description ; in fact the whole of my
school life up to my tenth year would have been much
better devoted to active exercises among a cheerful circle of
children of my own age, tempered by such miscellaneous
knowledge as my love of reading, insatiable even from an
age when few children have begun to think of learning
their letters, would have conveyed to me. As I recall
myself from the earliest period of self-consciousness to the


conclusion of the period now under notice, I can see a
delicate child, frequently exciting alarm as to his health
among his probably too easily alarmed women-folk, who,
not unnaturally, “ made a great deal ” of the little son and
brother who mainly bad to represent the male element in
their midst. A reputation for precocity, too, always
dangerous to a child, was .fostered and admired; and this
doubtless laid the foundation for an undue estimate of my
own opinions and abilities which has accompanied me
through ray subsequent life. The nervous temperament
was evinced in my earliest days by a restlessness which
nothing ever overcame. Many is the sixpence which was
unavailingly offered me if I would “ only sit still for five
minutes ” ; but unless intent on a book my fidgetty dis-
position was not to be so restrained. Next to the delight
of reading, my earliest predilections were shown in an
intense admiration and enjoyment of law proceedings. I
must have been very young when I managed on more than
one occasion to penetrate alone into the reserved parts of
the court in which the assizes were held, taking with me
a supply of buns to obviate the necessity of risking my
seat by going home to dinner. To this day I can remem-
ber the scope and details of some of the cases then heard,
and can even see before me the faces, and bear the speeches,
of the judges and counsel engaged. My highest ambition
at that time was to become a “ counsellor,” as barristers
practising in the courts were popularly styled ; and it has


been a matter of ranch subsequent regret that I did not
avail myself of an opportunity which presented, many years
afterwards, to enter a less ambitious branch of that pro-
fession. The fates, however, and my own self-will, decreed
otherwise.
In the spring of 1847 a change in my position occurred
by my being placed at a boarding-school at the little town
of Melksham, in Wiltshire. The reason of this selection
was probably to be found in the fact that a married sister
of ray hostess resided in Melksham, and, as several of her
children attended the same school, I should be in the
neighbourhood of friends and acquaintances. The new
domicile was, both in its domestic arrangements and its
educational features, a great contrast to my city home and
school. The dominie was a worthy old Quaker, very good-
tempered if occasionally choleric, and penetrated with
insouciance, and I might almost say mental indolence, due
no doubt, in a great measure, to advancing age. Our
studies were carried on under his own eye —when he was
awake. It was no uncommon thing, however, for the old
gentleman to indulge in a good nap at his desk ; advantage
of course being taken of the circumstance for a general
scrimmage. On awaking with a start, on some excessive
commotion being excited, the first boy who caught his eye
probably got a huge lump of india-rubber, kept for the
purpose, in uncomfortable proximity to his cranium. The
school was an old, rather rambling, place, which had


apparently been at some period a farm-house, A delightful
old orchard, partly surrounded by a brook, was our play-
ground, and I can imagine no more agreeable or suitable
place-for the healthful sports of boyhood. Our number of
boarders was small, and we indulged to a very limited
extent in the stereotyped games which have become almost
too elaborate and “ mannish ” in the hands and at the feet
of the rising generation of to-day. But we climbed trees,
set traps for dormice, studied the habits of hedgehogs
and other harmless denizens of the hedges and woods, and
roamed unmolested through the sylvan neighbourhood.
At suitable times our chief would take us long walks
over the hills and downs of that part of Wiltshire, and
these excursions were rendered delightful by the rattling
spirits and unfailing gaity which they never failed to
inspire in the good old man. This agreeable state of
things was not destined to be of long duration, as at the
expiration of my first quarter it was announced that the
establishment was to be discontinued, and it was accord-
ingly determined that I should be sent to one of the public
schools in connection with the society to which my
relatives belonged. This period, therefore, may be said to
terminate my childish days proper; as my education, or
such of it as was derived from school studies, only really
commenced after this time.
It will be gathered from what I have written that I had
as yet received none of that real training for the duties


and responsibilities of life, which should commence with
the earliest infancy. In my own home due attention was
paid to the observance of the first day in the week, and
we were, with the exception of my father, regular in our
attendance at a Wesleyan place of worship, my mother
having been brought up in connection with that denomi-
nation. This, however, was supposed to supply all that
was necessary for the moral and spiritual part of our
natures; the material anxieties connected with a large
family filling up the remainder of the week. On my
removal to my new home I of course accompanied my
protectors to the meeting house of their denomination ; but
this and the regular family devotional exercises, were
looked on, if anything, as being a mere wearisomeness and
necessary, but irksome, form. My experience is so far
from being an unusual one that I should say it was the
common lot of juvenile humanity to look on the warnings
and denunciations uttered from pulpits, and in professedly
religious instruction, as being matters of no immediate
personal necessity. With the example of unconcern as to
the arrangements in a future state set by the majority of
those around them, and observing that religion is treated,
even by most professedly pious people, as a thing to be put
on and laid aside with their Sunday clothes, it is difficult to
see how it could be otherwise. On the one hand the grow-
ing and observant child sees the whole world practically
ignoring the penalties, wbicb, if believed in, should cause


mankind to be in a perpetual tremor of apprehension ; on
the other he notices a select few, to whom such consider-
ations are of moment, eschewing most of the enjoyments
which seem harmless and natural to mankind, little and
big, and devoting themselves to what appears to him to be
a gloomy and cheerless existence. Mysteries, which he
does not then, nor probably at any subsequent period of his
life, grasp the interpretation of • inconsistencies, palpable
even to his youthful understanding ; harsh and impossible
penalties for conduct in accordance with the promptings
of an implanted nature ; —these and other repelling aspects
of religion, as generally presented to youth, sow the seeds
of the lax morality and the practical infidelity which are
and have been the characteristics even of so-called
Christian countries. I would not for a moment include a
large, though relatively trivial, section of all communions,
or of none, whose religion is shown “ not only with their
lips but in their lives,” and whose practical Christianity is
calculated to do more real good than all the sermons that
have ever been delivered. Such examples are few and far
between, and their sphere of influence is naturally limited
as compared with that of the great mass of nominal, but
essentially immoral, religious professors. Ido not remem-
ber that it was ever instilled into my youthful mind that
to a visible certainty “ what a man soweth that shall he
also reap ” ; —that punishment even in this world would as
surely follow transgression of the moral laws of the


universe—a knowledge of which the Creator has implanted
in our breasts —as burning would accompany a bodily con-
tact with fire ; —that the rules which govern the operations
of nature and those which dominate our mental and moral
personalities are alike evidences of infinite goodness,
wisdom, and power ; and that as such the latter should be
obeyed and acted on simply because “it is right.” These
views, to which after experience and reflection have led me,
when, alas ! their influence has been very much impaired by
the results of the pernicious mode of training ordinarily
brought to bear in childhood, found no place in the teach-
ings of my younger days. We shall see how far my subse-
quent circumstances were calculated to confirm or correct
any natural tendencies or deficiencies in early moral
training.
For the rest I may mention that one of my noticeable
weaknesses was a sort of bashfulness, or mauvaise honte,
which remained with me to a painful extent for many
years, after extensive contact with the world would
naturally be supposed to have rubbed it out. To be
addressed suddenly before several persons would bring the
blood surging through my frame, and suffuse my cheeks
with blushes. The mention of this peculiarity, which
exists to-day in a modified form, has often excited roars of
laughter among my acquaintances, but it is none the less
real, distressing, or detrimental. I take it to arise from an
excess of self-consciousness, and a sensitive shrinking from


ridicule, especially covert. To this I attribute the fact
that, in travelling in France, though passably conversant
with the language, I never dared to air my French lest I
should make as great an ass of myself as I observed the
majority of my fellow-countrymen doing. The same
infirmity has absolutely prevented my ever appearing in
public as a speaker ; a line which from other circumstances,
would have seemed congenial to me. I have known
recently a request to propose a formal vote of thanks to a
lecturer, before an audience of perhaps five-and-twenty
rustic neighbours, throw me into a cold perspiration dur-
ing the hour which elapsed before my small part of the
performance was to commence. If my present literary
venture should be cited as proof positive of my successful
mastery of this habit of shamefacedness, I would reply that
it never showed itself in connection with any deliberate
action, approved by the best judgment I could bring to
bear. Mistaken I might be, but once determined on my
course no ridicule would stop me. Another defect, of a
physical nature, which has exercised considerable influence
over my pursuits and habits, has been shortsightedness,
with which I have been afflicted during the whole of my
life. This has confirmed a tendency to sedentary pursuits,
by limiting my capability for field-sports, or even for
cricket. For many years, much to my amusement, I was
the object of much odium among a certain class in this
colony, on account of my wearing an eye-glass for the alle-


viation of my infirmity. This was freely characterized as,
an assumption and visible sign of “ swelldom,” by some of
those to whom a daily clean shirt and the use of a tooth-
brush are looked on as marks of a “ bloated aristocracy.”
It must not be omitted that at an early age, probably
nine or ten, I joined the ranks of the total abstainers, as a
member of a Band of Hope, or of some similar body. I
know that I had a medal, and I believe that the induce-
ment of joining a large pic-nic to a favourite watering-place
was the inciting cause. I know, however, that no con-
siderations of personal safety or of general philanthropy
entered into the motive, and though it was carried out in
its integrity till I left England seven or eight years later,
I am inclined to believe that the fact was due to my con-
tinuous residence in the houses of abstainers.
In concluding this chapter I would anticipate adverse
criticism on what may appear as an undue prominence
given to family details. I am fortified, however, by an
expression of opinion attributed to Thomas Carlyle, the
venerable “Sage of Chelsea,” that “to form anything like an
accurate idea of a man’s character it is necessary to be fully
informed as to his parents and their environments.”


GEORGE ROBERTSON,
Importer of Books & Stationery,
Calls special attention to his extensive and varied Stock of
COMMERCIAL & FANCY STATIONERY,
Which being imported direct from the manufacturers is
offered at lowest rates.
ACCOUNT BOOKS in every size and style of binding,
best hand-made and machine papers.
MEMO. BOOKS, Wallets, Purses, Manifold Writers, Copy-
ing Presses and Stands, Embossing and Eyelet
Presses.
PENS —George Robertson’s series of First-class Steel Pens,
also, Gillott’s, Mitchell’s, and Heath & McMiven’s.
STATIONERY CABINETS, Walnut and Rosewood Desks,
Tourist Cases, Deed and Cash Boxes, with Hobb’s
Locks.
WHATNEAU’S DRAWING PAPERS, Tracing Paper,
and Cloth.
PENClLS—Faber’s, Rowney’s, and Cohen’s, best quality,
WINDSOR & NEWTON’S Colors, Brushes, and Artist’s
Materials.
SCRAP BOOKS, Photographic Albums, Newspaper Cutting
Books, Music Folios.
AGENT FOR £YFORD’S EAC-SIMILE PRINTING PROCESS.
New Shipments of Stationery Every Month.
GEORGE ROBERTSON,
103, KING WILLIAM STREET,
OPPOSITE THE TOWN HAUL.


GEORGE ROBERTSON,
(OF LONDON, MELBOURNE, &. SYDNEY,)
Importer of Books & Stationery ,
Begs to notify to the Reading Public of South Australia
that he receives large and valuable supplies of all the'
* New and Popular Publications by every mail, and by ships
and steamers direct from London, and via Melbourne.
Institute, Siding dpufos, and look
Supplied on the most liberal terms.
A Large and Comprehensive Stock of
USEFUL, FANCY, AND COMMERCIAL STATIONERY.
MAGAZINES & NEWSPAPERS
By every Overland Mail,
A Complete Catalogue, price, is. ; posted, is. Bd. Also,
separate Catalogues of Medical, Law, Juvenile, and School
Books, free on application.
GEORGE ROBERTSON,
103, KING WILLIAM STREET,
OPPOSITE THE TOWN HALL. /


THE
UNSUCCESSFUL COLONIST;
FORTUNES; MISFORTUNES; OBSERVATIONS;
AND OPINIONS.
AS RELATED BY HIMSELF.
“ Make money, my son —honestly if you can —bid make
money — Maxim of the Age.
ii. i/c.A.3r. isvi
PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR BY
SCRYMGOUR & SONS, 89, KING WILLIAM ST.
1878.




CHAPTER 111.
PUBLIC SCHOOL LIFE.
The school to which my varying fortunes now conducted
me was one of several similar establishments in various
parts of Great Britain, conducted under the management of
the Society of Friends. The main idea underlying these
denominational schools, next of course to that of providing
for the youth of members of the body an education in
accordance with its tenets, was an eminently s Kialistic one.
I am not aware in what mode the original foundations
were provided for, but am inclined to think it must have
been by contributions from the group of meetings in the
district which each school centred. However this may
have been I know that their maintenance was secured by
the payments of the scholars, varying each year as the
expenses were less or more, but only proportioned to the
actual outlay. Board and lodging, clothing, and some
small weekly pocket money, in addition to tuition, were
supposed to be meted out to all alike, without the slightest
distinction as to the wealth or position of the parents. To
the best of my recollection the accounts used to show an
annual cost for each pupil of some £25 to £27. Those
*3 5 5/r97(8
2 6*6-77


who could afford it paid this amount, while for those whose
parents or guardians were unable to meet even this
moderate outlay, the respective meetings to which they
belonged became responsible for their individual expenses.
These dependants on charity, however, were in no wise dis-
tinguished from those more favoured by fortune, nor were
their special circumstances generally known to their
schoolfellows. In some of the Society’s schools this feeling
was carried so far even that the scholars were prohibited
from wearing any but the clothes provided for all, and no
pocket-money beyond the regular allowance was permitted.
The special one in which I was placed was somewhat
more lax : myself and two or three others generally indulged
in garments of better cut and workmanship than the regu-
lation uniform, and most habitually returned after the
holidays with larger or smaller amount of private pocket
money, which, however, had to be deposited with the head-
master, and only disbursed with his approval. Our trans-
actions with the old lady who paid hebdomadal visits with
a basket stocked with fruit and other youthful attractions,
were limited by the penny which was handed to each on
Saturdays. This naturally prevented the heartburnings that
might have arisen had a lavish display of private wealth
been permitted, while it pretty effectually checked that
tendency to gluttony so innate in schoolboy nature. lam
bound to say, however, that by ingenious contrivances of
sale or barter some of us managed to monopolize the


pennies of schoolfellows whose tastes lay in other direc-
tions, and so to achieve enlarged inroads on the old dame’s
stock of indigestibles. After all it is apparent that no very
dangerous excesses could be indulged in.
Sidcot—snch was the name of our school—was situated
in an infinitesimal village of the same cognomen, lying in
the immediate neighbourhood of the Mendip Hills, in
Somersetshire. We were 15 miles from Bristol, and 25
from Bath; had a small market town two or three miles
off', and were within four of Cheddar, celebrated for its
cheese and its cliffs. The establishment received both boys
and girls—of course discreetly fenced off in separate wings
—and had, besides extensive gardens, some considerable
quantity of farming land in the neighbourhood. At the
time of my residence there the number of pupils was
smaller than had previously been the case : I suppose we
averaged about 50 of the male, and 35 of the female,Tsex.
The education, while not pretending to be of an elaborate
character, was practical, and calculated to be of use in the
ordinary pursuits of life. Most of the boys left at 14 or
15 years of age; those intended for trade betaking them-
selves at once to the pursuits chosen for them, while those
whose parents had more ambitious desires generally received
a final polish at the hands of more pretentious pedagogues.
As I have said we did not aim high in our scholastic
pursuits; the ordinary branches of English education, with
Latin and mathematics in great moderation, formed the


staple of our work. Greek we did not attempt, but a few
had some opportunity, which I regret to say I availed
myself of too sparingly to be of any after advantage, of
acquiring the rudiments of French and German. This was,
however, a personal kindness of the head-master, and at
various times stray teachers would impart some little
instruction in special hobbies of their own, as phonography,
chemistry, and so on. These discursive dips into the
stream of knowledge produced little permanent effect; as
being entirely voluntary on the part of both ourselves and
our instructors, they were seldom pursued with ardour or
success. More popular were out of door studies and avo-
cations, which occasionally enlivened the monotony of
school-life. An occasional afternoon lesson in measuring a
field, or participation, general or partial, in the labours of
the farm or garden, were viewed with great favour. Well
can I remember my back aching with the stooping necessi-
tated by planting potatoes, and my small hands tingling
with cold produced by cutting the frosty dirt off mangel-
wurzels after the diggers. Yet these were employments
which were looked on by most of us as being glorious fun ;
and we were even more delighted to be turned out into a
pasture field, in the lovely spring weather, when the
cuckoos were about, to eradicate the colchicums, which
abounded to the detriment of the feed Fruit-pickings and
path-weeding gave us occasional admission to the extensive
and productive gardens, which on other occasions were


unapproachable by our longing feet and hands. Nor were
our labours confined to the outer world. Within the
building and play-yards a good deal of the necessary work
was done by ourselves, a variety of “ offices,” as they were
called, devolving on all the boys in rotation. Thus the
elders, in weekly pairs, waited at table, swept the dining
and school-room, and kept the play-grounds in order ; the
juveniles cleaned boots, and knives and forks, and per-
formed similar services. While some of these duties took
up a good deal of the play-time, for the week during which
they lasted, others involved occasional relief from school-
work proper, and were accompanied by certain other immu-
nities and small indulgences, so that on the whole they
were popular. We all made our own beds, and I have
often in later life, found the benefit of the thorough know-
ledge of this, and the other useful exercises mentioned
above, which I then acquired. Boys of the present day—
and parents too —may rest assured that no degradation
attends the acquirement of such habits in early life; the
best master is he who understands the details of the work
performed by his subordinates ; while, in this kaleidoscopic
world, one can never tell when such accomplishments may
become valuable. Had the necessity arisen in my days of
bachelorhood I should have felt no hesitation in under-
taking the position of steward of a vessel, or of waiter or
boots in a hotel, and I am very much mistaken if I would
not have come out creditably in either capacity. It will be


seen hereafter that I graduated in yet other industrial
pursuits, and that these have been of material service when
least expected.
Our hours for study were longer than is usual in this
enervating clime and age. Summer and winter we had an
hour’s regular school before breakfast; of course in the
latter season usually by gaslight. (We made our own gas
on the premises), f’rom 9 till 12, and from 2 till 5, were
our daily hours for classes; and in the evenings we had
lessons to prepare for next day. On Saturday and on
alternate Wednesdays we had a half-holiday, and on Wed-
nesday mornings and Sunday mornings and evenings we
attended an adjacent meeting-house for religious worship,
after the manner of the Quakers. As there were no stated
preachers, it was quite uncertain whether anything would
take place at these devotional gatherings; and I think I
may say that we have attended for months for the sole
purpose of sitting for an hour and a half in unbroken
silence, on the chance, haply, of an influence for good being
evoked by quiet and introspective reflection and meditation.
How far this result was attained, it is, of course, impossi-
ble to determine with any degree of accuracy; but I
imagine that with most, as with me, it proved a mono-
tonous and profitless task. On Sunday afternoons we had
more school, of course confined to Scriptural exercises,
learning hymns, and the like.
With all our scholastic and other work, we found plenty


of time for play and healthful exercise. Each season
brought its special class of games, which, it appears to me,
were of a good deal more varied character than those in
vogue in the present time. We had a commodious shed
for wet weather, in which the “ long rope”—a ponderous
wholesale skipping appliance of some fifty or sixty feet in
length—afforded us excellent warming work in winter,
when also we took advantage of sufficiently heavy frosts
to construct artificial slides within our own boundaries, A
day or two each winter used to be set apart for skating and
sliding on ponds within two or three miles, and great was
the anxiety to ascertain when our chosen resort would
“ bear.” Tennis and other games at ball were, of course,
in fashion in their turns, and we had the advantage of
playing the noble game (cricket), in one of our own fields
adapted for the purpose. A good swimming-bath was also
constructed during my residence, and this was a great treat
in the summer. On the whole, though our amusements
were not expensively got up or elaborately carried out, we
derived as much wholesome and varied enjoyment from
them as the most indulged children of the wealthiest and
most lavish parents could do, and probably more. In spite
of our “ Friendly” origin, too, the school had its annual
carnival. This was supplied by the General Meeting, as it
was called, which took place in May, and at which consider-
able numbers of friends of the pupils, as well as the
Managing Committee, assembled from all parts of the


country. A week was pretty well occupied with written
and vivd voce examinations, and with the business meetings
of the establishment. These serious avocations were
agreeably interspersed with frolic and festivity, in which
visitors and pupils often intermingled ; and the occasion
was not seldom availed of by rising juniors among the
guests to indulge in decided, if serious flirtations, I have
reason to believe that life-unions were not unfrequently the
consequences, more or less remote, of these gatherings,
when a general free-and-easiness prevailed more congenial
to the formation of intimacies between the sexes than the
staid habits of Quaker households usually permitted.
In this abode of learning, such as it was, of industry,
and of comparative innocence, I passed four not unhappy
years. My holidays were mainly spent with my good
friends at Exeter, my relatives and guardians considering, I
suppose, that when they had provided the means to pay
for my board and lodging, &c., they had fulfilled the
highest behests of nature and kinship. Of course I was
still regarded as something between a boarder and visitor
by the good people with whom I made my head-quarters,
and who, if “ less than kin,” were “ more than kind.”
Commencing at Sidcot at the bottom of the last class—or
rather, I think, I was the higher of two who entered at
the same time —I worked my way through the school to the
top position, which I held for most of my last year of
residence. When I say “ worked ”my way up, I must not


be understood too literally, as I was not by any means
given to over-industry, nor at all a model school-boy. What
I wanted in application, however, I made up in quickness,
and I was further assisted by a natural aptitude for certain
branches which prove great stumbling-blocks to many.
Thus, correct spelling seemed to require no effort, the so-
called system of learning this useful attainment being, in
my case, utterly unnecessary. Facility of composition was
another early-developed faculty, and I always stood high
for rapidity and correctness in mental arithmetic. Lan-
guages I never took kindly to, but a slight knowledge
of the rudiments of those which form so prominent a
feature in the composition of our mother tongue has been
of more utility and pleasure to me in after-life than any-
thing else I acquired at school. I can fully endorse the
judgment which attaches great value to the study of lan-
guages, both living and dead; and one of the great regrets
of my life has been the absence of much opportunity, and
the neglect of such as came to me, of familiarizing myself
with Latin and Greek authors. As an adjunct to a
thorough knowledge and appreciation of good English
alone this is invaluable, while it is absolutely indispensable
to the attainment of a cultivated intellect. While it is
undoubtedly of primary importance that education should
be directed, in the first place, to the acquisition of the
means of earning a livelihood, should such be necessary,
there is far too great a tendency nowadays, and especially


in these new countries, ta undervalue those branches of
study of which the practical importance is not at once
apparent. The love of knowledge, for its own sake, and
for the personal gratification and advantage to be derived
from its possession, is by no means fostered as it should be,
or as would tend to the elevation of the national tone. A
higher level of general education would mean a more
general diffusion of the sense of personal responsibility so
valuable in public affairs, and a capacity for the enjoyment
of something beyond the mere grovelling acquisition of
wealth, or indulgence in the lower forms of gratification.
I can safely say that I mainly owe to what little knowledge
study and travel have conveyed to me the means of
enduring much that would otherwise have been positively
unendurable in my lot.
While on the subject of education, I am reminded of the
vast and beneficial changes which are now being initiated
in this department of youthful training. In my time, and
indeed in many cases up till now, the true principles of
education were utterly misunderstood or ignored. Instead
of looking on the limited period necessarily devoted to
school attendance as the opportunity of teaching the child
to think , and so of preparing the way for that education
which should commence and end only with life, it was
sought to cram into the youthful brain a heterogeneous
mass of information difficult to receive, more difficult still
to assimilate, and most difficult of all to retain. The


natural consequence was, that everything pertaining to
study was usually thrown aside with the school-boy’s cap
and jacket, and a positive distaste for mental exercises was
engendered which boded ill for after self-improvement.
This intellectual stunting process has not, I regret to say,
yet died out, though the example set by the excellent
Model School system recently introduced by the state must
inevitably lead the way to a general reform. It was with
the greatest gratification that I availed myself of several
opportunities of examining the details of the educational
course introduced into this colony by Mr. Madley, the
former master of the first school under the new Act; and I
say without hesitation that, even at a higher cost, I would
prefer a child of mine to receive, at all events, his rudi-
mentary teaching, in that establishment, rather than to send
him to any school, collegiate or otherwise, that I know of in
South Australia. Amongst numerous demerits, the Legis-
lature of the colony deserves at least credit for an honest,
if too long-deferred attempt, to grapple with this all-neces-
sary subject, which has at last been thought almost worthy
to rank in importance with the serious and ever-recurring
question of who shall occupy the Ministerial benches.
Perfection has by no means yet been arrived at. The public
have not yet been able to grasp the idea that for education
to be compulsory—and our democratic institutions would
rapidly become unworkable in the absence of a general
diffusion of knowledge—it must be free. It is all very


well to talk of the pauperizing effect of granting a state
education for nothing, and that those able to pay should
be made to do so, while those unable to pay should be
provided for gratis. It will, I think, be found that the
effect of admitting free pupils into state schools where
some pay for themselves will be precisely that which it is
sought to avoid. Granted that many parents are improvi-
dent, and squander in vicious indulgences the means of
educating their offspring, I maintain that future evil is
lessened, as far as possible, by these children, and those of
legitimately poor people, being placed on a level of equality
with those more fortunately circumstanced, so that they
may obtain a fair start in life. It is evident to me that,
while the class of education attainable by the children of
persons of humble means is vastly improved, a very large
number of those most especially needing state protection
have not yet been reached, and that nothing but the “ free
and compulsory” system, carried out in its entirety, will
secure this object. Ignorance is a more deadly scourge to a
community than even that dreaded disease, small-pox; and
we have long ago made the means of ameliorating the latter
“ free and compulsory” in the general interest. Why, then
should we hesitate to grapple with the former enemy with
the same weapons 1 As collateral to these considerations,
I would urge that, pending the entire freedom which I
advocate, and which must come sooner or later, all teachers
in our national schools should be paid by the state directly,


instead of, as at present, partially by fees from the parents.
From personal observation I can say that the position of
debtor and creditor now established between the residents,
in country places more particularly, and the schoolmaster,
is often anything but a satisfactory one, especially to the
latter. These defects in the existing system, however, can
be easily remedied ; and it is my firm conviction that the
great stride already made will but incite the public to keep
their representatives up to the mark, and to demand still
greater perfection in this vital function of government.
The only other point remaining to be noticed in connec-
tion with my school-boy days, is the fact that two well-
known citizens of Adelaide received their education at the
same seminary, though at an earlier period than myself.
One is the local head of a large shipping and business firm ;
the other will be recognized when I mention that it is a
moot point whether his talents are more suitably displayed
in literary pursuits, or in the keen prosecution of a promi-
nent branch of retail trade. Anyhow, it is unlikely that
either, more than myself, has an unfavourable recollection
of the years spent at Sidcot School.


CHAPTER IV.
THE APPRENTICE BOY.
On several occasions during my school holidays I had paid
agreeable visits to the City of Bath, where two brothers of
my Exeter friends resided and carried on business. The
pleasant reminiscences of these visits, and the desire to
enter on the active engagements of commerce, led me, as
my fourteenth birthday approached, to open a personal
negotiation, with a view to being received into their estab-
lishment. No obstacle intervening in that quarter, I pro-
ceeded to inform my guardians of my wishes, and it was
shortly arranged that I was to be apprenticed for, I think,
five years and three quarters, at a fair premium. The main
portion of the business was that of cornfactors in a whole-
sale way, but my employers also kept an old-established
baking business, which had descended to them in connec-
tion with a retail trade in horsefeed and other congenial
matters. The elder brother took but small part in the
conduct of the concern in my time, as a sort of amateur
farming engaged most of his attention. The younger,
however, an active man of business, found abundance of
occupation in the supervision of the somewhat extensive


operations carried on. In addition to the home manage-
ment, his time was much spent in visits to London and
Bristol, where purchases of foreign grain were made, and
in attending country grain markets, where the imported
parcels were sold to local millers and dealers, and farmers’
wheat, &c., was bought for re-sale in other neighbourhoods.
Our firm also imported oatmeal and groats largely from
Scotch and Irish ports, and these, with other articles, were
supplied, after further manufacturing processes had been
applied to some of them on our own premises, to dealers,
grocers, &c., over a wide area. Most of the purchases of
all descriptions of stock passed through the warehouses,
which were, therefore, necessarily of a very capacious
character. The purchase, manufacture, and sale of flour,
too, at various mills owned by other people, as well as the
dealing in American, Spanish, and French importations,
formed no unimportant feature in the trade.
It will be seen that such a business afforded ample scope
for the energies of the most actively disposed youth, while
it promised to give him an insight into more than one phase
of commercial life. Our staff consisted of those in connec-
tion with the shop and counting-house, besides the necessary
storemen and the hands engaged in the bakehouse and in
the delivery of bread. As junior, I was at once put on,
English fashion, to open and sweep out the shop, weigh up
flour, and perform the numberless duties pertaining to a
new apprentice. We all resided in a house attached to


the premises (that is, of course, the clerks, &c.,) as did also
our employer and his two sisters, so that we were, out of
business, very much of a family party, regulated with the
usual Quaker decorum. The hours of business were con-
sidered light in those days, lasting, as they did, from seven
in the morning till seven in the evening in the winter, and
eight in the summer, for five days in the week, with an
extension till ten o’clock on Saturdays the year through.
As some little time was necessarily occupied after closing
in making things snug for the night, it may be supposed
that our leisure time during the week was but limited. On
Sundays we attended the Friends’ Meeting House twice;
but the remainder of the day could be devoted to walking,
or to quiet recreation in a pleasant garden rented by our
principal at a few minutes’ walk from the house. Amuse-
ments, as ordinarily so-styled, we had none ; but access to
a circulating library was afforded to me, and an occasional
lecture helped to relieve the monotony of working life.
The old passion for reading now stood me in good stead,
and, though I not unfrequently devoted hours stolen from
my slumbers to the perusal of exciting works of fiction, I
was by no means averse to more solid mental pabulum.
Meanwhile I took very kindly to the unintermitting
occupations of the business day. It must be confessed that
it went rather against the grain to rise from my warm bed
at 3 or 4 o’clock on a frosty morning, in obedience to the
clamorous summons of a bell which hung conveniently con-


tiguous to my head, for the purpose of admitting the bakers,
who commenced their laborious work at that hour. But
the varied and active nature of my duties, and the scope I
soon saw they afforded for smartness and tact, suited well
my energetic and restless turn of mind and body, I soon
became tolerably expert in the manual accomplishments
appropriate to our branch of retail trade, and was even
entrusted with the manufacture of sundry little specialties
for which the house had long been noted, and which had
never before been delegated to the hands of other than a
member of the family. A certain crisp description of
gingerbread in particular, for which some nicety of hand
was required, and the receipt for which was an heirloom
and made a mystery of, was confided to my charge, and at
periodical intervals I had to go through the whole process,
from mixing the materials to completing the baking, and
drawing the finished delicacy from the ovens. Far from
feeling this as being infra, dig., I was gratified at the proof
of confidence in my discretion and dexterity it afforded, and
looked on it as a sign that I was on the road to promotion.
Prior to this, too, my principal had signalized my comple-
tion of my first year’s apprenticeship by the present of a
handsome writing-desk, and the expression of his approval
of my conduct and business progress.
At almost the outset of this portion of my career—in-
deed within three months or so of my taking up my
quarters at Bath—l made my first acquaintance, oddly


enough, with the great metropolis. Though one of my
guardians and various other relatives resided in London,
it had never been my fortune to visit that famous city.
The first great exhibition, however, that of 1851, was
drawing to its close, and my senior employer, who was
going to Mark Lane on business, suggested that I might
accompany him, and have a flying look at the great show.
Of course I gladly assented, and we were duly deposited at
the Paddington Station in time for my companion to catch
the express omnibus, which then conveyed travellers into
the city in time for. the business of the corn market. With
an indication of the direction to Hyde Park, and a
reminder to be at the station in time for the returning train
in the evening, my somewhat eccentric and absent-minded
friend took his departure, leaving me to my own devices.
To find my way to Sir Joseph Paxton’s novel erection was
not difficult, and I was duly bewildered with the variety
and profusion of wonders it contained, as well as by the
unwonted crowds which assembled on that, which turned
out to be one of the most thronged days of the season. I
think that something like 110,000 people were returned
as comprising the visitors on that particular Monday. The
day passed rapidly away, and I left the palace, allowing
myself, as I thought, ample time to reach my destination,
but I had not calculated on the invincible ignorance as to
everything out of their immediate neighbourhood, which I
have since found is characteristic of Londoners of the lower


orders. One or two fruitless enquiries as to the way, and
one or two incorrect directions in reply, served so to delay
my progress that I arrived at the station just in time to
see my train leaving it. In answer to my questions I dis-
covered that there was only the night express available for
Bath, and that the cost of transit by it exceeded the
balance of cash left in my possession. I knew also that my
uncle lived at Tottenham, and that this suburban village
was at some distance from London ; but this was the extent
of my information, nor could any of the clerks enlighten me
farther as to its whereabouts. It then occurred to me that
the home of two of my late schoolfellows was in a particular
street in London, and that by looking them up I could be
set straight. I therefoi'e arranged with a cabman to take
me thither, but after driving about for an hour or two,
with a great drain on my limited finances, and after trying
in vain four or five streets of the same name in various
parts, I had to give this idea up as a bad job. Whether
" cabby ” had taken out of me all he thought fair and then
relented, I cannot say—as cabmen as a rule have no con-
sciences I should think it unlikely—but at this apparently
hopeless stage a happy inspiration seized him, that at the
“ Flowerpot ” in Qracechurch Street we should find Totten-
ham ’busses. Much to my relief I found on arrival there
that the first driver I accosted knew ray uncle’s residence,
and could set me down within an easy distance of it. At
about half-past ten at night, therefore, just as the bedroom


candles were being lighted, I dropped, as from the clouds,
into the quiet Quaker family, none of whom, except the
head, had I ever seen. The house, too, was full of visitors,
and I was, therefore, perforce delegated to the spare bed-
room of a neighbouring friend, where I was duly edified by
being ushered to bed by a gorgeous footman. In the
morning I accompanied my uncle to his place of business,
and as it was not thought desirable to cause unnecessary
uneasiness to my employers it was decided that I should
leave by that evening’s train for the West. So' a clerk was
detailed, nothing loth, to show me as many of the sights of
London as could be compressed into the limited time at my
disposal, and we “ did” the Tower, Madame Tussaud’s Wax-
works, St. Paul’s Cathedral, and I know not what besides,
and I was safely started on my homeward journey at the
appointed hour. Whether this dose of London sight-seeing
acted as the confectioners’ apprentice’s preliminary glut of
sweets is traditionally said to do I cannot say, but this I
know, that in my subsequent visits to, and residence in, the
metropolis I carefully eschewed all the stock shows, about
which country cousins are supposed to be insatiable. I say
it almost with shame, but it is nevertheless the fact, that I
have never visited the Thames Tunnel, the British Museum,
nor even Westminster Abbey. Henceforward I had a
feeling as though I had graduated as a Cockney, and was
entitled to take city life as a matter of course, and not as
being a source of perennial rustic wonderment.


My apprentice life passed on uneventfully, but naturally
each year of the three during which it lasted led me into
positions of increased responsibility. Thus, though I still
had duties to perform in the retail department, these were
varied by increased charge of the wholesale grain business
and books, and by periodical employment as what would
now be called town traveller. Not unfrequently, too, I
was despatched on commercial errands to Bristol, or took
trips, in place of my principal, to country markets. In a
lad of from 15 to 10 years of age, who had naturally a
pretty fair conceit of himself, such confidential engage-
ments, seldom entrusted to one so young, could hardly fail
to produce a perhaps overweening sense of his own
ability, before experience had brought that judgment and
caution which are essential complements to smartness as
an element of success. It therefore came to pass that,
though my humbler duties were still performed with as
much steadiness as so aspiring a youth could be expected to
bring to bear on them, a feeling of restlessness and impa-
tience of the restraints of my situation took gradual hold
on me. To add to this feeling the operative partner, while
he was as kind as possible in private life, and, as will be
hereafter seen, thoroughly appreciative of my business
capacity, made it a part of his system to be somewhat
exacting in his demands on my unflagging attention to the
drudgery of the shop, and laid apparently too little stress
on the zeal with which my brains were exerted on his


behalf. I will mention one incident, which somewhat
redounded to my credit. Among the articles in which we
dealt was one of patent groats, manufactured by ourselves,
and quite equal to Robinson’s or the best known brands
For these we had a moderate wholesale demand in the city
and surrounding counties, but the trade seemed to be
very inadequately pushed in comparison with its possibili-
ties. Anxious to strike out a new line of action I quietly,
in the name, but without the knowledge, of my principals,
forwarded sample packets to some five-and-twenty leading
medical practitioners of Bath, some of whom had attained
more than local reputation, with a polite request to be
favoured with a written opinion of the merits of the article.
The responses elicited were in the highest degree com-
mendatory, and to the unbounded astonishment and satis-
faction of my chief T presented him with a neatly-printed
sheet embodying the pick of these testimonials This gave
a stimulus to this branch of business and might have
made a very profitable feature of it, but I did not remain
long enough to carry through my plans, and a successor of
similar views did not turn up. I had time, however, to
commence an export trade in the line, which I did by for-
warding a shipment to Adelaide, South Australia, to the
consignment of a well-known firm there. The result was
profitable, though I had to depend on my own inner
consciousness as to the mode of packing, forwarding, Ac.,
these being quite new ideas in our inland establishment.


The experiment, successful as it was, was not repeated,
owing to my soon following the consignment to its distant
destination.
In the third year of my indentures our chief took to
himself a wife, and in consequence removed out of town to
live. For the due management of the business household,
therefore, a married man was engaged, and from the
necessity of thd position he was compelled to be placed, in
some sort, over my head, though the virtual lead of the
staff, to which I had by this time attained, was acknow-
ledged by my master. The withdrawal of the latter from
our domestic circle also in some measure loosened the
restraint which had been imposed by his companionship
after business hours ; and I, accordingly, took several occa-
sions of visiting the theatre and concerts—flagrant trans-
gressions from the Quaker code of ethics. The habit of
smoking I had contracted, I hardly know how, before I had
left school a twelvemonth, and though this was indulged in
by some very devout elderly Friends, it was considered by
no means proper for young persons, and many were the
boxes of cachoux aromatizes I had to consume in conse-
quence, to cover the perfume of the weed. I may here say
in passing that, though I have been a persistent, if not
usually an excessive, smoker ever since that time, and
although I have reason to believe that my mental and
physical habit to some extent justifies the practice in my
case, I am satisfied that it is injurious in the extreme to


the vast majority of undeveloped men, while in no case can
indulgence to excess be otherwise than harmful. There can
be no doubt, I think, that the main cause of the debilitated
digestions so commonly to be met with in our own country,
and still more general in the United States, is the extended
use to which tobacco has attained, and the early age at
which the habit is now commenced. I have often longed,
in the streets of our own city, to lay about me with a stick
at the sight of urchins, far distant from their teens, sucking
away at dirty clay pipes with all the gravity of Turks or
Red Indians.
The accidental discovery of one of my visits to the
theatre (I remember it well; it was my first experience of
Italian Opera—the play “ Les Huguenots ” —Formes,
Reichardt, Madame Caradori, and others, the performers
—and wasn’t it delightful) led to a kind but serious
remonstrance and rebuke. This caused, in vulgar parlance,
“ the pot to boil over,” and soon “ all the fat was in the
fire.” The fancied sense of repression and injustice boiled
up within me, and I made up my mind that I would change
the venue. I therefore intimated to my uncle, our manag-
ing guardian, that I intended joining my brother in Aus-
tralia, who had written for me to come out, and that the
sooner the necessary business preliminaries were arranged
the better I should be pleased. The good old gentleman
hastened up from the extreme west of England in a great
state of dismay, hoping to quiet me down ; but, as I think


gTRAKER & SONS’ FACSIMILE
PRINTING PROCESS.
By this novel invention a number of facsimile copies
of Documents, Price Lists, Drawings, &c , written with
the patent ink on ordinary writing paper, are printed
in a few minutes on ANY KIND of DRY PAPER
with the aid of the ordinary copying press, the original
writing remaining uninjured.
It is specially suited to the requirements of
Solicitors, Brokers, Merchants, Railway Companies,
Auctioneers, and Accountants, School Boards, &c.
The simplicity of working and the clearness and
exactitude of the copies produced render the invention
most valuable in all cases where economy of time and
labour is an object.
Prospectuses, price list, and directions for use
obtainable at
GEO. ROBERTSON'S,
103, King William Street, 103,
Sole Agent for South Australia.


J. MILLER ANDERSON & CO.
CARPET DEPARTMENT.
We have just opened our season’s shipments
of Brussels, Tapestry, and Kidderminster
Carpetings, which, added to our previously ex-
tensive stock, enable us to show one of the
LARGEST AND NEWEST ASSORTMENTS
To be found in the Colonies. The recent
shipments were purchased at very low prices,
the whole advantage of which we are giving
to our customers.
We beg to call special attention to our
stock of Brussels, the patterns and colorings
being very superior and the quality the best
made.
In Tapestries we are showing the newest
styles and also a very cheap lot, purchased
under their market value.
In Kidderminsters we have a splendid
variety of Bedroom and other patterns in
extra super, and lower priced goods
FLOORCLOTHS.
We have a good assortment of all widths
in a great variety of dressings and colorings.
J. MILLER ANDERSON & €o.,
15 &. 17. HINDLET ST.


o.
k.
THE
UNSUCCESSFUL COLONIST i
FORTUNES, MISFORTUNES, OBSERVATIONS,
AND OPINIONS,
AS RELATED BY HIMSELF.
“ Make money, my son —honestly if you can —but make
money.” — Maxim of the Age.
IP.A.XR/T 111. vJXJISrX]. 1878.
PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR BY
SCRYMGOUR & SONS, 89, KING WILLIAM ST.
1878.




PAULDING’S
OUGH ELIXIR
UNEQUALLED AS AN
Elegant, agreeable, and effectual remedy for Hoarsness, Coughs,
Colds, Asthma, Consumption, and all Affections of the Throat,
Lungs, and Chest.
There is no question that different constitutions require different remedies,
the same medicine will not cure every case alike, in spite of all assurances of
interested persons to the contrary, and although no Cough Medicine in South
Australia has ever yet obtained the popularity and extensive sale of
PAULDING’S PECTORAL DROPS,
Yet we have sometimes found it desirable to supplement it with the medicine
which we introduce now to the public as
PAULDING’S COUGH ELIXIR,
Which is from the prescription of a celebrated physician. With these two
remedies, pulmonary complaints may be met and cured in their first or initial
stage; or if permitted to fix their hold on the constitution, may be grappled
with, with almost certainty of success.
Having been extensively prescribed for many years, this Elixir is thus
confidently recommended as one of the most valuable remedies known, of
which one trial will prove the efficacy.
It relieves the chest by promoting easy expectoration, regulating it so that
where already too copious it will be reduced in quantity ; it diminishes
irritation in the throat and bronchial passages, removes difficulty of breathing,
and stimulates to a renewal of natural secretion and healthy action. An
approaching severe cold may generally be cut short by a dose of this Elixir
taken at bedtime on the first appearance of the symptoms. It never occasions
headache, even in the most delicate persons; and, being pleasant, is readily
taken by females and children. Full directions on each bottle.
Wholesale of the Proprietors,
F. H. FACLDIVC iV Co., Adelaide,
And Retail of them and all Chemists &, Storekeepers.
PRICE-TWO SHILLINGS PER BOTTLE.


CUNNINGHAM’S NEW IMPORTATIONS
Expressly for 1878, are now unpacked and on view.
AH the Latest Novelties of the Season, Wholesale & Retail.
ACiIJT FOR THE SILICATE!) CARItOX FILTERS. ALL
SIZES REFT IX STOCK.


be had previously begun to discover, when I had made up
my mind to a thing it had to be. It was therefore
arranged that my indentures should be cancelled as soon
as the proper preparations for my departure were completed.
These preparations assumed an elaborate form which would
have excited my wildest derision in later years, when I have
started for England with no more luggage than I could
carry, if necessary, in my own two hands. In those days
neither personal nor general experience of travelling pre-
vailed, and a voyage to Australia was looked on as a
desperate affair. It would seem incredible if I were to
recount the number of dozens of each item of underclothing
with which I was provided, but I well remember that my
stock of soiled linen was an intolerable nuisance long before
I reached my destination. Happy is the traveller who can
muster old things enough to last him through his voyage,
and who can consign them, without remorse, to the outside
of his cabin-port, as fast as they are done with.
Everything being at last in readiness, I took leave of
Bath and its associations, eager to join in that wider world
which lay outside the carefully-guarded road by which I
had as yet travelled. I was accompanied to the railway
station by my quondam master, whose last words to me
were, “ I think thee art making a mistake in leaving us, as
it had been our intention to have offered thee a partnership
on the expiration of thy apprenticeship.” It has often
been a matter of speculation with me as to what would


have been the course of my life had I not, as it were, taken
the bit between my teeth at this stage. Whether I should
have settled down into a sedate trafficker in wheat and
barley and “ lived happy ever after,” or whether any
inherent Bohemiaaism in my nature would not have broken
out at a later period, it is impossible absolutely to say.
My own self-knowledge, however, leads me to the convic-
tion that I should never have taken kindly to the circum-
scribed sphere presented to me. The absence of any con-
trolling moral influences over my actions up to that time,
as well as of firm but judicious parental or other guardian-
ship and guidance, left me very much at the mercy of my
own untrained impulses. The foundation, as I believe, of
all moral worth —obedience, instilled from the very cradle
as a household habit, and accompanied by a loving, if
authoritative induction into the great truths of existence,
by precept and example—had never been laid. The deve-
lopment of the reasoning faculties, stimulated by the com-
parative independence which had been my lot, had been
premature, and insubordinated to the judgment which only
comes from training or experience. The words of an
eminent writer and thinker, the well-known “ 5.G.0.,” of
the Times, seem to me to be literally borne out in this
second stage of my experience. “ A time must come,”
says he, “ and all a parent’s judgment is needed to deter-
mine when it has come, when advancing reason will ally
itself to that growing spirit of independence which is a


part of our nature —well-trained, the basis of life’s success ;
ill-regulated, the bane.” It will be seen hereafter that no
compensating influence arose to supply the place of these
early checks and guides, but that, on the other hand,
circumstances all tended to develop and confirm the radical
defects in my mental organization. It was left to that
stern, but dearly-paid monitor, Experience, to drive into the
grown man what the child might have absorbed into
its nature with comparative ease. Often in after years
have I pondered and wondered over what seems to me to
be the fatuous indifference of parents and others interested
in the career of children to the fearful responsibility attach-
ing to their position. It is considered necessary to prune,
graft, and train young plants if they are to fulfil the
purposes of their creation. The human off-shoot, however,
is too generally left, with its special implanted tendencies
and natural defects, to struggle along its course of aberra-
tion unaided by what should be the serious results of the
reflection and experience of its guardians.
It will have been observed that I have made but little refer-
ence to religion as a prime element in the subjugation and im-
provement of the natural mind and disposition. But in truth,
as I have hinted at earlier, I find it difficult to recognize, in
the so-called religious practice of ancient or modern times,
the controlling influence which human nature so evidently
requires. In strange confirmation of my hesitation on this
subject, I note that the Rev. Mr. Casely, a Wesleyan


minister, at an anniversary meeting of his church at
Gawler, is reported in a local journal of recent date to
have said : —“ He had thus began to ask himself whether,
after all, with the great advantages we possess in Sabbath-
schools and churches, with the wondrous results which have
been achieved, whether, after all, Christianity, so much
talked about, is not a failure. Looking at it for the past
1,800 years, he could not see that its triumphs had been
as great as they ought to have been for the immense
amount of preaching and teaching which has been going on
ever since that time.” I have no intention to dogmatize on
this subject, or to dwell unduly on ideas of an unsettling
character; but inferences like the above lead to the convic-
tion that something more is required in the moulding of
character than the mere abstract religiosity which proves so
inefficient a motive power in life. W hat that something is
I must leave to the consideration of those into whose
responsibilities the question enters so largely.
At various intervals during my apprenticeship I had
made holiday excursions of two or three weeks each, gene-
rally in company with some of my nearer relatives. One
of these trips was mainly spent at Plymouth, a town full
of interest, especially to the visitor from inland parts.
Itself a notably beautiful seaside resort, the varied added
attractions of a garrison town and naval depot afford
unequalled opportunities for spending a few weeks most agree-
ably. It would be difficult for a born South Australian to


realize the diversified picture presented to the view from
the Hoe, as the elevated plateau overlooking the Sound is
called The broad stretch of harbour, studded with
glancing sails, and sheltered to seaward by the magnificent
breakwater, and by Mount Edgecombe, the picturesque seat
of the earl of that name; the dockyards and naval build-
ings of Devonport and Stonehouse, with numerous gigantic
war vessels in their proximity,—some of them the veritable
“ wooden walls of Old England,” here reposing peacefully
after their career of victory and adventure ; the sheltered
resorts of the numerous merchant ships which make this
their point of departure ; the forts, frowning defiance at
all comers of sinister design—these and numerous other
striking features may be taken in almost at one view from
the same spot. At the same time the inland scenery, that
in the neighbourhood of the river Tamar especially, is
equal to most to be found in that county of loveliness.
The ostensible reason for visiting Plymouth was the depar-
ture of some members of my family for Melbourne in the
“ Northumberland” liner, which vessel also conveyed a
passenger since risen to public fame—the present Right
Hon. H. 0. E. Childers —then emigrating to Victoria
to occupy a Government situation in the new colony.
At another time I spent a fortnight on the equally
delightful and even more celebrated north coast of Devon-
shire. With Ilfracombe as head-quarters, a succession of
trips to some of the most delightful spots it has ever been


my fortune to view may be easily made. Before colonial
tourists wander over the Continent in search of the
picturesque, let me earnestly recommend them to pay a
flying visit, if no more, to the neighbourhoods I am
writing of, which are now very easy of access by rail or
steamer.
During the latter part of my residence in Bath my
lungs, never very sound, showed symptoms of giving way.
For some time I was under the care of a homoeopathic
physician, who prescribed sparingly, but insisted on my
removal to quarters out of town. A short time afterwards
I was examined in London by two eminent doctors for the
purpose of life insurance, and though they passed the risk,
they did it on the express understanding that I was about
to settle in Australia, the climate of which they considered
would probably neutralize the existing delicacy. This
anticipation has been realized, as, although three or four
years later I had to submit for six months to a cod-liver
oil treatment, my lungs have never, since I reached my
majority, shown the slightest sign of weakness. Indeed, I
may say with gratification that my constitution to-day has
every appearance of being sounder than at any previous
time of life.


CHAPTER V.
ADELAIDE Itf 1855.
All my elaborate preparations being completed, including
the life insurance, I repaired to London to join the vessel in
which my passage to Adelaide had been secured. The
“ Loevesteyn ” was a vessel of 700 or 800 tons register,
and as matters went at that period a very fine craft. The
fact of her being of Dutch nationality was not encouraging,
but as she had capital accommodation, was under engage-
ment to a well-known London firm, and charged the
highest rate of the season, it was not unreasonably calcu-
lated that the voyage would be a speedy and comfortable
one. In case of accidents, moreover, a supply of commis-
sariat stores from Batty & Co, was laid in for my private
consumption. Some little delay took place in our start,
owing to an unwillingness on the part of the crew to go to
sea in the vessel, —the stowage of the cargo, or the health
of the captain, or both together, being objected to. This
difficulty was smoothed over by the Dutch consul at one of
the minor channel ports, into which we put, and we got
clear away at the end of October, 1854.
I am not about to inflict on my readers the old story of


a voyage to Australia. Suffice it to say that we made a
four-months’ passage; that the captain died off the Cape,
and was pickled, Hollander-fashion, in schiedam ; and that
I acquired the rudiments of whist and cribbage, and a taste
for the alcoholic beverages in common consumption on such
trips. Both these accomplishments I have found of use at
various times ; but a tendency to devote too much time to
their pursuit requires careful watching, especially in early
life. The voyage over I was transported, early in the morning,
by the spring-carts and ferry-boats of the period, from the
Semaphore to Adelaide, arriving at my brother’s place of
business concurrently with his first appearance for the day.
It need hardly be said that the Adelaide I entered on the
first of March, 1855, presented a very different appearance
from that it wears to-day. Of course the outlines of the
city were the same, but in its internal arrangement “ mag-
nificent distances,” and architecture of primitive simplicity
undoubtedly predominated. From the accident of the
approach from the Port taking its direction Hindley Street
was the main thoroughfare for retail trade, and among its
then leading shops were many now looked on with con-
tumely in the unpromising neighbourhood of Morphett
Street. The merchants’ stores were scattered about
Hindley and King William Streets and their immediate
vicinity. The latter noble thoroughfare, undoubtedly the
finest in the Australian colonies, was but sparsely occupied
by mean and squalid-looking erections, a few of which


remain to the present time as foils to the more creditable
structures which are gradually filling up the valuable
frontages. Of buildings of a better class then existent the
most notable were Waterhouse’s Buildings, then occupied
as a grocer’s shop by one of the wealthiest of our present
absentee capitalists, and the older portion of the Bank of
Australasia. These, and Green’s Exchange, were substan-
tially the same as they now appear ; almost all else is new.
If the city itself has undergone a complete change, its
inhabitants and the state of society generally have not been
less altered—in this case perhaps not with unraixed
advantage. The most prominent citizens at that time, at
any rate those who formed the main portion of what is
understood by-“ society,” were for the most part persons
who had been brought up in an equal or even superior
station to that in which their lot was cast. Riches, as now
understood, were quite exceptional, and their possession by
no means conferred an undeniable claim to social or
political status. The higher class, of officials, leading pro-
fessional men, and the mercantile community, together
constituted the “ aristocratic element,” so to speak, of the
place ; and among these personal qualifications were more
considered than bank balances. Indeed, taking the latter
as a test, the majority of the elite would have made but a
poor show as compared with the plutocrats of this genera-
tion. With the exception of a very few old-established
houses, the merchants, the main representatives of material


position, were young men, offshoots of home firms, pos-
sessed of very moderate capital, but backed by their
respective London and Liverpool connections. These
naturally imported into their colonial career as much as
possible of the business style and habit in which they had
been brought up, and the result was decidedly agreeable
while it lasted. In private life the different classes named
approached each other very closely in general education and
breeding, so that society presented a homogeneity to be
sought in vain in the assemblages of the “ upper ten ” of
modern Adelaide, and greater freedom of intercourse and
absence of mere ostentatious display naturally resulted.
The preponderance of the bachelor element, too, created a
free and easy, not to say loose, state of intercourse among
the male sex ; men’s dinner parties abounded, and card-
playing was of very general adoption. And yet the tone of
morality, though not strictly speaking high, avoided many
of the degradations, by which vice is generally accompanied
at the present time. High play was very much in vogue,
but its votaries restricted themselves to risking what they
could pay if necessary, and that in the society of their
equals in means and manners. Gentlemen did not then
aspire to the society of professional blacklegs, nor rub
elbows in gambling saloons and billiard rooms with youths
whose losses would not improbably fall on the bank-safe or
shop-till. Other deviations from the strict line of the
moralist were in like manner carried on in modes which


robbed them of half their private injury and public dis-
advantage. In other words there was then less hypocrisy
and pretence of strait-lacedness, and I believe less real
immorality and viciousness than now prevails, none the less
certainly, and all the more mischievously, for being covert.
Business, too, was carried on in a very different way from
that now adopted. With the exception of drapery, nearly
all the supplies of imported goods came through the hands
of the general merchants, and very largely by way of con-
signment or indent. The merchants disposed of their
stocks to dealers or to the larger tradesmen direct in whole-
sale parcels, few of them being acquainted with the minutise
of the trades which they thus supplied. The large whole-
sale grocery and similar establishments of the present had
no existence, their proprietors being then dispensers of their
respective wares over Hindley and Bundle Street counters.
In fact, the foundations of the large capitals or credits
acquired by most of these great dealers were laid at the
time to which I am now referring, and are in great measure
to be attributed to the class of mercantile houses then
existing, who confined their business transactions very much
to a few known tradesmen, and ignored outside or country
custom. In this way some of the established shopkeepers
crept into a wholesale business ; and while, owing to their
limited number, they could buy goods often on ridiculously
easy terras, they were able to make their own arrangements
with their dependent customers without fear of competition


from the importers. Had the latter been more alive to the
necessity of adapting their business notions to the wants of
the new community in which they found themselves, and
dispersed their goods direct to retail traders in the different
localities as they arose, there can, I think, be no doubt that
their superior facilities for importing would have retained
them the command of the market. As it was, with very
few exceptions, and those mainly of firms whose squatting
connections were firmly established, the whole tribe of
whom I am speaking as existent something over twenty years
ago have disappeared, and their places are filled, alike in the
market and the drawing-room, by their former customers, the
shop-keepers of that day. I suppose that the great doctrine of
the survival of the fittest” holds good in this as in other
departments of “ natural selection” ; and it is easy to
understand that men brought up in the atmosphere of the
Royal Exchange or Mincing Lane would stand but a poor
show in the jostle with the very different element with
which they were called on to deal.
Among the most noticeable changes which have been
brought about by the increased and certain facilities for
communication afforded by the telegraphic and postal ser-
vices has been the decline of specidative operations. With
such a large and fluctuating market as Victoria in our
neighbourhood, the changes in prices were frequent and
extreme. At the time of my arrival, the only regular
steamer trading between the two colonies was the “Havilah,”


of which my brother had the Adelaide management, and
which was then literally coining money. As her trips were
only made once a fortnight, and were occasionally inter-
mitted altogether by accidents or periodical overhaulings,
great speculative excitement might, and often did, exist at
the other end in respect of particular stocks, long before the
information reached us. Any casual arrival, therefore,
might bring special news which would cause a prodigious
rise or fall in certain goods, and the natural consequence
was a perpetual lively “ spurting” in the market. It will
be in the memory of many of my readers how, at a some-
what later period indeed, a shrewd Adelaide man, happen-
ing to be in Melbourne when a rise of some £lO per ton
in flour took place, and finding that the “ Havilah” would
be detained for some days, chartered the “ Corio” steamer to
bring himself over. Getting landed down the coast so as
not to excite suspicion, he rode to town, and purchased
2,000 or 3,000 tons of flour before people could make out
“ what was up.” The result of this operation gave him
such a bias in favour of steamers, that he subsequently
turned most of his property literally into “ floating capital.”
When last I heard of him, he was working manfully at his
original trade of a carpenter in New Zealand, to which
colony he transported his fallen fortunes, steamship sailing
on competitive principles being a dangerous game for any
but very “strong” men. The same speculative feature
pervaded almost every branch of business, stocks of im-


ported commodities being periodically in excess of require-
ments or badly wanted. There was, therefore, plenty of
scope for operations either in the local market or to and
from the adjoining colonies; and these ventures agreeably
diversified the ordinary routine of mail work which regulated
most of our legitimate business transactions.
As may be supposed with such business men, and with
business of such a nature, commercial pursuits were not by any
means converted into slavery. In fact, “ free and easy ness
pervaded this as most other of the ideas of the time. A
trip to the Port, the necessity for which was construed very
liberally, was a matter of frequency ; and as dog-carts were
then the orthodox vehicles among our class, as spring-carts
were in other circles, a day was often consumed over,
perhaps, a matter of no great moment. I have not infre-
quently heard one merchant remark to another, on a fine
morning, “ What an infernal shame to be in town such a
fine day as this; what do you say to a run up to Ford-
ham’s 1” This would be followed by suggestions that the
horse of one would go leader in a tandem, and the result
would be that six or seven would start in the afternoon
with a couple of tandem teams for a drive up the Mount
Barker Road, due notice having been given to the worthy
old host of the “ Eagle on the Hill ” to provide one of his
well-known and excellent dinners. Two or three hours of
friendly 100, and a drive down by moonlight, would com-
plete a pleasant, if not altogether profitable day. As,


however, there was no eager competition in business, and
the parties concerned did not consider their dignity required
family carriages or gold-laced coachmen, such little extrava-
gancies could hardly be considered excessive. In other
ways good fellowship was evinced. A temporary loan of a
thousand or fifteen hundred pounds between neighbours
was of no unusual occurrence without a receipt being asked
or given ; and I can recall more than one case where a few
young men have privately put down a hundred pounds
apiece, without expectation of return, just to give a fresh
start to “ a decent fellow,” whose circumstances were at a
low ebb. Possibly, unassuming acts of kindness like these,
though hardly in accordance with the most advanced com-
mercial views, may be as valid compliances with that great
fundamental rule of human conduct, “Do unto others,”
&c., as the most lavish distribution of “ increment,” un-
earned or otherwise, amid the incense of altars, the adula-
tions of the Press, and the paeans of an applauding multitude.
The elements of “ sounding brass and tinkling cymbals ”
might have been altogether wanting ; but the essential con-
ditions of that “most excellent gift of charity”—grossly
abused term ! —seem to me to have been present on such
occasions. I would not for a moment suggest that any
of my readers are animated in their benevolences by a
desire to figure in published lists, or to take “ the upper-
most place in the Synagogue.” Present company are
always excepted; and lam quite satisfied, for instance, that


the large sums handed to the excellent publishers of these
ephemeral sketches are contributed with the highest
motives and in the purest of metals. Would that such could
always be said, and that the Apostle Paul’s sublime con-
ception of the charity which “ suffereth long and is kind,”
which “ thinketh no evil,” “ vaunteth not itself, is not
puffed up,” was more intimately associated with our doings
with our fellow-men. So would the first grand advance be
made towards that millennial period when “ peace on earth
and goodwill towards men” will prevail, but which unfor-
tunately seems nearly as far off to-day as it did eighteen
centuries ago.
Political matters in 1855 were in a very rudimentary
state, though public feeling at times ran high on special
subjects under consideration. Affairs were administered by
the Governor (Hon. B. T. Finniss then holding the acting
appointment), and his Executive Council of English crea-
tion, assisted by a Legislative body partly nominated and
partly elected. Among the permanent heads of departments
and prominent politicians of the day were men of rare
ability and high character, whom, taken as a body, we have
probably never since seen equalled. Sir Richard Hanson
and Sir R. R. Torrens, for example, were then in leading
positions; while the present Judges Gwynne and Stow (the
latter “a rising junior” in every sense), were among the
rank and file. There was also a strong leaven of old
English gentlemanly style, which, embodying as it did a


characteristically high sense of honor and integrity, added
no little dignity to public life, and no little enjoyment to its
pursuit. In mentioning as typical the names of Major and
Captain O’Halloran, Samuel Davenport, Charles Bonney,
and Major Warburton, many of my fellow-colonists will
fully understand my meaning. It is quite probable, I may
almost say certain, that under such leaders and the old
regime the colony would not have made such material
advances as it has done ; but I, for one, have strong doubts
whether the material gain is not a poor compensation for
the vastly lowered tone of personal character and ability
which undoubtedly pervades our existing political system,
and marks the majority of our “leading politicians.” It
is not my intention, however, to make any more extended
reference to the public affairs of that day or of several
subsequent years. Ample records of these matters are in
existence, and my own personal knowledge of the require-
ments of the colony, and of the relative merits of local
political questions, did not for some time attain to larger
proportions than that of an average member of Parliament
of to-day. I shall, therefore, maintain a discreet silence
on such topics till the time when, from study, observation,
and experience, I conceived myself competent to form views
on the more important points of public policy.
Among other institutions of the time was a volunteer
force, initiated under the influence of the Russian “scare”
during the Crimean war, and brought into a fair state of


efficiency at the time of my arrival. Besides artillery and
infantry there was a troop of mounted rifles, consisting
mainly of professional and mercantile men, all well-mounted
and equipped at their own expense, and evidently a crack
corps. This body was under the command of Captain
Gwynne, the present Equity Judge, and its meetings were
characterized by almost unbounded hospitality and joviality.
A review was held on Her Majesty’s birthday, followed by
a grand volunteer banquet, which I attended in my
brother’s uniform —with the sanction of the commander.
My brother himself was gorgeous in a consular uniform
which I had brought out from England, and which —cocked
hats and goldlace not being as common then as now —
excited great popular attention, much to the discomfort of
the wearer.
Into the society, some phases of which I have endea-
voured to depict, I was at once received and adopted. My
brother was one of perhaps an exceptionally kind and
genial nature, and finding that I was ready in business
matters, he was not a little proud of his young relative,
then seven years his junior. His business arrangements
had just been changed by his taking a partner into the con-
cern, and he soon informed me that an interest was await-
ing my attainment of my majority—l was not then 18 —
and that in the meantime it was his desire that I should
live with him and be in all respects his equal in social
position. Nothing in the shape of salary was assigned to


me, but all reasonable demands on the cashier were sup-
posed to be honoured at my discretion. But a few months
elapsed after my advent before my brother visited England,
leaving me the virtual management of the business, in con-
junction with his partner, who, however, was mainly occu-
pied with the books, he being an accomplished accountant.
Of course this was a gratifying and unusual position for a
youth of my age to be placed in, and I believe that I did
no discredit to the responsibility attaching to it. Subse-
quent experience, however, has convinced me that a more
dangerous path could hardly have opened out before me
than the apparently smooth one I was then treading. As
had previously been the case in England, such business
ability as I possessed pushed me into a position of prema-
ture responsibility, and confirmed my undue tendency to
self-sufficiency and self-will, and impatience of control or
contradiction. Nor did the evil rest here. As I was cir-
cumstanced in regard to pecuniary matters there was no
consideration necessary as to personal expenditure, and
absolutely no means of saving, had I been so inclined.
This most naturally engendered an utter ignorance of the
value of money in a personal sense, and apart from its
figurative employment in accounts and calculations; and
though at the time this did not lead me into greater extra-
vagance than circumstances warranted, or than was justified
by my seniors, I found it of incalculable disadvantage when
I had subsequently to begin the world on a very different


basis, I have often contrasted the relative positions then and
now of the present Mayor of Adelaide and myself. Not far
removed in age, we both entered the established businesses
of our elder brothers at about the same time. While I was
transacting important business on ’Change with the
authority of a principal, or enjoying my leisure at the Club
and elsewhere, he was assisting the storeman to lower
casks into the cellar, or performing purely clerical work as
one of the staff of clerks, receiving, I suppose, a salary
accordingly. It is true that the profitable business in
which he was engaged was eventually handed over to him
intact, while mine was knocked entirely from under my
feet. It is certain, however, that the discipline undergone
by him would have fitted me far better for the vicissitudes
I had to encounter afterwards than the apparently rosy
career I was then enjoying.
My brother’s absence only extended over a few months,
during which time the routine of the business was carried
on without material variation or difficulty. In addition to
a considerable English and intercolonial commission agency,
insurance business, and the steamer and general shipping
interests we had to look after, our firm were lessees, under
the Government, of the Queen’s Wharf at Port Adelaide,
and of extensive bonding warehouses. This and the Port
agency business attaching to it necessitated a staff of clerks
and workmen quite independently of the city office, but
of course under its control. It will therefore be seen that


my position was no sinecure, as I undertook the whole of
the large correspondence of the firm, in addition to the
sales, and to a great extent the general management. I
was now, however, in my element, and I can safely say
that few young men enjoy the so-called pleasures of life
more than I did the varied and responsible duties which
then fell to my charge.
As will be expected I had my share of the social
enjoyments of the period, and was admitted into much
fuller intercourse with my seniors in age and position
than is generally attained by one so young. IS'ot un-
frequently, too, a visit to Melbourne gave additional
variety to my ordinary pursuits. That city was then in
the full swing of the activity and excitement which the
diggings had evoked, while sufficient time had elapsed
since their outbreak to enable its institutions to assume
that aspect of luxury and opulence, which has ever since
characterized the “ Queen of the South.” On the occasion
of my first trip to Victoria, a few weeks after my arrival
in 1855, I found theatrical matters in a specially flourish-
ing state ; the most noteworthy performances being those
by G, V. Brooke and a company imported by Coppin, in the
little “ Iron Pot,” at the corner of Latrobe and Russell
Streets. The first play I saw in that unique theatre was
“ As You Like It,” with Miss Fanny Cathcart, erstwhile of
the Haymarket, London, as the heroine. Curiously enough
at the moment of this present writing the same lady,


as Mrs. George Darrell, is performing the same character
at the renovated Theatre Royal, Adelaide. Her interme-
diate professional career, mainly as Mrs. Robt. Heir, will
be familiar to most of my readers. While on theatrical
matters, one or two reminiscences of my very early Adelaide
life rise in my recollection. I was, unfortunately, out of
town when Kate Hayes made her first flying visit to us,
but the circumstances were very familiar to me at the time.
During the few hours’ ordinary detention of the mail
steamer in which the lady was proceeding to England, a
pre-arranged concert was given at the Old Theatre in Gilles’
Arcade. The price of admission was, I think, a guinea to
all parts of the house; but, at all events, the fair cantatrice
carried away some three hundred pounds as the reward of
her three hours’ visit to “ the farinaceous village.” The
world-famous Lola Montez was another notability who
honoured us with her presence, and eased us of our
loose cash. Her stay, with that of the small but effective
company she brought with her, extended over a very limited
number of nights, but she was understood to have netted
eleven hundred pounds. In conjunction with some friends
I secured for the season one of the boxes entered from the
stage, which formed a feature in the Old Victoria, and thus
had opportunities of conversing with the celebrated actress
and danseuse, who was in the habit of smoking cigarettes
in an arm-chair at the wing, in close proximity to my seat,
during her intervals off the stage. At first sight it was


difficult to account for the extraordinary fascination which
she had evidently exercised over “ all sorts and conditions
of men,” from royalty downwards, in the course of her
meteoric career. Her general personal attractions were by
no means sufficient to justify the indiscriminate slaughter
with which she was credited; but after a little opportunity
of observation you might observe a strikingly piercing
quality about her wonderful eyes, which at last gave you
the impression that their glances could riddle a deal board,
not to mention the much less penetrable stuff of which the
majority of male breasts are composed. To this, in com-
bination with a good figure and illimitable “ chic,” or as,
perhaps, it might be aptly rendered in the vernacular,
“ cheek,” I attributed the influence which she undoubtedly ex-
ercised over the heaven-anointed ruler of Bavaria, and which
created no small amount of popular ferment in that august
sovereign’s dominions. Nor was the fair adventuress with-
out her innocent victims in our prosaic city, albeit she
was accompanied in her colonial tour by a “frightful
example,” in the shape of the latest of her morganatic
attaches, whose life she made a burden to him by her
tyranny. Among the luminaries of Adelaide society at the
time was a gentleman of very strong prepossessions on the
subject of his personal attractions, and whose elegant pro-
portions were displayed in the becoming uniform of an
inspector of police. Anxious to make the acquaintance of
the renowned visitor, this gentleman paid his respects at


her temporary residence, little doubting fiat one interview
would make havoc with the peace of mind of the hitherto
irresistible actress. His aspirations were, however, doomed
to be rudely checked, for on receiving his card and ascer-
taining his professional status, the cruel message was re-
turned by Lola that “when she required the services of the
police she would send for them.” Another “ wandering
minstrel ” was Miska Hauser, the Hungarian violinist, who
is usually classed with Ole Bull as second only to Paganinni,
and good at that. I chanced to travel in the steamer from
Melbourne with this artist, and he subsequently dined
several times with me during his stay. His performance
on his particular instrument was marvellous ; but in private
life there was no perceptible halo of artistic romance to
hide the fact that he was a mere money-making performer,
with a particular Jewish eye to the main chance.
From this agreeable life of combined business and plea-
sure, or rather of business which was all pleasure, I must
hasten on to the more varied scenes of less familiar climes
which were speedily to come under my notice.


(Late GALL & SHERIDAN,)
|flercanttl( and dqnpl ipfqs,
LITHOGRAPHERS,
EITG-E/AYEJE/S,
ACCOUNT BOOK MAKERS, &C.
8 9,
King William Street , Adelaide.
THE AUSTRALASIAN
PLATE GLASS INSURANCE Co.,
LIMITEO.
CAPITAL £lO,OOO.
rpHIS Company has ESTABLISHED an AGENCY in SOUTH
JL AUSTRALIA, and has already taken numerous Risks on the
Shop Fronts of leading Business Houses in Adelaide. Damage
promptly repaired. For particulars apply to
HERBERT EVANS, Agent,
Green’s Exchange.


JNO, HODGKISS & Co„
IMPORTERS,
26 & 28, BUNDLE ST.,
SMPHINB PLAOB,
ADELAIDE,
Have at all times well assorted
Stocks in every Department of
Drapery pf Furnishing , to which
they respectpully invite the atten-
tion of purchasers.
Note the A<ldr ess—
26 & 28, BUNDLE ST., AND STEPHENS PLACE,
ADELAIDE-


gTRAKER & SONS’ FACSIMILE
PRINTING PROCESS.
By this novel invention a number ot facsimile copies
of Documents, Price Lists, Drawings, &c., written with
the patent ink on ordinary writing paper, are printed
in a few minutes on ANY KIND of DRY PAPER
with the aid of the ordinary copying press, the original
writing remaining uninjured.
It is specially suited to the requirements of
Solicitors, Brokers, Merchants, Railway Companies,
Auctioneers, and Accountants, School Boards, &c.
The simplicity of working and the clearness and
exactitude of the copies produced render the invention
most valuable in all cases where economy of time and
labour is an object.
Prospectuses, price list, and directions for use
obtainable at
GEO, ROBERTSON'S,
103, King William Street, 103,
Sole Agent for South Australia.


CARPET DEPARTMENT.
We have just opened our season’s shipments
of Brussels, Tapestry, and Kidderminster
Carpetings, which, added to our previously ex-
tensive stock, enable us to show one of the
LARGEST AND NEWEST ASSORTMENTS
To be found in the Colonies. The recent
shipments were purchased at very low prices,
the whole advantage of which we are giving
to our customers.
We beg to call special attention to our
stock of Brussels, the patterns and colorings
being very superior and the quality the best
made.
In Tapestries we are showing the newest
styles and also a very cheap lot, purchased
under their market value.
In Kidderminsters we have a splendid
variety of Bedroom and other patterns in
extra super, and lower priced goods.
FLOORCLOTHS.
We have a good assortment of all widths
in a great variety of dressings and colorings.
J. MILLER ANDERSON & €o.,
15 Sc 17, SXUSTDIjHJ'Z’ ST.


THE
AND OPINIONS,
«^
♦ U*
1878.
UNSUCCESSFUL COLONIST;
FORTUNES, MISFORTUNES, OBSERVATIONS,
AS RELATED BY HIMSELF.
“ Make money, my son —honestly if you can —but make
money. ” — Maxim of the Age.
IV. vJXJXjV, 1878.
PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR BY
SCRYMGOUR & SONS, 89, KING WILLIAM ST.




PAULDING’S
UGH ELIXIR
UNEQUALLED AS AN
Elegant, agreeable, and effectual remedy for Hoarsness, Coughs,
Colds, Asthma, Consumption, and all Affections of the Throat,
Lungs, and Chest.
There is no question that different constitutions require different remedies,
the same medicine will not cure every case alike, in spite of all assurances of
interested persons to the contrary, and although no Cough Medicine in South
Australia has ever yet obtained the popularity and extensive sale of
PAULDING’S PECTORAL DROPS,
Yet we have sometimes found it desirable to supplement it with the medicine
which we introduce now to the public as
PAULDING’S COUGH ELIXIR,
Which is from the prescription of a celebrated physician. With these two
remedies, pulmonary complaints may be met and cured in their first or initial
stage; or if permitted to fix their hold on the constitution, may be grappled
with, with almost certainty of success.
Having been extensively prescribed for many years, this Elixir is thus
confidently recommended as one of the most valuable remedies known, of
which one trial will prove the efficacy.
It relieves the chest by promoting easy expectoration, regulating it so that
where already too copious it will be reduced in quantity ; it diminishes
irritation in the throat and bronchial passages, removes difficulty of breathing,
and stimulates to a renewal of natural secretion and healthy action. An
approaching severe cold may generally be cut short by a dose of this E.ixir
taken at bedtime on the first appearance of the symptoms. It never occasions
headache, even in the most delicate persons; and, being pleasant, is readily
taken by females and children. Full directions on each bottle.
—♦
Wholesale of the Proprietors,
F. H. FAULDING & €o., Adelaide,
And Retail of them and all Chemists &. Storekeepers.
PRICE-TWO SHILLINGS PER BOTTLE.


CUNNINGHAM’S NEW IMPORTATIONS
Expressly for 1878, are now unpacked and on view.
All the Latest Novelties of the Season, Wholesale & Retail.
AC!ENT FOR THE SILICATED CARBON FILTERS. ALL
SIZES KEPT IN STOCK.


CHAPTER 'VI.
THE SUPERCARGO IX THE EAST.
Having, we will assume, added rather more than a year’s
experience of colonial business to that acquired in England,
the opportunity arose for me to still further enlarge my
commercial horizon. Shortly after my brother’s return to
the colony the firm determined to send to Singapore a
vessel, of which they were owners, with a view to her
disposal there. The “ Hero ” was a teak-built brig of In 3
tons register, which had attained the mature age frequently
arrived at by such ships—she acknowledged* to forty-five
years, but was believed to be much older —and was now
expensive to work by reason of her liability to frequent
repairs and of her antique outlines. In conversation with the
head of the firm on the evening before her intended
departure I happened to mention how much I should have
liked to accompany her, and on being told that had I sug-
gested it sooner it could have been arranged, and indeed
would have been of service to the business, it need hardly
be said that I expressed ray willingness to start then a-A
there. We occupied most of the night in writing the
necessary instructions, credits, and so on, and taking with
m I*>ss/Tl7fB


me a few of such creature comforts as our own warehouse
could supply, I got on board and under weigh the next
morning, being that of Her Majesty’s birthday, 1856. The
objects to be obtained by my eastern trips were mainly two.
In the first place I was to transact such commercial busi-
ness as was then entrusted to me by my principals in
Adelaide, —of course through our agents at the various
places I was to visit, who, however, in accordance with
usage, would deduct half their usual commissions in view
of the presence of a supercargo. Secondly, and perhaps
even more specially, it was desired that I should make
personal acquaintance with branches of business which the
firm had engaged in previously to some considerable extent,
but which were likely to develop largely in consequence of
my brother’s recent visit to the mother country. Much of
this eastern business was transacted jointly with our
London house—one of high position—or under financial
arrangements with it, and we were in constant correspond-
ence with its agents in the various parts of the world open,
or likely to be open, to our operations. With such plans
it was not unreasonable to desire a more distinct and
personal connection with the places and people among
whom such important interests lay, and a wider knowledge
of the peculiarities and relative advantages of the different
buying and selling markets within our reach. As my
launch, then, into these higher flights of commercial venture
—infinitely more fascinating to the aspiring youthful mind


than the selling of barley and 11 wuts ” in Somersetshire
market towns, or even than the chaffering about Booth’s
gin or North Wilt’s cheese “ to arrive ” with Bindley Street
grocers—l was first to do my best with the “ Hero ” in
Singapore, selling her if possible, loading her if compelled.
China and the tea trade were then to come within the
scope of my mission, and my instructions were shaped to
suit the varying circumstances I might encounter, as far as
they could be forecast.
Under the special prospects of sale entertained for her, it
was natural that the old vessel should be dispatched on this
occasion with as little outlay upon her as possible. She
was accordingly manned and victualled in a manner which
would be considered hardly compatible with luxury in its
more extravagant forms. The crew numbered, all told, six
souls, besides the captain. Provisions were laid in for
about a fifty days’ voyage. When therefore I mention
that it was forty-five days before we rounded Cape Leuwin
in the culminating gale of a constant succession which
accompanied, thrashed, baffled, drove, and headed us during
the whole of that time, it will be understood that all hands
had a rough time of it. Being of a “ Mark Tapley ”-ish
nature myself the little hardships did not affect my jolity in
the slightest degree, but the lengthened passage in that
severe weather was an exceedingly trying one to the captain
and hands, who, being so few in number, seldom enjoyed
an undisturbed watch below, or got the chance of keeping a


dry stitch on them for any length of time. My own
“ medical comforts ” were shared all round as long as they
lasted, but we were soon thrown back on the primitive salt
horse and hard tack of the forecastle. Indeed, before we
were well up in the south-east trades these got lamentably
short, and tea without sugar, accompanying cakes of flour
and water, elaborated with much care, and under my own
rigid supervision, by the ship’s cook, became our sole fare.
Fortunately after some days of these short commons we
came up with a Yankee whaler, which good-naturedly lay
to for us, and supplied us with such small stores as she
could spare. I accompanied the captain of the whaler to
his own ship, and partook of his homely, but to me deli-
cious, repast “ Pork and ’lasses” is not much alluded to
in the cookery books, but I never hear the combination
mentioned without considerable respect, and a vivid recol-
lection of my first introduction to it in the Yankee whaler
in the middle of the Southern Ocean. Need I add that
being American it was a strictly “ temperance ” ship, or
that, such being the case, the worthy skipper produced after
dinner—in his own cabin, with the door locked—a small
but welcome supply of unexceptionable schiedam.
A few days of baffling winds, and we were enabled to make
the entrance of the Straits of Sunda; and here I had my first
view of tropical scenery, under very favorable conditions.
Threading in the brilliant sunshine the islet studded passage
between those magnificent islands, Java and Sumatra, whose


wealth of foliage fringes the margins of the surrounding
seas, girdling old ocean as it were with cocoa-nut groves,
one was, perforce, charmed into forgetfulness of the two
months of danger and difficulty our'crazy craft had passed
through. The contrary winds which had impeded our
entrance into the Straits had served to collect a small
flotilla of vessels of various flags, and the light leading
breeze which wafted us along enabled us to vary our course
so as to come within hailing distance of many of them suc-
cessively. A Cowes regatta on a magnified scale, carried out
under the most favorable climatic conditions of the “ Isles
of Greece,” as sung by the poets, with distant surroundings
of tropical forest growth, would convey some idea of the
brilliant picture presented to our view. A slight detention
for supplies at the Dutch Port of Anjer, on the eastern end
of Java, well-known as the calling place for all vessels to or
from the “far Cathay” and the numerous island ports of
the eastern seas, and a prosperous run through the Java
Sea and the Straits of Banca and Rhio, and we cast anchor
in the open, though sheltered, roadstead which does duty as
a harbour for Singapore.
This little island has often been alluded to in dis-
cussions respecting free-trade which have taken place among
us, and I think its commercial experience may be of use to
us in more ways than one. With little or no produce of its
own for export, with, at that time at all events, no facility
for shipping or receiving cargo other than that afforded by


lighters in the open harbour, nor any of the advantages of
slips or docks for repairing vessels, Singapore had become
the entrepot of a large and profitable commerce of all nations,
and a flourishing and important appendage to the mercantile
interests of Great Britain. Its geographical position is,
undoubtedly, extremely favorable for the objects it has
served; but this alone would not have secured for it the
command of the numerous produce markets which contribute
to its exports, or its unrivalled advantages as a port of call
for eastern traders. It is unquestionably to the absence of
any expensive and hampering customs restrictions, and to
the fact that, with the exception of trifling light dues, there
are no port charges whatever on vessels arriving or
departing, that these results are due. Thus there are direct
inducements for unengaged vessels to make Singapore their
central station, from which they can shape a course to any
port in India, China, or elsewhere, where tonnage may be in
demand. Hence, also, as being such a rendezvous for
shipping, and as being devoid of the expense and worry of
customs duties, with their impracticable officials, and the
local expenses they otherwise entail, merchandise of all sorts
is attracted for the purposes of sale or shipment
Of course circumstances with us are not strictly analogous
to those of Singapore; they march with them sufficiently
closely, however, to satisfy every competent observer of the
fatuity which prevents our obtaining the vastly increased
trade which the abolition of the custom-house would attract


to our port. I shall probably have something to say here-
after on the fiscal aspect of this question. It is sufficient
here to remark that I know of no sight more absolutely
ludicrous than that of a so-called civilized community, which
has had liberty to carve out its own course unhampered by
legacies of absurdity from the dark ages, deliberately imped-
ing the ingress of the ships which bear its produce to market,
and of the goods which its necessities require, for the
purpose of raising a revenue by the costliest and most
inequitable system of taxation ever adopted, except, perhaps,
in the outlying provinces of Turkey, and under similar effete
despotisms.
Though the main portion of the indigenous inhabitants of
Singapore belong to the Malay race, the presence of the
übiquitous Chinaman in great force soon becomes perceptible.
Indeed, the small settlement was said to include' no less
than 70,000 of these mis-called barbarians, and preconceived
ideas of their helplessness soon had to give way. On the first
evening of my landing I strolled into the billiard-room of the
principal hotel, and was astonished to find one of the tables
occupied by two fac-similes of the ordinary coolie ; one of
whom was whistling, “ Oh ! Susannah ! don’t you cry for me,”
but suspended that amusement to exclaim, “ That’s a fluke! ”
as his companion made an accidental score in an otherwise
well-intended break. I began to think that our ideal China-
man was a very different person from his proto-type in actual
life, and subsequent experience fully justified this view.


In Singapore may be found many natives of the Flowery
Land or immediate descendants of emigrants thence, who,
while maintaining their national costume and peculiarities,
will compare favorably in education, manners, and morals,
with the average middle-class Englishman. A few attain to
that position of public dignity and private estimation which
we reserve, or rather ought to, for the wisest and best among
us. Wherever I have seen Chinamen established out of
their native country, I have observed that their intelligence,
industry, and thrift, have secured for them the respect of
the prior occupants of the soil; and that in most cases the
latter have had to subside into the lowest grades of social
life under the influence of these stronger-willed aliens. I
am not now, of course, referring to the Mongolian invasion
of Anglo-Saxon countries in this and the other hemisphere.
The problem this involves is of too large and complicated a
nature to be touched on in fugitive sketches such as these.
A due appreciation of the Chinese characteristics, as exhibited
elsewhere, is, however, of importance in considering the
bearings of the questions regarding him with which we
have to do. I shall have to refer to him again when I meet
him on his native soil.
Leaving the vessel at the earliest opportunity, I took up
my quarters with the merchants to whom I was accredited,
as was invariably the hospitable custom wherever I
travelled. The domestic life of Singapore presents great
attractions to a visitor; indeed, after several lengthened


visits to the island, I can say that it is the only tropical
place I have seen where I should at all care to reside. The
climate, owing probably in a great measure to its insular
situation, is one of great evenness, continuing the year
through with little change. Brilliant sunshine predominates,
but the almost daily or nightly occurrence of showers main-
tains the delicious freshness of verdure which is so striking
a feature. The heat would, no doubt, be considered trying
by a new arrival from the north temperate zone, but it lacks
that specially enervating effect which is felt in many
eastern countries. Hence, the residents are not debarred
from European female society, as is the case to a great
extent in many of our distant trading stations ; and families
may be reared without that constant recource to an English
climate, which renders matrimony in India so frequently
impracticable.
The well-to-do European resident —and most are well-to-
do, or at all events regulate their private expenditure on a
liberal basis —resides in a dwelling, half bungalow, half
mansion, perched on the summit of a small hill or mound,
and surrounded by a nutmeg or cocoa-nut plantation. In the
early morning he probably takes a ride —may be to the race
course, where others of his friends and acquaintances are
collected watching a motley group of horses being put
through their matutinal exercise in preparation for amateur
races in prospective. A cup of tea, a cheroot, and a little
horsey and general chat will pass away half-an-hour, when


he retraces his road to his own domicile, where tea, fruit,
&c.— the “little breakfast”—awaits him. This is suc-
ceeded by the bath and the operations of the toilet for the
day, and our merchant or lawyer makes his appearance en
grand Unue at the breakfast table ; where he fortifies his
inner man with substantial fare, always including, of course,
curries, and accompanied by pale ale or claret. His buggy,
with its handsome little half Arab horse and attendant
syce or groom, who runs alongside, now takes him into
the town, where he plunges into the mysteries of coffee, sago,
shellac or gum dammar, or the even more recondite subjects
of Turkey reds, grey shirtings or madapollams, and has to
pit his brains against those of Parsees, Malays, Chinese,
Arabs, and the other inheritors of the curse of Babel who
pervade the haunts of eastern commerce. Contrary to a
very prevalent delusion as to an afternoon siesta being in the
course of events in a business day in these regions, I may
say that in my somewhat extended travels I have never yet
met with the European firm which adopted any such
practice. The ten to five habits of London or Liverpool mer-
chants are equally in vogue on the banks of the Hooghly, in
the bureaux of Port Louis, or in the godowns of Hongkong
or Singapore. Our merchant, therefore, re-enters his buggy
at the orthodox hour and whirls himself rapidly again to
the suburbs, where his bath and a change of garments fit him
for a solemn drive in the carriage with the “ mem sahib
as his wife would be called in India—if he is fortunate


enough to possess such a luxury. Dinner, composed of all
the native and imported luxuries available, succeeded
perhaps by a little music or a game of billiards, with
cheroots and brandy and water as a wind up, brings him to
his early bed time at probably not later than 10 o’clock.
With tolerably regular living after this fashion, a person
of good constitution may pass many years in Singapore
without achieving an *■ Indian liver.” I was acquainted
with one fine specimen of the old English gentleman who
had resided for between thirty and forty years on the
island, bringing up to man and womanhood a numerous
family, some of whom had large groups of thriving
youngsters round their tables.
After some trouble and delay I succeeded in selling the
“ Hero ” at a fair price, considering her age, and the old
brig commenced her tropical career as the property of a
Chinese merchant. Her captain, who bore the same name
as myself, though not otherwise connected, took service
under similar Celestial auspices, and I believe is to this day
trading out of Singapore in the same employ. Difficulties
arose with the crew, who had been shipped to return to
the colonies; but after considerable bother, which I con-
sidered was rather increased than otherwise by the action
of my agents, I managed to get everything straight, and
found myself at liberty to proceed on my travels.
Voyaging in the China seas varies considerably, according
to the season in which it is undertaken. For a half of the


year, roughly speaking, the wind blows continuously, and
often furiously, from the northward and eastward; during
the other half it as persistently proceeds from the exactly
opposite points. The route from Singapore to China lying
almost directly in the course of these monsoons, it be-
comes necessary to employ steamers of great power to cope
with the adverse wind generally encountered on either the
upward or downward passage, The south west monsoon
was breaking up when I started for Hongkong in the
“ Lancefield,” a screw-steamer of about 1,000 tons and of
great proportionate engine power, belonging, like her sister
ship, the “ Fiery Cross,” to the well-known firm of Jardine,
Matheson, & Co., and employed principally in the opium
and silk trades. Starting from Calcutta with a cargo of
Patna drug, consigned to various firms in China, and call-
ing at Singapore en route, these vessels were in the habit of
running to the entrance of Hongkong harbour, where, un-
seen by the residents, they would be met by a Chinese
sanpan on the look-out for them. This unsuspected little
craft would receive advices of the state of the Indian
markets, the quantity of opium on board, names of con-
signees, &c., with which she made the best of her way to
the offices of her expectant employers—of course the owners
of the steamer—who were then in a position to buy and sell
as might be warranted by the forestalled information in
their possession. In the meantime the steamer itself was
dodging about outside the harbour, unseen by those on


shore, till the little game had been allowed time to mature.
This was only one specimen of the demoralizing nature of
the opium traffic, through which British merchants, under
special Government guardianship and co-operation, have
endeavoured to “ civilize ” the Chinese A government
monopoly in India, the country of its production, and an
outlet for its disposal among the ignorant population of
China maintained, in spite of the protests of the authorities,
at the cannon’s mouth, it has always seemed to me that the
history of our opium trade with that country has marked
with an indelible blot the character of our national relations
with it. Of what avail can it be to send missionaries of
religion among a people towards whom our own conduct
has been so grossly inconsistent with the commonest prin-
ciples of justice or morality 1 I am no advocate of state
nostrums for enforcing private morality, nor do I believe in
their efficacy. Supposing, however, that such a country as
Denmark or Belgium chose to prohibit within its borders
the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors, and Eng-
land, seeing a fine field for the benevolent operations of her
own brewers and distillers, declared war on such intolerant
nation to compel its reception of our vitriolic “ blue ruin,”
and tobacco-drugged beer. This would be a mild imitation
of our national action as regards China, where we may be
almost said to have created the appetite for the body-and-
soul-destroying drug, the profits of whose sale assists in
maintaining our beneficent and Christianizing rule over India.


But I am forgetting the passage in the powerful steamer
“ Lancefield,” which the necessities of the opium trade had
put in the way of bearing me from Singapore to Hong-
kong. The short voyage, though a tempestuous, was
not an unpleasant one, everything being on a scale of
eastern comfort, as far as such was compatible with rough
sea-going stability. Among my fellow-passengers was an
Italian nobleman, nearly connected I believe with the
reigning family of the then kingdom of Sardinia, and rejoic-
ing in the poetical title of Duke of Vallombrosa. Like
other distinguished young foreigners and native nobles of
more recent times, the duke was travelling for amusement
or instruction, and had just finished a lengthened sojourn
in India, where he had been the guest of the Governor-
General in Calcutta, besides going through a course of sport-
ing in the interior. Also, like most other men I have met
of real position, natural or acquired, he soon showed himself
to be an unassuming and agreeable companion, ready to
enter into the occupations and humours of the hour, and to
give and take in the levelling society of travelling bachelors.
If his lordship, with simulated gravity, sent his valet round
the table during dinner with a few rupees I had won from
him at ecarte solemnly laid out on a silver salver, I would
retort by ordering a steward to offer the potatoes to “ His
Serene Highness,” or to “my illustrious friend.” He was
the most insatiable devourer of the lightest possible litera-
ture I ever came across, finishing and pitching overboard


volume after volume of the trashiest French novels in an
incredibly short space of time, and, like Oliver Twist, per-
petually “ calling for more.” We spent some time subse-
quently in Canton at the adjoining'houses of our respective
kind entertainers, and took some exploratory excursions in
company; but I have never since heard his name mentioned,
so conclude that his travels did not inspire him with am-
bition to enter public life, or that success has not lifted him
into prominence.
On arrival at Hongkong I was at once invited to take up
my quarters at the house of my agents, who I found were
among the first rank of the merchant princes of the China
trade, then, much more than now, mainly in the hands of a
few houses of great wealth and influence. My first pro-
ceeding was to charter a vessel to convey a cargo of produce
to South Australia, and to make preliminary arrangements
to the purchase of her lading. Being dissatisfied with the
quality of the teas usually received in the colonies—what
was vulgarly called “ post and rails” then forming the bulk
of the importations—l rather astonished my friends by the
high character of the sorts I picked out, which they
imagined much too good for the Australian markets. As-
suming, however, that I knew what I was about, the
necessary instructions were sent on by mail to Foochow, a
port to the northward where my particular descriptions of
black tea were best obtained, to forward the required
quantities by coaster, with the monsoon then blowing down


the China sea. My vessel, a barque of about 500 tons register,
proceeded up the river to Whampoa, the port of Canton, to
await other cargo I intended purchasing there, for which
purpose my presence in the latter city was necessary. The
great city of Canton is situated about a hundred miles from
the English settlement on the island of Hongkong, up the
Canton or Pearl river, Whampoa being twelve miles nearer
the mouth, and the furthest point to which the larger
vessels can ascend. The English and other foreign mer-
chants carrying on business at Canton were then restricted
to a small plot of ground lying between the city walls and
the banks of the river. Their residences and offices were
packed together in courts of lofty houses, all closely
contiguous, and individualized as the “ English factory,”
“ American factory,” &c. Between these blocks of build-
ings and the river was a small space of ground, not so large
as a small city square, laid out with turf and shrubs, and
this was practically all the space allowed the numerous
foreign residents for recreation and exercise. One or two
streets of Chinese shops adjacent to the “ Factories,” as the
merchants’ quarter was distinctively named, were open to
the visits of Europeans, &c., but these were without the
city proper, and were barricaded at night. Admittance to
the city was entirely prohibited, and excursions into the
country, outside the jealously-guarded walls, would have
been attended with considerable danger, and were therefore
rarely undertaken.


As my residence in Canton was protracted to a much
longer period than I had anticipated it may he of interest
to give some idea of the mode of life then in vogue. The
particular court in which my agent’s house was situated
was lined and bounded at the extremity by attached and
very similar houses of four lofty stories, the fronts of which
were composed of jalousied balconies. The groundfloors
were occupied as offices for business and domestic purposes,
and overflowing into the paved court might be seen at all
hours of the day groups of half-naked Chinamen perpetu-
ally engaged in counting silver dollars, the currency of
commerce. These were passed with astonishing rapidity
from one bushel basket to anotheyr; coins of diminished
weight from long usage or clipping being detected and sorted
out, apparently by instinct, as they were run through the
nimble fingers. I certainly never saw such a display of silver
coinage as was here constantly changing hands, but when it
is considered that settlements for transaction of great mag-
nitude were necessarily effected through the medium of the
dollar, it is not astonishing that a perpetual clink of silver
ad nauseam was the result. In the offices would be seen a
staff of European clerks, the most important of whom was
the “ Tchaa-tze,” or tea-taster, by whose skill and judgment
all purchases of this great staple commodity were made.
Special natural aptitude, a delicate palate, and an appren-
ticeship of cultivation in the art, are essentials to the for-
mation of a tea-taster, and, as may be expected, excellence


in this department is well paid. A salary of £I,OOO a
year, with no remote prospect of a partnership on the death
or retirement in rapid rotation of the principals in one or
other of the various branches which each great firm has in
the different ports, reconciles many men to the undoubted
climatic and other disadvantages they have to experience.
Debarred from the ordinary pursuits of young men in less
circumscribed localities and with more favoured climates,
luxurious living was the main consolation and universal
resource. I have since experienced in my various wander-
ings perhaps the greatest heights to which culinary skill
and excellence can attain, but I think I have never seen any
class, in any country, who devoted more trouble and money
to the acquisition of the pleasures of the table than the
great commercial magnates among whom I spent four
months in China, But then it must be remembered that
—at least in Canton—they had no rides or drives, no balls
or picnics, no theatres or concerts, no clubs, no flirtations,
no wives, and no children. Nothing but the office and the
dining-room, varied by an occasional game of billiards, a
pull on the river, or a mill-horse tramp round the gravel
walks of the garden, as limited and nearly as dreary as one
of the enclosures of Victoria Square. If, therefore, in ad-
dition to the copious products of the country and such
amenities as Fortnum & Mason and Crosse & Blackwell
could furnish, relief was sought by indulgence in game pies
brought in ice from Shanghai, in pommeloes and potatoes


from Amoy, pines and bananas from Singapore, dungaree
ducks from Bombay, buffalo-humps from Calcutta, Bass’s
pale ale bottled at Madras, and everything else obtainable,
from wherever it could be got best, who shall be found to
object. I certainly didn’t. Matters were very much
simplified in this regard by the fact that principals and
employes of each firm lived in common, and at the cost of
the business. Domestic expenses were consequently
matters of secondary importance, and, being treated as
“ charges in trade,” and falling on the general operations of
the business, and as such participated in by absent partners
and wealthy capitalists, no personal economy was to be
expected. Then the profuse hospitality characteristic of
eastern life necessitated that the style or position of the
great houses should be kept up in a manner corresponding
to their importance, and the result of generous competition
under such favourable circumstances may be imagined.
Owing to the great variation of latitude between the
northern and southern ports of China, there are, of course,
corresponding differences in the climate; but in all parts
it is very unlike the comparatively even temperature I have
described as prevailing in Singapore. While the summers
are of intense heat, very trying to the European con-
stitution, the winters are distinctly marked, and may be
called cold even in the southern settlements. Hence, while
for half the year the residents are sweltering under extreme
tropical conditions, during the remaining portion carpets are put


down, curtains hung and fires lighted, as in the temperate
zones. Christmas in Hongkong or Canton is kept with
as near a resemblance to the style of the old country as the
local resources, aided largely by importations from England,
can produce. In the northern parts the rigours of winter
are, I believe, more thoroughly suggestive of the ideal of
that festive season.
Business matters being put fairly in train in Canton, I
had ample leisure to look round and see what was to be
seen. The curiosity shops which abounded in Old and New
China Streets (tbe available native quarter) afforded endless
scope for research ; while the workshops of artificers in
gold and silver, ivory, and other less costly materials, and
the manufactories of articles of ordinary consumption, were
full of interest. Even the dense, ever-moving, and laborious
population which thronged the narrow thoroughfares was
well worthy of examination in detail. Peripatetic money-
changers, open air scribes, medical practitioners and barbers,
vendors of edibles and potables of suspicious odour and
appearance,—these, and numberless other varieties of the
cheerful, bustling, hard-working Chinaman met the view on
every hand. The one class which seemed to furnish the
only exceptions to the general activity was that of the
mendicants, who, in appalling numbers, exposed their va-
rious infirmities to the public gaze. The total absence of
wheeled-vehicles and beasts of burden contributed to the
strangeness of the spectacle ; while the wayfarer was met at


every step by the heavily laden coolie, trotting along with
laborious grunts xmder burthens which would tax the
strength of the English lumper.
Among the few obtainable excursions further afield was
one to a famous Buddhist temple, at no great distance from
the city, but on the other side of the river, which was
crowded with the floating habitations of the 70,000 river-
borne population. This mass of people—enough of themselves
to constitute a decent sized city—were born, lived, labored,
marketed, made love, married, and died in their little floating
arks, which, to them, answered all the purposes of the
cottages, villas, and mansions of ordinary urban life. The
excellent English chaplain, who kindly acted as our cicerone
on the occasion, had picked a time when he knew that the
religious ceremonies of the temple would be in full swing,
so that we saw it at its best. The size of the enclosed
space may be imagined when it is mentioned that besides
embracing numerous courts and shrines for worship, it found
room to accommodate no less than four hundred attendant
priests, and an establishment of sacred hogs. We saw many
visitors performing their devotions by offering food and
burning joss-stick at the different shrines. I n one of the larger
temples full service was being performed before the altar
of an atrocious-looking representation of a deity. The head-
priest was assisted by numerous subordinates or acolytes,
all robed in the sacred colour, yellow ; the perpetual
genuflection, tinkling of bells, and wafting of incense, gave


the whole scene a striking resemblance to the rites of the
Roman Catholic Church. In deference to the feelings of
my other companion, His Grace of Yallombrosa, I did not
give utterance to this idea ; but almost as soon as it
presented itself he spontaneously remarked that it looked like
a ludicrous travesty of the forms of his own familiar faith.
From what I could gather, the Chinese have little or no
actual belief in this or any other religious system. The
priests are tolerated and supported, but no reverence or
even deference is shown to them individually. In fact, like
the great majority in many countries with which we are more
familiar, our celestial brethren devote a certain amount of
time and money to the performance of so-called religious
duties because “ they were brought up to it,” or because it
is considered “ the thing.”
Soon after this visit I was fortunate enough to be invited
to accompany a party in an excursion right round the outside
of the city walls. On this occasion we were under the
guidance of no less a person than Consul Parkes, afterwards
so well-known in connection with the Chinese war, and
subsequently as Sir Harry Parkes, the able representative
of Great Britain in Japan. In addition there were Captain
Bates, of H.M.S. “ Bittern ” —who fell shortly afterwards at
the first storming of Canton—and several of his officers.
Our route lay through about 15 miles of, for the most part,
densely populated suburbs, and as it had to be accomplished
on foot, and was not unattended with risk, owing to the


active hatred of the inhabitants to the “ foreign devils,” we
had to start soon after daylight. The greater part of the
journey was pretty much a repetition of the walk through
the streets in the immediate neighbourhood of the
“ factories ” ; and as we moved rapidly we experienced little
annoyance from the people beyond being saluted by oppro-
brious epithets. Occasionally, however, we would make a
short dash through an open gateway leading to the interior
of the city proper ; this would be immediately the signal for
such a commotion as may be observed in an ant-hill if an
intrusive stick disturbs its propriety. Soldiers would run to
arms, a crowd would rapidly begin to collect, and we would
speedily have to beat a retreat before a demonstration half
timorous and half hostile. In our track lay the famous
“ execution ground ”of Canton, This was a small triangular
yard surrounded by houses, and the scene of the judicial
massacres which the extraordinary indifference to human life
among the Chinese so frequently occasions. We were not
privileged on this occasion to “ assist ” at any executions,
though they are of frequent occurrence; and the Consul
told me that he had witnessed from an overlooking
window the beheading of three hundred persons in one
morning. The poor wretches are made to kneel in rows
with their hands bound; an assistant gives each a poke
in the back to induce a convenient position, when the
headsman, with a huge two-handed sword—replaced as
fast as blunted —walks along the line lopping off a head at


each blow. There were also set up several wooden crosses,
to which criminals guilty of certain offences are fastened,
either to die a lingering death, or to have their sufferings
shortened by a piecemeal dissection of their living bodies.
The horrifying associations of this disgusting place were
soon effaced in our minds by the spectacle of a parade
ground, in which a considerable body of native soldiers were
going through their evolutions under the superintendence
of a mandarin of high rank. This official was comfortably
seated under a shed at one end of the space, with his
umbrella and fan bearers and other attendants around him.
The exercises of the troops were of a most ludicrous
character to the eyes of those accustomed to the western
modes of warfare. Their great feat appeared to be the
discharge of their huge “ gingalls ” —a sort of lengthened
blunderbuss, requiring two men for its manipulation.
Under cover of the dense smoke produced by the firing of a
lot of these, a line of “ braves ” would advance a few paces
with great noise and demonstrations of ferocity ; presumably
catching sight of the opposing force, they would then leap
into the air with frantic yells, and immediately make the
best of their way back to where they came from. As our
conductor spoke the native languages—both that in common
use and the Court dialect —fluently, we were able to
exchange ideas with some of the military, who, being under
control, did not seem to evince the same repugnance to
us which was displayed by the populace generally.


Bmiumm & s©is,
(Late GALL & SHERIDAN,)
and General iniiiteiis,
LITHOGRAPHERS,
■COPPII PMfi PSIifiRS,
IE IST G- R, R S,
ACCOUNT BOOK MAKERS, &C.
King William Street , Adelaide.
THE AUSTRALASIAN
PLATE GLASS INSURANCE Co.,
LIMITED.
CAPITAL £lo,ooo*
Company has ESTABLISHED an AGEXCV in SOUTH
JL AUSTRALIA, and has already taken numerous Risks on the
Shop Fronts of leading Business Houses in Adelaide. Damage
promptly repaired. For particulars apply to
HERBERT EVANS, Agent,
Green’s Exchange,


JNO, HODGRISS & Co„
mportkss,
26 & 28, BUNDLE ST.,
SflPHllS , FLAOM,
Have at all times well assorted
Stocks in every Department of
Drapery & Furnishing , to which
they respectfully invite the atten-
tion of purchasers .
Note the Address—
26 & 28, BUNDLE ST., AND STEPHENS PLACE,
ADELAIDE.


W. C. BUIK & CO.,
General and
(JfupMiing Wai^rfloms,
47 and 49,
BUNDLE STREET, ADELAIDE.
Established 184r9.
Furniture, Mattresses, Bedsteads,
Cutlery, Ironmongery, China,
Glassware, Earthenware, Lamps,
Chandeliers, Fancy Goods.
— * —
SEWING MACHINES
By all the best makers, V.holesale and Retail at the lowest prices.
Illustrated Family Price lasts Post Free.
Town and Country Orders carefully executed, packed,
and forwarded to all parts of the Colony.
N.B.—Our Country friends will find it to their ad-
vantage to inspect our Stock before making purchases
elsewhere.
W, C. BUIK & CO,


it/A, ,s-i
rJ&kJO
J. MILLER ANDERSON I Co.
CARPET DEPARTMENT.
We have just opened our season’s shipments
of Brussels, Tapestry, and Kidderminster
Carpetings, which, added to our previously ex-
tensive stock, enables us to show one of the
LARGEST AND NEWEST ASSORTMENTS
To be found in the Colonies. The recent
shipments were purchased at very low prices,
the whole advantage of which we are giving
to our customers.
We beg to call special attention to our
stock of Brussels, the patterns and colorings
being very superior and the quality the best
made.
In Tapestries we are showing the newest
styles and also a very cheap lot, purchased
under their market value.
In Kidderminsters w r e have a splendid
variety of Bedroom and other patterns in
extra super, and lower priced goods.
FLOORCLOTHS.
We have a good assortment of all widths
in a great -variety of dressings and colorings.
J. MILLER ANDERSON & Co.,
15 eSc 17, LI IST IDLE IT ST,


THE
UNSUCCESSFUL COLONIST;
HIS „
FORTUNES, MISFORTUNES, OBSERVATIONS,
AND OPINIONS.
AS RELATED BY HIMSELF,
“ Make money, my son—honestly if you can —but make
money.”— Maxim of the Age,
V. -A.XJ GrXJ ST, 1878.
PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR BY
SCRYMGOUR & SONS, 89, KING WILLIAM ST.
1878.


GEORGE ROBERTSON ,
Bookseller & Publisher.
THE NEWEST BOOKS.
CHERRY RIPE : by Miss Mathers, author of “ Cornin'
Thro ’ the Rye .” 7s. 6d.
THE CAPTAIN’S CABIN : a yarn, by Edward Jenkins,
author of “ Ginx’s Baby.” Illustrated. 3s. 6d.
GREEN PASTURES AND PICCADILLY: by William
Black, 6s.
THE VAGABOND PAPERS : four series, each 2s. 6d.
THE HISTORY OF AUSTRALIA : from 1606 to 1876,
by A. & G. Sutherland. 2s. 6d.
THE MISSISSIPPI PILOT : by Mark Twain, is.
THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER : by MARK
Twain. 2s.
JOAN : by Miss Broughton. 2s. 6d,
OTHER PEOPLE’S CHILDREN: a sequel to “ Helen's
Babies” is.
MRS. BROWN ON CLEOPATRA’S NEEDLE, is.
ARIADNE : by OuiDA, author of “ Puck.” 2s, 6d.
THE MAN ON THE BEACH ; by Bret Harte. is.
THE MELBOURNE REVIEW : a Quarterly Publication,
devoted to Philosophy, Science, Theology, Art, &c.
Subscription, 10s, per Annum ; posted, ns. 6d.
ROBERTSOIT,
ioj, King William Si.


PAULDING’S
COUGH ELIXIR
UNEQUALLED AS AN
Elegant, agreeable, and effectual remedy for Hoarsness, Coughs,
Colds, Asthma, Consumption, and all Affections of the Throat,
Lungs, and Chest.
There is no question that different constitutions require different remedies
the same medicine will not cure every case alike, in spite of all assurances of
interested persons to the contrary, and although no Cough Medicine in South
Australia has ever yet obtained the popularity and extensive sale of
PAULDING’S PECTORAL DROPS,
Yet we have sometimes found it desirable to supplement it with the medicine
which we introduce now to the public as
PAULDING’S COUGH ELIXIR,
Which is from the prescription of a celebrated physician. With these two
remedies, pulmonary complaints may be met and cured in their first or initial
stage; or if permitted to fix their hold on the constitution, may be grappled
with, with almost certainty of success.
Having been extensively prescribed for many years, this Elixir is thus
confidently recommended as one of the most valuable remedies known, of
which one trial will prove the efficacy.
It relieves the chest by promoting easy expectoration, regulating it so that
where already too copious it will be reduced in quantity ; it diminishes
irritation in the throat and bronchial passages, removes difficulty of breathing,
and stimulates to a renewal of natural secretion and healthy action. An
approaching severe cold may generally be cut short by a dose of this Elixir
taken at bedtime on the first appearance of the symptoms. It never occasions
headache, even in the most delicate persons; and, being pleasant, is readily
taken by females and children. Full directions on each bottle.
♦
Wholesale of the Proprietors,
F. H. PAULDING & Co., ADELAIDE,
And Retail of them and all Chemists & Storekeepers.
PRICE-TWO SHILLINGS PER BOTTLE.


CUNNINGHAM’S NEW IMPORTATIONS
Expressly for 1878, are now unpacked and on view.
All the Latest Novelties of the Season, Wholesale & Retail.
AGENT FOR THE SILICATED CARBON FILTERS. ALL
SIZES KEPT IN STOCK.


At another spot we came across a body of Tartar cavalry per-
forming their exercises, which were, if anything, more gro-
tesque than those of their unmounted brethren. Each grim
warrior, fully accoutred, would clamber into the high peaked
saddle on the back of a diminutive pony. The little steed
would then be urged into a vigorous danter along a ditch con-
structed for the purpose, some two or three feet deep, a couple
of hundred yards long, and only just wide enough to admit
him, and the performance consisted in discharging an arrow,
during the transit, at a target set up in close proximity.
At the end of the course the triumphant performer dis-
mounted carefully, and the pony was led back to receive the
next member of the corps. The impression derived from
the view of these warlike manoeuvres was anything but one
of respect for the Chinese as a fighting nation. In their
contests among themselves I imagine that the amount of
blood shed in actual battle is very trifling ; but that when
one side gives in, as it speedily does, the victorious forces
indulge in unlimited massacre. On the side of the
city farthest from the river we found ourselves in the
neighbourhood of a fortress surmounting a steep conical
hill, commanding a view over the walls. By a rapid
ascent of the steps leading up to the gates, we tried to
obtain access to the interior, but, as usual, our object was
defeated by the vigilance of the sentries, who slammed the
portals at the first sight of our European costumes.
Within a few days after this adventure the affair of the


inrcha “ Arrow ” took place, and this led to the long and
complicated war, in which the British and French forces
were combined to punish the alleged misdeeds of the
Chinese authorities, and to dictate terms of future inter-
course. I was in Canton and Hongkong while the diplo-
matic skirmishing, which preluded the war, was going on,
returning to the former city in time to see the actual
outbreak of hostilities. Of course, access to any part of the
native quarters was now impossible, and the “ Factories ”
were guarded by cannon and marines landed from the gun-
boats, which had been sent up the river to menace the city.
Business was necessarily almost entirely suspended, and the
merchants’ houses were alive throughout the day with naval
and military officers, for whom open house was kept. It
was my good fortune to see the first bombardment of
Canton, or rather of the official portion, to which at that
time it was as much as possible confined. From the
attacking gunboats no part of the city was visible, the lofty
Factories ” extending at the rear of the garden abutting
on the river effectually intercepting the view. The admiral
in command was therefore located with his staff on the flat
roof of Messrs. Dent & Co.’s house, whence, by means of
flags, he directed the fire of the mortars on board the
gunboats. Our party took up its quarters on our own
roof, which joined on to that of Dent’s, and by means of
telescopes we were enabled to watch the proceedings, at
■their destination, of the huge missiles which were whizzing


over our heads in, I suppose, parabolic curves. The firing
must have been wonderfully accurate, for the fourth or fifth
shell dropped neatly into the governor’s yamun. When it
is remembered that the object aimed at was invisible to the
gunners, and at a distance of miles—l am afraid to say how
many, lest I may be led into an absurd blunder —it will be
seen that the operations of this branch of gunnery are not
to be despised. Speaking generally, and not from accurate
recollection, I should imagine that there would be no
difficulty, with the offensive weapons in use to-day, for a
vessel lying off Henley Beach to drop a few effective
persuaders into sundry snug board-rooms in King William
Street. Even were each of our banking establishments to
keep a corporal in full uniform on the premises, I expect
that such winged intruders would be difficult to deny
admittance to, and that the heavy drafts of which they
would be the advices would have to be honoured with a
very limited period of “ grace.” I need hardly say, there-
fore, that the volunteer movement now on foot seems to me
to be absolutely devoid of the slightest element of utility as
far as the special circumstances of South Australia are con-
cerned. A good gun-boat, carrying heavy metal, and
floating in shallow water, would afford us all the protection
we should want against a stray cruiser ; while we must
trust in Providence and the British navy to keep from our
shores an armed squadron, against which Ave should be as
helpless—forts, volunteers, gunboat, and all given in—as a


wren’s nest on which a schoolboy has cast a covetous eye. Not
that this prospect need be very alarming, as, in the event of a
war in which our mother country was involved, the enemy
would have her hands far too full at home to be able to
spare flying squadrons or war vessels for these distant
parts. Not to mention that England yet has a spare man-
of-war or two scattered about the surface of the globe for
the better checking of any such unlawful designs, and that
anticipation of the retribution certain to visit their home
ports would probably deter any hostile power from acts
which would have no appreciable effect on the general issue
of the conflict. If I remember rightly, Sir William Jervois
told us all this in effect in his report on our defences, and it
seemed to me that the volunteer part of the business was
referred to virtually as a matter which would relieve the
public of some of its warlike “gas,” and satisfy popular
expectation,—and so “ let the child have its toy if It
wants it.” So is the world governed.
Though thus in the midst of “ war’s alarms,” we had
no occasion to assist, other than as armed spectators, in the
actual operations. The approaches to the factories from the
city side were, as I have said, rigorously defended by
cannon; but as, of course, many native servants and
dependents remained in the European quarters a generally
watchful attitude was maintained. One small opportunity
of seeing service past in my way. While at dinner one
evening—numerous officers from the vessels being at table—


written orders were received by the senior lieutenant of the
flagship, an 84-gun man-of-war, to take the ship’s boats and
intercept a number of mandarin junks then on their way
down the river, I ascertained that there might be fighting,
and received permission to accompany the party, which
started at about 10 o’clock at night. The three boats carried
swivel-guns, and were crowded with marines; ourselves
were amply supplied with revolvers. After a long pull up
the river we met the enemy, consisting of several large
men-of-war junks, crowded with men, making the best of
their way down to attack our gunboats. Though the num-
bers of course were in immense disproportion, we surprised
the junks before their occupants had time to avail them-
selves of the peculiar weapons which render these clumsy
vessels so formidable at close quarters, so that I was
fortunately deprived of the opportunity of observing the
operations of the dreaded stink-pots. Taking possession of
the prizes, guards were set on board each, and several of
the officers, with myself, took up our quarters for the
remainder of the night on one of His Celestial Majesty’s
frigates. Sherry and cigars had been thoughtfully stowed
in one of the boat’s lockers, and our bloodless victory was
celebrated with a good deal of hilarity. In the morning we
returned to the city with our disarmed prizes.
Though somewhat out of place, I may mention here that
while my purchases were being prepared for shipment, I
joined in a fortnight’s trip to the island of Macao. This is


a Portuguese settlement lying near the mouth of the Canton
River, much resorted to by the European residents of Canton
as a sanitary change. Like several of the leading firms my
agents kept a seaside villa there, to which detachments of
their staff resorted occasionally to recruit their health and
spirits. One of these parties was made up during my stay,
and I was courteously included. Our time was pleasantly
spent in the limited excursions the island afforded, in ex-
changing hospitalities with other similar parties of refugees
from the great commercial head-quarters, and in occasional
participation in the gaieties of the Portuguese residents.
Of course the principal religious establishments were Roman
Catholic, the town containing more than one large church
of this persuasion, and, I think, a conventual house. I
attended once the English service in the small Consular
chapel, and it was very novel to see the congregation
worshipping in cane lounging chairs, bamboo fans in every
one’s hand, and punkahs busily waving over-head. Alto-
gether we had a “good time” in Macao.
I had fortunately secured my Canton merchandise before
the outbreak of the war, though progress was much impeded
by the general unsettleraent of public affairs; and very
shortly after the brilliant naval operation mentioned above,
I was called away to Hongkong to complete loading my
vessel. The teas from Foochow were advised as being in
transit down the coast, and I accordingly made my pur-
chases of oil, sugar, and other heavy cargo, and filled up


intervals, both of time and space, with selections of mis-
cellaneous Chinese wares. I was also fortunate enough to
secure a considerable number of beautiful specimens of
Japanese goods, through the then unusual event occurring’
of the arrival of a vessel from a port in one of the islands,
and thus brought to Australia the first direct importation of
the unrivalled lacquer-ware and egg-shell china from that
remote empire. After my prolonged and unexpected deten-
tion of four months in the Chinese ports, a most disastrous
termination of my travels on that occasion was very nearly
occurring. In working out of one of the narrow entrances
to Hongkong harbour the breeze failed us at a critical
moment, and we were swept by the rapid current to within
almost a hairbreadth of destruction on the rocks, which were
literally under the vessel’s stern. An opportune puff, how-
ever, cleared us of the danger, and carried us into the China
Sea, through which the fair monsoon took us at a spanking
pace to Singapore.
As I had been compelled to charter a vessel carrying too
large a cargo of teas for the Adelaide market, I intended to
fill up the two or three hundred tons of vacant space with
Singapore produce, and this object had to be attained in spite
of my determination not to operate through the firm’s
agents, whose commercial conduct in my former visit had
not met with my approval. It was necessary, therefore, to
“finance” a little here. I was fortunate enough to obtain the
co-operation of another house, with the head of which I


was acquainted, but on whom I had no credits or drawing
authority. This being arranged, no time was lost in
purchasing coffee, sago, pepper, and other local commo-
dities ; and when all was stowed on board, finding I had a
few square feet of 'tween-decks remaining, I crammed it
with Chinamen at a paying rate of passage money.
But one incident occurred during this visit to my favourite
island that calls for notice. Among the military and official
residents whose acquaintance I made, and of whose hospi-
talities I was a frequent partaker, was the American Consul,
who, being a bachelor, and holding office for the limited
period usual among his countrymen, resided at the principal
hotel. By this gentleman I was invited to meet a small
party of friends at his rooms on New Year’s Eve, with a
private hint that an unrehearsed scene would probably
repay my visit. The evening passed in friendly conviviality,
national sentiments, and music, slightly tinged, perhaps,
with spread-eagle-ism, occupying a prominent position.
Among the guests was a gentleman who had recently
arrived at the hotel, and with whom we were all on terms
of slight acquaintance. He was a man of elder middle-
age, of unassuming but agreeable manners, and of quiet and
well-regulated habits. Altogether, he gave the impression
of one who had retired with a comfortable sufficiency, after
a life spent in a regular but not laborious occupation, and
to whom a modest bottle of good claret, and an excellent
Savannah cigar, were the well-earned and satisfying enjoy-


ments of a quiet and easy nature in the afternoon of his
career. We had just risen to take our leave on the evening
in question, the new year having been ushered in, the
<l Star-Spangled Banner ” sung with choral honours, and
mutual good wishes for the future pledged, when our host
bespoke our attention by the following rather enigma-
tical remark, uttered, I must say, with some slight
nasal emphasis : —“ Well, now ! gentlemen, that a new
year has begun, I think it a good time that we should drop
our aliases! ” As, in saying this, he looked pointedly
towards our quiet elderly friend, all eyes were of course
turned in the same direction, to the evident discomposure of
the person thus disagreeably signalized, who enquired some-
what angrily what was meant. “I believe,” said the Consul,
now continuing his remarks to his victim directly, “ that I
have the honour of speaking to Mr. Forrest, of T.ondon ;
Mr. Watkins, of San Francisco ; and Mr. Peters, of Singa-
pore.” This produced the effect attributed to the gun of
the redoubtable Davy Crockett, at sight of which the coon
was supposed to sing out hurriedly, “ Don’t shoot, colonel •
I’ll come down.” Our friend of the interchangeable nomen-
clature hastily caved in, adding, however, “You’ve got no
warrant, and can’t touch me here ! ” The Consul admitted
that he regretted that such was the fact, but warned him
that he had better clear out of that place as soon as possible,
and that he would find any attempts to practise unlawful
arts on American captains or other citizens of the Great


Republic in those parts would meet with failure, and would
be visited by his being followed up wherever he might
betake himself, till legal punishment for Iris past conduct
could be brought to bear. From what I had been pre-
viously told, and afterwards learned, the quiet gentleman
had left London “ under a cloud ” of some sort, and settled
in San Francisco, where he obtained employment in a
merchant’s establishment. He must have worked himself
into a position of considerable confidence in this office, as
his employers, having occasion to be absent for some time,
left with him blank signed cheques to be used for custom-
house and other business purposes. Watkins, however,
thought he could apply the sums at his disposal to greater
personal advantage, and he accordingly utilized the cheques
to the extent of about £7,000, with which sum he deter-
mined to travel in pursuit of that tranquil enjoyment which
the wicked city on the Pacific coast did not afford. Singa-
pore happening convenient he dropped down there, confident
in the knowledge that time had not permitted legal forms
to track him, and in the belief that his previous career was
unknown. In this, as we have seen,*he was disappointed,
and his next step was to take passage to Australia in the
“Ashmore,” as my fellow passenger. Had the cabins been
at my disposal I should have hesitated to accept him in this
capacity, but I had reserved the receipts from that source
for the owners, so had no pretext for interfering with their
gains. Under the circumstances I did not think it desirable


to mention the matter to my captain, or to the other pas-
sengers, of whom there were several, satisfying myself with
the conviction that if inclined to be dishonest —and I did not
think he was so, now that he was “in funds”—my knowledge
of his previous peccadilloes would be a sufficient check. Not
the less did I keep my eyes open on the voyage, as many
opportunities might be found, on a dark night, to assist a
person with an inconvenient acquaintance with one’s history
to an “accidental” slip overboard. lam bound to acknow-
ledge that no annoyance arose during the passage, our
fellow-voyager being a much pleasanter travelling com-
panion, in his particularly quiet, urbane way, than great
numbers of persons of unimpeachable integrity—as far as
the world knew—with whom I have been thrown into con-
tact. Shortly after our arrival he pursued his travels in
some other direction, and I have little doubt is still, with a
good digestion and an unruffled conscience—are they
synonymous terms, as cynics declare —eating his cutlet and
enjoying his cigar in modest retirement.
It remains only to be said of my trip, that the cargo —
perhaps the most extensive and valuable of the sort which
had then reached Adelaide —produced satisfactory results.
We had at first some trouble to induce the trade to give the
increased prices which the quality of the teas necessitated ;
but they came to it at last, and I had the satisfaction of
observing that the “Ashmore” brand was for a long time
used in the best shops to maintain the highest standard of
excellence among ordinary importations.


CHAPTER YIT.
INDIA DURING THE MUTINY.
If I had not direct evidence that my first commercial
voyage had been satisfactory to my employers, the fact that
I received fresh marching orders within a month or two of
my return would have furnished sufficient proof. On this
occasion my operations were to be in a different region and
on an enlarged scale. Partly on our own venture, and
partly on account of another Adelaide firm, I found myself
placed in commercial command of a small squadron of three
fine barques, estimated to carry some 2,500 tons, and
chartered to load at Calcutta for Adelaide and Melbourne,
On the Queen’s Birthday, 1857 —the anniversary of my last
start—l set sail in the “ Royal Lily,” the vessel destined to
return to the home port, on my new cruise, my commission
including a general overhaul of the Indian ports in the
general interests of the business, after my special work at
Calcutta was completed. The voyage was an uneventful
one, but I remember being excessively amused shortly after
leaving Investigator’s Straits, by seeing the captain, one of
the officers, and some of the hands aloft reeffing topsails,
all suffering under an active attack of that dread disorder


which is supposed to be peculiar to landsmen on their first
essay on the troubled ocean. Even the nautical stomach
was not proof against the combined attacks of cross seas
from three different directions at once, which are apt to
produce a peculiar chopping effect off the southern part of
Spencer’s Gulf. Our arrival at'the Sand-heads, at the
entrance to the River Hooghly, took place after an average
run. At this point it became necessary to engage a pilot,
and usual to obtain the services of a tug, to get over the
100 miles of dangerous navigation leading to Calcutta.
Accordingly, on the Sunday morning on which we anchored
at the mouth of the river, we hoisted the usual signals, and
were soon gratified to observe a tug making for us. When
within hailing distance, negotiations were commenced as to
the price to be paid for her services, which were valued by
her captain at one thousand rupees (£100), while our
skipper thought eight hundred would be sufficient. Through
some misunderstanding each thought that the other had
acceded to his terms, and a boat came off with an agreement
for our captain to sign. On finding out the mistake, and
that the higher sum would not be given, the steamer’s man
returned to his boat, and I was accompanying him, with
some light baggage, to obtain speedy transit to the capital,
when orders were shouted that it was impossible to take
more passengers. On my enquiry as to the circumstances
necessitating this refusal, we were told that the steamer was
full of ladies, who had been sent away down the river to


escape the consequences of an expected rising of the
natives in Calcutta on that day. This was our first intima-
tion of the horrible rebellion which spread such terror and
disaster throughout our Indian possessions. The mutiny
was in full course; in fact, the massacre of Cawnpore
occurred on the very day I am speaking of.
I must confess that my first astonishment at the news was
speedily replaced by gloomy anticipations as to the probable
ill-effect of such commotions on my mercantile operations,
and my desire to get to the scene of action was proportion-
ately increased. We soon got a pilot on board, and, by a
most unusual slice of luck, were enabled to run up the
river during the following day, at the expiration of which
we anchored at a station some ten or twelve miles from our
destination. Here we were soon visited by several emis-
saries of the native agents, who attach themselves to
captains of vessels and other strangers arriving at Calcutta.
These men—half agents and half bankers on a small
scale —are some of them of considerable wealth. Having
secured the connection of the new arrival, they hand him
over to one of their subordinates, who accompanies him
about, recommends tradesmen, assists him in his purchases,
advances money if necessary, and is generally useful and
necessary to the stranger. The agent gets a handsome
commission out of every transaction, of however trifling a
character, and finally squares up his accounts with the client
or his mercantile agent previous to the departure of the


former. Attaching myself, for the time at least, to one of
these worthies, I determined to make a forced advance on
the capital without delay, and accordingly resolved to avail
myself of the boat belonging to my “baboo.” My captain
was anxious to deter me from trusting myself in the company
of only half-a-dozen natives, in view of the alarming state of
the times; but I had a shrewd suspicion that my com-
panion was at least as fond of gain as most persons in
similar capacities in other parts of the world, and that he
would hardly kill the goose that had not yet commenced
laying the golden eggs which might be reasonably looked for.
My anticipations were realized, for I was deposited safely in
the streets of the “ City of Palaces,” at two o’clock in the
morning, under tropical torrents of rain. Sheltered as
much as possible by the umbrella of my faithful guide, I
made for quarters for the remainder of the night, and after
knocking in vain at all the leading hotels, which seemed
calculated to stand a siege, found welcome shelter in an
inferior, but still fairly respectable hostelry. A glass of hot
brandy and water, and a cigar, removed any fear of ill-con-
sequences arising from my damp and dark entry into Calcutta
life, and when at breakfast-time, our correspondent’s carriage
was at the door, waiting to convey me to his hospitable
roof, 1 was quite in trim for doing justice to business or
pleasure.
Further enquiry showed that my fears as to the effect of
the mutiny on the produce market were not unfounded.


Business, of course, was still going on in Calcutta, where no
actual rising had taken place ; but supplies of produce were
scarce and high, and a general feeling of insecurity prevailed.
My instructions were to load one of the vessels at all risks,
and to use my own discretion as to the other two. To
summarize ray commercial proceedings in this place, I may
say that I succeeded with much difficulty in getting rid of
one of ray charters, and that I was unwillingly obliged, in
spite of the unfavourable circumstances, to load the other
two, which sailed duly to Melbourne and Adelaide re-
spectively, and realized very disastrously.
The month I spent in Calcutta was a very enjoyable one.
The wet season, during which the rains are incessant and
perpetual, was not in full force, and, though the heat was
intense, we had a fair share of fine weather. To the eye of
the new arrival, the high-sounding title of the “ City of
Palaces” does not seem misplaced. From the Governor-
General’s truly palatial residence, which for size and effective-
ness will put to shame the abodes of many western
sovereigns, through all the grades of dwellings occupied
by Europeans one is astonished by the prevailing magni-
ficence of architectural display. The native city, of course,
presents very much of the usual squalor and insignificance
of Asiatic occupation; but even in this part some of the
residences of the wealthier inhabitants bear evidence of
opulence and luxury. Concentrated in the fashionable
quarters we see fine hotels and shops, while private man-


sions occupy a large space of ground both within the city
and for some miles down the banks of the river. My agent
had a house in the latter locality, but owing to the disturbed
state of the country he had taken up his quarters tem-
porarily in a comparatively confined residence in the city.
Though, owing to this circumstance and the absence of his
family in England, himself and his wife were living in a
very quiet way—almost, as we might say, in furnished
lodgings—l found, in totting up the establishment, that it
included forty-eight servants, besides my own modest atten-
dant. The minute sub-division of labour, and the fact that
natives of different religions are required for different house-
hold duties, mainly account for this multiplication of
servants. Thus the table servants will not touch bedroom
duties, and men of different castes are required as grooms,
sweepers, bath-room attendants, and so on. The functions
of the punkah-pullers alone gave employment to nearly a
dozen men, as day and night relays were required for
separate rooms. The stables absorbed a goodly number, as
the sahib’s buggy, his wife’s carriage, and the gharry in
which he crossed the square to the office, all required dis-
tinct drivers, grooms, and running footmen.
Society life in this great metropolis I found varied very
materially from that prevailing in the other tropical places
I had visited. Our business day was passed very much as
elsewhere under similar conditions. For comparative
independence in forming my own designs I had found it con-


venient to retain a hired buggy during my stay. This was
obtained at the large establishment of Hunter & Co., well-
known by name to all shippers of horses to Calcutta, and
who do an extensive jobbing business. At some abnormal
hour in the morning my vehicle would be in attendance,
and unless otherwise ordered, would follow my movements
whenever I stirred outside the door, though frequently it
might not be wanted during the whole day. At tiffin time
it would temporarily disappear, to turn up before I was
likely to require it, with a fresh horse and driver, and
remain as before till dismissed at night. The occupations
of the day over we returned from the office to home-
quarters at about 5 o’clock, when bathing and dressing for
the drive was the first duty. Having duly arrayed our-
selves in the orthodox attire of civilization, absurdly com-
pleted by the chimney-pot of English superstition, the
carriage conveyed us to the magnificent esplanade, where
hundreds of vehicles of all descriptions were performing
solemn circuits to the music of an excellent band. Here
would be seen the most motley assortment of equipages the
imagination can depict. From the faultlessly appointed
carriage of the “ swell ” civilian, or wealthy merchant, and
the glaring magnificence of the turn-out of a native
potentate or millionaire baboo, to the lilliputian, German
waggon like hackery, drawn swiftly by a buffalo of the
size of a Timor pony, the variety was infinite. Hot unfre-
quently the partially-closed jalousies of a passing gharry


would half hide, half reveal the countenances of dusky
beauties in its interior, whose bright eyes and gleaming
teeth gave promise of the attractiveness of persons by
which many of all classes of females in India are character-
ized. The “ Lady’s Mile ” having been done sufficient
homage to, we usually protracted the drive by a detour
through some of the suburbs, reaching home in time for
dinner at half-past seven, after another course of bathing
and changing of attire. If a dinner party was in the pro-
gramme we never ventured to attend except in full evening
costume ; indeed, I have been present at bachelor dinners in
Calcutta where the ceremonial was rigidly carried out, though
in more free-and-easy circles the dress-coat would be ex-
changed for a white jacket, handed you by the host’s
servants on arrival. I have always looked on the adoption
of distinct and distinctive garments on relinquishing the
business of the day for the social circle as one of the bless-
ings of civilization ; but the wearing of the comfortable
black cloth raiment of temperate regions in such a climate
as that of Calcutta is a triumph of fashion over comfort,
which sufficiently shows what the human mind and body
are capable of enduring.
The season was unfortunately not the right one for balls
and other similar gaieties, nor were there any public amuse-
ments whatever during my stay. Owing to the mutiny
the European inhabitants were all more or less under arms
and doing military service of one sort or another. My


agent, like other mercantile men, had joined a mounted
corps, and to this was assigned certain posts to guard.
This necessitated his absence from home one or two nights
a week, when he had to take his turns of two hours each
on mounted guard. On these occasions, as I was the only
male resident—except of course the servants—in the house,
I had to submit to a whole ai'senal of defensive weapons
being placed under my pillow and by the side of my bed,
for the speedy repression of any outbreak, in which our
half-hundred servants might be disposed to join. No occa-
sion, however, arose for the display of any latent military
talents I might possess, and sabre and revolvers remained
in the state of spotless innocence in which I found them.
The unexpected intricacy of commercial operations
naturally necessitated greater attention and anxiety than
would otherwise have been called for, so that my attend-
ance at the office was nearly as regular as that of those whose
daily avocations required their presence there. This threw
me into intimate contact with the principal, whose business
was all transacted in my presence, and was often discussed
with me. As a result, as the period of my departure drew
near, my friend made me a proposal of a nature as unex-
pected as gratifying, considering that I had only passed the
mature age of twenty by a month or two. It being
desirable, for family reasons, that he should visit England,
where, as I have said, his children were being brought up,
and having no partner, he offered me a salary of a thousand


a year, with “ the run of his house,” if I would remain and
take charge in his absence. A partnership at the expira-
tion of two years, if all went right in the meantime, was
held out as an additional inducement. While thanking
him cordially for the liberal proposal, I said that I would
rather live, if necessary, as a clerk on .£SOO a year in
Australia, than take the highest remuneration Calcutta
could offer ; while, as matters stood, a partnership in my
brother’s firm only awaited my reaching my 21st birthday.
Had I foreseen that the firm in which I was interested
would have vanished into thin air at no distant period, and
that within a dozen years, with experience ripened and
character unimpeached, I should strive in vain in Adelaide
to obtain the meanest clerk’s billet, I would long ere this
have attained a competency, or have left my bones to
moulder, on the pestilential banks of the Hooghly. Neither
alternative would have seemed unbearable in the light of
subsequent events, then happily shrouded in the mists of
futurity.
One of the sights for a stranger to see in Calcutta is an
opium sale. As a Government monopoly, the drug—in its
cultivation, manufacture, and sale—is under the control of
officials, and periodical auctions ore held for its disposal.
At these auctions, of course conducted in one of the nume-
rous native tongues in vogue, may be seen representatives of
widely-varying nationalities and races. The sleek Parsee
and wily Hindu are the principal competitors with our own


countrymen for the honour and profit of disseminating this
poisonous narcotic. But these are the most common-place
characters to be seen in the room, —stalwart hill-men, of
almost feudal style afid of native gravity of demeanour, rub
shoulders with supple and typical Asiatics of all shades of
colour and varieties of costume. A very Babel of confused
tongues greets the ear, such as, for frantic earnestness, can
only be matched among the bulls and bears on the London
Stock Exchange on the publication of a fictitious telegram,
or in the French Chambers in their normal condition of
revolutionary fervour.
The manufacture of the refined sugar, which at that time
supplied our market —called after the locality in which the
factory was situated, Cossipore—and the extensive rope
and jute works for which Calcutta is well known, were
objects of great interest to me. Both were located on the
opposite side of the river, and were examined by invitation
of the respective proprietors, by whom I was hospi-
tably entertained. On one of these visits I made my first
acquaintance with the elephant, as he appears in private
life. Riding along at some distance from the factory with
my host, at a turn of the road we came sharply on the huge
animal, quietly plodding along in pursuit of his ordi-
nary avocation as a beast of labour. The horse I was
mounted on was as astonished as I was, and very consider-
ably more frightened. Finding that immediate retreat was
unavailable he stood and shook with fear till I thought he


would have dropped ia mortal terror, or vanished in the
streams of sweat which poured from him; and it was not
till he had been allowed to put a considerable distance
between himself and the, to him, fearful spectacle, that he
recovered any portion of his equanimity. I imagine that
he must have been somewhat of a' “ new chum,” as if a
similar effect was generally produced on the noble quadruped,
equestrianism and elephants would be clearly incompatible.
Politics, apart from the interest felt in the civil and mili-
tary services in departmental subjects, are not much regarded
in general Indian circles. I was present, however, on an excep-
tional occasion, which is probably locally regarded as historical
to the present day. This was an enthusiastic not to say
highly excited assemblage of the principal “ adventurers ”
as all outside the magic service used then to be technically
and somewhat arrogantly styled by “John Company ” —of
Calcutta, at which, after vehement and, I doubt not, satis-
factory harangues had been delivered by leading barristers
and others, this meeting resolved “that it would never relax
its efforts till British rule in India was wrested from the
hands of the Company and undertaken by the Crown.”
How far exactly this demonstration determined the subse-
quent action of the British Parliament in the desired
direction I am unable to say, but there is no doubt that it,
and the mutiny, brought matters to a crisis. It was my
good fortune to subsequently travel and become briefly
acquainted with one of the most eloquent orators of that


occasion ; tins was a barrister in leading practice, who,
when I met him, was visiting Madras with a view to relief
from his forensic labours by a prolonged sporting trip in the
Milgherrips Hills of that Presidency. I was pressed to
accompany him, and it was with unfeigned regret that I was
compelled to plead pressure of business engagements as a
ground for declining the tempting offer.
When on the eve of departure from Bengal, and when
I had fixed a time for squaring up accounts with
the native who had directly, or through his clerks,
acted as my financial “ guide, philosopher, and
friend,” in my personal matters of business or
pleasure, that respectable individual politely requested my
presence at a “ nautch ”to be given in my honour. Such a
chance of a frolic was of course not to be resisted, so on the
designated evening—my last in the Presidency—l drove to
the scene of festivities in the outskirts of the city, accom-
panied only by a jovial young steam-boat captain. Here we
found awaiting our arrival a considerable gathering of natives,
who had been collected by our entertainer in his rather im-
posing mansion, which was ablaze with lights, and pouring
out the hideous discord in which these people delight, to
the admiration of numerous by-standers. Our entrance was
the signal for the fete to begin, and the young ladies
engaged for the occasion were soon vigorously engaged in
contortions and shuffles—very dull if not very proper—
which pass for dancing in these latitudes. Some venerable


(Late GALL & SHERIDAN,)
Htynpmtilq and (Spcral it[intqB,
LITHOGRAPHERS,
mWfAI PM.fl PMifHS,
B IT <3- -R PL S,
ACCOUNT BOOK MAKERS, &C.
89,
King William Street , Adelaide.
THE AUSTRALASIAN
PLATE GLASS INSURANCE Co.,
LIMITED.
CAPITAL £lO,OOO.
THIS Company has ESTABLISHED an AGENCY in SOUTH
AUSTRALIA, and has already taken numerous Risks on the
Shop Fronts of leading Business Houses in Adelaide. Damage
promptly repaired. For particulars apply to
HERBERT EVANS, Agent,
Green’s Exchange.


JNO, HODCKISS & Co.,
IMMETEM,
26 & 28, RUNDLE ST.,
ADELAIDE,
Have at all times well assorted
Stocks in every Department of
Drapery & Furnishing , to which
they respectfully invite the atten-
tion of purchasers .
Note the Address—
26 & 28, RUNDLE ST., AND STEPHENS PLACE,
ADELAIDE.


W. C. BUIK & CO.,
General and
(xfitpiflMnjg Waprooms,
47 AND 40,
BUNDLE STREET, ADELAIDE.
Established 1849.
Furniture, Mattresses, Bedsteads,
Cutlery, Ironmongery, China,
Glassware, Earthenware, Lamps,
Chandeliers, Fancy Goods.
SEWING MACHINES
By all the best makers, Wholesale and Retail at the lowest prices.
Illustrated Family Price Lists Post Free.
Town and Country Orders carefully executed, packed,
and forwarded to all parts of the Colony.
N.B.—Our Country friends will find it to their ad-
vantage to inspect our Stock before making purchases
elsewhere.
W. C. BUIK & CO.


CARPET DEPARTMENT
We have just opened our seasons shipments
of Brussels, Tapestry, and Kidderminster
Carpetings, which, added to our previously ex-
tensive stock, enables us to show one of the
LARGEST AND NEWEST ASSORTMENTS
To be found in the Colonies. The recent
shipments were purchased at very low prices,
the whole advantage of which we are giving
to our customers.
We beg to call special attention to our
stock of Brussels, the patterns and colorings
being very superior and the quality the best
made.
In Tapestries we are showing the newest
styles and also a very cheap lot, purchased
under their market value.
In Kidderminsters we have a splendid
variety of Bedroom and other patterns in
extra super, and lower priced goods.
FLOORCLOTHS.
We have a good assortment of all widths
in a great variety of dressings and colorings.
J. MILLER ANDERSON & €o.,
15 & 17, HI ISHDIuttlZr ST.
