





[?]
Albert Mac-
donald
of Orroroo.




[?]
The Book
OF
Albert MacDonald
OF ORROROO.
BY ONE WHO KNEW HIM.
With the compliments of
THE AUSTRAL CYCLE AGENCY LTD.
Sole Agents for “SWIFT” Cycles.


INDEX.
Page
Introduction - - - - _ 5
Chapter L —Powell's Creek 7
„ II. —“Pendente Lite" - - 15
„ 111. —Station Life - - - 17
„ IV. —Correspondence - - 19
„ V. —The Trip and Its Impressions - 25
„ VI. —The Hall Mark of Heroism - 41
„ VII. —Conclusion - 47
List Jof - - - 48
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Albert Macdonald - - - - 3
Map of Route 4
MacDonald as he left Port Darwin - 6
Powell's Creek 8
Powell's Creek - - - - JO
Todd River 12
Rain Makers from Hart's Ranges - -14
New Year's Day at Daly Waters - - 16
“Up a Tree" —Aboriginal's Last Resting Place - 26
Alice Springs Telegraph Station - - 28
Residence of Cable Superintendent, Palmerston - 32
Mount Conway 36
MacDonald's Letter - - - - 40
Simpson's Gap —McDonnell Range - - 42


ALBERT
MACDONALD,
OF
ORROROO.


MAP OF
MACDONALD'S
ROUTE.


INTRODUCTION.
HLTHOUGH this book is published by the firm from
whom the bicycle, on which lVla.cDona.ld made his
wonderful ride, was bought, it nevertheless aims at being
something more than an advertisement. Even those who
sell bicycles may retain some remnant of a soul that is
capable of hero-worship, and may be pardoned for giving
expression to their feelings, especially when the object of them is
an Australian. Business people should not be troubled with
feelings, and we are tempted to apologise for having alluded to
what are left, but can assure the reader that they shall be kept
under proper control during the course of the narrative.
In speaking of Albert IVlacDonald as an athlete the task is
easy, for his deeds speak for themselves. It is as a man he is so
difficult to express, because his modesty is so embarrassingly
natural. His many friends in South Australia and in the
Northern Territory who read this book will forgive us for trying
to attempt the latter, and will recognise in this work an earnest
tribute to a brave man and to what we consider one of the
finest achievements of the century.


MACDONALD
AS HE LEET
PORT DARWIN.


Albert MacDonald, of Orroroo.
Chapter I.
POWELL'S CREEK.
'7N the heart of a desolate country there stand three iron
roofed dwellings with a rail and wire fence around them,
and if you approach this homestead from the east, or
from the west, you would he at a loss to account tor its
presence in that most undesirable land. Closer inspection,
however, would apprise you of the fact that a long galvanised
iron wire passes through this settlement from north to south,
or from south to north; and it is this long humming wire
that furnishes the homestead with its reason for existence.
It was at this isolated spot that, on the evening of August
J3th, three years ago, a young man of unassuming exterior
arrived from Port Darwin—having arranged for a two and a
half years' stay in the locality —for the purpose of manipulating
and caring for the long wire before mentioned.
An overland telegraph station in the centre of Australia
is not an enlivening spectacle, and the station we are now
concerned with, which is 550 miles from Port Da™, « no
exception to the rule. Its name is Powells Creek, and it was
there that Albert MacDonald remained as telegraph operator,
etc., for two and a half years.


POWELL’S
CREEK.


To say that life was quiet at Powell's Creek is to put the
matter mildly; but the new operator was not one of those who
are content to do as little as possible; he was possessed of a keen
and sensitive mind that was wretched in inaction. At first he
was glad of the restful solitude of his new home, having; been
reduced to a delicate state of health by the stress and worry of
his official and self-imposed duties, combined with the trying
tropical climate of Port Darwin, where he had spent two years.
With restored health he set about finding employment for his
spare time, and amongst other pursuits, soon recommenced
amateur photography, which he had discontinued on leaving the
coast. Some of our illustrations are specimens of his work at
this interesting pastime.
As a general rule, exercise could be gained by outside
work about the station —walking, riding, and occasionally
going long distances to inspect the line or repair such breakages
and interruptions as are caused by storms, and at times by
swagmen in distress or in want of a lift. There was one par-
ticular swagman who came along about this time, and who
cut the wire no less than three times between Charlotte Waters
and River Katherine. He was a typical "sundowner" in want
of a lift —nothing more; and on the last occasion he was
rewarded for his perseverance by transport to the nearest police
court, about 130 miles distant, from whence he was further
conveyed to a seaside retreat near Port Darwin, belonging to
her Gracious Majesty. Here he remained for a period of six
months, and spent his time taking vigorous exercise under
the direction of a liveried attendant. MacDonald had the
pleasure of repairing the second break 64 miles from Powell's
Creek, and thinks it regrettable that the gentleman was not
entertained at Fannie Bay through the hot season, when his
exercise would have expiated his crime.


POWELL’S
CREEK.


MacDonald's companions at the telegraph station became
accustomed to his superabundance of energy, and the little
failing was soon forgiven him on account of his amiability,
and means were found, no doubt, to turn the new comer's
“locomotor hysteria" to account. They little dreamed that
these long journeys over uninviting tracks and those settled
habits of personal privation were the beginnings of a long pre-
paration for an ambitious journey, which should some day
make MacDonald's name famous in all lands where an heroic
performance can be understood and appreciated. The truth to
tell, MacDonald had, so far back as 1893, while stationed at
Port Darwin, made up his mind to undertake the trip he finally
accomplished with such splendid success.
As time went on he had inured himself to a simplicity of
life, and had built up a physical constitution that no fatigue
or privation could upset. It may be thought that MacDonald
had a fine physique to help him, but he had not. He had
sound health and a spare frame, combined with a decision of
character and an amount of determination which, in under-
takings of this kind, count for a great deal more than does
mere physical strength. When his long course of preparation
and inquiry was within eighteen months of its accomplishment
there came news along the line that a wild-eyed theatrical
individual was on his way from Adelaide to Port Darwin, who
insisted on his bicycle accompanying him. Mac grew interested,
and began to look for intelligence of the overlander's progress;
but weeks went by and nothing but occasional messages were
tapped out, giving the stranger's whereabouts, but saying little
about his bicycle. At length, after having journeyed this
stage with a camel team, that with an accommodating tra-
veller, and the other with anyone who might be going along,
he arrived at Powell's Creek, still having his bicycle with him.


TODD RIVER.
—F.J. GILLEN.


He told his story, and he went his way; but he left behind
him at Powell's Creek not quite the impression he had antici-
pated* Instead of being: discouraged or scared, MacDonald's
determination to accomplish the journey entirely 44 on his own,"
and in reasonable time, was only increased tenfold by this
traveller's tales of privation and danger* On being questioned
on this point, Mac disclaimed being either brave or foolhardy.
He simply could see no necessity whatever for privation or
hardship, and had been long enough in the bush to know
that the dangers, excepting the risks of sickness or accident,
were purely imaginary* His subsequent experience confirmed
these impressions in every particular. At the same time,
MacDonald is not the man to detract from another's per-
formance; and he even goes so far as to say that the pioneer
overland cyclist showed commendable bravery in facing
dangers which he at any rate believed existed, while the
usual encouragement he received, to be paradoxical, was dis-
couragement; even the winds (pronounced wynds) meeting
him with the ominous dirge: 44 G0 back! Go back!!"
Well, we all know how Murif got through in 74 days,
and how "Diamond"-was dipped in the Northern sea while
the band played, or ought to have played, appropriate airs.


RAIN MAKERS
FROM HARTS’
RANGE.
—F. J. GILLEN.


Chapter II.
"PENDENTE LITE."
7T is time to begin a new chapter, but in consequence of
the thickness of the atmosphere we shall be obliged to
make it a short one. Some day the whole sad, sweet
story may be written, but the time is not yet. Let us
be content with an outline.
Mather and Coleman came through from Port Darwin to
Adelaide in 63 days. They also took bicycles with them —
they also passed in review before a pair of penetrating grey
eyes at Powell's Creek.
Their method and equipment was noted, but nothing was
said. They also told their story, and went their way. . . .
Well; well; let's have a fresh start.


NEW YEAR’S DAY
AT DALY WATERS.
—W. HOLTZE.


Chapter III.
STATION LIFE.
/[\\ YEAR is supposed to have elapsed between the end
/LA \ of our second chapter and the beginning - of our
] \ third, so you have had plenty of time, dear reader,
to refresh the inner man.
These twelve months were the last of MacDonald's term
in the Northern Territory, and had been spent in the same
vigorous preparation for hardship and endurance. Our illus-
tration on page \6 shows how the inhabitants of overland
telegraph stations hold their annual fetes. The track had
not at that time been condemned by the League, so you can
see that the greatest enthusiasm prevails. Unfortunately, the
officials have their backs towards you, or you would be able
to satisfy yourself that they are wearing their badges and
other insignia of office in a suitable manner. The photographer
has not been able to include in his picture the dangerous
comer —now so historic; you must, therefore, take it for
granted, or else send down a deputation in the regular routine
way; but don't worry us about it. The track is there, as
shown; and if you don't think it's safe, then stop away.
MacDonald found another way of working off his spare
energy while at Powell's Creek. He tried his hand as local
“Medicine Man." I don't say he gave his address as Collins


Street, or specialised his studies so as to confine his treatment
to any particular organs; but in the case under notice the patient
was an aboriginal lady, and it was one of her eyes that was
temporarily affected. As a matter of fact the other one was
permanently blinds and someone had been thoughtless enough
to give her a nasty poke with a sharp stick. " Dr.” MacDonald
applied the poultice in his best Collins Street style, and added
the usual formula: "You had better look in ap-ain to-morrow.”
(You will always notice doctors insist on this way of putting it,
whether the patient be blind or not.)
The patient did not "look in” for some days, and when she
did the good eye was as good as ever again, and she had shown
her confidence in the treatment by putting the poultice—by that
time as hard and dry as a brick—on the blind eye, with hopes
of the best results.


Chapter IV.
CORRESPONDENCE.
WHEN MacDonald saw that nothing; was likely to
interfere with his plans, he wrote to the Managing;
Director of the Austral Cycle Agency, asking;
him to allow the trip to be made under the
Company's auspices*
His letter, as written from Port Darwin, under date
February 24th, 1898, reads: —
"It is probable I am only one amongst many to approach
44 you on the subject of an overland bicycle trip from Port
44 Darwin to Adelaide. But I do so hoping; to impress you
44 with the practicability of my ideas and my own fitness for
"the work. It is my intention to undertake the journey
"in a few months' time; and as the pioneer honors are all
" appropriated, my task will be to perform a safe and creditable
" journey which may possibly defy the inevitable record breaker
"for some years to come. I have just returned from Powell's
"Creek, 550 miles inland, where, during; a stay of over two
" years, I gleaned every possible information concerning that
" portion of the route with which I am not personally acquainted.
" I have carefully examined the road to Attack Creek (620 miles),
" and am also acquainted with two or three hundred miles at the
" other end. I had also the privilege of accompanying Messrs.
"Coleman and Mather about 60 miles on their journey from


" Powell's Creek, and being an old cyclist I was easily able to
"discover the chief cattse of their slow progress* I therefore
"think I am justifed in saying that the transcontinental trip
" should be done in five or six weeks at the very outside, possibly
"less* As to the stamina and endurance necessary for such a
" lengthy journey, there is no doubt whatever in my own mind
" that I possess an ample supply* I have cycled in the Northern
"Territory, and ridden over roads round Port Darwin quite as
"bad as any on the overland route, on one occasion accom-
plishing a journey of 90 miles in one day, 12 miles of which
"journey I had to walk over Bay of Biscay country. In
"Adelaide, before leaving for the Northern Territory, I was
"a successful mile runner, winning from the 15 yards mark
" against all comers* The experience gained by me in the bush
"at Powell's Creek, and the fact that I am a telegraph operator,
" and shall carry a pocket instrument is also very much in my
" favor in this undertaking* It would not be necessary for me to
"interrupt the line in case of anything unforeseen happening.
" I mention these circumstances, as perhaps very few others are so
" fitted for such an undertaking and to show that my proposition
"is worthy of your consideration."
But that gentleman (the Managing Director) pointed out
that if it required 60 days to accomplish a journey of 2000 odd
miles it could hardly be regarded as a suitable track for testing
the quality of a machine* Furthermore he pointed to the terrible
accounts published of the almost insuperable difficulties that stood
in the way of overlanders, of the hundreds of miles that must be
walked, and of the ranges over which the machine must be
carried. No; the Company would not undertake, under these
conditions, to take any action in the matter.
But MacDonald was not to be denied; he wrote again
under date of May 3rd: —


"Dear Sir, —Re proposed overland bicycle trip, of which
"I wrote you under date of February 24th. Your reply of
"March 14th, though unfavourable to the project, leads me to
"hope that you are open to conviction on certain points, and,
" therefore, having finally decided to undertake the journey at all
" hazards, I trust you will favor me with your kind attention.
"In your chief objection to the undertaking * that it is not
" a question of the bicycle at all, but merely a question of carrying
" the bicycle over country, which is, for the most part, absolutely
" unsuited for its use/ I recognise a reflex of Mr. Mather's verdict.
"To correct that opinion it is necessary to briefly discuss Messrs.
" Coleman and Mather. The former rode a 66 geared machine,
" with a 6 [-inch crank; while the latter, to quote his own words
"to me, was afraid of breaking his patched fork again. While
"travelling with them south of Powell's Creek, I noticed that
" they dismounted at patches of dust and sand, over which they
"should have ridden at eight miles an hour (on machines
"properly fitted for the journey), notwithstanding the head wind
"blowing at the time. Further, these gentlemen told me that
" they were not in the habit of leaving camp before 7 a.m., and
" were content with eight or nine hours' riding per day. A glance
"at the reports of the journey will show how much time was
"devoted to * spelling' at the various stations along the road.
" It was, therefore, necessary to provide a good reason for their
" not reaching Adelaide more than a few days inside of the time
" occupied by Murif in his 4 leisurely' ride, and the 4 beastly road'
" was the best scapegoat in sight. Mather's verdict was a very
" unfair one, because it placed all the blame of a slow trip on an
" inanimate object which deserved only a small portion of it.
"As I have already told you, it is my intention to put up an
" unbreakable record, if possible; and by riding a 59 or 62 gear
"with a 6'j crank, and making the most of every hour of day


" light, I am confident that I can ride over a very large portion
"or the country over which Messrs* Coleman and Mather had to
"push their machines, and reach Adelaide early enough to reflect
"great credit on my mount* That I am physically capable of
" enduring the necessary strain I have not the least doubt, being
"strengthened in my opinion by performances which I have
" already done on Northern Territory roads.
"You evidently attach much importance to speed for adver-
" tising purposes. Considering the nature of the overland track,
‘and the poor attempts so far made at record breaking on it,
‘would not a trip of say from four to five weeks or less have
"some value from your point of view? Two hundred miles
" a day f is of course out of the question, but a determined rider
" should at least rival, if not eclipse, the Menzies to Melbourne
" record. Please remember, that in expressing this opinion lam
" personally acquainted with at least 800 miles of the road, and
" know the conditions under which the journey must be made.
"Since you do not see your way to offer me any induce-
"ment, please let me make a suggestion which may convince
"you that I speak advisedly on the subject, and which I trust
" you will consider a fair and satisfactory one. I will pay cash
"for my machine (a * Swift f ) t and if lam more than five weeks
"on the road nothing more will be said on the subject. I will
" accept no transport assistance from anyone, and will take all
" the risks of the journey, merely asking if you will guarantee
" the machine to be of good material and workmanship. Should
" the journey to Adelaide be accomplished in five weeks or less,
" I will allow you to say what it is worth from your point of
" view, only I should like you to give me an idea of what that is
" likely to be before I start, not that I think for a moment that
" you are likely to treat me unfairly, but in order that I may
" know what lam riding for. A sliding scale of reward would


“ best encourage me to stick firmly to the task, and to do my
“best to lower existing road records* This point, by the way,
“should have some interest for you in view of your very
“creditable and successful efforts to encourage record breaking
“on the track. Should you meet me in this matter, and desire
“me to make Melbourne the terminus of my journey, I will
“ gladly do so for a fair consideration. Pray excuse the length of
“this letter, and kindly oblige me with an early reply as before.
“Yours faithfully,
“(Signed) A. MACDONALD."
In his letter dated July 2nd, he accepts a time limit of the
journey from Port Darwin to Melbourne of five weeks, and he
says: “ This makes the undertaking a very formidable one, but
“I will certainly face it, and will not fail if determination and
“honest effort can pull me through. I understand clearly that
“ I am not in any way employed by you, and that all the risk of
“ the trip is mine. The price of the machine will be remitted to
“you within a fortnight of your receipt of this letter. lam
“ posting instructions to that effect by this mail.
“P.S. —Please do not make public the fact that I am
“attempting this journey in five weeks. Time enough for that
“ when I succeed."
The task he had undertaken was, in fact, more formidable
than he ever hoped to accomplish; but he determined to carry out
his preparations, even to sleeping on bare rock if necessary, for
unless he could feel certain of securing a good night's rest under
all possible circumstances, the sustained effort might break down
even the cast iron system he had built up. So he chose a concrele
floor, and began with a number of bags for bedding, to accustom
himself to impromptu couches, and by gradually reducing the


number of bags he was soon able to enjoy a good night's rest on
practically bare concrete* By this time the machine had arrived,
and as he was now physically able to spend his days in the
saddle, and nights on the concrete without inconvenience, he felt
in a position to start without further delay. He then publicly
declared his intention of making the* journey for the first time —
as his correspondence with Mr. Edge of the Austral Cycle Agency
had been of a confidential nature —and was thus able to avoid
making himself too prominent when the undertaking was still
“in posse." Notwithstanding his reticence concerning his in-
tentions he was sent off by an enthusiastic crowd of well-wishers,
who included the foremost inhabitants of Port Darwin, as well as
the staff of the telegraph department, who took an almost
personal pride in MacDonald's enterprise, and who felt that the
honor of the department was at stake. The news was flashed
along the line that MacDonald left Port Darwin at a quarter
past six on Monday morning, the 22nd of August, so it will
be just as well to follow Mac's example, and begin a new
chapter.


Chapter V.
THE TRIP AND ITS IMPRESSIONS.
“ [“EVERYTHING comes to him who waits ” (provided
=<\ he waits long; enough). Nearly five years ago the
___ / y idea of cycling from Port Darwin Adelaide first
seriously presented itself to Albert MacDonald. It
seemed to him, at first, like gigantic conceit on his part to even
think of such an undertaking. As information, however, con-
cerning the nature of the overland track, the distances between
the stations and waters, and the weather at different times in the
year was placed at his disposal, the idea lost much of its absurdity,
and finally, after a little cycling experience on the rough roads
around Port Darwin in June, 1894, the conviction that the under-
taking was quite possible took possession of his mind. It is
difficult to say whether the wish to accomplish the journey was
responsible for the conviction, or whether the conviction was
father of the wish. Certain it is that both took firm root in his
mind, and allured, he confesses, more by the credit which a
successful journey was likely to brinv, than by the actual pleasure
of the trip, the desire to be the first to cross Australia on a bicycle
became almost a craze with Mac.
But not alone! There was too much danger of sickness and
breakdowns on long lonely stages, and, worse still, the fear of
troublesome niggers made a companion an urgent necessity.
These are the impressions which almost anyone, who has had no
previous bush experience or acquaintance with the natives and


“UP A TREE.”
ABORIGINAL’S
LASTRESTING
PLACE.


their ways* would naturally form. The subject of this narrative
candidly confesses that the idea scared him at first, but the quiet
life at Powell's Creek, the inspecting and repairing trips along the
line in the company of a black boy only, his camping out and
gaining general bush knowledge, and above all the contempt or
disregard for long distances which one acquires in such sparsely
settled tracts of country, very soon dispelled those impressions in
his case. To be brief, almost every element of danger vanished
from the undertaking, leaving little else but a lively prospect of
hard work, whilst the minute information gained concerning the
track through the central part of the continent, and the know-
ledge of the general state of the weather, and direction and force
of the wind along the route throughout the year, formed a firm
basis for the calculations mentioned in Chapter IV.
Time rolled by, so did the clouds, and eventually the pioneer
cyclist Jerome J. Murif, from Adelaide to Port Darwin. Promptly
two other cyclists got in his wake, but they started from the
wrong end of it, and ran up against a south-east wind calculated
to break the stoutest cycling heart in Australia. Later on, the
pioneer' honors from Port Darwin to Adelaide, and on to
Melbourne became the property of T. L. Coleman, whose mis-
fortunes on the journey and afterwards, entitled him to the
sympathy of every true sportsman, whilst his companion's (Alt.
Mather) bad luck was also a most regretable feature of their
united undertaking.
The time occupied on these two journeys (Murif's and
Coleman's) 74 and 63 days respectively, left a splendid opening
for the record breaker, and since, owing to MacDonald's having
to complete a five years term of service in the Northern Territory,
the honor of making the initial trip had fallen to the lot of
another, nothing was left for him but to reduce the record as
much as possible.


ALICE SPRINGS
TELEGRAPH STATION.
—F. J. GILLEN.


“Everything comes to him who waits,” and in due course
the 22nd of August, 1898, dawned —a day looked forward to by
MacDonald for a very long while with ofttimes delirious eager-
ness, so completely had the undertaking captured his fancy*
There is very little, he says, to speak of in his monotonous
Joumeyings, day by day, mostly through uninteresting country,
with never an adventure, scarcely a mishap, worth speaking of,
and an almost clock-like fulfilment of the calculations made prior
to the commencement of the trip* Volumes might be written,
however, concerning the keen interest taken in the trip by every
European in the Territory* The kind wishes so warmly spoken
on every side, and the flattering confidence expressed by all in
the ability of their representative to successfully complete the task
he had taken in hand, were encouraging in the highest degree.
The presence of a large number of friends at the Port Darwin
Post Office at daylight to witness the overlander's departure, and
their stirring cheers as he moved away are amongst MacDonald's
brightest recollections. Then the kindness and hospitality ex-
tended to him at every place along the route, and the messages
of congratulation from friends at both ends of the line, awaiting
him at nearly every telegraph station, all contributed to his
success by urging him on to better efforts. The general im-
pression in the public mind is that such a trip as his must be an
appallingly lonely one. But who could be lonely with such
abundant and stimulating food for thought. MacDonald assures
us that he did not have a lonely moment from start to finish.
Even when camped in the lonely bush, far from any civilised
dwelling, he felt perfectly safe, contented, and at home.
From Port Darwin, MacDonald was accompanied some little
distance by the members of the North Australian Cycling Club,
including his brother and two friends, who Journeyed as far as
Adelaide River, Burrundie, and Union Town respectively, with


him. The first day's stage was the only one which occasioned
MacDonald any anxiety. During the afternoon he felt decidedly
weak and depressed, and for the first time he entertained a fear
that he had overrated his physical fitness for his formidable task.
The next two days, however, dispelled this fear, and experience
taught him that the weakness was merely the result of hunger.
Profiting thereby, he determined to carry sufficient provisions
on all stages, no matter how big or heavy the load might be;
and for the remainder of the journey he found it necessary to
eat as many as five and six meals a day. Though frequently
tired he did not again suffer from weakness. The first
symptom was the signal for a banquet, after which u Richard was
invariably himself again." This sounds like a second record
to Mac's credit. He still holds them both for, to use a playful
expression of his own, he ** never shies at the trough, no matter
at what time of day he runs against it." As a result of this
and the change of climate he is rapidly gaining in weight,
and thinks that his friends in Port Darwin who remember his
attenuated and delicate appearance prior to his transfer to
Powell's Creek, will be glad to leam that he is now entirely
out of the betting for the u Graveyard Stakes."
Speaking generally of the road, MacDonald says he found
it in a much better state than he expected. The first 88 miles
on the railway line was rough, much of the riding being done
on the ballast, where the embankment was either waterwom
or otherwise rendered too uneven for the bicycle. The second
day's stage, from Adelaide River to Burrundie, was, for the most
part, over fairly good road, but the strong S.E. wind blowing
all day made 49 miles an ** ample sufficiency." Between
Burrundie and Newcastle Waters (366 miles) there are many
stretches of excellent road, which enabled the cyclist to raise
his average to over 70 miles per day. At Newcastle Waters,


the road, which for hundreds of miles had been through almost
dead level country, approached the hills, and rough or sandy tracks
chiefly were MacDonald's lot for the next 350 miles* Between
Kelly's Well (32 miles south of Tennant's Creek) and the Taylor
Well (20 miles north of Barrow's Creek) there is a long weary
stretch of desolate spinifex country, 100 miles in extent, through
which the track is nearly all sand from two to four or five inches
deep. At the very commencement of this stretch, MacDonald
had the good fortune to have a light rain, which made much of
the sand sufficiently firm to be rideable at a slow pace. The
second day's journey over this portion of the route was much
more difficult, Mac having to walk or ride for many miles,
through the spinifex and bushes, where the track was too heavy
to follow. Partially deflated tyres proved of great assistance
over this and other sandy portions of the journey. Between
Barrow's Creek and Alice Springs there is, altogether, about 130
miles of splendid track, whilst the remaining 60 miles is from
** fair to middling."
The McDonnell Ranges proved a pleasant surprise. The
overlander had been led to believe that he would have to carry
his bicycle 10 or 12 miles over rough boulders and frowning
hills. As a matter of fact, he rode the machine those 12 miles
through the ranges in two hours, only having to dismount and
lead the bike down steep grades and over a few rough hillocks.
The most trying and difficult part of the journey, however, was
to come—viz., the sandhills between Alice Springs and Charlotte
Waters, roughly speaking about 100 miles in extent; but even
that was not so bad as MacDonald expected. Another opportune
fall of rain did much to improve matters, certainly, but the sand-
hills, though bad enough in all conscience, were neither as high
nor as difficult to cross as anticipated, whilst little flats between
them were often rideable, and afforded a welcome relief and


RESIDENCE OF CABLE
SUPERINTENDENT.
PALMERSTON.


change from the monotonous and tiresome trudging. The first
cyclist to cross this stretch of country was Mr. Treloar, a railway
employe in the far north, who rode from Oodnadatta to Alice
Springs, shortly before Murif commenced his overland trip. Mr.
Treloar, after reaching Alice Springs, expressed the opinion that
a good rider could make Oodnadatta from there in eight days
(Murif took eleven days from Charlotte Waters to Alice Springs).
It is, therefore, much to MacDonald's credit that he arrived at
Oodnadatta exactly six days and two hours after leaving Alice
Springs, including a clear day's rest at Charlotte Waters. The
benefit he received from the rain on the sand does not detract
seriously from this performance, since it amounted to little beyond
enabling him to ride from Alice Well to Depot Well (20 miles)
on a camel pad, which in dry weather he must have walked.
It would require a deluge to make much difference to the
sandhills proper. Stages of 57, 58, 40 and 58 miles per day
over this tract of country required all MacDonald's deter-
mination and energy to accomplish. The last of these, from
Crown Point to Charlotte Waters, proved the severest day's work
of the whole trip. He had, previous to this, had some very
trying stages, which had taxed his strength and endurance to
their utmost extent, but the one referred to was the nearest
approach to actual hardship he experienced. Soon after leaving
Crown Point Station on the morning of 10th September, steady
rain commenced to fall, and continued nearly all day. Boggy
Flat, which in dry weather would have proved several miles of
beautiful running, became a veritable glue pot before Mac had
more than half crossed it. So sticky was the mud, that he had
considerable difficulty in pushing the machine through it, and he
had frequently to remove the accumulation of pug from the
wheels and forks. In trying to avoid the worst of the Flat, the
sadly soaked and mud bespattered overlander missed the turnoff


of the wagon road to Charlotte Waters, and followed a buggy-
track which he took to be the mail road, but which led out
to a well on the east side of the Fink River, and ended there.
The sun's whereabouts had been a mystery all day, so that
MacDonald could only guess the direction in which he had been
travelling* It was now 3 p.m., and the prospect of a wet night
in the bush was not very cheering to the much soaked and
shivering one* Fortunately, at this juncture, old Sol peeped
out from behind the heavy clouds which had obscured him.
This enabled MacDonald to take his bearings (he had no
compass), and make good use of his bush knowledge by striking
straight across country to the telegraph line, along which the
proper road ran. He found that he had gone just eight miles
out of his way, but had the sun not appeared at the critical
moment it would have been necessary for him to return to
the point where he had gone astray* This would have entailed
a loss of between 20 and 30 miles, whilst a very miserable camp
would inevitably have been his lot that night* The extensive
plain on which the Charlotte Waters station is situated is
splendidly suited for cycling; but after the rain MacDonald
found it so muddy and slippery that he was compelled to walk
five or six miles into the station, where he arrived at 8.40 p.m.,
covered with mud, wet through to the skin, and thoroughly
worn and jaded* The bicycle was in an equally deplorable
condition, and a day's rest to recoup the former and clean the
latter had become an absolute necessity.
With nearly 100 miles a day to average from Charlotte
Waters to Melbourne, in order to complete his task within the
prescribed time, MacDonald made a fresh start at daylight on
Monday, September 12th, with a 66 gear up, having discarded
the 59, which had done him good service on the heavy roads
previously traversed. For the first time he reached “the century,"
arriving at Macumba (101 miles) a little after dark.


He believed the difficulties of the journey now practically
at an end, but after passing; Oodnadatta the track became
terribly stony, and continued rough and, in places, very sandy,
till William Creek was reached. From there things decidedly
improved, and MacDonald's hopes of success again rose till
he passed Hergott Springs, and found himself riding against
a strong head wind, which made progress extremely difficult
and slow as far as Edeowie.
By this time the daily average still to be attained had risen
to 112 miles, and, with a lively prospect of unfavorable winds
continuing, our friend's chance of success looked very small
indeed. Again, at the critical moment, Dame Fortune smiled.
September 18th was a lovely day, and the improved roads
enabled MacDonald to reach Wilmington (107 miles) by night-
fall. On the morning of the 19th the smile deepened, and before
the day was far advanced her ladyship was screaming with
delight. A strong north wind had risen, which soon increased
to a gale, driving the overlander before it at such a rate that
on every down grade his only difficulty was to avoid going
too fast. The run from Wilmington to Adelaide, 187 miles
(per cyclometer), in one day, placed the ultimate success of the
undertaking beyond all doubt, and occasioned a remarkable
degree of astonishment and delight amongst the overlander's
friends and admirers, as well as the public generally, which
found eloquent expression in the enthusiastic cheers of the
immense crowd which waited at the G. P.O. to witness his
arrival at 9.45 p.m.
MacDonald says he will never forget the occasion, though
he cannot find words to express the varying emotions of
bewilderment, gratification, and thankfulness which his arrival
and reception stirred up within his breast. No sooner had he
passed round the comer of the G.P.O. into Victoria Square


MOUNT CONWAY.
—F. J. GILLEN.


than the bells in the tower rang oat their welcome by chiming
the three-quarters. Promptly, as if this had been the signal,
the crowd burst into the wildest cheering; and when he dis-
mounted from his bike the overlander found himself in the
midst of a throng of old friends and acquaintances, who lost
no time in hoisting him shoulder high. Such a welcome home
after his exile in the Northern Territory he had never expected.
As he was carried round the office where, years ago, he had
performed his daily duties as an operator, and while many eager
hands were stretched up and friendly greetings shouted to him
from amongst the cheering throng which blocked King William
Street, he felt that no hardship or privation would be too severe
to undergo in order to win such enthusiastic and sincere applause.
Of the remainder of the journey to Melbourne the kindness
and attention shown him by all with whom he came in contact,
and the warm reception accorded him on the termination of his
long and arduous journey by the Victorian people, to very few of
whom he was previously known, MacDonald speaks with
pleasure and gratitude. But it is only natural that he should
reserve his warmest expressions of grateful regard for those friends
in the Northern Territory and along the overland route, who
supplied his wants with such lavish hospitality and encouraged
him over the hardest part of the journey. He speaks of them all
with an enthusiasm pleasing to witness, and says that the chief
pleasure of the trip was derived from the kindly welcomes, which
made him feel everywhere at home, and ofttimes sorry to resume
his travels.
But it is when he speaks of his friends at Powell's Creek and
Renner's Springs that his earnestness exceeds his power of
expression. Feelings of friendship, such as he evidently entertains
for Mr. and Mrs. ICell, of Powell's Creek, and Mr. Prentice, of
Renner's Springs, are not easily put into words. No welcome


could be warmer than that which awaited him at his former
home in the interior, nor could even a mother exhibit more care
and concern for his comfort and welfare than that shown by-
Mrs* Kell, whose kindness of heart has won for her the respect
and admiration of a very wide circle of friends and acquaintances.
It might be interesting to state that this lady is probably the most
isolated white woman in Australia —180 miles on the east,
350 miles on the north, and 460 miles on the south separating
her from the nearest of her sex ; whilst to the westward there are
none nearer than in the Kimberley district of Western Australia.
MacDonald regretted having to continue his journey from
no place so much as from Powell's Creek, where everyone on the
station showed an anxiety to do something or other to contribute
to his comfort and entertainment. No word of encouragement,
he says, did half so much to spur him on to his best efforts or to
strengthen his determination to succeed in his arduous under-
taking than did the three lusty cheers with which those friends
bade him farewell; and none but those who have heard three
British cheers (or Australian, which is the same thing) in the
lonely bush under such circumstances can understand the thrilling
and softening effect they have on one. MacDonald rode on with
a warmer place in his heart for Powell's Creek and a keener
appreciation of the blessing of friendship than he ever had
before.
At Renner's Springs MacDonald had the pleasure of staying
a night with Mr. Prentice, the gentleman who took so keen an
interest in him and his undertaking, as to present him with the
bicycle on which the trip was accomplished. Foremost amongst
the most pleasurable recollections of the undertaking is the
thought of this friend's satisfaction and delight on learning of
the splendid success of the journey. Like Murif, MacDonald
pays an eloquent tribute to the kindness and hospitality of the


bushmen of the interior, of whom he says Mr* Prentice is a
prominent and deservedly popular representative* His disin-
terested kindness to the overlander is only one of many instances
of his sturdy generosity*
Much more of an interesting nature, apart from the actual
facts of the trip, might be written concerning MacDonald's
remarkable overland ride; but enough has been said for the
purposes of this book* It might be worth while adding,
however, that, so far from beinv deterred by his performance,
MacDonald has expressed his readiness to do the journey again
at a later date should his laurels be wrested from his grasp by
any who may emulate his ride; provided, of course, that the
opportunity presents itself, and his official duties do not clash
with his intentions and prevent him making the necessary
arrangements*




Chapter VI.
THE HALL MARK OF HEROISM.
HMAN of MacDonalds penetration of mind and
thoroughness of character would not, you may be
sure, set out on a journey of this nature, where a
time limit had been imposed upon his task with-
out more than a nodding; acquaintance with his mount. For
some time "Swifts" have enjoyed great popularity in the
Northern Territory, and when MacDonald heard of the complete
success of the "Swift" in obtaining; all Australian records on
the track, he was convinced of this mountS suitability to bear
the great strain he would have to put on it if he were to
get through to Melbourne in 35 days. There could be no
picking; and choosing of routes; no waiting for fair weather;
but a steady downright ride through all obstructions if the task
was to be done at all. How admirably the " Swift" answered
all claims made on its four well known qualities of
STYLE, SPEED, STRENGTH and SAFETY
will be seen from MacDonakTs letter under date of Sep-
tember 26th.


SIMPSON’S.
GAP,
McDONNELL.
—F. J. GILLEN


" Grand Hotels Melbourne,
" K. E. EDGE, Esq*, "September 26th, 1898.
"Austral Cycle Agency,
" Melbourne.
"Dear Sir, —It affords me genuine pleasure to say, volun-
tarily, that the "Swift" No. \ Light Roadster, fitted with
"Dunlop Roadster Tyres, ridden by me from Port Darwin,
"Northern Territory, to Melbourne, via Alice Springs and
"Adelaide, has given me complete satisfaction.
"To the honest worth of the bicycle is due, in a very
"large measure, the success of the trip, and I am confident
"that only a machine of the best material and workmanship
"could stand the severe test of such a hurried journey over
"the rough roads of the interior.
"The excellent order in which the machine arrived in
"Melbourne is a more eloquent testimony in its favor than
"anything I can pen.
"Yours sincerely,
" (Signed) A. MACDONALD,
"Operator, S.A. Telegraph Dept."
We refer our readers to the page opposite, where is depicted
a gap in the McDonnell Range similar to others through which
a portion of the route passes.
To knock out 80 miles a day over this kind of country
requires in the machine ridden a strength and rigidity of frame
that must defy breakage by anything short of a sledge hammer
and a cold chisel; and in so saying we do not detract one iota


from the grit of the man whose iron will drove him at this
high rate of speed through this sometimes dangerous and at
all times difficult country.
A more detailed account of his daily progress will not be
attempted, but a schedule of stages and distances will be ap-
pended as supplied by MacDonald, and signed for by residents,
where available, at every stopping place. *
To our mind the most wonderful part of the whole affair
is the perfect balance of the man's mind that could withstand
the strain of occupation by a single overmastering idea for so
many consecutive days without allowing that idea to usurp
one jot more importance than it should possess relative to other
things. In hearing MacDonald speak of his trip we were struck
with the magnificent sense of proportion that he maintained
throughout, never allowing any force of circumstances to give
more prominence to the matter than it deserved. In hearing
Nansen speak of his interminable journey through the snow
his hearers were struck by the same idea. Intellects of imperfect
balance cannot always withstand the attacks of hysteria that
so often accompany a long sustained physical strain, especially
when this heavy strain is undertaken in such appalling solitude as
both these men had to face.
There are some who will attribute this mental equilibrium
to the temperance of the two men. Nansen used neither tobacco
nor spirit during the most severe portions of his journey; while
MacDonald is an habitual abstainer from both these pleasant
habits.
There are others who do not care to look further for the
materials of the heroic temperament than the blessings of a
Sood digestion, but we need not inquire further into primary causes.
l hero is easily recognisable when you see him, and we can
assure you, was ** hall-marked.”


SCHEDULE OF DATES AND DISTANCES.
/3<ft
Aug. 22. Port Darwin - - to Adelaide River - - 78 miles
„ 23. Adelaide River - - „ Burrundie - - - n
„ 24. Burrundie - - * Katherine - - -<><>*
„ 25. Katherine - - * The Gums - - bU„
„ 26. The Gums - - * Duck Ponds - -76 „
„ 27. Duck Ponds - - * McGorrery's Ponds - 79 „
.. 28. McGorrery's Ponds - „ Newcastle Waters - 73 ,,
29. Newcastle Waters - » Powell's Creek - - 60 „ — $y3
„ 30. Powell's Creek - „ Renner's Springs - - 20 „
„ 31. Renner's Springs - „ Attack Creek - ■ « »
Sept. 1. Attack Creek - - * Kelly s Well - - 73 *
2* Kelly's Well - - „ 3 miles north of Wycliffe 61 „
” Well
3. Camp north of Wick- „ 9 miles north of Barrow's 54 „
liffe Well Creek '
n 4. Camp north of Bar- ff Hanson s Creek - - 42 w
row's Creek _ ,
5. Hanson's Creek - „ 5 miles south of Ryan s 81 „
” Well
„ 6. Camp south of Ryan's „ Alice Springs - - 82 w __ to^y
Well
„ 7. Alice Springs - - n Deep Well - - 57 „
„ 8. Deep Well - - „ Depot Well - - - 58 „
„ 9. Depot Well - - * Crown Point - - £0 „
10. Crown Point - - n Charlotte Waters - - 53 n


Sept. 12. Charlotte Waters - to Macumba - - - J OX miles
„ 13. Macumba - - „ Railway Cottage 10 86 ,,
miles north of Warrina
n 14. Camp north of Warrina „ William Creek - - 82 „
n 15. William Creek - - „ Cottage 35 miles from 95 ,,
Herbert Springs
n 16. Camp 35 miles from ,, Lyndhurst Siding - - 87 ,,
Herbert Springs
„ 17. Lyndhurst Siding -. „ Edeowie - - - 84 „
„ 18. Edeowie - - - ,, Wilmington - - 107 ,,
„ 19. Wilmington - - „ Adelaide ~ - -187 „
„ 20. Adelaide - - - „ Wellington - - - 65 „
„ 21. Wellington - - „ Kingston - - -120 „
„ 22. Kingston - - - „ Balmoral - - - 127 „
„ 23. Balmoral - - - „ Ballarat - - - 147 „
„ 24. Ballarat - - - „ Melbourne - - - 68 „ __ Yl]
2596 miles
| day's rest at Powell's Creek, \ day's rest at Barrow's Creek,
1 day's rest at Charlotte Waters.
Port Darwin to Adelaide (2066 miles) - 28 days 15 hours 30 minutes
Port Darwin to Melbourne (2596 miles) - 33 days 5 hours 30 minutes
Average Day's Work, including stoppages 11 hours 10 minutes
Actual Riding Time - 8 miles per hour
Daily Average over all - - - - 78 miles
Deducting Stoppages (two days, as above) 82f miles a day


Chapter VII.
CONCLUSION.
$ this must be the last chapter, you will expect it
LA \ should bristle with thrilling adventure. It should
/( \ \ rattle with pistol shots, and no doubt would have done
only MacDonald neglected to take his maxim gun.
You see he took a “ Swift ” instead, and consequently travelled
so fast that the dangers were left behind before they had had
time to materialise.
We have always held that it was thoughtless of MacDonald to
leave out the pistol shooting and the Myalls and the rest of it,
for we could then have concluded this last chapter in our
best Rougemontese. Rest assured, we would not have
stuck at trifles; but alas, it was not to be. In 28 days 15 hours
30 minutes a Grien could scarcely have time to successfully take
up the reins of government, learn the language, and win the
esteem of a tribe of blacks, be they ever so accommodating.
Well, kind friends, the bell has rung, and we must sprint
for the tape at once or get left again. We have, with MacDonald,
followed the humming wire from sea to sea, and have put up
such a record as will satisfy the most exacting. .May our
hero have many another successful ride on his Swift, and in
pleasanter company than ours, and may the bell he hears be a
wedding bell, than which there is none sweeter.
Syd. Day, Printtr, f Wright' t Lam, Mtliourm.


The Austral Cycle Agency
-J& Limited, jt
Sole Agents
tor . ♦
DEPOTS:
ADELAIDE, —33 Street.
BENDIGO—PaII Mall,
BRlSBANE—Adelaide Street.
CHRISTCHURCH—CoIocqbo & Lichfield Streets.
CHARTERS TOWERS—GiII Street.
DUNEDIN—I 23 George Street.
HAMILTON—Sports Depot.
LAUNCESTON—II2 Charles Street.
MELBOURNE—I 39 Elizabeth Street.
HOBART—BB Liverpool Street,
PERTH—4O3 Hay Street.
ROCKHAMPTON—East Street.
SYDNEY—39I George Street.
WARRNAMBOOL—KepIer Street.
WELLINGTON—6I Larqbtop Qday.
305-7 Little Flinders St*, Melbourne*
AGENTS IN ALL THE PRINCIPAL TOWNS.
O
HEAD OFFICE:
000 o o










