

TH&
BIacK
TDri f s r
"’I if I
k/ ;/ fe,* ’-'•
f •&&£&''’ .V > A • •% jPv*/*
\ Jl
„, _ I */
•‘ ■• . •; V ’' .,,, •’ >
«■ » »■ **" \t *._ •' . \
:0£ <3A ’ ;
HUTCHINSON la ‘ j


7
N tun yBy
EXTRA CONCENTRATED
tgSS>
/ Blossoms.
I %MAi U» CO«OH*«IA.)
1 177 NEW BOND ST LONDON
(• ' ' ■■ Ol tTIR ■ . ,
IbImBP
{PiVENDERSAETS
liv. se53155!5^F^'2Mi'
f!IE CROWNPERFUMERYGuMTMTi a
\jo)H! HEWtOND STRUT LQNOONO’g
THOMSON’S
NINE FIRST MEDALS.
“Glove-Fitting” 55
CORSET.
The Perfection of Shape, Finish,
and Durability, and approved by the whole
polite world.
SALE—ONE MILLION PAIRS.
Dealers throughout the World.
“ Fits like a Glove.”
W. S. THOMSON & Co., Ltd., London, Manufacturers.
See that every Corset is marked “THOMSON’S GLOVE-FITTING,”
and bears our Trade Mark, the Crown. No others are genuine.
u It is the daintiest and most delicious of per-
>77 new bond's l, londow fum es, and in a few months has superseded all
77 NEW .?P.?T..» LOHPON j others in the boudoirs of the grandes dames of
hniiinh. in. i;n • lIHHIIIHHI— AhiP London, Paris, and New York. — The Argonaut .
Put up in 1, 2, 3, and 4 ounce Bottles.
m VIGOR A TING n
1 LAVENDER SALTO.
NEW ENGLISH PERFUME I
CRAB APPLE BLOSSOMS.
V/ MALUS CORONARIA. Regd.
WHAT LONDON AND NEW YORK SAY OF IT.
“Chief among the fashionable scents is ‘Crab Apple Blossoms,’
a delicate perfume of highest quality: one of the choicest ever pro-
duced.” —Court Journal .
“It would not be possible to conceive of a more delicate and de-
lightful perfume than the 1 Crab Apple Blossoms,’ which is put
up by the Crown Perfumery Company, of London. It has the aroma of
spring in it, and one could use it for a lifetime and never tire ot it.
New York Observer .
“Our readers who are in the habit of purchasing that delicious I|^jl{
perfume, 1 Crab Apple Blossoms,’ of the Crown Perfumery
Company, should procure also a bottle of their 1 Invigorating f Jljl
Lavender Salts.’ By leaving the stopper out for a few moments
a delightful perfume escapes, which freshens and purifies the air i %
most enjoyably.” —Le Follet. # iMVENDHiSiaiS
Genuine only with Crown Stoppers as shown herewith. Reject 1C
Spurious Imitations,
r Crown PERFUMERyCijM?AH'i
MADE ONLY BY
THE CROWN PERFUMERY Co.,
177, NEW BOND STREET, LONDON.
Fronts


*
THE BEST OF ALL WINTER BEVERAGES.)
\ RIRRFR A CO.’S
Bentury.” I
DH
EE
\ in its I
tion. I
ER MUM, I
I TIN.
Choicest and I
y selected Cof- I
sted on the I
•rinciple," and I
dth the Finest I
-e. Chicory.
IE THAT TOO I
TAKE NOME I
.OTHER,


I
'Frmz.
ARTHUR JAMES VOGAN
F.R.G.S. (ENGLAND), SINCE 188-3
M. POLYNESIAN SOCIETY
M. NATIONAL G.A. (U.S.A.)
F.A.G.S. (U.S.A.)
LATE ARTIST CORRESPONDENT
“ILLUSTRATED LONDON NEWS”.
AUTHOR: ‘BLACK POLICE" (HUTCHINSON
LONDON), “TARAWERA”, “A RIDE ACROSS
AUSTRALIA", “HOUSEHOLD AMBULANCE
RULES”, “THE RULE OF THE RED-HAIRED”.
"DANGERS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT”, BtC.
PACIFIC MIGRATIONS RESEARCH.
C/OF J. A. RICHARDSON
ELDON CHAMBERS
PITT STREET. SYDNEY. N.S. WALES


m
*
* '
• ' * '
• I
... ■ '{
••
* •*
•r
;
*
, \ k
. *
«
• # /■ •
i
[
- * _. .. v


i i
02
m
A
M
o
I—<
P3
O
(S


THE BLACK POLICE.
A STORY OF MODERN AUSTRALIA.
A. J. VOGAN.
WITH ILLUSTRATIONS AND MAP BY THE AUTHOR
LONDON:
HUTCHINSON & CO.,
25, PATERNOSTER SQUARE.
[All rights reserved.]




TO MY READERS
JN the following story I have endeavoured to
depict some of the obscurer portions of Aus-
tralia’s shadow side.
The scenes and main incidents employed are
chiefly the result of my personal observations and
experiences ; the remainder are from perfectly reli-
able sources.
Arthur James Yogan.
Tauranga, New Zealand.
September 1890.


>
.
'
.
A
-


PAGE
. 1
5
• •
. 19
. 33
. 52
. 68
. 85
. 115
if^
([? JAK199A
Vo. v^y
\y k A , j.
KIISS j A/7 9
i
CONTENTS.
I. A PENNY FOR BAD NEWS .... 1
111. EUREKA 13
IV. PADDY’S MARKET 19
V. THE SELVAGE EDGE OF CIVILIZATION . . 33
VI. TWO ESCAPES : A FALL AND A RISE . . 52
VII. MESSRS. WINZE AND CLINSKEEN . . .68
VIII. THE BLOODY SKIRT OF SETTLEMENT . . 85
IX. MURDER, MADNESS, AND MELODY . . .115
X, MISS LILETH MUNDELLA AND MR. WILSON GILES 143
XL THE BLACK POLICE 165
XII. BILLY AND THE “ HATTER ” . • • .184
xm. Claude’s letter to dick . . • .215
XIV. HECATE AND HEBE . 230
XV. THE GHOST OF CHAMBER’S CREEK • 252


. 291
. 326
. 338
’ . . .355
. . . .372
. 379
I
XVI, lileth’s disappointment
XVII. EN AVANT I
XVIII. A STATION SKETCH
XIX. THE GRAVE.
XX. A “dispersing” PARTY
xxi. fate’s avenging hand
XXII. LAST words


THE BLACK POLICE.
CHAPTER I.
A PENNY FOR BAD NEWS.
TAR! Ev-en’ Star!
Full account o’ the
fi-re !” echoes shrilly
1 on all sides from
the throats of bare-
legged, paper-laden
urchins, who after
the manner of their
kind are actively engaged in sup-
plying the passing public of Auck-
land, New Zealand, with the second
edition of the evening paper.
Queen Street, the principal thoroughfare of the city,
is crowded at this hour of the afternoon.. Business at
the banks and offices is over for the day, and the hot
pavements are crowded with homeward-bound pedes-
trians of many varieties. Pale-faced daughters of the
1


city’s nouveaux riches are there by dozens. Many are
accompanied by bealthy-looking female cousins from
the agricultural Waikato, and if the former do con-
gratulate themselves at the contrast between their own
gaudy plumes and their country relative’s more sober
feathers, what of that ? It is an odd fact too, worth
mentioning, that these young ladies always require to
do their shopping about this time in the day. But look
at the crowd again. There stalks a stately Maori chief,
with dark, tattooed, thoughtful face, surmounted with
the incongruous “long-sleeved hat” of Europe. Others
of his race are also there rubbing noses, and weeping
with long-lost friends, or holding consultations with
sharp-eyed lawyers, who, spider-like, are sucking the
unfortunate natives’ ancestral estates into the insati-
able and unscrupulous maws of pakeha landsharks.
On hurries the crowd, and somebody points out
Auckland’s richest man. “ Entirely devoted to Art,”
says our informant, adding that the object of our
attention “has found gin-spinning pay better than
feeling the pulses of hypochondriacs.”
Bustling past comes a knot of loud-voiced, white-
waistcoated mining agents. One of these turns for a
moment to buy a paper. Like minnows at a worm,
a shoal of newsboys make a dive at him, tumbling
over each other, and crying aloud their alto battle-cry
in the strange vernacular of their kind: “ Star I
Ev-en’ Star ! Full account of the fi-re ! Death of an
Australian explorer! ”
A young man, who with riding-whip in hand is
standing close by on the curb, turns at the last sen-
tence, and hurriedly buying a paper, glances eagerly
at it.


“ So it is true, after all,” lie murmurs half aloud,
and remains for a moment or two in deep thought.
As we want our readers to know him when they meet
him again, here is a brief description of Mr. Claude
Angland. As he stands there before us in a loosely-
fitting Norfolk jacket and Bedford cords, his dark-
brown, wide-brimmed felt hat—light as gossamer —
thrown back from his honest, sunburnt face, he looks
the beau ideal of what an intelligent, active pioneer in
a new country should be. Old ladies would call him
“ a fine young man to look at ; ” younger members of
the female persuasion, although denying his right to
be termed handsome, would naturally turn to him in
trouble or in danger, in preference to many a more
showy individual.
Our new friend does not stand long in thought; he
suddenly glances again at the paper, and then at his
watch, and turning on his heel is soon lost to view in
the crowd.
The news that has apparently so interested the
young man is in the latest telegrams’ column of the
evening paper.
“ (By special wire.)
“ Cairns, Queensland.
“ News has just been received from Georgetown confir-
matory of wire sent you last week respecting death of
Dr. Dyesart. Whilst exploring the country near the
Mitchell river he met with a severe fall, and died three
days afterwards. His sole companion, a black boy named
Billy, who has accompanied him during all his later ex-
peditions, reached Murdaro i station with the news ten
days since. An attempt will be made to find the body,


when the boy, who was also badly hurt, is sufficiently
recovered.”
In smaller type, below the telegram, a few brief
editorial notes appeared eulogising the deceased ex-
plorer, and giving a short outline sketch of his life.


CHAPTER 11.
SKTTA'AH.
11 No more by thee my steps shall be
For ever and for ever.”
N a long, ceilinglcss
room, half kitchen
and half parlour, two
figures are seated
O
near an enormous
fireplace, in which a
glowing heap of wood
ashes illuminates
that end of the other-
wise somewhat gloomy
chamber. One figure, that of an
elderly lady, is reclining in an easy chair.
Her brain is evidently busy with anxious and even
painful thoughts, the object of which is made evident
as she turns her moist eyes, from gazing at the
scintillating wonderland amongst the embers, to glance
from time to time at the form opposite to her.
The lady’s vis-d-vis at the fireside is a well-built,
athletic young man, to whom we have already been
introduced. In the rough garments of a working


farmer, he lies sleeping there in his chair just as he
came in from ploughing twenty minutes before.
The sleepy god, however, has apparently less power
over the youth’s brain than his body. The twitching
mouth and hands, the murmured words, show that
the anima is busy, if the body is not. The sudden
barking of a sharp-voiced collie outside the house
presently causes the sleeper to open his eyes. They
turn immediately to meet the smile of the lady
opposite.
“Well, you have not had a very good sleep after
all, Claude,” murmured the latter. “ I think Dick is
back. It was Bob’s barking awakened you.”
“ Ah,” returned the still dozy young man, “ that’s
all right. The old chap’s rather late, isn’t he ? D’you
know,” he added slowly, “ I’ve been dreaming about
my trip to Queensland.” Here Claude rose, and,
taking both the lady’s hands in his, continued, “ I’ve
made up my mind, mother, to run over to Queensland,
and find out the particulars of Uncle Sam’s death.
I’m not superstitious, but I’m sure there’s something
odd about it. I’ve dreamed a dozen times since we
saw that horrible telegram in the paper that poor
uncle was calling me to come to him.”
“ Nonsense, my boy, nonsense,” gently returned the
lady, “ you know we can’t spare you. It’s right you
should wish to go, Claude, but we can’t spare you.
It’s a fearful place, that Queensland.”
“Oh you ! Mollie wouldn’t be alone. Would you ?
Mollie ? ” Claude remarked in a louder voice, as a
pretty young girl tripped into the room, bearing a
lighted lamp in her hands.
“ Don’t be silly, Claude,” answered the fair one,


smoothing down a spotless white cloth upon a table
standing in the centre of the room. “ Dick is back,
and he’ll be so famished. Do run away and get ready
for tea.” , ,
« Oh, of course, it’s Dick is hungry now,” laughed
the young man; “ your poor brother is second fiddle
in the domestic orchestra since the arrival of the
young Irishman.” As one door bangs with the exit
of the last speaker, another leading on to the verandah
opens and quickly closes, showing in the interval a
brief picture of fiery sunset behind dark fir-trees. A
fresh figure is in the room. It is that of a jolly-
looking individual, whose plan of construction, so to
speak, is more inclined to squareness than height.
The younger of the two women is soon helping the
new-comer to empty his pockets and shoulder-bag of
letters and papers, chattering all the time. “ Oh,
Dick, haven’t you got a letter for me ? ”
“Nary a one, ducky; but I’ve got an important one
for Claude. D’you know, Mrs. Angland, it’s from the
Queensland police. They sent it here to Inspectoi
Goode, and he gave it to me just before I left town.
Maybe now it’s something about poor Dr. Dyesart.
Here Claude re-enters the room.
“ Well, old man, glad you’re back safe. How did
the mare go ? She was bound to be a bit skittish
after the long spell she’s had. I hope you’ve had her
shod ? Have you any news of the Doctor ? ”
“ Taihoa (wait a bit), old chap,” interrupts Dick,
with his fingers to his ears to illustrate histrionically
the pain such rapid questioning is giving him. “ Why,
Claude, you’re getting as bad as your sister. Here s
a letter for you, which you needn t apologise for


opening at tea. I myself beg to move that we do
now partake of what our black brethren here call
( kai,’ alias 1 tucker.’
The little circle now gathered round the white-
clothed table consists of an English lady, her son and
daughter, and a friend, —a young man from northern
Ireland. They had left the old country together,
some four years before the time when our story opens,
to settle upon a farm in New Zealand.
The youth from the Emerald Isle had, some time
before leaving his native land, determined in his own
mind that as long as he could settle down close to his
friend Claude’s pretty sister, he would remain perfectly
contented anywhere. Our friends had not been “ out ”
long enough to feel homesick ; the many novelties of
life in a new country had not yet lost their charms.
The rough life was almost like one long picnic. The
lovely climate made up for many hardships; and if it
would rain a little less at times, and if a market
could be depended upon for fowls when fattened and
cheese when made, the life of a New Zealand farmer
was one, they all agreed, to be envied.
Claude, to the surprise of his mother, quietly finished
his tea before opening the letter. There it lay by his
plate in tantalising proximity to her hand, containing,
perhaps, news of that poor brother of hers, —long
estranged from all his family through no real fault of
his or hers, to wander in a barbarous country, and die
at last in the wilderness he had braved so long. Tea
is cleared away, Dick and Mollie go out into the
verandah, —to look at the stars probably,—and in the
room the purring of the “ harmless necessary cat ”
upon the hearthrug, and the click click of Mrs.


Angland’s knitting needles, are the only sounds.
Claude lias taken a seat at the lamp-lit table, and lays
the envelope, marked 0. H. M. S., and bearing the
Queensland postmark, before him upon the red
cloth. . .
He feels instinctively his uncles presence in that
letter. There is no particular sign by which an ordinary
observer could tell it from a letter of ordinary im-
portance. Yet Claude knows, and it puzzles him to
think how he knows it, that an answer to his dreams
is before him. The truth of the theory of animism
never appeared clearer to him than at present. The
envelope is addressed to Claude Angland, Care of the
Superintendent of Police, Auckland, N.Z. Below this
direction is a note to the effect that the writer will be
glad if the aforesaid Claude Angland can be found
without delay, and handed the enclosed letter and
packet. Inside the envelope is a brief note from some
official at Cairns, informing Claude that a small packet,
enclosed, having been brought to the station ot a Mr.
Giles by the late explorer’s black boy, that gentleman
had forwarded it to the writer, who took the present
means of sending it to Mr. Angland, hoping the simple
address, as copied from the packet, would find him.
A few words expressive of the regret the writer, in
common with all colonists, felt at the loss of such an
able explorer as Dr. Dyesart closed the letter.
The packet referred to by the unknown correspondent
at Cairns, whose hieroglyphic signature looked more
like the shadow of a delirious spider than the name of
a human being, now attracted Claude’s attention. It
was about the size of a large walnut, and its outer
covering consisted of a piece of soiled linen rag, tightly


bound with fine fishing line. In irregular and almost
illegible blue-black characters, the same address as
that upon the envelope had been scrawled upon it by
aid of an indelible ink pencil. The covering removed,
—Claude saw at once it had at one time formed part of
the lining of a coat, —an empty revolver cartridge was
discovered, tightly plugged at one end with wood, the
joints and cap-end being smeared over with a kind of
resinous, dark-coloured gum.
Claude’s strong but trembling fingers are not long
in removing the wooden stopper, and in his hands is
a carefully folded piece of paper, which he recognises
on opening it as a leaf from a sketching block. The
same handwriting that had attracted the young man’s
attention upon the linen wrapper of the packet has
covered one side of the opened paper before him.
With head on hand, Claude sits without moving
aught save his eyes, poring over the letters. At last,
half turning in his chair, his voice pitched in a slightly
higher key than usual, he speaks :
“ Mother, here is my summons. I knew I should
get one. Come and see poor uncle’s letter.”
Mrs. Angland rises quickly, and stooping over the
table, her right hand on her son’s broad shoulder,
gazes with filling eyes at the well-known writing on
that crumpled paper lying there. The writing is small
and somewhat obliterated, and from the varying cha-
racter and style of the different sentences the same
have evidently been written at intervals. One could
easily imagine that a wounded man, who required to
rest often from his task, would write such a letter.
“ Read it to me, my son, I cannot.”
He reads as follows :


“To my nephew , Claude Angland, of Auckland, New
Zealand.
« j arn dying before my work is completed. It rests with
you to allow me to rest in peace after my death. I wish to
make reparation to those I have neglected too long. I have
tried to bury the past in science and in work. Your mother
will explain all to you at the proper time. Come to where I
now lie. You can trust Billy , whom you will remember with
me in England. I believe he will get out of this. Gome here
alone with him , and at once. Good-bye to all. I hope you
keep up your chemistry. Beware of squatters and police.
This note will be hard to read , but read the whole of it.
" Samuel D. Dyes art!
« What does he mean?” muses Claude out loud, after
a pause,—inadvertently speaking as if the writer was
still alive, so difficult was it to believe that the hand
that had guided the pencil that traced those shaky
letters was fast turning into its original dust.
Mrs. Angland comes of a practical stock, and sees
the letter only as it is.
u I suppose, poor fellow,” she says, speaking slowly
and softly, “ he liked to think that some one he had
loved in life would visit his lonely grave out there in
those fearful wastes. He was very fond of you, Claude,
even from the time he first saw you, a mere baby.
But don’t go, Claude,” she adds beseechingly; “ that
horrible Queensland that has cost me a brother shall
not take my son.”
“Mother,” interrupts Claude at this point, “you
don’t understand what I mean. Let me read the letter
to you again.” The letter is re-read. Presently Mrs.
Angland breaks the silence.


“ Perhaps lie wants yon to finish his work—his
horrid exploring. God forgive me if lam wicked
when I think it was wrong of your uncle to tempt
you away from me. But perhaps ho was wandering in
his mind rather. Poor fellow, what he must have
suffered ! How odd of him to think of your chemistry.
( I hope you keep up your chemistry,’ quoting from
the letter. “ Fancy his thinking of that when so near
death.”
Claude is listening in silence; but when Mrs.
Angland speaks of his uncle’s mention of chemistry,
he rises quickly, and, seizing the letter, holds it to
the light, and then proceeds to carefully examine the
remainder of the packet, including the cartridge case,
etc. He is rewarded by finding the single word that
heads this chapter scratched upon the tarnished brass
of the latter. u Hidden,” he murmurs, for luckily he
knew a little Greek. “ Hidden, what is hidden ?
and falls to poring over the letter once more.


CHAPTER 111.
EUREKA.
“ I had a vision when the night was late.”
UTSIDE on tlie
verandah a hap-
py couple are
sitting enjoying
the hay-scented
night wind as it
blows in gentle
gusts up the
. valley. Dick
\ and Mollie are
in that delight-
fully idiotic
frame of mind
known to the vulgar as “ being spooney.” A great
silver moon is shining down, as only a New Zealand
moon can shine, over the forest-clad Hnnna langes
in the distance and the neighbouring dewy pastures,
where white-backed cattle can be seen resting for the
night. The weird-voiced wvkci calls from the daik
fern-hill on the right, and a couple of night-jars, called


“ More Pork ” by the colonists, from tbeir pecnliai
cry, are proclaiming at intervals their carnivorous
desires from the grand Puriri tree by the stockyard.
The youth and his betrothed are thinking of anything
but the letter that is engaging the attention of the
people indoors, and Claude’s voice calling loudly
upon Dick is by no means a welcome sound.
“ Dick,” comes the summons again.
“ Here I am,” answers the owner of the one-
syllabled cognomen. A parting squeeze, and he opens
the door, and walks into the room rubbing his eyes.
_ “ Look here, Dick,” says his friend, without raising
his head from its bowed position over the letter upon
the table. “ Here’s the summons I expected from the
poor Doctor. But it’s an enigma, I’m certain. I’m
bothered if I can get at its meaning. Read it, and
find out its hidden signification, there’s a good fellow.”
Dick’s face is generally a smiling placid one, but
it is curious to notice how it changes, and becomes
thoughtful and determined, as its owner catches sight
of Claude s knitted brows and anxious, worried look.
Both young fellows remain seated at the table in
silence for a time, till Claude somewhat sharply asks,—
“ Well, what do you make of it ? ”
“ Humph,” grunts his friend, “ I think I’ll postpone
my decision till to-morrow.” Here he glances towards
the verandah door, round the jamb of which flutters
the white edge of a female’s dress. “ The letter has
a secret meaning I’ve little doubt. By-the-bye, I
didn’t notice these figures before.”
“ Oh, I did, but I don’t think they are part of the
letter.”
“ You bet they are, Claude. I wonder what I, cross,


six, nought, double lor is it H ?—two, nought, can
mean.” _
Claude leans forward, and seizing the .others arm
said, “ I didn’t understand myself till you read them.”
« What do they mean then ? ”
« They are chemical symbols for iodine mixed with
water. Yes, can mean nothing else.
Nothing more can the youths make out of the
hidden meaning of the letter, if hidden meaning there
was. Before long all save Claude retire to rest. That
individual, believing that no sleep will come to him
that night, sits in front of the fireplace, puzzling over
what part iodine—if iodine is meant' by the symbols
—can play in unveiling the secret message that he
believes lies in the letter. The kerosene lamp is
turned down low ; and the room, lit only from the
great fireplace, becomes darker each minute. Claude,
having thought his active brain tired, is almost drop-
ping off to sleep, when a sudden noise occurring in the
room causes him to spring from his chair. A few
shrill squeals in the dark corner of the room denote
that the cause of the disturbance is the black cat Te
Kooti, who has caught a mouse. Half-a-dozen books
have fallen from a shelf by the door, as evidence of
her prowess. After several vain attempts to get the
blind side of Mr. Mouse, the feline namesake of the
Maori patriot has employed a literary ambush to aid
her in her plans, and with perfect success.
“ Confound the cat! ” growls the awakened one ;
“get out of the room, you brute. Wonderful, women
always will have them in the house ! ”
Having ejected the poor discomfited animal, who
was making her way towards him to be congratulated,


as usual, upon lier prowess, Claude turns to pick up
the fallen books.
He has replaced all but two, when he stops short,
for the feel of the smooth, cold cover of one of them
now in his hand has made him thoughtful again.
Strange what a host of memories will crystallize into
shape, one after another, in the brain, like the scintil-
lating colours of the kaleidoscopes,—all arising from
a simple keynote set buzzing by some slight passing
circumstance. The book he held in his hand was a
rough copy-book, so dilapidated that he had hesitated
to pack it in his boxes when coming to the colony.
In it, when a boy at school, he used to keep his notes
upon the science lectures delivered once a fortnight to
the assembled scholars. He remembered, in the semi-
darkness, how fond he was of those lectures. He re-
collected, as if it had occurred but yesterday, that he
was holding the book just in that position when, at the
end of one lecture, he rose in exceeding trepidation to
ask a question relative to biblical science that caused
an awful hush to fall upon the schoolroom. There
before his mind’s eye was the picture of the professor
—who was small, and rather nervous amongst boys—
as he blushed, stammered, and finally refused to
answer “a foolish question,” to the delight of the
boys, his pupils, and the glorification of Claude in the
playground by-and-by.
Claude turns up the light, and glances through the
pages covered with his long-past schoolboy scrawl.
His whole attention is however presently directed to
a note on a scribbled memorandum, which relates/as
a fact, that iodine can be employed to determine
whether certain infusoria, in water taken from a pond


or ditch, belong to the animal or vegetable kingdom.
« The former,” says the note, “ do not contain starch
and remain unaltered in colour ; the latter turn blue
upon coming in contact with the iodine.”
Just as the thoughts, roused by reading these words,
are shaping themselves for action in Claude’s brain,
a step is heard on the stairs, the handle of the door
rattles, and Dick enters-the room. He is in his
pyjamahs, just as he has tumbled out of his bed.
I guessed you’d be grinding away at your letter,”
he roars, “so having had a bright idea I thought I
would come and lend you a hand. Cryptography’s
the answer to the doctor’s puzzle, and your iodine
will do something towards bringing the secret to
Well, we’ll try, without wasting further time,”
and Claude, going out of the room, presently returns
with a wine-glass half full of light brown liquor.
« It’s mighty strange that you should have hit on
what I believe is the answer to the puzzle just as
I had done the same thing.” Here the speaker
pushes the manuscript book towards Dick, who,
sitting on the table, is cutting some tobacco foi his
pipe off a rough roll of Maori-prepared leaf, called
torori.
Claude now pours some of the liquid, which contains
about forty per cent, of iodine, into a plate, and proceeds
with some hesitation to moisten a corner of the letter
with the same. Both young men watch the result
breathlessly. There is no result. Claude s face clouds
over with a disappointed look ; but he nevertheless
plunges half the sheet beneath the surface of the
liquor.


As if by magic a change immediately begins to make
itself apparent upon the surface of the paper.
At right angles to the pencil writing there gradually
appears, after the manner of a photographic negative
that is being developed, a series of parallel lines of
disjointed dots and dashes, of a faint blue colour.
These markings grow stronger each minute. The
letter is wholly immersed, -and presently withdrawn
and held to the lamp. A hitherto hidden message,
written in fairly distinct blue-green characters, is now
visible. It runs as follows :
“I am writing this with rice water. Proceed at once to
Sydney, see Winze and Clinskeen, Mining Agents , Pitt Street.
There await you valuable papers. You can trust Winze
entirely. Find Billy and take out Miner's Right. Come
up here and follow directions map other side paper. Billy
does not know of reef. Obliterate your tracks. You may
be watched in Sydney perhaps for other reasons. Travel
incognito."
On the other side of the paper, which had appeared
blank before the application of the iodine, a roughly-
drawn map now appeared, ornamented with dotted
lines and arrows. From it, it appeared that if a certain
direction was taken—shown by a dotted line—from
a point indicated by a cross, a creek would be crossed
running through a gorge. This creek followed up for
a mile would be found to cut through a region marked
“ the golden cliffs.”
“ It is plain,” remarked Claude after a few moments,
“ that I must first find Billy.”
“ That,” replied his friend, who was smoking off his
excitement, “ that is clearly an important preliminary.”


CHAPTER IY.
paddy’s market.
HE newly-arrived travel-
ler in Sydney is generally
- pestered by the urbane
and well-meaning citizens of
that London of the South by
three or more questions. Un-
til he has answered these, and
done so to their satisfaction, —
and the correct reply is the
“ Open Sesame ” to their hos-
pitable homes and hearts, —
his polite inquisitors will look
coldly upon him. This know-
ledge is worth much to those
of onr readers who intend visit-
ing Sydney for the first time ;
and we highly recommend such persons to study what
we have to say upon this highly important subject.
Many a time have we seen the learned scholar, the
gallant soldier, and the wealthy globe-trotter turned
back from the very gates of that Antipodean Paradise,
the inner circle of Sydney society, from an inability
to pass this curious test. As often we have seen the
artful u new chum,” who has received a clear hint


from liis friends, and acted upon such, glide without
exertion into the Elysium fields of Elizabeth Bay. and
Pott’s Point.
The principal of these questions, and the first one
generally asked, is, “ What do you think of our
beautiful harbour ? ” (Time being precious in Sydney,
the aspirate is seldom sounded in this case.)
The second screw of the interviewer’s mental thumb-
smasher is, “What do you think of the Post Office
carvings ? ”
The third query is generally, “Have you been to
Paddy’s Market ? ”
Now experience has shown us that to the first two
questions the simple words “Awfully jolly, bai
Jove ! ” especially if accompanied with a long drawl,
will put the knowing if unscrupulous candidate upon
his way rejoicing. That he may be able to answer
the third in a satisfactory manner, we ask him to
follow our story through the wastes that lie over
against Cambell and Hay Streets.
It is a curious and interesting fact that no one,
whatever command of language he may possess, can
describe a place, or thing, successfully to another, if
his auditor has never had personal experience of some-
thing similar. Who could picture up in his mind the
ocean in a storm, or a cavalry charge, from a mere
verbal or written description ?
The best literary effort would be thrown away
upon a man of no experience. Such an individual
would, after reading or hearing of the glories of
the sea, probably still have only a vague idea that
it was in appearance something similar to an animated
potato-bed ctf a green colour.


We trouble our readers with all this in order that
they may assist us in picturing the scene we are about
to describe, by conjuring up “ in the mind’s eye,” one
of the flaring midnight markets of the Old World,
Petticoat Lane, Seven Dials, Deptford, the more
ancient parts of the Cite, Paris, or the like.
The best admirers of Sydney —and it rightly has
many of these —will scarcely proclaim it as a moral
city. The unlimited license granted to its youth of
both sexes and every class, by the custom and habits
of the community, is fraught with those dangerous
elements that encourage the growth of the worst sorts
of crimes. Monied and unscrupulous blackguards are
to be found here, as elsewhere in the world; and
nowhere can they have their fling that e\eiy devil s
dance—to better advantage than in Sydney.
Paddy’s Market is one of the hunting-grounds of
this class of individuals.
As evening draws over the city vast crowds are to
be seen hurrying homeward past the glaring shops
and brilliantly-lighted hotels. Now dodging red- and
green-eyed steam-trams, as they screech and rumble
along the handsome but narrow streets ; and anon
dashing in open order like frighted sheep across the
bus-covered squares, the migratory sojourners of the
city flock nightly outwards from the business centres.
Let us allow ourselves to be carried down George
Street in the human stream “ Southward Ho I ” till
Cambell Street is reached. Here in the slack-water
of the comparatively deserted footpath ot a side street
we can look around us. A vacant space of ground
surrounded by a white railing is on the opposite side
of the way, and we become aware of a Chinese quarter


being at band from the acrid stench that reaches ns
from up the street.
The open square in front of us is being appropriated
for the night by a noisy crowd of itinerant ragamuffin
“ entertainers of the public,” of various callings.
There are the usual Try-yer-weight, Balm-of-Gilead,
and Try-afore-yer-buy rascals, and others of like
kidney. These, with the dirty evangelists of Kings-
of-Pain and Quack-doctors, are busy erecting various
machines and tables for the night’s work. The place
is busy with moving figures and the Norse-alpha-
betical rappings of twenty hammers, and gay with the
crowd-attracting glories of red paint and bright brass-
work. The gloaming gradually sinks into night, and
flaring lamps appear in all directions; and four long
buildings, that during the week have formed the Covent
Garden of Sydney, begin to light up as the numerous
stall-holders within commence business. Most of these
are Jews of the lower classes ; but here and there the
child-like smile of a quarantine-flag-coloured follower
of Confucius, or the merry, black, oily face of an
African, breaks the monotony. At one stall half-a-
dozen under-sized Chinamen are fingering some shoddy
clothes ; at another a “ young man from the country ”
is hurriedly purchasing some indecent photographs
from a dealer in church pictures and altar decorations,
looking around him nervously the while, lest “ his
people ” should see him. Close by, a lump of human
flesh, in black oily ringlets and an astoundingly ample
dress of vivid green, is showing off the glories of a
ruby-coloured velvet skirt to two fragile “ daughters
of the public ” by holding it against her majestic base.
Near this last group, seated upon the only empty show


bench within sight, are two men. One, enveloped in
a long, light dust-coat, and wearing a fashionable
light felt hat, looks to the casual observer like what
he once was, namely, a gentleman. His companion
is a short, thick-set fellow, with the ever-restless eyes
of a detective or a criminal. His otherwise stolid-
looking features are those that mark him at once as
a foreigner, probably a Wurtemburger. As far as
can be made out, as he sits in the shadow, he is more
anxious to avoid notice than is his companion, and is
dressed in a suit of dark-coloured tweed. Both are
apparently watching for somebody they expect in the
column of men, women, and children, as with the
orderly manner, characteristic of a Sydney crowd, it
dawdles its long length past.
«I know he left the hotel, and I know he’s not
been able to see the firm to-day,” whispers the man
in the dust-coat, rising and striking a match upon his
pants, and proceeding to light a cigarette. “ I slung
him a moral yarn or two about Paddy’s Market that 11
fetch him along.”
“ Why you not bring ’im mit you ? ” growls his
companion.
“ Because, my dear sir, if anything should happen
to the young man, and I had been seen in his company,
I might find it awkward ; d’ye see, Grosse ? ”
The last speaker continues, after knocking the ashes
oft' his cigarette with a delicate little cane he held in
his gloved hands, —
“ When I see him I’ll touch your arm. Clear out
then at once. And when you see us again—at, you
know where— don’t attempt to act if you don’t hear
me whistling 1 Killaloo.’ ”


Here lie of the cigarette whistled a bar of that
melody for the benefit of his accomplice.
The two men continue for some time sitting moodily
watching the faces of the crowd, till the one in the
tweed clothes abruptly rises, and, pulling his hat well
over his eyes, slouches off. His companion shortly
after leaves his seat, and, settling his collar, strolls
off in the opposite direction. His walk is slow and
deliberate, and as his lack-lustre eyes gaze alternately
right and left upon the busy stalls, more than one
remark about “ swell attire ” reaches his ear. His
face, however, remains a perfect blank, until he meets
the eye of a gentleman going the other way, when
it becomes suffused with the smiles and beams of
gratified pleasure.
A few words of recognition pass between the two
and they join company, and pushing onward are lost to
our view. The latest arrival, as our readers have no
doubt guessed, is the hero of this story. Regardful
of all his uncle’s instructions, save that clause con-
cerning the risk he ran by using his own name in
Sydney, he has just met a casual but delightful
acquaintance, who is stopping at the same hotel that
he has put up at. But before we follow the pair let
us try and learn a lesson from, or rather philosophize
over, the human panorama before us.
One of the first things that would strike a
thoughtful observer of the habitues of Paddy’s Market
are the number of young people to be seen there,—that
is, persons under twenty-one years of age. Of course
anywhere in the Australian colonies, save, perhaps, in
some parts of Tasmania, the balance of population will
be found to be in favour of youth rather than age, but


here there are far more than one would expect to meet
at such a place and at such an hour, for it is past
eleven o’clock. . ,
Numbers of these young people are pale-laced girls
of tender age, who, earning their own livelihood at the
pio- warehouses or millinery establishments of the city,
lam-h at the discipline of home (too often far away
« U p country”), and are rapidly following that easy
path that, with ever-increasing declivity, will likely
land them ultimately amongst the unfortunates of the
pavements. The “ pals ” of these young damsels are
also there by scores. Most of these have been “ turned
out ” after one general pattern ; and, to use another
mechanic’s term, are chiefly “ wasters.” The same
disgusting, unnatural, and unhealthy manikin appear-
ance surrounds all of them. There is hardly any
sight more pitiful to behold than these youthful
bodies, that have never known the youth which Cole-
ridge describes as “the body and spirit in unity.
These little weak-eyed, weak-kneed, man-like creatures
are mostly addicted to sham meerschaums, “flash
ties,” and “ blunderbuss ” cut trousers, the bell-bottoms
of which cover nearly the whole of their high-heeled
“number nineteens.”
Why, for the sake of these unhappy chickens ot
Hers, does not fair Liberty —who is fast being de-
throned in Sydney by her sly bastard-sister License
wake up, and let some paternal edict become law
that will make it a State concern to watch o\cr these
truly “ fatherless and motherless bairns ?
; “ The childhood,” said Milton, “ shows the man, as
morning shows the day.” What will Australia s da}
be like with all this wealth of youth, that should one


day form the voting and the thinking power of the
rising Republic of the South, wasting its sweetness
upon the tobacco-and-gin-stained wilderness of vice
and idleness in all her cities? Who that knows
Sydney is not also aware of the fact that these merry,
over-dressed companions of these miserable little
“ market-toffs ” fall an easy prey before the devilish
machinations of the foul prowler and her client-
slaves of appetence ? Each girl—womanlike—vies
with her work-fellows in extravagance of dress, de-
stroying the beautiful architectural lines of “ Nature’s
divine building” with her uneducated idea of a perfect
.vestis forensis. If her legitimate exertions and the
pocket money of her “ pal ” is insufficient for her
purpose, other persons, whose business it is to do so,
come forward to show her other means of obtaining
the necessary funds, and the mischief is done.
The colony of New South Wales is badly in want
of wives and mothers, and cries out ceaselessly to the
older countries that she cannot give to every man
a wife. here are her own flesh and blood,
female forms of which she need not be ashamed, all
hurrying down the sewer of crime, like drowning
butterflies, to rot in the foul slums and gutters of the
capital.
As democracy grows used to hbr new-born powers,
perhaps the people will cease to toy with the bright
but keen-edged weapons of responsibility, and turn to
guard their boys and girls. At present, however, and
that is what concerns the object of this book, Sydney
is a gigantic bait-pond where the wealthy debauchee
can luxuriously roll in sin, and feed, shark-like and
unchecked, upon the daughters of the colony.


But to return to Claude, and the delightful acquaint-
ance he has made. Our hero, having discovered that
he must wait a few days in Sydney before starting
northwards to prosecute the object of his journey, has
become fidgety and impatient. It is so annoying that
he cannot begin his work at once ; and he is only too
o-lad to find any means of passing the intervening
time. As the two men stroll along, Claude’s com-
panion discourses eloquently to him upon the scenes
around them, and Claude, walking silent and thought-
ful at his side, feels grateful to him for doing all the
talking.
u You have no idea, my dear fellow, rattles on the
young man in the grey coat, “ you can’t have the
slightest idea of the growing tendency which the un-
limited freedom of the youth of this colony encourages
towards the doctrine of Free-love.
« We see the lower orders here,” gracefully waving
his cane, “ and, mind you, the ‘ lower orders ’ is not a
synonymous term with that of ‘ poorer classes, as in
the older countries. And which of the young people
here to-night looks forward to marriage as more or
less of a certainty, as people do in the older countries ?
Even in the parent-land the new doctrine is growing
in strength. Here, I assure you, the girls dread mar-
riage, and simply because it curtails that of
life, of following their own inclination, that passion
that is bred in their bones, and was the holiest creed
of their parents. _ .
“ Only a wealthy husband, who is not likely to be
too uxorious or too particular, will be endured in a
few years. Do we not see it already in some of the
States of America ? Steady fellows like you may call


the new doctrine simply open sin. But after all, what
is sin ? What but the breaking of certain unstable
laws, that change and give way to others, as the
nations that made them clamber painfully upwards
towards the attractive light of freedom. Divorce is
becoming every day more common, and easier to obtain.
Every day home life is more and more exposed, and
is fading away before the searching bull’s-eye of the
unsympathetic paper-reading public. The beauties of
home, that suited our mutton-headed fathers, are de-
parting ; and the price—marriage—is too much nowa-
days to give for what is often everybody’s property,
as much as that of the unfortunate and foolish pur-
chaser. But, as I said, you can see here the lower
orders of the people. If you can judge the mind from
the exterior body, you will acknowledge I am right in
my deductions. And now, if you have no objection,
we will visit another place I want you to see, where
we can study those human fowls that roost upon the
second perch from the ground. Are you agreeable ? ”
“ Oh, I’m in your hands entirely,” replies Claude.
His companion smiles grimly,—turning his head
away, for they are passing under a lamp. “ It’s only
too good of you to take the trouble of entertaining a
dull country-fellow like myself. Where do you pro-
pose taking me to next ? ”
“ Oh, it isn’t far, and I’ll take you a short cut.
I want you to see a skating-rink. You’ll see lots
of human moths there, and very pretty specimens
of lepidoptera some of them are, fluttering, or rather
rolling, round the lamp of sin. These'rinks are little
more or less than places of assignation.”
The young men have left the whirring, noisy, lanip-


lit crowds of Paddy’s Market during this conversation,
and are making their way westward to George Street.
The air is hot, and steamy with the butyric odours of
a Saturday-night crowd. Crossing the wide rattling
thoroughfare just mentioned, with its thousands of
lights,°and busy streams of thundering omnibuses and
cabs, Claude and his companion push their way across
the pavement,—crowded with purchasing humanity,—
and find themselves suddenly in a new world. It is
in this locality that one of the few nests of ancient
rookeries that still remain in Sydney exists,—a menace
breathing the foul odours of vice and sickness upon
the rest of the city. Stately warehouses are, bit by
bit, pushing these plague spots out of existence, and
in a few more years they will happily be swept away.
Here is before us an example of Dr. Johnson s saying
“ that men are seldom better employed than when
making money,”—commerce successfully waging a
war of extermination against those fortresses of the
city’s criminal population. A few gas lamps here and
there, at long intervals, make the dark dreariness of
the blank wall, and lightless broken windows of the
tumble-down houses, more complete. Black, sus-
picious-looking alleys and lanes slink off to nowhere
in particular from unexpected corners to right and
left of the midnight passer-by, as if fearful of being
noticed. .
At the end of the dark silent street, by the flickering-
light of a solitary broken lamp, Claude reads, upon
the dirty wall of a house, a notice to the effect that a
collar-maker had once lived there. That he or any
one else existed there now, and was within call, was
hardly to be imagined, so lonely did the spot appear


to be,—no lights at the windows, no sign of life, and
no sound save the lessening roar of the great, hot,
artery of traffic fast being left behind.
The two men walked quickly on, their hollow foot-
steps echoing over the broken pavements, and then
another and still darker lane is crossed, surrounded
by still more tumble-down wooden tenements. The
place is a wilderness, long deserted, surely, by man-
kind ; only peopled by ghostly cats, and half-starved
supernatural dogs, that, at the sound of footsteps,
slink off like shadows into fetid drains, or through
broken doors and fences, under cover of the blackness
beyond.
“ Where the dickens are you taking me to ? ”
presently asked Claude, —the sound of his voice making
quite a pleasant relief to the dead silence around.
“ Oh I we’re quite near to Liverpool Street now,”
replies his companion. “ It’s a dreary neighbourhood,
this; is not it ? By Jupiter, it’s warm walking too !
I’ll take my coat off.” The speaker stops for a
moment, and, divesting himself of his dust-coat,
hangs it doubled over his left arm.
“ There,” he cries, a few steps further on, pointing
with his cane, “ there are the lights of the rink.” At
this moment the two men left the shadowy lane, and
felt under their feet the surface of a well-kept street,
a pleasant change after the broken ways they had
just traversed. Above where they stand, and about
a quarter of a mile off, the blue-white radiance of
several electric lights show the location of the famous
cosmopolitan rink.
The street they are in terminates as such some
twenty feet from where they stand, and, changing to


a well-paved road, rises upwards, on a wide, serpen-
tine viaduct built upon arches, to the dim building-
clad hill before them. A low wall has been built on
either side to prevent passengers from falling off upon
the pavement below. On the right-hand side of ,the
viaduct is a large cobble-stoned yard, covered with
hundreds of boxes, crates, and empty barrels of all
kinds. It is part of the railway goods station, and is
at one point some twenty-five or thirty feet below the
road upon the arches.
The faint earth-tremors of moving trucks and
carriages, and the distant whirr of machinery, an-
nounces that there are persons not very far off. But,
save for a hansom cab that dashes by the spot, it is
almost as lonely as the slums just left.
« We’ll soon be there,” says Claude’s companion,
who, glancing up the viaduct, has caught sight of a
short, stout figure, as it passed under one of the few
lamps above, coming slowly down the footing.
“ I can hear the music, too, I declare,” he adds
presently, as they reach the highest and darkest part
of the incline overlooking the railway yard below.
“Do you know the air ? It’s Killaloo.”
Claude’s friend ceases speaking, and whistles a bar
or two of the well-known song. Just then a short
lame man is seen hobbling out of the darkness towards
them, leaning upon a stick. He passes, and it is odd
to notice how he at once becomes cured of his in-
firmities. At the same instant Claude’s companion
exclaims, “ A fire, by Jove! ” and points towards a
distant glare in the sky. Immediately afterwards he
quickly steps backward, and seizing his light overcoat
in both hands suddenly, with great dexterity flings it


over his companion’s head, so as to comjdetely muffle
any attempted cry. Claude’s head is turned in the
direction indicated by his companion, when he feels
his arms suddenly pinioned behind. At the same
instant some rough kind of drapery is dragged tightly
over his head. He gasps for breath, and with the
sudden anger of a surprised and wounded tiger dashes
himself backward on his unseen foes. His frantic
efforts are unavailing; and before his half-dazed senses
have properly taken in his terrible situation, he feels
himself raised by four strong arms upon the parapet
of the viaduct. The fearful truth flashes through his
reeling brain. His whole body breaks out into sud-
denly alternating hot and icy sweats. He vainly tries
with struggling feet and back-bound hands to save
himself. It is but for an instant. The next moment
he feels his back upon the sharp edge of the coping
stones. The hot blood surges through his brain in a
red, wild, lurid, ever-increasing rush. Then he sud-
denly turns cold. His back overhangs the wall! He
is resting upon nothing ! He is falling !


CHAPTER V.
the selvage edge of civilization.
UR next act in the drama be-
fore us begins with the foot-
lights still turned down low,
for another night scene is to
be enacted. It is the new
township of Ulysses. Some
six or seven thousand miners
are crowding into the one
long, irregular street of a new
Queensland “gold rush” town-
ship. For it is the night of the
week, —pay-day night; with
Sunday for an idle to-morrow
on which to get sober.
The new field of Ulysses—some sixty miles from
the famous copper mines of Reid s Creek is, like many
of the later Queensland gold fields which have been
within an easy distance of railway communication with
the coast, quite a different affair to the old rushes of
an earlier date, or even the modern Croydens and
Kimberleys of the far north. As such it is worth
sketching. Rapid means of transportation, cheap fares,
3


and double-leaded notices in the daily southern papers
have brought hosts of town-bred men and boys to
compete with the professional miner.
The dilference between these two classes of workers
is immense. Now the reader can take it as a gospel
truth that of the various classes of men who earn
their bread with the sweat of their brow, those who
follow the profession of the practical miner are amongst
the noblest specimens of humanity. Mind you, we do
not mean the labourers, who, by hundreds, earn their
65. to 10s. per day in the great Wyndham “ stopes ” or
upon the hot “ benches ”of Mount Morgan. Nor do
I intend you to mistake for the real article the half
digger, half speculator, who haunts the grog-shanties
at night, and spies for chances to make some “ unearned
increment ” from the whisky-wagging tongues of the
true workers on the field. The professional jumper
of claims too, who figures more often in the Warden’s
court than the 11 m drives ” and “ cross-cuts ” of the
♦
field, is another individual that no one experienced
in mining camps would long mistake for a bond fide
Queensland miner.
Watch the latter at his work. Look at him toiling
over perhaps hundreds of miles of semi-desert to the
dreary, flat waste, covered with stunted box or quinine
trees, where the white quartz glares back at the red-
hot sun across the dusty plain. Burnt by the scorching
heat all day; watching midst the dangers of desperate
starving natives, poisonous snakes, and unguardable
fever all night; thankful if he can fill and boil his
pint pot three times a day with the foul drink that
goes by the name of water in the interior, —he toils
on to the golden goal.


Once there, his active brain and stalwart arms send
the stunted forest reeling with flashing axe-strokes,
The mushroom village of blue-gum bark and branches
springs up in a purple-brown crop around the red and
yellow trenches, and “whips” and “poppet heads”
rise in due course.
Geologist, mineralogist, carpenter, blacksmith,
hunter, surgeon, and cook, the true prospecting and
working miner, who has “ followed the diggings ”
since the Canoona rush or the Palmer field excited
the mining world, is a veritable Admirable Crichton.
He. is a true, iron-bound, walking edition of practical
receipts. Open-handed when “on a patch ; ” frugal
and level-headed when a “slide” or “fault” has
taken his golden “ leader ” out of sight; quick to
take offence at an intentional insult, and as quick to
“Put your hand there, pard,” if in the wrong,—this
character may be summed up in the expressive words
used by a miner to us, when describing a brother of
the pick: “ He’d lend you a fiver if you harsked him,
and he’d fight you for a bob if he thought it b’longed
to him.”
The “ towneys,” as I have hinted, muster very strong
at Ulysses, and as a consequence the rowdy element
swamps the steady miners, such as we have just
described, right out of sight. The Warden of the new
field has only just arrived, and is toiling night and
day to arrange affairs into workable form out of the
chaos of matters before him.
He is “ underhanded,” to use a nautical expression,
as is always the case, and is powerless to act, as he
could and would act, were he not —besides being Police
Magistrate, Warden, Senior-constable Surveyor, Clerk


of Petty Sessions, etc., etc. —also general adviser to the
field upon every conceivable subject.
Let me draw you a rough outline sketch, in black
and white, of a “ pay-day Saturday night ” at Ulysses.
The long, straggling collection of dwellings, that has
not yet crystallised into a town proper, and which is
now emerging from the “ bark-humpy ” to the “ iron ”
age, begins to look more lively than ever, as evening
with its lighted windows and moving lanterns shows
that business is commencing with the influx of miners
from the surrounding claims. Troops of “ larrikins,”
who think, because they wear muddy clothes and get
drunk, they must be rough-and-ready miners, begin
to perambulate the muddy street, in a state of body
more or less bordering upon intoxication. Crowds of
picturesquely-rongh characters now collect round the
gaming-tables, shooting-tables, and other attractions,
over and around which flare great oil-lamps, minus
shade or glass. Every shot, every throw of the dice,
every action of every actor upon the busy scene, gives
rise to strings of filthy oaths,—so profane, so disgust-
ing, that to any one but a man long acclimatised to
them a feeling of extreme nausea would result.
Darker grows the evening and larger the crowd;
oaths, blasphemy, and yells that would make a Red
Indian blush with envy hurtle through the hot, close
night-air.
Wilder grows the feverish excitement, born of bad
whisky and worse beer, till, words growing tame,
blows are resorted to. A curious and interesting if
disgusting spectacle is Ulysses on a Saturday night.
All around are wretched creatures wallowing in the
much-trampled mud, like so many spirit-preserved


beings —half hog, half man. From the open door
and windows of the foul-smelling, brilliantly-lighted
u shanty ” just at hand, a Babel of filthy and excited
language roars and roars, as if an opening to “the
murky pit” were close by, and the voices of the
damned had reached our ears.
Crowds of men and boys jostle each other as they
pass amidst the flaring lights and dusky shadows of
the much-peopled ways, and near us a couple .of tipsy,
blear-eyed rowdies are doing the only useful thing
they have done this day, in attempting to destroy each
other with fist, foot, and teeth. Round them a vile
crowd, mostly composed of lanky, big-piped, beard-
less, weakly-looking, youthful, would-be miners are
exchanging bets, in language as idiotic as obscene.
Darker grows the night and later the hour ; the
majority of the crowd are either reposing in the mud
or have staggered to their tents and “ humpies, out
of reach of the robbers, male and female, who begin
to slink about, like those horrible beings who haunt
the fields of battle to prey upon the spoils of the
honoured dead. Woe betide the sinner who lies
down to sleep off his drunken fit in an Ulysses street
after sundown if he has money upon him.
The main “ street ” is now abandoned by the
gamblers, three-card-trick men, and other blacklegs
of like nature, and now wretches, who disgrace the
name of white men, and who would never have dared
to show themselves upon the older fields of the colony,
are to be seen offering miserable, frightened native
women to the loafers round the “ shanties.’
One o’clock comes, and only select parties of soakers
still make night hideous with their songs.


Outside the “ gins ” (native women), drunken and
howling, are screaming out obscene remarks to each
other and passers-by in.broken English; and scenes
take place that make the observer almost fancy him-
self viewing one of those horrible December orgies of
Ancient Rome, rather than a scene in a civilized
township of an English colony.
But let us ring up a change of scene.
In another part of the embryo township, a few
hundred yards along the main “ street,” the Queens-
land Federal Banking Company has erected a small,
curiously-constructed edifice of galvanised iron and
sheets of bark. Competition is immense amongst the
Queensland banking concerns to establish the first
branch upon a new gold-field. On a new “ rush ”
taking place, information as to the likelihood of its
turning out a “ wild cat ” (or failure) or not is obtained
as rapidly as possible. The manager at the nearest
township receives a wire from the head office; and
next morning some unhappy wight, who likely enough
has just been married, or was to have taken unto
himself a wife in a few days, is ordered off at perhaps
two hours’ notice to administer to the commercial com-
fort of the rough selvage of humanity at Devil’s Gap,
or Three Gin Gulch, five hundred miles from any-
where, and situated in a dreary desert. He starts
actually not knowing what part of the country he is
going to, till he opens his sealed instructions at the
railway station or wharf.
The remarkable little building to which we have
referred is about the size of a ticket-taker’s office at a
small theatre. Upon its front elevation, and over-
hanging it at each end, hangs a wooden-framed sheet


of linen, upon which is painted the name of the bank
whose branch it is. But we must go behind the
bank-buildings to where stands the “ most desirable
residence” upon the field. It is a travelled house
this; and has seen more than one “ rush ’ before.
With tongued and grooved sides screwed securely to
studs and plates, the house can be taken to pieces
and removed a few hundred miles by a bullock
team, and put up again, not much the worse for
wear. .
It is like rising from the lower regions to that
« ethereal beyond,” which is the appointed permanent
location, so say the poets, of all “good niggers, to
leave behind the scenes we have just described, and
saunter up to the quiet deserted end of the town, and
hear through the darkness the chinkle chankle of a
real piano. Through the windows we catch a glimpse
of a lady (the only one within, perhaps, a hundred
miles), in a cool, white dress, indulging her husband,
the bank manager, and a few select sojourners upon
the field, with the latest waltz from Melbourne.
Inside the cottage—which stands on wooden blocks,
surmounted with snake-and-ant-foiling tin plates are
seated some half-dozen men, listening to the music
and chatting by turns. All are dressed in white, with
crimson or yellow sashes round their waists, save
one,—a new “chum,” lately from Albion’s cooler
climes, whose idea of what is due to the lady of the
“ house ” makes him appear in a suit of dark tweed,
as the nearest approach to evening dress his travelling
baggage can afford him. The conversation, as the
piano ceases its rather raspy vibrations, reopens upon
a subject that had commenced to be discussed earl er


in the evening,—the treatment of the aborigines by
the settlers.
“ Yes, it must appear strange to you,” says a dark-
eyed, brown-haired man, leaning back in his cane
chair, and looking at the ceiling of unpainted canvas,
“it must appear to you rather strange that such
scenes can occur in what people are pleased to call a
Christian land. But remember, my dear Mr. Jolly,
you are a ‘ new chum,’ and don’t understand our ways
yet.” After a pause he continued : “ I was one myself
once, by Jove.”
“If you mean by a 1 new chum,’ replied the young
gentleman rather hotly, —whose appearance in dark
clothes has already attracted our attention, —“ if you
mean by that, that I’m an Englishman, I’m only too
glad to acknowledge ”
“Now don’t fall out, you two boys,” roars a big,
burly, perspiring, jolly-faced, elderly man, who is
sitting by the open window, “it’s much too hot to
quarrel. Morton’s only trying to get a rise out of you.
All new-comers here talk like you do at first. Now
as I’m a little bit older than you are, Mr. Jolly, I’ll
just give you a friendly bit of advice. Don’t take
offence, if I say you are airing your opinions in an
incautious manner. You ought to allow that we ‘ old
chums ’ know more about the way to treat the niggers
than you can. You raise,” continued the speaker,
who is the pushing proprietor-editor of the new-born
local gazette, ladling an ant out of his glass of lager-
beer, “you raise the old indictment of wholesale
slaughter of the black population by the white
Christians who have seized upon their lands. It
is the ancient story of midnight murder, treachery,


bloodshed, hypocrisy, cruelty, and immorality, which
has been told in every land where the Englishman ”
«I deny that,” interrupts Mr. Jolly.
“Well* to please you,—the, er, European has come
in contact with and dispossessed a feeble population.
The men by whom these outrages,—confound the
brute I (this* to a gecke, or climbing lizard, that has
fallen otf the ceiling on to the speaker’s pate),—the
men by whom these outrages are perpetrated are
members of that race which, with all respect for Mr.
Jolly’s favourable and patriotic opinions of his country-
men, claims to be the protector of the oppressed all
the world over ; and the tale of their atrocities is
identical with the tales which—when the scene was
laid in Bulgaria instead of Australia—roused the whole
Anglo-Saxon race to an outburst of virtuous wrath
and holy reproach. It is a story, on a smaller scale,
continued the speaker, taking a fresh cigar from a box
near him and lighting it, “ on a smaller scale, of India
over again.”
« No ! ” jerks out the dark-coated youth.
“But it is,” snaps Mr. Editor-Proprietor. “The
tragedy which the British alleged Christian enacted in
Jamaica, Burmah, Egypt, and a hundred other scenes
of massacre, and which the same snuffling Christian
will continue to enact so long as he is strong enough
to kill, and some one else is weak enough to be
killed ”
Here the speaker paused, and, taking a glass of
lager at a gulp, spat out of the window, and looked
round, cigar in mouth, at the young man who had
been the cause of his lengthy speech.
“ Well, you surprise me, Mr. Brown, ’ says the


latter, in answer to that gentleman’s stare, “and
that’s all I’ll say further. I was prepared to find
some excuses presented for such atrocities, as, for
example, hot-blood, revenge, etc., but not on the lines
yon have laid down. You will excuse me if I take
your remarks to mean that you are expressing your
constituents’ opinions, not your own, when you say
that no man would attempt to protect the helpless,
unless he had selfish motives in view, or was a
fool.”
Swinging round on her chair at the piano, the
pretty, little, fragile hostess, who is a young woman
of twenty, but who looks at least twenty-five years
old, eyes the debaters with an amused and rather
satirical face.
“ Well,” she says, interrupting the somewhat heated
conversation, making a pretty little moue , “ what’s the
good of talking about those horrid blacks ? Augh ! I
hate them. And I ought to know, for I’m a squatter’s
daughter ; and my father had to shoot more niggers
when he first took up the Whangaborra country than
any man in Queensland has.”
The young black-coated philaboriginist turns his
head, and looks with mute wonder at the fair young
advocate of human slaughter.
u What’s wanted here is a Black war like they had
in Tasmania,” continues the fair pianist. “ Wait till
you’ve been amongst our squatters awhile, and you
won’t think more of shooting a nigger than of eating
your tucker.” The speaker laughs a silvery little
laugh, and all her audience, save one, smile in acqui-
escence. “ What are the blacks ? They’re only horrid
thieves, and are worse than wild animals, and murdered


poor old Billy Smith, only a couple of weeks ago, at
Boolbunda.” # .
u Yes,” growls a stern-faced man with dark hairy
face and coal-like eyes, a mine manager on the Mount
Rose line of reef, “ and many’s the j time I said to
Billy, ‘ They’ll close in on you, my hoy, some day.’
How he used to laugh when I told him he oughter
carry a shooting-iron I ‘ They know me too well,
he’d say, ‘ and this too,’ and he’d clap his hand on his
coiled-up stockwhip on the saddle. ‘ Many’s the yard
of black hide I’ve taken off with my bit of twist here.’
But they got him at last, the black devils I Poor
Billy; he was a rough sort, but he was true as a level,
was Billy.”
u Did they send the ‘ boys ’ out ? ” drawls out a
languid youth, who has been silent so far.
« Yes, rather! ” answers the bright little hostess,
with a curious steely gleam in her grey eyes, clasping
her tiny hands together on her lap, as a child does
when excited with delight or anticipated pleasure.
“ Yes, rather ! Inspector Puttis, my cousin, you know,
was at Gilbey’s station at the time when the news
came in. And you bet he gave them a lesson they
won’t forget in a hurry.”
« Did he catch the murderers ? ” asks the unfortunate
Mr. Jolly innocently, immediately wishing, on noticing
the half-hidden sneer on all the faces present, that he
had kept quiet.
“ Catch the murderers ? ” the little lady in white
repeats, with a grin that spoils for the instant her
pretty face. “No, indeed. We don’t go hunting
round with sleepy Bobbies here, and summonses and
such rubbish.” A murmur of applause rises from


the cigar-holding lips of the auditors. “No I Cousin
Jack I guess cleared off every nigger from the face
of the earth within forty miles of the place. At
least, if he didn’t, he ought to. They’re a horrid
nuisance, and besides, it’s a long time since they’ve
given the ‘ boys ’ a chance of doing anything.”
The irrepressible new chum however is not satisfied.
“ But they’re awfully useful as servants, ain’t they ? ”
he asks.
“ Yes, if they’re trained young. You saw that girl
of mine, when you were pretending to admire my
baby this morning.” And the fair speaker smiles a
smile of great sweetness upon Mr. Jolly, as she
remembers his unfeigned praise of her child. “ Well,
she comes from a bad lot of Myall blacks near Cairns.
The police have cleared them all out now. Inspector
Young gave her to me. One of his sergeants got her
at a £ rounding up ’ about three years ago, before I
was married. She was only about six years old then,
and had got her leg broken above the knee with a
bullet. She’d have got away then, he said, but the
dogs found her in a hollow log. He saved her,”
continued the lady, in the same tone of voice that a
sportsman’s daughter in England would have employed
when speaking of one of a litter of foxhounds, “he
kept the dogs off her and saved her, because she
looked such a strong, healthy little animal. But all
this reminds me that Jack Puttis, the Inspector, you
know, said he’d call in here to-night, if he could get
so far. So I’ll just go in and see about supper.”
Rising, the active, fragile speaker trips away, leaving
the rather stolid brain of the young Englishman
slowly recovering from the shock it has received.


His preconceived notions —■“ young-man notions, if
you like —of woman as a gentler, diviner creature
than man, and worthy of the worship of the ruder sex
as the citadel of mercy and holiness of thought and
action, have received a blow that they will never quite
recover from. His thoughts flash back to a line in
the “ Civilization ” of Emerson : “ Where the position
of the white woman is injuriously affected by the
outlawry of the black woman,” and he feels sick and
disgusted.
A grave-looking young man, who has sat in silence
watching the face of the heretical new chum expounder
of the doctrine of Mercy, now leans forward and touches
his shoulder. . . .. ~
“ It won’t do, Jolly,” he says, in a half whisper,
“you really mustn’t express your ideas upon this
subject. It isn’t business-like to speak of your opinion
against that expressed by a possible customer. You 11
have to get case-hardened, like I had to. We ain tin
England now, and you’ll have to close your eyes and
ears to much out here. A new chum is especially the
object of suspicion and dislike to many of the older
colonists. ‘ He’s come out to reap the harvests we
have sown in labour and danger,’ they say ; and con-
sequently the figurative ‘new chum’ is hated. You
can ask as many questions as you like, but don t air
your opinions on such subjects as you’ve broached to-
night. You’ll find the colonists hospitable if you wink
at their pet vices and sins, but act otherwise, and,
they’re the very devil. Now I’ve told you the square
facts, and don’t you forget it.”
« Here’s Puttis ! ” cries the fat man by the window,
at this instant; and the sound of several horses


stamping, and the silvery jingling of bits, is soon after
heard at the side of the house. Directly afterwards
a small, well-made man, wearing enormous spurs
(nearly a foot in length), and habilited in the semi-
uniform of an Inspector of the Queensland Black
Police, marches into the room. He is immediately
noisily welcomed by all the men present. Mr. Jolly
is, in due course, introduced to the new-comer, of
whom he has heard all kinds of terrible tales since* his
arrival at the new township, and he cannot overcome
his repugnance to the man who, he has reason to
believe, is a paid butcher of defenceless women and
children. He feels unable to stretch forward his
hands to meet the slender white fingers extended
towards him, and, pretending not to see them, bows
stiffly and turns away. The bad impression he h,as
already created is doubled in those who notice this
action of the young man, and he is forthwith put down
for certain as “an unmannerly, proud beggar of an
Englishman.”
Inspector Puttis, as he stands talking to the men
(all a head or more taller than he is), has a face that
\\ ould immediately attract the attention of an artist or
physiognomist.
The skin of the forehead and cheeks is pallid be-
neath the bronze of an open-air life. The “ corru-
gator” muscles of the eyebrows are unusually well
developed (a sign, according to Sir Charles Bell, of
great power of thought and action combined with the
savage and wild rage of a mere animal). The brows
cover small, piercing, restless, blue-grey eyes, the lids
of which are generally half-closed. The lips are thin,
and kept tightly closed over brilliantly white teeth,*


except when talking or smiling ; when expressing the
latter emotion the lips are lifted so as to expose the
canine teeth, which are large. The nostrils are full
and slightly raised. In conversation, the Inspector’s
words come short and sharp, in brief breaths of speech;
and he has an uneasy way with him, as if always
on the watch and impatient of inactivity. You feel,
looking at him, instinctively that before yon stands
a man who is as incapable of a merciful action as he
is of running away from an enemy, a sharp, active,
well-drilled man, who bites before he growls, and has
led a life of wild exhausting excitement and danger
for some years past. His black, tight-fitting jacket
(ornamented with frogs) and buckskin riding breeches
fit him to perfection ; his leather gaiters are splashed
with mud, and a dirty straw hat —the national head-
dress of Queenslanders, and called by them a “ cabbage
tree”—lies by him on the table. Inspector Puttis
stands chatting to the men for a few minutes, and
then turns to greet the little hostess as she trips in
and pays her tribute of welcome and laudation to her
« cousin the Inspector.” Handing him two telegrams
presently, she says, —
(c They came over from Nanga just after you left.
As you said you’d be back I didn t send them after
you.”
“ Thanks, awfully, Minta. You’ll excuse me; and
er—you gentlemen. May have to start at once.
To-night. Never know. Deuce take these telegrams,
I say.”
The little man bows an apology for opening the
messages in their presence, and struts to the candle
still burning on the piano, and tears open the first


envelope. It is from the Chief-Commissioner of
Police, Brisbane, and is brief and concise :
“ Proceed Cairns and Georgetown, with troop, to relieve
Inspector Snaffle.”
u What the devil does this mean ? ” murmurs the
police-officer to himself. Then a ghost of a smile
plays over his face—a grim, half-hidden trembling of
the nostrils and opening of the eyes —as he reads the
second wire. It is signed “ Lileth Mundella.”
“ Want to see you at once. Palmer will see Commissioner
about it. Bad news from Sydney.”
The message that the Inspector holds in his hand
is from his fiancee of six months’ standing ; and he
smiles to himself as he thinks how lucky he is in
having appropriated a girl who is clever enough to
bend even the Commissioner of Police himself to her
purposes.
There are numbers of odd matches arranged every
year, and this is one of them. Neither Inspector
Puttis nor Miss Mundella, to whom we shall intro-
duce our readers presently, have ever pretended for an
instant that either of them were “ soft enough ” (as
the lady once expressed it) to be in love with the
other. The one, a dark-haired girl of the Diana type
of beauty, who could carry a room full of ordinary
people to her wishes with a flash of her magnificent
brown eyes and a word from her haughty, firm-set
mouth ; the other, a determined man, who had
climbed through sheer hard work (work that few
would care to undertake, and, thank God, still fewer
to carry out) to a good position, and from which he
meant to climb still higher.


11 We can help each other to our mutual advantage,
Mr. Puttis,” Miss Mundella had said, when the pre-
liminaries of the arrangement between them were
being discussed.
Although we shall introduce this young lady
personally to our readers shortly, it is perhaps
best to preface that ceremony by a few preliminary
remarks.
Miss Mundella, since returning to Australia, some
five years before the date of our story, after receiving
a European education at London and Paris, has resided
with her uncle, a Mr. Wilson Giles. Highly educated,
and with the reputation of being a large heiress, Miss
Mundella, at the time she left school, was a girl whose
lot in life seemed to have been cast in pleasant places.
But a change came o’er the spirit of her dream. Her
bright chateaux cVEspagne were rudely broken up by
the unforeseen ruin of her father, and his subsequent
death. This gentleman—a member of an old Jewish
family in England—was a successful squatter for some
years in Queensland. Suddenly, to the surprise of his
friends, and the indignant anger of his relations in the
old country, he married a Christian lady. A complete
rupture with his own people ensued ; and he shortly
afterwards became nominally a member of the Church
to which his wife belonged. From this period ruin
seemed to dog his steps ; and finally, whilst his
daughter was still in Europe, a series of bad seasons
placed his name upon the list of bankrupts. Over-
come with the weight of his afflictions, which were
suddenly added to by the loss of his wife, Mr. Mundella
paid the only debt left in his power to liquidate,—that
of Nature. He left two children behind him, a son


and a daughter ; to the former we have already
introduced our readers, in “ mufti,” in Paddy’s
Market.
A professional visit to the uncle’s station in
Northern Queensland throws Inspector Puttis and
Miss Mundella into each other’s company. The two
individuals both find in the other those strongly
ambitious views for the future that is their own
bosom’s god. One meeting leads to others ; and the
arrival of Billy at the station with the deceased
explorer’s letter gives Miss Mundella the opportunity
of indulging in a scheme for placing herself, by means
of her fiance , in as enviable a position as that occu-
pied by herself when she left school, as the wealthy
young heiress.
But we have left our friends waiting for supper and
the Inspector to finish his telegrams too long, and
must hurry back. The well-drilled little man offers
his arm to his fair cousin, and the pair lead the way
to the next room.
Whilst the company are seating themselves the
Inspector attracts his cousin’s attention, and whispers
hurriedly,—
“ Will you do me a favour ? ”
“ Anything I can, Jack.”
“Is it likely you’ll be stationed here for a few
months ? ”
“ Yes.”
“Well, a young friend of mine—a great chum.
Made an awful mess of it. Hurt a man down south.
Want him out of the way for a month or two. Vous
savez ? ”
“ Is that all? ” answers the little hostess with a gay


laugh. “ Send him up here. If he ain't too handsome,
so as to make Boh wild, he can stop here. As for
being out of the way, there’s plenty of that lying
around here.”
« Thanks, awfully, I’ll wire him to-morrow.”


CHAPTER VI.
TWO ESCAPES : A FALL AND A RISE.
“ Sweet Puck,
You do their work ; and they shall have good luck.”
UR fourth chapter left our
hero, like Mahommed’s
L coffin, “ twixt earth and
B heaven.” Luckily, how-
■ B ever, for our story, if not
HI for Cfaude, Providence
||i dipped her umpire’s flag,
H after merely a momentary
I hesitation, to the first-
M named of the opposing
SF attractive forces, with the
result that marvellouslv
4/
little harm happened to
the chief actor in the
tragedy.
We mentioned the empty boxes, crates, and barrels
lying in cumbersome confusion about the stony seclu-
sion of the railway yard. It was the presence of
certain of these husks from the city’s great dinner-
table that saved Claude Angland’s life.
Some good fairy, early in the afternoon previous to
the assault upon the viaduct, had whispered into the


grimy little ears of one of the numerous shock-headed
waifs of the neighbouring alleys to play at building
houses with the smaller cases in the yard.
It was a glorious idea. And the diminutive owner
of the aforesaid shock-headed and dirty oral append-
ages got the credit of it, and was unanimously elected
master-mason by his juvenile compatriots ot the gutter.
How do we know how often this same good fairy
raises us humans above our natural level, for her own
good ends, whilst we are fondly priding ourselves upon
our specially gifted brains, and natural superiority to
our fellow-men ?
But see I The ragged troupe frisks noisily to the
yard. The corners of the sorrowful little mouths
forget to turn downwards for a time, and the tear-
stained, dirty cheeks wrinkle up with mirthful lines.
Shouts of glee, and the usual noisy revelry of happy
urchindom, echoes back from the grim, dark, smoky
arches. The tiny workers gradually build up, under
the unfelt gentle influence of some wonderful directive
power, a pyramid of perilous construction, about ten
or twelve feet in height.
Little did those baby builders, under the mystic
architect, know for what purpose their labours were
invoked. The work is completed, and the little tools
of Providence, tired with their game, move and pass
out of our story, leaving their structure to fulfil its
appointed duty.
Now the would-be murderers come into view, and
commit their crime, as described in Chapter IV., as
far as their power will permit them ; and decamp
forthwith, so much the more soul-soiled than they
were before.


Instead, however, of Claude’s body coming down
upon the pavements with a fall of some thirty feet,
as poor human ingenuity had intended, our young
friend fell upon the yielding, unstable erection of
cases, barrels, and the like, and was saved from
serious injury. Save that he received a severe shock,
and remained for a time unconscious from the com-
bined effects of partial asphyxiation,—for the overcoat
still remained round his face, —and a slight blow upon
the back of the head, he was really, but for a few
bruises and cuts, little the worse for his adventure.
Only a crash, followed by the brief tattoo of
falling boxes, signalled the occurrence through the
silent, still dark air. The night-watchman upon the
premises, who alone heard the noise besides the two
would-be assassins, awoke with a start, and had time
to call down the curse of the Immortal Jove upon
“ them blank, blank larrikins ” before he again fell
into his well-earned and peaceful repose. By-and-by
the cool, early-morning harbour breezes arrive and
aid Nature to bring Claude back to the world and
consciousness. Gradually, even before he is quite
himself again, his arms, working on their own account,
have freed themselves from the loosely-tied line that
has hitherto bound them together.
He moves his head at last. The muffling overcoat
falls partly off, and his strong lungs eagerly suck in
their full supply of life-giving oxygen in a series of
sob-like gasps. Consciousness dawns upon him, and
he realizes his position and feels his bruises. It is
some time, however, before he can his limbs, he
is so stiff; but he does at last, and sits up on the edge
of a broken crate.


All is silent. It is still dark, and lie cannot at first
make out where lie is. One thing is certain, he must
wait for more light ere he can make a move comfort-
ably. Presently, with the instinct of a smoker, he
feels for his pipe and matches, and solaces his lonely
reflections by puffing peace-bringing, but unseen, clouds
of fragrant smoke from his lips, and sits waiting for
daylight to appear. A dead stillness is all around,
broken only by the sound of a far-off steamboat s
droning whistle from time to time, the rumble of a
distant vehicle, or the occasional silver chiming hour-
bells from some clock-tower close at hand. Looking
upward from where he sits, Claude can see the dark
mass of the viaduct standing out against the sky; and,
not knowing of the children’s pyramid of boxes, for it
had utterly collapsed after performing its appointed
duty, wonders with a shudder how he could possibl\
have escaped as he has done. Why should these men
have attempted to destroy him ? His uncle’s warning,
which he now remembers in conjunction with his late
experience, seems to show that some mystery attaches
to the work he has to do, and that the late exploici
had reason in telling him to travel incognito. He
thinks of how nearly, through his own carelessness, he
might have been now a shattered corpse; he pictures
his mother’s grief, and half-rising utters an exclamation
of impatience against himself out loud. As he does
so, he hears a slight noise near him, and becomes
aware that he is not alone amongst the boxes, that,
like the ruined sarcophagi of some Babylonian grave-
vard, are just visible piled around him. The soft
regular sound of snoring reaches his ears, and comes
from a corner close by. Claude listens for a few


minutes, and tries to guess what kind of animal is
the cause of those tender nasal notes. He quickly
determines that the midnight music does not proceed
rom the vibrating mucous membrane of a man, nor
is it a drunken snore. It is either that of a woman
or a child. But who is it sleeping out here to-nio-ht
Avithout roof-cover, in this wealthy city P And why
does she or it do so ? J
A mixed feeling of curiosity and compassion makes
mi determined to solve the mystery; so, lighting a
match, he painfully scrambles towards the sleeper
making as little noise as possible. His search is soon
rewarded by finding a little ragged body curled up
upon some paper-packing in a corner. It is that of a
small-limbed boy-child of about eight years, clothed
in a torn, dirty linen shirt and ragged trousers,—the
latter innocent even of the traditional single brace of
street-arabism. The little sleeper is resting face down-
wards, on his left side, and a thin little bare arm is
hugging the dark matted coat of a well-fed puppy
which nestles close to the child’s bosom. Claude gets’
ut a brief sight of all this before another match is
needed, the noise of striking which causes both the
boy and dog to awake,—the former putting up his
arm, as if instinctively to ward off a blow, even before
he quite opens his eyes.
“ Well, youngster, what are you doing here ? ” asks
Claude, oblivious of the fact that the same question
might with equal right have been put to himself.
Hon t be afraid, I sha’n’t hurt you.”
“I ham’t a’ doin’ o’ nothin’, mister,” whimpers the
child, m a hoarse dry tone. “ Them Star boys collared
me ticket, an I’ll get (sob), I’ll get dollied if fayther


cotched me back at ’ome without a thick ’un fur
’im.”
“ Well, jump up, youngster, and show me the way
out of this place, and I’ll get you another ticket,”
Claude says kindly, not knowing in the least what a
“ticket” may be, or for the matter of that “Star
boys ” either. “ I’ve lost my way here, and,” giving
the boy a coin, which that diminutive creature im-
mediately put in his mouth, as the only safe pocket
available, “ and I hope you’ll be able to sleep at home
to-morrow night.”
“ Oh, I’ll show er the way, mister,” —here the
“ arab ” made a noise like ough, much after the style of
a Red Indian’s expression of surprise. “ Guess yer'd
better not let aid Sandie cotch yer lightin’ matchers
’ere,” he continued in the same hoarse whisper, looking
slyly at Claude out of the corners of his eyes, as our
hero strikes another light.
Then taking the aforementioned shaggy-coated
puppy carefully up, and placing it in straddle-legged
wonder upon his poor thin pointed shoulder, the little
guide bobs away into the gloom, his bare feet moving
quietly over the boxes, and his dirty shirt forming a
sort of sartorial “ pillar of fire ” leading the way out
of the wilderness of the yard. Painfully and slowly
Claude scrambles after the diminutive ghostly form
in front of him, and at last finds himself once more in
Liverpool Street. The boy stands there under a gas
lamp, his pup in his arms, but edges off into the road,
as if in suspicion of Claude, as the young man hobbles
forward. “ Now, youngster, could you get me a cab,
d’you think ? ”
“ If yer’ll mind er pup,” the hoarse-voiced baby


skeleton replies, after hesitation for a minute, and then,
like a spirit, he silently and suddenly disappears.
Claude is glad to sit down on the curb, and has only
waited a few moments when the well-known regular
O
pulsation of an approaching policeman’s walk is heard
upon the viaduct. Presently the form of a splendidly-
built sub-inspector of city police, in forage-cap and
cloak, and holding a riding-whip in his hand, appears,
and comes to a halt where Claude is seated.
“ What’s up, mate ? ” asks a powerful but musical
bass voice.
Claude has had time to think what answer he will
make in case of being questioned, and has decided
that his would-be murderers had better go free for the
time being, than let a police inquiry retard his search
for his uncle’s body; so, turning his head a bit, he lets
loose the first lie he has used since a boy at school :
“ I’m waiting for a cab ; have sent a boy for it. I
got knocked down by a cab or something an hour or
two ago, maybe more, and have been sitting down in
the yard there till just now.”
“ You don’t know who ran you down ? ”
“ Haven’t the faintest notion. I’m not much hurt,
and it was my own fault.”
“ Ah I it was you then lighting matches just now
in there ? ”
“It was I. I found a boy sleeping in the yard, and
have sent him for a cab. Will he have far to go ? ”
“To the Town Hall, sir. Were there many boys
camped in the yard ? ”
“ Only saw one, —said he had been robbed by ‘ Star
boys,’ whatever they may be, and was afraid to go
home. By-the-bye, Inspector, if you’re not in a hurry,


may I ask you something about these youngsters one
sees about the streets here ? Haven’t had an opportunity
before. Am a stranger in Sydney. I think you have
more ‘ street arabs ’ here, as we used to call them in
England, than ever I remember seeing in London, or
any of our large towns at home.”
“ Well, sir, fact is, I can’t spare much time now,
but you can come round with me some night if you
like. I’m a Londoner, and can tell you that you 11
see all the old familiar scenes in Sydney of houseless
beggars, and starving children driven out into the
streets by drunken parents, and suchlike, camping
around where they can find the softest pavements.
But you’ve hit it when you notice the number ol
‘ larrikins,’ we call them. We’ve got a larger pei-
centage of youthful criminals amongst our bad classes
than at home ; and it’s a growing percentage, more s
the pity.”
“ Well,” observes Claude, “ I’ve always been in-
terested in these subjects ; and I guessed what you ve
just confirmed, namely, that parental supervision is
almost a dead-letter here, isn’t it ? ”
“ Yes,” answered the Inspector, stroking his splendid
flaxen beard, and glancing up and down the road, that
was now lightening up with approaching sunrise.
“Yes; it’s a fact youthful crime is increasing here,
faster than it used to do in past years. It is my
opinion that the Government will have to look after
the children altogether before long, just as it schools
them now. The parents wouldn’t or couldn’t see to
the schooling business, and the State had to step in
and do it. The Government will have to look after
the young people altogether pretty soon, if we are


not to have a nation of criminals growing up around
us.”
“ Well, Inspector, from a professional point of
view, you don’t object to a decent sprinkling of
criminals amongst the population, I suppose?” laughed
Claude ; but he continued gravely, u I’m very glad
to have met you, and sincerely hope to have a chat
with you again.”
The subject Angland has broached is a favourite
one of the sub-inspector’s, moreover, he is anxious
to know who Claude is. So he determines to wait
a few minutes longer.
u Thank you, sir,” he goes on, acknowledging
Claude’s compliment. “ One word more : the parents
here, if they can spare threepence a week for school-
ing their children, pack them off there to get them
out of the way, and Sunday Schools are in favour
chiefly as a means of getting a quiet afternoon. The
kids are bundled off to school; whether they go there
or not is another thing.”
“ h T ow that boy I found amongst the barrels, how
does he get a living ? Does he go to school ? ”
“ Oh, he’s a newspaper boy, likely enough,” replies
the police-officer. He told you about his ticket, didn’t
he ? The boys get a dozen papers for 9d., and on
handing over that sum to the publisher they receive
a ticket, which, when presented at another part of
the paper office, brings them the required number of
‘ Evening Hewses,’ or i Stars,’ as the case may be.
“These boys? Well, they’re a class really worth
study, sir. That is, if you’re fond of such things.
They’re a wild, untamable herd of free-lances, that’s
what they are.”


“ I suppose there's a large army of them ? ”
“ Yes. And I suppose nearly half of them are on
their own hook, and many ot them combine the
professions of loafer, thief, and larrikin with their
legitimate calling. They’re bright lads, —have to be,
.—with any amount of courage, and hard as nails.
They’re worth protecting; and they should be, by
the newspaper proprietors or the Government. But
here’s your cab, sir, I think. Any time you like,
you’ll find me at the ‘Central,’ or my whereabouts
if I’m away. My name ? Sub-Inspector Chime, at
your service, sir. Good-night.”
The cab rattles up. Claude bids adieu to his small
guide, and leaves him with more silver in his mouth
than it has ever held before. Then our hero gets
back to his hotel, and finds himself so far recovered
next day as to be able to set forth for a stroll in the
evening. It is not long before the gems Newsboy
forces itself upon his notice, and he sets to work to
study them carefully. Who that has done so has
not been amply repaid ? A new class established in
the community by the necessities of an advancing
civilization, —a class composed, for the most part, of
neglected youth, whose useful services to the needs
of the public are recompensed by starvation wages
and ill-usage. Of course there are many bad ones
amongst these newsboys, —these poor, little, ragged,
dirty-faced, barefooted \ arabs of our colonial streets,—
but on the whole they are wonderfully honest, hard-
working little souls. Amongst the best ot them are
the paid boys in the employ of some one who has
purchased the sole right of street sale of certain
thoroughfares or parts of thoroughfares,


Let the unattached newspaper-boy, who, finding
trade slack amongst the idlers at his own particular
corner, come poaching upon a preserve. In such a
case, the reception of a yellow ant which has fallen
upon a black ant camp, or the welcome of a stranger
dog in a country town by the local canines of the
place, is tepid, compared with the fever heat of com-
bined patriotism shown by the “ regular boys ” in
driving off the intruder. Throwing papers and petty
jealousy to the winds, the unwary invader is soon
hurried over the frontier.
Near the book-stall at the corner of King Street
Claude finds six or seven very small newsboys.
Amongst them is a little, bare-legged, fairy-like girl-
child in a dirty red frock, also engaged in disposing of
mental food from one of the great “ Fourth-Estate ”
mills of the city.
The girl dodges in and out amongst the crowd that
is waiting for the trams, selling her papers, quite
heedless of the boys’ angry voices, which follow her
with abuse. But as Claude comes upon the scene one
youthful protectionist has caught the diminutive object
of his wrath, and gives her several blows in the face
with his open hand. No one interferes. A newsgirl
getting a beating for cutting into the trade of the
“ regular boys is to be seen any night in Sydney,
and consequently is not worth interfering about. In
this case, however, the boy goes off howling instead
of the girl, the result of a cut from Claude’s cane.
Angland is immediately surrounded by a contingent
of youthful “ regulars,” and a little hubbub of flat-
toned voices rains upon him—
“ What er you a-hittiu of ’im fur ? ”


“ The gent’s mad cos ’is gurl hain’t met ’im !
“ Yah, you wid the stick ; ’it a man yur hown
size ! ”
Claude of course does not heed the abuse, but firmly
impresses upon the erring lad he had chastened that
if he touches the girl again he will thrash him
soundly.
*• . , ... • ** -i • i i
« Hain’t ’e got er right ter ’it ’er ? ” shrieks a cat-
fish-mouthed manikin, resting his head against an
adjacent yerandah-post, as street-curs sometimes do
when they howl. “ Hain’t ’e got er right ter ’it er ?
She’s ’is sister.”
This evidence in favour of the accused is hailed
with a cackling chorus of approval by the remainder
of the boys, amidst which Claude takes the girl aside
to question her a bit.
She informs him, in better English than the boys
employ, that she must sell two dozen u Stars and
“ Nooses ” before she can go home.
u How long will that take you to do ? ”
u Ten o’clock ; p’r’aps a bit later ; p’r aps a bit
hearlier.”
“ Have you any parents ? ”
“ Dunno, mister. Mother hired me out er to Missus
Bowen a year ago. I live at Woolloomooloo Bay.
Buy a ‘ Noose,’ sir ? ”
« And if you don’t sell all your papers, what then ? ”
« Guess I’d get a lickin’, or p’r’aps have ter sleep
in er yard.”
“ Was that your brother hit you ? ”
(( Dunno, sir. He’s got ter look after me. That s
all I know. Buy a ‘ Star,’ sir ? Mother Bowen has
three gurls as sells papers. ‘ Star, sir ? ere you hare.


Jack, he’s got ter look arter two gurls, and Johnnie,
that’s he, he looks arter another down the Royal
V
Arcade.”
“ How old are you ? ”
“ ’Bout ten, sir.”
“Do you go to school ? Can you read ? ”
“ No, sir. I hain’t swell enough. I used ter, when
huncle sended me, but the missus at the school, she
said, ‘Yer a dirty little gal, yer are,’ that what she
said. ‘ Yer a dirty little gal, and yer must get a tidy
gownd afore yer come agin.’ I hain’t been since, sir.
Buy a ‘ Noose ’ ? ”
“Of course I will,” and Claude buys all her
papers, straightway returning them to her. Then he
walks down Elizabeth Street, and seeing two grue-
some juveniles with large mouths and shock heads, who
are howling out “ Even’ Noose ! Even’ Noose ! ” he
gets them to come into a tea-shop and have a feed.
Seated at the clean, white-topped table, Claude is
glad to recognise one of the boys as his little friend
in need of the night before. The motherly dark-eyed
mistress of the tea-shop, in reply to a question put to
her, smiles kindly on the trio, and wagging her head
slightly, with the air of knowing more than she cares
to tell, says, “ They know me well enough. Don’t
you, boys ? ”
“ Er yes, missus,” from both.
“ Do they come here for their meals, then ? ” asks
Claude with surprise.
“ They’re always coming in, sir, and saying,
1 Missus, are yer got er stale bun ? ’ and sometimes
they buy a cup of cocoa on a cold night.”
“ Is that all they get to eat, d’you think ? ”


To the casual observer, the boys look as if food was
a rarity rather than a regularly recurring feature in
the day’s landscape.
« Well, sir, I sees a lot of them, and I don’t think
they get more than breakfast at ’ome and a bun, or
a stale roll during the afternoon, which they call
supper, poor things. They lie long abed of a morn-
ing, I believe, and have their breakfast at half-past
nine or ten, —they’re up so late, you know.”
The dark-eyed ministering female trots off, and
Claude watches the dirty smudged faces of his little
guests, as the rolls and sweet tea disappear. They
eat but little, however, and that very slowly.
Of the two boys only one, Claude’s friend, possesses
a hat, or rather the remnants of one. The happy
possessor of this ghastly semblance of a chapeau has
carefully removed it on coming into the shop ; and
our hero notes his well-formed head, and falls to
musing over the probable future of the owner.
Neither of the little craniums before him is that of a
weak or poor intellect, and the faces would be beau-
tiful, if the shadows of sorrow, hunger, and neglect
were but removed. The dirty, unkempt, elfin locks
are growing vigorously around a brain clearly worth
cultivating, —an active brain that will expend a vast
amount of energy in the world, for weal or for woe,
as its budding inclinations are directed. The boys
answer Claude’s questions promptly, and to the
point. They are little business-men with no time to
waste. One tells how he sells three dozen papers a
day “ fur me bruther; ” the other is working on his
own account.
rxj. cnowuixti . ,
Says the hatless youth : “I sells £ Nooses, sir, an
5


I ’ave ter give one er ter me mother, and one er ter
me sister.” He continues: “I sells more ‘Sunday
Times ’ ner ‘ Nooses.’ I gets a dozen ‘ Times ’ fur a
thick ’um and a narf, and I sells em fur three
shillin’.”
“ And if you don’t sell your papers ? ”
“ I’ll get a hidin’, that’s all.”
“ Does your father whack you ? ”
“ No, mother does the lickin’.”
“ Does your father do any work ? ”
“ Mostly no, mister. He ain’t much out of the
’ouse. He’s a wool-packer, an’ he’s mostly out of
work.”
“ How old are you and your friend there ? ”
“ I’m ten, Don’s ’bout nine.”
It is the same old story which one can get repeated
from hundreds of children in the busy Sydney streets.
Another phase of the utter neglect to which the
parents of the poorer classes consign their children,
to the danger and trouble of the State. Grim old
London cannot show, in proportion, so many unhappy
human fledgelings slaving and starving through the
dusty streets, —driven out to work for their parents’
gin money, or hired out to slave-drivers with the
same end in view.
Claude listens with a tear of sympathy in his eyes
as the boy aged ten tells how he has “ runned hisself
two year,” and mostly “ sleeps out er nights ” by the
Circular Quay. And how he would like to go to
school, but has not a coat to go in, nor a threepence
a week to spare to invest in education. Then the
children get fidgety, and the dark-eyed, kind-hearted
shop-woman, with true feminine intuitiveness, whispers


to Claude that they “ want to join their mates.” And
so off they go, each gravely saying, “ Thank ye, sir,”
and each pocketing his shilling in his capacious mouth,
hut neither showing any capability of pleasure nor of
gratification. Claude wishes them “ good-night,” and
finishes up the evening with a visit to the Circular
Quay at twelve o’clock, and there finds a solitary
policeman standing under one of the wonderful electric
lights, who shows him where to look for the newsboys
sleeping out.
“ But don’t you go a-questioning of ’em, hif you
don’t want to get mobbed by them blessed larrikins,”
was the constable’s last good-night.
Not much hunting is required. Down amongst
the cases, the barrels, the timber, and the great iron
water-pipes, Claude counts over ninety boys camping
out. He wisely follows the policeman’s advice, how-
ever, and does not disturb their slumbers, and goes
home more puzzled with Sydney than ever.


CHAPTER YII.
MESSES. WINZE AND CLINSKEEN.
“ So shines a good deed in a naughty world.”
HE firm of Messrs. Winze
and Clinskeen, Mining
and Stock Agents, of
Pitt Street, Sydney, is
known as well, if not
better, in “ outside ”
wilds as even in Syd-
ney. The establishment
is one of those remark-
able outcomes of Aus-
tralian push and enter-
prise that are to be found in
these colonies and nowhere
else in the world. The office
before us is the focussing-
| I— O
point of two great fields of
operations,—mining and stock-raising. In the ground-
glass case in the office —dedicated, as a black letter
notice on the door informs us, to Mr. Clinskeen, the
station-business partner—a subtle brain is directing
the business affairs of fifty large stations a thousand
miles away, comprising a total area of perhaps 50,000


square miles. Any hour of the day you may drop in
at the office, and you are sure to find somebody from
the “ Far North ” closeted with the keen-eyed, cour-
teous, military-looking old gentleman and his short-
hand clerk in the little glass case aforesaid. Tall,
slim, darkly-bronzed men, in well-cut clothes and
be-puggeried light-felt hats, come there and drawl
out their ideas about “fats,” stores, capital, artesian-
bores, and the like, whiffing long cigars meanwhile,
and everlastingly “nipping” from the decanter of
«three star ” upon the table. One of these bowed
out, perhaps the “ boss-drover ”of a mob (herd) of
fat cows, which has lately arrived from the north
in Sydney, enters, with his dirty, rough, cabbage-
tree hat in his hand. He has a jolly, brown-red
face, and has come to get his “accounts squared
up.” He is a bit “breezy” just now, for he has
already begun to “knock down his cheque” (spend
his money) ; but he sobers up under the keen “no
nonsense ” glance of Mr. Clinskeen in little less than
no time. He is not quite happy, to tell the truth,
about these same accounts. Thoughts will enter his
head about that beast that disappeared mysteriously
about the time he had to wait with his cattle near
Swindle’s grog-shanty, at Parakelia Creek, for five
days, whilst his black boys tracked some of his pack-
horses that had wandered away. His mind is not
quite easy either about his enormous butcher s bill j
for Mr. Clinskeen knows something about the awk-
ward mistakes that will arise sometimes with drovers,
in mixing up their own private grog account with
the “rations expenses’ list.” However he has got
down with only a loss of one and a half per cent, of


Ms “ 0. B. Fours,” and Ms business being soon dis-
patched to his satisfaction, he goes away as contented
as may be. Jew money-lenders, hydraulic engineers,
stock-inspectors, patentees ofear-marking” machines,
t come and go, and then more squatters. The flow of
business through that little glass office is never
ceasing.
On the opposite side of the clerk’s outside office is
Mr. Winze’s special apartment. “ His claim,” he calls
it, for he it is that conducts the mining part of the
affairs of the firm, and he is thoroughly professional
in speech as well as action. Born a “ Cousin Jack”
(a Cornishman) ; working for his living when nine
years old in the submarine levels of a great, rambling
tin mine on the ragged sea-front of the Old-land;
educating himself by the light of flaring tallow-dips,
whilst the moisture of the mine walls fell upon his
book ; the noisy man-engine creaking mournfully by
his side, and the sea roaring far up above his head,
he has fought his way through life ; and, by means
of Australian gold-fields and Cornish pluck, is now
one of the wealthiest and most respected of Sydney’s
citizens. He does not see so many visitors in his
little sanctuary as his business-brother Mr. Clinskeen
does, over the way ; but it is through his far-sighted-
ness and practical knowledge of mining that the firm
has amassed the capital that his partner can lend to
such advantage to their run-holding clients. Mr.
Winze is sitting, as our curtain rises, at his paper-
strewn table. He is a powerful-looking, squarely-built,
elderly gentleman, with magnificent, dark-brown eyes,
and well-formed head covered with thick iron-grey
hair. The expression of his face shows that much of


the youthful fire remains ; and although over sixty
years of age, he is really younger in many respects
than some of the town-bred, thirty-five-year-old clerks
in his own office. By the side of the mining partner
is an open iron deed-box, from which he takes several
pink-ribboned bundles of papers. He reads rapidly
through some of them, glances at others, taking notes
meanwhile ; then, glancing at a clock upon the wall
opposite, turns towards the corner of the room where
his lady type-writer is seated, and informs her, with
a kindly smile, that he will not require her presence
till three o’clock. Left to himself, he stretches him-
self, and letting his gold pince-nez fall upon his broad
chest, with a shake of his head, proceeds to fill and
light his “ thinking pipe,” as he calls it.
u Disengaged, sir ? ” at this instant says a red-
headed clerk, opening the door after first knocking
on the glass. “ Mr. Angland, sir.”
“ Oh, how d’ye do, Angland ? Come in ; right to
time to a minute. Easy to see your heart’s in the
work you’ve undertaken. Sit down over there, that
chair’s more comfortable. This other one is an old
mate of mine, let me tell you. It has a history. I
made it myself from the ‘ sets ’ that gave way in the
O’Donaghue, when what we thought was the ‘ hanging-
wall ’ caved in, and showed us the true reef again,
and a nice little fortune too on the other side of a
1 horse.’
“ Can I offer no ? You’re almost an abstainer.
So much the better. Well, I’ve thought out your
matters carefully , —and when I say that , knowing,
as you do, that your uncle was the nearest approach
to a brother I ever had, and that his wishes are


sacred to me, I think you’ll believe me.” Pointing
to the table with a paper-knife made from a piece
of silver-kaolin from Broken Hill, be continued, after
a pause, “ I’ve just been going through bis papers
again, so as to be well posted up against your coming.
Now, to drive right into the subject,—and perhaps
you’d better not interrupt me till I ‘clean up,’—to
go right ahead, I propose that you leave for the north
at once. That you go to Cairns, in company with a
tough old practical miner that I’ll introduce you to,
—a ‘ hatter ’ who knows a lot about that part of the
coast range. You’re not safe here, evidently. This
little arch-business the other night showed that; and,
almost teetotaler as you are, you may possibly be
helped, nolens nolens , to a drop too much —excuse
the joke—that will leave you not worth 1 panning out.’
It’s no use your travelling under an assumed name
now. You’ll be watched, likely, in any case ; and
I intend to hedge you round in a better and different
way. You shall be a public character to a small
extent. You shall go under the distinguished auspices
of the Royal and Imperial Ethnological and Geological
Society of Australasia.
“Plain Mr. Brown, or John James, Esq., may dis-
appear and it’s too late to look for traces of either
when missed. It’s very different, let me tell you,
with an accredited explorer of the Royal and Imperial
—excuse the rest. He is under the eyes of the public
wherever he goes ; and there is much protecting
virtue in the words ‘ Royal and Imperial,’—and this
is especially the case here, in republican Australia.
Odd, ain’t it ? Now you have trusted me because
poor old Sam, your uncle, told you to do so ; and


you mustn’t object to my old miner friend going with
you. If the poor old boy has kept something good
up there, in the mining way, for you, you wouldn’t
be able to do things properly without an old hand
to teach you the ropes and dodges. If you went by
yourself you’d be shadowed and tracked down, safe
l as a Cornishman’s set.’ How about money ? Ah I
that’s all right; but if you do want any, draw on me
to any amount.”
Claude murmured an expression of thanks.
“Not at all,” continued Mr. Winze, rising, “and
now you’ll come and take lunch with me, and after-
wards we’ll interview the scientists.
After lunch, seated in a corner of the splendidly
appointed smoking-room of the “ only club in
Sydney, Claude’s new friend and ally discloses to
him the past history of the late explorer.
“Now, all you know about your uncle, you say, is
that you thought him ‘ the grandest fellow you ever
met; ’ that you saw little of him when he visited
London in 1878, with his native boy Billy, whom you
are to find ; that his time was much taken up with
lecturing and seeing old friends ; and that the late
Dr. Angland, your father, and he did not quite hit it
altogether. Both seemed to respect each other, but
they didn’t combine well. You’ll see the same sort
of thing every day,-first-class fellows, who respect
each other’s good qualities, but haven t enough in
common in thoughts or prejudices to become friendly.
Will fence with each other in a friendly, but stilted
conversation, but won’t amalgamate any more than
sickened silver will with gold on a badly managed


battery-table. Well, the main reason of the—anti-
pathy, I suppose we must term it in this particular
case —I’ll explain. Have you a match ? Have used
all mine. Burn more matches than tobacco, I verily
believe. Your uncle and your mother were the only
children of a wealthy London merchant of the old
school,—a man whose word was as safe as a Bank
of England note ; punctilious to a fault; and who,
from what Sam used to tell me, would have died of
horror, I. verily believe, if he had lived to see the
modern way of conducting business affairs. He was
one of those straight-laced, horribly exact men of the
last generation ; one who never traded beyond his
capital, and never owed a ha’penny. Old Mr. Dyesart
would have turned his only son out of his house, I
believe, if he had found him borrowing sixpence on
an 1.0. U. or promissory note. Sam was brought
up on these lines, and inherited all the best points
of his father’s character. He was, however, of a
speculative turn. When he became a partner in his
father’s business he developed a taste for big things,
and at first rather startled the steady old clerks in
the tumble-down offices in Fenchurch Street. I
recollect his telling me how he took up the trade
in maize from America which commenced after the
last Irish famine, and did splendidly. Things went
on well, and the old gentleman and his aged clerks
felt more confidence in Sam in regard to his specula-
tions, the vastness of which often caused his father
at first to storm at his son, and afterwards to admire
him more than ever. Then bad years came, and Sam’s
Australian wheat connection drew him into various
‘ wild cat ’ N ventures in Queensland sugar plantations


and gold mines, and before long the credit of the
old-established firm was in danger. He did not tell
his father, and hoped to tide over the bad time, and
anxiously searched for an opportunity to recover
himself.
“ With all this trouble on his shoulders, he still, —
he was ever the same, —he still could think, feel, and
work for others. He was indeed, as you say, ‘ a grand
fellow.’ As one of the ‘great unpaid,’ he was ex-
ercising his official position of Justice of the Peace
for some little country town near London where he
lived, when a young girl was brought before him one
day charged with being an immoral character and
without means of support. She told a pitiful tale.
She was from Australia, she said, having left all a
year before to follow the fortunes of a young libertine,
who, as traveller for the soft goods firm by whom she
was employed, had come in contact with and ruined
her. He had been commissioned by his firm to buy
for them in the chief manufacturing towns of England,
and, having been already seduced by him in Sydney,
the girl had no alternative —or desire either, if you ask
me—but to accompany him to Europe when he told
her to do so. After a brief sojourn in London he
deserted her ; gave her the slip. Without money,
friends, or much of a character, left helpless in the
great city of a strange land, and afraid to write to her
parents, she fell into the ranks of the wretched
4 necessary evils of the pavement.’ Now instead of
passing over this girl’s story with an incredulous
smile, as most J. P.’s would have done, he communi-
cated through his agents with the girl’s parents,—no,
it was the girl’s brother, a gold miner, —and, paying


her passage, packed her off hack to Sydney again.
The girl never reached home, hat died on the voyage,
of consumption, I think Sam said, contracted hy the
fearful life she had led in London. You’ll see why I
mention this matter by-and-hy. Soon after this,
Sam saw what he thought was at last a chance of
winning hack his losses. It proved a ‘ duffer.’ This,
with other mining speculations, proved to be the straw
to break the business back of the old firm; and, happy
only in the thought that his father had been spared
the shock and disgrace of the collapse by quietly
dying beforehand, Sam Dyesart left for Australia, —
‘ To cure my wounds with the hair of the dog that bit
me,’ he used to say, for he turned gold miner, and
was pretty lucky all through. His sister, your lady-
mother, was engaged to be married to your father,
young Dr. Angland, just about the time the final
crash came. Although wooing your mother as an
heiress worth £20,000 or more, his affection —with
honour let it be remembered of him—his affection
knew no change when he found her penniless. He
must have been a very good fellow. But it appears
that he had all along warned Sam of the risk he was
running in dabbling in mining matters, and when the
crash came rather crowed over Sam I fancy. At any
rate, a tremendous row ensued. Sam forbade his
sister to marry the doctor. The doctor stuck to his
colours, however, and the marriage took place, Sam
being absent from the wedding. Then, just after you
were born, I think, having wound up his affairs, Sam
started for this country, promising his sister before
he went that he would return her dowry to her with
interest some day. A number of years afterwards,


when Sam was my mate upon the West Coast diggings
in New Zealand, a stranger arrived in the camp, and
came to our ware (house) one night and asked if Mr.
Dyesart was at hand. You didn’t hear many surnames
on the camp, I can tell you, and Sam was generally
known as ‘ Doctor,’ from the surgical knowledge he
possessed, and the fact of his being ever ready to
nurse anybody who might be sick. The visitor turned
out to be the brother of the girl Sam had tried to save.
It appears that, upon hearing of his sister’s disgrace
and death, he set to work and saved up his wages till
be could go to England. There he traced out the
girl’s destroyer ; and finding him, left him a helpless
cripple for life. The avenger was arrested, and served
a term of, I forget how many, years’ imprisonment, to
which he was sentenced by a judge who pointed out,
in the usual cold-blooded style, ‘ that the girl had her
remedy against her seducer,’ and that the law did not
recognise the righteousness of a brother’s anger against
the destroyer of his only sister. But the object of
this long yarn, which has apparently not bored you so
much as it has tired me, is that the faithful brother,
—I forget his name now, ‘ Solemn Jim ’ the boys used
to call him, —Jim met with an accident a few months
after he found Sam, and on his death-bed told your
uncle some cock-and-bull yarn of a regular bonanza
of a gold-bearing reef, situated somewhere in the
Queensland desert country. It was the belief in this
imagined ‘ second Mount Morgan,’—the outcome ot a
feverish imagination and a wish to repay your unc e
for his goodness to the sister, and nothing more, 1
verily believe,— it was this that kept Sam flying
round the country like a Cooper’s Creek ‘brumbie


(wild horse) of late years, for he did not know the
exact spot to look for his gold mine in, as Jim had
turned up his toes in the middle of the directions how
to find the reef.”
“Do you know what the directions were, Mr.
Winze ? ” asks Claude.
“ Nothing about it, save that the reef was firmly
believed in by your uncle, and he expected of late to
find it on the Great Coast Range, in Northern Queens-
land. Now I’ve told you all I know. My pump of
recollection ‘ sucks,’ as the engineers say. No more
to be had of personal reminiscences. But I’ve still
one thing to add, —had almost forgotten it, although
to my mind most important of the lot. I’ve reason to
believe that, contrary to his usual custom, your uncle
has either invested in some large speculation up north
or has loaned a considerable amount to some one. I
say contrary to his usual custom, for he did not inform
me of it. It strikes me that this is the secret of his
calling you to his grave. Now, as lam appointed sole
executor under his will, which will have to be proved
upon your return, it is part of my duties to find out
what has become of the missing money. The singular
silence upon this point maintained by him is odd ;
but I think that your friend of the Royal, who took
you to see the rink so obligingly, but who carelessly
dropped you on the way, could point out the answer
to what we want to get at.”
The two men rise to go, and soon they are crossing
Hunter Street, on their way to the rooms, or rather
room, of the Royal and Imperial E. and G. S. of A.
Claude,i so far from feeling inclined to murmur a lch
bin langeweilig ” —as an illustrious person did on


a similar occasion—at the loquacity of the old
gentleman at his side, has been intensely interested
in all he has heard. The evident affection also the-
narrator had for the memory of the best points in the
character of his “ old chum Sam” reflected Mr. Winze’s
own goodness in its expression ; and the young man
respects him accordingly, and is ready to follow his
directions. Our friends arrive at the Society’s room,
and on the way the mining agent has sketched its
history for Claude’s benefit.
This august body, like many of the institutions of
New South Wales, is unique in its way; it belongs to
a class of scientific associations whose parallel is to
be found nowhere outside the Australian colonies. To
understand the Society’s present position, one must be
aware that the most prominent trait of the practical,
pushing, nervous brains that are rolling Australia’s
“ old chariot along ” is the instinctive readiness with
which any object likely to facilitate the upward march
of the individual is seized and made use of, to be
thrown aside when it has served the purpose of the
climber.
“ Advance Australia,” yells Mr. Corn-stalk (N. S.
Wales), John Chinaman Crow-eater, Esq. (South Aus-
tralia), or hot-headed Master Banaana-boy (Queens-
land) ; but really they mean “ Advance Australian,”
which Australian is the particular ego of each individual
shouter of the national motto.
Let a thing be untried or unknown, then America
or Europe must test it. It will hardly have a chance
in Australia of a fair trial. But once an idea has
proved itself a good one, an invention has been found
labour-saving, an actor has crowded the houses of


New York or London, and the hero-worshippers of
Sydney and Melbourne become frantically enthusiastic
over the new matter, man, or thought brought to their
notice. It was through this latter kind of forcing
growth that the humbly-useful, plain Geological
Society (no Royal and Imperial then) of Sydney—
which was originally composed of real lovers of
science—suddenly burst into the green-leafed glory
of public recognition, with a real live Governor of
the Colony as patron.
Science is a tender plant in many respects, and re-
quires plenty of room in which to expand and throw
out its ever-increasing tendrils. You cannot assist it
by tying its budding branches to the regal fence with
ribbons and parchment charters. Indeed, the healthful
circulation of the life-giving chlorophyll is dependent
on freedom. Second only in harmfulness to the dank
shadows of the Church is the hot blaze of Imperial
glories on the tender shootlets. Science is impatient
of both.
About 1884 great public interest was awakened by
an attempt of the “man of blood and iron” to
annex the whole island of New Guinea. Germany’s
Chancellor for once in his life made a mistake. He
had calculated upon the surprise, supine, peace-at-any-
price restfulness of the English Colonial Secretary,
but he was frustrated by the prompt pluck of the
Premier of the Queensland Ministry, Sir Thomas
Mcllwraith. Some of the business-men subscribers
of the Society—who had joined to oblige their scientific
friends, wives, or sons —saw in the excitement caused
by the New Guinea question the tide in their affairs
that, taken at the flood, was to lead them on to


promotion in their business and social worlds. They
got elected on the executive of the Association ; worked
upon the feelings of the newspaper proprietors till
copious “ notices ” of the Society appeared in “ our
columns; ” got anybody and everybody who knew, or
pretended to know, anything of New Guinea to read
papers before the members ; and, after judiciously
waiting till the public were well advertised of the
existence of the Society, suddenly proclaimed that an
expedition would be despatched to the Dark Island,
and proceeded to obtain contributions towards the
same. Dinners and conferences follow, with the
Governor himself yawning at the end of the committee-
room table ; and then, as a finishing touch of the
picture, came the gilding of u Her Majesty’s gracious
permission ” to add the prefix Royal and Imperial to
the little Society’s scientific cognomen. The energetic
councillors soon received the rewards of their energy;
their plan to robe themselves in the reflected glories
of the English scientific societies, by building a dazzling
looking-glass association on the lowly foundation of
an already established body of thinkers, met with
perfect success. Plain Mr. Orkshineer became John
Orkshineer, Esq., F.R.G.S., and Hon. Treasurer
Royal and Imperial Ethnological and Geological
Society of Australasia, and found himself rubbing
shoulders, at conversaziones and soirdes, with a far
better crowd in which to enlarge his clientage than
he could have i dared to show himself in heretofore ;
and Mr. Lionel E. Gently don, the gay and handsome
—but, ala’s ! briefless —barrister, met sixteen solicitors’
daughters at one scientific garden-party, where he
spread his peacock’s tale of new-born glories as Hon.


Sec. of the E.I.E.G.S.A. He has never since re-
gretted his far-sighted policy in climbing up by the
scientific ladder, which he had helped to ruin on his
way up. The original and true naturalist members
of the Society are, as is generally the case, quiet men
who dislike all this tinsel and glitter, and they retire
more and more into the shade. The New Guinea
expedition goes ; the brave explorers employed find
their provisions composed of damaged and unsaleable
articles got rid of by advertising firms, whose names
appear before the public as Donators to the Expedition
Fund. Even the steam-launch, which must be their
home for many months, has long been condemned as
useless by her owners, and is obtained for the Society,
at an enormous sum per month, through the kindness
of one of the shipping-agent members of the Council.
The expedition returns, scientifically successful in
spite of all the disadvantages of jobbery and bad man-
agement, and the round of dinners, speech-making, and
festivities is begun again. Meanwhile the unhappy
explorers —several of whom are quite incapacitated by
sickness and the hardships they have undergone—wait
in vain for their wages for months, when it is discovered
that the Society is financially ruined. The business men
have sucked what they wanted out of the Association,
and now the older members come forward, and are
trying to rejuvenate the dried husk when Claude is
first introduced to their notice by Mr. Winze. We
have perhaps trespassed too long already upon the
subject of the Society, or we would indulge in a sketch
of the Executive Council, as the members thereof sit
round the little table in the shady room with the
map-covered walls. Suffice it, however, to say that


the genial old mining-agent, having long been a
member of the Society, briefly introduces Claude. He
points out that he is a scientifically-inclined young
man, who is about to visit on business some property
of his in Central Northern Queensland, and that Mr.
Angland is willing to collect information and data upon
such subjects as the Council may suggest, without
cost to the Society, in return for being accredited
as its representative. The President welcomes and
thanks Claude, and half an hour afterwards he says
good-bye to Mr. Winze, having successfully accom-
plished the first item in the programme laid out for
him by his new friend.
Claude feels light-hearted, and is intensely interested
in the work before him ; and he proceeds to make a
few purchases of such scientific instruments as he may
require in his new role of explorer,—a couple of ane-
roids, maximum and minimum thermometers, and the
like. Then he sends word from a messenger-boy office
for his little friend of the arches to be ready to start with
him next day,—for Angland has taken his little guide
of the arches under his wing entirely. Don’s parents
have readily agreed to part with him to Claude, upon
receiving a few greasy, crumpled pieces of paper issued
by a local bank ; and so altered has the child become,
in the last few days, that the old expression, “ his own
mother wouldn’t know him,” would have actually been
the case had that bedraggled, whisky-sodden lady
taken the trouble to go and look at him. The general
“ cleaning and refitting ” the youngster has undergone
by Claude’s orders have so changed him that even
our hero can hardly believe that his little henchman
is the same child that piloted him out of the railway


yard. By the advice of Mr. Inspector Chime, Don
nas been placed under “ police supervision,” namely,
at the home of a suburban constable ; and here, in a
week, by the motherly care of Mrs. Peeler, he has
developed into a bright, good-looking little fellow, with
an intense desire to become a policeman, and a large
capacity for food. His pup has improved with its
master, and now shows —the matted coat being treated
with carbolic soap—all the points of a well-bred brown
retriever. For Claude has wisely arranged that the
development of the child’s good qualities should suffer
no arrest, even for an instant, by being separated from
the only object he has as yet learned to show unselfish
kindness to.


CHAPTER VIII.
THE BLOODY SKIRT OF SETTLEMENT.
“ I had always heard the Indian (North American) spoken of as
a revengeful, bloodthirsty man. To find him a man capable of
feelings and affections, with a heart open to the wants and respon-
sive to the ties of social life, was amazing.”— From the Memoirs of
Henry R. Schoolcraft, the hero-explorer of “ Garden of the 11 est
fame.
iQR tlie purposes of
our narrative we
must turn back in
our portfolio of Aus-
tralian reminis-
cences, and present to
our readers a sketch
\ of an event that took
; place sixteen years
previous to the date
of the commence-
ment of our story.
An August even-
ing is sealing up in
long red rows of clouds another day of the year of
1873. The scene before us is the heart of the weird
“ Never, Never Land,” so called by the earliest pioneers
from the small chance they anticipated, on reaching


it, of ever being able to return to southern civilization.
Eight hundred miles in a direct line nor’-north-west
from Sydney on the sea-board, and over fifteen hundred
miles by the dreary ways a traveller must follow, the
sand-hills, clay-paws, and low sandstone prominences
of the district, now called the country of the Upper
Mulligan, was still a terra incognita to Europeans on
the aforementioned evening. It is true those ill-fated
heroes, Burke and Wills, had passed through it twelve
years before ; but, poor fellows, they were hurrying
southwards for the relief that came too late, and had
no time to take much notice of the country. Night is
coming on, with that gloamingless presumption that
is mentioned as one of the oddities of the new land
by most new chum visitors to tropic Australia, in their
epistolary offerings to friends in the old country.
The crimson clouds just above the horizon flash out
brighter than before, as the sun sinks its lower edge
behind the dim grey-blue line of dreary sand-hills.
The earth grows darker suddenly, and the bosom of
the piece of water in the foreground, is led and fringed
with graceful lignum bushes, and backed by a pic-
turesque outline of broken sandstone cliffs, becomes
lighter by contrast as all else merges into purple
shadows. Native companions (a large kind of crane)
croak hoarsely high overhead, as they follow the sun
westward, across the violet expanse of sky, to their
feeding grounds by the salt lakes ; large buzzards,
called turkeys by the Australian settlers, come out to
wrangle over grubs by the water’s side ; mosquitoes
rise in shrill-voiced, murmuring clouds to address the
night-feeding fauna of the locality, vice swarms of
persistent house-flies retired, the latter having now


festooned themselves in countless myriads upon the
zigzag branches of the Gidea scrub around ; dingoes
are slinking by, like the guilty shadows of departed
thieves, to the dark, slippery mud-pools, where the
overflow of the water-hole (a small lake left in an
intermittent river’s bed) has formed a broken, snake-
haunted swamp ; and all the life of the half-deseit
country around this part of the Parapee (now Mulligan)
river gathers to enjoy the moisture, the comparative
coolness, and the food-producing qualities of this
Australian oasis.
Westward across the dreary salt pans, were we
to follow the pelicans and native companions in their
evening flight, we should find bitter lakes, with
dazzling fringes of snowy salt, and strange and,
according to native legend, Cunmarie-haunted mound
springs. There, also, in the neighbourhood of the
rocky Gnallan-a-gea Creek and sand-locked Etabooka,
we may find the wondrous Pitchurie plant (of the
poisonous order of Solanacea). Growing here, and
nowhere else in Australia (at the time we write of),
the location of this valuable native drug, with its
lanceolate leaves and white flowers,—that fires the
warrior, soothes the sufferer, and inspires the orator,
was shrouded by the cunning protectionist inhabitants
of the wilds with the grimiest, most mysterious sur-
roundings their medicine men’ could possibly invent.
Black boiling lakes, Cerberus-like portiers , half man,
half emu, and devils of the most uncivil type were
supposed by the natives of other districts to guard
this sole source of revenue, in the shape of boome-
rangs and red ochre, of the Paree and Mudlow country.
Eastward a matter of twenty miles from the
•T.' > i


water-hole are the castellated “ spires and steeples ”
of a long range of flint-crowned sandstone hills, whose
dcbns has covered the intervening country with an
almost unbroken “ dressing ”of glaring yellow and
red brown stones, or “ gibbers.” If we were to follow
the river bed southwards we should come upon
magnificently grassed flats, now covered with the
shorthorns of various squatter-kings.
On the sandy summit of a mass of brittle, broken
sandstone, overlooking the water-hole, is the chief
camp of the aboriginal inhabitants of the district.
The father of this little hamlet—if we can honour the
collection of beehive-like, mud-coiffured gunyaks by
that name—belongs to the strong class-family, or totem ,
of the Mourkou (ignana-lizards); and, food being
plentiful, enemies scarce, and no death-avenging
troubles on hand, the little community is happy and
contented on this winter evening, as the sun goes
down. The smoke from the camp fires curls up
fearlessly from the tree-studded flat below the village,
setting the More-Porks (night-jars of Australasia)
coughing in the branches ; and the peaceful though
monotonous chants of infant-suckling mothers come
with a soft lullaby murmur upon the ear. There
is something very soothing about these native Yika-
wimma (literally, milk songs), although we have heard
them facetiously likened to the buzz of a meat-tin-
imprisoned blow-fly ; but, anyhow, their effect on a
quiet evening like this is perfectly in sympathy with
the spirit of the surroundings. Presently some
twenty male natives, naked almost as the day they
were born, collect round one of the fires, and proceed
to discuss the merits of sundry lizards, fish, and


bandicoot which have been roasted on the embers.
The menu also includes two varieties of potato-like
roots —Kylabra, a rather rare climbing plant, and
that yellow-flowered “ praty ” of the interior, 1 intina.
The women sit patiently waiting for their turn to
come, each watching her particular lord, much as a
brown-eyed collie does his master, but scarcely ever
ceasing their droning song. Now and then their
patience is rewarded by a morsel being flung to them ;
and by-and-by, at a few words from the village-
father—there is no real chief in these truly socialistic
circles —the men gather round him to hold a consulta-
tion of some importance, the “ ladies ” immediately
proceeding to do justice to what remains of the dinner.
The men now gathered round the white-haired old
native are mostly athletic-looking fellows, whose dark,
naked skins, freshly polished with the fragrant fat
—to an aboriginal’s olfactory ideas —of the ignana,
shine in the firelight like the dark oaken carvings of
saints in an Antwerp cathedral during midnight mass.
The younger men and the boys (derrere), who keep
at a respectful distance, and have eaten their meal
apart from the fully-initiated males, are far from bad-
looking as a rule. Ceaseless fun and joking, with
occasional tale-telling, is going on amongst the youths;
and presently they skip oft into the shadows of the
wurleys (huts) on the hill, where one of their number
tells the oft-repeated native yarn of the “ Crow and
the Parula Pigeon,” amidst the shrieks of laughter of
his delighted audience as they open their white-ivoned
jaws in merriment at his imitations of the car-car,
car-car, of the feathered rascal of the stoiy.
The middle-aged men have the usual distinctive


characteristics of all Australian aborigines,—the
slightly-made, calf-less leg ; the brilliantly-expressive
yet bloodshot eyes ; the short, flat, “ tip-tilted ” nose
and strongly emphasized corrugator muscles of the
forehead. They wear their hair generally in a matted
collection of wiry curls, cut so as to fall round their
heads in the modern high-art fashion ; but some,
having need of materials for fishing-net and line
making, are cultivating their locks into cone-shaped
elevations, by means of bands of grass. All of them
stalk, rather than walk, as they move about, with
long, from-the-hip strides that remind one of Harry
Furniss’ caricatures of Irving. And what is parti-
cularly noticeable is, that the hunted-thief look one
nearly always sees on the face of the average “ station
boy ” (squatter’s aboriginal servant) is absent.
“ What does the father of my mother’s sister,
Pirruup, the clever sandpiper, think of these warnings,
of these warnings ? ” chants one of the men, addressing
the grey-haired patriarch, who sits a little apart from
the rest, all being now squatting on their hams around
the fire. “ Shall Deder-re-re, of the duck-haunted
Bindiacka water-hole, tell us once more of the strangers
he saw, so that all may hear ? ”
Only two of the men have yet heard the important
news brought by their red-ochre trader on his return
home an hour before, so with the eagerness of children
they wait open-eyed for the sage’s answer. Gazing
heavenwards, where the stars are fast appearing at
their brightest, the old man sits blinking his cunning
old whiteless eyes, without apparently having heard
the question. Upon his shrivelled, old, monkey-like
features, lit by the fitful, dancing glare of the flames,


nature lias written a long history of privations, of
weary trackings and watchings, and of savage battles.
Yet there is something decidedly picturesque about
him, and even admirable; for there is a certain air of
dignity, command, and superior knowledge that makes
itself manifest in all his movements.
After a somewhat lengthy silence, broken only by
the laughter of the hoys, and the distant, musical
howling of far-off dingoes, the old man turns his head
towards a young man, wearing the Yootchoo, or “ string
of barter,” and murmurs, “ Yathamarow ” (you may
speak).
All the men present are busy plaiting hair, scraping
the thigh-bones of emus for dagger-making, and the
like ; but they cease their work as their trader, who
has the distinctive red-ochre marks upon his body that
show his profession, begins to speak.
“ Three are the moons that have broken, as the
Nerre (lake-shells) break upon the wave-beaten shore,
since I departed for the land of the Dieyerie, for the
land of the Yarrawaurka. The sun is hot. The birds
fly only in the shade. After'two days water is needed
by the man who carries a weight.” The speaker pro-
ceeds, in a round-about way, to notify to his hearers
that, partly through want of water and partly by fear,
he had not cared to follow up a certain discovery he
had made, —of approaching strangers.
“ They travelled slowly,” he continued, gesticulating,
and glancing round as his growing excitement fired
the faces of his audience with reflected interest.
“ Their heads were ornamented with the white
moongurwooroo of mourning, but worn differently to
ours. Their skin is covered with hair like the Thulka


(native rodent), and they carry the fire-sticks of the
southern people in their hands. Their women are
large as sand-hills, and bent double with the weight
of their loading,—their black hair sweeping the sand,
and their resemblance to emus in the distance being
great.”
We are bound to pause again, to explain that the
natives of the interior have often told us they mistook
the first-comers’ horses for their women, as they
carried the packs, the females of a native party on
the march always taking the part of porters. This
will explain the ochre-trader’s error.
A general conversation follows for a time, when the
red-marked native cries, —
“ Listen ! I have learned a new Wonka (song).”
Then commencing to mark time with his nodding
head, and tapping an accompaniment with two carved
boomerangs, he commences to chant the following
verse :
“ Pooramaxa, oh poor fellows,
Oro Tora Tona, cooking,
In the embers savoury morsels,
Came the strangers, Plukman iiolo
Bum, Bum.”
An impromptu chorus here came in from all the men
present of—
“ Paramana, oh poor fellows,
Bum, Bum.”
With the ready appreciation of Australian aboriginals,
all those present took in immediately the significance
of the above words, and saw in them the singer’s wish


to warn his brethren that the approaching strangers
were of the same kind as those mentioned in his song.
As however, the difficulty of true translation and the
obscureness of the meaning may puzzle our white
readers and prevent them culling the poet’s idea, we
will explain that the trader had, in these terse lines,
pictured how some poor black fellows, having obtained
some savoury morsels, were cooking the same over the
fire when the dreaded strangers surrounded and de-
stroyed them by means of smoke-emitting fire-sticks,
that made a great noise, the imitation which
formed the chorus of the song “ Bum, Bum.”
There is a cessation of the song, and a feeling o±
insecurity saddens each face, for it is only be ore
whites, and the natives of other and possibly hostile
districts, that the stolid, expressionless physiognomy,
sometimes mentioned as characteristic of the American
Indian, is seen in Australian aborigines.
The old man has taken a plug of a tobacco-like
compound from behind his ear and is chewing it,
crowing excited meanwhile. He is seeking for in-
spiration from a sort of hasheesh, formed of the dried
and powdered leaves of the Pitchurie mixed with the
ashes of the Montera plant.
The author of the didactic dialogues of Thebes, the
old world expounder of some of the theories of modem
psychology, if he could revisit the earth and wend his
way to Central Australia, would there find some of his
ideas, or rather the ghostly semblance of them, pass-
able as religious coinage amongst the old men of the
tribes. Grand old Cebes taught that man had a sort
of life of apprenticeship before he entered upon this
world’s stage, and could (if pure of heart) sometimes


take counsel in times of perplexity by looking back-
ward into bis sinless anterior existence.
. one of the virtues that tbe native drug Pitcburie
is supposed to possess when used by tbe old men is
tbe opening up of this past life, giving them tbe
power and perquisites of seers.
To return to tbe old man and tbe camp. All tbe
men watcb bim, waiting for bim to speak. Tbe boys
meanwhile, having tired of story-telling, are playing
at Benngaroo over a large fire they have started.
Ibis game is performed with boat-like toys formed
out of tbe leaf of tbe Aluja, warmed and pinched into
shape. _ Flung upwards with a sharp twirl, imparted
to it with tbe first and second fingers, concave side
downwards ov*r tbe blazing fire, the plaything mounts
with the draft, spinning rapidly, till it meets tbe
cooler air, when it descends, only to mount again,
still whirling in bawk-like circles. Shouts of applause
reward tbe player whose toy keeps longest on tbe win-.
Let tbe big fire be extinguished!” comes tbe
word of command from tbe old man, uttered in a low
voice. Then the speaker rises, and stretching out bis
towards tbe west, with tbe saliva caused by tbe
chewing process running from bis mouth upon bis
wbfie beard and tawny chest, be commences to speak,
-tbe boys’ fire has been quickly subdued, and men
women, and children watcb tbe fingure of their “ e-uide*
philosopher, and friend.” 8 ’
Slowly, at first, come tbe words ; tbe old man’s
voice growing louder and more excited towards the
end of bis speech, which is a kind of address to bis
patron-, or birth-star, in this case that of tbe Evening
or Lizard’s eye :


« Amathooroocooroo, Star of approaching night,
Kow wah, thon risest, dilchiewurruna, from the sun’s
camping-place.
« Boonkunana boolo, Thy shining head ornamented
with gypsum,
« Is slowly ascending o’er Waieri , the sand-hills,
« Aumin thieamow, Remain and tell us, Purrurie,
what see you, Ooyellala, beneath you ?
“ The red-ochre hunters, Wolkapurrie.
“The braves who have carried Murulyie, the red-
ochre, hither, Wilchrena, are fearsome ! ”
Here the men and women burst in with a chorus of
one word, dwelling on the last two syllables:—
11 Muracherpu-na, We are groping in the dark.”
The old singer continues :
“ Quiet is wathararkuna, the south wind; but gna-
pou houta,
u The noise of the waters reaches us.
“ The ko-ning-chteri, the noisy gnats,
“ Chaudachanduna huriunia, are whispering over
the spinifax (spiny grass).”
Chorus : “ Mur ackerpu-naP
“ Thou dancest as kintallo, the shrimp,
“As o’er Kuldrie, the salt-lake, thou risest.
“ Kouta , the waves, koolhamuna, dance round you,
“ Apoouna, Apoouna , bathing thy face.
“ Murieami mungarina, farewell, thou silent one !
“ Mungamarow mungara, let my soul speak ! ’
Chorus : “ Mungamarow mungara I ”
As the last vibrations of the chorus die away, the
aged vocalist suddenly turns, and, filled with the
spirit of prophecy, cries aloud in a different tone of
yoice, “ The strangers are coming,” and then proceeds


to march rapidly up and down beneath the Walke trees,
his limbs quivering with excitement, and his staring
eyeballs almost flashing with the wild madness of
intoxication.
“ I hear them crush the Yedede with their feet,” he
howls. a No more shall our women gather the food-
seed of Warrangaba .” Then stopping, and raising
his arms, he continues in a lower tone: “ High above
my head soars the hawk Kerreh-i , laughing as he
smells the slaughter.” Then mournfully, as he goes
on with his promenade : “No more shall the emu
seek the Nunyakaroo for its young ones. Both the
Yeraga and Galga will disappear from the land.
What does Tounka, the crayfish, whisper in the waters
of Palieu ? Why does Mol-la, the crab, cry Kow-wah !
come here ! Kow-wah ! come hither ? ”
The old man goes on marching and gesticulating,
as he continues his prophetic lament; and the fright-
ened boys, huddling together near the women, have
ceased to laugh, and can hardly breathe with terror.
The mothers hug their fat little oflspring closer to
their breasts, and dismay is pictured on all faces save
that of the travelled bearer of the dreadful news. He
had already owned to feeling timid, when two days
since he found himself alone in the proximity of the
dreaded white-faced devils from the south, of whose
cruelty and far-reaching lightnings he had heard
account on his travels. But he is with his friends
and brethren now, he thinks, and besides, the new-
comers will not arrive at the village yet awhile,
perhaps not at all. The white-faced ones were not
always victorious either ; he had heard of a party of
them, who had been on a slave-making expedition,


being attacked, and their prisoners rescued, at Conga-
bulla Creek, to the south-east. To-morrow the signal
fires could be lighted, and the whole tribe collected
for a grand consultation upon the subject of the
invaders. Three hundred braves could surely defy the
handful of approaching Pur die (locusts). The Pulara
(women who collect the braves and hunters together)
should start at day break. Just as the thinker’s
meditations gave birth to a more hopeful view of
things, the old prophet of evil ends his harangue from
sheer exhaustion, and sinks theatrically upon the
sandy soil, lying there motionless in a state of
coma.
Nearly every emergency produces its hero. Stepping
forward into the open space before the other natives,
bold-hearted Deder-re-re, of the red stripes, expresses
aloud his hopes and plans, and winds up with a kind
of nasal chant, that only a few of his audience-
wonderful linguists as most of them are —can under-
stand, as it is of southern origin, and in the language
of the Warangesda tribe of New South Wales. The
words have, as in most native songs, a hidden mean-
ing,—a double entendre, —and in this case they are
intended to illustrate the fact that a tribe is safest
when its members are collected, or “ rolled together,”
much after the manner of the fable of the bundle of
sticks. The song sung and explained has a visibly
cheering effect upon all. At the risk of being tire-
some, we place the words before our readers, with a
fair translation of it, as another example of Australian
aboriginal poetry: —
“ ChuuVyu Will’ynu,
Wallaa gnorcm
7


Chillce binuce aa gna ,
Kinuncea gnuurace. jeeaa
Chiceba-a gnuutata."
Chorus : “ Kirrcegirrce, kirrcegirrai Leeaa gna
TRANSLATION.
“ The porcupine has fiery spikes,
Burning like the fire-stick,
Surely some one is pinching me,
Softly, as a sister pinches her brother,
But I am safe, safe beyond danger
Grinning, grinning, grinning, are my teeth.”
1 The men now begin to discuss the matter in hand
in a low voice, the old patriarch still lying upon the
ground meanwhile ; and a strange, wild group they
form in the firelight, as they squat round in various
attitudes. The women and boys now retire to the
hut-crowned hill above the river flat. The heavenly
peacefulness of the night scene, with the star-spangled
sheet of water lying silent in its dark fringe of verdure;
the purple dome above, pierced with the golden eyes
of native deities ; and the tremulous cries of various
night-prowling birds and beasts, softened and sweetened
by distance, —all seems in curious contrast to the
anxious faces of the little community.
A woman wearing the Bilpa forehead ornament of
kangaroo teeth is sitting at the door of one of the
gunyahs on the hill, with a child in her arms. The
hut, which is exactly like all the others in the group,
—and for the matter of that all within two or three
hundred miles, —is built of sticks, which have been
stuck into the ground at the radius of a common
centre, and then bent over so as to form an egg-shaped


cage, which, is substantially thatched on top and sides
with herbage and mud. The door, on opening, faces
the least windy quarter, namely, the north. Reclining
against the portal is the satin-skinned native mother,
who, dark as night, has the beautiful eyes, teeth, and
hair of her race. She is gazing at the fat little man-
animal on her lap by the light of an anti-mosquito
fire-stick which she gracefully holds above her, and
the group would form as beautiful a model as any
artist could wish for to illustrate that affectionate
adoration for their offspring which is the pleasing
attribute of most mothers, civilized or uncivilized, all
over the world. A slenderly formed boy, of about
eight years of age, kneels by her side, amusing his
baby brother with a toy boomerang that he has that
day won as a prize, in the throwing game of Wuce
Whuuitch, with his fellows. The woman is singing
the chorus of the chant with which the villagers
have that day welcomed the returning ochre-trader,
her husband :
“ Mulka-a-a-a-wora-a-a,
Yoong-arra-a-a Oondoo-o-o
Ya Fillie-e-e-e Mulka-a-a-a
Angienie,
Kooriekirra-a-a ya-a-aya."
TRANSLATION.
“ Put colour in the bags,
Close it all round,
And make the netted bag
All the colours of the rainbow
But leaving the peaceful village for a time, let us
turn our mental night-glass towards a point four miles
down the river’s course. Here the stream, having left


the rocky, sandstone country, rushes its spasmodically
flowing waters, from time to time, between banks of
alluvial mud. A rank growth of various herbs, rushes,
and fair-sized gum-trees has arisen here from the rich
soil, whose fertile juices are more often replenished by
the river than that farther afield. It is very dark
below the branches ; but if the meagre star-light
could struggle in sufficient quantity between the
pointed leaves, we should be able to see upon the
water’s brim a strange mark in these solitudes, the
footprint of a horse’s hoof,—the first of its kind that
has ever refreshed its parched and grateful throat in
the little billybong before us.
The ochre-hunter was in error when he calculated
the speed at which the strangers were approaching his
village. He had seen only the pack-train, which was
proceeding leisurely to Palieu water-hole. The in-
vaders were squatter-explorers pushing northwards in
the van of that great red wave of European enterprise
that, set in motion by the land fever of the “ Seventies,”
burst with a cruel and unbridled rush over the native
lands lying north of the Cooper and Diamentina
rivers.
Delighted with the Mitchell-grass and salt-bush
country which the party had discovered a few days
before, four of their number were now making a flying
trip round in order to ascertain the extent of the
“good country.” Hearing from their trained native
scouts of the village on the rocky water-hole, they
have decided to disperse the dwellers therein after the
usual fashion, that still obtains in Australia when land
belonging to and inhabited by the weaker aboriginal
race is being taken up.


A consultation is being held by the four whites in
the shadow of a group of native plum-trees. The two
scouts, both armed with Snider carbines, stand close
by, and answer the questions put to them from time
to time in the strange pigeon-English taught them
by their masters. Each carries a tomahawk in the
cartridge-belt that, fastened round his dark, oily waist,
forms his only article of clothing.
“Well, it’s too dashed early to go near them
beggars yet, by least three hours, says one of the
white men at last.
“And yet,” he adds to himself, “it’s risky not to
get the job done, for if that blank, blank Englishman
got scent of what I’m really after in pushing up here,
he’d try his best to let the black devils escape. We’ll
go back,” he adds aloud, with a curse, “to the old-
man sand-hills by the clay-pan, where I sent Jackie
back with the pack-horses. It won’t do to stop here,
or the black devils, curse ’em, will drop on us, you
bet. So we’ll retire and doss down for a couple of
hours’ camp —say till one o’clock. Take us an hour
to reach the beggars ; half-past two’s the time to catch
’em sleeping.”
Turning to one of his boys, he asks,
“ How many black beggars sit down alonger camp,
Bingerie ? ”
Bingerie, who has been close to the village that our
readers have just left, and on business not altogethei
unconnected, as country newspapers would say, with
the proposed slaughter of its inhabitants, murmuis
huskily in reply, —
“ Mine bin think him plenty black fellow sit down
longer camp. Big fellow mob. Plenty little beggar,


plenty pickaninny all about gunyab.” The speaker’s
black face wrinkles up into a cruel, Satan-like grin, as
be touches tbe tomahawk in bis belt, the two actions
boding no good for tbe said pickaninnies if be gets
them in bis clutches. Then glancing with cunning,
obsequious eyes at bis master’s face, to try and catch
through tbe darkness a facial expression of approval,
be continues, “ Mine see um plenty gin, plenty little
beggar gin (little women, i.e., girls); mine catch um,
by’m-bye.”
Tbe white men laugh at this, and tbe “ boss,” fling-
ing a stick of “station-twist” to tbe black imp
before them, gives him some directions.
“Well, Bingerie, you black devil, there’s some
’baccy for you. Now, you see that fellow star,” point-
to that part of tbe heavens where tbe constellation of
Orion’s belt was looking down from tbe calm Australian
sky upon tbe group of explorers,—“ you see one, two,
three fellow star. All tbe same star longer brandy
bottle.”
“Me know,” murmurs tbe black “boy,” with a
smile of pleasant recollections crossing bis attentive
features for an instant.
“White fellow go alonger gunyabs, when three
fellow star catch ’em that fellow branch. Big fellow
boot then, eh I you black limb of Satan, you I ”
Tbe black “ boy ” —all aboriginal male servants of
Australians are called “boys,” regardless of tbe age
to which they have attained—regards tbe overhanging
branch, and, mentally gauging tbe time it will take
for tbe stars indicated to reach it on their track west-
ward bo I across tbe heavens, grunts “ Me know,” and
slinks off as noiselessly as a cat after sparrows, and


presently reappears with another attendant sprite,
both of them being mounted on wiry little horses, and
leading the steeds of the rest of the party.
“Now, Jim,” says the man who has previously
spoken to one of the others, as they ride over the
sound-deadening sand, “ we’ll have a camp for a couple
of hours, and then we’ll proceed to give these cursed
niggers something to let ’em know we’re not to be
trifled with. Curse their black hides, I’ve tried kind-
ness, and I’ve tried the other thing ; but curse me if
it ain’t less trouble to clear ’em off first thing, Iye
always found it so, instead of having to shoot em in
compartments afterwards.” He laughs a short, hard,
hac I hac! as he finishes, to which his companion
responds with, —
“My trouble’s about shooting of ’em hither way,
curse their livers ; all in the day’s work. Safe to
light up yet, capting?”
“ Not yet,” replies the “ boss“ round the sand-hill
it’ll be all right,” and soon the party emerging from
the brushwood, where a dark, spinifax-covered sand-
hill overhangs an empty water-hole, pipes are lit, and
the horses given in charge of the “boys ; ’ the whites
lying down for a spell, for they have ridden many
weary miles that day.
Let us return to the village. Whilst we have been
away, two braves have arrived at the water-hole with
a message-stick for the head man of the village from
the Eta-booka branch of the tribe. This curious means
of communication consists of a piece of wood about
five inches long—the half of a split length of a small
branch. On the flat side a number of transverse
notches have been cut with some rather blunt tool,


probably a flint-knife. The larger cuts denote the
names of men and places ; the smaller are symbols of
sentences. The message, which is soon read, is to
the effect that Eta-booka people have seen the white
strangers whose approach has alarmed the Paree-side
villagers ; and finishes by proposing a “ meeting of
the clans ” for the next day. A reply message is
determined on, manufactured, and despatched by the
trusty runners, who start homewards with rapid feet,
happy in the possession of a small piece of ochre each,
with which they intend to beautify themselves at the
“ full dress ” meeting to be held.
The thought of combination and safety on the
morrow now sends the villagers, tired with the excite-
ment of late events, to their gunyahs on the hill; and
soon slumbering, they do not see the fateful fall of
myriads of Ditchiecoom aworkoo, shooting stars, that
takes place at one o’clock. Deder-re-re is restless,
however, in his smoke-filled wurley; and, half awake,
dreams he is on one of his distant expeditions, and
that the southern night-owl is screeching to its mate,
as it flits past him on its ghostly wings. Suddenly
he wakes. He listens, with upraised head. Yes,
there is no mistaking it; the cry he heard in his dreams
comes to his ears once more. Creek-e-whie , creek-
e-whie, this time from the back of the hill. It is
answered by a somewhat similar call from the water-
hole below. A southern bird up here ; and two of
them. Trained hunter-warrior that he is, Deder-re-re
tikes in the situation in an instant. Foes are at
hai d, probably the dreaded white devils ; and are
surrounding the camp, signalling their position to
ea<h other, before the final attack, by imitating the


cries of a night-bird. Smiling to himself at the
foolish mistake of the enemy in using the note of
a bird foreign to the district, he prepares for action.
A touch and a whispered word to the wife of his
bosom, and he slinks out of the gunyah, crawling on
noiseless hands and knees to warn his fellows in the
other huts. His sharp sense of hearing, made doubly
powerful now that all his savage heart holds dear is
in peril, distinguishes the crushing of branches close
by. Only white men could be the cause of that, he
instinctively guesses. A passing dingo or emu would
brush by the branches, and a black foe would make
no noise whatever. It is too late for resistance. He
must alarm the camp openly and effectively at once,
and perhaps his loved ones may escape in the general
excitement. A bright idea, heroic as ingenious,
suddenly strikes him. If he can get the enemy down
by the river-flat to chase him, and at the same time
make noise enough to wake his brethren, perhaps the
majority of the latter will be able to reach the water-
hole, their only chance of escape, through the gap
thus formed in the circle of foes. With a fearful yell,
he therefore springs to his feet, and bounds down the
rocky side of the hill, sending a rattling avalanche of
stones all round him as he goes, and reaches the flat
below. Here the white “ boss,” having arranged his
men, is taking up his position for potting the black
fellows as they make for the water, as his long
experience in taking up u new country, and knocking
down the inhabitants thereof, has taught him they
are sure to do. The cool-headed white man heais
Deder-re-re’s yell, and can just see him as he bounds
past the smouldering fire towards him. A snap-shot


rings through the air, and the black fellow, springing
upwards, falls dead upon the red-hot embers, crushing
and fanning them into a sudden blaze, that shows
the dark, flying forms of the villagers rushing towards
the water-hole. Now ring the short, sharp carbine
shots through the still morning air ! Now whistling
swan-shot from fowling pieces buzz through the
falling leaves ! Wild shrieks, deep groans, the scream
of frightened birds, the plunge of swimmers in the
water, and all the fearful turmoil of a night surprise !
Where lately the silent brushwood hooded over its
dark image in the lake, the leaves blush ruddily with
the sudden blaze of bursting stars of flame, as the
white men fire upon the swimmers in the water-
hole.
Then comparative quiet again. The opening scene
in the act of bloodshed is almost as soon over as
begun, and then the fearful work of despatching the
wounded commences. The whites leave this job to
their black accomplices, and retire to the gunyahs on
the hill, to mount guard over those who are giving
the coup de grdce to the unfortunate wretches writhing
on the flat below. Well do they know that their
“ boys ” will miss no opportunity of painting those
already dripping tomahawks of a still deeper tint.
Brought from a far-off district, and believing it to
be perfectly legitimate for them to kill their black
brethren if belonging to another tribe, their savage
natures, moreover, trained to the awful work, they
glory in a scene like this. The rapid and sickening
thud, thud of their small axes, right and left, at last
ceases as the early blush of dawn begins to break
behind the weird hill to the eastward. The mangled


bodies of some thirty men, women, and children lie
here and there amongst the broken bushes and half-
burnt gunyahs ; and the wild dack skimming down on
to the once more placid bosom of the little lake, rise
again with frightened squeaks on seeing the ghastly
objects on its red-frdthed banks.
“Didn’t do so badly,” says the white man whom
the others address as “ boss,” as he looks down from
the rugged hill. “ Got more than half the black
devils. But I’ll bet their friends won’t come near this
water-hole, at any rate, for a few years to come. No
spearing of ‘ fats ’ here, when they come down for a
< n ip.’ ” Then turning his jolly, sensual face towards
one of the other men, as they shoulder arms and pre-
pare to return to their horses, he asks, with a laugh,
“ What did you do with the little gin you caught ? ”
“ Give her ter Nero (one of the ‘ boys ’) when we
was tired of each other. She’s begun a long ‘ doss ’
(sleep),” he continues, with a grin that puckers up
one side of his cruel face, winking at the “ boss ” at
the same time with a bloodshot eye ; “ guess she’s
tired with the fun she had. Saw her lying precious
still jess now, heac ! heac ! ”
The two other white men are gone on in advance a
little bit with the “ boys,” being glad to quit the place.
Now that the excitement is over, they begin to find
it unpleasant. They have not seen enough frontier
service with squatters yet to harden their hearts
sufficiently to joke at the scene of a holocaust, although
when the water-hole is left behind a mile or two
their fast succumbing consciences will be asleep.
“ Yarraman (horses) come this way,” suddenly cries
one of the boys, and throwing himself upon the ground


to listen adds, “ Two fellow Yarraman (two liorses)
come pretty quick.”
The white party stand altogether on the flat, listen-
ing, for a few minutes, and then the less perfect
auditory organs of the whites can distinguish the
“ property, property, property ” of approaching horse-
men. A couple of minutes more, and a rattle of
brittle stones, followed by a brief plunging in the
narrow part of the swamp close by, and two horsemen
appear upon the grassy flat, and, bending upon their
horses’ necks to avoid the branches, ride through the
shadows at a walking pace towards the men on foot.
The first of the new-comers to appear in view is a
black “ boy ” of the conventional type, save that he
is better clothed than the usual station native, and
wears a scarlet handkerchief, placed turbanwise, upon
his head.
“ I’ll be hanged if I wasn’t right about that blank
Britisher ! ” says the “ boss,” angrily, out loud, as the
second rider comes into view. “ Why couldn’t the
beggar leave this part of the work to me if he doesn’t
like to do it himself, not go poking his nose after me
wherever I go. But I don’t care a cursed shake of a
possum’s tail if the beggar ‘ props ’ or not at it.” He
openly affirms his feeling of nonchalance, but in his
heart he feels very uncomfortable, —which, seeing
that the new-comer is his partner, who is to supply the
necessary funds for stocking the new run with cattle,
and for wages, rations, and fencing wire ; and, more-
over, since an important contract between them has
just been broken by himself, his irritation is natural.
“ Curse me,” he murmurs to himself, biting his lower
lip, “if I’d waited till he’d got accustomed to what


the other fellows will do when they take up the
country round us, and he found the niggers coming
for beef on his own run, he’d soon have been the same
as all of us.” ml , ,
The white rider comes up to the group. The broad
brim of his dirty, white felt hat, turned up in front,
so as not to obscure his view, shows the stern and
severe face of a man of about forty-five. He holds a
revolver in his sword hand, is spare of form and
sinewy, and wears a thick brown beard. The bosom
of bis grey shirt flaps opens as he moves ; and the
long stirrup leathers he uses show at once that he
has learned riding elsewhere than in Australia.
« Horning, Sam,” says the u boss, as the horseman
pulls up, “ anything wrong at Bindiaka ? ”
The other men look on curiously, as if they ex-
pected a wordy warfare and were waiting lor the first
shot.
« Have not come from the camp,” answers Dyesart,
for it is our hero’s uncle that is eyeing his partner
keenly as he replies to the latter s question.
u i p a( i a look round the big flat to the eastward
after I left you yesterday. Came across a friendly
lot of natives at a place,” pointing to his “boy,”
“ Saul says they call Narrabella. Coming back cut
your tracks. Lost them on the ‘ gibbers ’ (stones)
last night. What have you been doing up here ?
No row with the natives, I hope ? Heard rifle shots
early this morning.”
“We camped here last night,’ replies the last
speaker’s partner, turning to avoid the keen eyes
fixed upon him; “ niggers attacked us, if you want
to know.”


“Yon camped here, leaving yonr horses and tucker
(food) behind,” sneers Dyesart, disgusted with the
palpable lie.
He continues after a moment, —
“ Well, I’ll find out for myself what’s been your
game. I’m afraid I can guess what has happened.”
He rides past without another word into the arena
of death, where a few crows are already at work upon
the bodies. Dyesart has seen many awful sights in
his time, and is expecting one now, but the scene
overpowers him for a minute with mingled feelings
of horror, pity, and indignation.
Speaking a few words to Saul, who is an educated
“boy” he had obtained from the good missionaries
of Billalpininna [on his way up from Adelaide,
he fastens the horses to a tree, and proceeds on
foot to examine the wounds and positions of the
corpses.
“ A night surprise,” he says to himself; “ I thought
as much. The third of the sort I have seen in two
years, and yet those smiling squatters one meets
down south swear through thick and thin these
things occur only in the imagination of the mission-
aries. What cowardly devils ! ” he adds aloud, as
he stands before the body of the pretty young mother
of Deder-re-re’s children. One dark, shapely arm
still clasps the baby form ; the other, crushed and
mangled with attempting to ward off the blows of
some weapon, rests upon the gory, horror-stricken
face. Both the woman’s skull and that of her child
have been smashed in with axe blows. Over each
body in turn the sinewy form of “ Doctor ” Dyesart
bends, as he searches for any wounded that may still


be alive for Mm to succour. But the work has been
too well done. Thirty yards away the boss’s black
boys are peering over the rocks, wondering what he
is doing. Dyesart is so different to the other white
men that have come within their ken. On the road
up, his curiosity with regard to rocks and stones, and
his perennial kindness to them and all the other
“boys,” has often much amused them. Presently
one of these “ boys ” spies out a body amongst the
rocks he has not noticed before. It is that of a young
boy, —the one that played with his baby brother, as
it lay in its mother’s arms, last night. The child’s
thigh-bone has been broken by a snider-bullet, which
has torn a frightful hole in the limb’s tender flesh.
He is alive and conscious. But with the firm nerves
that he has inherited from his hardy ancestors, he
lies motionless, feigning death, though his soul is
racked with agony and fear, and his mouth is dry and
burning with a feverish thirst. Saul is helping his
master in the search, and sees the movements of the
other “ boys,” as they proceed to despatch the victim
they have hitherto overlooked. A hurried sign to
“ Massa Sam,” and the long barrel of a “ Colt ” rests
for an instant on a steady left arm. Then the com-
bined noise of a yell and a revolver shot breaks the
silence, followed by the ping of a bullet and the whir
of rising crows. Dyesart has shown his wonderful
skill with small arms on many a gold-field, but he
never felt more satisfied with his shooting powers
than on this occasion. The bullet, hitting the black
boy’s up-lifted tomahawk, hurls it from his half-
dislocated wrist, and poor Deder-re-re’s son still
breathes. The wounded boy is attended to, and then


the question of what to do with him arises. He can
scarcely be left behind, for his friends will hardly
venture back to the water-hole for many days. In
the meantime the horrible dingoes, crows, and ants
would leave little of the original youth. Dyesart,
too, wants a “boy” (as his nephew did long after-
wards), as he must return Saul to the little mission
station before long. So, after fastening a long branch
to the child’s side and injured limb as a splint, and
fixing it securely with well-trained fingers by means
of strips torn from his saddle-cloth and Saul’s gaudy
head-gear, Dyesart makes the little black body look
like a newly “ set up ” skin in a taxidermist’s labora-
tory. Little Deder-re-re, junior, who will figure in
future in these pages as Dyesart’s “boy” Billy, is
then placed upon the saddle in front of Saul ; and
the waterbags being filled and suspended from the
horses’ necks, the two riders proceed across the dreary
sand-hills towards the junction of two wet-season
creeks, where the explorers’ camp and “ station ”
preliminaries have been established. It is late in
the evening when the two horsemen, having been
delayed by their wounded burden, reach the white
tents, where the “ boss ” and his subordinates have
previously arrived ; and after a silent meal of damper
and duck, Dyesart says a few words to his partner, as
the whites sit round the fire smoking.
“ I am returning south to-morrow,” he begins. “As
it is no use, I suppose, telling fellows like you what
I think of your cowardly last night’s work, all I’ll
say is that I feel justified in withdrawing from the
arrangement we made between us about taking up
land. When a man finds he’s made a contract with


another fellow who doesn’t carry out his part of the
arrangements, he’s right in getting out of it.”
«I don’t want to shirk my part of the agreements,”
growls the “boss.”
« Part of the contract,” calmly continues Dyesart,
« between us was that all collisions with the natives
were to be avoided if possible, —I quote correctly,
don’t I ? ”
“ Curse me if I know or care,” comes the muttered
reply.
“ And that no ‘ dispersing/ ‘ rounding up/ or em-
ployment of the Native Mounted Police was to be
allowed on any new country we should take up. You
have broken this part of the contract several times,
I believe, but this time once too often. I return south
immediately, and if you try to hold me to my agree-
ments with you,—but no, I don’t think you’ll be such a
fool as that. You fellows have made me more ortho-
dox than I was, at any rate,” he says, rising ; “ I never
believed really in a material hell till to-day, but now
I’m sure there must be one for such cowardly devils
as you are.”
Next day Dyesart leaves, with his “ boys” and
horses, without bidding farewell to the others of the
party, who, though they wouldn’t confess it for the
world, are sorry to lose him with his jolly songs and
genial temperament.
And this was how Dyesart obtained his faith-
ful henchman Billy. He had the little savage edu-
cated with white children in New Zealand, where the
natives have equal rights with the Europeans, and he
flourished into a bright, trustworthy young scholar,
8


like one of those that any of the half-dozen struggling
mission stations of Australia can produce, in refutation
of the popular Australian saying that the aborigines
“ are mere animals, and should be treated as such.”
Billy accompanies his preserver on all his later
wanderings through the Australian wilds ; and lastly,
after laying the remains of his beloved master beneath
the soil, he starts off across the desert with the
treasured message, which when delivered in safety to
the nearest white man, he sinks unconscious and ex-
hausted upon the ground. Billy thus becomes one of
the main instruments of Providence whereby our hero
is set upon his journey and these pages written.
We close this chapter with a saying of the late
explorer’s that expresses his views on a somewhat
mooted point: “ The true definition of civilization, it
seems to me, is a state of social unselfishness, com-
bined with useful learning. Knowledge and works
that are antagonistic to this state of society, I do not
believe to be properly designated as civilized.”


CHAPTER IX.
AND MELODY.
« On him attends the blue-eyed martial maid.”
—Homer’s Odyssey.
N board the swift coastal
steamer Eidermere, as she
cuts through the tepid waters
of the Molle passage with her
/MA knife-like stem, on her way to
~UT the northern Queensland ports.
The coral-reef-sheltered expanse of
waters is quite oily in appearance,
so perfectly calm is its mother-of-pearl
surface, which, crimson, blue, and yellow with even-
ing tints, reflects a perfect topsy-turvy picture of the
purple, pine-covered, pointed islets and grand, shadowy
hills of the mainland, that make this spot the most
charming point upon the Australian coast.
There is really no excuse for even the most suscep-
tible sufferer from mod de mer on board to remain
below. Consequently the whole “ contingent ”of pas-
sengers, saloon and steerage, are lolling about on deck
in various easy attitudes, enjoying the ever-changing
beauties of the glorious sunset picture before them, and
revelling in the comparative coolness of the hour.


On the raised “ first-class ” end of the vessel the
usual specimens of humanity one always sees on
board a passenger-steamer, in whatever part of the
world yon travel, are present. The over-dressed,
noisy bagmen of wine and spirit houses are there ;
the quiet, canny representative of a pushing “ Glascy ”
soft-goods manufacturer ; two or three Jewish mine-
owners ; a sprinkling of Scotch storekeepers ; an
Irish doctor ; a German inn-keeper ; and a select
circle of long-limbed members of those upper circles
who belong to the genus termed in Australian par-
lance “ silver-tailed,” in distinction to the “ copper-
tailed ” democratic classes.
Here a thin-faced clergyman, on the way to his
missionary labours amongst the Papuans, stands by
his fresh, young Victorian wife, pointing out to her
the various “ outward and visible signs ” that they
have at last entered the tropics, as the trembling screw
hurries them past lazy-looking turtles, long rows of
algae seed, and occasional broken branches of mangrove
and pandanus.
Over there the courteous captain of the ship, dressed
in spotless linen suit, is pointing out to a lady pas-
senger “the identical spot on that particular island,
my dear madam, on the dark red rocks that lift them-
selves out of the deep water, where Captain Cook
landed in 1770.” The gallant skipper, who is a well-
known antiquary and geologist, proceeds to promise
he will some day show his fair friend —who, by-the-
bye, does not appear very interested —the cairn erected
by the same wonderful navigator near Cooktown, and
lately discovered by himself.
Down near the forecabin a few greasy-looking


stewards are dawdling over the job of emptying over-
board sundry trayfuls of debris from the saloon tea
table, enjoying meanwhile the fresh air, ere the “ boss
shall' call them back into the stuffy atmosphere of
their principal sphere of labours.
a Golly I ” says a small boy to one of these marine
waiters, as the former stands on tiptoe to look over
the bulwarks, “ Golly ! but them kiddies round the
news office, guess they’d give alf of theii papers fur
that lot o’ grub you chucks away, mister.”
Without waiting to see if his remark is understood
or even noticed, Don —for it is Claude s little fiiend
dives down, and, seizing a fat brown puppy that is
lolling against his legs, lifts it up to see “ them gooses ”
that are skimming past the ship. Above the group,
on the saloon deck, is Claude, leaning against one of
the boats, and trying to listen to a dark, elderly man,
dressed in a “ slop ’’-made grey suit and soft felt hat,
as he spins him a yarn of the Palmer diggings, com-
mencing,—
’Spose you’ve heard of poor Jack Straw, who was
killed by the natives under his waggon ? ” etc.
Claude, to tell the truth, is neither interested in the
tale nor the scenery; and when the former is finished,
and the historian has been dragged off ,to take a hand
at “cut-throat” euchre, our young friend relapses
into a reverie.
11l LVy x v J vaxvi
Eager as he was to follow out the instructions of
his dead uncle until the steamer reached Brisbane, he
cannot disguise from himself the fact that since that
day his enthusiasm has greatly cooled. Something
happened during the few hours he spent on shore in
the capital of Queensland which has disturbed his set


purposes considerably. Struggle as he may, he feels
a longing he can hardly understand to return to
Morecombe Bay,—a mysterious tugging at his heart
strings that grows stronger as the steamer rattles its
way northwards. Any lady readers who may honour
these pages with their perusal will already have
guessed correctly that young Angland has been at-
tacked with the same sort of complaint that caused
sorrowful young Werther to make such an egregious
stupid of himself in Goethe’s marvellous histoirette.
A pretty girl has flattered his vanity by apparently
particularly admiring him, and, man-like, he cannot
help feeling that she shows a sense above all other
girls in so doing. , The birth of love in man is generally
after this fashion. True admiration, whether signalled
by word or smile, is the expression of adoration by an
inferior to a superior being. And as man’s hereditary
instincts teach him unconsciously to wish to succour
and protect the weaker of his immediate species,—for
it is probably owing greatly to this desire that the
human race has worried its way along to the front
seat in creation, —the usual predilection strong men
(physically or otherwise) have for mating with weak
women, and vice versd , is easily explained.
So Claude develops at first a simple desire to shield
this forlorn maiden. He feels somehow that she must
be forlorn, although he does not, —and he feels ashamed
to own it, even to himself, —he does not even know her
name. She may be engaged to marry a man who will
not appreciate her. What a sickening feeling comes
over him at the thought. What a pity the days of
the duello are over, and all that kind of thing. Surely
she could never have looked into anybody’s soul before,


as she did into his, with those deep bine orbs,—those
eves that have floated before him day and night since
his little Brisbane adventure ; her little dimpled lace,
flushed with excitement and pretty pursed-lipped anger,
as he first saw it; or that angel look of mute entreaty
as those glorious eyes shot burning arrows into his
brain as he turned to her assistance, that would have
spurred him to any rashness, much less knocking
down a clumsy lout of a drayman. Yes, permanently
nailed upon the wall of his mind’s photographic
studio is the sunlit picture of the neatly dressed
petite figure, with the halo of golden hair, that held
out a [tiny, faultlessly-gloved hand to him as she said
good-bye, and, thanking him for his service, left
him half-stupefied with a last glance of those glorious
This is Claude’s first affair, and one must not be too
hard on him. Some men take love easily, as others
do the measles. Some young fellows, on the contrary,
have their best natures all over one grand eruption,
which leaves their soul’s cuticle marked for ever, lor
good or bad, as the circumstances of the case direct.
But really the spooney season is a more important time
in a young man’s life than it is generally considered
For there is little doubt that men (who have telt
the pain ”) look at womankind during the remainder
of their lives through spectacles that are coloured
rosy or grey, according to their happy or miserable
experiences of “ the sex,” as represented by the par-
ticular cause of their premiere grande passion.
instead of stating our own opinions upon a matter
that every healthy subject diagnoses for himself or
herself in his or her own way, we had better proceed


to state at once that Claude had been u hard hit,” and
that the “ pleasing punishment ” was given under the
following circumstances.
On the afternoon of the S.S. Eidermere’s arrival at
Brisbane, where she had to stay a few hours, Claude
landed, and proceeded townwards from the region of
great, busy wharves, behind which noisy steam-cranes
were rattling and puffing at the cargoes of sundry
vessels. At the gates of the steam-ship’s company’s
yard the usual crowd, that always congregates in
similar places to prey upon the freshly-arrived and
perhaps sea-sick passengers, was there in force.
Porters, cabmen, van-drivers, runners, and nondescript
loafers of various sorts jostled each other and fought
for the luggage of the travellers. Pushing his way
through these, he soon found himself in the com-
paratively quiet neighbourhood of the public gardens,
and was just about to enter them when he heard a
great “ how d’ye do ” close at hand. This was occa-
sioned by the dusty scuffling of two dogs, one of which
was shrieking as only a small dog can shriek when in
fear of immediate disintegration at the hands, or rather
teeth, of a larger canine animal. Above all rose hoarse
yells of delight from a circle of the city’s gamin who
were enjoying the scene. Claude would have pro-
ceeded on his way, after turning his head to ascertain
the cause of the uproar, but for a sight that attracted
his sudden attention.
The small dog evidently belonged to a young lady,
who, alone and unprotected amongst the crowd of
roughs, was courageously but injudiciously trying to
save her tiny four-footed dependent by beating the big
dog with her parasol. Hurrying up to her assistance,


Angland saw a burly, red-faced man, apparently
the owner of the large animal, step forward and
roughly snatch the fair one’s weapon of attack from
her vigorous little hands, giving vent to his indignant
feelings at the same time by expressing his intentions
of “ seem’ fair play,” and “ lettin’ no blessed gal hurt
’is dawg.” Claude just saw the little figure with
clasped hands, and heard the faltering appeal for
help to the brutal bystanders, as he burst through
the crowd. To him, accustomed to wild-boar hunting
in the dark Hunua ranges near his home, the job of
making a fierce pig-dog “take off” from its quarry
had often been an every-day occurrence when training
Ms canine hunters. It was comparatively an easy
work to choke the big, over-fed cur, and make it let go
its hold of the little ball of palpitating floss beneath
it in the dust. To give the large dog a sounding kick
that lifted it half-a-dozen yards away, whence it slunk
off homewards, was the next act; and the whole thing
was done ere the disappearing mongrel’s master could
recover from his open-mouthed surprise. Claude was
stooping to pick up the young lady’s dishevelled pet,
when he saw the red-faced man “ coming for him,”
and was just in time to receive that gentleman’s most
prominent features upon his own large and rather
bony left fist. Angland knew that in a row with
those modern mohocks, Australian larrikins, you must
“ Mt to kill,” as Dick, his old home chum and “ tutor
in pugilism,” used to call it. So, following his defen-
sive blow with one of attack, he instantly brought
his right fist forward, so as to knock loudly on that
thinner portion of his adversary’s skull which is situ-
ated just above the approximation of the jaw and ear,


dropping him as neatly as the proverbial bullock.
The crowd of roughs around, who would have half-
killed and afterwards robbed our hero if he had been
worsted in the encounter, drew back on seeing the big
man fall, and respectfully made way for Claude, as,
holding the little dog in his arms, he escorted the lady
to whom he had been thus curiously introduced into
the gardens, where she sank trembling on one of the
seats.
“ Oh, how good of you ! How brave of you ! I can’t
thank you enough ! Oh, I didn’t know what to do I
Poor Fluffy, you’re? not hurt much, my darling, are
you ? ” (this to the dog). “ You know I’d just landed
from the ferry-boat, and I wanted to go to the post-
office ; and I’m always afraid of those horrible men
and their nasty dogs .when I come over. Poor little
doggie,” as the worsted ball of a creature continues to
wail softly. “ How can I thank you! ” And all the
while the sweet little smiles, that were impartially
divided between the dog and the man, were working
a state of- havoc in Claude’s heart, the completeness
of which even the larrikins could hardly have imitated
upon the young man’s body.
If the young lady had been plain, or even a little
less enchanting, Claude would probably have found out
a good deal about her in no time. But the bright
little maiden, with the golden hair and dark, melting
eyes, bewildered him with suppressed emotion, and
when she prayed that he wouldn’t think her ungrate-
ful if she said he mustn’t come with her further than
the post-office, and then when they arrived there
tripped off, after giving his hand a timorous little
pressure with her tiny fingers, he felt as if he had just


learned what heaven was and had lost all chance of
it for ever.
He was inclined to rush madly after her and ask
sundry questions, hut by the time his thoughts had
arranged themselves for action, his goddess had dis-
appeared, and a white-shako’d policeman was watch-
ing him suspiciously with gin-and-watery eyes, as a
possible slightly inebriated stranger whom he could
drag to durance vile.
So Claude walked vaguely about the town (noticing
nothing of it), vainly hoping all the while to see her
once more, and, barely catching his boat, became surly
for the rest of the evening.
u Turning in ” early, he dreamed a lot of kaleido-
scopic nonsense about fighting red-faced men with
small-gloved hands, who changed into laughing-eyed
girls and scraggy dogs by turns, and finally burst
into pieces, looking like minute larrikins, with a noise
resembling the rattling of the rudder-chains, whose
jangle overhead awoke him every morning.
And this was how it came about that our young
friend wasted his time and opportunities of learning
about the wonderful land he was approaching from
his fellow-passengers, and remained for a few days
in an almost perpetual state of reverie, consisting of
alternate pleasing remembrances and self-objurgations
at not having ascertained “ her ” name. His “ maiden
meditations,” however, daily became fewer and farther
between, and the particular one that cost him the
loss of his mate’s yarn, and most of the lovely scenery
that lies between Whitsunday Island and the mainland,
was abruptly brought to a close by the Irish doctor
aforesaid, who, having been a quondam associate of


Claude in New Zealand, came to re-open a subject of
conversation between them that had interested our
hero considerably before the Brisbane catastrophe.
“ Well, me boy, is it brooding over the mimery of
the dusky daughters of fair Ohinemuri ye’ve left far
behind you in far Zealandia, you are, or has some
Australian rose
u Put your ring on her finger
And hers through your nose v c i
And the gay, dapper little Dublin licentiate winds up
his bit of good-natured banter with a piece of im-
promptu verse, as he seats himself by Claude’s
side.
Why is it that Irish doctors are, as a class, the most
fascinating of men ? Is it because in addition to their
attractive mother wit and natural kindness of heart,
their glorious profession makes them also better
judges of mankind than the ordinary outside barbarian,
by teaching them the “ why ” of human sayings and
doings, where every-day folk only observe the “ how ” ?
We don’t know. But at any rate, Dr. Junelle, as a
representative of the class, was just the right man
in the right place to charm Claude out of his moody
thoughts.
Noticing immediately, with quick medical eyQ, from
the slight flush of confusion that rises on Claude’s
face, that his carelessly thrown conversational fly has
hooked the real cause of the young man’s thoughts,
he proceeds to cover his mistake by plunging at once
into the theme that he knows will interest his friend.
Dr. Junelle has travelled through a great deal of the
little-known and less-populated districts of Australia


called generally the “outside” country. Whilst
moving amongst the frontier settlers ot these parts,
as the medical referee of one of the great assurance
associations, he had ample opportunity for studying the
effect of some of the wildest forms of bush-life upon
the human mind and body, and has made an especial
study of hereditary characters developed by the off-
spring of Australian backwoodsmen.
“ I’ye got a bit of news for you, my dear fellow,”
he continues ; “in troth, that’s the reason 1 m afthei
bothering you this minute. Did you happen to notice
that tall young fellow who joined us at Mack ay ? Sure
it’s himself that's standing there with his swately
embroidered forage-cap stuck on the north-east end of
his face, wid a military air an' no mistake. You did,
eh ? Well, and he’s an officer in the Corps I was
telling you about. I’ll introduce you by-and-by, if
it’s to your liking. He’ll be glad to give my Royal
Geologist here any information he can, but don’t you
go indulging in any of the caustic remarks about his
profession that you did to me when I told you some of
my experiences of the work of the Black Police. No,
cushna machree , remember the swate little Irish
melody, ‘ Tha ma machullcts na foscal me ,’ which,
being translated literally, means nothing at all but
‘ I’m ashlape and moinde ye don’t thread on me tail.
For it’s myself that knows what power and influence
these same gentlemen have in the north, and our
friend over there would pay any grudge he had against
you on your humble servant, that’s me. Now it s
live and let live, say I, although I am a doctor, and
I’m after making a fortune as soon as ever I can, me
boy, and then, hey I for the bosky dells of scrumptuous


New Zealand, and divil a Lit I’ll pine any longer in
this confounded tropical climate.”
“ Well, doctor,” answered Claude, laughing, “ I’ll be
just real glad, as our American friends say, to have
a chat with the hero of a hundred fights over there,
and I’ll promise I won’t offend him. I don’t expect
all these inspectors are the savage, Nero-like demons
you and Williams make out. He looks quiet enough,
in all conscience. By-the-Lye, do you really mean to
settle down in our tight little island of the south
some day or other ? ”
" You can lay your last dime on that, me boy, an’
sure I won’t be long before I’m there, if the spalpeens
don’t spoil me honest fields of labour for a year or
two by going in for those cursed Saxon innovations
that no medical man with an honest pride in the
rights of his profession likes to see about him,—drain-
age and temperance. But, nonsense aside, just to
show you that ‘ it’s the truth I’m telling you ’ when I
say the officers of the Black Police,—or Native Mounted
Police, as the Corps is officially termed, —that these
fellows hold a good deal of social power up north, I’ll
spin you a yarn if you’ll promise you’ll not go off to
sleep. It’s all about a quandary a friend of mine—a
Dublin man—was put in, and how he had to knock
under to the powerfully persuasive police of his district.
“At a mining township not far from that ‘rocky
road to Dublin ’ you will have to follow, I expect, on
your way up country, there used to be a lot of natives
employed about the houses of the miners. There were
‘ batteries,’ or something of the kind, in the place that
employed a lot of men, and some twenty natives used
to come into town every morning and work as hewers


of wood and drawers of water for the miners’ wives.
These niggers were as quiet and well-behaved as any
in the colony, barring one I’ve got at home myself,
who’s always up to some divilmint. And they were
all as well known as the bodagh on me father’s own
estate, which, botheration ! was left to me uncle in-
stead when me gran’father died. Now one day—all
this happened about five years ago—an inspector of
Black Police rides up to the town, all alone but for
his regiment of ‘ black boys,’ who came up some time
after, and, showing a warrant for the arrest of certain
blacks for murder of a stockman, asked, as politely
as you please, of the townsfolk if they could inform
him where these unauthorized vivisectionists were at
present to be found. Divil a one of them was known
in the place. But the good gentleman wasn’t going
to be beaten, and with the admirable zeal that had
made an inspector of him determined not to return
home with hands full of nothing. So my noble sends
his ( boys ’ round the township, and they catch all the
aboriginals who haven’t run away the moment they
saw the red-and-blue uniforms, and these were three
or four ‘ buck ’ niggers, a very old chap, some native
women, and a child or two. All these, mind you,
Angland, were as well known, and better, than the
Maories that help you with your maize at home.”
“ Didn’t the miners object ? ”
“Yes, they did, but only a few men were about, the
rest being at work. Those whites about the place
showed the inspector that the natives he’d collared
were working in the township at the time of the
murder, but it was no good. Unfortunately, the local
J.P., who was the owner of the batteries and mines


in the vicinity, and had made himself objectionable to
the police of the district by doing his best to preserve
the natives of the place, was absent, and no one liked
to take the responsibility of making a stand against
the law in the matter. So the niggers were hauled
off. This was bad enough, sure, but the bitter part
was to follow. I must stop for a moment to go on to
tell you that it’s a divil of a bother to bring home a
conviction of murder against an aboriginal, through
some of the judges having decided that it is illegal to
try a man in a language of which he doesn’t know a
single decent word, barring a few swear-words he’s
heard used by bullockies, and drovers, and the like.
So, finding this lion in the path of justice, the artful
protectors of the public have hit upon another plan
for arriving at the same desired end.”
“ What is that ? ” asks Claude.
“Sure the idea is ‘just grand,’ as my Scotch gar-
dener says, and as easy to carry out as falling off a
greasy log, and that’s as nate as it’s convanient. The
plan is to let the prisoner have a chance of escaping
when taking him to gaol, and promptly perforate him
with bullets if he takes it or not.”
“ But that wouldn’t work long. Too many witnesses,
doctor. Sure to leak out some day.”
“ Not at all, me boy. The gentleman in charge,
who is so anxious to save the Crown the expense of
the trial, it’s just himself that knows what he’s about.
His squad of ‘ boys ’ is composed of black fellows from
various parts of Australia, who belong to different
tribes, or factions, to tip it a rale Irish simile. On
the top of a downright lovely, natural animosity for
each other, which is only restrained by discipline,


these savages wearing the Government lively ha\e
been trained to commit every sort of atrocity at a
word from their ‘ Marmee,’ as they call the ‘ boss.’
Should a ‘ boy ’ misbehave himself, turn rusty because
he receives a flogging, or otherwise fail to please his
master, that gentleman doesn’t trouble to rason wid
him ; he has only to wink, as you may say, and it s a
case of ‘ off wid his head,’ for his black comrades are
only too glad to be allowed to steal behind the bocaun
of a boy and leave him pulseless, all alone wid himself
behind a bush. These ‘ boys ’ are the only witnesses.
But to come home to me story. The prisoners were
marched off in an iligent line, or tied to a line, it don’t
much matter, and three miles outside the town they
were neatly despatched, and left to amuse the crows
and ants.”
“ But what did the townsfolk do ? ”
“ Oh, they waited till the boss of the place came
back, the J.P. I’ve been telling of, and that was
the same afternoon. They told him all about it.
Holy poker ! there was the divil to pay, an’ no mistake.
1 Dripping mother I ’ he cried, ‘ I’ve never had a single
instance of throuble wid the darkies of the place.’
And then he went on to say, and he was telling the
truth, mind ye, that he had been there, off and on,
ever since he came, the first white man, to the district.
And he told the miners how he feared the retaliation
of the friends of the murthered creatures, and the
consequent vendetta warfare that would ensue. And
then the whole township, headed by the J.P., went
out together by themselves, and found the place where
the murtherers had left their victims ; but divil a bit
of them did they diskiver, barring their bodies stuffed
9


so fall of ballets, IVe bin told, that you couldn’t see
them but for the wounds outside.
“ Well, a message was presently despatched to the
resident magistrate of the nearest town.”
“ And with what result ? ” asks Claude.
“ Nothing, save but that the artful police thereupon
sent some of their 1 boys ’ at night, who quietly burned
the bodies to prevent identification. Next day the
coroner arrives, all dhrookin wid heat, for he’d hurried
a bit to oblige the J.P., who was a powerful man and
commanded a lot of votes, and, moreover, was a 1 bit
of a lad’ when vexed. Now my friend, the doctor
that this tale’s about, was a young man, just commenc-
ing practice, at the time, in the next town, and he
was sent as an independent man, and one who was
family docther of the gentleman who might get hanged
over the matter, to see the bones and identify them
as human. Before he left home, however, the Black
Police officials 1 got at him.’ ‘ You’re a young man in
this same district,’ they said, ‘and you’re not the
gentleman to be afther taking the part of the black
divils against your old friends you’ve just come to live
amongst, let alone the fact that you’re our district-
surgeon, and the same for the City Police. And isn’t
your bread and butter dependent on the squatters and
settlers round, who call us to do their dirty work
for them and clean off the natives ? Divil a one of
the same but would shut you out if you interfered wid
one of us. So, docther asthorj they said in conclusion,
‘ see what you can do to help poor Dash out of the
mess, for it’s yourself will be called as a truthful
witness at the inquest.’
“ Well, this young friend of mine went and pleaded


that he could not tell if the bones were human
remains or not, and the inquiry consequently dropped
through.”
“And did the inspector get off scot-free ? ”
“Well, not quite; c though very like it,’ as Mr.
Pecksniff used to say. The J.P., as I said, was an
influential man, and did his best to get the murderers
punished. The inspector got sacked till the elections
were over, just to keep our J.P. and the newspaper
folk quiet. The 1 black boys ’ too were brought to
trial, but were released on the ground that they could
not understand English, although they’d been years in
the force, and English was the only medium employed
in their conversations with each other, and their in-
structions and commands were always given in that
language.”
“Well, doctor, that incident rather reflects on the
judges of the colony. But although I confess I can’t
altogether believe that such cruelty and gross mis-
carriage of justice does often happen in Queensland,
yet what you say just bears out what Williams, my
mining friend, says.
“ He was on the Palmer gold-field, before it was the
Palmer, you know, and he tells me that the blacks
were safe enough to travel amongst till the settlers
began to drive them from their water-holes and steal
their women. Why, two fellows and himself travelled
from Rockhampton to where Cooktown is now with-
out any trouble from the natives, three years before
the Palmer broke out.”
“ Yes, that’s thrue for ye, but the older school of
diggers were a mighty different lot to the rough lads
that followed them. Many’s the yarn I’ve had with


the old boys in the accident ward, for it’s there they
open their hearts, as well as their months, for their
medical attendent to pry into. Bnt the species is
growing scarce, me bhoy, and one may ask wid the
swate poet, —
“ ‘ Why is this glorious creature found,
One only in ten thousand ? ’ ”
And here the doctor forsakes the light Irish tone he
has hitherto assumed, which he calls his “visiting
voice,” and calmly settles down to smoke a cigar and
answers his old friend’s questions in a prosaic English
conversation; honouring Claude, as he does but few,
by throwing aside, for the nonce, those scintillating
surroundings of synonyms that, like the gay flag at
the live end of a lance, are generally employed by
the doctor’s countrymen in shielding the true point
of their remarks from view. He continues, after a
thoughtful pause: —
“After the first prospectors came those of whom
Burns might have been thinking when he sang,—
li c Man’s inhumanity to man
Makes countless thousands mourn.’ ’
“ Well, doctor, it’s true I haven’t seen much of
miners yet, but the only two I know are of the old
school, and they certainly deserve the encomium
you borrowed from Wordsworth. But, by-the-bye, I
wanted to ask you, Do you remember that surveyor
telling us about the permission given to a man, I
forget his name, some years since, by the Queensland
government, to shoot any aboriginal he came across,
because his family had all been massacred by some


tribe whose land they bad taken ? Was it a fact or
a yarn of our friend’s inventive powers ? ”
« Not a bit of it; true as logic, and not the only
case. Frazer was the man’s name who had the per-
mission given to him. Why, I travelled up here only
two years since with a fellow who had a similar soit
of ‘ license to kill.’ He was going to some part of
the Gulf” (of Carpentaria) “to revenge his brother’s
death by killing all the blacks he might come across.
This Frazer went about for years shooting all and
every native he could see, 1 station boys,’ warragals, or
town blacks, —he was not very particular. It became
a kind of mania with him ; and at last, having killed
a favourite boy of some influential squatter, there
was a bit of trouble over it, and he had to leave off
further sacrificing to the Manes of his people, except
out of the way of newspaper folk.
“ I once knew an inspector of police, who’s dead
now, who asked my advice professionally about him-
self. He said that after some years of this man-
hunting, he found himself suffering from a growing
morbid desire to kill everything alive he saw. He
was distracted with an idea that haunted him, that he
might be unable to restrain himself some day,— ‘ run
amuck’ amongst the townsfolk or his own family;
become a new kind of Helene legado, in fact. ’
“ That’s an admirable peg, doctor, to hang a sen-
sational tale on,—a man haunted by the spectre of
murder that he has raised himself, and which he fears
will some day make him turn his assassin’s knife against
his own beloved.”
“ Oh, the disease is well known,—a phase of that
called cerebral hypereemia,” continued the doctor;


“but it is rarer in the more civilized countries than
elsewhere. I consider the mere fact of an educated,
civilized man being able to continue to act the part of
wholesale exterminator of human beings, at so much
a month, is a prima facie sign of insanity of the type
Sir Henry Parkes mentioned the other day to a
deputation that waited upon him. Wonderful man,
Sir Henry, knows everything. Have you seen him ? ”
“ Yes, but what did he say to the deputation ? He
didn’t call them lunatics to their faces, did he ? ”
“Not exactly, though he did so in a roundabout
way. No, the deputation was composed of a number
of good, soft-hearted, but also soft-headed, old fogies,
who wanted to obtain a reprieve for the late-lamented
murderer Hewett. ‘ Sir ’Enry,’ as the Bulletin calls
him, received them kindly, but sensibly refused to
accede to their request, saying, a There are few per-
sons save scientific inquirers who are aware of the
number of people who take delight in acts of deliberate
cruelty.’ I think it is Dr. Marshall Hall, no, it’s
Andrew Winter, on ‘ Insanity,’ says :
“ 1 It is the sustained departure from the normal
condition of mind and mode of life which should sug-
gest a grave suspicion of impending insanity. When
we find a modest man become boastful, a lover of truth
transmitted into an habitual liar, a humane individual
suddenly become cruel, etc., we may be sure there is
mental disturbance of a very severe character.’ ”
“ Well, how about our friend over there, doctor ? It’s
too dark now to look at him, but our young inspector
doesn’t seem to me either particularly mad or cruel.”
“ No, not yet, Angland, but I’d bet a thrifle, if I had
it, that he hates his work. At present he’s only a


1 sub,’ and if lie’s wise he’ll not stick to it. No, he s
not got the cruel facial-lines yet on his ‘ boyish
front.’ ”
“ Whilst you’re on the subject of ‘ hatred, murder,
and all uncharitableness,’ will you tell me about the
hereditary part of the business ? Does a child always
inherit the bloodthirsty proclivities of its parents, say,
in the case of the father having been forced by circum-
stances to become a member of the Black Corps ? ’
“ No, not always. It would be rough on the coming
race of young bush-reared Australians if that was the
case. But as the history of an animal is the history,
to a great degree, of the race to which it belongs, as
Darwin says, only he puts it in rather a better way,
young humans have generally more or less savage
instincts. Dr. Hammond, the great authority upon
neurology, declares, in a paper upon the Whitechapel
murders, that i a desire to kill exists, to a greater or
lesser extent, in the mind of every human being with-
out exception.’ Now civilization is the counteracting
force. Parents living in the backwoods of Australia,
and accustomed to few of the restraints of civilization
and plenty of scenes of slavery and slaughter, are
hardly likely to train their offspring in the paths of
gentleness and peace.”
“ You think there is more in a child’s associations
and home training in determining its character than
in its parentage ? ”
“My experience of children I have seen grow into
men certainly points to that conclusion. But it is
a somewhat difficult subject on which to gather reli-
able data, for in nine cases out of ten the child s
parents are inculcating their own ideas of right and


wrong into their youngster during the years its
expanding brain is most sensitive to permanent im-
pressions. What an ordinary observer might put
down to hereditary characteristics of the individual,
may thus merely be due to tuition and example.”
“You think the guardians of youngsters, then,
more responsible for their children’s sins than is
generally supposed ? ”
“ Well, the young of well-bred men and animals—l
mean by that of parents whose ancestors have long
been trained in and for certain purposes and habits —
have possibly less inclination to revert to the original
or wild type ; but what a lady friend of mine in
Auckland said to me once upon a case in point very
well expresses my opinions. This lady told me that
the mother of Hall called upon her once, bringing the
afterward notorious poisoner with her, he being then
a child. The youngster was a very spoilt child, and
made a great disturbance at first; but by-and-by he
became quiet, and left the room where the ladies were
seated, to the great relief of both of them. Presently,
on Mrs. Hall leaving, the two ladies went to look for
the boy, and found him sitting on the lawn quietly
watching the agonies of my friend’s ‘ harmless, neces-
sary cat,’ all of whose paws he had carefully dis-
articulated with a small axe. My lady friend in telling
me the incident said, ‘ I was very shocked, of course,
but I can’t say I was very surprised, for he was a
thoroughly spoilt boy, and allowed to follow his own
inclinations entirely ; any child almost would become
bad and cruel under those circumstances.’ I believe,
on the whole, she was right in her reasoning.”
“Aid does this murdering of natives still go on,


doctor? I can’t really get my mind to believe
it?”
(( Come bere, Angland, to the light from the cap-
tain’s cabin, and read this.”
The doctor hereupon takes a South Queensland
newspaper from his pocket. Claude reads as follows
in the Thargomindah Herald , of date May 30th,
1889:
“ (From our Correspondents.)
“THE RECENT MURDER BY BLACKS.
«In connection with the recent murder of Edmund
Watson, and the attempted murder of James Evans, by
blacks at Pine Tree Station, in the Cook district, it has been
ascertained that the weapons used were a knife and axe,
which were supplied by a station black boy. The pei-
petrators were caught next day. Every station on the
Peninsula is contributing men to give the blacks a lesson.
“The perpetrators, who were station hands, were
caught next day, as the telegram says, but I suppose
the excuse for the slaughter of the whole tribe will
not be missed.”
“Well, they don’t believe in Buddha’s assurance
that ‘ With mercy and forbearance shalt thou disarm
every foe,’ up here, evidently,” says Claude, as the
two men descend the companion ladder on their way
to “ turn in.” Down below, an impromptu concert is
being given by'a cluster of young men round the piano
at the end of the saloon, and the performers, who are
mostly smoking, turn round constantly for refresh-
ments to the interesting collection of bottles and


glasses on the table behind them. A grand finale
chorus, composed of a conglomeration of “ Ballyhooly ”
and “ Finnegan’s Wake,” is just coming to a close,
and the gifted accompanist, being only six bars behind
the leading tenor, is hurrying up to be “ in at the
death ” when Dr. Junelle’s entrance is noticed.
A shout of recognition hails his appearance, and he
is forthwith hauled off to the piano, where a dozen
voices press him to “name his pison.” Having
refreshed himself with a foaming glass of “ Irish
Liminade,” he protestingly complies with the loudly
expressed desires of the company, and throwing him-
self into the spirit of the fun around him, as only an
Irishman can do, at a moment’s notice, forthwith
bursts into melody.
“ An’ mind you handle your tongues at the chorus,
bhoys, for I’m afther thinkin’ it’s me own will want
breathing time betwane the varses, the kays are that
sticky wid lime juice and tobacco.”
Striking a few preliminary chords to silence the
“ bhoys ” who are all shouting for different songs, the
doctor forthwith “ trates ” the company to the follow-
ing thoroughly “up country ” song, well known in
Northern Queensland, which goes to the ancient air
of “The King of the Cannibal Islands.”
“THE QUEER WAYS OF AUSTRALIA.
“Dick Briggs, a wealthy farmer’s son,
To England lately took a run,
To see his friends, and have some fun,
For he’d been ten years in Australia.
Arrived in England, off he went
To his native village down in Kent, —


’Twas there his father drew his rent,
And many happy days he’d spent.
No splendid fine clothes on had he
But ‘ jumper ’n boots up to the knee,
With dirty Sydney ‘ cabbage tree,’—
The costume of Australia.
Chorus.
“ Now when a fellow takes a run
To England for a bit of fun,
He’s sure to ’stonish every one
With the queer ways of Australia.
“ Now Dick went home in this array ;
His sister came out, and did say,
‘ No, we don’t want anything to-day,’
To her brother from Australia.
Cried he, ‘ Oh, don’t you know poor Dick ? ’
They recognized him precious quick ;
The 1 old man ’ hugged him like a brick.
And there was feasting there that night,
For Richard was a welcome sight,
For each one hailed with great delight
The wanderer from Australia.
Chorus.
“ The blessed cattle on the farm
Regarded Dick with great alarm ;
His swearing acted like a charm
When he gave them a ‘ touch ’ of Australia.
He could talk ‘ bullock ’ and ‘ no flies,’
And when he bless’d poor Strawb’r’y’s eyes.
She looked at him with great surprise
As out of her he ‘ took a rise.’
1 Fie, fie,’ his mother said one day,
‘ What naughty, wicked words you say.’
‘ Bless you, mother, that’s the way
We wake ’em up in Australia.’


“ Dick went to London for a spree,
And got drunk there, most gloriously ;
He gave them a touch of ‘ Coo-00-ee ! ’
The bush cry of Australia.
He took two ladies to the play,
Both so serene, in dresses gay;
He had champagne brought on a tray
And said, ‘ Now, girls, come fire away.’
They drank till they could drink no more,
And then they both fell on the floor.
Cried Dick, as he surveyed them o’er,
* You wouldn’t do for Australia.’ ”
Chorus.
Several other songs followed, and during the in-
terval Claude makes the acquaintance of the young
sub-inspector of police. He appears to be a par-
ticularly obliging kind of individual, although a
little “ stand-offish ” till Angland explains his pre-
sent position, when, as the doctor and Mr. Winze had
both predicted, the words “ Royal and Imperial ”
once more assisted him in his project. How to get
the young officer to speak about his awful profession
was the next question. Would he be chary about
giving any information about it ? But before Claude
had time to puzzle himself much about arranging
a plan of campaign, he was saved the trouble of
sapping up carefully to the subject by the sub-
inspector himself ; for in response to a call for a
song, he obliged the company with a “ little thing of
his own,” illustrative of the prowess of his Corps
during a night attack by natives upon a squatter’s
head station. This, as it is a lively bit of poetry, we
give in full; it was sung to the air of that best of
Whyte-Melville’s hunting songs, “ A day’s ride,”


having been written' in the same metre with that
object in view.
“A NIGHT’S RIDE.
“When the evening sun is dying,
And the night winds o’er us sighing,
And the sad-voiced dingoes crying,
Where the dark hill’s shadows lay,
“ Then the sounds of horses crashing,
Through the dark bush wildly dashing ;
And bounding feet go pulsing past,
Quick beating on their way.
“ Then on 1 blue coat, white shako !
Soon let your carbines rattle,
Where black My-alls are howling round
A little force at bay !
“ When we reach the station clearing,
And we hear our brothers cheering,
And our rifle-shots shout answer
O’er the yells of fear and pain,
“ Knees tightly press our saddles,
As we charge the mass of devils,
And flashing red ’neath burning thatch
Our sabres clear a lane.
“ Right and left the black forms reeling,
And our souls fierce pleasure feeling,
As madden’d steeds and whirling blades
Beat down the cursed crew.
“ Every foe has fled, and quicker
Than he came, and in the glitter
Of half-burned sheds we gather
By the dark pool’s gloomy side ;
« And we pledge the panting horses,
That are standing ’midst the corpses
Of the white-ribbed, grinning devils
That have caused our midnight ride ’


This song ended and the vocalists dispersing, Claude
ventures to ask the singer, “ as a stranger in a strange
land,” what the Corps may be and what its duties.
He finds that so far from the young officer being
ashamed of his profession, he evidently feels proud
of his position in the Black Police. The conversation
is continued next day, and before Claude says good-
bye he discovers that the doctor was right in his
surmise.
“ Yes,” the young sub-lieutenant once said to him,
when they had become somewhat confidential, “ there
is a good deal about the work I don’t like. The worst
part is the terrible anxiety lest any one owing me
a grudge should go in for proving a case against me.
It is not a pleasant feeling, the noose-round-your-neck
idea one has at times. I’m getting used to it, how-
ever ; but there, I confess I don’t like some of the
business.”
He also told Claude a curious little incident about
a young “ sub,” new in the force, who made a sad
mistake in the first report he sent into headquarters,
describing a successful “ rounding-up ” of a party of
natives. He used the word “ killed ” instead of the
official “ dispersed ” in speaking of the unfortunate
natives left hors de combat on the field. The report
was returned to him for correction in company with
a severe reprimand for his careless wording of the
same. The “ sub,” being rather a wag in his own
way as things turned out, corrected his report so
that the faulty portion now read as follows : u We
successfully surrounded the said party of aborigines
and dispersed fifteen, the remainder , some half dozen,
succeeded in escaping.”


CHAPTER X.
MISS LILETH MUNDELLA AND MR. WILSON GILES.
“Where the banana grows the animal system is indolent, and
pampered at the cost of the higher qualities ; the man is sensual
and cruel.” —Emerson.
: is a blazing
winter day in
Northern Queens-
land ; a morning
when it is quite
a pleasure to turn
one’s eyes from
the sun-scorched,
shadowless u open
country ” outside to the
cool, thatched verandah
of “ Government House ”
(head station-house), where Mr. Wilson Giles, the
owner of Murdaro run, resides. It is particularly
grateful to do so to-day, for in addition to the soft
green shade of crimson-blossomed Bougainvillias and
other northern floral favourites, the presence of a fair
female form in a cool, light dress-that sight so dear
to men imprisoned in up-country, societyless wilds


lends a double charm to the already attractive shelter
from the sun’s rays. The young lady who is now
to engage our attention for a brief period is Miss
Lileth Mundella, to whose future hopes and ambitions
we have already alluded in Chapter Y. On the day
in question she sits in the shelter of the verandah,
slowly rocking herself in a great cane-chair, the
embroidery of light and shadow cast by the motion-
less leaves falling in picturesque chiaroscuric effect
upon her handsome, artistically-draped figure.
Miss Mundella is in deep thought, and the long,
dark lashes of her half-closed eyes are turned earth-
wards as she gently rocks herself to and fro. In
front of the low-eaved station-house, on a withered
grass-plot,—a futile attempt at a tennis-lawn, —two
of the house cats are bounding in turns over a small
brown snake, trying to get an opportunity of breaking
the angry reptile’s back with their sharp teeth. Upon
the verandah a few emerald lizards are chasing the
house-flies ; and, looking through the passage to the
quadrangle at the back of the house, where the store,
bachelors’ quarters, and kitchen buildings are situated,
we can see the dark-skinned, brightly-dressed abori-
ginal “ house-gins ” as they prowl about, grinning and
chattering over the preparation of “ tucker long a
boss,” or master’s dinner. It is nearly “ tiffeu time,”—
a term for the mid-day repast copied by Australians
from their Anglo-Indian brethren,—and Miss Mundella,
who acts as housekeeper to her uncle, having finished
her light household duties for the day, is now giving
herself up to her thoughts anent the scheme which
so nearly concerns our young friend Claude Angland.
A casual male observer, with the average amoimt


of discernment and experience of the fair sex, would
doubtless have decided in his own mind that this
young thinker, with the low forehead and dark, pro-
nounced eyebrows, was pondering over her next new
costume, or perhaps of some rival’s successes. For
the young lady’s thoughts are evidently intense, and
also unpleasant. But neither dress, envy, nor in fact
any of those other common troubles that come to
ruffle the soft feathers of ordinary maidens’ medita-
tions, ever disturb the firm balanced mind of Miss
Lileth Mundella.
“I will make myself honoured, obeyed, perhaps
even loved, by means of that one talisman that has
survived the ages, and can still work efficiently in this
extremely practical world in which I find myself.
Money alone will give me the social position which
will make life worth living. I will strive to make
myself rich.” This had been the young lady’s key-
note of thought and action since the day when she
found herself dependent upon an uncle’s generosity.
Much had it marred the original beauty of her pure,
aesthetic soul.
In addition to her duties as hostess and commander-
in-chief over the native contingent of her widower-
uncle’s household, Lileth was also his secretary.
The ladies of an up-country squatter’s family very
often act in this capacity, for they are generally better
educated than the ‘ boss,’ and, moreover, have plenty
of leisure time.
Miss Mundella was glad to find herself in this
position of trust, for it afforded her the means she
sought of strengthening her hands for the ambitious
coup d'etat, that she intended to put into practice
10


some (lay. Already Giles’s niece had profited by the
opportunities her secretaryship gave her, by learning
far more of her uncle’s past career than that jolly-
looking, selfishly-cimning, middle-aged gentleman had
any idea.
Wilson Giles was afraid of his niece. A fast youth
had enervated his mental powers considerably, and
without knowing it, he fell by degrees nearly entirely
under the almost mesmeric influence of Lileth’s dark
eyes and powerful will, whilst yet he fondly half-
flattered himself that he was only acting the part of
the “ generous relation.” The two had only had one
serious struggle for supremacy : it was in reference
to Miss Mundella’s brother. This young man had
held a position in a southern bank for some years,
but being discovered in running a nice little private
discount and loan business over the “teller’s cotmter”
at which he presided, he was forced to seek fresh fields
of labour.
Lileth won the battle with her uncle, “hands
down,” and her brother became a u rouse about ”
(apprentice on a run) at Murdaro station.
That her uncle was indebted to a large amount to
the late Dr. Dyesart she knew well ; she believed the
two men, also, to be partners in the run. But this
was one of the few things she found herself unable
to pry fully into. Miss Mundella had taken charge
of the letter from the dead explorer, which faithful
Billy had curiously brought to the very station his
late master had been so much interested in. She had,
moreover, carefully opened the packet which contained
the message from the dead ; not from idle curiosity,
but with the idea that it probably contained something


that would assist her in her plans. The words of the
letter she saw at once clearly pointed to three things :
firstly, a reparation or gift to he made to some one
through the nephew ; secondly, a command to this
nephew to visit the grave of the writer ; thirdly, a
suspicion of the honesty of squatters, —possibly a
concealed distrust of her uncle Wilson Giles him-
self.
Miss Mundella’s first thoughts were to destroy the
letter, but upon consideration she thought she saw
in it a means of obtaining further command over her
uncle, and so sent it on its road to New, Zealand.
She must act, and act quickly, for her brother
had informed her from Sydney of young Angland’s
departure for the north; but before she could move
in the matter she must know more of the relations
that had existed between Dyesart and her uncle.
The young lady is sitting wrapped in these cogi-
tations, oblivious of the snake-hunting cats and
meteoric lizards, when we first see her, rocking
herself gently under the cool and shady verandah.
Presently a light step is heard in the large room
whose French windows open upon Miss Mundella’s
leafy retreat, and the little figure of an aboriginal
girl appears, her dark limbs and cream-coloured gown
making her resemble one of those composite statues
of bronze and marble.
It is Dina, Miss Lileth’s special handmaiden.
Caught as a child, she is the sole surviving member
of a once great Otero , or tribal-family, which was
annihilated by the Black Police some eight years
before, at a “ rounding up ” of the natives in the
neighbourhood.


It is slie alone, as we see her, of all the house-gins,
or unpaid native women, who are employed about
“ Government House,” that is decorated with that
insignia of civilized female servitude, —a white lace
cap ; and though Dina looks to-day slightly untidy,
one generally sees her glossy, luxuriant locks of jetty
hair as neatly stowed away beneath the natty ornament
before mentioned as Phyllis of old herself could have
desired.
Dina stalks slowly towards her mistress, with a
grin of respectful humility wrinkling her dark, shiny
face, which would be beautiful but for that excessively
triangular appendage, her nose. Suddenly, however,
remembering that “ missie ” has threatened her with
a flogging if she appears before that lady without her
stockings on, she sneaks off again, softly as a bat
upon the wing, and presently reappears with her
calfless lower limbs clothed in neat white cotton and
shod with highly polished shoes.
The girl stands for some time with her arms
akimbo, and her white-palmed hands resting open
upon the waistband of her short gown, meekly waiting
for her mistress to notice her. But Miss Mundella’s
thoughts are far away. So Dina at last looks round
for something with which to while away the time.
A large beetle, with tesselated-pavemeut back
and enormous antenna?, presently attracts her atten-
tion, and squatting down the dusky maiden plays
with it, till the frightened insect escapes through a
joint between the floor-boards. However, she soon
finds fresh amusement in the troubles of a mantis
religiosa , which has foolishly attempted to cross the
thin brown stream of hurrying ants that extends from


the house to their mound, a hundred yards away.
Dina’s childish face beams with fun as she watches
the contest. She is not cruel—few Australian natives
delight in seeing pain in any form—hut she is, like
many of her sex, white and black, indifferent, that is
all ; content to he amused, and forgetful of the suffer-
ing anything may feel so long as it pleasantly tickles
her sense of the humorous. The mantis on the path
hy the verandah is invulnerable to the ants’ attack,
save at two points, —its soft tail and long, facile neck.
On the other hand, the mode of warfare employed by
those tiny, insect bull-dogs, the emmets, is simplicity
itself. Laying hold of whatever part of the intruder’s
awkward body happens to come near them, they
“ freeze on,” their hind legs being used as drag-
breaks to impede the mantis’s forward march. The
mantis, although covered with busy foes, marches on,
with that prayerful aspect —the beseeching, upturned
head and pious, folded, hand-like front-legs—that has
earned it its name. Ever and anon some enterprising
ant ventures to attack the weak points already alluded
to of this insect Achilles ; then are the lately-folded
mandible claws deliberately brought into play, and
the enemy is crushed, even as a nut is broken in a
pair of nut-crackers.
The solemn, pre-occupied air of the bigger insect,
and the plucky onslaught of its tiny foes, at last cause
Dina to forget her state of bondage, also the august
presence of her mistress, and she bursts into a merry
fit of laughter. Her hilarity, however, ceases as
suddenly as it commences.
“Dina, what are you doing there?” comes the
clear, contralto voice of Miss Mundella,


The culprit stands before “ missie ” with downcast
eyes and trembling figure.
“ Your cap is half off your head, and your stockings
are coming down. You have forgotten to tie your
shoe-laces. And why have you not an apron on ?
Don’t you remember the flogging you received for
forgetting what I told you about your coming to me
in an untidy state ? Be off and get yourself straight
at once, and hurry that lazy Sophy with tiflen.
Marmie (master) will soon be back.”
Miss Lileth always refrains from employing that
foolish pigeon-English that generally obtains amongst
Australian settlers in their conversations with ab-
origines. And she has found herself perfectly
understood and implicitly obeyed since she first
arrived at the station, and established her authority
by having the house-gins flogged for the slightest
misbehaviour, till they were thoroughly “ broken into
her ways,” as she pleasantly termed it.
Dina, who had come to ask her mistress for leave
of absence for the next day, is afraid to do so now,
and instead bursts into a theatrical cry, with her
knuckles rubbing her eyes and tears rolling down
her ludicrously-wrinkled face and dusky bosom. The
moment the girl thinks herself out of sight, however, she
is transformed into a laughing little nigger once more.
She stands in the passage giggling with all her
might at the sight of the youngest house-gin, Lucy,
cetat ten summers, who out in the quadrangle at the
back is up to one of her favourite tricks. This
consists of imitating the ungraceful waddle of that
head of the culinary department, u Terrible Billy,” the
old man-cook.


Poor little, large-mouthed, wriggling Lucy loves
to get behind the spare, hardship-twisted, little old
man as he crosses the yard, and burlesque his ever}
action, to the delight of the black heads that appeal
at the doors and windows, and grin white-teethed
plaudits at the little actress’s histrionic powers.
Every action ol Lucy’s lithe little body, ever}
gleam of her cunning little black eyes, was wicked
to a degree. Needless to say, her powers of mimicry
were perfect. Nothing escaped her active examination.
To see the suddenness with which she could flash
from merriment to passive stupidity when discovered
in her pranks, or when Terrible Billy —a harmless,
old periodical-drunkard retainer of Mr. Giles, whose
awkward, stumbling gait she imitated exactly turned
round, was worth a good deal. Her bended little
body shaking witli bubbling merriment in her single
garment of an old gown ; the thin, ugly little face,
against which her tiny black hands are pressed, as if to
stifle the sound of her giggles, whilst she hobbles after
the dilapidated old model; and then when he turns,
flash ! Lucy has changed as quickly into a dull, sad-
looking child, who has apparently never known what
laughter means, and has thoughts for nothing evidentl}
but her work, to which she is sullenly creeping when
“ the Terrible” changes his position, and looks sus-
piciously at her with his bleared old eyes.
Dina is looking at and enjoying the tun, and quick
as both she and Lucy are, they are caught by Miss
Mundella, who has followed her untidy handmaid to
the door.
Lileth says nothing, but rebukes the laggard Dina
with a look so fraught with cruel meaning that the


black girl melts into real tears this time, as her mis-
tress returns to her seat on the verandah.
The sound of wheels is now heard approaching, and
a buck-board buggy (a kind of light chaise) appears,
driven by an elderly gentleman, with a very red face
and very white linen suit and hat.
The trap is pulled up near the house, and the
driver, taking a boatswain’s whistle from his pocket,
blows a couple of shrill notes thereon, when two
native boys, in dirty moleskin trousers turned up to
the knee and grey flannel shirts, hasten up and take
their station at the horses’ heads.
The occupant of the buggy, however, does not
release the reins, but, calling up first one boy and
then the other, hits each a couple of stinging cuts
with his driving whip round their bare legs, and
makes the recipients roar with agony.
“ I’ll teach you to keep me waiting, you black
beggars ! ” the red-faced man roars. “ Couldn’t you
hear me coming? Now, Tarbrush, yer’d better look
out, for, swelp me, but if I have any more of your
durned laziness I’ll flay you alive, like I did your
cursed brother Bingo ! ”
“ Now, look alive, and take the mare and water
her,” the speaker continues in a calmer voice, “ and
mind you put a soft pair of hobbles on her. You can
let Joe go in the horse paddock. It’s your turn,
Dandie, to get the horses to-morrow, and if you keep
me a minute after seven o’clock I’ll loosen some of
your black hide, swelp me if I don’t.”
The speaker, who is Mr. Wilson Giles, now gets
out of the trap, and taking his whip in one hand and
a revolver that he always has with him in the buggy


in the other, he toddles with the usual short steps
of a bushman to the house, just nodding a brief “ good-
morning ” to his niece as he crosses the verandah.
Mr. Giles is, as we have said, an elderly man, but
he has rather grown old through his kind of life than
the number of his years. A somewhat corpulent man
too is he, with a heavy, sensual countenance, on the
sides of which, in pale contrast to his scarlet face, are
ragged, light-red whiskers. The-expression upon this
gentleman’s face before strangers is generally either a
look of suspicious cunning or an affected one of jolly
frankness,— the latter having once formed an ample
cloak for many a mean action, but, being now worn
threadbare, is less useful than its owner still fondly
imagines it to be.
After copious “ nips ”of whisky and soda-water,
Mr. Giles presently throws himself into a chair before
the elegantly provisioned table, where his niece and a
middle-aged gentleman have already taken their places,
and immediately betrays the fact, by the impartial
way in which he thrusts his knife into meat, butter,
cheese, and preserves, that he is either an eccentric
or an ill-educated man.
“ Come outside, I want to speak to you,” he grunts
to his niece, when he has finished a very rapid repast,
quite ignoring throughout the presence of the third
person at the table. This is Mr. Cummercropper, the
store- and book-keeper of the run, who, being a new
arrival in the wilds, has not yet been able to obtain
that point of rapid consumption of diet at which most
station folk are adepts.
“ I will be with you shortly, uncle,” Miss Mundella
replies, and proceeds to enter into a conversation upon


music and art with the polished storekeeper, who is
the very opposite of his highly inflamed “ boss.”
Mr. Cummercropper is hopelessly in love with
Lileth, like most of the men this young lady thinks
it worth while to be civil to. It is a curious feature
about Lileth’s male acquaintances that they soon
become hot admirers or warm haters of the dark-eyed,
haughty young lady.
“ Oh, you’ve come at last, have you ? ” Mr. Giles
says, as his niece sweeps to her chair on the verandah,
and she knows by experience that his bullying air is
the result of something having annoyed or puzzled
him, and that probably he will end what he has to
say by asking her advice. But her uncle must u blow
off his steam,” as he sometimes calls it, on somebody,
and a scapegoat must be found before he will become
quiet enough to talk sensibly. So Lileth’s first act
is to pacify her uncle in the following way.
“ Before you begin,” she says, “ I want you to have
Dina and Lucy beaten. You had better have it done
at once, because the Eev. Mr. Harley may be here this
afternoon. He said he would try and do his circuit
in one month this time.”
. “ Oh, you needn’t mind Harley,” replies Mr. Giles ;
u he knows better than to interfere with our ways,
Lileth. Besides, he used to ‘ dress ’ his wife’s little
gin down proper at Croydon last year. Even the
squatters at the hotel he was stopping at kicked up
a row about it. The servant gals told me the little
nigger’s back was pretty well scored. What have
the gals been doing now ? ”
. “ Oh, I don’t really think that it is worth while
my going into the long exposition of household


arrangements that an explanation would necessi-
tate.” , ,
Mr. Giles looks sideways at the calm dark eyes
that are lazily looking upwards, as their owner sits
slowly rocking her chair by his side.
“ I’ll soon fix their hash for them,” he growls forth
at last, feeling glad of the opportunity to wreak his
ano-er on somebody. Then he whistles upon the boat-
swain’s call, which had once before that morning
heralded a punishment, and shortly a big native ap-
pears whose well-pronounced nasal bones proclaim
him to belong to a Cape York or Torres Straits tribe.
The black’s oily face is surmounted by an old cabbage-
tree hat, and he wears trousers and shirt like the
other boys ; but he also rejoices in a pair of Blucher
boots, of which he is inordinately proud.
« Here, Carlo,” says Mr. Giles, in the curious pigeon-
Eno-lish already referred to, “ you know that um
fellow waddy (that stick) ; him sit down alonger
office (it is in the office) ; mine beat it
(my black fellow beater). You fetch um along. The
oily face lights up with a smile of anticipation, for he
it is that generally acts the part of executioner, and
“ combs down the gals ” by Marmie’s orders when it
is needed in the cause of discipline. As a member of
an alien tribe, Carlo returns the hatred of the station
blacks with interest. ,
The waddy, a long-handled “ cat ” of six tails, made
of leather, is brought to Mr. Giles.
“ Go and catch Lucy and Dina,” says that gentle-
man. ,
Both uncle and niece sit in silence till the girls
arrive, the two miserable creatures having been found


at the collection of huts close by, known as the native-
camp, where they had run to hide on seeing Carlo
take the whip to the “ boss.”
“ Don’t move till I come back. Won’t be long,”
murmurs the squatter rising, and presently the yells
and screams of the two girls are heard down by the
stockyard, where the boss is standing admiring their
graceful, naked bodies as they writhe beneath the lash
wielded by the bfawny Carlo.
Mr. Giles returns quite an altered man. Either the
enjoyable sight he has just witnessed, or a couple of
u pegs ” of whisky he swallowed medicinally after-
wards, has sweetened his soul for the time being.
“Well, niece,” he said, sitting down, “I’ve done
your little job. And now I want you to listen to
what I’m going to tell you, and tell me what you
think of it.” Miss Mundella’s handsome, white-draped
figure rocks a little faster than before, but her eyes
remain still fixed on the leaves above her head.
“You know, Lileth, I think, —no, I’m pretty sure
you do, —that I’d have gone a ‘ broker,’ ” —the black
eyes flash a rebuke at him for the slang he presumes
to use before her. “ Oh, you know what I mean. I’d
have had to have filed in ’B5 if it hadn’t been for
Dr. Dyesart turning up trumps and lending me some
of the ready. Well, when the doctor died he held
promissory notes of mine for nearly £20,000. D’you
know, niece, why he lent me the money ? ”
After a short pause the speaker continued, “But
I don’t know why I should tell you. Likely enough
I’ll be sorry for it to-morrow.”
“If you think I can advise you, uncle, the more
I know about the matter the easier can I come to a




decision. That is your excuse for telling me and
mine for listening to what would otherwise not interest
me.”
“ Well, I suppose that’s logic, Lileth. At any rate,
Dr. Dyesart, I may tell you, was once engaged to be
married to my late wife, to the mother of Glory and
Georgie.”
“ Indeed, uncle, and how long is it since poor Aunt
Mary was engaged to him ? ”
“Don’t exactly know. I never saw Dyesart till
about five years ago—two years after the death of my
poor old worn ,of your aunt.” The speaker hastily
corrects his lapsus linguae , glancing at his niece mean-
while, and continues :
“ Dyesart comes here. Glory and little George,—
Lord, what I’d give to find out what’s become of my
little George,” and a tear moistens the inflamed
orbits of Mr. Giles, —“ Glory was playing with George
on the verandah here. The doctor speaks to them,
and was telling Glory he was an old friend of her
mother’s when I arrived on the scene. ‘My name’s
Dyesart,’ said he ; ‘ let me speak to you in private.
1 had the honour of knowing the late Mrs. Giles, your
wife.’ ”
Miss Mundella’s chair ceases rocking, and that
lady’s eyes watch her uncle’s lips.
“ He told me,” continued Mr. Giles, “ and I will
just cut what he said as short as I can, that he was
a wealthy man and a bachelor ; that his agents in
Sydney had told him Murdaro station would probably
be in the market before long; also that he had dis-
covered that the lady to whom he had once been
engaged in England had married me, the proprietor


of Murdaro, and was dead. He liad come up to
see the place, as it was interesting to him. Well,
the doctor went into a rapture over Glory, —who’s
neat enough, I believe, but wasn’t a patch on little
Georgie. ‘ She’s like your late missus,’ he said;
and then before I . knew it he offered me money on
loan without interest, enough to put me on my feet
again.”
“It was he that gave Glory her money, then?”
asks Miss Mundella, showing for the first time her
interest in her uncle’s narrative.
« Yes, he did all that he did do in a real gentle-
manly way, I’ll say that for him,” returned Mr. Giles,
lighting one of two green-leaf cigars that Johnnie, the
Chinese gardener, presents to his boss about this time
every day. “ Whilst I’m on the subject I may as well
tell you that I find Dyesart’s death doesn’t affect
Glory’s money; I’ve got a satisfactory letter from my
Brisbane lawyers about that.
“ Now I have told you pretty well all, Lileth. Is
there anything else you’d like to know ? ”
“Well, yes, uncle; first, how are you situated as
regards funds—money matters —now ? I should like
to know particularly before I ask any more questions.”
As she ceases speaking Miss Mundella cannot help
glancing scornfully at her relative, for she sees he is
afraid to ask her advice, although his object in opening
up the conversation was to do this. But her look
changes as the thought enters her brain, “Is this
story of the money the real and sole reason of his
anxiety ? ”
“ Well, I’m tight pressed,” replies Mr. Giles, looking
nervously at his niece; “ that confounded spec, of


mine on the Mac Arthur River was a stiffener for me,
and for better men than me too.”
“You could not refund the money lent you by
Dyesart if his executors,” —the young lady watches
her uncle as she speaks, and sees that gentleman’s
rather washy eyes open a little bit wider and become
fixed, a sign that expresses in his physiognomy what
turning pale would in most other men, — u could you
refund this money if his executors were to press you
to do so ? ”
“Jupiter! No!” gasps Mr. Giles, without an
apology for the oath. Indeed, neither notice it in their
interest in the matter in hand.
“ What would you have to do if you were forced to
repay this £20,000, say, to his nephew Angland ? ”
“ I’d have to sell every beast on the run,” gasps
Mr. Giles, his eyes protruding more than ever, “ and
I’d have to sell my own carcase into the bargain,” he
adds, coarsely.
“ You must please control yourself, uncle, or I
must go indoors,” murmurs Lileth, leaning back in
her chair.
“ Oh, you’re not inquisitive about hearing any more,
ar’n’t you ? ” begins Mr. Giles, angrily. “ You are a
woman, although you’ve got brains, and you needn’t
pretend ” But the uncle is obliged to nip his
ungallant speech in the bud, and afterwards to apologise
for it; for his niece rises to leave him, and he feels he
cannot afford to quarrel with her at any price.
“Well, uncle,” the young lady inquires, “would
you be sorry if these promissory notes were found ? ”
“Why, of course. They’d ruin the whole bilin’ of
us.” Mr. Giles’s answer, coming as it does from a


mouth whose chin is sunk upon a desponding breast,
is scarcely audible.
“ With the exception of Glory ? ”
“ Oh, her money’s all right; can’t touch hers.”
“You have tried, then,” thinks Lileth, “and this
is the reason you inquired about it. You are desperate.
The game is mine if I play my cards carefully.”
“ Well, uncle,” she continues, “ there are only two
ways that I can see to get rid of this awkward state
of affairs.”
“ What’s them ? ” comes the snappish inquiry.
“ Either to find out a means of getting at and
destroying these P.N.’s, or ” Here Miss Mundella
pauses so long that her uncle’s face grows redder than
ever with excitement, till at last he bursts out im-
patiently, “Or what?”
“ Or destroy the means this young Angland has of
finding where the notes are.”
“ Can either of these things be done ? ”
“ Yes, the latter.”
“ How can it be done ? ”
“ By means of money.”
“ Who will do it ? ”
«I will.”
Mr. Giles cogitates for a minute or two.
“ You know more of this matter than you pretend.”
“ Than I pretend ! ” The young lady expresses her
surprise at this accusation in her sweetest tones.
“Well, then, than you have told me, if you like
that way of putting it better. You’re a clever gal, and
have more ‘ savez ’ than I have in a matter like this.”
The speaker’s eyes withdraw into his head, and he feels
more cheerful and hopeful as he goes on speaking.
n •


He ends by placing the whole affair in his niece’s
hands for her to fight out for him.
Lileth has her fish in the shallows now, but she
knows she must not startle him till her landing net
is safely under and around the prize. So putting a
little softer intonation into her voice, and rising from
her seat, she goes to her uncle’s side.
“Uncle, 1 am only a poor orphan,” she begins,
looking almost through Mr. Giles’s downcast eyelids.
Mr. Giles can feel the power of his niece’s glance and
fairly trembles, for he is always most afraid of her
when she speaks thus softly.
“ You have given my brother and myself a home,”
goes on the young lady. “We owe you everything.
I can help you and I will.”
Mr. Giles breathes more freely, but he would
hardly have done so if he had known that Miss
Mundella only wanted to make him easier for a
moment in order to insure his feeling shy of having
the whole trouble back on his own shoulders
again. ' 1
“ But, uncle, I have my good name to think 'of,
I must risk that and a good deal more besides -in
forwarding these interests of yours. I owe it to Mr.
Puttis as well as to myself to ask you if you will
make me some token of regard, of appreciation, if I
clear this trouble out of your way.”
“ Anything you like,” Mr. Giles murmurs sleepily*
almost as if the words were somebody else’s and he
was simply repeating them. , *
“ I have thought out a plan of releasing you en-
tirely from your indebtedness, but both myself and my
future husband will have to risk everything in doing


it. Will you promise to give me a quarter share in
the run if I succeed ? ”
Mr. Wilson Giles’s tenderest point is touched at
this request, and the pain wakes up his courage for
a moment or two.
“ You’re not afraid of opening your mouth to ask,”
he says, fighting his ground as he retreats. “ You
know I’ve never given up all hopes of finding little
George some day. I don’t, believe the niggers that
stole him killed him, or I’d have heard of it. I’d
look nice if I gave away what’s to be his some day
if he turned up afterwards, wouldn’t I ? ”
“ If you make me a partner in the run I’ll help
you. If not, I’ll marry Mr. Puttis at once, as he
wishes me to do, and go to Brisbane. I don’t mind,”
adds Lileth, pausing for a moment, “ agreeing to give
up to poor Georgie half my share if he ever returns
to you. ■
“I shall want a written and signed agreement,
uncle,” she observes, as she leaves him to enter the
house, “before I commence work.” Then at the
doorway she turns and remarks, in a careless tone
of voice, “You may like to know that Angland—
Dyesart’s nephew—has already left Sydney, and may
be here any day.”
This last bit of news was just what was wanted
to complete the subjugation of Mr. Giles to his niece’s
will. How did she know of this news about Angland ?
Why, of course, from that young devil of a nephew
of his, whom he had bribed to intercept the dead
explorer’s approaching relative. His own rough-and-
ready plan had failed; perhaps his niece s scheme
would succeed. Anyhow, it was best to have her


on his side, for otherwise she might consider it best
for herself to make young Angland fall in love with
her. She could do that, if she liked, Giles felt certain.
The squatter rises and paces up and down the creaking
floor of the verandah restlessly at the thought.
11 Fool that I was to let that black hoy of the
doctor’s escape me,” he murmurs aloud. “ Torture
and money would have made him reveal the grave
to me. It is in that grave, or near it, where the
secret that can blast and ruin me lies. If that girl
knew that secret she would kill me without compunc-
tion. I know it. At any risk she must remain on
my side till the danger is past.”
So the agreement is signed and handed to Miss
Mundella that night. And the dark eyes flash like
unto Diana’s upon a successful mythological hunting
morning as Lileth’s steady pen directs two telegrams,
one for Inspector Puttis, which we saw him read
at Ulysses, and another to an influential admirer
of hers in the office of the Commissioner of Police,
Brisbane. And then the active brain falls to ponder-
ing over the something that she believes her uncle
kept back from her that afternoon.


CHAPTER XI.
THE BLACK POLICE.
41 Ye to whose sovereign hands the Fates confide
Of this fair land the reins, —
This land for which no pity wrings your breast, —
Why does the stranger’s sword her plains invest,
That her green fields be dyed ? ”
Petrarch.
EKE’S another snob
trying to get ns all
cashiered I Confound
those beastly news-
papers, —jnst my
■ luck ! ” exclaims an
elderly and rather
handsome man, who,
sitting before his
office table, has just
opened an important-
looking letter, headed
with the royal arms
printed in red ink.
“ Just my confounded
luck. Just at this time too, of all others, when my
application to be appointed Protector of Aboriginals
for the district must just have reached the chief.
Now I wonder what Mrs. Bigger will say if I don’t


get this extra salary as Protector, for I can’t send
Jane down south to school, as I promised, if I don’t
get more than my present pay, that’s certain.”
The blue-paper letter that has occasioned Inspector
Bigger of the N. M. Police so much vexation —for it
is this well-known gentleman who now sits nervously
rubbing his eyeglass in the little hot office of the
barracks—is dated from the bureau of the Superin-
tendent of Police, Brisbane, and runs as follows :
“ June Uh, 1889.
“ John Bigger, r Esq,, Inspector of N. M. Police for
Tovmsend Barracks, Werandowera District.
“ The Colonial Secretary having requested the Commissioner
of Police to supply him with such information as lies in
his power, concerning the truthfulness of an occurrence of
which the enclosed newspaper article [which appeared in a
recent issue of the 1 Northern Miner ’) purports to he an
account, I am directed to desire you to communicate immedi-
ately with this Office upon the subject.
“ I am, sir,
“ P. P. Commissioner of Police,
“ lIAERY StOCRAT.”
The following is a reprint of the newspaper cutting
which flatters to the floor on the letter being
opened : T
“ ANOTHER N, M. P. ATROCITY.
“ Close to Townsend, a reliable correspondent informs,
the following lately took place ;■ —
“At a mining camp where nothing had been stolen by
the natives for months, tbree natives ran by a miner’s tent


one evening. Going into town next day, the said miner
mentioned this, but did not ask for assistance. The neigh-
bouring sergeant of Black Police with four boys, however,
appears at the camp in a few days. As night falls the light
of a native camp fire is sparkling away on a mountain
range some four miles off. No one knows or cares if these
particular natives had committed the crime of running
by a miner’s tent. Taking a ‘ boy ’ by the shoulder, the
sergeant points out the fire, and soon after the four troopers
steal off into the gloom, armed to the teeth, and naked save
for their cartridge-belts. The sergeant remains behind,
and in about an hour and a half the sound of nine shots
coming rapidly one after another is heard. Presently the
‘boys’ again appear with spears and dilly-bags, and tell,
amongst other horrid details, that they have despatched
‘ plenty fellow pickaninnie ’ with their tomahawks.
The Inspector’s little office occupies half of a small
weather-board, erection, which is so crazy from the
attacks of white ants (termites) that it can hardly
support its hot, galvanised-iron roof. A rough wooden
bookcase occupies one wall, standing on a rusty iron
tray, which is generally kept supplied with water to
defend this article of furniture from the same insect
foes that are fast destroying the joints and studs of the
building. On its dirty shelves a number of dusty law-
books, blue summons papers, and the like, repose in
picturesque disorder.
On either side of the single window of the apartment
hangs a cat-o’-nine-tails,—one for the use of the refrac-
boys ” of the corps, and manufactured of plain
leather thongs ; the other having the narrow lengths
of hide decorated with swan-shot artistically fastened
to the cruel tongues with whipcord. This more com-


plicated instrument is used for such cases as refractory
native witnesses, when a murderer has to be discovered,
and has also visited many of the stations round on loan
to squatters who are anxious to instil the beauties of
civilization into the bosoms (and backs) of those of
their native slaves who are desirous of escaping from
their bondage. A number of handcuffs and leg-irons,
and a few racing pictures, spotted to indistinctness by
the last summer’s plague of flies, decorate the walls ;
and behind Inspector Bigger’s chair is a rack of Snider
carbines, whilst a pair of loaded, long-barrelled “ Colts ”
lie on the pigeon-holed letter rack before him on the
table, which occupies the centre of the room.
“Now what shall I do about this, I wonder?”
ponders the gallant defender of frontier settlers. “ I
can’t say it was Sergeant Blarney’s fault and call Urn
over the coals, for I have already reported the matter
to the Chief as if I had been present. Well,” with
a sigh, “ it’s another proof of how careful we must be
nowadays. Bai Jove ! if any of these scribblers had
seen some of the little affairs we’ve managed in the
old days, between here and Herberton, there would
have been some ‘tall writing,’ as the Yankees say,
there would so. Bai Jove ! ” the Inspector adds aloud,
rising from his chair and peering out of the open door
down the bare barrack yard to where the square, rush-
covered huts of the boys stand side by side, “ if that
isn’t Puttis back again. Wonder if he’s been sent up
to replace me ? Why, he was only ordered down to
Nanga district six weeks ago.”
The small, military figure of Inspector Puttis, to
whom we have already introduced our readers half-a-
dozen chapters back, dismounts quickly from the




magnificent chestnut which has carried him from
Cairns, and, after a few rapid words to his black
; orderly, who has dismounted also, rapidly marches
the scrupulously neat yard towards the residence
of his brother officer. The white sergeant of the local
force, and two or three native constables who are
standing near, stand “attention ” and give the military
salute as the dapper little man passes them, which
he replies to by lifting his riding cane to his cabbage-
tree hat.
Whilst the new-comer is being welcomed by In-
spector Bigger, let us glance at the more prominent
objects in the scene before us.
Two rows of weather-board iron-roofed buildings,
amongst which are the white sergeant’s quarters,
stretch down a slight declivity to where they meet
at right angles a terrace of brown, single-roomed
huts, occupied by the native constables. At the
upper end of the fair-sized quadrangle thus formed,
the thatched, bungalow-like home of the Chief, covered
with creeping plants and standing in a brilliant
flower garden, looks down on the rest from the
summit of the moderate rise on which the barracks
are situated.
The “ boy ” who arrived with the Inspector, and
who, in company with several other natives, is now
leading the two horses to the stockyard down by the
heavily-timbered water-hole, is in the well-known
uniform of the Black Police. This consists of a linen-
covered shako, blue-jacket garnished with red braid,
and white duck trousers ; brown leather gaiters reach
to the “ boy’s ” knees, and he wears an old pair of his
master’s enormously long spurs on his “ Blucher ”


boots. As be is “in marching order,” a brass cartridge
belt, containing Snider cartridges, is slung, after the
fashion of a sergeant’s scarf, around his body, io
complete this somewhat lengthy description of a
uniform to be seen only in “ up-country ” Australia,
we may add that a Snider carbine hangs in its “busket
and strap from the “ off ” side of the “ boy’s ’’ saddle. ■>
• A few boys in the u undress ”of a pair of trousers
are sweeping one corner of the yard, and from the
doors of the dwellings the brightly turbaned heads of
a number of native women, the property of the Chinese
cook and white constables, are lolling out for a view
of the new arrivals.
But to return to the two officers, who are nOw
seated under the verandah of Inspector Bigger’s.
home, near a table loaded with the usual “ spiritual
signs of Australian hospitality.
“ Well, Puttis, so you’re going up to Murdaro again,
are you?” begins the host, after the preliminary,
courtesies of greeting have been gone through between
the two friends. “ Bai Jove 1 I wish I had the
influence you have, old fellow, with our lords and
masters down there at Brisbane. Ah! you sly dog,
can I congratulate you yet?” asks the smiling elder
man. “There’s not the slightest doubt but Miss
Mundella’s the handsomest, eh? and the smartest
young lady this side of the Clarence. Did she ever
tell you, by-the-bye, old man, that I knew her father?
« Never,” replies Puttis, with his customary brevity,
just letting his jaws open and shut to emit the word,
much like a fox-terrier does when it snaps at a
troublesome “ blue-bottle.”
“ Old Mr. Mundella—it was young Mundella then


—was one of the first to take up country near where
you’ve just come from. And d’you know,” continues
the verbose Bigger in a low tone of voice, “d’you
know, they used to say at the time that it was our
old friend Giles, that’s got Murdaro now, that cleaned
him out of his run, and not the ‘ pleuro ’ (a cattle
disease) at all.”
“ Humph,” observes Inspector Puttis.
u Yes, that his wife’s brother did it. Well, upon
my soul, I would not be surprised at anything I heard
of Giles doing. Mundella was grand company, and
I don t think I ever saw a better shot at a running
nigger in my life, except yourself.”
u Hah I ’ snorts the little man in the black, frogged
jacket, “ that is nothing,” and he bows in acknow-
ledgment of the compliment paid to him by his
friend. “Have lived with finger on trigger—night
and day-over ten years, may say. You shot well
yourself, a few years back.”
“Age making me old and shaky now, me boy,”
answers Bigger; and if he had said a life of almost
unrestrained licentiousness he would have been nearer
to the truth. “ But what have you done with your
troop, Puttis ? ”
“ Camped down creek. Four miles. Some niggers
camped there. Want my ‘ boys ’ to pick up some
information. About man I’m after.”
“ Ah I a nigger ? ”
“ Yes ; perhaps you can help me.”
“ With pleasure, if I can,” replied the elder In-
spector, adding, “Especially, my dear fellow, as I
sha’n’t feel so diffident about asking your assistance,
in that case, in a little affair of my own.”


The host has by this time had six “ nips ” to his
guest’s abstemious one, so turning his head towards
Puttis he rattles on ; “ But won’t you alter your
mind and have another ? Or, if you prefer it, I’ve
some real, genuine ‘ potheen.’ Queensland make,
of course, but just like the real stuff. One of my old
constituents on the Barron river, ha! ha I sent it to
me.” The two men smile and wink knowingly at
each other. “Chinamen never forget a generous
action, ha ! ha ! ”
Laughing at the remembrance of how he obtained
the “ potheen,” and filling his glass from the decanter
on the table with a very shaky hand, the jovial
inspector continues, —
“ In consequence of information received from one of
my ‘ boys,’ I rode up to the chinky’s little scrub farm
one day, two years ago. ‘ John,’ said I, ‘ how many
bushels of corn you get off this piece of ground ? ’
‘ Welly bad crop, Missie Bigger,’ answered the yellow
devil, with a sly look at me to see how I took the
lie he’d just uttered. ‘No goody Chinaman makey
garden here. Twenty bushels me sell to Missie
Brown. That all,’ and the cursed spawn of Confucius
kicked some of the rich soil contemptuously over with
his sandal. Any one could see there’d been a big
crop, perhaps three hundred bushels off the land,
by the heaps of husks off the heads of maize lying
about the clearing. * Well, John,’ said I, leaning over
in my saddle so that some friends who were with me
shouldn’t hear, ‘ well, John, you can send me a little
of the 1 real stuff’ you sold Mac Duff on Saturday,
and then, whether you get twenty or five hundred
bushels here, I sha’n’t trouble to ask yon what you use


it for next time.’ Hal La ! how Li Ching (that was
his name) stared I He grew green, but he never
opened his lips. But what’s more to the purpose, he’s
sent me a box of potatoes, regularly, every few months
since, which I have carried carefully into my bedroom.
I’m sure you’d like it. Take a bottle or two with you
for Giles. He’s a good judge. What ? ”
“ Thanks, awfully,” replies Inspector Puttis. “Do
so with pleasure. But what’s your trouble ? Little
affair you mentioned ? ”
f The jolly smile that has illuminated Inspector
Bigger’s face during his telling of the previous anec-
dote fades suddenly upon the objectionable subject
of the official inquiry being recalled to his memory.
He hands the red-sealed epistle and the newspaper
cutting to his friend with a sigh, and watches the
expressionless face of the little man as he carefully
reads both with anxiety.
“ Well, Puttis, what had I better do about that ? ”
“ About correct ? ” inquires the person addressed,
pointing to the clipping in his hand.
“ Oh, I think so. Of course I wasn’t there. No
good my going up those beastly hills in the wet. You
see, there’s not been much doing lately in our line
about here, and the ‘ boys ’ were getting troublesome,
so I told Blarney (the sergeant) to see if he couldn’t
find something for them to do. He heard of niggers
having been seen up Mulberry Creek way, and ”
.>-/X v V f
“ How did you word report ? ” interrupts Puttis,
lighting a cigarette.
“ Oh I same old style : 1 Having received repeated
complaints from, the Mulberry Scrub settlers of the
wholesale destruction caused by a ferocious tribe of


dangerous Myall blacks, ’—and that kind of thing,
you know.”
“Ahl too risky nowadays!” snaps Inspector ruttis,
again interrupting his senior. “ Can you get a written
complaint? ‘We demand assistance,’and that style
of thing ? ”
«Qh 1 there’s Thompson, and that old Herman
Bauer,— he wants to sell me a couple of cows.
Either would do that for me, I think”
u Umph I ” grunts Inspector Puttis, a I d like to
see sergeant. Will think I’m up here about case.”
The white sergeant is summoned to the presence ot
the two superior officers, through the medium of a
native constable who is weeding the garden close by,
and, after a little word fencing, he settles down into
an account of the occurrence which corresponds, in
most particulars, with that of “our trustworthy corre-
spondent.” In answer to a question put to him ,he
continues, — ,
“ I heard of the camp, sorr, from a young gmtleman,
yer honours, who kapes the stour at Eiversleigh, an
he tells me, sorr, that one of them miner chaps up at
High Cliff |had tould him as how two murthering
thaves of nigger women was in the creek by their
camp lately. ‘ Divil tax ’em, sorr,’ he said, but the
varmints they got away before the miner could get
his mates to help catch ’em.” „
“ Were the miners glad to see you and the ‘ boys :
demands Puttis. # jk>-
“ Sure, sorr, it’s yourself has guessed the right words
they spake, sorr. They was sulky as bandicootes, an’
never said a word till I amused ’em. with me arthful
stories, —the 6 hhoys 5 having started afther the fire


on the hill. ( We’re not afraid of the niggers,’ said
one, —who I’ll kape me eyes on when he’s in town for
a bit of a spree, —‘ we hain’t afraid of niggers ; let
’em bide.’”
“Wait a bit, sergeant. How do miners get tucket
(provisions) up there ? ”
“ It’s Thompson, sorr, the only settler, yer honours,
on that side of the Cliffs ; he kills fur ’em.”
u ls that Thompson who trained the bloodhounds
for Inspector Versley ? ”
“ The same, sorr.”
“ That’ll do, sergeant.” The energetic non-commis-
sioned officer salutes and withdraws, and Puttis turns
towards the local chief.
“ Say, Bigger, have you got that western * boy’ you
lent me once? What was his name? Oh I' Toma-
hawk. Got him still ? ”
“No, accidentally shot. Very sorry to lose him,
for he was a good 1 boy.’ He knew every nigger’s
tracks for fifty miles round. No, I lent him to
Versley, and you know what Versley is. Tomahawk
gave him a piece of cheek, and —and he was acci-
dentally shot.”
“ Ah! that’s a pity. Fact is, I want a ‘ boy ’ who
knows the western lingo. Also knows scrub. Got
one ? ”
“ Yes ; Teapot’s a good ‘ boy.’ ”
“ I want to get hold of that educated nigger that
Dyesart had with him when he died. Giles heard
him telling other niggers. Had killed Dyesart. Have
got warrant to arrest him. Served Dyesart right
though. Educating a cursed nigger.”
“ Oh, you mean that fellow Billy. Why, I thought


he brought a letter or something to Murdaro from
Dyesart. Should not be surprised if the nigger wrote
it himself though. Those civilized blacks are up to
anything.”
“He was at Murdaro,” remarks Inspector Puttis,
“ but he made himself scarce.” He might have added,
for he knew it to be a fact, that Billy had only made
himself “ scarce ” because he had very good reasons
for believing that Mr. Wilson Giles intended to make
him altogether “ extinct,” —the reason for that worthy
gentleman’s inhospitable behaviour being explained
and set forth hereafter for the benefit of our readers.
“ Shouldn’t be surprised if he was at the Mission
Station,” observes Inspector Bigger, after a short pause
for reflection. “If so, I can get him for you. I’ve
got a little gin (girl) that will fetch him, if he’s to be
fetched out of the sanctuary where all these rascals
go to.” After another pause, and a “ peg ”at the
volatile fluid on the table, the speaker continues
musingly, —
“ If these missionary fellows did any good I wouldn’t
object, but they don’t. They just teach those black
devils of theirs to think themselves better than a
white man. Why, one beggar they’ve reared they
sent over here, —in a black coat, if you please ! —who
had the impudence, curse him ! to give a sermon in
the Wesleyans’ Gospel-mill down there.”
“Ha ! ha ! ” laughs Puttis grimly, looking straight
in front of him, his left hand unconsciously fingering
the revolver pouch on his hip. “These mission
stations. Good preserves for us sometimes. Besides
missionaries prevent squatters doing our work them-
selves. No missionaries, no Black Police very soon.


A Black War, like they had in Tasmania, would soon
result. No more niggers for us to disperse.”
Taking a Sydney paper from his breast pocket, the
little man points to it, asking if his friend has “ Seen
this ? ”
Inspector Bigger adjusts his eyeglass after some
nervous, blundering attempts, and with some trouble,
for he has “ nipped ” himself into a happy, sleepy
mood by this time, makes out the following paragraph
in the Sydney Telegraph.
‘DEPREDATIONS BY BLACKS.
SWEEPING CHARGES AGAINST THE MISSIONS.
“(By Telegeaph.)
“ Adelaide,- Wednesday.
“ A deputation of Northern Territory pastoralists to-day
asked the Government to send more mounted police to the
Territory in order to deal with depredatory blacks, who
killed large numbers of stock. The majority of these
natives belonged to the mission stations. The Minister for
Education, in reply, said it seemed to him that the mission
stations did more harm than good. He had official infor-
mation that all the black outlaws in the : Territory made
for the missions when hard pressed and the missionaries
protected them, and that the worst cattle-killers were the
mission aboriginals. He was sorry, however, that owing to
the bad state of the finances of the Northern Territory
additional police protection could not be granted.”
“Yes,” murmurs the inspector, when he has got
the gist of the article fairly into his slightly muddled
brain. “That’s comforting. Right man' in right
place. Education’s the thing. He knows what he’s


talking about. As long as we’ve squatters the
ministry and on the bench we’re all right, eh ?
“ Yes, and when Western Australia is out of home
Government’s interference. Ha! ha ! something to
do for squatters there, I fancy. 11l see Thompson,
Puttis adds, rising, “ about your affair. He knows
me. Never allow nonsense from cockatoos (settlers).
He will send evidence you want. Double quick time.
And Inspecter Puttis knows what he is talking
about, and is not bragging when he declares himself
superior to the irritations occasioned wilfully at times
by settlers. There were not wanting instances where
imprudent scrub-farmers and others had suddenly
lost horses and cattle; had found their cottages
burned to the ground on a temporary absence in the
bush ; had left their crops safe over night, to wake
cornless and hayless next morning; and yet no
trace of the ravagers and thieves was to be found
when the aid of the Black Police trackers had been
called in to help to discover the aggressors. And as
such invisible pirates, it was noticed, appaiently only
attacked the holdings of the few persons who were
publicly at enmity with the Black Police, ugly stories
got about that pointed to the N. M. u boys as having
played the role of midnight marauding Myalls (wild
aborigines) “at the special request ot the officers of
their troop.
Inspector Puttis now proceeds to bid his host adieu,
and before he goes arranges for the neighbouring
mission station to be watched for the arrival ot
Billy.
******
It is growing dark when Miss Mundella s Jlciuce


leaves the barracks, and be rides with loose rein
at an easy canter towards his camp. The black
“ boy,” Inspector Pnttis’s aide-de-camp, follows some
hundred yards behind. After a couple of miles along
the red clay banks of a dried-up mountain torrent, the
track leads up a small ridge into an outlying portion
of the dense u scrub,” or jungle, that covers the high
ranges on either hand. Here the way becomes far
more difficult to travel, and the riders allow their
clever steeds to slowly pick their own path. The
clay surface of the treacherous road, worn into wave-
like corrugations, a foot or more in depth, from the
passing trains of pack-mules from the distant tin-
mines, and ever moist with the dews of the dense
tropical growth on either hand, is quite dark with
the overhanging branches of buttressed fig-trees of
gigantic growth, of > graceful palms and pendent
ferns and creepers, whilst dangerous stinging-trees
and lawyer-vines to right and left render caution
necessary. But the other side of the patch of scrub
is safely reached, and the inspector is just about to
urge his horse into another canter, when that animal
suddenly snorts and bounds to the other side of the
track. This impromptu action probably saved its
rider’s life, for as it does so, phut! and a long kangaroo
spear flies harmlessly past the inspector’s body, and
goes clattering down upon the stony bottom of the
watercourse in front.
Puttis, although a perfectly fearless man, is one
of those persons who never throws a chance away,
and, knowing what good cause the aborigines of
the district have to wish for his destruction, always
carries a revolver in his hand when out late in the


scrub. Almost before the spear has toncbed tbe
ground, certainly before it is motionless, tbe active
little man has swung round in his saddle, and fired
a snap-shot at his cowardly assailant, whose dusky
form can just be seen, as he stands, paralyzed for an
instant at the escape of his victim, upon a fallen tice
trunk by the wayside. A sparkling burst of flame,
a crashing echo, half drowned with a yell of agon} ,
and the inspector’s horse becomes unmanageable,
and bolts with him down the track into the open land
beyond.
When Puttis can prevail on his horse to return into
the scrub, he finds his attendant native constable
standing by the side of the prostrate body of the
would-be murderer, examining him by the light of
a wax match he has just struck. The wounded
savage, who is desperately hurt in the region of the
right lung, scowls up at his enemies as they lean
over him. He is quite naked, and lies on the road on
his left side. The necklace of joints of yellow grass
that he wears, shows him to be in mourning for a
relative.
“What name this beggar, Yegeree?” inquires
Puttis of his constable, meaning, “ Who is this ? ”
“ Malle beggar, Marmie. Him bin long a ’tation,
mine think it” (Bad fellow, master, has been a
station-hand, I think), pointing to some half-healed
scars on the man’s shoulder-blades that demonstrate
to the experienced eyes looking down on him that he
has recently received a flogging.
“ Any more black fellows about ? ”
“No more black beggar, Marmie. This one sit
down long his self, ’ replies the trained black, in


whose wonderful powers of hearing, seeing, and de-
duction his officer has perfect confidence.
“What ’tation you belong to ?” continues Yegeree,
kicking the wounded man with the toe of his
boot.
“ Ah-r-r-r,” growls the wounded savage, with such
angry fierceness that Inspector Puttis’s revolver drops
into position, ready to give the sufferer his coup de
grace should he attempt any mischief.
“ Monta karaan ! ” (curse you I) hisses the feeble
voice, “ you white devil. You kill nm lubra
(wife); you kill um pickaninnie; you,”—he pauses
to gasp for breath, —“ you kill um all about
black fellow. No more brudder long a me. Ah !
no more brudder long a me. Monta karaan!! ”
The sufferer’s head drops down towards the ground,
and he literally bites the dust, or rather mud, in
a frenzy of passion and agony. Then he becomes
unconscious apparently, and murmurs a few unin-
telligible words, followed by a groaning request
for—
“ Kouta! kouta /” (Water, water.)
“ Ah ! ” muses Puttis to himself, knowing by ex-
perience that a dying man speaks his last words in
the language of his childhood, however much he may
have forgotten it a little while before, when in full
health. “Ah I Kouta is a western word. He’s a run-
away nigger, and has been living with some tribe about
here. He will be very well out of the way.” And
nodding to his black aide-de-camp, who thereupon
begins to drag the wounded savage off the track into
the scrub, the inspector mounts and rides off.
As he reaches the other side of the dried-up


river-bed once more, bis chestnut starts at the sound of
a single carbine shot that rings out with weird, muffled
suddenness from the dark glades he has just left. It
is the requiem of another departed member of the fast-
fading aboriginal race of Australia.


CHAPTER XII.
BILLY AND THE U HATTER.”
“ He traced with dying hand ‘ Remorse,’
And perished in the tracing.”
J. G. Whittier.
IXTY miles in a southerly
direction from the place
where Inspector Puttis met
with the adventure related
in our last chapter, the
figure of a man is reposing
beside a silent rocky pool,
in the heart of a dense jungle.
The tropic vegetation around
him is part of the same
straggling line of “ scrub-
country ” that covers the great,
nigged shoulders of the coast-
range of Northern Queensland
with a soft green mantle of
indescribable grandeur and
beauty. Enormous fig-trees {Ficus), with gigantic,
buttressed stems, tower on all sides into the hanging
gardens of climbing ferns, orchids, and creepers that
swing above in mid-air, and provide the dark, moist


soil beneath with a perennial shelter from the sun’s
rays.
Save where a brawling brooklet has cut a rugged
pathway for itself through the dense undergrowth,
or a hoary monarch of the forest has succumbed to
age and insect foes and fallen to the ground, no road
through the matted growths around seems passable
but for the smallest animals. Yet it is in these
gloomy wilds that some of the tribes of Queensland
aboriginals find their only safe sanctuary to-day, from
the white settlers who have driven them from their
old homes in the open country at the foot of the moun-
tain chain. It is midday, but the green shadows
of the leafy canopy overhead would render the reading
of a newspaper difficult work. But although so dark,
the forest is not silent. Its great pulses throb and
murmur with the pleonastic signs of tropic life.
There comes upon the ear the thousand tiny voices
of insects and of birds, swelling and dying in a
soft-toned lullaby chorus, which, like the murmur ot
the coast-waves ten miles to the eastward, is never
ceasing.
It does not require a second glance at the lonely
figure at the little rocky pool to ascertain that it is
that of an aboriginal. He is dressed in the ragged
remains of a coarse woollen shirt and trousers, both
of which garments are so torn with the thousand
thorns of the thickets their wearer has just traversed
that the wonder is that they still cling to his thin
and emaciated body. ■
Presently the black raises himself from the ground,
where he has been reposing at full length upon his
back, with his arms extended at right angles to his


body, after the fashion of aboriginals who have under-
gone excessive fatigue, and totters towards the little
water-hole. First examining the sand upon its banks
for footmarks, he next proceeds to bathe his bruised
and bleeding limbs. The man before us is Billy, the
late Dr. Dyesart’s “ boy,” and he is almost in as bad a
plight as when we saw him on the eventful morning
by Paree Eiver’s side, when the explorer saved the
wounded child from the uplifted axe of the squatter’s
tracker. Billy is now a young man of twenty-four
years of age, well-built, active, and handsome for an
aboriginal ; but the privations and trouble he has
lately undergone have pulled him down considerably.
After refreshing himself at the pool, he sits down on
a fallen tree, and, feeling in his pockets, smiles to him-
self as he finds that he still possesses a pipe, tobacco,
and matches. He is too fatigued to search for food
yet awhile, and here is something to stave off the
feeling of hunger for a time. Odd as it may appear
to those of our readers who do not know Australia
intimately, Billy, although a native, and born a
warragal , or wild native, was almost as helpless as a
white man in this “ scrub ” country, as regards finding
the means of sustenance. Take an aboriginal from
the semi-desert interior of Australia, and place him in
the coastal jungles of the north-eastern shores of the
great island, and he is hardly more capable of getting
his living there than a European, who then saw the
“ bush ” for the first time, would be under similar cir-
cumstances. The fauna and flora were all new to
Billy ; even the snakes were different. This was bad
enough, but, in addition, he had only just escaped
from remorseless enemies, who might even now be


again upon his tracks. The dependent life he had led
for sixteen years with his old master was much against
him, now that he was thrown upon his own resources.
Much of his late life had of course been in the “ wilds,”
but they were very different to those that now formed
his hiding-place. And, besides, there had generally
been flour galore for u damper ” and u Johnnie-cake
making, and always plenty of powder and shot as a
dernier ressort with which to procure a meal.
The young man sits smoking and thinking for a
while, and then falls to digging away at the rotten
wood upon which he is seated, —a small, toothsome
luncheon of fat, oily grubs rewarding his operations.
Suddenly he stops, and withdrawing the pipe from his
mouth listens intently. His marvellous powers of
hearing have detected a distant sound that, falling on
the tympanum of a European’s ear, would have become
jumbled up and lost amidst the confusing buzz of
flies and other myriads of tiny noises around him.
What the sound is caused by Billy cannot tell, but it
is a stationary one, and in a different direction from
that by which any of his pursuers are likely to ap-
proach. It may be natives chopping down a tree for
honey, but it is almost too sharp in tone for that.
After listening awhile the young man rises, and, having
determined to ascertain the cause of the phenomenon,
begins to crawl down the bed of the little rocky creek
near by in the direction of the curious sounds.
Bagged fragments of basalt, straggling tendrils of
sharp-toothed lawyer-vines, and other impediments,
make his progress slow and painful ; but after creep-
ing along the half-dried-up course of the torrent about
a quarter of a mile, where hundreds of mosquitoes and


leeches combined, in a sort of guerilla warfare, to
attack the black’s arms, legs, and face, he at last finds
himself on the edge of a cliff, above one of those
curious, circular, crater-lakes that abound in one part
of the great uplands of the wild coast-range.
Black walls of basalt rise more or less perpen-
dicularly around the dark, indigo water at their feet.
Here and there the ancient lava has crystallized into
prismatic columns, or weathered into picturesque
battlements and projections, which stand up, like the
ruins of some old abbey, above the feathery palms
and undergrowth that struggles down the precipitous
cliffs in places in avalanches of sunlit emerald or
shady o’erhangings of brown and purple.
The dark mountain tarn is some two hundred yards
across, and opposite to where the stream, whose bed
has hitherto been Billy’s road through the jungle,
joins it, the surrounding wall of cliffs seems to fall
away, as far as one can make out in the shadows,
as if the waters of the lake there found a means of
exit.
Cautiously peering through the prickly palms and
brushwood, our black friend endeavours to find an
open space through which he can proceed on his way;
but so dense is the mass of vegetation on all sides
that there appears but one road to take, that offered
to himlby the lake itself.
It speaks well for the superstitionless training Billy
had received at his late master’s hands that he at
last determined to take water, as a means of continuing
his journey towards the sounds that still, intermit-
tently, make themselves heard above the various
voices of the forest. For little in nature can surpass


the awful, supernatural look of these black, silent
jungle lakes, and there was something particularly
u uncanny ” about the appearance of this one. And
when, in addition to this, there was the certainty
of those dark waters being the abode of more or
less numerous swimming snakes, also the grim pos-
sibility of some frightful veengnaan —the local Aus-
tralian edition of a Scotch “ water-kelpie lurking
in those gloomy depths, we may safely say that it
showed Billy to be possessed of a cool courage of no
ordinary sort when he determined on trusting his
fatigued and wounded body to its inky bosom.
Quickly making up his mind, he wriggles through
the springy mass of steaming vegetation upon the
edge of the cliff before him,— losing quite a number
of square inches of his fast-disappearing garments m
the process,—and emerges from the shadows into the
fierce mid-day heat of a tropical winter da}.
A drop of twenty feet only has to be made to
reach the silent waters at this point, for the storm-
creek has cut through the brim of the crater basin a
dozen feet or more ; and Billy is just about to make
the necessary dive—as the prickly vines around offer
no friendly chance of descending by their means—
when he pauses to listen once moie.
There are two sounds now audible above the
ordinary murmurings of the forest. The clink !
clink ! of the noise he has followed now comes clearly
upon the ear, and he recognizes it as proceeding from
the pick of some prospector or miner working a
creek or gully below, and beyond the lake. There is
a cheerful ring about it that strikes a pleasant chord
of remembrance in the mind of the poor, hunted


wretch who now hears it; for it reminds him of happy,
hopeful days with his old master. But the other
sound that is upon the air, and whose purport Billy
recognizes as easily as that of the unseen worker’s
blows, —there is no mistaking those musical whisper-
ings that are just audible, and seem to come from that
broken mass of piled-up grey and purple rock that
towers above the scrub a little distance off upon his
right hand. The “ banked-up fires ”of Billy’s savage
nature burst up into an energetic blaze as he hears
the voices of a party of natives arranging themselves
into a half circle, with the intention of surrounding
and capturing some prey they have discovered. Billy
correctly guesses the purport of these signals, but
does not understand the exact meaning of the words,
for he knows little or nothing of the coastal languages.
What the natives on the rocky hill have in view is
evident: it is the busy worker in the gully beyond.
Billy forgets his fatigue as he glances round and
satisfies himself that he has the start of the hunters,
and then plunging into the water, with marvellously
little noise considering the height from which he has
descended, swims after the manner of a dog rapidly
round the lake, keeping close to the cliffs on the side
nearest to the approaching blacks.
The natives of most countries situated in the southern
hemisphere, ere foreign civilization has crushed them
in her deadly embrace, are good swimmers, but some
of the inland tribes of Australian aborigines are
perhaps able to produce the best of these, —men who
can beat even the marvellous aquatic feats of Tongan,
Samoan, and Maoris. The blacks of some portions
of the central wilds have a fish-like proclivity for


swimming and remaining for a long time under water
that is simply marvellous.
In the muddy water-holes of the great, intermit-
tently-flowing rivers of Northern Australia, we have
seen aborigines successfully chase the finny denizens
of the deep pools, and bring them otter-like to the
shore in their white-toothed jaws. And many a
hunted black has saved himself from the cruel rifle
of squatter invaders of his native land by pretending
to fall as if shot into a river or water-hole, and
remaining, apparently, at the bottom. They manage
this artifice in various ways : sometimes by swimming
an incredible distance under water to a sheltering
weedy patch or bed of rushes, where they can remain
hidden ; but more often by plastering their heads and
faces with mud, and remaining, sometimes for hours,
with only their nose above water, in some corner
where floating leaves, grass, or the like, afford a
temporary blind to baffle their relentless foes.
Billy, although by no means as perfect a swimmer
as some of his countrymen, showed great skill in the
way in which he noiselessly moved through the water
to the opposite side of the black lake, and hardly a
ripple disturbed its placid surface, above which his
dark, glistening head only thrice briefly appeared
during his swim.
Arrived at the point he had started for, the young
man slowly raises his face again into the hot sunshine
behind the leafy cover of a fallen mass of enormous
stagshorn ferns, and carefully reconnoitres the summit
of the opposite cliffs for any enemies who may be
watching him.
None are in sight, so Billy leaves the water ,and


proceeds to climb the rough side of the old volcano
crater, and as the rocks are lower and less precipitous
than at the place where he dived into the lake, he
soon reaches the shelter of the scrub once more. A
kind of rugged giants’ staircase, which the overflow
from the lake has cut in the ancient lava covering
of the mountain, now leads Billy down into a wide,
wild-looking gorge, about two hundred feet below the
surface of the dark tarn above. Through the centre
of this deep gully, and flanked with a dense growth
of gracefully festooned trees, runs a clear, silver stream,
with a cool, refreshing, rushing voice, amongst the
smooth, rounded bounders in its course. Taking its
rise in some limestone formation in the unknown
depths of the jungles beyond, it has painted its rocky
bed of a pine white with a calcareous deposit, that
stands out in strong relief to the sombre hues of the
overhanging cliffs that here and there jut out boldly
from the verdure on either side.
Each recurring wet season sees the whitened
boulders swept off towards the sea-coast by the angry
brown waters of the “ flushed ” river, in company with
the like that has collected during the interval since
the previous rains, and then the fierce torrent, gradu-
ally settling down once more into the bubbling little
stream as we now have it, sets to work again to paint
a fresh strip of white through the twilight forest
glades. •
Kneeling by the side of one of the chain of snowy
pools that stretches into the misty vista of graceful
palms and dark-leaved trees, beneath the afternoon
shadows of the gorge, is a strange-looking figure,
quite in keeping with the wild surroundings,—a thin,


elderly man, with a ragged, unkempt beard and
deeply bronzed and furrowed face, shaded by the
most dilapidated of soft felt hats. The spare figure
that Billy is now watching is covered with clothes
so old, patched, and repatched that one would hesitate
to pronounce an opinion as to which of the frowsy
fragments formed part of the original garments. A
certain yellow tone of colour, something between that
of a nicely browned loaf and the lighter tints of a
Cheddar cheese, pervades the “ altogether ” of the old
man, for the iron-rust and clay-stains of years of
lonely toil amongst the mountains have dyed both
skin and rags of one common colour.
A thin but muscular left hand holds the outer rim
of a brown, circular iron pan, —called by miners a
“prospecting dish,” —and presses its other edge against
the ancient’s open-bosomed shirt, so as to keep the
vessel firmly in position, as the keen old eyes examine
its contents for the cheering yellow specks with a
small pocket-lens.
Billy stands looking at the old prospector for a
minute, and rightly guesses that he is one of those
mining recluses, called “ hatters ” in Australia, some
specimens of which class our dark friend has met
before. In fact, Billy’s curiosity as a miner himself
makes him nearly forget the approaching natives, in
his eagerness to ascertain if the dish now being
“panned off” shows the presence of the precious
metal in the locality. But this hesitation on his part
is not for long. Billy has retained his European
raiment at some considerable inconvenience in his
flight through the scrub, for the same reason that
chiefly prompts Australian aboriginals to put such
13


value upon the sartorial signs of civilization, and now
he is to reap the fruits of his forethought.
Many an Australian hushman will shoot a native
at sight, without compunction, if in puris naturalibus ,
and it is a fact that many make it a rule to do so when
meeting a “ nigger ” alone in the bush; but the same
individuals would hesitate to pay this attention to a
black sheltered in that badge of servitude, an old
shirt or ragged pair of inexpressibles whose wearer
may possibly belong to a neighbouring squatter or
police inspector.
Billy trusts now implicitly to his torn clothes to
serve as a flag of truce till he can get a hearing from
the man whose life he is probably about to save;
and careless of the fact that the old miner has a
revolver hanging in the open pouch at his belt, and
that a fowling-piece lies by the pick within a yard of
the thin, hairy right arm, he girds up his tatters and
commences to whistle loudly as he makes his way
over the hot boulders towards the curious, propensic
figure by the stream-side.
The old prospector turns suddenly as the shrill
notes of Billy’s musical trilling echo along the rocky
sides of the glen, and, dropping his dish, snatches up
the brown old “ Manton ” by his side.
“ Hold on, boss ! ” shouts Billy, thinking for the
instant that perhaps he had been too rash after all, in
leaving his shelter amongst the rocks before holding
a parley with the stranger.
“ Hold on, boss ; you’ll want your powder for war-
ragal blacks directly, and better not waste it on ‘ good
fellow ’ like me.”
“ Who the devil are you ? Move a step an’ I blow


your brains out,” responds the old man, lowering the
piece, however, from his shoulder.
“ I’m white fellow’s boy,” explains Billy, sitting
down on a boulder in order to show his faith in the
miner’s good sense, and also to give that dangerously
excited old individual a chance to examine him and
cool down. “ I’m white fellow’s boy, and I see black
fellow coming after you. They make a circle to catch
you. See, I have swum the lake to bring to you this
news. I was hidden when I saw them first. They
will try to get me now as well as you ; you must let
me go with you.”
Where’s your boss ? ” asks the old miner, glancing
round on all sides for any signs of approaching
foes.
“My boss is dead. His name was Dr. Dyesart,
Dyesart the explorer. Perhaps you’ve heard of him ?
But you had better clear before the Kurra (vermin)
reach us.”
The old “ hatter’s ” eyes gleam suspiciously at Billy
as he speaks again.
“Yer may be a good nigger. But yer too durned
well spoken fur a nigger fur my thinkin’. I knew
Dyesart once, and I’ll soon find out if ye’re trying ter
fool me. But here, take the pick an’ dish, and go on
ahead of me down past the rock there.”
Billy picks up the utensils mentioned, and, sum-
moning up all the remainder of his strength, totters
along the bed of the stream in the direction indicated
by the skinny finger of the dirty old solitary, who
comes shuffling along after him.
The part of the ravine the two men are now enter-
ing is even wilder than that where they first became


acquainted with each other. The ground sinks rapidly,
as the increasing noisiness of the brawling streamlet
indicates, as it leaps from rock to rock on its way, as
if rejoicing upon its approach to freedom and the sea.
Some way down the gorge, the steamy haze ot a
cataract climbs up the cliff sides and blots out further
view in that direction, and the soft thunderings of
falling waters come up the gully at intervals, as the
evening breeze begins to stir the topmost branches of
the stately trees.
Great black cliffs tower skywards on the left-hand
side, and their grim fronts yawn with numerous
caves, the cold husks of what were once enormous
air-bubbles in that awful flood of molten rock that in
the far-off past poured down these mountain slopes
from the Bellenden Ker group of ancient volcanoes.
A few more words have passed between Billy and
the ancient “ hatter,” which have apparently fairly
satisfied the latter as to the goodness of the dark-
skinned younger man, when the clamour of shouting
voices behind them makes both turn round.
The sight that meets their eyes is by no means a
pleasant one. Halfway down a part of the cliffs that
the two men had passed only a minute or so before,
a party of natives has just arrived, all of them naked,
and carrying long spears, probably with the intention
of cutting off the old digger’s escape down the gully.
These sable hunters, seeing that their quarry has, for
the time, escaped them, are shouting to their friends
up the gorge to join them, for a fresh effort to sur-
round the object of their hatred and suspicion.
“ Only just in time, boss 1 ” exclaims Billy, his white
eyeballs glowing like coals from their dark setting of


swarthy skin, as he watches the rapid movements of
the enemy, who are moving along the summit of the
cliff towards them. “Those devils got you safe
enough, s’pose they’d kept you up there till daik,
pointing to the open part of the gorge.
“ 33ut where will you camp ? I m tired. In fact,
just ’bout done. I have walked many miles to-day,
and have eaten little since three days.
« This is my camp,” answers the “ hatter,” climbing
up to one of the aforementioned caves with an agility
that a far younger man might have envied. “We
can keep out of the niggers’ way here.” And the old
man coolly began to collect some sticks and leaves
that lay about the entrance to the cavern, in order
to start a fire, just as if two or three score of howl-
ing savages, all thirsting for his destruction, within
a couple of hundred yards of him, was a matter of
every-day occurrence to him, and therefore one of no
importance.
Night falls quickly, and outside the cave the darken-
ing forest begins its night chorus of many voices,
day-choristers retiring one by one. The mountain teal
whistle and “ burr ”in answer to each other ; owls
and night-jars scream and gurgle in the trees ; boon-
garies (tree-kangeroos) squeak and bark to their
mates, as they leave the branches for a night stroll in
the scrub ; and every crevice of the caves gives forth
its dark legions of flitting bats, some of enormous size,
who vociferate shrilly, with ear-piercing notes, as if
thousands of ghostly slate pencils were squeaking in
mid-air on an equal number of spectre slates.
Inside the cave, which is much larger than its small,
porthole-like entrance might lead one to imagine, the


two men speedily make themselves as comfortable as
they can under the circumstances. There is ample
room for the fire that soon lights up the concave roof
of the cavern with a cheerful, ruddy glow, and the
smoke rolling out of the doorway keeps the place
clear of mosquitoes, who are getting pretty lively out-
side already.
The old “ hatter ” has used this retreat as his camp-
ing ground for the last few days, whilst prospecting
this part of the upper waters of the unnamed creek,
that can be heard in the darkness flowing past his
temporary abode, and a small but sufficient supply
of flour, tea, and sugar is to be seen carefully suspended
from the stalactite-like projections from the ceiling
of the cave. This provender, with the remains of a
couple of pigeons, half a dozen wild turkeys’ eggs
and some coohooy nuts give promise of a good “ square
meal,” at last, to the exhausted and half-famished
Billy.
“ Yer’ve done me a good turn, and though yer are
a nigger, yer welcome ter what I’ve got here,” remarks
the grey-headed old gold-seeker after a long silence,
during which he has disinterred some of the afore-
mentioned viands from an anti-wild dog pyramid of
stones in one corner of the cave.
“ Them blarmed devils outside hain’t seen a white
face up here afore I’m thinking, and I guess they’ll
not bother us till morning. What do you think,
Charlie, or Jackie, or whatever yer name is ? ”
“ My name’s Billy, boss,” replies our dark friend,
who is endeavouring to keep himself awake by fran-
tically chewing some of the sodden tobacco he has
discovered in his pocket. “ I think these fellows throw


spear into cave by-an-by, p’r’aps. I think best keep
up here,” pointing to a buttress of rock that, project-
ing from the walls of the cavern, provides a substantial
shield against any missiles flung in at the cave-
entrance. “ But I know little of these fellow-blacks.
I come from the flat country, this time, out by the
Einsleigh River way.”
« Ugh,” grunts' the old man in reply, and telling
Billy to “ have a ‘ doss ’ (sleep),” whilst his namesake,
the billy, is boiling, the “ hatter ” proceeds to cut
up a pipe-full of very foul-smelling tobacco, looking
thoughtfully at the fire meanwhile.
Billy, on his part, is not slow to avail himselt ot his
host’s invitation, and sinking down upon the cold rock
floor goes immediately to sleep.
If it should appear, to any of our readers to border
upon the incredible, that two men should thus calmly
sleep and smoke in the face of danger, that to one
inexperienced in the wilder phases of bush-life would
appear to demand the utmost vigilance, we can only
reply by offering as our defence, firstly, the old saying
that “ truth is oftentimes stranger than fiction ;
and, secondly, that in this scene, as in each of our
main incidents, we have endeavoured to sketch from
memory a faithful if humble representation of an
actual occurrence, in preference to indulging what
latent talents we may possess in the walks of imagi-
native scene-paintiug. , ~ „
Mais revenons d nos moutons. The old hatter
sits silently smoking ; sometimes glancing upwards
towards the roof of the cave, where the almost ob-
literated representations of white and red hands—the
work of previous aboriginal occupants of the retreat—


are still discernible, and at others fixing bis ferret-like,
bloodshot eyes upon the dark, hardship-lined face of
the slumbering Billy, as the firelight dances upon its
swarthy surface. Nothing appears to disturb the well-
earned repose of the two men, save a small black
snake that comes wriggling in to enjoy the warmth of
the blazing branches, and meets with a warmer recep-
tion than it had anticipated. Then the billy at last
splutters out its welcome signal, and the old digger
and his companion proceed to indulge that taste that
has made Australians the greatest consumers of tea,
per head, in the world.
Them Myalls (wild natives) don’t seem to mean
business to-night,” observes Billy’s host, when the
silent meal is finished, as he hands our black friend a
piece of (i nailrod with which to charge his evening
pipe.
“ I think they wait, boss. Watch an hour, perhaps
two or three, then throw spears.” Billy leans forward
as he speaks to heat a piece of tobacco in the embers,
in order to soften the flinty morsel, and thereby facili-
tate the operation of cutting it into shreds.
“ I think those beggars,” jerking his black thumb
towards the darkness outside the cave entrance, “ I
think those beggars come by-and-by. u Urraurvuna
(take care) ; I think they come presently.”
Then both men relapse again into silence, each
engaged with his own unpleasant thoughts. The
u Matter,” although somewhat favourably prepossessed
with Billy s appearance, and glad of a companion for
the time being, has that instinctive distrust of a
“ nigger ” common to most Australian bushmen. He
does not care altogether for the presence of his new


acquaintance in the cave, and even considers, for a
moment, what would be the easiest way of getting rid
of him, and making him seek another shelter for the
night. But the feeling of gratitude to Billy for the
service he has rendered that day finally prevails, and
the old man determines to hear the “ boy ” further
explain his appearance in the gorge before he acts.
Billy, on his part, although naturally of a sanguine
turn of mind (as indeed all his race are), and little
given to ruminating upon the sorrows of to-morrow, is
trying to puzzle out a plan of future operations, whose
main object is to discover the nephew of his late
employer. He notices the half-concealed, suspicious
glances of his dirty old host, and is almost tempted
to offer to seek other lodgings, when the latter breaks
the silence once more.
“’Spose .you’re a runaway nigger? Station or
police ? ”
“ Yes, boss, I’m a runaway. But I’ve never worked
on station. Always with the doctor. All my time
mining and cooking for the old man.”
“Thought yer was,” grunts the old prospector,
taking his pipe from between his yellow teeth for an
instant; “ noticed the way yer carried the pick, and
guessed yer knew something about ‘breaking down
a face.’ ”
“ Yes, I can do that much, anyhow,” remarks Billy
quietly.
« Well, that bein’ so, lad, I ain’t the man as would
turn dog on a poor beggar, let alone a miner, be he
black or white. I ain’t built that way,” The old
man stops speaking to listen to a slight noise outside
the cave for a moment, and then continues ; “ If yer


like to camp here longer me till I’ve done this gully,
yer can. But just sling me a yarn about how yer
came to this hole in the ranges.” The speaker turns
towards the fire, that has burnt itself low, and com-
mences to rake it into renewed brightness. As he
does so, his head and right arm leave the shelter of
the projecting rock before-mentioned, and come be-
tween the luminous background of flames and the
cave entrance.
Then Billy’s prognostications are fulfilled; for
some natives, who have been silently watching for an
opportunity to attack the occupants of the cavern,
immediately take advantage of the appearance of the
old digger, and the fire embers are scattered right
and left by three spears, which, however, luckily all
miss their human target.
The two men leap to their feet, and Billy, snatching
up the old “ hatter’s ” shot-gun, without waiting a
moment to ask the permisson of its owner, glides
noiselessly into the darkness, and is lost to the view
of his startled host. Presently the latter proceeds to
collect the scattered fire-sticks, and adding to them
the spears, which he breaks up into pieces, he relights
his pipe and waits for the return of his guest. Half
an hour passes in silence, and then two loud reports,
followed by the rain-like pattering of bouncing shot
about the entrance to the cave, and the screams of a
number of agonized voices, proclaim the successful
accomplishment of Billy’s plucky plan of retaliation
upon the enemy outside.
“No more trouble to-night,” observes that in-
dividual, with a complaisant grin, as he presently
returns into the cavern, striking the butt of the gun


be carries, as be walks, so as to give a jangling signal
of bis approach to the man by the fire, who, revolver
in band, might otherwise mistake him for an enemy.
“ Shot gnns better at night than a rifle for this kind
of work. The beggars have all cleared. None killed,
I think.” , ,
“ All the better, lad. All the days I’ve knocked
about the bush, I’ve never shot a black yet, though
I’ve seen a many bowled over. But they warn’t bad
ip the old days, as they are now. These beggars here,
though, are a bit koolie (fierce) ; and I don’t blame
them. They don’t like to see a white face,”—the
old man’s countenance was about the tone of colour
of a new pig-skin saddle, — u they don’t like to see a
white face hereabouts, for the scrub’s the only place
in this part of Queensland where the poor beggars
ain’t hunted.”
The night passes without further cause for alarm,
and next day, and the one after, and for several weeks
Billy remains with the old prospector. And the latter,
being a sensible man, and finding himself thus brought
into contact with a mind in no ways inferior to his
own,—albeit housed in corporal surroundings of that
dark tint that has hitherto placed the unfortunate
aborigines beyond the pale of civilized law in Australia,
—soon makes a companion and partner of Billy,
instead of treating him as a mere animal, as has
hitherto been his custom with those black “ boys ” he
has had occasion to employ.
Moreover, in our dark friend the ancient hatter
finds his ideal of what a model “ mate ” should be,—
strong, cheerful, plucky, frugal, and, above all, luck}.
And sometimes, as the strange pair smoke their


evening pipes together in the fire-lit cave, and the
thoughts of the “ boss ” go flying back into the dim
vistas of memory, and the cruel swindles perpetrated
upon him by this and that white partner of his
younger days are re-enacted in his mind’s eye, he
cannot help contrasting them unfavourably with his
present mate, whose coming departure, although he
is “ only a nigger,” the old man begins to dread with
a fear that surprises himself.
“ Swelp me,” the poor old solitary soul sometimes
ejaculates to himself, as the chilling thought of once
more being a lonely “ hatter ” in these awful wilds
goes like an ague-shiver through his spare and bended
form, “ I suppose I’m getting too old for this kind of
work ; and if I had had a mate like Billy when I was
young I would have been doing the ‘ toff’ in Sydney
by this time, like that rascal Canoona Bill that swindled
me on the Crocodile, and not have had to work up to
my knees in water, with the pan and shovel, at my
time of life.”
But it is not approaching age or failing bodily
strength that is the cause of this change in the old
miner’s feelings, as he tries to persuade himself it is,
for he cannot find it in his mind to confess he feels
any attachment or affection for a “ nigger.” It is
something very different that begins to make him feel
disgusted with the idea of a return to his solitary
mode of life.
Billy’s new friend, like most of his class of old
“hatters,” became disgusted with the world owing to
having been unfortunate in his choice of partners,
and now that he at last finds one to suit him, his view
of life becomes correspondingly fairer than heretofore.


« Billy I ” one evening said the old man, —who has
lately informed our black friend that he is known
at Geraldtown and Herberton by his patronymic of
Weevil, —“ Billy I you ain’t told me yet how you
come to clear out from the station where you left the
doctor’s letter. What station was it ? ’
Billy, who is shaping a new pick-handle by the
light of the fire, does not reply for a minute or two.
When he does look up at the lean figure on the other
side of the flames, he betrays a little of that sulky,
spoilt-child demeanour generally exhibited by mem-
bers of his race when recounting any occurrence that
has been a source of annoyance to them.
“ I ran away, boss, because they try and get me
to show them the way back to where I planted the
doctor. Mister Giles, who owns the station ”
u y\rh 0 ? ” Old Weevil leans across the smoke to-
wards Billy. “It warn’t Wilson Giles, were it ? ” he
asks in a low, hoarse voice, looking at the black with
ill-concealed anxiety.
«Yes, Wilson was his front name. D’you know
him?” . 1 . , ~ -
The old man withdraws into the semi-obscurity ot
a shadowy pile of firewood against which he is stand-
ing at the question, much like a sea-anemone shrinks
into its rock cleft before an obtrusive human finger.
« y eSj j know him,” growls the old man in the
darkness, exhibiting an amount of hatred in the tone
of his voice that makes Billy look in the direction of
the wood stack with open eyes and mouth. Weevil,
however, does not appear likely to be communicative,
so Billy presently continues; “The doctor’s last
words almost were, ‘ Don’t let any one know where


yon left me save my nephew,’ and so it wasn’t likely
I was going to tell the first man as asked me. Was
it likely ? ”
“ Burn him ! No ! ” ejaculated Mr. Weevil, in
parenthesis.
“ Gdles tried me with one thing and then another.
Offered me anything I liked, at last, to take him to
the grave. Thought I was only like a station black,
I suppose ! ” and the speaker scrapes angrily at the
wooden handle between his knees, with a black
splinter of obsidian (volcanic glass) that he is using
as a ready-made draw-knife.
“ Then Giles has a talk with his niece,—she bosses
it at ‘ Government House ’ ” (is mistress at the head-
station), — u and she says ‘ Flog the nigger! flog him F
And a house-gin who belongs to my Mordu Kapara
(class-family), which is Kalaru, hears all this as she
sets cloth in the parlour. She come and tells me.
Then me run away. Then me turn wild beggar
again ! ”
Billy, who by this time is gesticulating excitedly
with his hands, curiously relapses, slightly,—as he
always does when highly agitated,—into the remark-
able “ station-jargon ” to which we have already had
occasion to refer.
“Me run and run. An’ Giles, he borrow the big
dogs with the red eyes and thin flanks (bloodhounds)
from Billa Billa station.”
“ I know ’em,” interrupts old Weevil; “ that fellow
on the Mulgrave’s made a good thing out of breeding
them for the squatters.”
11 Well, boss, I made for the scrub. But I gef
tired, and the stinging-tree blind me, all but. The


dogs come up close. I hear them howl, and the men
calling to them. But the big dogs badly trained ;
they go after young cassowary, and I drown my tracks
in a creek, and then ‘ possum ’ (hide in a tree) all the
day.”
After Billy has thus graphically given his account
of his marvellous escape from the clutches of Mr.
Giles, the conversation turns upon the subject of going
down the creek to the nearest township, which we
will christen Meesonton, after a well-known Australian
explorer living in the district.
« We’ll both go as far as the low scrub range, over
the Beatrice creek,” observes old Weevil, “and yer
can work the old sluice there I was telling yer of
yesterday if them cursed Chinkies ain’t found it. I
won’t be more nor a week or so away. 1 wouldn t
advise yer,” continues the old man, “ ter show yer
face near the store yet awhile. That beggar Giles
is well in with the perlice, and they’d knab yer like
enough.”
So very early next morning Billy and the old miner
set out; just about the time when that earliest of
early birds, the crow, has begun to think it time to
commence his matutinal robberies, and long ere t e
sun has risen to dry the fern and scrub sufficiently
for any natives to be out hunting who might notice
the two men’s departure. By midday our friends
have followed for eight miles that only road possible
through the dense jungle,—the rough, white bed ot
the merry little creek. Here, after a rest and a
smoke, the men left the stream and clambered up the
dark, clayey banks, when they found themselves on
a broken, open piece of country, across which they


steered, Weevil leading, in a north-easterly direction,
passing numerous little trickling creeks trending
eastwards on their way. Here and there the recent
footprints of aborigines were to be seen in the rich,
volcanic soil ; and once Billy detected the voices of
natives, but said nothing to his companion about it.
Late in the afternoon, after crossing some level table-
lands, thinly covered with scrub, several large gunyahs
(native dwellings) were discovered, and, as the evening
began to look stormy, the two men took possession of
one of the largest of them. These huts were similar
to beehives in shape, like those of the village on the
Paree river that we described in Chapter YIIL, and
were substantially thatched with fern fronds and that
coarse kind of grass that grows in the open spaces in
the scrub called “ pockets ” by northern bnshmen.
These “pockets” are treeless spots circular in form,
and generally half an acre in extent, and are used by
the aborigines for hoovers (native tournaments) and
dances. One of these native Champs de Mars , on the
upper Barron river, covers quite fifteen acres, and is
also a perfect circle.
It was still dark, the next morning, when Billy and
old Weevil started once more on their journey; and
the latter, in consequence, fell into a two-foot hole
near the gunyah in which they had slept, and found
himself lying on a mass of loose, rattling objects,
which his sense of touch quickly told him were human
skulls, —the remains, doubtless, of by-gone picnics of
the good people whose village the two men had appro-
priated during the previous night.
Pushing onwards, our friends spent the first half
of the day in climbing rocky peaks, and crossing the


dark, rugged sources of creeks, wrapped in their
primeval gloom of frizzled, intricate masses of thorny
vines and dangerous stinging-trees ; and, after making
only three miles in six hours, were forced to rest
awhile in a ragged gully, walled in by grey slate
cliffs, and strewn with glistening blocks of white and
“ hungry ” quartz.
The stinging-tree, which we have twice mentioned
in this chapter, is worthy of a few remarks, for it is
perhaps the most terrible of all vegetable growths,
and is found only in the scrub-country through which
Billy and his friend are now forcing their way.
This horrible guardian of the penetralia of the
Queensland' jungle stands from five to fifteen feet
in height, and has a general appearance somewhat
similar to that of a small mulberry-tree ; but the
heart-shaped leaves of the plant before us differ fiom
those of the European fruit just mentioned in that
they are larger, and because they look as if manu-
factured from some light-green, velvety material,
such as plush. Their peculiarly soft and inviting-
aspect is caused by an almost invisible coating of
microscopic cillia, and it is to these that the dangerous
characteristics of the plant are due. The unhappy
wanderer in these wilds, who allows any pait of his
body to come in contact with those beautiful, inviting
tongues of green, soon finds them veritable tongues of
fire, and it will be weeks, perhaps months, ere the
scorching agony occasioned by their sting is entirely
eradicated. Nor are numerous instances wanting of
the deaths of men and animals following the act of
contact with this terrible lusus TidtuvcE.
Billy and Weevil make more progress during the
14


afternoon, the country being more level and the scrub
less thick ; but, although both men are inured to
fatigue and discomfort of all sorts, they are forced to
camp early, after doing another six miles. Ragged,
weary, and barefooted, —for even the most imaginative
mind could hardly recognize the flabby pieces of
water-logged leather that still adhere to the men’s
feet as boots, —the two travellers fling themselves down
on the dry, sandy bed of a mountain torrent, and scrape
the clusters of swollen leeches from their ankles,
which are covered with clotted blood, and pick the
bush-ticks and scrub-itch insects from their flesh
with the point of the long scrub-knife the old digger
carries.
As our friends are engaged in this painful but
necessary toilet of a voyager through the Queensland
scrub, a wild turkey comes blundering by in all the
glories of her glossy, blue-black feathers and brilliant
red and yellow head, —not the Otis Australasianus
which is known to southern settlers as a “ wild
turkey ” and is in reality a bustard, but a true scrub
turkey ( Telegallus ).
Billy is not long in tracking the footprints of the
bird back to its enormous mound nest. For this
ingenious feathered biped, like her smaller contem-
porary the scrub hen (Megapodius tumulus ), saves
herself from the monotonous duty of sitting on hex-
eggs by depositing them in a capital natural incuba-
tor, formed of rotting and heated leaves, which she
collects into a pile, and ax-ranges so as to do the
hatching part of the business for her.
A meal -of turkey eggs and roasted “cozzon”
oerries, whose red clusters are to be seen hanging


from parasitic vines upon the great stems around in
plentiful profusion, and then the men retire to rest
upon their wet blankets, beneath a great ledge of
granite, upon whose surface some aboriginal artist
has delineated in different colours the admirable repre-
sentations of immense frogs in various attitudes.
But trouble commences with the morrow; and
when old Weevil raises his stiff and patch-work form
from the hard couch upon which he has passed the
night, he finds Billy, gun in hand, watching some-
thing on the dim summit of the cliffs opposite their
camp.
“ gh ! ” observes that individual, without turning
his head; “plenty black fellow all about here.
D’you see that beggar’s head ? ”
“ Bust ’em f” yawns the old digger, stretching ;
u they won’t interfere with us. Let’s have tucker,
and 1 break camp ’ as soon as we can.”
The frugal repast is soon silently completed, but
half a mile down the creek, where the aborigines have
constructed an ingenious weir, armed with conical
baskets in which to catch what fish may pass that
way, Billy and his companion find a small army of
copper-coloured natives collected on the opposite side
of the stream, who wave and beckon to the two
travellers to return whence they came. Their gesti-
culations and fierce yells not having the desired effect,
a series of signals are given by them to other natives
in ambush on the jungle-fringed precipices that rise
with lycopodium-tasselled ledges above the heads of
the intruders.
“ We’re in fur it now ! ” grunts the older man, who
has done some prospecting in New Guinea, amongst


other places. “ Them yellow niggers is Kalkadoones,
and as like Papuans as may he ; and they’re devils
to fight. Keep close under the cliff.”
Billy guesses the mode of attack which the old
digger’s experience teaches him to anticipate, and
which prompts his advice to his mate to seek the
shelter of the rocks as much as possible. The wise-
ness of this precaution is soon seen. For when our
friends are fairly started on their way past the rapids
in the gloomy gorge, the natives commence hurling
down great boulders of conglomerate. These would
speedily have crushed the adventurous twain below,
had they not been sheltered by the overhanging base
of the precipice, which was worn concave by the river’s
action during floods. As it was many of the rocks
bounded horribly close to the men’s heads.
“I can’t use my gun here, that’s sartin,” presently
observes the old man, as he puts fresh caps upon his
old companion of many years. “ We’ll have to clear
them beggars off before we go any further.” Then
springing from his shelter with his rags and tangled
grey locks flying in the air, Weevil makes for a rocky
reef that juts out into the river, which is deep at this
place, with the idea of peppering the enemy from
this point of vantage.
But the Fates are against him, and sable Sister
Atropos snaps her weird scissors on poor old Weevil’s
thread of existence. A shower of stones descends
upon the wild-looking figure as it hurries towards the
river, and the old miner falls an uncouth, bleeding
object upon the strand, groaning heavily.
Happily, the gun has escaped destruction, and by
its aid Billy, who rushes forward to defend his friend,


performs prodigies of valour that on a field of civilized
warfare would certainly have gained him some such
coveted distinction as the Victoria Cross.
A hurried shot at the yelling figures that are cling-
ing to the trees overhanging the edge of the cliff in an
appalling manner, and one of them comes spinning
down with a sickening thud upon the rocks below.
A second wire cartridge sent in the same direction is
equally successful, and another of the enemy tumbles
forward on to a jagged rock that projects from the
precipice ; while his friends, horrified at the sudden
illness that has thus overtaken two of their number,
stop short in the middle of a diabolical yell of
triumph, and clearing off are seen no more.
Billy bathes the crushed features of the old man,
whose stentorous breathing shows how badly he is
injured, and the cold water revives him somewhat.
“ I’m busted in my inside, lad,” he murmurs raspily.
u Gimme me pipe. I can’t see to How blind
I’m gettin’! ”
After a pause, during which he has tried to smoke
in vain, he asks to be raised in a sitting posture.
“ Billy,” he says, when this is effected, “ you’re a
good boy. I’m goin’ fast. Listen ter me afore I
chuck it up altogether. Me legs is dead already.”
The dying man has a crime upon his soul, and
dreads to take the secret of it with him into the
unknown which he is about to enter, so he fights
gamely against the dissolution that is fast approaching
till he has told it to Billy.
“ Remember what I tell ye, lad. ’Twas I as stole
Wilson Giles’s only son. Giles had ruined my life,
and (gasp) I tuck revenge. I marked the boy blue


star an’ W. G. on near shoulder. Then I cleared out
an’ tuck him (gasp) ter Sydney.”
Silence for a time follows, after which the expiring
flame of life flickers up, and the last words Weevil
speaks on earth are gasped out.
“ God furgive me ! Intended to return boy after a
bit. Lost him in Sydney. God furgive me ! (gasp).
Goo’-bye, ole man. Let’s have ’nother- (gasp).
Oh God I Jane ! Jane ! come back ter me I ”
The old man stretches out his wounded hands as
he wails the last sentence in tone of wild entreaty,
and Billy feels, by the suddenly-increased weight in
his arms, that he is holding a corpse.


CHAPTER XIII.
Claude’s letter to dick.
“ We have at various times had stories told us of the treatment
the blacks are subjected to in the bush, and it behoves the Govern-
ment to make strict inquiry into the whole question. By the way,
where is the Protector of Aborigines, and what has he got to say in
the matter 1
“ Oh it’s only a nigger, you know ;
It’s only a nigger, you know ;
A nigger to wallop, a nigger to slave,
To treat with a word and a blow.
“ It’s only a nigger, you know;
A nigger, whose feelings are slow ;
A nigger to chain up, a nigger to treat
To a kick, and a curse, and a blow.
“ It’s only a nigger, you know ;
It’s only a nigger, you know ;
But he’s also a brother, a man like the rest,
Though his skin may be black as a crow.”
“ Bacca.”
From the “Lantern," South Australia,, 1889.


“ Mount Silver,
“ Avgust Bth, 1889.
“ Me. Richaed Shaw, Te Renga-renga , Drury ,
Nero Zealand.
EAR DICK, —In my letter to
the 1 Mater ’ I have set forth
all those of my experiences,
up to date, that I consider of
most interest to the gentle
female mind, and have omit-
ted certain others of a more
painful character. For yon,
old man, I preserve the hon-
our of participating in the
‘ noble indignation ’ which at pre-
sent suffuses the soul of ‘yours
regardfully,’—the outcome of my
present surroundings of many
most un-English institutions. For
my pericardiac region is sickened
and disgusted with certain ‘ goings on ’ in this fair
colony of the British Crown, and I would fain burst
into poetry —after the Whittier style—only that I am
well aware that my knowledge of the properties of
the hexameter is considerably less than my acquaint-
ance with those of the lactometer.
“ But ere I launch into these matters, I will
roughly sketch out my doings since I posted my last
letter, which I wrote at the pretty, sand-surrounded,
and ‘ quite too awfully ’ tropical little port of Cairns.
“ Australian hospitality is proverbial, but I have
to withdraw myself as much as possible from the


£ here’s-a-hand-me-trusty-fren’ ’ kind of thing, as I
find it means participating in an unlimited number of
< n ips ’of ‘ stringy bark,”—a curious combination of
fusil oil and turpentine, labelled ‘ whisky,’ or of a
decoction of new and exceedingly virulent rum, much
patronised by the inhabitants of these sugar-cane
districts. However, whilst arranging the necessary
preliminaries for my journey at this little inland
township, I have made several acquaintances. One,
a Mr. Feder, —the manager of a German-Lutheran
mission station about fifty miles from here, who, it
appears, knew my Uncle Dyesart some few years
back, and may prove useful to me in my search after
Billy. I have also come across an Inspector of
Police, by name John Bigger, who, although I have
certainly not returned his advances with much
warmth, for I think him a silly old swiper, is ever-
lastingly thrusting his companionship, upon me; and,
although he is apparently doing his best to make my
stay here agreeable, one can have too much of a good
thing, especially when the said good thing suffers
rather from I furor loquendij in other words, is a
confounded old bore. 1 ' • ■
_ “• This inspector introduced himself to me as a friend
of one Inspector Puttis, whom he says was a friend of
uncle’s. This Puttis sends word that Billy has dis-
appeared from Murdaro station ; but as I never
mentioned the fact that I wanted to find Billy to
any one here till after I received this message, I am
rather at a loss to understand it altogether.
“Now my other acquaintance here —the missionary
cuss I mentioned—curiously re-echoes the last words
in uncle’s letter, namely, to distrust the police. And


in faith I believe they’re a bad lot entirely, although
I suppose there are some exceptions.
“ is partly in consequence of this that I have not
accepted an invitation to go shooting with the in-
spector to-day, and am writing to you instead.
“ My old miner-friend got bitten by a large poisonous
black spider at Cairns, and is hors de combat. So I
have been obliged to leave him behind for a time with
Don, who is turning out a grand little fellow. These
two will follow me to Mount Silver next week, when
I shall start for Murdaro station immediately. lam
not wasting my time in the interim, although I itch
to start, but am making myself acquainted with the
ways of station-life and mining matters in this wild
part of the world. If Billy arrives at the mission
station, as Mr. Feder thinks he probably will, I shall
be communicated with at once. But ‘ how do I manage
without my little henchman Don ? ’ you’ll be after
asking. Well, that brings me to the main subject
matter of this epistle. I have a second ‘ boy Friday ’
now; and what is more, he’s black as a crow, and,
moreover, I bought him. Yes, in the year of our Lord,
1889, in the civilized street of a town in an English
colony, I followed the custom of the place, and pur-
chased the little black specimen of humanity that is
now amusing a party of his aboriginal friends, over
there by the town well, by imitating with a piece of
stick the way I brush my teeth of a morning, which
operation I noticed has amazed him muchly, and is
probably indulged in by few of the whites about here.
u I travelled alone as far as this place, being anxious
to get on here ; and my obliging host—who talks
broad Scotch, although he is by two generations a


colonist —advised me to get a ‘ boy,’ as all black
servants, regardless of age, are called here, to look
after my two horses. Well, to cut the story short, I
paid £2 for little Joe to a carrier whom ‘ mine host ’
informed of my wants, Joe is a great help, and
according to the unwritten law of the place, —which
appears to be supported by what little pulpit power
they have here, —my 1 boy ’ is, in this free land, my
property, body and soul.
a Yes, coming here from New Zealand one feels as
if he had somehow descended into the slave countries
of Mrs. Beecher Stowe, and the odd part of it is that
its very existence is unknown in England, neither in
Sydney nor Brisbane to any great extent. But these
places, it is true, have their own little white slaves
‘always with them,’ as my experiences amongst the
newsboys, when I got little Don, has taught me.
“ Although I did pander to the local custom, against
which I am speaking, in buying Joe, I trust to do
something good for him to cover this sin of mine,
and will bring him back to New Zealand with me.
u Any one who boasts of being the ‘ free-born son of
an Englishman ’ cannot look coolly on at the treat-
ment of the unfortunate blacks up here in Queensland.
The poor wretches one sees forced to work by brutal
squatters, carriers, ‘ cockatoo ’ settlers, and others,
have no hope to cheer them like those mentioned
by your old American poet-friend, John Greenleaf
Whittier :
“ ‘ O’er dusky faces, seamed and old,
And hands horn-hard with unpaid toil,
With hope in every rustling fold,
We saw your star-dropt flag uncoil.’


“ No, the (five) star-drop flag of Australia, heralding
the (three) star drop (whisky) of the advancing army
of locust-squatters, brings no hope, or mercy either,
to the poor devils whose ancestral domains become
their fields of unceasing and ‘ unpaid toil.’ All
the horrors depicted by Mrs. Beecher Stowe, all the
sorrows sung of by the immortal AVhittier, are rampant
around me as I write. And it seems that it is in vain
that the immorality of the horrible traffic is thundered
into the ears of the various Governments—who after
all are but the representatives of the squatter-kings—
by various southern papers from time to time. Bead
the following first-rate article upon the subject, by
Mr. Rose, the editor of the Brisbane Courier , the boss
paper of the colony, which appeared on September
16th, last year.
“ ‘ Communications that have lately reached us from
the north show too clearly that our people have not
yet been educated to the recognition of the human
rights of the original jjossessors of Australia. A
correspondent forwards descriptions of atrocities of
alleged frequent occurrence in the northern districts,
the bare recital of which is enough to make one’s ears
to tingle. Nor are we allowed the common consola-
tion of ignorance or sentimentalism or exaggeration
on the part of our informer. For our ‘correspondent is
a well-known pressman, who has done a bit of exploit-
ing both in Australasia and New Guinea, who admits
that he has himself shot natives who would otherwise
have shot him, and of whom we can readily believe
that, as he says, he is u not particularly prejudiced in
favour of the natives or very soft-hearted.” He even
tells us that he is not himself a religious man, and yet


declares that he would not think the future commonly
assigned to the wicked by religions people as too
condign a punishment for atrocities that have come
within his knowledge. His indictment touches mainly
the districts lying between Cairns and Georgetown,
where, he says, the blacks are being decimated, and
by Government servants in the shape of black troopers
and their masters, whose “ dispersion ” of the aborigi-
nals in particular localities has simply come to mean
their slaughter. He speaks of men being kept for
the sole purpose of hunting and killing the aborigines;
he gives instances of their camps being surrounded,
and men, women, and children massacred for killing
cattle, when, through the white man’s presence, they
could no longer find game ; and he tells in detail
one story of the extermination of a camp simply
because some blacks had been seen passing a mining
station where nothing had been stolen for months.
Roundly he charges the “grass dukes” and their
subordinates with “murdering, abducting children
for immoral purposes, and stockwhipping defenceless
girls,” and he condemns “each Government that comes
into power for winking at the slaughter of our black
fellow-subjects of the Queen as an easy way of getting
rid of the native question.” The Northern Miner
asserts that this picture is not overdrawn, and that the
atrocities mentioned have even been exceeded. It
refers to squatters branding blacks, keeping harems ot
black gins, and finding their slaughtering record no
bar to advancement to high office in the btate. The
black trooper system is, in the view of this paper,
legalized murder, which reckons the life of a bullock
of more account than that ot a scoie of black fellows.


We do not vouch for the truth of these serious
charges ; but, if true, the horrible demoralisation of
such a system on blacks and whites alike it is difficult
to over-estimate ; and cry exaggeration as we may, it
is clear that enough remains to call for the immediate
and earnest attention of the Government. Sir Thomas
Mcllwraith will earn the gratitude of the colony to
all time if he will but exert himself for the aborigines
of Australia—whose country after all we have simply
taken from them by force—as Sir Samuel Griffith
exerted himself for the kanakas. Surely there is as
much call for a Commission of Inquiry in the one case
as in the other. The recently inaugurated society for
the protection of the aborigines has its work cut out
for it, and has not been formed a moment too soon.
We hope that the statements we have referred to will
waken our people to the fact that there is a much
louder call and a great deal more room for this kind
of protection than is commonly supposed. We must
add that the Northern Miner , referring to the circum-
stance that the Americans have tried to stay the
extinction of their aborigines by granting them large
reserves, scattered all over the western states, pleads,
and surely with reason, that a similar course should
be followed with ours. We can do it more easily now
than it can be done in future generations. Most of
their vices, and the very thefts for which they are so
terribly punished, come from the contact with the
whites into which they are driven by want, and an
occasional outburst of not unnatural vengeance. If
the Aborigines’ Protection Association will add this to
the otherwise admirable programme of their operations
—if indeed it is not already practically included—


published by us the other day, and set themselves
vigorously to carry their plans into effect, they will
earn the gratitude alike of whites and blacks, and aid
in removing a stain which will otherwise blot and
burn into our future history.’
“ Mr. Feder, my missionary friend, who gave me
this newspaper clipping, says that Thadeus O’Kane,
the proprietor-editor of another influential paper, the
Northern Miner , has taken up the subject warmly at
various times, but with little or no good resulting
therefrom.
“ But although I know that, —
‘ The age is dull and mean. Men creep,
Not walk ; with blood too pale and tame
To pay the debt they owe to shame,’
and that this community is too much enfeebled by its
tropic habitat to make an energetic move against the
shocking system that its landholders have introduced,
even if it wished to do so, yet I am at a loss to under-
stand why that spirit of the age, Trade Unionism, has
not risen against this slave business. Surely Labour,
whose power, at any rate, in the southern parts of
Australia is immense, must be aware of the benefit
that must accrue to white workmen if the ‘unpaid
labour ’ of the blacks, now forced to work by squatters
and others, were made illegal. Chinamen and kanakas
are hounded down by the Australian working-man
with a certain amount of reason, for beastly immora-
lity, combined with Oriental diseases, are things to be
avoided in a young colony, where all men should be
healthy voters and thinkers. But why should the
1 horny-handed ’ keep silent when the paths of labour


are clogged by the slave system,—which obtains, I
believe, over a large and growing portion of Australia,
—and yet shriek wildly when coloured labour of
another sort competes with them at a wage only a
little less than that demanded by whites P
“ Before I close with some of my ‘ personal experi-
ences,’ I want you to note the missionary side of this
question. You know I’m too disgusted with the
greedy way various missionary societies have gone in
for land-grabbing and land-dealing in New Zealand
to be much of a philo-missionist, and we both know
something of mission work in the South Seas, and that
too much humbug and too many tares among the
wheat—
‘ Of generous thought and deed were sown ; ’
yet I feel very friendly towards the little circle of
men who have taken up the cause of the unfortunate
natives of Australia. The Revs. J. B. Gribble, R. J.
Flanagan, Fyson, J. Flierl, and my friend Feder here
have made a hard fight for it; and a most dangerous
and unthankful position these men occupy, in the
midst of squatters and squatter-commissioned police
who watch their every action. As it is, the fund
secured to preserve and protect the natives is
apparently almost entirely derived from Europe, and
half of that amount I believe from Germany. Are
these natives worth preserving? Well, when the
colony of Victoria a few years back—as I see by a
Government report —adopted a new system of educa-
tion, the first school obtaining one hundred per cent,
of marks was the Ramah Yuck School of Aborigines ,
Gippsland. This, I believe, is a fair sample of what


can be done with the ‘ niggers ’ if properly handled,
and all agree that the northern blacks are a finer race
than those of the south; and, speaking of my personal
acquaintance with them, I can say they compare in
intelligence very favourably with our ‘ noble savage ’
in New Zealand ; in fact, are, I think, much ‘cuter.’
Now, at the risk of making this letter too long,—and
if so yon can take it in instalments,—l’ll just give
you some of my ‘ personal experiences ’ to show you
to what an extent slavery and murder obtains in
Queensland.
“ I had been introduced a few days since to
cockatoo-squatter, who holds a small run within thirty
miles of one of the civilized (?) municipalities in this
district.
“ ‘ Come out and stop a few days with me,’ he said,
1 and if you want any native curios, or a skull or two, as
you’re a scientist, I’ll see if Sergeant Bedad can come
up with his “ boys.” No end of sport, can assure you.’
I thought he was making a grim joke,—but you will
see. A town councillor who was going my way, to
visit a gold-mine up on the ranges beyond my des-
tination, offered to show me the way. We started
together, and, after about two hours’ ride, as we were
entering a piece of scrub, Mr. Councillor pulls out a
long-barrelled revolver from his dust-coat pocket, and
motions to me to be quiet. Thinking he sawj a wild
pig or cassowary, I let him go on by himself a bit.
“ ‘ I saw two niggers here, last time I was passing,
—last week,’ he explains as I overtake him, 1 they
were getting grubs out of that rotten tree, by the
bush-layers there ; but they cleared off before I could
get a fair shot at them.’ - I needn’t tell you, old man,
15


that I was astonished at what my companion said ;
and, getting off my horse to see if he was ‘having
me,’ found the print of the niggers’ feet in the black
soil, the hole in the rotten tree which they had
made in searching for grubs, and lastly, the most
circumstantial piece of evidence to prove he was not
joking, but terribly in earnest, the bullet-hole of the
shot he had fired in a tree stem close by.
“ Arrived at the little station, I was introduced to
Mrs. Cockatoo-squatter. She was a tall, dark, lady-
like person, with something particularly gentle and
woman-like about her, that was yery charming after
the specimens of the weaker (?) sex one generally sees
up this way. But she was the next one to startle my
new-chum anti-slavery notions. She had no children
of her own, but was possessed of two little child-
slaves, who, she informed me, the local sergeant of
Black Police had kindly ‘saved for her’ out of a
camp of blacks he had destroyed four miles down the
river. I saw the remains of the ingenious fish-weir
erected by these unfortunates one day when out for
a ride. These blacks had apparently never injured
any one ; but, as Mrs. Cockatoo informed me, with
a gentle smile, ‘ they were always singing or making
a noise of some sort, and disturbed the cattle,’ which
liked to stand in the shallows, near the camp, in pre-
ference to merely taking a drink at the steep banks
of the other parts of the river frontage. ‘ The niggers
frightened them; besides, the blacks are always a
nuisance.’ So the camp was surrounded one night
and ‘ dispersed,’—the meaning of which word, in
this part of the Queen’s dominions, I have already
explained to you.


“ These child-slaves, whose baby-love for each other
was most touching, were naturally very pretty, as
most of the native children I have seen are ; but they
were sadly neglected, and very cruelly treated. Their
sole garment consisted of an old sack, stiff and
coated with dirt, the bottom of which was perforated
with three holes, one for the head and two for the
little black arms. Although only six or eight years
of age, these children had to chop up the firewood
used in the house, fetch the water from the river, etc.,
and were often cruelly beaten for trivial offences. In
fact I left the station, after spending three days there,
chiefly on account of the painful, sight always before
my eyes of the cruelty inflicted upon these unhappy
little ‘ niggers.’
“ Mrs. Cockatoo told me a pleasant story, too, the
first day I was at her house, illustrating the ‘ annoy-
ance ’ the blacks had been to her husband and herself,
‘till dear Inspector Nemo cleared the niggers off
the hills’ that surround the run. ‘lt was January,
I think,’ she said ; ‘ yes, the end of last January. I
hadn’t had Topsey and Turvey (the two slave-children)
very long, and I was cleaning some fish that we
had got out of a net we sometimes run across the
river at the old fish-weir. Bob (her husband) was
away, and there were only two white men near
the house. They were fencing round the dog kennel
there. Bob hadn’t got the dogs then,’ my fair hostess
added, turning her gentle eyes towards the two
magnificent bloodhounds which were sunning them-
selves by the ‘ lean-to ’ door, and whose use I was
afterwards to learn.
“ ‘ Well, I was at work, just as I am now,’ she went


on, ‘ when I chanced to look np, and I saw two old
niggers coming up from the river, and walking across
the paddock towards the house. Bob had told me
not to allow any niggers to cross the run or “ come
in ” (come and work as slaves) to the station ; so
when they came near I told them to go or I’d shoot
them. They, at least one of them did, kept on say-
ing, “Me very good boy, me very good boy,” and
“Me velly hungey,” and they wouldn’t go away. So
I got the gun, that one with the broken stock, —Bob
broke it finishing an old rascal of a nigger, last time
he was out with Inspector Nemo, —and I told them
to go, but they knelt down and wouldn’t go. So I
had to shoot them, and get the men to throw them
into the river. Bob said I had done quite right, but
I’m afraid you don’t think so.’ This amiable couple,
for they were really amiable and good-hearted in
every other respect than their treatment of niggers
and animals, had destroyed by poison, shooting, and
hunting with 1 the dogs,’—whose 1 score was only
four at present,’ Mrs. Cockatoo informed me, laugh-
ing,—about thirty or forty aborigines in the six years
since they had taken up the small run. Mr. Cockatoo
reminded me, in his conversation, much of that old
Periander, the tyrant of Corinth, we used to read
about at school, who, you will remember, although
as cruel and devilish an individual, perhaps, as ever
sat on a throne, yet patronised the Arts, was fond
of peace, and said ‘ that not only crime, but every
wicked and corrupt thought, ought to be punished.’
He was one of the ‘ seven wise men,’ too, I think.
“ Both my friend the cockatoo-squatter and Periander
of old evidently are examples of sufferers from that


horrible disease, cerebral hypercemia , that Dr. Jnnelle,
whom I met on board the boat coming up the coast,
and whom perhaps yon recollect at Mercer, told me
of. But this letter is far too long to be ever all
read by a lazy old fellow like yourself, so ‘ so long,'
old boy.
“ Yours till death,
“ Claude Angland.
“ p.S _ By-the-bye, how is the little iron-grey filly
shaping ? 1 mean the one out of the three-quarters-
bred mare I got from Matata. She ought to jump
well. She’s by that big chestnut horse, Saint Patrick,
as I suppose you know.”


CHAPTER XIY.
HECATE AND HEBE.
“ Wise wretch with pleasures too refined to please,
With too much spirit to be e’er at ease,
You purchase pain with all that joy can give.”
Pope.
T is an liour after sundown
at Mnrdaro station. A few
lights twinkle here and
there about the dusky quad-
rangle of low-roofed build-
ings, ere shadow and silence
bring to a close another
workday.
The giant curlew screeches
impatiently to his dilatory
mate at intervals from the
bush hard by; the dingoes
wail mournful signals on
thedistant sandstone ridges;
and at the other side of the star-reflecting water-hole,
beneath the dark group of Deadfinish gum-trees, the
native station-hands and fat house-gins, their labours
over for the day, can be heard crooning out their
evening chants.


In the drawing-room of “ Government House ” the
blinds and curtains have been drawn across the
windows, and the light of a couple of silver-plated
oil lamps shows that the apartment boasts of an
amount of fine art decoration and luxurious furniture
quite unusual, even in the salon aux dames of a
“large” squatter’s household.
Wealth has joined hands with taste under the
direction of a graceful female mind, and beneath the
shaggy, rush-thatched roof of the station building,
that is really little better in external appearance than
an English barn, an oasis of elegance, a “holy of
holies” of refined surroundings, has arisen in the
desert. > , ,
Give a cultivated human mind carte blanche to
furnish a room after its own ideas of and
fitness, and it is marvellous how a picture of itself
will presently be reflected in the polished complete-
ness of the undertaking.
Character can be read in the furnishing of a room as
easily, perhaps easier, than by means of handwriting.
Any trained upholsterer of long experience will tell
you this. A tradesman in this walk of life knows
almost intuitively, after conversing with you for a
few minutes, what kind of “ fixings ” you will most
affect. Of course where “the coat must be cut
according to the cloth ” these remarks do not apply
in such force, any more than a Napoleonic mind
would discover itself to the expert in readmg-
character-by-hand-writing in an epistle scratched
with the stiff, unexpressive point of a needle.
Goethe intimates that a man’s true character can be
capitally tested by ascertaining what are the things


which he considers ridiculous; and perhaps it will
assist us to understand Miss Mundella’s if, bearing
this rule in mind, we note the appearance of the
station drawing-room, late “ parlour,” which she has
so charmingly transformed since taking over the keys
of her uncle’s establishment. She was not the kind
of young lady to follow the absurdities of those
ephemeral fashions that, from time to time, appear
as plague spots to desecrate the refined interiors of
even the best houses in Melbourne and Sydney.
No absurd u fallals ” in the shape of dusty, velvet-
covered soup-ladles, forks, gridirons, rolling-pins, and
the like, hung upon the walls of this young lady’s
audience chamber.
This latest of fashion’s most offensive follies is
much in vogue, as we write, in modern Australian
houses, and the practice of dragging the kitchen into
the drawing-room is surely to be deplored.
Doubtless the practical mind of our fellow-colonists
found it useful in some cases, hence its origin. These
silken effigies of culinary utensils were doubtless
originally found to be fitting surroundings for the
central point of attraction, —the red-faced female, like-
wise clothed in velvet, squatting upon the sofa; which
lady’s antecedents have been more associated with
frying fat than burning midnight oil, and who plays
her modern part of “ missus ” or “ me lady ” before
company with less nervousness than she would other-
wise do, were she not surrounded by the fetishes of
her past career.
In Miss Mundella’s drawing-room everything is
reposeful, chaste, and in harmony with the idea
of elegance and refinement. From the soft-toned,


tapestry-like wall-paper to the white marble statuette of
Marguerite that stands before the Queen Anne mirror
upon the mantel-piece, all is unobtrusive yet beautiful.
A few first-class water-colour examples of Gulley and
Atkinson, also some well-executed plaques, hang upon
the walls. A graceful palm hangs its fronds over a
rare Etruscan vase in one corner, and numerous little
gems of Dresden china and Venetian glassware —the
gifts of various admirers —assist towards forming a
picture whose altogether is delightful, whose every
detail is a work of art.
Miss Mundella, dressed in a directoire gown, of some
soft, silken material of an amber colour, fringed with
black lace, which costume admirably suits her dark
complexion, is seated at a little rosewood secretaire,
and the soft, pink light from the ornamental shades
of the lamps upon the centre table casts a glorifying
touch of colour upon her calm and handsome features.
On the other side of the big table her uncle, Mr.
Wilson Giles, is sitting awkwardly upon a low-seated
chair, twirling his thumbs, and thinking regretfully
of the good old days when he was allowed to enjoy an
after-dinner cigar in this very room, —a ruthless edict
against which proceeding has gone forth since his
niece has taken the reins of power into her able
fingers.
“Well, Lileth, what is it?” asks the nominal
master of the house, u what is it you have got to
Whatever it is, let’s have it over quick, so as I can
have a smoke on the verandah.”
“ Have your smoke first, uncle, if you like ; but
please change your coat before you come in here after-
wards. You know I don’t object to tobacco ; but you


know those English girls, who are coming over from
Simon’s to-morrow night, and I want to have one room
in the house, at any rate, that doesn’t smell like a
taproom.”
Mr. Giles is not an adept at repartee ; hut it occurs
to him to remark, in retaliation, that, unless his niece
smokes herself upon the sly, there must be several
rooms in the house free from the odour of the fragrant
weed. He also means to ask that lady how she
knows what are the true characteristics of a taproom,
but his cutting sarcasms do not arrange themselves
with sufficient facility for him to give them vocal
form ere Miss Mundella again speaks.
“You asked me, uncle, to consider two or three
schemes you mentioned to me for getting rid of the
monetary responsibility that rests upon your shoulders
with regard to the P.Ns. you gave to Dyesart.”
“ Well, what d’you think of ’em ? ”
“ Well, uncle, I really don’t see why you need
trouble yourself further in the matter, now that you
have placed the—er—arranging of affairs with me. But
I will tell you, just to show you how little you under-
stand this kind of business, why your ideas would not
work out satisfactorily; like that remarkably risky
one you tried in Sydney, and of which, perhaps, you
have not yet heard the end.”
Lileth adds this last sentence as a sort of cold
douche, to extinguish any rising indignation her
previous words might have aroused.
Giles reddens, forces his eyes out from his head
a bit, and, gasping, presently returns to his normal
state of weak submission.
“If the notes,” Miss Mundella continues, “ are to


be found where the doctor’s body lies, wherever that
may be, and are payable to bearer, Mr. Puttis, or any
one we might send, might—l do not say would be
able to cash them for themselves, or at any rate raise
money upon them. Possibly whilst trying to do this
they might be asked to say how they became possessed
of them, and what lawyers call mala Jides might be
suspected. Then you would probably get into trouble
as well as they.”
“Well, then, what d’you propose ? ”
“ I find, also,” continues the young lady, without
noticing the interrupting question, “I find also that the
destruction of the notes would not clear you from } our
liability. For by this Act of Parliament, 17 and 18 of
Victoria,”— turning over the leaves of a new edition of
“Byles on Bills,”—“ by section eighty-seven, ‘it is
provided that, in the case of any action
« Oh, cut it short, Lileth 1 ” exclaims the sufferer
on the low-seated chair. “ Will it do to destroy the
notes instead of the nephew? That’s what I want
ter know.”
The squatter’s niece continues, as if no interruption
had occurred, “ 1 In the case of any action founded
on a Bill of Exchange, Promissory Note, or other
negotiable instrument, the court or judge ”
“Oh Lord, what are yer driving at?” groans
Mr. Giles.
“ 1 Court or judge has power to order that the
loss of such instrument,’ —now, listen to this, uncle,
‘ the loss of such instrument shall not be set up, pro-
vided an indemnity is given, to the satisfaction of the
court, or judge, or a master, against the claims of any
other persons upon such negotiable instrument.


Although the fair young lawyer’s powers of facial
command are nearly perfect, she has much ado to
refrain from smiling at the muddled look of the red-
faced man opposite to her.
“ Don’t you remember how these notes were drawn ?
On demand, or at sight, or bearer ? ” she asks.
(t I’m jiggered if I do,” returns Mr. Giles. “ There
was some talk about—of my making the notes come
due at a certain time ; then Dyesart, he up and says
‘that might prove awkward to you, make them on
demand after a certain date.’ And then—but I forget
how we fixed it up at last. Don’t exactly ‘recco-
member.”
“At any rate, uncle,” says Miss Mundella, rising
and moving towards her relative, with the dignified
grace an empress might have envied, “ at any rate, we
can be sure of this, that if this nephew finds the notes,
or even has a knowledge that you ever obtained money
from his uncle under a written contract to return the
same, you will pretty certainly have to pay up. I feel
sure this was the meaning of Dyesart getting young
Angland to come all this way up here. I can’t see
what else it can be. By-the-bye, I have young
An gland’s photograph here. Would you like to see
it?”
“ How the dev ” begins Giles, but correcting
himself continues, “ How the goodness did you come
by that ? You’re a wonder I Swelp me if you’re not.”
“Oh, I made my arrangements,” answers Lileth
in her rich, contralto voice. And this is all the young
lady deigns to reply.
Holding the photograph in her firm, white hand
all the time her uncle is looking at it, Miss Mundella


continues : “And now, once for all, uncle, jou will
please leave the whole matter to me. You will spoil
my plans, possibly, if you interfere. You can assist
our mutual objects, however, in this way : you can
refrain from drinking too much whilst young Angland
is here. You are horribly indiscreet when you have
had too much. And another thing, be ready to take
any hints of mine, and don’t cross me in anything I
propose.” .
Just as the low, steady voice closes its melodious
utterings, the door of the drawing-room is flung open,
and a white, fluttering female figure appears upon its
threshold.
It is that of an exceedingly pretty young girl, petite
and (strange to say in this part ot the world) losy. A
wondrous mane of golden-yellow hair falls about hei
dimpled cheeks and symmetrical neck and shoulders
in such profusion that she has the appearance, as the
lamps in the room shine upon her, of being surrounded
with an aureole of silken rays of light. In fact, as she
stands in the framework of the doorway, before the
dark background of the passage, hesitating whether
to disturb the two people in the room, her figure for
all the world might be that of a miraculous picture
of an angel of light, about to come to life and interrupt
the machinations of those evil-minded plotters before
her, who glance up anxiously at this interruption to
their interview.
“ Oh, papa, I’m afraid you’re busy. I didn’t mean,
truly, to interrupt you. Shall I run away ?
“No, my dear, not at all,” responds Mr. Giles,
rising, and evidently glad to thus close the tete-d-
--tete with his dark-browed niece. “ Come on to the


verandah, Glory, and talk to me whilst I have a cigar.
There’s nothing more to say, I suppose, Lileth? I
leave all to you.”
“ No, uncle, nothing more,” replies Miss Mundella,
adding, u Don’t keep dear Glory out too long in the
cold. She s not fever proof, and the cool evenings
here are dangerous to people from the south. You’ll
come in, dear, presently, and give us a little Mendels-
sohn before supper, won’t you ? ”
“Oh yes, Cousin Lileth. But can’t you come on to
the verandah with us ? Oh my I ” Miss Glory Giles
adds excitedly, as her bright glance- falls upon the
photograph of Claude that Lileth has allowed to
remain upon the table. “ Wherever did you get that ?
So good, too. He’s not here, is he ? Oh ! he’s a per-
fect darling, and saved poor Fluffy and me from—
oh ! such a terrible lot of larrikins. And what’s his
name ? ”
There is no knowing how long Glory would have
continued her avalanche of excited encomiums and
questions relative to young Angland, had she not been
interrupted by her father. For the young lady before
us is the damsel whose blue eyes created such havoc
in our hero’s breast during his short stay in Brisbane,
and she is now pleasurably regarding the sun-picture
of her “ own hero,” as she always calls Claude when
relating the story of his prowess to her school-girl
friends, not knowing his real name. And what better
name would young Angland have desired, had he only
known the honour thus done to his memory ?
At the rather anxiously expressed request of
Mr. Giles, his daughter, who has just left school for
good, relates, without reserve, the whole story of her


adventure near tlie Brisbane Public Gardens. Holding
Claude’s photograph all the while, she winds up her
breathless recital by repeating her former questions.
Miss Mundella, knowing that her uncle will expect
her to take the initiative and smooth down this awk-
ward discovery of Glory’s, that bids fair to prove a
complication of the conspirators’ scheme against
Claude, has quickly determined what course to pursue,
and immediately marches her wits forward against
the new danger.
I may as well tell Glory all about it, Lileth
observes, turning her dark eyes up to Giles, and
signalling to him to keep silence with the nearest
approach to a wink that she has ever condescended to
employ.
“ This young man, Glory dear,” she goes on,
smiling upon her fair cousin, and placing her hand
upon Miss Giles’s shoulder, “is the nephew of Dr.
Dyesart, the explorer, of whose death we were speak-
ing during dinner. He will, possibly, be here before
long, on his way to attempt the discovery of his
uncle’s grave. Mr. Angland, for that is the nephew s
name, was staying at the same hotel in Sydney with
my brother Abaddon, —Cousin Jack you used to call
him. My brother, finding that Mr. Angland was
coming up here, sent me a photograph of him. I
don’t know how he got it. I suppose it was given to
him. Now, you’re not a silly;school-girl any longer,
and I think I can trust you with something I am
about to say. Can I, dear?”
«Oh yes, Cousin Lileth. But,” hesitatingly, “ but
it’s not anything bad you’ve heard about Mr. Ang-
land, is it ? If it is, pray don’t tell me, please.


I always want to be able to think of him as a
hero.”
“Well, dear,” answers Miss Mundella, laughing
softly, as she recognizes in this confession of hero-
worship the characteristics of a simple mind that her
own powerful will may some day find it profitable to
employ. “ Well, dear, you can still continue to do so,
as far as I know to the contrary. It’s nothing against
Mr. Angland, but just this. You know my brother
Abaddon is just a little wild. He has been so long
up here, you know; and when he went for his holiday
to Sydney, he got—well—rather ( rampageous ’ I
think is a good word to express what I mean.”
Mr. Giles, standing a little distance from the two
ladies, wonders what on earth his niece is about to
evolve from her inner consciousness.
“How, Glory, I’d rather,” continues Lileth, “I’d
rather you did not inform Mr. Angland, if he comes
here, that we are any connection of Abaddon’s, for I
believe my brother got into serious disgrace with your
hero in Sydney.”
“But his name, Lileth? Mundella’s such an
uncommon name.”
“Oh, well, you see your Cousin Abaddon is so
afraid of people taking him to be a Jew. He’s so
sensitive to the rudeness of people, although he’s
brave as a lion ; so he always goes by the name of
Smith when away from here. In fact, it is really
absurd how few . people, even about here, know his
real name. I believe poor Abaddon, from what I can
make out in his letter, took too much to drink one
night, and insulted Mr. Angland dreadfully.”
“Poor Cousin Jack,” murmurs Glory to herself,


as, recollecting the Brisbane affair, she thinks of the
sight Abaddon’s face must have presented shortly
after his having insulted Mr. Angland.
“Is that all, Cousin Lileth ? ” she asks aloud.
“ Oh, then I’ll never mention a word about the photo
or about Mr. Abaddon Smith. Ha I ha ! how funny
it sounds, don’t it ? ” The young lady laughs merrily.
“ I only hope Mr. Angland,—ah ! isn’t that a nice
name ? —I only hope he will have time to stop here
and have some tennis. He and I against you and
Mr. Cummercropper, what fun ! But he’s sure to
rush away again. All the nice people do,” she adds,
pursing up her pretty lips at the thought. Then
suddenly turning to her father, she seizes his arm,
and laughing and talking all at once, she drags him
off to the cool verandah, where she lights his cigar
for him, and chatters away about her most amusing
recollections of the charming southern capital she has
just left.
Mr. Giles and his fair daughter have not long been
seated in the cane chairs on the verandah, when the
tattoo of an approaching horseman comes to interrupt
their conversation.
The fox-terrier, Spot, who has been sitting silently
in the darkness by his master’s chair, sleepily watching
the red cigar end, as it pulses alternately bright and
dull, rushes out to investigate matters; and presently
all ten of the canine dependents of the station folk
join in a vari-toned vocal notice of the advent of the
equestrian.
At this moment Miss Mundella joins her relatives.
“ That’s Jim back from the muster at Bulla Bulla,
I expect,” remarks Mr. Giles.


“No, uncle,” says Lileth in a low, strange voice,
“ it is Mr. Claude Angland.”
Mr. Giles starts in his cane-chair, as its creaking
hack testifies in the shadows.
“ Now, how can you possibly tell ? You can’t
know that much, at any rate.”
“ I can’t tell how I know, but it is he,” answers his
niece in the same tones.
Glory does not say anything, but stands up ready
to catch a first glimpse of the stranger, whoever it
may be.
A few minutes more and Miss Mundella’s predic-
tions are fulfilled ; and ere a quarter of an hour has
elapsed our young friend Claude is sitting down to
supper with the station folk, after being formally intro-
duced to all present, including Mr. Cummercropper,
the high-toned and love-sick station storekeeper, by
Miss Glory Giles as “My hero,”—a title which
Angland in vain attempts to show he does not deserve,
but one that enamoured youth intensely enjoys all the
same.
Claude had felt his heart beat quicker as he “ saw
the station roofs,”—the place from which his uncle’s
last letter had reached him. A thousand emotions
poured through his soul. Anxious thoughts were
amongst them. He was about to meet people of
whom, somehow, he had vague suspicions. Would he
be welcome ? Would he be even safe ?
But now, as he sits next his fair-haired young
goddess, a very Juventus of youth and vigour, amidst
the pleasant and jovial conversation of his new friends,
in a brilliantly-lighted and elegantly-furnished room,
a new set of thoughts comes to oust his lately sombre


ones. Pie finds himself the honoured and welcome
guest of an hospitable and charming circle ; and
although Claude is not generally accustomed to wear
his heart upon his sleeve, his happy revulsion of
feelings is inclining him to a dangerous revelation of
his private concerns, when something occurs to sober
him suddenly and put him once more upon his guard.
Claude’s conversation has been mainly with his
host and that gentleman’s charming daughter. Mr.
Cummercropper spoke only when the Arts were
mentioned, and then rather incoherently. Lileth was
silently watching and studying the new-comer, only
putting in an odd word here and there, where courtesy
demanded it. Presently the subject of music is dis-
cussed, and Glory, amongst other new songs, speaks
of “ Killaloo.”
As the name of this remarkable ballad is men-
tioned, Claude’s thoughts rush to the midnight scene
upon the viaduct with a sort of graveyard chilliness,—
the air whistled by the elegant desperado at his side,
the blue-white electric lights upon the rink. Angland
becomes serious at once.
Miss Mundella here, at last, joins in the conver-
sation, and at some length condemns certain of the
caprices of modern musical taste, which is a favourite
theme of hers. Going on to speak of certain newly-
published ballads that call forth her unfavourable
criticisms, she mentions the crickets ( Gryllus ), which,
according to Mouffet, are objects of commerce in
certain African tribes, and are sold about, as canary
birds are amongst Europeans, to the inhabitants, who
like to hear their amorous chant.
“ Their chirping would be irritable to the ears of


persons trained to more melodious sounds,” Lileth
concludes by saying, “ but the caprice of those African
blacks is not one whit stranger than that of those who
enjoy some of the more modern drawing-room songs.”
Mr. Cummercropper gazes in weak-eyed rapture at his
dark-eyed enchantress as she speaks, and inclines his
large, pink ears unto her. He is even about to second
her remarks. But he gets no further than, “ Yhas,
bai Joave,” when he accidentally drops his eyeglass
into his wine, which misfortune entirely upsets all
his ideas, and renders him hopelessly nervous during
the remainder of the evening.
After glancing at the unhappy storekeeper, as he
clumsily fishes for his “ glass eye ” in the ruby-coloured
Dalwood, Miss Mundella turns towards Claude, and
finds him regarding her curiously.
“ Pardon me,” he says, as he observes that Lileth
is for the instant somewhat disconcerted by the look
she has seen in his face. “ Pardon me ; but we have
surely met before. I am nearly certain of it. Will
you kindly assist my ungallant memory ? I confess I
am puzzled to know how I could ever forget. It is
hardly likely you will remember the circumstance of
our meeting, when I ”
Claude suddenly ceases to speak. His features
become set and firm, and slightly paler than before.
Memory has come to his aid, and the bridge scene in
Sydney is enacted over again in his mind’s eye. All
but Angland and Miss Mundella are amusing them-
selves with Glory’s little dog Fluffy, which is begging
for cheese rind.
Lileth leans forward and softly speaks,—
“ Your thoughts seem unpleasant ones, Mr. Angland.


I trust that the memory of any previous meeting, if
we have met, is not associated with them.”
Claude again regards the grand face turned towards
him observantly as he replies, —
“ I thought I recognized your voice. But I made
a foolish mistake. And to tell you the truth, the
sound of your voice'brought to my mind some very
unpleasant recollections. I see I have aroused your
interest. You will then pardon me if I explain under
what circumstances it was that I last heard a voice so
much resembling yours. I was assaulted in Sydney,
a month or so ago, by. two men who attempted my
destruction. One of them, forgive my saying so,
somewhat resembled you. But it was the tones of
your voice, which are exactly like his, that at first
puzzled me.”
“You are certainly not very complimentary, Mr.
Angland,” responds Miss Mundella, smiling, without
betraying in the least the agitation which almost
renders her incapable of playing her part; 11 but I
forgive you. And you must tell me, to-morrow, all
about your adventure with my badly behaved ‘ doppel-
ganger ’ in Sydney. Come, Glory ! ” she adds gaily
to her cousin, as she rises to say “ Good-night.”
“We shall have to be up early to-morrow, if we
are to meet the Miss Chesters at the Red Billabong.
Schlaf wohll ” And the two ladies retire, leaving
the men to wind up the evening with their cigars.
Midnight,
Of all the persons beneath the roof-tree of Murdaro
head station house during the first part of that night,


Mr. Cummercropper was the only one who was suc-
cessful in wooing “ the gentle sleep,” and it was not
till early morning that slumber slid upon the souls of
the remainder of the party.
For Claude, his host, and the two fair cousins,
u each and severally ” have their excited brains full of
a reeling panorama, called into action by memory and
thought, which it is far beyond the power of slumber
to extinguish.
Mr. Wilson Giles’s better feelings are fighting a
losing battle with the more selfish promptings of his
nature, which are supported by the heavy artillery
of his niece’s arguments.
The grateful memory of Dyesart’s kindness in the
hour of need ; the evident affection and esteem —
possibly the herald of a warmer feeling—which his
daughter evinces for young Angland ; the risky nature
of the game that his niece urges him to continue; are
all arguments in favour of a laissez faire policy. But
on the other side there is the uncomfortable thought
of losing the fruits of his life’s labour, —the run that
he has purchased with hardships innumerable ; with
blood, murder, and selfishness. Moreover, Lileth
knows too much about his concerns now. Her thumb
is turned downwards, and the victim of the scheme
must be sacrificed.
Giles groans as he thinks how much he hates his
niece. He conceives her to be a true Jew at heart, —
remorseless and unswerving in her purposes. And
who knows better than he, Giles, what Hebrews are.
When his gay, wild-oat sowing youth was beginning
to wane, had he not felt the white, unforgiving but
smiling fangs of members of the race tearing at his


throat ? Ah ! how well he had retaliated upon the
first of them who came within his power. Giles rolls
over in his bed as he chuckles a hard, dry gurgle of
laughter, as he calls to mind how he had schemed
and schemed, and, sacrificing his sister in his revenge,
had married her to Lileth’s father, with the successful
intention of ruining him. But his wandering thoughts
always hark back to the same conclusion, —Lileth
must have her way.
Meanwhile, Claude in his room tumbles about
restlessly, as he thinks, alternately, of the strange
likeness between the dark-eyed lady he had met that
evening and the assassin of the arches, and of the
fair-haired angel into the heaven of whose presence
he had so strangely ascended.
Two o’clock, ante-meridian, strikes the carriage clock
in Glory Giles’s bedroom, which adjoins that of Miss
Mundella. And ere the deep music of its coil-bell
vibrations have faded in waves of dying sweetness
into silence, the charming occupant of the apartment
is wide awake.
All is silent in the house, and the golden-haired
maiden lies deeply thinking within the cosy sanctum
of her mosquito-curtained couch. Glory had heard
the last part of the conversation between Claude and
Lileth. It had, of course, considerably interested her.
But it was not till the young lady had entered into
the quiet of her own room, that she had thought of
there being any connection between the murderous
attack upon her admirer in Sydney and the photo-
graph incident of the previous evening.
Glory remembers the promise of secrecy exacted
from her by her cousin Lileth, —whom she looks


upon more in the light of a step-mother than a girl-
companion only a few years older than herself, —and
dreadful thoughts begin to shape themselves.
The merry little girlish brain is not given to much
labour in the tiresome direction of induction-drawing.
But where female interest is highly excited, there
arises into being a more active means of interpretation
than that employed by the more stolid brain of the
male human when solving similar problems. This
power—called by men “jumping at a conclusion”—
tells Claude’s inamorata hearer that “ her hero ” is in
danger at the hands of her dark-haired relative, now
slumbering in the next room.
Slumbering? No I For there is a light in there ;
and presently the green-baize door, that opens from
one bed-chamber to the other, swings noiselessly back-
wards, and Miss Mundella appears holding a lighted
taper in her hands.
She wears her dark morning dress, and, after
addressing Glory softly, to ascertain if her cousin is
awake, and receiving no answer, she moves silently
out of the apartment and down the passage.
An hour afterwards one of the station “ boys ”
rides off with a letter from the shadow of the quiet
buildings.
This is the burly Cape York native called Carlo, —
the executioner of “ Government House,” —and as he
has been enjoined, by Miss Mundella herself, to hurry
over his appointed task, he is not likely to tarry on
the way.
The mysterious rider’s iron-grey steed—one of the
famous Satan’s daughters—is pawing the ground as
her rider, who has dismounted, is fumbling at the


fastenings of the home-paddock gate, which opens on
to the unfenced run, when he becomes aware of a
white figure approaching him.
The aboriginals are great believers in ghosts, and
the black horseman is about to fly in terror, when
his marvellous powers of sight—good almost in the
darkness as a cat’s —tell him that it is the little
Marmie-lady ” (the master s daughter) that is before
him.
« Carlo I ” exclaims Glory, in the breathless voice
of one who has been running, “do you know who I
am?” '
«Iss. Mine know urn, allite, Missee Gorrie,” replies
the “ boy.” . „ „
u Well, then, tell me where you are going ? ”
a Oh! mine go look longer bullockie, Maimie.
Plenty fellow oberthrees sit down longer Bulla Bulla
’tation.”
The black means to inform Miss Giles, whom he
submissively calls Marmie, or Mistress, that he goes
to look for a number of bullocks —branded with the
station mark of 0 B 3, which he calls “ oberthree
which have wandered on to the next rim.
“ You tell big fellow lie, Carlo ! ” exclaims Glory
excitedly. You take letter; you take book-a-book
alonger station.”
Click , click, click! The black hears the ominous,
metallic rattle of the chambers of a revolver, as
the fair hands thus emphasize the demand that
follows: —
“Miss Lileth give you book-a-book for Inspector
Puttis. Give it to me I ”
The unfortunate native hesitates for a moment, not


knowing which, way to retire from out of range of the
two fires between which he finds himself: the terrible
retribution that will fall upon him if he proves false
to “ Missee Lillie’s ” orders threaten him on one
flank ; on the other is the present danger of being
shot if he does not surrender what he had strict
injunctions to deliver into the police officer’s own
hands at Bulla Bulla station.
The native mind, till trained to think after the
European fashion, cares little for the morrow. So
Carlo, wisely and quickly, decides to escape the near
danger, come what may afterwards, and holds out a
white envelope towards Glory beneath the faint star-
light.
The little white fingers take the note ; and, retiring
a few yards so as not to frighten the horse, a match
is lit, and the “ fair highwayman ” examines her
plunder. Yes, it is the letter she wants.
“ You sit down here, Carlo,” Glory says, “ till I
come back. If horse want walk about, walk up and
down,” waving her hand explainingly. Then, giving
the black a piece of money, she disappears. Ten
minutes afterwards Carlo has the letter returned to
him by the “ little Marmie,” and is soon flying over
the spear-grass plains in the direction of the next
station. Glory returns to her room, by means of the
open window, as she left it, and exhausted with her
bold adventure soon falls asleep.
If any sharp-eyed detective had, about this time,
examined one of the dining-room windows near to
which Miss Mundella had written her letter, he would
have found a slightly greasy spot upon one of its
panes; and, if worthy of his noble profession, he


would have been led by a process of induction to
surmise that this mark had been caused by the nasal
organ of some smallish person, who had been engaged
not long before in what may be correctly termed as
u prying into the room.”


CHAPTER XY.
THE GHOST OF CHAMBER’S CREEK.
“ Mongst thousand dangers, and ten thousand magick mights.”
Faerie Queene,
EXT morning, when
Claude wandered into the
supper-room of the pre-
vious night, he found a
couple of fat, comely
young native women,
in short, light-coloured
frocks, relaying the cloth
upon the table for a
second or late breakfast.
One of these girls on
seeing Claude toddles up
to him, and explains,
in the ridiculous jargon
she has been taught to
consider English, that Mr. Giles and the young ladies
have already partaken of breakfast and gone out.
“ Marmie bin go out longer Missie Lillie, urn Missie
Gory bin go longer Marmie big fellow way.”
“ What name ? ” she adds briefly, bringing her


beautiful eyes and smiling features to bear upon
Claude with awkward suddenness as she puts her
question.
In reply Angland bashfully but carefully explains
to the gins how his name is usually pronounced by
himself and friends ; but the girls only grin in return
with their pearly rows of teeth, as if they are the
victims of suppressed mirth. They are evidently
highly amused, and even retail some joke to the
diminutive Lucy, who, seeing that something out of
the ordinary is going on, has popped her little black
head in at the door to listen.
“ What name, Marmie ? ” the smiling “ lubras ”
repeat in chorus.
Whilst Claude stands puzzling over the mystic
meaning of the dark fair ones before him, Mr.
Cummercropper enters the room, and nodding to our
hero—and thereby losing his eye-glass for a few
seconds—proceeds to tediously deliver the same
message Angland has already received. Claude waits
till the msthetical station-storekeeper has finished,
and then begs him to enlighten him as to the meaning
of the laughing girls.
“ Hal ha I ” chuckles Mr. Cummercropper out of
the depths of his high collar. “ Bai Joave ! not bad,
by any means. They don’t want to know your name.
Picked that much up long ago. ‘What name?’
means, in this part of the globe, ‘ Which will you
have, coffee, tea, or cocoa, for breakfast ? ’ Don’t it,
Dina ? ”
Dina grins a comprehensive smile, and nods her
brilliantly beturbaned head in reply to the query;
and, obtaining a satisfactory answer at last to her


oft-repeated question, trots her buxom little figure away
into the kitchen. After breakfast Claude spends his
morning in trying to learn something of Billy; but he
is almost entirely unsuccessful, as the blacks about
the station are strangely reticent. The disappearance
of his late uncle’s servant is very annoying to Angland,
and our young friend is really puzzled to know what
steps he had better take next. Claude has a lonely
lunch, for none of the station folk are yet returned,
and Mr. Cummercropper has descended from the
art student to the “ rational ” storekeeper, and has
started off in a buggy and pair with a load of
il rations ” for a far-off out-station; and then, getting
a “ boy ”to fetch his horse in from the paddock, he
canters over to an out-station, where he left his
miner friend and the two boys the night before.
“Well, lad, thou hast not been successful in thy
work, ’ says old Williams, Claude’s digger companion
as he observes that young man’s disappointed face.
“ And that I were right to camp here I’ll show ye.
There’s nowt save ourselves here, for. they’re out
must’ring ‘ weaners.’ So coome inside out of the
sun, and I’ll tell thee news o’ Billy.”
Claude watches his lively purchase, Joe, hobble the
horse, and then follows Williams into the two-roomed
shanty, which is honoured by the name of an “ out-
station house.” It is merely a roughly-built hut, with
walls of gum-tree slabs laid one upon another, and a
roof formed of sheets of brown gum-tree bark. The
studs of the building, also the rafters and purlieus, are
ingeniously kept in position by neatly fastened strips
of “ green hide ” (raw leather), and the hard grey
floor and colossal chimney-place are composed of the


remains of a number of ant-hills that have been
pounded up for the purpose. The material of which
these hills are built is a kind of papier mache ,
consisting of wood-fibre and clay, and is in much re-
quest amongst northern settlers for various structural
purposes. The termites, or “ white ants,” sometimes
raise their many-coned mounds to a height ol from
twelve to fifteen feet, and these “ spires and steeples,”
with the absence of dead tree-stems upon the ground,—
another sign of the presence of these insects,— are two
of the most characteristic features ot the open bush-
country of Northern Queensland.
Williams squats down on his hams, bush-fashion,
in front of the yawning fireplace, where a camp-oven,
suspended over the grey embers, is frizzling forth the
vapoury flavour of “ salt-junk,” and after lighting his
pipe proceeds to tell Claude what he has found out
from the stockmen. This, to condense the lengthened
yarn of the old miner, is just what Billy related of
himself, in our presence, to the old u hatter Weevil
in the lonely jungle cave.
“ He’ll coome back here, I tell ye. For note ye,
lad, he camped as long as he could at Murdaro, till
they made him clear.”
“Yes, I believe he was waiting there for me,”
responds Claude.
“Now, mind ye,” continues the digger, gesticulating
with his maize-cob pipe, “ mind ye make every nigger
round know that yer wants to find Billy, and ye’ll
hear of him soon, like enough. Now the more ye
gets known here the safer fur ye, so wait here till the
men get back. Ye can pitch ’em a song after supper
and ride home with the head stock-keeper. He 11 be


going up to ‘ Government House ’ to-night. Moon
rises ’bout nine.”
Half an hour before sundown a dust-cloud that has
been slowly travelling for the last two hours across
the plain, in the direction of the out-station, reaches
its destination. It is now seen to be caused by the
feet of a small “ mob ” (herd) of cows and unbranded
calves. These, after much yelling and an accom-
panying—
“ Running fire of stockwhips,
And a fiery run of hoofs,”
are at last forced down a funnel-shaped lane between
two wide fences, called “ wings,” into the receiving
yard of a large stockyard near the house.
Not long afterwards the head stock-keeper and his
two white stockmen appear ; and the former, after
being introduced to Claude, and having indulged in a
very necessary wash, sets the example, which is soon
followed by the other men, of proceeding to work
upon the evening meal. This is placed upon the table
by two dark-skinned nymphs, whose airy costume
consists chiefly of one old shirt and a pair of smiles
between them.
The position these girls occupy in an establishment
where all are bachelors may be guessed, and Claude
learns, before the meal is over, that they are under the
“ protection ” of the white stockmen, having been 11 run
down ” for this purpose some months previously.
“ Run away I ” laughs one of the stockmen, skilfully
supplying his mouth with gravy by means of his
knife-blade, as he repeats a question put to him by
Angland before answering it. “ Run away! No, I


rayther think as ’ow Nancy was the last gal as will
ever try that game agin. The black beggars know
what they’ll get for trying the speeling racket here.
Short and sharp’s onr motter on this here station,”
the speaker adds, as his savoury knife-point disappears
half down his gullet.
Upon Claude expressing a wish to hear about
Nancy’s ultimate fate, the men become reticent; but
Claude learns afterwards on good authority that the
unfortunate girl was overtaken whilst attempting to
return to her tribe, and was flogged to death before
the other native station-hands, “ pour encourager les
autres.”
After the whites have done their meal, the black
stockmen are handed their “ rations,” which consist
of the broken viands from the table, and such pieces
of “junk” as have become tainted. The whole
amount does not seem very much for the eight
“ boys ” after their hard day’s work in the saddle,
and when they have further sub-divided it with their
relatives at the black camp close by, their earnings
for the day must appear very small indeed.
Selfishness is unknown between relations amongst
aborigines. There is no mcum at tuum. A hunter s
spoil or a “ boy’s ” earnings are given away imme-
diately upon his return to camp ; and the individual
who has obtained the good things generally keeps
less than his own proper share, being complimented
upon this by the women in a low chant or grace
during the eating or cooking of the food.
It seems probable, however, that if the right of
purchasing their liberty was permitted to the station
blacks, and each “ boy was allowed his pecv<lium,
17


as instituted by Justinian, the first anti-slavery
emperor of Rome, this unselfish division of each day’s
wage would soon become out of fashion. It is,
perhaps, in order to encourage this virtuous practice
of their station slaves that the Australian squatters
have never followed the example set them by the
ancient Romans.
The head stock-keeper, whose name is Lythe, but
who is generally known upon the station as “ the
Squire,” is a very different kind of man to his two
stockmen. These individuals belong to a much lower
type of humanity, and are apparently without any
education whatever, save a superficial knowledge of
horses and cattle.
Born of good parentage in an English “ racing
county,” Lythe is a fair average sample of a certain
class of men not very uncommon in up-country
Australia. Life’s chessboard has been with him an
alternating record of white, glowing triumphs, and
black disgrace of wild, feverish saturnalia and rough
toiling at the hardest kinds of colonial work. A wild
boyhood, a wilder time at Sandhurst, a meteoric
existence as Cornet in a lance regiment,—with the
attendant scintilla of champagne suppers, racehorses,
and couturieres , —and then he slipped on to a u black
square ” and became a “ rouseabout ” on an Australian
run. Presently he rises again, by making for himself
a bit of a name as a successful “ overlander ”or
cattle-drover, and, becoming rich, moves “ on to the
white.” He is a squatter, takes up-country, loses all,
and then becomes an irreclaimable tippler. “ Black
square” again, and here he is, working hard to
“ knock up ” another cheque, —a well-educated, usq-


ful member of society when free from liquor ; a wild,
quarrelsome savage from tbe time be reaches the
first “ grog-shanty ” on his way “ down south,” till
he returns “dead broke” to “knock up another
cheque ” at the station.
Claude’s hosts at the little out-station —who, like
most Australian colonists, are as hospitably minded
as their means will allow them to be—do all they can
to render his visit to their rough home as agreeable
as possible. They even indulge him with a few bush
songs, whilst the after-supper pipe is being smoked.
One of these, sung in a voice gruff and husky with
shouting to the cattle all day, to the air of a well-
known nautical ditty, is descriptive of the first
“ taking up ” of the Never Never Land, and has a
taking chorus, concluding thus :
“ Then sing, my boys, yo ! ho !
O’er desert plains we go
To the far Barcoo,
Where they eat Ngardoo,
A thousand miles away.”
At nine o’clock “ the Squire ” and Claude say good-
bye to the others, and mounting their horses, which
have been brought up to the house across the dewy,
moonlit pastures by a pair of attendant sprites, pro-
ceed leisurely in the direction of the head station.
Around the riders stretches the tranquil indigo and
silver glory of a marvellous phasmagoria, painted by
earth’s cold-faced satellite. And accustomed to the
softer beauties of a New Zealand moonlight night,
Claude cannot help exclaiming to his companion upon
the strange, phantom-like appearance that all the


familiar objects around him appear to have put on
beneath the argent rays. Even that most unpoetical
object, the stock-yard, where the imprisoned cattle are
roaring impatient of restraint, seems, with its horrid
carcase gallows, all dressed with a silvery, mystic
robe of light, as if transformed into a spectre castle,
filled with moaning, long-horned beings of another
world.
“Yes, that is so,” returns Claude’s companion,
when our young friend has remarked the curious
features of the scene before him. “ What yon notice
is just what is the chief characteristic of an Australian
moonlight scene. The only real poet Australia’s ever
had was Lindsay Gordon. He was an Englishman,
by-the-bye, and he has the same sort of weird touch
running through all his poems. But it isn’t so much
to my mind,” —the speaker rubs his chin thoughtfully,
—“ it isn’t that the moonlight is different here to what
it is elsewhere, I fancy, so much as it is that Nature
herself puts on an outlandishly-awful, God-forsaken,
ghastly kind of rig-out, when left to herself in these
wilds.”
“ That’s very true,” responds Claude, looking at
the dreary scene of broken sandstone cliff and dead
forest through which their horses are picking their
way.
“ Now, really, Mr. Angland, what a devilish night-
mare of a place this ‘ outside ’ country is. Look at
those ghostly, white-stemmed gums. I’ve heard those
trees groan like dying men when there was hardly a
breath of air moving. Why, there! you can hear
them for yourself now. And, like all their kind, at
midday they cast no shadow ; and therefore migbti,


well be considered bewitched, if we went by the old
standard of ancient European justice, that considered
this infringement of the natural laws the very ear-
mark of Satan’s cattle. Look at our deserts, our old
volcanoes, our fishes that run about on the shore like
mice, our rivers of sand, and —but we need not go
farther than our wild animals. What artist —Griset,
Dor 6, or any one else —ever conceived a more impish
brute than the dingo, or a more startling caricature
of a deer with grasshopper’s legs than we find in the
kangaroo ? ”
The dree wail of some neighbouring dingoes upon
the distant hills comes as a sort of unearthly murmur
of acquiescence, as the speaker closes his remarks.
“ Why, really,” remarks Claude, laughing quietly,
“ now that you point it out, there is really something
curiously nightmare-like about Australian nature.
He adds after a pause, “ You would be a grand hand
at telling a ghost story.”
The two men canter over a smooth piece of country
in silence ; and when their horses have again come
within easy speaking distance, “ the Squire ” asks
Claude if he would like to hear a ghost yarn.
u I’m touchy, rather,” goes on “ the Squire,” “ on the
subject of this the only ghost that I have ever seen ;
and I give you warning you mustn’t scoff at me for
believing in it. I haven’t told any one about it since,
—well, it don’t matter when. You’re not in a hurry
to get to the station, I suppose ? ”
“ Oh, the yarn, by all possible means ! ” assents
Claude.
But his companion does not hear the reply to his
question, for as he loosens the flood-gates of his


memory there rushes vividly before his mind a long-
forgotten scene, like a weird picture from a magic
lantern, shutting out all external things,—a scene
of moonlit rock and dark, gloomy trees, of sleeping
cattle, of wild and awful midnight terror.
But it is only for an instant. Then he pulls himself
together, and half unconsciously lifts his hand to
wipe away the cold dew that even the memory of that
fearful night has called forth upon his brow.
“ You must know then,” commences “the Squire,”
after the manner of Master Tommie in “ Sandford and
Merton,” “ that, like most new chums in Australia, I
wandered about a good deal over this great, sunburnt
island before ever I settled down as head stock-keeper
at Murdaro. During part of that time I followed
the calling of an overlander. An ‘overlander,’ Mr.
Angland, —for, as you haven’t any of the breed in New
Zealand, I’ll explain what that is, —is Queensland-
English for a long-distance drover ; and a rough, hard
life it generally is. Cattle have to be taken long
distances to market sometimes from these ‘ up-
country’ runs. I have taken several mobs of ‘fats’
(fat bullocks) from the Never Never Land to Sydney,
—a distance of about fifteen hundred miles.
“ Now, when my story begins I was ‘ boss ’ of a
road-party taking fat cattle down to Sydney from
Contolbin station on the Lachlan. In fine weather,
when there’s plenty of grass or herbage, and water
every twenty miles or so, a drover has rather a jolly
time of it, after he’s trained the cattle to camp
properly, take it altogether : an open-air life, with
just enough exercise to make him enjoy his ‘tucker’
(food). But, like most lines of life, there are more


bitters than sweets connected witb the 1 overlanding
profession. Sometimes there’s no .water for forty,
fifty, perhaps ninety miles at a stretch, —for instance,
on the Birdsville and Kopperamana track,—and keep-
ing awake for days and nights together, you must
push on (with the sun at 120° in the shade, some-
times) taking yonr cattle, at their own pace, along
the Parakelia- covered sand-hills till the next water-
hole is reached. And at other times there is too
much water, and it is a case of swimming rivers e\eiy
few miles, or else sitting down for a stream to run
by for a few weeks,— riding through mud, sleeping
on mud, drinking mud, and eating it too, lor the
matter of that, for weeks at a time. I’ve done that
at the Wyndham crossing of the Cooper more than
once. But on the particular trip I am going to refer
to, the weather was more what you, as an Englishman,
will understand better than most Australians, for it
had been snowing hard for several nights in succes-
sion upon the Swollowie Mountains, over which our
road, from Orange to Bathhurst, lay, and the air
was almost as cold and chilly as it ever is in the
old country.
« I never shall forget the sight that poor old Sanko,
one of my native boys, was when he came off the
middle watch, the first night we reached the high
country. Sanko was a ‘ white-haired boy ’ when he
came off watch to call me that morning, and no
mistake about it, although his waving locks and
beard had been as black as night the day before.
“ No, Mr. Angland, he hadn’t seen a ghost 1 You’re
a bit too fast.
“ But he had seen something strange to him, and


that was a fall of snow. And when he poked his
head in at the. door of the ‘ fly ’ (tent) and called
me, his good-humoured, hairy face was white with
snow crystals. He really gave me a kind of ‘ sheer,’
as our American cousins call it, for a moment. He
looked like the apparition of some one I had known
in life. I thought I was dreaming at first ; and I
had had fever a little while before, and was still
rather weak from its effects. I mention this because
the scare Sanko gave me may have made a more
lasting impression upon me than I thought at the
time, and had something to do with what happened
the next night. All I did at the time, however, was
to tell Sanko not to call the next watch, as the cattle
would not shift in the snow. And rolling myself up
in my blankets, I was soon asleep again.
“ One of the greatest hardships of cattle droving is
the watching necessary at night. All sorts of things
may occur to frighten them ; and when that does
happen, off they rush, a resistless flood of mad animals,
into the darkness, breaking each other’s necks and
legs, and the remainder getting lost. Cows that want
to return to where they dropped a calf will sometimes
start a mob. The cunning brutes will watch you as
you ride past them on your ‘ night horse ’ on your
way round the mob, and then slink off into the
shadows, and be miles back along the track by
daylight. A thunderstorm is also a frightful cause
of mobs stampeding. But the worst thing to be
dreaded by the drover is a deliberate attempt to
frighten the cattle by cattle-thieves, or 1 duffers,’ as
we call them, who used in my time —there’s little
of it done now, I believe—sometimes to steal the


larger part of a travelling herd by this means. ell,
the plan of these midnight robbers is to watch till
your horses have wandered a bit from the camp, and
then, getting amongst them, slip their hobbles and
drive them quietly away. Then, knowing you can
do nothing to stop them, the rascals proceed to startle
the cattle by shouting, a gun-shot, or some such
means ; and you are lucky if you get half your horses,
let alone half your cattle, back again.
u It is necessary to tell you all this in order that
you may understand my ghost tale.
u These mountains we were coming to, as I knew,
had been the scene of several exploits of this kind,
and it made me anxious to get through by daylight.
There was a very rough lot of Cornish miners working
on the hills, in the Icely gold-mines ; and, rightly
or wrongly, we drovers mostly used to put these
midnight stampedes down to these ‘ Cousin Jacks.
But some of the older cattle-men upon the road,
and all the inhabitants of the (then) sparsely peopled
district, declared that these occurrences were due to
no human interference. They said that the goige
in the mountains, that I should have to pass through
to-morrow with my cattle, was haunted by the spirit
of a murdered man, whose corpse was ‘planted
where he had fallen many years since, with the knife
of a treacherous mate still sticking in his ribs. It
was this deceased gentleman’s nightly constitutionals
that were supposed to account for the various disas-
trous rushes of mobs of cattle in the mountain glen
during past years. I had often heard it used as an
argument, in favour of those who upheld the spectre-
theory, that the camp horses had been found still


hobbled after these rushes, —an oversight of which
no experienced ‘ cattle-dutfer ’ would be guilty. Well,
I felt rather anxious about the matter, but as I had
arranged my stages so as to camp at the foot of the
ranges that night, I thought I should be able to
push on over the fatal pass before the next sun went
down.
“ You may imagine my annoyance then, on the
morning when Sanko poked his ‘ frosty pow ’ into my
tent, to discover that the snow would delay our progress
for some hours. The creeks would be ‘ big ’ till mid-
day, and there were several reasons why I could not
camp another night where I was. I determined, there-
fore, to push on and try my luck.
“ The sun blazed out, and the white, patchwork
mantle on the blue-grey hills disappeared as if by
magic. But the Fates were against us. First our
horses did not turn up till late ; then the cows we
had with us kept on getting bogged in the muddy
billeybongs, and had to be hauled out. And what
with one delay and another, I saw the sunset redden
the cliffs before us as we crossed Chamber’s Creek
and entered the pass, and knew that I must camp my
cattle there for the night, and no help for it,
“ Leaving my men to bring on the cattle and horses,
I pricked my spurs into my steed’s sides, and made
him scramble up the stony track ; and, after half an
hour’s search, found a good place to camp the cattle
in a narrow part of the gorge, between two cliffs of
gnarled and distorted rock. There was plenty of long
grass, and the melting snow had. left puddles of water
all round amongst the rocks, that in the evening
light looked like so many pools of blood.


THE GHOST OF CHAMBER’S CREEK. 267
« Soon the cattle arrived, and I was glad to see
that, tired with their scramble up the mountain-side,
they were evidently contented with their camp, and
seemed likely to remain quiet all night.
«‘ Not so bad after all,’ I said to myself, as I rode
back to our camp-fire, after seeing the cattle safely
put on camp.
“But the words were hardly out of my mouth
when I noticed, in the twilight, a little fence of rough-
split shingles, up against the cliff, exactly opposite
the cattle. It was the grave of the murdered man.
I knew it from having had it so often described to me.
We must be then located exactly on the spot wheie,
six years before, a mob of cattle had suddenly been
seized with maddening terror, and stampeding over
the drover’s camp, killing two men in their wild rush,
had been lost entirely from that day to this.
“Well, there was no help for it, so I turned my
horse’s head from the solitary corner in the locks
and rode on towards our fire. Was it fancy or what ?
I know not, but as I left the grave behind me I
heard a sound like a low moan. It was followed by
a low, plaintive cry overhead, in the air.
“ ‘ Well, this is a creepy kind of place,’ I thought
to myself, ‘but I won’t tell the other fellows my
fears, but just double the watches to-night.’
“ I saw at a glance, however, on reaching the camp,
that my four white companions had evidently learned
of the close proximity of the grave, and knew the
history connected with it. And the black boj s had,
contrary to custom, made their fire close to ours, a
change that I thought it policy not to notice.
“ ‘ Now then, Sanko,’ said I to that worthy, after


supper, ‘you and Merrilie sit down alonger yarraman
(horses) till I come.’
“ The two ‘ hoys ’ went off unwillingly enough,—
another unusual thing that I, also, pretended not to
observe. Then, knowing that no one would attempt
to interfere with the cattle for an hour or two, I lay
down by the blazing mulga- branches for a short nap,
before sitting up for the rest of the night.
“ I had not been asleep ten minutes, I suppose,
before I woke to find Sanko tumbling oft' his horse
by my side in his hurry to speak to me, and could
see he was in a great state of terror about something.
“ ‘ Mine no like it sit down longer horses,’ he
grumbled, gaspingly,—his eyes rolling excitedly, as
he turned his head right and left over his shoulders,
as if in fear of something behind him. i Too much
the devil-devil all about. Him yabba-yabba, and
make it the walk about longer minga (grave) longer
white beggar. Mine no like um.’
“ I saw that it would be useless to try and get him
to go back alone, and there was evidently something
that required watching. I, therefore, sent all the
whites and blacks off to guard the horses, keeping one
of the former with me to mind the cattle. Telling
the latter to follow me ‘ when he was girthed-up,’ I
left him by the fire, and commenced to ride slowly
round the cattle, who were mostly lying down and con-
tentedly chewing their cud-suppers. The silver light
of a true Australian Alpine star-lit night made the bare
cliffs above stand out on either hand with an almost
phosphorescent contrast to the dark indigo shadows at
their feet. One could almost imagine that the rugged
rocks had absorbed a certain amount of sunlight


during the preceding day, and were now themselves
light-giving in a small degree—after the fashion of
those life-buoys that I’m told they cover now with
a sort of luminous paint. The light of our camp-fiie
warmed to colour a few projecting rocks and the
trunks of the smooth, white-stemmed gums, and now
and then the soft, purring sound of far-off falling
water came up the glen ; no other sound but trom
the chewing cattle, and all was quiet so fax.
a Suddenly my horse stopped short, with out-
stretched neck and pricked ears ; then suddenly
wheeling round would have dashed into the middle ot
the cattle, if I had not checked him in time. I could
not see anything to frighten him, and the cattle were
not alarmed ; they, happily, apparently saw nothing
strange Then I noticed that we were close to the
grave It was in deep shadow, but I could not look
at it comfortably over my shoulder, and, do what I
could my trembling night-horse would not face m
that direction. ~ ,
u There was nothing for it; so, as I could not finis i
mv patrol in that direction, I turned and rode round
the cattle the other way. By the fire, on my return
to the camp, I found my fellow- watcher Charley.
« ‘ Look here, boss,’ he said excitedly, ‘ there s some
beggar trying to duff the cattle, and make them string
this way, so I thought I’d wait here till you returned.
«i j)id you see any one ? ’ I asked.
«{'Well I believe as how I did ; but this moke got
that skeered, and well—-I didn’t know how many
there might be, and ’
« It was no time to expostulate with Charley for his
cowardice and negligence, so simply saying ‘ Follow


me ! ’ I turned and rode towards the grave. The place
seemed awfully weird in the starlight, and you could
make out little besides the white-backed cattle here and
there amongst the shadowy trees, and the great pile
of rocks towering upwards on either hand. The air
was very cold and my feet felt dead against the icy
stirrup-irons. As before, I could not get my horse to
pass in front of the grave ; that was now in such
deep shadow that nought of it could be seen.
“ Charley’s horse would not come so near as mine,
and both of them trembled and snorted with terror ;
and every moment tried to wheel round and escape
from the awful Something that they were watching.
“ We sat in our saddles and listened, but there were
no sounds but from the reposing cattle, and the
squeaking, here and there, of the branches overhead,
rubbing one upon another, as a passing breeze swept
sighing by.
u Presently the horses became less excited; then,
for the first time that night, I was able to get my
animal past the grave. I rode round the cattle
followed by Charley.
“ ‘ You’re right, there are duffers about,’ I said ;
and, telling him to keep a sharp look-out till I re-
turned, I hurried off, as fast as the darkness would
allow, and, finding the men looking after the horses,
presently returned with one of them. We all watched
together for an hour; and then hearing nothing I
‘ turned in,’ telling the men to call me when the morn-
ing star rose. They did so, and fearfully cold it was
when I turned out. I was very glad to hear the
watchers report that nothing had happened to disturb
the cattle.


“ ‘ Them blessed duffers hev found as ’ow we’re too
wide awake fur em,’ said one of the men,—who, I
found out afterwards, had slept nearly all through his
watch.
“ I felt now that the risk of losing my cattle was
over for that night, at any rate, and, mounting, rode
down to them. Nothing disturbed the first part of
my lonely watch; and 1 rode round the cattle more
asleep than awake, I confess, for half an hour or so,
when my steed, this time a very steady old night-horse,
suddenly showed signs of uneasiness, and I found we
were by the grave again.
“ I pulled up, and, sitting firm with both hands on
the reins and head thrust forward, listened intently.
The pale light of the morning star was creeping over
the face of the tall rocks. Its light would soon pene-
trate the shadows at their foot, and reveal the some-
thing in the darksome corner of the cliffs.
« All of a sudden there was a little rattle, as of
tumbling pebbles, in front of me; and then the
sound as of a sack or heavy piece of drapery being
dragged over the low split-shingle fence that I knew
was there, but could not see. A moment more, and
a low, hollow moan came from just where the grave
was situated.
«I pit my lip to make sure I was awake, and then,
straining my eyes into the darkness, I could just dis-
tinguish something, what I could not make out, moving
slowly towards me from the shadows.
u ]\jy horse swerved round just at this moment, and
when I got him back to his old position nought
could I see. I confess I was really alarmed now.
Old stories of ghosts and wraiths, which I had been


accustomed to consider so much childish rubbish, rushed
through my brain, do what I would to keep calm. I
pulled myself together, however, sufficiently to deter-
mine to wait and see the up-shot of it all. Then the
thought struck me that it might only be duffers after
all, and nothing supernatural ; and I could not over-
come the idea that some one was aiming a gun at me
in the darkness in front. I rode back once more to
the camp-fire, and by that time felt pluckier again,
and was thoroughly ashamed of myself. I then took
up my position before the grave, determined to find
out, single-handed, the cause of all the trouble.
“ The blessed star of morning had risen fast since
my last visit, and I could now see the outline of the
tumble-down fence around the lonely resting-place of
the murdered bushman. My horse was trembling as
before, but with spur and knee I got him to within
thirty feet of the grave.
“ The starlight crept more and more into the mys-
terious corner. I sat and waited.
“ Then suddenly I felt my hair raise the ‘ cabbage-
tree ’ upon my head, and my skin broke into a cold
sweat, for there I could see a curious something lying
upon the mound, a something that had not been
there last evening. Every moment the light grew
stronger, and I sat in a helpless state of terror as I
became aware of the figure of a man sitting on the
grave, with awful, sorrowful face turned towards me,
and bright, unearthly eyes looking into mine.
“ The apparition was that of a man below the
average height, and was apparently wrapped round,
as far as I could make out, in a grey, soft, filrhy kind
of cloak. It was the rotten remains of the blanket in


which he had been buried. He moved not, but sat in
awful silence gazing into my very soul.
“ My horse trembled violently, but remained rooted
to the spot. Then the figure rose slowly, and with
eyes still fixed on mine began creeping, or rather
gliding, noiselessly towards me.
“ Oh, horror ! I tried to shout ; I could not. My
tongue was dry and useless. The awful figure came
slowly, slowly on. It, was crouching now as if to
spring upon me. Oh, heavens ! Would nothing save
me from that fearful, ghastly face, those awful eyes,
that came nearer, nearer mine ?
“There I sat in a kind of trance, watching ; the
thing as it silently approached.
“ Then suddenly an awful cry of agony burst forth
close by my side ; and from the air above, and from
the dark wood behind, moans, groans, and hysterical
bursts of laughter, shrill and blood-curdling, came in
thick and bewildering succession.
“ I nearly fainted. And, as the figure came on,
and reached a spot where the early morning light fell
upon it, I saw that it was a little, harmless animal of
the sloth species, called a bear by Australian settlers.
Others of its kind were barking and groaning their
curious morning cries all round me upon the
branches.”
“ The Squire ” having terminated his story, Claude
expressed his appreciation of its merits, and then the
two men cantered their horses the remainder of the
way to the station.
* _ • , r i • i i m
Here, after bidding his companion “ Good-night,”
young Angland discovers that it is long past eleven
o’clock; and a black boy, who runs out to take his
18


horse, informs him that the young ladies have retired
to rest, also that Mr. Giles has not yet returned
home.
So, after partaking of some supper which lies
waiting his appearance upon the dining-room table,
Angland goes out on to the verandah, feeling somehow
more inclined for a thoughtful half-hour with a
Manilla, beneath the stars, than to go to bed at once.
He sits there puffing, thinking first of Billy,
then of Glory, and lastly of “ the Squire’s ” ghostly
experiences.
“Spot,” he calls presently to the fox-terrier, who
was sitting near him, in the flood of light that streams
forth from the hall door, when he first lighted his
cigar. “ Spot, I wonder how you’d behave, if you saw
a ghost ? ”
Spot, however, instead of prancing up to be petted,
as he usually does when strangers take any notice of
him, pays no attention to Claude’s remark. So the
smoker lazily turns his head round to see if the dog is
still there. There stands Spot, having been appar-
ently disturbed by something, looking down towards
the dark end of the verandah, with his knowing little
head cocked on one side.
“ I wonder what he sees,” thinks Claude ; “ the cat,
I suppose.” But turning his eyes in the direction of
the dog’s inquiring gaze, the young man becomes
grimly aware of the fact that he and the dog are not
alone upon the shadowy portico. Seated in one of
the great cane-chairs, his widely opening eyes descry
a dimly visible figure. It remains silent and motion-
less.
Claude has studied Professor Huxley’s “Physiology,”


and remembers the celebrated case of tbe plucky
“ Mrs. A.” and her spectral annoyances. But not-
withstanding all this, on seeing the unexpected appari-
tion near him, the young man exhibits one of those
interesting automatic actions, attributable to what
scientists, we believe, call “ spontaneous activity,”
in other words, sits up with a start.
But before Angland has time to investigate matters,
or even indulge, were he so minded, in any of those
eye-ball-pressing experiments recommended by dry
fact physiologists to all wraith-pestered persons, Spot
had taken the initiative, and with perfect success.
He runs forward, wagging his tail, and jumps up
against the chair in which is seated the mysterious
figure.
“Oh my ! ” exclaims a musical girl’s voice, tbe
tones of which make Claude’s heart beat as blithely
as an excursion steamer’s paddle-wheel.
u Wherever- Oh ! Spot, is that you ? Why,
you quite frightened me, I declare.”
Then the sound of a dear little yawn is heard in
the darkness, and soon afterwards Miss Glory Giles
makes her appearance, and on seeing Claude motions
to him to be quiet and refrain from speaking.
“ Oh, Mr. Angland, I’ve been waiting up to see you,
and I really believe I’ve been asleep,” whispers the
young lady. “ Here, come with me. Be as quiet as
you can ; for goodness’ sake, don’t let her hear us.”
Claude rises obediently; and, overcome with sur-
prise, is unresistingly led out into the darkness on
to the dried-up lawn in front of the house by his
charming escort.
“ Oh ! hide that horrid light of your cigar, please,”


Glory suddenly exclaims, in a low, excited voice.
“ Somebody might see us. It’s too dreadful to think
of.”
Then, with her warm, balmy breath fanning her
admirer’s cheek and her little hands clutching at his
arm, she pants out to Claude the story of the inter-
cepted letter.
“ I’ve never liked her,” Glory exclaims with pretty
anger, as she finishes her account of the discovery of
her cousin’s plot ; u but she’s dreadfully clever and
strong-minded, and poor papa couldn’t get on without
her, I do believe. But read this paper : it’s a copy
of the letter. She did not sign it. Ain’t she cute ?
Meet me at the new stable before breakfast to-morrow;
I go there every morning to see my mare Coryphee
groomed. But 1 mustn’t wait. Good-night! ”
The little figure flits away like a fairy ghost into
the darkness—silently as a moth—and is gone.
When Claude presently opens the paper that Miss
Giles has given him in his own room, he finds the
following words scratched upon it in pencil, in a
school-girl’s unformed hand :
Copy op Her Letter.
“ Burn this directly you leave read it. He is here, and
is on the eve of discovering all. Send him the message we
agreed upon at once ; to-morrow, if possible to arrange matters
so soon. Delay is dangerous. Burn this NOW”


CHAPTER XYI.
lileth’s disappointment.
“ Le jour de Gloire est arriy6.”
Marseillaise .
is mncli later
than Claude’s
usual hour for ris-
ing when he opens
his eyes upon the
morning following
his midnight in-
terview with Miss
Giles. And he
remains in a sort of half-
dormant condition, listen-
ing to the sound of a rich
contralto voice singing a martial air, to the ac-
companiment of a piano, at the other end of the
house.
The young man dreamily endeavours to make out
the words of the song, hut cannot. Though when it
draws to a conclusion he is surprised to hear, as he
fancies, in the chorus or refrain a poetical reference
to the Christian name of the young lady who has


honoured him with an appointment at the stables for
that morning. Claude, thus curiously reminded of his
engagement, is not long in making his toilet and
finding his way to the trysting-place ; but discovering
that Glory has not yet put in an appearance there,
he returns to the house, and looks in at the drawing-
room door to discover who the fair singer may be.
There he finds Miss Mundella seated at the piano.
She looks up as she hears the intruder’s footsteps,
and, seeing Claude, smiles ingenuously upon him,
holding out to him a perfectly modelled hand, and
apologising for her absence the previous day.
Lileth is really glad to see Angland, and, odd as
it may appear, admires him considerably, although
she intends to wipe him out of her way at the earliest
opportunity. She feels quite sorry now, as she looks
up at him, not for his own sake, —far from it, —but
because she thinks what a much more agreeable
cavalier he would make than the flap-eared Mr.
Cummercropper, who at present fetches and carries
for her. And after the manner of the soldiers of
opposing armies, who fraternise together during a
temporary armistice ere they again fly at one another’s
throats, so Lileth is just as glad to enjoy a con-
versation with her intended victim, as she would
be with any other young man who came up to her
standard of excellent parts, and these youths were
very scarce visitors at Murdaro.
“ I hope I have not disturbed you with my play-
ing,” Miss Mundella remarks, noticing as she does
so the hesitation with which Angland takes her hand.
“ I generally practice a little of a morning before
breakfast. Are you fond of music ? ”


“ Very fond,” answers Claude, gazing with a mixed
feeling of admiration and dislike at the proud, calm
features of the fair object of his suspicions, as she
bends over the music lying on the chair beside her.
“ Is it possible such a girl can be a heartless criminal,
or at least an abettor ? ” he asks himself, “or are
appearances against her only ? ”
Then, to break the rather awkward silence, Claude
speaks about the song he had heard when he awoke,
and requests her to oblige him by singing it once
more. Without any foolish affectation of hesitation
she immediately complies.
“It is an almost forgotten piece of music nowadays,
at least amongst English people,” Lileth says. “I am
rather fond of it, probably because it suits my voice.”
Then with perfect skill, her splendid face grandly
eloquent with the military spirit engendered by the
air and words, Miss Mundella sings the grand
“Chanson de Roland” of the great Napoleon’s
time :
“ Soldats francais/chantez Roland,
L’honneur de la chevalerie,
Et rdpetez en combattaut
Ces mots sacrds,
Ces mots sacres :
Gloire et Patrie !
Gloire et Patrie ! ”
“ Rather an elastic kind of patriotism was that of
Rouget de Lisle,” observes Miss Mundella laughingly
as she finishes, her eyes sparkling and cheeks warm
with the verve she has put into her song; “most of
his chansons are charmingly spirited, and he is credited


with fifty I think ; but there are some thoroughly
imperialistic, others republican, and others again
legitimist,—all got up for the occasion.”
“Yes,” answers Claude, as the inspiriting music,
combined with the fascination of Miss Mundella’s pre-
sence, renders that young man gradually oblivious of
his suspicions, “ and he was rather fond of annexing
other people’s musical ideas, if the German critics are
to be believed. You know they say he got his grand
Marseillaise hymn from a Deutscher named Holzmann,
some time before he wrote his impromptu masterpiece
chez Baron Dietrich.”
“ I have never heard that sin laid to his charge
before,” remarks Lileth, striking some sonorous chords
upon the keys as she speaks. “ Are you great on
musical anecdotes ? I dote on them.”
“Oh no. I know little or nothing upon the
subject. I’m really afraid I couldn’t tell you even
Mendelssohn’s surname, if you asked it, correctly. But
I remember about Rouget because I saw the house
when I was at Strasbourg, and more particularly
because it was there I heard a very good story, that
in my opinion eclipses anything in the way of French
wit I’ve ever heard before or since.”
“ Oh, will you repeat it to me ? ”
“Well, I’m rather a bad hand at a story,” responds
Claude, “but I will try to give you a general idea
of the joke, which was attributed either to Rouget de
Lisle himself or to some relative of his. I daresay
it has been put in the mouths of many other notables
as well.
“ There was a grand wedding taking place at the
parish church, and the charming bride, all blushes


and lace-veil, was tremblingly signing her name in
the register, when, horror of horrors, she upset the
contents of the ink bottle over her wedding robes I
All the vestry was in a commotion directly, and the
little bridesmaids were like to faint when they saw
the horrible black stains destroying the spotless purity
of the bridal vestments. What a bad omen ! Worse
than spilling the salt at the breakfast. Everybody
was about to rush forward to commiserate with the
unhappy bride.
« But De Lisle’s relative, or somebody else’s relative,
as the case may be, stepped forward, and, smiling on
the woeful faces, took all the sting out of the accident,
he even turned the mishap into the cause of much
merriment, with a singularly happy hon mot:
ul Mais c'est tout naturel ,’ he said, ‘ aussitot que
mademoiselle est arrive au port , elle ajete Vancre.
When Claude ceases speaking, Lileth shows her
appreciation of his anecdote with a low, musical laugh.
Then, taking advantage of the opportunity afforded
her, she proceeds to give Angland a good dose of the
kind of music that she observes has effect upon him;
hoping that in the intervals of playing, by a skil-
fully conducted conversation, to worm a little useful
information from him as to his plans, as he warms to
her fascinations and becomes confidentially inclined.
« Yes,” she says, as Angland finishes a gay de-
scription of the little concert given in his honour by
the stockmen at the out-station the night before,—
u yes, some of these men have naturally reall} splendid
voices. Always in the open air, and wearing no heavy
coats to confine their chests, it is not to be wondered
at that they have good lungs, at any rate. Miners I


know are proverbially good singers. I have beard
several at different times. Your late uncle sang very
well, I believe, for example. Have you beard, by-the-
bye, anything of bis boy Billy yet ? ”
“No,” replies Claude, “and I am very anxious to
get on with my nude’s I mean, to find my uncle’s
grave. But as Billy is not here, and I can’t very well
get on without him, I suppose I can’t do better than
wait here for a time, as Mr. Giles so kindly pressed
me to do, and see if the boy turns up.”
An independent observer, noticing the looks of
admiration with which Angland was regarding the
young lady by the piano, would hardly have imagined
that an immediate withdrawal from her company was
what he chiefly desired.
“Oh, pray, Mr. Angland,” says Lileth, turning
towards Claude, and concentrating upon him all the
will-power that a rapid glance of her glorious eyes
can convey, “do not desert ns just yet. It is such
a pleasure to have an agreeable, educated man to
converse with again. Any one who has travelled, and
who knows about something besides horses and cattle,
is quite a rara avis up here, I can assure you. I shall
miss you very much when you have to go,” adds Miss
Mundella, with a sigh.
Claude bows his acknowledgments of the com-
pliments paid him, and the young lady continues
speaking in a low voice, looking demurely downwards,
and playing pianissimo meanwhile that bewitching
Cavatina love-spell of Donizetti’s
“ Believe me, I somehow feel a very great deal of
interest in your search. It is so brave, so honourable,
of you to take all this trouble merely to visit the


grave of your relative. I fancy few men would care
to do that for an uncle nowadays.”
Now it is one of the strange things u that no fellar
can understand ” how most of the best men one meets
in every-day life will hasten to repudiate any assertion
crediting them with an honourable or unselfish motive
for any action they may have performed. It is just
as if such a reason for a deed was something to be
really ashamed of.
It is an odd but undeniable fact that men often take
considerable trouble to make themselves out to be
worse than they really are. So Claude, following the
general rule, immediately endeavours to prove that he
is not so good-hearted—therefore, in a worldly sense,
so foolish—an individual as Miss Mundella would im-
agine. In fact, he swallows the encomiastic bait held
out to him by that young lady.
(( J n.m really afraid,” he exclaims, a that I cannot
claim that it is all affection, on my part, that brings
me up this way to search for my uncle’s grave. I must
confess that there are more mercenary considerations
mixed up with my sublimer motives than you kindly
would credit me with.” And here we have to record
a serious mistake Lileth made. For, instead of keep-
ing her quarry under the gentle thraldom of her
music, and the attractive warmth of manner which
was really more natural to her than her usual ap-
pearance of coldness, Miss Mundella began to excuse
this “ mercenary motive ” of Claude’s to him in
her ordinary conversational tones.
Instantly he awakes, as it were, from the sweet
confidential mood into which he has drifted, for the
peculiar notes ( timbre ) of Lileth’s voice have again


called up the viaduct scene to his memory ; and Miss
Mundella can tell by the altered manner in which he
speaks, as he rises with some feeble excuse for quit-
ting her side, that she has somehow scared him for
the nonce.
But she has gained one little piece of information :
which is, that Claude is aware that something advan-
tageous to himself awaits the successful accomplish-
ment of his expedition. “It must be the P. Ns.” she
thinks, as she leans backward on the sofa after he has
left her.
And at breakfast Lilcth makes another and rather
disconcerting discovery,—namely, that Claude and
Glory have some secret understanding between them.
And although those young people do all in their
power to conceal the same from the dark-browed
mistress of the house, her keen glances soon pierce
their transparent natures, and she becomes cognisant
of the fact, also, that their secret is antagonistic to
herself.
It is towards evening that Claude, who has been
away on horseback all day, returns to the head-station,
and is lucky enough to find Glory Giles by herself
upon the verandah.
“Is that Don, the newspaper boy, you told me
about ? ” that young lady asks, looking at the small,
comical figure, who, on the top of a tall, lank mare,
is holding Angland’s horse by the station gate.
“Yes,” answers Claude, “and I will introduce him
to you some day before long. You’ll find him a first-
class youngster. But I can’t spare the time to do so
now, for, Miss Giles,” lowering his voice, “for I’ve


found Billy , and of course I start directly on my
search.”
« But the false message ? ” asks Glory, rising, and
looking anxiously up at the young man’s face.
o I have received Pnttis’s kind invitation also,
Claude replies, with a smile. “ Let me tell you all
about it.”
Angland sits down by Glory s side, and, hardly
taking his eyes olf her sad, anxious little face for an
instant, notices, with some relief, that the news of his
departure is really unpleasant to his fair companion.
« goon after breakfast,” he continues, 11 that rascal
Carlo came to me, and told me something in a mys-
terious sort of way, which I at (length made out to
mean that a ‘ wild fellow black fellow ’ had brought
me something. I followed Carlo to the black camp,
I guessed I could not come to grief only a couple of
hundred yards from the station,—and found a ‘ boy ’
there, who handed me a piece of crumpled paper, upon
which was scrawled some words. They were these,
as near as I remember: ‘You can trust this boy.
He bring you to me.’ It was signed ‘ Billy.
«ap 1 ” cries Glory excitedly, and casting a swift
glance down the passage towards Lileth s room, and
what did you do ? ” _ .
There is something so charmingly attractive m the
warm interest which Glory evinces in what Claude is
narrating, and her sweet little face blushes so prettily
with her emotion, that it is only by exerting all his
self-command that Angland can restrain himself from
clasping the little form beside him in his arms.
Angland, however, instead of acting thus, at
once destroying the good opinion Glory has of him,


does just the reverse of it, and withdrawing his eyes
from the bewitching object of his affections, he goes
on speaking :
u I noticed at once that the black who’d brought
the letter had a red ribbon tied round his forehead, —
which I have often seen police and station ‘ boys ’
wearing, as a mark to distinguish them from the wild
natives who may be about. I also thought that the
messenger seemed to be putting on a good bit of £ side ’
for a warragal, and I hardly expected that Billy
would be hiding at a station, and employ a station
hand as his Mercury. So, remembering the letter you
intercepted, I guessed that the ‘ boy ’ must be a police
‘ boy ’in mufti. So, after reading the note, I thought
I would test the messenger by pretending that the
letter, which I was sure he could not read, was a
message from Puttis. ‘ Here,’ I said, holding out the
piece of paper, ‘ Mr. Puttis say you take me to him.
Which way inspector sit down ? ’
“ The black looked up at me rather sulkily, I
thought, as if undecided how to answer ; then, after a
moment’s consideration, he mumbled, —
“ ‘ ’Spector Puttis him sit down longer Bulla Bulla
’tation ! ’
“‘All right,’ I said, ‘you wait here till I come
back.’ ”
“ And then ? ” asks Glory.
“ Then I rode off to see my old miner, Williams, and
asked his advice. When I got to the out-station I
found him most jubilant, for, what do you think ?
he had found Billy. Yes, little Joe, acting under
Williams’s orders, had been scouring the country
with coloured handkerchiefs, which he gave to all the


niggers he could find. Each of these had a small
message to Billy, telling him where to find me, written
upon it.
“ Billy saw one of these messages, and But I
mustn’t say anything further about it, Glory, I mean
Miss Giles,— for Williams made me solemnly promise
I wouldn’t do so to any one.”
“He was quite right,” remarks Glory. “ Give him
my compliments, and tell him that I think him ever
so clever, and hope you’ll bring him here when you re-
turn.” Then after a pause she looks up and asks Claude
a question, with her bewitching little head held side-
ways-towards him, for her admirer’s ardent gaze has
somewhat disconcerted the little, golden-haired maiden.
“May I ask one thing more? You won’t mind
telling me that , will you ? ”
“ What is it ? ” responds Claude, who, to tell the
truth, would have gone near breaking his promise with
Williams if Glory had demanded him. to do so,
“ I want to know how you know that it was really
Billy that you have found ? ”
“ Well, because I’ve seen him. We both, in fact,
mutually recognized each other, although, as I told you,
it is about ten years since I saw Billy in England. He,
moreover, showed me an old scar I remembered upon
his leg. He looks in very poor condition, poor fellow.”
“ Mr. Angland,” says Glory gravely, “ I will try
and find out why poor Dr. Dyesart’s boy was hunted
from here. Papa says, as I told you, that Billy told
one of the boys here that he had killed your uncle,
and that Billy ran away when he found that the boy
had told papa. But papa must have been mistaken.
It is all part of some horrible plan of Lileth’s.” Then


standing up, and giving her tiny right hand to Claude,
who holds it as if it were a precious piece of fragile
crockery, she continues in a pleading tone of voice :
“ You must not think papa had anything to do with
that letter I got from Carlo either. Will you try, just
'for my sake, to believe that papa had nothing to do
with driving away Billy and writing that letter ? My
papa is rough, and I know you think he’s cruel to the
niggers,—so did I when I first came up here for
a visit, but I didn’t notice it after a while. But he’s
really very good at heart ; he really is.”
Glory speaks very earnestly; but suddenly, as she
remembers that her father was present when Miss
Mundella bound her to secrecy about the photograph,
her voice falters, and she hesitates whether she ought
to tell Claude all or not. But Angland interrupts her
thoughts by speaking.
“ If your father was the worst fellow going, and had
kicked me out of the house, instead of treating me
very hospitably, as he has done, I would forgive him,
and vote him first class, because of his being your
father. And now ‘ good-bye ’ till I return.”
Claude finds the dreaded moment of separation, now
that it has at last arrived, harder even than he had
anticipated. There is a curious lump in his throat
that renders the farewell words difficult of expression.
Glory, on her part, although she bravely endeavours
to appear the cheerful, laughing creature as Claude
knew her first, in order to ease his pain at parting,
is not successful in carrying out this innocent piece of
deception. And, to tell the truth, Claude, although
grieved to see her sadness, which this affected cloak
of gaiety does not conceal from the eyes of her lover,


yet cannot help taking comfort to himself therefrom.
For man’s love is a more selfish sentiment than it is
generally regarded to he, and differs in this respect
especially from woman’s, which, if more eccentric in its
taste, is certainly more thoroughly disregardful of self-
interest than that of the other and more practical sex.
Claude, on his part, feels that what he would like to
say to the golden-haired girl, that glances at him with
such tender hlue eyes, would not offend, perhaps not
even surprise, his inamorata. But Angland has a
gentleman’s strict notions of propriety and integrity,
and having already decided in his own mind that he
has no right to speak those words that hover on his
lips till his present mission is fulfilled, he refrains
from doing so.
Of course, whilst transmitting this fact in our
history to paper, we feel that our hero will appear
very foolish to certain of our readers. He, however,
acted as he considered correctly, according to his
lights, and no man can blame another for doing that;
although they can pity his mistaken ideas of right and
wrong to their heart’s content, if they feel so disposed.
u Good-bye, Miss Giles,” he says at last, huskily;
« for the service you did me the other night I can never
repay you. There is only one thing I would like you
to do, and that is, I have no time to write to my mother
now before starting, if anything should stop us coming
back again from the wilds, would you mind writing
to her ? It would comfort her to hear from some
one whom I’ve spoken of already in my letters to
her.”
Then he is gone, and Glory, returning to the house,
enters her own room and “breaks down.” Lileth, hear-


ing her cousin sobbing in the next room, and having
been apprised of the arrival of the false messenger,
smiles to herself as she guesses that Claude has
started for his last appointment on earth, and mentally
congratulates herself upon the successful beginning
her scheme has made. But she is somewhat astonished
and disconcerted on presently being informed by Carlo
that Inspector Puttis’s messenger is awaiting Claude’s
return. Inquiries made of Glory through the door of
her room —for having a sick headache that young
lady does not appear at the dinner-table—only elicit
the fact that Angland has departed, having requested
Miss Giles to convey his compliments and adieux to
Mr. Giles and Miss Mundella.
Before retiring to rest Lileth indites a long letter to
Inspector Puttis, of which the following is part
“ Your letter plan has missed fire. The boy you
sent was somehow suspected by A., and Carlo tells
me that he heard your boy confess to A. that you had
sent the letter. You can do what you like with your
boy, of course, but I hope you will remove all chance of
his again denouncing you. I shall send Carlo to you
next week, when I hope you will be able safely to dispose
of him. Carlo and your boy are both too dangerous
now to be about. A. has started, and I had Carlo out
after them, and he tracked them some miles towards
the Flat Top ranges. He believes that Billy is with
them, as they are travelling on the track of some
blacks who arrived on the run from the hill country
yesterday. Come over here as soon as you finish
your western patrol, but beware what you say before
Glory Giles ; she is not so foolish as she looks, and
met A. down south. The two are great compatriots.”


CHAPTER XYII.
EN AVANT !
“ Boot and saddle, see the slanting
Rays begin to fall.
Flinging lights and colours flaunting
Through the shadows tall.
Onward I onward ! must w© travel ?
When will come the goal
Riddle I may not unravel
Cease to vex my soul.”
Ada m Lindsay Gordon.
FT E R
leaving
Murdaro
“ Govern-
me nt
House,”
Claude, in
company
with his
little fol-
lower Don, was
not long in re-
joining his party
at the out-station. Here he found the pack-horses all
ready, and Williams and Billy just concluding a


lengthy confabulation as to the best route to follow.
So, there being nothing to delay the immediate depar-
ture of the expedition, a start was called, and some
twenty miles travelled before darkness necessitated a
camp for the night.
It is now three o’clock a.m. The chorus of crickets
that has thrilled through the warm night air since
sunset is gradually dying into the solemn stillness of
the darkest hour that goes before the dawn.
The stars overhead throb with a clearer light than
heretofore, and when some eccentric or sleepless
insect breaks the hushed mantle of shadow resting
upon the world with disturbing squeak or chirp, the
ear jumps and strains into the deep, black silence
with an intensity that is almost painful.
Now, through the dark aisles of ebon-stemmed
gum-trees, ths ir*i white stain of morning begins to
blot out those stars near to the horizon, and high
above the topmost branches of the tall, gaunt trees
the pure lustre of the morning star heralds the day.
Round the grey embers of the camp-fire, upon
which remains the impress of last night’s damper, the
figures of the party lie motionless in their tossed
coverings of red and blue blankets, and near by
stands the billy, containing sodden tea-leaves, where
the last man on watch drained the cold tea ere
turning in.
Each man’s saddle is his pillow, and beyond is a
vague litter of pack-saddles, bags, and snaky-looking
surcingles ; amongst which Don’s retriever pup keeps
guard against the prowling, cowardly dingoes, whose
blinking eye-stars have circled the camp during the
dark hours.


Suddenly the hush of night seems broken by the
brisk chirping of a small pied-tit, called by Australians
a shepherd’s companion, and, as if in response to the
volatile little creature’s busy notes, the morning breeze
comes with a soft, murmuring rush, and flutters
through the long, pendant gum-leaves as if fair
Nature was softly sighing ere she awoke to the heat
and toil of another tropic day.
Claude, whose anxiety makes him a light sleeper,
is roused by this peaceful reveille and opens his eyes,
and then, raising himself upon his elbow, he throws
off the blanket that has encompassed him during the
night and is now wet with dew, and looks around.
In a semi-circle by the camp-fire lie his companions,
their limbs outstretched in various unstudied positions
of utter repose, and over there, against the widening
band of eastern grey, he can see the black form of
old Williams, who, mounted and armed, is taking
the last watch.
Although only a short time in Australia, Angland
has already travelled over two hundred miles with
horses through the bush, and has consequently
already experienced some of the vicissitudes insepar-
able to that mode of progression,—straying horses and
such “ chances of the night ” amongst them.
So his first thoughts are common to all equestrian
travellers through the interior wilds, namely, “ Where
are the horses ? Shall we be able to break camp
early, or must we track some of the brutes back to the
last camp ? ”
But Claude is relieved from much anxiety on that
score by reason of the watches that have been kept
during the night; so he proceeds to finish a hurried


toilet and afterwards awaken his slumbering com-
panions.
There is always a great deal of vexation, and often
danger, in waterless country, attending the loss of
horses whilst travelling in the hush, and we pause in
our narrative to remark upon a certain marvellous
faculty possessed by many Australian bushmen of
long experience.
During many years, often for months at a time,
these men have listened anxiously for the sound of
their horses’ or bullocks’ bells, —at sundown when
they turned in, during their wakeful moments through
the night, and with redoubled anxiety in the early
morning. It is therefore hardly surprising, taking all
this into consideration, that these men gradually get
into the habit, if we can correctly designate the new-
born power by that term, of still being able to hear the
bells, even when fast asleep, in which they resemble
Erckmann-Chatrian’s murderous innkeeper, in The
Polish Jew. But what is far stranger, having done
so they can remember all about it next morning; in
which they differ from those gifted somnambulistic
individuals one reads about who write poetry and
solve difficult problems during their slumbers.
Many bushmen will wake up out of the deepest
sleep if their bells wander too far away, or if these
cease their jangling for too long a period; but those
“ old hands,” who are the particular object of these
remarks, will be able in the morning to tell you as
much about the wanderings that the horses have made
during the previous hours of darkness, as if they had
been watchfully awake all night; will unhesitatingly
state to the “ boys,” when these youths go horse


limiting in tlie morning, where Bob, with the “ con-
daminer ” bell, has got to, and which direction Boco,
with the goat-bell, took witli his part ot the mob,
when the horses began to feed at two o’clock.
It is still dark when Claude gives the usual bush
signal for all hands to wake up, by shouting out
“ Daylight ! ” Little Don gives Angland a wide,
steady look, till, his wits gathering themselves to-
gether, he repeats the word interrogatively, and after
sleepily rubbing his eyes, proceeds to put on his boots,
thus completing his attire.
Far away across the dark plain, upon the bush-
fringed edge of which the party have camped, the
faint tinkling of several of the horse-bells can be
heard, —blessed sounds ; and, more to the left, the
thump, thump, of the big “ frog ” bell on Claude s
horse Charlie. Another hour and the buzz ol the
awakened insect world will drown all sounds more
than a few hundred yards away, and therefore it
behoves those who perform the matutinal horse-
hunting duties of a caravan, such as that which Billy
is about to pilot across the desert, to imitate the
policy of the proverbial u early bird,” ere the daily
plague of flies have made their noisy appearance.
So whilst Claude and Williams are preparing
breakfast, Billy and the two boys are away after
the horses ; and these animals, being all good campers,
are soon rounded up and unhobbled, and come racing
in towards the smoke of the camp-fire, biting and
kicking, as if they highly appreciated the delightful
feeling of being rid once more of those horrible gyves
of chain and leather.
“ Say, boss, I want to speak to you bime-bye,”


Billy observes to Claude, after breakfast, as he leans
across the saddle of a pack-horse to give a finishing
pat to one of the pack-bags before he tightens up the
surcingle.
Claude nods a signal that he has heard the remark,
from where he is fixing a bunch of hobbles to another
horse’s neck, and presently intimates that he can
give the black youth his attention, by begging him to
“ fire away.”
“ You know, boss, I was very sick gin I come up to
station,” Billy observes in a slow, sulky sort of voice.
“ Yes, I expect you were pretty bad when you’d
finished your journey from my uncle’s grave,” replies
Claude.
“ I bin tell you yesterday,” the dark youth goes
on, “ all about the wild fellows’ camp where I stay;
where I come from three days ago.”
“ The village where you’ve lived since the old
digger you were with got killed ? Yes, I remember
about it. Are we near to it ? ”
“Yes, boss. Now I think this way. I was very
sick when I get this far from where I plant the
doctor, and I wonder sometimes if I able to pick
up my pad (tracks) after all this time. I remember
country near grave ; not this way. You see, I was
very sick this end of the stage.”
“ I understand, Billy ; but what has that to do with
the wild fellows’ camp ? ”
“ Just see here, boss, I think I better go to black
camp and get two boys—one won’t come without
a mate. These people very good at the track. They
find my old pad, and bime-by, when I come to country
I know, boys come back. You like ? ”


u All right, Billy,” complies Claude, “ but will you
be able to get the blacks to come ? They won’t like ■
to leave the ranges, especially to go along with white
folk. And I don’t blame them, either.”
a Well, you see, boss, the doctor, he bin to their
camp two, no three time, and they like him. He
very good to them. When the old hatter get killed
by them cussed Kalcadoones, I think to m} self, I
make tracks back to this camp, and by-and-by
doctor’s friends come along and 1 hear of them.
a And I’m very glad you had the 1 savez ’ to do so,”
responds Claude, patting Billy on his shoulder.
The black’s eyes brighten at the praise given him
by the master to whom he has begun to transfer those
dog-like affections lately left objectless by the death
of Dr. Dyesart. • .
a The wild fellow,” he continues, “ bin very glad
to see me when I come along. There was komorbory
tuckout (plenty of food). I tell them doctor was
dead, and me like to live with them for a time.
“ Can you talk their language, Billy ? ”
a No, boss, but there was two runaway boys^ with
them. One, he come from down Boulia way, the
speaker waves his black arm towards the south-west.
a This boy speak my language a bit, and I bin mining
with the doctor in his country and know his ”
the speaker hesitates for want of a word, and then
gives a number of flourishes with his hands, to express
to Claude the masonic-like manual signs by means
of which the members of some tribes are able to
communicate with each other, to a great extent, without
speaking.. . ,
“Well, get these boys if you can, interrupts


Claude ; “ but don’t you think you can do without
them ? ”
“ Ho, 1 think it good to get the boys,” replies Billy
quietly but firmly.
“ How long will you be away,” asks young Angland,
slightly expressing by the tones of his voice the
annoyance he feels at this fresh detention.
I come back with boys to-night or to-morrow.
’Spose you camp next water-hole—’bout twenty miles.
I tell Joe all ’bout it last night. He knows place ;he
bin there.”
“ But, Billy! ” exclaims Angland, as a thought
suddenly strikes him. “ Look here, if white fellow
send boys to track us they will see your track up
to village. You’ll get your friends up there into
trouble if you don’t mind what you’re about.”
“ All right, boss,” replies Billy, smiling a smile of
superior wisdom ; “ you see it bime-by.”
Both men have for the last half hour been cantering
after the rest of the party, who, with the
aie on in front. Presently Claude’s companion signifies
his desire that they should proceed less quickly, and
then, pulling his horse into a walking pace, Billy
throws his reins over his steed’s head, and holds them
out to Claude. Our hero takes them, and looks on in
silence, wondering what the black youth is about to
do. Sitting sideways on the quiet animal he is riding,
Billy next proceeds to divest himself of his boots and
hat, which he fixes firmly to the dees of his saddle, and
then producing a pair of queer, mitten-like objects made
of emu-feathers, he fastens them securely upon his feet.
He now motions Claude to lead his horse under a big
gum-tree that stretches its great branches over the


cattle track they are following, and suddenly rising
into a kneeling position upon his saddle, he clutches a
branch above his head, and lifts himself clear of his
horse into mid-air.
ii “Me leave no track into bush this way,” the black
cries from his perch, his dark face covered with a big,
oily, triumphant smile, and Claude, turning his head
as he rides on, sees Billy swinging from tree to tree,
like some great anthropomorphic ape, into the heart
of the dark forest on his right.
Angland has heard of the feather slippers used by
the natives of some parts of Australia when particu-
larly anxious to abstain from leaving any dangerous
trail behind them during their peregrinations, but
Billy’s are the first he has seen. And on catching up
to Williams, and telling him of the method in which
the black youth has taken his departure, the old miner
spins Claude so many interesting yarns about the in-
genious devices employed by the aborigines to avoid
being hunted down by their native or foreign foes,
that he determines to get up an exhibition of some
of them when his pilot returns with the two new
auxiliaries.
But, leaving little Joe to lead the rest of. the party
on to the next water-hole, let us follow the dark-
skinned Billy on his way to the village. This young
man has learned a good deal about the kind ot country
he is now traversing during the last few weeks, and,
moreover, he has journeyed to his friends hamlet
more than once before from about the same point
where he has just entered the forest. So he wends
his way in a fairly straight course, and is not more
than three hours doing the seven miles ot rough


travelling that has to he got over before he reaches the
vicinity of the Myall camp. After leaving the forest
at the foot of the wild range, his way lies for the
greater part up the dried-up bed of a mountain torrent,
that has cut its way during countless ages through
the enormous mass of grey granite of which the moun-
tain is composed. High above the dark boulder-
strewn path of the storm-stream, the grim old cliffs
rise on either hand, their broken fronts decked here
and there Avith clinging tufts of herbage, and crowned
with overflowing wealth of perennial vegetation of the
dark forest on their summits. Here and there the
outcrop of a quartz reef stretches across the path with
great, teeth-like projections of white, flinty rock, and
now and again the brown face of what is a waterfall
after the rains necessitates a bit of climbing. At last
the traveller reaches the crown of the watershed, and
follows the rocky ridge of the range northwards for
a couple of miles. The forest, that has hitherto con-
sisted chiefly of various kinds of eucalypti , some of
which give off an almost overpowering odour much
resembling peppermint, now changes its character
suddenly, for here is the edge of the basaltic “ top-
dressing ” that covers the bigger lines of ranges, lying
to the eastward, with its characteristic vegetation.
Billy, arrived at this point, sits down to rest awhile
near a mound of stone chips, which is the sole monu-
ment remaining of a past generation of aborigines who
once had a stone-axe manufactory here. A number
of “ wasters ” and half-finished adzes, made of basalt,
are lying about, and at a future day, no doubt, will
grace some museum, when the old chip-heap has been
discovered by some prowling ethnologist. Over Billy’s,


liead swings the flat nest of a king-pigeon,—built, as
is usually the case, on the extreme end of a bough,
—and thousands of beautiful insects, notably some
gigantic green and day-flying moths, are making
their erratic, aerial promenades through the glades
bordering upon the gloomy jungle.
No white man’s eye could have detected the slightest
sign of the track that Billy now commences to follow,
but to an aboriginal it is a fairly dear one. Here
and there an overturned stone, a broken twig, or a
crushed leaf make it patent to the young man that
some one has passed this way towards the village fmly
a short time before. This is a cheerful sign for Billy,
knowing as he does that so great is the tear that his
friends the villagers have of being discovered by the
neighbouring squatters, that it was highly probable
they might have shifted their camp upon his leaving
for the station. Presently the traveller stops and
glances at a palm-leaf that is lying across the almost
invisible track he is following. It has apparently
fallen there naturally, but the black understands its
signification, and immediately alters his course. And
after a rough scramble down the precipitous sides of
a densely scrubbed ravine, he comes to where he can
hear the sound of voices below him. Creeping like
a snake amongst the dank, humid undergrowth, Billy
gets near enough to recognize the sounds as proceeding
from the vocal chords of a party of the friends he has
come to interview. So he begins a low guttural chant
to apprise those beneath him of his arrival.
“ Kolli! kolli! ” (Hush !be silent!) one of the
talkers ejaculates, and the talking ceases immediately.
Soon afterwards, without heralding her approach by


tho slightest noise, a woman stands before our black
friend, clad only in the undress costume of her native
shades ; and after a few brief words of recognition
have passed between her and the new-comer, the former
returns to her people below, and reporting “ all
serene,” a united chorus of welcome invites Billy to
descend to them.
Had a civilized European been present at the meet-
ing in the merry woods, and had he been able to have
understood the meaning of Billy’s opening chant
and the reply chorus, he might have been forcibly
reminded ot certain of the musical dramas of the old
world.
The happy, beribboned peasant of the operatic stage
has for years borne the brunt of many facetious
remarks, simply because he cannot indulge even in
the most commonplace conversation without surround-
ing his words with a shroud of fascinating trills. Yet
here in the Australian woods and plains we find the
untutored savage, like the wild birds round him,
doing the same kind of thing, and much given to
confabulatory chants and choruses. It truly would
seem quite within the bounds of possibility that ere
the joyous dwellers in Arcadia had relinquished their
independent notions and simple acorn diet before the
incoming flood of European civilization, they really
did “ carry on ” in the harmonious manner in which
they are represented to us to-day by the gifted authors
of modern opera.
But whilst we have been thus sadly digressing from
our story Billy has climbed down to the aboriginals
m the gully below, and finds he has been following up
a hunting party that, having been out all the morning,


is now on its way home. Half-a-dozen men, armed
with womeras , spears, and nulla nullas, stand waiting
for him to appear. Most of them are resting on one
leg, the sole of one foot being pressed against the inside
of the other leg at the knee joint, after the local method
of “ standing at ease,” their spears or a neighbouring
branch being used to keep their bodies in a state of
equilibrium. One of the men, the runaway station
boy spoken of by Billy to Claude, who belongs to the
former young man’s Mordu , or class-family, steps
forward and welcomes the new arrival by embracing
him. Then, after a few guttural ejaculations, the
party forms Indian file and proceeds villagewards ;
three or four women carrying the hunters’ game,
which consists of a couple of rock-wallaby and a few
bandicoots, bringing up the rear.
As the natives get into the vicinity of the village,
they take every precaution to leave no track behind
them, and each individual enters the thicket in which
the little collection of gunyahs is ensconced by a
different route.
It is quite remarkable how the inhabitants of these
scrub hamlets manage to travel to and from their
habitations, for years sometimes, without leaving any-
thing like a beaten track which might attract the
notice of a passing foe.
The huts comprising the village into which the
hunters are now entering are of the universal pattern
affected by Australian aborigines throughout their
great island home. Their form resembles that of a
half-spread mushroom or a very squat beehive. But
instead of being plastered over with red or yellow
clay, as are the domiciles of the natives of the open


country, these gunyahs are simply but securely
thatched with palm-leaves.
This common type of dwelling is worth notice as
being rather remarkable. One might have expected
to have found that the present race of Australian
natives, who are unmistakably the descendants of
Papuan immigrants, who have intermarried with an
inferior and puny aboriginal race, would have copied
the well-built houses of their near neighbours and
relatives the New Guinea blacks. Both races of
people have the same name for the land they inhabit,
calling each Daudee, and many of their marriage
laws and religious ordinances show a common and
probably Indian origin,—the occasional worship of
the crocodile ( Sebara ) and snake being a case in
point.
Possibly these small houses were necessitated by
the absence of the bamboo, which supplied their
foreign ancestors with such splendid building material.
And the form of the dwellings may have originally
been devised to imitate the spiuifax-crowned mounds
so common upon the sand-hills of the plain country,
for to combine the advantages of an elevated position
and one of comparative obscurity in a village would be
a distinct gain to a community in a savage land from
the increased protection they would afford.
A few shrivelled old crones, who are sitting scrap-
ing and scratching themselves at the entrances to
their several residences, commence a low howl of
welcome upon seeing the good things brought by the
returning hunters, and presently other men and
women appear upon the scene —the latter carrying
their fat, bright-eyed offspring in elegantly shaped


wicker-baskets, which are made so as to be conve-
niently carried in the hollow of the back by bands of
plaited grass passed round the forehead. Several
brilliantly painted shields for use in native hoovers
(tournaments) and wooden dishes are scattered about,
and a curiously carved stick —a sort of almanac, which
is the property of the old man or father of the village—
stands in front of a large gunyah at one end of the
semi-circle of dwellings. A meal is now prepared by
the younger women, consisting chiefly of such dainties
as the roasted flesh of wallabys and a big kind of
carpet-snake, which has been preserved till tender by
being kept under water for some days, with a few
side-dishes of grasshoppers, roasted grubs, wild-figs
( yanki ), and various kinds of berries ; and these deli-
cacies being consumed, Billy proceeds to disclose the
object of his visit. Whilst speaking, however, he
judiciously distributes some brilliantly coloured hand-
kerchiefs to the male villagers, who are chewing an
aromatic kind of resin, obtained from a scrub tree
much resembling the kauri {dammara) of New
Zealand. After a great amount of talk, in which
the women join at times, one of the runaway station
boys and a tall, long-legged Myall finally agree to
return with Billy, and the old father of the little
community brings the business to a close by observing,
“ Vai mollie moungarn ,” —intimating thereby that
the sun is fast declining towards the mountain tops,
and that the men had better start at once.
A touching scene of parting now takes place between
the men who are about to join Claude’s party and
their families. Again and again, when on the point of
marching off, do Billy’s, recruits return to fondle their


children once more before leaving, and it is only
by the promise of fabulous wealth —a blanket and
tomahawk apiece—that the two blacks are at length
persuaded-,to tear themselves away.
Australian aborigines have always a great affection
for their children ; these seldom cry, and are never
beaten, or indeed corrected, save when breaking any
of those sacred laws, regarding the mysteries of which
we shall presently speak, in which case terrible, even
diabolical, punishment ensues.
It is nearly sunset when at length the three men
set off, and after some rough • travelling in the dark
a clear spot in the jungle is reached, where they rest
till the moon rises, when they again push on.
The grey hours of the next morning see Billy and
the two other blacks arrive at Claude’s camp, some
time having been spent towards the end of their
journey in removing all signs of their tracks where
they left the bush.
“At last! ” cries Claude exultingly, as, a few hours
afterwards, he takes a parting survey of last night’s
camp, to make sure that nothing has been left behind;
“ at last I am really en route ! ”
The rest of the party are gone on in advance. The
neighbouring water-hole looks up at the white-hot sun
above it with its thousand eyes of water-lilies in their
gorgeous robes of white, yellow, crimson, and violet.
On the low trees round about numbers of large crows
—those scavengers of the wilds—are croaking their
harsh cries of impatience : “ Augh, augh, ah-h-h-h.”
These sable rascals are never absent from an Austra-
lian traveller’s camp, and appear like magic when he
lights his billy fire. Hardly has Claude mounted to


ride after his companions, when the crows swoop down
by the cold ashes to fight and squabble over the odds
and ends that lie about. At two o clock arrives the
hottest time of the day, —it is really as warm as any
living thing can stand with safety,—and as the expedi-
tion crawls along over the burnt-up, reddish soil of
the plain, upon which withered tufts of various kinds
of coarse grass appear at intervals, Claude feels certain
that he has never been in such a thirsty-looking place
before. Everything around, trees, grass, and all, looks
as if fashioned out of brown paper and sprinkled
with dust.
A few dark-brown kites—similar to those that
Angland has seen some years previously at curious
Cairo and barren Aden —sit panting with open beaks
on the hot branches of the stunted quinine and gutta-
percha trees, too overcome by the heat even to move
as the party rides by, almost within arm s length of
them. The country round about, as the horsemen get
well out into the plain, is almost a dead flat; the
only difference in level being the long, wide, gentle
rises which, like ocean waves, cross the shimmering
expanse of heated earth from east to west, at distances
apart of about a couple of miles. Every kind of
animal life is gradually left behind as the travellers
push on ; not even a kite, or a u gohanna, as old
Williams calls the ignana-like lizards that are generally
common throughout the bush, is to be seen. The
weary horses wade patiently through the dust, which
is so fine that it rises into the air on the slightest
provocation. The horizon is a level circle of mono-
tonous, grey-brown tree-tops; the middle distance sun-
burnt, reddish clay, grass that reminds one of the


harmless, necessary doormat, and dusty tree-stems ;
and the immediate foreground is hidden in clouds of
dust, so fine, so penetrating, that Claude feels his
throat to resemble the interior of a lime-kiln before
half the day’s journey is done.
This desert country, however, is left behind by the
time the dull-red sunset has begun to tinge the pillar
of dust raised by the horses of a lovely rose colour,
and at last a detour is made from Billy’s old tracks
in order to reach a water-hole known only to the Myall
(native) pilots. And Claude blesses his black friend
Billy, in his heart, for having procured the guides, as
he sees the horses prick their dust-covered ears, and
liven up as they sniff the refreshing odour of the little-
mud-surrounded pool of dirty liquid.
The next few days’ travelling are monotonous in
the extreme. Sometimes the party toil over red
deserts, whose sterile surfaces offer hardly a mouthful,
even of withered grass, for the horses, and where no
water can be found with which to refresh the suffering:
animals, For the country has suffered from a continual
drought for two years or more, and the moist mud
which still remained in the water-holes that Billy
luckily came across, on his late journey to Murdaro
Station, has all disappeared.
At other times the horses pick their stumbling way
over rough and semi-mountainous tracts of country,
that stretch on all sides in an apparently interminable
and dreary treeless waste. Here and there, however,
little patches of far better country are traversed, where
water and dried but highly nutritious herbage is to
be found. On arriving at one of these oases when
the expedition has been nearly a week “ out,” Claude,
/


acting by his friend Williams’s advice, determines to
spell his horses for a day, and camps by a rocky pool,
fringed with a feathery belt of dark she-oaks. Close
by rises a flat-topped little bit ot light-red sandstone
covered with euphorbia trees, and, upon the morning
after his arrival, Claude proceeds to explore thip
elevation, taking with him the runaway station boy,
who can speak a little broken English, and has intro-
duced himself to Angland by the name of General
Gordon.
The view that meets Claude’s eyes from the summit
of the scalloped and overhanging sandstone cliffs
yfell repays the trouble he has taken in scrambling up
their tawny sides. Numerous other fortification-like
projections are to be seen on all sides standing up,
like weird islands, above the surface of the haze-
bounded expanse of rolling desert.
He sits down and drinks in the weird, harmonious
picture of desolation before him, and, as he does so,
some lines of Pringle, the explorer-poet of South
Africa, float into his memory:—
‘ A region of emptiness, howling and drear,
Which man has abandoned from famine and fear ;
Which the snake and the lizard inhabit alone,
With the twilight bat from the yawning stone ;
Where grass, nor herb, nor shrub takes root,
Save the poisonous thorns that pierce the foot.”
Then glancing downwards over the little patch
of verdure round the solitary water-hole, where the
grey smoke of the camp-fire and the colour and com-
motion amongst the moving men and horses formed
a little gem of life in the vast setting of deathlike


stillness around, Claude’s thoughts take a serious
turn, and he enters into conversation with his com-
panion General Gordon, with the idea of discovering
if the aboriginal mind has any notions of a Supreme
Being as conceived by Europeans. But although the
black has been amongst station civilization for some
years, and has even been interviewed by a clergyman
of the Church of England upon the subject of his
soul, his answer is hardly satisfactory:—
“ Yes, boss, mine know alle ’bout Gord. Missionary
him bin tell me, ‘ Gord alle same ole man sit down
longer sky.’ Missionary tell me budgerie (good)
yon yabber (say), yabber, ‘ Give it to-day mine
damper, give it to-day mine tuck-out.’ Mine bin
yabber, yabber, plenty long time ; oh, plenty long time.
But,” added the speaker in a sulky voice, evidently
disgusted with the treatment he had received, “but
bale (not) mine get it tuck-out, bale mine get it
lillie bit tuck-out.” General Gordon turns to catch
and swallow a grasshopper, and then, shaking his
woolly mat of hair, further expresses his opinions,
in the following remarkable language : “ Bale mine
think it Gord sit down longer sky. No good de ole
man. Him only like it white fellow; no like it poor
black beggar.”
Claude ventures to calm the ruffled feelings of the
General by suggesting that in a future life black
fellows may possibly have a better time of it.
“ Yes, boss,” excitedly exclaims the “ boy,” his
face altering from an expression of injured worth to
one of perfect faith in his noble existence. “Yes,
bime-by mine bin kick out ” (By-and-by I die).
The speaker points eastwards, as his race often


do when speaking of dying. “ Bime-by me kick out,
then me jump up white beggar. Me jump up stock-
man. Budgeree (very good), mine like it.”
Claude tries to conceive wliat the General finds
in life worth living for when he can look forward
with pleasure to a future life as a stockman, which,
in common with most station blacks, he evidently
firmly believes in.
Our young friend unconsciously follows the lines
of reasoning laid down long since by a celebrated
wit, when he finally concludes that it is probably the
same with blacks as with whites, in that, “By the
time the emptiness of life is discovered, living has
become a fatal habit.”
Old Williams now joins Claude upon the hill-top,
and, looking carefully round about him on the ground
as if in search of something he has dropped, presently
deposits himself upon a chocolate-coloured block of
sandstone with a grunt of satisfaction.
“ Mind where ye sit doone, lad,” he observes to
Angland, through clenched teeth, which hold a grim}
old maize-cob pipe; “ this hill is just the very place
for snakes.”
The words are hardly uttered, when the black boy,
who is standing behind the white men, suddenly
ejaculates a guttural exclamation, and dashes his
nulla nulla (a three-foot club of heavy wood) down
upon a small branch-like object, lying on a ledge oi
rock close to where Claude’s feet are resting.
“ A cussed death-adder, by all that’s blue I ” exclaims
Williams, as both men start up, and bending over
the cliff observe a little light-brown serpent that is
writhing on the rocks below.


“ A narrer squeak you’ve had of it, my son,” the old
miner observes, wiping his broAV Avith the back of his
hairy hand. “If you’d happened to move your foot,
it would have been a case of death in less than twenty
minutes. There ain’t no cure for their bite.”
General Gordon, acting under orders from the
elder white man, now fetches the snake from where
his well-directed shot had thrown it, and Claude
shudders slightly as Williams, pointing to the crushed
remains of the dangerous reptile,—which is only about
two feet in length,—proceeds to direct his friend’s
attention to a curious horn-like projection which
sticks out from the tail end of the hideous, slug-like
body.
Some say that this ’ere’s got a poison fang in it,
but I don’t believe it,” the old miner observes. “ It’s
against Nature for the warmint to have a sting at
each end. It can do all’s fair with the fangs it’s got
at its business end, I take it.
Claude nods his acquiescence.
“ This ’ere horn is just for helping the devils to
jump. They move when they’re sheered jest like
them yellow grubs in a cheese. And I believe they
use this prong to catch hold of, just like this.”
The speaker, to exemplify his meaning, takes a
springy stem of dry grass betAveeu his finger and
thumb, and, bending the two ends towards each other,
allows the fragments to fly off into the air.
Ihe black boy, who has been watching this object
lesson in ophiology, roars with delight at the ingenious
method Williams has employed to explain the snake’s
mode of progression.
“ Hah ! hah ! Ilia perrachie (the snake) him make


it the buck, alle same little fellow waddy ” (woodie ;
piece of wood, stick).
By which remark Claude infers that the native,
whose experience amongst snakes must of course be
very great, fully endorses the old miner’s theory;
although, had our young friend known the polite
readiness which most aboriginals manifest for corro-
borating anything affirmed by a white man in their
presence, it is questionable whether he would have
placed as much reliance upon General Gordon’s evi-
dence as he did.
It is now getting too warm for the men to sit or
stand still, for there is no wind; indeed, not the slight-
est movement of the air. So Claude and his companions
rise and stroll across the hot, flat fragments of rock
towards the other side of the table-topped hill. Here
and there a lively lizard or an emerald snake attracts
the eye for an instant, but little else of interest is to be
seen. Presently, however, Angland stands in amaze-
ment before a level expanse of rock ; for he is appar-
ently upon a sandy sea-shore, from which the waves
that left those ripple marks have but just now ebbed
away. He can almost imagine that he hears the suif
still rippling over those almost red-hot stones at his
feet, so recent does everything appear. Here lie
numerous shells of the succulent and delicious
at the sight of which Claude’s memory flashes
back to many a delightful picnic in the land of the
Maori; star-fish, echina, seaweed, cockle-shells, and
mussels, or rather their ghostly semblance in hard,
brown silica, are scattered around on all sides where
the last wave left them.
Clambering down the other side of the hill, where


a fall of rock has recently occurred, Claude finds in
the geological section thus formed an open page in
which to read the history of the country. At a little
distance below the surface of the old sea-bed, volcanic
dust is mixed with the grains of silica that form the
rock, —drab-coloured dust, such as fell at Krakatoa
and Tarawera. This gradually gives place in the
lower strata to a volcanic conglomerate, composed
chiefly of rounded masses of felsite, ferruginous clay,
burnt to a cinder, and silicious, iron-stained nodules.
The old sea-beds have long ago received the red-hot
ejecta from some great eruption, and then, the land
rising, gradually pushed back the ocean. Next come
the centuries during which the resistless sea rolls
again over the land, and once more retiring the waves
cut much of the old ocean bottom awav, and leave the
flat-topped, island-like hills as the travellers see them.
And upon the last page Angland sees the sandstone
rock before him with its fossil exuvice , and its surface
sheltering a few miserable euphorbias, where passing
birds have dropped undigested seeds. The poor grass
struggles here and there to clothe the barren, ugly
rocks, during the few months in every two or three
years when it has the opportunity of growing. Per-
haps Nature will one day add another and a brighter
chapter to this history of the wilds of central-northern
Queensland —a chapter of forest life and copious rains.
It may be so ; but, at any rate, Claude, looking round
him, decides that man has come upon these deserts
too soon—some five thousand years too soon.
When night falls upon the little camp beneath the
rocky cliff, and the first watch—consisting of Don
and the two natives from the Mvall villao;e—have
%i O


gone on duty, Billy spreads a saddle-cloth upon a flat
stone by the camp-fire, and commences to mix some
flour and water thereon into a thick paste, preparatory
to cooking to-morrow’s bread.
He has made a discovery that morning, whilst
bathing in the water-hole with the boys, and it appears
to him to be such an important one that he is rathei
puzzled how to act. So instead of droning a song or
keeping up a lively chatter with anybody who happens
to be near, as he usually does when at his culinary
occupations, he frowns over his work and remains
silent. , , ,
The ruddy light of the hot pile of embers, that he
has just fashioned into a glowing nest for the reception
of the damper that he is now manufacturing, falls on
his thoughtful face. Presently Claude notices that
Billy is strangely quiet, and, seeing his preoccupied
air, puts the cause down to one of those troubles to
which all bush-cooks are at times heir.
“ What’s up, Billy, not made it wet enough ?
Angland asks, referring to the loaf the black is
“ Oh *no, boss,” answers Billy, keeping his black
fingers moving in elliptic spirals in the little crater
of dough before him. A fight is going on in the
darkie’s mind as to whether he shall keep his discover}
to himself or tell Angland ; in which latter case he
knows his secret will ultimately reach and render
happy the man he most hates on earth. But the
young fellow’s dependent and affectionate disposition
wins in the end, and, after he has raked the last
embers over his cookery, Billy turns to Claude deter-
mined to reveal his thoughts to his new master.


Williams is asleep at a little distance from the
others, his bush experience inclining him to take his
night’s rest away from the light of the camp-fire,
that might show his ont-stretched form as a tempting
target for the spears of any avenging aborigines who
may be about.
“Yon remember, boss,” Billy begins, as he lifts
a piece of glowing charcoal with his bare fingers to
light his pipe,—“ yon remember what I told yon about
when them cussed Myall blacks killed old Weevil ? ”
“ Yes, I think I remember all yon mentioned to me,
Billy,” responds Claude. “ There was something the
old hatter told yon when he was dying that you said
yon could not understand altogether. Yon said, 1
think, that yon had missed a good deal the old man
said in the excitement of the moment.”
“ That’s jest it.” The black looks sadly into the
fire at the remembrance of his old friend’s death,
and then, glancing round to see that he and Claude
are alone, continues, “ I had forgotten what the old
man said. Now I remember. He told me he had
stolen a boy pickaninnie of old Giles’s from Mnrdaro
Station, long time ago.”
“Yon told me that much, I remember, the day after
we started on this trip.”
“Yes, I not forget that; but old man say, ‘ 1 mark
that boy on shoulder, on near shoulder. 1 mark him
with blue star and the front letters of Giles’s names,
W. G.’ ”
“ Well,” inquires Claude as the last speaker pauses,
“ but what became of the boy ? You didn’t tell me
if he told you that.”
Billy does not answer the question, but goes on


puffing at liis pipe, even now undecided whether to
reveal his secret. Presently, with a sort of groan,
he turns him towards his master and ashs,
« Where you get that lillie fellow Don ? I think
him very clever hoy.” n
«I got him in Sydney,” replies Claude, laughing.
“Are you concocting a plan to palm him off on Mi.
Giles as his long-lost son, you rascal ? ”
“ No, boss,” responds the dark youth thus addressed,
in an injured, pettish tone of voice that shows that
his feelings are hurt by the light way in which Claude
has treated his question.
«No need to ’coct a plan. Don, he got the mark
on shoulder, all the same Weevil tell me ’bout.”
“ Nonsense ! ” Claude ejaculates, —he is perhaps
rather too much given to making this remark when
surprised,—“ I know the mark you mean ; it’s a bruise
he got the other day when his saddle turned round on
Kittie, careless young devil.”
“Oh, all right, boss ; I ’spose I get blind now,
Billy replies in an offended tone, for nothing insults
an aboriginal more than to distrust his keenness of
vision. But his clouded expression dissolves into
a sunny grin of satisfaction, as he sees that the
information he has imparted to Angland has appar-
ently excited a far deeper interest in Angland’s mind
than he had supposed it would.
What Claude’s first thoughts are upon teaming
that which seems likely to turn out a most fortunate
discovery for himself and several other persons besides
little Don may easily be guessed. He conjures up
happy pictures in his mind, that for the most pait
are variations of one glorious central idea,—Wilson


Giles, with weak tears of joy dribbling down his purple
countenance, presenting his golden-haired fairy of a
daughter to the man who has recovered for him his
“ little Georgie.”
And if these mental sketches of our young friend’s
are rather selfish ones, and more redolent of love and
Glory than of the mutual gratification upon meeting
that the long-separated father and son will soon enjoy
at his hands, it is but natural, after all, that in Claude’s
present state of mind it should be so. But cold
second thoughts and chilly doubts soon come to tone
down these brilliant visions. Then a half-conceived
suspicion as to whether Billy and Don—or perhaps
Billy alone —might not have concocted the story of
the blue marks upon the boy’s shoulder duly presents
itself ; to flee away, however, before the knowledge
that the tattooing and subsequent healing of the
wounds produced thereby would take longer than
the whole time the two individuals concerned have
known each other.
For various reasons, at any rate, Angland determines
not to investigate the subject further that night, and,
as he rolls himself up in his blankets prior to going
off to sleep, he tries to call to mind all that he has
heard about the lost child.
During the second watch, which he keeps in
company with his little purchase Joe, Claude re-
members that Glory had told him once about a severe
accident that happened to her baby brother not many
months before he disappeared. It had occurred when
some visitor at Murdaro head-station —who was rock-
ing himself in one of the chairs upon the verandah
and had not noticed the approach of Mr. Giles’s tiny


son and heir—had heard a sudden scream at his
elbow, and discovered that the rocker of his chair had
crushed some of the child’s tender little toes. _
“Ah, when I examine Don to-morrow morning,
Claude’thinks, “I will notice if his toes are intact.
I am glad I remembered this, as it will possibly throw
some light upon the mystery.”
As Angland looks up in thought at the purple
dome above him, where “ the stars burn bright m
the midnight sky,” suddenly a great meteor appears,
and blazes into brightness as it comes in contact
with the world’s elastic shield of air, and then sinks
with a graceful, downwards streak of brilliant incan-
descence into earthly obscurity.
« What makes that fellow star fall down ? Claude
asks of the owner of the small, dark figure standing by
his side, who is gazing up at the purple-set jewels o
scintillating worlds above the watchers heads.
Joe, in reply, grins fondly up at his friend and
owner his white teeth glistening under the star-
light as he answers, “ Me know, ’’-and, taking a match
from his pocket, proceeds to explain what to his mind
appears to be the correct solution of the cause ot
meteoric phenomena. Striking his match and pretend-
ing to light an imaginary pipe, and putting on a silly
grave countenance, which in the darkness, however, is
lost upon Claude, the boy says,
“Me think great, big, one Master,’ —pointing o
the heavens, —“ Him want um smoke urn pipe. Strike
urn matche,”— acting the process meanwhileand
puff puff,”—pretending to smoke. Then Joe makes a
movement with his hand, and drops the match slowly
to the ground, which, with its bright, smouldering
I


end, gives a remarkably faithful representation of
a shooting star on a very small scale.
Claude has often been struck before with the
u smartness of his diminutive henchman, and many
a weary hour has the boy enlivened with his grotesque
sayings and doings. But Angland is particularly
interested in this last piece of evidence of Joe’s
histrionic powers,—the more so since it is the first time
the youth has expressed a belief in a supreme “ great,
one Master.” But just in order to prove that the
aboriginal mind—as represented by the little specimen
of the race that is now following Claude in his mid-
night march round the slumbering men and horses—
is practical, as well as theoretical, perhaps we may be
excused if we linger, for a moment, to relate another
comical little instance of Joe s ingenuity. It happened
when Angland and his companions were on their way
to Murdaro, and amused our hero a good deal at the
time.
Little Joe, upon becoming “by right of purchase”
one ot Claude s goods and chattels, had been presented
with a suit of slop-made clothes and a tiny pair of
boots. These latter shortly disappeared. Whether
the boy sacrificed them as a parting gift to one of his
numerous brothers—all male blacks of the same class-
family stand in this relationship to each other—when
the party left Mount Silver, or whether they were
stolen, as Joe stated was the case, never transpired.
But, anyhow, a few days afterwards, the black urchin,
who did not relish being the only one of the party to
lide baie-footed, chanced upon an extremely ancient
pair of what had once been elastic-sided boots lying
upon the site ot a deserted camp, and straightway


determined to appropriate them to his personal adorn-
ment. Dismounting from the tall steed he is riding,
two small black feet are carefully inserted into the
sun-dried derelicts, and with a grin of satisfaction
Joe prepares to mount. But as he lifts his right leg
over the horse’s back, the enormous boot thereon—
which is absurdly too large for the diminutive limb-
tumbles off upon the ground. Again and again the
boy tries, with the same result. The “ boss ” is call-
ing, but it will never do to leave the treasure behind.
Joe has no string to fasten it upon his foot, but he
soon solves the problem. Running round to the other
side of his steed, he seizes the stirrup-iron and
securely jambs this into his prize ; then mounting, he
places his foot therein, and joins the other riders, look-
ing very proud and haughty, with the dilapidated
old leather coffins swinging at his horse’s girths, in
ludicrous contrariety to the spindle-like shanks which,
decked with short white trousers, rise from them.
******
The next afternoon Claude finds an opportunity,
as old Williams and he ride side by side behind the
trackers, to tell his friend of Billy’s discovery con-
cerning Don’s supposed parentage.
_ -.a. i 1 • • n
“ I bathed with the boys myself this morning,”
Angland says, “ and took the opportunity of checking
what Billy told me about the mark on the youngster’s
shoulder. It’s there safe enough.”
« You didn’t tell the boy about all this, nor Billy
neither ? ” inquires Claude’s companion.
“ No, of course. I don’t intend Don to know any-
thing about it at present, and I told Billy to keep
mum about it.”


“ All ! it’s what I call a rum yarn now,” remarks
Williams, as he muses over what he has just heard.
“ If it had been any one else nor yon had found the
boy, I’d have said they had salted him against the
chance of making a rise out of old Giles.”
“ Salted Don ? ” repeats Claude interrogatively,
looking at the old miner, and wondering at the strange
expression he has made use of. “ What do you mean
by ‘ salting ’ him ? ”
“ Don’t you know what salting a mine is ? ” asks
Williams in return.
u Well, I fancy I’ve heard that term applied to
some kind of mining swindle,” replies Claude.
“ Exactly so, my lad. And after I’ve explained
what ‘ salting’ is, you’ll understand what ‘ salting ’ a
boy is.” Old Williams is never happier than when
explaining some mining term to a new hand who will
listen patiently, and, when started on such a theme,
—especially if a chance of bringing in old reminis-
cences occurs, —he must be allowed time to run down.
Claude has already learned this much about him, so
does not attempt.to check his elderly friend when
he sees him settle down comfortablv in his saddle to
begin his discourse.
“ Salting a mine,” Williams goes on, “is getting
rayther out of fashion; leastwise there’s a many easier
ways bin invented of late years—and safer ways too,
mind ye—of making a ‘ wild cat ’ look like a fust-class,
boniefied speculation.”
“ Well, tell me first what the old system, the
‘ salting,’ was like,” interrupts Claude, fearful that
Williams will wander yet further from his subject
unless kept in the groove.


“ Salting a mine, lad, accordin’ to the old way of
doing business, was just firing some gold dust into a
‘ face ’ in order to sell out well or float a company.”
Claude remembers that Williams has already in-
formed him that a “ face ” is the exposed section of a
reef in the workings of a mine in distinction to the
“ backs,” which is that part of a lode unworked and
above the lowest levels.
“ There is better ways nowadays than this kind of
‘ salting,’ —such as using chloride of gold and the like,
—but get a good syndicate together to help ye, and it
will do all the dirty work for you and float anything.”
Stopping every now and then to persuade his horse to
walk a bit faster, Williams continues, “ Some say as
how the term ‘ salting ’ originated this way. On a new
field, especially if tucker’s scarce, as it often is, there’s
always a lot of hungry dogs about. They’ll steal
anything they can grab hold, of, from your last piece
of damper to a pair of boots. Now it ain’t quite the
go ter shoot these ere ‘ canine tithe collectors,’ —that’s
what I calls ’em, —for their owner might come down
and arguefy in the ‘ love me love my dog ’ style. So
yer puts salt in yer gun, and the dog ain’t killed, but
he don’t come hankering around agin where he finds
he’ll only get condiments and nary a bit of meat. I
don’t like to shoot any man’s dog,” observes the
lecturer feelingly, “ let alone a camp-mate’s, and I’m
always sorry fur the brutes when they go off yelling
after getting a charge of salt.”
“Yes, I suppose so,” observes Claude, who, thinking
of certain appropriate lines, proceeds to quote them :
“ Sympathy without relief
Is like mustard without beef.”


“ But what lias this ‘ salting a dog ’ got to do with
‘ salting a mine ’ ? I can see now, at any rate, the
origin of ‘ saving one’s bacon,’ for I expect the dogs
would make a bee line for home on finding themselves
thus salted down, —but why all this about dogs ? You
don’t think any one has been firing salt into Don,
do you ? ”
“ No, lad,” Williams says, “ you don’t take me. In
the rough old diggin’s we always used to empty our
revolvers about sundown, if we did it at all. Those
who made the most show about doing this were mostly
new hands, but that’s neither here nor there. I mean
you wouldn’t hear no firing after nightfall. If there
should happen to be a shot fired it was either a
murder or a robbery, and the whole camp would turn
out. But if it turned out to be only a hoax, the boys
would skylark round, and mayhap the man who
started the fun would have to put on a roller bandage
instead of a shirt for the next few weeks.”
“ I see,” remarks Claude, knowing that it is of no
use to attempt to hurry the old miner, who always
moves towards the main subject of his remarks after
the manner of a hawk approaching its prey, namely,
in circles.
“ Well, some chap invented this plan of punishing
the dogs, and then firing at night got to be quite
common. Instead of turning out when you heard a
shot, you’d say ter your mate, 4 Oh, some one’s cur is
gettin’ salted.’ By-and-by all kinds of shooting got
to be called 1 salting,’ and from that, not only firing
gold into a reef, but every kind of swindle, went by
the same name.”
“ You’ve explained it very well,” Claude says, as


Williams closes his remarks, “ and, as regards little
Don, I thought myself it might he a try on till I
examined his feet, and found that the toes on his
left foot have evidently been damaged at some time
or other.” Angland then discloses to his companion
what Glory Giles had told him about the accident
that befell her baby brother, which we have related
for the benefit of our readers.
“ And now, Williams, what ought I to do ? I
somehow feel I should send Don back to Giles at
once. I might send Joe and General Gordon with
him, but it would be risky work with one water-
bag. That’s the only reason, as you know, I’ve not
sent Gordon and his mate back before.”
“ Send him back ! ” exclaims the elder man ; “ not a
bit of it. Providence, lad, has given yer the boy to
keep for a time, and it would be going agin yer luck
to send him back. Don’t you go out of your way to
chuck what Providence has lent you, just to oblige
a man who you don’t count as a friend, anyhow. A
very obliging man is another name for a fool, take my
word for it. Besides, how do you know these Myall
blacks wouldn’t knock both the boys on the head if
they got a chance ? They would do it, and no fear
they wouldn’t, if they thought Don was Giles’s son.
Wouldn’t they like to get square with old Giles I
He has polished off a good many of their relatives, if
you ask me. No ! ” adds the speaker in a voice that
shows he puts his foot down at what he says, “ we’ll
all go back together. You’ll be able to play this
trump card, my son, better when you’ve got some
more in your fist, as Providence is going to give
you shortly.”


CHAPTER XYIII.
A STATION SKETCH.
“ The proper quarry of mankind is man.”
T is about eight o’clock p.m., at
Borbong head-station, which lies
at some fifty miles’ distance
from Murdaro, and the even-
ing meal being over, half-a-
dozen men are settling down to
enjoy an after-dinner smoke
in that sanctum of Government
House, the boss’s “ den.”
Most of the bronzed, manly
figures before us are dressed in
white linen, and one wears the long
top-boots and spurs of a sub-lieu-
tenant in the N.M. Constabulary.
Three of the other men are passing
travellers, and although quite un-
known to the hospitable manager of the run, till a
couple of hours since, are made none the less welcome
on that account, after the laudably generous custom that
obtains on the better class “ up-country ” stations.
One of these strangers is the new manager of
Hanga run, who is on his way northwards to take
charge of his new scene of labours, and the other


two are mining speculators up from Brisbane to look
at a new find of silver in the neighbourhood.
“ Now, gentlemen, make yourselves at home,”
observes Mr. Browne, in the loud, resonant voice ot
one who is accustomed to give outdoor commands.
« Here are some cigars that ain’t bad. You’ll have
to excuse me for a bit, but I’ll be back by the time
you’ve filled your glasses. I just want to see about
the horses for to-morrow.” Mr. Browne retires, being
followed from the door by a battalion of enormous
cats, who, with tails erect, stalk noiselessly after their
master, whose sole hobby is breeding animals and
training them to perform all kinds of unfeline feats.
The manager’s guests proceed to make themselves
comfortable upon various seats about the xathci
roughly furnished room, and an observant eye might
have noticed that the older frequenters of the house
studiously avoid the neighbourhood of a certain chintz-
covered sofa standing near the door, which is known
to them as the favourite roosting-place of their host’s
strange pets.
The room in which the smokers are assembled has
no ceiling, and the rafters of the thatched roof can
dimly be descried in the gloom overhead. Upon the
log walls, which are scantily covered with a mutilated
covering of scrim, a few coloured almanacs and
pictures from the illustrated papers have been pasted.
A dusty, little-used book-case and a well-supplied
gun-rack—fit emblems of the unequal amount of in-
fluence exerted by peace and war in the locality
occupy two opposite corners of the room by the door,
which, hanging upon green-hide hinges, has evidently
at some time or other formed parts of various packing


cases. This is the “ den,” otherwise the sitting-room
and office, of Mr. Browne, —where that splendid speci-
men of humanity writes his diaries, does his obtuse
calculations as handicapper for the neighbouring
Jockey Club, and pays his hands, —and the absence of
a ceiling is not without certain advantages, as may be
perceived after a number of guests have been loading
the air for the best part of a warm summer night with
fragrant clouds of incense in honour of the Genius of
Bachelordom.
“ Wonderful lot of cats about the place ! ” exclaims
one of the mining speculators, moving suddenly off
the aforementioned chintz-covered sofa, and proceed-
ing to stamp and shake himself as if he had come in
contact with a lively ant-hill. “I’ve always admired
Henry the Third of France because he hated cats.”
The other men smile knowingly at each other, as if
they had expected him to vacate his seat before long,
and one explains, “ That’s the cats’ seat; there ar’n’t
any over here.”
“ Talking of cats,” observes the station storekeeper,
who, being the distant relative of an Irish baronet,
is considered a person of some importance in the
district, “it wouldn’t be a bad ideah, bai Joave, to
twain some of Bwowne’s cweatures for the hill-country,
where the dawgs cawn’t work properly. How did you
manage to get along yesterday, Mr. Morth ? ” The
last sentence is addressed to the young sub-inspector.
“ Oh, not so badly,” replies the police officer, as
he knocks his cigar end off upon the leg of his rather
rickety chair. Mr. Morth is a youngish man, slim
and active as a greyhound, who glories in his work
from a sportsman’s point of view. “ Oh, we didn’t


do so badly. We got another lot besides the party
your boys put us on to. But that broken country at
the back of the Black Rock is the very devil. Fifteen
miles, sir, we had to track the beggars after we left
our horses, and then they’d have got away if there
hadn’t been old people with them.”
“ Yon lost a boy, didn’t you ? ”
u Yes, worse luck. Boor old Jet lost the nuinbei
of his mess. We got the beggars against a cliff, and
when they found they were in a trap they rushed at
the boys. I never saw a nigger harder to kill than
the rascal that knocked Jet on the head. I put six
bullets into the beggar before I dropped him.”
“ Niggers bad up my way ? ” asks the new manager
of Hanga Station.
“ That’s not in my patrol, so can’t say,” replies the
sub-inspector.
“ I think you will have a deuce of a lot of trouble
up there,” observes the storekeeper. “Your prede-
cessah allowed the beggars to wandah alb ovah the
wun. Spoilt them all togethah. Weally one could
not go neah a water-hole without seeing some of the
black devils camped there. They came in from all
the other stations wound.”
“ Oh, I’ll soon alter all that,” remarks the Hanga
manager with an oath.
“Milby was the boy with niggers,” says a dark-
eyed man at the other end of the little table, as he
glances up from the American cloth cover befoie him,
upon which he has been amusing himself by imprison-
ing sundry stray ants in a complicated maze, traced
with the wet bottom of his tumbler. “ Did you evei
meet him, Lawrence ? ”


The individual addressed, who is a cattle-drover of
a superior kind, replies in a husky voice that he has
not only met him, hut was with him some time in
the Northern Territory the year before.
“He was a beggar to shoot niggers,” this gentle-
man adds, “and no mistake. Why, hang me, if
he didn’t order six cases of Sniders up to the station
when he first took up that Mac Arthur country.”
“ What on earth did he want with that lot ? ” asks
the new manager of Hanga run.
u Oh,” replies the drover, “he said the niggers’
heads up that way were so precious thick that his
boys would break all their gun-stocks if he didn’t
keep a good supply of ’em.”
A general laugh greets the news that the red-faced
drover has just retailed concerning this latest piece of
eccentricity of the famous Milby.
“ I was with him for two years up at Hidamoor,”
observes the dark-eyed man. “He hadn’t a single
i hoy ’on the run ; they was all lubras (girls). He
used to tog them out in trousers and shirts, and they
made jolly good stockmen. Does he do that still up
north ? ”
“ Yes,” replies the drover, “they all do it up there.
He lets his white stockmen have two gins (women)
apiece. I brought a couple down with me to the
Springs last trip; give them to Boker there.”
“Milby’s a smart fellow all round,” remarks Mr.
Browne, who has just entered, dismissing all save
two of his furry following, these latter taking the
seats demurely upon the chintz-covered sofa.
“Yes; first time I was out with Milby,” continues
the manager, stooping to use the tobacco-cutter, “ we


got nicely on to about a dozen buck niggers near Wise-
man’s water-hole —you know it, Lawrence ? Well,
I sow Milby taking a long feather out of his poc
when we’d grassed all the black devils, and wondered
what he was going to do with it Hanged it he
didn’t send a ‘ boy ’ round to each of the beggars we d
knocked over to tickle their noses.
‘“What’s that for?’ I asked. Oh, you 11 see,
said he. And sure enough presently the boy with
the feather ranged up alongside a nigger who d been
shamming. I’d tried the beggar before with a match,
in the ordinary way, and he hadn’t shown a sign. 1
thought I’d have died o’ laughing,” the manager con-
tinue! after moistening his inner man when I saw
the beggar twitching his nose as the feather ticUed
it; he couldn’t for the life of him keep it still. Tha
wls a very good ‘ dart ’ of Milby’s ; we’d have missed
that buck without the feather dodge.
« Oh, that’s an old trick,” remarks the new manager .
of Epsom; “they always used it about Kimberley when
I was through there with horses befoie the rush.
“Ain’t you station-folk a bit rough on the niggers
nbout here ? ” inquires one of the two burly m i-
viduals that wo have already introduced to our readers
as mining speculators. “ I’ve had a good all-round ex-
perience with ’em, as you may g'f* 3 , whcm v ow
I’m the original prospector of the Mount IV al ,c .
I’ve had to shoot one nigger in my time, but only one,
and I was living amongst them, you might say, fo
, about twenty years, till I made my rise at the Mount
“Oh ah ! ” drawls the storekeeper, bestowing an
insolently pitying smile upon the simple-minded indi-
vidual Who thus dares to find fault with one of the pet


institutions of the i scjuattah nobles of tbe country.
“But you must remember there’s a deuced lot of
difference between wunning a wun and wunning a
mine, Mr. Walker.” This remark smells so strongly
of a sneei that the black Cornish eyes flash angrily
across the table, till, observing that the storekeeper
is a foe that is hardly worthy of his steel, Mr. Walker
calms down again.
“ Ma ybe, maybe,” he goes on, “ but I’m a practical
man, and 1 look at everything in a practical way. I
don t blame you gentlemen for potting a nigger for
cattle spearing. I’d as lief shoot a man as a dog
black or white, if he tried robbing me too often.
You mustn t think, gentlemen,” Mr. Walker goes on,
as he observes that he has decidedly not got “ the
house with him, “you mustn’t think I’m presuming
to teach } ou anything about how you ought to manage
your own affairs. But it’s always been a good stout
argument of mine that it’s waste of good bone and
muscle, as the country can’t well spare, all this
shooting business.”
What would you do with the cussed vermin ?
Can you tell me that, eh ? ” asks the Epsom manager,
winking at Mr. Browne with the intention of attracting
his attention to the observations he is about to make.
“ You’d go in for making miners of them, would you ?
It strikes me somehow that you miners ain’t very
fond of coloured men knocking round the diggings.
Look here, Mr. Walker, the miners played it pretty
low down on both the niggers and the chinkies at the
Palmer rush, for one place, and you know as well as
Ido that it was near as a toucher that the Johns
(Chinamen) didn’t get kicked off Croydon last year.


Look at the Kimberley rush, too ; the niggers ain’t
learnt to fall in love with what they’ve had from the
diggers there.”
Mr. Walker knows that these accusations are cor-
rect, but is not going to be led into an argument as
to whether miners or cattle-men are the “ roughest
on the native population, so he answers the last
speaker as follows,—“ I’m not arguing whether it’s
right to shoot the blacks or not, but whether, looking
at the thing fair and square, in a practical, common-
sense, business way, it’s a sensible thing to do.
“ Yes, that’s the talk,” remarks his mate of chintz sofa
notoriety, who has hitherto refrained from argument.
“ But,” continues Mr. Walker, “as this gentleman
here has got hold of the Chinese Question, I’ll tell
him that, talking as a miner, I think you’ll find most
of us think this way.” The speaker whilst arguing
takes a pencil from his pocket, and from the force of
old associations makes as if to draw the plan of an
imaginary mine upon the table-cover. “ We’d let the
aboriginals mine if they like to ; it’s their country after
all, and they’ve a right to do that, at any rate. In fact,
lots of them have done mining ; the first big nugget
got in Queensland was found by a nigger at the Calyope.
But foreign coloured men is different altogether.
“Ah, but these niggers are a useless lot of devils,
and they won’t work unless you make ’em,” observes
the drover.
“ Well, mate,” Walker says, laughing, “ they suffer
from the same complaint as many whites they
won’t work unless they’re driven to it ; that s all I
can say about that. But as to their being no use, I
don’t know how you’d be able to get on without the


‘ boys ’ to muster, track, and drove. And I’ve seen
blacks near Adelaide who’ve become farmers, and
they’re just as good as lots of the Europeans farming
near them. And on the Russell diggings we couldn’t
have kept going if we hadn’t trained our ‘ boys ’ to
bring us tucker from the township. I’ve got a couple
of ‘ boys ’ with me now as can carry a two-hundred of
flour for a mile without resting. Now there ain’t a
man in this room could do the same. I’m open to
bet on it.” Mr. Walker, like most modern Hercules,
is much given to judging of a man’s value by the
amount of physical power he has at his command; and
this rule of the one time miner is not a bad one to go
by, for as a general thing the most practically useful
members of society are those strongest in wind and
limb. Mens Sana in corpore sano.
Just as Mr. Walker closes his remarks a knock
comes at the door, and the manager’s favourite house
gin pops her red-turbaned head into the room.
“ What do you want now, Oola ? ” Mr, Browne
sharply inquires of his grinning handmaid.
The dark-skinned girl glides forward, keeping her
long-fringed eyelids turned bashfully towards the
earthen floor, as the men stare admiringly at her
buxom figure, and then, lifting her beautiful soft eyes
to her owner’s face for a brief instant, remarks that
“ Charlie bin come up,” and hands to the manager a
2>iece of paper.
“ Oh, a note from my brother Jim ! ” exclaims
Manager Browne, looking meaningly at Morth.
“ Ah, anything fresh ? ” asks the gentleman
addressed, his eyes brightening. During the late con-
troversy he has maintained a most masterly neutrality.


“Tell yon directly; if 1 can make out his pencil
scrawl.”
After sundry screwings of the managerial eyebrows,
and bendings of the managerial back to the lamp
upon the table, Mr. Browne ceases snorting smothered
anathemas at his relation’s bad handwriting, and
looking up motions with his finger the sub-inspector,
whereupon both men leave the room together.
« Thought it safer to speak to you out here, Morth,”
observes the manager, as soon as they are be} ond
earshot of the station-house. The police officer replies
by nodding his head, but remembering immediately
afterwards that it is too dark for Mr. Browne to see
this signal of acquiescence, he proceeds to convey his
meaning by observing, u Just as well.
« I told you about the weaner,” goes on Mr. Browne,
“ that Jim found speared last week up Agate Creek,
didn’t I ? ”
u You did. Has Jim picked up any tracks yet ?
a Yes. It’s like this : I sent Jim out with a couple
of ‘ boys ’ to see if any of our beasts had gone over
the Murdaro boundary. Well, he writes to me he’s
come across the tracks of a party of horsemen going
north. Thinks it is that explorer fellow who was
stopping with Giles.”
a By Jingo ! they’ll have a dry trip of it,” observes
Morth, who has just crossed a corner of the northern
desert on his way to Borbong.
a Yes, but he’s picked up a Myall black,—to show
him the water-holes, I suppose. Jim noticed the
beggar’s tracks besides the horse’s hoof-marks, and
guessed that it was a warragal, because if it had been a
station black he’d have ridden one of the spare horses.”


“That was smart of Jim,” remarks the police
officer.
“Oh, the young ’un has got his head screwed on
level. But to continue : Jim ran the tracks back,
and then sent for Bogie—the best tracker we have—
to have a look at them. Bogie spotted where three
niggers had come out of the scrub.”
“Ah ! ” interrupts Morth, with a laugh, “ I’m glad
I waited.”
“Bogie,” continues Mr. Browne, “knows every
black’s track around, and he swears that one of
those which Jim found is that of a nigger who cleared
out from Murdaro lately; what was his name now ?
Never mind that, however.”
“Oh, you mean that boy of Dyesart’s,” observes
the sub-inspector.
“No, I don’t mean Billy—that was the name of
Dyesart’s boy.” The manager suddenly stops speaking,
and smacks the palms of his hands together,—an
impromptu manifestation of delight, for a new idea
strikes him that satisfactorily clears up a mystery
contained in his brother’s note. “ Why, that explains
it I ”
“ Explains what ? ”
“Why, don’t you see, what puzzled me was how
this explorer got hold of a Myall. They are pretty
shy of whites. But I guess this Billy, that you’ve
just reminded me of, has been camped with some
lot of blacks about here, and has joined this party.
Won’t Giles and Puttis be mad; they’ve been raising
Hades to get him. And he’s been camped close by all
the while ! Ha I ” Mr. Browne laughs out loud, and
then informs his friend how he has long suspected that


there must be a camp of runaway niggers in the
direction where Jim has found the tracks.
u You’d like me to take the 1 boys ’ up there then,
I suppose, before I go on,” observes the police officer.
“ The clouds on the hills this evening looked like
rain. Nothing like a wet night for stalking a camp,
so many noises going on in the scrub.”
“ No, old man, my idea’s this,” rejoins the manager,
taking Morth’s arm, and walking him back towards
the house. “ I’ll put Jim up to letting Bogie and
another good tracker we’ve got watch for these
blacks coming back into cover, —that they won’t go
far with the exploring expedition I’m pretty certain.
I’ll arrange, in the meantime, for the Bulla Bulla
and Murdaro people to be ready to join us, and we’ll
clear all this end range; I’ve often intended to do it.”
“Will Giles turn out, d’you think ? ”
“ Turn out ? ” exclaims Mr. Browne ; “ he’s the most
energetic old cock I ever came across where a nigger’s
concerned. Besides, one of these is a runaway of his.
Oh, he’ll come fast enough ! ”
It is finally arranged for a select party of sportsmen
to join Morth and his troop upon the return of the
three natives to the scrub, —who, as our readers have
no doubt already guessed, are Billy and his village
friends, —and thus, whilst combining the business of
exterminating sundry nests of human vermin with
the exciting pastime of a big game shooting-party,
at the same time assist to carry out that line of Native
Policy that obtains to-day under the regime of three
out of five of the Australian Governments of Her
Most Gracious Majesty the Queen.


CHAPTER XIX.
THE GRAVE.
“ Sleepe after toyle,
Port after stormie seas,
Ease after wane,
Death after life,
Doth greatly please.”
Spenser’s “Faerie Queened
vT was there he fell,
boss. He struck
right on top of them
gibbers (stones). I
caught at him, and
fell too, — there’s
the mark where I
struck the mud by
the broken stem
v of that cooliebar
\ there.”
It is Billy who is
speaking, as, with
tears in diis eyes,
aud his affectionate heart overflowing with genuine


grief, lie looks up at the rugged cliffs and points out
to Claude and Williams the place where Dyesart met
with his fatal fall.
On the ninth day out from Murdaro the expedition
has reached the long blue line of gum-trees, towards
which it has been "toiling since daybreak across the
desert plain. And here, at no great distance from the
little water-hole, near which the horses are now being
unsaddled by the rest of the party, Claude pays a first
visit to the lonely mound where, beneath a protecting
cairn of stones and tree-stems, his explorer-uncle has
begun his long, well-earned rest. As the young man
stands there in the scanty shade of she-oaks and box-
trees, a thousand solemn thoughts gather around him.
What strange power is it that has seemed to guard
and guide his footsteps so far in the fulfilment of his
appointed task ? Will it pilot him to the end ? And
what is to be the climax of this journey ? By Claude’s
side is Don, who has filled out wonderfully since our
hero found him a little waif upon the Sydney streets.
The boy, not having been enlightened as to his parent-
age, still bears his old name, and Angland making
more of a companion of him since Billy’s discovery,
has noticed with delight that the youth, who by a
strange procession of circumstances seems likely to
become his brother-in-law some day, is developing a
kindly disposition and an engaging manner.
Billy now arrives and unearths a small tin box, the
contents of which Claude feels much tempted to in-
vestigate forthwith; but, acting on Williams’s advice,
he postpones the operation, and determines to make
the most of what remains of the day in searching for
the supposed mine at the “ Golden Cliffs,” —which our


readers will remember as being set down upon the
secret map discovered by Angland on the back of his
uncle’s posthumous communication. About two miles
from the grave there rises, white and weird against
the violet sky, a barren, isolated mountain, or rather
a collection of rugged peaks. And thither, across the
red, rock-strewn plain, —bounded by a phantom sea of
desert mirage,—the white men and Billy proceed, and,
having traversed the gentle slope that rises from the
dried-up course of the river to the hill, they now stand
beneath the shadow of the rocks.
“ And you carried my uncle all the way to the
water, over those gibbers, without once putting him
down ! ” Claude exclaims, as he stands wiping the
moisture from his forehead at the summit of the
boulder-strewn glacis that surrounds the mount, and
hears once more the story of the accident. “Why,
you were hurt yourself! ”
“ When I carry the doctor I pikaued (Anglice,
carried) all I cared about in the world. ’Spose that
made it easy,” Billy replies simply, and leaning his
head upon his arms against a rock, he allows his
exuberance of emotion caused by the painful remem-
brance to wash itself away in tears.
As Angland regards the weeping black he cannot
but feel half ashamed of his own want of feeling.
“ Surely this is rather incongruous,” he thinks, “ that
Billy, who after all is only an aboriginal servant of
the dead man, should thus appropriate the position
of chief mourner, whilst I can look on with only a
strange, solemn feeling in my heart, and certainly with
ilry eyes. But it seems all like a dream to me. Of
course, however, with Billy it’s very different.”


Williams calls at this instant and disturbs the
young man’s meditations.
“ Look here, Mr. Angland ! ” The old miner’s
short, thick thumb points to a copy of the secret map
which he holds in his toil-worn hands.
« Here’s where we’ve got to go ; follow the dotted
line. Light up the gully there.” The old man points
to a narrow opening in the side of the hill, not far
from where they are standing.
“Yes, but we must find out where this place
marked by the cross is, Williams,—the point of
departure, you know.”
“ It’s here, lad. The doctor knew the boy’d lead
us to where the accident happened ; and see, there’s
the gully. A storm creek running from some hollow
in the hill I take it to be.”
Billy meanwhile observes what is going on with
some considerable surprise, for this is the first inkling
he has received of the existence of a map of the hill
—so carefully had Dyesart apparently guarded the
secret that he wished only to reach his sister’s child.
The men now move on again, Williams leading, and
enter a dark, gloomy defile, the walls of which, rising
to a height of some eighty feet, are composed of rain-
furrowed masses of hard, grey mud. Enormous flakes
and slabs of transparent gypsum protrude from the
sun-dried mass in places, and some of these, catching
the rays of the afternoon sun, blaze and scintillate
like gems of priceless value. The gorge is, in fact,
just what Williams has termed it, a storm creek, and
the dark cliffs of hardened clay on either hand
are formed of debris which has washed down from an
open basin or depression in the centre ot the mount.


After following the watercourse upwards for two or
three hundred yards, Claude and his companions find
themselves in a great, crater-like valley, about three
hundred yards across, grey and blasted, a picture of
desolation. On all sides rise the sun-scarred domes
of mud-springs of various sizes, some of which are
twenty feet in height, but all appear non-active ; in
consequence, no doubt, of the long drought. Around
the valley, across which Williams proceeds to lead
the way, stopping here and there to consult his map
or examine a stone, is an encircling, battlemented
array of strangely weird and broken cliffs, some three
hundred feet in height, of a hard, flinty rock, varying
in colour from light red to pure white. At intervals
along the scarped and tortured summit of the pre-
cipices strange, turret-headed peaks rise like giant
sentries posted upon the heights to guard its sacred
loneliness, and these, as the sun lowers in the heavens,
cast protracted shadows over the silent, ghastly
valley below. In many places heaps of honey-combed
boulders of a kind of quartzite, which have fallen
from the overhanging cliffs, form slopes that reach
halfway up the walls of this wild-looking amphi-
theatre, and here and there the explorers have to turn
to avoid the mysterious openings of vast, ancient
fumaroles, whose orifices and walls are grandly
blotched with black, purple, and Indian-red incrusta-
tions.
At last Williams comes to a halt where numerous
nodules of ironstone-clay litter the ground, and,
turning towards Claude, places his hand upon the
young man’s shoulder, and whispers in a mysterious and
impressive manner “that them’s the ‘ Golden Cliffs.’”


Stretching across the valley, and apparently bar-
ring further progress in that direction, is a dark mass
of "brown and purple rock, which Claude can see
differs in many respects from the material of which
the other cliffs already passed are composed.
But why “ golden ” ? There seems nothing, as far
as he can judge, to make the sombre pile—which
appears to be some kind of ironstone deposit wort y
of the auriferous title bestowed upon it on the map.
Claude’s heart sinks within him. He knows what a
gold-bearing reef is like ; he has seen plenty in New
Zealand, and some also about Cairns and Mount
Silver, but there is n (f trace of a reef here. But
perhaps Williams has made a mistake. The map is
examined and re-examined with the sole result of
proving that the old miner has guided his companions
correctly. Then Claude begins, for the first time since
he started, to feel that he has been somewhat rash
in going to all this trouble, risk, and expense when
after all the mysterious message from his uncle may
have been only the result of the feverish promptings
of a brain disordered by accident, and at the same
time haunted with the desire to leave something
behind for that loved sister from whom he had been
estranged so long.
Neither can our young friend gather any comfort
from either of his companions, who, although far more
experienced than he is with rocks and minerals, seem
also puzzled and disappointed. But happy is the
man who, under adverse circumstances, can gather
fresh stores of energy and strength such as now come
to relieve Angland from the desponding frame of
mind into which the frowning, barren rocks have


plunged him for the moment. The memory of a
loving, girlish face comes like a peaceful messenger
of hope to cheer yet softly chide the heart that fails
when it should be strong for her sake. And Claude
remembers that, however barren his journey through
the desert may prove in other ways, the strange
message from the dead has been the cause of his
meeting Glory, at any rate, and a deep feeling of
thankfulness makes his heart glow with renewed
determination and courage.
At the foot of the cliffs Williams and Billy are
closely examining the rocks. The former, breaking
off chips with a short-hand led 1 prospecting pick, bends
now and again to observe a likely fragment with a
pocket lens ; whilst close by the black boy is at
work shovelling up the sandy soil from between the
fallen fragments of stone with the blade of his toma-
hawk, winnowing the same cleverly from hand to
hand for the canary-coloured particles of heavy metal,
that, judging from the sulky look of the operator, have
not yet come to reward his busy efforts.
“ What do you make of it ? ” Williams turns to
Angland at the question, and, carefully pocketing his
lens, stands looking up at the cliff with his arms
akimbo.
“ Well I’m blowed if I know, to tell you straight,
Mr. Angland. I don’t see nary a colour. Fact is,
I’ve never seen anything like this before.” As the old
man speaks he affectionately pats a boulder by his
side. For just as an M.R.C.S. loves to meet an in-
teresting and complicated case of human infirmity, to
correctly diagnose which will redound to his credit in
the scientific world, so does old Williams, enthusiastic


prospector and geologist that he is, leel quite a warm
regard for this strange mass of rock whose hidden
secrets it is now his business to unravel.
“ It might be a big kind of gozzon out-crop,—the
rock’s got a lot of iron in it, there’s no doubt about
that. An old mate of mine used to say, —
“ ‘ Es thut kein gang so gut
Er hat einen eisernen hut.’
He was a German, but a good miner for all that, and
quite right about an i iron hat, for them s the best
reefs. But,” "Williams goes on as he heaves a sigh,
u blest if this is a real £ozzen out-crop either. And,
moreover, it ain’t likely-looking to my thinking.”
« Well, it can’t be helped,” says Claude, watching
the stalwart old miner’s face with some amusement
as he stands rubbing his stubby chin, and screwing
up his mouth and eyebrows, like some art-critic
engaged in reviewing an enormous piece of sculpture.
« I’ll carry out the instructions in the letter, and if
it all turns out to be nothing,—well, I can’t help it.”
Both men hear a shout at this instant, and Billy,
who has climbed up the cliff a little way, is seen
waving excitedly to the white men, and calling to
them to follow him to his elevated perch. Claude is
not long in scrambling up, but he has to descend again
to assist Williams, whose knees are getting a bit stiff
with age, although the muscles of his arms and
shoulders are as good as ever. Arrived at Billy’s
post of vantage, the black proudly shows them a re-
markable tunnel opening into the cliff: it has smooth,
shiny walls, and is evidently not the result of human
labour.


“ Look! ” the dark youth shouts, stooping and
pointing to the floor of the cavern, upon which the
winds of heaven have spread a thin covering of desert
sand ; “ look ! ”
A compound exclamation of surprise and annoyance
bursts from two pairs of lips, for there, stamped into
the soft, yellow carpeting of silicions particles, are
the marks of numerous human feet. Not those that
wandering natives might have made, but boot-marks,
and, what is worst of all, apparently quite fresh.
“ Somebody been here afore us,” exclaims Williams.
Claude simply looks downwards, and whistles a
musical execration.
Billy, who stands behind, grins extensively as he
sees the discomfited faces of his white companions,
and hesitates for the best part of a minute before he
proceeds to relieve their minds. Then he whispers
huskily,—
“ That been the doctor come along here.”
“ Dr. Dyesart! What on earth do you mean ? ”
exclaims Claude excitedly, as the wild hope of his
uncle still being alive flashes through his brain.
Billy, like most persons possessed of some superior
instinct or talent, can hardly appreciate the fact that
others may be deficient in the same, so he grins again
when he finds that the white men are still unable to
distinguish between an ancient and a recent footmark.
“ How long since my uncle was here ? ” asks Angland
sharply. But our hero’s hopes are dashed out of sight
as Billy replies sadly,—
“ He been dead over four months now.”
“ How the dickens are these marks so recent then ? ”
“ They very old, boss,” replies the black, and turning


awav, he lights a match, and boldly leads the way
into the black month of the natural tunnel, which
slopes downwards at an easy incline.
All the men are smokers, therefore provided with
the means of producing an impromptu illumination.
Claude carries his matches, after the fashion of most
settlers in the New Zealand bush, in a small but stout
glass bottle,—the moist atmosphere of the Land of
Ferns rendering this precaution necessary,—and as he
creeps after his black guide, he examines the dark,
glossy surface of the walls and roof of the cave, which
are covered with ripple-like corrugations. Ihe pait)
has not proceeded far, when Claude slips upon a long,
smooth object lying across his path, and as he falls
is horrified to hear Billy, who is immediately in front,
sing out that a snake has bitten him. In an instant
the party are in darkness. Williams has tripped over
Angland, and the black boy having leapt wildly up-
wards against the rock overhead—with a force that
would have demolished any but an aboriginal skull-
lies rubbing his head where he has rolled to, which
is some yards on in advance, for the tunnel descends
pretty steeply here.
To be left thus suddenly in perfect darkness, in a
steep, subterranean passage, with the dread possibility
of coming in contact at any moment with a furious
and probably poisonous reptile, which has just bitten
one’s companion, is an awkward if not an uncomfort-
able position to be placed in. But in addition to this
our friend Claude has had all his breath crushed out
of him by the superincumbent Williams. It is not
surprising, therefore, that some seconds, which appear
minutes, elapse before a match is struck and a light


thrown upon the scene. It is then discovered, to the
great relief of poor Billy, and for the matter of that
of all three pnen, that the snake-bite which the dark
youth is expecting every moment to prove fatal has
been occasioned by Claude, who, stepping upon a
dead bough, has caused it to turn over, and inflict a
wound upon the black’s hairy calf with the broken
end of one of its lateral branches.
A few other pieces of wood being also found lying
about, torches are now manufactured; and by the
extra amount of light thus procured, the travellers
discover that they are following a kind of tortuous,
rocky artery, from whose jetty sides numerous vein-
like smaller channels open in all directions. In places
the tunnel widens, and the red glare of the flames
dances upon the polished surfaces of curious, twisted
columns, stalactite-like roof pendants, and marvellous
bunches of natural filigree-work.
“ Well, this is a rnm kind of diggings ! ” exclaims
Williams presently. “ Did you ever see anything like
this before in your travels, Mr. Angland ? ”
“I was just thinking that it is a sort of black
edition of some of the limestone caves I’ve been in,”
replies Claude, adding, “ But they’re as miserably wet
and cold as this is hot and dry.”
The explorers have now been some fifteen minutes in
the tunnel, and the white men have decided to return,
and prospect the cave further upon the morrow, when
Billy, who is some way on ahead, shouts “Daylight I”
A minute afterwards and the party stand blinking
their eyes on a kind of undercliff, overhanging another
valley, similar in some respects to that which they
have already traversed, but smaller in size and with


a much fairer aspect. For here and there trees and
shrubs are growing amongst the fallen rocks, and
these, although stunted and bleached-lookmg, convey
a certain softening effect to the otherwise wildly
barren slopes. It is as if the goddess Flora had once
smiled into the valley of death long ages ago, and
some of the gentle radiance of her glance still
remained behind to tell of her passing visit. And
there, too, are a couple of wallaby, of the rare black
and chestnut kind, skipping noiselessly away from
the immediate vicinity of the intruders, to sit
motionless upon adjacent boulders, watching wi
awful tameness the movements of these strange
visitors who have come to disturb them in their quiet
domain. ~ , , . ,
On either side of the valley, which, sloping west-
ward, opens upon the desert plain below, rise t e
scarped and pinnacled buttresses of great, crumbling
granite cliffs. These grey heights are crowned with
a dark-red stratum of rock, which Claude recognizes
as part of the desert sandstone formation, which has,
in all probability, at one period covered the greater
portion of Northern Central Queensland.
It is now getting late in the day, so a council is
held as to whether to retire campwards by the road
they have come, or by proceeding down the valley o
return on the outside of the hill, which they will then
have passed completely through. The latter route is
quickly selected, and the rosy tints of sundown are
just beginning to stain the whole landscape when
our friends commence clambering over the boulders
towards the lower ground. The route selected lies
over and amongst enormous masses of coarse-gramec


porphyritic granite, from whose weather-worn surfaces
great square crystals of feldspar project, catching the
sun’s ruby rays and flashing them back amidst the
glints of light off flakes of ice-like mica. And Claude,
looking round him, thinks of the valley of gems into
which Sinbad was carried by the mighty Hoc, and
how, perhaps, Dr. Dyesart may have also recalled that
wondrous Eastern story, when he, the first and solitary
explorer of the mountain, saw the jewel-like crystals
blazing round him on the rocks. The descent to the
valley is not by any means so facile as the bird’s-eye
view taken from above seemed to promise ; and a
small precipice presently necessitates our friends to
travel along to the left, beneath the underclitf upon
which they had emerged when leaving the tunnel.
A hundred yards brings them to a great black but-
tress, which, projecting from the cliff, threatens to bar
the way. But the active Billy, who declares he sees
signs of the doctor having been in that direction,
soon finds a narrow ledge, and by its means the
rocky corner is safely rounded, after a rather risky
passage. And here the men are suddenly arrested in
their further progress by a most strangely beautiful
sight.
A large portion of the cliff immediately before them,
probably from the action of some ancient earthquake,
has fallen forwards into the valley below, leaving
exposed a bay or recess about three hundred feet in
height and nearly as much across. The walls of this
kind of alcove are formed of some dark rock, but
here and there it is blotched and clouded with an
almost luminous coating of iridescent colours—such
as one sees on soap-bubbles and decaying glass—that


burns and shimmers in green, golden, and violet hues,
as though a hundred rainbows were trembling on the
sombre surface of the mountain steep.
Around the summit of the semi-circular precipice is
suspended a kind of rocky cornice composed of great
icicle-like pendants, as if some mighty torrent of lava
plunging over the cliff had suddenly cooled in mid-
air and become converted into stone.
Some of these o’erhangings appear to be tipped with
burnished copper, others with silver, others again shine
bright and golden against the dark, purple shadows
behind. And all of them in the evening light—which
bathes the whole scene with a soft crimson veil—glow
and blush like molten drops of metals oozing from the
of the wonderful rocky valance above.
Some little time elapses before the men have re-
covered sufficiently to speak; and then it is the sun
which, sinking with true tropical celerity, releases
them from the enthralling beauty of the scene. An ,
as the glowing hues fade into cold indigo shadow,
each individual member of the party experiences
that curious emotion —a mixed feeling of re le an
disappointment—which some of our readers may
remember to have been keenly sensible of, when, as
children, the green-baize curtain dropped slowly upon
the limelit fairyland of their first
Then are three tongues unloosed, and three pair o
legs hurry their owners toward the darkening cliffs.
Claude, being gifted with a scientific and artistic
mind, forgets to think about the practical value of the
discovery, and exclaims characteristically, ‘ That zs
beautiful ! X wonder wfiat’s the cause of those
colours I ”


Billy, remembering the prismatic tints of a material
sulphide known to miners by the name of “ peacock
ore,” concludes that what lies before him is an immense
deposit of the same, and shouts gleefully, “ Copper ! ”
To which Williams, who likes to have a good-humoured
“dig” at his black companion when he advances
any opinion upon mining matters, observes “ Grand-
mother ! ” and further explains, for Claude’s benefit,
“ that them colours are iron oxides. Couldn’t think at
first where I’d seen the same kind of thing before,” he
adds, as he stoops to pick up a piece of stone, “but I
recollect now. It was just the same as this here on
the top of Mount Morgan, when they first opened up
the top bench, only on a much smaller scale.”
“Mount Morgan eh!” exclaims Claude, as he
hears the old authority at his side compare this dis-
covery of theirs to the richest gold-mine in Australia.
“Oh, don’t you jump to conclusions yet, Mr.
Angland,” observes Williams, whose lengthy experi-
ence amongst those most "disappointing affairs, gold-
mines, has left him incapable of putting any faith in
one till he has fully examined it. “Many a man’s
burnt his fingers with the idea that because stone
resembles the Mount it’s auriferous. It don’t follow
in the least.”
It is late when the men reach camp, but, tired as
he is, Claude spends the greater part of the night in
making assays of the specimens of stone brought back
from the mount; and so interested are Williams and
Billy in the experiments that they sit round the
blazing logs with him, keeping up a running fire of
mining anecdotes, and lending him a hand, when he
requires it, at pounding pieces of stone to powder in a


big iron mortar with a heavy pestle, called technically
a “ dolly.”
Having Angland’s diary before us as we write, we
perhaps cannot do better than copy an extract there-
from which was, apparently, written on the next
evening to that on which our friends discovered the
now famous u Golden Cliffs ” : -
“Weather: fine, clear, hot.
“ Barometer : 29’250, 29'350.
“Thermometer: 72, 84, 91.
“ Minimum last night; 52.
“ Spent day prospecting ‘ Golden Cliffs.’ There is
no doubt but that, like Mount Morgan, the formation
there is the result of a vast thermal spring, and what
I took to be a hollow in the cliffs is the half of the old
basin, the other half having fallen into the valley.
My rough assays made last night of the best speci-
men .of stone, gave a result of about fifteen ounces to
the ton.
« By grinding the stone very fine under water, in an
agate mortar I have fortunately brought with me, I
can obtain more than half the gold in the stone, as
shown by assay. Neither W. or B. can obtain a
colour by means of the ordinary panning process.
Williams says this is what he expected, but he is one
of those worldly-wise people who seldom venture an
opinion till they are certain to be right.
« Our Myalls say the name of the Mountain is
Pillythilcha Doolkooro, which seems to mean, accord-
ing to Billy, the Valley of Glowing Charcoal, there
appears to be a belief amongst the blacks that the
place is the abode of Kootchie, or devils ; also that all
r 23


men are unlucky who go near the hill, and those who
venture into its secret valleys will surely die, Billy
and Williams both agree, for a wonder, that there is a
strong probability of this being the Sacred Hill, that,
according to them, is believed in by the natives
throughout Australia as the place from which Moora-
moora, the native Supreme Being, will some day arise
to protect them from the cruelties of the white settlers.
“To-morrow Williams leaves for Palmerville to
register claim, and on his return I shall go to Mur-
daro with Don. Killed a big black snake just now
which had crept under my blankets.”


CHAPTER XX.
A “ DISPERSING ” PARTY.
“ Greet her with applausive breath,
Freedom gaily doth she tread;
In her right a civic crown,
In her left a human head.”
NSPECTOR PUTTIS,
N.M.P., is pacing the
verandah of Borhong
head-station house. The
hour is early, and al-
though the active little
man was one of the live-
liest of last night’s party
of bronzed and loud-
voiced men, who held wild
carousal till the “ wee,
sma’ hours,” he is up betimes,
as usual, to enjoy a cup of
tea in the cool morning air,
i and issue instructions for the
j day to the “ boys of his troop.
1 The loose verandah boards
creak under his diminutive
Wellington boots, as with
military strut he marches to
and fro ; and each time he
Teaches the end of his beat and right-about-faces to


move back again, a sable crow upon a native orange
tree hard by, who is acting as sentry to some feathered
thieves by the kitchen door, raises his hoarse voice in
a warning caw.
The Inspector’s head is bent forward, and after a
custom of his when thinking deeply, he carries his
hands folded behind his back. This morning they
rest upon an empty revolver case, suspended from the
wide, white-leather belt which he always wears when
upon active duty.
If the man before ns would only cease frowning at
the boards, and, arranging his thoughts, give ns the
benefit of the same in words, they would probably be
after this fashion :
“Yes, I don’t see how he can miss me this time.
And the risk is not so very great, as we shall have
rain enough to-night, or to-morrow at furthest, to
drown any tracks. I will take his horses away ; then
either himself, or one, perhaps two, of the blacks, will
have to go after them. The rest will be easy. If his
body ever is found, and it’s not likely, they will think
he was in the black camp and got shot there, and, as
everybody round about here will have a finger in that
affair, nobody will dare to make a fuss about it.”
A loud flapping of wings, as the crows at the back
of the house fly off at the approach of footsteps, now
arouses the Inspector from his meditations.
“Ah, Yegerie! ” he says, as his black orderly
presents himself, and stands “ attention ” after duly
saluting his officer.
“ Why didn’t yon report yourself here to me directly
you arrived ? ” Puttis adds, for, casting a rapid glance
at the boy, the Inspector —having almost as sharp


an eye as the best tracker in his troop —has discovered
some wood ashes upon the new arrival’s boots.
Yegerie, who has just returned from doing a piece
of special duty, has waited to warm his cold, stiff
fingers at the camp-fire before hobbling out his
horse, and he trembles now before the master who
seems to see and know everything. Inspector Pnttis
does not appear to expect his black trooper to answer
the question put to him, but marches up the verandah
and back again. Then he halts opposite Yegerie, and
examines him as to how he has performed instructions
given him.
“ Everything right ? ”
“ All lite, Marmie,” replies the boy, saluting again.
“ Mine bin come up werry slow. Mine bin come
longer ribber. No leabe it any tracks ’
All right. I have been delayed by following up river
bed, in order to leave no tracks).
“ What tracks you see ? ”
“ I bin see tracks longer six yarraman. I bin catch
it; see um mob ” (I have seen the tracks of six
horses. I have seen also the party). “ I bin see one
white beggar, one pickaninnie white beggar, three
black beggar. One fellow Myall, him make it the
walk all about longer mob ” (One wild black walked
alongside the party).
“ Ah, that’s right! Who’s on guard at the camp ? ”
u Sambo and Dick, Marmie.”
u Run ring round camp. Report to me if you see
a track directly. That’ll do. Dismiss.”
The boy salutes and disappears silently.
We pause here to explain that on the vast majority
of up-country runs the native station-hands reside


in villages of huts, built by themselves in close
proximity to the head and out stations. No other
aborigines are allowed even to cross the run, far less
to live on it. On the arrival of a “ rounding-up ”
party or a police troop at a station, a guard is generally
placed over the station black camp, to prevent any
of its inhabitants giving the alarm to such runaway
blacks, or Myalls, who may be camped —in contra-
vention of the squatter’s decrees —in the vicinity.
The police officer has just commanded Yegerie to walk
round the camp and see if there are any signs of such
a messenger having escaped the sentries and set out
during the night.
Half an hour passes, and then the musical clatter
of cups and plates is heard in the dining-room, as
the breakfast things are laid—or, to speak more accur-
ately, flung—upon the long table, in serried rows, by
a laughing, chattering bevy of dark-skinned damsels
belonging to Mr. Manager Browne’s harem.
There are few up-country bachelor squatters but
solace themselves for the absence of white ladies bv
%*
indulging their leisure moments in the society of
a private, selected circle of native girls—popularly
known as the “ stud gins.” Many of these dark-eyed
houris are remarkably handsome, and after a year
or two at “ Government House ” they are relegated
to the black camp for the use of the black and white
station-hands.
But to return to Inspector Puttis. With his usual
abstemiousness he drank but little last evening, and
his nerves are in perfect order for the day’s, or rather
night’s, work before him. He is, of the whole
“ rounding-up ” party collected beneath the hospitable


roof of Borbong head-station house, the only one that
feels much inclined for breakfast that morning.
So when Charlie, the clean, yellow-faced Chinese
cook, informs him that the morning meal is “ all lie ”
all right, or ready), he turns immediately
towards the glass-door of the dining-room. But just
then the rattle of a buggy coming at a furious pace
towards the station arrests his attention, and he waits
to see who is so rash as to drive so fast over the lough
ground.
“ Giles, for a tenner ! ” he mutters half out loud ;
“ no other fool would drive like that.”
The dust cloud occasioned by the arrival of the
vehicle presently subsides, and, amidst a crashing
of breakers suddenly applied and a volley of blas-
phemy, a pair of reeking horses are pulled back on
to their haunches. Then a red-faced, burly form
clambers slowly down from the trap, and after kicking
an attendant “ boy ” gives him some directions, and
waddles hurriedly towards the house.
“ Well, Puttis, Pve found you at last.”
“ Morning, Giles. Want me particularly ? ” inquires
the police officer.
“ Want you ? Yes, by Jupiter ! Haven’t I driven
all night from Bulla Bulla to try and catch you ? ”
“ Indeed ! ” observes the smaller man, keenly ob-
serving the excited face of Mr. Giles, as he mops it
with a red silk handkerchief. “ Come in and have
a nip.”
The squatter half turns, by force of custom, towards
the door, then he stops, and says hurriedly, “ No, I
won’t. Here, come outside. I want to speak to you
first.”


“ You’ve had good news, Giles,” remarks the In-
spector, his sun-dried cheeks wrinkling np into a grin,
and exposing his large, canine teeth.
“ How the devil do yon know ? ”
“ Never mind, old friend. .What have yon to tell
me ? ”
The men stroll ont by the kitchen garden, where
Giles takes a seat upon a low, rustic gate, beneath a
sweetly scented gnm-tree. Looking nervously round
about to be sure that they are alone, the owner of
Murdaro turns to his companion, and in a low voice
asks, “ What have you done about Angland ? ”
“ Nothing,” replies the Inspector; adding hurriedly,
“ Did you tell Miss Mundella you were coming to see
me?”
“ Thank the Lord, I’m in time ! ” exclaims Giles,
quite ignoring the question put to him. “ Now, listen
ter me, Puttis, and don’t interrupt. Firstly, you
mustn’t interfere with Angland. I’ll explain why
directly. Secondly, I’m going to repudiate my agree-
ment with Lileth.”
“ Stay ! ” exclaims Puttis, half shutting his eyes
and causing his parchment cheeks to warp once more
into a sardonic smile. “In that case, must make
fresh bargain.”
The low, wooden gate groans beneath Mr. Giles, as
he shakes his podgy sides with a series of defiant
laughs, which he raps out with a double, postman’s-
knock-like abruptness.
“Ah ! ” thinks Inspector Puttis, looking at him,
“he has the air of a man who holds good cards.
Wonder what his game is ? ”
“ I am going to repudiate my agreement,” repeats


Mr. Giles. “ I am going to repudiate everything.”
His voice grows more cheerful and confident as he
proceeds to disclose his intentions. “ And if you’re
the sensible chap I take you ter be, you’ll just listen
ter what I’ve got ter say.”
The police officer leans over the low gate, and, nod-
ding his head as a sign that he agrees to keep silent,
prepares to listen. “ I’ve had a letter from Angland,”
the squatter continues, “ which has altered my opinions
of him. He writes from Palmerville to say he’s just
returned from where that—where Dyesart the explorer
pegged out.” The sonorous clanking of a bullock-bell,
the'signal for breakfast, here interrupts the speaker.
“ There’s tucker ready, so I’ll cut short what I was
going to say. Angland writes to say he finds as I’m
indebted to him, as heir to Dyesart, for a large
amount; but don’t intend pressing me, as was his
uncle’s wish. And then, blow me if he don’t say that
he wants to marry Glory ! When 1 told the gal
blessed if she didn’t seem to expect it. And lastly,
what d’yer think of this ? If he ain’t found my
little Georgie ! ” The speaker’s sensual face looks
almost handsome for an instant, as a momentary
blaze of parental pride and love warms the sinful old
heart. “ Yes, he’s found my little Georgie as I lost
six year ago ! ”
In the excitement caused by disclosing the news ol
the discovery of his long-lost son and heir, Mi. Giles
springs from the gate, and after performing a short
pas seal upon the ground,—much resembling the
clumsy prancings of a pole-prodded street beai,—he
turns to Puttis, and suddenly seizing his hand wrings
it violently.


u How did he get liold of boy ? ” asks the Inspector,
as the squatter resumes his seat upon the gate.
u Hh> I’ll tell you all about that another time.”
Mr. Giles’s face has resumed its ponderously would-be
cunning expression as he goes on : “ Not only that,
but it appears Dyesart had just discovered a whacking
big mountain of gold, or something of the sort, up
there, just before he kicked the bucket, —a sort of
second Mount Morgan, and I’m to have a share in it.”
Inspector Pnttis faces round at this, and beneath
the stern, determined stare of the little man, Mr. Giles
feels and looks very uncomfortable.
11 Congratulate you on your luck. Lost son restored.
Rich son-in-law. Debts forgiven. But,” —the police
officer grins as he growls the next words, —“ but you’ll
not forget your friends ? Awkward rather if Angland
should happen to hear of your late contract with your
niece, eh ? ”
“ We won’t have a row about it! ” exclaims Giles
weakly, avoiding the Inspector’s gaze; “ .why should
we ? And look here,” he adds in a tone in which the
bully gradually becomes discernible, —“ look here, I’ve
got copies of certain letters you’ve received from
Lileth about Angland. Ah! that’s got you, has
it ? And I can prove you received them, that’s more.
You can’t prove I had anything to do with ‘ this
arrangement,’ as Lileth calls it. I defy you to do
it.”
“ Don’t try it, old friend,” observes Puttis, pulling
his moustache ; “don’t try it. I’ve got the ‘joker’ to
play yet. Don’t forget that.”
“ You mean my nephew,” responds Giles. “ I’ve
squared him all right. And I can prove, moreover,


that it was you got him a hiding-place at Ulysses.
Can you heat that ? ” .
“ Yes 1 ” hisses Puttis, whose inventive genius is
only equalled by a valuable faculty he possesses for
bringing all kinds of novel resources to his aid upon
an emergency arising. “ D’you remember the musical
box Miss Mundella received from Brisbane a month
ago ? ” „
“ What has that got ter do with all this ? asks
Giles, looking in a puzzled way at the calm, firm face
that is grinning coolly up at him.
“ Well, old friend, musical box all sham. ’Twas
a phonograph. All your talk taken down. Even
your swear words.” The speaker pauses a moment,
then adds, “ Have another card to play. Ho you want
it ? ”
Mr. Giles remembers the fact of a so-called musical
box having arrived at Murdaro, which Lileth had
informed him, and with perfect truth, had been broken
in coming up from the coast, and would not play.
Like all ignorant persons, he has an almost super-
stitious dread of the more modern appliances, of which
he has read such wonderful stories in that sole source
of his information regarding the outside world, the
weekly press. It never for a moment enters his head
that Puttis is “ bluffing him,” to use a colonial term.
Giles has been flattering himself up to this minute
that he is at last free from the machinations of his
tyrant niece, and the horrible thought that she has
still got him in her power, and can reproduce his late
conversations with her by means of a phonograph, so
flurries his loosely strung brain, that for a time he
becomes quite unable to see that, for their own sakes,


neither Pattis nor Lileth are likely to take that step,
even if it were in their power to do so. It is not so
much that he fears how he might suffer in body or
estate at the hands of Angland, should his villainies
be made patent; but rather a sneaking, cowardly
horror of what his circle of squatter acquaintances
would think of him, should they discover by means
of this threatened expose , how he, Giles, the man who
has always loudly affected to consider woman as an
inferior creation, has been all this time guided, even
governed, by one—and a young one at that.
Before a minute has elapsed, however, the squatter
has recovered considerably from the effects of the
shock that Puttis’s words have dealt him, and his
wits are sharpened by the very desperateness of his
position.
“ That’s mighty clever of you both, that is,” Giles
says, with an attempt at a careless laugh—which
breaks down as he catches sight of the Inspector’s
watchful, grinning face. “ Look here, though this
plan of yours might hurt me with Angland, what
good will it do you? You’ll all be in for conspiracy
to defraud.”
“ Pshaw I ” exclaims Miss Mundella’s fiance , “ Ang-
land won’t prosecute his father-in-law. We stand
behind the father-in-law. But here’s Browne coming
to drag us in to breakfast. Say, what about deed of
partnership in run for Lileth? Must I play my
joker ? ”
“ I’m going to repudiate all that, I tell you,” replies
Giles doggedly. “If you’re fools enough to bring it
into Court, I’ll swear I was drunk or something.”
Inspector Puttis grins again, and, drawing an


imaginary card from his pocket, leans forward as if
to play it, and speaks in a low, hurried voice, for Mr.
Browne is slowly approaching.
« Once upon a time there was a stockman on Nango
run ; let me see, he was head-stockkeeper it I re-
member rightly. He had a sister, and her only fault
was a blind devotion to the interests of her brother.
She was ”
u Curse you, what d’you mean ? gasps Giles,
o’oing through the eye-bulging and general inflam-
matory symptoms which we have already had occasion
to describe.
« The owner and manager of Nango at this time,
continues Puttis in a louder voice, for Mr. Browne,
seeing his friends are evidently busy, has moved away
ao-ain, “at this time was a wealthy young man, who
had been bred and born to believe in the Jewish system
of salvation.” Mr. Giles continues silent, though
breathing stentorously. “ A successful trick was
played upon the Hebrew squatter.
“ Don’t go too far,” gasps Giles, adding pleasantly,
u or I’ll wring your blooming neck.”
a I won’t risk it, old friend,” laughs Puttis coolly.
a x»ve shown you corner of card. How d’you like it.
Mr Giles does not appear anxious to criticise the
appearance of the figurative “ joker,” and remains
a If things must go to Court,” the Inspector continues
in a careless tone of voice, “ we’d have to show a
reason why you should have made present to Lileth ot
share, -a quid pro quo. Now, a certain agreement
made between her mother and you would nicely suit
our purposes. I think you take my meaning.


Both men again remain silent for a time, then
Inspector Puttis closes the interview with the following-
words, by which he routs his opponent entirely,
“ Yon know me, Giles ; I don’t shirk at the hurdles.
If too high I’ll break the timber. Now Lileth’s entitled
to this share and more. I’m not very partial to half-
bred Jewesses generally, but this one I know to be an
heiress, although she’s not aware of it herself. Besides,
she’s the niece of a very dear old friend.” The little
man grins up at his big victim, with the same kind of
smile that no doubt a small spider puts on, could we
but catch it doing so, when in the act of putting the
finishing turns to the silken hammock in which it has
managed to swaddle an intrusive blue-bottle.
“Yes, friend Giles, I’ve started on last lap. Don’t
stand in the way. Will be worse for you. Don’t
want to tell Bileth how she came to be heiress.
Would spoil my chance with her. Would hate me.
Secret need never be unearthed. But if you attempt
repudiation, or Lileth goes in for jilting me when she
gets her own again, then out comes my trump card,
my little £ joker.’ Now, old friend, let’s go to break-
fast. Hope you’ve got a good appetite.”
An hour after this conversation, Inspector Puttis
despatches a native trooper with orders to recall
two others, who are watching a party of horsemen
approaching Borbong run.
After some clever manoeuvring the “ boy ’’—known
officially as Native Constable Dick—succeeds in dis-
covering his'fellows, without attracting the attention of
any of the members of the cavalcade which has been
under their surveillance, and the three blacks return
together stationwards. Not long afterwards! the


travellers, who are Claude, Don, Joe, and the two
desert trackers, prepare to camp just within the Bor-
hong boundary, by a water-hole lying in the course of
Agate Creek. Close by on their right hand rise the
dark, bush-draped heights of the rocky promontory
forming the boundary between Mhrdaro and Borbong
runs, in whose fastnesses Billy had waited for Claude s
coming. , . „
“ Big fellow rain come alonger night, muckcnc
(Anglice, heavy rain to-night, friend), observes
General Gordon to Don, as the two return from
hobbling out the horses ; and the white youth, to
whom Claude has decided to impart the secret of his
birth upon the morrow, goes straightway and informs
our hero what the native meteorologist has prophesied.
« Well, we’ll have to put up with wet jackets, my
boy,” answers Angland, “ for Billy and Williams have
got our tents with them at the mine. But peihaps,
he adds, looking at the darkening cliffs, “ we’ll be able
to get a dry roost for the night up there some-
where, if there are any caves about. Tell Gordon I
want him.” The black villagers, whose hamlet is
only some four miles distant, fortunately know of a
suitable shelter, and soon the party are spreading
their blankets beneath an overhanging, smoke-dis-
coloured slab of granite, some fifty feet above the
plain. Down below, beyond the water-hole, the horses
are feeding upon a patch of herbage, whence comes
the musical jangle through the darkness of a solitary
bell, which is clanking against old Rupert’s busy
jaws.
Claude feels very happy as, forming one of the
picturesque group round the fire, he sits smoking


beneath the rocky portico. To-morrow, all being well,
he will feast his eyes and soul in the presence of the
girl he loves so well ; to whom, blessed thought, he
can now, being wealthy, approach honourably as a
suitor for her hand and heart. To-morrow he will
see his little friend Don —now “ George,” but always
to be Don to him—welcomed to a home where a
parent and sister await him. To-morrow, taking his
uncle’s cloak upon his shoulders, he will begin the
great Work of Humanity to which the dead explorer
has asked him to dedicate half of the vast wealth
of the u Golden Cliffs.”
To-morrow the wonderful prophecy concerning the
mysterious Pillythilcha Doolkooro —whispered and re-
peated for many cruel years by trembling slaves and
fugitives in fireless camps—will begin its humanizing
fulfilment : a bright to-morrow of mercy for the un-
happy race that Dyesart had pitied, beginning with the
emancipation and protection of the villagers who had
succoured the doctor’s faithful servant Billy—without
whose devoted courage and assistance the “ Valley of
Glowing Embers ” would still be waiting for a hand
to rouse the great slumbering Mooramora to defend
His children.
Claude sits smoking long after his companions
have fallen asleep, for his brain is far too busy
with happy thoughts for it to become drowsy. By-
and-by he notices that Gordon’s prognostications
are about to be fulfilled, and rain-clouds are flying
across the starlit heavens from the north-east, —
dark, shadowy masses of vapour, “ like flocks of evil
birds,” heralding an approaching thunderstorm.
“ If the creek rises we shall be cut off from the


horses,” thinks Claude, as he hears the awe-inspiring
mutterings of thunder echoing down the valley.
“ Suppose I must go out and turn the brutes hack
this way myself,” he says to himself, adding in a
louder voice, “ Here, Joe, you young rascal. Come,
turn out and lend me a hand.” But the youngster
sleeps on, or pretends to do so, and Angland, hearing
the heavy drops of rain that, like skirmishers before
the advance guard of the shower, begin to pat, pit-pat,
plop around, thinks that it is a pity to disturb
the boy, and determines to go alone, as the horses
are at no great distance, and so save the youth a
ducking.
Angland therefore rakes up the fire into a blaze,
so that it may serve as a beacon to guide him on his
way back to the camp, and as he steps forth into
the darkness he hears the buzz of a heavy tropical
rainfall coming nearer and nearer over the forest
leaves.
Stumbling down the hill the best way he can in the
darkness, over awkward boulders and through detain-
ing brushwood, Claude soon finds himself upon the
plain. The horse-bell sounds delightfully near at
hand, and crossing the bed of the creek with some
difficulty, he finds it already knee-deep in water, al-
though quite dry when he passed it three hours before.
Another minute or two and he is alongside of the
bell-horse, and by stooping can distinguish the heads
of several of the others standing out against the lighter
sky on the horizon like inferior silhouettes. Then, as
if some one had pulled the string of an enormous
shower-bath suspended in the great black cloud over-
head/down comes the rain in one mighty cataract that


floods the plain around with tons of water per acre in
as many seconds, —a true tropical shower that will
fill the half-empty water-holes in a few minutes to
overflowing. It is not long, however, before the
downfall lessens in violence, and then, using old
Rupert as a blind, Claude drifts gradually towards the
other horses, which are momentarily revealed by the
white glare of lightning flashes. Some of the animals
are naturally rogues at any time, and now are doubly
difficult to approach, having become timid and treacher-
ous under the combined effects of heaven’s fiery and
watery display.
After a hard fight, however, a series of highly
scientific strategic movements brings the work of
unhobbling to a close, and mounting his own mare
barebacked, which Claude knows he can reckon on as
a good swimmer, he drives the little mob of horses
across the level ground, now six inches deep in water,
towards the river. An almost constant succession of
lightning flashes shows to the rider the frightened
animals before him for the first hundred yards,—then,
suddenly, the electric display ceases, and the rain pours
sullenly down ; and Claude finds himself sitting on
a wet, trembling steed in perfect darkness, without
the slightest idea of which direction he ought to pursue
in order to find the camp, whose fire he has long lost
sight of.
Our young friend, whose bush experience has not
been lengthy enough to teach him to trust his steed
rather than himself in such an emergency, now goes
through the usual bewildering tactics of a new “hand.”
One minute pushing on hurriedly, the next stopping
to listen for Rupert’s bell, anon trying to retrace his


steps, till lie is completely lost, and as cold and miser-
able as he was jolly and warm half an hour before.
By-and-by the storm begins to withdraw from oft
the face of the sky like the black edge of a magic-
lantern slide, and a patch of starlit heaven shows
towards the east, shining all the brighter apparently
for having had such a washing.
Claude now gradually makes out that he is close
under a cliff, and strains his eyes into the darkness to
see more ; when, hiss ! and the blackness before him
is suddenly dissolved into fire. A blue-white column
of flame has leapt from the cloud above and struck
the earth close in front with frightful force, and every-
thing around whirls into sparks, chaos, then silent
darkness.
For, unconscious of the mighty crash of thunder
that, like a thousand exploding shells, follows instantly
upon the flash, Claude is lying stunned and bleeding
beneath a tree against which his frighted steed has
thrown him, on the other side of the valley to that
where his camp amongst the rocks is situated.


CHAPTER XXI.
fate’s avenging hand.
“ Thou hast said well; for some of you there present,
Are worse than devils.”
The Tempest .
AKING advantage of
the storm whose part-
ing fusilade has left
Claude hors de com-
bat for the time being,
Manager Browne’s
“ ronnding-up” party,
under the skilful gene-
ralship of Inspector
Puttis and Sub-Inspector
Morth, has completely
invested the native
village upon the rocky
promontory.
It is made up of strange
constituents, this murderous
shooting party. Squatter J.P.’s are there ; youthful
“ rouse-ahouts,” some of these youngsters only a few
years released from the sanctified thraldom of a
Christian home in the old country; reckless, godless


stockmen ; a colonial legislator, who has made a name
by howling for separation from England; and numerous
biacks, oiled, naked, and anxious for their work to
begin.
There, in the darkness, around the unconscious
villagers, amongst wet, dripping rocks and slimy
brushwood, crouches a bloodthirsty circle of Native
Constables, naked, save for a cartridge-belt and a red
band round the head, and armed with Snider carbines
and tomahawks ; and with them are a number of no
less sanguinary white men.
Regardless of the majestic fury of the roaring
elements overhead, of the heavy, drenching rain, of
dangerous snakes and poisonous thorns, and with the
fierce, sweet love of slaughter warming each individual’s
heart with its terrible excitement, the cruel cordon
has shrunk its wreath ot death nearer and nearer
around its slumbering prey ; and now some thirty
pair of eyes are watching the small glimmer of the
black camp-fire, and thirty fingers itch to pull the
smooth, cold triggers against which they rest.
On all sides is the noisy dropping of water from
the leaves, and occasionally a dead bough, sodden
with moisture, and thus suddenly grown heavy,
breaks from its parent tree, and crashes through the
underwoood with startling echoes.
But it is not our purpose to describe the sickening
scene of murder and rapine that follows, when towards
four o’clock Inspector Puttis gives the revolver shot
signal to commence the holocaust. We have already
rendered to our readers a faithful account of a similar
occurrence in an earlier chapter. To those gentlemen
who, taking a special interest in such kinds of sport,


have honoured our pages by perusing the same, we
will respectfully point out that they can obtain their
fill of it by making their way to up-country Australia.
Partly for the benefit of such “ sports,” and partly for
another class of reader, our publishers have deemed
the late Dr. Dyesart’s map of the “ Wicked Island ”
worthy of reproduction with this our narrative of his
nephew’s adventures.
So, instead of “ potting ” a few “ buck ” niggers, or
tomahawking a woman or child, or otherwise assisting
the police (Queensland Native Mounted) in the execu-
tion of their dutv, let us follow Mr. Wilson Giles and
V /
watch his movements and actions, which more nearly
affect our story.
It having been reported to Mr. Morth that a party
of runaway “ boys ” are encamped a few miles ‘from
where he is assisting his senior officer in the develop-
ment of his plan of attack, the sub-inspector, taking a
few native troopers with him, starts off to investigate
matters in this new direction, being accompanied by
Mr. Giles and a few other gentlemen.
After a dark ride of an hour the party reach the
cliffs which Claude Angland has descended only a
few hours before, and, leaving their horses with a
couple of station-hands, creep silently through the
shadows after their black guide.
Presently each man feels, rather than hears, the
whispered order to halt, and Mr. Morth glides forward
like a snake to reconnoitre.
As ill-luck would have it, at the time when the
police officer raises his keen eyes above the edge of
a sheltering rock that commands a view of the camp,
the only members of Angland’s party in sight are


General Gordon and the Myall black, whose friends,
a short distance off in the village, are in like imminent
peril to themselves. Both are naked; for having dis-
covered Claude’s absence, and guessing something of
what has happened, they are about to set forth in
search of him. Don and Joe lie in the deep shadow
of the rock and are invisible; neither does the feeble
illumination afforded by the wood embers reach the
blankets, pack-bags, and other civilized impedimenta,
and warn the scout that what he takes for a warragal
camp is at present occupied by the “boys” and
belongings of a white man.
On the other hand, Morth recognizes Gordon, as
he stoops over the fire for an instant to light his
pipe, as a runaway from Murdaro Station. So ciawling
backwards to his waiting friends and troopers, he
commences to arrange them quietly round his intended
prey.
The early morning sky is now clear and star-
studded, and in another hour or two another day will
have begun.
The men creep forward amongst spiny grass trees,
rocks, and tree stems, but are not yet in position,
when, above the roar of the creek hard by and
multitudinous noises of a water-laden scrub, all veil-
ing the approach of the foe from the occupants ot
the granite shelter,— comes the muffled sound of a
distant rifle volley.
The stalkers hear it as they slink through the
darkness, and know that their friends have commenced
their work of destruction at the village, ihe runaway
“ boy ” Gordon and his Myall friend hear it also, and
guessing its fearful import spring to their feet and


stand trembling to listen, as the faint echoings of a
few more single shots follow the first discharge.
The tall black forms of the aborigines before the
firelit granite background offer too tempting a pair
of targets for certain of the younger members of the
attacking party to be able to further restrain their
sportsmanlike proclivities.
Out from the blackness two rifles spit forth their
ringing, sparkling tongues of flame, and Gordon,
leaping upwards without a cry, tumbles forward into
the shadow of the rocks below the camp.
Then the crash and blaze of many rifles follow, as
other figures, startled and hesitating in which direc-
tion to escape, are seen moving past the fire.
Mr. Giles, who is the nearest of Morth’s party,
covers one black form rapidly and pulls the trigger.
As he does so the cliff echoes with a wild, boyish
scream of mingled agony and terror.
There is something so piercing in that note of
anguish, something that seems so like some echo
from the past, that hardened as the squatter is by
a large previous experience of such scenes, he feels
a passing pang of remorse tapping at his heart-
strings.
Morth and the other men are scrambling back down
the hill ; some making for the horses, others for the
creek. For, as though bearing a charmed life, the
Myall, having hitherto escaped unhurt from the hail
of bullets aimed at him, is now bounding over the
plain with the speed of an antelope towards the
river’s angry tide.
Giles thus left alone—for he is not the kind of
man to hurry after the others—reloads, and then


turns to descend the cliff; but something makes him
alter his mind, and without knowing exactly why,
he clambers up to the ledge whereon his victim is
lying.
As the squatter’s head rises on a level with the
camp, he starts as if he had been bitten by a snake;
for the dull red glare of the tire shines upon pack-
bags, blankets, billies, and other objects, that tell him
at once that a terrible mistake has been made, and
that this is no wild blacks’ camp, but that of some
party of travellers.
Then fearful thoughts begin to paint a vivid pro-
phecy in his mind of what is to follow.
And forgetful of his age and the stiffness of his
limbs, he drags himself frantically upwards, till,
upon the granite platform, he sinks upon his knees
where two little forms lie almost side by side before
the glowing embers.
Then, as if mocking the horrified wretch’s agonizing
fears, the fire flares up before the rising morning
breeze, and upon the side of a leathern satchel sus-
pended from a bough hard by he reads the name of
Claude Angland.
A sickening odour, resembling roasting pork, is
beginning to make the air heavy around, and a little
pulseless black hand lies cooking on the ashes. But
Giles sees nothing with his staring eyeballs but one
small, pallid face, that even in the ruddy light of the
fire lies white as marble upon the dead body of a
ragged-coated dog.
No need for Giles to search for the marks by means
of which Billy and Claude had discovered the identity
of the long-lost child.


With fearful, awful clearness the distracted man
sees his dead wife’s features in those childish ones
now gasping at his feet.
A groan bursts from his lips,—the deep moan of a
soul too paralyzed with torture to feel further torment
for a time.
Raising the child into a sitting posture, Giles madly
tries, with shaking fingers, to wipe away the dreadful
froth that is oozing from poor Georgie’s mouth.
As he does so, his touch seems to rekindle, for a
moment, the waning spark of life within the boy’s
fragile frame. The pallid lips open to gasp out their
last words on earth, and Giles, bending to catch them,
hears Don murmur, —
“ Don’t ’it me. Ain’t doin’ ”
Then the expression of pain fades off the child’s
features, and a smile of peaceful restfulness comes to
take its place, as with a sigh the curly head falls
back on Giles’s arm, and the spirit takes its flight.
And at that moment Giles —as Giles—dies too. His
feeble brain, whirling round with a wild and ever
wilder rush of fearful changing scenes and thoughts,
suddenly breaks down.
A madman lifts the dead child from the ground,
and, leaping over stocks and stones with a fearful,
ape-like agility, vanishes into the darkness.
And none witness the false step in the dark or hear
the maniacal howl, as, from a cliff hard by, a form
resembling that of Murdaro’s owner, clasping some-
thing to its breast, spins downwards into the angry
waters of Agate Creek.


CHAPTER XXII.
LAST WORDS.
“ Hear a little further,
And I will bring thee to the present business
What’s now upon us; without the which this story
Were most impertinent.”
The Temped.
“ Sydney, N.S.W.,
“ March 10 th, 1890.
“ Mr. Richard Shaw, Te Renga-renga , Drury,
Neiv Zealand.
EAR DICK, —I have at
last a few hours to my-
self, during which I can
sit down quietly, here in
my room, which over-
looks the Botanical Gar-
dens and ‘ our beautiful
harbour,’ and write to
my relatives and friends.
“ I was very glad to
get your letter yester-
day, and learn that you are all well up to date. As
for myself, I am pretty well, thank % you. After


getting rid of the ophthalmic troubles which seized
upon my eyes whilst I was lying ill in the fly-
pestered north, I went to Brisbane, where, of course,
I got low fever. My trip to Melbourne, —Smel-
bourne the Bulletin calls it, and rightly,—which is
the dirtiest if the most go-ahead city in Australia,
however, set me up and fattened me, but also gave
me typhoid fever. It was only a slight touch, how-
ever, and the return voyage to Sydney has put me on
my legs again.
“ Since last I wrote I have pretty well arranged all
my affairs on this side of the water, and you may
expect to see me in New Zealand before very long.
I may as well run over the chief items of interest that
have eventuated since I last wrote, before setting forth
for your edification the outline of the scheme that I
shall probably adopt for carrying out my uncle’s
idea of ameliorating the condition of the Australian
aborigines.
“ In accordance with my uncle’s half-expressed wish,
in the letter of instructions which I discovered at his
grave, I have made my respected friend and adviser,
Mr. Winze, a quarter proprietor in the marvellous
‘ Golden Cliffs,’ and he has started for the north
to superintend the erection of the chlorination plant
at the Mount, where already a small village has
sprung up in the desert round the ‘ doctor’s ’ no
longer lonely resting-place.
“ Glory is still staying with her friends in Brisbane,
and I am starting by to-morrow’s boat to interview
her upon a very particular subject, the result of which
confabulation I will communicate to the ‘ Mater ’
next mail.


u I have gathered no information which tends to
throw any fresh light upon the terrible occurrence at
Agate Creek. I was so long laid on the shelf at the
shepherd’s hut at Borbong run that the perpetrators of
the crime—if a crime was committed—upon the night
of the storm had ample time to hide all traces of it.
At any rate, when I revisited the site of the camp
amongst the rocks, there was not the slightest indica-
tion of anything wrong having taken place there.
u Giles’s body, as yon know, was found, and so was
Morth’s. The latter, a police officer, was drowned
trying to swim his horse across the creek aftei a
fugitive black fellow. The former probably met with
his death in a similar manner. I cannot think that
Giles intended to attack ns, having, as I have ascer-
tained, received my letter previously; besides thei e
were too many witnesses about. I rather expect that
Giles and Morth’s party mistook onr camp for that of
some Myall natives. It is by no means the first time
such a mistake has occurred in the colony. And
cannot we see the finger of Fate in all this? The
sins of the father, Giles, visited upon the child,
my poor little friend Don. I miss the little fellow
tremendously.
« The people in the neighbourhood of Murdaro keep
very close about the affair, as all the powerful squatter s
round had a hand in the ‘rounding-up’ party that
destroyed Billy’s villager friends, and with little
doubt our camp as well. It would be a very risky
work to attempt an investigation. To tell the truth,
also, I have not pushed for an inquiry into the matter
for fear of something turning up that might prove an
extra source of pain to Glory, who has been fearfully


cut up, poor girl, as it is, with the double loss of her
father—of whom she was very fond—and her brother,
to whose return home she was looking forward with so
much pleasure.
“ Glory is supposed to be under the impression that
it was the flooded state of the creek that caused the
loss of the pere et fils ; but I am afraid the poor girl
has an inkling of the dreadful truth, or rather what
I take to be the truth.
“ Miss Lileth Mundella, to whom I had the pleasure
—to cut a long story short —of communicating the
fact, which I learnt from certain papers I found at
the grave, of her uncle Giles having unjustly kept
her out of a large share in Murdaro run, has apparently
already made good use of her new position as an
heiress, for she writes to say she is about to marry a
wealthy squatter near Bourke.
“ Inspector Puttis has therefore been jilted. Nor
is this the only misfortune that has befallen this
gentleman,—who, although personally unknown to
me, took a good deal of interest in your humble
servant, as you are aware, some time since, —for he
has, upon the ‘ recommendation ’ of the Commis-
sioner of Police, resigned his commission in the Black
Corps.
“ Mr. Missionary Feder, with whom I am in
business communication, informs me that Puttis’s late
fiancee has probably been the cause of this energetic
officer’s enforced withdrawal from public life.
“And now with regard to my uncle’s letter of
instructions and scheme.
“ It would seem from the papers which I discovered
in the tin box addressed to me at the grave, that


my uncle Dyesart was wliat is called a disappointed
man, and that the lady who jilted him afterwards
married Giles and became the mother of Glory. Mrs.
Giles died in giving birth to little Don, or rather
George.
“ I gather that the wild speculation or gambling
call it what you will —in mining concerns, that
ultimately caused uncle to begin life again in the
colonies, was the outcome of this disappointment.
And that this, combined with a hope to be able to
return my mother’s fortune, which had gone with
the rest, had more to do with my uncle’s ceaseless
wanderings, than any real belief in the wonderful
Golden Hill that he had been told of by the dying
miner. It was during these wanderings that my uncle
was shocked with the treatment of the aborigines
by the whites, and he has commissioned me, or rather
desired me, which amounts to the same thing, to use
a considerable part ot the wealth thus suddenly
placed in his hands for the amelioration of the con-
dition of the Australian blacks. Dyesart had intended
publishing a book upon this subject, and I quote the
following from his MSS. in order to show you a sample
of his thoughts. After recounting a number of cases
of cruelty that had come within his personal know-
ledge, he says :
“ < After habitual crime, especially after that which
involves cruelty, the human mind, so prison and other
authorities say, loses that correcting sense of right
and wrong which John Stuart Mill, and other experts
in Socialism, tell us is one of the foundation stones
of a stable social system. This sense is as valuable
perhaps more so—than those of seeing, hearing,


et cetera. Taking it for granted that it is by the senses
alone that we hold any communication with our
fellows, it follows that any individual must have his
mind impaired, as far as those particular senses of
which he has become bereft are concerned. And that
such an individual’s mind may not be further impaired
by the privation of such sense or senses, arises only
from his not endeavouring to reason about things
concerning -which that sense or those senses could
alone give him information. He compares only what
he perceives, and therefore continues to make com-
parisons which, however limited, are still correct.
For example, there are not uncommon cases of men
who, as regards colour, do not know green from red;
or again, where taste is concerned, a much commoner
case, cannot tell the difference between ’47 port and
a poisonous concoction of logwood, sugar, and other
ingredients. Such defects or impairments are com-
monly discovered and avowed by the persons affected,
and they rely on the judgment of others concerning
those things of which they have themselves no accu-
rate sense. A man could not assert, without fear of
being judged insane, that green was red; and, follow-
ing the same argument, can he say without undergoing
a similar risk that a cruel, cowardly, or murderous
action was either than what it is ? If, however, his
sense of right and wrong are missing, from hereditary
taint or the benumbing influence of criminal com-
panionship, he may possibly believe such actions to
be commendable; but whilst in the society of sane
persons, with minds of the usual capacity, he will
hardly express his own contorted opinion—say, that
taking pleasure in the slaughter of defenceless and


healthy men, women, and children is an honourable
action, and worthy of a brave and good citizen.’
“ It is not so much the ultimate destruction of the
aboriginal race, as it now exists, that my uncle seems
to have hoped might he prevented, nor did he appar-
ently deplore that such a thing should take place
eventually. He says that a native race, in order to
survive the changes wrought in its surroundings by
the incoming of a foreign and superior civilization,
must have within itself the power of being able to
change its customs and mode of life, and of rapidly
adapting itself to the new order of things. It must,
in fact, be like that singular animal, the armadillo,
of South America, which, having altered most of its
habits since its native wilds have become the home of
European settlers, has, so far from dying out, increased
in number of late years.
“ It would appear that my uncle doubted whether
the Australian aborigines possess this necessary
power to any extent, although he mentions cases
of blacks who have become useful colonists as farmers
in N.S. Wales and South Australia.
“ His two main arguments against the present
attitude of the Australian Governments, as regards
the native population, are, firstly, the great amount
of harm that this rampant demon of cruelty and
slavery is working upon the foundations of the grow-
ing national life of Australia; and, secondly, the fearful
waste of useful lives resulting from this inhuman
policy.
“He says that the intermarriage of a certain class
of European settlers with the native women would
be ‘ a consummation devoutly to be wished,’ and


that this should be encouraged in every possible
way. In the rougher parts of the colonies a European
woman is out of place as a settler’s wife. She
becomes more or less debased, and cannot, upon a
return to civilization, so readily resume the more
artificial style of life as can her husband.
“ Native women, on the other hand, make first-class
wives under such circumstances, and the resulting
half-caste progeny generally make useful members
of society in those cases where they have a fair
chance afforded them of doing so.
“He then goes on to point out, by means of
numerous examples, how offshoots from various
European nations have- derived renewed physical
vigour from crossing with the dark-skinned aboriginal
inhabitants of different parts of the world, and gives
instances of men who, belonging to families which
exhibited those infallible signs of a decaying race,
failing teeth and hair, have, by marrying with Aus-
tralian and New Zealand native women, become the
parents of children of splendid physique and good
mental powers. 1 Spain,’ he says, ‘ threw away the
chance that Providence once gave her of becoming
perhaps the mightiest nation upon earth, when she
destroyed, instead of intermarrying with, the natives
of South America, who had a superior civilization to
that of their conquerors.’
“ Now for the plan I propose to adopt: —
“ I shall endeavour, for a commencement, to work
through the machinery of Missionary and Aborigines’
Protection Societies already existing. In such cases
where I find officers of the Black Police drawing
salaries as ‘ Protectors of Aborigines,’ I shall en-


124
130
12
6
142
148
154
SLAVE MAP |
OF 1
*%j|V
C
INEW^
a P«? Ko; A
1EA
AUSTR ALfAj
Wn
fGULF OF
Q
|||& C
12
BRITISH MILES
0 1QO 200 300 400
°A RPEN TA Rl A
>J>C*<X>CK.\*vsA>vyVS
■ -y.
\ K&s&Cooktown
\ i
1
#
3 r
1
Tt
:RFfr6^H
tZv££&.
g||
ns
i8
-r jggilr
/'
•
•
/ %
w %
M
’ggk
mJk
aii ge s
mm
K&S88&
m I
18
R N
1 fXX ' r
j
% I
% [
• |
%
•
1
Q»
1
Wmmn
> > A (
1
5£
. sain
W 3£ p E i
DYT^
■
ockhamptoo
24
\ rT R A
\ \Wm? \
N
i
mrZ
m
\?
24
ym
\ \M>s \ . *
0 i°!
A
A
s o u f
Vl-s.-C)
-~f
30
Y
»
\ \ ijliL /y~^
\ Perth \} r /?
\ | 5 / (
A
£
>4
? t
USTR^
4 r i*
L / >4 /v\ /
r Adels
|l> UE f /C J
30
*
\ 2LS*ny 1
forms of Aboriginal Slavery
w<
/
36
\ Vorst forms l of Slavery 1
/
S\ /
36
ggsgglgggj Natives all destroyed in Black War
I Strait 1
112 118
124
130 136 TASMANIA
Iteag 148
154
SLAVE
MAP OF MODERN
AUSTRALIA.


deavour to draw the attention of the public to the
grim joke thus perpetrated, by means of newspaper
articles and pamphlets, to thus get other persons
appointed.
* “ From my uncle’s and my own observation, the
weak point in the present missionary system, as carried
out in Australia, is the fact that, after the raw material
—the native.children —have been converted, hy educa-
tion, into an article worthy of a place in the civilized
world, there is really no market for it.
“ As a rule, the girls begin life as servants, are led
astray, and finally become prostitutes, or the con-
cubines of settlers or squatters. The boys generally
are relegated to the black camp with their uneducated
brethren.
“ I therefore propose to endow each native girl with
land and capital, upon her passing a certain time and
standard in one of the farm schools I shall establish
in various parts of the country.
“ Any white man making one of these girls his wife
will obtain a quantity of land and small amount of
capital. I am pretty certain that the Governments
of the various colonies would assist in such a move-
ment by giving the land, as it would ensure its being
settled by a good class of settler. These at present
form the main body of wandering “ wallaby ” men,
who seldom marry,—chiefly from want of funds and
suitable partners, —for the white women who would
marry men of this sort make neither desirable wives
nor healthy mothers.
“ I will also endeavour to get reserves placed aside
for the natives, as is done in New Zealand, and there
farm schools will be opened. In these reserves adult


natives can find a safe refuge from the squatters, and
will be registered. If they assist upon the farm,
they will receive payment for same in kind. No
attempt will be made to force civilization or education
upon the adult natives, as this never has any prac-
tically good results. The children and young natives
will be brought up apart from the adults. Infanticide,
which is now the rule, not the exception, amongst
station blacks, will disappear as the natives are
granted protection, a means of earning food, and relief
from the burden of keeping their offspring. Boy
natives, after passing a certain standard at the farm
school, will be apprenticed to various tradesmen and
farmers, and will be granted land or capital, after
becoming proficients in their special line of business,
wherewith to start upon their own account. In-
spectors, accompanied by interpreters, will constantly
perambulate the country with the object of informing
the natives of the advantages offered by these schools
and reserves, and for the purpose of prosecuting
any one committing atrocities upon the aborigines.
Premiums will be offered for a series of articles and
papers upon the best means of protecting and utilising
the native race.
“ Having given you this rough outline of my plan,
I must bring my epistle to a close. Perhaps I could
not commence my campaign better than by writing
an account of my search for the grave. By Jove, I
will! I append a newspaper cutting, showing that
some one else is moving in the matter.
“ Yours regardfully,
“Claude Angland.”


(“ South Australian Register .)
“ THE BROTHERHOOD OF MEN.
“THE CONDEMNED PRISONER JACKET.
“ December IWi, 1889.
“ We publish to-day two letters called forth by the
Court proceedings in the case of Jackey, the aboriginal
who at the last criminal sittings in Adelaide was
found guilty of murder and sentenced to be hanged.
One of these, signed ‘ Gauntlet/ is directed to the
treatment said to be commonly meted out to the
blacks on distant stations, and more particularly in
Queensland. The writer, who informs us that he
speaks from personal observation and from information
gained from thoroughly trustworthy sources, in reality
only repeats an oft-told tale. The atrocities practised
upon the natives in various parts of Australia—
sometimes in retaliation for treacherous and barbarous
acts committed by them, but very often without any
such excuse —have been horrible, and even now it is
undeniable that there are some who think as little of
enslaving or even shooting a black as of killing a mangy
dog. This certainly cannot be said of all run-owners.
Even in the far interior there are men who have
gained the confidence and goodwill of the aboriginals
by treating them with kindness and giving them fair
'payment for what they do. There is too much reason
to believe, however, that the system of compulsory
service, or, as ‘ Gauntlet ’ describes it, of downright
‘ slavery/ accompanied by cruelty, does prevail. The
protection professedly afforded to the natives in remote
portions of the country is a protection only in name.


They are practically at the mercy of the settlers, who,
if they are so disposed, can ill-treat them with impunity.
What chance has a native of having his testimony
believed as against that of a white man ? He has to
grin and bear the kicks without receiving any large
amount of salve in the way of halfpence. It is quite
time Australia recognized better its duty towards the
blacks, and gave them the full benefit of the protection
of the laws to which they are made amenable. With
all respect to the tribunals of justice, it is impossible
to say that the trial of Jackey for murder was satis-
factory. We say this without reflecting for a moment
upon the judge or jury,—who conscientiously exhausted
every available means for getting at the facts, and who
could not on the evidence well have come to any other
conclusion than that which was arrived at,—but it is
impossible not to feel that the prosecution had im-
mense advantages over the accused. And this brings
us to the letter appearing elsewhere signed 1 Veritas.’
If the facts are as there stated, and it is as an eye-
witness that our correspondent —who will doubtless
be easily identified by those chiefly interested—writes,
Jackey, on his way down to Adelaide, was treated with
shameful brutality. Had the luckless creature been
already found guilty of the worst crimes in the calendar,
he could hardly have been dealt with with greater
severity, but in point of fact, according to the maxims
of British law, he was at the time an innocent man.
It was, of course, necessary to take all reasonable pre-
cautions for preventing his escape, but will any one say
that this object could not have been secured without
subjecting him to such inhuman treatment as ‘ Veritas ’
describes ? Had he been a white man the picture


drawn of him heavily manacled, forced to sit hour
after hour upon camel back in a most painful position,
under a broiling sun which heated the irons upon him
until they burned him, would arouse intense indigna-
tion throughout the length and breadth of the land.
And why should it be different when the victim of
such usage is a black fellow ?' The matter is one that
should be strictly inquired into, as well in the interests
of justice and of humanity as of the aboriginals, who
are necessarily so heavily handicapped in their dealings
with white men.”
FINIS.


0 •
*
•'
• *
.
%
s
• , -A.
% •
.
i
-
♦
••
.
.
»
‘
*
*
:
■ *
<
\ » ■'
• • • k
- ' .


NEW VOLUMES
HUTCHINSON’S POPULAR LIBRARY.
HELEN MATHERS.
Sam's Sweetheart. By Helen Mathers (Mrs.
Henry Reeves) Author of “ Cornin’ thro’ the Rye,” “Cherry Ripe,” eta
In ciown Bvo, cloth gilt, gilt top ; 2 s. 6 d. ;or in picture boards, 2 s.
[ln the press .
Fifth and Popular Edition.
JOSEPH HATTON.
Prohibited by the Russian Censor.
By Order of the Czar. The Tragic Story of Anna
Klosstock Queen of the Ghetto. By Joseph Hatton. In crown Bvo,
cloth gilt, gilt top, 2s. 6d. ; or in paper boards, 2s.
“ The story is cleverly told/’— Athenaum.
tr cleverest, compactest, and sensationally the most effective story Mr
Hatton has published ; a book which is sure to be read and enjoyed.”— Academv
Mr. Hatton exposes the cruelties of Muscovite rule in the most trenchant vet
entertaining fashion. It is not altogether surprising that the Russian officials
possibly fearing that the handsome volume might cause a revolution, should have
refused the book admission to the Emperor’s dominions. ’’ — Punch.
Mr. Jennings, M.P., says : —“The entire story has been worked out with the
greatest care. Shows not only practised literary skill, but great knowledge of the
world. may do for Russian despotism what ‘Uncle Tom’s Cabin’did for
SlaVer T [ln the press.
FLORENCE MARRY AT.
Miss Harrington’s Husband : A Novel by Flo-
rence Marryat. Crown Bvo, cloth gilt, gilt top, 2s. 6d.; or in picture
joar s, 2s. { ln the press .
Mount Eden i A Romance. By Florence
Marryat. In crown Bvo, cloth gilt, gilt top, 2s. 6d. ; or in paper boards, 2s.
IZA DUFFUS HARDY.
The Girl He did not Marry. A Novel. By
DHardy ? Author of “Hearts and Diamonds,” etc. Crown Bvo,
cloth gilt, gilt top, 2s. 6d. ; or in picture boards, 2s. [f n the press.


Love and Mirage; or, the Waiting on an Island.
An out-of-door romance, by M. Betham Edwards. In crown Bvo, cloth
gilt, gilt top, 2 s. 6 d. ;or in paper boards, 2s.
SIR JULIUS VOGEL, K.C.M.G.
fourth edition of
Anno' Domini 2000; or, Woman’s Destiny.
By Sir Julius Vogel, K.C.M.G. Crown Bvo, cloth gilt, gilt top, 2 s. 6J. ,
paper boards, 2 s.
.7 * t • „ lo ,j; n(r nrtirle savs •—“ Everybody wants to know some-
tVThe£?fevOT 2000 or S somethin g y about the destiny of woman, and most
thing about the year 2000, & about bot h. The volume is interesting
persons would be glad t o< lean ~g a dream> but a dream with a purpose.
It°S oneT e thos n e W fascinating' forecasts of the perfectibility of man which are apt
to beguile the leisure of the sluggard of intelligence.
J. MAITLAND STUART.
How “ No. I ” became “iJ ” in Norway.
By J. Maitland Stuart. In crown Bvo, cloth gilt, 5-r.
“ Th P book is no more or less than a book of holiday travel through Norway.
So" ‘SVyoSgldJ? aSSSveSSsV"ympathy wUh his sundry
Satires iSup to tl£ result. I. is a very readable book’-/**..
W. GERRARE.
A. Theosophical Romance.
jo, cloth gilt, 6s.
old The character of Mr. Caradoc Morgan is
th considerable power.”— Manchester Examiner.
e respect raised above the ordinary book. It is
ours • it is far removed from the conventional in
any reader who has a love for the sensational,
w rivals among the fiction of the season. Ihe
■d interest by every reader.” — Yorkshire Post.
worked out in a sufficiently startling manner.
1508 00011890 6 & CO., 25, Paternoster Square, E.C.
[End,


I FOR A THOUSAND HOUSEHOLD OSES, j
Makes Copper Makes Tin I frtakai Pamt j Makc-5 Mark's! : :<cs Brass
line Cold. like Silver, i look Ne-v. I i like Mirrors, 8
FOR POTS AND PANS. FOR KNIVES AND FORKS FOR KITCHEN TABLES.
FOR BATHS. REMOVES RUST FROM STEEL. AND IRON.
Sparkling Glassware. Shining Pots and Pm e. Clean Polished Stair Rocs.
Paint like New. Brassware lik? Minors. ••
Sold by IRONMONGERS, GROCERS, & CHEMISTS EVERYWHERE. I.
« -nmmnmn ■ iA-imwu..MiJ[iWPjj.L minimaiMjmwummma.m wii
i WATS' N & V|.\tr, L D LlTrt, E j (
L j
