

THE
BRITISH NAVY
AT WAR
BY
G. C. HENDERSON, M.A. (OXON.)
PROFESSOR OF HISTORY
UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE
ONE SHILLING
The Gross Proceeds from the sale of this book , less only the
booksellers' discount , will be handed over to the
Soldiers' Memorial Fund
ADELAIDE: G. HASSELL & SON




THE BRITISH NAVY AT WAR




THE BRITISH NAVY
AT WAR
BY
G. C. HENDERSON, M.A. (OXON.)
PROFESSOR OF HISTORY, UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE
ADELAIDE: G. HASSELL & SON
19 1 7




PREFACE
In this little volume the author publishes a course of lectures
on “The British Navy at War,” which he delivered last winter
in Adelaide and thirty-two country towns of South Australia.
The object of the lectures is to explain, as simply and clearly
as possible, what the British Navy is, the extent of the
services which it has rendered to the whole of the Empire at
this crisis, and why it has been able to do its work so
efficiently. The author makes no pretence to expert or even
profound knowledge of the Navy. The events of the past
two years of war at sea are reviewed in the light of common
sense with the help of some slight knowledge of the history
of British naval affairs from the time of Alfred the Great.
The subject is one of great interest, and worthy of a good
deal of attention from the people of Australia, who have just
begun their career on the sea of battle, and not without one
achievement of note. This island continent will never be
adequately defended without a strong naval force, and it
behoves all thoughtful citizens of the Commonwealth to try
and understand what are the right as distinct from the wrong
principles underlying the construction, maintenance, and use
of an up-to-date Navy. There is no teacher like experience,
and there never was a war with so much to teach about the
future needs of the Navy as this.
The gross proceeds from the sale of this book will be handed
over, as the proceeds of the lectures were, to the Red Cross
Fund, to be ear-marked for the Soldiers’ Memorial Fund.
The finest tradition in the history of this country has been


established by the men who fought and died for the Com-
monwealth and the Empire, in Egypt, Gallipoli, France, and
Flanders. It is fitting that the Professor of History should
do what little he can to help to perpetuate their memory.
The author wishes sincerely to thank Miss M. R. Walker
for reading through his manuscript and the printer’s proofs;
Mr. C. R. Hodge, Registrar of the University, for arranging
his lecturing tours; and all the kind folk at the local
centres who worked assiduously to make the lectures a
success educationally and financially.
University of Adelaide,
December 1, 1916.


CONTENTS
Chapter I. THE SPIRIT OF THE NAVY.
The calculated daring of the British school of naval war-
fare; illustrations: Drake at Cadiz, and Nelson at Copenhagen;
Admiral Beatty at Jutland, and Admiral Cradock off the
coast of Chili; significance of Mr. Balfour’s tribute to
Admiral Cradock. The spirited policy of offensive defence;
its history; its application immediately after the declaration
of war with Germany; effect on the welfare of the Empire
as a whole. Influence of the supreme command on the spirit
of the Navy; the strain of ceaseless vigils in the North Sea;
test of the commander’s quality in Nelson’s day and our own;
supreme test in the heat of action; one glimpse of Admiral
Jellicoe in the battle of Jutland.
THE MATERIAL OF THE NAVY.
Chapter 11. Battleship and Cruiser.
The most important ships of the Fleet are the battleships,
on which the command of the sea mainly depends; their
pre-eminence in naval history; Nelsons ships-of-the-line.
Different classes of battleships; the problem of the pre-dread-
nought era; its solution by Colonel Cuniberti and the advent
of the dreadnought; table showing the comparative strength,
speed, and gun power of various classes of battleships, repre-
sented by the King Edward VII, Dreadnought, Iron Duke,
and Queen Elizabeth; relative strength of Great Britain and


Germany in battleships in June, 1915. Importance of big
guns; their range, smashing power, and accuracy. Cruisers
carry less armour than the battleships, and vary in size and
speed according to the purpose for which they are built;
chief reason for the conspicuous part they have played in
actual engagements since the war began; different classes of
cruisers: the light cruiser, Arethusa; the battle-cruiser, Lion;
other cruisers.
Chapter 111. Torpedo Craft.
The development of the torpedo as an offensive weapon
since 1868; construction of torpedo boats and destroyers; the
Thorneycroft and the Swift; dangerous work undertaken by
these craft. The submarine essentially a torpedo boat; its
chief advantage: the power of concealed approach; history of
the submarine from 1620; description of the E class. The
submarine a vulnerable craft; its leading defects as an instru-
ment of war; British methods of dealing with the submarines
of the enemy; steel nets and gunfire; the arming of merchant-
men in self-defence. Will the submarine survive as an
important arm of a legitimate naval service? The difficulties
and dangers encountered by the crews of all torpedo boats.
Chapter IV. The Auxiliary Fleet.
Auxiliary cruisers, and ships commandeered by the Navy to
convoy troops and supplies; employment of 100,000 trawlers
for clearing the seas of mines and netting submarines;
splendid and heroic service rendered by the fishermen;
mystery ships and their work. Monitors for coastal and river
work, and in waters infested with submarines.
THE SURFACE CRAFT IN ACTION.
Chapter V. The War on Trade.
Statistics showing the strength of the German and British
mercantile marine at the beginning of the war; comparison


of the losses on both sides up to the end of November;
evacuation of the open seas by German ships of commerce.
Disturbing effect on British trade of the eight or nine German
cruisers in the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian oceans; difficulties
experienced in rounding them up.
Chapter VI. The Battles of the Cruisers.
Importance of these early battles as an indication of the
strength of the rival Fleets in material and personnel; the
allowances that must be made for “the uncertainties of the
sea.” The forces engaged in the battles of Coronel, and
Falkland Islands; the entire reversal of fortune; explanation
so far as the material of the Navy is concerned: the
importance of big guns, and, still more, of a combination of
big guns and superior speed; confirmation from other
engagements, and from the history of naval warfare.
Vindication of Lord Fisher’s policy of scrapping boats too
weak to fight, and too slow to run away; “the little more and
how much it is”; the disastrous effects of parsimony on the
construction and maintenance of the material of naval
warfare.
Chapter VII. The Personnel of the Navy.
Even more important in these battles is the test of the
personnel of the Fleet in marksmanship, daring, and endur-
ance, especially under fire. Comparison of German and
British gunnery. Mr. Churchill’s cautious conclusion after
the battle of Dogger Bank: “Our shooting is at least as good
as theirs”; confirmation by reference to other battles. Display
of bravery by the seamen and officers of both Fleets. Splendid
heroism of British seamen throughout the war: the battle of
Coronel, and the last fight of the Pegasus off Zanzibar. The
most rigorous traditions of the Navy everywhere maintained.
Superiority of British over German seamen in the capacity to
endure under protracted and heavy fire; evidence from the
battles of Heligoland Bight and Jutland. The spirit of the
Navy as good as ever it was.


THE UNDER-WATER MENACE.
Chapter VIII. Mines.
A war of attrition provided for in Germany before the
outbreak, in case of the proved inferiority of the surface
craft; mine and submarine the chief instruments to be used.
History of mines in naval warfare; rules to govern their use
drawn up and agreed upon at the Hague Conference in 1907.
Violation of these rules by Germany in the North Sea and
the Atlantic ocean; Great Britain’s retaliatory action limited
by observance of conventions. Difficulty of keeping the routes
clear greatly increased by the use of German submarines for
sowing mines; the hardy fishermen and their dangerous work.
Chapter IX. The Submarine.
Controversy in England in the early part of 1914 concerning
the value of the submarine; the test of war; list of British
warships sunk by German submarines in the Narrow Seas and
the Aegean; influence of submarines on naval strategy in the
Mediterranean and the North Sea. Failure of Germany’s
efforts to reduce the strength of the British Fleet. Application
of the submarine by Germany to the destruction of ships of
commerce, neutral as well as belligerent; statistics showing
the losses sustained by the British mercantile marine up to
the end of 1915 from this source; Mr. Balfour’s reply to
Count Reventlow’s statements concerning the effects of
German submarine warfare on the economic life of England.
Chapter X. Frightfulness at Sea.
The real reason for the application of the policy of fright-
fulness on land and sea; Germany’s lame attempts to justify
it; refutation by reference to instructions issued to German
officers before the war, and also to the humane conduct of
German captains in distant seas before the humiliation of the
High Seas Fleet. Proclamation of a submarine blockade of
Great Britain in February, 1915; the sinking of the Lusitania;
protests transmitted by President Wilson; his alternation


between two conceptions of his duty; his ultimatum after the
sinking of the Sussex. Explicit statement of the objection to
submarine warfare against ships of commerce. The influence
of Prussian brutality throughout Germany; nevertheless a
split in the German camp on the subject of submarine fright-
fulness. Reasons for believing that frightfulness has done
far more harm than good to Germany, and that she is likely
to lose caste among civilized nations because of her insolence
and savagery.
Chapter XI. The Command of the Sea.
Supreme importance of maintaining command of the sea.
Failure of the German submarine to prevent the British Navy
from discharging any of its important functions: the transport
of troops and supplies; protection of the outlying Dominions;
security against invasion while the full military strength of
the United Kingdom was being realized; the blockade of the
enemy’s Fleet, and the paralysis of her foreign trade. The
submarine unfit for using the command of the sea, even if
she could get it; statement by Mr. J. Daniels, Secretary to the
United States Navy. Only one way for Germany to wrest
command of the sea from Britain. Results of the battle of
Jutland; German bulletins; reports by Admirals Jellicoe and
Beatty; German Fleet saved by mists and darkness from
irretrievable disaster; British Fleet left in undisputed com-
mand of the sea.
Chapter XII. The Outlook.
Review of the relative strength of the British and German
Fleets justifies confidence in contemplating the future of the
war at sea; so does a comparison of the condition of our time
with that of Europe in the struggle against Napoleon.
England’s struggle from 1797 to 1805; its result. The indirect
influence of the Navy on the course of the war on land.
Captain Mahan on the effect of the daily pressure of naval
force.




THE SPIRIT OF THE NAVY




CHAPTER I
THE SPIRIT OF THE NAVY
The most important naval battle since Trafalgar was
fought near Horn’s Reef, off the coast of Jutland, on
May 31, 1916. In his report, Admiral Jellicoe stated
that “the conduct of the officers and men was beyond
all praise. They were cool and determined, with a
cheerfulness which would have carried them through
anything. The heroism of the wounded was the
admiration of all. I cannot adequately express the
pride with which the spirit of the Fleet filled me.”
Coming from a man who is scrupulously careful about
the accuracy of his statements, these assurances are of
great value. The material of the Navy is vastly im-
portant, and more so in this war than in any that has
preceded it; but it is even more vital to success that
the personnel should be dominated by the right spirit.
The spirit of the Navy was never finer than it is
to-day. There has not been a single engagement at
sea since this war began in which the seamen and
officers have failed to uphold the most rigorous and
glorious traditions of the service. Those traditions


reach back into the past as far as the reign of King
Alfred; but the man who first set a seal upon them
was Sir Francis Drake. Before his time no great
traditions had been definitely fixed, and the true prin-
ciples of naval warfare were but vaguely known. With
his unrivalled experience, matchless fortitude, and
natural ability, he saw more clearly than any other man
of his time what were the right as distinct from the
wrong principles of naval warfare; and on his eleva-
tion to the position of Admiral he applied them with
conspicuous success against the Spaniards, who were
at that time the enemies of his country. Drake is the
true founder of the British school of naval warfare.
The spirit which he infused into the service was the
same as that which animated Blake in the seventeenth
century, but the finest incarnation of it is Nelson.
Nothing is more characteristic of this school than
the spirit of calculated daring by which its com-
manders have been, and still are, animated. In 1586
Drake forced his way into Cadiz Harbour and did not
retire till he had sunk a hundred ships. The operation
involved great risks, and Burrows, his second in com-
mand, took the opportunity of going below to write
a protest against the policy of his commander. Drake
put him in irons, and urged capital punishment on his
return to England. Even more daring was the conduct
of Nelson at Copenhagen, where he was second in
command under Admiral Parker. The approach to
the Danish fortifications round Middle Ground was
so dangerous that no pilot could be induced to under


take the responsibility of leading the attack, and the
master of the fleet was obliged to do it himself. Three
out of Nelson’s twelve ships went aground, but, even
then, he would not be deterred. At a critical stage of
the battle, Parker hoisted the signal to cease firing.
Nelson’s attention was drawn to it, but he put the
telescope to his blind eye, and went on with the attack.
Nelson was no hot-blooded, head-strong combatant.
His daring was based upon careful calculation, and a
knowledge of the magnitude of the issues involved,
and, in the event, he was justified by the authorities
in London.
The same spirit of calculated daring has been dis-
played in this war. Sometimes it has succeeded. At
other times it has involved disaster. But even in the
latter event it has evoked high commendation from the
supreme command.
When Admiral Beatty deliberately interposed his
battle-cruisers between the German High Seas Fleet
and their base at Horn’s Reef, he placed himself in a
most perilous position. His object was to lure
the German Fleet away in the direction of Admiral
Jellicoe’s force, and, after a display of rare skill in
manoeuvring, he succeeded. His losses in the early
part of the engagement were heavy, and many voices
were raised in denunciation of his so-called lack of
prudence. Very different was the language of his
superior officer, Admiral Jellicoe, who, in the early
part of his report, praised him and Admiral Thomas
for the manner in which they had fought an action


under disadvantageous circumstances, “in keeping with
the best traditions of the Navy.” In the last para-
graph of the same report he says: “Admiral Beatty
showed fine qualities, gallant leadership, firm deter-
mination, and correct strategic insight. He appreciated
the situation immediately.”
Admiral Beatty had his measure of success in the
results achieved, but the issue of Admiral Cradock’s
action off the coast of Chili was disastrous. His
ships were older than those of the enemy; the only
guns which he could use were outranged. The battle
began at 6.18. He had no chance after the first
quarter of an hour, and by 9.20 the Good Hope and
the Monmouth had gone down with all their officers
and men, and not a soul was saved. The Canopus,
with her big guns, was somewhere in the neighbour-
hood, but the Admiral decided to engage without even
calling for her assistance. Evidently he was determined
to give the enemy no chance to slip away after the long
chase. The result was tragic; but he was not con-
demned. On the contrary, a noble tribute was paid
to his memory by the highest official in the
service, Mr. Balfour, the First Lord of the
Admiralty. On June 16, 1916, a monument was un-
veiled in his honour, and in the course of his speech
Mr. Balfour said: “Sir Christopher Cradock’s deed
was not one of uncalculating daring, but was inspired
by higher wisdom than calculation, and higher courage
than daring. He attacked because he knew the German
Fleet in the Pacific was far from any dockyards, where


it could refit, and there were no friendly bases open if
it suffered damage, so that its power for evil would
be utterly destroyed. Admiral Cradock was unable to
foresee the subsequent battle off the Falkland Islands,
by which Admiral Sturdee annihilated the Germans.
He only knew that the German squadron was a great
peril in the Pacific while it remained efficient. Admiral
Cradock judged that his squadron would be well sacri-
ficed if he destroyed the power of the hostile fleet. If
I am right in estimating Admiral Cradock’s motives,”
continued Mr. Balfour, “there was never a nobler act,
unsuccessful though it was, than the Coronel fight, and
Cradock and his comrades have won an immortal place
in the roll of naval heroes who have built up the
Empire.”
Admiral Cradock will go down to history as a true
representative of the British school of naval warfare,
and that is his glory as well as his justification.
From the sixteenth century two very distinct
schools are discernible, and, in his History of the
Great Rebellion, Clarendon draws a clear distinction
between them. The object of the one, he says, was “to
keep their ships and men out of danger, as if the
principal art requisite in the captain of a ship had been
to be sure to come home safe again.” It is in contrast
to such a policy that he writes in praise of Admiral
Blake, who was “the first that infused that proportion
of courage into the seamen by making them see by
experience what mighty things they could do if they
were resolved; and taught them to fight in fire as well


as water.” Clarendon is wrong in stating that Blake
was the first to do this. The honour of founding the
heroic school belongs to Drake, who lived and fought
a century before. But he is right in proclaiming the
superiority of the “heroic” over the “prudent” school
of naval warfare.
Not that any great naval commander neglects the
claims of prudence. They who regard Drake, Blake,
and Nelson as hot-blooded, head-strong combatants
are very much mistaken. None knew the value of
discipline better than they; but all of them had learnt
by experience that, in the conduct of great affairs,
there is higher wisdom than calculation. Never since
the time of Byng has any British admiral retired
before a slightly superior force of the enemy; and it
would be an evil day for the Empire if ever Byng’s
policy should prevail again. Occasional disasters will
and must occur when great risks are undertaken; but
they are slight compared with the effects of the
degenerate condition into which the Navy would inevit-
ably sink, if the naval commanders were to be restrained
by “some craven scruple of thinking too precisely on
the event.” In the conduct of great affairs such men
as Hamlet always will fail, splendid though they be
in other respects; and of all places in the world, the
one least suited to their capacities is a sea of battles.
The men of the school represented by Burrows and
Byng have brought no credit to the British Navy; the
men of the heroic school have made it illustrious, and
only through such men can its prestige be maintained.


From the moment war was declared, the strategy-
employed by Admiral Jellicoe was the same as that
for which Drake contended, even to the point of
defiance. It is a strategy which proclaims the spirit
of the service, and is known as offensive defence.
Instead of clinging to the shores of Great Britain and
waiting for attack, the Grand Fleet put out to sea at
once, and prepared for battle as near the enemy’s
coast as circumstances would permit. No British
admiral would stop to argue the wisdom of such
strategy now. It is enough for him that it is one of
the most important of the principles which govern the
British school of naval warfare, and that its value has
been proved by centuries of experience.
From the reign of Alfred the Great to that of Wil-
liam the Conqueror, no attempt was made to anticipate
the invasion of enemy forces by sending a fleet to
attack them in their own harbours. They were allowed
to come, and though some battles were fought along
the coasts of Britain, the main idea of the early kings
was to destroy their enemies on land. Whether this
was due to ignorance or want of funds is uncertain;
but it was an entirely erroneous policy. Instead of
protecting the sea surrounding Great Britain, they
relied far too much upon the sea itself as a natural
defence. It is reported that when Lord Kitchener went
to Egypt he asked the commander whether he was
protecting the Canal, or the Canal protecting him; and
that, later on, the defences were pushed far out into


the desert beyond. The same idea underlies the naval
policy of offensive defence. Since Admiral Jellicoe
took up his position with the Grand Fleet, the frontiers
of Britain have been pushed far out into the waters
of the North Sea, and Britain’s first line of defence
is as near the shores of the enemy as the modern use
of mines and submarines will permit.
The first indications of this strategy appear in the
reign of Edward 111, but it was Drake who made it
a settled principle of policy. So important did he
consider it that, in 1586, he became almost mutinous
because the authorities in London would not allow him
to go and attack the Spaniards in their own ports.
In 1587 his policy did prevail, and he inflicted such
injury upon the Spaniards that the sailing of the
Armada had to be postponed. Had he not been
detained by contrary winds and forced to return in
1588 to revictual, he would have caught Midonia
Sidonia in Corunna harbour, and in all probability the
Armada would never have reached the English Channel
at all.
Since his day the value of offensive defence has
never been seriously questioned, and the Navy has
generally been maintained at sufficient strength to put
it into effect. In the seventeenth century Blake attacked
the enemy in the Mediterranean and the harbour of
Teneriffe, and, later on, the appearance of the Dutch
in the Thames was regarded as a national disgrace.
In the eighteenth century, and until the close of the
Napoleonic wars, the fleets of the enemy were either


blockaded or attacked in their own harbours at
Toulon, Texel, and Copenhagen.
The grand object of all naval warfare is the com-
mand of the sea, and this is one very effective way of
securing it. At the beginning of the war there were
eight or nine German cruisers at large, in addition to
auxiliaries, and, until they were destroyed, the high-
ways of the world were rendered unsafe for British
commerce. Since that time the German Fleet has been
bottled up. One determined attempt was made to
break through, but it failed, and the German ships
were driven back, battered and crippled, from the
coast of Jutland.
Whether the people of the Dominions have any idea
of the magnitude of the service being rendered to them
by the Navy in this way may be doubted. It would
appear from some of the objections raised to
conscription in the late referendum campaign
that many in the Commonwealth of Australia
have not. They did not object to conscription
for service at home; but they refused to send
men abroad to fight the enemy as near to his own
frontiers as possible. If that policy had been adopted
by the Admiralty, if the Grand Fleet had clung to the
coasts of Britain instead of forcing war on the confines
of the enemy, what would have been the result? Ger-
man cruisers in large numbers would have slipped out
into the open sea, and the trade of the Empire would
have been paralyzed and thrown into utter confusion.
Nor would that have been by any means the worst


effect. Long ere this the horrors of invasion would
have been brought home to the people of the Common-
wealth. There is hardly a capital city that could not
be shelled by German 12-inch guns, and the destruction
of life and property would have been terrible. From
these horrors we have been saved by the application,
from the first day of the war, of the policy of offensive
defence. By the same policy Germany has so far
kept war out of her own territory, and she will fight
with all her power to keep it in other lands as long
as possible. She did not scruple to ride rough-shod
over the laws of civilized nations to carry it into Bel-
gium. The hands of the British Fleet are clean. It
has applied its policy of offensive defence in accordance
with tradition and national honour, and the outlying
Dominions have been protected more securely by it
than even the people of Great Britain. There have
been no raids on the coasts of the Dominions, as there
have been occasionally on the east coast of England.
Some there are who think that even these raids
should be rendered impossible by a Fleet with such a
preponderance of strength as that of Great Britain.
But they are mistaken. There never has been a time
when some raiding could not be done by the enemy,
no matter how securely the command of the sea was
held. In the reign of Edward 111, when his ships
were off the coasts of France, some of the biggest
towns in the south of England were sacked and burned
by enemy raiders, and yet the king declined to detach
any of his ships to prevent them. In the naval ser


vice, as in every other, there are great objects and
small, and it would be a fatal mistake to imperil the
command of the sea by withdrawing squadrons for
coastal defence. If the Germans are prepared to take
the risks, there will be occasional raids till the end of
the war. But they will not always get away with
losses as light as those of the Dogger Bank.
By its strategy the Grand Fleet has so far preserved
the unity of the Empire and retained the command of
the sea. It has made invasion either of Great Britain
or the Dominions impossible, and it has been the means
of bringing all the available forces of the Empire to
bear upon the points of danger. It has done this not
by clinging to the coasts of England and waiting for
attack; but by preventing any portion of the enemy’s
fleet from passing out of its own waters. It is a
policy dictated by consideration of wide imperial
responsibilities, and not degraded by pettifogging
prejudices about national exclusiveness.
No estimation of the spirit of the Navy can be satis-
factory without some reference to the supreme com-
mand. Every captain exerts an influence for good or
ill on the men and officers under his authority. Every
admiral has his chance of leaving the impress of his
mind on the squadron of his command. But the spirit
of the supreme commander permeates the whole Fleet.
If he has the ability to inspire confidence, and a per-
sonality that wins upon the affections, his officers and
men will follow him through fire and water without


a murmur. Great are his responsibility and power
from the moment war is declared, but in the hour of
battle they are stupendous. A mistake in tactics or
manoeuvring, and the loss of life and treasure may be
terrible. Failure to rise to the greatness of an occasion,
and the very existence of the Empire may be imperil-
led. The personnel of the Navy is supremely impor-
tant, the material more important in this than in any
previous war; but the effective use of both on “the
day” will depend upon the character and ability of the
supreme command.
For two and a half years now, Admiral Jellicoe has
been on his trial. Little has been heard of the Grand
Fleet since it disappeared into the mists of the North
Sea on August 4, 1914. Only a word now and then
from men who have been permitted to visit him, and
only one glimpse of him in battle on May 31, 1916.
All that we have been told directly is reassuring; not
less some important facts revealed by time and
experience. The student who knows what Nelson
passed through in his blockades of Toulon realizes a
good deal of the strain that has been upon Admiral
Jellicoe in the last two years and a half. The
doubts and uncertainties that racked Nelson’s mind in
his pursuit of the French fleets, through the Mediter-
ranean or across the Atlantic, must have pressed thick
and fast upon the mind of Jellicoe many a time as he
swept the North Sea in the hope of finding the German
High Seas Fleet. The rigours of the Mediterranean
do not surpass the severity of the storms in the


Narrow Seas, and the fogs that embarrass navigation
are as rare in the south as they are common in the
north. No death-dealing mines and submarines lurked
beneath the waters that Nelson sailed. Yet Nelson,
heroic' spirit that he was, felt the awful strain of
watching, watching, and found untold relief in the
heat and stress of battle. Jellicoe must have suffered
as Nelson suffered; but no word of complaint has
reached the outside world. Only a wish that we might
go on as we have been going. That is one proof of his
quality.
Another is the conduct of the officers and seamen
under his control. In the year 1797, when Britain was
at war against Napoleon, there were two serious
mutinies in the Fleet —the one in the Channel, the other
at the Nore. The seamen had grievances then which
do not exist to-day. The food is good, and their
liberty larger. But during the past two years their
hardships have been innumerable, and the strain upon
them has never been relaxed. There have been strikes
on land, where the conditions of life are infinitely more
agreeable; but no breath of a mutinous spirit in the
Fleet has yet disturbed the serenity of public opinion.
On the contrary, the world is informed that the men
are cheerful, and sustained by confidence in and affec-
tion for their commander. This is a remarkably fine
record up to the end of 1916, and, please God, that,
for the good of the Empire and the welfare of civiliza-
tion. it may continue. But it will not continue as a
matter of course. Its maintenance depends in no small


measure upon the personality of the commander. The
history of the Fleet in 1797 proves it. That was the
year of the mutinies at the Nore and in the Channel.
But even when the rebellious spirit was at its height
there was no mutiny on Nelson’s ship. In 1797 he
left England for the Mediterranean in command of
the Theseus. One night a paper was dropped on the
quarter-deck by one of the seamen, stating that there
would be no mutiny on the Theseus, and that she
would yet be as famous as the Captain. The discipline
on Nelson’s ship was strict; but he was sympathetic
as well as just, and the seamen knew it. They knew,
too, that he understood his job. They believed in him,
and felt a pride in his management. It may well be
that the loyalty of the seamen in this war, through so
long and trying a period, is to be accounted for in the
same way. There is, at least, a strong presumption in
favour of it.
But more is expected of a great naval commander
than the maintenance of discipline throughout the
Fleet. The supreme test comes in the hour of battle,
when circumstances are changing rapidly, and he is
called upon to decide in a flash what is the right thing
to do. Thousands of men succeed in ordinary adminis-
tration, where only one can rise to the height of a great
occasion, and mould circumstances as they arise. No
military or naval commander has any real title to
greatness unless he has this power. “Purpose wedded
to plans may easily suffer shipwreck,” says George
Meredith in Evan Harrington, “but an unfettered


purpose that moulds circumstances as they arise mas-
ters us and is terrible.” This was the quality that
Nelson displayed in every action that he fought. In
the very tempest and whirlwind of battle, when events
were moving with ever-increasing rapidity, he could
see at a flash what was the right thing to do, and he
had the courage and the strength to do it.
In 1797 he was serving under Admiral Jervis
when, with only fifteen sail, the British fell in
with twenty-seven of the enemy. In the ensuing
battle, without any signal from his commander,
he left the line and attacked the leading ships in
one of the enemy’s divisions. Later on, and still with-
out any signal from Admiral Jervis, he sailed across
the V-shaped lines of battle. It was well for Nelson
that his commander was capable of detecting the value
of his movements, and giving orders to the rest of the
Fleet to follow his daring lead. Captain Calder after-
wards complained that “it was an unauthorized depar-
ture from the line of battle.” “It certainly was,”
replied Jervis, “and if ever you commit such a breach
of your orders I will forgive you, too.”
Nelson had his share of good fortune, but here is
the touch, the “Nelson touch,” that was the outward
visible sign of the man’s genius. Admiral Beatty dis-
played something of that quality when, after being led
in the direction of the enemy at Horn’s Reef, he sud-
denly changed his plans and lured the enemy in the
direction of the Grand Fleet. But what of Admiral
Jellicoe? The strategy of the battle of Jutland has not


been published in full by the Admiralty for obvious
reasons. But one of his achievements, involving swift
initiative in the turmoil of battle, was not suppressed.
On his arrival, two hours after the fighting had begun,
he manoeuvred his mighty Fleet so successfully that
ship after ship swung into line and place, and though
the mists hung heavily over the fight, not a single
mistake was made by attacking his own instead of the
enemy’s ships. The battle proceeded, and the German
Fleet was severely punished. This is the only glimpse
we have had of Jellicoe in the heat of battle, but it
reveals something important. It looks as if he, too,
were a man of unfettered purpose, who has the power
to mould circumstances as they arise. It was the
prevailing mists, followed by darkness, which robbed
him of his chance of inflicting a terrible and final defeat
on the German High Seas Fleet.


THE MATERIAL OF THE NAVY




CHAPTER II
BATTLESHIP AND CRUISER
The British Navy consists of a great variety of ships,
of which the most important are battleships. On the
outbreak of war between Great Britain and Germany
the main part of the Grand Fleet disappeared. It
took up its position somewhere in the North Sea, and
very little was heard about it until the battle of Horn’s
Reef on May 31, 1916. But through all these months
it was doing all that a great Navy is expected to do in
war, and doing it as effectively as any Fleet in the
history of Britain has done its work hitherto. And the
effect of that work was felt on the most distant seas;
for the German High Seas Fleet was kept under con-
trol, and no German ships could get out to help the
lonely squadrons in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans;
nor could any help be sent to the defenders of the
German Colonies beyond the seas. The results of this
soon became apparent. The German mercantile
marine was swept from the highways of commerce in
four months. From the moment that war was declared


the Grand Fleet held command of the sea, and the
challenges issued to the German High Seas hleet neai
Heligoland to come out and fight were ignored: the
risks were too great. If the German High Seas Fleet
could have broken through the Grand Fleet of Great
Britain at the beginning of the war, and seemed com-
mand of the sea, the British Empire would have been
dismembered long ago. But it could not, and, so far
as the material of the Navy is concerned, the chief
reason is that, on the outbreak of the war, Great
Britain had a large preponderance of battleships over
Germany’s. It is for this reason that they demand
more than ordinary attention from the student of
naval warfare.
The most important of them are those popularly
called dreadnoughts, and the name is so well known
that there are obvious advantages in retaining it; but
in a general classification it is better to refer to the
most powerful fighting ships of the Navy as battleships
or capital ships. In the days of Nelson the ships that
bore the brunt of the fighting were called ships-of-the-
line, that is, ships that were powerful enough to take
their place in the line of battle in any first-class
engagement. They were the ships on which Nelson
relied to keep command of the sea, and the work they
did in his day falls to the lot of the capital ships 01
battleships of the Grand Fleet to-day. There may be
very little difference between a battle-cruiser and a
fast battleship, and there is no reason why a battle-
cruiser may not also be called a dreadnought.


That is because the battle-cruiser is on the border line
between the battleship and the cruiser; and her com-
bination of weighty armour, high speed, and powerful
guns, gives her a place in the rank of dreadnoughts.
But within this class of capital ships there has, in
recent years, appeared another distinction of great
importance between the dreadnought and the pre-
dreadnought. The distinction began in the early part
of the twentieth century, and it involved a change in
the construction and equipment of big warships that
amounted almost to a revolution.
During the past 400 years the evolution of naval
warfare has been dominated by a contest between the
strength of the ship and the power of the gun. In
the eighteenth century the size of the ship-of-the-line
increased, and in the nineteenth armour came into use.
But so did explosive shells and bigger guns. The
result was that weight increased to such an extent that
a high rate of speed could not be maintained in a
heavily-armoured ship carrying the biggest guns.
In 1871 a committee of naval experts decided that
in future there must be a wider distinction between the
boats built for speed, and those built to carry the
armour and armament strong enough to enable them
to bear the rudest shock of battle in any first-class
engagement. The result was the battleship of the pre-
dreadnought era—slow but powerful. This separation
of high speed from strength and power was a serious
disability. But it was regarded as inevitable, until
Colonel Cuniberti, constructor to the Italian Navy,


published his famous article on Fighting Ships in
1903. Cuniberti argued that it was possible to recover
superior speed in a fighting ship of 12-inch armour
carrying twelve of the most powerful guns, provided
she had a displacement of not less than 17,000 tons.
This was the true conception of the modern dread-
nought. The Japanese were the first to realize its
value. The first keel was laid down by the Americans,
but the British were not far behind, and, having the
best shipbuilding yards in the world, they were able
to launch the first boats of this class. In 1900-6
twelve were built. They carried the heaviest guns,
were driven at a speed of 21 miles an hour by turbine
engines, and cost one and three-quarter millions each.
It is only necessary to compare the figures indicating
the displacement, armour, speed, and guns of the ships
in the pre-dreadnought and dreadnought eras to
realize that the combination of speed and gun-power
has been recovered by ships that are strong enough to
bear the heaviest shock of battle.
Of the pre-dreadnought battleships, the King
Edward VII, completed as late as 1905, may be taken
as a fair illustration, while the Dreadnought com-
pleted in 1906 may stand for the ordinary dread-
noughts. Admiral Jellicoe’s flagship, the Iron Duke,
is a super-dreadnought, and the Queen Elizabeth an
extra-super-dreadnought.


Name.
Displace-
ment.
Speed.
Guns.
Armour.
Com-
pleted.
King Edward VII
Dreadnought
Iron Duke
Queen Elizabeth
16,350
17,900
25,000
27,500
19 knots
21 „
22 „
25 „
12 inch
12
13'5 ,.
15
up to 12 in.
„ 11 „
„ 12 „
„ 13 „
1905
1906
1912
1913
Great
Britain.
Germany.
Dreadnought battleships 30
17
Dreadnought battle cruisers 10
5 or 6
Pre-dreadnought battleships.. 33
23
73
45 or 46
Of these capital ships, the dreadnoughts are more
effective than the pre-dreadnoughts, and of them
Great Britain had 40 against Germany’s 23 about the
middle of 1915. The following table shows the
strength of each belligerent at that time:
Here, as far as the material of the Navy is con-
cerned, is the reason why the German Fleet has been
bottled up in harbours and restricted waters since
August 4, 1914. But Great Britain’s superiority in
strength is not merely to be measured by numbers.
Our fastest ships can outstrip the fastest of the Ger-
man High Seas Fleet; the Lion and the Tiger are
faster than the Derfflinger and the Seydlitz; and the
biggest and most powerful of our guns are bigger and
more powerful than those of the enemy.
This is a matter of great importance. At
the beginning of the war the Germans had no


naval gun bigger than 12-inch; the British had
13.5-inch guns, and the Queen Elizabeth class,
of which there were five or six, carried 15-inch
guns. The Germans trusted rather to the massed
firing of many guns; the British to the greater power
of a limited number of big guns. The superiority of
the one or the other depends to some extent upon
atmospheric conditions; but the course of the war has
shown that the bigger the gun the more effective it
is. The smashing power of the 15-inch shell, with its
weight of 2,200 lb., is much greater, the range is more
extensive, and its fire more accurate. A 13.5-inch
gun will score twice as many hits as a 6-mch gun
firing at a target within the range of both. This is due
to the flatter trajectory of the bigger gun, which
increases the “danger space.” One clear indication of
the importance placed upon the size and power of the
gun in Great Britain is the scare that was caused by
the news of the bombardment of Dunkirk by the
Germans at a distance of 23 miles. It was stated that
a 17-inch naval gun had been brought from Kiel; and
the assumption was that the Germans were equipping
their boats with guns much more powerful than those
of the Queen Elizabeth. An inquiry was instituted,
and it was found that the gun was neither naval nor
17-inch, but a howitzer of 15-inch calibre. All feais
on this point were ultimately allayed by the official
report of the battle off Jutland, in which it was stated
that there were no surprises in the methods and means
employed by the Germans.


Cruisers have been far more in evidence than the
battleships. No important engagement has been fought
in the North Sea or on the distant oceans of the world
in which they have not played a conspicuous part. The
reason is not far to seek. Ever since the day on which
war was declared the German High Seas Fleet has
been bottled up in the harbours, canals, and the
restricted waters of Heligoland Bight; and, when a few
ships have ventured into the open for raiding purposes,
they have always tried to avoid a battle with the
superior forces at the command of the British. There
were eight or nine German cruisers in distant waters
when the war broke out, and their object was primarily
the same as that of the High Seas Fleet at home: to
avoid an engagement wherever possible unless the
forces opposed to them at any time were small enough
to offer a reasonable hope of success. This policy was
dictated by wisdom, not cowardice. The German
commanders have studied Mahan, and they know the
difference between calculated daring and reckless
indiscretion. But here lies the reason why the cruisers of
the British Navy have played such a conspicuous part
in the battles of Heligoland Bight, Coronel, Falkland
Islands, Dogger Bank, and Horn’s Reef, off Jutland.
The only chance of engaging the German squadrons
has been to pursue, overtake them, and force them to
fight. That can only be done by swift ships, and among
the swiftest in the Navy are the cruisers. A modern
cruiser may carry 13.5-inch guns, and she may or


may not have a thick belt of armour on the turrets and
along the water-line; but she must have speed. Her
armour is not as thick as that of the battleships,
because weight must be sacrificed when great speed is
required, and the swiftest cruisers are generally those
that carry the lightest armour. It is rumoured that
ships are now being built in England to cany 11-inch
guns, and to travel at a rate of forty-three miles an
hour. If so, they will probably have no armour at all.
There is a great variety of cruisers in the British
Navy. At one end are the swift light craft of the
Arethusa class, of which twenty were built shortly
before the outbreak of the war. Their size and equip-
ment indicate the purposes for which they were built.
The Arethusa had a displacement of 3,750 tons, carried
6-inch and 4-inch guns, was protected along the water-
line with a belt of armour three to three and a half
inches thick, and could steam at twenty-nine to thiity
miles an hour. She proved to be a highly serviceable
craft. In the battle of Heligoland Bight she fought
all day long, drove off two German cruisers more
powerful than herself, and had a share in the sinking
of the Mainz. But the use of ships of this class is not
restricted to fighting; they are the eyes and ears of the
Fleet, and do valuable scouting work.
At the other end are those powerful fighting ships
called battle-cruisers, which mount 12-inch and even
13.5-inch guns, and are only distinguishable from the
regular battleships by the speed at which they tiavel,
and the reduction in the weight of armour on the


turrets and along the water-line. To this class belongs
the Australia, and they have rendered great service
in the war. The Inflexible and Invincible fought at
the battle of Falkland Islands, the Lion and Tiger at
Dogger Bank; and it was the battle-cruisers that
engaged and held the German Fleet at Horn’s Reef
until the slower and more powerful ships had time to
come up. Of these battle-cruisers, Admiral Beatty’s
flagship, the Lion, has already covered herself with
glory. She has taken part in all the important engage-
ments in the North Sea, and, though battered and even
crippled, has always been able to get back to harbour
for repairs. She still carries the flag of an admiral
who is one of the finest embodiments of the heroic
spirit of naval warfare in the Fleet to-day. She has a
displacement of 26,350 tons, a speed of twenty-eight
and a half knots, carries 13.5-inch guns, and armour
nine inches thick along the water-line and on the
turrets.
Between these two extremes there are a large number
of cruisers varying in speed, gun power, and weight
of armour. But, in whatever way they vary, a high
rate of speed has to be maintained. They are not the
swiftest boats in the Navy, but they have speed enough
to act as scouts and overtake the cruisers of the enemy.
Had the British cruisers on the distant seas been
swifter and more up-to-date than they were, the
Emden would not have enjoyed so long and successful
a career of raiding, and the battle of Coronel might
have ended in a very different fashion.


CHAPTER III
TORPEDO CRAFT
In cruiser and battleship alike the gun is the offensive
weapon relied upon; but for the purpose of deluding
a knock-out blow, when an antagonist has been dis-
abled, the big ships have for long been provided with
another engine of destruction —the torpedo. As com-
pared with the gun, the torpedo is a modern weapon;
its range is very much more limited, but its smashing
power is terrific, and it is probable that no battle-
ship can survive the effect of its explosion if it
gets right home at a distance of 2,000 yards. W hen
the torpedo was first invented its range was limited to
a hundred yards, and its use restricted to harbour
defence. But, in 1868, a great improvement was
effected, and from that time the Admiralty began to
provide for its use in the bigger ships. The inven-
tion of the gyroscope made it possible for a torpedo
to correct variations of steering from within, and still
further advances were made in the range of fire. At
the beginning of the twentieth century the torpedo
could travel 2,000 yards, and four years later the


Whitehead torpedo could be driven at a speed of
thirty-three knots for a distance of 4,000 yards. The
Hardcastle torpedo was even more effective; it could
travel 7,000 yards at a speed of forty-five knots, and
11,000 yards at thirty knots. While these improve-
ments were being made a class of ships was specially
constructed for the use of torpedoes. They were
called torpedo boats, torpedo boat destroyers, and
submarines. Of the torpedo boats, the Thornycroft,
built in 1908, is one of the largest. She has a dis-
placement of 287 tons, two 12-pound guns, three
torpedo tubes, and steams at twenty-six and a half
miles an hour. Soon after the torpedo boats came the
torpedo destroyers, commonly known as destroyers.
They are among the fastest ships in the Navy, and
sometimes attain a speed of thirty-six or even thirty-
nine miles an hour. It is because of their great speed
that they are so valuable in scouting. The Swift was
one of the fastest in the Grand Fleet at the beginning
of the war. She was fitted with two torpedo tubes,
and carried 4-inch guns; her displacement was 1,800
tons, and she travelled at a speed of thirty-six knots
an hour. The number of these craft sunk in the
battle of Jutland proves how dangerous is the work
they undertake, not only because they are the escorts
of the big ships, protecting and screening them, but
also because, in order to use their weapons effectively,
they have to rush in and expose themselves to the
gunfire of the enemy long before they can use their
weapons at all. The torpedo has a range exceeding


10.000 yards, but it is not considered deadly beyond
2.000 or 3,000, and, long before the destroyers get
within that range, they may be sent to the bottom by
the guns of the light cruisers or the secondary arma-
ment of the big ships. It takes four minutes for a
torpedo to travel 6,500 yards, but the shell from a
12-inch gun can travel the same distance in nine
seconds. In these days of quick-firing guns this dis-
crepancy places the torpedo boats at a serious disad-
vantage. In the battle of Jutland the British lost eight
destroyers, the Germans probably nine.
The submarine has one great advantage over the
other torpedo boats that swim on the surface. She
can approach the enemy with only her periscope above
the water, and, in the presence of extreme peril, can
dive and disappear. It is this power of concealed
approach which has made the submarine so trouble-
some in this war. Nearly three centuries have elapsed
since the first boat was constructed to swim beneath
the surface of the water. It was propelled by means
of oars, and provided with tubes for the removal of
foul and the supply of fresh air. Cornelius van
Drebbele, a Dutch physician, built the boat in 1620,
and it is reported that James I took a trip down the
Thames in her. It was not till the war of American
Independence that the submarine was used in fighting
at sea. Even then, no results were achieved sufficiently
encouraging to justify a serious inquiry into its merits
as an offensive weapon. In 1776 David Bushnell did
succeed in bringing his boat up to the edge of the


English flagship Eagle, but he failed to fix his explo-
sive machine, and had to come to the surface and
retire. In Bushnell’s device there were two serious
defects. When under water he could not see where
he was going, and his explosive, even when it was in
contact with the enemy’s ship, failed to work. The
invention of the periscope and rapid improvement of
the torpedo before the close of last century remedied
these defects, and naval authorities in England began
to turn their attention in earnest to the construction
of submarines. In 1901-3 the A class were laid down,
and in the succeeding years the B, C, D, and E classes.
The E class, of which so much has been heard in this
war, were built in 1913. They are fitted with four
torpedo tubes, have a displacement of 700 to 800 tons,
a speed of sixteen miles on the surface of the water,
and ten when submerged. The German submarines
are all marked with the letter U, and the different
classes are indicated by numbers. Since the beginning
of the war great improvements in this class of war-craft
have been made by both countries, but more especially
by Germany. According to a report in “The Times”
(London), the super-submarine U7O, which sank the
Lindfield, had a maximum surface speed of twenty-
five knots, and fifteen submerged. She carried ten
torpedoes, and could remain away from her base for
thirty to forty days. If these statements are correct,
the U7O, built in 1914, was a great improvement on
the U3O of 1913. It is now near the end of 1916.
What improvements has Germany made in the last


eighteen months? Many, no doubt, and, in conse-
quence, the losses sustained by the mercantile marine
are still serious, and may become very embarrassing
in the future. But there are compensations. Of late,
the destruction of German submarines has been pro-
ceeding at a very rapid rate. According to a cable
which appeared in the papers on September 3, 1910
the German Chancellor had just informed his Federal
Council that “Germany was not able to build sub-
marines with sufficient rapidity to keep pace with the
losses due to British anti-submarine operations.”
The submarine is, and probably always will be, a
comparatively fragile and vulnerable boat, no matter
how much is spent on her construction. The danger
of being rammed by surface craft has very great y
diminished since the last decade of the mneteent
century. When they were first built it took about
twenty minutes to submerge; in 1900 only five, and
nowadays only two, even when everything has to e
stored away; if only the conning tower is exposed,
half a minute suffices. But, whilst this improvement
has increased the efficiency of the submarine very
greatly, the operation of diving is still very difficu t,
and can only be achieved with safety by men o
experience. Nor are the troubles at an end
when she is submerged. A rough sea will cause her
to roll at sixty feet below the surface, and at two
hundred feet the pressure of water is as great as she
can bear Submersion does give her the greatest
advantage she possesses, that of concealed approach


to the enemy; but, even in that, she is not as immune
from attack as she was at the beginning of the war.
On calm, clear days a sea-plane flying overhead may
detect her course and drop an explosive, and the
shattering effect of an explosion within a dozen
or twenty yards may send her to the bottom. If ever
science should discover means of readily locating sub-
marines, either by collecting the vibrations of the far-
off thump of the engines, or by bringing them more
easily within the range of visibility when they are upon
the surface, their efficiency will be very greatly
impaired.
That, however, belongs to the future and is
matter for speculation. What seems to be
beyond doubt is that the anti-submarine opera-
tions of Great Britain have made the life of
the German submarine short and by no means
merry. What those operations are, many would like
to know; but for obvious reasons they are kept secret.
Nevertheless, some information does find its way into
reviews and books. It would appear that the safety of
ships in harbour is secured by dropping steel nets
across the entrance, and it is said that the Straits of
Dover are guarded by double lines of nets, through
which friendly ships have to be piloted. This explains
why so much supplies and so many reinforcements
have been sent safely across to France since August,
1914. But, of late, the use of these nets has been
greatly increased. Out in the North Sea there are
lines of trawlers extending over a distance of fifty


to as much as a hundred miles. The track of a sub-
marine is noted by messages received at an office m
port, and, when she has reached a certain position,
the order to close in is given.
But, important as this operation may be, it
is almost certain that German submarines suffer
more from the number and accuracy of British
guns. The submarine is essentially a torpedo
boat, and carries only small guns. Long before
she gets near enough to launch her torpedo, or fire
her guns with effect, she may be sent to the bottom
by a shell from a four or six-inch naval gun. The
danger from this source has been vastly increased
since the British Admiralty decided to arm merchant-
men with 4-inch guns, giving at the same time specific
instructions that they were to be used only in self-
defence. How effective these guns have been may be
estimated fairly accurately from the attempts made
by Germany to induce the government of the United
States to treat the merchantmen so armed as men-of-
war. At first Mr. Lansing and President Wilson
appeared to hesitate; but ultimately they decided that
no legal objection could be taken to the comse
adopted by the British Admiralty; and when, at a later
time, Germany tried to justify her unlawful and
inhuman submarine atrocities against neutral subjects
on the ground that they were reprisals taken against
the arming of British merchantmen, she was rebuked
in one of the stiffest notes that has passed between
the President and the Kaiser. It is quite characteristic


of the German government that they should use this
weapon in defiance of the law of nations and the
usages of civilized people, and then seek to excuse
themselves by trying to shift the responsibility on to
the shoulders of those whom they have forced to
defend themselves. As though a man were forbidden
by law, common sense, or humanity to take such
measures as will safeguard his own life and property
when an outlaw is waylaying him! There is something
truly Prussian about this method of reasoning. Pre-
cisely the same kind of argument led them to inflict
barbarous punishment on Belgian civilians, whose
country they had invaded against all recognized law,
and whose women and children they had slaughtered,
when they tried to defend themselves and their pro-
perty! But, apart from all this, it would be surprising
to find that there is any existing law, international or
otherwise, which forbids merchant ships to carry guns
at any time. That they have refrained from doing so
in the last two or three centuries is an accident due to
the growth of a Royal Navy as distinct from the
mercantile marine. In the middle ages merchantmen
had to carry arms in order to secure a safe passage
at sea, and very little change was needed to make
them suitable for organized warfare. In the reign of
Henry VII the Royal Navy, as distinct from the
mercantile marine, began to appear; but even in
Elizabeth’s reign the distinction was not quite clear,
and Drake fought the Spaniards in the boats that car-
ried him round the world, and brought cargoes from
the tropics to Great Britain.


In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the
Royal Navy became the purely distinctive fighting
machine it is to-day, and ships of commerce ceased to
carry any important armaments simply because the
guns they could mount were quite ineffective against
the guns of the regular men-of-war. But. in this war,
a new boat has appeared which may be destroyed by
guns no bigger than a ship of commerce can carry.
From the beginning of 1915 Germany has used the
submarine in indiscriminate and unlawful warfare
against trading ships, and, naturally, the merchantmen
have taken precautions to defend themselves against
it. Because they have done so Germany tries to
excuse her own illegal and brutal methods, and to
embroil the United States with England! America
is not deceived, and British merchant ships are not
deprived of their protecting guns. The result is a
serious doubt in the mind of the German Chancellor
whether it pays to go on building submarines or not.
The success achieved by German submarines in this
war has been due to the fact that they have been used
in a way that is contrary to international right and
the usage of civilized nations. In estimating the losses
sustained by the British Navy in the first nine months
of the war, it must not be forgotten that, before
August, 1914, the Admiralty did not take the sub-
marine very seriously, and they had to learn everything
about the methods of keeping it under control after
the war began. They know enough now to justify
the belief that submarines have very much more to


fear from war craft than war craft have to fear
from them. The trouble is not in controlling their
legitimate use, but in preventing them carrying on
a kind of warfare that is illegal and barbarous.
This is the consideration which provokes doubt as
to whether the submarine will survive as an effective
arm of the naval service or not. When the time comes
for drawing up the terms of settlement, it may be
presumed that neutrals as well as belligerents will be
whole-hearted in their determination to provide ade-
quate safeguards against the perpetration of such
atrocities in the future. Take away all the
damage that German submarines have done in
defiance of law and civilized usage in the past twelve
months, and how much is left to justify the expendi-
ture of life and money that Germany has lavished upon
them? They have failed to wrest the command
of the sea from the capital ships of the British Navy,
and, because of their comparatively fragile construc-
tion, they would always be unable to make any sub-
stantial use of that command, even if they had it.
Brave of heart and strong of nerve must be the
crews of the torpedo craft, above or under the water.
Wherever perils are thickest and most extreme, there
they are most serviceable and even indispensable. The
big ships of the Navy can no longer venture near the
coasts of the enemy, because of the hidden dangers
from mines and submarines. Their place must be
taken by the lighter scouting ships, and among these
are the destroyers. Where new minefields are sown,
thither destroyers must repair, and, often enough,


the first intimation of danger is an explosion from
which they are lucky to get away with bows buckled
and torn. They have to be out in all weathers, small
though they be, and, travelling at their high rate of
speed, they are never dry. In stormy seas they are
continually awash from stem to stern. There is no
comfort on board a destroyer at any time; but in the
hour of battle the crews are expected to display a
quality of heroism that is little short of sublime. The
men who went down with the Shark in the battle of
Jutland were as brave and hardy as the Vikings of a
thousand years ago; and they were typical, not excep-
tional. Whether it be in searching for minefields,
hunting the enemy, or screening the battleships, they
are the men who live at close quarters with peril and
death.
And so do the crews of the submarines. In the
stormy seas they can dive deeply enough to escape the
fury of the waves, and still deeper beyond the ocean s
roll; but they only escape one peril to encounter others
prepared for them by ingenious foes. Sometimes, like
Captain Holbrook in the Dardanelles, they have to
thread their way through minefields sown with death,
clanking against the mines as they go. Always after
protracted submersion the atmosphere becomes so
heavily charged with impurities as to impair the health.
If German seamen had not been brave, their submarine
crews would have failed long before this. Shame it is
to put brave men to the work of foul Gottstrafers. The
authorities at Wilhelmstrasse and Potsdam are the
real criminals.


CHAPTER IV
AUXILIARY CRAFT
Battleships, cruisers, and torpedo craft are the ships
that belong to the official Navy; but, in times of war,
numbers of other craft, commonly called auxiliaries,
are requisitioned for special service. Ever since the
war began, thousands of ships of commerce have been
employed in supplying the needs of the Fleet in the
North Sea. carrying troops from all parts of the
Empire to the theatres of war, and furnishing them
with the food, equipment and munitions which they
require. Some of the swiftest and best are used as
auxiliary cruisers. The total number of ships used
for these purposes by the British Admiralty exceed
the aggregate of the French mercantile marine.
But the needs of modern naval warfare have neces-
sitated further encroachments on the industrial fleets
of Great Britain. The highways of commerce have to
be kept clear of mines and enemy submarines, and to
do this effectively about 3.000 trawlers and “floaters”
are at work, manned by about 100,000 fishermen and
other seadogs who fear no storm, and find their way


about the ocean as if by instinct. They are the
modern representatives of the seamen of Devon, on
whom Queen Elizabeth relied against the day when
Spain would try to do her worst. Well is it for the
Empire that Great Britain has so many of these
weather-beaten heroes to draw upon to-day. In all
the essentials they have had an admirable training for
the dangerous self-sacrificing work they are called
upon to do. Any time in the past hundred years they
might have been seen putting out in heavy weather to
sweep the banks for fish. Now they set out with ropes
of wire to tear the mines from their mooring, and
explode them on the surface by rifle fire. Others use
nets made of steel. They spread out in lines extend-
ing over fifty and even a hundred miles, and on a
signal by wireless given from a distant port, they close
in and catch a German submarine. It is a sport that
has the fascination of big game hunting, and it is full
of perils. The storms may rage, as they raged on
December 26, 1915, but the only craft that leave their
posts are those that founder, or are driven on the
rocks by the fury of the winds. Sometimes, all too
often, they strike hidden or floating mines, a message
comes to the office in port that the boat has been blown
up and is lost with all hands! Another trawler is
sent to take her place, and, next morning, in an obscure
corner of “The Times,” the names of the ill-fated crew
appear. But England knows the worth of these men
now, as well as Queen Elizabeth knew the value of
the seamen of Devon in the sixteenth century. In


one of his cartoons for September 6, 1916, Mr. Punch
greets the skipper of a trawler, as he climbs the steps
of the landing, with the words: “Risky work, isn’t
it?” To which the skipper replies: “That’s why
there’s a hundred thousand of us doing it.” The
interest of the cartoon lies in the face of the fisherman.
Raven Hill has never drawn anything more
convincing.
For years these men have been trained to a mastery
of the seas. All they needed to make them efficient
was a few months’ drill. Great Britain has always
relied on her fishermen and merchantmen to help her
in times of stress; but she never had greater need of
them than she has to-day. They have risen to the
occasion bravely and calmly. Their blood is up; but it
is the blood of storm-bred sportsmen, not Gottstrafers.
Some of the smaller of these fishing boats are called
“mystery ships,” and they are indeed mysterious. Not
that they look different from any other fishing boats,
but that they are not at all what they seem. The boats
that swing at the davits are not real boats, and the
crew, who are rigged to look like ruffians of the
deep, are really gentlemen who know nearly every-
thing that a well-trained naval officer knows. Mr.
Alfred Noyes has been writing some interesting
articles to “The Times” about trawlers, mystery ships,
patrol and motor boats, and in one of them he raises
the veil, though only for a minute or two, because the
Admiralty is jealous of its secrets. “There was once
upon a time,” he says, “a simple fishing boat, shooting


her fishing nets for simple fish. A submarine appeared
and gave her men ‘Five minutes, you swine!’ Imme-
diately there was a panic which had been part of their
drill in port. Two of the crew went on their knees for
mercy, and others hauled at the boat like men possessed.
.... I must pass over the details once more, but
the resultant picture was this. A dummy boat on deck
in four pieces, and a fine big gun levelled straight at
the submarine, attended by gunners of His Majesty’s
Navy, ‘like gods in poor disguise.’ There were two
Germans kneeling for mercy; and after they had
scrambled into safety, there was an abolished sub-
marine and oil upon many troubled waters.” Such
glimpses into the world of real romance are precious;
but they are necessarily few till the war is over. May
be the authorities thought that even this was beyond
the limit of discretion, for the fourth article, promised
by “The Times” for Monday, September 4, did not
appear on that date.
This is not a complete list of the ships that are
used by the Admiralty in this war, but it will suffice
to mention one other kind—the monitors, of which
little was heard before August, 1914. Big guns
are useful everywhere, and the monitors, with
their shallow draught, can carry them into waters
where the battleships cannot go. They rendered
splendid service off the coast of Belgium when the
German army was trying to outflank the British and
march on Calais, and they have proved very useful
where the dangers of submarine attack were too great


for more costly ships of deeper draught. They are
provided with an outer belt of softer steel, into which
the nose of a torpedo drives. The consequent explo-
sion does not shatter the inner belt, which is really the
side of the vessel, sufficiently to cause her to sink. A
large number of these boats have been employed off
the coast of Belgium wrecking submarine bases, and
they took the place of the ordinary fighting ships in
the Aegean after the submarines had appeared and
sunk the Triumph and the Majestic. But though
monitors have been employed successfully in European
waters, they are specially adapted for river work in the
outlying parts of the Empire. According to one
report it was a monitor which found and destroyed the
Konigsberg after she had forced her way up the
Rufigi River beyond the range of the British cruisers
on the coast.




THE SURFACE CRAFT
IN ACTION




CHAPTER V
THE WAR ON TRADE
The annual expenditure of money upon the construc-
tion and maintenance of ships of war is often justified
on the ground that it is an insurance against disaster
to the mercantile marine. This is reasonable, for one
of the great objects of naval warfare is to destroy the
enemy’s trade at sea, and secure your own. On the
distant seas, beyond the range of submarine activity,
this object was attained in less than six months after
the beginning of the war, and the people of the outlying
Dominions have been enjoying enormous advantages
in consequence. Never before, in the history of Great
Britain, have the surface craft of the enemy, warships
and ships of commerce alike, been swept so rapidly
from the open seas as they have been in this war. In
the beginning of August, 1914, Germany had 2,090
ships in her mercantile marine. On November 27,
1914, less than four months after the struggle began,
eighty of them had been captured, one hundred and
sixty-six detained in British or Allied ports, six hun-
dred and forty-six had sought refuge in neutral


harbours, and three hundred and twenty-nine were
shut up in German ports. That left eight hundred and
sixty-nine unaccounted for. Of these, only ten were
known to be at sea; the rest were in the Baltic. By
the end of November, German trading ships had
evacuated the highways of commerce, and trade with
the outside world, except such as could be carried on,
indirectly and furtively, through neutral countries and
the Baltic, was at an end.
Great Britain entered the war with a mercantile
marine of 10,123 ships of over one hundred tons. By
November 27, when the trade of Germany had been
swept from the open seas, forty-nine British merchant
ships had been captured, seventy-five detained in
German ports, and seventy-one were held up in the
Black and Baltic Seas. That is, our mercantile marine
had suffered no more than a diminution of 1.9 per
cent., and 9,928 ships were going on with their work
of convoying troops, supplying the needs of the Fleet,
and carrying on their ordinary trade with distant parts
of the world. Compared with the disaster that over-
took the German mercantile marine, this loss is almost
negligible.
But it was not the only injury sustained by our trade.
When the war broke out, eight or nine German cruisers
were out on the distant seas. So long as they were
abroad, passengers were shy of travelling, ships of
commerce were forced to go out of their ordinary
routes, and higher insurance rates, amounting to five
per cent, in dangerous seas, had to be paid, in order


to cover risks. It was no easy matter to get rid of
these marauders. Though the British had control of
nearly all the important coaling stations in the world,
there were numerous islands where the Germans
could get such supplies as they needed by paying a
high enough price; and, if Germany had few bases in
the distant seas, she had plenty of gold. Then, again,
the Germans had a good system of wireless, by which
they sent out and received warnings of danger. But
what made the task of rounding them up most difficult
was the wide extent of the ocean, and the spherical
shape of the globe. Thousands of miles had to be
traversed in searching for them, and, though a cruiser
might be no more than fifty miles away on the beam,
she could escape observation, and elude pursuit. It
was not until the movements of seventy Allied
cruisers were carefully co-ordinated that the enemy’s
ships were overtaken, and forced to fight, singly or in
squadrons. The Emden had a highly successful
career in the Bay of Bengal; and the Karlsruhe in the
Atlantic. But in less than six months they had all
ceased from troubling, and Britain was left in command
of the trade routes.


CHAPTER VI
THE BATTLES OF THE CRUISERS
Of the battles that were fought with the object of
clearing the seas, the one off the coast of Chili, and the
other at the Falkland Islands, were the most important.
So far as the number of ships engaged is concerned,
they were not first-class engagements; but in other
ways they were vastly important. They brought the
strength of the material and the personnel of the rival
fleets to a test which enabled students of naval warfare
to form a shrewd judgment as to what was likely to
happen on the day when the High Seas Fleet of Ger-
many and the Grand Fleet of Great Britain should
meet in the North Sea.
In nearly all naval engagements the uncertainties
of the sea play a part, and, in some of them, a decisive
part. Atmospheric conditions are highly important;
mists and darkness may make effective fighting at long
range almost impossible. Accuracy of fire depends, to
some extent, on whether the boat on which the guns
are mounted is a good sea boat or not, and it does make
a difference in any engagement whether the sea is


tempestuous or tranquil. Conditions may change,
rapidly reversing advantages and disadvantages. A
fleet that has the glare of the sinking sun behind it
cannot so readily be seen as the opposing force; but
as soon as the sun has set the advantage passes to the
other side; for then the darkening shadows begin to
protect the fleet to the east, while those to the west are
silhouetted against the sky-line. Sometimes, again,
ships may be caught in a condition almost hopeless:
they may be short of coal, or crippled by an accident;
or a squadron may be taken by surprise and over-
whelmed by superior numbers. All these chances, and
many more, have to be taken into consideration in
drawing conclusions. Yet it is possible to form some
sound judgments from a study of these battles for the
clearing of the distant seas, especially when they
derive confirmation from what has taken place in
engagements nearer home.
In the battle off Coronel, the British suflfered a
disastrous defeat. Admiral Cradock had under his
command the Good Hope and Monmouth, a smaller
cruiser (the Glasgow), and the auxiliary cruiser,
Otranto. Admiral von Spec had the Scharnhorst and
the Gneisenau, and two smaller cruisers, the Dresden
and Leipzig or Nurnberg. The Canopus, an old British
ship, carrying 12-inch guns, was not far away; but
Admiral Cradock, who had been long pursuing the
enemy, decided to engage with such ships as he had.
The action began at 6.18 p.m., and, by 9.20, the two
cruisers, Good Hope and Monmouth, had gone down.


Of the 1,625 officers and seamen on board, not one was
saved. The German ships sustained no injury at all.
But nemesis followed swiftly in the wake of Admiral
von Spec. He resolved to make his way round Cape
Horn, and then steer for the Falkland Islands, which
in all probability, he intended to take, and use as a
base for operations against South Africa. The
British Admiralty divined his purpose. With the
utmost secrecy they prepared their plans for avenging
the disaster off Coronel. Two battle-cruisers, the
Inflexible and the Invincible, were ordered to take in
supplies and proceed with all speed down the east
coast of South America, where other ships would join
them. After travelling over 7,000 miles of ocean, they
arrived at the Falkland Islands, on the afternoon
before the arrival of von Spec’s squadron! Admiral
Sturdee, who was in command, proceeded to harbour,
and began to coal. Before he had finished, smoke was
reported on the southern horizon, then the tops of the
masts appeared, and Admiral Sturdee decided to put
out to sea. In the engagement that followed, the Ger-
man Admiral had under his command the Scharnhorst,
Gneisenau, Dresden, Nurnberg, and Leipzig; Admiral
Sturdee commanded the Inflexible, the Invincible, and
five or six smaller cruisers, probably the Carnarvon,
Kent, Cornwall, Glasgow, and Bristol. The Inflexible
and the Invincible engaged the Scharnhorst and the
Gneisenau, and the smaller German cruisers were
attacked by the rest of the British squadron. The
result was even more appalling for the Germans than


Coronel had been for ns. Of the five cruisers of the
German squadron, four, including the Scharnhorst and
Gneisenau, were sunk, and, of their crews, 3,000 were
lost, and only 170 saved. On the British side no
serious damage was done to any of the ships, and their
casualties were eight killed and four wounded! It is
worth recording that the Invincible, which carried a
complement of 950 men, and fought all the time, had
no casualties whatever.
Such a complete reversal of fortune off the opposite
coasts of South America invites investigation. What
is the explanation? To begin with, it places beyond
all reasonable doubt the importance of the big gun in
modern naval warfare, especially where, as in the
case of these two battles, the atmospheric conditions
are favourable for sighting at long range. In the
battle off Coronel, the guns of the German squadron
were larger and more powerful than any that Admiral
Cradock could use. It is true that the Good Hope
carried two 9.2-inch guns, but they were badly placed:
one in the bow and the other in the stern, and the sea
was so tempestuous that they could not be used. Next
to these, the British ships carried no gun more power-
ful than a 6-inch, of which the Good Hope had sixteen
and the Monmouth fourteen. Against these, von Spee
carried eight 8.2-inch guns in the Scharnhorst, and the
same number in the Gneisenau; and the crack shots of
the German Navy were in these two ships. They lost
no time in finding the range, despite the gale, for, on


the third salvo, the Good Hope and the Monmouth
were ablaze. The result was that our boats were
deprived of the opportunity of rushing in, though
it is doubtful whether that would have been possible,
even if the shooting of the Germans had not been
effective so soon. The Good Hope and the Monmouth
were older than the German boats, and though their
speed was slightly higher on paper, in actual fact it
may have been, and probably was, lower. As it was,
the British fire was quite ineffective, and it is probable
enough that no shell ever reached the German ships.
In the battle of Falkland Islands, the Germans were
even more hopelessly outclassed in range and power
of guns than we were off the coast of Chili. The main
interest of that battle centres in the attack made by the
Inflexible and the Invincible on the Scharnhorst and
the Gneisenau. The German cruisers never had a
chance; for, against their 8.2-inch guns, the Inflexible
and the Invincible carried sixteen 12-inch guns each.
Very few of the German shells ever reached our ships,
and those did no material damage.
It was not, however, merely a matter of big guns.
If the ships of the German squadron had been faster
than those of the British, they might have got away
as soon as they realized that they were being attacked
by battle-cruisers, and before very serious damage had
been done. But they could not; for, while the Scharn-
horst and the Gneisenau were twenty-two and a half
knot boats, the Inflexible and the Invincible could
attain a speed of twenty-six knots; and they actually


reached twenty-six and a half during the battle by
burning boats, tables, chairs, and any other woodwork
available. Whether von Spec made any determined
attempt to rush in or not, does not appear from the
evidence published; but, even if he did, it was within
Admiral Sturdee’s discretion and power to decide how
far. He had the advantage of speed, and that gave him
the power to choose his range. Judging by the results
of the battle, it would seem to be clear that he chose
to shoot from a distance beyond the range of the
German 8.2 guns.
So far as the material of the Navy is concerned
then, the importance of a combination of gun-power
and speed is clearly demonstrated in these two battles.
A general review of the course of the war would seem
to confirm it. Thick and strong armour has its
advantages in some situations; but no amount of
armour can withstand the smashing efifect of the shells
from big guns; and it is very doubtful indeed,
whether there is any battleship afloat that can
survive the explosion of a torpedo when it gets home.
The conclusion would seem to be irresistible that a
ship’s armour is of little avail when there is a com-
bination of speed and big guns in the ship or ships
arrayed against her. The battle between the Sydney
and the Emden, at Keeling-Cocos, had the advantage
of being a simple operation, carried out in fine weather,
when the range of visibility was high. There were no
complicating considerations, and it furnishes an excel-
lent illustration of the truth of this contention. The


Emclen was a cruiser of twenty-four knots, carrying
4.1-inch guns; the Sydney had a speed of twenty-six
knots, and mounted 6-inch guns. It is true that, before
the captain of the Sydney got his range, his ship was
punished rather severely; but the casualties at the
close of the battle tell their own tale. The Emden lost
two hundred killed and thirty wounded; the Sydney
three killed and sixty wounded.
There is nothing new or startling in the efficiency of
a combination of speed and gun power in one ship.
It was as well known to Sir Francis Drake as it is to
us. He never went to sea without the best cannon and
ammunition procurable, and his swift little ships could
generally work to windward of the heavier Spanish
galleons, and keep their own range. In the instructions
to Midonia Sidonia, in 1588, the King of Spain
advises his admiral not to engage the English at long
range, because of their superior gunnery and marks-
manship. The advice was futile, for the range was
in the power of Drake, not of the Spanish admiral.
Drake’s experience in the West Indies, and in his
voyage round the world, had taught him the value of
material of the finest quality, and how to use it effec-
tively.
There can be no doubt that the British Admiralty
fully realized the value of this combination before the
outbreak of the war. It is the dominating considera-
tion in the construction of the latest cruisers and bat-
tleships. How far Lord Fisher is responsible for this
policy, only those who are of the inner circle of the


Admiralty know; but he was the man in power when
the dreadnoughts were built, and he it was who aroused
a storm of opposition in England by scrapping about
eighty pre-dreadnought ships, soon after he came to
power, on the ground that they were too weak to fight
and too slow to run away. Whatever mistakes he may
have made, or been a party to, in operations against
the fortifications along the Dardanelles, there can be
hardly any doubt that experience has justified him in
this matter. We are fighting against a scientific peo-
ple with a passion for efficiency, and to have met them
on the seas with boats that were old and ill-equipped
would have been worse than useless. Every British
ship that is sunk increases the prestige of the enemy,
and hundreds of brave, well-trained men go to their
doom with her. Parsimony in naval construction is
not only a blunder; it is a crime. Anything short of
the best is expensive in human life, as well as material,
when the day of testing comes. We live in an age of
scientific advancement, and lack of a few improve-
ments may place the ships of yesterday at a terrible
disadvantage in the shock of battle. It seems incon-
gruous to apply the verses of a love poem to the condi-
tions of modern naval warfare, and, yet, there are two
lines in Browning’s “By the Fireside,” that seem
strangely applicable:
“Oh, the little more, and how much it is,
And the little less, and what worlds away.”
A little more power in guns and speed, and how
much it was at the battles of Coronel and Falkland


Islands! A little less, and what ships and men away!
In the contests at sea between two great powers such
as Great Britain and Germany, it is the little more or
the little less that makes all the difference between a
glorious victory and a disastrous defeat. Up-to-date
material was never more important in naval warfare
than it is to-day. And it is well for the Empire and
civilization that Great Britain was so well prepared on
the sea when the thunderbolt was launched.


CHAPTER VII
THE PERSONNEL OF THE NAVY
But big guns are of little avail unless skilful
men are behind them; and swift ships would soon
go to the bottom, if their crews and officers were in-
capable. The personnel of the Navy is even more
important than the material, and, before the seas were
cleared of marauding cruisers, its quality was tested
too. For long we have been told by men who had
facilities for investigation, that the spirit of the Navy
was never better than it is to-day. The war has proved
it. The qualities of a good seaman are manifold; but
there are three by which the personnel of the Navy
may fairly be judged: marksmanship, daring, and
endurance under protracted and concentrated fire.
How do British and German seamen compare in res-
pect of these qualities since the war began?
Of marksmanship, the battle of Coronel was no test
on. our side, because it is probable that none of our
shells ever reached the German squadron. Neither is
the battle of Falkland Islands any test of German gun


nery, because, again, our ships were almost entirely
beyond the range of their guns. A better test was the
battle of Dogger Bank, where both sides were within
range, though the British had some 13.5-inch guns, and
the Germans nothing more powerful than 12-inch.
Some of our ships were crippled, but none was lost.
The Germans lost the Blucher; and two others, prob-
ably the Derfflinger and the Seydlitz, were set on fire,
and just managed to make their way through the mine-
fields. Referring to the results of this battle, Mr.
Churchill, who was then First Lord of the Admiralty,
said that the bursting-smashing power of the heavier
British projectile had proved to be decidedly greater
than the German, “and —this is the great thing—our
shooting is, at least, as good as theirs.” This is the
language of caution; but, judging by the performance
of the German gunners in other battles, it would seem
to be wise. In modern shooting, much more depends
upon scientific appliances than ever before, and the
Germans are a scientific people. But. besides that,
experience in these early battles has proved that they
shoot well. Admiral von Spec got the range of
Admiral Cradock’s ships in a few minutes. Though
the sea was tempestuous, his third salvo set the Good
Hope and the Monmouth ablaze. That was good
shooting, even for the crack shots of the German
Navy. The Emden, in the early part of the fight,
punished the Sydney rather severely, considering the
calibre of her guns. But the contest which gives a fair
idea of the relative efficiency in gunnery is quite a


subordinate one. It took place between two auxiliary
cruisers, the Carmania and the Cap Trafalgar. There
was no difference in the power of their guns, and their
speed was about the same. They started pounding
into one another at five miles; and, after one hour and
forty minutes, the Cap Trafalgar sank; but, by that
time, the Carmania had 304 holes in her! Obviously,
there is very little to choose here; for any one of those
304 might have been a lucky hit, and sent the British
auxiliary cruiser to the bottom first.
Neither is there reason for doubting the bravery of
the German seamen. It is hardly possible that their
gunnery could be as good as it is, if the bravery of their
gunners were not beyond question. There are different
kinds of bravery. Men who. under the influence of
excitement, and the sympathy of numbers, make an
impetuous charge in the face of a withering fire, are
brave beyond all question. The bravery of the gun-
ners on a ship is of a different quality; but it is no
less admirable. In the very tempest and whirlwind of
battle, when the shells are bursting and screeching about
them, they must keep a steady nerve and a cool head,
to take aim and get their mark. And in many a battle
German seamen have proved themselves to be good
marksmen. But this is not the only way in which
their bravery has been tested. Men who can fight as
the Germans fought at Falkland Islands, and die as
they died there, are brave men. Clambering on the
sides of their sinking ships, with the consciousness that
the cold blue waters of the Atlantic below them would


soon be their graves, they gave cheers, and sang
patriotic songs. The man who can look into the jaws
of certain death, and give cheers, is not wanting in
courage, and the seamen of the German Navy have
done it many a time.
But, once again, the conduct of British seamen is at
least as heroic as theirs. Nothing that the commanders
of the German submarines have done surpasses the
bravery of Lt.-Com. Holbrook, in his passage through
the Dardanelles, and his work in the Sea of Marmora.
No raid yet made by the German ships on the coast
of Britain shows a daring of finer quality than that of
our seamen in the raid on Cuxhaven. Nor has the
personal bravery of the British been soiled by acts of
insolence and savagery, such as those that have de-
graded the whole naval administration of Germany in
the eyes of the civilized world. Every British ship
that has gone down in the Narrow Seas or the Aegean,
is a proof that British seamen can look death in the
face with steady eye and nerve. The Formidable was
torpedoed in the English Channel on a tempestuous
night; but the men stood to attention, and preserved
their discipline, until the last order, “Every man for
himself,” was given.
The conduct of British seamen in the war leaves no
doubt that they are determined to maintain the most
glorious, as well as the most rigorous, traditions of the
Navy, and there is no need to go beyond these early
battles on the distant seas to prove it. From the time
that Admiral Cradock’s cruisers were set on fire, offi


cers and men must have known that they were doomed.
The battle began at 6.18 in the evening, and it could
hardly have been much later than 6.30 when the hope-
lessness of their position must have become apparent.
Yet their only thought was to fight on in the hope of
damaging the enemy in a region where she had no
bases to repair. At 7.50, the fire having reached her
magazine, the Good Hope blew up and disappeared
with all her crew. Then the Monmouth was left alone,
crippled, and with inferior guns, to carry on an utterly
hopeless contest with both the hostile cruisers, that
poured in their shell now with redoubled violence. No
chance of escape; but no thought of striking colours!
On she fought, doggedly, without a single ray of hope,
till 9.20, when the captain of the Glasgow saw the last
flash of her guns over the horizon. It is a thrilling
story of British pluck and endurance against over-
whelming odds, for the maintenance of the most rigo-
rous tradition in all warfare, and the honour of the
flag that waved above them.
Not less inspiring is the story of the last fight of the
Pegasus, one of the few of those worn-out old cruisers
which Lord Fisher reserved from the scrap-heap.
When she was launched in 1897, the Pegasus had a
speed of twenty-one knots; but. on the outbreak of
war, she could not do more than sixteen, and her 4-inch
guns had seen their best days. After sinking a German
gunboat and a floating dock at the port of Dar-es-
Salaam, she was caught by the Konigsberg oflf the
coast of Zanzibar, with her fires drawn, cleaning her


boilers. The Konigsberg had newer and better 4-inch
guns, and was able to rake the decks of the Pegasus
at a safe range, which she reduced, later on, to 6,000
yards. The shells of the Pegasus fell short, though
her own decks were strewn with dead and dying. One
shot from the Konigsberg hit the halliards to which
the Union Jack was attached, and brought it down
upon the deck. Without a moment’s hesitation, two
seamen rushed up, and held the flag aloft, lest the
Germans should think they had struck their colours.
One of them was killed by a bursting shell, but another
rushed up immediately, and took his place. So the
flag was kept flying till the Konigsberg, having battered
her helpless adversary beyond repair, steamed away
to the south.
Of such quality are the British seamen to-day, and
by such deeds do they uphold the heroic traditions of
the past. If ever men could be justified in striking
their colours, surely these heroes of the Pegasus were.
Outranged, unable to move a yard, absolutely at the
mercy of the enemy! Yet no thought of striking
colours, no thought of relaxing the rigour of the sever-
est of all the traditions of war, even under such cir-
cumstances. The spirit of the men who won the
battle of Trafalgar was there in full measure, and run-
ning over. It may be that some of these gallant seamen
were not unmindful of the wish expressed by Nelson,
as he lay dying in the hospital of the Victory. Captain
Hardy had promised to bring reports of the progress
of the battle, and the last news was of victory. “My


lord,” he said, “twelve to fourteen of the enemy’s ships
have been captured.” “I hope none of our ships have
struck,” replied Nelson. “No, my lord,” said Hardy,
“no fear of that.” The test of the men on the little
worn-out cruiser, off the coast of Zanzibar, was far
more searching and severe than that of the heroes of
Trafalgar. The seamen of Trafalgar won a victory;
the seamen of the Pegasus fought against overwhelm-
ing odds, without a ray of hope.
There is not much to choose between British and
German seamen in marksmanship and bravery, but it
would seem to have been proved beyond doubt that
the British are capable of greater endurance under
protracted and concentrated fire than the Germans.
This is a matter which is worthy of serious attention,
because it affects the personnel of the fleets very in-
timately. In the battle of Heligoland Bight, the first
naval engagement of the war, we were told that some
of the German sailors, unable to endure the severity of
the British fire, jumped overboard into the sea, and
that they were shot by their own officers, while swim-
ming in the water. Confirmation of this was not alto-
gether wanting, for some of these men were rescued
and taken prisoners, and while they were in the British
hospitals, pistol bullets were extracted from their
bodies. Further important evidence on this point is
available in the report of the Jutland battle. Fighting
began at 3.48, and the German fire was effective almost
from the start; but, in Admiral Beatty’s contribution


to the despatch, we are told that “our fire began to tell,
while the accuracy and rapidity of the enemy s fire was
depreciating considerably.” This was at 4.17, almost
half-an-hour after the battle began. Two hours later,
at 6.15, we are informed, again by Admiral Beatty,
that “its (the enemy’s) gunnery had gone to pieces.
It was 6.30 before Admiral Jellicoe arrived on the
scene, and from that time till 8.30 he tells us that “the
enemy’s fire was ineffective, and our damage was
insignificant.”
In estimating the quality of German marksmanship,
these statements must not be overlooked. The nerve
of the German gunner is not as steady as that of the
British. But this need not be attributed to a lack of
natural bravery. It can be accounted for m other
ways. The naval guns of the British are more power-
ful than those of the Germans, the smashing power of
their shells is much greater, and the shock of explosion
more terrible. But, besides this, the training of the
German seamen compares very unfavourably with that
of the British in respect to length of service. Only
one-fourth of them are volunteers, who have re-engag-
ed after the regular three years of service; the remain-
ing three-fourths are conscripts, who have found their
way into the navy rather than the army, as much by
accident as choice. British seamen are engaged for
periods of ten years, or five years, according to the
kind of work on which they are engaged, and they are
encouraged by promises of pensions to re-engage. The
fact that the five years’ men are called “ticklers” is m


itself an indication of the value set upon the long-
service men by general opinion in the British Navy.
Long-service men, habituated to the discipline and
rigour of the sea, are likely to endure longer under fire
than short-service men.
If any further reason is required to explain the
superiority of the British seamen in this respect, it
may be found in the conditions under which they have
lived in the past two years and a half. They have been
constantly at sea, facing perils, and undergoing hard-
ships that must have wrought their nerves into the
condition of steel by this time. Moreover, they have
been getting their practice and experience in the con-
ditions under which battles are likely to be fought.
The Germans, on the other hand, have been shut up
in harbours, canals, or limited to the sheltered waters
of Heligoland Bight or the Baltic Sea. They have
been a blockaded fleet. Nelson was wont to say that
after a protracted blockade, British gunnery would be
three times as effective as that of the enemy, and
events proved that his forecast was substantially
correct. Anything like so great a superiority must not
be looked for now. Scientific instruments are far more
important in gunnery now that they were in Nelson’s
day; but, besides that, the blockade in the North Sea
gives the enemy much more freedom to move about
than the blockade of Brest, Cadiz, or Toulon. But the
personal efficiency of the gunner still counts for a
great deal; and, because it does, our men were able to
reap some reward in the battle of Jutland, for the


innumerable hardships which must be endured, so long
as they maintain their vigil through the winter snows
and gales in the open waters of the North Sea. Nobly
have the seamen and officers of the Fleet upheld the
most glorious traditions of the British Navy since the
war began. Within six months the enemy’s surface
craft, cruisers and merchantmen alike, were swept
from the open sea, and only one auxiliary has managed
to elude the vigilance of the blockade in the last two
years. It is a remarkable performance, and none have
benefited by it more than the people of the Common-
wealth of Australia.


THE UNDER-WATER MENACE:
MINE AND SUBMARINE




CHAPTER VIII
MINES
Judging by the public speeches of Admiral von Tirpitz
before the war, it is safe to say that the German people
never imagined, in their most cautious moments, that
their High Seas Fleet would be reduced to such galling
and humiliating impotence as it has been since August,
1914. Nevertheless, it is clear, from the pages of
Bernhardi’s hook on Germany and the Next War, that
some of the inner circle knew that it might be very
risky to undertake a first-class engagement with the
Grand Fleet, unless they had reason to believe its
personnel inferior to their own. They were not left
long in doubt. The fate of their mercantile marine,
and the “fortunate and fruitful” action in Heligoland
Bight, left no question of the real strength and effi-
ciency of the British Fleet. They settled down, there-
fore, to a war of attrition, by which the ships of the
Grand Fleet were to be sunk, one by one, until the
numbers were reduced to something like an equality
with their own. For this kind of warfare, they relied
almost entirely on their under-water weapons, and, in


waging it, they had at their disposal two: the mine
and the submarine, neither of which had been much
used in naval warfare before. The submarine was
almost entirely unknown in the actual experience of
war, and on that the Germans placed their hopes. It
was destined to prove a more formidable engine of
destruction than the mine, and a good deal more trou-
blesome than the majority of experts in Great Britain
expected at the beginning of the war. In all prob-
ability we shall never know for certain how many
ships have been sunk by mines, as distinct from those
that have been destroyed by submarines. In an article
in The Quarterly Review, for July, 1915, Mr. Archi-
bald Hurd says; “All the losses at sea suffered by the
Allied navies, with the exception of the cruisers
Good Hope, Monmouth, and Amphion. have been due
to the torpedo”; and of these three, the destruction of
the Amphion alone was due to mines. The ill-fated
Hampshire, carrying the late Lord Kitchener to Russia,
must be added to the list; but, thanks to the heroic
labours of the hardy fishermen of the North Sea,
disasters have been comparatively few.
Mines were first used off Kronstadt, during the
Crimean War. They contained about 70 lbs. of pow-
der, and were supposed to explode by contact. The
only people who suffered any injury from their explo-
sion were the curious, who picked them up to examine
them. But several improvements were made in the
next twenty years, and, in 1874, they were seriously
considered in an inquiry into methods of defence. The


Japanese used them with effect in the Russo-Japanese
war, in the first decade of the twentieth century, and
the rules governing their use were discussed, and
agreed upon, at the Hague Conference of 1907. No
serious objection was made to the sowing of mines
round the mouths of harbours, or along the coast for
the protection of forts against bombardment; but
Great Britain entered a strong protest against their
emplacement in shallow waters of the open sea, and
along the trade routes. She did so, not merely in her
own interests as a great commercial power, but also
to safeguard the commerce of non-combatants in times
of war. Against these limitations Germany fought,
and, on the broad question, her opinion prevailed; but
she, like the rest of the Powers, agreed upon the fol-
lowing important points; (1) that every possible pre-
caution must be taken for the security of peaceful
navigation; and (2) the danger zone be notified as
soon as military emergencies should permit.
How both of these provisions have been violated by
Germany, from the very outbreak of the war, all the
world now knows. On August 5, 1914, the Konigin
Luise was caught sowing mines off the south-east
coast of England, and sunk by the Amphion, which
was so shortly afterwards blown up by a mine. From
this time onward the Germans seized every opportunity
of sowing mines in all possible places in the North
Sea. They took no precautions for the safety of
civilians, nor did they even notify the danger zone for
the protection of neutral shipping. As a matter of


fact, in the first three weeks of the war, neutral ship-
ping suffered more than British from mine explosion,
and fishing boats of diverse nationalities were sent to
the bottom of the sea. The German Admiralty, with
characteristic disregard for veracity, disseminated
reports charging the British Government with respon-
sibility for these disasters. To this, the lie direct was
given in a statement published by the British Admiralty
on August 24, to the following effect: “The
Admiralty, while reserving to themselves the utmost
liberty of retaliatory action against this new form of
warfare, announce that they have not, so far, laid any
mines during the present war, and that they are
endeavouring to keep the sea routes open for peaceful
commerce.”
A few days later, the Admiralty did use its right of
retaliatory action. British mines were sown between
the Goodwin Sands and the coast of Belgium, and
elsewhere, for self-protection; but, in accordance with
convention, an intimation to this effect was given to
the world on October 4, and neutral shipping was
advised to call at British ports, where a chart would
be available, indicating the routes that were kept free
from mines, at the cost of the British Government.
Germany did not restrict herself to the Narrow Seas
in sowing these death traps. Boats flying neutral
flags were used to anchor them in the Atlantic routes
to the north of Ireland, where the Manchester Com-
merce was blown up. In consequence of this, the
British Admiralty was forced to declare the North Sea


closed on November 2. From that time Germany had
little or no chance of using surface craft for this kind
of indiscriminate warfare; but she was not at the end
of her resources. Submarines were adapted for the
work of sowing mines, and, as they travel without
much risk of detection, they proved to be effective.
Mines are still being sown in diverse places, and some-
times their whereabouts is only discovered after a
destroyer or trawler has run into one unexpectedly.
But, though the work of sweeping is dangerous, the
brave fishermen have done, and are doing, it so thor-
oughly that only a chance boat, here and there, is vic-
timized by this species of Germany’s frightfulness.


CHAPTER IX
THE SUBMARINE
A few months before the war began, Admiral Sir
Percy Scott went so far as to say that “the submarine
had reached a stage at which it practically rendered
obsolete and useless the surface fighting ships.” Two
years’ experience of war has proved that this estimate
of the value of the submarine was very extravagant
indeed; but, on the other hand, it has done enough
damage to compel those who derided the opinion of
Sir Percy Scott to readjust their estimate of its
importance as an offensive weapon.
In the early months of the war they sank a number
of the ships of the Fleet. The Pathfinder, Aboukir,
Hogue, Cressy, Hawke, Hermes, and Formidable,
were sunk in British seas. They were all old ships,
and two of them were lost because they stood by to save
the crew of the Aboukir, which had been sunk by a
submarine, and not, as was thought, by a mine.
In the Aegean, the Irresistible, Ocean, Triumph,
Majestic, and Goliath were sunk, the Inflexible crip-
pled, and the transport Royal Edward sent to the
bottom with the loss of one thousand troops. These
disasters occurred between September, 1914, and June,


1915. Since that date it would seem that ships of war
have learned to take pretty good care of themselves,
even in waters infested by submarines.
But submarines have been troublesome to the Fleet
in other ways. They have necessitated a modification
of naval strategy. On their appearance in the Mediter-
ranean, for instance, our bombarding operations had to
be suspended for a time, and the Queen Elizabeth,
though fully escorted by lighter craft, had to leave
immediately for an unknown destination. Sir lan
Hamilton’s despatch, dated June, 1915, shows that our
military operations were very much hampered by them.
“Upon such a situation,” he says, “appeared quite sud-
denly the enemy submarine on May 22. All trans-
ports had to be despatched to Mudros, for safety.
Thenceforth, men, stores, guns, horses, etc., etc., had
to be brought from Mudros —a distance of forty miles
—in fleet sweepers, and other small, shallow craft, less
vulnerable to submarine attack. Every danger and
every difficulty was doubled.”
In the North Sea, too, there were changes of
strategy, which disturbed traditions that had lasted for
centuries. The great ships-of-the-line, dreadnoughts,
as they are called, had to be escorted for protection,
and the greater the escort, the more their fighting
quality was impaired. In the old days, again, ships
that were in danger rushed to some point of concen-
tration, where they were supported by other ships.
In the presence of submarines, concentration increases
the danger, and the best policy for the time being is


to scatter. But the most important change was in the
conduct of the blockade. The use of mine and sub-
marine drove the big ships far out from the infested
waters of the enemy’s coast and harbours; the des-
troyer, the scout, and the patrol boat took their places,
and so the traditional masking blockade passed into
the watching blockade of our time, giving rise to much
controversy on relative subjects between Great Britain
and neutral Powers, especially the United States.
So much may be admitted, without conceding a
tithe of the claims advanced by Count Reventlow in
favour of the German submarine. Modification of
strategy is one thing; the control of strategy quite
another. This the Germans have never attained at
sea, by submarine or any other weapon; nor even come
within measurable distance of attaining. In their
immediate object of wearing down the strength of the
British Fleet, they failed utterly. Nearly all the
destruction, by under-water weapons, of the ships of
the Navy was done before the close of 1915, when
Captain Persius, in an article published in “The Tage-
blatt,” in Berlin, had to confess that the British Fleet*
was stronger than ever. It was because of this failure
that Admiral von Tirpitz made up his mind to employ
submarines in a way that was contrary to civilized
usage, and to the instructions issued to the captains of
his own service before the war began. From the
month of October, 1914, but more especially after Feb-
ruary 18, 1915, merchant ships were sunk at sight.


Much damage has been done to British and neutral
shipping, and the end is not yet.
The events of the past month or two justify a good
deal of diffidence in expressing an opinion on the
future destruction of merchant ships by German sub-
marines. At present the British Admiralty find con-
siderable difficulty in controlling the most efficient of
them. It is a contest between British and German
ingenuity, and the issue, so far as the safety of the
mercantile marine is concerned, is by no means decided.
But statistics of losses up to the end of 1915 are avail-
able now, and it is worth while to consider them in
the light of certain statements made during that year
by Count Reventlow. It appears that 225 British ships
of commerce were sunk by German submarines from
February, 1915, to February, 1916; and, up to the
end of 1915, the total loss in British tonnage amounted
to five and a half per cent. Assuming these figures to
be correct, the British mercantile marine suffered much
less during this year than in any of the great wars of
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
In the Seven Years’ War, which lasted from 1756
to 1763, Great Britain lost 2,500 trading ships, or an
average of nearly 360 a year. In the war against
Napoleon, the average reduction in the tonnage of the
British mercantile marine was ten per cent., and in
one year the number of ships lost amounted to over
500. But, further, it must not be imagined that while
Germany has been destroying ships of commerce, Great
Britain has been doing nothing to replace them. Bri


tish shipbuilding yards are probably the most efficient
in the world, and there are other ways by which a
wealthy country can fill up gaps in her mercantile
marine. According to the “London County and West-
minster Bank Review/ for May 16, 1916, the total
tonnage lost up to the close of 1915 was 1,534,901 tons.
But in the same period Great Britain added 1,523,750
tons to her mercantile marine. The net loss, therefore,
was 11,151 ; that is, a ship about the size of the Orvieto
or the Malwa!
So much for the “submarine blockade” of Great
Britain by Germany up to the end of 1915. So much
for the boast of Count Reventlow, in his article in the
New York press, wherein Germany is practically
credited with the invention of the submarine as an
instrument of war, and it is paraded as a greatei men-
ace to the command of the sea than the fleet in being
of the historian! The reply made by Mr. Balfour was
as stinging as it was just: “What was new in the Ger-
man use of submarines,” he said, “was not their em-
ployment against ships of war, but their employment
against defenceless merchantmen and unarmed tiaw
lers. This, it must be owned, was never foreseen,
either in Washington or London. It is purely German.
But Count Reventlow is profoundly mistaken if he
supposes that, during the year that has elapsed, these
murderous methods have affected, in the slightest
degree, the economic life of England. What they have
done is to fix an indelible stain upon the fair fame of
the German Navy.”


CHAPTER X
FRIGHTFULNESS AT SEA
Ai< ter the conduct of the German Army in Belgium,
it might have been expected that frightfulness would
be applied on sea, as well as land. It seems to be a
maxim of German policy that “military necessity”
must over-ride the ordinary usages and laws of war;
and the Report furnished by Lord Bryce has made
it clear that, to the Prussian mind, “military necessity”
arises as soon as any effective opposition is offered to
German ambitions, no matter how reasonable and
righteous that opposition may be. Though the Belgians
were acting simply in defence of their rights and
responsibilities as a free and independent nation, the
fact that they had administered a rebuff to the invad-
ing Germans at Liege, and continued their opposition,
was enough to bring them under the operation of the
policy of frightfulness.
The same policy has been applied, to their warfare
on sea and in the air. Great Britain swept the German
mercantile marine from the highways of the world in
four months, by methods that were in accordance with


the rules of the game; and Germany, had she been able,
would have applied the same policy to her people as to
the Belgians. She could not, simply because the Bri-
tish Fleet was far more powerful than her own. But,
what she could do, she did do. Her Zeppelins dropped
bombs on unfortified towns, killing women and chil-
dren ; her ships of war, not daring to come out in
force, and meet the British Fleet, made sporadic raids
on unfortified towns along the coast of England, kill-
ing, in one instance, seventy-eight women and children,
and wounding three hundred and ten.
But the chief instrument for carrying out this policy
against Great Britain has been the submarine, and,
knowing the way in which the Prussian mind works,
it is not hard to find the chief reason why. German
ships had been swept from the sea. Therefore, Ger-
many must have her revenge. She had no chance of
getting it in fair fight, by means of her surface fleet;
therefore she would get it in foul fight, by means of
her under-water craft. She was not even deterred by
the knowledge that peaceful neutral shipping would be
destroyed, and the lives of neutrals sacrificed. Ger-
many had been thwarted, and that crime had to be
avenged. Fair play was shoved aside to make way for
the hammer and the anvil, and the amazing proclama-
tion of February 4, 1915, was put into effect on Feb-
ruary 18. At first the German authorities tried to
justify themselves by arguing that the submarine was
a new weapon, unknown to warfare, and, therefore,
outside the scope of existing rules. The fact that


there were specific rules protecting the crews and pas-
sengers of merchant ships was ignored entirely. As a
matter of fact, these rules were as well known to
Germany as to other civilized nations, and this can
be shown by reference to her own instructions and the
conduct of German captains in the early part of the
war.
On August 3, 1914, before they had realized what a
sorry part their fleet was to play in this war, instruc-
tions were issued by the German Admiralty that “be-
fore destruction, all persons on board, if possible with
their personal effects, are to be placed in safety.” This
was in accordance with civilized usage, and it was the
policy carried out by Captain Muller, of the Emden,
in the Bay of Bengal. He captured six ships, sank
five of them, but sent the sixth, with all the crews and
passengers aboard, into Calcutta. The British
Admiralty showed its appreciation of Captain Muller’s
humanity by allowing him to retain his sword, after
the destruction of the Emden at Keeling-Cocos. Even
more striking was the conduct of the Captain of the
Wilhelm der Grosse, off the coast of Africa. The
Galicia was captured in the evening, inspected, and
kept under surveillance all night. Next morning the
captain of the Galicia received this message: “On
account of your women and children, I will not sink
the ship. You are released. Bon voyage.” Not long
afterward the Wilhelm der Grosse was sunk by the
Highflyer, and the crew were taken prisoners. Once
again the British Admiralty showed its appreciation of


humane conduct by informing the officers of the High-
flyer that “the German prisoners were worthy of all
seamanlike consideration.” The conduct of the cap-
tains of the Emden and the Wilhelm der Grosse shows
clearly what the opinion of German naval commanders
on this question was before the spirit of revenge took
hold of the Admiralty.
But by the end of 1914 the futility of the German
High Seas Fleet had become apparent, and Admiral
von Tirpitz decided to make good by submarine fright-
fulness. Before the end of February, the policy of
sinking merchant ships at sight was in full swing. No
proper precautions were taken, or could be taken, to
safeguard the passengers and crews, as in former wars,
and, in the case of the Falaba, those who were trying
to get away in the ship’s boats were fired upon! Neu-
tral ships, as well as belligerent, were sunk, and, al-
though the indignation of neutrals was running high,
the United States was the only nation strong enough,
and far enough away, to speak her mind plainly to
Germany. Even the United States said little when the
Cushing and the Gulflight were torpedoed. But at
last, on May 7, the Lusitania, with two thousand souls
on board, was sent to the bottom, and over one hundred
American citizens were drowned. The conduct of the
Germans in this case was no worse in quality than it
had been in dozens of cases before. It was simply
the magnitude of the crime that arrested the attention
of the world, and made men think furiously about the
German policy of frightfulness at sea.


Feeling in the United States culminated in a burst
of indignation against Germany, and, under its influ-
ence, President Wilson made a strong and humane
protest, in language that expressed the views of most
civilized men. “The objection to their present mode
of attack against the trade of their enemies lies,” he
said, “in the practical impossibility of employing sub-
marines in the destruction of commerce, without dis-
regarding those rules of fairness, reason, justice, and
humanity, which all modern opinion regards as impera-
tive.” This is sound argument, and pity it is that
President Wilson allowed Germany to trifle with him
so long on such great issues, before his ultimatum,
threatening a rupture of diplomatic relations, was
transmitted.
Throughout this war President Wilson has alter-
nated between two conceptions of his duty. At one
time he speaks as though the interests of the United
States were alone his concern; at another, as though
that country were the champion of neutral nations, and
he the spokesman for civilization. In his correspon-
dence with Germany, from the destruction of the
Lusitania to the sinking of the Sussex, the duality of
his mind is revealed. Then he stiffened his back, in
opposition to Congress, and stood our definitely again
as the spokesman of civilization. There was a sus-
pension of German submarine activity for a time; but
the sinking at sight has begun again, and the world is
waiting to see what the President of the United States
will do.


Nobody can object to the use of submarines against
ships of war, and, since Germany cannot take her
captures into harbour, it is reasonable that she should
sink them; provided she can do what civilized nations
have done for centuries—safeguard the lives of the
passengers and crews on board. To this condition she
is bound by international right, and the usages of
civilized peoples for centuries. Before this war, ships
have been sunk, and the special conditions under which
they may be sunk are known to international law.
But in no case where ships do not try to run away has
the sacrifice of human life been sanctioned. The
worst that has happened to such crews, hitherto,
has been imprisonment until the end of the war.
But where submarines are employed to sink ships
at sight, the crews and passengers cannot be safe-
guarded. At best, those who are not killed have a
chance of getting away in boats; but that is not
enough. The whole matter resolves itself into a con-
test between self-regarding nationalism and inter-
national right. A new species of boat has come into
modern warfare, and it cannot be used effectively
without violating the law of nations, and the laws of
humanity. Under these circumstances Germany
claims that law must be modified to suit the conditions
under which this new instrument can be used with
effect. If this be conceded, it is difficult to imagine
any form of wholesale murder that could not be justi-
fied, provided it is novel.


Amazing as such doctrine is when reduced to plain
terms, it does not represent the limit of Teutonic arro-
gance. On May 12, 1916, Air. McNamara, who is the
Financial Secretary to the Admiralty, stated in the
House of Commons that, during the twelve months
up to May 7, 1916, no less than twenty-two neutral
unarmed merchantmen, making no attempt to escape,
had been sunk by enemy submarines. Among the
nations of the world that pass as civilized, there is
probably no other that would venture to carry insolence
and savagery to such lengths. There can be little
doubt that of all the German States, Prussia is the one
chiefly responsible for these outrages on land, sea. and
in the air. There is a strain of brutality in the Prus-
sian character, and the Government of Germany,
dominated as it is by Prussia, has been trying, by un-
dignified and even revolting methods, to communicate
that strain to the whole of the German people. Chil-
dren in the schools have been instructed to learn the
“Hymn of Hate,” and a holiday was proclaimed to
celebrate the sinking of the Lusitania. This is nasty
and brutish, and only serves to show how little the
Prussian is affected by considerations of chivalry and
humanity. He is no sportsman. He scowls when he
is thwarted, and hates where he is beaten. With all
his enlightenment and material progress, he is sorely
in need of that kind of education which the English
Public schools afford. How far Germany, as a whole,
has been leavened by his spirit, is it difficult to say.


Undoubtedly, the people have been misinformed and
misled by an official and carefully-controlled press, as
well as by the speeches of the rulers, in the Reichstag
and out of it. The one consolation left to right-minded
men and women is that there has been a split in the
German camp over these atrocities, and especially
those for which the submarines have been responsible.
The removal of Admiral von Tirpitz has been attri-
buted to a difference of opinion between him and the
Chancellor, Bethmann-Hollweg, on this subject; and
from time to time there have been suspensions of sub-
marine activity. If these suspensions were due to any
budding respect for international usage or humanitar-
ian feeling on the part of the German Government,
there would be some ground for entertaining the hope
that they are beginning to realize a truer sense of
proportion in estimating the relative values of things
in human life. But evidence points rather to the con-
clusion that they are due to the rapid destruction of
submarines by British guns, and the fear of a rupture
of diplomatic relations with the United States. The
conviction that might is right still dominates German
policy, and there is only too good reason to believe
that if frightfulness is ever abandoned by them it will
only be because experience has proved that it does not
pay.
One of the leading defects in German mentality is
a lack of sympathetic imagination. If only they could
get a little more outside themselves, and enter into the
feelings and thoughts of other people, they would


have realized long before this the perils, as well as the
brutality, of such a policy. When they embarked on
this war they believed that the peace-loving nations of
the world were decadent nations, and that a policy of
frightfulness would terrify them into submission.
They made a great mistake. The soldiers of the
Allied armies, and the seamen of the Allied fleets, have
proved that they are, at least, as brave as those of the
Central Powers, and on such men the effect of a policy
of frightfulness is exactly the reverse of that which
the German Government and military authorities
expected, and desired. It has not only aroused the
feeling of neutral nations to a high pitch of indigna-
tion ;it has also had the effect of welding the Allies
closer and closer together in defence of those interests
that belong to our common humanity. Germany’s only
hope of getting a satisfactory peace is, as Bethmann-
Hollweg has said, in the Reichstag, to detach one
of the Allies. That is true; but every atrocity com-
mitted by Germany has the effect of infusing one
temper into the Allied governments, and consolidating
their policy. Minor differences are forgotten when
the larger interests of fair play and humanity are at
stake.
And what of its effect on the men who are actually
fighting? Every man along the Western front knows
what happened to Miss Cavell, and every seaman
remembers what happened to Captain Fryatt. The
whole world knows what women, children, and old
men have suffered; and millions who have been well


affected toward Germany, in the past, are now bitterly
estranged. Before this war began, British and German
workmen met in the common cause of the amelioration
of the lot of their fellows. On September 16, British
unions solemnly decided, in conference, to meet the
Germans on the battlefield, and nowhere else. There
is only one explanation of this change: Prussian fright-
fulness on the land, in the air, and on the sea, is an
outrage, not only to this nation or that, this class or
that, but to the whole of civilized humanity. There
is a touch of nature that makes the whole world kin,
and the Prussian, in his rage, does not understand
what this touch of nature is. He is no sport, and
there is hardly any chivalry in his composition. When
Europe was learning to be chivalrous, in the eleventh,
twelfth, and thirteenth centuries, the Prussian lived
beyond the pale of civilization.
Little wonder that Germany should lose caste among
the nations of the world, because of her conduct in
this war, notwithstanding all the enlightenment of her
people, and the undoubted bravery of her troops.
There is a passage in Rudyard Kipling’s Fringes of
the Fleet, in which he makes one of his hardy seamen
say: “Oh, if Fritz only fought clean, this wouldn’t be
half a bad show. But Fritz can’t fight clean. . . . This
war was his first chance of making his name, and he
chucked it all away for the sake of showin’ off as a
foul Gottstrafer.” This is only a little more severe
than the language of Mr. Balfour, and no man in this
world has a better reputation for finding out the good
qualities of his adversaries than Mr. Balfour.


If it be true that it is by the soul that men and
nations are great, Germany, in this war, has sacrificed
her claim to true greatness. It ought to have been
beneath the dignity of any great nation in the twentieth
century to wage war upon women, children, and old
men; and it is deplorable that so many brave men, on
sea and land, should have been driven, by instructions
from headquarters, to perpetrate such barbarities.
The best hope for Germany is that the people have
been misinformed to such an extent that they know
not what they do. As for their rulers in the Govern-
ment, the army, and the Admiralty, under whose
authority these instructions have been issued, it is
devoutly to be wished that they will be made to answer,
at the bar of justice, for the crimes they have commit-
ted against the laws and decent observances of man-
kind.




THE COMMAND OF
THE SEA




CHAPTER XI
COMMAND OF THE SEA
Of all the objects of naval warfare by far the most
important is the command of the sea, and the value of
the submarine as an effective arm of the naval service
will be determined ultimately by reference to that.
Count Reventlow, the champion of submarine fright-
fulness in Germany, has already made up his mind.
In an article published in one of the New York papers,
in 1915, he informed the world that “the German sub-
marine has asserted such power as to make the under-
water menace a more effective bar to the command of
the sea than the fleet-in-being of the historian.” This
statement shows the same regard for truth as the
announcement of “a glorious victory” by the German
High Seas Fleet at the battle of Jutland. That the
German submarines have inflicted serious damage
upon neutral and belligerent shipping is admitted; and
it cannot be denied that naval strategy has been pro-
foundly modified by the ever-present possibility of
their attacks. But, to pass from this to the assertion
that the German submarine can do more to prevent


the use of the seas than the surface craft of the
British Navy (for that is what he means) shows a
wanton disregard for obvious facts; and it is only
necessary to refer to the achievements of the Grand
Fleet in the past two years and four months to prove
it.
German submarines have been busy since the out-
break of the war, and on February 18, 1915, the block-
ade of the British Islands began. To what extent has
the British Navy been prevented from doing anything
and everything that the most powerful navy is expected
to do in times of war? The facts are known to all the
world, and any man of average intelligence can judge
for himself.
One of the most important duties of a fleet is to
convoy troops, so that all available forces may be con-
centrated upon the points of danger. At the beginning
of the war, Great Britain sent an expeditionary force
to France, consisting of over 100,000 men, and not a
single life was lost in transit. It was a very small
force, as numbers go; but it did excellent work in the
retreat from Mons, and played its part in helping to
drive back the Germans when they were only twenty
miles from the gates of Paris. It was touch and go,
even with the help of that force. What might it have
been without them? “The little more, and how much
it is,” at such critical times in this world’s history!
During the last two years and a half hundreds of
thousands of troops have been convoyed to the
various theatres of war —from New Zealand, Austra


lia, South Africa, Canada, and every other part of the
Empire, across every ocean; and the loss of the Royal
Edward was the only disaster involving serious loss of
life. All this has been done notwithstanding the activ-
ity of German submarines in the British seas and the
Aegean! How many troops has Germany been able to
convoy across the seas ? Not one. Such troops as she
gets from abroad must come by round-about ways, and
furtively—because Britain has held command of the
sea.
Germany had an empire beyond the seas, once. She
had possessions in the Pacific: part of New Guinea,
Bismarck Archipelago, part of Samoa, and Kiao-Chou.
With the help of the Australian unit and Japanese
warships, the Allies have wrested them from her. Her
empire in Africa has gone the same way. She has
lost Togoland, the Cameroons, German South-West
Africa; and the fate of German East Africa is sealed.
How many troops has Germany, with all her sub-
marines, been able to send to the help of these
dominions ? Probably none. Meantime, every part of
the British Empire is safe from the devastations of
shell-fire, and the horrors of German invasion—
because Great Britain holds command of the sea.
At the beginning of this war Great Britain had an
army of not more than 250,000; to-day she has a
national army of 4,000,000, and an Imperial
army of 5,000,000. And not only that. She
has the factories to provide munitions and equipment
for this mighty host, and we have at last reached the


stage at which British artillery is proving its superior-
ity to that of the Germans. What power has enabled
Great Britain to realize such vast military strength?
Once more, the British Fleet, which was strong
enough to hold the German High Seas Fleet at bay
from the moment war was declared. If at the begin-
ning the German High Seas Fleet had been too stiong
for the British Grand Fleet, the fate of the Empire
would have been sealed long ere this, and the people
of the Dominions subjected to all the terrors of ever-
impending attack. But, happily for them, for the
Empire, for freedom, and for civilization, the British
Navy had such undisputed command of the sea that
immediately on the outbreak of war the High Seas
Fleet was forced to retire from the open seas, and take
refuge in harbours, canals, and the restricted waters
of their neighbourhood, where it has been penned up
ever since, save for a few sporadic raids on the
coasts of Britain, and some cautious expeditions into
Heligoland Bight, and along the coast of Denmark, to
threaten our shipping from the Baltic.
And what a price Germany has paid for that humilia-
tion ! Not so much in the losses she has sustained when
her squadrons have been detected and engaged, as in
the capital expenditure on her helpless navy, and the
paralysis of her overseas trade. The most effective
work that the British Fleet can do is to destroy the
enemy’s fleet. That has not been possible, simply
because the enemy has not risked a first-class engage-
ment. But the next best thing has been done. The


German Fleet, built at a cost of £300,000,000, has
been rendered almost useless, and the inevitable result
has been, not only the destruction of her dominion
overseas, but also the loss of nearly all her overseas
trade. Not a single German merchantman dare appear
on the surface of the water outside the Baltic. A
submarine, the Deutschland, has reached American
harbours, and she has been proclaimed a ship of com-
merce. But how much merchandise can a submarine
carry, and how much will the goods cost by the time
they are delivered? The performance of the
Deutschland is not without spectacular, and, possibly,
military interest; but its commercial importance is very
slight indeed.
Here are the facts, known to all the world, that
constitute the most effective refutation of Count
Reventlow’s claim for the German submarine; but it
may be well to add the statement made by Mr. J.
Daniels, Secretary to the United States Navy, who, like
other students of naval warfare in America, is watch-
ing the progress of events at sea very closely. “The
dreadnought,” he says, “still remains the chief arm of
the naval force. The backbone of all navies must con-
sist of the strongest sea-going and sea-keeping craft
to keep command of the seas.” Whatever the future
of the submarine may be, nothing has occurred in the
present war to throw any serious doubt on the accuracy
of Mr. Daniels’ statement.
Nor is there any reason, in experience, for
believing that in any important engagement be


tween the rival fleets, the German submarine
will prove a formidable engine of destruction. Even
in those waters that are close to their own naval bases,
two such actions have been fought: the one in Heligo-
land Bight, the other off the coast of Jutland. German
submarines were at work in both, but in neither do
they appear to have done any serious damage. In the
battle of Heligoland Bight our ships were quite close
to the base at Heligoland, and German submarines
were in the vicinity; but the attacking squadron was
able to manoeuvre out of danger whenever threatened
by the submarines, and the engagement proved “fortun-
ate and fruitful” for us. Some of our ships were
damaged; but we lost none. The Germans lost two
cruisers, another disappeared in the mists, ablaze, and
other craft were damaged. In the battle off Jutland
our losses were more serious; but that was not due to
the action of submarines. In his report Admiral
Jellicoe says: “The Germans appeared to rely very
much on torpedo attacks, which were favoured by the
low visibility, and the fact that we were chasing the
fleet. A large number of torpedoes were apparently
fired, but only one took effect. That was upon the
Marlborough; but even the Marlborough was able to
continue the action.” Nor is it certain that the torpedo
which struck the Marlborough came from a submarine.
More likely it was fired by one of the many German
destroyers taking part in the action. The participation
of submarines in these engagements necessitates much
more manoeuvring, and it is also clear that the big


fighting ships need an escort of destroyers and light
cruisers to act as a screen before they begin their
bombardment; but the results of both these battles go
to show that the command of the sea is not imperilled
by their presence in battle, any more than it is by their
sporadic attacks on individual ships in the open-seas.
It is the dreadnought fleet, the fleet-in-being, or the
historic fleet, with its combination of speed, power, and
strength, that matters supremely, and, until the German
Fleet can overcome that, Great Britain’s command of
the sea is assured.
Only once, for a few hours, in the course of this
war has there been any doubt of Great Britain’s power
to hold command of the sea against Germany, and that
was removed as soon as the voice of truth was heard
above the dying fall of Teutonic bombast and men-
dacity. On May 31, 1916, an engagement between the
rival fleets took place, and a few days later the people
of the Empire were astounded by the publication of
information which, if correct, falsified all reasonable
anticipations, and implied a disaster of unparalleled
gravity to the cause of the Allies. Shortly afterwards
the strain of bitter disappointment was relieved by the
publication of further details; but it was not till the
receipt of Admiral Jellicoe’s report, about five weeks
later, that the truth was made known. There seems to
be a general consensus of opinion that the Admiralty
were to blame for the manner in which the first news
of the results of the battle was placed before the public;
but, at least, they showed a strict regard for the truth.


Not so the German Admiralty. So much were they
in need of a victory at sea, that they were determined
to proclaim one, even by the suppression of facts,
which, before long, they were forced to admit. The
succession of bulletins issued not only made them a
laughing stock, but also placed their gallant officers
and seamen in a very undignified position before the
world.
At first they announced a glorious victory, which
had sent the British rats running back into their holes!
Then they explained that some of their losses had
been concealed “for military reasons” ; and, finally, they
confessed that is was an indecisive battle; but that the
responsibility for the indecision lay with the Biitish!
In some ways the mentality of these German leadens
is difficult to understand. Having confessed to the
publication of false statements, “for military reasons,”
they expect the world to believe what they say on the
same subject immediately after! But no sane man is
likely to believe that the British Fleet was responsible;
for there is one very obvious and unassailable fact
which proves the contrary. The battle was fought on
the last day of May; on the first of June the British
Fleet was still in undisputed command of the sea, and
it has maintained it ever since. That fact settles
beyond all possible doubt the responsibility for any
indecisive result.
That we suffered heavy losses is not to be denied;
but the reasons why are clear enough from Admiral
Jellicoe’s dispatch, and they leave no doubt that the


traditions of the British Navy were upheld off Jutland
with the same gallantry and determination which has
been displayed in every other battle of the war. On
the first news of the enemy’s whereabouts, Admiral
Beatty, followed by Admiral Thomas, rushed in be-
tween the German ships and their base, fought till
their full force came in sight, and then lured them on,
till Admiral Jellicoe rushed into action at 6.20. That
was daring strategy; heavy losses were sustained in
carrying it out; but they were justified by the results,
and still more by the great objects Admiral Beatty had
in view. From 6.20 to 8.20 the German Fleet was
punished very severely, and just saved from destruc-
tion by the mists. Mists had been falling at intervals
from the beginning, obscuring most of their ships; but
at 8.20 they came to stay, and gave the German Fleet
its chance of slipping away in the ensuing darkness.
Our swift destroyers pursued them through the night,
and inflicted further losses upon them; but at dawn
the enemy were nowhere to be seen. Admiral Jellicoe
searched the horizon till 11 o’clock, and then returned
to British waters for supplies. What the German Fleet
did win was not the battle of Jutland, but the race
back to harbour; and when they arrived at Cuxhaven
the gates were closed against an enthusiastic German
public! Evidently the relics were too sacred to be
profaned by the cheers of the multitude. But it was
strange that the German authorities should throw away
such a unique opportunity of parading the evidence of
“a glorious victory.”


Notwithstanding the risks undertaken by Admiral
Beatty, it is now known that the German Fleet suffered
greater losses than the British, absolutely, and, since
they were the weaker power, their losses were much
greater relatively. But they were fortunate indeed to
get back to harbour at all. A few more hours of day-
light, and their losses would have increased in geo-
metrical proportion to ours. That is one of the terrible
possibilities of a naval battle, when one side gains the
upper hand decisively. How near it was to a complete
and final victory for the British Fleet, Admiral Jellicoe
has told us in these words: “I fully sympathize with
his (Admiral Beatty’s) feelings when the evening mist
and failing light robbed the Fleet of the complete
victory for which he manoeuvred, and for which his
ships had striven so hard.”


CHAPTER XII
THE OUTLOOK
Since the battle of Jutland the German Fleet has been
in retirement, and it will probably be a long time before
it issues forth again to run the risk of being lured into
an engagement by Admiral Beatty. It may be that
the internal condition of Germany, and the pressure
of public opinion, will force the Admiralty to issue
commands to von Scheer similar to those issued by
Napoleon to Villeneuve in 1805, when their battered
ships have been restored. If so, the sooner the better.
Allowing for all uncertainties of the sea, and they are
many, there is no reasonable ground for doubt as to
what the issue will be when the two fleets meet in full
strength, and fight to a finish. The German seamen
are brave, their officers intelligent and daring, and their
ships are worthy of an up-to-date scientific people;
but the course of the war has proved that in both per-
sonnel and materia] the British have the advantage.
If we take a wider view, and compare the combined
strength of the Allied Fleets with that of the Central
Powers, the assurance of final victory becomes doubly
sure.


But there is another way of estimating our chances
of success—by reviewing the conditions under which
similar struggles have been conducted in the past, and
noting their issue. A little more than a century ago,
the freedom of Europe was imperilled to an even
greater extent than it is to-day. By 1797 Napoleon
had been so successful that England was the only
country standing out against him, and that was because
of her geographical isolation. The British Fleet,
guarding the English Channel, and barring the way to
invasion, proved to be the rock on which the ambitions
of a despot were wrecked, and the traditions of free-
dom preserved. In 1798 Nelson won a decisive victory
at the battle of Aboukir. which not only gave him com-
mand of the Mediterranean, but also shattered Napo-
leon’s dream of an empire in Egypt and India. From
that time Napoleon realized that Britain was the great
bar to the attainment of his ambitions. His prepara-
tions for invasion were pressed on more vigorously
than ever after his return to France, and. incredible as
it may seem to us now, Russia, Prussia. Sweden, and
Denmark joined in an armed neutrality against Great
Britain, in 1800, because of her interference with their
trade, though she was then fighting single-handed
against the common oppressor and devastator of Eur-
ope. In February, 1801, Nelson punished the Danes
so severely at the battle of Copenhagen, that they
agreed to a truce; and, on the death of the Czar of
Russia, shortly afterwards, the Baltic League was
broken up. A patched-up peace was arranged for a


time, but Napoleon still worked hard for the destruc-
tion of England. Realizing his intentions, the British
Government declared war again before his plans were
completed. Nelson was sent down to blockade Toulon,
and there he waited for nearly two years before Vil-
leneuve slipped out, and made his way through the
Straits of Gibraltar into the Atlantic. Nelson followed
him to the West Indies, chased him back to Europe,
and finally caught him coming out of Cadiz Harbour,
under pressure of orders from his master at Paris.
The battle of Trafalgar finally secured Britain’s undis-
puted command of the sea, and cut off Napoleon’s com-
munications with the outside world. From that blow
he never recovered, though it took ten years more to
complete his overthrow at Waterloo.
The outlook of the Powers arrayed against despotism
in this war has never been so serious as it was in those
days. Germany has overrun Belgium, Serbia, and
Poland, and she is still in possession of a part of
France; but these conquests are small compared with
those of Napoleon on the mainland of Europe. On
the sea she never has had a chance of victory. Her
communications with the outside world were severed
from the first, and her foreign trade paralyzed. By
her diplomatic success in Bulgaria, and the conquest
of Serbia, she secured communications with Constan-
tinople and Asia Minor, which relieved her, in some
slight measure, of the consequences of the blockade at
sea. If the ferocious attack by Germans, Austrians,
Bulgars, and Turks upon Roumania should succeed,


the strain upon Germany will be greatly relaxed, and
the work of the blockading fleet very seriously im-
paired.
It is not likely that the Allies will succeed in starving
Germany into submission, in any case. She has wide
tracts of country suitable for cultivation, and the Ger-
mans understand intensive agriculture. In normal
seasons they will be able to grow enough to keep the
people alive. But there can be little doubt that Ger-
many has felt the strain economically, and that the
poorer people are finding it more and more difficult to
obtain the necessaries of life. At the present time it
looks as though the Central Powers were fighting des-
perately for the additional supplies of food and oil
that the conquest of Roumania would ensure. The
extent of their need in this respect is the measure of
the efficiency of the blockade in the North Sea. The
battles of naval warfare are few compared with those
on land, as Captain Mahan has pointed out; but it is
not always by battles that the Navy inflicts the greatest
injury upon the enemy. “It is the unremitting daily
pressure of naval force, when it has attained command
of the sea against an opponent —the continuous block-
ing of communications —which has made sea power so
decisive an element in the history of the world. ’ The
Grand Fleet has command of the sea, and Germany’s
communications by sea are blocked. The economic
condition of the Central Powers will become more and
more desperate if the pressure of • the Fleet can be
exerted to its fullest extent, and if no other line of
communications with the outside world is left open.


But much depends upon this. The conquest of Ron-
mania by the Germans, Austrians, Turks, and Bulgars
would not only be a military disaster; it would also
impair the efficiency of the blockade in the North Sea.
The line of communications between Berlin and Bagdad
would then be assured, and the products of Asia Minor
and Mesopotamia could be used to relieve the strain
upon Austria and Germany. If Russia could join
hands with Great Britain, France, and Italy across the
neck of the Balkans, the pressure of the blockade in
the North Sea might reach the point of strangulation.
But if Roumania fall, the grip of the Fleet will be
relaxed, to some extent. It is the co-operation of land
and sea forces that matters supremely, and not so
much their separate achievements. The blows on land
are all the more decisive when the unremitting daily
pressure of naval force, exerted over a period of years,
has weakened the morale and fibre of the enemy beyond
the possibility of recuperation. If the Central Powers
can be encircled with a ring of steel, the blockade may
be made terribly effective; if not, the conditions that
make possible a complete co-operation of land and sea
forces cease to exist, and the war may go on for a long
time yet, if anything more than an inconclusive peace
is to be attained.


WHCLLY SET UP AND PRINTED
IN AUSTRALIA BY
G. HASSELL & SON, ADELAIDE
