

L^jr^// ■ 0 fi Is |j\^ Ki Li o
I 11 // i “ x “ **
CTi Ilf| ▼ 11 / /
1 \i \y/jM 1
\ %&w. -
''"i^jP^H


av b o
. — - — - - "**" . _ ... . —
y X H X H it if ve xh XKit v y iry yy.y » y.y-yif.y.y y y y y
.School Board for London.
it-ir it Of » 3f-ir jr jt ot -jt'.y j'f A- A- hjV x-iil'r if it -XqA -if -.Xi jt°x° if °* - ir 3 A cA qm 0 m cmq
V\A / -\yv\y\ /^^\/-V<\/Ay\yA>X/ \/\y^/\S'.\/\/\y’-VAA7\ , \-\'\ , .V^^\/\Ay\/VAAy\-A7^'/VAAA/^y\.A'Av
S p~^l
I BOOK
vaz/ «5!" m -
' OyC'Ctyu/ct'K €€y ey /n faow*) We>
sudiy/e J^eccSi/
; , REGULAR
.. LaA-A-AAvA-Av' .vVAAAAAy AAAA\aAaA-A jgL- • v
jJSA 3 ~ ' J " V ,<




.
4
i
'




jVjr,S\accy. . 1 ' '"•
l _ /^r/SBai3cj
760
A TREACHEROUS BLOW.


YLuct m minamu#3
THE
BUSHRANGER’S SECRET
Mrs. HENRY |CLARKE, m.a..
ILLUSTRATED BY W. S. STACEY.
LONDON:
BLACKIE & SON, Limited, 49 OLD BAILEY, E.C.
GLASGOW, EDINBURGH, AND DUBLIN.


'> 9


CONTENTS.
I. A Fugitive, 7
11. Tempted ! 23
111. At Waeeandilla, 43
IV. In quest of Teeasuee, 62
V. Deadman’s Gully, 77
VI. The Teeasuee Found, 97
VII. Deseeted! - - 115
VIII. Lost in the Bush, 128
IX. Facing Death, 143
X. A Geim soet of Picnic, 158
XI. A Ruthless Villain, 176
XII. Undeb Geeen Boughs, 185


■


ILLUSTRATIONS.
“Hebe, Give it me back,” said the Bushranger, - 17
The Meeting in “Deadman’s Gully,” - - - - 95
A Treacherous Blow, .... Frontispiece. 180




THE BUSHRANGER’S SECRET.
CHAPTER I.
A FUGITIVE.
ppflWO men were sitting together in a
small outlying hut on one of the
great grazing farms of South Aus-
tralia. The hut was a comfortless place.
The floor was of beaten earth. Two bunks
for sleeping were fixed to the log wall.
Above one of the bunks hung the framed
photograph of a comely woman, with two
bright-faced lads leaning against her. It was
the only picture on the walls. A rough table
stood opposite the window, and behind the
table was a wooden bench. Above the bench
there was a shelf, and a stand for guns.
The men were sitting on the bench.
They had not long returned from a hard
days riding. The elder man was leaning


back against the wall in a heavy sleep. The
other, a slender, dark-eyed fellow, hardly
more than a lad, was looking at him with a
gloomy contemptuous irritation in his glance.
“ Better asleep than awake, though/’ he
muttered to himself, after a moment. “ What
can he talk about but cattle and horses?”
He shrugged his shoulders, and got up from
his seat and stretched himself. The dog
lying at the older man’s feet, with its paw
resting on one of them, raised its head
sharply at Gray’s movement, but did not
attempt to get up even when Gray went to
the door and opened it, letting the light of
their lamp flow out in a steady stream.
All round the hut stretched the gray level
grass-lands, rolling away in vast monotony to
a far horizon. A wide sky arched over them,
in which the stars were shining with a soft
yet brilliant splendour. Gray glanced care-
lessly up at that glorious sky. He believed
himself to be endowed with a keen sense of
the beautiful. He prided himself on his dis-
taste for ugly surroundings. When he had
earned the fortune he had come to Australia
to earn he meant to prove to the world how


keen and true his artistic tastes were. But
he glanced carelessly up at the shining stars.
They had no message for him.
After standing in the doorway a moment
he turned back into the hut, shutting the
door behind him with a sudden bang that
made Harding start up, rubbing his eyes.
“Why, I must have been asleep!” he said
with a surprised air. He drew himself up to
his full height, towering like a good-tempered
giant over Gray’s slight figure. “ I’m tired
out, and that’s a fact,”he added apologetically.
“I think I’ll turn in.” Gray did not answer.
He flunsr himself down on the bench and
O
began to pare his finger-nails, looking at
each finger critically as he finished it, and
taking no notice of Harding. The elder man
regarded him doubtfully.
“ In a wax, old man?” he said in a depre-
cating voice. Gray flung him a vicious look
over his shoulder, and returned to his nails.
Harding’s face had a very tender expression
in it as he advanced a step and put out his
hand to touch the young man’s shoulder.
“ If it’s anything I’ve done,” he began in a
shuffling, awkward, kindly tone —


Gray turned upon him with startling
suddenness.
“Anything you’ve done 1 ?” he demanded,
squaring his arms on the table, and fixing his
dark glance on Harding. “You needn’t flatter
yourself that I care a rap for what you do or
don’t do. Turn in, and leave me to myself.”
“ Come, come, Gray, don’t take a fellow
like that. You’re tired out; I can see you’re
just tired out.”
“ I am tired out,” responded Gray grimly.
“ Tired of it all. Tired and sick of you along
with the rest of it. A pretty life this is to
live. A pretty companion you make, don’t
you?”
“Well, well, things may better soon,” said
the other soothingly. “ I wish I was more
book-learned for your sake, old fellow. But
that’s past wishing for, ain’t it? And you’ll
have to make the best of me for a spell.”
“ Best or worst, I can’t endure this life any
longer,” returned Gray impatiently. “ I’ll
ride over to the station to-morrow and give
it up; or end it quicker than that perhaps;”
and he glanced up with a dark look at the
loaded gun lying across the shelf.


Harding knew Gray well enough to be
able to disregard that look, but he spoke very
seriously.
“ You'll not be such a foolish lad as to
throw up your berth in a fit of temper. This
won’t last much longer. You will be called
in to the station in a week or two and given
a better post; and it’s your duty to stick on
here till you’re called in, you see.”
“Duty!” Gray flung the word at him
like a missile.
Harding’s mild eyes looked at him in
gentle reproof.
“ It’s a fine thing to do, my lad. No man
can do more if he lived in a king’s palace.
And a man who does his duty is greater than
a king.”
“ That’s all rubbish, talk like that,” re-
turned Gray sharply. “You just drop it,
Harding.”
He got up, thrusting his hands deep into
his pockets, and leant against the wall. His
eyes went round the hut.
“A king’s palace!” he said with a hard
laugh. “ Verily it needs strong imagination
to think of such a place here. What a hole


to live in! But 111 not stand it much
longer.”
Harding did not answer this time. He
went up to his bunk and took from under the
pillow his little shabbily bound Bible and sat
down to read his evening chapter.
Gray watched him moodily; but in a
moment his attention was drawn off by the
strange behaviour of the dog, which, when
Harding had sat down on his bunk, had
crawled under it.
But it had come out again almost at once,
and now stood in the middle of the hut,
with its head bent and its ears upraised in
the attitude of intent listening.
“ What’s the matter with the dog?” said
Gray. “He hears somebody.”
Harding looked up.
“Nobody ever comes this way; it’s out
of the track. Come here, Watch. You’re
dreaming, old fellow.”
The dog turned its head and looked at its
master, gave a slow wag of its tail to show
that it heard his voice, and then with a dash
it sprang at the door, barking fiercely.
Harding got up and flung back the door.


His movement was so sudden, that a man
who had crept up to the hut and was now
leaning against the door had no time to re-
cover himself, and staggered forward into
the hut. Watch retreated, still growling
fiercely, but restrained from attacking the
stranger by a gesture of its master. Gray
made a clutch at the gun above his head, but
the next moment withdrew his hand. That
pitiful, abject, trembling fugitive was not a
man to take arms against.
The stranger staggered across the hut and
crouched down against the opposite wall,
breathing in short hurried pants. His face
was painfully thin, and as white as death.
From a long jagged wound, half hidden by
his matted hair, blood was trickling in a
dark slow stream. The clothes he wore
were torn to tatters. You could see his skin
through the rents.
He crouched back against the wall, hugging
his arms against his breast, and looking from
Gray to Harding with a wild agonized en-
treaty in his eyes. It was the look of a
hunted animal appealing for mercy rather
than the look of a man asking help of fellow-


men. He was evidently unable to speak.
He tried to articulate something, but his
baked, blistered lips refused their office.
“ He’s just done for,” said Gray. Harding
nodded, and going up to the pannikin of cold
tea on the shelf took out some in a cup and
held it to the stranger’s lips. He drank it
up greedily and then words came to him.
“Don’t give me up,” he cried out in a
strange hoarse scream, and fell along the floor
huddled up in a dreadful heap.
The two men looked at each other.
“ It’s plain enough to see what he is,” said
Gray with a slight shrug of the shoulders.
“ Shall we have to entertain the rest of the
gang, do you think?”
“The police, more likely, lad. They’re
close on his track, I fancy.”
He bent over the man and straightened
him out. Gray did not attempt to help
him; he stood looking down at the wretched
fugitive with a cold unsympathizing curiosity
in his handsome face as he said:
“ He isn’t dead, is he?”
As he spoke the man opened his eyes and
gazed up at them. Wild gleaming dark


eyes they were, looking all the darker for
the haggard pallor of his face. He raised
himself on his elbow and made a clutch at
his breast. There was something hidden
there, and he kept his hand closed upon it.
Harding put the cup with more tea to his
lips again, and again he drank greedily. Then
he tried to raise himself into a sitting posture,
but sank back on the floor.
“I’ll cheat the beaks after all,” he said
hoarsely. A grim smile flickered over his
face. “ I swore I’d never be caught.”
He looked from one man to the other.
“ They’ll make no gallows-bird o’ me,” he
added with a sort of hoarse chuckle. He
still kept his hand clutched upon his breast
Gray noticed the action, and a vivid curiosity
rose up in him to know what the man kept
so jealously hidden there. He must have
shown this in his face, for the man addressed
him sharply.
“What are you starin’ at, eh? Do you
think I’ve got the Kohinoor hidden about
me? Well, I ain’t got it.”
“I don’t think anything about you, my
man,” replied Gray loftily. He turned to


Harding. “ What are we going to do with
him?”
“ Lend me a hand and we’ll lift him on
my bunk,” said Harding.
“ I’ll lie here,” broke from the man. “ You
just leave me alone.” He pushed away the
food Harding offered him. “ I can’t swallow
Just leave me alone.”
Gray shrugged his shoulders and walked
to the door. The man’s eyes followed him
with a suspicious glance.
“Thinks himself a fine gentleman, it’s
plain,” he muttered. Then he beckoned to
Harding. “Do you know Princes Street,
Adelaide, mate?” he whispered.
Harding nodded.
“No. 5 Princes Street, top floor. You
give two knocks. Write that down.”
Harding took out his worn pocket-book
and wrote it down. The man lay staring
up at him, then with a sudden effort, as if
his mind was at last made up, he dragged a
tattered scrap of yellow paper from his
breast and held it up to Harding.
“ Send it — there ,” and he feebly nodded at
the pocket-book in Harding’s hand.


|p9pPf*'*' Jt f
mu
- — ™1*- w
■>■ lm II > l «.l.iMi>* l —IXMfcrt— ■ .■■ii.ii.iiii ■ -. ,„., ...itf ■-.. ~ I—I u—*. ■>,..> aM «a»,»it^..^
“here, give it me back,” said the bushranger.




Gray was still standing in the doorway,
looking out over the level pastures. He half
expected to hear the gallop of well-trained
horses, the shout of authoritative voices; but
all was still, the police had missed the track.
He shut the door and came back into the hut.
“ Make your mind easy, my friend,” he
said in a half-sneering tone. “ It's all quiet
outside.”
The man gave him a dark look and raised
himself towards Harding.
“ Here, give it me back,” he said, with a
hasty snatch at it. “Your pahs no call to
• j yy
see it.
Harding had raised the paper towards the
lamp-light, and was looking scrutinizingly
at it. It seemed to be a rough map. There
was a wavy line that evidently represented
the course of a ravine or gully, and on each
side were jagged marks that betokened rising
ground. Right across the paper ran the
words in large ill-formed characters:
“Deadmaris Gully”
About the middle of the paper there was
a sort of big blot, and underneath in smaller
words was written:
(760) B


“ Big gum. Dig jive feet due south from
holer
Gray came leisurely up to Harding’s side.
“What is it?” he said, holding out his
hand for the paper.
A scowl came over the face of the man on
the ground. He flung himself upward and
snatched the paper from Harding’s hand
with a violent oath. The effort was too
much for him, and he fell back groaning and
helpless. But he still kept the paper clutched
in his right hand, and his eyes fixed them-
selves on Gray with something of the look
of a trapped wild beast.
“ Keep off, can’t you! ” he gasped out.
“ A pretty gentleman you are, pryin’ and
sneakin’ like that.”
Gray stood over him, looking down upon
him with a cold cynical regard that seemed
to madden the man.
“ Better step back and leave him to me,”
whispered Harding.
Gray laughed.
‘All right! but play fair, old fellow.”
Harding’s mild eyes looked their wonder
at him, but Gray only laughed again and


went back to the table, where he sat with
his head propped on his hands watching the
two.
Harding dragged his box out from under
his bunk and sat down on it. The man lay
still for a moment and then painfully raised
himself into a sitting posture against the
wall.
“ Look here/’ he said. “Do you think
I’m dyin’?”
“ Yes,” said Harding briefly.
“ Before mornin’?”
“ I don’t believe you have many hours to
live.”
“Right, that’s what I think myself. I’ve
cheated the beaks, eh'?”
Harding was silent. The man looked
sharply at him.
“You’ve got that address written down?”
“Yes, but I can’t send that paper.”
“You can’t send it?”
The words dropped slowly from the man’s
lips.
“Of course I can’t,” returned Harding.
“You know that well enough.”
“ You won’t send it,” repeated the man


again, with a dull rage in his voice. The
paper was still clutched in his hand, and
he looked at it and then up at Harding.
“ There’s a fortin in it,” he whispered under
his breath. “Bill ’ull go shares. Here, you
take it. You go to 5 Princes Street, top
floor, and ask for Bill Clay. He’ll go shares,
and thankful.”
Harding made no attempt to take the
paper. He merely said:
“ Tear it up if you like, but if you give it
to me I shall hand it over to the police.”
The man stared at him with a fierce
incredulity in his gleaming dark eyes.
“ There’s a fortin in it,” he repeated, as if
the words must convince Harding of his
foolishness —“ a fortin, mate. And you
carn’t miss the place. Bill, he knows Dead-
man’s Gully.”
He held out the paper, but Harding shook
his head and said:
“ You are wasting your words.”
“ You won’t send it? Look here, just look
here.” He stopped to moisten his dry lips,
and then went on:
“ You’ve heard of Tom Bearing?


Harding nodded. It was the name of a
noted bushranger, whose last crime had
been a daring robbery of the chief bank of
Adelaide.
“ Well, I’m Tom Hearing. Now you
know.”
Harding gazed silently at him. He could
not get the right words to speak, but it did
not need words to make Hearing understand
the intense ardent desire to help him that
was flooding Harding’s soul. It affected
the man strangely. He forgot the buried
treasure for a moment. The paper fluttered
out of his hand and fell on the floor as he
cried:
“ You’re sorry for me; sorry for me!”
“ I’m dead sorry for you, lad,” said Harding
with slow fervent utterance. “You’ve been
spending your life in getting trash like that”
—he waved his hand toward the paper. “And
now you’ve got to die, and go before God.
He’ll be sorry for you too. If I’m sorry, a
man like me, what must God’s sorrow be for
such a life as yours has been! Hon’t think
about that hateful money, lad. Let it lie
where you’ve laid it if you like.”


Harding took the paper up and thrust it
back into the man’s fingers as he said:
“ Tear it up. But you’ve got a chance to
show you’re ashamed for what you’ve done.
Giive the money back to those you stole it
from. ’Tis all you can do now to make
amends.”
The man gazed irresolutely at him.
“ You talk mighty fine, but what’s to
hinder you grabbin’ the whole blessed lot 1 ?”
“ Nothing.”
That single word said everything. Bearing
stared fixedly at Harding for a moment, and
then thrust the paper into his hand.
“ Here, take it,” he said. “ And if there’s
anything good you’ve got to say to me, let’s
hear it. I’ll listen to you, old man. You
act up to what you talk of.”


CHAPTER II
TEMPTED!
BEARING died next day just after sun-
rise, They buried him down by the
creek, out of sight of the hut.
“ So that’s the end of Mr. Tom Bearing,”
said Gray, as they turned away and walked
back towards the hut. “He didn’t manage
well, did he?”
Harding gave him one of his pained, won-
dering looks.
“Don’t talk like that, dear lad,” he said,
“ you don’t mean it, you know.”
Gray gave a laugh that had not much
mirth in it.
“What a fellow you are, Harding! You
insist on everybody being as virtuous as
yourself. But I mean exactly what I say.
Why did Mr. Tom Bearing take to robbing
his neighbour unless he could insure himself
against being found out? It may be bad to


be a rogue; it’s unpardonable to be known
for one.”
“ What difference does it make in the sin,
lad?” said Harding, with a sorrowful look at
him. “And it’s the sin we’ve got to think
of.”
“ Yes, I know that’s your view,” said Gray,
with a scarcely concealed sneer. “ But it’s a
sadly old-fashioned one, my dear fellow.”
Harding was silent.
O
“ It’s only the fear of being found out that
keeps men honest,” Gray went on after a
moment. “ We’re told, from our youth up,
that * Honesty is the best policy,’ and most
of us are sensible enough to believe it —and
so we’re honest.”
“Don’t you believe it, lad?” burst with
emphasis from Harding; and not even Gray’s
flippant rejoinder, “Not believe that ‘ Honesty
is the best policy?’ you can’t mean that?”
was able to check his eagerness to speak.
He stopped in the path and laid his hand on
Gray’s arm, more moved than Gray had ever
seen him before.
“ You wouldn’t talk like that if you’d seen
that poor fellow die, Gray,” he said. “There’s


more difference between doing riglit and
doing wrong than just that you get punished
for wrong-doing if you’re found out. Sin
drags a man down, lad; it eats the manhood
out of him. It makes a ruin of what’s best
in him.”
The words fell on ears dull to their mean-
ing. And Harding was quickly silent; speech
was always a difficult thing to him. He had
never spoken so earnestly to Gray before^
When they came back to the hut Harding
took out the tattered sheet of yellow paper
from his breast-pocket and placed it in the
small desk upon the shelf.
“ One of us must take that over to the
station,” he said. “ The bank authorities
will be glad enough to get it.”
Gray had heard enough of the conversation
between Harding and Hearing to know what
the paper was about, though Harding had
not mentioned it before.
He stood at the door, swinging his heavy
stock-whip in his hand.
“ I should like to have a look at it,” hr
said carelessly.
“So you shall, lad. And I think you’d


better go over witli it. But we'll talk of
tliat to-night"
“ What made him hide the money, do you
know?" he asked.
“He didn’t say. The police were after
him, I expect, and he hoped to be able to get
back sometime and dig it up."
“ I wonder if he had told any of his friends
and acquaintances?" said Gray, looking up at
the desk where Harding had put the map.
“ If so, I wouldn’t give much for the bank’s
chance of getting the money."
“He hadn’t told a soul," was Harding’s
answer. “He wanted me to send the map
to some mate of his, but he thought better
of that afterwards."
“ Better?" Gray lifted his dark eyebrows.
“ What does the bank want with the money?
It’s rich enough to stand the loss. It isn’t
as if he had robbed a poor man, you know.
It’s the best thing I’ve heard of him, his
wanting to send that map to his mate."
“ Stolen money does no good to anybody,"
said Harding rather shortly.
“ It didn’t do any good to him at anyrate,"
said Grav. He moved from the door to let


Harding pass. “ I suppose we must start,”
he went on with a yawn. “ Another day of
this hateful stock-riding! and another day
of it to-morrow, and the next day, and the
next day! How am I going to stand it, I
wonder?”
Harding had disappeared into the stable,
and Gray said the last words to himself.
There was a heavy frown on his handsome
young face, bitter discontent in his dark
eyes. When Harding brought his horse to
him he scarcely thanked him, and he rode
away by his side in sullen silence.
When they returned that night, Harding
was too fagged out to talk of anything. He
went off into a heavy sleep directly after
supper, and Gray found it impossible to wake
him sufficiently for rational conversation.
The desk in which he had placed the
paper was not locked, and Gray took out the
paper and sat down by the lamp to study it.
It was very easy to understand. Anyone
who knew Headman’s Gully could not fail to
find the treasure, Gray thought to himself.
And his thoughts ran on something like
this:


“ Suppose I had found this map, not
knowing whose it was, and had gone to dig
in Headmans Gully on the chance, what a
wonderful and blessed change it would have
made in my life? No more hateful stock-
riding; no more dreary days spent with this
dull-witted Harding; but a glad return to
civilized England, and a rich cultured life in
congenial society. If it only had happened
so! Yet, even now —?”
But there Gray’s thoughts took pause.
The secret was not his alone. It was shared
by Harding. Even if Harding would allow
him to — But Harding would not, and
there was an end of it.
They arranged at breakfast next morning
that Gray should ride over to the station the
day after and carry the paper with him.
From the station it could be easily sent in to
the inspector of police with the report of
Hearing’s death.
Gray got the paper down for another look
at it.
“ I believe I’ve heard you speak of Dead
man’s Gully, Harding.”
“ That’s most likely, old man. I know the


place well. I was stationed within a mile
of it once. You know Rodwell’s Peak?"
“ Haven't the honour," said Gray flip-
pantly. He got up and put the paper back
in the desk. “Rodwell’s Peak and Dead-
mans Gully! The Australian mind isn't
gifted with imagination in regard to names."
“Deadman’s Gully got its name rightly
enough. It was the haunt of a gang of
bushrangers. A track runs right by the
mouth of it, and they buried the travellers
there that they waylaid. That wasn’t in my
time, but I’ve heard old Jebb speak of it.
He went with the police there once. A lonely
dismal spot, he said, between high rocks, with
a few trees in the middle."
“ Our friend Bearing knew the spot well,
it seems."
“Yes; but he didn’t belong to that lot.
He used it as a hiding-place, I fancy. He’d
had a miserable life from what he told me."
Gray was putting on his boots, and ap-
parently paying but little attention to Hard-
ing’s remarks.
“ I suppose you could find it, though?" he
said carelessly.


“ Easily enough. You’ve just got to follow
the track till Rodwell’s Peak is right in front
of you. You’ve never been in the uplands,
have you, Gray?” Harding broke off to say.
“ It’s grand scenery. You ought to go there
one day.”
“ Suppose we go there now.”
Gray had finished putting on his boots,
and was taking his whip down from the
nail. He said it laughingly, looking back at
Harding over his shoulder. Harding, who
was washing the dishes at the table, returned
his laughing look with a wondering glance.
“How could we? Who’d look after the
stock?”
“ Leave them to take care of themselves,
the ugly brutes,” went on Gray in the
same laughing way. “ Let us run up to
Headman’s Gully and appropriate that coin,
Harding. What do you say to that plan,
eh?”
Harding laughed, but half-sadly.
“ I believe you’d make a joke of anything,
lad. But don’t joke about that money. It
don’t seem right.”
“ It isn’t a joke the bank would appreciate


at any rate,” returned Gray, with another
laugh.
He did not continue the subject.
“You get a talk with Mr, Morton, lad,”
said Harding to him, as they stood outside
the hut, ready to start for their day’s work.
“Hell listen to you, I know. Tell him
you’re tired of the work here.”
“What’s the good of telling him that?” re-
turned Gray, with a shrug of his shoulders.
“I’m tired of work everywhere—tired and
sick of this horrible country, and everything
and everybody in it.”
“Well, Morton might help you to a post
in Adelaide,” said Harding, who had been
much troubled by Gray’s constant despond-
ency of late. “You’d have better company
there. It’s more like England, you know.”
“ What post could he get me in Adelaide?”
returned Gray, with a bitter irony in his
tone. “ And do you think it would be any
pleasure to me to sit in an office and see the
carriages driving by? I had enough of that
in England. No, I’d be off to the diamond
fields if I’d the cash for the journey. Do
you think Morton would lend me that?”


Harding shook his head sorrowfully.
“ I wish I knew how I could help you,
lad. I can’t bear to see you like this. I
wish Polly was here. She’d know how to
talk to you better than I do.”
Gray cast a scornful look at his companion’s
troubled face. It rankled in his heart that
Harding should pity him.
“Are we going to stand talking here all
day?” he said irritably. “Aren’t you going
to get the horses out?”
They rode off in different directions that
morning.
Gray went on a long round. His ride
took him to a distant part of the run, from
which he could get a glimpse of the far-off
mountains. The peak towering up in the
blue air so far above its fellows was Rod-
well’s Peak. Gray remembered now that
Harding had pointed it out to him when
they had been together at this spot. He
checked his horse and paused for some time
gazing at the peak. Close under it was
Headman’s Gully! Gray knew well enough
how deceptive distance was in that clear air.
He knew how far off those hills really were;


but the sight of Rodwell’s Peak seemed to
bring the money close within his grasp, to
give the convict’s story a reality it had
wanted before. It was with a darker face,
and a heart overflowing with bitterness, that
he left that spot and turned his horse’s head
homewards.
Harding was not at home when he returned.
This was a new cause for vexation, for Gray
had to light the fire and prepare the tea, a
task he hated. It was with a muttered
curse against Harding that he set about it,
and he was ready with a very unpleasant
greeting for him when he should at last
appear.
Gray was very slow and awkward over his
unaccustomed work; but tea was at last got
ready. Gray finished his meal, and still
Harding had not come.
It was getting dark now; the stars were
coming out; the wide outlines of the pas-
tures were growing indistinct. Gray went
outside the hut and looked searchingly in
the direction from which he expected Hard-
ing to come. But there were no signs of
him.
(760) C


Up to this point Gray had not even won-
dered at his lateness; he had only felt an-
noyed at it. But now a wild thrill went over
him. Had something happened ? Had
Harding met with some accident?
Gray caught hold of the top rail of the
fence to steady himself as the thought swept
over him. It brought such a throbbing of
wild hope with it that Gray recoiled at his
own feelings, but the feelings remained. He
could not crush them out. He knew—even
while the knowledge horrified him —he knew
that if Harding did not return, if some dark
fate had overtaken him, that he would be
glad —yes, glad! For then the secret would
be his alone. Then there would be nothing
to prevent him from taking possession of the
buried treasure.
But it was early yet. He and Harding,
Gray reflected, had often been out together
as late; only, Harding had said so decidedly
that he should be back long before dusk.
What could be keeping him?
Gray left the hut and walked for some
distance along the grassy plain, but he could
see nothing, hear nothing. He “coo’eed”


once or twice, but there was no answer. All
was dark and still under the starry sky.
He went back, and sat down in the hut
and waited. Once or twice he thought of
taking his horse and riding out to search for
Harding. But that would be of no use, he
reflected. Harding had had a wide stretch
of country to cover. It was a million chances
to one that he could find him. So Gray sat
still and waited.
Towards midnight he rose, drawn by a
horrible sort of fascination, and took the
paper from Harding’s desk. He spread it
out on the table, and sat down to study it.
The more he looked at it the more easy it
all seemed to be. It was such an absolutely
safe thing. No one could possibly know the
contents of that paper but himself and
Harding. If Harding never came back he
would be the sole owner of the secret.
Gray made his plans as he sat there with
his eyes fixed on the faded, dirty sheet.
He would destroy the paper —he did not
need to keep it now; he knew its contents
too well. Then he would give up his work
at the first opportunity, and after waiting a


certain time would make his way to Dead-
mans Gully, get the money, and be off to
England. Then he would begin to live his
life in earnest.
Dazzling visions of that new life began to
rise before Gray. Not a life of vulgar dissi-
pation—Gray was not that sort of man; he
loathed coarseness and riot —but a life of
cultured ease, of refined luxury, rich in all
the beautiful things that wealth could bring
him.
A sudden noise without brought him back
with a shock to present surroundings. He
rose hurriedly and pushed the paper back in
the desk. He thought Harding had returned.
But it was only his own horse moving un-
easily in the stable. It was missing its
companion, and was restless and unhappy.
Gray soothed it as well as he could, and
then went out once more to look across the
plain. But dark and silent the land lay be-
neath the stars. No sound, no movement.
Gray went back into the hut and sat down
again; but he did not touch the paper any
more. The certainty that Harding would
never return began to grow upon him, and


he was frightened at himself. It was as if
his half-formed wishes had brought about
Harding’s fate.
The hours passed, and at last the dawn
came —a clear, beautiful dawn, with a fresh
wind blowing over the grass and a rosy
radiance flooding the sky.
Gray went out once more to look along
the horizon. This time his search was not
in vain. Almost at once he discerned a
small moving object against the sky. It was
moving slowly towards the hut. Gray knew
at once what it was. It was the dog, and
Harding must be close behind.
The dog came slowly on, moving with
heavy, dragging steps, very unlike its usual
joyous bounds; and it was quite alone. Gray
could see no other moving thing along the
plains. The dog had come back, but not its
master.
Gray hurried forward to meet it. He
saw the dog leap up when it caught sight of
him, and make a dash forwards, but before
it had gone a dozen steps it slackened its
pace again and began to drag itself slowly
forward as if utterly worn out.


It was a pitiable object to look at. Its
beautiful coat was matted with blood and
dust. One of its ears was almost torn away,
and its body was covered with wounds. But
it dragged itself onward, moaning now and
then, until it got near Gray. Then it sank
down on the grass and lay there, faintly
wagging its tail, and fixing its eyes on Gray
with a pathetic, supplicating glance.
It was plain to see that the dog had been
attacked and sorely wounded. Gray surmised
that one or more of the herd had turned
savage, and in conflict with them Watch
had got his wounds. He bent over the dog
and unfastened its spiked collar.
“Poor old fellow, what — V*
He broke off suddenly. A scrap of paper
fastened by a string to the collar caught his
eye. Some words were scrawled on it:
“ Badly hurt. Watch will show —”
There was an attempt at another word or
two but they were illegible.
Gray read the paper and let it flutter from
his fingers to the ground. The next moment
he picked it up again, and crushed it between
his fingers.


He had not made up his mind what to do;
but the thought flashed through him as he
saw the paper lying on the ground, that it
might be necessary to destroy it, if—
If what? Gray hardly dared finish the
thought, even in the secrecy of his own
soul.
The dog followed his actions with a dumb
pathetic glance, and then slowly struggled
to its feet. It stood looking up at Gray,
lifting one paw towards him with an in-
describable air of supplication in its whole
attitude. Then it turned, and began to
move in the direction it had come from,
looking round at every painful step to see if
Gray would follow.
A rush of pitiful feeling swept over Gray.
He ran back towards the hut with one
thought uppermost in his mind, to get his
horse and go with the dog. Everything else
was forgotten. When he had run a short
distance he looked round at Watch and
whistled. The dog was lying on the grass
regarding him, but it refused to come at his
whistle.
Gray stood still, and began to argue with


himself. It was absurd to start at once.
Watch would die on the way. It would be
far better to wait for some hours till the poor
creature was rested. Harding, in all proba-
bility, was already dead. Still he would go
—of course he would go; but not just yet.
It would be the height of absurdity to start
just now. He would fetch Watch some
water and food where it lay, if he could not
get the dog to go back to the hut.
He whistled again, but Watch made no
response. It lay with its head between its
paws, and its eyes still fixed on Gray.
“ Stay there, then,” muttered he impa-
tiently, and went on towards the hut. The
dog was still lying in the same place when
he brought the food and water for it. It ate
and drank greedily, and then rose and shook
itself with a glad, eager movement, and ran
a few steps forward. It was pitiful to see
the change that went over the dog when on
turning its head it saw that Gray was
walking steadily back towards the hut. It
lay down again, and gave a series of short
barks and then a long pitiful howl when it
found that Gray still went steadily on.


Gray did not turn round this time. He
went into the hut, and sat down to think
the matter over. What was the use of going
with the dog at all? he began to say to him-
self. Would it not be better to go over to the
station at once? or, better still, go later on
in the day, so as to reach the station in the
evening when the men would have come in
from their work? Yet —was not every mo-
ment precious? If he went at once with
the dog, might he not be in time?
He sat thus, swaying to and fro between
different decisions, till a violent scratching at
the door roused him. He got up and flung
back the door. Watch stood there with
drooping tail, and eyes full of dumb entreaty.
Gray shut the door sharply on him. “ Lie
down, sir!” he exclaimed imperatively. The
sight of the dog filled him with rage. Watch
whined once or twice; but then came silence.
Gray sat down again at the table. “ I will
not go,” he said to himself. And he put the
thought of Harding from him, and tried to
plan how he would carry out his scheme.
But suddenly, before he was aware, a wave
of remorseful shame came over him, and he


sprang to his feet as one awaking from some
hideous dream. He grasped his whip and
hurried to the door; but, —
The dog was gone.


CHAPTER 111.
AT WARE AND ILL A.
AN hour after, Gray was riding swiftly
across the plains on his way to the
station. He was urging on his horse with
voice and hand and spur, riding as if for
dear life, yet even while he rode he was
making up his mind to keep back from Mr.
Morton all knowledge of Hearing’s map. Of
Hearing’s death he was bound to tell him,
but he would say nothing of the map. If
Harding was found it would be so easy to
say he had forgotten it in his anxiety; if
Harding— Gray did not finish the sentence
to himself, but he determined to keep back
the map.
It was not much past noon when the
plains began to give place to undulating
ground, richer in vegetation, and with great
clumps of dark-foliaged trees here and there;
and it was soon after that that Gray caught


liis first glimpse of the river, and saw the
roofs of the station gleaming in the sunlight.
Mr. Morton had spent the morning watch-
ing the men at work on the new cottages he
was building near his own house for his head
shepherds and stock-keepers. They were
comfortable, roomy cottages, looking down on
the river, with gardens before them, which
Mr. Morton intended to be as well stocked
and as pretty as his own.
“ They will be finished in another week,”
he said to his wife. He had come back to
the house across the garden, and found her
sitting in the shady verandah. “ And I have
made up my mind, Minnie, who’s to have the
one we meant for Murray.”
Mrs. Morton put down her needle-work,
and looked eagerly at her husband. Murray
had lately left them to start a run of his own,
and Mr. Morton had been undecided who
should take his post.
“ I shall give it to Harding,” he said.
“Til ride over and tell him so to-morrow.
You’ll like having him on the station, won’t
o ))
you {
" I am very glad indeed,” said little Mrs.


Morton with energy. “ And how delighted
he will be. He will be able to get everything
ready before his wife and boys get here.
They don’t leave England till next week.
He was telling me all about them when
last he was over here.”
“ Oh, I knew he was a great favourite of
yours, my dear,” said her husband with a
well-pleased look. “ And if he isn’t as sharp
as some, he is as true as steel. I thought it
all over this morning, and I believe he’s my
best man.”
Mrs. Morton was called into the house at
that moment, and her husband strolled into
the garden to await his summons to the mid-
day meal. He had not been there many
moments when his quick ear caught the
sound of rapid hoof-beats on the road below
the house. A gate from the garden led into
the road, and Mr. Morton hurried towards
it. Gray had intended to ride up to the
other side of the house, but when he saw
Mr. Morton at the gate he checked his horse
and flung himself off. There was no need
for him to speak for Mr. Morton to know he
brought bad news. His whole frame was


trembling as he stood steadying himself by
his horse; his lips were white as death.
“ Something has happened to Harding, is
that it?” exclaimed Mr. Morton when Gray
had twice tried to make his voice audible
and failed.
“ I fear so,” Gray gasped out. “He has
not come back. He started yesterday morn-
ing for Big Creek, and he has not come
back.”
Gray had determined beforehand what to
say, but he had not known it would be so
difficult. His eyes fell before Mr. Morton’s
glance, as if that glance could read his soul.
But Mr. Morton had never felt so warmly
towards Gray as he did at that moment.
He was a better fellow than he had thought
him, he said to himself, to feel Harding’s
disappearance so keenly.
“ Look here, my lad,” he said kindly, “ you
£0 into the house and ask Mrs. Morton to
give you something to eat. You’re just tired
out, you know, and won’t be fit for anything
till you’ve had a rest. Oh, you shall go with
us,” he added as he saw Gray’s hesitating
look. “ But we can’t start for another hour.


I must send over to Billoora for a man or
two. Don’t be so downhearted about it,
Gray. We shall find him, never fear.”
But Mr. Morton’s cheerful prophecy was
not destined to be verified. The search for
Harding was long and thorough —and fruit-
less. His horse was found lying dead, with
an ugly wound in its neck from the horn
of a bull; but Harding and his dog were
gone.
Gray grew very worn and haggard in
those weeks of waiting. His youth went
from him. They attributed his changed
looks at the station to his grief for Harding.
It was enough to unhinge any man, they
said—that mysterious loss of his mate. And
in this explanation they were partly right.
At first, Gray’s remorse was almost more
than he could bear. He was one of the
most eager in the search-party. He rode
day after day across those barren wastes of
back-country, and spared no effort to find
some sign of the missing man. But when
the search was at last given up as hopeless,
when those on the station began to take
Harding’s death for granted, and life began


to flow on in the ordinary channel, then
Gray’s mind went back to the map he had
destroyed, and the treasure hidden in Dead-
man’s Gully.
He was thinking of it one afternoon as he
was riding across to Billoora on an errand
for Mr. Morton. It was a clear beautiful
afternoon, and the air on the grassy uplands
was fresh and bracing. Gray might have
taken the river road, which was a mile or
two nearer, but it would have led him past
the cottages, and he could not bear to look
at them —the remembrance that Harding was
to have had one of them was too exquisitely
painful. But on the uplands there was
nothing to remind him of Harding —the
richly-green rolling wooded pastures were
altogether unlike the gray plains round the
hut.
Gray gazed about him and thought of
England. If he got that money he would
go back there; his mind was fully made up
on that point. And though he had not yet
said so in so many words to himself, he knew
he intended to get the money. Only the
day before he had refused a new post offered


to him by Mr. Morton, and said that he
wished to leave the station in a week or two.
And this afternoon, for the first time since
Harding’s disappearance, he allowed himself
to dwell on the great and wonderful change
the finding of the treasure would make in
his life.
Absorbed in these thoughts he did not
notice the approach of a man along the
grassy track. The man was walking slowly
and painfully, carrying a bundle over his
shoulder. He was a small, wiry, narrow-
shouldered man, with a thin peaked face,
from which a pair of small eyes looked keenly
out from under thick reddish eyebrows. He
had caught sight of Gray long before Gray
saw him, and after walking some distance
towards him, he sat down on the bank and
waited for him to come up. Gray checked
his horse to speak.
“You look tired, my man.”
Gray’s tone of cool superiority was not
resented by the wayfarer. He got up and
came nearer.
“ I’ve had a longish tramp,” he said in a
thin, not unpleasant voice. “ I’m bound for
(760 ) D


Warrandilla, Mr. Morton’s place. I’ve begun
to fear as bow I’ve missed my road.”
“Ob, you’re all right!” Gray returned in-
differently; “the station is just over the rise
there. You’ll see it in a mile or so.”
The man looked in the direction Gray
pointed, and then turned his eyes again on
Gray’s face. Curious, shifty, cunning eyes
they were —eyes that went well with the
narrow, cruel mouth, and the sharply-pointed
chin.
“ Perhaps you’re Mr. Morton yourself,
sir,” he said ingratiatingly. “You deserve
to be, I’m sure.”
“No such luck,” said Gray with a laugh,
not ill pleased at the man’s suggestion. “But
you’ll find him at home if you go on. I’ve
just left him.”
Gray was about to ride on, when the man
spoke again.
“I won’t detain you a minute, sir, but
perhaps you can tell me if I’ve got a chance
of some work over there.”
“ It depends on what you can do, and who
you are, you know,” said Gray, with a brief
comprehensive glance over the man’s figure.


“ You’d better not try to play any tricks with
Morton if you want him to help you. That’s
a friendly bit of advice I’ll give you.”
“ Thank you, sir; I’ll remember it,” was
the humbly-spoken answer, though there was
a sudden gleam in the pale blue eyes that
Gray did not see. “ I’ve heard along the
road what a good employer he is. They
were tellin’ me at Billoora last night about the
poor cove what was lost, I suppose there’s
no chance that he’ll ever be found now,
sir?”
Gray felt the colour going out of his cheeks
at the sudden reference to Harding.
“ I’m afraid not,” he said hurriedly. “But
I must go on. There’s your road straight in
front of you. You can’t miss it.”
The man had put his hand on the neck of
the horse, and he still kept it there.
“ I’m sorry I spoke, sir. I can see as how
you’re a friend of his, and I wish I’d held my
tongue. But ’tis his mate I pities most.
How’s he bearin’ it now, sir? They was
tellin’ me he’s nigh broken-hearted.”
Gray stared blankly at the man for a
moment without answering. Then he re-


covered himself and said with some haughti-
ness, “ I would rather not talk of it, my man.
Just let my horse go, will you? I’m in a
hurry.”
The man stepped back instantly with a
word of apology, and Gray rode on without
looking back. If he had turned his head he
would have seen his late companion gazing
after him with a satirical smile on his crafty
face.
“ We’ll have some more talk afore long,
my fine gentleman,” he was saying. “You
didn’t think, did you, that I knowed who
you was? Them men at Billoora aren’t half-
bad at a description.”
And with a laugh Mr. Lumley, as he chose
to call himself at that particular moment,
went on his way.
He was bent on staying at Warrandilla for
a time, and would have tried his hand at any
work offered to him, but as it turned out the
work he could do best was just the work that
was wanted, and he got regular emplojnnent
at once. Mrs. Morton was devoted to her
garden, and Lumley was really a clever
gardener; so that, though she could not help


agreeing with her husband’s verdict about
the man, she was eager to keep him.
Lumley made no secret of his past “ mis-
fortunes.”
He had been shipped to the colony while
it was still a convict station, and his record
was by no means a good one since his first
term had been worked out.
“ But I have never had a good chance be-
fore, madam,” he said to Mrs. Morton, trying
to keep his shifty eyes fixed in a straight-
forward look upon her face. “I’ve never
had a good kind friend like you before.
Please God, I’ll do well now.”
And though Mrs. Morton distrusted his
professions of reform, she found him a clever
steady workman, and one most anxious to
please. He became one of the most frequent
attendants at the religious services which
Mr. Morton held two or three times a week
in the little chapel next his house.
If Mr. Morton had been a different sort of
man the new gardener might have gone on
to worse hypocrisy still, but there was some-
thing in his employer’s strong keen face that
kept him back from that.


As Lumley put it to himself, “ Shammin’
religion is no go with him.”
It was about three weeks after Lumley’s
appearance at the station that Gray’s time
for departure came. Everyone was very
kind to him; their kindness and sympathy
cut him to the heart. They tried to comfort
him by telling him that no one could have
shown more energy in the search than he
had, that nothing had been left undone, and
that Harding himself would have been the
last to wish that his friends should grieve too
much. In some such strain Mr. Morton
talked to him when he went to the house to
bid him good-bye.
“You must cheer up, my lad,” he said
kindly. “You have done all you could.
No man can do more.”
Gray made no reply, nor did he raise his
gloomy eyes to meet the pleasant kindly
glance of his employer. Mr. Morton went
on: “So you are thinking of going back to
the old country, Gray. Well, there ought
to be room there for a man like you; and I
don’t wonder at your wanting to get away
from here after what’s happened.


“ I am not sailing for a month or so/' said
Gray. He spoke hurriedly, clearing his
throat before he could articulate the words
properly. “ I think of taking a trip into the
mountains. I don’t feel equal to the voyage
just now.”
“Well, take care of yourself; and let us
know how you get along.” He took Gray’s
hand and pressed it warmly. “ God bless
you, my lad!”
Gray looked up into his face with such a
strange, wild, miserable glance that Mr.
Morton started. He put his hand on the
young man’s shoulder and looked earnestly
at him.
“What is it, Gray'? There is something
troubling you. Can I help you?”
But Gray drew back.
“There is nothing,” he said coldly
“But there is something,” Mr. Morton
said to his wife that evening. “ Can Gray
be keeping back something about Harding,
Minnie? I confess lam not altogether satis-
fied with the result of the search. Harding
was not a man to get lost in the Bush; he
knew the country too well. And yet —”


“ You don't suspect Harding of pretending
to be lost?” said his little wife with an
amazed look.
“No, no; Harding was not a man to do
that sort of thing. I never suspected any-
thing till I saw Gray’s face this afternoon.
But there is some mystery; and Gray knows
more than he has told. I feel sure of
that.”
“ What shall you do?” asked Mrs. Morton,
with a startled look on her pretty face.
“ What can I do?”
“You don’t think Gray—”
‘ Don’t put it into words, Minnie. I have
no right to think anything. But his face
startled me. No man ever looked like that
who hadn’t got some great trouble weighing
on him. And he wasn’t so devoted to Hard-
ing as all that, you know. It surprised me
to see how much he felt it.”
“ I always thought he patronized Harding;
believed himself too good for him.”
“ Oh, I know you never hked Gray much,”
returned her husband, “Harding liked him
though. He must have something in him.”
To get back to his own quarters Gray had


to cross the garden. It was looking its love-
liest this afternoon. The turf was as green
if not as smooth as the turf of an English
lawm, and the glow of colour was more
brilliant than any English garden could
show. Gray loved flowers. But he passed
through that beautiful garden without a
glance right or left, with his eyes bent upon
the ground.
Not far from the gate which he would have
to pass through Lumley was busy cutting
the grass with a hand-machine. He had
been working in another part of the garden
when Gray had gone up to the house, but
had caught sight of him as he crossed to the
verandah steps. Soon after he left the work
he was about in order to cut the grass by the
gate.
It was a curious trait in his vicious char-
acter that he really loved his gardening work.
He had come to the station for a definite
purpose, a purpose nearly fulfilled—-he was
leaving the place at dawn next morning—yet
he was working busily still in the pleasant
evening light, anxious to leave the grass in
perfect order. Mrs. Morton never had such


a good gardener again. He was not working
too busily, however, to be unmindful of
Gray’s approach. He watched him with a
crafty sidelong look as he came swinging
down the path, and when he was quite close
to him he touched his cap as an English
servant might have done in respectful greet-
ing. He had saluted Gray in the same
manner before, and Gray had been curiously
pleased by it.
“ Good evening, my man,” he said loftily
and would have passed on. But Lumley
stepped out on the path. He had taken off
his cap and he turned it round and round
in his hands as he spoke.
“ Beggin’ your pardon, sir,” he said humbly,
“But I was wantin’ to speak to you. I took
the liberty of callin’ on you this afternoon,
but you was out.”
“What is it you want?” said Gray. “I
am leaving the station to-morrow, you
know.”
“ That’s the very reason, sir.” He looked
up suddenly from under his bushy eyebrows.
“ I’m leavin’ the station too. Perhaps you
didn’t know that, sir?”


“ I hadn’t heard it,” said Gray indifferently.
“Aren’t you comfortable here, then?”
“It isn’t what I’ve been used to, sir. I’ve
been a gentleman’s servant. Gentlemen as
knows how to treat a servant. Real gentle-
men.” Then came again the sudden crafty
look.
“ That was in England, I suppose?”
“Yes, sir, before my ‘misfortunes’ came
upon me. I had many good places; and
that’s the sort of work which suits me best.
I’m goin’ to try to get a place again, sir.”
“ Indeed,” said Gray, a little impatient at
all this.
“ And when I heard as you’d come into a
fortune, sir, I says to myself, ‘ Mr. Gray’ll be
wanting a servant, and if he would take me
on how blessed I should be!’”
Gray’s face had turned an ashy white.
“What are you talking of?” he said
sharply. He recovered himself with an
effort, and added in a milder tone: “ I expect
I’m poorer than you are, Lumley. I’ve
hardly enough to live on myself, let alone a
servant.”
“Indeed, sir! I’m very sorry, for if any-


body would grace a fortune ’twould be you,
sir/’
He turned his cloth cap round and round
in his hands as he added:
“Then you don’t want a servant, sir?”
Gray laughed out.
‘j &
“Most decidedly not, my man. But I
must go on, I’m busy.”
Lumley stood in his way and did not
move.
“If I didn’t want any wages, sir? I’d
like to go along with you, if only for the
journey down to Adelaide. I’d serve you
faithfully, sir.”
“ It’s utterly impossible —out of the ques-
tion,” exclaimed Gray with a wave of the
hand. “ Besides, I’m not going to Adelaide.”
“ Indeed, sir!”
It had been a slip of the tongue, which
Gray repented at once.
“ It’s altogether out of the question, my
good fellow,” he said. “ You must have
been dreaming to think of it. Now, will you
let me pass? I have a great deal to do.”
Lumley stepped aside.
“ I wish you humbly good-bye, sir, and


good luck. Theres riches in your face, sir;
I see ’em as plain as can be. You’ll think
of me when the good times come.”
Gray turned a quivering face upon him.
“What do you mean'?” he gasped, and
then he stopped and gave an unsteady smile.
“ I’ll certainly think of you when my riches
come, my man. It’s an easy promise to make.”
He waved his hand in hurried farewell
and hastened along the path. Lumley stood
looking after him with an evil glance.
“You will think of me, my fine gentleman,
and no mistake.”
And he chuckled harshly to himself.


CHAPTER IV.
IN QUEST OF TREASURE.
/A RAY’S spirits rose when he had left the
VJ station behind him and found himself
ridino 1 alone: the well-worn track towards the
o o
hills, that showed themselves in clear outline
against the brightening morning sky.
With a good horse under him and the fresh
wind blowing on his face, he found it easy to
convince himself that it would not have made
any difference if he had gone back with the
dog. He found it easy to look forward instead
of backward, to make resolutions about using
the money well, instead of indulging in vain
repentance for the past.
It was a clear beautiful morning. The
country Cray was riding through was very
unlike the level pastures he had lived on for
months. It was undulating and richly wooded.
Here and there a stream, full and strong in
this joyous spring-time, flashed white in the


dawn. Westwards rose the great hills, blue
in the distance, the hills towards which Gray
was riding. It was a country to make glad
the heart of man, where he might richly
enjoy the fruits of his labour.
It was not thickly settled as yet. Gray
passed but few houses in that day’s far ride,
and it was long past dusk when he rode up
to Mr. Macquoid’s, who owned the run next
to Mr. Morton’s, and where Mr. Morton had
advised him to stop that night.
Gray received a warm welcome. Tea was
brought for him into the pleasant sitting-room,
where Mr. Macquoid’s wife and daughters
were eager to hear Gray’s account of Hard-
ing’s disappearance. Mr. Macquoid had sent
out a search-party on his own account, for
he knew Harding well.
It irritated Gray savagely to find how
warm and eager an interest they all took in
the lost man. He could have spent such a
delightful evening in that charming house,
with those pretty girls. The piano was open,
and Gray was fond of music and could sing
well. It would have delighted him to prove
to them his musical abilities. And the books


in the low book-cases, the etchings and engrav-
ings on the walls, the periodicals and news-
papers fresh from England, that lay heaped
on the round table by the window, showed
that the Macquoids had a keen cultured
interest in literature and art. Gray could
have talked to them of so many things,
showed them so easily how wide his know-
ledge was, how correct his taste.
But they would talk of nothing but Hard-
ing. They seemed to think it was the only
subject Gray could feel any interest in just
then. He was thankful when the evening
was over.
His next resting-place was a small station
close under the shadow of the hills. Here
only vague rumours of Harding’s loss had
come, and Gray found it easy to say nothing
of his connection with the lost man.
A strange thing happened to him that
night. He was put to sleep in a small room
opening on the rough verandah that ran
round the house. It was a hot still night,
and the window was left open. Gray lay
awake for the first part of the night. He
was restless and excited and could not sleep.


But towards morning he fell into a heavy
dreamless slumber, from which he was roughly
awakened by a sharp, sudden noise.
He started up in bed and looked round
the room, A man was standing with his
back to him in the act of picking up the
chair he had just thrown over. In the dim
starlight Gray could just see him as he bent
over the chair. With a sharp exclamation
Gray sprang out of bed and made a dash at
him. But the man was too quick. He
wriggled out of Gray’s grasp as a snake
might wriggle out of its captor’s clutch, and
keeping his head well down, that Gray might
not see his face, he dashed out of the window
and across the court-yard. Gray saw him
disappear over the fence, and run swiftly
down the hollow.
He struck a light and carefully examined
the room. His purse was safe. Everything
in his pocket was left intact.
Gray’s story caused great excitement next
morning. There had never been an attempt
at robbery in the station before.
“ It must have been a black fellow,” Mr.
Stuart said. But Gray was certain it was
( 760 > E


no black man. If it had not been absurd to
think of such a thing, he would have said it
was Lumley, the Mortons’ gardener.
But he dismissed that idea as absurd and
impossible.
His next day’s ride took him into the
heart of the hill-country. The track was far
less clearly marked here, and often difficult to
follow. It ran through deep lonely ravines
walled in by precipitous heights of dark rock,
and along the sides of mighty hills from
which glimpses could be got of still higher
hills, towering up into the still blue sky.
Some of the hills were darkly wooded, others
were clothed in rich grass and flowering
shrubs almost to the summits; others again,
and these more numerous as Gray rode on,
were bare of blade or leaf, heaped with dark
scarred rocks, waterless, desolate.
Gray missed his road once or twice that
day; and once he was unable to cross a
furious torrent which had swept down the
frail bridge laid across it, and was forced to
make a long round.
There was a small cottage in these parts
kept by MTherson, an old stock-keeper of


Mr. Macquoid’s. Gray had hoped to leave it
far behind him in this day’s journey, but he
was only too glad to see it when he had at
last regained the track just after sunset. He
and his horse were both tired out.
The old man came to his cottage door as
Gray clattered up the hilly path. He looked
at Gray, and then beyond him.
' “ YeTe kindly welcome, lad. But hasna
your mate come up wi’ ye?”
Gray looked involuntarily behind him.
The path stretched away lonely and desolate
in the gathering darkness.
“What do you mean?” he asked, turning
a pale face on McPherson. “ I am quite
alone.”
“Weel, weel; there was a callant here no’
sae lang syne, speering after ye. Aye, ’twas
you he meant. A weel set-up, black-haired
chap, he said, riding a roan horse wi’ a white
blaze in front.”
Gray got off his horse and stood with his
hand upon the bridle.
“I know no one about here. You must
be mistaken,” he said. But he said it falter-
ingly, and a cold sweat broke out upon his


brow. The idea had flashed upon him that
it might be Harding who was tracking his
footsteps.
“What was he like?he asked, as care-
lessly as he could.
“ A soft-spoken callant wi’ reddish hair —
a puir thin sort o’ body wi’ a ferrety face.
Sae ye didna luke for him? Weel, weel,
maybe it’s no a maitter for greeting that ye
havena come across him. I wadna hae gi’en
muckle for his honesty. But ye wull be
wanting a meal, lad, and your bonnie horse
too. Yon’s the stable. A gude man is
gudc to his beastie, and ye’ll no be wanting
me to assist.”
He bustled into the house without waiting
for Gray to speak. He would have waited
long, for Gray was too startled to speak.
He began to think it must be Lumley who
was following him. He slowly led his horse
to the stable and made it comfortable, and
then went back to the house. He stopped
at the door to look back into the dusk.
The house was built in a green hollow
carved out of the side of a steep hill. The
ground rose steeply behind the place, rising up


into a jagged ridge against the sky. In front
there was a small flat meadow immediately
before the house; then the ground fell almost
precipitously and then rose again, with only
a narrow ravine between. The opposite hills
were higher than the hill under which the cot-
tage was built, and frowned above it in heavy
overhanging masses of rock. As Gray looked
up he could only distinguish the vague dark
outlines of the gloomy hills. A thousand
men might have been hidden in the hollows
and he would have been none the wiser. He
listened intently, but there was no sound of
human life. The wind had fallen, and the rush
of the stream at the bottom of the ravine
was the only sound that struck his ear.
M‘Pherson had a comfortable meal pre-
pared for him, late as it was. But Gray
could not eat. He was too excited and un-
easy. He tried to get a clear description of
the man who had asked for him, but McPher-
son could tell him little more. The man had
come to the door about four in the afternoon.
He explained that he was expecting to come
up with a friend along that road, and wanted
to know how far he was ahead.


“ He seemed verra oneasy when I told him
Td set eyes on naebody the day lang. I
tauld him ye must hae gone the ither road.”
“ I missed my way.”
“ Aye, ’twas that made ye sae late. And
sae ye arena acquent wi’ the man? ; Tis
verra strange.”
Yes, it was very strange. The more Gray
thought of it the more alarming it seemed.
And then quite suddenly an explanation
came to him, which, while it did not remove
the annoyance of the occurrence, robbed it of
all its more alarming elements. The expla-
nation was this
Lumley had evidently conceived an absurd
dog-like affection for him. The fellow had
not taken his refusal to have him as a servant
as a final one, and was following him in the
hope that he might still be taken on. He
had not dared to come face to face with
Gray. Perhaps when he had entered the
room at Mr. Stuart’s (for Gray was now con-
vinced that it was Lumley he saw) he in-
tended to make one more appeal, but Gray’s
sudden wakening had startled him too much.
Gray’s face cleared as he forced himself to


accept this explanation as the true one. He
stretched himself with the air of one who
throws off a burden.
“ 111 turn in/’ he said, yawning as he spoke.
“ But I’ll have another look at my horse
first.”
“ Aye, do, my lad. But ye needna feel
oneasy aboot your horse. Sandy here” —
and he looked down at the old sheep-dog at
his knee —“wull hear ony step that comes
near the house, be it e’er sae saft.”
Gray shuddered as his glance fell on the
dog. He was looking up at his master just
as Watch used to look at Harding.
“Ye arena that fond o’ dogs,” said the
old man quickly. He had noticed Gray’s
look. “ But Sandy’s nae common dog. I
could tell you mony a tale o’ his clever-
ness.”
He patted the dog’s head and looked across
at Gray, who had resumed his seat and was
staring fixedly into the fire. He had turned
deadly pale. MTherson’s shrewd kindly
eyes dwelt on him for a moment. Gray was
conscious of the look and roused himself with
an effort.


“How far is it to Daintry’s Corner?” he
asked abruptly.
Daintry’s Corner was close to Kodwell’s
Peak, and Gray was making that the apparent
end of his journey.
“ Aboot a maitter o’ twal mile or sae. Ye’ll
win it by mid-day the morn.” He paused a
moment and then added: “Ye look ower
pale, my lad, for sic journeying amang the
hills. Ye wad do weel to tak’ a bit rest;
and it’s lang since I’ve set een on a braw
lad like you. A day or twa’s rest wi’ me
wad freshen you up.”
Gray hastily declined the invitation, and
then, feeling he had been too abrupt, he
said:
“ I am sailing for England in a month,
and I want to get a good idea of your hill
scenery. I’ve lived on the plains a great
deal, and this is my first opportunity.”
“ Eh! I ken what the plains are. I lived
nigh the allotted span o’ life upon them —
saxty years I lived there. I cam from Scot-
land a bairn o’ seven, and I lived on the
Macquoid estate till I cam up here.”
“ Whatever made you leave your home for


this lonely spot?” Gray asked, glad to keep
the old man talking about himself to prevent
any more curious inquiries about his own
doings.
“Ye wadna understand if ye werena born
amang the hills, lad. The gudewife, she
kent how I felt, and when the Lord took
her hame the hills seemed to ca’ more and
more on me. It’s no lonely here; there’s
voices everywhere. Did ye ever think, my
lad, o’ the way the Bible speaks of hills an’
a’ high places. ‘ The shadow o’ a great rock
in a weary land.’ Yon’s a grand passage;
but the fu’ meaning naebody can understand
wha hasna kent the thirst and heat o’ a
waterless desert. Were ye ever lost in the
Bush, lad?”
Gray stared across at him in angry bewil-
derment.
“Never,” he said abruptly.
“Ye may be thankful; ’tis a terrible place.
The skies like brass abune your head; the
grund like parchment under your feet. I
was a lost man amang those deserts once.
Four days I wandered through dry and
thirsty places. Eh, sirs, ’twas a terrible time!


But the Lord brought me through; thanks
be to His holy name!”
Gray did not speak. The old man’s words
had called up in clear vision those endless
deserts of scorched sand, where the very
herbage was hateful to look upon, and the
blessed light became a consuming fire. Had
Harding, faint with his wounds, wandered
helplessly there till he fell to rise no morel
MTherson got up and reached down the
great Bible that lay by itself on the shelf
above his head.
“’Tis time for evening worship, my lad.
11l read ye a chapter.”
He sat down and placed the Bible on the
table, and put on his silver-rimmed spec-
tacles. Gray leant back in his chair and
folded his arms, and prepared himself to
listen. The old man looked at his face, and
then turned over the leaves of his Bible with
a sigh.
“ 111 read ye what has often been a com-
fort to me, my lad,” he said.
But Gray’s eyes had fallen on the sheep-
dog, and he had seen it drag itself up, with
ears upraised and head pointed at the door, in


the very attitude of Watch that night the
fugitive Bearing had been outside the hut.
“ Look at the dog! ” he stammered out to
M‘Pherson. “He hears someone outside the
house/'
“That’s verra onlikely,” said MTherson
with a calmness that was intensely irritating
to Gray.
“He isn’t much use as a dog if he makes
that fuss for nothing,” Gray returned.
“ Weel, weel, we are baith getting auld
thegither.”
MTherson rose as he spoke and went to
the door to open it.
“You are not going out?” Gray cried.
The old man turned a wondering face
upon him.
“Wad ye keep the door barred on sic a
nicht as this, if there’s onybody outside i’
the wind and rain? A braw laddie like you
suld hae nae fears: ye suld leave that to the
women, puir feeble folk.”
Gray’s face grew scarlet at the rebuke.
He said no more, and MTherson opened the
door and peered out into the dark, stormy
night. He shouted once or twice, but there


was no answer nor sound of footsteps. If
the dog had heard footsteps they had now
ceased; and only the voices of wind, and rain,
and rushing torrent came up the glen.


CHAPTER V.
deadman’s gully.
RAY reached Daintry’s Corner before
VT noon on the following day. For some
miles before reaching his destination his
road had lain through a deep narrow gorge,
with gigantic walls on each side of almost
perpendicular rock. Much of the rock
was bare, and of a sullen, cheerless brown,
but here and there trees sprang out of
hollows and showed green against the rock,
and dark-leaved climbing plants flung their
long arms from crevice to crevice, and
hung in gloomy wreaths along the broken
ground.
The morning had come with sunshine and
gentle breezes, but no sunshine reached this
frowning ravine, and the air there was damp }
and heavy, and close.
The ravine had run in an almost straight
line for some miles, and Gray was beginning


to weary for its end, when he suddenly
checked his horse with a start of amazement
and dismay. Some few hundred yards
before him the ravine apparently came to a
full stop. A great precipice rose up before
him closing up the end of the gorge —a pre-
cipice far too steep for any track to run
over it.
Gray began to think he had come to a
cul de sac, and that he should be obliged to
retrace his steps, but before doing so he
determined to ride on to the foot of the
precipice before him and examine the ground
carefully.
A new surprise awaited him there. He
found that the gorge took a sudden turn
here, in fact, ran on at right angles to its
former course, though considerably narrower
and closed in by walls of rock higher and
gloomier than ever.
O
The bottom of this new part of the gorge
was not open and grassy, but studded thickly
with enormous trees clad in dark heavy
foliage. It was a gloomy spot to enter, and
Gray hesitated; yet it was evident the track
went this way. There was the mark of a


horse’s footstep just before him, freshly made
too!
Gray’s eyes fell on this as he was looking
along the ground, and he sprang off his
horse to more closely examine it. Some one
had evidently passed here quite lately. As
Gray looked he saw that the footsteps ceased
a short way up the glen, and that when they
ceased the ground was slightly broken away
as if horse and rider had tried to climb the
cliff. With a rush of sudden, unexplainable
terror, Gray looked up the steep impassable
wall of rock. Horse and rider had gone that
way! But how I ?—and for what purpose?
He listened intently, but no sound came to
his ear that spoke of a living presence. An
oppressive silence reigned on every side.
Gray was no coward, but the blood forsook
his cheek and his knees trembled under him.
Who was it that was haunting him thus?
He dared not make any answer to himself.
He dared not stay longer in that dark and
silent spot. Taking his horse by the bridle
he led him hastily onwards, picking his way
with difficulty through the mighty tree-
trunks and among the wave-worn boulders


that lay between them. The trees grew so
near together that it was impossible to see
more than a yard or so ahead.
Gray was stumbling blindly on, with the
belief growing in him that the gorge was
impassable, and that he would be forced to
go back past that spot in the cliffs which
chilled him to think of; when suddenly the
light grew brighter through the trees, a keen
breeze blew upon his face; in a few steps,
the trees ended, and the gorge ceased. Gray
found himself standing on a rocky platform
commanding a glorious view. There lay the
hills, rising range after range before him,
bathed in the sunshine of early noon. It
was a wonderful prospect —a sight to make
one’s heart leap up; and Gray stood entranced,
drinking in all its beauty, forgetting himself
and his errand.
But not for long. He had soon to consider
his path; and, as he looked round him with
that purpose in his mind, all the glory seemed
to die out of the scene, and his pleasure in
it passed away. For this must be Daintry’s
Corner, Gray concluded. He must be very
near the end of his journey.


He looked keenly along the ranges of
hills in front of him, but he could not
see the towering battlements of Eodwells
Peak. That must lie behind him. M‘Pherson
had directed him to a small settlement some
miles beyond Daintry’s Corner. Gray could
see the roofs of the houses over the slope
of one of the lower hills to the right of
him. He determined he would spend the
night there if he could reach it in time,
but his first business was to find Eodwells
Peak, and then to search for Deadman’s
Gully. Once the exact spot was reached,
he hoped soon to find the treasure. Gray
did not anticipate much difficulty in taking
it away.
The robbery of the Bank at Adelaide by
Bearing had made a great sensation at the
time. He had carried off more than £30,000
in gold and notes; and he had managed to
change much of the gold and all the notes
for Bank of England notes, whose numbers
were not known. The notes Gray could
easily carry away and much of the gold.
The remainder he had determined to leave
behind him safely buried. It was better
(760) F


to lose a part than run the risk of dis-
covery by weighting himself too much. A
few hours would suffice for this, he thought,
then he determined to go down to the settle-
ment for the night, and make his way to
Adelaide by another route. Nothing should
prevail upon him to go back the same way:
he had long ago decided that, and recent
events had made his determination more
fixed than ever.
But now to reach Rodwelhs Peak! Gray
carefully examined the ground, and made
up his mind that his road lay along the
rocky platform or terrace on which the
gorge had ended, and which seemed to run
along the hills through which the gorge had
cleft its way. He made a rough calculation,
and then decided to follow the terrace in its
westerly direction. He called his horse,
which had begun to graze on the short sweet
grass that clothed the gentle slopes above
the terrace, and set off on the road he had
chosen.
If he had looked backwards down the
gloomy ravine he had just left behind him,
he might have seen a face looking cautiously


out through the dark boughs of the trees —
an evil sallow face with reddish slanting eye-
brows. But Gray did not look back. He
was too excited at the near fruition that
awaited his hopes. All the fears that had
assailed him, all the remorse that had been
growing up in him disappeared as mists dis-
appear before the morning sun. He mounted
his horse and rode gaily along the broad
even platform, whistling as he went. The
platform or ledge continued for some time,
sloping almost imperceptibly downwards till
it ended in a wide, grassy, meadow-like
valley, with a giant eucalyptus in the midst
of it. Through the valley a stream went
singing—every ripple making a line of silver
in the sunshine.
Gray crossed the valley, stopping to let his
horse drink at the stream, and to take a
draught himself. The hills beyond the val-
ley were strewn in places with great boulders,
but it was easy to find a path, and Gray
made good progress for a time. Then the
way became rougher and more precipitous,
but Gray pushed hurriedly on; for over the
shoulder of the next hill rose the jagged


crest of Rodwell’s Peak. He knew the knife-
like edge of the lower summit, the towering
outlines of the peak itself. Now a well-defined
track began to disclose itself running in easy
curves down the hill and along the rocky
bottom.
Gray rode more slowly, his heart beating
wildly. This must be the track Harding
had spoken of, leading from the settlements
below. He kept a sharp look-out, but no
sign of a gully disclosed itself, though Rod-
well’s Peak rose well in front.
The valley, at the bottom of which the
track ran, had been wide at first, with sloping
shelving sides, richly covered with foliage.
But now it was narrowing fast; the sides
were growing steeper and steeper, and the
vegetation less abundant. Gray rode slowly,
stopping every now and then to examine the
rocks for an opening between them. It could
not be far off. Looking down the valley the
towering crest of Rodwell’s Peak was all that
could be seen. It rose at the mouth of the
valley like a mighty sentinel guarding the
fortress of the hills. But though Gray care-
fully examined the rocks on either side, he


could find no trace of a gully running between
them.
He rode on until he reached the point
where the valley ended, and the land began
to shelve upwards before him. He saw that
the track ran across the shoulder of Rodwell’s
Peak, but he did not follow it. It was use-
less to do that. He felt certain that the
opening into Headman s Gully lay in the
valley behind him.
He turned his horse and rode backwards.
As he turned, a sharp sound caught his ears,
and he checked his horse to listen. It ceased
instantly, and though he stopped there for
some moments listening intently it did not
recur. The sound had been like the beat
of a horse’s hoofs against hard rock. But
there was no sign of horse or rider to be seen.
The valley was silent, save for the hoarse cry
of a magpie among the trees and the rush
of a stream in the distance.
Gray rode slowly back, but he did not
pursue his search with any vigour; he had
been too much startled by that sudden sound.
He tried to reason himself into believing that
it was a mere hallucination of hearing, that


the fall of a stone down the steep hill had
been mistaken by him for the clatter of a
horse’s feet. But reason as he would the
conviction remained strong within him that
it was a horse he had heard, and he was
looking more carefully, as he rode down the
valley, for other signs of a horseman’s
presence, than for the opening into Dead-
man’s Gully.
It was quite accidentally that, about half-
way down the valley, he noticed a crevice
in the rocks, on his left hand, thickly hung
with creepers. It was more a crack in the
rock than a crevice, so narrow was it, and
only by looking some distance up could it
be seen at all, for its lower portion was
entirely hidden by a curtain of hanging
foliage. But it was the only opening of
any sort that Gray had discovered, and he
determined to examine it more closely,
though it seemed absurd to suppose that
this could be the entrance he sought.
He rode up to the bottom of the fissure
and dragged aside the heavy creepers. A
wild thrill went through him as he discovered
that the crack widened towards the ground


into an opening just large enough for a man
and horse to pass through. Gray could not
see where the dark passage before him led,
for after a few yards it took a sudden turn
to the right, but he determined at once to
make a thorough investigation.
He got off his horse and cut away with
some difficulty enough of the curtaining
foliage to allow an easy passage through.
Then, with a long fearful look up and down
the lonely valley, he entered the cleft. His
entrance disturbed a vast number of bats,
that flew shrieking out of the damp hollows
of the rocks and whirled wildly round him.
Their cries had an eerie sound well in keeping
with the gloomy spot. But Gray pushed
doggedly on, soothing his good horse with
voice and hand, and becoming more and more
convinced that he was on the right track.
After some distance the passage widened,
and he began to see broad daylight ahead of
him. A few yards more and he came out
into a narrow valley heaped with rocks.
It was a gloomy, dreadful place, shut in
by high, bare, precipitous cliffs. The passage
by which Gray had just entered seemed to


be the only mode of access: no human foot
could scale those dark overhanging cliffs-
There was but little vegetation. Some
coarse grass grew in the hollows and on the
ledges of the rocks, and a gray-leaved repul-
sive-looking bramble spread its gnarled
branches thickly along the uneven bottom
of the gully.
But Gray looked in vain for the mighty
tree he had expected to see, towering up in
the midst of the valley. There were no
trees of any kind in the place. Yet Gray
felt sure that he had reached the right spot,
and a discovery he made after a brief survey
supported his opinion. This was a ruined
hut built under the shelter of a shelving
piece of rock. It was a hut built of logs;
the roof was partly off and the roughly made
door was lying rotting on the ground. This
deserted, ruinous hut only added a new
touch of desolation to the dreary gully.
Gray involuntarily shivered as he stood
before it and his horse tugged restlessly at
the bridle.
He fastened the horse securely to the door-
post and stepped into the hut. The door


was of beaten earth. It was heaped up now
with the debris of the fallen roof, but Gray
could see where the rude hearth had
and where a half-smouldered log still lay.
The walls were intact. They were strongly
built of heavy logs fastened securely together.
The hut might have been built for a miniature
fortress, so strong were its walls.
Who had built the hut? Where had the
logs come from that formed its walls ? Gray
carefully considered these questions. He
remembered now that Harding had told him
of some big trees that were in the gully
when a gang of bushrangers, who had made
the place their home, had been broken up.
There were trees in the gully then. What
had become of them?
Gray stepped hastily out and carefully
examined the ground. It did not take him
long to find the scarred trunks of a few
trees hidden by the brambles. He cut away
the brambles, and tried by measuring to
decide which had been the largest tree. But
he could not decide. The trunks were all
about the same size. Either the trunk of the
largest tree had been taken away altogether,


or it had not been much larger than the
trunks of the other trees.
Wearied out by his search, Gray returned
to the hut. He sat down on one of the
fallen rafters of the roof and considered what
it was best to do next. He was beginning
to feel hopeless. The direction had seemed
so clear on Hearing’s map. He had been so
certain that he would easily find the treasure
if he once could reach the gully. Yet here
he was, apparently as far off as ever from the
attainment of his hopes.
Some hours had now passed since Gray
entered the gully. The afternoon was draw-
ing to a close. There were only a few hours
of daylight before him.
Gray had brought a little food with him,
pressed upon him by the kindly old Scots-
man. He took down his knapsack and ate
the food. It was no matter of regret to him
that he had only a sufficient store for one
meal. Nothing would have induced him to
spend the night in the gully. Even now, in
the broad daylight, an unreasoning terror
was taking hold of him. Every little sound,
the movement of his horse, the cry of a bird


as it flapped its way across the sky, the
rustle of the long grass in the hollows of the
cliff’s, even his own footsteps as he moved
to and fro, struck upon him with a sense of
fear. He could have sworn once that he
had heard a footstep that was not his own, a
slow and wary footstep, among the brambles.
So sure was he, that he sprang to the door
and looked out. There was nothing to be
seen. And with a bitter laugh at his own
fears he went back and sat down. But he
made up his mind there and then that he
would not stay much longer in the gully.
He would not have spent the night there for
all the wealth the world could offer him.
He had now to consider what was best to
do in the short period of daylight that lay
before him. It seemed a hopeless task to
dig south of each of the trunks in the gully,
yet what else was there to be done? It was
best for him to set about it at once. He
decided this, and yet he sat still. He could
not make up his mind to go out into the
gully again. The place was becoming a
horror to him.
As he sat thus on the broken rafter, think-


ing miserably of the task before him, his
eyes fixed themselves on the little window
of the hut. It was the only window and
was very small. It was, in fact, a hole
drilled in one of the beams.
With that strange power the mind has, of
carrying on two trains of thought at once,
Gray found himself, in the midst of his
weary thoughts about the hidden treasure,
wondering why the window had been made
so small and such an odd round shape.
The explanation quickly occurred to him.
The hut had been built by men who were in
daily fear of capture. It had been built not
so much as a shelter from the weather, for
there were deep caves in the rocks that
would have served that purpose, but as a
means of defence. Safe inside the hut, with
the door shut and that small window guarded
by a good rifle, one man might have defied
a score.
Gray guessed, and guessed truly, that
Dearinc; had built the hut. The "an" of
o o o
bushrangers who had formerly used the
gully for their lurking-place had lived in
the caves. The gully was an unknown


place then, and having once reached it all
fear of detection was over. But when once
the place was discovered, some means of
defence within it was necessary, and Bearing
had built this place.
Gray remembered Bearing’s face as he
staggered into the hut, the look of abject
horrible fear upon it. What days and
nights he must have spent in this gully,
watching, waiting, no rest, never safe for a
single moment!
“Poor wretch!” Gray murmured to him-
self “What a life to live!” And his
thoughts went back, by force of sudden
contrast, to the life of another lonely man.
He remembered how MTherson had an-
swered, with a glad, deep peace in his old
face, “ It’s no lonely here. There’s voices
everywhere.”
Gray would not dwell on that. He rose,
throwing back his head and straightening
himself with a quick proud gesture. He
told himself he had no part or lot with the
fears of Bearing, any more than with that
strange faith that kept JVPPherson glad in
his lonely old age. There was no need for


him, he said to himself, to have the fear of
man before his eyes; and if he need not fear
man, what was there to fear? Nothing. He
repeated it to himself. Nothing. It was
only women and uneducated men who
believed in the supernatural.
Yet even as he said it his face turned an
ashy white; the great sweat-drops broke out
upon his brow, his knees trembled under
him. He had heard again the sound of a
cautious footstep and the rustle of the bram-
bles as if some hand was moving them. He
rushed to the door of the hut and looked
round; but as before all was still and silent.
He gave a loud shout, but no answer came,
save the echo from the rocks. He waited
there some moments, but he saw no sign of a
human presence.
Yet he was now absolutely certain he had
heard a footstep. The very hair began to
rise on Gray’s head, a freezing terror seized
hold of him. A moment before he had feigned
to disbelieve in the supernatural, but now,
in an agony of mortal fear, he cried out to
himself that it was no living man who was
dogging him thus. A living man he could


*
760
THE MEETING IN “ HEADMAN’S GULLY.”




have faced, but not this mysterious visitant
from the world beyond the grave.
In a calmer moment Gray might have
reasoned with himself, but he did not stop
to reason now. He felt he must escape from
this horrible place at once, or madness would
come upon him. His horse was still tied to
the door-post, and was cropping the thin
grass that grew up between the crevices in
the rocky platform on which the hut was
built. Gray hurriedly unfastened him and
led him towards the entrance to the gully.
He had gone a short distance when he re-
membered he had left his knapsack and
pistol-case on the floor of the hut. All the
money he had, a scanty store, was in the
knapsack. He could not leave it behind.
Still holding the horse by the bridle he
went hurriedly back. He flung the rein
over the door-post and made one step into
the hut. Then he fell back with a sharp
and sudden exclamation. The hut was no
longer empty. Leaning in an easy attitude
against the window with a revolver in his
hand stood Lumley, the ex-gardener of the
Mortons.


There was a sardonic grin on his thin
peaked face.
“So you have come back of your own
accord, Mr. Gentleman Gray/' he said. “I
was just about to order you back.”


CHAPTER VI
THE TREASURE FOUND,
GRAY’S first feeling was one of intense,
overpowering relief. That dreadful
terror which had beset him left him when
he saw that it was indeed Lumley who had
followed him. He spoke sharply:
“ What do you mean by following me up
like this, and skulking in the brambles? It
was a dangerous game, mind you! I might
have sent a shot into them just now, you
know.”
Lumley looked at him and laughed.
“ You’re a pretty fellow to go bushranging.
When did you look at your pistols last,
eh?”
Gray caught up his pistols and looked at
them. The charges had been tampered with.
They were useless.
Lumley stood regarding him with vicious
amusement in his foxy eyes.
(760) G


“ You’d best have stuck at an honest trade,
mate,” he said. “You’re no good at bush-
ranging at all. It’s been too easy to take
you in. You needn’t look at ’em any more,
you know. I made ’em safe enough at
Stuart’s place.”
Gray dropped the pistols on the ground.
“ How dare you ? ” he began in a choked
voice. Then he checked himself. “ I’ll
trouble you to tell me what you mean,” he
said. “ And —”
He made a dash to snatch the revolver
from Lumley’s hand, but Lumley was too
quick for him. He jumped back and levelled
the weapon full at Gray.
“ Stand where you are or I’ll fire,” he said
coolly. “ Move a limb, and you’ll have a
bullet into you.”
Gray stood still. A cold sweat broke out
upon his brow. Lumley had dropped all
disguise now. The evil soul of the man
looked out from his face.
“ That’s better,” he said. “ Just stand
there, will you?” He seated himself on some
of the fallen debris, still keeping his revolver
pointed at Gray.


“ Now well have a comfortable little talk
together, mate,” he said. “You can sit
down now if you like.”
Gray looked round and carefully chose a
seat. The pallid look of terror had gone
from his face. He had recovered his calm-
ness and his power of thought. He saw
clearly enough that he was in Lumley’s
power. He guessed his reason for following
him; and he had determined on his course
of action. If Lumley chose to insist upon
it, he would tell him Hearing’s secret and
leave him to get the money if he could; and
he would go straight to the nearest station
and inform against him. Not for all the
money in the world, Gray declared to him-
self, would he put his reputation into this
man’s keeping.
“ That’s right, mate. Now we’ll be com-
fortable,” said Lumley, with a grin, “ and
we’ll talk about the business that’s brought
me here. You know what it is well
enough.”
“ Well, I can make a pretty good guess,”
Gray said, carefully selecting a cigar and pro-
ceeding to light it. “ But you’ll have to tell


me plainly, you know, before going any
further.’’
The change in Gray’s manner was too
striking to escape Lumley. He looked at
him with a steady crafty look before answer-
ing.
O
“There ain’t no money hid here, I s’pose?
You’re on a pleasure toor, ain’t you? That
pick in your knapsack is for ge’logical speci-
mens, ain’t it?”
Gray carefully flicked a little ash from the
end of his cigar, and then looked up.
“ You are quite wrong, Lumley. That
pick is not meant for geological specimens
at all. It’s meant to be used for digging up
a large sum of money hidden somewhere
about here. Unfortunately I don’t know
where.”
“You don’t?”
“I haven’t the faintest idea. Perhaps
you know?”
Lumley glared at him like a wild beast.
“Was that why you were going away?”
Gray nodded.
“ Tom Hearing didn’t tell you where ’twas
hid? Don’t you try to deceive me, young


man. I'll not stand it. 11l have that swag
if I’ve got to swing for it to-morrow. What
made you go proddin’ and pryin’ round those
old trunks for, eh? You tell me that.”
“With all the pleasure in life, my man.
But I should like to hear a few things from
you first. How did you get to know of this
money? I may not be far wrong in suppos-
ing you an accomplice of our good friend,
lately deceased, Mr. Tom Hearing?”
“ I’d wring your neck for tuppence,” Bum-
ley muttered savagely.
Gray looked up at him with a pleasant
smile.
“What did you say?”
Gray was beginning to feel thoroughly
satisfied with himself again. He felt him-
self very much more than a match for Mr.
Lumley.
That individual made no reply to his last
inquiry.
“ So you want to know how I got on this
job. I’ll tell you quickly enough. Hearing
made a dying speech and confession, didn’t
he?”
“ Something of the kind,”


“ He’d do that for sure and certain. That
was his way. He was always half-hearted,
Tom was. P’raps he didn’t mention a pal
of his, Bill Clay, eh'?”
“ I think he did, now I come to think of
it, I suppose you are that gentleman. Is
Clay your real name, or one of your many
aliases?”
“You’re right, mate. I’m Bill Clay, as
you’ll find out before you’re done with me,”
said Lumley, with a savage look. “ I wasn’t
in that business with the bank, but Tom told
me he’d hidden the money; but he didn’t
tell me where he’d hid it, d’you see. You’ve
got to tell me that, Mr. Gentleman Gray.”
Gray leisurely took his cigar from his
mouth and said:
“With pleasure, my man, if I knew it
myself; but you see I don’t.”
Lumley gave him a savage frown.
“Think I’m going to believe that? Look
here, I’m in a hurry, and you’ve just got to
tell me all you know. If you don’t, I’ll—”
He lifted the revolver again with a signi-
ficant gesture.
Gray did not speak for a moment. His


hand might have trembled slightly as he
stroked his moustache, but he showed no
other sign of agitation. Lumley watched
him narrowly.
“Ain’t you goin’ to tell me?” he said.
“Yes I am,” said Gray: “on one con-
dition.”
“ What’s that?”
“ Unload that pretty little weapon of yours,
and hand it over to me. I don’t trust you,
you see, Mr. Lumley, alias Clay. You might
find it convenient to leave this place all by
yourself. Dead men tell no tales.”
“ Good for you they don’t, ain’t it?” Lum-
ley answered darkly.
Gray looked sharply up.
“What do you mean by that?”
“I don’t mean anything. But you're a
pretty fellow, ain’t you, to crow over me?”
The taunt was more than Gray could bear.
“What do you mean?” he exclaimed
again, with sharper emphasis as he leapt to
his feet. “ How dare you?”
Lumley laughed out —a rough, coarse,
jeering laugh, which filled Gray with sicken-
ing, helpless rage.


“ Don’t you be afraid of me,” he said; “ a
partner’s always safe with me. I don’t set
up to be a virtuous cove like but a
partner’s always safe with me. We’ll go
shares, mate —share and share alike. That’s
a fair offer, ain’t if?”
His manner was as coarse and offensive as
he could make it. He seemed to find delight
in the sort of torture he was inflicting on
Gray.
Gray seated himself again and tried hard
to recover his coolness. After all, he told
himself, he had but to bear Lumley’s insults
for a time. He had but to wait till they
reached a settlement for this hideous partner-
ship to be over.
“ It seems to me we are wasting good time,
my man,” he said, in the lofty tone that so
nettled Lumley. “ I don’t pretend to under-
stand your innuendoes, but let that pass.
What you want is the money, isn’t it?”
“What I want? You don’t want it; no,
of course not? You didn’t come here to get
it?”
Lumley laughed.
“ I certainly came here to get it. There’s


a considerable reward offered for its recovery,
as I daresay you know. I intended to claim
that reward.”
Lumley looked at him in silence for a
moment, and then burst out into another
laugh.
“ You are a cove!” he said, when his mirth
would let him speak. “So that’s your name,
is it? Bah!”
He spat on the ground in fierce derision,
and then with a sudden change of manner
he came close up to Gray.
“Stow all that nonsense, lad. Tell me
what Bearing said, and be quick about it.
We’re goin’ to be fond partners, share and
share alike. Come, shell out this minute!”
Gray looked up at him; then he took out
his note-book and rapidly reproduced the
map he had destroyed, and handed it to
Clay without a word. The light was fading,
and he took it to the door to examine it.
Gray’s eyes followed him with a savage
concentrated hate in them.
It was the man’s coarse scorn of himself
that was hardest to bear—harder even than
the knowledge that he had lost the money


he had sacrificed so much to gain. Gray had
been accustomed to the admiration of his
fellow-men. He had been liked and respected
wherever he had been. It was horrible to
him to be the object of this convict’s coarse
taunts and sneers. He, who had so prided
himself on his clean name and unblemished
record, had fallen low indeed. And he could
not feel that the taunts were undeserved.
Slowly and grudgingly, just for a moment,
the curtain that hid his true self was lifted
for Gray, and with a shudder he confessed
that Lumley did him no wrong in claiming
partnership with him.
His gloomy thoughts were broken into by
a chuckle from Clay.
“I always said he was the ’cutest of us
all,” he declared in an admiring tone, as he
came back to Gray. “ Too soft for me. We
lost a goodish pile once because he wouldn’t
use these little beauties,” and he touched the
revolver in his hand. “ But that ’cute he
was; up to every trick of the profession.
You couldn’t understand this, couldn’t you?”
He did not wait for an answer, but went
on in a quicker tone.


“Of course you couldn’t; you’d have been
searching here for a month of Sundays if I
hadn’t kindly come to help you. ‘ Big Gum
Tree.’ Ha! ha! Tom was ’cute, to be
sure.”
Gray did not speak; he did not even look
up.
“Don’t be down on your luck, my lad,”
said Clay jocosely; “there’s enough for
both of us. It’ll be more than the reward,
any way,” and he chuckled with a cruel sort
of mirth. “ You’ve got a handy little pick
in that knapsack of yours; just fetch it, will
you?”
“ Get it yourself!”
Clay gave him a fierce threatening look.
“ None of your airs and graces here, young
man. You do what I tell you, or it’ll be the
worse for you.”
He sat down on the block of wood opposite
Gray, folded his arms and added:
“ You’re the junior partner, and you’ll just
wait on me, my fine fellow. You go and
fetch me that pick to begin with.”
Gray ground his teeth with helpless rage,
but he got up and took the pick from his


knapsack. It was a small slender tool, but
very strong. Clay looked at it approvingly.
“Now, you dig up that hearth-stone, mate,
and you’ll see what you’ll see.”
“The hearth-stone?”
“You do what I tell you,” returned Lum-
ley with a nod. “ You go and dig up that
hearth-stone.”
Gray flung down the pick.
“ I won’t do anything of the sort. I won’t
stand any more of this sort of treatment.
You may shoot me if you like” —for Lumley
had raised his revolver —“ but do your bidding
IJj )>
won t.
Gray fully expected, even half-wished for,
a shot from the revolver Lumley held up at
him for a moment. But the convict changed
his mind. He put the weapon in his pocket
and got coolly up.
“Well, if you won’t I must,” he said, and
went over to the hearth-stone that lay buried
under a heap of earth and timber.
Gray sank down on the fallen rafter and
buried his face in his hands. No man can
look on death and bear an unchanged front,
not even the bravest and the most prepared,


and Gray was not of these. For a brief
moment he had believed that death was
dose to him. It was to Lumley’s interest to
kill him now that he knew where the gold
was, and there had been murder in his eyes
as he had looked across at Gray. And Gray
sat with his hands clasped over his eyes, in
sick, horrible fear at the thought of himself
lying cold and stiff, with eyes staring blindly
up at the sky; his soul gone —where?
At the other end of the hut Clay was busy.
He dashed away the heap of rubbish on the
hearth-stone, and digging the pick into the
loose earth round it, dragged it up without
much difficulty. A cry of exultation broke
from him as he did so. Embedded in the
ground below the hearth-stone lay a small
tin box, bound round and round with whip-
cord. To drag up the box, cut the already
decaying cord, and wrench open the cover
was the work of a moment. Two or three
wrappings of thick brown paper lay over the
contents of the box. He tore these off, and
clutched at what lay beneath.
“ Come here, partner/’ he shouted; “ what
do you say to this, eh?”


Gray slowly rose and came towards him.
How he had anticipated the moment when
this money should lie before him! There it
was, and he looked at it with a shudder.
Lumley emptied the contents of the box
on the floor before him, and began eagerly to
count over the notes and gold.
“A prime catch, eh?” he remarked, as he
caught up a handful of sovereigns and let
them fall back in a glittering heap. “ Well
be able to cut a dash on this, partner. Look
at this nugget! And the flimsy is all safe—
Tom took care of that; there ain’t one of the
numbers known.” And he held up the bank-
notes to Gray with a grin. “Better than
the reward after all, my boy, even the half
of it, though not quite so good as the whole
lot. You thought you were going to grab it
all, didn’t you? You were a green un to
think so. Why, I’ve followed you up from
the moment I heard of Tom’s death. I knew
he’d leave some paper or other to tell where
’twas. Tom wasn’t greedy, not he.” He
went on with the examination of the treasure
while he spoke; counting the gold and
notes, and putting the nuggets into a heap


apart. Presently he looked up with his
cunning smile at Gray’s dark face.
“You don’t ask me, partner, how I came
to hit on the hearth-stone.”
“How was it?” said Gray indifferently.
The gold might have been withered leaves,
the notes blank pieces of paper for all the
interest he could feel in them.
“ ’Twas a good job for you I followed you,”
returned Lumley cheerfully. “You might
have prodded round till doomsday. I knew
what Tom meant by *hole in Big Gum ,’
d’you see. That big log there with the win-
dow was from the biggest gum of the whole
lot we cut down. And the window was the
hole. Ain’t it plain as daylight now, eh?”
“ Plain enough.”
It was getting dusk outside, and Lumley
got up and went to the door of the hut.
“We’d best be starting, partner,” he said
over his shoulder. “There’s nothing out
against me that I know of, but I’d rather not
be seen by daylight with you just at present,
as you’ll understand.”
Gray hardly heard the words. He picked
up his knapsack from the floor


“I’ll start this minute. I suppose you
have got a horse'?”
Lumley came back to the money before
he answered. He began to divide it into
two heaps.
“ Yes, I’ve got a horse, partner, a pretty
good one too. We scared you pretty well
just now, eh? down along the track. My
horse can climb like a ’possum, and I didn’t
want you to see me then.”
The man’s manner had changed again.
It was smoother and more refined. It was
as if he had slipped on a mask, and Gray’s
loathing of him increased as he marked the
sudden easy transition. His coarseness was
almost better than this oily softness. It
maddened Gray.
“ You needn’t divide that money,” he broke
out in a sudden impulse of miserable rage.
“ I’ll have none of it. And if I leave this
place alive I’ll give you over to the police.
You mark my words!”
Lumley looked up at him with a quiet
smile.
“Two of us can play at that game, my
fine fellow!” Then his manner changed


quickly from softness to ferocity. “You
young fool, you! Don’t you know the police
are after you? They may be outside this,
for aught I know, this minute. Anyway,
they’re close upon your track.”
Gray stepped fiercely towards him.
“You lie!” he gasped out.
“ You’d better ride down to Ford’s to-night
and find out,” returned Lumley in a sulky,
indifferent tone; “you’ll have a warm wel-
come!”
“It’s false!” Gray almost shouted the
words. “ They have no reason.”
Lumley looked up at him with a grin
“ That’s a pretty statement for you to
make, partner. Anyway, there’s a warrant
out against you. Not for this pretty stuff
alone, mind you —suspicion of murder!”
His crafty, cruel eyes fixed themselves on
Gray’s pallid twitching face.
“ Murder of your mate, partner. ’Twas a
pity you had to do it, for it’s a hanging
matter; but he was an obstinate chap, I ex-
pect. Pious and all that.”
“ They believe I murdered Harding?” Gray
gasped out.
( 760 ) H


“Don't take on, partner,” returned Clay
cheerfully; “murder will out, as they say.
And the police haven't got you yet. You
trust to me: I know a track that’ll take us
out safe enough. I daresay you feel queer,
though. It’s unpleasant to be tracked by
the police. I’m used to it, but I don't like
it. I expect you wouldn’t have done it if
you'd thought you’d have been found out;
eh, partner V’
It overwhelmed Gray to find that he could
be suspected of a cold-blooded treacherous
murder.
“You think—you dare to think—” he
broke out, and then his voice failed him.
Had he not, in very purpose and act, been
the murderer of his mate? The words of
angry defence faltered on his tongue. He
stood self-convicted, seeing for the first time
all the horror of his act —unable to say a
word to clear himself of the charge Lumley
brought against him.


CHAPTER VII
DESERTED!
AVAST sun-scorched plain stretching
away in endless miles under a blazing
sky. A waterless desert, where the horses
sunk fetlock-deep in shifting sand, or were
cruelly pricked by the thorny leafless shrub
which was the only living plant to be
seen. No trees; no flowers; no grass; no
sparkle of water far or near. Such was
the land Cray and Lumley were riding
through, four days after leaving Headman’s
Gully.
In dull despair Gray had submitted to
Lumley’s plan for escaping the police. It
had never occurred to him to disbelieve
Lumley’s statement. There seemed no reason
for the lie, and he remembered Mr. Morton’s
sudden keen glance at him the night he left
the station. If it had leaked out that he had
gone searching for Hearing’s hidden treasure,


they might well suspect him of ridding him-
self of Harding.
Gray’s confidence in himself had altogether
gone. Dull despair had taken possession of
him. The past he could not bear to think
of. The future made him shudder when he
looked along the dreary years. What was
there left for him to live for?
They had passed the hill-country on the
second day, and were now crossing a portion
of that arid region which lies to the north-
west of the mountains. Clay had brought
with him a stock of food sufficient for a week
or more. There was no danger of starvation.
It was water that failed them.
A consuming thirst came upon Gray as the
sun rode higher and higher in the heavens.
It was ten hours since he had tasted water,
and his lips and throat were becoming baked
and painful.
“You are sure you know the track?” he
said to Lumley, checking his horse to look
round him.
A light heat-mist was quivering over the
plains. The air was intensely hot and dry.
Lumley stopped his horse too.


“ Thought you were never goin’ to speak
again/’ he said jeeringly. “ I know the
track well enough. We shall see water in
another twenty-four hours, take my word
for it.”
Gray marvelled within himself how it was
possible to follow any track in such a place
as this. They had been riding for miles and
miles without seeing a tree or a hillock, or
even a dry water-course. One mile was
exactly like any other mile. But he said
nothing more to his companion. Silence was
a boon Gray craved almost as much as he
longed for water. At first Lumley had
thrust his talk upon him, and found pleasure
in the misery he inflicted on Gray by his
coarse jokes and cruel jeers. But he had
grown more silent lately, and for the last
hour or so had not spoken at all.
He was riding now a little in advance of
Gray, looking round him with somewhat
anxious eyes. He was looking for a group
of cypress-trees. He felt sure they were
riding in the right direction, but he had a
strong reason for wishing to see them rise on
the horizon before another halt. When once


he saw them his course would be clear and
easy. He would know his position exactly,
and reach water in an hour or two.
Gray saw that his companion was looking
for some landmark; but Lumley said nothing
of the object of his search. He had never
mentioned the cypress-trees to Gray. Gray
had asked him once how he would guide
himself across the desert, and he had refused
to answer.
“ You’d like to make off by yourself,
wouldn’t you'?” he had said with a jeering
laugh; “ stick a knife into me, and leave me
for the flies to feed on? No, no, partner;
we’ll jog on together. You sha’n’t serve me
as you served your mate. Not if I know
it.”
Gray had given up asserting his innocence
of Harding’s actual murder. His words had
not the slightest effect on Lumley. It was
not that he pretended to believe in Gray’s
guilt. Gray saw, and saw truly, that his
companion actually believed that he had
murdered Harding in cold blood and buried
him in some secret place. Clay had only
laughed at his declarations of innocence


“ What’s there to make such a fuss about,
partner \ I never did see such a cove for
making believe. But you can’t take Bill
Clay in, my lad. I can tell a rogue directly
I set eyes on him. By fellow-feeling, you
))
see.
The day grew hotter and hotter. The air
that blew against their faces as they rode
along was dry and scorching. It was like
riding in a heated furnace. Suddenly Lum-
ley gave a shout. He had seen on the
horizon, through the quivering heat-mist,
three cypresses pointing with , black fingers
to the sky. He knew as he looked that it
was but an illusion, a mirage. But he knew,
too, that the real cypresses, of which he saw
the shadows, were in that direction, and not
so very far off.
Gray saw the cypresses in the same mo-
ment.
“ Trees!” he cried eagerly —for where trees
grew water must be near.
“ You’re a pretty fellow to go bush-riding,”
grumbled Lumley. “They ain’t trees —not
real ones, so to speak. They’re clouds.”
And Gray saw for himself how misty the


dark outlines were; and even as he looked
he saw the mirage disappear. But he marked
the point in the horizon at which the mirage
had appeared, and was astonished to see
Lumley suddenly turn his horse in a totally
different direction.
“ Surely it would be better to go that
way. There must be water near.”
“Go by yourself, then,” snarled Lumley,
over his shoulder; “and a good riddance
too.”
He rode sulkily on and Gray followed
him. When they had gone a few miles
Clay’s horse gave a stumble, and Clay sprang
off
“He’s dead beat,” he said. “We’ll rest
here.”
“But —” Gray began, and then he stopped.
What was the use of speaking? He was
forced to trust to Lumley’s guidance.
They lay down on the baked scorched
soil, hobbling their horses that they might
not wander far. Gray flung himself on the
sand, face downwards, careless of the hot sun
that poured upon him. Lumley went a few
paces off to a bed of polygonum, the gloomy


leafless bramble of the wilderness. He
scooped out a liollow in the sand below the
bramble and lay down there in the tiny oasis
of shadow he had thus obtained. Unseen
of Gray he took a bottle he had secreted in
his pocket and drank the few drops remain-
ing in it, then corked it and put it back.
Then he turned upon his side and slept.
He was sleeping still when Gray roused
himself from the heavy stupor of despair that
had come upon him and sat up. There lay
the grim horrible wilderness all about him.
A short distance off the horses were standing
with drooping heads and panting sides. In
the scanty shadow of the bramble Lumley
lay asleep.
Gray got up and walked to Lumley s side,
and stood looking down on the evil face as if
his eyes were drawn there by some horrible
fascination. The convict slept heavily, his
face turned upwards to the sky. Gray saw
that his lips were wet. He had water, then!
Gray had suspected that he had, but he
did not try to find out where it was hidden.
He turned away with a shudder and flung
himself down upon the ground again.


It was growing dusk when Lumley woke
from that heavy sleep. He started up wildly
and looked round him. For days he had
kept awake fearing treachery from Gray if
he let sleep overcome him. Now he had been
sleeping for many hours. The sun had been
blazing in a clear sky when he fell asleep;
now the sky was covered with thick gray
clouds, and night was close at hand. He
looked round him and saw at once the two
horses. A second glance showed him Gray
lying with his face upon one arm not far
from him. Lumley approached, and saw
that he was asleep.
He bent over him to satisfy himself the
sleep was not feigned, and then turned to-
wards the horses. It was not difficult to
catch them, and he had prepared to mount
when an idea struck him. Taking a scrap
from his pocket, the page on which Gray had
reproduced Hearing s map for him, he scrawled
a few words, putting the paper on his saddle
to write. Then he softly approached
and stuck the paper into the sand by a branch
of bramble. When this was done he crept
back again to the horses.


He remained looking at them reflectively
for a moment. His own horse stood with
drooping head and panting sides, evidently
nearly done for, but Gray’s horse had borne
the long journey well. Lumley had already
fastened the bag containing the money and
the pistols to his own saddle, but now he
shifted it to the other. Gray’s horse turned
an uneasy glance on him as he did so; and
Lumley had a little difficulty in mounting it.
But he got into the saddle at last, and taking
the bridle of his own horse in his hand he
rode away, giving a backward look now and
then to the man he was deserting.
Night came, a thick starless night with
clouds hanging low over the desert. A cool
O O
wind came with the clouds and blew on Gray,
and he slept. He was worn out, and he slept
hour after hour. The dawn was breaking
when he at last awoke. His sleep had been
so deep, so dreamless, that in it he had for-
gotten all that had happened. But memory
came quickly back. He started up and
looked round for Lumley and the horses.
All was still, with a stillness unknown
save in desert lands. The silence was pro-


found. In the gray dawn he could see the
plains with perfect distinctness. He looked
round him from horizon to horizon. There
was no living thing in sight. He was alone.
He understood instantly what had hap-
pened. Lumley had deserted him. His
first feeling was one of absolute relief. He
had escaped from that hateful bondage. It
was not for some moments that he realized
the hopelessness of his position. Ignorant
of the track, alone, on foot, without water or
food, what hope was there for him of escaping
from the desert ? Gray knew how little hope
there was. As he had deserted Harding, so
he in turn had been deserted. As Harding
had perished, so he too would perish. He
looked his fate in the face with the calmness
of despair.
Before he had fallen asleep he had made
up his mind to give himself up to the police
and meet the charge brought against him if
once he escaped from the wilds. It seemed
to him now as if God had refused him a
chance of proving his repentance. He was
to perish in the wilderness, an outcast from
God and man.


He sank down on the ground again, and
sat there with his elbows on his knees, his
head propped on his hands, staring steadily
before him. In the dawn the wide level
spaces of the wilderness resembled the pas-
tures that had surrounded their hut. Gray
found himself remembering his life there
with intense clearness. He saw Harding
busy about the hut, ever cheerful, ever ready.
He saw him among the cattle, strong of hand,
alert of eye. He saw him riding home in
the twilight, talking of his wife and his little
lads; turning in his stirrups to give a word
of cheer to Watch; or bearing Gray’s grum-
bling talk with cheerful patience.
What depths of steadfast affection there
were in the heart of that rough man! Once
when Gray was ill he had tended him like a
woman. He had sat beside him night after
night in unwearying affection. Gray remem-
bered how he had lifted him from bed to
chair, as he might have lifted a child. He
seemed to feel the pressure of his hand on his
shoulder still as he stood over him, pressing
him to eat some dainty he had prepared, to
see his rugged kindly face bending over


him. What would he not give for a sight
of that kind face now, and a touch of that
strong honest hand?
Gray’s stony despair gave way; the hard,
desperate look on his face softened. He
burst into bitter tears. His frame shook
with the strong, terrible crying of despairing
grief.
But the tears did him good; they cleared
his brain, and made it possible for him to
think of what was best for him to do. He
no longer felt inclined to give up without
a struggle for life. He got up from the
ground and looked round him with a new
strength. It was then he saw the note
Lumley had stuck into the sand beside him.
He picked it up and read it. It was only a
few scrawled words:
“ The police ain't after you at all, Mr.
Gentleman Gray, so you can clear out of the
Bush as soon as you like. Fll not split on
you, and you won’t on me, I guess.
“ N.B. Dead men tell no tales.”
The words were perfectly clear in the pale
morning light. Gray read them and then
threw the paper away with a shudder. He


felt no anger against Lumley, only a sick
horror that made anger impossible. What
Lumley had done was what he himself had
done. He deserved his fate.
The knowledge that the police held no
warrant against him, that the story was but
a trick of Lumley’s to get him into the Bush,
affected him strangely little. He had made
up his mind to tell the whole story if ever
he got back to the haunts of men again.
The confession he had to make would be a
purely voluntary one now; that was his chief
thought as he read Lumley’s letter.


CHAPTER VIII.
LOST IN THE BUSH.
GRAY lost no time in starting forwards.
The choice of direction made by him
was determined by remembering the cypresses
of which they had seen the mirage. He
believed that they had been a landmark to
Clay, and that his turning in another direc-
tion was but a feint.
It was difficult for Gray to decide the
exact direction. The sky was heavy with
clouds, and no sun could be seen behind
them. But he carefully calculated as well
as he could whereabouts on the horizon the
trees had appeared, and turned towards that
point.
He knew enough of Bush stories to know
the tendency of wanderers there to travel in
a circle; and in this sterile waste, where every
mile was like ever other mile, Gray felt he
might travel round and round and never


know it. To prevent this he dug shallow
holes with his knife here and there, and
stuck boughs of the bramble in them, so that
he might recognize the spot if he came to it
again.
Towards noon the clouds gradually dis-
persed and the sun blazed down upon him.
This bettered his position in one way, as he
could now be sure of walking forward, but
it increased the torment of thirst until it be-
came almost unendurable agony. He strug-
gled on till past noonday, but no dark
cypresses lifted themselves on the sky-line.
The desert stretched round him in its blank,
dreadful loneliness. The blazing sun beat
down upon him, making sight a torture. He
could go no further. He flung himself down
on the unsheltered burning sand and hid his
eyes from the light.
Towards evening the clouds gathered again,
and he rose and struggled on. He walked
many miles that night, and towards dawn
lay down and slept. The second day passed
much as the first had done. The sky cleared
again, and the fury of the sun beat down
upon him. He struggled on for a time, and
1760) I


again gave up the struggle and lay down and
waited for evening.
On the third day his agony of thirst had
become unbearable. He knew that in a few
more hours death must end his sufferings if
he could not reach water. With grim deter-
mination he battled on that day through the
flaming sunshine and gave himself no rest.
Every moment he expected to see the
cypresses rise on the horizon; and he was
sweeping it with his glance when his eye fell
on a white object fluttering on the wind from
shrub to shrub. At first he could not discern
what it was—his bloodshot weary eyes refused
their office—but on approaching nearer he
saw it was a piece of paper. It fluttered
across his path. He picked it up with a
horrible foreboding. It was Lumley’s letter,
written on the back of the map he had
drawn in the hut.
It was just possible the wind had carried
it onwards to cross his path. Gray made an
effort to think that this was so. But a few
staggering steps further on brought him to
the shallow holes in which the brambles stood
upright. He had come back to the place


from which he had started! All hope died
within him as he saw those hollows. He
sank down on the sand to wait for death.
He was lying face downwards on the sand,
with his arms flung out before him, when a
low distant sound suddenly broke the still-
ness. He started up and looked wildly
round. The twilight had fallen, and he
could not distinguish objects clearly; but as
he strained his gaze from side to side the
sound came again to his ears —the sound of
a horse galloping at full speed across the
desert.
Gray could now distinguish from what
direction the sound came, and he hurried
forward, hope once more rising up in him.
Was it Lumley come back to help him, re-
pentant for his desertion 1 ? Or was it some
lost traveller like himself, seeking a way out
of these dreadful wilds? Or had Lumley
sent a party to search for him from the
nearest station, while going onwards him-
self to safety? Gray asked himself these
questions as he hurried on through the
gathering darkness. He still could hear the
galloping hoofs, and for a time they seemed


to come nearer and nearer. But suddenly he
became aware that they were receding from
him—the sound was becoming fainter and
fainter, it was dying away in the distance.
Gray stopped. A cry of despair broke
from him, and then, summoning all his
strength, he raised a loud “Coo-ee!”
The shrill shout died away upon the air
and left profound stillness behind it. Gray
could no longer hear the faintest sound of
the horse’s hoofs. Either the rider had
stopped to listen to his call or had gone on
beyond hearing. Gray moistened his baked
and blistered lips, and then again shouted.
The shout again died away, leaving intense
stillness behind it. But this time the stillness
only lasted for a moment. There came a
faint answering cry, far-off and indistinct,
but unmistakably the cry of a human voice.
Gray once more hurried forward. The
ground was growing rougher; it was broken
up into hillocks, and his progress was less
rapid. After a time he stopped and called
again, and again heard the answering call.
He was no longer alone in the wilderness;
friendly help was near.


The moon rose as Gray hurried on, rose in
full splendour, making the plain almost as
light as day. Gray looked in vain for what
he had hoped to see—the outline of horse and
rider against the pale silvery glow of the sky.
There was no horse anywhere to be seen;
there was nothing to be seen but the low
bushes and the bunches of dry grass, and
the great circle of the desert against the
horizon. But as Gray stared round him,
refusing to believe the evidence of his own
eyes, the shout came again—came with a
mocking ring in it that made Gray’s blood
run suddenly cold. He knew the voice now: it
was Lumley’s voice. But it was as cruel and
mocking as ever. Gray’s dream of help from
him vanished like a breath as he heard it.
He stumbled on across the sand hillocks,
and presently could discern a huddled figure
on the ground, with its back propped up
against a hillock. The moonlight was full
on the haggard blistered face that looked up
at Gray with twitching lips.
“Welcome, partner,” were Lumley’s first
words. “ You didn’t expect to see me again,
did you now?”


Gray made no answer. He was too far
gone in despair to have even a flicker of
curiosity as to how Lumley came to be lying
there. But Lumley proceeded to enlighten
him. He thrust forward his foot, from which
he had cut away the boot, and Gray could
see that it was discoloured and badly swollen.
“I owe that to your cursed horse,” he
said, in a sulky, vindictive tone. “ Just as
Ld hit upon the track again, too.”
Gray cast a wide glance over the moonlit
plains before he spoke. But no horse was
visible.
“He flung you, I suppose?” he said, in a
quiet, expressionless tone. “I could have
warned you not to play any tricks with him.
Where is your own horse?”
The absence of vindictiveness from Gray’s
manner puzzled Lumley. He stared up at
him, wondering what it meant.
“ Dead,” he said sulkily after a moment.
“ I’d better have stuck to you after all, you
see, mate. But I’d have sent after you the
first chance I had. I meant to do that all
along.”
He had paused before adding the last


sentence, and his manner had suddenly
altered, had become smooth and conciliat-
ing.
Gray did not attempt to answer him. He
moved away a few paces and flung himself
down on the ground, and sat with his head
propped on his hands, staring straight in
front of him. Lumley watched him in
silence. His face showed none of the dull
despair that had settled on Gray’s, but was
alight with fierce excitement. And the
glance he bent on Gray was a strange one.
There was hate in it, and longing, and a
torturing doubt.
“You’re pretty bad, ain’t you, partner 1 ?”
he said at last. “Had a bad time since we
parted, I daresay.”
“ Did you expect me to have a good time?”
Gray answered without looking at him.
“ Missed the track ? Been wanderin’ round
and round? Just what happened to me, you
see, though I thought I was dead sure of my
way. But I got my right bearings again—if
it hadn’t been for that horse of yours—”
He was tearing up fiercely the scanty grass
beside him as he spoke, and there broke out


a sudden fury in his face. But he thrust
back the oath that came to his lips, and
spoke, after a pause, in the same conciliating
tone.
“ WeVe had bad luck, both on us, haven’t
vve, partner? And my bad luck’s been
yours; for I’d have sent back for you. I
only meant to frighten you a bit.”
“What’s the good of talking about it?”
Gray said wearily. “ It’ll soon be over for
both of us now. Another day must see the
last of it.”
He just turned his head to speak, and then
went back to his old position, his eyes staring
hopelessly across the silent waste. His
apathy seemed to rouse Lumley to a sort of
frenzy again. With an effort that forced a
groan from him he dragged himself a pace
forwards and plucked Gray by the sleeve.
“You’d not sit there long if you knew’
what I know, you fool,” he burst out.
“ Didn’t I tell you I found my bearings again?
Didn’t you hear me say it?”
His excitement communicated itself to
Gray. He turned round with a wild ques-
tioning glance.


“ Do you mean — For God’s sake tell me
the truth! Do you know where we are ? Is
that it?”
He had not sprung up, but life and energy
had come back to him. His hands clenched,
his shoulders straightened themselves. He
had it in him, he felt, to make a good fight
for life yet.
Lumley grew cool as he saw the hope leap
into Gray’s face. He let go his sleeve and
sank back against the hillock.
“ Suppose I do know,” he said in the old
mocking tone; “what then, partner?”
Gray stared at him without speaking, and
Lumley repeated the question:
“ What then, partner?”
Gray was silent. He had fixed his eyes
on Lumley’s face, as if his glance could drag
out the truth from him. Lumley gave him
back glance for glance. Then he suddenly
bent down and drew a rough circle on the
sand. Gray drew close, bending towards the
circle with intent eyes.
“That’s where we are, partner, d’ye see?”
said Lumley, making a hole with his finger
in the middle of the circle; “and here’s the


moon/’ making another mark. “You’re
follerin’ me so far, eh?”
“ Yes, go on,” said Gray breathlessly.
Lumley gave him a quick look from under
his bushy eyebrows, and then bent over the
plan again.
“Do you remember them trees we saw
just afore we parted?” he said, looking on the
ground as he spoke. “’Twas the sight of
them made me sure we was in the right road.
I made tracks for them when we parted
company.”
He looked up furtively at Gray again.
“ You got that bit of a note I wrote you,
partner?”
Gray hardly heard the words.
“Never mind that. Go on, go on!” he
hurried out with passionate eagerness.
He was sure now that Lumley knew in
which direction the trees lay, knew where
water was to be obtained.
Lumley looked into his face with a sar-
donic grin. He had grown cooler and cooler
as Gray’s excitement rose.
“What’s the hurry, partner?” he said;
“ there’s nobody as I knows on who’s likely


to interrupt us. Well, as I was sayin’, I
made straight for them trees, but somehow
I missed the track. That cloudy weather
put me out, you see; and ’twasn’t till near
sundown last night I got sight of them.”
He stopped, gave a rapid glance round the
horizon, and then bent over the sand again.
“ They can’t be far off then ? ” asked Gray,
who had followed his glance with breathless
impatience.
“Too far off for me anyways,” Lumley
answered, with a quick upward look at him.
“ I’d tried that afore I answered your call,
partner. Did you think ’twas me, now,
when you got an answer? I knew ’twas you
in a minute.”
“ I don’t know; I forget. What’s the
good of wasting time like this?” cried Gray,
getting suddenly on his feet. “ Tell me
which way to go. I can do it now, but in
another hour or two it will be too late.
Which way? Be quick!”
“ It can’t be more than half a dozen miles
or so,” returned Lumley in a slow reflective
tone that almost drove Gray out of his senses
with impatience. “ You make a bee-line for


the trees, and then strike off to the left
where the ridge is, and it’s just over the
ridge that there’s water. Yards of it, part-
ner, all shining and sparkling in the moon-
light. Why, you could be close to it in an
hour almost. And there’s no mistake about
it; it isn’t no salt-pan, but fresh water fit for
a king to drink. I’ve seen it afore me all
the time I’ve been lyin’ here. Can’t you see
it, partner?”
It was a maddening vision which Lumley’s
words had called up before Gray. A cool
stretch of limpid, shining water —there it lay
before him, close to him. He was kneeling
down by it, plunging his fevered face into it,
slaking the thirst that was burning his life
away. And it meant life, that cool, delicious
draught; it meant more than life —it meant
opportunity for atonement, for undoing, as
far as in him lay, the wrong he had done,
for proving his repentance a real and lasting
one.
Lumley was stooping over the sand, but
his eyes were on Gray’s face, and he saw all
the eagerness in it. He saw it, and inter-
preted it according to his own nature. He


broke into a harsh laugh, and with a sweep
of one hand on the sand, he destroyed the
rough chart he had made.
“You’d like to start this minute, wouldn’t
you, partner? and the crows might make
their meal off me. I saw a flock of them
nigh here yesterday; they’re waiting for their
feast. You wouldn’t like to disappoint them,
would you?”
Gray did not comprehend him in the
least.
“ Don’t waste time like this,” he said im-
ploringly; “let me be off at once. I could be
back to you by sunrise if I have good luck.
And you have a bottle about you, haven’t
you? Let me have it. And who knows?—
I may fall in with the horse.”
Lumley laughed again.
“So you may, partner, so you may. ’Twas
the smell of the water that drove him frantic,
I believe. He made straight for it. And
there’s the swag upon him, and the pistols,
and the grub. You’ll be well set up if you
come across the horse.”
A sudden terror had come upon Gray
as he listened to this speech of Lumley’s,


and looked down upon his sneering, evil
face.
“ You are playing with me!” he burst out,
and the cold sweat stood out upon his brow
as he said it. “You know nothing of the
water! ”


CHAPTER IX.
FACING DEATH
LUMLEY paused a moment before answer-
ing that last speech of Gray’s. Then
his tone was mild and smooth.
“What’s the good of talking like that,
mate? But just look there.” He pointed
to his foot again as he spoke. “ Does it look
as if ’twould carry me half a dozen miles?
Or a mile? Or a couple of yards? And
I’ve hurt my side as well. Broke a rib or
two, maybe. I tried crawlin’ a while ago,
but I couldn’t even manage that. I’m no
better than a log —only fit for the crows,
partner. What’s the good of water to me
when I can’t get at it?”
His tone was so mild and reasonable that
Gray felt no difficulty in answering him.
“ But half a dozen miles is nothing to me.
Give me that bottle. I’ll be back before
sunrise.” He paused a moment, and then


as he saw the expression in the other’s face
he added impetuously, “ I swear it. Good
heavens, Lumley, you don’t think I would
desert you? You don’t think that?”
The fury that had once or twice swept
away Lumley’s coolness had come upon him
again, and he no longer cared to restrain it.
He lifted himself, shaking one clenched fist
towards Gray.
“Do you think I’d trust you for a single
minute, you smooth-tongued hypocrite!” he
screamed. “ You’d be glad enough to leave
me lyin’ here, wouldn’t you? But you’re not
going to get the chance, Mr. Gentleman Gray-
We’ll stick together, like partners should.
The crows sha’n’t feast on me alone, I’ll tell
you that.”
Gray made no attempt to answer him just
then. When Lumley stopped speaking and
sank back with a groan of pain on the sand,
Gray turned and walked away a few paces,
and stood trying to get some mastery over
the trembling sick misery that seemed ready
to overpower him. There was no anger in
his heart against the man whose deep,
laboured breaths he could still hear behind


him. It was only natural, Gray said to him-
self, that he should believe him capable of
deserting him. He had deserved to be
thought willing to commit even such a base-
ness as that.
Yet if he could not convince Lumley that
he was to be trusted, there was nothing but
death for both of them. Gray had felt in-
capable of reasoning with his companion for
the moment, incapable even of speech. He
had felt ready to give up the struggle—to
let it all end there. But as he stood fight-
ing manfully with his weakness, strength
came to him —power to will and act as a
brave man should. The far-off moon-clear
skyline, the stars faintly shining in the upper
blue, the solemn moonlight, the rustle of the
wind in the dry grasses, all seemed to have
a message for him —to whisper hope, to lift
him out of himself, to give him courage to
make another fight for life.
He went back to Lumley, and sat down
again where he had sat before.
“ Listen to me a moment, Lumley,” he said
“You say you know where water is?”
“ Say I know ? Ido know, partner; you
(760) K


may lay your life to that/’ responded Lumley
harshly.
He had been lying watching Gray, wonder-
ing what his next move would be. Grays
quiet manner was a surprise to him.
“Very well, you do know. Now, I will
tell you what lam going to do. I shall
wait a few moments for you to tell me where
it lies—”
“You may wait a hundred years if you
like,” broke in Lumley with a savage look.
“And then I mean to set off to try and find
it for myself,” went on Gray, as if Lumley
had not spoken. “ You have told me too
much if you did not mean to tell me more.
I shall walk six miles in one direction, and
if I do not get in sight of the trees, I shall
walk back and try again. I must hit upon
them at last, you know.”
“ You’d never do it,” said Lumley scoff-
ingly. “You’re nigh beat already. You’d
die in your tracks.”
“ You’re wrong there,” returned Gray, with
a quiet confidence that had its due effect on
his companion. “ I shall not be walking
aimlessly, you see, and in this moonlight


there’s no fear of going over the same ground
again. I am convinced I shall reach the
water in time enough for myself. It is you
who will probably suffer for keeping back the
information you possess.”
“What d’ye mean by that?” broke from
Lumley fiercely.
“ Just this,” said Gray, keeping his glance
steadily fixed upon him: “if I could reach
this water without delay I should be able tc
get back to you with a supply; but if I wear
out my strength in getting there, I may not
be able to get back to you in time. Surely
you can see that?”
Lumley glared at him like a trapped beast.
“You’re just the one to come back, ain’t
you ?” he exclaimed. “ A cove what murdered
his own mate for a bit of flimsy. You’re one
to be trusted, ain’t you?”
“You must believe that if you will,” said
Gray calmly. His voice faltered as he went
on after a momentary pause. “ I betrayed
my mate —the truest, best mate man ever
had; but I’ll be true to you, Lumley, if
you’ll give me the chance. lam not the
man I was.”


The only answer Lumley vouchsafed to
that was a harsh mocking laugh. Gray did
not speak again, and they sat in silence for
some moments, while Lumley dragged up his
injured foot and rubbed it, keeping a furtive
scrutiny on Gray’s determined face. When he
had first heard Gray’s call and answered it,
he had not made up his mind as to whether
he should trust him or no, and through their
first talk he had wavered to and fro—now
feeling ready to risk the chance that Gray
would come back to him, now savagely vow-
ing within himself that they should both die,
almost within sight of the water that would
be life to them, rather than Gray should alone
escape. At the last this savage mood had
conquered, and he had felt it impossible to
trust Gray with his precious secret.
But now he began to see clearly enough
that he had outwitted himself. The trees
were so near, and such a striking landmark,
that Gray was certain to find them if he had
strength enough to persevere for some hours
in the search; and that he had strength
enough, Lumley could not but believe as he
looked at his quiet resolute face.


The silence continued for some moments.
It was broken by Gray.
“ I think I have given you time enough,”
he said, getting deliberately on his feet.
“Now, which is it to be, Lumley? I shall
start in another moment.”
A fierce oath escaped Lumley’s lips.
“ I’ll not be left to rot here,” he snarled
out. “ I’ll walk it somehow. Give me your
arm, partner.”
He made a clutch at it, and dragged him-
self slowly and painfully to his feet. The
agony of movement turned Lumley’s face to
the clammy hue of death, but he would not
give way to the pain. He essayed to walk
forward, but after the first step Gray stood
still.
“ You can’t do it, Lumley. It is mad-
ness to attempt it.”
Lumley glared at him for a moment, and
then suddenly yielded.
“You’re right, partner; I’m beat. You’ve
got the best of it this time. Now help
me back again, and I’ll tell you all I
know.”
Gray helped him back to the hillock, and


put his foot in as comfortable a position as
possible.
“ I’ll be back to you before many hours
are over, Lumley. I’ll make all the haste I
can,” he said, his tone softened by a sudden
pity for the disabled man.
Lumley looked up at him with implacable
eyes.
“I’ll believe you when I see you, mate.
But you’ve bested me all round, and I’ve got
to trust you, you see.”
He dragged out the flat bottle from his
pocket, and held it up to Gray.
“ Turn your back on the moon and walk
straight on; and if I ever see you again
you’re a bigger fool than I take you for.”
“ I shall come back,” Gray said briefly.
He pocketed the bottle, and turned sharply
away in the direction Lumley had pointed
out.
He was hardly conscious of fatigue as he
pressed across the sandy waste. Even the
torture of thirst had grown less since hope
had come to him. He hurried on with
strong, eager footsteps, expecting every mo-
ment to see the trees lift themselves against


the sky. Once the terrible thought came to
him that Lumley had been deceiving him all
the time, and his story of the water was a lie;
but as he remembered Lumley’s looks and
words, and recalled the intensity of excite-
ment in his face when he had left him, he
knew that there was indeed water close at
hand. Then, again, when he seemed to have
been walking for a long time, and the horizon
still lay before him bare and unbroken, he
began to suspect that Lumley had wilfully
misled him, and the water lay in another
direction.
But it was almost immediately after this
that his foot struck against a shrub, and
looking down he saw he had come upon a
banksia, a sign, as he was bushman enough
to know, that better country was close ahead.
The green leaves of the pretty little shrub
were a welcome sight, and it was shortly
after passing this that he saw the tops ot
the cypresses begin to show themselves
against the sky-line, as the mast of a ship
lifts first above the sea-line.
Gray pushed on with renewed energy, and
it was not long before he was close to the


gloomy trees. A cloud of birds, the crows
Lumley had spoken of, rose from the trees as
Gray approached, and flew screaming over
his head. He listened to their harsh voices
with a shudder, and hastily struck away to
the left, where a low ridge crossed the plain
and hid what lay beyond.
It took him some time to reach and breast
the ridge, and his strength was nearly at an
end when he at last gained the top and looked
down on the shallow valley below. He could
not see the shining stretch of water Lumley
had spoken of, the valley was too thickly
covered with shrubby undergrowth for that.
But even in the moonlight Gray could see
that this undergrowth was densely green, and
that the trees that sprang above it were
full of life and vigour.
And as he descended the ridge he came
upon a faint track through the underwood —
a native track, Gray felt sure, and one that
led to the water. He hurried along it,
piercing deeper and deeper into the dark
recesses of the wood. But the darkness had
no terrors for Gray. He felt the track
under his feet, and pressed boldly onward,


pushing away the interlacing boughs with
his hands as he went. And presently there
came a faint light through the trees ahead,
and in a few more steps he came out into a
little open space, and saw the reflection of
the moonlight in a round, deeply - fringed
pool close before him.
For the moment he saw nothing but the
glimmering sheen of that water. He flung
himself down with a cry, and plunged his
face in it. It was stagnant, it was thick
with mud and floating weeds, but it was
fresh, and to Gray it was purest nectar. He
had self-control enough left not to drink too
much at once, but he lay by the side of the
pool with hands and arms buried deep in it,
utterly oblivious for the moment of every-
thing but the mere physical delight the
water brought to him.
How long he lay there he never knew.
He could never recall that time except as a
vague memory. He could remember break-
ing out of the wood and seeing the little
moonlit pool before him, but after that it
was all confused. What brought him back
to clear consciousness was a movement


somewhere on the other side of the pool,
where the branches of a tree cast a flicker-
ing shadow on the grass. Gray started up,
dizzy and trembling; but his first glance
showed him what it was. His horse had
found its way to the water before him, drawn
by some sure and marvellous instinct, and
now had drawn close again to the pool,
gazing across at its master with mild recog-
nizing eyes.
Gray cautiously approached it, fearing it
might start away; but it showed no desire
to escape. It arched its neck and whinnied
joyfully when Gray came close. It was
evidently delighted to feel its master’s hand
again. Gray stood by its side, patting it
and speaking to it, finding strange delight
in its joyful welcome. The wallet containing
the money still hung at the saddle, with the
rough bag in which Lumley had carried the
food.
Gray, standing by the horse, took out
some food and hurriedly ate it. He would
not trust himself to sit down again; he felt
that sleep might suddenly overcome him un-
awares. When he had eaten a few morsels


—he found it too difficult to swallow to be
able to eat much —he carefully filled the
bottle he carried, and the larger bottle that
was in the bag with the food, drank a deep
draught himself and allowed his horse to
drink, and then, holding the horse by the
bridle, he began to pick his way along the
path by which he had come.
The horse followed him quietly; it was
only when they emerged from the wood and
began to ascend the slope of the ridge that
it showed the first signs of unwillingness.
Gray had to encourage it by voice and hand
before he could prevail upon it to take the
upward path.
Gray was able to discern more clearly now
how worn out the poor creature was by all
it had gone through. He felt an impulse
once to let it have its way, and let it remain
in the valley, but he dismissed the impulse
at once. The horse was too useful, too neces-
sary to be dispensed with.
They reached the brow of the ridge, and
there Gray rested for a while. He had not
mounted the horse, he had determined to go
on leading it for some time longer at least.


He doubted if it bad strength left to carry
him. He stood beside the horse with the
bridle in his hand, and looked down upon
the vast plain stretching away from the foot
of the ridge.
Up to that point Gray, since finding the
horse, had acted instinctively, almost as an
automaton might act. He was so worn out,
so numb with privation and fatigue, that he
had not gone in thought beyond the present
moment. But now it was as if a cloud had
lifted from his brain; he saw the whole
position in a glance. What had been his
heart’s dearest wish was fulfilled for him.
All he had coveted, all he had betrayed his
mate Harding to get, was at last within his
grasp. He had but to turn his horse’s head
away from that silent, secret-keeping bush,
and the gold was safely his.
Gray did not thrust the thought from him;
he let his mind dwell upon it, he regarded it
steadily; for his eyes had been opened to see
in what the real happiness and worth of life
consisted. Through suffering and humiliation
he had learnt to measure things at their right
value. In contact with a man who had de-


liberately chosen evil to be his good he had
been taught what evil meant. The tempta-
tion that had once been too strong for him
was no longer a temptation. He could see the
full baseness of it now. Better death, better
open confession and a dishonoured name,
than life and honour bought by treachery and
guile.
The trees stood up dark and funereal
against the cloudless sky. His path lay
beneath them, and on towards the moonlit
east.
“ Come, we must start, old fellow/’ Gray
said to the reluctant horse, and he began to
descend the slope of the ridge.


CHAPTER X.
A GRIM SORT OF PICNIC.
THE dawn was breaking when Gray ap-
proached the spot where Lumley lay.
He had walked the whole distance, for his
horse was evidently too dead-beat to carry
him. He had had no difficulty in keeping
to the right track. Indeed he had calcu-
lated so well, that when he first stopped and
“ coo-eed ” to make sure he was going right,
Lumley’s answer had come from a point
straight ahead, and no considerable distance
off.
Lumley had seen him before that call.
Though he had told himself again and again
that Gray would never come back, that it
was too much in his interest to leave him
there to die, his eyes had anxiously watched
the western horizon.
There had been something in Gray’s look
when he had spoken his last words that had


impressed Lumley powerfully, and so it was
not altogether a surprise to him when he at
last could distinguish a dark, moving object
against the sky. The surprise came later
when he was able to discern that Gray was
leading his horse with him.
A strange change came over Lumley’s face
when he realized that; his thin lips set them-
selves together, his brows contracted with a
frown of anxious thought, his eyes grew like
the stealthy, waiting eyes of a beast of prey
which has not the strength to attack its
victim in the open, but lurks in ambush and
springs upon it unawares.
With that look on his face he watched
Gray approaching him through the clear
rosy light of the sunrise, but it was gone
before Gray came near enough to see his face
clearly. He made an effort at a smile of
grateful welcome.
“So you haven’t left me to the crows,
partner?” he said, raising himself on his
elbow as he spoke to grasp the bottle Gray
held out to him. “ I’m glad enough to see
you, I can tell you that.”
Gray nodded silently, and then went back


to the horse and took the bags from the
saddle. He brought them to the spot where
Lumley was lying, and flung them down at
his side. He saw that Lumley had done
little more than wet his lips from the bottle,
but that he had torn some strips from the
lining of his coat, and was proceeding to pour
water on them with a careful hand.
“ You’d better let me do that for you/'
Gray said quietly. “And there is more water,
Lumley; take another pull. I can fill the
bottles again if they are empty before you
can move.”
He had knelt down as he spoke, and taken
the wet rags from Lumley’s hand to bind
round his injured foot.
“The horse will have to carry me,” said
Lumley after watching Gray’s bandaging for
a moment. “You found him by the water,
didn’t you, partner?”
“ Yes, close by it.”
Lumley eyed the horse, with a quick furtive
glance, and then looked at Gray again.
“Did you tramp it all the way, partner?
Ld have let the horse save my legs if I’d
been you.”


“ He’s dead beat,” Gray said briefly. “He
had enough to carry.”
Lumley’s eyes turned involuntarily to the
bags at his side. He had avoided looking at
them since Gray had placed them by him.
“ ’Tis a mercy we’ve got the grub all right,
ain’t it, partner 1 ?” he said. “Though I’m
blessed if I feel a bit peckish. Twas water
I wanted.”
He drank a little from the bottle and
corked it again. Gray marvelled at the self-
control he showed in taking so little.
“ I’d finish that bottle right away if 1
were you, Lumley,” he said. “ It’s only a
few mouthfuls after all. I shan’t want any
more for a good time yet.”
Lumley took another sip and then put the
bottle away from him.
“’Tain’t good to take too much at once,
partner. And so you found it pretty easy,
eh? Now, how far should you reckon it?”
“ Perhaps eight or nine miles.”
Gray had finished his bandaging, and had
opened the bag containing the food. As he
sat down on the ground near Lumley he
pushed the wallet of money from him with
(760) L


his elbow, but Lumley did not give it a
glance. Neither he nor Gray had yet referred
to it.
“ Here’s the other bottle of water,” Gray'
said, taking it out and sticking it in the sand.
“And here’s the damper.” He took out
some of the dry uninviting scraps and laid
them close to Lumley. “ There’s nothing
else,” he added, looking into the bag.
Lumley gave a quick glance at the bag.
“ Didn’t I put the pistols there, mate ? I
haven’t got ’em about me.” He spoke care-
lessly.
“ Oh, they’re here,” Gray returned. “ But
that’s all the food left. Still, there’s enough
to last us for a day or two.”
“A kind of grim sort of picnic, isn’t it?”
said Lumley with a grin, as he took up a bit
of damper. He ate a few mouthfuls and then
drew out the bottle for another sip. “ Here’s
to you, partner,” he said with an awkward
nod at Gray, “ and good luck to both on us.”
Gray returned his nod, but made no answer
in words. Lumley put back the bottle again,
and watched him for a moment from beneath
his heavy brows.


“You don’t bear no malice, I hope, mate 1 ?”
he said suddenly.
Gray raised his heavy eyes and looked at
him inquiringly.
“ I was pretty rough on you last night,”
went on Lumley in a persuasive, apologetic
tone; “but I was drove up in a corner, you
see. I’d served you so bad that I reckoned
you’d be glad enough to pay me out. Though
I’d have sent back for you from the nearest
station, partner. I meant that all along.”
Gray did not believe him, but he did not
think it worth while to tell him so.
“ We’ll let bygones be bygones, Lumley,”
he said in a friendly tone. “We’ve both
had a hard time of it, but it’s nearly over
now, I hope. And you’ll be able to trust
me for the future.”
“ So I shall, so I shall, partner,” returned
Lumley rapidly. “’Tisn’t many as would
have come back —not after they’d got the
horse and everything. What a bit of luck
’twould have been for you if you’d come back
and found me dead. Didn’t you hope you
would, now?”
“ No,” said Gray. He got slowly up and


looked round for a hillock that would give
him a little shelter from the sun. “ I must
get a sleep,” he said. “ I shall be fit for
nothing till I’ve had that. I’m dizzy for
want of it.”
Lumley was staring up at him with sudden
fierce suspicion in his glance. A new thought
had struck him. Ever since he had seen
Gray with the horse he had been wondering
what had made him come back. Such refusal
of good fortune seemed inexplicable to him.
“You didn’t come across the police, did
you?” he said. “You’ve not set a trap for
me?"
But even as he said it he saw how un-
founded his suspicion was, and the sudden
fierceness left his face, giving way to the
anxious, apologetic look it had worn all
through his late talk with Gray.
“ I haven’t seen anyone,” Gray said in-
differently.
He moved away as he spoke, and Lumley
watched him settle himself for a sleep a little
distance off. Gray lay down with his back
to him, under the scanty shade of a hillock,
and drew his hat over his eyes.


Lumley watched him intently till he had
satisfied himself that he had fallen into a deep
sleep. Then he made a quick clutch at the
wallet of money, and drew it close to him.
He hurriedly counted it over, giving furtive
looks at Gray the while. Once Gray moved,
and he crushed the notes he held back into
the bag, and pushed the bag from him. But
Gray did not move again, and after a pause
he resumed his counting. When he had
satisfied himself that the money was all there
he replaced it in the wallet, which he put
back into its original position.
He then, in the same cautious, hurried way,
examined the pistols, and replaced them in
the bag. He left them there for a moment,
then took one out again, and thrust it into
his pocket. But he changed his mind after
a short consideration, took out the pistol
from his pocket and replaced it in the bag.
Then he poured some water on the rags Gray
had bound round his foot, took a sparing sip
from the bottle, and having corked it and
pushed it back into the sand, turned himself
round to get a sleep; and almost at once
sleep, heavy and dreamless, came to him.


Many hours elapsed before either of the
men awoke. It was Gray who came back
to consciousness first. He was roused by the
glare of the sun on his face, and sitting
drowsily up he saw that it had travelled
right across the sky while he slept, and was
now declining towards the west. His next
glance showed him the horse languidly crop-
ping the dry grass some few paces off, and
Lumley asleep with one arm flung up above
his head.
But almost at once, before his eyes had
travelled away from him, Lumley awoke.
He raised himself quickly, looking round him
with a wild suspicious stare and thrusting
out a hand to clutch the bag of money at his
side.
Gray got up and slowly approached him.
“How is your foot?” he asked.
“ Bad,” returned Lumley with a groan.
He said no more, and Gray sat down by
him in silence. Lumley drew up his foot
and began to wet the bandages again.
“ The pain’s worse than ever,” he muttered,
without looking at Gray.
“ The water will do it good,” replied Gray.


He drew the bag of food towards him as he
spoke. “ I believe I can eat something now,”
he said. “That sleep has done me any amount
of good.”
“How long have you been awake 1 ?” asked
Lumley, with one of his quick glances.
“Not more than two minutes. I must
have slept pretty nearly all day by the look
of the sun.”
“That’s just what done, partner,”
returned Lumley, without saying he had
done the same. He looked across at the
horse. “What do you think of him?” he
asked, with a nod towards it. “Doesn’t
look up to much in my opinion.”
“ I think the sooner we can start the
better,” answered Gray. “ The poor old
fellow can get nothing here. What do you
think? Could you manage to mount him?”
Lumley shook his head in decided nega-
tive.
“ Let’s see what my foot’s like to-morrow,
partner. I couldn’t stand on it to-day to
save my life.”
“ The sooner we get off the better,” Gray
returned.


Lumley made no reply to this.
“ You found the water just as I said,
didn’t you?” he asked presently. “ Tis years
agone since I was in this part, but I was
sure of it.”
“ I expect the place is a good deal over-
grown since then,” replied Gray. “ You
can’t see any water from the ridge, but
there’s a track leading to it. I had no
difficulty.”
Lumley listened intently, but did not
pursue the subject of the water.
“There’s a station not so far off. We’ll
have to get on there and rest a bit,” was his
next remark.
“You know the way I suppose?” asked
Gray.
“ I know it well enough. You won’t get
lost again, I promise you.”
He was slowly rubbing his leg as he spoke,
with his face turned from Gray.
“ Couldn’t I find it by myself?” said Gray
after a moment. “ They’d send a wagon
back for you.”
Lumley gave a curious sort of chuckle.
“We’ll see, partner, we’ll see. We won’t


part company again unless we’re forced to.
And while I think about it, there’s a little
point we’ve got to settle.” He stopped rub-
bing his leg, and turned his pale blue eyes
full on Gray. “What about this?” He
touched the wallet of money with his elbow.
“ Share and share alike, eh?”
Gray had been expecting a question of
this sort. He returned Lumley’s glance as
steadily as he could.
“ I shall tell the whole story to the first
responsible person we meet, and hand the
money over to him for safe keeping.”
“ Which story are you goin’ to tell, if I
may make so bold as to ask?” said Lumley
with an ugly smile. “You’ve forgot, maybe,
about the reward you meant to claim. You
told me that was all you wanted when first
we met, you know, mate.”
“ I told you a lie. I meant to steal the
money just as much as you did,” returned
Gray quietly. He waited a moment, and
then went nervously on. “ I need not mention
your name to the authorities, Lumley, but I
wish you could come to see as I do. When
a man’s been face to face with death, as you


and I have, he begins to learn the truth about
himself. ”
Gray’s voice faltered before he stopped
speaking, and he did not say all he had
wished to say. Burnley’s cold mocking
glance was too hard to bear.
“You’re as good as a parson, ain’t you,
partner ? But you’ve always took the virtuous
line, ever since we’ve been together. Why,
the first time I set eyes on you you preached
to me; and now you’re at it again! I never
did see such a chap for sermons.”
Gray’s face grew scarlet.
“You can’t think worse of me than I do
of myself,” he returned; “but I mean what
I say about the money, Lumley, —I mean
every word of that.”
“Well, you’re master, I s’pose,” the other
returned with an odd look that Gray remem-
bered afterwards. “But no tricks, mind; no
going in for the reward when my back’s
turned, mate; though, p’raps, you’ll not get
the chance.”
“ I think I’ve proved to you whether or
not you can trust me now,” said Gray, with
just a touch of the old superiority in his tone.


Lumley gave a short laugh.
“Yes, you’d best stick to the virtuous line,
partner. You’re not cut out for any other;
you’re too soft-hearted and afraid. P’raps
you thought my ghost would haunt you un-
less you came back —but I don’t believe in
ghosts, mate.”
Gray made some answer, he hardly knew
what, and presently he got up and moved
away.
A shiver went over him once or twice as
he stood talking to his horse, who had come
up to him as he left Lumley. He had in-
voluntarily recalled Lumley’s mocking, in-
credulous look when he had tried to speak
of the change his sufferings had wrought in
him.
Next morning Lumley complained that his
foot was worse than ever, and that it would
be impossible for him to mount the horse
that day. Gray did his best to persuade
him at least to try, but with no effect. And
Lumley positively declined to let Gray ride
on to the station.
“ I shall be able to start to-morrow,” he
declared; “ and we can do all right till then.”


There followed a day that Gray found
very hard to bear. The moments seemed to
lengthen themselves out into hours, the hours
into weeks—the day seemed as if it would
never end. It passed at last, and the night
came—a lovely moonlight night like the last.
Gray had not slept during the day, and
he hardly expected to sleep during the night;
he felt too feverishly eager for the morning.
But sometime after midnight he fell into a
troubled, restless slumber. It was still bright
moonlight when he awoke; the east showed
no sign of dawn.
He woke suddenly with a strange sense of
terror upon him. He started up, and looked
suspiciously round. The horse was there>
not far from the spot where he had last seen
it, but Lumley was no longer lying against
the hillock, and in his first hasty glance
Gray failed to find him. But a rough laugh
broke on his ear.
“ Don’t go off your head with fright, part-
ner,” called out Lumley, who was crouching
on the ground close beside the horse. “ I’ve
just been try in’ my strength a bit. We can
start at sunrise, if you like.”


Gray walked slowly across to him
“How did you manage to get here?” he
said wonderingly.
Lumley had got hold of the bridle of the
horse, but he let it go as Gray approached.
“ Crawled on my hands and feet,” he said.
“ And a pretty hard bit of work it’s been.”
Gray could see he was much exhausted.
His face was deathly pale, and there were
great drops of sweat upon it, brought there
by the pain he had gone through. He had
been trying to mount the horse by his un-
aided efforts, and had given up the attempt
in despair just before Gray woke. But he
did not tell Gray this, and Gray did not
guess it.
“You should have waited till I could help
you,* Gray said after a moment. “ I hardly
understand how you can have got so far.
Your foot must be much better.”
He was still looking down on Lumley with
a wondering look. He saw that he had
fastened the wallet of money round his
shoulders, and was half lying upon it with
one arm tightly grasping it.
“ P’raps you think I was toyin' to clear


off? ” said Lumley sulkily; “ what would be
the good of tryin’ that. You know the way
now, don’t you? You’d be pretty soon on
my tracks. And, besides, I’m not much
better than a log; I can’t do without you
yet, partner.”
Suspicion after suspicion flashed through
Gray’s mind, only to be dismissed at once.
It was impossible, he said to himself, that
Lumley could be meditating foul play against
the man who had saved his life. And, be-
sides, it was as he said, he could not do
without him.
Lumley read his thoughts correctly enough.
“ You needn’t stare at a cove like that,”
he said in the same sulky tone. “ You were
so mighty anxious to get off I thought I’d try
what I could do. And we can start at sunrise,
mate. You’ll not have much longer to spend
in company with me; you’ll be glad of that,
won’t you? I’m not good enough for the
likes of you.”
“Couldn’t we start before sunrise?” Gray
said quietly; “it’s almost as light as day
now.”
“ It’ll be dark as pitch in another hour


when the moon goes down. And I want a
rest/' returned Lumley; “ I’m not goin to
stir from here till sunrise for anybody, Mr.
Gentleman Gray."
His sulky rage reassured Gray more than
smooth language would have done, as Lum-
ley perhaps had guessed.
“Very well, at sunrise, then," he said, and
turned away to lie down again in his old
place.
The moon went down, and, as Lumley had
said, there followed an hour of darkness in
which the stars shone forth with undimmed
splendour.
Gray lay on the ground staring up at
them. A little way off Lumley was stealthily
watching him, wondering what his thoughts
were. But Gray had forgotten Lumley —he
was thinking of Harding.


CHAPTER XL
A RUTHLESS VILLAIN.
IT was just before sunrise that they started
on their way; Lumley riding the horse,
and Gray walking by the horse’s side. It
was with great difficuly that Gray had man-
aged to get his companion on the horse.
Lumley had made it more difficult than it
need have been. He was anxious that Gray
should believe his foot was much worse than
it really was. The night before he had
found himself quite capable of getting rapidly
along on hands and feet, and even of stand
ing for a moment, holding on by the horse.
“Goes like a lamb, don’t he?” he said to
Gray as they went across the plain. “No
fear of his kicking up his heels again, is
there?”
“ Not much,” said Gray with a pitiful look
at the poor worn-out creature.
“Well, he won’t run off with anything


this time,” said Lumley with a laugh; “ I’ve
taken care of that. But hell go straight for
the water again, that’s what he’ll do, and
carry me with him.”
Lumley spoke again after a moment.
“You might go after that wagon when
we get to water, partner. What do you
think of that plan, eh?”
“ I think it’s the best plan.”
“ And you could take the money with
you, couldn’t you? I suppose you wouldn’t
leave it with me?”
“ I had better take it,” Gray answered
heavily.
Lumley darted a suspicious glance at him.
“ You’re down in the mouth, ain’t you,
partner? You’d better be advised by me.”
He stopped the horse. “ Come, mate, let’s
strike a bargain. Share and share alike.
Half of it’s a pretty pile for any cove. And
who’d be the wiser or the worse for it?
You go off to England and live like the
gentleman you are. I’ll not blow on you,
and nobody else knows a word about it.
Come, there’s a fair offer; and I mean it,
mind you.”
( 760) M


Gray looked steadily up at him.
“ Its no good, Lumley; nothing you could
say would tempt me. You’re wasting your
words.”
A sulky frown settled on Lumley’s face.
He jerked on the horse.
“ Wastin’ my words, am I? I won’t waste
any more of ’em. You can do as you
like.”
They went on in silence for some time.
Gray broke it.
“ There are the trees,” he said.
Lumley gave a sudden start, and Gray
saw his face change colour.
“ I didn’t expect ’em so soon,” he said
huskily. He stared at them with a gloomy
troubled look, and then glanced at Gray, who
was walking on a pace or two ahead with his
head sunk on his breast. Lumley’s hand
stole to his pocket. There was a pistol there.
He gripped it, then let it go and dragged his
hand away.
“Look here, partner,” he cried out hoarsely.
Gray turned round.
“You’ll leave us the reward? The bank
will pay it in a jiffy, and glad enough. You


ain't goin’ to be fool enough to lose us
that ? ”
Gray’s face set in stern determination.
“ You are wasting your words, as I told
you just now. What claim have we to the
reward? They don’t reward thieves for re-
turning what they stole. I have told you
what I mean to do. I shall do it.”
Lumley’s hand had gone back to his
pocket, and lay hidden there. He did not
speak again for some moments. They were
full in sight of the trees now, and to the left
the low ridge had become visible.
“ We’d better strike off here, I think,” said
Gray. “It will be easier for the horse a
little lower down.”
They turned as he suggested.
“It’s pretty close now, ain’t it?” asked
Lumley huskily.
“ Just over the ridge. The track was
plain enough, even by moonlight We can’t
miss it.”
Lumley made no answer, but the moment
after he came to a stand-still.
“What’s the matter with the horse?” he
exclaimed. “ It’s dead lame.”


Gray turned round and looked at it.
“ A stone in the hoof, perhaps/’ he said,
bending down to take a look.
The moment he stooped Lumley drew out
his pistol and took aim at him. Gray’s life
was saved by the horse. As he bent down
and lifted up the hoof it made a sudden,
violent swerve away from him. It was at
that moment Lumley pulled the trigger.
The bullet whistled past Gray’s head, and he
sprang up, dazed and horrified, but quite
unhurt, and made a clutch at Lumley’s arm.
But the arm was already lifted with the
smoking pistol in it, and it descended with
crushing force on Gray’s upturned brow.
Lumley had no need to repeat the blow.
Gray fell back without a groan, and lay upon
the earth as senseless and motionless as one
already dead. For the moment Lumley
thought he was dead.
“ He brought it on himself,” he muttered,
as he stared down at the still figure. And
then added, “I’ll make sure; it’s safest.”
He levelled his pistol again, but he did
not fire. His arm fell by his side. He could
not fire. An oath at his own weakness broke


from his lips. He thrust from him the pity
that had taken the strength from his arm,
and raised the pistol again. He meant to
fire this time. But his opportunity was gone.
The horse had been straining at the reins
ever since he had fired, and now with a sud-
den jerk it got its head free and bolted off at
a wild gallop along the bottom of the ridge.
Lumley clutched at the reins again, but the
horse was beyond control, and he had the
utmost difficulty in keeping his seat. He
tried to turn the horse up the ridge, but the
frantic animal rushed blindly on. It was
mad with terror.
The blow had badly stunned Gray, and it
was some time before he recovered conscious-
ness. Even then he could not recall clearly
what had happened or where he was, but lay
looking up at the sky, trying vainly to get
his confused thoughts clear.
After a few moments he raised himself
slowly and languidly on his arm, and looked
round him. The trees were close at hand.
There were crows sitting on them watching
him, and on the sand not far off him two or
three more had stationed themselves. Quite


near them there lay something that Gray
recognized with a thrill. It was the pistol
Lumley had dropped as the horse dashed
away.
Gray could remember it all now. He
lived over again that terrible moment when
the bullet had sung past his ear, and he had
leapt up to clutch Lumley’s murderous arm.
But where was Lumley?
Gray raised himself into a sitting posture
as he asked himself that question, and looked
up the ridge, half expecting to see Lumley
just crossing it to the water below; but the
ridge showed no signs of him or of the horse.
Yet as Gray looked and listened he could
plainly hear the sound of galloping hoofs,
just as he had heard them two nights be-
fore.
He turned his head away from the ridge,
and looked in the opposite direction. And
then with a cry he staggered to his feet.
The horse was coming rapidly towards him
with Lumley clinging to it, his body thrown
forwards, his arms clutching the horse’s
neck.
“Help me! Save me! Stop the horse!”


broke in shrill cries from the lips of the
terrified man as he was whirled past Gray.
Gray staggered forward and made a clutch
at the hanging rein; but he might as well
have tried to stop a whirlwind. The horse
dashed past him along the ridge, in the path
it had traversed before, and then, as before,
swerved aside and rushed away into the
Bush.
Gray sank back upon the ground, and
covered his face with his hands. He could
do nothing.
It was not long before he heard the sound
of the returning hoofs. He struggled to his
feet once more and looked.
The horse was coming back on its path,
swaying wildly from side to side, with foam-
ing mouth and staring eyeballs; and this
time no terrified, white-faced suppliant was
clinging to its back shrieking out to Gray
for help. The horse was riderless!
Riderless! But what was that dark life-
less weight hanging by the stirrup, dragged
across sand and bramble as the horse stag-
gered on 1 A sickening, paralysing fear took
possession of Gray as he saw and knev He


stood with his eyes fixed upon it unable to
move.
The horse staggered on, but not far. It
suddenly gave a dreadful cry and fell. There
was a struggle, a moan, and then it lay still,
as still as the dead body by its side.
Gray drew near, drew close. He looked
down upon the face of the man who had de-
serted him, and attempted to murder him.
Then with difficulty he dragged the body
from under the horse and straightened it
out. The wallet containing the money fell
from the shoulders of the dead man as he did
so, and opened, showing the gold and notes.
Gray did not even look at them. He laid
the body out in decent fashion, and covered
the dreadful face.
Then he stumbled away across the sands,
caring not whither he went, caring only to
get away from the spot where the dead man
lay. His eyes were burning and throbbing,
there was a great singing in his ears. He
sank down again. His limbs refused to carry
him further. Then came a sudden silence, a
great darkness, and he knew no more.


CHAPTER XII.
UNDER GREEN BOUGHS.
WHEN Gray came to himself again he
was lying on a bank of green herbage
under the shadow of a mighty tree. The
boughs kept up a pleasant murmuring.
Bright-hued birds were flitting to and fro,
now in the shadow, now in the sunshine.
Through the waving boughs Gray could see
a blue sky shining.
It was all so beautiful, so unlike the scene
on which his eyes had closed, that he could
not believe it to be real. It was a fevered
dream, he said to himself; and presently he
would awake and see the vast sun-baked
plains stretching round him in their awful
loneliness, and that thing lying not far off
beside the horse.
But the dream lasted! He slept and woke
again, and still the trees waved above him
and the birds fluttered to and fro. He could


even hear now the tinkling of bells not far
off, such as oxen wear upon their heads. He
lifted himself on his elbow, for he was too
weak to rise, and looked round him. As he
raised himself he saw a dog lying a few feet
off, with its head between its paws, gazing
at him with brown intelligent eyes. Gray
fell back on the bank. The dog might have
been Harding s dog. The sight of him brought
back the past again. He remembered all he
had done, and the wish rose in him that he
had died like Lumley, that—
But the thought was never finished, for at
that moment a hand was laid upon his
shoulder, a cheery voice sounded in his ears.
Gray dropped his hands and looked up with
a wild glad cry It was Harding’s self who
stood at his side!—thinner, paler, with white
streaks in his brown hair that were new to
Gray, but Harding’s very self.
“ Don’t speak, don’t try to speak, my lad,”
he said, sitting down by Gray and taking
his hand. Gray held that rough brown hand
tight, putting his other hand over it, and look-
ing into Harding’s face with eyes that could
scarce believe the reality of the joy that had


come to him. But memory came to cloud
the rapture of that first moment.
“ I am not fit to touch your hands, Hard-
ing,” he said in a low voice. But he did
not attempt to let go his grasp, and Harding
stretched out his other hand and laid it on
his shoulder.
“You mustn’t talk, old fellow; you’ve
been ill, you know. No, I won’t hear any-
thing just now,” he added, as Gray attempted
to speak; “ I’m spokesman just now. Don’t
you want to know —” He made a sudden,
awkward stop, and then continued lamely;
“I’m all right, you see. Got picked up
by some friendly black fellows. I’d hurt my
leg, you see, and couldn’t walk. They carried
me with them till I could tell them who
I was. I had a touch of fever, and was out
of my head for a time; but they nursed me
well. I was off my head a while, you see,
and they carried me along with ’em. We
were crossing a bit of the bush when I got
myself again. And I found —” Harding
stopped and cast a hasty, commiserating
glance at Gray. “Well, I found that map
you’d drawn, and the letter on t’other side.


It didn’t take me long to put two and two
together, you know.”
Gray had turned from him and hidden his
face. Harding stretched out his hand again
and put it on his shoulder.
“Well, I got two of the trackers, clever
fellows, and we hit upon your trail; and
found you, you see.”
“ Did you —did you —” Gray could not
finish.
“We buried him,” Harding said shortly.
“And I’ve got the money in the wagon.
We sent over to Ford’s for a wagon. You
were close to water, lad, if you’d only
known it.”
“ I knew it,” said Gray; “we had water.”
Harding looked inquiringly at him.
“ It’s a long story,” said Gray. A shudder
went over him, and he hurried on. “He got
out of the track when he left me, and I found
him. The horse had thrown him, and he
had hurt his foot, but he knew where the
water was and I got it. And I found the
horse by the water.”
Harding put his hand on his shoulder.
“Did he give you that blow, lad?”


Gray nodded, and Harding asked no more
questions just then.
Gray remained silent for a moment, then
he turned his face to Harding.
O
“ I have got to tell you —”
“I won’t hear, lad. You’ve said a lot in
your fever, and I won’t hear any more just
now. I can see how it’s all happened.”
Watch was lying at his master’s feet, and
here he looked up with a short bark and a
delighted wag of his tail. Harding pulled
his ears. “ I don’t know how Watch managed
to live through it all; but he did—old faith-
ful fellow!” And then Harding’s face turned
scarlet.
He would have got up to move away, but
Gray held his hand fast.
“ The dog was faithful,” he said in a low
tone, “while I — No; you must let me speak,
Harding.”
“Not now, my lad; you are not fit for it.’
“ I got your letter,”
Gray said the words firmly, almost roughly;
then his voice faltered, and he went brokenly
on:
“God has been merciful to me, a sinner.


He sought me wandering, set me right; He
showed me what Td done when —when I
thought it was too late.” He stopped a
moment, then his voice strengthened itself.
“ I had made up my mind to confess every-
thing if ever I got back. I little thought I
should be able to confess it to you. Do you
understand me, Harding? I got that letter.”
“ My poor lad!”
It was all Harding could say.
“ I did not deliberately say I would not
go,” went on Gray; “but it was just the
same. I put it off, and put it off; and then
Watch disappeared, and 1 was glad. You
know why?”
Harding nodded sadly.
“It all seemed easy then. If I had been
successful — I don t know —I hope even then
I might have found myself out; but I was
sent into the wilderness —I was brought face
to face with the fruits of sin.” Gray shud-
dered as he spoke. “ I saw myself as I was,
Harding.”
“ My poor lad! ” said Harding again.
There was silence between them for a while;
then Gray spoke again.


“ I mean to live a different life, Harding.
You will have to help me. The first thing
is to tell Mr. Morton everything.”
“ Yes, lad, except one thing. I wont have
that told. No, I insist on that, old fellow.
Let’s forget it. Promise me never to speak
of it. I never shall. You didn’t mean to
do it, you know.”
Gray shook his head.
“About the money,” went on Harding
quickly. “ Well, you’d best tell Mr. Morton;
and the bank can have it all right. And
we’ll go back to the run, Gray, until Polly
and the lads come. Thank God, she had
started before a letter could reach her. She
will have been spared this time of suspense.”
“ Morton won’t have me back,” said Gray
under his breath.
“Yes, he will. It’s the best thing you
can do, lad. If you go off by yourself—”
“ If you will have me—if Morton will let
me, it is what I most desire,” said Gray
brokenly.
“ Then, that’s all right,” Harding said.


t


BLACKIE & SON’S
BOOKS FOE YOUNG PEOPLE.
G. A. HENTY.
St. Bartholomew’s Eve: A Tale of the Huguenot Wars.
By G. A. Henty. With 12 page Illustrations by H. J. Draper,
and a Map. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
The title of this story takes you at once to its subject. The hero, Philip
Fletcher, is a right true English lad, but he has a French connection on
the mother’s side. This kinship induces him to cross the Channel in order
to take a share in that splendid struggle for freedom known as the Hugue-
not wars. Naturally he sides with the Protestants, distinguishes himself
in various battles, and receives rapid promotion for the zeal and daring
with which he carries out several secret missions. At length, however, he
is entrapped in Paris, with other prominent Huguenots, on that terrible
St. Bartholomew’s Eve, when the tocsin gave the signal at midnight for
the massacre to begin. It is an enthralling narrative, and the chapter
which deals with the escape of the hero out of that monstrous city is one
of the most thrilling in a story which is full of interest.
Through the Sikh War: A Tale of the Conquest of the
Punjaub. By G. A. Henty. With 12 page Illustrations by Hal
Hurst, and a Map. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
This story gives a vivid picture of the pluck and obstinacy with which
the British maintained their ascendency in India. Percy Groves, a spirited
English lad, leaves school to join his uncle in the Punjaub, where he is
governor of a district under the native Sikh prince, Runjeet Singh. The
natives are in a state of revolt, and Percy takes an active part in all the
troubles which precede the Sikh war. His uncle’s fortress is beleaguered,
and he assists in repelling the attack. Then when the authorities at
Lahore proclaim war Percy joins the British force as a volunteer, and
takes a distinguished share in the famous battles of Moodkee, Sobraon,
and Chillianwalla. Apart from its high interest as a record of personal
daring, this story shows in dashing style how Englishmen have made an
Empire.
A


BY G. A. HENTY.
“Mr. Henty is one of the best of story-tellers for young people.”— Spectator.
BePiC the Bpiton: A Story of the Roman Invasion. By
G. A. Henty. With 12 page Illustrations by W. Parkinson.
Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“ Beric the Briton is the boy’s book of the year.”— Observer.
“ We are not aware that any one has given us quite so vigorous a picture of
Britain in the days of the Roman conquest. Mr. Henty has done his utmost to
make an impressive picture of the haughty Roman character, with its indomitable
courage, sternness, and discipline. Beric is good all through.”— Spectator.
In Greek Waters: A Story of the Grecian War of Inde-
pendence (1821-1827). By G. A. Henty. With 12 page Illus-
trations by W. S. Stacey, and a Map. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 6s,
“There are adventures of all kinds for the hero and his friends, whose pluck
and ingenuity in extricating themselves from awkward fixes are always equal to
the occasion. It is an excellent story, and if the proportion of history is smaller
than usual, the whole result leaves nothing to be desired.”— Journal of Education.
Redskin and Cow-Boy : A Tale of the Western Plains, By
G. A. Henty. With 12 page Illustrations by Alfred Pearse,
Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“It has a good plot; it abounds in action; the scenes are equally spirited and
realistic, and we can only say we have read it with much pleasure from first to
last. The pictures of life on a cattle ranche are most graphically painted, as are
the manners of the reckless but jovial cow-boys.”— Times.
The Dash fop Khaptoum : A Tale of the Nile Expedition.
By G. A. Henty. With 10 page Illustrations by J. Schonberg and
J. Nash, and 4 Plans. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“The Dash for Khartoum is your ideal boys’ book.”— Tablet.
“It is literally true that the narrative never flags a moment; for the incidents
which fall to be recorded after the dash for Khartoum has been made and failed
are quite as interesting as those which precede it.”— Academy.
By England’s Aid: The Freeing of the Netherlands (1585-
1604). By G. A. Henty. With 10 page Illustrations by Alfred
Pearse, and 4 Maps. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“ Boys know and love Mr. Henty’s books of adventure, and will welcome his
tale of the Freeing of the Netherlands.”— Athenceum.
“The story is told with great animation, and the historical material is most
effectively combined with a most excellent plot..”— Saturday Beview.
By Right of Conquest: Or, With Cortez in Mexico. By
G. A. Henty. With 10 page Illustrations by W. S. Stacey, and
2 Maps. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“Mr, Henty’s skill has never been more convincingly displayed than in this
admirable and ingenious story ."—Saturday Beview.
“ By Bight of Conquest is the nearest approach to a perfectly successful histori-
cal tale that Mr, Henty has yet published.”— Academy.


BY G. A. HENTY.
“Surely Mr. Henty should understand boys’ tastes better than any man living."
—The Times.
With Lee in Virginia: A Story of the American Civil
War. By G. A. Henty. With 10 page Illustrations by Gordon
Browne, and 6 Maps. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“ The story is a capital one and full of variety, and presents us with many
picturesque scenes of Southern life. Young Wingfield, who is conscientious,
spirited, and ‘ hard as nails,’ would have been a man after the very heart of
Stonewall Jackson.”— Times.
By Pike and Dyke: A Tale of the Rise of the Dutch Re-
public. By G. A. Henty. With 10 page Illustrations by Maynard
Brown, and 4 Maps. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“The mission of Ned to deliver letters from William the Silent to his adherents
at Brussels, the fight of the Good Venture with the Spanish man-of-war, the battle
on the ice at Amsterdam, the siege of Haarlem, are all told with a vividness and
skill, which are worthy of Mr. Henty at his best.”— Academy.
With Clive in India: Or, The Beginnings of an Empire.
By G. A. Henty. With 12 page Illustrations by Gordon Browne.
Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“Among writers of stories of adventure for boys Mr. Henty stands in the very
first rank. Those who know something about India will be the most ready to
thank Mr. Henty for giving them this instructive volume to place in the hands
of their children .’’—Academy.
The Lion of St. Mark: A Tale of Venice in the Fourteenth
Century. By G. A. Henty. With 10 page Illustrations by Gordon
Browne. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s,
“ Every boy should read The Lion of St. Mark. Mr. Henty has never produced
any story more delightful, more wholesome, or more vivacious. From first to
last it will be read with keen enjoyment.”— The Saturday Review.
Under Drake’s Flag: A Tale of the Spanish Main. By
G. A. Henty. Illustrated by 12 page Pictures by Gordon Browne.
Crown 8 vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“There is not a dull chapter, nor, indeed, a dull page in the book; but the
author has so carefully worked up his subject that the exciting deeds of his
heroes are never incongruous or absurd.”— Observer.
Bonnie Prince Charlie: A Tale of Fontenoy and Culloden.
By G. A. Henty. With 12 page Illustrations by Gordon Browne.
Crown 8 vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“ Ronald, the hero, is very like the hero of Quentin Durward. The lad’s
journey across France with his faithful attendant Malcolm, and his hairbreadth
escapes from the machinations of his father’s enemies, make up as good a
narrative of the kind as we have ever read. For freshness of treatment and
variety of incident, Mr. Henty has here surpassed himself. "—Spectator.


BY G. A. HENTY.
“ Among writers of stories of adventure for boys Mr. Henty stands in the very
first rank.”— Academy.
For the Temple: A Tale of the Fall of Jerusalem. By
G. A. Henty. With 10 page Illustrations by S. J. Solomon, and
a Coloured Map, Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“ Mr. Henty’s graphic prose pictures of the hopeless Jewish resistance to Roman
sway adds another leaf to his record of the famous wars of the world. The book
is one of Mr. Henty’s cleverest efforts.”— Graphic.
True to the Old Flag 1 : A Tale of the American War of
Independence, By G. A. Henty. With 12 page Illustrations by
Gordon Browne. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“ Does justice to the pluck and determination of the British soldiers. The son
of an American loyalist, who remains true to our flag, falls among the hostile red-
skins in that very Huron country which has been endeared to us by the exploits
of Hawkeye and Chingachgook.”— The Times.
The Lion of the North: A Tale of Gustavus Adolphus and
the Wars of Religion. By G. A. Henty. With 12 page Pictures
by J. Schonberg. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“A praiseworthy attempt to interest British youth in the great deeds of the
Scotch Brigade in the wars of Gustavus Adolphus. Mackay, Hepburn, and Munro
live again in Mr. Henty’s pages, as those deserve to live whose disciplined bands
formed really the germ of the modern British army.”— Athenaeum.
The Young* Carthaginian: A Story of the Times of
Hannibal. By G. A. Henty. With 12 page Illustrations by C, J.
Staniland, r.i. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“ The effect of an interesting story, well constructed and vividly told, is en-
hanced by the picturesque quality of the scenic background. From first to last
nothing stays the interest of the narrative. It bears us along as on a stream,
whose current varies in direction, but never loses its force.”— Saturday Review.
With Wolfe in Canada: Or, The Winning of a Continent.
By G. A. Henty. With 12 page Illustrations by Gordon Browne.
Crown 8 vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“A model of what a boys’ story-book should be. Mr. Henty has a great power
of infusing into the dead facts of history new life, and as no pains are spared by
him to ensure accuracy in historic details, his books supply useful aids to study
as well as amusement.”— School Guardian.
In Freedom’s Cause : A Story of Wallace and Bruce. By
G. A. Henty. With 12 page Illustrations by Gordon Browne.
Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“Mr. Henty has broken new ground as an historical novelist, llis tale of the
days of Wallace and Bruce is full of stirring action, and will commend itself to
boys. "—A thenceum.


BY G. A. HENTY.
“Mr. Henty is one of our most successful writers of historical tales.”— Scotsman.
Through the Fray: A Story of the Luddite Biots. By
G. A. Henty. With 12 page Illustrations by H. M. Paget. Crown
Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“ Mr. Henty inspires a love and admiration for straightforwardness, truth, and
courage. This is one of the best of the many good books Mr. Henty has produced,
and deserves to be classed with his Facing Death."—Standard.
Captain Bayley’s Heir: A Tale of the Gold Fields of Cali-
fornia. By G. A. Henty. With 12 page Illustrations by H. M.
Paget. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“A Westminster boy who makes his way in the world by hard work, good
temper, and unfailing courage. The descriptions given of life are just what a
healthy intelligent lad should delight in.”— St. James's Gazette.
A Jacobite Exile: Being the Adventures of a Young English-
man in the Service of Charles XII. of Sweden. By G. A. Henty.
With 8 page Illustrations by Paul Hakdy, and a Map. Crown
Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
In this story Sir Marmaduke Carstairs, who is a Jacobite, is denounced
as a plotter against the life of King William, and although innocent of the
charge, he has to flee from England. His son Charlie, who goes with him
to Sweden, is the hero of the tale. This youth joins the foreign legion
under Charles XII. of Sweden, and takes a distinguished part in several
famous campaigns against the Russians and the Poles. Besides his stirring
career as a soldier, the narrative is full of the hero’s personal adventures
in Poland, Sweden, Russia, and England. The narrative swings along at
a breathless pace, and holds the reader entranced to the end.
Condemned as a Nihilist: A Story of Escape from Siberia.
By G. A. Henty. With 8 page Illustrations by Walter Paget.
Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“ The best of this year’s Henty. His narrative is more interesting than many
of the tales with which the public is familiar, of escape from Siberia. Despite
their superior claim to authenticity these tales are without doubt no less fic-
titious than Mr. Henty’s, and he beats them hollow in the matter of sensations.
The escape of the hero and his faithful Tartar from the Samoyedes is quite the
high-water mark of this author’s achievement.”— National Observer.
Orange and Green: A Tale of the Boyne and Limerick.
By G. A. Henty, With 8 full-page Illustrations by Gordon
Browne. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“An extremely spirited story, based on the struggle in Ireland, rendered
memorable by the defence of ’Derry and the siege of Limerick.”— Sat. Review.
“The narrative is free from the vice of prejudice, and ripples with life as
vivacious as if what is being described were really passing before the eye. . . .
Should be in the hands of every young student of Irish history.”— Belfast News.


BY G. A. HENTY.
“Mr. Henty is the king of story-tellers for boys.”—Sword and Trowel.
One of the 28th : A Tale of Waterloo. By G. A. Henty.
With 8 page Illustrations by W. H. Oveeend, and 2 Maps. Crown
8 vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“ Written with Homeric vigour and heroic inspiration. It is graphic, pictur-
esque, and dramatically effective . . . shows us Mr. Henty at his best and
brightest. The adventures will hold a boy of a winter’s night enthralled as he
rushes through them with breathless interest ‘from cover to cover.’”— Observer.
The Cat of Bubastes; A Story of Ancient Egypt. By
G. A. Henty. With 8 page Illustrations by J. R. Weguelin.
Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“The story, from the critical moment of the killing of the sacred cat to the
perilous exodus into Asia with which it closes, is very skilfully constructed and
full of exciting adventures. It is admirably illustrated.” —Saturday Review.
Maori and Settler: A Story of the New Zealand War. By
G. A. Henty. With 8 page Illustrations by Alfred Peaese, and
a Map. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“It is a book which all young people, but especially boys, will read with
avidity.”— Athenaeum.
“A first-rate book for boys, brimful of adventure, of humorous and interesting
conversation, and of vivid pictures of colonial life.’’—Schoolmaster.
St. George for England; A Tale of Cressy and Poitiers.
By G. A. Henty. With 8 full-page Illustrations by Goedon
Browne. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“ Mr Henty’s historical novels for boys bid fair to supplement, on their behalf,
the historical labours of Sir Walter Scott in the land of fiction.” — Standard.
“ A story of very great interest for boys. In his own forcible style the author
has endeavoured to show that determination and enthusiasm can accomplish mar-
vellous results; and that courage is generally accompanied by magnanimity and
gentleness.” —Pall Mall Gazette.
The Bravest of the Brave: With Peterborough in Spain.
By G. A. Henty. With 8 full-page Pictures by H. M. Paget.
Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“ Mr. Henty never loses sight of the moral purpose of his work—to enforce the
doctrine of courage and truth, mercy and lovingkindness, as indispensable to the
making of an English gentleman. British lads will read The Bravest of the
Brave with pleasure and profit; of that we are quite sure.” —Daily Telegraph.
FOP Name and Fame: Or, Through Afghan Passes. By
G. A. Henty. With 8 full-page Illustrations by Gordon Beowne.
Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“ The best feature of the book, apart from its scenes of adventure, is its honest
effort to do justice to the patriotism of the Afghan people.” —Daily News.
“Not only a rousing story, replete with all the varied forms of excitement of a
campaign, but, what is still more useful, an account of a territory and its inhabi-
tants which must for a long time possess a supreme interest for Englishmen, as
being the key to our Indian Empire.” —Glasgow Herald.


BY G. A. HENTY.
“Mr. Henty is the king of story-tellers for boys. ’’—Sword and Trowel.
Held Fast for England; A Tale of the Siege of Gibraltar.
By G. A. Henty. With 8 page Illustrations by Gordon Browne.
Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“Among them we would place first in interest and wholesome educational
value the story of the siege of Gibraltar. . . . There is no cessation of exciting
incident throughout the story.”— Athenceum.
In the Reign of Terror; The Adventures of a Westminster
Boy. By G. A. Henty. With 8 full-page Illustrations by J.
Schonberg. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“Harry Sandwith, the Westminster boy, may fairly be said to beat Mr. Henty’s
record. His adventures will delight boys by the audacity and peril they depict.
The story is one of Mr. Henty’s best.” —Saturday Review.
By Sheer Pluck: A Tale of the Ashanti War. By G. A.
Henty. With 8 full-page Pictures by Gordon Browne. Crown
Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“By Sheer Pluck will be eagerly read.”— Athenceum.
“Morally, the book is everything that could be desired, setting before the boys
a bright and bracing ideal of the English gentleman. ” —Christian Leader.
The Dragon and the Raven; Or, The Days of King
Alfred. By G. A. Henty. With 8 page Illustrations by C. J.
Staniland, r.i. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“A story that may justly be styled remarkable. Boys, in reading it, will be
surprised to find how Alfred persevered, through years of bloodshed and times
of peace, to rescue his people from the thraldom of the Danes. We hope the
book will soon be widely known in all our schools.”— Schoolmaster.
A Final Reckoning: A Tale of Bush Life in Australia.
By G. A. Henty. With 8 page Illustrations by W. B. Wollen.
Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“ All boys will read this story with eager and unflagging interest. The episodes
are in Mr. Henty’s very best vein—graphic, exciting, realistic; and, as in all Mr.
Henty’s books, the tendency is to the formation of an honourable, manly, and
even heroic character.”— Birmivyham Post.
Facing Death : Or, The Hero of the Vaughan Pit. A Tale of
the Coal Mines. By G. A. Henty. With 8 page Pictures by
Gordon Browne. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“ If any father, godfather, clergyman, or schoolmaster is on the look-out for a
good book to give as a present to a boy who is worth his salt, this is the book we
would recommend.”— Standard.
A Chapter of Adventures: Or, Through the Bombard-
ment of Alexandria. By G. A. Henty, With 6 page Illustrations
by W. H. Overend. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, 3s. 6d.
“Jack Hobson and his two companions have their fill of excitement, and their
chapter of adventures is so brisk and entertaining we could have wished it longer
than it is. ’ —Saturday Review.


BY GEORGE MACDONALD.
A Rough Shaking. By George Mac Donald. With
12 page Illustrations by W. Parkinson. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 6s.
One of Mr. Mac Donald’s wonderful and charming stories.”— Athenaeum.
“One of the very best books for boys that has been written. It is full of mate-
rial peculiarly well adapted for the young, containing in a marked degree, the
elements of all that is necessary to make up a perfect boys’ book.”— Teachers' Aid.
At the Back of the North Wind. By George Mac
Donald. With 75 Illustrations by Arthur Hughes. Crown
Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“In At the Back of the North Wind we stand with one foot in fairyland and
one on common earth. The story is thoroughly original, full of fancy and pathos,
and underlaid with earnest but not too obtrusive teaching.”— The Times.
Ranald Bannerman’s Boyhood. By George Mac Donald.
With 36 Illustrations by Arthur Hughes. Crown Bvo, cloth ele-
gant, olivine edges, ss.
“The sympathy with boy-nature in Ranald Bannerman’s Boyhood is perfect.
It is a beautiful picture of childhood, teaching by its impressions and suggestions
all noble things.”— British Quarterly Review.
The Princess and the Goblin. By George Mac Donald.
With 32 Illustrations. Crown Bvo, cloth extra, 3s. 6 d.
“Little of what is written for children has the lightness of touch and play of
fancy which are characteristic of George Mac Donald’s fairy tales. Mr. Arthur
Hughes’s illustrations are all that illustrations should he."—Manchester Guardian.
The Princess and Curdie. By George Mac Donald.
With 8 page Illustrations Crown Bvo, cloth extra, 3s. Qd.
There is the finest and rarest genius in this brilliant story. Upgrown people
would do wisely occasionally to lay aside their newspapers and magazines to
spend an hour with Curdie and the Princess.”— Shejjield Independent.
The Clever Miss Follett. By J. K. H. Denny. With
12 page Illustrations by Gertrude D. Hammond. Crown Bvo,
cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
This is the story of a great fortune, and its attendant train of misfor-
tunes. The Folletts are a middle-class family who suddenly find them-
selves in the possession of immense wealth, and the interest is obtained by
showing what effect this change has upon their various characters. With
fine subtlety the author depicts the schemes, duplicities, worries, and dis-
appointments which follow the Folletts in their efforts to scramble into
society and make aristocratic marriages. Then, in the midst of their plans,
the wealth is taken from them, and the friendships which they have made
are shown in their true character. Altogether it is a bright, clever, enter-
taining tale, with a rare distinction in its minute portrayal of diverse
character.


NEW EDITION OF THE UNIVERSE.
The Universe : OrThe Infinitely Great and the Infinitely Little.
A Sketch of Contrasts in Creation, and Marvels revealed and
explained by Natural Science. By F. A. Pouchet, m.d. With
272 Engravings on wood, of which 55 are full-page size, and a
Coloured Frontispiece. Eleventh Edition, medium Bvo, cloth ele-
gant, gilt edges, 7s. 6(1.; also morocco antique, 16s.
“ We can honestly commend Professor Pouchet’s book, which is admirably, as
it is copiously illustrated.” — The Times.
“Scarcely any book in French or in English is so likely to stimulate in the
young an interest in the physical phenomena.”— Fortnightly Review.
ROBERT LEIGHTON.
The Wreck of “The Golden Fleece;” The story of a
North Sea Fisher-boy. By Egbert Leighton. With 8 page
Illustrations by Frank Brangwyn. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, ss.
In this story the interest is mainly secured by a description of life on the
wild North Sea, —the hero being a parson’s son who is apprenticed on board
a Lowestoft fishing lugger. The lad has to suffer many buffets from his
shipmates, while the storms and dangers which he braved on board the
“North Star” are set forth with minute knowledge and intense power.
The wreck of ‘ ‘ The Golden Fleece ” forms the climax to a thrilling series
of desperate mischances. From this point the narrative deals with a
mysterious highway robbery and murder; the trial of the accused fisherman;
his escape, and the mad chase after the criminal out upon the high seas.
Altogether, this is a wholesome tale with plenty of sea-water in it, and a
fine run of breezy adventure.
The Pilots of Pomona; A story of the Orkney Islands.
By Egbert Leighton. With 8 page Illustrations by John Leigh-
ton, and a Map. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“ A story which is quite as good in its way as Treasure Island , and is full of
adventure of a stirring yet most natural kind. Although it is primarily a boys’
book, it is a real godsend to the elderly reader who likes something fresh—some-
thing touched with the romance and magic of youth.”— Glasgoiv Evening Times.
“ Mis pictures of Orcadian life and nature are charming. "—Saturday Review.
The Thirsty Sword; A Story of the Norse Invasion of
Scotland (1262-63). By Egbert Leighton. With 8 page Illus-
trations by Alfred Pearse, and a Map. Crown Bvo, cloth ele-
gant, olivine edges, ss.
“ This is one of the most fascinating stories for boys that it has ever been our
pleasure to read. From first to last the interest never flags. Boys will worship
Kenric, who is a hero in every sense of the word.”— Schoolmaster.
"It gives a lively idea of the wild life of the Western Islands in those rough
days, reminding one not seldom of Sir Walter Scott’s Lord of the Isles. It is full
of incident and sensational adventure.”— The Guardian.


BY GEORGE MANVILLE FENN.
Mr. Fenn stands in the foremost rank of writers in this department. ’’—Daily
News.
Quicksilver: Or, A Boy with no Skid to his Wheel. By
George Manvillk Fenn. With 10 page Illustrations by Frank
Dadd. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“ Quicksilver is little short of an inspiration. In it that prince of story-writers
for boys—George Manville Fenn— has surpassed himself. It is an ideal book for
a boy’s library.” —Practical Teacher.
“The story is capitally told, it abounds in graphic and well-described scenes,
and it has an excellent and manly tone throughout.” —The Guardian.
Dick o’ the Fens; A Romance of the Great East Swamp, By
G. Manville Fenn. With 12 page Illustrations by Frank Dadd.
Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“We conscientiously believe that boys will find it capital reading. It is full
of incident and mystery, and the mystery is kept up to the last moment. It is
rich in effective local colouring; and it has a historical interest.”— Times.
“ Deserves to be heartily and unreservedly praised as regards plot, incidents,
and spirit. It is its author’s masterpiece as yet .’’—Spectator.
Devon Boys: A Tale of the North Shore. By G. Manville
Fenn. With 12 page Illustrations by Gordon Browne. Crown
Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“An admirable story, as remarkable for the individuality of its young heroes
as for the excellent descriptions of coast scenery and life in North Devon. It is
one of the best books we have seen this season.”— Athenaeum.
The Golden Magnet; A Tale of the Land of the Incas. By
G. Manville Fenn. Illustrated by 12 page Pictures by Gordon
Browne. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s,
“There could be no more welcome present for a boy. There is not a dull page
in the book, and many will be read with breathless interest. ‘The Golden Mag-
net’ is, of course, the same one that attracted Raleigh and the heroes of West-
ward Ho!”—Journal of Education.
In the King’s Name: Or, The Cruise of the Kestrel. By
G. Manville Fenn. Illustrated by 12 page Pictures by Gordon
Browne. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“A capital boys’ story, full of incident and adventure, and told in the lively
style in which Mr. Fenn is such an adept. ’’—Globe.
“The best of all Mr. Fenn’s productions in this field. It has the great quality
of always ‘moving on,’ adventure following adventure in constant succession.”—
Daily News.
Nat the Naturalist ; A Boy’s Adventures in the Eastern
Seas. By G. Manville Fenn. With 8 page Pictures. Crown Bvo,
cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“This sort of book encourages independence of character, develops resource,
and teaches a boy to keep his eyes open.” —Saturday Review.


BY GEORGE MANVILLE FENN.
“No one can find his way to the hearts of lads more readily than Mr. Fenn.”—
Nottingham Guardian.
Bunyip Land: The Story of a Wild Journey in New Guinea.
By G. Manville Fenn. With 6 page Illustrations by Gordon
Browne. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, 4s.
“ Mr. Fenn deserves the thanks of everybody for Bunyip Land, and we may ven-
ture to promise that a quiet week may be reckoned on whilst the youngsters have
such fascinating literature provided for their evenings’ amusement.”— Spectator.
Brownsmith’s Boy; A Romance in a Garden. By G. Man-
ville Fenn. With 6 page Illustrations. New Edition. Crown
8 vo, cloth elegant, 3s. 6 d.
“Mr. Fenn’s books are among the best, if not altogether the best, of the stories
tor boys. Mr. Fenn is at his best in Brownsmith’s Boy."—Pictorial World.
*** See also under heading of Blackie’s 3/ Series for other Books
by G. Manville Fenn.
Grettir the Outlaw; A Story of Iceland. By S. Baring-
Gould. With 10 page Illustrations by M. Zeno Diemer, and a
Coloured Map. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“Is the boys’ book of its year. That is, of course, as much as to say that it
will do for men grown as well as juniors. It is told in simple, straightforward
English, as all stories should be, and it has a freshness, a freedom, a sense of sun
and wind and the open air, which make it irresistible.”— National Observer.
Two Thousand Years Ago: Or, The Adventures of a Roman
Boy. By Professor A. J. Church. With 12 page Illustrations by
Adrien Marie. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“Adventures well worth the telling. The book is extremely entertaining as
well as useful, and there is a wonderful freshness in the Roman scenes and
characters.”— The Times.
The Seven Wise Scholars. By Ascott r. Hope. With
nearly 100 Illustrations by Gordon Browne. Cloth elegant, ss.
“As full of fun as a volume of Punch; with illustrations, more laughter-
provoking than most we have seen since Leech died.”— Sheffield Independent.
Stories of Old Renown: Tales of Knights and Heroes.
By A scott R. Hope. With 100 Illustrations by Gordon Browne.
Crown 8 vo, cloth elegant, 3s. 6 d.
“A really fascinating book worthy of its telling title. There is, we venture to
say, not a dull page in the book, not a story which will not bear a second read-
ing.”— Guardian.


CY G. NORWAY.
A True Cornish liaid. By G. Norway. With 6 page
Illustrations by J. Finnemore. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, 3s. Qd.
This is a story of the Cornish coast at a time when the press-gang
brought terror into all its seaports, and smuggling was an everyday prac-
tice. The heroine of the tale is sister to a young fellow who gets into
trouble in landing a contraband cargo, and shooting the officer in charge
of the press-gang. In this extremity she stands by her brother bravely,
and by means of her daring scheme he manages to escape. There is abun-
dance of stirring incident in this tale; the characters are all natural, and
the tone is altogether breezy and wholesome.
HllSSein the Hostage : Or, A Boy’s Adventures in Persia.
By G. Norway. With 8 page Illustrations by John Schonberg.
Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“ Hussein the Hostage is full of originality and vigour. The characters are life-
like, there is plenty of stirring incident, the interest is sustained throughout, and
every boy will enjoy following the fortunes of the hero ."—Journal of Education.
The Loss of John Humble: What Led to It, and what
Came of It. By G. Norway. With 8 page Illustrations by John
Schonberg. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“ This story will place the author at once in the front rank. It is full of life
and adventure. He is equally at home in his descriptions of life in Sweden and
in the more stirring passages of wreck and disaster, and the interest of the story
is sustained without a break from first to last. ” — Standard.
HARRY COLLINGWOOD.
The Pirate Island : A Story of the South Pacific. By
Harry Collingwood. With 8 page Pictures by C. J. Staniland
and J. R. Wells. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“ A capital story of the sea; indeed in our opinion the author is superior in some
respects as a marine novelist to the better known Mr. Clark Russell.”— The Times.
The Congo Rovers: A Story of the Slave Squadron. By
Harry Collingwood. With 8 page Illustrations by J. Schonberg,
Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“No better sea story has lately been written than the Congo Rovers. It is as
original as any boy could desire.”— Morning Post.
The Log of the “Flying Fish:” A Story of Aerial and
Submarine Peril and Adventure. By Harry Collingwood, With
6 page Illustrations by Gordon Browne. New and cheaper Edi-
tion. Crown 8 vo, cloth elegant, 3s. 6d.
“The Flying Fish actually surpasses all Jules Verne’s creations; with incred-
ible speed she flies through the air, skims over the surface of the water, and darts
along the ocean bed. We strongly recommend our school-boy friends to possess
themselves of her log.”— Athenaeum.


BY DR. GORDON STABLES.
Westward with Columbus. By Gordon Stables, m.d.,
c.m. With 8 page Illustrations by Alfred Peaese. Crown Bva
cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
The hero of this story is Columbus himself; and a very picturesque,
noble, and enchanting hero he makes. His career is traced from boyhood
onwards, but the narrative deals chiefly with the great naval venture
which Columbus conducted across the Atlantic, and which resulted in the
discovery of the American continent. There were many dangers which
threatened to wreck this momentous enterprise, but these were all over-
come by this indomitable man, and his efforts were at last crowned with
success. It is a splendid story, possessing all the value of truth, with
all the charm of the most daring romance.
Twixt School and College: A Tale of Self-reliance. By
Gordon Stables, c.m., m.d., r.n. With 8 page Illustrations by
W. Parkinson. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“ One of the best of a prolific writer’s books for boys, being full of practical
instructions as to keeping pets, from white mice upwards, and inculcates in a way
which a little recalls Miss Edgeworth’s ‘Frank’ the virtue of self-reliance,
though the local colouring of the home of the Aberdeenshire boy is a good deal
more picturesque.”— Athenaeum.
FRANCES ARMSTRONG.
A Fair Claimant: Being a Story for Girls. By Frances
Armstrong. With 8 page Illustrations by Gertrude D. Hammond.
Crown 8 vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
The heroine of this story is found, when a child, in the attic of a lodging-
house in Chelsea. Her mother has unaccountably disappeared, and her
parentage remains a mystery. She is adopted by a wealthy lady, and re-
sides abroad until the death of her benefactress. Thereafter, Olive Bethune
comes to England as a governess, and it is then that she begins to learn her
own strange history. It is a tale of surprising vicissitude, which is slowly
unravelled with happy skill, but in the end all the wrongs are pleasantly
righted. The interest of this narrative never for a moment flags, because
the character of the heroine is as fascinating as the mystery of her birth.
ANNE BEALE.
The Heiress of Courtleroy. By Anne Beale. With 8
page Illustrations by T. C. H. Castle. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, ss.
“We can speak highly of the grace with which Miss Beale relates how the
young ‘ Heiress of Courtleroy ’ had such good influence over her uncle as to win
him from his intensely selfish ways.”— Guardian.
“ In Le Roy we have perhaps the most striking and original creation that Miss
Beale has made. He interests us to the last ."—-Spectator.


BY KIRKE MUNROE.
The White Conquerors of Mexico: A Tale of Toitec and
Aztec. By Kirk Munroe. With 8 page Illustrations by W. S.
Stacey. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
This story deals with the Conquest of Mexico by Cortes and his Spaniards.
They are the daring white conquerors who pushed their way through count-
less difficulties into the great Aztec kingdom, and established their power
in the wondrous city where Montezuma reigned in barbaric splendour.
This episode is one of the most romantic in all history, and the author of
this narrative has male it newly entrancing by the many cunning effects
which he has added with consummate dexterity. It were simply vain to
single out any particular adventure in a narrative which teems with
happenings of the weirdest kind.
With the Sea King’s: A Story of the Days of Lord Nelson.
By F. H. Winder. With 6 page Illustrations by W. S. Stacey.
Crown 8 vo, cloth elegant, 4s.
Philip Trevellon was an English lad who thought to become a Lord High
Admiral like his hero, Horatio Nelson. By way of achieving this purpose
he ran away from home and joined a privateer. After taking part in the
capture of a French fx-igate, he was captured by Corsairs and sold into
slavery. He escaped, and his subsequent bravery in a sea fight brought
him an interview with Lord Nelson, and promotion. Having been appointed
to the Victory he took part in the battle of Trafalgar. This is a real salt-
water story, set forth in a hearty, handsome, old-fashioned style.
F. FRANKFORT MOORE.
Highways and High Seas: Cyril Harley’s Adventures on
both. By F. Frankfort Moore. With 8 page Illustrations by
Alfred Pearse, Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“This is one of the best stories Mr. Moore has written, perhaps the very best.
The exciting adventures among highwaymen and privateers are sure to attract
boys.”— Spectator.
Under Hatches: Or, Ned Woodthorpe’s Adventures. By F.
Frankfort Moore. With 8 page Illustrations by A. Forestier.
Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“The story as a story is one that will just suit boys all the world over. The
characters are well drawn and consistent; Patsy, the Iris’’ steward will be found
especially amusing.” — Schoolmaster.
Giannetta : A Girl’s Story of Herself. By Eosa Mulholland.
With 8 page Illustrations by Lockhart Bogle. Crown Bvo, cloth
elegant, olivine edges, ss.
“ Giannetta is a true heroine—warm-hearted, self-sacrificing, and, as all good
■women nowadays are, largely touched with the enthusiasm of humanity. One
of the most attractive gift-books of the season. "—The Academy.


BY J. M. CALLWELL.
A. Champion of the Faith: A Tale of Prince Hal and the
Lollards. By J. M. Callwell. With 6 page Illustrations by
Herbert J. Draper. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, 4s.
The earlier part of this story deals with the merry escapades of Prince
Hal and his favourite, Sir John Oldcastle. Then the narrative deepens in
its interest when the Prince ascends the throne as Henry V., while his old
comrade becomes a Lollard and a champion of the new faith. As such,
Sir John Oldcastle endures many hardships, and escapes from the Tower,
but finally he is captured by treachery and burnt at the stake. This his-
torical tale is full of the most interesting episodes, while at the same time
its tone is pure and ennobling.
ALICE CORKRAN.
Meg’s Friend. By Alice Corkran. With 6 page Illustra-
tions by Egbert Fowler. Crown Bvo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
“One of Miss Corkran’s charming books for girls, narrated in that simple
and picturesque style which marks the authoress as one of the first amongst
writers for young people.”— The Spectator.
Margery Merton’s Girlhood. By Alice Corkran. With
6 page Pictures by Gordon Browne. Cr. Bvo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
“Another hook for girls we can warmly commend. There is a delightful
piquancy in the experiences and trials of a young English girl who studies
painting in Paris.” —Saturday Review.
Down the Snow Stairs; Or, From Good-night to Good-
morning. By Alice Corkran. With 60 Illustrations by Gordon
Browne. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 3s. Qd.
“A fascinating wonder-hook for children,”— Athenaeum.
“A gem of the first water, bearing upon every page the mark of genius. It is
indeed a Little Pilgrim’s Progress.”— Christian Leader
Gold, Gold, in Cariboo: A Story of Adventure in British
Columbia. By Clive Phillipps-Wolley. With 6 page Illustra-
tions by G. C. Hindley. Crown Bvo, cloth extra, 3s. 6 d.
Ned Corbett, a young Englishman, and his companion set out with
a pack-train in order to obtain gold on the upper reaches of the Frazer
Eiver. Many difficulties lie in their path, but chiefly they are the victims
of an unscrupulous Yankee. After innumerable adventures, and a life-
and-death struggle with the Arctic weather of that wild region, they find
the secret gold-mines for which they have toilsomely searched. This story
is so real, and vivid, and enthralling that no boy would skip a single page.


BY SARAH DOUDNEY.
Under False Colours: A Story from Two Girls’ Lives.
By Sarah Doudney. With 6 page Illustrations by G. G. Kil-
burne. New Edition. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, 4s.
“Sarah Doudney has no superior as a writer of high-toned stories—pure in
style, original in conception, and with skilfully wrought-out plots; but we have
seen nothing from her pen equal in dramatic energy to this book.”— Christian
Leader.
ANNIE E. ARMSTRONG.
Three Bright Girls: A Story of Chance and Mischance.
By Annie E. Armstrong. With 6 page Illustrations by W. Par-
kinson. Crown 8 vo, cloth elegant, 3s. Qd.
“Among many good stories for girls this is undoubtedly one of the very best.
The three girls whose portraits are so admirably painted are girls of earnest,
practical, and business-like mood. Ever bright and cheerful, they influence other
lives, and at last they come out of their trials and difficulties with honour to
themselves and benefits to all about them.”— Teachers’ Aid.
A Very Odd Girl: or, Life at the Gabled Farm. By Annie
E. Armstrong. With 6 page Illustrations by S. T. Dadd. Crown
Bvo, cloth elegant, 3s. Qd.
“ The book is one we can heartily recommend, for it is not only bright and
interesting, but also pure and healthy in tone and teaching.”— The Lady.
“ The doings of the heroine at the Gabled Farm are amusing in the extreme,
and her escapades are always bringing her into trouble. Vera is a flne_ character,
however, and our girls will all be the better for making her acquaintance.”—
Teachers’ Aid.
EDGAR PICKERING.
An Old-Time Yarn: Wherein is set forth divers desperate
mischances which befell Anthony Ingram and his shipmates in the
West Indies and Mexico with Hawkins and Drake. By Edgar
Pickering. Illustrated with 6 page Pictures drawn by Alfred
Pearse. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, 3s, Qd.
“And a very good yarn it is, with not a dull page from first to last. There is
a flavour of Westward Ho! in this attractive book.”— Educational Review.
“An excellent story of adventure. Especially good is the description of Mexico
and of the dungeons of the Inquisition, while Don Diego Polo is a delightful
mixture of bravery and humour, and his rescue of the unfortunate prisoners is
told with great spirit. The book is thoroughly to be recommended.”— Guardian.
Silas Verney : A Tale of the Time of Charles 11. Edgar
Pickering. With 6 page Illustrations by Alfred Pearse. Crown
Bvo, cloth elegant, 3s. Qd.
“Wonderful as the adventures of Silas are, it must be admitted that they are
very naturally worked out and very plausibly presented. Altogether this is an
excellent story for boys. ” —Saturday Review.


BY C. J. HYNE.
The Captured Cruiser: or, Two Years from Land. By
C. J. Hyne. With 6 page Illustrations by Frank Brangwvn.
Crown 8 vo, cloth elegant, 3s, 6 d.
“ It is altogether a capital story, well illustrated. ’’—Saturday Review.
“The two lads and the two skippers are admirably drawn. Mr. Hyne has
now secured a position in the first rank of writers of Action for boys.”— Spectator.
Afloat at Last : A Sailor Boy’s Log of his Lift at Sea. By
John C. Hutcheson. With 6 page Illustrations by W. H.
Overend. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, 3s. 6d.
“As healthy and breezy a book as one could wish to put into the hands of
a boy.”— Academy.
“ A tale of seafaring life told with Are and enthusiasm, full of spirited incident
and ~ ell-drawn character.”— Observer.
Picked Up at Sea: Or, The Gold Miners of Minturne Creek.
By J. C. Hutcheson. With 6 page Pictures. Cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
“ The author’s success with this book is so marked that it may well encourage him
to further efforts. The description of miuing life in the Far West is true and accu-
rate.”—Standard.
Sir Walter’s Ward: A Tale of the Crusades, By William
Everard. With 6 page Illustrations by Walter Paget. Crown
Bvo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
“ This book will prove a very acceptable present either to boys or girls. Both
alike will take an interest in the career of Dodo, in spite of his unheroic name,
and follow him through his numerous and exciting adventures.”— Academy.
Brother and Sister: Or, The Trials of the Moore Family.
By Elizabeth J. Lysaght, With 6 page Illustrations. Crown
8 vo, cloth elegant, 3s. 6d.
“ A pretty story, and well told. The plot is cleverly constructed, and the moral
is excellent.”— Athenceum.
The Search for the Talisman: A story of Labrador.
By Henry Frith. With 6 page Illustrations by J. Schonberg.
Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, 3s. 6d.
“ Mr. Frith’s volume will be among those most read and highest valued. The
adventures among seals, whales, and icebergs in Labrador will delight many a
young reader.”— Pall Mall Gazette.
Reefer and Rifleman; A Tale of the Two Services. By
J. Percy • Groves, late 27th Inniskillings. With 6 page Illustra-
tions by John Schonberg. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, 3s. 6 d.
“ A good, old-fashioned, amphibious story of our Aghting with the Frenchmen in
the beginning of our century, with a fair sprinkling of fun and frolic.”— Times.
B


BY CAROLINE AUSTIN.
Cousin Geoffrey and I. By Caroline Austin. With 6
page Illustrations by W. Parkinson. Cr. Bvo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
“Miss Austin’s story is bright, clever, and welj developed.” —Saturday Review.
“ A powerfully written and realistic story of girl life. . . . The tone of the
book is pure and good." —Practical Teacher.
Hugh Herbert’s Inheritance. By Caroline Austin.
With 6 p.ige Illustrations by C. T. Garland. Crown Bvo, cloth
elegant, 3s. Qd.
“Will please by its simplicity, its tenderness, and its healthy interesting
motive. It is admirably written.”— Scotsman.
Storied Holidays: A Cycle of Bed-letter Days. By E. S.
Brooks. With 12 page Illustrations by Howard Pyle. Crown
8 vo, cloth elegant, 3s. 6cL
“ It is a downright good book for a senior boy, and is eminently readable from
first to last.”— Schoolmaster.
Chivalric Days: Stories of Courtesy and Courage in the
Olden Times. By E. S. Brooks. With 20 Illustrations by
Gordon Browne and other Artists. Crown Bvo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
“We have seldom come across a prettier collection of tales. These charming
stories of boys and girls of olden days are no mere fictitious or imaginary sketches,
but are real and actual records of their sayings and doings. Literary World.
Historic Boys: Their Endeavours, their Achievements, and
their Times. By E. S. Brooks. With 12 page Illustrations by
R. B. Birch and John Schonberg, Crown Bvo, cloth extra, 3s, 6d.
“ A wholesome book, manly in tone, its character sketches enlivened by brisk
dialogue and high-class illustrations; altogether one that should incite boys to
further acquaintance with those rulers of men whose careers are narrated. We
advise teachers to put it on their list of prizes. "—Knowledge.
Dr. Jolliffe’s Boys: A Tale of Weston School. By Lewis
Hough. With 6 page Pictures, Crown Bvo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
“ Young people who appreciate Tom Brown's School days will find this story a
worthy companion to that fascinating book. There is the same manliness of tone,
truthfulness of outline, avoidance of exaggeration and caricature, and healthy
morality as characterized the masterpiece of Mr. Hughes.” —Newcastle Journal.
The Bubbling Teapot. A Wonder Story. By Mrs. L. W.
Champney. With 12 page Pictures by Walter Satterlee.
Crown Bvo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
“Very literally a ‘wonder story,’ and a wild and fanciful one. Nevertheless
it is made realistic enough, and there is a good deal of information to be gained
from it. The steam from the magic teapot bubbles up into a girl, and the little
girl, when the fancy takes her, can cry herself back into a teapot. Transformed
and enchanted she makes the tour of the globe.” —The Times.


BY JENNETT HUMPHREYS.
Laugh and Learn . The Easiest Book of Nursei’y Lessons
and Nursery Games. By Jennett Humphreys. Profusely Illus-
trated. Square Bvo, cloth extra, 3s. Qd.
“ Laugh and Learn instructs and amuses; it is the very book for a wet day
in the nursery, for besides solid instruction, admirably given, it contains number-
less games and contrivances, with useful and amusing illustrations. The musical
drill is remarkably good.”— Athenaeum.
“One of the best books of the kind imaginable, full of practical teaching in
word and picture, and helping the little ones pleasantly along a right royal road
to learning. ” — Graphic.
“Every mother of children should have Laugh and Learn , and go through
with them the excellent course it contains.” —Journal of Education.
MARY C. ROWSELL.
Thomdyke Manor: A Tale of Jacobite Times. By Mary
C. Rowsell. With 6 page Illustrations by L. Leslie Brooke.
Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, 3s. Qd.
“It is a good story, with plenty of ‘go’ in it.” — Times.
“Miss Rowsell has never written a more attractive book than Thorndylce
Manor.”—Belfast News-Letter.
Traitor or Patriot? A Tale of the Rye-House Plot. By
Mary C. Rowsell. With 6 page Pictures by C. 0. Murray and
C. J. Staniland, r.i. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, 3s. 6d.
“ Here the Rye-House Plot serves as the groundwork for a romantic love epi-
sode, whose true characters are lifelike beings, not dry sticks as in many histori-
cal tales.”— Graphic.
Dora : Or, A Girl without a Home. By Mrs. R. H. Read. With
6 page Illustrations. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, 3s. 6cZ.
“ It is no slight thing, in an age of rubbish, to get a story so pure and healthy
as this.” —The Academy.
Life S Daily Ministry : A Story of Everyday Service for
Others. By Mrs. E. R. Pitman. With 4 page Illustrations. Crown
Bvo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
“Shows exquisite touches of a master hand. She depicts in graphic outline
the characteristics of the beautiful and the good in Hie."—Christian Union.
My Governess Life : Or, Earning my Living. By Mrs. E.
R. Pitman. With 4 page Illustrations. Crown Bvo, cloth extra,
3s. 6c l.
“Full of sound teaching and bright examples of character.”—rtf. & Chronicle.


BLACKIE’S NEW THREE-SHILLING SERIES.
Beautifully Illustrated and Handsomely Bound.
NEW VOLUMES.
MenhardOC: A Story of Cornish Nets and Mines, By G.
Manville Fenn. With 6 page Illustrations by C, J. Staniland,
E.l. New Edition. Crown Bvo, cloth extra, 3s.
“ They are real living boys, with their virtues and faults. The Cornish fisher-
men are drawn from life, they are racy of the soil, salt with the sea-water, and
they stand out from the pages in their jerseys and sea-boots all sprinkled with
silvery pilchard scales.”—Spectator.
YuSSUf the Guide: Or, The Mountain Bandits, A Story of
Strange Adventure in Asia Minor. By G. Manville Fenn. With
6 page Illustrations by J. Schonberg. New Edition. Crown Bvo,
cloth extra, 3s.
“This story is told with such real freshness and vigour that the reader feels
he is actually one of the party, sharing in the fun and facing the dangers with
them.” —Pall Mall Gazette.
Robinson Crusoe. With 100 Illustrations by Gordon
Browne. New Edition. Crown Bvo, cloth extra, 3s.
“One of the best issues, if not absolutely the best, of Defoe’s work which has
ever appeared.”— The Standard.
Gulliver’S Travels. With 100 Illustrations by Gordon
Browne. New Edition. Crown Bvo, cloth extra, 3s.
“ Mr. Gordon Browne is, to my thinking, incomparably the most artistic,
spirited, and brilliant of our illustrators of books for boys, and one of the most
humorous also, as his illustrations of ‘Gulliver’ amply testify. "—Truth.
Patience Wins: or, War in the Works. By George Man-
ville Fenn. With 6 page Illustrations. Cr. Bvo, cloth extra, 3s.
“ Mr. Fenn has never hit upon a happier plan than in writing this story of
Yorkshire factory life. The whole book is all aglow with life, the scenes varying
continually with kaleidoscopic rapidity.” —Pall Mall Gazette.
Mother Carey’s Chicken: Her Voyage to the Unknown
Isle. By G. Manville Fenn. With 6 page Illustrations by A.
Forestier. Crown Bvo, cloth extra, 3s.
“ Undoubtedly one of the best Mr. Fenn has written. The incidents are of
thrilling interest, while the characters are drawn with a care and completeness
rarely found in a boys’ book. The illustrations are exceptionally good.”—Liter-
ary World.
The Missing* Merchantman. By Harry Codlingwood.
With 6 page Illustrations by W. H. Overend. Crown Bvo, cloth
extra, 3s.
“ One of the author’s best sea stories. The hero is as heroic as any boy could
desire, and the ending is extremely happy.”— British Weekly.


THREE SHILLING SERlES—Continued.
The Rover’s Secret: A Tale of the Pirate Cays and Lagoons
of Cuba. By Harry Collingwood. With 6 page Illustrations by
W. C. Symons. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, 3s.
“ The Rover’s Secret is by far the best sea story we have read for years, and is
certain to give unalloyed pleasure to boys. The illustrations are fresh and
vigorous. ’’—Saturday Review.
The Wigwam and the War-path: Stories of the Eed
Indians. By Ascott R. Hope. With 6 page Illustrations. Crown
Bvo, cloth elegant, 3s.
“Is notably good. It gives a very vivid picture of life among the Indians,
which will delight the heart of many a schoolboy.”— Spectator.
Perseverance Island: or, The Robinson Crusoe of the 19th
Century, By Douglas Frazar. With 6 page Illustrations.
Crown Bvo, cloth extra, 3s.
“This is an interesting story, written with studied simplicity of style, much in
Defoe’s vein of apparent sincerity and scrupulous veracity; while for practical
instruction it is even better than Robinson Crusoe.”—lllustrated London News.
Girl Neighbours: or, The Old Fashion and the New. By
Sarah Tytler. With 6 page Illustrations by C. T. Garland.
Crown 8 vo, cloth elegant, 3s.
“ One of the most effective and quietly humorous of Miss Sarah Tytler’s stories.
Girl Neighbours is very healthy, very agreeable, and very well written.” —The
Spectator.
BLACKIE’S HALF-CROWN SERIES.
Illustrated by eminent Artists. In crown Bvo, cloth elegant.
Nicola: The Career of a Girl Musician. By M. Corbet-Sey-
mour. Illustrated by Gertrude D. Hammond.
This is an interesting study of a girl’s character who has ambitions, and
a rare gift for music. Nicola is also self-willed, and selfishly sets aside all
claims, both of family and friends, in her desire to become famous. Ulti-
mately she learns, after bitter experience, that even the lowly duties of
life bring their own exceeding pleasure.
A Little Handful. By Harriet J. Scrippo. Illustrated by
L. Leslie Brooke.
In this story you have the amusing escapades of an American boy at an
English watering-place. No doubt Willie is “a little handful” to his
friends, but notwithstanding all his freaks, he is a clever, entertaining,
intelligent youngster, who wins our love without an effort.


HALF-CROWN SERlES—Continued.
A Golden Ag*e : A Story of Four Merry Children. By Ismay
Thorn. Illustrated by Gordon Browne. New Edition.
The four children whose everyday experiences are here given are singu-
larly happy in their choice of pastimes. Their adventures have all the
virtues of the ordinary and the probable, and to these they add the merit
of being set forth in a delightful style.
A Rough Road: or, How the Boy Made a Man of Himself.
By Mrs. G. Linnjsus Banks. Illustrated by Alfred Pearse.
“Mrs. Linnaeus Banks has not written a better book than A Rough Road." —
Spectator.
"Told with much simple force and that charm which belongs to one who has
known herself what a rough road is, and how to traverse it. ” Winter's Weekly.
The Two Dorothys: A Tale for Girls. By Mrs. Herbert
Martin. Illustrated by Gordon Browne.
“A book that will not only interest and please all girls, but will also, from its
pure but unostentatious teaching, stimulate and encourage to better and higher
things, youthful hopes, dreams, and ambitions.” —The Lady.
Penelope and the Others: A Story of Five Country
Children. By Amy Walton. Illustrated by L. Leslie Brooke.
“This is a charming book for children. Miss Walton proves herself a perfect
adept in understanding of school-room joys and sorrows, and her name ought to
become a household word amongst our boys and girls.”— Christian Leader.
A Cruise in Cloudland. By Henry Frith.
“A thoroughly interesting'story, especially the part dealing with the siege of
Plevna. There is an excellent sketch of General Skobeloff.”— St. James’s Gazette.
Marian and Dorothy. By Annie E. Armstrong.
“ This is distinctively a book for girls. It contains a bright wholesome story,
with the useful morals of industry and forgiveness of injuries. The book is
decidedly to be commended.”— Academy.
StimSOn’S Reef: A Tale of Adventure. By C. J. Hyne.
“Few stories come within hailing distance of Stimson’s Reef in the matter of
startling incidents and hairbreadth ’scapes. In these respects it may almost vie
with Mr. 11. L. Stevenson’s matchless Treasure Island." — Guardian.
Gladys Anstruther. By Louisa Thompson.
“ It is a clever book, and some of the passages in the narrative are novel and
striking in the highest degree.”— Schoolmistress.
The Secret of the Old House. By Evelyn Everett-
Green.
“Tim, the little Jacobite who asks his grandmother if she can remember
Charles 1., is a charming creation. So original a child as Tim must win the
hearts of all who read the pleasant tale.” — Academy.


HALF-CROWN SERIES-Continued.
Hal Hungerford. By J. R. Hutchinson, b.a.
“ There is no question whatever as to the spirited manner in which the story is
told; the death of the mate of the smuggler by the teeth of the dog is especially
effective. Altogether, Hal Hungerford is a distinct literary success. ’’—Spectator.
The Golden Weathercock. By Julia Goddard.
“ A cleverly conceived quaint story, in which the golden cock on the church
spire is the recipient of enchanting stories of enchanted people and places. Full of
pretty and ingenious ideas, prettily and ingeniously written.”— Saturday Review.
White Lilac: Or, The Queen of the May. By Amy Walton.
“ Every here and there we are reminded of Mrs. Tulliver and Sister Pullet in
the quaint dialogue of the story. . . . Every rural parish ought to add White
Lilac to its library.”— Academy.
Miriam’s Ambition. By Evelyn Everett-Green.
“Miss Green’s children are real British boys and girls, not small men and
women. Babs is a charming little one.” —Liverpool Mercury.
The Brig 1 “Audacious.” By Alan Cole.
“ Bright and vivacious in style, and fresh and wholesome as a breath of sea air
in tone.”— Court Journal.
The Saucy May. By Henry Frith.
“ Mr. Frith gives a new picture of life on the ocean wave which will be acceptable
to all young people.” —Sheffield Independent.
Jasper’s Conquest. By Elizabeth J. Lysaght.
“ One of the best boys’ books of the season. It is full of stirring adventure and
startling episodes, and yet conveys a splendid moral throughout.”— Schoolmaster.
Little Lady Clare. By Evelyn Everett-Green.
“Certainly one of the prettiest, reminding us in its quaintness and tender
pathos of Mrs. Ewing’s delightful tales. This is quite one of the best stories Miss
Green’s clever pen has yet given us.” —Literary World.
The Eversley Secrets. By Evelyn Everett-Green.
“ A clever and well-told story. Roy Eversley is a very touching picture of high
principle and unshrinking self-devotion in a good purpose.”— Guardian.
The Hermit Hunter of the Wilds. By G. Stables, r.n.
“Pirates and pumas, mutiny and merriment, a castaway and a cat, furnish
the materials for a tale that will gladden the heart of many a bright boy.”—
Methodist Recorder.
Sturdy and Strong’. By G. A. Henty.
“The history of a hero of everyday life, whose love of truth, clothing of
modesty, and innate pluck carry him, naturally, from poverty to affluence. He
stands as a good instance of chivalry in domestic life.”— The Empire.
Gutta Percha Willie, The Working Genius. By George
Mac Donald.
« Had we space we would fain quote page after page. All we have room to say
is, get it for your boys and girls to read for themselves.” —Practical Teacher.


HALF-CROWN SERIES-Continued.
The WaP of the Axe: Or, Adventures in South Africa. By
J. PeRCY-GtROVES.
“The story of their final escape from the Caffres is a marvellous bit of writing.
. . The story is well and brilliantly told.”— Literary World.
The Lads of Little Clayton. By r. Stead.
“A capital book for boys. They will learn from its pages what true boy cour-
age is. They will learn further to avoid all that is petty and mean if they read
the tales aright. They may be read to a class with great profit.”— Schoolmaster.
Ten Boys who lived on the Road from Long Ago to Now.
Jane Andrews. With 20 Illustrations.
“ The idea of this book is a very happy one, and is admirably carried out. We
have followed the whole course of the work with exquisite pleasure. Teachers
should find it particularly interesting and suggestive.”— Practical Teacher.
A Wail of the Sea: Or, The Lost Found. By Kate Wood.
“ Written with tenderness and grace, the story will appeal to mothers who
have felt the pain of being parted from their children, as powerfully as to the
hearts and sympathies of younger readers.”— Morning Advertiser.
Winnie’s Secret : A Story of Faith and Patience. By Kate
Wood.
“ One of the best story-books we have read. Girls will be charmed with the
tale, and delighted that everything turns out so well."— Schoolmaster.
Miss Willowburn’s Offer. By Sarah Doudnet.
“Patience Willowburn is one of Miss Douduey’s best creations, and is the one
personality in the story which can be said to give it the character of a book not
for young ladies but for girls.”— Spectator.
A Garland for Girls. By Louisa M. Alcott.
“The Garland will delight our girls, and show them how to make their lives
fragrant with good deeds.”— British Weekly.
“ These little tales are the beau ideal of girls’ stories.”— Christian World.
Hetty Gray : Or, Nobody’s Bairn. By Rosa Mulholland.
“ A charming story for young folks. Hetty is a delightful creature—piquant,
tender, and true—and her varying fortunes are perfectly realistic.”— World.
Brothers in Arms : A Story of the Crusades. By F. Bay-
ford Harrison.
“ Full of striking incident, is very fairly illustrated, and may safely be chosen as
sure to prove interesting to young people of both sexes.”— Guardian.
The Ball of Fortune: Or, Ned Somerset’s Inheritance. By
Charles Pearce.
“ A capital story for boys. It is simply and brightly written. There is plenty
of incident, and the interest is sustained throughout.”— Journal of Education.


HALF-CROWN SERlES—Continued.
Miss Fenwick’s Failures: Or, “Peggy Pepper-Pot.” By
Esm£ Stuart.
“Esm6 Stuart may be commended for producing a girl true to real life, who
will put no nonsense into young heads.”—Graphic.
Gytha’s Message: A Tale of Saxon England. By Emma
Leslie.
“This is a charmingly told story. It is the sort of book that all girls and some
boys like, and can only get good hom."—Journal of Education.
Jack O’ Lanthom : A Tale of Adventure. By Henry Frith.
“The narrative is crushed full of stirring incident, and is sure to be a prime
favourite with our boys, who will be assisted by it in mastering a sufficiently
exciting chapter in the history of England.”— Christian Leader.
The Family Failing. By Barley Dale.
“At once an amusing and an interesting story, and a capital lesson on the
value of contentedness to young and old alike.” —Aberdeen Journal.
My Mistress the Queen; A Tale of the 17th Century. By
M. A. Paull.
“ The style is pure and graceful, the presentation of manners and character
has been well studied, and the story is full of interest.”— Scotsman.
The Stories of Wasa and Menzikoff: The Deliverer of
Sweden, and the Favourite of Czar Peter.
“ Both are stories worth telling more than once, and it is a happy thought to
have put them side by side.”— Spectator.
Stories of the Sea in Former Days.
“Next to an original sea-tale of sustained interest come well-sketched collec-
tions of maritime peril and suffering which awaken the sympathies by the realism
of fact. Stories of the Sea are a very good specimen of the kind.”— The Times.
Tales of Captivity and Exile.
“It would be difficult to place in the hands of young people a book which
combines interest and instruction in a higher degree.” —Manchester Courier.
Famous Discoveries by Sea and Land.
“Such a volume may providentially stir up some youths by the divine fire
kindled by these 'great of old’ to lay open other lands.”— Perth Advertiser.
Stirring Events of History.
“The volume will fairly hold its place among those which make the smaller
ways of history pleasant and attractive.”— Guardian.
Adventures in Field, Flood, and Forest.
“ The editor has beyond all question succeeded admirably. The present book
cannot fail to be read with intei’est and advantage.”— Academy.


BLACKIE’S TWO-SHILLING SERIES.
Illustrated by eminent Artists, In crown Bvo, cloth elegant.
NEW VOLUMES.
Queen of the Daffodils : A Story of High School Life. By
Leslie Laing. Illustrated by W. Parkinson,
Raff’s Ranche: A Story of Adventure among Cowboys and
Indians. By F. M. Holmes. Illustrated by Paul Hardy.
An Unexpected Hero. By Eliz. j. Lysaght.
“Among the very best of the series is, An Unexpected Hero. There is abun-
dance of pleasant incident and skilful character delineation.”— Freeman's Jour.
The Bushranger’s Secret. By Mrs. Henry Clarke, m.a.
“One of the best stories we have had of the Australian bush, with a good plot,
an action always good, and rising into dramatic intensity at times. ” — Spectator.
The White Squall. By John C. Hutcheson.
“This is a capital story. The descriptions of scenery and places, and especially
of the changes of calm and tempest, are lifelike and vivid.”— Standard.
The Wreck of the “Nancy Bell.” By J. C. Hutcheson.
“The narrative is full of excitement and interest; it cannot fail to develop
resource, and encourage independence and manliness of character.’’—Academy.
The Lonely Pyramid. By j. H. Yoxall.
“It is full of wild surprises and marvels. The Pyramid alone is a fascinating
invention, and the ‘lost oasis of the vision on the sand’ is even more delightful.”
—Saturday Review.
Bab: or, The Triumph of Unselfishness. By Ismay Thorn.
“Bah is a capital story for children, who will he much amused by the picture
on the cover of the worthy doll Jocasta.”— Athenaeum.
Climbing the Hill, and other Stories. By Annie S. Swan.
“ Miss Annie Swan’s children are children, and not old people masquerading in
children’s attire. This volume of tales is made up of just the kind of incidents
of which children love to read.”— Christian Leader.
Brave and True, and other Stories. By Gregson Gow.
This is one of those very few volumes which are adapted for reading aloud to
children in the nursery.”— Spectator.
The Light Princess. By George Mac Donald.
“ Graceful, fantastic, delicately didactic in its playfulness, this volume is likely
to give as much pleasure to the elder folk as to the younger.”— Daily News.
Nutbrown Roger and I. By J. H. Yoxall.
“ The pictures of manners is perfect, the excitement, of the healthiest kind,
goes on increasing to the last. It is one of the very best and most delightful
story-books of the season.”— Tablet.
Warner'S Chase ; Or, The Gentle Heart. By Annie S. Swan.
“In Milly Warren, the heroine, who softens the hard heart of her rich uncle,
and thus unwittingly restores the family fortunes, we have a fine ideal of real
womanly goodness. "—Schoolmaster.


TWO-SHILLING SERIES-Continued.
Sam Silvan’s Sacrifice. By Jesse Colman.
“ There is a spirit of gentleness, kindliness, and tenderness manifest in every
page of this volume, which will make it an influence for good.”— Christian Union.
Insect Ways on Summer Days in Garden, Forest, Field,
and Stream. By Jennett Humphreys. With 70 Illustrations.
“This book will prove not only instructive but delightful to every child whose
mind is beginning to inquire and reflect upon the wonders of nature. It is
capitally illustrated and very tastefully bound.”— Academy.
Susan. By Amy Walton.
“A clever little story, written with some humour. The authoress shows a
great deal of insight into children’s feelings and motives.”— Pall Mall Gazette.
A Pair Of Clog’S. By Amt Walton.
“Decidedly interesting, and unusually true to nature. For children between
nine and fourteen this book can be thoroughly commended.”— Academy
The Hawthorns. By Amy Walton.
“A remarkably vivid and clever study of child-life. At this species of work
Amy Walton has no superior.”— Christian Leader.
Dorothy’s Dilemma. By Caroline Austin.
“An exceptionally well-told story, and will be warmly welcomed by children.
The little heroine, Dorothy, is a charming creation.” — Court Journal.
Marie’s Home. By Caroline Austin.
“An exquisitely told story. The heroine is as fine a type of girlhood as one
could wish to set before our little British damsels of to-day.”— Christian Leader.
A Warrior King*. By J. Evelyn.
“The friendship formed between the African Prince and Adrian Englefield will
remind the reader of the old story of the ‘ wonderful love’ which existed long ago
when Jonathan and David made a covenant.”— Dundee Advertiser.
Aboard the “Atalanta.” By Henry Frith.
“The story is very interesting and the descriptions most graphic. We doubt
if any boy after reading it would be tempted to the great mistake of running
away from school under almost any pretext whatever.”— Practical Teacher.
The Penang- Pirate. By John C. Hutcheson.
“A book which boys will thoroughly enjoy: rattling, adventurous, and romantic,
and the stories are thoroughly healthy in tone.”— Aberdeen Journal.
Teddy: The Story of a “Little Pickle.” By John C. Hutcheson.
“He is an amusing little fellow with a rich fund of animal spirits, and when at
length he goes to sea with Uncle Jack he speedily sobers down under the discip-
line of life.”— Saturday Review.
A Rash Promise. By Cecilia Selby Lowndes.
“A carefully told story; and Meg Clifford is a delightful and natural little girl.''
Spectator.


TWO-SHILLING SERIES-Continued.
Linda and the Boys. By Cecilia Selby Lownd.es.
“ The book is essentially a child’s book, and will be heartily appreciated by the
young folk.”— The Academy.
Swiss Stories for Children. From the German of Madam
Johanna Spyei. By Lucy Wheelock.
“Charming stories. They are rich in local colouring, and, what is better, in
genuine pathos.”— The Times.
The Squire’s Grandson: A Devonshire Story. By J. M.
Callwell.
“ The lessons of courage, filial affection, and devotion to duty on the part of the
young hero cannot fail to favourably impress all young readers.”— Schoolmaster.
Magna Charta Stories. Edited by Arthur Gilman, a.m.
“A book of special excellence, which ought to be in the hands of all boys.”—
Educational News.
The Wing’s of Courag’e; AND The Cloud - Spinner.
Translated from the French of George Sand, by Mrs. Corkran.
“ Mrs. Corkran has earned our gratitude by translating into readable English these
two charming little stories.”— Athenaeum.
Chirp and Chatter: Or, Lessons from Field and Tree,
By Alice Banks. With 54 Illustrations by Gordon Browne.
“We see the humbling influence of love on the haughty harvest-mouse, we are
touched by the sensibility of the tender-hearted ant, and may profit by the moral
of ‘ the disobedient maggot.’ The drawings are spirited and funny.” —The Times.
Four Little Mischiefs. By Rosa Mulholland.
“ Graphically written, and abounds in touches of genuine humour and innocent
fun.”— Freeman. “A charming bright story about real children.”— Watchman.
New Lig’ht through Old Windows. By Gregson Gow.
“The most delightfully-written little stories one can easily find in the literature
of the season. Well constructed and brightly told.” —Glasgow Herald.
Little Tottie, and Two Other Stories. By Thomas Archer.
“We can warmly commend all three stories; the book is a most alluring prize
for the younger ones.”— Schoolmaster.
Naug-hty Miss Bunny. By Clara Mulholland.
“This naughty child is positively delightful. Papas should not omit Naughty
Miss Bunny from their list of juvenile presents.” —Land and Water,
Adventures of Mrs. Wishing’-to-be. By Alice Corkran.
“Simply a charming book for little girls.” —Saturday Review.
“Just in the style and spirit to win the hearts of children.”—Daily News.


The Joyous Story of Toto. By Laura E. Eichards.
“ A very delightful book for children, which deserves to find a place in every
nursery.”— Lady’s Pictorial.
Our Dolly; Her Words and Ways. By Mrs. E. H. Read. 2s.
Fairy Fancy : What she Heard and Saw. By Mrs. Read. 2s.
BLACKIE’S EIGHTEEN PEN NY SERIES.
With Illustrations. In crown Bvo, cloth elegant.
NEW VOLUMES.
A Soldier’s Son : The Story of a Boy who Succeeded. By Annette
Lyster.
Mischief and Merry-making',
Town Mice in the Country:
Isabella Pearson.
A Story of Holiday Adventure.
M. E. Erancis.
Phil and his Father. By Ismay
Thorn.
Prim’s Story. By L. E. Tiddeman.
Littlebourne Lock. ByF. Bayford
Harrison.
Wild Meg and Wee Dickie. By
Mary E. Ropes.
Grannie. By Elizabeth J. Lysaght.
The Seed She Sowed. By Emma
Leslie.
Unlucky: A Fragment of a Girl’s Life.
By Caroline Austin.
Everybody’s Business: or a Friend
in Need. By Ismay Thorn.
Tales of Daring and Danger. By
G. A. Henty.
The Seven Golden Keys. By James
E, Arnold.
The Story of a Queen. By Mary
C. Rowsell.
Edwy: Or, Was he a Coward? By
Annette Lyster.
The Battlefield Treasure. By F.
Bayford Harrison.
Joan’s Adventures at the North
Pole. By Alice Corkran.
Filled with Gold. By J. Perrett.
Our General: A Story for Girls. By
Elizabeth J. Lysaght.
Aunt Hesba’s Charge. By Eliza-
beth J. Lysaght.
By Order of Queen Maude: A Story
of Home Life. By LOUISA CROW.
The Late Miss Hollingford. By
Rosa Mulholland.
Our Frank. By Amy Walton.
A Terrible Coward. By G. Man-
vxlle Fenn.
Yarns on the Beach. By G. A.
Henty.
Tom Finch’s Monkey. By J. C.
Hutcheson.
Miss Grantley’s Girls, and the Stories
she told them. By Thos. Archer.
The Pedlar and his Dog. By Mary
C. Rowsell.
Down and Up Again. By Gregson
Gow.
Madge’s Mistake. By Annie E.
Armstrong.
The Troubles and Triumphs of
Little Tim. By Gregson Gow.
The Happy Lad. A Story of Peasant
Life in Norway. By B. Bjornson.
Into the Haven. By Annie S. Swan.
A Box of Stories. Packed for Young
Folk by Horace Happyman.
The Patriot Martyr: Narratives of
Female Heroism,


THE SHILLING SERIES OF JUVENILES.
Square 16mo, Illustrated, and neatly bound in cloth extra.
NEW VOLUMES.
Brave Dorette. By Julia Goddard.
Piecrust Promises. By W. L.
Hooper.
Summer Fun and Frolic. By Isa-
bella Pearson.
Little Aunt Dorothy. By Jennie
Chappell.
The Lost Dog, and other Stories.
By ascott R. Hope.
The Rambles of Three Children.
By Geraldine Mockler.
A Council of Courtiers. By Cor.
Langton.
A Parliament of Pickles. By Cora
Langton.
Sharp Tommy. By E. J. Lysaght.
Adventures of Nell, Eddie, and
Toby. By Geraldine Mockler.
Freda’s Folly. ByM. S. Haycraft.
Philip Danford: A Story of School
Life. By Julia Goddard.
The Youngest Princess. By Jennie
Chappell.
Arthur’s Temptation. By Emma
Leslie.
A Change for the Worse. By M.
Harriet M. Capes.
Our Two Starlings. By C. Bedford.
Mr. Lipscombe’s Apples. By Julia
Goddard.
Gladys. By E. O’Byrne.
A Gypsy against Her Will. By
Emma Leslie.
The Castle on the Shore. By Isa-
bel Hornibrook.
An Emigrant Boy’s Story. By
Ascott R. Hope.
Jock and his Friend. By Cora
Langton.
John a’ Dale. By Mary C. Rowsell.
In the Summer Holidays. By Jen-
nett Humphreys.
How the Strike Began. By Emma
Leslie.
Tales from the Russian of Madame
Kubalensky. By G, Jenner.
Cinderella’s Cousin. By Penelope.
Their New Home. By A. S. Fenn.
Janie’s Holiday. By C. Bedford.
A Boy Musician: or, The Young Days
of Mozart.
Hatto’s Tower. By M. C. Rowsell.
Fairy Lovebairn’s Favourites.
Alf Jetsam. By Mrs. Geo. Cdpples.
The Redfords. By Mrs. G. Cupples.
Missy. By F. Bayford Harrison.
Hidden Seed. By Emma Leslie.
Ursula’s Aunt. By Annie S. Fenn.
Jack’s Two Sovereigns. By Annie
S. Fenn.
A Little Adventurer, By G. Gow.
Olive Mount. By Annie S. Fenn.
Three Little Ones. By C. Langton.
Tom Watkin’s Mistake. By Emma
Leslie.
Two Little Brothers. By M. Har-
riet M. Capes.
The New Boy at Merriton. By
Julia Goddard.
The Children of Haycombe. By
Annie S. Fenn.
The Cruise of the “Petrel.” By
F. M. Holmes.
The Wise Princess. ByM. Harriet
M. Capes.
The Blind Boy of Dresden and his
Sister.
Jon of Iceland.
Stories from Shakespeare.
Every Man in his Place.
Fireside Fairies and Flower
Fancies.
To the Sea in Ships,
Jack’s Victory: Stories about Dogs.
The Story of a King.
Prince Alexis: or, Old Russia.
Little Daniel: A Story of the Rhine.
Sasha the Serf: Stories of Russia.
True Stories of Foreign History.


THE NINEPENNY SERIES OF BOOKS FOR
CHILDREN.
F’cap Bvo, Illustrated, and neatly bound in cloth extra.
NEW VOLUMES.
A Little English Gentleman. By Jane Deakin.
The Doctor’s Lass. By L. E. Tiddeman.
Spark and I. A Story told by a Cat. By Annie Armstrong.
What Hilda Saw. By Penelope Leslie
Little Miss Masterful. By L. E.
Tiddeman.
A Sprig of Honeysuckle: A Story
of Epping Forest. By Georgina
M. Squire.
An Australian Childhood. By Ellen
Campbell.
Kitty Carroll. By L. E. Tiddeman.
A Joke for a Picnic. By W. L.
Hooper.
Cross Purposes, and The Shadows.
By George Mac Donald.
Patty’s Ideas, and What Came of
Them. By L. E. Tiddeman.
Daphne: A Story of Self-conquest
By E. O’Byrne.
Lily and Rose in One. By Cecilia
S. Lowndes.
Crowded Out : or. The Story of Lil’s
Patience. By M. B. Manwell.
Tom in a Tangle. By T. Sparrow.
Things will Take a Turn. By
Beatrice Harraden.
Max or Baby. By Ismay Thorn.
The Lost Thimble. By Mrs. Mus-
GRAYE.
Jack-a-Dandy. By E. J. Lysaght.
A Day of Adventures. By Char-
lotte Wyatt.
The Golden Plums. By Francis
Clare.
SOMETHING FOR THE
Fully Illustrated. 64 pp., cloth. Six-
pence each.
Tales Easy and Small for the Young-
est of All, By J. Humphreys.
Old Dick Grey and Aunt Kate’s Way.
By J. Humphreys.
Maud’s Doll and Her Walk. By J.
Humphreys.
In Holiday Time. By J. Humphreys.
Whisk and Buzz. By Mrs. A, H.
GAELICS.
The Queen of Squats. By Isabel
Hoknibrook.
Shucks, By Emma Leslie.
Sylvia Brooke. By M. Harriet M.
Capes.
The Little Cousin. By A. S. Fenn.
In Cloudland. By Mrs. Musgrave.
Jack and the Gypsies. By Kate
Wood.
Hans the Painter. By Mary C.
Rowsell.
Little Troublesome. By Isabel
Hornibrook.
My Lady May : and One Other Story.
By Harriet Boultwood.
A Little Hero. By Mrs. Musgrave.
Prince Jon’s Pilgrimage. By
Jessie Fleming.
Harold’s Ambition: or, A Dream of
Fame. By JENNIE Perrett.
Sepperl the Drummer Boy. By
Mary C. Rowsell.
Aboard the Mersey. By Mrs.
George Cdpples.
A Blind Pupil. By Annie S. Fenn.
Lost and Found. By Mrs. Carl
Rother.
Fisherman Grim. By Mary C,
Rowsell.
VERY LITTLE ONES.
Little Tales fop Little Folk.
By Miss W. L. Rooper. Well Illus-
trated ; cloth cover; price 2 d. each.
FRED’S RUN.
NORA’S DARK LOOK.
ELLA’S FALL.
PATTY’S WALK.
HONEST DOLLY.


THE SIXPENNY
SERIES FOR CHILDREN.
Neatly bound in cloth extra.
Each contains 64 pages and an Illustration.
NEW VOLUMES.
Mrs. Holland’s Peaches. By Pen-
elope Leslie.
Marjory’s White Rat. By Penelope
Leslie.
Grandmother’s Forget-me-nots.
By Aimhe Dawson.
From over the Sea. By L. E. Tidde-
The Kitchen Cat. By Amy Walton.
The Royal Eagle. By Louisa Thomp-
son.
Two Little Mice. By Mrs. Garlick.
A Little Man of War. By L. E.
Tiddeman.
Lady Daisy. By Caroline Stewart.
Dew. By H. Mary Wilson.
Chris’s Old Violin. By J. Lockhart.
Mischievous Jack. By A. Corkran.
The Twins. By L. E. Tiddeman.
Pet’s Project. By Cora Langton.
The Chosen Treat. By C. Wyatt.
Little Neighbours. By A. S. Fenn.
Jim: A Story of Child Life. By Chris-
tian Burke.
Little Curiosity. By J. M. Callwell.
Sara the Wool-gatherer. By W.
L. Hooper.
Fairy Stories: told by Penelope.
A New Year’s Tale. By M. A. Currie.
Little Mop. By Mrs. Charles Bray.
The Tree Cake, and other Stories,
By W. L. Hooper.
Nurse Peggy, and Little Dog Trip.
Fanny’s King. By Darley Dale.
Wild Marsh Marigolds. By D. Dale.
Kitty’s Cousin. By Hannah B.
Mackenzie.
Cleared at Last. By Julia God-
dard.
Little Dolly Forbes. By Annie S.
Fenn.
A Year with Nellie. By A. S. Fenn.
The Little Brown Bird.
The Maid of Domremy, and other
Tales.
Little Eric: a Story of Honesty.
Uncle Ben the Whaler.
The Palace of Luxury.
The Charcoal Burner.
Willy Black: A Story of Doing Right.
The Horse and his Ways.
The Shoemaker’s Present.
Lights to Walk by.
The Little Merchant.
Nicholina: A Story about an Iceberg.
A SERIES OF
FOURPENNY
REWARD BOOKS.
Each 64 pages, 18mo,
Illustrated
I, in Picture Boards.
A Start in Life. By J. Lockhart.
Happy Childhood. By Aimee de
Venoix Dawson.
Dorothy’s Clock. By Do.
Phil Foster. By J. Lockhart.
Papa’s Birthday. By W. L. Hooper.
The Charm Fairy. By Penelope.
Little Tales for Little Children.
By M. A. Currie.
Worthy of Trust. By H. B. Mac-
kenzie.
Brave and True. By Gregson Gow.
Johnnie Tupper’s Temptation. Do.
Maudie and Bertie.
Toddy. By L. E. Tiddeman.
Stories about my Dolls. By Felicia
Melancthon.
Stories about my Cat Timothy.
Delia’s Boots. By W. L. Hooper.
Lost on the Rocks. ByR. Scotter.
A Kitten’s Adventures. By Caro-
line Stewart.
Climbing the Hill. By Annie S.
Swan.
A Year at Coverley. By Annie S.
Swan.
The Children and the Water-Lily.
By Julia Goddard.
Poor Tom Olliver. By Do.
Fritz’s Experiment. By Letitia
M'Lintock.
Lucy’s Christmas-Box.
BLACKIE & SON, Limited,
LONDON, GLASGOW, EDINBURGH, AND DUBLIN.


-f\ J'fy




3 ' 508 C206363 7 - J


