







O T E L ® CAEE
i ui or> iA
THE HOTEL WENTWORTH stands upon Church Hill, one of the finest and
most elevated positions in the City of Sydney. It is over forty years since
its first foundations were laid, yet something of historical interest still clings to
it, although, since that time, the original building has been considerably altered
by reconstruction and additions. In the days of the Old Sydney that is so rapidly
giving to the Sydney of the present, the Hotel Wentworth was frequented by
sea-faring men, and the buildings in this quarter of the city were sparse while
much bush remained. But the march of civilisation swept forward and carried
the Hotel Wentworth upon its waves of progress. To-day it stands a noble
structure, indeed, among other noble buildings in the same vicinity, and is looked
upon as Sydney’s premier hotel de luxe. It is to-day the haunt of many of the
world’s greatest celebrities in Art, Letters, and Politics; in Music, Stage, and
Song. Built in the good old solid style, it is said to be one of the best-built
houses in Sydney. The whole of the ground floor is built ovei an eighteen-inch
concrete foundation. The walls between each section of the house have at least
a twelve-inch thickness. With fireproof doors and plentiful fire escapes, ample
provision has been made against an outbreak. Besides which the building is
fortunately situated within a few minutes of the Fire Station. In modernity, the
Hotel Wentworth can compare favourably with any of the best hotels abroad.
The acme of comfort is obtained here, the perfect cuisine, the faultless service,
and an absolute attention to details. The appointments are luxurious, but an
atmosphere of the refinement pervades.
It is the object of this booklet to further familiarize the, traveller with the
excellence of Sydney’s Hotel Wentworth.


7 elled fetlm Couri
unvaralt
npHE PALM COURT is a comparatively recent innovation. For many years
the Hotel Wentworth Winter Garden was the popular rendezvous for
afternoon teas and parties. But, charming as the Winter Garden was, the
ambitious proprietress realised that the space thus occupied could be rendered
even more attractive —and so the Palm Court sprang into existence. It came as
a sensational surprise, for it had no precedent in Sydney. Up to the present it
has no equal, and its beauty would be difficult to surpass should attempts be
made to outrival it in the future. Palm Court resembles a tropical garden
where, throughout the winter and the summer months, flourish many exotic
plants and graceful ferns swung in huge baskets from the high latticed dome.
The installation of fine water-pipes, rendered almost invisible by the greenery,
with small sprays concealed in each box and basket, facilitates the task of
watering the plants. Otherwise, the extreme height would render this impossible.
Throughout the day the twitter and song of birds intermingle with the music of
the fountains and the strains of melody from a hidden orchestra. But in the
evening the whole scene changes to one equalling a palace in fairy land. By
means of colored lights, miraculously hidden in the high latticed dome, an
exquisite glow of color is cast over the whole scene. Even the plants become
animated by these fairy lights which peep so enchantingly from the greenery.


r r COURT adjoins the Ballroom, and the dancers find it easily
fWE JjTj accessible when relaxation and refreshment are required. All that
artistic taste and ingenuity and capital can devise has been
unsparingly lavished upon the creation of Palm Court. With the
roar of tJie City shut out by day, is it any wonder that Palm Court is the
premier rendezvous for afternoon tea parties; and when the City is hushed by
night it is the scene of joy and gaiety.
r /ie
U/ENWORTH
—H O "TEL @ CAPE,
' ''V^2sar-
w'fSSS pjgessj
S*#S


d denzus in dPcznadement
OINCE the year 1901, Mrs. Maclurcan has guided the destiny of the Hotel
Wentworth to its present-day success and high standing. In that first year
dubious heads were shaken hard and often over her venture, but Mrs. Maclurcan
trusted to her vision of what the future would require, and through the years
steadily improved and enlarged the property. For many years she carried on
entirely alone financially, until in 1912 a company was formed. Her battles
have not been easily won —yet the same troubles which attacked the career of
the Hotel Wentworth were shared by the rest of the world. In 1914 came the
Great War; in 1919 the influenza plague; yet, by astute management, Mrs.
Maclurcan came triumphantly through all, never for a moment losing sight of
her goal. ‘ Progress” is her watchword, and though she has brought the Hotel
Wentworth to the present pitch of perfection she still plans to surpass her own
brilliant efforts. Her life is a strenuous one, for, though she pays tribute to
her staff declaring it to be “the very best in the city of Sydney,” it is part of
her energetic nature to give her personal supervision to everything that will
add further to the comfort of her guests. No smallest detail escapes her—in
the kitchen, in the dining-room, in the bedrooms, in the ballroom—her personality
pervades the house and contributes substantially towards its refined and high-
class atmosphere.


Wfioguides ifie desi iny o /
r /ze weniuiorih
IN Mrs. Maclurcan’s private room are many valuable and interesting curios
and Art treasures from various parts of the world. The Sanctum stands in a
secluded alcove olf the Palm Court, a charming nest among the greenery.


/Zest a reality in ifie Counoe
WENTWORTH
-H OT'EL- ® OAEE
TUST within the Entrance to the Hotel Wentworth one comes upon this restful
corner known as the Lounge. Permanent guests make good use of this
place and declare that it is one of the many features of the Hotel Wentworth
that make it seem such a ‘home away from home.” The color scheme is carried
out in soft buff and blue tones which makes a fitting background for the artistic
harmonising furniture solidly constructed in dark brown woods and leathers
and upholstered with blue. It would seem that the very choice of each chair
and sofa and settee had been made from their comfort-giving capacity, into any
of which one might sink deeply and restfully and enjoy one’s novel, or a perusal
of the world’s daily doings, with as much comfort and seclusion as at home.
The Lounge is eminently a place that meets with the approval of the menfolk,
but is also a favourite resort of the ladies. Strictly speaking, the Lounge is not
a room from the enclosed sense that the word “room” implies; yet it is none
the less private for all that. It is really a continuation or expansion of the
Entrance Hall, an idea that has been carried out for the convenience of visitors,
for here many prefer to await the arrival of messengers, telegrams, letters, and
guests. It is a cosy place is this Lounge-room in the winter time, for it is well
heated. Ample, though the accommodation at present seems, the proprietress,
with her eyes ever turned towards future progress, has acquired an adjoining
property and plans to enlarge the Lounge-room considerably.




U/ENTWORJH
n OTEU 9 CAPE
the Hotel Wentworth Cafe was thrown open for luncheons, the first
among those to hail the fact with delight were the business men of the
city. Yet, though the majority of those who lunch in the Cafe are city business
men, the feminine element is well represented also. The Wentworth Cafe is
pre-eminently the kind of place to which a man might bring his women-folk
with as much confidence at mid-day as he would bring them to dance and dine
in the evening. In summer the Cafe is particularly inviting, with its cool color
scheme of white and gold, its spotless napery, and its spaciousness. Through
the open doorway and windows one catches a glimpse of the Palm Court and
its exquisite greenery, song of birds and music of fountains. In the winter the
Cafe is no less attractive. The proximity of the evergreen Palm Court, with its
resemblance to a tropical garden, tempts one to forget the winter’s winds and
bask in this sunlit spot. The mid-day menu is always one to spur the most
jaded appetite to enthusiasm and appreciation. Many of the dainty dishes are
prepared from Mrs. Maclurcan’s own excellent and well-proven recipes. In the
afternoons the Cafe room often holds an overflow of patrons from the Palm
Court, the daintiest of afternoon teas being served here.




W/dite and dold Dallroom
WENTWORTH
OWEL 0 C.AEE
AGENT to the Palm Court lies the Ballroom, a magnificent room carried
out in white and gold. The effect of this color scheme is exquisite by
daylight when the Ballroom is often utilised for a The Dansant in the afternoon.
But in the evening the effect is most brilliant, for the lighting arrangements are
lights of the Ballroom there is a charming reflection
the Palm Court. Between the dances the Court is
tables the welcome ices and other refreshments may
romantic surroundings. Many of the famous balls
lavish. Coupled with the
of the rainbow lights of
greatly sought, and at the
be enjoyed in lovely and
of Sydney’s winter season are held at the Cafe Wentworth. It is also very
popular for big dances. The Ballroom floor is perfect, and the whole environ-
ment ideal for an evening’s enjoyment. At one end of the room is an artistic
winding staircase, leading whither? A spacious balcony is to be found at the
top of this small flight of stairs, and in this gallery there are comfortable chairs
for those who wish to rest between or during the dances. Non-dancers find this
balcony a haven as well as a vantage point from which to view the dancing.
At the other end of the room the orchestra is situated, always ready to dispense
appropriate music. Although the Ballroom is a comparatively recent addition,
the cost of making this modern alteration is already justified by its popularity.
The balcony will accommodate one hundred people, and, having a beautiful
dancing floor, is often engaged by private parties.


0 dance and dine at the Wentworth Cafe is quite the
smartest as well as the most enjoyable way of spend-
y M' 1 ing an evening. The Ballroom may be conveniently
IJKwK entered from the Palm Court. Ihe floor of the Ball-
room is well cared for and is always to be found in excellent
condition.
—H'O T~ E L @ CA E E
m,r -i
P •-" /
r *
ip , IPIJI
I '
pf * H
MN -
fi I


■■l
\yENT WORT H
-MOTEL 0 OAEE
room is referred to as the “house Dining-room” since it is used mainly
by the guests. The appearance of this room is rich, dignified and reserved,
but withal cheery and artistic in the extreme. It is a room greatly appreciated
by those who like to dine in artistic surroundings. Its walls have oft-times
echoed to the voices of many a celebrity and world traveller. In the evenings
especially does this room assume an aspect of gaiety. Epicures express them-
selves charmed with the menu which always consists of something choice. In
fact, this is one of Mrs. Maclurcan’s particular cares, and with all her busy
day she still finds time to devote spare minutes to the culinary art. Her recipes
are celebrated, and she possesses many a precious secret that makes her dishes
such pronounced successes. From the adjoining room, where the casual comers
dine and dance, there floats the music of the orchestra—none the less enchanting
for being subdued by the distance. House guests are invited to join in the
dancing each evening. Travellers from all parts of the world express their
complete satisfaction with the service and the cuisine of the Hotel Wentworth.
,7/o'iel % bntmorihDm


adjoins the Ballroom, the latter being easily accessible to those
who care to join the dancers.


'Vi :■
K ’
WENTWORTH
OTEL. 0 OA.FE
unously appointed Bedrooms
Bedroom, whether single, double, or belonging to a suite, is not merely
well furnished but luxuriously so. Many of the Double Bedrooms have a
balcony attached, built in stone, and strictly private. From these balconies the
occupiers of the bedrooms may command a splendid view of Sydney Harbour
with its ever-changing beauty, or overlook the City, according to the aspect of
the room. The Bathrooms on each floor are very plentiful, but many of the
Double Bedrooms have a Private Bathroom attached; and every room, whether
single or double, is supplied with hot and cold running water. The fact that
in the winter times the bedrooms are heated further testifies to the thorough
modernity of the Hotel Wentworth. There is a telephone installed in every
bedroom. The spaciousness of each room is worth remarking; each is lofty of
ceiling and built with large windows that can be thrown open wide to admit
plenty of fresh air and through which one can step on to the balconies. The
thickness of the walls between each room means the utmost privacy and quiet-
ness. The bedrooms are high enough above the City’s roar, so that very little
noise can penetrate to them. They are reached by elevators, and fire escapes
are amply provided.


Bpjii
I
n I ■
VERYTHING to be desired has been thought of in designing
r,V and furnishing these Bedrooms. The furnishing is luxurious
f J- h and includes spacious wardrobes, ample mirrors, easy chairs;
the floors richly carpeted, the beds excellent. Single as well
double rooms are installed with telephone, and hot and cold running water
supplied in each bedroom throughout the day and night. The example
Bedroom here illustrated has private bathroom attached.
' V\ BS$
agSBJ^
m m


who wish to see the outstanding beauty
spots and other points of interest around Sydney
and in New South Wales will probably find the follow-
ing suggestions helpful.
THE BLUE MOUNTAINS, the scenery of which is
magnificent, may be reached by motor car or by train
travelling to Mount Victoria, then to the Jenolan Caves.
THE JENOLAN CAVES, the fame of which is world-
wide, should not be passed over by tourists. The
marvellous formations should be of interest to all. The
splendid installation of electric lighting makes inspec-
tion easy.
MOUNT KOSCIUSKO is best visited in the Winter
when a special season for winter sports is arranged.
Snow caps the Mount throughout the year.
ILLAWARRA DISTRICT AND CAMBEWARRA
MOUNTAINS. —By taking the train to Moss Vale one
may make a charming tour, thence by motor to the
Fitzroy Falls, Kangaroo Valley and the Cambewarra
Lookout. The Cambewarra Mountains would be diffi-
cult to surpass for scenery.
THE SOUTH COAST.—A journey to Nowra by rail
will take one through exquisite scenery by the edge of
the ocean.
BULLI PASS, an easy day-trip by taking the morning
train from Sydney to Bulli, motor to Bulli Pass and
the Lookout, returning to Sydney by the evening train.
TRIPS ROUND THE HARBOUR fill in a day amidst
charming scenery. The Lane Cove and Hawkesbury
River trips are never-to-be-forgotten.




, f\J
awwi t a i r r
W -
SINGLE ROOMS, from 20/- per day inclusive. DOUBLE ROOMS, from £2 per day.
DOUBLE ROOMS, with Bath, from 50/- per day.
Double Rooms with Bath attached may be secured.
All Single Rooms have hot and cold running water and telephone installed.
Suites of Rooms may also be had with one or two Bedrooms and Bath, Sitting-room and Telephone.
AFTERNOON TEA DANCES— Daily.
Monday to Friday . . . . from 3.30 p.m. to 5.30 p.m .. 3/6 plus tax.
Saturday „ 3.30 „ „ 5.30 „ 4/6 „ „
DINNER DANCES— Every Evening.
Monday to Wednesday . . from 7.30 p.m. to 11.30 p.m 12/6 plus tax.
Thursday „ 7.30 ~ „ 12.00 midnight .. . . 21/ „ „
Friday ~ 7.30 ~ ~ 12.00 midnight . . . . 21/ ~ ~
Saturday „ 7.30 „ „ 11.30 p.m 21/ „ „
NON-DINERS—DANCING.
11l II 111 IMi I 111 Monday to Wednesday .. from 8.30 p.m. to 11.30 p.m 5/ plus tax,
IE Hi illnlllil 11IIIH Thursday „ 8.30 „ „ 12.00 midnight 7/6 „ „
■I ill 3lm IE llli ||hJ| Friday „ 8.30 ~ „ 12.00 midnight 7/6 ~ „
3 1508 0 007973 4


)
>
>
