

fiiO^'o
J'HOUGHTS SUGGESTED ON READING JTICHOLS’ pONFESSION
of the Parramatta jPivER yViui^pEißS
ANDREW EOSS, M X).,
MASTER IN SURGERY OF THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW.
By Scripture we are commanded to love and honor God, and obey his laws— TO
HOLD FAST TO THE FORM OF SOUND TRUTH AND THE WORD OF GOD.
jSYDNEY J
GIBBS, SHALLARD, & CO., PRINTERS, 108 PITT STREET.
1872.




THE
Power of Mind over Matter
Thoughts suggested on reading Nichols’ Ponfession
iF THE p.IVER
.AUSTDBEW BOSS,. M.U.
MASTER IN SURGERY OF THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW.
JBy Scripture we are commanded to love and honor God, and obey his laws —TO
HOLD PAST TO THE FORM OP SOUND TRUTH AND THE WORD OF GOD.
jSYDNEY ;
GIBBS, SHALLARD, & CO., PRINTERS, 108 PITT STREET.




OF yVIIND JA ATTERJ
Thoughts suggested on reading Nichols’ Confession
of the Parramatta River Murders.
Money is a useful friend and servant, but the want of it often proves
a rather cruel, villainous, and mischievous enemy. Tis further said,
where there is gold or money that there there is generally,
also, an abundance of sin, disease, misery, crime, "and wickedness. By
this it is implied that all evils and crimes, less or more, take their
root, in some way or other, in money. Be this as it may, there is
invariably always some kind of premonitory warning or symptom to
denote the beginning of every motive and action in life. If an
original impulse be wrong, it naturally and inevitably follows, d priori ,
that the act itself must likewise be wrong. When our reasoning or
guiding faculties, therefore, are sound, healthy, natural, and true, no
sin or temptation, however great, can ever befall, derange, or drive us
to do wrong. Let mind once, however, give way to a wrong thought,
or a single false act, anything, in fact, that is contrary to reason,
truth, or the statutes of the moi’al law, then the false thought and act,
or what is commonly termed “devil,” sooner or later, leadeth to destruc-
tion in an endless variety of ways. Not by this that there is any reality
or truth in the existence of a devil, or that the devil tempts people to
commit sin, for I hold that the term “ devil” is but a mere myth, or, at
least, representing nothing more or less than the act of an upright
spirit or mind when it first begins to fall away from the ordinary or
accepted path of truth and moral rectitude. Were people to first
reason honestly and fairly on every act and thing that’s to be done,
in place of, as too frequently happens, jumping to rash, ill-digested
conclusions, probably derived from erroneous inferences, or to meet,
perhaps, the demand of some present or urgent want, then right would
always rule wrong—and good, likewise, would predominate over evil.
In many cases crime, and criminal acts, however, too frequently take
their first origin or root from a total disregard to some of the original
laws which are intended to regulate mind and nature, viz., that right
and truth must ever rule. When error or falsehood, however, pre-
M3SSS j Y iSO'Tbh
m-i~ "7~7,


vails over mind, and especially when reason, sense, or judgment is
unappealed to, then crime or sinful offences must naturally follow,
because truth and the moral law is thus made subordinate to the
ruling and irregular wants of passion, or other misleading, unnatural,
sordid, or morbid desires. When animal propensities, therefore, pre-
dominate over the moral and normal spiritual mind, then God’s laws
become subverted by giving evil the precedence in place of following,
as we arc commanded to do, viz., His ways and not our ways, and to
be ever on our guard against falsehood, or any other means which may
lead us astray from the right path of duty, truth, and good works.
The moment Adam had partaken and eaten of the forbidden or evil
fruit, he instantly knew that he had done wrong. The devil, I con-
tend, did not tempt him to commit the disobedience or wrong, but
rather, I am inclined to believe, his reasoning or moral faculties seem
to have, by some unknown means or other, become either perverted or
defective, and thence happened the fall, not, however, from any devil’s
temptation, for I hold that this interpretation of Scripture is absurd;
but rather that he (Adam) being made a responsible being chose
rather to follow the dictates of his own imaginative thought, false
reasoning, or aberrant mind, in place of continuing in the perfect, up-
right state in which he was first created, viz., that mind and reason
shall ever rule and govern matter. The fall, as it is termed, was
nothing more or less than the penalties arising from this very trans-
gression, on the same principle as fire produces pain when the naked
hand is suddenly thrust into the midst of burning coals of fire, or any
other kind of burning substance. The mind is assui’edly as much
under the dominion and control of spiritual laws, as the body is under
physical. Because we are unable to understand or explain either its
profound functions or constitution, is no proof that mind, or the laws
which regulate mind, don’t exist. In my belief, there is as much an
inward mechanism of mind as there is an inward physiological function
of body, or other portions of the latent or material world; but that con-
stitution is founded on laws far higher than those on which the
phrenologist seeks to found his absurd, delusive doctrine, that mind
emanates from the distribution of special organs disseminated through-
out the brain. In other words, that some brains show a superior
development to othei-s—that they are defective in some qualities
and superabundant in others—that every brain, in reality, contains
two sorts of organs or faculties —viz., those of good and those of evil,
a thing as monstrous as it is ridiculously absurd. And even classed
with an artful cunningness to make the ignorant and vulgar believe
that by these outward tokens experts in this would-be a considered
science can readily divine the guilty from the innocent, the murderer
from the hypocrite, and the swindler from the knave. It will need
some more powerful and reliable a science, I imagine, than that of phre-
nology to teach and enlighten us on the true working principles or
mysterious operations of the pure from an impure mind. To the vast
majority of people, nay, indeed, to mankind in general, mind is a thing


often, bnt very little, cared for; or in what way it’s trained or culti-
vated, for it’s a sad state, I fear to think, that it’s almost universally
regarded as a perfect blank in regulating our thoughts, wants, actions,
and duties in our pilgrimage through this life. Training, decorating,
and gratifying the physical body, everyone seems readily enough to
believe ; but what, it is almost needless to ask, would have been the
real, true state or condition of the human or physical body without it had
first been illuminated and impregnated with the vital spirit or princi-
ples of an everlasting, immortal mind 1 A physical body would then
have possessed but very little real happiness or everlasting enjoyment
beyond, perhaps, a mere animal instinct. It is mind alone which
gives or constitutes the essence of life, and when this mind or spirit
is pi’operly cultivated and guarded by sound truths, faith, and sterling
principles, no crime or devils, as it’s falsely supposed, can ever, then,
tempt the truly upright and faithfully pious to swerve from the one,
true, honest path of duty. When mind rules matter, mind then is
as when first originally created; but when matter rules mind, or
moral law, sin and crime follow as the natural consequence of the
irregularity. No real lover of Scripture Gospel, or firm believer in
God or eternity, can well, or feasibly attempt, I think, either to dis-
prove or gainsay so obviously palpable, and' incontestible a fact.
All penalties of the physical body seem to me to take their first counter-
feit in some obscure aberration of the mind. When mind is wrong,
or off its proper healthy balance, the body then, also, by participating
in the error, must likewise be wrong ; and thus when the body
is unguarded, or inadaquately protected by a sound, stable mind,
it may then be said to be out of its true, natural, healthy
vortex, and, consequently, it is rendered more liable to the pains and
penalties of its own abnormal, irregular, or unhealthy action.
Mind must be nourished, supported, and governed by as eligible a
class of laws, as much as the physical body; but it unfortunately so
happens that very few people seemingly believe in the existence of
mind, or that it is composed and regulated by its own peculiar
functions. The action of the one is as apparently necessary and
perfect as the intricate, physiological mechanism is to the healthy
order of the other. The general error seems to consist in the belief
that body governs mind, in place of which it is mind, rather, which
governs body. Animal instinct is, of course, in a limited sense, a
type, perhaps, allied to mind, but only in an inferior or a modified
degree, to suit the wants of the general creation. When body [i. e.,
our worldly wants) rules, matter then, strictly speaking, is made to
rule mind—the carnal over the moral—the perishable world and all
it contains over the everlasting edicts of Heaven, and thus consequently
mind becomes, and is made the secondary, in place of being always
regarded as the one, primary, fixed standard of life and universal law
of nature, truth, holiness, uprightness, faith, justice, and mercy.
When this law is not so considered, then the door becomes widely
opened lor the ready admission of all manner of temptations,


miseries, and sins. It is said, “ hold fast to the law.” Can this
allude to any other fact than that of mind or moral law 1 for stupefy,
as with chloroform, drunkenness, or other narcotic sedatives or
agents, and how, then, is it possible to make the physical body
susceptible of its proper natural feeling when the main functions of its
life and vitality are, either actually deadened, or else arrested by the use
of these foreign narcotic agents 1 It is surely plain from this one,
simple, single illustration, that the brain or mind of man inherits the
sole dominion of all physical functions of the human body. I argue
from the major to the minor proposition, the only true way in which,
I believe all acts of life may be reasonably explained, viz., that
good and evil, truth and falsehood, must first be conceived by the
normal or abnormal state of mind, ere the physical body can ever
execute a purpose, be it for good or for evil. The moral training of the
mind, therefore, is of far higher importance, and indispensible to life and
happiness, than contriving to cram the youthful mind with a smattering
of heterogeneous learning, knowledge, accomplishments, or education.
Educate as we will, and store the mind with the superb riches of
every tongue and language on earth, if judicious moral training be
neglected in early life, then these things very often prove cumbersome
leather than auxiliaries to shield us from the many fierce, physical
struggles and battles of this world; lacking this all-powerful,
essential, moral element of training, how many an otherwise noble
mind has gone down to the grave in sin, or given way to error,
falsehood, degradation, and crime 1 An upright, honest, moral mind
must make an ever steadfast, faithful, and inflexible body. The one
grand aim and object of all pure religion is but to keep the moral
mind of man within the precincts of truth, and while faithfully
living to fulfil this one law, he is protected with a shield, a help to
prevent him from falling into the numerous snares of the world of
sin and sinful ways. Nursing and doting over the things of the
world is but treasuring up things temporary and perishable ; but ever
diligently striving to inculcate the mind with sound, solid, enduring
moral truths, is preparing to reap the fruits of an eternal, spiritual
happiness awaiting us above. As long as mind or reason remains
healthy, unbiassed, and perfect, no man, then, can readily go astray ;
and, therefore, all evil habits, sins, temptations, or devils are kept at
proper bay. This is the only way, I believe, whereby we are most
enabled to resist sins, temptations, the devil, the world, and the flesh,
viz., ever striving to live in conformity to the laws of God, and ever
still making mind the sole and chief ruler of body or matter. Once
depart from the unerring laws which regulate a healthy-constituted,
well-balanced mind, and we depart also from truth, and as we depart
from this truth, so also do we render ourselves more liable to sinful
encroachments, and manifold temptations and transgressions. A strict
adherence and fervent abidence in moral truths operates as an
auxiliary or ample fortification to the mind, and while mind continues
so fortified, neither sin, temptation, or the devil can ever enter therein


or lead us astray from the path of duty. The beginning of sin is
but the too common neglect we pay to moral training, and the
intrinsic value of mind or soul—living unto ourselves in place of
unto God—thinking of the present, or nursing our vile bodies and
passions with every perishable luxury of earth, in place of feeding or
soothing the soul with things eternal—striving daily to wear the
corruptible, while God our Father entreats, offers, and insures us of
the incorruptible—bedecking the body with all manner of rich and
rare perishable, precious gems, diadems, and jewels, yet starving and
neglecting, all the while, the things pertaining to mind, soul, or
immortality, which is hereafter to live again with the Almighty in
eternity. While body rules death continues also to reign, but when
mind or moral laws conquer those of flesh, then the soul is made to
live for ever and ever, and where sin, crime, disease, misery,
temptation, death, and the devil are unknown. The devil on earth,
as it is termed, is but a metaphor or figurative expression, and
implies nothing more or less, in my candid belief, than the exercise
of the right or wrong internal mind or moral spirit of man : in other
words, wrong passions, or the devil, tempts to sin only when our
physical body attempts to rule mind ; but when mind rules, then
there is no temptation to sin, because there are no transgressions of
the moral law—the only law which is ever intended to direct and
protect man through this life. Physical laws necessarily are ever
changing —sun, moon, and stars in their revolutions—weather, seasons,
life, growth, decay, and death ; but the moral law, mind, or soul, is
unchangeable and immortal. To maintain mind upright is to ensure
it the protection of the first law of immortality; but if physical
matter rules, then changes innumerable, and ever thirsting, begin and
continue, and no matter how perfectly educated or well-instructed,
while life and mind are irregular, the door is open to the entrance of
every temptation, and sin, misery, and crime will probably, also, still
continue. To accomplish any radical reform, it is absolutely necessary
that mind should first be made to rule matter, and not matter, mind.
Had the recent murderers, Nichols and Lester, followed this law in
place of giving themselves up entix-ely to the acquisition of physical
needs or sordid gains, then their numerous crimes, forgeries, and
wholesale murders, &c., might, probably, never have been conceived,
far less afterwards, even, ever subsequently committed. It was
physical wants alone which dictated and governed morals or mind in
these sad, pitiful cases; consequently, like our first parents, matter
with them was made to rule mind, and, therefore, the wrongful
thought, by usurping the functions of mind, led to sin, sin to
temptation, temptation to irresistible destruction, and, finally, an
ignominious death —the consequence and sure penalties arising from
these transgressions.
Before Nichols could finally yield himself up to the awful doom or
temptation to murder Bridger, we read in his written confession,
that his moral spirit was first strongly moved within, and apparently


knew by this feeling of mental commotion, from which he suffered,
that the unavenged crime he was then about to perpetrate on his two
innocent victims, was wrong, and still, seemingly, he either could or
would not desist or resist the sad temptation, for, in the very words of
his dying confession, he plainly admits, while his prey was in his own
charge, of having twice failed to commit the heinous deed, and before
the purpose was accomplished or ultimately effected at the third time
—he says : —“ At last, as if moved by some unseen power, I grasped
the pistol, and fired at Bridger’s head while he was asleep. As soon
as I had done it, I felt as though my heart had leaped into my head,
and said, *My God !my God !lam a murderer.’ Bridger rose,
saying, ‘ Oh ! Mr. Clarke, you have deceived me ; put me ashore, put
me ashore.’ I then struck him on the head with the pistol. Lester
searched his pockets, and handed all the money to me. And while
the dying man kept saying— ‘ Put me ashore; put me ashore,’ Lester
fastened a stone to his feet, and Nichols shoved him by the shoulder,
and cast him into the water. As he was being shoved into the water,
Lester said ‘we had not searched his pockets.’ I answei'ed, ‘ Good
God, I have done enough ; let him go.’ At first the three of us
started together in a boat, I sitting in the stern, Lester in the fore-
part, and Bridger between us. On the river we had some brandy ; I
had the first glass, and then handed it to Lester. He (Lester) being
at the back of Bridger, put the poison in a glass of brandy, and then
handed it to Bridger twice. The second time Bridger complained
that it was very bitter, and said that he would have no more of it.
Neither dose taking the desired effect, the pistol then was to be used.
At my suggestion we landed on a point on the river, and walked for
a short time until the tide should rise, it being my intention to shoot
him in the bush. My heart failed me, and we returned to the boat.
Bridger then said, ‘ I think you must be humbugging me.’ In
answer, I said ‘Ohno !we are only waiting for the tide.’ I sat in the
beat in my former position, and strove to nerve myself for the deed. I
thought I could not do it. I went forward to Lester, and said he must
do it, for I could not. Lester went to my place in the boat, but could
not fire the pistol. I again took my place in the stern of the boat, and
run her on to the shore, telling Bridger that the tide was not high
enough to get up. We backed the boat out, and all laid down to
sleep until the tide rose. When I had slept some time I rose up ;
and seeing the position he was in, and knowing for what purpose I had
taken him into the boat, nerved myself the third time, and thus the
deed, as previously narrated, was now effectually committed.” In the
history of this painful tragedy, and the career of these criminals, who
have now forfeited their lives on the scaffold, we learn many useful
and valuable, practical, moral lessons; that the beginning of smaller
sins often leads on to more heinous ones ; and that our present system
of prison discipline is utterly, and even wofully useless as a means of
reforming the lives of many criminals. There’s a something, evidently,
more effectually needed in the way of reforming criminals or the sup-


pression of crime, than merely confining their bodies in cells sur-
rounded by iron-barred windows, and iron-clad doors in monotonous,
dreary prison-houses. Taking a rational view of such systems of
punishment compared with the state of morals or mind leading to
the commission of many of these offences, and the prisoners therein
confined—in place of mercy and justice guiding and trying to reform
the guilty and fallen—prison discipline that now is, is more like driving
the crimes deeper, and making them more incurable and inveterate.
In short, multiplying ignorance and barbarism rather than redeeming
or reclaiming the lives of prisoners from unlawful habits, and sinful
ways. Incarcerating them in dungeons, and mustering at the clergy-
man’s routine visit, and automaton religious service once a week, is
not exactly the kind of way to bring fallen men back to the light of
reason, truth, or God. If moral reformation is ever to be satisfactorily
begun, it must take root and origin in more congenial places, and at
earlier periods in life, than waiting till it reaches police offices,
criminal courts, or prison dungeons, ship Vernon, and such like
reformatories. Let the moralist—the Christian—or sincere reformer
only pause to patiently and minutely study the career of these men’s
sad lives, and how much are we indebted to law for their original
downfall, or its cruel system of discipline, which may, perhaps, have
hastened them on to their last final doom 1 Repeatedly found guilty
for other minor offences, sentences mitigated through good prison conduct,
and on the recommendation of members of Parliament and magistrates;
but did law, or its useless punishment, tend any the better to strengthen
or even purify their minds so that they were enabled to again return
in peace to society, or with the will to shake off the indelible felon’s
brand it had left behind 1 Or did it prepare them to expect any
better or more permanent source of livelihood than what they had,
seemingly, formerly met with when their sentences had expired, and
they had again obtained their liberty 1 These are all grave and
momentous matters of importance, (to some they may, of course, seem
questionable, and already, perhaps, sufficiently perfect for all purposes),
whether a barbarous system of prison life, and expensive law and
criminal tribunals, from the petty street patroller up to the Judge on
the dais, are in themselves sufficiently free from defectiveness, vice,
and corruption, either to effectually control and subdue crime,
dispense sanctity, or to neutralise evil in others 1 The fountain of
evil has a far wider and deeper root than this, and law, I fear, when
not directed to the exact morbid spot, is far more likely to be instru-
mental in aiding and abetting, than subduing or diminishing crime.
When law and its expensive paraphernalia increases, it seems as if
crime, in a similar and proportionate rate, would also increase. It
would, I believe, do far more moral good were the money, which is
now annually expended on keeping up a rotten system of law and
prisons, to be distributed to pious clergymen to disseminate the never-
dying moral truths of the Bible and religion. Civil or criminal law,
in my honest belief, ignores and stultifies too much the fact of that


existence of practical religion, or the virtue and power of the moral
law. And thus one reason, perhaps, why crime of every grade and dye
increases, while the force and correcting rod, and influence of true
religion on the other hand seems to be diminishing. The customary
belief is, I think, patent and palpably inclining and yielding itself
up more and more every day to civil and criminal codes of law, in
place of following and recognising the one only true rule and standard
of’life—viz., pure religion, and the moral law. Many people, doubt-
less, think that it’s enough to conform to civil rule and government,
but it’s just on this very point alone where sad mistakes oft begin, and
which then lead, as we have more than once experienced, to many a
dreadful crime, and an untimely, sorrowful end. Making man’s law
rule in place of God’s —making matter rule in place of mind, spirit, or
moral truths. God and His laws first, man second; in place of which,
civil law, «fec., tries to pervertly making man first, and then God
second. I say, and say it fearlessly, too, that our clergymen should
be up and diligently doing to prevent religion’s rights from being
overthrown by civil. The Church should maintain its holy ground
against all such perverted notions of the power and virtue of law to
heal and cure the mind of criminals : if not, then Church degeneration
but becomes the key to crime, police courts, and prisons. It’s not
enough to teach and preach once a week, to visit the sick, or console
with the dying, to help the afflicted, the widow, and orphan ; but
Churches should control their members and hearers by their own strict
code of moral laws, and not leave their sacred and professed functions
to be entirely usurped by civil tribunals, jurisdiction, and authorities.
Religion does a grave and serious injury to general society by allow-
ing the debased shelter within, and concealing offences under the deep
cloak of deceit and hypocrisy. The Church should be able alike to
speak of criminals before as after sentence. Nay, I’ll go a step
further and insist on more general government and control of its
members, its own tribunals, its own inspections, censures, or dismis-
sals, &c. The members belonging to such a Church, so regulated
and ruled, should receive preference in all transactions of life, and
by this means would then become a surer guide to the well-being of
society, in place of waiting till law has once inflicted its blow, and
only now called in to console with, or to heal the pangs and sorrows
of a sufferer’s stripes. Enticing innocent, perhaps ignorant people,
with a useless and cumbersome amount and multiplicity of statute
laws, merely to break them, then afterwards punishing while thus
ensnared, and stuffing them, like caged birds or wild animals, with
mock discipline and involuntary doses of religion, to try to bring them
back again to a sense of right and duty. Making, as I have already
said, civil law the ruler of man in place of religion. Teaching law
first, and religion next, in place of sound religion first; then men
would not so often wrong their fellow-men, or need anything else but
God’s inflexible laws as their only true rule and guide through this life.
God surely never made laws so insufficient or imperfect as to


need man to supplement them with any of his blundering works of
handicraft. The less money that is spent in the way of inculcating
sound principles of religion in early life, the more, I believe, will
afterwards be required for the suppression of crime, and the mainte-
nance of law and justice, (as it is called), prisons, and prison
discipline; but the more money that goes to assist in the dispensation
and teaching of religion, the less, 1 firmly believe, will then be needed
to keep up law, justice, courts, gaols, prisons, &c. The early neglect
to receive religious instruction is but the first means of fostering and
feeding law ; but reverse matters, and circumstances then become as
they were first ordained for man’s rule and guide in life, viz,, religion
first, law second; mind, spirit, soul, first; matter, second. Let law,
however, once usurp, as I believe it is now fast doing, the real
functions of religion, and crime inevitably, then, must also increase.
It is the province of religion to keep mind, spirit, or soul pure and
upright; but too much law seems to me to make men forget rather
the first principle and value of religion, the first attribute of God,
and the only real security against all crime, &c. Lord Bacon says :
“ Every man should know enough law to know how to keep himselj out
of it." The functions of the clergyman are of late years made more
and more to follow, rather than precede, the Judge or judgment.
Were the Church or religion to stand firmly to its own inherent and first
professed duty of life, it would not stand to be so often dictated to, and
jostled out of, its sacred rights and functions by many of our increasing
innovations, authorities, civic or civil rules and mockeries. Keligion has
its foundation in the written and inspired Word ol God, and is ever-
lasting; but law is the often selfish and accursed fruits (I won’t say
devils or grasping evil spirits) of capricious, changeable, perishing man
—deifying and subsidising all manner of judges, courts, and justice, in
place of faithfully supporting our Churches and principles ol religion
—honouring man and his frail mortal works, dishonouring God and
his life-giving, immortal ones—worshipping civil laws, disobeying
moral ones—falling into sin, then calling on God, in place of living
first unto God, and banishing sin and law, and its labyrinth of falla-
cies. Before Nichols could actually commit the woful deed of murder,
and for which he has now suffered death, we see that he had first some
hard mental struggles to contend against—a strong internal commotion
of mind to overcome ere the fatal blow was executed. This commo-
tion or mental struggle was nothing else, no doubt, but the spirit of
evil striving to overcome the good or upright reasoning powers of the
mind. While reason and moral justice prevailed. Nichols, we read,
was wholly unnerved, and unable to carry into effect his odious
purpose of doing wrong ; but when his reasoning or moral strength at
last gave way, the nmatter, or worldly affairs, viz., the greed of gaining
the paltry sum of money he stood at the time in need of, fairly stepped
in, and usurped the pure moral functions of an honest mind (thou
shalt do no wrong) which is always to guard and protect the body
against the approach of sin and temptation, exactly as the sentinel


is placed to guard and protect the arsenal against foreign invasion,
and to give the alarm, when needed, at the proper time. The insatiable
passion for the temporary gain, or money, urged him on to the commis-
sion of the cold-blooded deed; but he was still totally unable to
execute his wicked design while sound truth was master of his mind
to deter him from doing wrong. He was sensible enough all along,
apparently, of the heinousness of the offence he was about to commit,
as was evidently shown by the repeated halts made in the fulfilment
of his resolutions; but instead of conquering the vile thought that
kept springing uppermost in his troubled mind, and sparing the life
of his victim, he clung rather, apparently, to the phantom thought of
the sordid gains which kept haunting him, in place of seeking strength
and refuge in prayer to God to help him to desist, and thus have
preserved reason on the throne of truth, uprightness, justice, and
mercy, without calling on God for help; reason, however, at last gave
way under the burning moments of murderous pilfer and greed,
showing, too truly, that matter in this instance was more powerful
than mind, and the temporal gains of more importance to him than
the eternal. When the horrid and fatal blow was struck, and the
death or eternal sound had just proceeded from the pistol to his
innocent victim, remorse, like the previous mental struggles, at
once struck or recoiled back into his burning yet sensible perverted
brain and reason, adding but another pang of sorrow to his former
burdensome miseries, and another nail to his rapidly approaching end
and coffin; for as soon as he had done the murderous act, he then
exclaimed, as the words in his confession inform us, “As soon as I
had done it, I felt as though my heart had leaped into my brain, and
said, ‘My God ! my God ! lam a murderer ! Let him go, I have
done enough.’ ” These are his very words, unraistakeably showing the
state in which his feelings were at the time he committed the grave
and dreadful offence against the life of an innocent fellow-creature
and All-wise Omniscient God. Another illustration of the awful doom
which sooner or later awaits those who strive to make evil overthrow
the good, or when the power of matter rules a never-changing mind,
soul, or eternity. Nichols’ own words are but another corroboration
of facts which have occurred in similar cases from the beginning of
the world, as plainly told us in Scripture records, the invariable fate
of matter where matter rules instead of mind, reason, or moral truth.
Eve ate of the forbidden fruit because it looked fair and good to the
sight. Before she did so she was naked, but apparently did not know
of it, for we read, that after the transgression of the law she only then
discovered her state of nakedness, and therefore tried to hide herself
from the presence of the Lord among the trees in the garden of Eden.
So did Nichols (and every other murderer or transgressor of the law)
try afterwards to conceal his crimes j but the same God, and the same
laws of justice and truth reign and rule supreme still as ruled when
our first parents offended against the first law of nature and God—
that mind or soul will ever continue to rule matter.


Both Adam and Nichols, <fec,, knew well at the time of their
respective offences, that they had done wrong, and were perfectly
sensible that they had broken and transgressed the moral law,
showing that religion without some thorough, sound, early, moral
training is insufficient, if not even useless, to protect mind against
the many alluring and powerful devices and captivating snares and
sinful temptations of this temporary, wicked world. To gain eternity
and happiness, the mind must ever reign supreme, and ponder over
eternal things. Who can show us any enduring or everlasting thing
on this earth ] No, nothing. Everything around us must perish.
The sea, the air, the earth, yea, even the very mind of man, must
yield up its treasures at that sound which no one ever disobeyed.
In concluding these remarks I shall not attempt to offer any
exposition of that equally abstruse part of our subject having reference
to the physical state of “ life beyond the grave.” Suffice it to say, it
is enough, surely, for our present purpose to know and confine our
thoughts simply to the moral or spiritual aspect of the question;
for if the spiritual life here below be kept as pure and undefiled as
possible, then no one, I think, need fear but what the physical state
(whatever it may be, or shall consist of) will afterwards be properly
taken care of, and amply provided for without bur making any unne-
cessary inquisition on that score. The appalling cold-blooded murders,
for which these men have recently and justly undergone the last
penalty of the law, are rendered still more heartrending and disgraceful
in the eyes of all professed Christians, (demoralising, as some may
choose to have termed it), from the very fact that our authorities, to
their shame, were besieged, prior to and on the day of execution, with
numerous applications from persons wishing actually to feast their
pitiful eyes on the last dying struggles of these unfortunate men.
Not even this, but crowds, too, seemingly rushed to and fro to get a
glimpse, if possible, of their ghastly, mutilated, distorted, dead bodies,
while they were, it is said, in the very act of being transported from
the scaffold to the grave ! In the face of “ private executions” and in
the midst of our boasted state of enlightenment and civilisation, our
spirit-teaching religion, morality, and Christianity, what kind of
refinement of taste or sense can scenes and conduct like this be 1 I
suppose it is too desecrating and debasing to be told. Nay, more,
how can we reconcile any value to the religious ceremony or habit of
administering the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper to criminals about
to expiate their lives on the scaffold for cold-blooded deeds of mui’der,
in brutality far outshining the Burke and Hare tragedies in days
gone by 1 Or who can believe in the utility or virtue of any such
kind of death-bed, dying repentances 1 Or is it not carrying religious
ceremonies or mockeries to extremes, provoking the Lord to still
greater wrath and anger at the crookedness and hardness of men’s
hearts 1 Oh, Religion ! abstain from playing havoc, or inflicting
murder also on poor souls, as it is surely enough to suffer in body, far
less to be subject also to torture in mind with, perhaps, false hopes


and faith when within a few paces of the grave, eternity, and an
Eternal Judge ! What the statute law has just condemned, religion,
by the administration of such rights and ceremonies, only appears to
me to be again contriving to ignore the justice of the sentence by
assuming to issue such passports to Heaven. Better far for religion
to away with all such kind of intercessions for mercy, and leave the
troubled spiritual mind of poor penitent criminals to the goodness,
forgiveness, and mercy of a kind Father, a just, true, and loving God
and Lord, slow to anger, and ever ready to forgive. The empty
curiosity was greater, no doubt, to look at the last brief, suffering,
moments of ebbing life and their physical frame in the first step to
decay, than stopping, probably, to deeply ponder over the sad life and
career of these unhappy men, whose eai’thly and sinful lives were soon
to terminate; or how they had tended or guarded their mind or soul,
so soon to be for ever separated from their tabernacle of clay, and to
appear again before A Imighty God; and soon also must those be who
were there to witness the agonising flight of soul from body, as none
need think, while looking and gazing on others, that they can escape
the sure and certain pangs of death, or transition of mind—soul—from
body to eternity, from earth to heaven. All should in time take
warning, and promptly look to the state of their own mind or soul,
and be prepared for the coming and unavoidable change. It is not
the body, but the mind, that God will soon demand of us to be
returned. It is not the body that will have to atone to God for sin
and transgressions; it is the spirit or mind, which is only now for a
short time entrusted to our care and keeping on this earth. The
heavens, the sun, moon, and stars—everything, in fact, on earth will
pass away, but God’s word endureth for ever and ever, world without
end. Mind must not only think, but it must also believe in the Lord
to be saved. Mind must not be deluded by false hopes, or by saying,
There, I have done this, that, and the other thing; but everything is
to be firmly fixed or offered up in sacrifice unto the Lord. We have
Christ’s death as a visible proof of this. “ The first Adam was made a
natural, living soul; the last Adam (Christ) was made a quickening
spirit. Howbeit, that was not first which is spiritual, but that which
is natural; and afterwards that which is spiritual. There is a natural
body, and there is a spiritual body.’’ Nothing can ever leave this
world but mind—the moral spirit or soul of man ; this alone is what is
to be kept pure and undefiled to win God’s mercy and eternal salva-
tion. The dross of the earth can help us nothing, as it is pronounced
but a gnawing, cankering worm to both mind, soul, body, and flesh.
The world and all that it contains is “ vanity and vexation of spirit.”
The aim and art of photography is to secure, if possible, correct
imprints, or faithful likenesses or images on material substances, but
in a moral, spiritual, or mental light, who can estimate the probable
or material injury the recent pitiful public disclosure of facts accom-
panying and surrounding the execution of these murderers, may have,
unintentionally and imprudently, inflicted on the general mind of


society, or the kind of impressions or inward photographic images
the witnessing of such contumelious sights may have indelibly
imprinted on the mind or feelings of the more susceptible individuals
who, no doubt, I am sure inadvertently, allowed the noble mind or
moral sense (either before or after execution) to pander to the petty
thought of gratifying such base, low, idle acts of curiosity and odious
scenes of death—sights the most repulsive to men with any pretension
to mental sensitiveness, or refinement of human or manly feeling?
How happy would not the thought be, could we but be convinced to
look as steadfastly into the real state of our own mind or approaching
death, as we so narrowly and closely desired to watch and scrutinise
the tortured, trembling limbs and muffled groans of these unfortunate
men yielding back their neglected souls to the keeping and demand
of God ! What a sickening thrill of deadly fear and trembling
would it not make each of us feel at the state of our own moral
condition, our own responsibility of life and death, and at the short-
comings and miserable imperfections of our own mind, and responsi-
bility of soul to God, so soon also to be demanded of all of us in
truth and justice, at the bar of an unerring and Almighty Judge !
The last stage of the whole horrid affair of the Parramatta River
murders furnishes another palpable illustration of the fact, that accom-
plishments, or mere refinement of taste, or intellectual attainments,
or educational capacity, unless it is first duly incorporated with some
sound principles of religion and early moral training, is no satisfactory
or effectual guarantee against the perpetration of crime, or even appa-
rently of thwarting the minds of many from visiting and beholding
the last debasing sights or end of such men who had perpetrated
such atrocious, diabolical deeds of murder. There is a training of
the will and mind of man assuredly indispensable and necessary to
the support of moral life, and a healthy rectitude of every action in
life, as a regular discipline of the physical body is essential to the
maintenance of a just equilibrium of health; but what great moral
lesson is there to be gained, «r acquired, by feasting or gloating the
eyes on ignominious executions, or even (before or after execution)
frantically thirsting to witness either the living or dead bodies of
lawfully and righteously condemned murderers ? The monster, the
tempter, the leavener of all evil, must, indeed, be much more strongly
developed in some than others, to account for this strange idiosyn-
cracy of temperament. Is crime not of the first giving way of the
mind by imbibing sinful thoughts, or evil sights ? for, assuredly such
di'eadful scenes must not unfrequently exercise the very opposite
effect to that of pleasantness on the spectators’ feelings (if they have
any) if they do not have a tendency afterwards of subjecting them
to painful, cold, dead, thrilling sensations, rushing to and fro through
their thinking, fevered minds, when reflecting on sights witnessed on
these sad occasions ? Mind, as in photography, too truly receives
similar kinds of imprints or repulsive images imbibed at many of these
unnatural scenes, which are afterwards not so easily again obliterated,


especially in sensitive or susceptible subjects, as some fatuous people
so lightly imagine, or readily suppose.
The probability is, were we more conversant and familiar with
the lives and career of many murderers, their state of conception,
procreation, or entrance into this world, we might then find, that
much of the crime which now unfortunately stains the history of our
fair land is, in some degree or other, not unlikely, in the first instance,
attributable to the want of some proper care over the moral feelings
or mind in being corrupted while witnessing some such sad, repulsive
sights, or, perhaps, some minor or similar unrevealed or concealed tra-
gedies, leaving the mind, perhaps, impregnated with haunting im-
prints, which it is again unable either to destroy or eradicate —Cain’s
blood and brand, in short, descending to posterity. Once give way
to one evil thought or deed, however trivial, and the regular normal
action of moral feeling, or mind, may ever afterwards jar and tor-
ment one through life, and it is impossible to tell how the simplest
transgression may, under favourable circumstances, afterwards end,
or what other evils it may again lead and bring us to.
It is not enough to educate the mind with accomplishments, or the
mere art of teaching every person to read and write, that will diminish
crime ; but it’s upon some sounder and better system of early moral
training, or religious instruction, whereby man can ever become
perfectly fortified and shielded from any of the transgressions of God’s
laws. It is to be able to resist the tempter, or spirit of doing evil, at
the proper time, and in every act of life, however trivial, ( i . e., by
always endeavouring to keep the faculties of mind in as true and
healthy an order and condition as possible), that mind shall ever
rule matter, that is, that moral sense and mind should ever and inva-
riably be first appealed to before the performance of any act of life,
be it great or small, is rashiy undertaken. When the moral sense of
the mind accedes to the act to be done, then the act must be right;
but when acts are done without first obtaining the moral sanction of
its justness and justice, then the act must indeed be wrong ; for mind
alone rules in truth and justice, and not the changeable laws of
matter. It is not, simply, enough to know where people go who tell
lies, but it should rather be, “ where do people go who speak the
truth 1” Lying is a secondary law, but truth is for ever primary—
lying is matter, but truth is mind—lying is worldly, but truth is
holy and heavenly—lying is of the devil, or perverted, wrong, evil
spirit, but truth is of God, justice, mercy, and righteousness —lying
is perishable, but truth is everlasting, etexmal, and abideth for ever.
True religion, then, should only be made to teach us the simple love
of God, and not intimidation, or the fear of the devil. Love to God
is the first great law of Nature, the fear of the devil is but the second.
It’s a wrong religion entirely to first preach the fear of the devil,
and then teach the love of God as second. Man, and man’s duty,
should be to preach according to moral, and not the statute law.
The moral law is of God, but the statute, or changeable, perishable


law, is of man, God’s always first; evil, or devil’s, second. The first
law is of God, the second law is of man. God, positive —the devil,
sin, temptation, negative.
Heaven positive, the world negative. This is the order of law
we are by Scripture commanded to obey. What does civil or statute
law, however, profess or endeavour to teach, but to commit sin and
crime first; then seek God’s love and forgiveness, through religion,
second. Stealing sheep, horses, cattle, or bullocks, is made one of its
primary maxims or laws, but the sin itself, of stealing, is merely
accounted in a secondary place, or, indeed, considered as a very infe-
rior matter of importance. .Rigidly enough punished, of course, for
the value of the sheep, the horse, or bullock, depriving the rich man
of his property ; but, oh no, it would be too preposterous for criminal
law ever to think of inflicting punishment for the bare sin alone of
stealing. Men are sent to gaol, not for the naked sin of stealing,
but rather for depriving or robbing the rich of their riches, and
enabling them, from carrying on an unmolested wholesale practice of
pilfery and barefaced robbery, from the covering which covers our
back and nakedness to the food we consume, and which is often
scarcely sufficient to satisfy the natural cravings of hunger, or to
keep death from the door of many a truly honest, half-starved, strug-
ling, pious family, who (many of them) would rather die of want and
sheer starvation, than forsake their true principles, or neglect their
moral duties to their God. Making the petty worth of the article
stolen govern the sin, in place of sin governing the article. Making
moral law a farce while civil and criminal laws are adored as an
indispensable earthly deity. Making man, in fact, undergo, as it
were, a double, in place of a single punishment, for the one same
offence, viz., a statute punishment on earth, and a moral punishment
in Heaven. Nay, I’ll go a step further, and, without fear of con-
tradiction, assert that it’s often not the crime, but rather the man
that’s punished. Men are, I am fully convinced, often hunted and
fairly run down to crime, to an undeserved punishment, and to an
untimely end. I abhor crime as deeply as any man, but one cannot
always readily shut the ears of truth to what we every now and again
occasionally hear, may be from unbiassed, prejudiced, or truthful
lips, but it may yet be a very difficult matter, indeed, for many
a long year to come, to for ever silence the tongue in regard to
the career, life, and end of Ben Hall (his body riddled with bullets),
and his notorious clique of bushrangers. Crime must, like every-
thing else, I presume, have its regular periodic cycles of good and
evil, and but for bad men, where, probably, would our good ones
come from, and what would be done with our clever, able, learned,
infallible Judges, our forensic pleaders, and hair-point splitters of law;
our M.Ps., or law framers ; the grandiloquent eloquence of our J.Ps.;
our testimonial-receiving constables, gaolers, sheriffs, coroners, turn-
keys, hangmen, police magisarates ; our C.P.S.’s ; our Attorney and
Solicitor Generals, et hoc genus omne, and our messengers ; our faith-


ful jurymen, curiosity hunters, and news mongers ; our gossipers and
court idlers ; our prisons, prisoner-servants, lawyers, and clerks ; to
cut it short, I may, briefly, say the endless ladder or chain of
guardians which now stand between us and the two H’s., and all
living to feast and fatten on crime, the sins, miseries, and wickedness
of mankind ? Am Imy brother's keeper? Yea, are these notour
brothers’ keepers ? Miserable platitudes, tyrannical law, cruel
reform! That God should have created man, with an immortal soul,
to need any such keepers, and to be tended, guarded, and watched,
like a parcel of wild beasts! Divorce Bills, indeed! and their facetious
and argumentative cart-loads of clap-trap and dross, while we stand
in more need of a “ Royal Divorce Bill” to for ever separate the
moral from the statute law, or God’s laws from man’s.
In place of true religion, the accomplished scholar, the divine, or
the educated, refined, and learned, teaching men, by their example, how
to worship God, and to love and adore His laws, it is more and more
every day becoming rather a too truly painful and palpable or patent
fact, that “ man, or hero worship,” is more frequently the only guid-
ing principle of our lives than God-worshippers, practical followers of
religion, or believers in eternity. Nichols in vain tried to conceal
his crime by tying a stone to the dead body, and then sinking it into
the river ; but matter and sin were unable to conceal the truth, for
we read that the body, some little time afterwards, again rose, and
floated on the surface, as if to show, however cunningly concealed,
“ that murder will out in time” and so it will be with those who tie
false religion to their neck, in hopes to conceal their errors. God
assuredly, in due time, will make all falsehood and hypocrisy to float
on the surface, and come to judgment, as surely and certainly as the
murdered body of Bridger was made to float on the river. Hypocrisy
and concealment is but a period of time in the one case as in all
others. Like the history of the preservation of the life of Noah and
bis family, during the period of the flood, this “ earth,” by an
all-wise, merciful Providence, is no doubt made and become like unto
the one only resting domicile, or “ ark,” whereby man now floats up
and down on the mighty abyss of many turbulent scenes, quicksands,
and currents of life, until our perturbations and probationship here
below shall have abated, been completed, or else called upon to settle
on Mount Happiness, in Heaven above. Man must be his own ship
or life builder, pilot, captain, and preserver; and with Christ as his
compass, and the Bible as his helm, none need have any fear or diffi-
culty in safely steering onwards through the many fierce billows of
life’s rugged ocean, till sure, safe, and certain anchorage is reached in
yonder port, or Heaven, which stands looming off conspicuously in the
distance, bidding welcome to thousands and tens of thousands to come
and enter therein, and finally rest in peace, safety, and sure eternal
happiness.
A kind and blessed law, thankful criminals and happy prisoners !
When convicts have once undergone all the pains and penalties which


man or his pliable sentences of law can inflict, surely it’s not intended,
by this legal interpretation of Scripture doctrine, that criminals are
again to suffer for the same offence in another world ? If it be so, then
man becomes an object and sufferer of a double-edged cruelty, torment,
and punishment, making criminal and civil law worse than a farce or
a mockery ? lam not now wishing, by any means, to make man
both Judge and God; but I desire rather to, if possible, establish the
irresistible fact, that all punishments should be based after some more
rational and graduated moral scale of justice, than on the mere
worth and value of a few paltry, earthly goods and chattels. Men
nowadays are sentenced to five, ten, and fifteen years’ imprisonment
in gaol, or to hard labour on the roads or other public works,
for stealing a sheep, horse, or bullock, of the value of from a few
shillings to a few pounds ; but the heinous and villainous sin of per-
jury (the heart of England, of late, has been kept almost in a per-
fect ferment, or state of revolution, and shocked to its core with the
trial and history of such an extraordinary case) is often actually
winked at, and is even frequently allowed to escape with a petty
sentence of a few months in gaol ! Forgery, fraudulent insolvency,
gambling, horse-racing, speculations, Sabbath. desecration, and many
other matters, are treated as affairs of very minor or indifferent im-
portance. The punishment, apparently, is not for offending against
any rule of moral law, but meted out simply, seemingly, only to suit
particular conveniences, circumstances, or according to the extent the
offender has either transgressed against worldly things, the goods and
chattels of the rich, and value of riches. In giving judgment, it is
quite as easy to open the jaws to say ten years as it is to say ten
months ; but wherein rests there a comparison (and unequal compari-
sons) between the crime committed and the punishment inflicted, or
the punishment and the crime 1 Crime has no reliable or comparable
distinction between its oft-unequal sentences, and never will, pro-
bably, be so, while we are content to remain under its fluctuating,
oscillating, changeable, fickle-minded influence, in place of being
guided by some properly regulated scale of punishment, based on the
moral law. Two men, for the very same identical offence, frequently
receive very dissimilar, opposite sentences; and the command of
interest, influence, or money, is a matter not at times to be too lightly
despised in many of these cases. Man can, with impunity almost,
transgress and ignore any or all of his altar vows, baptism, sacrament,
marriage, &c., but once let him commit even the veriest petty breach
of statute law, and you may be sure the culprit is very soon lodged
in the felon’s cell, and under lock and key. Not that I have any
ambitious desire to give either assent, poignancy, or colouring
to these remarks, or seek to make people moral by Act of Parliament,
but rather that Acts of Parliament, I do think, should be more gene-
rally, consistently, and closely framed, to suit many or these cases,
after religion and the moral law, and be the means, therefore, of
entirely abolishing much of its present ambiguity, and anomalous


inconsistencies. I don’t argue that religion is even altogether in every-
thing immaculate, or infallible, for much of the religion, or the reli-
gious dogmas of the present day teach us to worship the devil rather
than how to worship God. Why should religion teach man to fear
God or devil ? We should be taught rather to love God and reve-
rence His laws; and those who devoutly do so, need have little fear of
death or devils. Those who really and faithfully love God love death,,
and those who love death only long for the coming of eternity, and
eternal happiness ; but those who fear the devil, fear death, and those
who fear death, only fear eternity, and the state of their own per-
verted, neglected, or sinful mind or spirit coming to judgment. When
God is with us, who can be against us 1 By obeying His laws, God is
ever with us ; but by trusting to matter, we are with the devil, and
under the dominion of an evil spirit. God’s omnipotence and omni-
science exist everywhere ; the devil is to be found nowhere except in
incarnate dispositions, disobedience, and transgressions. As the par-
son once said to the sailor, viz., “ that the devil was chained up for a
thousand years.” “If this be so,” said the sailor, “ then might I ask
how long his chain might be?” Parson: “It reaches all over the
earth.” “ Then,” replied the sailor, “if that be the case, they might
as well let him loose altogether !” And so it is with the religion of
a great many professing Christians at the present day; they seek to
chain up their love and obedience to God, and allow fear and the devil to
roam at large; in place of which they should chain up their fears and
devils, and let love and reverence to God have its freedom and liberty.
By all means, chain up all evil ways, and then there is no fear of sin,
temptations, crimes, or devils ever trying to haunt the mind of man,
or to make it fall away from the lofty citadel of truth, love to God, or
eternal happiness. There are, no doubt, some few whose lives or foot-
prints are still to be visibly traced far back on the receding sands of time,
but, generally speaking, the neglect of the human mind, I fear, makes
the mass or great multitude to hie onwards in a state of ignorance and
darkness of the real nature and object of life on this earth, or the pro-
found oblivion which is so soon to engulph and encompass all deeds,
thoughts, worldly actions, and lives. If mind remains in a state of
oblivion here, while in our keeping, how can a soul be expected to live-
or shine hereafter ? or the kind of resurrection that is to be expected
of either mind, soul, or body?
Talk of the lamentable increase of crime, insanity, and the dis-
closures of so many sad and dreadful cases of suicide and murder *
but is it anything to be wondered at, while men absolutely allow mind
to be subject to so much contemptible neglect, and systems ofill-regu-
lated conduct in the ever-increasing and endless, fantastic, or infatu-
ated puerile pursuits, avenues, and alluring whiles of a greedy, gay,
contentious, and jealous world. The Scripture fact is as trite as it is
tnie, “ men have eyes, and yet see not; ears, but yet cannot hear;
hearts, but cannot feel; and minds, but cannot think.” Let us not
stop to lament over the vast multiplicity of so many grave and serious


offences, or crimes; but rather let us rationally and soberly think of
the awful amount, or wholesale destruction, of human mind—mind or
soul.
Mind claims no special latitude or longitude; its abode is uni-
versal, with God and the Bible as its first meridian. Light is inimical
to guilt, for guilt generally makes night and darkness its confidant,
guide, and natural shelter; but innocence and truth love to bask in
the vitalising influence of light, and the glittering sunbeams of noon-
day. Where truth is, there God is ; and where God is, light is; but
-where guilt dwells, there dwells also darkness, fear, the devil, destruc-
tion, and death.
“ Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed."
No one can readily fault the justice or righteousness of this command-
ment. The question, or rather the doubt is, “ how it should be done ?”
Whether death by burning, poison, starvation, shooting through the
heart, drowning, beheading on the block, stoning to death, the rack,
guillotine, nailing to a cross, hanging, garroting, blowing the living
bodies of criminals from the mouths of cannon, or the Russian practice
of confining the living bodies of criminals in a narrow iron case, and
then, at a given signal, allowing a heavy weight, of from five to ten
tons, to drop suddenly, so as to crush the bodies to instantaneous
death, and many other ways. The object of all such systems of
punishment is not simply with the view of putting criminals to death,
but it is those who can devise, seemingly, the most barbarous instru-
ment of inflicting torture as well as death. It is enough, surely, for man
to simply deprive the criminal of his life, without seeking to torture,
and leave the rest of the punishment in the hands of the Almighty.
It is no reason, because a murderer has committed a brutal murder,
that his death also must be a brutal one. In acknowledging this
fact, it only makes man try to usurp the power of a Supreme func-
tion, for it is in God’s hands alone the period of punishment, judg-
ment, and mercy should entirely rest, and besides, the torturing of
criminals won’t bring back life again to innocent blood, and it don’t
even seem to diminish the commission of such grave offences.
But what is law to-day is crime, seemingly, to-morrow ; and what
is crime to-mori’ow may be law again the day following. What right-
minded, rational man can either look or think, and not wonder in
amazement at the opposite decisions lately given in two almost
identical cases, viz., the Hastings election of 1869, with the Orange
election of 1872 1 Right in the one instance, and wrong in the other.
Can men believe their own eyes? The end of the world, or the
millenium, has already in many people’s ideas, I sadly fear, begun
and ended long ago ! How preposterous it is for man to presume to
interpret God’s laws, since he actually fails, or at least cannot
seemingly rightly understand or interpret the real nature or true
meaning of his own ignis fatuis constructions or law-making. Man,
God; God, man ! Is it not enough to make thoughtful minds stagger
at the idea of such glaring, anomalous inconsistencies, which is almost


enough to make men curse the day of their birth into such a shifting,
uncertain, faithless, and miserable world 1 Sixteen years’ experience
of bush life in this colony has taught me that Courts of Petty Session,
surveillanceship, and semi-military police systems have driven, I
believe, many a hundred truly honest and upright men to habits of
drunkenness, crime, ruin, destruction, if not premature deaths. It is
not drunkenness in the strict sense which necessitates the existence of
police courts, but it is man’s tortuosities of law which, in my fervent
belief, is too often the really exciting cause of many cases of drunken-
ness and other crimes. Two, three, and four hundred thousand
pounds expended annually to keep up this system and the support of
prisons, and a total population in the colony of only half a million
souls, the fourth being only mere children ! Is it possible! Yes, and
the beginning and birth of nearly all little inland towns in the colony
is a police magistrate, court-house, two or three police, a lock-up,
and police barracks. This is (in colonial phraseology) what is styled
bringing law to every man’s door—the pioneers of civilisation; in
other words, I presume, teaching people how to quarrel, fight, go to
law, destruction, gaol, gallows, and death. Thousands of immigrants
from the old country, [ am sure, were never in a court-house until
they landed in this colony, and now, were the truth known, they are
more often and regular there in kissing the Bible and taking oaths
than they are, perhaps, to be found in churches chanting hymns or
offering up prayers to God. We don’t want bush homes in Sydney;
we want bush churches in the hush. Court-houses are often found
choked to overflowing with idlers and curiosity seekers, while our few
places of worship on Sundays are almost always deserted ! Regular
enough many are in their attendance at police courts, frequenting
wayside inns on Sundays to drink, horse-racing, gambling, kangaroo
hunting, fishing, shooting, spinning or rehearsing police yarns, cattle
and horse stealing cases, and all manner of Sabbath desecration, and
you have a plain illustration of the maxim of colonial or bush life. I,
indeed, pity the life and drudgeries of many of our hard-working,
inland bush clergymen, who have, I am sure, oft to kick very hard
against the pricks.
Sin, crime, misery, war, murders, <fec., are not conceived or
begotten in the mind of man in an hour, a day, or a week, a month or
a year ; but they are as regularly and unerringly begotten by the
womb of time, as the most healthy, natural, vital action, or any other
universal law of creation. It is upon this hypothesis alone whereby,
I believe, we are enabled to make an approximate or feasible-like
attempt of explanation to account for the regular recurrence or period
of cycles of some of our most dreadful murders, and wholesale butcher-
ing, bloody wars, and horrible battle-field sights—sights worse, in
fact, than the limited, though no less odious and disgusting, depraved
scenes pertaining to executions on the scaffold, and where the body
has been decapitated, or else the head frequently wrenched from the
body by sheer brutal force, or its own weight, as if the thoughts of


.such barbarous sights or systems of coercion would ever have the
effect of retarding either the perpetration of crime, or bringing men’s
minds, steeped in diabolical deeds of bloodshed and depravity, back
—back to the paths of virtue, faith, happiness, truth, love, eternity,
or God—Deut. xxx., 15 and 17.
Molong, New South Wales,
26th June, 1872,
Gibbs, Shallard, and Co., Printers, 108 Pitt Street, Sydney.


