

V / J
THJI
RtsomciM ii in Mai TM
WHICH WAS RECENTLY
SLAIN & BURIED
To His Own Satisfaction,
by THE
REY,'GEORGE MicINNES, m.a,, b.d.,
The Right Rev. the Moderator of the General
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church
of New South Wales.
Being a Defence of the Orthodox Doctrine
of the Plenary Inspiration of the
Holy Scriptures.
Yarley Brothers, Printers, Melbourne.




INSPIRATION.
Prof. ARCHIBALD A. HODGE, D.D., LL.D,
Prof. BENJAMIN B. WARFIELD, D.D.
REPRINTED, BY PERMISSION, FROM THE “ PRESBY
TERIAN REVIEW” OF APRIL, 1881.
PHILADELPHIA:
PEESBYTEEIAN BOARD OF PUBLICATION
AND SABBATH-SCHOOL WORK,
No. 1334 CHESTNUT STREET.
No. 206. J




INSPIRATION.
The word “Inspiration,” as applied to the
Holy Scriptures, has gradually acquired a specific
technical meaning independent of its etymology.
At first this word, in the sense of “ God-breathed,”
was used to express the entire agency of God in
producing that divine element which distinguishes
Scripture from all other writings. It was used in
a sense comprehensive of supernatural revelation,
while the immense range of providential and
gracious divine activities concerning the gene-
sis of the word of God in human language was
practically overlooked. But Christian scholars
have come to see that this divine element, which
penetrates and glorifies Scripture at every point,
has entered and become incorporated with it in
very various ways, natural, supernatural and
gracious, though long courses of providential
leading, as well as by direct suggestion —through
the spontaneous action of the souls of the sacred
writers, as well as by controlling influence from
without. It is important that distinguishable
1» 5


ideas should be connoted by distinct terms, and
that the terms themselves should be fixed in a
definite sense. Thus we have come to distinguish
sharply between Revelation, which is the fre-
quent, and Inspiration, which is the constant,
attribute of all the thoughts and statements of
Scripture, and between the problem of the gen-
esis of Scripture on the one hand, which includes
historic processes and the concurrence of natural
and supernatural forces, and must account for all
the phenomena of Scripture, and the mere fact
of inspiration on the other hand, or the superin-
tendence by God of the writers in the entire pro-
cess of their writing, which accounts for nothing
whatever but the absolute infallibility of the
record in which the revelation, once generated,
appears in the original autograph. It will be
observed that we intentionally avoid applying
to this inspiration the predicate “ influence.” It
summoned, on occasion, a great variety of in-
fluences, but its essence was superintendence.
This superintendence attended the entire process
of the genesis of Scripture, and particularly the
process of the final composition of the record.
It interfered with no spontaneous natural agen-
cies, which were, in themselves, producing re-
sults conformable to the mind of the Holy Spirit.
On occasion it summoned all needed divine in-


fluenoes and suggestions, and it sealed the entire
record and all its elements, however generated,
with the imprimatur of God, sending it to ua
as his Word.
The importance of limiting the word “ inspira-
tion ” to a definite and never-varying sense, and
one which is shown, by the facts of the case, to
be applicable equally to every part of Scripture,
is self-evident, and is emphasized by the embar-
rassment which is continually recurring in the
discussions of this subject, arising sometimes from
the wide, and sometimes from the various, senses
in which this term is used by different parties.
The history of theology is full of parallel in-
stances, in which terms of the highest import
have come to be accepted in a more fixed and
narrow sense than they bore at first either in
scriptural or early ecclesiastical usage, and with
only a remote relation to their etymology; as, for
instance, Regeneration, Sacrament, etc.
PRESUPPOSITIONS.
From this definition of the term it is evident
that instead of being, in the order of thought,
the first religious truth which we embrace, upon
which, subsequently, the entire fabric of true
religion rests, it is the last and crowning attri-
bute of those sacred books from which we derive


our religious knowledge. Very many religious
and historical truths must be established before
we come to the question of inspiration; as, for
instance, the being and moral government of
God, the fallen condition of man, the fact of a
redemptive scheme, the general historical truth
of the Scriptures, and the validity and authority
of the revelation of God’s will, which they con-
tain — i. e. the general truth of Christianity and
its doctrines. Hence it follows that, while the
inspiration of the Scriptures is true, and, being
true, is a principle fundamental to the adequate
interpretation of Scripture, it nevertheless is not
in the first instance a principle fundamental to
the truth of the Christian religion. In dealing
with skeptics it is not proper to begin with the
evidence which immediately establishes inspira-
tion, but we should first establish theism, then
the historical credibility of the Scriptures, and
then the divine origin of Christianity. Nor
should we ever allow it to be believed that the
truth of Christianity depends upon any doctrine
of inspiration whatever. Revelation came in
large part before the record* of it, and the Chris-
tian Church before the New-Testameut Scriptures,
inspiration can have no meaning if Christianity
is not true, but Christianity would be true and
divine —and, being so, would stand —even if God


had not been pleased to give us, in addition to
his revelation of saving truth, an infallible record
of that revelation absolutely errorless by means
of inspiration.
In the second place, it is also evident that our
conception of revelation and its methods must be
conditioned upon our general views of God’s re-
lation to the world, and his methods of influen-
cing the souls of men. The only really dangerous
opposition to the Church doctrine ot inspiration
comes either directly or indirectly, but always
ultimately, from some false view of God’s rela-
tion to the world, of his methods of working, and
of the possibility of a supernatural agency pene-
trating and altering the course of a natural pro-
cess. But the whole genius of Christianity, all
of its essential and most characteristic doctrines,
presuppose the immanence of God in all his
creatures, and his concurrence with them in all
of their spontaneous activities. In him, as an
active, intelligent Spirit, we all live and move
and have our being. He governs all his crea-
tures and all their actions, working in men even
to will and spontaneously to do his good pleasure.
The currents, thus, of the divine activities do not
only flow around us, conditioning or controlling
our action from without, but they none the less
flow within the inner current of our personal


lives, confluent with our spontaneous self-move-
ments, and contributing to the effects whatever
properties God may see fit that they shall have.
There is also a real logical and ideal, if not a
physical, continuity between all the various prov-
inces and methods of God’s working: providence
and grace, the natural and the supernatural, all
constitute one system in the execution of one
plan. All these agents and all these methods
are so perfectly adjusted in the plan of God that
not one interferes with any other, and all are so
adjusted and controlled as that each works per-
fectly, according to the law of its own nature,
and yet all together infallibly bring about the
result God designs. In this case that design is a
record without error of the facts and doctrines
he had commissioned his servants to teach.
Of the manner in which God may inform
and direct a free intelligence without violating
its laws we have a familiar analogy in Nature
in the relation of instinct to free intelligence.
Intelligence is personal, and involves self-con-
sciousness and liberty. Instinct is impersonal,
unconscious, and not free. Both exist alike in
man, with whom intelligence predominates, and
in the higher animals, with whom instinct pre-
dominates. In every case the instinct of the
creature is the intelligence of the Creator work-


ing through the creature’s spontaneity, informing
and directing, yet never violating any of the
laws of his free intelligence. And in Nature we
can trace this all the way from the instinct of
the bee, which works mechanically, to the magic
play of the aesthetic instincts, which largely con-
stitute the genius of a great artist. We are not
absurdly attempting to draw a parallel between
natural instinct and supernatural inspiration.
But the illustration is good simply to show that
as a matter of fact God does prompt from with-
in the spontaneous activities of his intelligent
creatures, leading them by unerring means to
ends imperfectly discerned by themselves; and
that this activity of God, as in instinct or other-
wise, does not in any wise reveal itself, either in
consciousness or in the character of the action
to which it prompts, as interfering with the per-
sonal attributes or the free rational activities of
the creature.
THE GENESIS OF SCRIPTURE.
We allude here to this wide and as yet im-
perfectly explored subject only for the purpose
of distinctly setting apart the various problems
it presents, and isolating the specific point of in-
spiration, with which we, as well as the Church
in general, are more particularly interested. All


parties of believers admit that this genesis of
Holy Scripture was the result of the co-operation,
in various ways, of the agency of men and the
agency of God.
The human agency, both in the histories out
of which the Scriptures sprang, and in their im-
mediate composition and inscription, is every-
where apparent, and gives substance and form
to the entire collection of writings. It is not
merely in the matter of verbal expression or lit-
erary composition that the personal idiosyncra-
sies of each author are freely manifested by the
untrammeled play of all his faculties, but the
very substance of what they write is evidently
for the most part the product of their own men-
tal and spiritual activities. This is true except
in that comparatively small element of the whole
body of sacred writing in which the human au-
thors simply report the word of God objectively
communicated, or, as in some of the prophecies,
they wrote by divine dictation. As the general
characteristic of all their work, each writer was
put to that special part of the general work for
which he alone was adapted by his original en-
dowments, education, special information and
providential position. Each drew from the stores
of his own original information, from the contri-
butions of other men and from all other natural


sources. Each sought knowledge, like all other
authors, from the use of his own natural facul-
ties of thought and feeling, of intuition and of
logical inference, of memory and imagination,
and of religious experience. Each gave evi-
dence of his own special limitations of knowl-
edge and mental power, and of his personal
defects as well as of his powers. Each wrote
upon a definite occasion, under special historic-
ally grouped circumstances, from his own stand-
point in the progressively unfolded plan of
redemption, and each made his own special
contribution to the fabric of God’s word.
The divine agency, although originating in a
different source, yet emerges into the effect very
much through the same channels. The Script-
ures have been generated, as the plan of redemp-
tion has been evolved, through an historic process.
From the beginning God has dealt with man in
the concrete, by self-manifestations and transac-
tions. The revelation proceeds from facts to ideas,
and has been gradually unfolded as the prepa-
ration for the execution of the work of redemp-
tion has advanced through its successive stages.
The general providence unfolding this plan has
always been divine, yet has also been largely
natural in its method, while specially directed to
its ends, and at the same time surcharged along


portions of its line, especially at the beginning
and at great crises, with the supernatural, as a
cloud is surcharged with electricity. There were
divine voices, appearances, covenants, supernat-
ural communications and interventions —the in-
troduction of new institutions, and their growth
under special providential conditions. The
prophet of God was sent with special revela-
tions and authority at particular junctures to
gather and interpret the lessons of the past, and
to add to them lessons springing out of the prov-
idential conditions of the present. The Script
ures were generated through sixteen centuries cf
this divinely-regulated concurrence of God and
man, of the natural and the supernatural, of rea-
son and revelation, of providence and grace.
They are an organism consisting of many parts,
each adjusted to all the rest, as the “ many mem-
bers ” to the “ one body.” Each sacred writer was
by God specially formed, endowed, educated,
providentially conditioned, and then supplied
with knowledge naturally, supernaturally or spir-
itually conveyed, so that he, and he alone, could,
and freely would, produce his allotted part.
Thus God predetermined all the matter and form
of the several books largely .by the formation
and training of the several authors, as an organ-
ist determines the character of his music as much


when he builds his organ and when he tunes hi?
pipes as when he plays his keys. Each writei
also is put providentially at the very point of
view in the general progress of revelation to
which his part assigns him. He inherits all the
contributions of the past. He is brought into
place and set to work at definite providential
junctures, the occasion affording him object and
motive, giving form to the writing God appoint?
him to execute.
The Bible, moreover, being a work of the
Spirit for spiritual ends, each writer was pre-
pared precisely for his part in the work by the
personal dealings of the Holy Spirit with hi?
soul. Spiritual illumination is very different
from either revelation or inspiration, and yet it
had, under the providence of God, a large share
in the genesis of Scripture, contributing to it a
portion of that divine element which makes it
the word of God. The Psalms are divinely-
inspired records of the religious experience of
their writers, and are by God himself author-
itatively set forth as typical and exemplary foi
all men for ever. Paul and John and Petei
largely drew upon the resources and followed the
lines of their own personal religious experience
in the intuitional or the logical development of
their doctrine; and their experience had, of course,


been previously divinely determined for that very
purpose. And in determining their religious
experience God so far forth determined their
contributions to Scripture. And he furnished
each of the sacred writers, in addition to that
which came to him through natural channels,
all the knowledge needed for his appointed task,
either by vision, suggestion, dictation or eleva-
tion of faculty, or otherwise, according to his
will. The natural knowledge came from all
sources, as traditions, documents, testimonies,
personal observations and recollections —by
means also of intuitions, logical processes of
thought, feeling, experience, etc.; and yet all
were alike under the general direction of God’s
providence. The supernatural knowledge be-
came confluent with the natural in a manner
which violated no law of reason or of freedom.
And throughout the whole of his work the Holy
Spirit was present, causing his energies to flow
into the spontaneous exercises of the writer’s fac-
ulties, elevating and directing where need be,
and everywhere securing the errorless expres-
sion in language of the thought designed by
God. This last element is what we call “ Inspi-
ration.”
In all this process, except in a small element
of prophecy, it is evident that as the sacred writers


were free and active in their thinking and in the
expression of their thoughts, so they were con-
scious of what they were doing, of what their
words meant, and of the design of their utter-
ance. Yet, even then, it is no less evident that
they all, like other free instruments of Prov-
idence, “ builded better than they knew.” The
meanings of their words, the bearing of the prin-
ciples they taught, of the facts they narrated,
and the relation of their own part to the great
organism of divine revelation, while luminous to
their own consciousness, yet reached out into in-
finitely wider horizons than those penetrated by
any thought of theirs.
STATEMENT OF THE DOCTRINE.
During the entire history of Christian theol-
ogy the word “Inspiration” has been used to
express either some or all of the activities of
God co-operating with its human authors in the
genesis of Holy Scripture. We prefer to use it
in the single sense of God’s continued work of
superintendence, by which, his providential, gra-
cious and supernatural contributions having been
presupposed, he presided over the sacred writers
in their entire work of writing, with the design
and effect of rendering that writing an errorless
record of the matters he designed them to com-


municate, and hence constituting the entire vol-
ume in all its parts the word of God to us.
While we have restricted the word “ Inspira-
tion ” to a narrower sphere than that in which
it has been used by many in the past, neverthe-
less we are certain that the above statement of
ft
the divine origin and infallibility of Scripture
accurately expresses the faith of the Christian
Church from the first. Still, several points re-
main to be more particularly considered,‘con-
cerning which some difference of opinion at pres-
ent prevails.
First. Is it proper to call this inspiration “ plen-
ary ” ? This word, which has often been made
the occasion of strife, is in itself indefinite, and
its use contributes nothing either to the precision
or the emphasis of the definition. The word
means simply “ full,” “ complete,” perfectly ade-
quate for the attainment of the end designed,
whatever that might have been. There ought
not to be on any side any hesitancy to affirm this
of the books of the Bible.
Second. Can this inspiration be properly said
to be “ verbal ” ? The objection to the applica-
tion of this predicate to inspiration is urged
upon three distinct grounds:
(l.) We believe that the great majority of
those who object to the affirmation that iuspira-


turn is verbal are impelled thereto by a feeling,
more or less definite, that the phrase implies that
inspiration is, in its essence, a process of verbal
dictation, or that, at least in some way, the reve-
lation of the thought or the inspiration of the
writer was by means of the control which God
exercised over his words. And there is the more
excuse for this misapprehension because of the
extremely mechanical conceptions of inspiration
maintained by many former advocates of the use
of this term “ verbal.” This view, however, we
repudiate as earnestly as any of th»se who object
to the language in question. At the present time
the advocates of the strictest doctrine of inspira-
tion in insisting that it is verbal do not mean
that in any way the thoughts were inspired by
means of the words, but simply that the divine
superintendence, which we ( call inspiration, ex-
tended to the verbal expression of the thoughts
of the sacred writers, as well as to the thoughts
themselves, and that hence the Bible, considered
as a record, an utterance in words of a divine
revelation, is the word of God to us. Hence, in
all the affirmations of Scripture of every kind
there is no more error in the words of the orig-
inal autographs than in the thoughts they were
chosen to express. The thoughts and words are
both alike human, and therefore subject to hu-


man limitations, but the divine superintendence
and guarantee extend to the one as much as the
other.
(2.) There are others who, while insisting as
strongly as any upon the presence of the divine
element in Scripture, developed through special
providences and gracious dealings, religious ex-
periences and mental processes, in the very man-
ner we have just set forth under the head of the
“Genesis of Scripture,” yet substantially deny
what we have here called “ inspiration.” They
retain the word “inspiration,” but signify by it
the divine element in the revelation, or providen-
tial or gracious dealing aforesaid, and they believe
that the sacred writers, having been divinely
helped to certain knowledge, were left to the nat-
ural limitations and fallibility incidental to their
human and personal characters, alike in their
thinking out their several narrations and expo-
sitions of divine truth, and in their reduction of
them to writing. This view gives up the whole
matter of the immediate divine authorship of
the Bible as the word of God, and its infalli-
bility and authority as a rule of faith and prac-
tice. We have only the several versions of God’s
revelations as rendered mentally and verbally,
more or less adequately, yet always imperfectly,
by the different sacred writers. This class of


objectors are, of course, self-consistent in reject-
ing verbal inspiration in any sense. But this
view is not consistent either with the claims of
Scripture, the consciousness of Christians or the
historic doctrine of the Church.
(3.) There are others who maintain that the
Scriptures have been certainly inspired so far
forth as to constitute them in all their parts, and
as a whole, an infallible and divinely-authorita-
tive rule of faith and practice, and yet hold that,
while the thoughts of the sacred writers concern-
ing doctrine and duty were inspired and error-
less, their language was of purely human sug-
gestion, and more or less accurate. The question
as to whether the elements of Scripture relating
to the course of Nature and to the events of his-
tory are without error will be considered below:
it is sufficient to say under the present head that
it is self-evident that, just as far as the thoughts
of Scripture relating to any element or topic
whatsoever are inspired, the words in which
those thoughts are expressed must be inspired
also. Every element of Scripture, whether doc-
trine or history, of which God has guaranteed
the infallibility, must be infallible in its verbal
expression. No matter how in other respects
generated, the Scriptures are a product of human
thought, and every process of human thought


involves language. “ The slightest consideration
will show that words are as essential to intellect-
ual processes as they are t: mutual intercourse.
. . . Thoughts are wedded to words as necessa-
rily as soul to body. Without it the mysteries
unveiled before the eyes of the seer would be
confused shadows; with it, they are made clear
lessons for human life.”*
Besides this, the Scriptures are a record of
divine revelations, and as such consist of words;
and as far as the record is inspired at all, and as
far as it is in any element infallible, its inspira-
tion must reach to its words. Infallible thought
must be definite thought, and definite thought
implies words. But if God could have render-
ed the thoughts of the apostles regarding doc-
trine and duty infallibly correct without words,
and then left them to convey it to us in their
own language, we should be left to precisely that
amount of certainty for the foundation of our
faith as is guaranteed by the natural compe-
tency of the human authors, and neither more
nor less. There would be no divine guarantee
whatever. The, human medium would every-
where interpose its fallibility between God and
us. Besides, most believers admit that some of
* Canon Westcott’s Introduction to the Study of the
Gospels, sth edition: Introduction, pp. 14, 15.


the prophetical parts of Scripture were verbally
dictated. It was, moreover, promised that the
apostles should speak as the Spirit gave them
utterance. “The word of God came unto the
prophet.” The Church has always held, as ex-
pressed by the Helvetic Confession, 11., “that
the canonical Scriptures are the word of God”
Paul claims that the Holy Spirit superintended
and guaranteed his words as well as his thoughts
(1 Cor. ii. 13). The things of the Spirit we teach
“ not in the words which man’s wisdom teacheth,
but which the Holy Ghost teacheth” ( aoyxpivovTes ),
combining spiritual things with spiritual — i. e.
♦spiritual thoughts with spiritual words.
It is evident, therefore, that it is not clearness
of thought which inclines any of the advocates
of a real inspiration of the Holy Scriptures to
deny that it extends to the words. Whatever
discrepancies or other human limitations may
attach to the sacred record, the line (of inspired
or not inspired, of infallible or fallible) can never
rationally he drawn between the thoughts and the
words of Scripture.
Third. It is asked again: In what way, and to
what extent, is the doctrine of inspiration de-
pendent upon the supposed results of modern
criticism as to the dates, authors, sources and
modes of composition of the several books ? To


as the following answer appears to be well found
ed, and to set the limits within which the Church
doctrine of inspiration is in equilibrium with the
results of modern criticism fairly and certainly :
The doctrine of inspiration, in its essence —
and, consequently, in all its forms —presupposes
a supernatural revelation and a supernatural
providential guidance entering into and de-
termining the genesis of Scripture from the
beginning. Every- naturalistic theory, there-
fore, of the evolution of Scripture, however dis-
guised, is necessarily opposed to any true ver-
sion of the catholic doctrine of inspiration. It
is also a well-known matter of fact that Christ
himself is the ultimate witness on whose testimony
the Scriptures, as well as their doctrinal con-
tents, rest. We receive the Old Testament just
as Christ handed it to us, and on his authority.
And we receive as belonging to the New Testa-
ment all, and only those, books which an apos-
tolically-instructed age testifies to have been pro-
duced by the apostles or their companions— i. e.
by the men whom Christ commissioned, and to
whom he promised infallibility in teaching. It
is evident, therefore, that every supposed con-
clusion of critical investigation which denies the
apostolical origin of a New-Testament book or
the truth of any part of Christ’s testimony in


relation to the Old Testament and its contents,
or which is inconsistent with the absolute truth-
fulness of any affirmation of any book so au-
thenticated, must be inconsistent with the true
doctrine of inspiration. On the other hand, the
defenders of the strictest doctrine of inspiration
should cheerfully acknowledge that theories as
to the authors, dates, sources and modes of com-
position of the several books which are not plainly
inconsistent with the testimony of Christ or his
apostles as to the Old Testament, or with the
apostolic origin .of the books of the New Testa-
ment, or with the absolute truthfulness of any
of the affirmations of these books so authenti-
cated, cannot in the least invalidate the evidence
or pervert the meaning of the historical doctrine
of inspiration.
Fourth. The real point at issue between the
more strict and the more lax views of inspiration
maintained by believing scholars remains to be
stated. It is claimed, and admitted equally on
both sides, that the great design and effect of in-
spiration is to render the Sacred Scriptures in all
their parts a divinely infallible and authoritative
rule of faith and practice, and hence that in all
their elements of thought and expression, con-
cerned in the great purpose of conveying to men
a revelation of spiritual doctrine or duty, the


Scriptures are absolutely infallible. But if this
be so, it is argued by the more liberal school of
Christian scholars that this admitted fact is not
inconsistent with other facts which they claim
are matters of their personal observation: tu
wit, that in certain elements of Scripture which
are purely incidental to their great end of teach
ing spiritual truth, such as history, natural his
tory, ethnology, archaeology, geography, natural
science and philosophy, they, like all the best
human writings of their age, are, while for the
most part reliable, yet limited -by inaccuracies
and discrepancies. While this is maintained, it
is generally at the same time affirmed that when
compared with other books of the same antiquity
these inaccuracies and discrepancies of the Bible
are inconsiderable in number, and always of
secondary importance, in no degree invalidating
the great attribute of Scripture —its absolute in-
fallibility and its divine authority as a rule of
faith and practice.
The writers of this article are sincerely con-
vinced of the perfect soundness of the great
catholic doctrine of biblical inspiration— i. e.
that the Scriptures not only contain, but are,
the WORD OF God, and hence that all their
elements and all their affirmations are absolutely
errorless, and binding the faith and obedience of


men. Nevertheless, we admit that the question
between ourselves and the advocates of the view
just stated is one of fact, to be decided only by
an exhaustive and impartial examination of all
the sources of evidence — i. e. the claims and the
phenomena of the Scriptures themselves. There
will undoubtedly be found upon the surface many
apparent affirmations presumably inconsistent
with the present teachings of science, with facts
of history or with other statements of the sacred
books themfeelves. Such apparent inconsistencies
and collisions with other sources of information
are to be expected in imperfect copies of ancient
writings, from the fact that the original reading
may have been lost, or that we may fail to realize
the point of view of the author, or that we are
destitute of the circumstantial knowledge which
would fill up and harmonize the record. Besides,
the human forms of knowledge by which the
critics test the accuracy of Scripture are them-
selves subject to error. In view of all the facts
known to us, we affirm that a candid inspection
of all the ascertained phenomena of the original
text of Scripture will leave unmodified the an-
cient faith of the Church. In all their real
affirmations these books are without error.
It must be remembered that it is not claimed
that the Scriptures, any more than their authors,


are omniscient. The information they convey is
in the forms of human thought, and limited on
all sides. They were not designed to teach phil-
osophy, science or human history as such. They
were not designed to furnish an infallible system
of speculative theology. They are written in
human languages, whose words, inflections, con-
structions and idioms bear everywhere indelible
traces of human error. The record itself fur-
nishes evidence that the writers were in large
measure dependent for their knowledge upon
sources and methods in themselves fallible, and
that their personal knowledge and judgments
were in many matters hesitating and defective,
or even wrong. Nevertheless, the historical
faith of the Church has always been that all the
affirmations of Scripture of all kinds, whether
of spiritual doctrine or duty, or of physical or
historical fact, or of psychological or philosoph-
ical principle, are without any error when the
ipsissima verba of the’original autographs are
ascertained and interpreted in their natural and
intended sense. There is a vast difference be-
tween exactness of statement, which includes
an exhaustive rendering of details, an absolute
literalness, which the Scriptures never profess,
and accuracy, on the other hand, which secures
a correct statement of facts or principles in-


tended to be affirmed. It is this accuracy, and
this alone, as distinct from exactness, which the
Church doctrine maintains of every affirmation
in the original text of Scripture without excep-
tion. Every statement accurately corresponds
to truth just as far forth as affirmed.
PROOF OF THE DOCTRINE.
We of course do not propose to exhibit this
evidence in this article. We wish merely to re-
fresh the memory of our readers with respect to
its copiousness, variety and cogency.
First. The New-Testament writers continually
assert of the Scriptures of the Old Testament,
and of the several books which constitute it, that
they ARE the word op God. What their
writers said God said. Christ sent out the
apostles with the promise of the Holy Ghost,
and declared that in hearing them men would
hear him. The apostles themselves claimed to
speak as the prophets of God, and with plenary
authority in his name binding all consciences.
And while they did so God endorsed their teach-
ing and their claims with signs and wonders and
divers miracles. These claims are a universal
and inseparable characteristic of every part of
Scripture.
Second. Although composed by different hu-


man authors on various subjects and occasu us,
under all possible varieties of providential con-
ditions, in two languages, thiough sixteen cen-
turies of time, yet they evidently constitute one
system, all their parts minutely correlated, the
whole unfolding a single purpose, and thus giv-
ing indubitable evidence of the controlling pres-
ence of a divine intelligence from first to last.
Third. It is true that the Scriptures were not
designed to teach philosophy, science or ethnology,
or human history as such, and therefore they are
not to be studied primarily as sources of infor-
mation on these subjects. Yet all these elements
are unavoidably incidentally involved in the
statements of Scripture. Many of these, be-
cause of defective knowledge or interpretation
upon our part, present points of apparent con-
fusion or error. Yet the outstanding fact is, that
the general conformableness of the sacred books
to modern knowledge in all these departments
is purely miraculous. If these books, which
originated in an obscure province of the ancient
world, be compared with the most enlightened
cosmogonies or philosophies or histories of the
same or immediately subsequent centuries, their
comparative freedom even from apparent error
is amazing. Who prevented the sacred writers
from falling into the wholesale and radical mis-


takes which were necessarily incidental to their
position as mere men ? The fact that at this
date scientists of the rank of Faraday and Henry,
of Dana, of Guyot and Dawson, maintain that
there is no real conflict between the really ascer-
tained facts of science and the first two chapters
of Genesis, rightly interpreted, of itself demon-
strates that a supernatural intelligence must have
directed the writing of those chapters. This, of
course, proves that the scientific element of Script-
ure, as well as the doctrinal, was within the scope
of inspiration. And this argument is every day
acquiring greater force from the results of the
critical study of Scripture, and from advanced
knowledge in every department of history and
science, which continually tend to solve diffi-
culties and to lessen the number of apparent
discrepancies.
Fourth. The moral and spiritual character of
the revelation which the Scriptures convey of
God, of the person of Christ, of the plan of re-
demption and of the law of absolute righteous-
ness, and the power which the very words of the
record, as well as the truths they express, have
exercised over the noblest men and over nations
and races for centuries, —this is the characteristic
self-demonstration of the word of God, and has
sufficed to maintain the unabated catholicity of


the strict doctrine of inspiration through all
change of time and in spite of all opposition.
Fifth. This doctrine of the inspiration of Script-
ure, in all its elements and parts, has always
been the doctrine of the Church. Dr. Westcott
has proved this by a copious catena of quota-
tions from Ante-Nicene Fathers in Appendix B
to his Introduction to the Study of the Gospels.
He quotes Clemens Romanus as saying that
the Scriptures are “the true utterances of the
Holy Ghost.” He quotes Tertullian as say-
ing that these books are “ the writings and the
words of God,” and Cyprian as saying that the
“ gospel cannot stand in part and fall in part,”
and Clement of Alexandria to the effect that the
foundations of our faith “ we have received from
God through the Scriptures,” of which not one
tittle shall pass away without being accomplished,
“ for the mouth of the Lord the Holy Spirit
spake it.” Dr. Westcott quotes Origen as teach-
ing that the Scriptures are without error, since
“ they were accurately written by the co-opera-
tion of the Holy Ghost,” and that the words of
Paul are the words of God.
The Roman Church (Can, Cone. Trid., Sess.
IV.) says, “ God is the author of both ” Testa-
ments. The second Helvetic Confession repre-
sents the whole Protestant Reformation in saying


(Ch. I.) : “• The canonical Scriptures are the true
word of God,” for “ God continues to speak to
us through the Holy Scriptures.” The West-
minster Confession says: “It pleased the Lord
at sundry times and in divers manners to reveal
himself and to declare his will unto his Church,
and afterward ... to commit the same wholly
unto writing.” It declares that the Scriptures
are in such a sense given by inspiration that they
possess a divine authority, and that “ God is
their author,” and they “ are the word of
God.”
It is not questionable that the great historic
churches have held these creed definitions in the
sense of affirming the errorless infallibility of
the Word. This is everywhere shown by the
way in which all the great bodies of Protestant
theologians have handled Scripture in their com-
mentaries, systems of theology, catechisms and
sermons. And this has always been pre-eminently
characteristic of epochs and agents of reforma-
tion and revival. All the great world-moving
men, as Luther, Calvin, Knox, Wesley, White-
field and Chalmers, and proportionately those
most like them, have so handled the divine
Word. Even if the more lax doctrine has the
suffrage of many scholars, or even if it be true,
it is nevertheless certain that hitherto in nine-


teen centuries it has never been held by men
who also possessed the secret of using the word
of God like a hammer or like a fire.
LEGITIMATE PRESUMPTIONS.
In testing this question by a critical investi-
gation of the phenomena of Scripture, it is evi-
dent that the stricter view, which denies the
existence of errors, discrepancies or inaccurate
statements in Scripture, has the presumption
in its favor, and that the onus probandi rests
upon the advocates of the other view. The lat-
ter may fairly be required to furnish positive
and conclusive evidence in each alleged instance
of error until the presumption has been turned
over to the other side. The primd facie evidence
of the claims of Scripture is assuredly all in
favor of an errorless infallibility of all script-
ural affirmations. This has been from the first
the general faith of the historical Church and of
the Bible-loving, spiritual people of God. The
very letter of the Word has been proved from
ancient times to be a tremendous power in hu-
man life.
It is a question also of infinite importance.
If the new views are untrue, they threaten not
only to shake the confidence of men in the
Scriptures, but the very Scriptures themselves


as an objective ground of faith. We have seen
that the Holy Spirit has, as a matter of fact,
preserved the sacred writers to a degree unpar-
alleled elsewhere in literature from error in the
departments of philosophy and science. Who
then shall determine the limit of that preserving
influence? We have seen that in God’s plan
doctrine grows out of history, and that redemp-
tion itself was wrought out in human history.
If, then, the inspiration of the sacred writers
did not embrace the department of history, or
only of sacred and not of profane history, who
shall set the limit and define what is of the es-
sence of faith and what the uncertain accident ?
It would assuredly appear that, as no organism
can be stronger than its weakest part, if error
be found in any one element or in any class of
statements, certainty as to any portion could
rise no higher than belongs to that exercise of
human reason to which it will be left to dis
criminate the infallible from the fallible.
The critical investigation must be made,
and we must abide by the result when it is un-
questionably reached. But surely it must be
carried on with infinite humility and teachable-
ness, and with prayer for the constant guidance
of the gracious Spirit. The signs of success will
never be presumption, an evident sense of intel-


iectual superiority, or a want of sympathy with
the spiritual Church of all ages or with the
painful confusion of God’s humble people of
the present.
With these presumptions and in this spirit
let it (1) be proved that each alleged discrep-
ant statement certainly occurred in the original
autograph of the sacred book in which it is said
to be found. (2) Let it be proved that the in-
terpretation which occasions the apparent dis-
crepancy is the one which the passage was evi-
dently intended to bear. It is not sufficient to
show a difficulty, which may spring out of our
defective knowledge of the circumstances. The
true meaning must be definitely and certainly
ascertained, and then shown to be irreconcilable
with other known truth. (3) Let it be proved
that the true sense of some part of the original
autograph is directly and necessarily inconsistent
with some certainly-known fact of history or
truth of science, or some other statement of
Scripture certainly ascertained and interpreted.
We believe that it can be shown that this has
never yet been successfully done in the case of
one single alleged instance of error in the WORD
of God.


CRITICAL OBJECTIONS TRIED.
It remains only to consider more in detail
some of the special objections which have been
put forward against this doctrine in the name
of criticism. It cannot be, indeed, demanded
that every one urged should be examined and
met, but it may be justly expected that the
chief classes of relevant objections should be
briefly touched upon. This, fortunately, is no
illimitable task. There are, as already stated,
two main presuppositions lying at the base of
the doctrine, essential to its integrity, while to
them it adds one essential supposition. The pre-
suppositions are —1. The possibility of supernat-
ural interference, and the actual occurrence of
that interference in the origin of our Bible;
and, 2. The authenticity, genuineness and histor-
ical credibility of the records included in our
Bible. The added supposition is—3. The truth
to fact of every statement in the Scriptures.
No objection from the side of criticism is rele-
vant unless it traverses some one of these three
points. The traditional view of the age and
authorship of a document or of the meaning of
a statement may be traversed, and yet no con-
flict arise with the doctrine of a strict inspira-
tion. But criticism cannot reach results incon-


sistent with the genuineness and authenticity of a
document judged according to the professions of
that document or the statements or implications
of any other part of Scripture, or incompatible
with the truth of any passage in the sense of
that passage arrived at by the correct applica-
tion of the sound principles of historico-gram-
matical exegesis, without thereby arraying her-
self in direct opposition to the Church doctrine
of inspiration. All objections to that doctrine
based on such asserted results of criticism are
undoubtedly relevant. Our duty is, therefore,
to ask what results of criticism are claimed
which traverse some one of the three assertions
—of a supernatural origin for the Scriptures,
of genuineness and authenticity for its books,
and of absolute freedom from error of its state-
ments.
I. The Authenticity and Integrity of the
Books op the Old and New Testa-
ments, AS THEY HAVE COME DOWN TO US.
The first point for us to examine Avould nat-
urally be the bearing upon the Church doctrine
of inspiration of the various modern critical
theories concerning the origin and present integ-
rity of the several books of the Old and New
Testaments. This is at present the most moment


ousj question which agitates the believing world.
The critical examination of all the most inti-
mate phenomena of the text of Scripture is an
obvious duty, and its results, when humility, do-
cility and spiritual insight are added to compe-
tent learning and broad intelligence, must be
eminently beneficial. It is obvious, however,
that this department of the subject could not be
adequately discussed in this paper. It is con-
sequently postponed to the near future, when it
is intended that the whole subject shall be pre-
sented as fully as possible.
In the mean time, the present writers, while
they admit freely that the traditional belief as
to the dates and origin of the several books may
be brought into question without involving any
doubt as to their inspiration, yet confidently
affirm that any theories of the origin or author-
ship of any book of either Testament which
ascribe to them a purely naturalistic genesis,
or dates or authors inconsistent with either their
own natural claims or the assertions of other
Scripture, are plainly inconsistent with the doc-
trine of inspiration taught by the Church.
Nor have they any embarrassment in the face
of these theories, seeing that they believe them
to rest on no better basis than an over-acute
criticism overreaching itself and building on


fancies. Here they must content themselves
with reference to the various critical discussions
of these theories which have poured from the
press for detailed refutation of them. With
this refutation in mind they simply assert their
conviction that none of the claims or assertions
of the Scriptures as to the authenticity of a sin-
gle book of either Testament has hitherto been
disproved.
11. Detailed Accuracy of Statement.
We are next confronted with objections meant
to traverse the third of our preliminary state-
ments, consisting of bold assertions that, what-
ever may have been their origin, our Scriptures
do exhibit phenomena of inaccuracy, that mis-
takes are found in them, errors committed by
them, untrue statements ventured. Nor is this
charge put forward only by opponents of reve-
lation : a Van Oosterzee, as well as “ a Tholuck,
a Neander, a Lange, a Stier,” admits “ errors
and inaccuracies in matters of subordinate im-
portance.” * It is plain, however, that if the
Scriptures do fail in truth in their statements
of whatever kind, the doctrine of inspiration
which has been defended in this paper cannot
stand. But so long as the principles of historico-
* See Van Oosterzee’s Dogmatics , p. 205.


grammatical exegesis are relied on to determine
the meaning of Scripture, it is impossible to
escape the fact that the Bible claims to be thus
inspired. And thus it is not a rare thing to find
the very theologians who themselves cannot be-
lieve in a strict inspiration yet admitting that
the Scripture writers believed in it.* We can-
not, therefore, occupy the ground on which these
great and worthy men seem to us so precariously
to stand. A proved error in Scripture contra-
dicts not only our doctrine, but the Scripture
claims, and therefore its inspiration in making
those claims. It is therefore of vital import-
ance to ask, Can phenomena of error and untruth
be pointed out ?
There is certainly no dearth of “ instances ”
* Thus Tholuck; “Yet his [the author of Hebrews]
application of the Old Testament rests on the strictest
view of inspiration, since passages where God is not the
speaker are cited as words of God or of the Holy Ghost
(i. 6,7, 8; iv. 4, 7 ; vii. 21; hi. 7 ; x. 15).” —Old Testa-
ment in the New, in Bibliotheca Sacra, xi. p. 612. So also
Richard Eothe: “It is clear, then, that the orthodox the-
ory [ i . e. the very strictest] of inspiration is countenanced
by the authors of the New Testament.” So also Canon
Farrar: “He [Paul] shared, doubtless, in the views of
the later Jewish schools —the Tanaim and Amoraim—
on the nature of inspiration. These views . . . made
the words of Scripture coextensive and identical with
the words of God.” —Life of Paid, ii. p. 47.


confidently put forward. But it is abundantly
plain that the vast majority of them are irrele-
vant. We must begin any discussion of them,
therefore, by reasserting certain simple propo-
sitions, the result of which will be to clear the
ground of all irrelevant objections. It is to be
remembered, then, that —1. We do not assert
that the common text, but only that the original
autographic text, was inspired. No “ error ” can
be asserted, therefore, which cannot be proved to
have been aboriginal in the text. 2. We do not
deny an everywhere-present human element in
the Scriptures. No mark of the effect of this
human element, therefore—in style of thought
or wording —can be urged against inspiration
unless it can be shown to result in untruth. 3.
We do not erect inspiration into an end, but hold
it to be simply a means to an end —viz. the ac-
curate conveyance of truth. No objection, there-
fore, is valid against the form in which the truth
is expressed, so long as it is admitted that that
form conveys the truth. 4. We do not suppose
that inspiration made a writer false to his pro-
fessed purpose, but rather that it kept him in-
fallibly true to it. No objection is valid, there-
fore, which overlooks the prime question: What
was the professed or implied purpose of the
writer in making this statement? These few


simple and very obvious remarks set aside the vast
majority of the customary objections. The first
throws out of court numbers of inaccuracies in
the Old and New Testaments as either certainly
or probably not parts of the original text, and
therefore not fit evidence in the case. The
second performs the same service for a still
greater number, which amount simply to the
discovery of individual traits, modes of thought
or expression, or forms of argumentation in the
writings of the several authors of the biblical
books. The third sets aside a vast multitude,
drawn from pressure of language, misreading of
figures, resurrection of the primary sense of
idioms, etc., in utter forgetfulness of the fact that
no one claims that inspiration secured the use of
good Greek in Attic severity of taste, free from
the exaggerations and looseness of current speech,
but only that it secured the accurate expression
of truth, even (if you will) through the medium
of the worst Greek a fisherman of Galilee could
write and the most startling figures »of speech a
peasant could invent. Exegesis must be histor-
ical as well as grammatical, and must always
seek the meaning intended, not any meaning that
can be tortured out of a passage. The fourth in
like manner destroys the force of every objection
which is tacitly founded on the idea that partial


and incomplete statements cannot be inspired, no
documents can be quoted except verbatim, no
conversations reported unless at length, etc.,
and which thus denies the right of another to
speak to the present purpose only, appeal to the
sense, not wording of a document, give abstracts
of discourses, and apply, by a true exegesis, the
words of a previous writer to the present need.
The sum of the whole matter is simply this: No
phenomenon can be validly urged against verbal
inspiration which, found out of Scripture, would
not be a valid argument against the truth of the
writing. Inspiration securing no more than this
— truth, simple truth —no phenomenon can be
urged against verbal inspiration which cannot be
proved to involve an indisputable error.
It is not to be denied that such phenomena are
asserted to be discoverable in the Scriptures. Is
the assertion capable of being supported by facts ?
That is the only question now before us. And it
thus becomes our duty to examine some samples
of the chief classes of facts usually appealed to.
These samples —which will, moreover, all be
chosen from the New Testament, and all at the
suggestion of opponents —must serve our present
needs.


HISTORICAL AND GEOGRAPHICAL ACCURACY.
1. It is asserted that the Scripture writers are
inaccurate in their statements of historical and
geographical facts, as exhibited by the divergence
existing between their statements and the infor-
mation we derive from other sources, such as pro-
fane writers and monuments. When we ask for
the proofs of this assertion, however, they are
found to be very difficult to produce, A genera-
tion or two ago this was not so much the case 5
but the progress of our knowledge of the times
and the geography of the region in which our
sacred books were written has been gradually
wiping out the “ proofs ” one by one, until they
are at this day non-existent. The chief (and
almost the only) historical errors still asserted to
exist in the New Testament are the 1 fifteenth
year of Tiberius” of Luke hi. 1; the enrollment
during Cyrenius’s governorship of Luke ii. 2 ;
and the revolt of Theudas of Acts v. 36. It is
not denied that these statements present diffi-
culties, but it is humbly suggested that that is
hardly synonymous with saying that they aie
proved mistakes. If Herod died in the spring
of a. u. c. 750 (which seems wellnigh certain),
and if, in Luke iii. 23, the “ about ” be deemed
not broad enough to cover two years (which is


fairly probable), and if Luke iii. 1 means to date
John’s first appearance (as again seems prob-
able), and if no more than six months intervened
between John’s and Jesus’ public appearance
(which, still again, seems probable), —then it is
admitted that the “ fifteenth year of Tiberius ”
must be a mistake —provided that, still further,
we must count his years from the beginning of
his sole reign, and not from his co-regnancy with
Augustus; in favor of which latter mode of
counting much has been, and more cau be,
urged. Surely this is not a very clear case of
indubitable error, with its five ifs staring us in
the face. Again, if the Theudas mentioned in
Acts is necessarily the same as the Theudas
mentioned by Josephus, then Luke and Josephus
do seem to be in disaccord as to the time of his
revolt; and if Josephus can be shown to be, in
general, a more accurate historian than Luke,
then his account must be preferred. But neither
of these ifs is true. Josephus is the less ac-
curate historian, as is easily proved; and there
are good reasons —convincing to a critic like
Winer and a Jew like Jost, neither certainly
affected by apologetical bias —to suppose that
Acts and Josephus mention different revolts..
Where, then, is the contradiction?
The greatest reliance is, however, placed on the


third case adduced —the statement of Luke that
Jesus was born at the time of a world-enroll-
ment which was carried out in Syria during the
governorship of Cyrenius. Weiss* offers three
reasons why Luke is certainly incorrect here,
which Schurerf increases to five facts —viz.: 1.
History knows nothing of a general empire-
census in the time of Augustus; 2. A Roman
census would not force Joseph to go to Bethle-
hem, nor Mary to go with him ; 3. Nor could it
have taken place in Palestine in the time of
Herod; 4. Josephus knows nothing of such a
census, but, on the contrary, speaks of that of
Acts v. 37 as something new and unheard of;
and, 5. Quirinius was not governor of Syria dur-
ing Herod’s life. This has a formidable look,
but each detail has been more than fully met.
Thus, Objection 1 turns wholly upon an argu-
mentum e silentio, always precarious enough, and
here quadruply so, seeing that (1) an empire-
census is just such a thing as Roman historians
would be likely to omit all mention of, just as
Spatian fails to mention in his life of Hadrian
the famous rescript of that monarch, and all
contemporary history is silent as to Augustus s
geometrical survey; (2) We have no detailed
* Meyer’s Markus und Lukas, p. 286 (ed. 6).
f N. T. Zeitgeschichie, pp. 268-286.


contemporary history of this time, the inaccurate
and gossiping Suetonius and Josephus being our
only sources of information; (3) Certain oft-
quoted passages in Tacitus and Suetonius ac-
quaint us with facts which absolutely require
such a census at their base; and (4) We have
direct, though not contemporary, historical proof
that such a census was taken, in statements of
Cassiodorus and Suidas. Objection 2 gains all
its apparent force from a confusio verborum.
Luke does not represent this as a Roman census
in the sense that it was taken up after Roman
methods, but only in the sense that it was ordered
ultimately by Roman authority. Nor does he
represent Mary as being forced to go to Bethle-
hem with Joseph ; her own choice, doubtless, de-
termined her journey. The same covfusio ver-
borum follows us into Objection 3. It may be
improbable that Herod should have been so far
set aside that a census should have been taken
up in his dominions after Roman methods and
by Roman officials; but is it so improbable that
he should be ordered to take himself a census
after his own methods and by his own officials ?
Josephus can give us the answer.* Whatever
may have been Herod's official title, whether rex
* Cf. Ant, xv. 10, 4; xvi. 2,5; 4,1; 9,3; xvii. 2, ] ;
2,4; 5,8; 11, 4, etc., for Herod’s status.


socius or, as seems more probable (one stage
lower), rex amicus Ccesaris, it is certain that he
felt bound to bow to the emperor’s every whis-
per ; so that if Augustus desired statistics as to
the regna (and Tacitus proves he did), Herod
would be forced to furnish them for his regnum.
Objection 4 again is easily laid: Josephus not
only mentions nothing he could escape which
exhibited Jewish subjection, but actually passes
over the decade 750-760 so slightly that he can
hardly be said to have left us a history of that
time. That he speaks of the later census of
Acts v. 37 as something new T is most natural,
seeing that it was, as carried on by the Roman
officials and after Roman methods, not only ab-
solutely new, and a most important event in
itself, but, moreover, was fraught with such his-
torical consequences that it could not be passed
over in silence. Objection sis the most import-
ant and difficult, but not, therefore, insuperable.
It states, indeed, a truth: Quirinius was not gov-
ernor of Syria until after Herod’s death. But
it must be noted, on the one hand, that Zumpt
has proved, almost, if not quite, to demonstra-
tion, that Quirinius was twice governor of Syria,
the first time beginning within six months after
Herod’s death; and, on the other, that Luke
does not say that Christ was born while Cyre-


thus was governor of Syria. What Luke says is,
that Christ was born during the progress of a
census, and then defines the census as the first
which was carried on when Cyreuius was gov-
ernor of Syria. If this census was begun under
Varus and finished under Quirinius, Christ may
have been born, according to Luke, at any time
during the progress of this census. This, be-
cause Luke ii. 2 is not given to define the time
of Christ’s birth, but more narrowly to describe
what census it was which had in verse 1 been
used to define the time of Christ’s birth.* Thus,
doubtless, it is true that Christ was born under
Varus, and yet during the course of the first Qui-
rinian census; and thus Schiirer’s fifth objection
goes the way of all the others.
The wonderful accuracy of the New-Testa-
* Take an example: If one should say of any event,
that it occurred during our war with Great Britain, and
then add, “I mean that war wherein Jackson fought,”
would he necessarily refer to an event late in the war,
after Jackson came to the front? Not so, because the
war alone defines the time of the event, and Jackson
only which war. So in Luke the census alone defines the
time of Christ’s birth, and Quirinius only which census.
It ought to be added that there are at least three other
methods of explaining Luke’s words, all possible, and
none very improbable, on the supposition of any one
of which conflict with history is impossible.


ment writers in all, even the minute and inci-
dental, details of their historical notices can-
not, however, be made even faintly apparent
by a simple answering of objections. Some
sort of glance over the field as a whole is neces-
sary to any appreciation of it. There occur in
the New Testament some thirty names —empe-
rors, members of the family of Herod, high
priests, rabbis, Roman governors, princes, Jew-
ish leaders —some mention of which might be
looked for in contemporary history or on con-
temporary monuments.* All but two of these—
and they the insignificant Jewish rebels Theudas
and Barabbas —are actually mentioned; and the
New-Testaraent notices are found, on compari-
son, to be absolutely accurate in every, even the
most minute, detail. Every one of their state-
ments has not, indeed, passed without challenge,'
* These are: Augustus, Tiberius, Claudius —Herod
Antipas, the two Philips, Archelaus, Agrippa 1., Agrip-
pa 11., Herodias, Heredias’ daughter, Bernice, Drusilla
—Annas, Caiaphas, Ananias Gamaliel Quirinius,
Pilate, Felix, Festus, Gallic, Sergius Paulus —Aretas
(Candace), Lysanias —[Theudas], Judas of Galilee [Bar-
abbas]. Candace seems to represent a hereditary title,
not a personal name; Theudas and Barabbas are not
named in profane sources. Cf. the (incomplete) list
and fine remarks of Rawlinson {Hist. Evidences , Boston,
1873, p. 195 sq.).


but challenge has always meant triumphant
vindication. Some examples of what is here
meant have been given already; others may be
added in a note for their instructiveness.* Now,
the period of which these writers treat is absolute-
ly the most difficult historical period in which to
be accurate that the world has ever seen. Noth-
ing was fixed or stable; vacillation, change, was
everywhere. The province which was senator-
ial to-day was imperial to-morrow —the bound-
aries that were fixed to-day were altered to-mor-
row. That these writers were thus accurate
in a period and land wherein Tacitus failed to
attain complete accuracy means much.
We reach the same conclusion if we ask after
* It was long boldly asserted that Luke was in error
in making Lysanias a contemporary tetrarch with the
Herodian rulers. But it is now admitted that Josephus
mentions an earlier and a later Lysanias, and so corrobo-
rates Luke; and inscriptions also have been brought for-
ward which supervindicate Luke’s accuracy, so that
even M. Renan admits it. Again, it was long contend-
ed that Luke had inaccurately assigned a proconsul to
Cyprus; but this was soon set aside by a reference to
Cyprian coins of Claudius’s time and to Dion Cassius,
liv. 4; and now Mr. Cesnola publishes an inscription
which mentions the veritable proconsul Paulus whom
Luke mentioned ( Cyprus , p. 425). So with reference to
the titles of the rulers of Achaia, Philippi, Ephesus, etc,
(See in general Lee on Inspiration, p. 364, note 2.)


their geographical accuracy. In no single case
have they slipped here, either; and what this
means may be estimated by noting what a mass
of geographical detail has been given us.* Be-
tween forty and fifty names of countries can be
counted in the New-Testament pages; every one
is accurately named and placed. About the
same number of foreign cities are named, and
all equally accurately. Still more to the pur-
pose, thirty-six Syrian and Palestinian towns
are named, the great majority of which have
been identified,f and wherever testing is possible
* Compare the efforts of a real forger with the accu-
racy of these autoptic writers — e. g. of Prochorus, as
given in Zahn’s Acta Joannis, p. lii. Only nine real
places can be found in a long list of geographical names
invented for the need. Thus, to the little Patmos a num-
ber of cities and villages is ascribed which would require
a Sicily or Cyprus to furnish ground to stand on.
f These names are: CEnon, *Antipatris, fArimathea,
*Azotus, *Bethany, fßethany beyond Jordan, "'Bethle-
hem, ||Bethphage, |Bethsaida, gCana, Cae-
sarea, Caesarea Philippi, Chorazin, HDalmanutha, Da-
mascus, JEmmaus, *Ephraim, Cadara, *Gaza, §Gerasa,
* Jericho, *Jerusalem, *Joppa, f Jouda, fKerioth, *Lyd-
da, *Magdala, Cain, Cazareth, *Salim, *Seleucia, *Sy-
char, *Tiberias, *Tyre. Those marked * are pretty cer-
tainly identified; those f, with great probability; those
‘i, with a choice between the two places; and those ||, as
to their neighborhood. There are, besides, some names


the most minute accuracy emerges. Whether
due to inspiration or not, this unvarying accu-
racy of statement is certainly consistent with
the strictest doctrine of inspiration.
COMPLETE INTERNAL HARMONY.
2. Another favorite charge made against these
writers is, that they are often hopelessly inconsist-
ent with one another in their statements; and this
charge of disharmony has sometimes been push-
ed so far as to make it do duty even against
their historical credibility. But when we begin
to examine the instances brought forward in
support of it, they are found to be cases of dif-
ficult, not of impossible, harmony. And it is
abundantly plain that it must be shown to be
impossible to harmonize any two statements, on
any natural supposition before they can be as-
serted to be inconsistent. This is a recognized
principle of historical investigation, and it is
the only reasonable principle possible, unless
we are prepared to assert that the two state-
ments necessarily contain all the facts of the
case and exclude the possibility of the har-
quoted from the Old Testament — e.g. ([Gomorrah, *Rama,
*Sarepta, *Shechem, ((Sodom. Also some other geo
graphical names — e.g. *The brook Kedron, * Jordan,
*the Mount of Olives and *the Sea of Galilee, etc.


monizing supposition. Having cur eyes upon
this principle, it is not rash to declare that no
disharmony has ever been proved between any
two statements of the New Testament. The
best examples to illustrate the character of the
attempts made to exhibit disharmony, and the
rocks on which these attempts always break, are
probably those five striking cases on which Dr.
Fisher most wisely rests his charge against the
complete harmony of the four evangelists —viz.
the alleged disharmony in the accounts of the
place and phraseology of the Sermon on the
Mount, the healing of the centurion’s son, the
denials of Peter, the healing of the blind man
at Jericho, and the time of the institution of
the Lord’s Supper.* But that in each of these
most natural means of harmonizing exist, and
are even in some instances recognized as possi-
ble by Dr. Fisher himself, President Bartlett has
lately so fully shown in detail f that we cannot
bring ourselves to repeat here the oft-told tale.
Take one or two other examples: for instance,
look at that famous case alleged in the specifi-
cation of the hour in John xix. 14 and Mark
xv. 25. The difficulty here, says Dean Alford,
is insuperable, and with him Meyer et al. agree.
* Beginnings of Christianity, p. 460 sq.
f Princeton Beview, January, 1880, p. 47 sq.


But even Strauss admits that it would be can-
celled “if it were possible to prove that the
Fourth Gospel proceeds upon another mode of
reckoning time than that used by the Synoptics.
And that it is possible to prove this very thing
any one can satisfy himself by noting the tour
places where John mentions the hour (i. 39 ; iv.
6, 52; xix. 14); whence it emerges that John
reckons his hours according to the method prev-
alent in Asia Minor* —from midnight, and not
from daybreak. Thus all difficulty vanishes.f
The disharmony claimed to exist between Matt,
xxvii. 6-8 and Acts i. 18, 19 is also voided by a
naive kind of admission; Dean Alford, for in-
stance, asserting in one breath that no reconcil-
iation can be found consistent with common hon-
esty, and in the next admitting that the natural
supposition by which the passages are harmo-
nized is “of course possible.” This admis-
sion, on the recognized principles of historical
criticism, amounts simply to a confession that
* That this was the custom in Asia Minor is evident
from Marturium Polyc., c. 21, etc. Cf. also (in general)
Pliny, Nat. Hist., ii. 77, and Plutarch, Quaest Rom. t
Ixxxiii,
f Cf, Townson’s Discourses, Discourse 8; McClelland’s
N. T., vol. i., p. 737 sq.; Westcott on John, p. 282; Lee
on Inspiration, p. 352; where this subject is fully dis-
cussed.


no disharmony ought to be asserted in the
case.
Perhaps, however, the two most important
and far-reaching instances of disharmony alleged
of late years are —that asserted between the nar-
ratives of the events preceding, accompanying
and following the birth of our Lord given by
Matthew and Luke, which is said to prove the
historical untrustworthiness of both (!) narra-
tives ; and that asserted between the accounts of
Paul’s visits to Jerusalem and his relations to the
Twelve in Acts and Galatians, which is said to
prove the unhistorical character of Acts. In the
brief space at our disposal it is not possible to
disprove such wholesale charges in detail. It
must suffice, therefore, to point out the lines on
which such a refutation proceeds. In the first
instance the charge can be upheld only by the
expedient of assuming that silence as to an event
constitutes denial of that event, supported by
criticisms which tacitly deny a historian’s right
to give summary accounts of transactions or
choose his incidents according to his purpose in
writing. Any careful examination of the pas-
sages involved will prove not only that they are
not inconsistent, but rather mutually supplement-
ary accounts; * but also that they actually imply
* The events recorded by Luke are —1. Annunciation


ane another, and prove the truth of each other
by a series of striking undesigned coincidences.*
to Zachariah; 2. Annunciation to Mary (in the sixth
month thereafter); 3. Mary’s visit to Elizabeth (extend-
ing to three months later) ; 4. Birth of John (after 3);
5. His circumcision (eight days after 4); 6. Journey of
Joseph and Mary to Bethlehem (“in those days”);
7. Birth of Jesus (while at Bethlehem); 8. Annuncia-
tion to the shepherds (the same day); 9. Visit of the
shepherds (hastening); 10. Circumcision of Jesus (eight
days after); 11. Presentation (thirty-three days later);
12. Return to Nazareth (when all legal duties were per-
formed). The events recorded by Matthew are—A.
Mary is found with child (before she is taken to Joseph’s
house); B. Annunciation to Joseph; C. Mary is taken
home by Joseph; D. Visit of the Magi (after Jesus’
birth at Bethlehem); E. Flight into Egypt (after their
departure); F. Slaughter of the innocents (when Herod
had discovered that the wise men had gone); G. Death
of Herod; H. Return from Egypt to Nazareth (after
Herod’s death). These events dovetail beautifully
into one another, as follows: 1,2, 3,4, 5, A, B. C, 6,7,
8,9, 10, 11, D [l2 (E, F, G, H)]. It is only neces-
sary to assume that 12 includes E, F, G and H compend-
iously, and all goes most smoothly. Other arrangements
are also possible— e. g. the first half may bt varied to
I, 2, A, B, C, 3,4, 5,6, or to 1,2, A, 3, B, C, 4,6, 6; and
the second half to 9, 10, D, 11 [12 —(E, F, G, H)], or
even to 9, 10, D, E, F, G, half H, 11, half H—l 2. In
the face of so many possible harmonizations it certainly
cannot be asserted that harmony is impossible.
* Thus the account in the one of the annunciation to


And when it is added that the choice of the ma-
terial which each writer has made can in each
incident be shown to have arisen directly out of
the purpose of the writer, it may be seen what a
load the assertion of disharmony must carry.
Joseph, and that in the other of that to Mary, which are
often said to be irreconcilable with one another, actually
prove each other’s truth. Both assume exactly the same
facts at their bases—viz. that Mary conceived a child
snpernaturally, and remained a virgin while becoming
a mother. Moreover, if Luke’s narrative be true, then
something like what Matthew records must have hap-
pened ; and if Matthew’s be true, something like what
Luke records must have happened. Two things need-
ed explanation: why Mary was not crazed at finding
herself so strangely with child, and how Joseph, be-
ing a just man, could have taken her, in that condi-
tion, to wife. Luke’s narrative explains the first, but
leaves the other unexplained; Matthew’s explains the
second, but leaves the first unexplained. It is ad-
mitted that there was no collusion here. How does
it happen, then, that the two so imply one another?
Again, Matthew does not mention where Jesus’ parents
lived before his birth, but only states that after that
birth they intended to live in Bethlehem, and, after
having been deterred from that, chose Nazareth. Now,
why this strange choice ? Luke, and Luke alone, sup-
plies the reason; Nazareth was their old home. Still,
again, that Luke calls Mary Joseph’s “betrothed”
in ii. 5 is not only remarkable, but totally inexplicable
from Luke; we can only understand it when we revert


The asserted contradiction between Acts and
Galatians is already crumbling of its own weight.
Thus Keim, certainly no very “ apologetic ” critic,
has shown very clearly that the passage in Gala-
tians has suffered much eis-egesis in order to make
out the disharmony,* and sober criticism will
judge that even he has done inadequate justice
to the subject. We cannot enter into details in
so broad a question: it will be sufficient, how-
ever, to call attention to the fact that no dis-
harmony can be made out unless —(1) Violence
be done to the context in Galatians, where Paul
professes to be giving an exhaustive account,
not of his visits to Jerusalem, but of his op-
portunities to learn from the apostles. Any
visit undertaken at such a time as to furnish no
such opportunity (and Acts xii. was such) ought,
therefore, to have been omitted. (2) Convenient
forgetfulness be exercised of the fact that while
the context shows that Paul uses “ apostles ” in
the narrow sense in GaL i. 19, yet this is not
true of Acts ix. 27; but, as Luke’s usage shows,
the contrary may very well be true (Acts xiv.
4, 14). So that it is in no sense inconsistent for
Paul to say that he saw but one apostle, and
to Matt. i. 25 and the preceding verses. These are but
samples.
* In Aus der Urchristenthum (1878).


Luke that he saw several. (3) Misunderstand-
ing be fallen into as to the nature of the “ de-
cree ” of Acts xv. 20, and its binding force to
churches not yet formed and not parties to the
compromise. (4) Misrepresentation be ventur-
ed as to the testimony of Galatians as to Paul’s
relations to the Twelve, which Paul represents
to have been most pleasant (Gal. ii. 3, 7-10), but
which are made out to have been unpleasant
through misinterpretation of phrases in Gal, ii.
2,3, 4,6, 9, etc. (5) Incredible pressure of the
detailed language of both Galatians and Acts be
indulged in. (6) And, finally, a tacit denial be
made of the possibility of truth subsisting
through differences in choice of incidents aris-
ing from the diverse points of view of the two
writers. In other words, an unbiased compari-
son of the two accounts brings out forcibly the
fact that there is no disharmony between them
at all. Taking these examples as samples (and
they are certainly fair samples), it is as clear as
daylight that no single case has as yet been ad-
duced where disharmony is a necessary conclm
sion. Therefore all charges from this side fall
to the ground.


CORRECT APPLICATION OF THE OLD
TESTAMENT.
3. Another favorite charge against the exact
truth of the New-Testament Scriptures is drawn
from the use of the Old Testament in the New,
and especially the phenomena of its quotation.
Here also, however, most of the objections urged
prove nothing but a radical lack of clear think-
ing on the part of those who bring them. For
instance, Dr. Davidson argues * that the verbal
variation which the New-Testament writers al-
low themselves in quoting the Old Testament is
conclusive against verbal inspiration, for “ the
terms and phrases of the Old Testament, if
literally inspired, were the best that could have
been adopted,” and therefore the New-Testament
writers “should have adhered to the ipsissima
verba of the Holy Spirit (seeing they were the
best) as closely as the genius of the Hebrew and
Greek languages allowed.” Here, however, a
false view of inspiration is presupposed, and
also a false view of the nature and laws of quo-
tation. Inspiration does not suppose that the
words and phrases written under its influence are
the best possible to express the truth, but only
that they are an adequate expression of the
* Hermeneutics, p. 513-


truth. Other words and phrases might be
equally adequate —might furnish a clearer, more
exact, and therefore better, expression, especial-
ly of those truths which were subordinate or in-
cidental for the original purpose of the writing.
Nor is quotation to be confounded with transla-
tion. It does not, like it, profess to give as ex-
act a representation of the original, in all its
aspects and on every side, as possible, but only
to give a true account of its teaching in one of
its bearings. There is thus always an element
of application in quotation; and it is therefore
proper in quotation so to alter the form of the
original as to bring out clearly its bearing on the
one subject in hand, thus throwing the stress on
the element in it for which it is cited. This
would be improper in a translation. The laws
which ought to govern quotation seem, indeed, to
have been very inadequately investigated by those
who plead the New-Testameut methods of quo-
tation against inspiration. We can pause now
only to insist —(1) That quotation, being essen-
tially different from translation, any amount of
deviation from the original, in form, is thorough-
ly allowable, so long as the sense of the original
is adhered to; provided only that the quoter is
not professing to give the exact form ; (2) That
any adaptation of the original to the purpose in


hand is allowable, so long as it proceeds by a
true exegesis, and thus does not falsify the orig-
inal ; (3) That any neglect of the context of the
original is allowable, so long as the purpose for
which the quotation is adduced does not imply
the context, and no falsification of sense is in-
volved. In other words, briefly, quotation ap-
peals to the sense, not the wording, of a previous
document, and appeals to it for a definite and
specific end; any dealing with the original is
therefore legitimate which does not falsify its
sense in the particular aspect needed for the
purpose in hand.* The only question which is
relevant here, then, is, Do the New-Testament
writers so quote the Old Testament as to fal-
sify it?
Many writers who have pleaded the phenom-
ena of the New Testament against verbal in-
spiration yet answer this question in the nega-
* Still further; the amount of freedom with which a
document is dealt with will be greater in direct propor-
tion to the thoroughness with which it is understood.
If a quoter feels doubtful as to his understanding of it,
he will copy it word for word; if he feels sure he un-
derstands it fully and thoroughly, he will allow himself
great freedom in his use of it; and if he is the author
of the original document, still more. If he is conscious
of having supernatural aid in understanding it, doubt'
less the amount of freedom would be greatest of all.


tivc. Tims, Mr. Warington admits that there
are “no really inapposite quotations ” —“ the
pertinency of the quotations may be marred by
their inaccurate citation, but pertinent, notwith-
standing, they always are. In a word, while .. .
the letter is often faulty, the spirit is always
divinely true.” * This is simply to yield the
only point in debate. Others, however, of not
such clearness of sight, do not scruple to assert
that the New-Testament writers do deal so loose-
ly with the Old Testament as to fall into actual
falsification, and this mainly in two particu-
lars: they quote passages in a sense different
from that which they bore in the Old Testa-
ment, and they assign passages to wrong sources.
As an example of those who make the first
charge we may take Prof. Jowett, who is never
weary of repeating it. f But when we ask for
his proof, it is found to rest on four false assump-
tions, tacitly made: that difference in form means
difference in sense, that typology is a dream, that
application through a true exegesis is illegiti-
mate, and that all adoption of language binds
one to its original sense. Thus Prof. Jowett
has difficulty in finding apposite examples,
* Inspiration, p. 107.
f See St. Paul’s Epp., etc., vol. i., p. 353 sq. : Lon*
don, 1855.


and those he does finally fix upoi. fail on ex-
amination.* Dr. Sanday, in his excellent class-
* The following are his examples: Eom. ii. 24, “ where
the words are taken from Isaiah, but the sense from Eze-
kiel.” Possibly a true criticism; what is illegitimate in it ?
Note, however, that this is probably not a formal quota-
tion, but an expression of Paul’s own thought in Old-Tes-
tament words, and hence the “ as it is written ” succeeds
(not precedes) the quotation; this “asit is written ” may
therefore refer to Isaiah as quoted, or to Isaiah and
Ezekiel, or to Ezekiel alone, now remembered by the
apostle. (Compare Beet with Philippi Meyer in loc.)
Horn. ix. 33, where only a composition of two passages
takes place, which are rightly “ harmonized,” as Prof. J.
admits, in Christ. 1 Cor. iii. 19, where the words are
altered from the Psalm to suit the context indeed, but
also in direct agreement with their context in the Psalm,
so that no alteration in sense results. Eom. x. 11, which
is called an “instance of the introduction of a word [?raf]
on which the point of the argument turns,” but which
is simply a case of true exegesis and application to the
matter in hand. The same passage, and without the
traf, had already been quoted in this context (ix. 33);
Paul now requotes it, calling attention to the force of the
unlimited 6 tviutevuv by emphasizing its sense through an
introduced waf, and confirming his interpretation imme-
diately by an additional Scripture (verse 13). Compare
Luke xviii. 14, as given in Matt, xxiii. 14, as an exam-
ple of like explanation, 1 Cor. xvi. 21, which is ad-
mitted to be a case “ of addition rather than alteration,”
and any objection to which must rest on a tacit denial
of typology, which even Meyer admits to be historically


I'fication of New-Testament quotations as to
justifiable here. Rom. x. 6-9, presenting alterations
which “ we should hesitate to attribute to the apostle but
for other examples, which we have already quoted, of
similar changes,” but which, even if considered as a
quotation, is defensible ' enough; then how much more
so when we note that it does not profess to be a quota-
tion, and is probably nothing more than the expression
of the apostle’s thought in old and beloved words!
1 Cor. xv. 45, “ a remarkable instance of discrepancy
in both words and meaning from Gen. ii. 7.” Quite
true, and therefore neither in words nor meaning taken
from Gen. 7. Prof. J. has simply neglected to note that
the quotation extends only to (.uaav. (Of. Meyer in loc.)
Rom. x. 13, where the charge of change of meaning
rests only on a misunderstanding of Mai. i. 2, 3. Rom.
iii. 10 sq., “a cento of quotations transferred by the
apostle [from their original narrow reference] to the
world in general.” As if Eccles. vii. 21, Ps. xiii. (xiv.)
12 were not already as universal as anybody could make
them, and as if the choice of passages throughout was
not admirably adapted to Paul’s purpose, which was to
prove that all men are sinners—yes, even the Jews.
Rom. xii. 20, which requires no remark. And finally
six allegories, which are immediately admitted not to be
allegories in the only sense of the word which would be
to their disadvantage— i.e. in the sense of an interpre-
tation which treated the literal sense of the words as
unimportant, in which sense of the word no allegory
occurs in the New Testament. These “allegories” are,
some of them, simple illustrations, some typical inter-
pretations.


their form,* cites two passages only which can
be plausibly asserted to be cases of mistaken
ascription —viz. Mark i. 2 and Matt, xxvii. 9,
10. The first of these ought not to present
any difficulty. The form of the sentence shows
that the actual words of the citation are paren-
thetical in essence: Mark declares that John
came preaching in accordance with a prophecy
of Isaiah, and then inserts, parenthetically, the
words referred to, adding also a parallel proph-
ecy of Malachi. That he gives more evidence
than he promised ought surely to be no objec-
tion ; it is enough that, having promised a
prophecy from Isaiah, he does give it. This
is strengthened by the fact that the prophecy
quoted from Malachi is actually based on, and
largely drawn out of, Isaiah, so that Isaiah is
actually the ultimate source of both the proph-
ecies given, and that from Malachi can be right-
ly looked upon as simply a further explanation
of what is essentially Isaiah’s. The quotation in
Matt, xxvii. 9, 10, on the other hand, does pre-
sent a difficulty, and is indeed, in whatever as-
pect it be looked upon, a very puzzling case. It
presents the extreme limit of paraphrase of the
original, and it is exceedingly difficult to assign
all its parts to their proper originals. It is plain,
* Gospels in the Second Century, pp. 16-25.


however, that Zech, xi. 13 was strongly coloring
the writer’s thoughts when he wrote it. Yet he
ascribes it to Jeremiah, Here, it is said, is a
clear case of erroneous ascription. This judg-
ment, however, takes no account of the exceed-
ing difficulty of ascribing the words actually
quoted to Zechariah alone. There seem to be
but three ways in which the passage can be
plausibly understood, and no one of these implies
an error oil Matthew’s part. We may either (1)
understand the words as a very free paraphrase
of Zech. xi. 13, and then appeal to the fact that
in the Talmudic arrangement Jeremiah stood
first in the “ book of the prophets,” so that Jere-
miah here stands as general title for the whole
book —with Lightfoot, Scrivener, Cook, Schaff-
Riddle, etc.; or (2) take the reference in v. 9as
intended for Jer. xviii., xix.—apart from which
passage, indeed, the quotation following cannot
be understood —and suppose the quotation itself
to be deflected to the words of Zechariah, so that
the passage becomes analogous to Mark i. 2, and
is meant to call attention to both Jeremiah and
Zechariah with (in general) Hengstenberg,
Hofmann, Thrupp, Fairbairn, etc,; or (3) we
may, with Lange, find the originals of the words
in four passages in Genesis, Zechariah and Jer-


emiah, the key to the whole being Jei. xxxii. 6-
8. Whichever of these views may be accepted
is of no moment so far as the present question
is concerned; each alike is consistent with the
evangelist’s truth, and therefore with his in-
spiration.
With these examples we must close. It is
only necessary to add the caution that the pas-
sages dealt with are supposed by Mr. Jowett and
Dr. Sanday to be the most striking and difficult
ones that could be put to the apologist out of the
two hundred and seventy-eight quotations which
the New Testament makes from the Old. It is
surely not presumptuous, then, to assert that Mr.
Warington’s wisdom is apparent, and that it is
true that the New-Testament quotations always
preserve the sense of the Old-Testament pas-
sages.
And with this, this paper must close. It has
been possible, of course, to examine only sam-
ples of critical objection. But those that have
been examined are samples, and have been selects
ed wholly in the interests of the objection. These
laid, therefore, and all are laid. The legitimate
proofs of the doctrine, resting primarily on the
claims of the sacred writers, having not been
rebutted by valid objections, that doctrine stands


doubly proved. Gnosis gives place to epignosis,
faith to rational conviction, and we rest in the
joyful and unshaken certainty that we possess a
Bible written by the hands of men indeed, but
also graven with the finger of God.


•>■ ■ f
\ ■
* ♦
