





THE
NEW SETTLEMENT
OF
AUSTRALIND.
WITH
A MAP OF THE DISTRICT,
AND A FULL DESCRIPTION OF THE COLONY, AND OF THE
PRINCIPLES ON WHICH IT IS SETTLED.
COMPILED FOR THE USE OF COLONISTS.
BY H. S. CHAPMAN ESQ.
HARVEY AND DARTON, GRACECHURCH STREET.
PRINTED BY C. REYNELL, LITTLE PULTENEY STREET.
MDCCCXLI.
Price Two Shillings.








THE
NEW SETTLEMENT
OF
AUSTRALIND.
WITH
A MAP OF THE DISTRICT,
AND A FULL DESCRIPTION OF THE COLONY, AND OF THE
PRINCIPLES ON WHICH IT IS SETTLED.
COMPILED FOR THE USE OF COLONISTS.
BY H. S. CHAPMAN ESQ.
LONDON:
HARVEY AND DARTON, GRACECHURCH STREET.
MDCCCXLI.


LONDON:
PRINTED BY CHARLES REYNELL,
LITTLE PULTEEEY STREET.,


CONTENTS.
PACK
Introduction 1. Object of the Work. 2. Necessity
for Colonization. 3. Plan of Work ...... 5
Chap. I.—Principles of Colonization Old and New
Countries—Old and New Principles 13
Chap. ll.—l. Of Australia in general, 2. Of Western
Australia in particular, 3, And especially of Aus-
tralind, its position, extent, and general character . 20
Chap. lll.—Captain Grey’s Journal—General Descrip-
tion of Australind 41
Chap. IV.—Rivers and Harbours -57
Chap. V.—Climate and Soil 04
Chap, Vl.—Productive and Commercial Resources . . 70
Chap, Vll.—The Natives and their Civilization ... 94
Chap. VIII.—The Western Australian Company—
Change of the Site of Australind —Application of
Principles 110
Chap. IX.—lnformation for Emigrants—the Emigration
Fund—New Ties —the Voyage, &c 130




INTRODUCTION.
§ 1. Object of the Wouk.
The object of this little volume is to describe the new
British province of Australind, on the western coast of
Australia, with its harbour, Port Grey; to explain the
principles of colonization on which it is founded; and
generally to embody, within a reasonable space, such
information as may be useful to the Australind emigrant.
As a necessary preliminary to the subject, it has
been deemed convenient to throw into the form of an
Introduction a few observations on the circumstances
which have of late years rendered colonization the great
necessity of the age, and which have co-operated with
the practical application of sounder principles, to rege-
nerate that spirit of colonization which animated the
whole of Europe during a part of the sixteenth and seven-
teenth centuries.
§ 2, Necessity ron Colonization.
If we contemplate the condition of the great body oi
the people in Great Britain and Ireland, we shall find
that both the agricultural and the manufacturing classes
are perpetually subject to insufficient wages and excessive
toil. We are so accustomed to hear of the depressed
condition of the people, that unless we take some care to
keep our sympathies alive to their sufferings, the tales
of misery which so constantly occur lose their force by
reason of their frequency j and it is only when we are


induced to contemplate some particular case that the
picture, like that of the captive in Sterne’s ‘ Sentimental
Journey,’ awakens our compassion.
An instance of the equanimity with which men listen
to the most striking evidences of the misery of the people,
occurred during the last session in the House of Lords.
In the course of some discussion which there took
place, the Duke of Buckingham, who would be sorry
even to be suspected of want of feeling for the people,
spoke of nine shillings a-week as “good wages” in
this country. The duke, no doubt, believed what he
said ; he never dreamed that he had advanced a propo-
sition revolting to any man, although at the moment he
spoke good wheat was at least nine shillings a bushel';
nor did he ever reflect that at that price the labourer’s
wages must be wholly expended in the purchase of bread,
by which stern necessity the labourer and his family are
deprived of everything in the shape of comfort.
The above declaration, shocking as it must appear
when we examine it closely, elicited no extraordinary
feeling on the part of those to whom it was addressed.
Many of those who heard the remark, are certainly men
of benevolent tendencies, and all that we are entitled to
infer from the circumstance is, that they have so long
been accustomed to contemplate the wretchedness of the
people, that they cease to regard it as such. Their ge-
neral disposition towards the mass of the people is best
expressed by the English word charitable, which does
not always include the idea of just s but having been
from infancy removed from the possibility, of sympathy,
which is something very different from well wishing,
they have never knowrr what it is to think otherwise
than that eight or nine shillings a-week is quite enough
for an agricultural labourer. It is not long since that,
in the House of Commons, a well-dressed gentleman,
having all the externals of humanity, spoke of what the
landlords and farmers considered sufficient for the feed
(for that was the word made use of) of a farm-labourer’s
family. Indeed it is scarcely possible for a man, who
has never known a want, to place himself in the position


of a peasant; and when the Lancashire and Spitalfield
weaver’s five shillings a-week is night after night expa-
tiated upon, we may almost cease to wonder that well-fed
Lords and Commoners should deem nine shillings a-week
“ good wages,” and benevolently rejoice that the bold
peasantry of England are really sot very well off.
In the course of the hand-loom inquiry, the writer
had opportunities of seeing some of the forms and aspects
of misery to which the labouring population are subject
in the manufacturing districts. The only period of life
in which any degree of comfort was perceptible, was
when the working men’s children were old enough to
work—a short period, indeed, as it ceased as they mar-
ried away from him. The periods of misery, embracing
almost his whole life, are before his children become old
enough to earn, and after they marry off, which they
usually do at an early age. There is scarcely any
period of the labouring man’s life where his difficulties
oecome so great as about the ninth or tenth year of his
marriage, with a family of four, five, or six children too
young to labour.
If colonization be calculated to alleviate sach misery,
by altering the ratio between the supply of labour and
the demand for it, by diminishing the one and increasing
the other, we apprehend its necessity becomes apparent.
As a contrast to the depressed condition of the people
of this country, and even to the good wages of the Duke
of Buckingham, let us now look at the wages 1 of labour
in new countries.
On the landing of the first settlement of New Zealand
-—a colony established on the same principles as Aus-
tralind—even with considerable competition from native
labour, the lowest wages were twenty-eight to thirty shil-
lings per week. Mechanics could earn as much as fifty
shillings; and some few artizans were earning sixteen
shillings per diem, or nearly five pounds per week.
Let it be remembered that this is before the grants of
land were given out, so that when the town acres and
country sections shall be allotted, wages must neces-
sarily rise.


• In South Australia high wages also prevail. Mr.
James, who wrote an account of South Australia, in-
tended to be very discouraging, gives many details of
the high wages in and around Adelaide. Meeting a
steerage passenger, who had also emigrated in the same
ship, Mr James asked him what he was doing. “I am
employed,” said the labourer, “ in collecting firewood
for the brickmakew.”—“ I hope you are doing well,”
said Mr James. “Yes,” said the labourer, “ I have
no cause to grumble; it brings me in, one way with
another, fourteen shillings a-day.” Now collecting fuel,
that is, picking up sticks, is about the lowest employ-
ment—the merest brute labour to which a man can be
put; and yet we find it rewarded with something over
two hundred a-year ! or rather more than nine times the
“ good” wages of the Duke of Buckingham.
Skilled labour is more highly remunerated; and in
especial cases, where there is an unsupplied demand, the
remuneration is necessarily very high. “ That tall man
yonder, with his long pit-saw across his shoulders, glit-
tering in the sun, and his mate with him, are both from
New South Wales, and were even convicts, or the de-
scendants of convicts, in that colony. They are now
earning good wages (not the Buckingham “ good
wages”) as sawyers in the Mount Lofty Range; ana the
pair of them received, last Sunday morning, eighteen
sovereigns for their previous week’s work in the bush.
Nine pounds a-week for a working man!”— (James,
p. 6.)
Of the strong motive to escape from the “ good wages ”
of the Duke of Buckingham, there cannot be a doubt.
In most of our colonies the wages of common labourers
are many times as great as in England, whilst provisions
are generally lower; so that if a reason why men do not
emigrate be desired, it must be sought—not in the ab-
sence of an adequate motive, but rather in the difficulty
and expense of removing, and perhaps partly in igno-
rance of the advantages of new countries.
Whilst the industrious classes are thus perpetually
subject to “ insufficient wages and excessive toil,” the


middle class—that is, all between those who, having
nothing but their hands, work for hire, and those whom
wealth removes from the necessity of exertion, either
bodily or mental —are carrying on a perpetual Struggle
to maintain their position in society. The author of
* England and America ’ calls them the uneasy class, and a
better name could not have been devised. Take the agri-
cultural, manufacturing, and commercial classes, it will
be found that all but the wealthy few are engaged in ft
constant and painful effort to preserve their station in so-
ciety, from which numbers are continually being thrust
by the superior energies of their fellows. That there fs
not room for all, is obvious to all, and this necessarily in-
duces a struggle of painful intensity.
What actual distress is to the industrious classes, “ the
difficulty of providing for a family,” is to the middle
class. It is the conspicuous form of complaint in which
the uneasiness of even the more fortunate and wealthy
portion of the class in question is frequently made mani-
fest. It is a difficulty which even brings the aristocracy
within the limits of uneasiness. After showing the ex-
treme difficulty of providing for soh#, the author of
‘ England and America ’ thus continues -
“But if a man of fixed income, his income being small
or moderate, be troubled to provide for his sons, how to
provide for his daughters is ft more perplexing question.
The first, no, the second point, is to gel them married;
the first point is to prevent them from marrying into a
lower, which commonly means into a poorer rank than
that in which they were born. The first point is generally
effected during childhood, when every day, and almost
every hour of the day, something happens to impress them
w ith a fear of such degradation as attaches to imprudent
Marriages. The second purpose being subject to the
first, becomes extremely difficult. If the girl had a for-
tune, she would belong to Captain Hall’s spending class;
V'e suppose her to have no fortune, except beauty, ten-
derness, modesty, and good sense. Who will take her as
a wife that she will take as a husband ? She may by
chance, or rather her mother may, by dint of great toil


and management, catch one of the spending class; bill!
this -would be an exception to the general rule. The
general rule with the daughters of men with small incomes,
whether fixed or not, is a choice between celibacy and
marriage with one of the uneasy class. Now a great
proportion of young men of the uneasy class dread mar-
riage, unless there be fortune in the case, as the surest
means of increasing their embarrassments. This is onti
of the most important features in the social state of
England.”
‘ ‘ There is not in the world a more deplorable sight than
a fine brood of English girls turning into old maids one
.after the other; first, reaching the bloom of beauty, full
of health, spirits, and tenderness; next, striving anxiously,
aided by their mother, to become honourable and happy
wives; then fretting, growing thin, pale, listless, and
Cross; at last, if they do not go mad or die of consump-
tion, seeking consolation in the belief of an approaching
millenium, or in the single pursuit of that happiness in
another world which this world has denied them.”—
P. 101—105.
The motive to remove is clearly as strong among Mr
Wakefield’s uneasy class as among the industrious mil-
lions, so that all that seems necessary is to render out
. colonies attractive to them—attractive not merely to the
mere money-seekers, but to those also whose education
and habits render a refined society necessary to their hap-
piness. How this is to be accomplished will be seen in
the first chapter, in which the effect of the new principles,
• or the attractiveness of colonies, will be fully explained.
It may be sufficient to state, in this Introduction, that
the principles in question have certainly given a new im-
pulse to that ancient spirit of colonization which has for
centuries been conspicuous among the English people.
Under the impulse of new principles, the colonizing
spirit has acquired an entirely new character. Emigra-
tion is no longer confined to the most wretched portion
of the population—to the mere labouring masses. It is
the light of science alone which has shed a brilliant ray
on the modern practice of colonization. New countries


which have until recently been mere receptacles for the
superabundant portion of the hard-working millions,
have recently become attractive to the more enlightened
portions of the community. In short, what was once
mere emigration is now colonization. The removal of
society has taken the place of that of mere masses; and
men of education and refinement may now emigrate,
without any material disturbance of their previous habits.
This has very naturally been accompanied by a com-
plete revolution in the state of opinion respecting emigra-
tion, This is a necessary consequence of the superior
attractiveness of colonies at present compared with former
times, but it also reacts as a cause of such attractiveness.
As to the change of opinion itself, it is impossible to go
into intelligent society without meeting ample evidences
of its prevalence. People to whom the bare idea of
severing themselves from their native country was in-
superably repugnant, now readily embrace a favourable
opportunity to emigrate, and we hear them constantly
speaking of emigration as a contingency not to be dreaded,
and even to be desired. Among the educated portion of
the middle class, where families are numerous, it is now
not unusual to find some one or more of the sons seeking
fortune in our several colonial possessions, and carrying
with them those energetic habits which have made this
country what she is.
“ Coelum non anlmum mutant qui trans mare currunt.”— Horat,
Similar causes produce like effects, and the most par-
donable of all national feelings is that pride with which an
Englishman may view the nations of Englishmen to
Which the spirit of colonization has given birth.
Women, too, of refined education, no longer object to
emigration, if circumstances favour the step. South
Australia, New Zealand, and more recently Australind,
the colony of which we write, afford many striking cases
of the cheerful emigration of young women of refinement,
who have been accustomed from infancy to a species of
society which the older colonies were destitute of, but
which in our newer colonies they themselves help to form.


The younger portions of the aristocratic class also, who
were formerly content to accept a miserable pittance at
the hands of the party in power, are now catching some of
the enthusiasm of the class habitually trained to activity.
The result is, that, we find them no longer playing the
part of office-seekers in our old and ill-governed colonies,
but honourably striving for wealth and distinction as
active, settlers in the more attractive of the Australian
Colonies, and in New Zealand.
There is, in fact, no class of persona to whom the
colonies recently established on the new principles, and
especially the colony of Australind, are. not highly at-
tractive.
§ 3, Plan op the Work.
Having shown that no class of persons in this country
is wholly exempt from the motive to colonize, we are in
a situation to explain the plan of the volume.
The first chapter will explain those principles of coloni-
zation which are alone calculated to render new countries
attractive to all classes of the community. This portion
of the volume will embrace a contrast of the most conspi-
cuous features of what we call old and new countries,
with especial reference to old and new principles, or ra-
ther modes of colonizing. The succeeding chapters, after
giving a general sketch of Australia, will enter into some
simple details respecting the position, extent, and ge-
neral features of Australind; its soil and climate; its
rivers and harbours; its native population considered with
especial reference to civilization; and its productive
resources and commercial prospects; together with in-
formation of practical use to those who contemplate
emigrating to this beautiful country.


CHAPTER I.
PRINCIPLES OF COLONIZATION.
It is the duty, as well as the interest of every person who
contemplates removing from an old to a new and thinly-
peopled country, such as Australind, to make himself
thoroughly acquainted with the system of colonization, of
which he is necessarily destined to form a component
part.
In pursuing this object, it will be found that, there is
in colonization, as well as in everything else, a good and
a bad way of attaining the end—a position which the
following well-chosen parable forcibly illustrates:—
“ Sir Joseph Banks wishing to ornament a bare
piece of ground in front of his house near Hounslow,
transplanted into it some full-grown trees. Those trees
were torn from the beds in which they had grown to
maturity. In order to save trouble in moving them, all
their smaller roots and branches were cut off; the trunks,
thus mutilated, were stuck into the ground, and there,
wanting the nourishment which they had before received
through innumerable leaves and fibres, they soon died
and rotted. A way, however, has lately been disco-
vered of transplanting full-grown trees, so that they shall
flourish as if they had not been removed. The art, for a
knowledge of which we are indebted to Sir Henry Stew-
art, consists in removing the whole of the tree uninjured;
the stem, all the limbs, every branch and twig, every root
and fibre ; and in placing the several parts of this whole in
the same relative situation as they occupied before; so that
each part shall continue to perform its proper office, the
trunk to be nourished by its proper number of mouths
above and below; and a due proportion or balance be
preserved between the weight of the branches and the
n


strength of the roots, between the action of the roots as
well as branches on opposite sides, between the func-
tions of each part and all the other parts respectively
and together. The work of colonizing a desert bears a
curious resemblance to that of transplanting full-grown
trees. In neither case is it the ultimate object merely to
remove; in both cases it is to establish; and as, in the
former case, the object is to remove not a mere trunk, but
an entire tree, so, in the latter case, the immediate object
is to remove not people merely* but society. In both
cases equally, success depends on attention to details.
The planters of modern colonies have generally gone to
work without much attention to details; as if society
might be planted in a desert, without regard to the
numerous and minute circumstances on which society
depends. Many a modern colony has perished through
the inattention of its founders to little matters which it
was supposed would take care of themselves. Of those
modern colonies which have not perished, many suffered
in the beginning the greatest privations and hardships;
while in the least unfavourable cases, it has been as if a
full-grown oak, carelessly removed and soon dead, had
dropped acorns to become in time full-grown trees.”*
To feel the force of the above illustration, it is necessary
to mark the difference between what are usually called old
and new countries. In old countries capital and people are
abundant, land scarce, and therefore dear. In new coun-
tries, on the other hand, the features are reversed; land
is plentiful and cheap, whilst everything else, including
labour, is dear. So cheap, in fact, has land been in most of
our colonies, that it might be had by asking for; that is, the
government was in the habit of making grants of land
to all who applied for it, and who would agree to fulfil
certain easy conditions.
The prominent consequence of this improvident system
of land-granting was, that no man would labour for hire.
Every labouring man who went out to a new country,
had been in the habit of associating the idea of wealth
* ‘ The new British Province of South Australia.—Knight, 183 S.


with that of owning land. In old countries, experience
taught him that to own land was to be wealthy and pow-
erful ; to be a landowner, therefore, has always been the
first wish of the settler. The capitalist going out at the
same time, instead Of being able to command such
assistance as would render his capital productive, has not
unfrequently been compelled to confine his operations to
just so much land and capital as he could work with the
few pair of hands constituting his own family. It was
as if two men should go forth to settle in a new country,
one of whom possessed two spades, and the other had
none. He of the spare spade would not lend it to him
who had none, because he himself had a large plot of
land which he wished the labourer to help him to dig;
whilst the labourer, having just as much land as his
spade-owning neighbour, would rather poke up the sur-
face with a stake, and retain the envied character of an
independent freeholder, than become the hired servant of
any man. The consequence of this thorough want of co-
operation between the spade-capitalist and the spadeless
labourer would be, that the spare spade—the unemployed
capital—would rot, and the sum of production, instead
of being the result of the labour of two men, working
amicably and in combination, with two good tools,
would be simply that of their isolated exertions, the one
only working with a good tool, and the other with a
rude help to labour, which really amounted to no tool at
all. The loss by reason of want of combination would
be incalculable. They could effect none of those opera-
tions which require the combined force of two persons.
This is a type of planless colonization, which proceeded
on the supposition that the removal of mere masses was
all in all.
The last colony deliberately promoted on this yicious
principle, was the colony established at the Swan River
in 1829. It turned out the most signal failure of modern
times; although, under the wise management of Mr
John Hutt, the present governor, there is every prospect
of its being completely resuscitated. Its first failure—
from no defect in the country, but clearly the result of


the cheapness of land—is thus described by Mr Wake-
field in his evidence before a Select Committee of the
House of Commons on the disposal of waste lands in the
colonies.*
Chairman. —What do you consider the most striking
practical evil resulting from too great a profusion in
granting land ?—The most striking, because it happens
to be the last, is the new settlement of Swan River, in.
Western Australia.
In what way is that the most striking?—That colony,
which was founded with a general hope in this country,
amongst very intelligent persons of all descriptions, that
it would be a most prosperous colony, has all but perished.
It has not quite perished, but the population is a great
deal less than the number of emigrants; it has been a
diminishing population since its foundation. The greater
part of the capital which was taken out (and that was very
largo) has disappeared altogether, and a great portion of
the labourers taken out (and they were a very consider-
able number) have emigrated a second time to Van Die-
men’s Land and New South "Wales. The many disasters
which befel this colony (for some people did actually die
of hunger), and the destruction of the colony taken out
to Swan River, and the second emigration of the people
who went out, appear to me to be accounted for at once
by the manner in which land was granted. The first
consisted of 500,000 acres to an individual, Mr Peel.
That grant was marked out upon the map in England—
-500,000 acres were taken round about the port or land-
ing-place. It was quite impossible for Mr Peel to culti-
vate 500,000 acres, or a hundredth part of the grant;
but others were of course necessitated to go beyond this
grant, in order to take their land. So that the first oper-
ation in that colony was to create a great desert, to mark
out a large tract of land, and to say, “ This is a desert;
no man shall come here—no man shall cultivate this
land.” So far dispersion was produced, because, upon
the terms on which Mr Peel obtained his land, land was
* Ordered by the House of Commons to be printed, Aug. 30,1836.


given to others. The governor took another 100,000
acres; another person took 80,000 acres; and the dis-
persion was so great, that at last the settlers did not
know where they were; that is, each settler knew that
he was where he was, but he could not tell where any
one else was, and therefore he did not know his own
position. That was why some people died of hunger;
for though there was an ample supply of food at the
governor's house, the settlers did not know where the
governor was, and the governor did not know where the
settlers were. Then, besides the evils resulting from dis-
persion, there occurred what I consider almost a greater
one; which is, the separation of the people, and the
want of combinable labour. The labourers, on finding
out that land could be obtained with the greatest facility,
—the labourers taken out under contracts, under engage-
ments which assured them of very high wages if they
would labour during a certain time for wages, imme-
diately laughed at their masters. Mr Peel carried out
altogether about 300 persons, men, women, and chil-
dren : of these 300 persons, about 60 were able labour-
ing men. In six months after his arrival he had nobody
even to make his bed for him, or to fetch him water from
the river. He was obliged to make his own bed, and to
fetch water for himself, and to light his own fire. All
the labourers had left him. The capital, therefore, which
he took out, viz., implements of husbandry, seeds and
stock, especially stock, immediately perished; without
shepherds to take care of the sheep, the sheep wandered
and were lost; eaten by the native dogs, killed by the
natives and by some of the other colonists, very likely by
his own workmen; but they were destroyed; his seeds
perished on the beach; his houses were of no use; his
wooden houses were there in frame, in pieces, but could
not be put together, and were therefore quite useless, and
rotted on the beach. This was the case with the capi-
talists generally. The labourers, obtaining land very
readily, and running about to fix upon locations for
themselves, and to establish themselves independently,
very soon separated themselves into isolated families, into


■what may be termed cottiers, with a very large extent of
land; something like the Irish cottiers, but having, instead
of a very small piece of land, a large extent of land.
Every one was separated, and very soon fell into the
greatest distress. Falling into the greatest distress, they
returned to their master, and insisted upon the fulfilment
of the agreements upon which they had gone out; but then
Mr Peel said, “ All my capital is gone; you have ruined
me by deserting me, by breaking your engagements; and
you now insist upon my observing the engagements when
you yourselves have deprived me of the means of doing
so.” They wanted to hang him, and he ran away to a
distance, where he secreted himself for a time till they
were carried off to Van Diemen’s Land, where they ob-
tained food, and where, by the way, land was not obtain-
able by any means with so great facility as at Swan River,
Such are the evils which necessarily spring from ex-
cessive cheapness of land, and which have been more
conspicuous in Western Australia than in any other
country ; because it was a great scheme with abundant
means of every kind, with an extremely eligible field,
and from which scheme great expectations were formed.
Failure, too, was more clearly traceable to the vicious
plan of colonization there adopted, from the contrast
exhibited by South Australia, which with fewer natural
advantages, and solely by the . force of a better system,
has advanced more rapidly in population and wealth
than any colony previously established. So long as ex-
cessive cheapness of land is permitted to continue, pros-
perity is impossible. It can only produce a body of
pauper landowners, scattered sparingly over a wide
extent of country, scarcely knowing their neighbours,
and rendering combination and co-operation—the main-
springs of civilization—impossible. The capitalist is
literally scared from such a country. He must feel,
after the example of Swan River, that he has no induce-
ment to offer to the labourer to -work for him, equal to
the seductive influence of an estate for next to nothing ;
whilst the landlord-labourer—the pauper-freeholder, can-
not draw from the soil half so much as his share


would amount to*—a share which, in that case, -would
take the form of wages—in case he could be brought to
co-operate with the capitalist.
, The statement of the evil in itself almost conveys a
suggestion of the remedy. Cheapness, or rather excesr
give cheapness, being the evil, an evil which really
presses more severely on the labourer than the capitalist,
the remedy consists in making land—we will not say
dear, for that is not contemplated,—we will simply say
not cheap. By fixing an uniform price per acre upon
all land in the colony, the labourer is compelled to work
for wages for a time ; and by devoting the proceeds to
the removal of people from the country in which people
are plentiful, and labour, therefore, cheap, to that country
in which it is deficient, a continual supply of labour is
kept up.
To render colonies attractive to the capitalist by keep-
ing up a due supply of labour, and to the labourer by
keeping wages high,—to preserve, in short, a due pro-
portion between land capital and labour, it is not alone
necessary that the price of land should be fixed and uni-
must also be “sufficient, but not more than
sufficient,” to attain the object sought. Between the
extremely high price of land in old countries, and its
excessive cheapness in new countries, there is room for
every possible degree ; but there must be some mean
which is equally free from the very opposite evils exhi-
bited by old and new countries. If the price be less than
sufficient, —that is, too low, —the peculiar evils of new
countries must arise. There must be dispersion of people,
as at Swan River, together with complete want of co-
operation between the capitalist and the labourer, and an
impossibility of combining labour to produce effects
which isolated labour is incapable of. If, on the other
hand, the price of land be “ more than sufficient,” it
must fail in one of the two following ways:—either by
producing the very evils which colonization proposes to
remedy, or by promoting that unauthorized occupation
of land, which in America is called “ squatting,” and
so producing dispersion of the population and its


consequent, barbarism. If fixed at a price approaching
to that which prevailed in the emigrating country, so as
to confine the population within a space inconveniently
narrow, the labourer would have no motive to remove.
To induce the industrious labourer to emigrate, the colony
must be made attractive to him; and in the case of too
high a price, he would only emigrate provided there
were facilities for squatting. In countries like New
Zealand and Australind, for instance, nothing can pre-
vent squatting, if the price be too high. Too high as
well as too low a price, therefore, would ultimately pro-
duce the same evil—dispersion, and in both cases capital
would cease to flow into the country. The price sought
must be the “golden mean” between these two ex-
tremes; in other words, it must be “sufficient, but not
more than sufficient.” Before the Committee of the
House of Commons on the disposal of colonial lands,
Mr Wakefield was pressed to state what price he deemed
sufficient, but he very prudently declined. Such a price
could not be legislatively fixed, though it may be deter-
mined experimentally with considerable accuracy. The
land and emigration commissioners, for instance, being
apprised of all the circumstances connected with labour
and employment in each colony, will perpetually have
before them two beacons to enable them to avoid each
class of evils. No labourer should want employment
at high wages, and no capitalist should want labourers.
So long as labourers have no disposition to squat,
and the steady continuance of the sales of land shows
that the attractiveness of the colony continues unim-
paired,—so long as every labourer who becomes a capi-
talist, and purchases land, can at once find a labourer
to aid him, it may be fairly affirmed that the golden
mean has been preserved.
“ This golden mean obviates two species of bondage;
by providing corabinable labour, it renders industry very
productive, and maintains both higher wages and liigher
profits; it makes the colony as attractive as possible
both to capitalists and labourers; and not merely to
those, but also, by bestowing on the colony the better


attributes of an old society, to those who have a distaste
for the primitive condition of colonies heretofore.” *
As the proceeds of the sales of land constitute a fund
for the removal of labourers from the old to the new
country, the efficiency of that fund necessarily depends
on the mode in which it is expended. The object is to
relieve the population of the old, and increase, to the
utmost, that of the new country : to produce, in short,
the greatest effect at the smallest cost. How this is to
be done may be easily explained.
The faculty of continuing the race can only reside
in a portion of the population. It is this portion also
which competes in the labour-market. By selecting
emigrants from this section of the population only, we
not merely diminish the supply of active labour at home,
and increase it where it is most wanted, but we also
convey the greatest germ of increase at the smallest cost.
Let us take two extreme cases. Suppose the expen-
diture of the labour-fund to be exclusively employed in
removing the aged and the imbecile—those who had
long ceased either to add to the population or to com-
pote for wages; and who, in the ordinary course of
nature, could not long continue on the scene, the effect
would be to produce not the slightest good, but merely
inflict the pain of removal uselessly and improvidently.
Let us now turn to the other extreme. If, instead of
even a promiscuous emigration of families, composed of
persons of all ages, we removed only those who annually
attained the age of puberty, we should, in time, wholly
depopulate the old country, and rapidly fill up the new.
Between these two extremes lies the wise and proper
course. By selecting emigration as to age and sex, by
confining the expenditure of the emigration-fund to equal
proportions of both sexes between certain ages say
eighteen and thirty-five, we give the greatest relief to the
old country, and provide for the rapid peopling of the
new. To repeat the words we have already made use of,
we convey the greatest germ of future increase at the
smallest cost.
* British Colonization of New Zealand ,p. 422.
B 2


• Many of the advantages of selection, both as to age
and sex, must be obvious; but the following extracts
from Mr Wakefield’s evidence before the waste lands
committee, place those advantages in so clear a light,
that they cannot be unacceptable to the reader.
Chairman. Have you considered the effect of a
selection of emigrants, as to age and sex, upon the pro-'
fmrtion that would take place between land and popu-
ation in the colony, and upon the consequent progress
of colonization ?—I have considered what would be the
effect of selection, having for its object the greatest pos-
sible amount of emigration by means of any given sum;
but I do not feel competent to give a very specific
answer on that point. I once made a calculation, by
which it appeared to me that if all the convicts who had
been sent to New South Wales had been young persons
in an equal proportion of the sexes, just arrived at the
age of maturity, the population of New South Wales
would have been 600,000, instead of what it actually was
when I made the calculation, namely, 50,000. It ap-
peared to me that the selection of emigrants would enable
you, in the course of a certain number of years (about
48 years, I think, was the term of my calculation), to
place in the colony ten times as many people, with any
given sum, as you could place there without any selection
at all; or rather perhaps, in that ease, I ought to say,
with a bad selection, for in New South Wales the worst
possible selection was made; a large proportion of males
and women, principally past the time of child-bearing,
and when not so aged, yet in a situation where the great
excess of males put marriage altogether out of the ques-
tion, or child-bearing out of the question, That was the
worst possible selection; but the difference between the
best and the worst appeared to me to be as ten to one.
It must strike every one that there is a selection of emi-
grants which would give a much greater power to the
emigration-fund than if no selection at all were made;
that there is a selection as to the age and sex, which
would enable you, with any given emigration-fund, to
remove to the colonies a much larger number of people


than if no selection were made; that, in short, there is a
selection by which, with the minimum of expenditure,
the maximum of colonial population would be obtained.
This is a question on w’hich I do not pretend at all to be
sufficiently informed to offer any precise opinion 5 and if
I might be allowed to offer a suggestion to the com.-
mittee, I should say, that the persons of whom they
ought to make inquiry on this subject, are gentlemen
whose profession it is to make calculations relating to the
rate of mortality, the increase of population, and various
questions connected with population, such as some of the
more intelligent actuaries of the insurance offices,
Mr Roebuck.— Do not you think that there is a slight
inadvertence of expression, “ you would be able to carry
Out a larger number of personsdo you not mean that
you would carry out the means of increasing the future
population to a greater degree ?—I ought to have used
the expression “ established in the colonyfor the
object is to establish the largest number in the colony,
by means of the removal of the smallest number.
Chairman. —You conceive that it is by selection of
emigrants, that the power of the immigration fund would
be at its maximum ?—Yes, Ido .... And that, in proper,-
tion as the population 'of the colony was increased, the
population of the mother country might be diminished, by
this proper selection ; the future population at all events ?
—Yes, the future population of the mother country, just'
as it would be the future population of the colony. Of
course, whatever carried to the colony the greatest means
of increase, would also remove from the mother country
the greatest means of increase; and whatever the benefit
obtained by the mother country or the colony, the maxi-
mum of benefit would be obtained by the employment of
any given sum with the best selection.
You would wish to have a selection of young couples
for emigration ?—lt seems quite clear that the class of
persons to be selected, would be an equal proportion of
the sexes, who have just arrived at the age of maturity.
Are there any other advantages, in addition to those
you have stated, which would result from giving a


passage to young couples ?—Very great ones, as it ap-
pears to me. By removing the selected class, not only
would you remove the greatest seeds of increase in the
smallest number of people, but you would remove the
greatest quantity of labour (using the term labour to ex-
press saleable muscular exertion) at the least cost. If
there were a pressure upon the labour market at home,
by removing that class which was then commencing to
work, and which had before it a long period of health
and strength for labour, you would give the greatest
relief to the labour market with the least expenditure;
and in the next place, your object in the colony being the
greatest possible labour at the least expense, by bringing
to the colony a young man who had just arrived at his
strength, but who had the prospect of a long life, you
would give to the colony the greatest benefit at the least
expenditure. Thirdly, there is in all emigration the
same sort of evil as there is in storms and floods. Emi-
gration perse is an evil; it is the greatest evil to remove
from the country of one’s birth and one’s affections.
Now by the proposed selection, since the greatest amount
of emigration would really take place with the removal
of the least number of people, you would obtain the
maximum of good to be obtained by emigration with the
minimum of evil, whatever the evil may be. In the
fourth place, there are great objections to any but young
people; I will not say any, but the narrow class to which
T have adverted. Children suffer immensely in being
removed; they suffer on board ships, they suffer from
the confinement; and when they arrive in the colony,
they are either neglected or are a great incumbrance.
Old people suffer much more from being removed from
the scenes to which they are attached, and they are also
less able to bear the fatigues which necessarily attend
upon a long voyage. Lastly, almost every young couple
no sooner marry in this country, or wherever they may be,
but they look out for anew home. At the moment when
they contemplate marriage, or at least when they are
about to marry, they may be said to be already on the
move. You would catch them moving; you do not tear


-them from a place where they were fixed, but you would
enable them to move to that place where their labour
■would be of the greatest possible value to them. By that
selection, therefore, it appears to me that you would
reduce the evil of emigration, whatever it may be, not
only to the minimum, but positively to a very small
amount indeed.
Thus, then, the two great principles of colonization,
which, with some slight modification hereafter to be ex-
plained, have been adopted by the Western Australian
Company in the colonization of Australind, arc:—
I. That the waste lands in our colonies be sold at a
. fixed, uniform, and sufficient price.
. 11. That the proceeds be expended in conveying young
persons of both sexes, in equal proportions, to the
colony which furnishes the fund.
Such are the principles of colonization which have been
adopted by the Western Australian Company, and which
have been successful wherever they have been applied.
They embrace a combination of the means which are
necessary not only for conveying masses, but for perma-
nently establishing society in a new settlement. They
perform their office with the least possible disturbance of
previous habits. They are the very opposite—the an-
tagonist principles, as it were—of that planless practice
which supposes that to convey people to the new colony
is the one thing needful. The example of Virginia
shows that the conveyance of masses alone to the fertile
lands of new countries, is not sufficient to subdue the
wilderness. In Virginia, after twenty years’ perseverance
in colonization, and the conveyance of 20,000 people, not
above 2,000 were to be found. There were people, there
was wealth, and there was intelligence, but all were ill-
directed, There was no system, and combined exertion
was unknown. All our early efforts at colonization were
disastrous; under the new system, the causes of such dis-
aster have been carefully investigated and guarded against,
and the extraordinary example of New Zealand may be
adduced as a proof of the perfect practicability of the
system. Similar success may fairly be anticipated in the


case of Australind. In every respect, as we shall pre-
sently see, the field is eligible ; in point of soil, climate, and
natural resources, and above all in position for trade, no
part of Australia enjoys a greater combination of advan-
tages ; hence all that is wanting is what has just been
supplied, and what we trust this chapter has sufficiently
explained— a sound system of colonization.
CHAPTER II.
I. OF AUSTRALIA IN GENERAL—II. OF WESTERN AUS-
TRALIA IN PARTICULAR—III. AND ESPECIALLY OF
AUSTHALIND: ITS POSITION, EXTENT, AND GENERAL
CHARACTER,
§ I. Australia generally.
Australia is the name given by modern gecgi&phers to
that great insular continent lying immediately south of
the great Asiatic islands between the Indian and South
Pacific Oceans, and comprising what was formerly
known as New South Wales and New Holland.* It
extends from the torrid to the temperate zone, from lati-
tude 9° to 38° south, and from 112° to 150° east longi-
tude. It is 3,000 miles from east to west, and 2,000
* The nomenclature of the various divisions of island groups in
the southern hemisphere has been improved of late years, and what
is more, the Improvement has been pretty generally adopted. Poly-
nesia embraces the whole of the islands of the Pacific, from the
Xadrone Islands in the North to the Tonga Islands and New Cale-
donia in the South Pacific. Australasia includes Australia, Van
.Diemen’s Land, Norfolk Island, New Zealand, and the Chatham
Islands, together with all other islands lying adjacent to these*
Tasmania is sometimes used to embrace Van Diemen’s Land and
the small islands around it, after Tasman, the discoverer. It has
the merit of being a more euphonous name than Van Diemen’s
Land, but the latter has too old a tenure to be displaced* Austral-
ind is analagous to all these, and has, moreover, a definite meaning.
With a better name for the New Zealand group, the nomenclature
of the modern discoveries in the Southern Ocean would be unex-
ceptionable.


miles from north to south; its circumference has been
estimated at 8,000 miles, and, in point of superficial
extent, it is nearly equal to Europe.
Of the interior of this vast country, our knowledge is
comparatively small. The northern, north-eastern, and
north-western portions of the coast are very imperfectly
known, and our settlements, great and increasing as they
are, occupy, in fact, but a small and interrupted belt
of territory, extending around the southern or more tem-
perate portion of the continent, and not hitherto passing
the thirtieth degree of south latitude on either coast.
These settlements are now four in number, namely,
New South Wales, sometimes called Eastern Australia,
on the eastern coast; Australia Felix, better known
from the name of its harbour Port Phillip, a dependency
on New South Wales at the southern extremity; South
Australia, immediately adjoining Australia Felix to the
westward ; and Western Australia, • which includes the
Swan River, a name well known to English ears, on the
western coast, a little further north. An inspection of
any general map of Australia will make the positions of
these colonies sufficiently clear to the reader. New
South Wales and Western Australia are in nearly the
same latitude, but on opposite coasts, the only difference
being that the former comprises a greater extent of
country than the latter. South Australia corresponds
with the southern portion of New South Wales, Ade-
laide, the capital of the former, being about one degree
south of Sydney, the capital of the latter. Port Phillip,
as already stated, lies south of all.
The island of Van Diemen’s Land is situated to the
south of Australia, from which it is separated by Bass’s
Strait, so called from the person who discovered it,
and thereby ascertained the insularity of Van Die-
men’s Land, which before that time was believed to
be part of the main land. Van Diemen’s Land extends
to 43° south latitude; its length,from north to south, is
200 miles, and its breadth about 160. It has been com-
puted to contain about 15,000,000 of square acres, which
is about the superficies of Ireland.


' Such are the broad geographical features of these
growing colonies, but they have at times occupied a
place in the public eye from other characteristics. New
South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land, for instance,
are convict colonies; Port Phillip is remarkable, as
having been voluntarily colonized by free settlers from
the other colonies, and latterly from England; South
Australia has been regarded with intense interest as the
first field chosen for the application of those sound
principles of colonization on which Australind is esta-
blished, and which have been discussed in the first
chapter; whilst Western Australia is remarkable as the
scene of that notable blunder in colonization already
noticed, but which, under the wise administration of
Mr John Hutt, and the better information of her Ma-
jesty’s government, is now happily in process of rapid
reparation.
If we compare Australia with other countries, it fur-
nishes the conception of a country in an imperfect state
of formation. Yastand nearly barren plains cover a large
portion of its surface, volcanic action has been extremely
sparing, and it seems to require what the German geolo-
gists call an universal upheaving—a complete breaking up
of the surface, to render the whole country thoroughly eli-
gible for the habitation of man. The whole animal race dif-
fers from that of other countries, presenting singular
anomalies when judged of by our classifications, and
seeming to connect the present with a former world. The
bones of animals long since extinct in the older world,
are here clothed with flesh and endowed with life; and,
as if still further to confirm the views which modern
science hath developed, man here exists in his lowest,
but we trust not irreclaimable state.
- But there are Oases in this comparatively desert region,
spots of remarkable fertility which are admirably fitted
for colonization. Though the mountain ranges are few,
some there nevertheless are which give origin to the nu-
merous fertilizing streams that spread themselves over the
favoured portions,of the country. Still these fertile dis-
tricts do not form a large proportion of the whole extent


of country as yet traversed, which is computed to be
only one-eighth of the whole surface; and of this eighth
it is computed that only one-fourth is fit for pasture and
cultivation. It will be almost needless to add, that the
fertile portions are included within the limits of the four
colonies already named, and as they lie within the tem-
perate portion, it is probable that much of the interior of
the unexplored regions to the northward will be found
scarcely fitted for the fixed abode of civilized men.
In speaking thus of proportions, let us remind the
reader, that they are proportions of a great whole; and if
we take only the traversed and well known districts, we
shall find that there is ample room for the establishment
of populous nations.
Within the last ten years, our knowledge of the whole
of that portion of Australia lying to the southward of the
thirtieth parallel of latitude has been greatly extended by
the enterprising exertions of Sir Thomas Mitchell, the
surveyor general of New South Wales.
A runaway convict named George Clark, alias “ the
barber,” who had for some time eluded the police, had,
when arrested, given an account of a large river to the
northward, which he called the Kindur, He also de-
scribed large plains lying to the northward of the then
limits of the colony, together with other rivers, especially
the Nammoy, and a burning mountain which he had
seen when approaching the sea. As vague accounts of
“ a great river beyond Liverpool plains had often been
received, and Major Mitchell had for some time contem-
plated a general survey of Eastern Australia, the verifi-
cation of the barber’s accounts was not inconsistent with
his original plan; and the first of three expeditions, the
journal of which has since been published,* was accord-
• Three Expeditions into the Interior of Eastern Australia, with
Descriptions of the recently explored region of Australia Felix (Port
Phillip), and the present Colony of New South Wales. By Major
Mitchell, F.G.S. and M.R.G.S., surveyor general. In 2 vols. Bvo,,
with 2 maps, and numerous plates, T. and W. Boone.—This is the
most interesting and important work ever published on New South
Wales, and is in every respect beautifully got up.


ihgly undertaken in 1831-2. The result of this expedi-
tion -was the determining of the courses of several rivers,
which, pursuing a north-westerly direction, empty them-
selves into the Darling, the general course of which is
south-west until it falls into the Murray.
In the second expedition, the whole course of the
Darling was traced, with the exception of about fifty or
sixty miles a little to the northward of its junction with
the Murray. The Bogan, a river running into the Dar-
ling, had previously been explored. It was by that route,
indeed, that Major Mitchell commenced his second ex-
pedition.
In the following year the rivers Darling and Murray
were again visited, the entire course of the Lachlan traced
to its junction with the Murrumbidgee, which falls into
the Murray; and the greater part of the southern portion
of Australia, called by Major Mitchell Australia Felix, tra-
versed. The river Glenelg was at this time discovered.
The point most completely determined by these expe-
ditions, taken together, was the general direction of
the whole drainage of the southern portion of this
continent, for so we shall take leave to call it. If the
reader will turn to any recent general map of Australia*
he will find a mountain range lying from one to two
degrees from the coast, and extending from about 33°
south, to the tropic of Capricorn. This forms a complete
dividing ridge, separating the small rivers which flow into
the sea along the eastern coast, —such as the Manning*
the Hunter, the Colo, See. —from those which flow into
the Darling, and thence into the Murray, which reaches
the sea on the south-western coast. Beyond the western
or rather north-western bank of the Darling, nothing is
known. The small streams which flow from the coast
range eastward into the sea; and, though not navigable,
perform a most important office in fertilizing the country
through which they flow.
Major Mitchell’s short general summary well describes
the general character of the country which he visited,
namely, that which is drained by the tributaries of the
Murray,


Released from" the necessity of recording each day’s
proceedings,”—says our author towards the conclusion of
his second volume, —“ I may now add a few remarks on
the character of the country traversed in these various
expeditions.
“ It has been observed, that the soil of New South
Wales is good only where trap, limestone, and granite
rocks occur. Sandstone, however, predominates so
much more than all these, as to cover about six-sevenths
of the whole surface comprised within the boundaries
of nineteen counties. Wherever this happens to be the
surface rock, little besides barren sand is found in the
place of soil. Deciduous vegetation scarcely exists
there; no turf is formed, for the trees and shrubs
being very inflammable, conflagrations take place so fre-
quently and extensively in the woods during summer,
as to leave very little vegetable matter to return to earth.
On the highest mountains, and in places the most remote
and desolate, I have always found on every dead trunk
on the ground, and living tree of any magnitude also, the
marks of fire; and thus it appeared that these annual
fires extend to every place. In the regions of sandstone,
the territory is, in short, good for nothing, and is, besides,
Very generally inaccessible, thus presenting a formidable
obstruction to any communication between isolated spots
of a better description.
“ Land near Sydney has always been preferred to that
which is remote, where the quality may have been equal,
yet throughout the wide extent of twenty-three millions
of acres, only about 4,400,000 acres have been found
worth having, while the owners of this appropriated land
within the limits, have been obliged to send their cattle
beyond them for the sake of pasturage.*
“ We have already spoken of the manner in which the
fertile portions of the country lie in relation to each other,
namely, in insulated spots of greater or less extent. Major
Mitchell is of opinion, that the labour of convicts (working
in gangs, but not amalgamated with the people) might be
• Mitchell’s ‘ Three Expeditions,’ &e., vol. ii, p. 325,


beneficially used in connecting the fertile districts With
each other, and with Sydney. By such means, he thinks
“ even the sandstone wastes, extensive though they be,
Bright be overstepped, and the good parts being con-
nected by roads, the produce of the tropical and temperate
regions could then be brought to one common market.
“Where there is so much unproductive surface,” he
continues, “ the unavoidable dispersion of population
renders good lines of communication more essentially
necessary, and these must consist of roads, for there are
neither navigable rivers nor, in general, the means of form-
ing canals. This colony might be extended northward
to the tropic of Capricorn, westward to the 145th degree
of east longitude; the southern portion having for boun-
daries the Darling, the Murray, and the sea-coast.
Throughout the extensive territory thus bounded, one-
third probably consists of desert interior plains, one-
fourth of land available for pasture or cultivation; and
the remainder of rocky mountain, or impassable or un-
productive country. Perhaps the greater portion of
really good land within the whole extent will be found
to the southward of the Murray, for there the country
consists chiefly of trap, granite, and limestone. The
amount of surface comprised in European kingdoms,
affords no criterion of what may be necessary for the
growth of a new people in Australia. Extreme differ-
ences of soil, climate, and seasons, may indeed be usefully
reconciled and rendered available to one community
there, but this must depend on ingenious adaptations,;
aided by all the facilities man’s art can supply in the free
occupation of a very extensive region. Agricultural re-
sources must be ever scanty and uncertain in a country
where there is so little moisture to nourish vegetation.
We have seen, from the state of the Darling, that all
the surface water flowing from the vast territory west of
the dividing range, and extending north and south be-
tween the Murray and the tropic, is insufficient to support
the current of one small river.”*
• Mitchell, vol. ii, p. 326.


§ 11. Western Australia.
Such is the general character of that portion of Aus-
tralia which is drained by the Murray, and with the ex-
ception of the settled portion of South Australia, and that
belt of territory which comprises Western Australia, the
remaining portion remains unknown. An inspection of
any general map of Australia will show how small a pro-
portion the known bear to the unknown parts of this vast
and partially explored country.
In order to comprehend the most prominent geogra-
phical features of Western Australia and of Australind,
the reader should cany his eye along the southern coast
from the western boundary of South Australia to Cape
Leeuwin. He will there find that from longitude 132°
east, to Doubtful Island Bay in 11 east, comprising a
distance of twelve degrees of longitude, but little even of
the coast line is known, and of the interior, nothing.
About a degree and a half further to the westward he
will perceive King George’s Sound, from which, if a
line be drawn due north until it cut the parallel of 271°
south latitude, it will be found to embrace all the known
portion of Western Australia, including Australind. It
will further appear that the drainage of this section of
country has not the most remote connexion with that
which we have already described. As we proceed with
our examination we shall find, that in many essential
particulars Western Australia differs from the other co-
lonies. A faint type of the manner in which the country
is watered, may, however, be discerned in that portion of
New South Wales which lies to the eastward of the
dividing ridge, as we have already described. Lying
back from the western coast is a range of hills or moun-
tains, called the Darling range. From this range de-
scend a considerable number of rivers, none of which are
of any great extent, but all of which play an important
part in fertilizing the valleys through which they flow.
The principal of these fertilizing streams in the older
portion of Western Australia (that is, south of 30°) are
the Moore, the Swan, the Canning, the Helena, the


Avon, the Murray,* the Harvey, the Preston, the Collie,
the Brunswick, the Vasse, the Blackwood, theDonelly,
the/KLagan, and the Hay, together with some smaller
tributary streams.
The coast line has several bays, harbours, and inlets,
all of them more or less available for the purposes of
commerce, and some of them especially so: these are
Doubtful Island Bay; King George’s Sound, an excellent
harbour; Tor Bay, Flinder’s Bay, and Hardy Inlet, into
which flow the Blackwood and Scott rivers; Geographe
Bay; Koombanah Bay and Leschenault Inlet, a spot ad-
mirably calculated for settlement, which was, in the first
instance, chosen by the Western Australian Company;
Peel’s Inlet, Safety Bay, Cockburn’s Sound, Owen’s An-
chorage, Gage’s roads, Melville water, and Port Grey,
an excellent harbour, which we shall hereafter describe,
together with Shark Bay, at the northern extremity of
the colony. All who have written concerning Western
Australia speak in favourable terms of the soil, which
indeed, from the geological features exhibited, must be
better than that of Eastern Australia. It is remarked by
Major Mitchell, that where sandstone prevails, it is inva-
riably accompanied by infertility, whilst granite and lime-
stone formations denote a better soil. Now, sandstone
prevails in New South Wales, whilst limestone and
granite are abundant in Western Australia.
Sir James Stirling tells us, “ that the surface of the
country is generally covered with those substances which
are technically called earths, in contradistinction to soils
but still these earths are fertilized by decayed vegetation,
for we find, that in well watered districts the soil is for
the most part of vegetable origin. Near the sea the
country is generally sandy, but not always absolutely
barren, for we learn that even in this unpromising soil—
for soil it proves itself to be—trees, shrubs, and grasses
exist in considerable quantities, and on the latter cattle
thrive well. When this sandy district is cultivated, with
• Weneed scarcely remind the reader that this is not the Murray
already so often spoken of.
f Report, dated 15th Oct., 1837.


the aid of proper dressing, it is found to produce all the
ordinary vegetables, not only of our own country, but of
the south of Europe ; and when the Western Australians
learn how to cure the defect of a soil by the admixture
of other earthy materials, perhaps to be found in the
neighbourhood, portions of the Sandy district will pro-
bably be made, to yield more than they have hitherto
done.
When this narrow sandy belt is passed, the valleys
exhibit great fertility. Alluvial tracts of considerable
extent have been discovered in many different directions,
and where they have been sown with wheat, Indian corn,
and other grain, the crops have been most abundant.
It is well ascertained that throughout Western Aus-
tralia the fertile land bears a much larger proportion to
the whole extent of country than in any other part of
Australia, except, perhaps, in Australia Felix, which
exhibits similar evidences of fertility to those of Western
Australia. The great number of streams has already
been mentioned as a cause of fertility. The principal
mountains range to the eastward, which we have already
mentioned must have a considerable influence in keeping
the country well watered and fertile, and the temperature
equable. The Darling range of hills, to the eastward of
the Swan River, runs the whole length of the settle-
ment, and varies in height from seven or eight hundred
to nearly two thousand feet above the level of the ocean.
There are two mountains, the St Anne and Mount Wil-
liam, which are said to reach an elevation not far short
of 3,000 feet. The Darling range terminates at the sea,
at Cape Chatham, in latitude 35° south, and its width is
from thirty to forty miles. The Stirling range, in the
neighbourhood of King George’s Sound, is also con-
spicuous, and contains several mountains of considerable
height, namely, Toolbrunup, 3,000 feet; Koi-Kyeun*
eruf, 2,500 feet; and Hume, 1800 feet. In this range
several abundant streams have their source, namely, the
Kalgan, which waters the rich and fertile vale of the
same name, and empties itself into King George's Sound;
the Macquoid of Kent, which also waters a rich valley,


is fed in its course by some lakes, and after passing
through some barren country is lost, like many of the
Australian rivers, in swamps and lagoons, which com-
municate with the sea at Irwin’s Inlet. Various other
smaller ranges of hills will be seen upon Arrowsmith’s
larger map of Western Australia, all of them having their
streams and fertile valleys. A country, the surface of
which is so much more hilly and broken than Australia
generally, and in which streams are so abundant, affords
a very strong presumption, without specific knowledge
of the fact, that considerable fertility must exist.
A considerable portion of these ranges are crowned
with the majestic mahogany tree, which not only pre-
sents to the eye the most verdant appearance, but affords
further evidence of considerable fertility of soil. We
may mention here, that the extent to which a country
is wooded affords a criterion of the fitness of the soil for
cultivation. It has often been mentioned as an advan-
tage enjoyed by the Australian settler, that he is saved
the expense of clearing; but those who have any expe-
rience in w'aste countries know well that districts without
wood are, for the most part, barren; and that densely-
wooded countries more than repay the expense of clear-
ing by their superior fertility. In all the accounts of
Western Australia to be met with, the reader will find
constant mention of the well-wooded character of the
country. In some districts dense forests of the maho-
gany tree are mentioned, and the gigantic gum-tree, or
Eucalyptus, which in some cases reach 25, 30, and, it is
said, even 40 feet in girth, bear unimpeachable testimony
of fertility.
In the valleys a considerable number of native grasses
promise abundant food to the future flocks of the colony.
Sir James Stirling mentions sixteen different varieties,
which afford room for the judgment of the future occu-
pier to encourage and foster such as may be found to
afford the best nourishment to his flocks and herds.
Granite and limestone formations, Major Mitchell’s
tests of fertility, are to be found in every part of
the colony; indeed, Sir James Stirling asserts that


the whole of the explored portion of Western Australia
rests on a granite base. Some of the mountain ranges
in the southern part of the colony are of primitive for-
mation; near Doubtful Island Bay gniess abounds; ba-
saltic rocks appear at Geographe Bay, and the base
of Cape Naturaliste is composed of immense beds of
granite and schist, alternating with each other. Between
Geographe Bay and Flinders’ Bay the country, which
is watered by the Blackwood and the Yasse, is described
as of “ granite and limestone formation, considerably
elevated, gently undulating, moderately wooded, and
abounding with springs;* good soil and grass in the
valleys, and sheep feed on the ridges.”
Another advantage which may be mentioned among
the general features which characterise Western Austra-
lia, is the absence of those droughts which occur so fre-
quently in Eastern Australia. This, no doubt, arises
from the mountain ranges, and the circumstance of the
Country being better sheltered by forests than the other
colonies of Australia. Though dry seasons have occurred,
nothing in the shape of drought has been known in the
twelve years that the colony has existed, and the Agri-
cultural Society of Western Australia express a hope that
from the seasonable and protracted rains which fell in
1833, added to the experience of ten. years, the western
side of New Holland is not subject to such droughts. In
this hope there is every reason to believe the society will
not be disappointed; for, to say nothing of “the expe-
rience of ten years,” the hilly and wooded character of
the country forbids all anticipation of such droughts.
The portion of Western Australia first occupied in the
neighbourhood of the Swan River, is undoubtedly well
adapted for settlement, and the only reason -why it has
not so rapidly flourished is, that it was founded on a bad
system. South Australia, with physical advantages ad-
mitted to be greatly inferior, has increased rapidly in
population and wealth; and all who are conversant with
* The whole of Geographe Bay abountls with springs of excellent
ttatcr, a few yards only intervening between each.
c


the rise and jirogress of colonies, with what maybe called
the necessary conditions to prosperity therein, are of
opinion that a sound system of colonization is all that
Western Australia requires to secure the fullest prospe-
rity. The colony is as well adapted to the breeding of
sheep and the growth of wool as any other part of Aus-
tralia, and for tillage it is superior. In point of salubrity,
on which we shall have occasion to dwell in a future
chapter, Western Australia is not surpassed by any known
country.
As to a sounder system, it is satisfactory to know that
it lias already been introduced. In this country, the
adoption of the principle of an uniform price for lands;
and the devotion of the proceeds to emigration, extends
to all the colonies, and is especially applicable to West-
ern Australia, where much ungranted and forfeited land
exists. Governor Hutt too, is thoroughly acquainted
with the system which has been so successful in South
Australia, and is at this moment using every exertion to
extend its application throughout his government in
the newly explored portions of Western Australia, north
of Swan River; these principles will be applied under
the immediate auspices of the Western Australian Com-
pany, so that from this time forward it is not too much
to say the prosperity of Western Australia is generally
secured.
These general observations on the most conspicuous
features of the colony at large, arc all that our purpose
requires.
§ 111. Australind.
Australind is the name given to the new settlement of
the Western Australian Company at Port Grey, but the
name may be extended to the whole country traversed
by Captain Grey, from Gautheaume Bay, in 27? 40' to
the Arrowsmith River in 29° 30' south.*
In its prominent features this country does not differ
materially from the older portion of Western Australia,
* It is proposed to call this district Victoria.


as will more particularly appear from the more minute,
details in the succeeding chapters.
As in the neighbourhood of Swan River, mountain
ranges occupy the eastern portion of the colony. Of these,
the Victoria Range, and Moresby’s Flat-topped Range, arc
the most conspicuous. From these mountain ranges a
considerable number of streams descend, and like all the
other Australian rivers they are not navigable. The
most considerable of these is the Hutt, which empties,
itself into an inlet or lagoon; and the Arrowsmitb, which,
bounds the newly discovered district on the south.
As in the case of the other portions of Australia, sandy
downs and “scrub” occur towards the coast, and im-
mediately at the back of these and extending to the
mountains are verdant and highly fertile valleys. Gra-
nite and limestone are conspicuous; throughout every part
traversed rich and well-wooded districts occur; native
warran* grounds arc scattered over the country, and bear
witness to the luxuriance of the soil; and the numerous
kangaroos afford evidence of the abundance of the native
grasses.
A considerable portion of the country is well-wooded,
especially towards the mountain ranges, and where wood
is absent, verdant grassy plains of great extent meet the
eye. The coast line of barren sand and scrub appears
to be narrower, and more broken by fertile spots, than the
more southern portion of the colony, especially in the
neighbourhood of the rivers and lagoons, where tracts of
considerable fertility were found.
The country seems to differ from the Swan .River and
more southern districts in its superior elevation, which
elevation along a considerable portion of the coast reaches
to the very sea. This, no doubt, accounts for the narrow
and broken character of the sandy belt, and the fact that
the fertile districts run in many places down to'the cliffs’
edge.
As this beautiful range of country is from 2;j° to 4y°
nearer to the equator than the Swan it may be sup-
posed to be proportionally hotter, but this is considerably
A kind of yam.


modified by its superior elevation, as we shall find when
we treat of the climate more at length. We shall merely
say in this place, that there is reason to believe that the
conflicting effects of proximity of the equator and con-
siderable elevation is to produce that delightful equabi-
lity of temperature and seasons which are so congenial
to animal and vegetable life, and above all to the human
constitution.
One remarkable feature we shall briefly mention here,
namely, that in the very centre of this most promising
district, the features of the tropical and temperate regions
seem to meet and harmonise. Latitude 28° was the most
southern spot in which Captain Grey found the gigantic
ant of tropical climates ; and there also, but not further
north, he found the grass tree or Xanthorrhca, which
flourishes in the older parts of Western Australia.
Of the excellent harbour of Port Grey, we shall here-
after have occasion to speak more fully. We shall con-
tent ourselves in this place by saying, that it is in lat. 28 Q
65' S., almost the centre of the district; that it is sur-
rounded by the most fertile part of the country, and that
in every respect it seems infinitely better adapted for
commerce than any other portion of the coast.
Taking Port Grey in lat. 28° 55' S., long. 114° 36'
E., let us consider its position in reference to other coun-
tries.
It is nearer to England than Sydney, by at least three
weeks’ sail, the voyage occupying not more than 100
days, and often less. Its distance from our East India
possessions being only between three and four thousand
miles, the voyage thereto may be accomplished in twenty-
five or thirty days; and by steam, which in a very few
years will be established, at all events for inter-colonial,
if not for European intercourse, in little more than half
that time. Sydney is 2,600 miles, and the average
voyage less than twenty days. Van Diemen’s Land is
2,200 miles, the voyage not exceeding sixteen days, and
capable of being performed in ten, and by steam in eight
days. From the flourishing colony of Port Nicholson the
distance is 3,500 miles, and the voyage will occupy be-
tween three and four weeks. The distance of the Cape


of Good Hope is 5,000 miles, and the sailing voyage five
or six weeks, or even less, but by steam it would be
reduced to three weeks. The track of ships bound to
the East Indies lies about two days’ sail of this part of
the coast, so that it may be deemed a harbour of refuge,
in case of need, to the eastern trade. It is, moreover, ad-
mirably situated for the black and sperm whale fishery,
as we shall presently show.
With these general observations we shall close this
chapter, reserving more detailed descriptions of the cli-
mate, soil, and above all the productive resources of the
colony, for the succeeding chapters.
CHAPTER III.
CAPTAIN GREY’S JOURNAL-DESCRIPTION OF AUSTRALIND.
As the principal part of our knowledge of Australind* is
derived from Captain Grey’s report of his journey from
Gantheaume Bay to Perth, corroborated by other wit-
nesses, we have thought the fairest way of dealing with
the reader is to lay it before him entire. As this most
interesting journal speaks for itself, it needs no further
introduction from us. It is printed verbatim from the
notes which Captain Grey made on the spot, day by day.
“ Notes upon that portion of Western Australia, which
lies between Gantheaume Bay and the Arrowsmith
River.
“ Tuesday , 2nd April, 1839 In the morning completed
niy survey of the shores of Gantheaume Bay, and of the
riverf which discharges itself into the sea about the
centre of the bay, and started in the afternoon to walk
* We continue to use the word “Australind” to designate, not
merely the company’s settlement at Port Grey, but the whole dis-
trict traversed by him from Gantheaume Bay to the Kiver Arrow-
smith.
f The Murcheson, To assist the reader in comparing this inte-
resting description with the map, and both with our subsequent
chapter, we shall add the names of the rivers in notes.


overland to Perth ; we found the bed of a stream* oc-
cupied by pools of water, which runs into the sea from
the south-east, through the opening in the south part of
Gantheaume Bay, which is laid down upon Capt. King’s
charts. The country hereabouts was composed princi-
pally of a sandstone rock, resembling in character the
ancient sandstones of England, and differing altogether
from the sandstone formations of the south-east portions
of Australia. The form of the hill was that of a series
of table lands, intersected by deep and rocky ravines,
Which were so narrow that the small extent of good land
on them could scarcely be occupied, for in the rainy sea-
sons the whole of the bottoms of these ravines must be
flooded and occupied by the waters of mountain torrents.
The vegetation on the hill consisted chiefly of an almost
impenetrable bed, composed of a species of the tea tree
(of the colonists): in the ravines grass and trees of a
larger growth were found. The country being of so im-
practicable a nature, our progress was slow and toilsome,
and we halted for the night at the brow of one of the ra-
vines, having climbed to the top of a cascade, down
which the water was slowly dropping.
“ Wednesday, 3rd. —Started at dawn; after travelling
for an hour over a country of exactly the same character
as we had passed over yesterday evening, we gained the
summit of a sandstone tableland, at a point distant about
ten miles due south of the BaWoned Hill. We here fell
in with a well-beaten native path, which ran along the
summit of the table land, winding round the heads of the
ravines, and thus avoiding them. Travelled two> and a
'half miles, south by east, over sandy downs thinly clothed
with Banksia trees and scrub; one and a half miles south
by east through a similar country. We had still been
following the native path, and at this point we found the
largest native well I had yet seen; it contained plenty of
water, but it smelt badly.
“ From this point the country changed its character
from barren precipitous sandstone to gently sloping lime-
Not named.


stone hills and valleys, affording good feed for sheep and
cattle. This limestone was of an altogether different
character from the recent limestone formation found along
the coast in the neighbourhood of Perth.
“We travelled three miles south by east, through a
country of the nature above described, and found a spring
of water nearly every half mile. The native path run-
ning away too much to the eastward, we continued a
south by east course, over gravelly table land, for the
next two miles; in this distance we passed several ponds
of water, and saw several emus and kangaroos. The
country now became densely wooded with a species of
tea tree, and it took us nearly two hours and a half to
make as many miles in a straight line, and even then we
were dreadfully torn by the bushes. A fault had been
committed in quitting the native path, which doubtless
ran along the open country, and avoided the dense woods
in which we had become embarrassed.
“ Thursday, 4th. —Started at dawn on a south by east
course, fell in with the native path, which we had yester-
day quitted; for the first five miles we travelled over an
indifferent country, consisting of elevated sandy downs,
covered with scrub, and a species of Banksia; we then
entered a rich and thickly wooded limestone valley, in
which we found the most northern grass tree (Xan-
thorrhea), and the most southern gigantic ant’s nest
which I had seen;* from these circumstances, both of
animal and vegetable life, it was evident that we were
entering that portion of the continent where the produc-
tions of the tropical and more temperate regions were
becoming confounded, previously to an absolute change
from one to the other taking place. It might have been
expected, h priori, that the animal and vegetable produc-
tions would change at the same point, for the former are
dependent for subsistence upon the latter.
“ For the next four miles we travelled south by east,
along the native path, which ran through a low country,
composed of a rich soil, and which produced abundantly
• In Arrowsmith’s map, from Captain Grey’s survey, a river U
here laid down, but it is not named.


the warran, or native yam, which always grows in the
most fertile tracts.
“ This warran ground was situated on the gently sloping
foot of the range of hills which bounded the valley (be-
fore mentioned) on the south, and over which we were
now passing ; it extended on each side as far as we could
see, and was thinly wooded, with a species of wattle tree,
which grew in detached clumps; nothing in Australia
had ever given mo such an idea of the antiquity of the
aboriginal inhabitants as this large tract of ground, fuller
of holes than a sugar plantation, all of which had been dug
by the natives to extract their favourite yams. There were
also many large beaten paths, along the sides of which
we every here and there found native wells, of a depth
and size quite unknown in the southern portions of the
continent; these circumstances all combined to give the
country an appearance of cultivation, and of being densely
inhabited, such as I had never before seen.
“ Having reached the summit of the low range we had
been ascending, we found a gentle descent to the south ;
for the next two miles we still continued travelling south
by east through a warran ground, which was bounded
eastward by a high range of limestone hills, in places
precipitous (part of the Mount Naturaliste Range of the
French), and to the westward by a very low range of
limestone hills; the valley down which we proceeded was
about two miles wide; it was very fertile and grassy,
and was wooded luxuriantly with a species of black
wattle.
“Two miles further on, the native path which we were
travelling on ran across the low range of hills we had
seen to the westward, and as its direction was nearly
south by east, wc continued to follow it. After crossing
the hills, we found ourselves in a grassy valley, three or
four miles wide, bounded seawards by sandy dunes;
down the centre of this valley ran a chain of fresh reedy
swamps; many native paths here ran into one large one,
■yvhich ran about south by east; we followed this path
for about two miles more, through a valley such as is
above described, and then found ourselves at the head of


an estuary running nearly north and south, and two or
three miles wide ;* to the eastward we still saw the high
range of precipitous limestone hills, thickly wooded at
their summits; at the base of these hills was a rich under-
cliff, resembling that of the Isle of Wight; these hills
were flat-topped, the whole country was grassy, and
wooded with clumps of black wattle.
“ We did not travel more than a mile down the estuary,
which was bordered with rich and extensive flats, with
many fresh-water pools (the drainage from the high range
of limestone hills), where we halted for the night; grass
was so abundant here that we easily cut enough to form
soft and pleasant beds ; this was a luxury we had never
yet known during this excursion. The dew was so heavy
during the night that our clothes were saturated, as if
from rain.
“We travelled east for half a mile, and then turned
south-east for two and a half miles, still following the
river upwards, until we reached a branch of the Hutt
which came from the north; the bed of the river where
we made this branch was composed of the rock which is
called ironstone at Perth, and which is a species of red
sandstone, but belonging to a much more recent period
than the rock I have called ancient red sandstone in these
notes. The bed of the stream was from thirty to forty
yards wide, and the centre of this was now occupied by
a stream of water, of such a size as would be called a
large brook in England; its course was rapid, and WO-
crossed it where it formed a series of small cascades.
“ About two miles before we had reached this point,
I observed two very remarkable hills, which bore due
east of us; of these I have given a sketch, as by these
points any future traveller can easily recognise his
position.
“We halted for the night at the point where we had
crossed the river amidst a clump of Xanthorrhea —the
country here was, from the nature of the soil, necessarily
barren and unpromising.
* This is the inlet of the Hutt, which is very similar to Peel's
inlet, already described.
c 3


“ Friday, sth. —l started at dawn, in a south south-east
direction, in order to pass round a bluff point in the
limestone range, which here approached nearer to the
estuary ; for one mile wo continued along the rich flats
which bordered the estuary, but, after rounding the bluff
point, the estuary appeared to trend away rather to the
eastward ; and as the limestone range became more easy
of access, we ascended it, and got a view of the country
to the eastward, and found it still grassy, and exactly
the same character, as far as we could see.
“ For the next five miles we continued along the top
of the limestone range, the estuary still occupying the
valley which lay to the west of us. No change whatever
took place in the country until we reached this point.
“The estuary had been, as yet, throughout its whole
extent, separated from the sea by a range of high dunes;
but 1 now thought that I could see a small opening in
the dunes, through which the estuary communicated with
the sea. Being, however, so far distant from this ima-
gined opening, it is very possible that I may have been
mistaken. We now again began our descent towards
the estuary, and in another mile were once more upon
the rich flats which bordered it.
“ For the next two miles we continued travelling in. a
due south course along the flats; we found several springs
of water, some of which ran through limestone caverns,
evidently issuing from the range upon the east. We
then began to ascend a neck of rocky land, which ran. out
from the limestone range to the estuary; this neck of
land was more thickly wooded than the other.portions of
the country hereabouts.
“ At the end of a mile in a south by east direction, we
had ascended and descended this neck of land, and found
ourselves upon the back of a river (the Hutt) from forty
to fifty yards wide, which was running strong, and was
brackish at its mouth ; wc were unable to find a ford
across this river, and therefore followed up its course in
a due east direction.
“ This stream occupied the centre of a very deep
ravine, which was between two ranges of lofty limestone


hills, -which were well wooded; on either bank of the
river were fertile flats.
“ Saturday, 6th. —Started at dawn ; travelled three
miles in a south direction, the first mile over ironstone
hills; we then came down upon rich flats, through which
the main branch of the Hutt ran; the river was now
(end of dry season) nearly a continuous chain of pools,
“ The flats we travelled over were formed from alluvial
depositions; they were grassy, and wooded with.a
species of wattle; there was plenty of water all along the
river.
“ Travelled three miles further south by west, now
ascending a sandy table land, covered with scrub; an
oddly-formed flat-topped range lay to the eastward of us,
distant four or five miles (the Table Hill of Captain
King), five miles further, along the summit of a sandy
table land, scrubby, and not very promising, our course
was parallel to the sea. At this point we found our-
selves on the summit of a very precipitous limestone
descent, which led down into a deep ravine.
“ At the bottom of this ravine were rich flats, through
which ran a water-course,* which I followed down to
the sea without finding any water; when this stream
runs it flows out to the sea by a. very small tortuous
course, which winds through sandy dunes. Finding no
water, we followed the bed of the stream for nearly two
miles in a north-east direction ; the ravine through
which it wound was bounded north and south by steep
limestone hills, having an elevation of several hundred
feet; the flats at the bottom of the ravine were rich, and
certainly not flooded in winter, for the winter huts of
the natives, plastered over with clay outside, were situ-
ated upon these flats. Having found water in a pool,
in the bed of the stream, we halted to rest ourselves. In
the evening we ascended the limestone hills, which
bounded the valley on the south; these were thickly
wooded. When we gained the summit of the hills we
found ourselves on a sandy, scrubby, table land, similar
• This is named the Bowes in the map.


to what we had passed in the morning; and, after tra-
velling along this for two miles in a due south direction,
we halted for the night.
“ Sunday, Ith. —We moved off at day-light, our course
for the first five miles lay over open sandy downs, co-
vered with scrub; these downs were very elevated, the
sand of which they were composed rested on limestone,
and the country towards the interior appeared to improve;
we were gradually approaching a range of remarkable
flat-topped hills, and as we wound over an eminence on
the downs, I saw behind the flat-topped range, about
twenty miles to the eastward, a still more lofty flat-topped
range, which I named the Victoria range, in honour of
her Majesty.
“ The country between these two ranges was an open
grassy valley, thinly w r ooded, and it appeared to be one of
the most extensively fertile portions of country which I
had yet seen in Australia.
“After travelling for another mile over the sandy
downs, we reached another romantic glen-like valley,
bounded both to the north and south by steep limestone
cliffs: we descended these cliffs, and at their base found,
as in the last valley, we had crossed extensive flats,
through which wound a water course* ; w r e had to scrape
a hole in the bed of this in order to obtain water; all the
hills I could see in the vicinity consisted of limestone, and
for the whole distance I could see to the eastward (about
seven or eight miles), the country appeared to be of the
most fertile and picturesque character; the hills were
slightly wooded with large timber, and the valleys were
nearly bare of trees, and covered with grass.
“ On ascending the limestone hills to the south of the
valley, we found ourselves once more on open sandy
dowms; after travelling three miles across these in aS.
by E. direction, we again came to a valley of the same
character as the one above described—it ran from the
same direction; to the eastward we saw a fertile country,
and it was as picturesquely wooded as the valley we had
before crossed. After crossing this valley we found
• Tlie Duller in the map.


ourselves once more on open sandy downs resting on
limestone, and four miles in a due S. direction across
these, brought us to a valley of the same character a
those just described; in the water-course in it we found
plenty of water in pools, and we halted for some time im-
mediately at the foot of Mount Fairfax.*
“ We continued our route in the evening over the sandy
downs, which, at the distance of half a mile from the
sea, terminated in cliffs, beneath which lay an under-
cliff, which fell gradually until it met the dunes on the
coast. There appeared to be good feed all along this
under-cliff. After travelling three miles, we hailed for
the night.
“ Monday, Bth, —The first three miles of our route lay
over sandy downs, which, however, became less elevated,
gradually falling to the south; and at the end of three
miles we found ourselves in grassy wooded plains, lying
between the flat-topped range and some sandy dunes
which bordered a bay.
“ Two miles and a half further, S. by E. over plains
such as I have above described, we passed several lagoons
of water. The character of the country again changed,
and for the next two miles and a half the plains were
sandy, and covered with scrub. At the end of another
mile we reached a river, about twenty-five yards wide; f
it was salt where we made it; and it was so shallow, that
we soon found a place where, by jumping from rock to
rock, we could cross it. This river discharged itself into
a bay; I it ran rather from the S. of E.
“ Four miles further, S.by E. over sandy plains, with
scrub ; some of the men here became rather exhausted
from the heat and want of water; and as the country to
the eastward looked very promising, I turned S. by E.
and at the end of half-a-mile w'e found ourselves on the
bank of a small stream, with plenty of water standing in
pools; it came from E. by S. and the country near it
appeared to be good.
* This is the Chapman in Arrowsmlth’s map, in which Mount
Fairfax is also laid down.
t The Grecnough. } Fort Grey.


“ In the evening we travelled five miles in a S. S. E.
direction, over a country which was, generally speaking,
sandy and indifferent; we then reached the bed of a
stream, which ran from the eastward, through a fertile
valley ; but we did not find water here, although, from
the abundance of the grass, and the greenness of the ve-
getation, there must have been a supply of water in our
vicinity. The high range of hills still bounded our view
to the eastward, and we saw some hills of moderate ele-
vation to the south.
“ Tuesday, 9th. —We commenced our day’s journey by
ascending and descending a low sandy chain of hills,
which ran nearly east and west, being a minor range
thrown off from the Darling Range. We then found
ourselves on some low sandy plains. In the front of us
was another low sandy chain of hills, running nearly east
and west, the summit of which was so densely wooded,
that we found it would be difficult to force our way
across it; and as the line of wood which followed the
• direction of the summits of the lulls lay nearly at right
angles to our route (S.S.E. by E.) we turned off to the
eastward, where the country appeared to be more open,
and of a very fertile nature.
“ After travelling for about a mile due east, we found
ourselves on the summit of a low hill, looking down over
extensive low grassy plains, which extended to the north,
south, and east, as far as the eye could see. The mists
of morning were just rising from these plains, and so
heavy had the dews been, that the whole low country
appeared to be one vast lake; indeed, for some time wc
debated whether or not it was water which we saw in the
distance. Having descended into these plains, we found
them covered with grass, and thinly wooded with a
species of wattle. Por the next three and a half miles
we continued our course along these fertile plains j but
at this point, the sandy land which lay parallel to the
coast line advancing further into the plains, and being
unwilling to swerve from the direct line, we travelled for
the next four miles over sandy, scrubby land. In the
course of this four miles we met the first Zamia trees


(of Swan River) I had yet seen, so that this appears
to be the most northern parallel of latitude which these
trees reach. We now, again found ourselves in the grassy
plains; and two miles E. S. E. across these brought us
to the dry bed of a river fifty yards wide.*
“ We could find no water whatever in the sandy bed
of this river; and although we dug for some time, to
increase the depth of a hole in the bed of the river, from
which the natives had obtained -water, our efforts were
unsuccessful. The men were much exhausted from the
heat of the day, and from such continued marching for
several days ; after moving them, therefore, for about a
mile along the grassy plains, I halted.
“ After about an hour’s rest, I started, with a de-
tached party, for a remarkable peak, which bore E. S.E.
from us, and at the foot of which I felt certain (from
its height) we should find water. Our route to this hill
lay principally across low, grassy plains, thinly wooded
with a species of wattle, as also with some large timber;
we passed also several warran grounds of the natives, a
good proof of the fertility of the soil. Just before sunset
we reached the foot of the peaked hill,f and following- a
large native path, we were led to a spring of beautiful
water.
“ We then commenced our return to the party, but as
there was no moon to light us on our way, our progress
was slow and toilsome —moreover, the country was full
of holes, where the natives had been digging up the
Warran roots, and we were heavily laden with water;
from these circumstances our falls, at last, became so
frequent, that I thought it more prudent to halt where
We were, and not to attempt to join the rest of the party
that night.
“ Wednesday, 10 th. —This morning, soon after dawn,
we reached our comrades, bringing them a supply of
''rater; on coming up to the point where they were, and
asking for some of them whom T did not see, I was told
that they had just gone away to seek grass (for the. sake
* The Irwin. t Called Water Peak in the map.


of the dew). This circumstance will give a better idea
of the heaviness of the dew in these parts than anything
else that could be stated. As soon as my party were
rested, we moved on to the peaked hill, at the foot of
which we had found the water ; and having reached this
spring, we halted for the rest of the morning, to refresh
the men.
“ In the evening I moved on with a detached party in
the direction of Perth, with the intention of making that
place by forced marches, and forwarding speedy assist-
ance to the more exhausted portion of the party. Our
course was south by east, and for the first two miles we
traversed plains which were alternately grassy and
scrubby. We then became embarrassed in a very dense
wood of spearwood trees, through which we found great
difficulty in forcing our way. Having passed this wood,
we emerged on a low, undulating, sandy downs, and,
after making three miles more, wc halted in a clump of
Banksia trees for the night.
“ Thursday, 11 th. —Four miles south-east by east, over
an undulating sandy country, brought us to the sum-
mit of another low range of hills, whence we saw the
sea, distant four or five miles to the westward, the country
gradually falling to it from the point where we stood.
This intervening tract of country appeared to be grassy,
and very fertile ; and Mr Walker, who subsequently
traversed it, confirmed the opinion which I had formed
of its fertility.
“ Three miles south by east, over sandy, scrubby plains,
and densely wooded hills, the trees small, and the timber
of no importance ; three miles south by east, over a
similar scrubby country, we then entered a fertile valley,
and warran ground of the natives ; the timber now be-
came large, and of a valuable kind. This description of
country continued for about two miles, and we crossed
several dry water courses running nearly east and west.
I had just given up all hope of finding a river in this
valley, when, rising from one of these dry water-courses,
we suddenly found ourselves on the banks of the dry bed
of a river, composed of white sand, and at least two


hundred yards across; the depth of the bed of this river
Avas about fifty' feet, and on scraping in the sand in its
bed Are immediately found Avater; but avc did not until
aftenvards ascertain that there Avere large pools of Avater
in the bed of the river, both above and beloAv the point
Avhcre avc Avere standing, and only distant a feAv hundred
yards from us.
“ On the banks of this stream, the trunks of very' large
trees Avere lying, these had evidently been carried doAvn
to their present position during the period of heavy
floods, and at such times a large volume of Avater must
be rolled along this curious river, Avhich I named the
Arrowsmith, in compliment to J. ArroAvsmith, Esq.,
Avho has rendered such important services to the science
of geography.*
“ Whilst avc halted on the banks of this stream, a num-
ber of native Avomen and children came doAvn to drink
at a pool in the river, Avhich Avas situated immediately
above the point Avhere we Avere ; they did not see us, and
Avhen avc moved omvards I pursued such a course as not
to disturb them ; they Avere thus not alarmed, but stood
gazing at us Avith great Avonder. One and a half mile
more, south by east, brought us to the top of a loav range
to the south of the river, whence avc had a fine vibav
of the rich valleys that this stream drained: a remark-
able peak in the interior, distant about eighteen miles,
bore east north-east of us.
“ In the evening avc travelled six miles, south by' east,
over scrubby, barren plains, extending on all sides as far
as the eye could see; even to the very summit of the
* The Arrowsmith may be considered the southern boundary of
the district of Australind, or Victoria, and it seems that the country
between its course and Juricn 15ay, a distance of about sixty miles, is
barren. We may state that the naming of this river is a just tribute,
on the part of Captain Grey, to the indefatigable geographer to whom
we are indebted for the map which illustrates this volume. No man
has contributed more to geographical science than Mr Arrowsmith,
and it is creditable to Captain Grey that the discoverer has not for-
gotten how much he owes to the scientific geographer.


interior range the country presented the same triste ap-
pearance. In the course of these six miles we, for the
:first time, met a native esculent root, called by the
natives “ borne,” a species of hasmadomen, which is a
principal article of food of the aboriginal inhabitants of
the country near Perth. About this point, therefore,
is probably the limiting northern parallel of latitude of
this plant. We halted for the night in a clump of
Banksia trees.”
After Captain Grey’s arrival at Perth, the account he
gave of the country caused a farther expedition to the
northward to be undertaken. Of this expedition we
have no further information than an extract from the
Perth Gazette, of ■ the Bth of February, 1840, which
especially refers to Port Grey and the country around.
“ Expedition to the Northward.
“ After Captain Grey had the misfortune to have his
boats wrecked in Ganthcaume Bay, having started
thence with his party, and walked to Perth, he reported
that he had passed over extensive tracts of fertile coun-
try in the neighbourhood of Moresby’s Flat-topped
Range, whore there were several rivers, one of which,
the largest, he had called the Hutt River, after his
Excellency the Governor.
“ His Excellency having directed the Champion schoo-
ner to proceed to explore the coast in that neighbourhood,
with a view to ascertain whether there was any prac-
ticable entrance to that river, and whether there was any
harbour, shelter, or anchorage in that neighbourhood,
and also what sort of anchorage there was about the
Houtman’s Abrolhos ; it appeared very desirable that
such an opportunity should be taken advantage of to
obtain, at the same time, as much information as circum-
stances would permit as to the nature and quality of the
soil, and its general capabilities, with reference to its
eligibility as a district to be occupied by settlers.”
With this view Mr Moore, the Advocate-General, of


Western Australia, and President of the Agricultural So-
ciety, embarked on the expedition, and the following ex-
tract is given in the paper just named.
(i On Sunday the 12th, continued to explore tha
several islands; unable to land upon the first we ap-
proached, on account of a reef which ran round it. This
was one which lay at the north-east extremity of the
Horse-shoe. It was high and sandy, but with some
vegetation on the surface, and we saw many large seals
sleeping on the sandy beach. After this, visited five or
six in succession, all of the same formation, some being
masses of loose coral and dead shells. In passing from
island to island, we had many opportunities of observing
the different formation and shape of several species of
coral; some stood in masses of the brain-stone and
cock’s-comb coral, some like petrified sponge, some again
like fans, some again of the branch coral, interlaced and
intertwined in every direction, again some broad flat
masses, laying layer over layer like huge sea lichens,
again many presented the appearance of a fungous or
great sea mushroom, with a broad spreading head
1 springing from a small thick base. It is not a little sin-
gular that many of the growing islets, which are nearly
■ level with the surface of the water, have a similar form,
not rising from the bottom with a perpendicular side,
but with broad overhanging heads resting upon a small
base. In many places we passed over some of these iso-
lated sea-mushrooms, upon which there was barely water
for a small boat, where one step over the ledge would be
in the deep sea, and you might see the hollows under-
neath as if looking under an umbrella. Birds were
abundant on most of the isles, and on two of them were
hawks’ nests, raised to the height of four feet by an
accumulation of sticks, stones, and shells. This day
there was but little breeze; the thermometer ranged
from 76° to 86°.
“ On our return to the ship, I proposed that we should
now touch at the more northern river, where we were
deterred from landing by their first appearance. We
went, therefore, to the mouth of the river, which is com


pletely blocked up by sand-hills, with two or three small
gaps through which water appeared to have made its
way at some time, but the entire bed of the river, which
was only a few yards wide, was covered with growing
samphire. There were two or three small pools of very
salt water above this, but no fresh wafer visible. We
took a hasty view from a high sand hill. The interior,
where we could sec anything of it, looked grassy, and
there was some grass even on the sand-hills near the
beach ; but our view was very limited and hurried. We
had no sooner returned to the boat than we saw a party
coming along the beach about a quarter of a mile away,
and another party on the top of the hill above, where we
just saw them, and where we supposed their weapons to
have been left. They shouted—we went on board.
“ Weighed anchor, and stood to the south to examine
a bay opposite the southern part of Moresby’s Flat-
topped Range. This bay,* which is not laid down in
the charts, was found to be an excellent anchorage, com-
pletely sheltered from all southerly winds, which are the
prevailing winds on this coast at this time of the year,
and also much protected by a reef running north and
south from the extreme point of the bay. This reef or
bank was found to have from three to five fathoms upon
it, and within it there was seven fathoms, even near to
the shore at the bottom of the bay, and there is no
appearance of any heavy sea or violent action of the
water on the beach at any time of the year. To the
south of the tongue of land which forms the bay, there
is also another bay, which would be completely sheltered
from all northerly winds, so as to combine between the
two bays perfect shelter at all seasons of the year.
From the deck of the schooner where she lay we had a
view of the entire slope of ground from the beach to the
top of the range, about five or six miles distant.
“ The range seems to consist of isolated hills, rising
■ from an elevated plain. Judging by the eye at that
distance, the entire space, as far as we had any opportu-
* Port Grey.


nity of seeing, after going a little way back from the
coast, on the slope to the hills, upon the hills, among the
hills, beyond the hills, and, in short, everywhere as far
as the eye could discern, appeared a grassy country,
thinly sprinkled with some low trees or shrubs, perhaps
the acacia. If this be the case, and that there be water
sufficient, of which there is no reason to doubt, this may
certainly turn out to be the finest district for sheep pas-
ture that this colony can possess.
“ What may be the breadth of this district, how far
it may extend into the interior, of course nothing can be
known or said; but, from what I have now seen, and
from what Captain Grey has seen on a former occasion,
there is little doubt that it extends north and south
from the northern part of the Menai hills, as far south
as the river Arrowsmith a distance of more than
eighty miles. To the south of that river comes the
range of hills which Captain Grey has called Gardener’s
Range, and which is supposed to be the northern termi-
nation of the Darling Range ; if so, it is very probable
that by keeping on the east side of the Darling Range, a
continuation of pastoral country might be found all the
way to Moresby’s Flat-topped Range.”
CHAPTER IV.
RIVERS AND HARBOURS.
The word river, as applied to Australia, means some-
thing very different to what the word imports in Europe
and America. Our readers need scarcely bo told that a
river fitted for ship navigation, and communicating with
the sea, does not exist in Australia. The Darling and
the Lachlan, two extensive rivers, which drain the south-
ern and eastern section of Australia, are at some seasons
of the year a mere chain of pools, and at some parts of
their course these pools arc so far distant from each
other that Major Mitchell, in his three expeditions, was


often for days together in great distress for water,
although his course lay along the banks, and not unfre-
quently across the beds of these water-courses. The
Murray, indeed, as we have before had occasion to
mention, is the only considerable stream, but then it is
fed by all the streams in that part of the continent, except
those small water-courses which have their origin on the
eastern side of the “ dividing ridge,” and the rivers
which rise in the high lands in Australia Felix, and
empty themselves into the sea, independently of the
system of waters tributary to the Murray.
The rivers of Western Australia, as far as our present
information goes, are, in like manner, not navigable
streams; but as they are, so to speak, independent rivers,
—as they do not all feed one larger stream, —as they are
not grouped together in one system of drainage, many of
them continue to flow at all seasons of the year. Others
dwindle into chains of ponds, similar to the generality of
rivers in Australia.
In the southern portion of Western Australia the
Murray, the Harvey, the Brunswick, the Preston, and
the Donelly, are said to flow all the year round. The
Murray and the Harvey are small streams, but important,
from flowing into Peel’s Inlet, which has a practicable
entrance, somewhat improperly laid down in the maps as
the mouth of the Murray. It was examined by Captain
Gill, and was ascertained by him to be safe at all times,
there being three fathoms on the bar at low water, and
seven fathoms in the inlet, and deep water without the
bar. The inlet is of considerable extent, but the country
in its immediate neighbourhood does not appear to be
very eligible for settlement.
We shall now notice the rivers of Australind, In the
order in which Captain Grey traversed the country.
Ganthcaume Bay is situated in 27° 42' south. It Is
somewhat open to the north-west, but is well protected
from all other winds. It was surveyed by Captain Grey,
but his observations on it have not yet been made public.
It is believed, however, that it is a valuable roadstead,
though a part of the shore is studded with dangerous


rocks. At the southern portion of the bay there ap-
pears to be secure anchorage, and, when well known,
it will doubtless be an available roadstead for shipping.
Into Gantheaurne Bay two rivers empty themselves.
One, called the Murcheson, discharges itself into the sea
about the centre of the bay, through an inlet, or some-
what -widened estuary, so common on the western coast
of Australia. The other runs into the sea, through the
opening in the south part of Gantheaurne Bay, as laid
down in Captain King’s chart, and in Mr Arrowsmith’s
larger map. On a smaller scale they will be found in
the small map in this volume. This second river is un-
named ; it is that which Captain Grey crossed at the
commencement of his journey, and was a chain of pools.
In the map will be found a river, laid down as having
been crossed on the 4th of April, but it is unnamed, and
is not mentioned in the journal; it may therefore be
assumed to be merely a succession of pools. It may
here be mentioned, during the second day’s journey,
springs of water were abundant, —a feature which doubt-
less adds much to the fertility of the country.
The next river to the southward has been named
the Hutt, and is the most considerable in the district
of Australind, if not in Western Australia. It has two
branches, which have their rise in the hills to the
eastward, which Captain Grey has named the Victoria
Range, and which branches are probably fed by other
streams in their course. These branches empty them-
selves into an inlet of considerable size, similar in its
character to Peel’s Inlet, already alluded to, and to
which it bears a strong resemblance. This estuary
extends from north to south almost twelve miles,
and is from three to four miles broad at its northern
extremity; but it diminishes to two miles where it re-
ceives the main branch of the river. About midway on
its western side the inlet discharges itself into the sea.
This is called in the maps the mouth of the Hutt, but
what is its character, and whether it is practicable for
large vessels, our information does not enable us to say.


The first branch of the Hutt crossed by Captain Grey
was found to be thirty to forty yards wide, and a con-
tinuous stream flowed down its centre, though the season
at which he passed was towards the end of summer,*
and before the autumnal rains commence. Its course
was rapid ; and where Captain Grey’s party crossed, it
formed a succession of waterfalls. Another branch of
the river was merely a succession of pools, but there
was, nevertheless, plenty of water all along the river.
Now “ plenty of water” is all that can be expected
of the best of the Australian rivers, and more than most
of them furnish. The great Darling and the Lachlan
did not furnish “ plenty of water” during Major
Mitchell’s expeditions; and as far as our present knowr-
ledge of Australia goes, that district which has
sufficient for the wants of the animal creation is for-
tunate indeed. In New South Wales droughts are of
frequent occurrence; in Soutli Australia the same evil
occurs ; and in the intervening country it was last year
found necessary to kill some of the flocks that others
might drink their blood. Nothing in the shape of
drought has occurred in Western Australia since the
country has become known to Europeans; and for all
the purposes for which Australian rivers can be made
available Australind is abundantly supplied.
In many of the accounts of the Australian colonies
which we have met, we have seen the rivers described in
a manner to lead the reader to suppose they arc some-
thing more than they really are. Their breadth—the
beauty of their scenery—the geological character of their
beds—the alluvial deposits on their banks—the trees and
shrubs they nourish, and many other particulars, have
been related with distinctness; but, somehow or other,
it has generally been forgotten to state what was their
depth, and whether there was any water at all in summer.
To those who have read these favourable accounts, our
simple statement of the truth may disappoint; but wc
must state, that if the reader will take the pains to exa-
* 4th April, equivalent to 4th of October in the northern hemis-
phere.


mine the evidence, he will find that Western Australia
generally is better watered * than any of the other colo-
nies, excepting Australia Felix, which is independent of
the drainage of the Murray.
Carrying his eye along the map of the coast to the
southward, the reader will find three rivers emptying
themselves into the sea—the Bowes, the Buller, and the
Chapman, besides two smaller brooks, not named. These
were all water-courses, dry, or nearly dry, in the sum-
mer, yielding their water only by scraping a hole in their
respective beds. They all, however, passed through a
fertile, well-wooded, and picturesque country, which they
evidently sufficed to nourish. The fact of their yielding
water when apparently dry, by merely scraping up the
surface, is really a curious feature, which may be ac-
counted for. All the streams which descend from the
ranges of hills in Australia flow more abundantly at their
sources than at a lower part of their course; and many
of them, as they reach the sandy belt of land, which has
been so often alluded to as lying near the sea, are en-
tirely' lost. It seems as if, although at first abundant,
they were absorbed by the arid soil through which they
pass; and as Captain Grey’s course was almost con-
fined to this belt, because it is less obstructed than the
wooded parts of the country', we have no doubt that in
the fertile districts nearer to the ranges, the rivers bear a
more imposing character. This is the case to the south-
ward, and will, no doubt, be found to be so throughout
Australind.
The harbour of Port Grey now claims our attention,
inasmuch as it is proposed to found the principal town
of Australind there. This port was seen by Captain
Grey during his journey, and its outline sketched by him
from the anglef in bis course on the map, just before he
took an east course, in order to cross the Greenough
River. This outline, together with the verbal account he
• Besides the never-failing supply of the rivers, pools, and springs,
Captain Grey found the dews of Australind sufficient to nourish vege-
tation See his Journal, in the last chapter, passim.
f Marked a in the larger map of Australind.
D


gave of the bay, the River Hutt, and the superior fertility
of the country through ■which he passed, induced the
local government to fit out an expedition, the most pro-
minent result of which is the establishment of the fact,
that Port Grey is the finest harbour on the western coast
of Australia. Port Grey is about four miles in length,
in the direction of the coast, and two miles and a half
from within the reef from the coast, and may thus con-
tain six or eight square miles of surface. It is protected
by two headlands, which stretch from the coast to the
westward; and from the northern headland runs out a
reef of rocks nearly due south, thus extending the shelter
against winds from the northward and westward.
If the reader will take the trouble to draw lines from
every point of the compass, he will find that there is no
point against which either the northern or the southern
bight of the harbour does not afford shelter. The
anchorage is in seven fathoms at all parts of the harbour,
and there do not appear to be any dangers—the reef
already mentioned being a protection rather than a
danger. Mr Moore states that the deep water extends
close to the shore; and from the appearance of the beach
there was no appearance of any heavy sea, at any time of
the year. Immediately south of the southern headland
which forms the bay, is another harbour, of about half
the extent of Port Grey, but we apprehend it would be
seldom resorted to for shelter, Port Grey affording it in
so superior a degree.
If the adjacent coast should not afford marks for the
reef, buoys, or a light vessel, or even a harbour-light,
either on the north or south headland, might be re-
sorted to.
There is another fact connected with this harbour
which remains to be stated. When Captain King sailed
along the coast, he was surprised, on reaching lat. 29°,
by the sudden and remarkable smoothening of the water.
He ran along in smooth water for a considerable distance,
as if he had been sailing under the lee of a weather shore,
although the wind was blowing fresh from the westward
at the time. This phenomenon is now explained. He


was under the lee of Houtmann’s Abrolhos, a singular
chain of islands, which are laid down in the map, and
which always make smooth water for Port Grey.
The Greenough river flows, or rather, like the gene-
rality of the Australian rivers, filters into the sea at Port
Grey. This river, where Captain Grey crossed it, was
twenty-five yards in width, and salt. He crossed two
other streams during the day, which seem to be branches,
or tributaries of the Greenough, which no doubt, ac-
cording to that anomalous rule which is common to all
nature in this singular region, is more abundant towards
its mountain source.
The River Irwin is the next river to the southward of
Port Grey. It is described as fifty yards wide, but was
dry at the extremely dry season of the year at which
Captain Grey visited it. It passes through a fine sheep-
country, and from the fresh appearance of the valley, as
far as the eye could reach, is probably -well supplied
with water towards the inland portion of its course.
But the most remarkable and curious of all the rivers
of Australind is the Arrowsmith. It is described by
Captain Grey as 200 yards wide, and 50 or 60 deep.
It bore everywhere the marks of being at times an im-
petuous water-course. Trunks of enormous trees,
brought down by the winter floods, lay prostrate on its
banks, and yet there w r as no w r ater on the surface of its
bed when the expedition crossed it. By digging a few
inches in the sandy bed, an abundant supply was ob-
tained, and at a short distance from where they crossed,
both above and below r , were large pools of water.
The Arrowsmith drains extensive valleys, running
north and cast between the interior range and the sandy
limestone range, which stretches along the coast. It
probably comes through the range as other streams do,
Us course appearing to be E.S.E. From a low range,
about a mile and a half south of the river, the party had
a fine view of the rich valleys drained by this stream.
In reference to the subject matter of our present
chapter, the points established by the journals of Captain
Grey and Mr Moore are, first, the abundant supply of


water furnished by the numerous water-courses —the
only service that is expected of a river in Australia ; and,
second, the existence of a harbour, which, according
to our present information, has no equal on the western
coast of Australia, whether we consider its intrinsic
merits, or its singularly happy position for the fisheries,
for trade with all parts of the world, and for communi-
cation with the interior country.
CHAPTER V.
CLIMATE AND SOIL.
Every account of tlie climate of Western Australia that
we have met with bears testimony to its genial and salu-
brious character. Sir James Sterling’s report on this
head is unfortunately rather scanty. He contents him-
self by telling us that it is congenial to health as well as to
enjoyment; and that the children born in the colony are of
very rapid growth, and that they possibly may attain to
a more slender frame of body than their progenitors. In
the meantime, he adds, they are exempt from many of
those diseases which afflict and destroy, in childhood, so
many persons in more rigorous climates.
Climate does not depend on mere latitude, although,
no doubt, distance from the equator plays a most im-
portant part in determining the mean temperature of a
country, if it he nearly at the level of the ocean. From
an extensive induction from a large number of meteoro-
logical observations, made at different and distinct parts
of the earth’s surface, Professor Mayer, an astronomer of
celebrity at Gottingen, was enabled to lay down an empi-
rical rule for determining the mean temperature of any
given place. Round the pole the mean temperature is
assumed to be at the precise limit of freezing, since the
accumulation of icc seems neither to increase nor di-
minish from year to year. Under the equator the mean
temperature, at the level of the sea, is found to be 84° - 3
of Fahrenheit. In latitude 45 o, —that is, the middle
point between the equator (0 o> ) and the pole (90°-), the


mean temperature lias been found to be the mean between
32° and 84 0, 2; that is 58o*l. Upon these data it be-
came easy to construct a table for every degree of latitude
at the level of the ocean; and if there were no hills or
vales, if the earth’s surface were perfectly uniform, if
land and water were equally distributed, if the earth were
equally clothed with wood, or equally barren—equally
cultivated, or equally waste; if, in short, there were no
disturbing circumstances, the professor’s rule would
hold good universally. But it so happens that there are
so many causes of disturbance, that if we take any given
spot, at any given time, we shall rarely find the fact and
the professor’s rule agree together. Far be it from us,
however, to underrate the value of a scientific deduction,
for it is undoubtedly true that climate depends on dis-
tance from the equator; and subject to correction for all
sorts of disturbances, many of which can scarcely be
measured, the rule is no doubt correct.
The principal circumstance affecting climate is the ele-
vation of the land above the level of the sea. It is a fact
well known to every one, that the tops of high mountains
are covered with perpetual ice and snow; and by nu-
merous observations in different latitudes, the rate at
which temperature decreases as we ascend from the level
of the sea, has been ascertained with great accuracy.
The height at which the snow never melts is called the
line of perpetual congelation. At the pole it is at the
surface, but as we leave the pole and move towards the
equator, it becomes higher and higher for every degree
of latitude. At the equator it has been found to be
15,207, or nearly three miles high, and as the increase
of height from the pole to the equator is by imperceptible
gradations, it forms a curve line, which has been called
the curve of perpetual congelation. We shall not trouble
our readers with a more mathematical statement of the
curve, but shall content ourselves, by saying that, even
under the equator, in latitude 00,O 0, at the top of a moun
tain three miles high (correctly 15,207 feet), we should
have a polar climate, whilst at Swan River we should
meet with perpetual snow at two miles high (correctly


Place.
Latitude.
Height of
perpetual
Ice,
Port Grey .
Perth
Sydney ,
Adelaide
Bay of Islands
Port Nicholson
Hobart Town
Australind
W, Australia
N. S. Wales
S. Australia)
N. Zealand j
N. Zealand
V. D. Land
. 29° S. 71°-9
. 32 • 69 ■ 5f
. 34 • 67-9
. 35 • 67-0
. 41 • 61-7
. 43 • 59 -9
. 11,780
. 11,013
. 10,534
. 10,287
. 8,738
. 8,206
11,018 feet) and at London, at a little over one mile in
height (5,808 feet). The immense influence of elevation,
in determining the temperature of a given latitude, will
readily be understood, for it will require an elevation of
5,000 under the equator to produce the same effect as a
hill of 3,500 in Western Australia,* whilst at the pole it
would be necessary to penetrate into the earth to escape
from the icy temperature of the surface.
The following table shows the mean temperature which
the principal settlements in Australia would exhibit, if
there were no disturbing causes, at the level of the ocean;
together with the elevation of the curve of congelation,
in other words, the height at which a polar climate
prevails:—
As a diagram best conveys a clear conception of the
curve of congelation, the reader will understand that, in
the following figure, the earth is supposed to be a level
plain, and that near the pole the height of the. curve of
congelation increases by minute degrees, that between
latitude 60 and 30 it increases most rapidly, when it
again moderates as it approaches the equator; hence the
one half of the curve is nearly the reverse of the other.
This curve, and the table corresponding with it, is calcu-
lated on theoretic data, but it is nevertheless remarkably
confirmed by observation. Thus Ben Nevis in Scotland
is covered with snow all the year, with the exception of
two or three weeks in the middle of summer; hence the
theoretic inference is, that it is rather below the line of
perpetual congelation for that latitude. What are the
* The highest of tbe Darling range
t The actual average has been found to be 65°, or 4°s' lower than
the theoretic mean.


facts?—lt is in 57° N.; the curve of congelation in that
latitude has an altitude of 4,534 feet, and it has been
found by observation, that Ben Nevis is 4,380, or 154
feet below the curve of congelation—a ‘difference just
sufficient to account for the two or three weeks of freedom
from snow in the summer.
It is not merely the elevation of the place itself which
affects the temperature, but that of neighbouring coun-
tries also. A plain in the neighbourhood of mountains
will be cooler than one in the neighbourhood of other
plains; indeed, the number of circumstances affecting cli-
mate is so great as to entirely have baffled all attempts
to enumerate them. Although we know that some
strange anomalies exist, we can scarcely account for
them, and even to this day it remains a problem, why
Quebec, which is in the latitude of the south of France,
should experience a Siberian winter.
As to the southern hemisphere generally, that has its
peculiarities of climate, among which may be stated the
lower temperature, as compared with the same latitudes
in the north-eastern hemisphere. This is often attributed
to the larger proportion which the water bears to the land,


and to tlie direction of the winds, both of which causes
have no doubt very great influence. Various allowances,
from 3° to 7°, have been proposed as corrections for the
degree of latitude; but if we take the mean, we shall
probably find that we are not far from the truth. This
would make Port Grey.correspond with 340 north, which
parallel passes through the Mediterranean sea, a few
miles south of Candia and Cyprus. The same rule places
Perth in the parallel of the south of Spain, of Sicily, and
the Morea, and makes Western Australia correspond
with the most fruitful and genial portion of the south of
Europe.
No extensive tables of the temperature of the Swan
River settlement have reached this country that we are
aware of; but what is perhaps more satisfactory, we have
the reports of two competent medical witnesses on the
salubrity of the climate. Dr Milligan reports as follows:
“ The favourable opinion I have already expressed of
the influence of this climate on European constitutions,
and of the place as a residence for invalids from India, is
strengthened by a further experience of two years.
“1 have met with several individuals here, who, on
leaving England, were great sufferers from dispepsia and
disorders of the digestive organs generally, from the ner-
vous affections which so often accompany these, from
hypochondria, from asthma, and from bronchial diseases
—who have recovered their health in a remarkable degree
since their arrival. Some of slight figure have become
more robust and stronger. Parturition with the female
sex is expeditious and safe, being accomplished by the
efforts of nature alone, within from three to six hours.
No woman has died from childbirth in this colony since
its commencement, nor am I aware of any who died
within a month after. Children thrive remarkably well,
and, I may add, every description of livestock, although
collected from different climates—England, India, South
America, Africa, &c. ; and various plants and vegetables
collected from as many different sources, find here a con-
gen'al temperature. Indeed, lam disposed to conclude
that, when the settlers are well lodged and fed, and the


country more cultivated and improved, but few diseases
will be met with; I might perhaps say, only dysentery
and ophthalmia, and these of a mild character.
The testimony of Dr Johnson, the surgeon of his
Majesty’s ship Sulphur, is to the same effect. In an offi-
cial letter addressed to Sir James Sterling, in December:
1832, he says ;
“In compliance with your Excellency’s request as to -
my opinion of the climate of Swan River, I beg leave to
state, as a climate, with regard to health, I am not aware
of any other that can be compared with it,
“As a proof of its salubrity, during three years his
Majesty’s sloop Sulphur was employed upon that station,
not a single death, and very few important cases of
disease, occurred, notwithstanding the very great ex-
posure of her men, not only to wet, but also to night
air, in consequence of her boats having been a great deal
employed at a distance from the anchorage. When
exploring the country, for several days, and sometimes
weeks, these people have been exposed to the sun, fatigued
in the evening, after a day’s excursion, slept in the open
air, and repeatedly in wet weather, without suffering in./
the slightest degree.
“ Another point ought also to be taken into consider- -
ation—the debilitated state of those constitutions which'
were undergoing this exposure, in consequence of having
been so long a period upon salt provisions, and without
vegetable diet—out of three years and ten months the
Sulphur was employed upon the Swan River service, her
crew were only 256 days upon fresh diet. A life of this
description in any other climate, I have no hesitation in
asserting, would have been productive of the most serious
disease.”
. The following interesting letter from the present gover-
nor of Western Australia to Ids brother, William Hutt,
Esq., the member for Hull, gives a favourable picture of
the delightful and salubrious climate of the colony :
“ Mornings and evenings, sunrise and sunset, in this
land, are peculiarly calm, hushed, and beautiful. I
never sec the evening sun sink beyond Mount Eliza,


without recalling Guido’s Assumption of the Virgin,
which was the pride of the British Institution (I think)
three years ago. Distant objects seem actually painted
on the horizon, and their edges appear more sharply
carved out than I ever noticed in Italy.” Again : “There
are many proofs of the extreme dryness of this climate.
You may treat articles of steel with a degree of neglect
that would be most injurious in England : they hardly'
ever rust here. Iron hoops may' be observed scattered
in all directions on the ground, where Europeans have
been congregated. The hoops of casks in which stores
have been brought out have been lying exposed to the
atmosphere for years; these are rusted, but very little
decayed. Mildew is very rare here indeed.
“ Thursday, 30 th May* —My' gardener tells me there
was ice in the garden early this morning. I found it
cold enough for the use of fires all the day, in rooms not
exposed to the sun. We find winter clothing very com-
fortable: I did not bring out enough, reckoning upon the
summer lasting two-thirds of the year ; instead of which,
I find the duration of hot and cold weather is pretty
nearly as in England. Many persons would now wish to
add a featherbed (to the mattress) and a blanket at night.
“ The seasons are the opposite of those in England ;
January being the middle of summer, and July of winter.
The summer extends from the first of November to the
first of March; the spring and autumn are brief, but
well defined; the winter of a bracing coolness, with
occasional frosts. The spring months are, September,
October, and November; the summer, December, Janu-
ary, and February'; autumn, March, April, and May ;
winter, June, July, and August. March, April, and
August are generally' considered the rainy months. The
average temperature of spring is 65° s' ; of summer,
72°; of autumn, 66°; and of winter, 55°. The barome-
trical pressure it about 29 - 94319 inches, and the average
of the thermometer 64 Fahrenheit. Of course, as the
land rises above the level of the ocean, a difference of
temperature is felt.
* Equivalent to the 50ih of November In the Northern hemisphere.


“The wet season commences with light showers in
April, which continue to increase in number and force
throughout May, June, and July, and from that period
to decrease, until they cease altogether, in the month of
November, when the dry weather begins. These two
seasons, with an intermediate spring following the con-
clusion of each, embrace the circle of the year. It is
usual to call the wet season the winter, and the dry sea-
son the summer, but neither of them has the character
of the corresponding season in Europe.
“ The prevailing wind in the seas adjacent Cape Leeu-
win is from the westward throughout the year. On the
coast, however, land and sea breezes take place with
great regularity during the summer. In the winter sea-
son gales of wind from the north-west and south-west
are very frequent, and are usually accompanied by heavy
falls of rain. At such periods the atmosphere is charged
with moisture to a considerable degree, and the quantity
of rain that has been ascertained to fall at King George’s
Sound, in the course of the six winter months, equals the
quantity experienced in the western counties of England.
The atmosphere in the summer season retains so little
moisture, that none but hardy and fibrous plants can
withstand the drought. The air is so clear, and the re-
flection of solar heat so great, that the thermometer occa-
sionally reaches in the shade near the ground 105°, but
the effect at those times upon the European constitution
is not injurious. This can only be accounted for, under
so great a heat, by the peculiar dryness of the air, and
the regular succession of cool nights after the warmest
days. • The experience of the last eight years has esta-
blished in the minds of the colonists the full belief that
the climate of the settlement is in a remarkable degree
conducive to health and to comfort, but it certainly is
not equally suitable to the growth of those vegetable pro-
ducts which flourish to great advantage in moister cli-
mates. With reference to this point of difference between
England and this new colony, it is, perhaps, fortunate
that it does not resemble the former country, but may
rather be considered, in temperature, as a supplement to


the southern districts of the United Kingdom, and as
affording every range of temperature between the Land’s
End and the equatorial regions, for the production of
commodities which cannot be raised in the colder atmos-
phere of the mother country.
“ As Australia, in everything regarding climate, is the
opposite of England, it may be observed, that the north
is the hot wind, and the south the cool; the westerly the
most unhealthy, and the east the most salubrious; it is
summer with the colonist when it is winter at home, and
the barometer is considered to rise before bad weather,
and to fall before good. To these diversities it may be
added, that the swans are black, and the eagles white;
the mole lays eggs, and has a duck’s bill; the kangaroo
has five claws on its fore paws, three talons on its hind
legs, like a bird, and yet hops on its tail; there is a bird
which has a broom in its mouth, instead of a tongue; the
cod is found in the rivers, and the perch in the sea; the
valleys are cold and barren, and the mountain-tops warm
and fertile; the nettle is a lofty tree, and the poplar a
dwarfish shrub; the pears are of wood, with the stalk
at the broad end; the cherry grows with the stone out-
side; the fields are fenced with mahogany, the humblest
house fitted up with cedar; and the myrtle plants arc
burnt for fuel. Such are the opposites of England v.
Terra Australia.”
The more northerly situation of Australind, leaving
all other circumstances out of consideration, would lead
to the inference that the climate is considerably hotter
than the neighbourhood of Swan River ; the average
temperature of the whole year may, perhaps, be rather
higher; but there are two facts to be taken into account
which render the climate of Australind peculiarly favour-
able to animal and vegetable life, and especially to the
human constitution—we mean the general elevation of
the country, and the equability of climate which invari-
ably prevails as we approach both the northern and south-
ern tropic. The effects of elevation on temperature we
have already explained, and as Captain Grey describes
the elevated land as approaching the coast line much


more conspicuously than it does to the southward, we
are prepared to agree with Mr Wakefield in his observa-
tions on this head, made in a speech at the London
Tavern, on the occasion of a meeting of the landowners
of Australind, in November last. In answer to a ques-
tion respecting the climate, Mr Wakefield said:
“ He was glad the gentleman had given him an oppor-
tunity of offering a few observations on the subject, on
account of the doubts which a consideration of the mere
latitude was calculated to create. But, although lati-
tude no doubt exercised a most important influence, there
were many other circumstances which modified the
effects of latitude, and the chief of these circumstances
was the general elevation of the country. He should
illustrate this position by calling their attention to Mexico,
because what he should state was well known. In parts
of Mexico, in the course of a few hours’ drive, you may
pass from the climate of the tropics to the region of
snow. In the plains above Vera Cruz, sugar is to be
seen growing with tropical luxuriance; proceeding in-
land, the traveller first passes the climate of the mulberry
and the olive—the climate of Naples. Soon he reaches
the district where the currant and the gooseberry may be
cultivated—fruits which will only thrive in a temperate
climate. At length he approaches those higher regions,
where nothing is to be found but the hardy pine.
(Cheers.) Thus, then,” he continued, “we must look to
elevation as well as latitude; and finding that the coun-
try around Port Grey was considerably elevated, he
came to the conclusion, without requiring further testi-
timony, that the climate cannot be oppressive. (Cheers.)
He was further confirmed of this by what was going on
in Eastern Australia or New South Wales. There the
disposition of the colonists was decidedly in favour of
what had been named New England, which was nearly
in the same latitude as Port Grey. He would also men-
tion that Captain Grey’s testimony was to the effect, that
the climate of Port Grey is both agreeable and salubri-
ous. ITc was therefore strengthened in his opinion that
the resumption of the original land was a happy accident.
(Cheers.)”


The gentleman who put the question to the directors
now said, “ That his own view entirely coincided with
Mr Wakefield’s very able exposition (cheers) ; but that
he had refrained to mention it, in order to give the meet-
ing the benefit of Mr Wakefield’s opinion. (Cheers).’’
Mr Wakefield’s view is undoubtedly borne out by the
temperature of all elevated countries. The most striking
instance of this is New Mexico. The latitude of New
Mexico is not higher than that of Syria and Persia, and
yet it is very cold, simply because it is considerably ele-
vated. What the average elevation of Australind may
be, or what other circumstances may lower the average
temperature, remains to be discovered.*
As to the greater equability of the climate of such
countries as are near the equator, we have only a very
few words to offer. At the equator the average tempe-
rature is found to be 84° 2' of Fahrenheit’s thermometer.
This is without much fluctuation. As the sun acquires
declination the heat is somewhat moderated, but the
range is extremely small. In countries at a distance
from the equator, on the other hand, the difference of
temperature between summer and winter is very great.
In Canada, for instance, the range of the thermometer
is about 140°; and although the mean or average tempe-
rature does not materially differ from that which theory
assigns to that parallel, the thermometer sometimes
reaches 96° in the shade, and occasionally sinks below
the freezing point of mercury • —39°, in the winter. From
excessive fluctuation, Australind is necessarily free—a
circumstance which is much in favour of its salubrity.
If we compare the soil of any of our Australian colo-
nies with that of our American colonies, or of the United
States, it must be at once admitted that nothing like the
fertility of the latter is exhibited by the former; but,
notwithstanding the inferior fertility of the Australian
colonies, the equability of the climate, and their peculiar
adaptation to animal life, has rendered them extremely
attractive to Europeans, and has accelerated production,
• The difference, according to mere latitude, between Perth
and Port Grey, is only 2° of Fahrenheit.


and, consequently, the accumulation of wealth in an ex-
traordinary manner.
Comparing our Australian colonies, not with the rich
and teeming valleys of America, but rather one with
another, we shall find that Australind, in point of ferti-
lity, stands at the very top of the scale. This is easily
accounted for. Granite and limestone there prevail, and
even the sand stone which Captain Grey met with, is
not that which bears witness to the barrenness of a large
portion of Eastern Australia, but is of a character sus-
ceptible of some improvement, which it will receive so
soon as population has increased to a point to allow of
the expenditure of labour upon the soil.
We have before alluded to the most striking feature
in the coast line of the whole of the Australian conti-
nent, namely, that a belt of sand, more or less barren,
encircles every part of the coast which has been visited.
In Australind this belt is much narrower than elsewhere,
and in many parts, as wo have already pointed out, the
higher and more fertile district pushes its way through
the sandy region to the coast’s edge, and even in some
places has precipitated itself upon the shore, forming an
undercliff similar to the south coast of the Isle of
Wight. If the reader has gone carefully through Cap-
tain Grey’s journal, he will have seen how constantly
fertile valleys were passed through or seen from high
land, over w’hich he travelled. The abundance of mois-
ture, the luxuriance of the vegetation, the number of kan-
garoos and emus with which they met, and the constant
recurrence of warran grounds, at once proclaim the
superiority of the soil of Australind to that of the other
colonies.
In Western Australia generally soil which is available
for agricultural purposes is good, but it does not bear a
large proportion to the whole extent of the colony,
which certainly includes much unavailable land;* but
in Australind, Captain Grey’s report leads us to believe
the good land exhibits a larger proportion to the una-
vailable land.
• Sir James Sterling, Report, p. 5.


. As the country to the eastward of the Darling Range
becomes better known by means of a systematic exami-
nation, such as that of Australind by Captain Grey, it
is probable that fertile districts may be discovered con-
nected with a separate system of streams as in Eastern
Australia. It must be admitted, however, that the inte-
rior is far from promising, and the most that we are
entitled to hope is, that as the beautiful district of Aus-
tralind becomes well inhabited, a considerable tract of fer-
tile country will be found to the eastward of the Victoria
range, to give a new impetus to emigration thither.
. We shall now close this chapter, with the single
remark that its subject matter will be found in a manner
illustrated by the next chapter.
CHAPTER VI.
PRODUCTIVE AND COMMERCIAL RESOURCES OF
AUSTRALIND.
About the latitude of 28° south, that is, one degree
nearer the equator than Port Grey, Captain Grey found
the productions of the tropics as well as those of the
temperate zone flourishing. At that point he entered a
rich and thickly-wooded valley, in which he found the
most northern grass tree and the most southern gigantic
ant’s nest which he had seen, and he therefore inferred
from these evidences, both of the animal and vegetable
kingdom, that he w'as actually in that part of the conti-
nent where the productions of the tropical and more
temperate regions are confounded previously to an abso-
lute change from the one to the other taking place.
Hence, in the northern portion of Australind, many tro-
pical productions will doubtless flourish, and at no
very distant period reward the labour of man; whilst to
the southward, those of the more genial portions of the
temperate zone—the olive, the orange, the fig, the mul


berry, and, above all, the fine-woolled sheep will yield
their rich and abundant produce to Australind industry.
The sheep demand notice on account of the sur-
prising success which has attended the business of flock-
keeping in every part of Australia. This is not to he
wondered at, for whilst the latitude of the Australian
colonics coincides with those countries, in which the fine-
woolled sheep have been most successfully reared, the
superior dryness of the Australian climate generally pre-
vents those destructive diseases to which sheep are liable
in our wet, cold, and variable climate.
The fine-woolled sheep, both in ancient and modern
times, has best succeeded in the most genial countries of
Europe and Asia. Angora, the ancient Ancyra, the
former seat of arts and manufactures, still retains its
breed of fine-woolled sheep. So also does the country
around Damascus. Tarentum and Sicily, both of them
corresponding with Western Australia, were long famous
for the superiority of their fleeces, whilst even in the
present condition of the Barbary fleeces, the experienced
eye may perceive the vestiges of a fine-woolled race of
sheep, though they have since degenerated by utter
neglect. The fine Merino wools of Spain and the south
of Portugal retained its high reputation until a very
recent period, having only yielded within a very few'
years to Saxony and New South Wales, where superior
energy and care have met their just reward by the most
extraordinary success.
It will be observed that Barbary and Damascus coin-
cide with the corrected latitude of Australind ; Angora
with South Australia; Spain, Tarentum, and Sicily with
New South Wales and the southern parts of Western
Australia.
These considerations, added to the peculiar character
of the climate and the abundance of rich pastures, would
have led to the inference that the fine-woolled sheep
would flourish in Australia; indeed, Mr M‘Arthur, who
first introduced the Merino breed of sheep, was pro-
bably influenced by these circumstances, but we have now


1820 ....
90,415 lbs.
1835 ....
.... 4,210,310 lbs.
1825 ....
323 995 —
1840 ....
.... 12,000,000 —
1830 ....
1.907,309 _
evidence of a more satisfactory character in the remark-
able success already alluded to.
Mr John M‘Arthur commenced sheep-farming in
Tfew South Wales in 1793. He had then only thirty
Bengal ewes, growing a coarse and very inferior wool,
scarcely indeed deserving the name. Two years after
he obtained one Merino ram and two ewes, and with
these he began to cross his coarso-woolled sheep, select-
ing the finest woolled progeny to breed from.*
In 1802 he brought specimens of his wool to Eng-
land, and being encouraged by the government, he ob-
tained two Merino ewes and three rams from his Majes-
ty’s flocks, and from the date of his return to the colony
his flocks improved and increased most rapidly. It is
only of late years, namely, since the year 1829, that
wool has become an extensive article of export, and we
now receive from Australia alone more than we received
from all countries previous to 1820. The rapid increase
which has taken place in the quantity of wool imported
into Great Britain from the Australian colonies, is shown
in the following statement for every fifth year ending
last year:
In the production of wool in the Australian colonies,
the growers of wool enjoy a species of natural monopoly,
so to speak, which secures them a price beyond the
mere cost of production. They have the whole of con-
suming Europe open to them as a vast market or cluster
of markets; they can produce cheaper than most other
countries, and the prices they obtain are regulated by the
large demand, and not by the state of Australian pro-
* It is a well-known fact that the ram determines the fineness of
the wool, and not the ewe, the progeny following the sire in the
proportion of three quarters instead of half as fine as compared with
the dam. Hence the importance of selecting the finest-woolled
rams.


1790 ...
1820 ...
1800 ...
... 35,000,000 —
1830 ...
1810 ...
1840 ...
... 600,000,000 —
duction. The inducement to produce is therefore exces-
sive, and if Australia could so far augment the produc-
tion of wool as to meet the demand, then the price would
come down to the cost of production. But this is not
the case. Her wool-growers may go on straining every
nerve to increase production for years, and still make
but a small impression on the markets of Europe. Eng-
land alone consumes nearly twenty times as much as
Australia produces, so that Australia may go on dis-
placing successive portions of the wool supplied by
Europe, without debasing the price, until a point is
reached, when she is met by the competition of other
countries, either by a small increase in her cost of pro-
duction, or a decrease in theirs, or both, all of them
taken together being capable of supplying the demand,
when this monopoly price will cease, and Australia will
be reduced to the position of an ordinary producer.
This has been the case with the growth of cotton in
America. It is not more than sixty years since cotton
was produced in America, and the following is the pro-
gress of production:—
Now the cause of this wonderful increase was similar
to the great increase in the growth of wool. There was a
ready market in this country much larger than America
could supply, although she could produce much more
cheaply than the cotton growing countries in the east. If
she could fully have supplied the demand, she must have
been content with the ordinary and average rate of pro-
fits, but being unable so to do, the price continued to be
regulated by the whole demand, and in the production
of cotton America enjoyed something analogous to a
rent. America has had a further advantage in a rapidly
increasing market. This is partly owing to the im-
provements in machinery, but it is partly owing to her
cheaper and better cotton. In like manner Australia
will hereafter improve the market by cheapening as
well as improving the quality of the wool she supplies.
Improvements are constantly being introduced into the


woollen manufacture, and Australia will no doubt here-
after do for the woollen manufacture what America has
done for the cotton manufacture. In the case of cotton
there is reason to believe that America has reached the
point when she must forego the monopoly price. She can
supply nearly the whole demand, so that the market price
will now regulate the production, which again will deter-
mine the price the grower obtains. In the case of wool,
however, Australia has many years before the point of
saturation can be attained. The woollen manufacture is
diffused throughout every country in Europe, and it is
impossible to fix a limit to European demand; hence
she may enjoy a monopoly price, which may stimulate
production in the same ratio as it has hitherto done, for
years to come, before the growth of wool in Australia
receives any perceptible check.
In this promising branch of production Western
Australia has taken her place. The number of sheep in
the colony in 1835, 1836, and 1837, was respectively
6,133, 8,119, and 12,000. “Their rate of increase,”,
says Sir James Sterling, “ is found to be, exclusively of
the wethers and the proceeds of wool, about 40 per cent,
per annum, or they double their numbers in each period
of two years. No obstacle is found to the extension of
sheep-keeping, and therefore, at the rate specified, with-
out any fresh importations, the number of sheep in the
colony may be expected to amount to 400,000, giving
an export of wool of the value of 100,000/.”* In an-
other place he says, “The return of profit on sheep-
farming may be estimated in the gross at 75 per cent,
per annum. The rate is undoubtedly higher here, where
the price of meat is high and the value of land low, than
it can be in New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land.
After deducting the expenses of shepherding, and allowing
a reasonable rent for the land on which the flock is main-
ained, a net profit remains to the owner of about 5() per
cent, per annum. Such a profit as this, combined with the
means of extending indefinitely the number of sheep farms,
must attract to this branch of investment, in the course
of a few years, a large amount of capital. At present
• Report, p. 20.


the absence of funds within the colony applicable to such
purposes, and the prejudices which unjustly exist with
respect to its capabilities, together with the mishaps
attendant on the importation of sheep from other places,
impose obstacles on its extension apart from natural
increase.”*
From what we have already stated respecting the
climate of Australind, and the countries with which it
agrees in point of latitude, the reader will at once per-
ceive how especially it is adapted to the productions of
southern Europe and parts of Asia. “ The culture of the
vine, fig, peach, and melon tribe,” says Sir James Ster-
ling, “has been carried thus early to a considerable extent,
and if ever it should be desirable for the mother country
to possess a wine growing colony, the soils and seasons
of this country afford reasonable ground for antici-
pating a successful issue to such a speculation.” To
this limited enumeration we may add the olive, the mul-
berry, and therefore the silk worm, and the orange.
There is, perhaps, no part of Australia in which the
vine would not yield abundantly ; although, in propor-
tion to the increased temperature of the country, greater
richness of flavour is attained, and less labour required
in its cultivation. The peculiar racy wines of Germany
are produced in latitude 46° and 48° north. Those of
France extend two or three degrees nearer to the equator,
whilst the fuller bodied, and richer wines of Spain,
Portugal, Sicily, and Madeira, extend from latitude 37°
to 32 c ' north.f
The culture of the vine for commercial purposes was
introduced into New South Wales about eighteen years
since. At that period there were only two vineyards in
the colony. In 1825 Mr Busby planted on an estate
belonging to the Orphan School about three acres of vines.
Wine made from this vineyard in 1829 is said to have
resembled Burgundy, and it proved of very fair quality.
A small quantity of the vintage of 1830 which Mr Busby
brought to England in 1831, without any of the precau-
tions usually adopted to prevent the deterioration of
■ Report, p. 10.
t Funchal, the chief town of Madeira, is in 32° 37' north.


light wines, continued perfectly sound, and was pro-
nounced a very promising wine by many wine merchants
and wine drinkers who tasted it. A bottle of the same
wine was taken back to Sydney, and was opened on the
25th of October, 1832, when it was found to be perfectly
sound, and, moreover, a well-flavoured and strong-
bodied wine.
Mr Busby afterwards visited the wine-growing coun-
tries, where he obtained cuttings of many hundred kinds
of French, German, and Spanish vines, most of which
are now thriving well in New SouthVVales. Mrßusby’s
opinion, and it is the opinion of experience, is decidedly
in favour of the success of the vine in Australia. His
views extend beyond the mere consumption of the
colony, and he expresses his firm conviction, in his visit
to the vineyards of Spain and France, published last year,
that Australia will hereafter furnish wines to the British
market.
Now Australind corresponds with the southernmost of
the wine-growing countries of Europe, namely, Madeira,
and should any enterprising settler be disposed to attempt
the culture of the vine, we should recommend him to
make choice of those which produce the richer wines of
Madeira, Oporto, Xeres, andperhaps some of the Italian,
Grecian, and Sicilian varieties, in preference to the delici-
ous but less generous wines of Germany and France.*
The olive is another production of southern Europe,
which has been transplanted with success to New
South Wales, where it is subject to none of those vicissi-
tudes from frost to which it is liable around Nismes
and Tarascon. As it flourishes best in a warm and
equable climate, Australind offers peculiar advantages
* It is said the Madeira grape is a native of Crete, whence it was
imported In 1421, We may here mention that among the grapes
for which the climate of Australind seems well adapted, is what is
commonly called the Currant (which is a corruption of Corinth), to
the growth of which the whole Island of Zante is devoted. In
Cephalonia and in the other lonian Islands, as well as In the Morea,
it is also cultivated. We learn that Mr C. H. Smith, the Secretary
of the Western Australian Company, has already sent out some of
these currant vines to Australind by the Park/icld, the Company’s
emigrant ship, and he has no doubt of their success.


for its culture. In a congenial climate the olive is a
hardy tree, and is, moreover, propagated with extreme
facility. Even a stake cut from the olive-tree will take
root if stuck in the ground. The following is related by
Mr Busby on this point:—
“ The olive having been mentioned, we were shown
two olives which supported a wheel for drawing water
from a well. Two posts having been required for this
purpose, when they were clearing the ground for some
olive trees three years ago, they took two of the trunks
of these, which were respectively ten or twelve inches in
diameter; they nevertheless took root, and are now
covered with strong branches, affording a proof of the
great facility with which the olive takes root. The
Vinador said the olive would produce a crop three
years after its plantation, but not a full crop until its
fifteenth year, and it would reach its greatest perfection
in its tenth year. He said a plant ought to be a limb of
a tree of the thickness of a man’s arm. Being asked
how long it would take before a slip, such as we plant in
New South Wales, would bear a crop, he appeared to
consider the proposal as ridiculous, and said lie thought
twenty years. He did not consider the oil of young
olives inferior to that of old; the only difference of their
value arises from their quantity.”
The orange will also undoubtedly flourish in Austral-
ind at no very distant period, as will also the lemon, the
lime, the shaddock, and all similar fruits. The orange
requires a much steadier climate than the olive, and
its sweetness and flavour depends even on the well-chosen
position of the trees as to sun, and protection from cold
winds. In St Michael’s, for instance, not merely are
the oranges on the south side of the island superior to
those of the north, but those of the south side of the tree
are clearly distinguishable by their greater richness. In
Europe the great orange mart is Seville, in about 37i°
north. Seville exports sweet and bitter oranges in the pro-
portion of two of the former to one of the latter. The
orange, however, flourishes considerably north of Seville,
so that parts of Australia, less favourably circumstanced
than Australind, may cultivate the orange with success \


but the rich-flavoured oranges of the south of Spain,
Michael’s, and, above all, of Malta, will probably be-
come the exclusive productions of Australind. The
Malta blood orange is, perhaps, the finest in the world,
and it would be well if some plants were transmitted
to the colony. In like manner the fig, the almond, the
chesnut, and indeed all the fruits of the south of
Europe may be transplanted to Australind with a cer-
tainty of the most perfect success.*
From the position of Australind, and from a comparison
of its climate with other countries, we may conclude that
all the semi-tropical productions, if we may be allowed the
expression, will there succeed admirably. South Carolina,
Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi, arc the states of
America to which we must look, in order to find the pro-
ductions best suited to the climate of Australind, and indeed
of Western Australia generally. South Carolina extends
from latitude 32° to 35°; Georgia, from 30° 30' to 35° ;
* Note from Ward’s * New Zealand,* page 50 :—** The following
suggestions will be found worthy the attention of emigrants. The
chief articles of produce to be first thought of are such as—l. Call for
little labour. 2. Are not bulky for'exportation. 3. Suitable for
consumption in the colony. 4. Affording a quick return.
Fruit trees have the first requisite. If our emigrant takes out a
few bushels of almonds (which we now import from Sicily) they
will soon be bearing trees, and either the fruit or the oil is a good
article of export. From a hundred-weight of raisins of the sun
(from the seed of which a good vine is known to have been raised)
he might sow several acres; it would be needful only to plant out
the seedlings at the end of the year, and then let them stay till they
had borne fruit enough to judge of. Perhaps one in a hundred
would be worth keeping, and the rest being rooted up, their places
might be supplied with cuttings from the good sorts, and in a few
years there would be a flourishing vineyard ; or from any of the wine
countries the marc might be preserved in a dry state (it is for fuel
they keep it) which contains all the grape stones. Of walnuts, the
same may be said as of almonds; they are very profitable in Switzer-
land. The kumera, or sweet potatoe, which is well known in New
Zealand, has been found, in America, to make beer exactly like
malt ; five bushels being equivalent to three. (This last remark is
probably equally applicable to the xcarran of Australind.)
The olive, when once established, may be propagated quickly by
cuttings; as also the fig.
Plants to be transported by sea should be covered over with a
glass hermetically sealed; and never uncovered till they arrive.


North Carolina extends to 36° 30' north. They there-
fore correspond very nearly with the whole extent of
Western Australia, including Australind.
The staple commodities of South Carolina are cotton
and rice, of which great quantities are exported. Cotton
was not raised for export until 1795, and before that time,
indigo, next to rice, was the most important article of
production; but it is now neglected, because the others
are more profitable.
Tobacco also thrives admirably, and is grown for ex-
port to a considerable extent.
The fruits which flourish are pears, pomegranates,
water melons, figs, apricots, nectarines, apples, peaches,
olives, almonds, and oranges, all of which will flourish at
least equally in Australind. We say at least equally,
because the climate of South Carolina is subject to
reverses, to which that of Australind is a stranger.
In the four winter months South Carolina is subject
to frosts, which frequently do considerable injury to the
more delicate productions. The low country is seldom
covered with snow, but the hills near the western bound-
ary are often mantled with a wintry robe. At some sea-
sons the temperature is extremely variable, having been
known to vary 46° in one day. In seven years, the
range was found to be from 17° to 93°,
To such severity no part of Western Australia is sub-
ject, so that the productions we have named will no doubt
thrive well. We do not mean that they will all be culti-
vated. We have seen that, in South Carolina, the cultivator
found it to his interest to abandon the growth of indigo,
for the more profitable business of raising cotton; but
what we affirm is, that Australind, from its position,
will have an enormous catalogue of productions out of
which to choose; and if the colonists reject some, and
adopt others, it will be because it is advantageous and
profitable so to do.
Sir James Stirling, in one of his despatches, suggests,
that sugar and cotton may be cultivated in the northern
portion of Western Australia by means of free labour to
be procured from Hindostan, or the neighbouring islands
E


'of the Malay Archipelago. Of all the productions we
have named, sugar perhaps is the most peculiarly tropical,
yet it flourishes in America, in countries which have
a much less steady climate than Australind; in Florida,
for instance, which extends from 25 9 to 31°, the princi-
pal productions arc sugar, coffee, cotton, rice, indigo,
tobacco, wines, olives, oranges, and many other tropical
fruits; and yet it sometimes freezes in the northern parts
of Florida. The summer temperature is from 84° to
'BB°, and in July it sometimes reaches 94°; hut even
this is more equable than the climate of Canada, where
'the thermometer is often at 96°, and sometimes for a few
days over 1008; whilst, in winter, it sometimes sinks to
the freezing point of Mercury, or 40° below Zero. Now
the climate of Australind is more equable than that of
Florida, frosts being entirely unknown. We have little
doubt, therefore, that sugar may be raised in that portion
of the country north of Port Grey; and, as to all the
other productions we have named, they will undoubtedly
flourish'; but which of them will be found sufficiently
profitable to induce the inhabitants to grow them for ex-
portation, can only be ascertained by trial. These articles
have the great profits of wool-growing to compete with,
and, unless they can reach that, it would be folly to attempt
them as articles of external trade. For home consump-
tion, however, some of them will no douht be produced,
for the cost of importation always gives the home grower
a species of protection. Further than that natural pro-
tection, we trust, the Australind settler will never seek
for. Forced protection cramps the industry of a country,
and after an extensive examination of the subject, we
could not name a case in which such protection has not
been injurious.
The same distinction also exists between the capability
of Western Australia to produce wheat, and the proba-
bility of its being profitably cultivated for exportation.
In the portion of Western Australia which has been long
settled the culture of wheat has made considerable pro-
gress, and Sir James Stirling has given his opinion, that
the adaptation of the country to wheat-growing has been


placed beyond a doubt; but he also considers that it
cannot be profitably cultivated for exportation until there
is a greater command of labour, as the raising of stock
is more likely to engage the attention of settlers. This
•will be more especially the case as regards Australind,
which, being a few degrees further north, is less adapted
to the growth of wheat than the more southern portion
of Western Australia. Forced production is always
disadvantageous. Every country should confine itself
to the production of those articles which best suit its
soil, climate, and circumstances, and become the customer
of neighbouring countries for some articles that they
may in like manner become customers in return. The
wheat-growing country for that hemisphere will be New
Zealand; and Australind will find it much more advan-
tageous to import wheat from that colony than to expend
a portion of her industry, which may be otherwise more
profitably employed in raising it for herself. On some
lands, no doubt, it will be well worth while to raise grain.
Tillage, to a considerable extent, will be profitable in
some favoured spots, but still it must be subordinate to
the other resources we have named.
The fisheries will occupy a more important position in
the productive industry of Australind. Of the present
state of the fisheries of Western Australia, Sir James
Stirling writes as follows:
“ Since the earliest discovery of this coast it has been
known to abound in various descriptions of fish. The
Malays have carried on, for at least 200 years, an exten-
sive and profitable tripang and tortoiseshell fishery on
the north-west coast. Dampier, Baudin, and King, at
different periods, have reported the existence of astonish-
ing numbers of whales in the adjacent seas ; and our own
experience, since the establishment of the colony, and still
more recently since whale fishing commenced in its bays,
about twelve months ago, confirms the reports of the
earlier navigators. This abundance of fish is probably
connected with the existence of a bank which adjoins
the shore from the northern to the southern extremity of
the colony. On this shoal, which extends for thirty or


forty miles from the land, and which is composed for the
most part of calcareous or coralline substances, there
exist several varieties of edible fish, which admit of
being cured for exportation,
“ The various descriptions of fishery which may be
carried on under such circumstances, must eventually
employ a large amount of capital, and a great number of
seamen.
“ At present there are only four whaling establish-
ments or associations; these are not as yet upon an effi-
cient footing, but their success has been great enough to
ensure their future improvement and extension. The
catching of fish for the purposes of food gives profitable
employment to a few boatmen; and the convenience
afforded in the estuaries for learning in smooth water the
art of managing boats, seems likely to attract to mari-
time pursuits a large number of young men.”*
Sir James Stirling further states, that there are four
fishing establishments at the colony of Western Aus-
tralia, two at the Swan River, and two at Doubtful
Island Bay. One of the former is at Freemantle, and
consists of thirty shareholders, of 501. each share; the
other is called the Perth Fishing Company, is divided
into sixty shares at 1 51. each. The fishing ground of
these two companies is near the entrance of the Swan
River. The other two companies occupy fishing stations
in Doubtful Island Bay, on the south coast; they have
not long been established, but have nevertheless found
abundance of employment.
Speaking of the prospect of the settlement as regards
the fisheries, Sir James, in another despatch, says:
“ In a recent despatch I had the honour to bring under
notice the state and prospect of the fisheries on this
coast. lam satisfied that the extension of this pursuit
will be most rapid ; for if the profitable nature of the bay
fishing be considered, as well as the saving of expense
by employing in the seas adjacent to this colony smaller
vessels than those usually fitted out from London, toge-
• Report, p. 10.


ther with the advantage arising from the constancy of
their employment in fishing, without the necessity of long
voyages to and from their whaling grounds, it may be
fairly estimated that the profits on capital so employed
here will be one-third higher than on vessels sailing out
of English ports. This advantage is of great importance
at the present time, when the British whaler, loaded with
an outfit exceeding by one-third that of the American
ship, in consequence of taxation within the United King-
dom, has no chance of competing with foreigners in the
markets of the continent or China, and consequently four
vessels out of five engaged at present in the south sea
fisheries belong to America.
“ The produce of the colonial fishery in the present
season* is expected to attain the value of 4,200/, in oil,
whalebone, and sealskins. In 1847, I anticipate the
export of these articles will reach to the amount of
100,000/.” f
There can be no doubt that the present mode of fitting
out ships in London for a voyage to last three years and
a half, will be hereafter superseded by local establish-
ments in Australind and elsewhere. Shore parties will
be established at convenient situations, and schooners and
other small vessels will be attached thereto, for the pur-
pose of bringing in the fish. The oil will be prepared on
shore, from the whales taken by these small craft, and
will be transmitted, in packages of convenient size, to
Port Grey, thence to be shipped to the consuming market,
by ships which have previously taken out emigrants.
Under the present clumsy arrangement the outward
voyage of a south seaman is a dead loss. By taking out
emigrants, and bringing home a cargo of oil, already pre-
pared for shipment, and by repeating the process four
times during the period now occupied by the south sea
voyage, the greatest benefit will accrue to the ship owner
as well as to the public at large;—to the former in the
shape of better profits arising out of quicker returns,
and to the latter in the shape of a cheaper commodity.
• 1837.
| Report, p. 20.


If the -whale fishery be worked in this economical
manner, the French and American fishermen, having the.
disadvantage of a distant voyage and an expensive outfit,
will find it impossible to compete with this more econo-
mical method of carrying on the enterprise; and in a
very few years the revolution which has already com-
menced will be completed.
Mr Beale, in his natural history of the sperm whale,*
mentions among the haunts of the animal the eastern
coast of New Holland, from 25° to 34° south, and the
north-west coast about the same latitudes; hence
Australind is the very centre of that profitable branch of
industry. The following details respecting the Western
Australian fisheries generally, arc from a Report of a
Committee appointed by the Western Australian Agri-
cultural Society, to take into ■ consideration the state of
the colony in 1838:
“ The capture of oil entitled to British certificate in
1837, was in round numbers one hundred tons, and of
bone about five tons. Over and above this quantity
there was taken in the bays of the colony, by American
vessels, or vessels from New South Wales, about four
hundred tons of oil, and the corresponding amount of
bone. In the current season, the Freemantle Company
have cashed fifty tons; Duffield’s party, thirty tons; Ball’s
party, seven tons; the Harvest, in Leschenault Bay,
has taken ninety tons; and the Pioneer, in Safety Bay,
thirty-five tons. The proceedings on the south coast
are not as yet known here.
“ The bay-fisheries, as at present carried on in this
colony, notwithstanding the undeniable abundance of
fish, will be found more profitable to the boatmen and
the store-keepers than to the absent proprietors of shares;
but vessels may be employed in the bays with great profit,
provided they are fitted out and manned in England
upon the plan customary in the mother-country.
“ The influence which Western Australia exerts upon
* Van Voorst, Paternoster row, Second Edition, 1839.—An in-
teresting work.


the whaling business is worthy of attention. Vessels
sailing from England in November, and arriving by
Christmas-time at the edge of the southern ice, in latitude
40° south, and on the meridian of Greenwich, may fish
successfully from thence to Cape Leeuwin during the
months of January, February, March, and April; and
if they arrive in the ports of this colony about the 15th of
May, they will have a few days to tranship cargo, and
refresh their crews, before it will be time to take up their
stations for bay-fishing : this commences about the 20th
of May, and lasts till October. They may then send
home by freight-ships their previous captures, and pro-
ceed on the sperm-fishery off Timor and the Seychelles,
reaching Table Bay about the Ist of January; from
whence, after taking in refreshments, and sending home
their oil, they may proceed again on the same route of
■continuous employment. The seas around the Moluccas
and Japan open, moreover, excellent stations for ships
fishing out of the ports of the colony; and it cannot be
doubted that, as the centre of such operations, Western
Australia will enable the whalers, on the plans above
mentioned, to drive their competitors, whether English-
men or Americans, out of the market. In illustration of
this take the following comparative statement of an Ame-
rican and English vessel, if the latter be employed as
above mentioned:—The expense of outfit for slaps of
equal tonnage will be the same for both; and we will
suppose the lays out of London and America to be the
same, although, as there are no reductions for casks and
agency amongst the latter, the lay is actually greater in
the ratio of 33£ per cent, to per cent., minus the
aforesaid deductions.
“ But out of an eighteen months’ voyage, the American
is three months coming out and three months going
home; while the British vessel, pursuing the continuous
voyage alluded to, is employed the whole eighteen
months fishing. Again, the average price of American
oil for seven years in America, has been 14k 16s. per
ton, and in London 261. Here, then, in quantity (if time
be the measure of success) there is a difference of 33£


per cent., and in value a difference of 60 per cent.: total
gross advantage, 93j- per cent. But from this must be
deducted freight home at 51, per ton, or 20 per cent.,
and cost of colonial agency, and of colonial expenses, to
5 per cent., and also freight of provisions and supplies of
casks from time to time sent out, amounting to 20 per
cent, more; leaving a clear advantage of per cent,
to one mode of fishing over the other, arising out of the
facilities offered by this colony. But this particular
mode admits of employing much smaller vessels; and
on the whole, without stating this estimate as exactly
accurate, such are the peculiar merits of this place as the
centre of fishing operations.
“ Other descriptions of fishing may be carried on in
this country with great advantage. Seals, shark’s fins,
tortoiseshell, and trepang, are abundant; but the pre-
sent number of colonists, and their limited means, forbid
all hope of seeing these sources of maritime wealth in a
productive state for many years.”
Before we close this chapter, we must offer some re-
marks on the influence of markets on production. At
the distance at which Australind lies from Europe, we
may assume primd facie, that it is with the productions
of countries equally distant that she will compete. The
other colonies of Australia, for instance, supply wool to
England, and the inference is that Australind will do so
with equal advantage; but until wool-growing had been
tried in Eastern Australia, no one could have supposed
that the superior adaptation of the climate would have
enabled the Australian colonies to overweigh the advan-
tage which Germany enjoys of being near the consuming
markets. That point, however, being proved, we are
entitled to expect that Australind will share in this pro-
fitable class of production.
In the production of indigo Australind enjoys an
advantage over the east, in being rather nearer the
consuming markets; but with regard to cotton, the ad-
vantage is the other way, for America has already shut
out the east, and our own impression is, that however
Well Australia may be adapted to the growth of cotton.


there is no reason at this moment to suppose that she will
shut out the cotton of the United States.
But it is not on the European markets alone that Aus-
tralind will depend. It will be well worth her while to
produce many articles for consumption in the other Aus-
tralian colonies, in our Eastern possessions, and in the
numerous islands of the Pacific. Her rich fruits, for
instance, dried and fresh, will, in time, spread them-
selves over those parts of the southern hemisphere which
are not far distant from Port Grey; and there is scarcely
a production which we have named which wall not find
a market within a practicable distance. The fish oil
collected along her shores will doubtless find its way to
England, but the dried fish, which promises to become
an important article of export, will find markets in every
island of the South Pacific.
In a word, although it would be difficult at this early
day to foretell the channels into which the trade of Aus-
tralind will find its way, it is quite safe to infer, from the
extraordinary capabilities of the country in point of soil,,
climate, and position, that her productiveness will be.
abundant, and her commerce considerable.
s 2


CHAPTER VII.
NATIVES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA-HEIR CHARACTER,
ORIGIN, THE TREATMENT WHICH THEY HATE RECEIVED;
THEIR PROSPECTS, AND THE DUTIES OF COLONISTS
TOWARD THEM.
The natives of New Holland appear to have excited very
little sympathy in the minds of the colonists, -whether
convict or free, by whom British settlements have hi-
therto been formed in that continent. In making this
assertion, we do not deny that there have been exceptions,
and bright exceptions too; but we wish to proclaim a
fact which, to the shame of our age and country, has
not received the attention it merits. The native New
Hollanders arc generally spoken of as constituting, both
in their physical character and in their intellectual
and social state, the lowest of the races into which
mankind is divided. In very few instances have they
formed sufficiently large and organised bodies, or been
possessed of sufficiently deadly weapons, to render them
formidable to any colony by attacks menacing the entire
settlement. Nevertheless, in retaliation for injuries re-
ceived, excited by the desire to possess European
articles, or impelled by the pinchings of hunger, ren-
dered inevitable by the destruction of their game and
the occupation of their provision-grounds, they have
committed acts of theft and personal violence, which, to a
greater or less degree, in every colony hitherto established,
have been the cause of apprehension, complaint, and
Hostility on the part of the colonists.
Notwithstanding the general character which has been
given of the natives of New Holland, it has been repeat-
edly stated, on good authority, that individuals may be
• The author is indebted for this interesting chapter to a friend,
whose name, were he permitted to use it, would be a sufficient
passport to the reader’s earnest attention, on the subject to which
the chapter relates.


found amongst them who are above the middle stature;
that many are remarkably robust and stoutly madej that
personal agility is by no means uncommon; and that,
when opportunities have occurred to put their intelligence
to the test, it has proved by no means deficient. Though
there is, on the whole, a great similarity of race, the ac-
counts of almost all travellers concur in representing them
as differing, in different parts of that continent, in their
stature and disposition. In the northern parts their bru-
tality has hitherto rendered them formidable to exploring
parties, whilst in other parts they have shown no disposition
to refuse friendship, and in various ways have rendered
assistance to the stranger. It appears that the natives of
Western Australia, as a body, form a superior class of
New Hollanders, and although numerous instances of
painful collision have unquestionably occurred between
them and the colonists, they seem, on the whole, to be
an inoffensive people, and to have exhibited considerable
aptitude for European habits, and have not unfre-
quently been taken in some small degree into the employ
of the settlers. They are by no means diminutive in
stature. Though of dark complexion, and often called
blacks, they must not be confounded with the negro or
iEthiopic race. They have been represented as a woolly-
haired people; but though their hair frequently exhibits
a disposition to curl, it has by no means the woolly cha-
racter of that of the negro, and habitually acquires a
length unknown amongst the African race. It is pro-
bable that their mode of matting it has contributed to this
mistake. Even the accurate Captain Cook has, in some
degree, fallen into it, but rather on the authority of others
than that of his own observation, which seems to have
coincided with the description here given, from the state-
ments of Captain Grey, now the Governor of South
Australia, and of James Backhouse and George Wash-
ington Walker, recent travellers, who have paid particular
attention to the characters of the natives.
It is generally believed that numerous languages arc
to be found amongst the inhabitants of New Holland;
and it is pretty certain that, even within a limited space,
they frequently do not mutually understand each other,


so that it is necessary to employ interpreters amongst
themselves, as well as in their intercourse with Europeans,
In this respect, the natives of Western Australia possess
a decided advantage over those of other parts of the
country, since Captain Grey found them speaking one
common language throughout a very extensive tract.
It seems to be satisfactorily shown, by the statements
of settlers as well as of travellers, that the natives
of New Holland live in groups, which possess a family
character rather than constitute tribes, such as are
generally met with amongst other uncivilized people.
They do not appear to recognize any chiefs, although
each family may have its patriarch or head. This cir-
cumstance is very favourable to the safety of colonies
established in the country, since it almost necessarily
precludes their combining into large masses of an or-
ganized and hostile character. Another very important
fact connected with this peculiarity of the New Hol-
landers is, that the land is allotted, in comparatively
small portions, to different families, as their hunting and
provision-grounds. The boundaries of these tracts are
very distinctly defined, and scrupulously observed
amongst themselves. This fact implies the existence of
personal property in the soil, which is well worthy the
consideration of those who may be connected with the
colony as settlers or proprietors, in violation of the weak
but just title of the natives, whose hereditary possessions
are made the subjects of bargain and sale, in which they
are altogether disregarded.
There is another important consideration connected
with the peculiar mode of holding land amongst the
New Hollanders. Seeing that they claim their own
boundaries and respect those of others, they are not at
liberty, when deprived of their own estates, to go
and settle on any portion of the country of which the
settlers may not, as yet, have taken possession. They
are compelled to become intruders, and if they are not
repulsed, it is only because they find more cordiality
in the savage than in the Christian. The fact appears to
be that, when thus dislodged, they seldom remove far
from their own lands, from which they probably continue


to seek their means of subsistence, so long as the changes
introduced by the whites allow it to produce any game
or esculent vegetables. When these fail, they beg or
work for a scanty supply of European food, of which
they soon become extremely fond. When not supplied
in either of these modes, they make free with the flocks
and kitchen-gardens of the settlers, -which have taken the
place of kangaroos and native plants, in doing which they
are continually exposed to be shot by the colonists ; and,
as James Backhouse was informed, many of the natives
are “popped off’.” When it is considered that, amongst
these uncivilized people, the killing of one of their family
imposes an imperative duty on his relatives to take the
life of the man-slayer, or of one of his party, it cannot be
surprising that acts of hostility and aggression, as well
as of pilfering and theft, should be committed by the
natives, or that in return the settlers, who have taken the
land from them without purchase, should, under such
excitement, take their lives without scruple. It has been
reported, on authority which is not doubted, that hunting
parties have been formed for the express purpose of going
out to shoot the natives ; and the writer has received the
credible testimony of a resident in the colony, that fire-
arms are placed in the hands of thoughtless youths, and
a price occasionally put upon the head of a native.
These facts are not stated for the purpose of exciting the
just indignation which they can scarcely fail to produce,
but to show that, in the establishment of a new colony, it
becomes the bounden duty of the settlers individually, as
well as of the administration, to adopt a new line of con-
duct and policy towards them, and, from the first, to
adopt some systematic course, which may be both care-
fully contrived, and strictly and zealously pursued.
The safety of the colonists would not be the only re-
ward which they would derive from such a reform. In
every new colony labour is one of the most expensive
requisites, and imperfectly as the experiment has hitherto
been made, ample proofs have been obtained that there
are various occupations to which the powers of the natives
might be very advantageously directed, and in which they


might be readily engaged, if adequate inducements were
held out. In Perth, and elsewhere on the coast, the
natives are already accustomed to obtain a part of their
precarious subsistence by the performance of the most
laborious tasks. Many of their native works, executed
with most miserable instruments, give proof of ingenuity
and expertness, which, under more favourable circum-
stances, might be rendered extremely serviceable in many
species of handicraft. It is stated by Captain Grey, and
also by James Backhouse and George Walker, that the
natives, amongst themselves, are in the habit of holding
periodical fairs for the purpose of commercial exchange.
The objects which are bartered on these occasions by the
natives of Western Australia consist of various manu-
factured articles, chiefly designed for clothing or orna-
ment, or of some local natural production to which a
value is attached. From this fact we not only have con-
vincing evidence that they have the desire to possess pro-
perty, but that they have forethought regarding future
wants, and that they arc willing to exert themselves for
the purpose of obtaining a deferred reward, since the
commodities exchanged at these fairs are not only at
times brought from a distance of some hundred miles,
but may have been prepared for months in advance.
Although it does not appear that the Western Australians
have been in the habit of adopting any kind of agriculture,
they are not inattentive to the supply which Nature her-
self provides, and amongst their numerous and peculiar
laws is one strictly prohibiting the destruction of an
esculent plant in time of seed. They are likewise in the
practice of burning dead and dry herbage, for the double
purpose of promoting subsequent growth, and aiding in
taking the wild animals driven before the fire. Both of
these facts indicate the existence of a disposition which
might be rendered availing in social life.
Some of the laws in force amongst these people are
prohibitory as to certain places and acts, and, like the
taboo in vogue amongst the New Zealanders and other
islanders of the Pacific, must not only be inconvenient to
themselves, and tend materially to retard improvement.


but must be the causes of very serious collision between
them and the settlers who may violate them through
ignorance, or want of caution.
We shall offer but a few remarks respecting the origin
of the New Hollanders. Here, as in the case of other
people who have long remained in an isolated condition,
—who have no written language, and consequently no
records of their history—who have no monuments or
works of art to throw any light on the condition of their
forefathers, and who seem to be nearly without traditions,
we are left almost entirely to barren and unsatisfactory
conjecture. The only grounds upon which anything can
with some degree of confidence be based, are physical
characters, language, prevailing customs, and a careful
investigation of the winds, currents, and other natural
causes calculated to promote the arrival of human beings
from other parts of the globe. From the few facts al-
ready stated as to physical character, the idea of any
near connexion with the African race must be very much
excluded. It has been generally believed, on the reports
of travellers, that two races, the one tawny, the other
black, are to be found in Australasia; and though the
fact has lately been called in question, we require much
more accurate and extensive observations than have al-
ready been published in order to set it aside. Full and
accurate replies to the systematic queries proposed by
the British Association for the promotion of Science, will,
it is hoped, throw considerable light on this subject.
With regard to the languages of New Holland, Captain
Grey, who has paid careful attention to the subject, is of
opinion that, notwithstanding many apparent differences,
they are all traceable to one stock, the roots of the words
being to a great extent the same, although the termi-
nations and other modifications may be very dissimilar.
He conjectures, with great appearance of probability,
that the continent of New Holland has received its popu-
lation at different times and from different quarters,
though chiefly, if not exclusively, from islands in the
Pacific; and that consequently, although there may be
one common basis of language in the Polynesian, there


may be modifications attributable to the respective is-
lands from which the first settlers may have come, as
well as others which have sprung up amongst the iso-
lated groups subsequently to their establishment in the
country. The existence of a dual number of a peculiar
kind in the pronouns of the New Hollanders, is a striking
peculiarity, which appears strongly to indicate affinity to
the Polynesians. In arts, social customs, government,
and religious belief, however erroneous, the Polynesians
generally are greatly in advance of most of the Austra-
lians ; a circumstance which may easily be accounted for
by the first settlers in New Holland having probably
arrived in small numbers, and in a destitute condition.
But the kind of taboo which exists amongst them may be
recognised as a strikingly characteristic Polynesian cus-
tom, which the most destitute individuals cast away
upon the shore might easily have introduced, although
they may not have had with them any priest to keep up
the mysteries and rites of their peculiar worship. The
divisions of caste, and the relations of master and slave,
would also be very easily lost under similar circum-
stances, more especially on an extensive territory like
that of New Holland, where any one could escape from
the influence of his fellows and become his own master.
Examples have been pointed out by those who have
become conversant with the manners of this people, and
more especially by Major Mitchell, in which their cus-
toms bear a resemblance to those which have been known
to exist in other countries. If these are not accidental,
and such as, from the constitution of the human mind,
might originate independently in any part of the globe,
they must be admitted to be such as point to a very
remote period for the separation and settlement of this
branch of the human family.
At the close of this chapter we shall present the
reader with some extracts from the writings of the
travellers of whom mention has been made. They will
serve to show, in the most striking manner, the actual
condition of these poor people, and the fearful calamity
■which the influx of a white population has proved to


them; whilst they account for, and in some degree
extenuate, those aggressions which have excited the
merciless hostility of the colonists, they also prove
the imperative necessity for the adoption of another
line of policy towards them by a new colony, which,
like that of Australind, is planted with the praiseworthy
and Christian resolution to keep itself unspotted in this
matter. But we must observe, not for the discourage-
ment of the new colonist, but as a stimulus and also as
a warning, that South Australia was founded with the
expression of the purest sentiments as the rule of conduct
towards the aborigines. The governors have made the
avowal of the same sentiments, and some of the colonists
have done the same, and have made sacrifices of time
and means for the purpose of carrying them into exe-
cution. In a new colony, every settler, doubtless, finds
that he has sufficient to do to attend to his own affairs, and
watch the interests of his family; and he may think he
is clear so long as he abstains from participating in any
manifest cruelty. He forgets that his own occupation'
is in itself an aggression ; and when an act of hostility is
committed by the natives under the influence of hunger
or revenge, self-preservation or indignation produces an
altered feeling towards them, and leads to the com-
mission or sanction of a line of conduct totally at
variance with original professions. Events which have
taken place at Adelaide and Port Philip, and, we regret
to add, the semi-judicial proceedings of the late governor,
afford strong reason to apprehend that on the southern
coast of Australia the fate of the aborigines is as little
promising as in any other part of the world. We are
far from wishing to attach to the colonists, as a body, a
censure which is only due to the acts of some of their
number; but we wish to point to the state of things
which has been suffered to take place, as a convincing
proof of what must again occur whenever colonies are
established in similar situations, unless systematic mea-
sures are adopted in the outset, and faithfully and
vigorously maintained as the colony advances.
The Directors of the Western Australian Company


Lave seen the great importance of the question of the
treatment of the aborigines; and it has been felt by some
of the strongest supporters of the colony, that the adoption
of a correct and Christian policy towards them is the
sine qvd non of their connexion with it. The directors
themselves have opened a communication with the Abo-
rigines Protection Society, and in conjunction with its
committee they have -waited on Lord John Russell, in
order to propose, for the sanction and support of the
colonial office, a most important practical step suggested
by themselves. The united views of the Directors and of
the Aborigines Protection Society will be seen in the fol-
lowing address, which was presented on the occasion
referred to.
“ To Lord, John Russell, Principal Secretary of State
for the Colonies.
“ The Aborigines Protection Society is truly solicitous
to abstain from trespassing on the time and attention of
lord John Russell, except on occasions of adequate and
urgent importance. Such an occasion they conceive to
have presented itself in the formation and progress of the
colony of Western Australia. In the justice, humanity,
and liberality of the directors of this enterprise, the
memorialists see with gratitude the strongest grounds for
hope that the object of the Aborigines Protection Society,
as respects that colony, will be zealously and ably pro-
moted. Nevertheless, the concurrence and support of
the government arc essential to the success of any plan
from w’hich lasting benefit to the natives may be looked
for. It is the object of the present memorial to solicit
this support from Lord John Russell, and the directors
of the Western Australian Company individually and
collectively concur in this petition. The petition em-
braces three points.
“ First.—An arrangement with the natives for the
extinction of their title to the crown lands of the colony,
and the security to these natives of a portion of land
adequate to supply the means of their peaceful existence.


u Secondly.—Measures •which may afford both to the
natives and to European settlers that security of life and
property, the absence of "which is the fruitful source of
evils in other colonies similarly instituted, and -which,
unless averted by seasonable precautions, must, by their
recurrence in Western Australia, seriously interfere with
the happiness and prosperity which it must be the united
wish of her Majesty’s government and of the Company
that it should enjoy.
“ Thirdly.—The adoption of measures which may pro-
mote the advancement of the aborigines (who have
virtually become our adopted fellow-subjects), and secure
to them the enjoyment of equal civil rights with the other
inhabitants of the colony.
“ In contemplating the difficulties which present them-
selves in the construction of measures to attain these
points, it has appeared evident that the first step to their
removal is the acquisition of full and authentic informa-
tion on the whole subject. This, it is believed, can only
be effected by the exertions of an able and qualified
person expressly devoted to the inquiry. The Western
Australian Company has volunteered to contribute libe-
rally towards the expense of sending out such an indi-
vidual, if selected by the Aborigines Protection Society,
provided the mission receive the sanction and support of
the government, and with the understanding that her
Majesty’s Government so far recognises the principle of
aboriginal claims as to Insure the adoption of any really
practical measures which may be devised. In cordially
uniting with these views of the Western Australian Com-
pany, the Aborigines Protection Society only seeks the
practical adoption of principles already laid down by
commissioners of the crown in the formation of the
colony of South Australia, and which, in the case of
that colony, have become a dead letter for want of pro-
visions similar to those which it is the object of this
memorial to crave.
“ Signed on behalf of the Society,
“ R Maitland Innes, Secretary.” .


Sufficient time has not yet elapsed for the receipt of
Lord John Russell’s reply, but it does not seem probable
that he will wholly set aside a measure which is both
reasonable and entirely consistent with the sentiments he
so recently expressed on the occasion of the New Zealand
dinner, and which he must have felt were responded to
by all present.*
We have no hesitation in setting down as fundamental
principles, upon which alone success can be based—lst,
that the natives should be compensated for the land
taken from them ; and 2ndly, that a regular system of
organisation should be introduced into the territory occu-
pied by them and the colonists, and as far as possible
beyond its limits. We do not attempt to enter into
details, which would be premature, and would too far
extend the limits of this chapter; but we invite careful
attention to the subject, especially on the part of those
who may contemplate emigration ; and we would refer
them to the following books and pamphlets, as well
calculated to aid and direct the formation of a just con-
ception of the subject:
‘ Howitt on Colonization and Christianity.’
‘ Saxe Bannister on Colonization and Coloured Tribes/
‘Report of the Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry
respecting the State of the Aborigines in the British
Colonies, reprinted by the Aborigines Protection
Society, with an Introduction and Appendix.’
‘ Rev. Montague Hawtrey’s Address to Emigrants to
New Zealand.’
‘ Standish Motte’s Outline of a System of Legislation
for securing Protection to the Aborigines of all
Countries colonized by Great Britain.’
‘ Reports and Monthly Extracts of the Aborigines
Protection Society.’
‘ The Letters of James Backhouse and George Wash-
ington Walker, printed by a Committee of the
Society of Friends.’
* Since this article was sent to the press, the assent of the Govern-
ment lias, in a gratifying manner, been given to the proposal contained
in the memorial.


From Captain Grey's ‘ Vocabulary of the Western
Australian Dialects.’
“ Throughout the whole of this extensive range of
country, the language is radically the same, though the
variations in dialect, and in the use of certain words by
single tribes, are very considerable; but certainly not
more than from the scattered and ignorant state of the
population, the little intercourse existing between adja-
cent tribes, and the want of any fixed standard of speech',
we might have been led to expect.
“ It is not the object, nor would it enhance the useful
purposes of this work, to enter into any discussions which
belong to the department of philology ; I shall therefore
only say, that my observations lead me irresistibly to the
conclusion, that all the various dialects yet known to us
throughout this great continent, are intimately connected
in their origin and roots; that the inhabitants are (with
some few exceptions on the northern coast, perhaps) of
the same family race, and that the dialects now in use
are so nearly allied throughout, that an acquaintance
with the language spoken in any one part of the country
would materially facilitate its possessor in attaining others,
however remote.
“ The general laws relative to their families are, that no
man can marry a woman of the same family name as him-
self, and that the children should always take the family
name of their mother. As the sons inherit the property
of their father, it follows that the land is never for two
generations in the hands of men bearing the same family
name; and, in the event of the head of a family having
had several wives of different family names, his land
becomes divided between several new families. His
male children also owe certain duties to their half-
brothers, and other duties to men of their own family
name, which often clash with one another, and give rise
to endless dissension amongst them.
“ Mundja —a sort of annual fair, which takes place in
the spring of the year, when the natives of different


districts meet for the purpose of exchanging various
articles of utility with one another; for instance, the
Murray men and the Perth men meet, and the following
exchanges take place between them:
“ The Murray men bring the girdle of opossum’s hair,
worn round the waist, a long straight spear, the native
knife, a species of dowak, a dog’s tail, a tuft of feathers,
dewer, burnt ocherous clay, a tuft of cockatoo feathers,
the string of the opossum’s hair, worn round the head.
• “ The Perth men bring a hammer, a cloak, a kind of
nool-burn, the hair of the opossum spun into thread, a
stone.
“ Some of them have been again obtained from other
tribes: for instance, the Perth men have generally ob-
tained them from the Northern men. An approach to
an internal system of commerce thus exists throughout
all this part of Australia. A curious ceremony takes
place on the occasion of their meetings : it consists in
rapidly passing fire-sticks from hand to hand, and in
endeavouring to drop a small piece of lighted wood on
the females in such a manner that they get slightly
burned before they can shake it off. In passing the fire-
sticks from hand to hand, they also endeavour to do it
so rapidly and dexterously as to burn the person they
give them to.
“ Ee-ee—yes ; a sign of assent, pronounced with the
lips almost closed. In pronouncing these sounds, and
generally in assenting, all races who speak the Polynesian
dialects throw the head backwards, whilst the European
races, on the contrary, incline it forward,”
From the printed Extracts from the Letters of James
Eackhouse and Georrje Washington Walker,
“ 15th 11th mo. We returned to Melbourne, and
made some calls upon persons we had known in Van
Diemen’s Land, and among these on John Batman, who
has long been an invalid. Though much immersed in


the world, John Batman has long taken considerable
interest respecting the aborigines of these colonies; and
he now has several from the vicinity of Sydney ; and a
woman and two boys, natives of Van Diemen’s Land, in
his employment: he finds them useful servants, and not
disposed to indulge their wandering habits, when re-
moved from their native haunts. Perhaps this may, in
some measure, arise from fear of the tribes by which they
are surrounded. John Batman showed us the skull of a
native, found near Gellibrand’s Point, in this neigh-
bourhood, which was perforated with slugs on one side,
and had some of the lead lodged in the bone, evidently
proving that the individual to whom it had belonged had
been shot; but though from its appearance, when picked
up, the murderous deed did not appear to have been per-
petrated above six months, yet he said no inquiry had
been instituted as to how the party had come by his
death. J. T.’s opinion is, that J. T. Gelllbraud and
Hesse (of whose death he thinks he has obtained some
clue), had been killed by the natives of a distant tribe,
in retaliation for the death of some of their own people
by Europeans.
The number of blacks in the vicinity of Port Philip,
including its whole circuit with Western Port, is esti-
mated at from three to five hundred. They are said to
be more healthy than those of many other parts of New
South Wales, and few of the women have not children,
though their families are far from large: these circum-
stances are attributed to the consumption of a much
larger proportion of roots than are eaten by their country
people in many other parts, and probably to their having
had less intercourse with Europeans.”
“ The blacks here (in Adelaide) are very peaceable,
and though much like those of other parts of Australia,
most persons admit that the pictures they have seen of
them in England are caricature likenesses, of much more
forbidding aspect than the originals. I think those that
I have seen here have not, however, quite such large
mouths as in other parts. Only one European has lost


his life from them, and this was the result from his own
profligacy : the man who destroyed him is awaiting his
trial, as a prisoner at large in the day-time, with a party
of marines, about nineteen of whom constitute the armed
force of the province, and are said to be amongst its most
disorderly inhabitants. At one o’clock this black was
imprisoned on board a ship, but was removed by the
governor, who reprimanded the parties that had the man
in charge, but treated him like a wild beast, and this
irritated him, and on one occasion headed him up in a
cask. A protector of the blacks is appointed there, but
hitherto little has been done for their amelioration; they
obtain articles of food or clothing, or receive payment in
money, with which they buy bread, for turns of work
done for the settlers; but they have not yet any correct
idea of the relative value of money and labour, which it
is important they should be instructed in.”
“ I had some interesting conversation with the last-
mentioned individual, (Patrick Taylor, a magistrate,)
respecting the blacks of this immediate district, (King
George’s Sound,) commonly known here by the desig-
nation of the King George tribe. They are very
docile, and live on good terms with the European in-
habitants. They exhibit few of the vices that prevail
among their countrymen in the older settlements on the
eastern side of Australia, and especially about Wellington
Valley. From what w r e have seen and heard of those of
the south coast, I incline to the opinion, that many of
their most atrocious vices in the older settlements are the
result of a contact with a depraved white population.
Infanticide is said to be unknown among the King
George blacks, who are about fifty in number. No case
is known of a white man having been speared by them,
nor by any other tribe within about seventy miles. Their
dwellings are rude shelters of leafy boughs, about four
feet high: they wear a garment of kangaroo-skin, or
blanket, fastened over the shoulders, and reaching to
about the knees: they smear their heads, faces, and
necks with grease and red ochre, and dust a little of this


article, or of a yellow earth, upon their cheek-bones:
their countenances generally are not unpleasant, but
some of them have very prominent mouths: they use
their teeth in straightening their spears, which are simple
rods.”
“ A few of these people have been employed by the
settlers in carrying wood and water, and some other
domestic occupations; but, taking into account the
length of time that the British settlement of King
George’s Sound has existed, and the docility of these
people, it is remarkable that no systematic attempt at the
civilization of this tribe has been made. There is one
solitary instance of a childless couple of white people
adopting a little black orphan girl, to which they seem
much attached, and she is forward for her years with her
book and her needle. Surely the British Government
is not clear of culpability in faking up the lands of the
aboriginal inhabitants, and neglecting to provide for
their maintenance and instruction; and the reason that
this is so little urged upon them by the colonists, is, I
apprehend, that so few of the last are more than merely
nominal Christians. The precept of Him, whose name
they vainly profess to bear, ‘As ye would that men
should do unto yon, do ye even so unto them/ has little
weight in these communities.”
“We dined at Government-house, Swan River settle-
ment, at seven o’clock, in company with the colonial
chaplain : he stated, in a conversation respecting the na-
tive population, that in almost every case of destruction
of white people by the natives, he had traced the fault
to the whites. The Governor stated that if they could
meet with a suitable person to act as missionary, or
instructor to the natives, funds should not be wanted to
enable him to carry on the work.”
“ In the course of the day a medical man from the
country called at our lodging ; he stated his opinion to
be, that the blacks were a people who deserved no consi-
F


deration, but whom it would be best to destroy when-
ever they were troublesome ! To this sentiment we re-
plied, that neither Christianity, justice, nor even common
sense admitted such an idea; and that though, according
to the ideas of these people, blood was required for blood,
yet that persons who voluntarily settled in a country
which the British government had usurped, ought, with
that government, to labour for the civilization of the
native inhabitants, and to bear patiently the inconveni-
ences resulting from their customs, until these could be
changed. I fear many entertain the same sentiments
with this individual: we heard something similar in the
boat yesterday.”
“ The native blacks are numerous about Perth ; they
arc a fine race, and far from defective in intelligence r
they have a few irregular elevated scars upon their
bodies, generally about their shoulders; their teeth are
not injured as a token of manhood, as in New South
Wales, where one is knocked out on a youth being ad-
mitted to the privileges of a man. They usually wear a
small rug of Kangaroo-skin about their shoulders, some-
times brought partially before, at other times hanging
over their backs, and not unfrequently the men walk
about Perth and Freemantle in a state of nudity, which
custom appears so to reconcile, that little pains are taken
to discourage their practice. They cut wood, draw
water, and perform many other little offices for the Euro-
pean population, for which they obtain bread, or money,
which they lay out in bread (the two-pound loaf now
costing Is.), not having yet acquired a taste for tobacco
or spirits, nor a disposition to wear English clothing.
They arc remarkably docile; but I have not been able
to learn that any attempts have been made to civilize
them. We are informed that the people here have been
discouraged from attempting anything in this way, by
the ill success they understood to have attended such
efforts in New' South Wales. It seems to me, that there
is a great willingness to suffer the poor aborigines to
dwindle away, under the easy conclusion, that thus the


Indians of North America passed away, and the natives
of Van Diemen’s Land, and that nothing could be done
for those of New South Wales, and that any attempt,
therefore, at so unhopeful a task as their civilization here,
is not of much consequence. A native black is to be
tried here to-day for being one of a party who beat two
boys belonging to Major Nairn, and left them for dead,
and drove off the sheep that the boys were tending, many
of which they killed and eat. I cannot but regard the
professed recognition of the blacks as British subjects,
(however well intended in England) as practically a sort
of blind to the British public as to the real state of these
injured people; their evidence being refused, because
they do not understand the nature of an oath; and their
violent deaths (many of which, there is reason to believe,
take place by the white inhabitants of this colony) not
being properly made the subjects of inquests, nor the per-
petrators of them brought to trial.”
“ The black tried yesterday at Perth was sentenced to
death. Dr Guistiniani pleaded for him, and compared
the taking away of the sheep by the blacks with the
destruction of the kangaroo by the whites; and that
undue temptation was put into the way of the blacks by
placing the sheep in the charge of such very young boys.
We had some conversation respecting the natives with
the boatman, who says he is sure the fault lies, in the
first place, with the white men, when the blacks attack
them, and that “ many of the blacks are popped off,”
i. e. shot secretly. He is a man who, from his occupa-
tion, learns much of what passes in the colony.”
“ 10th Ist mo. We returned to Perth, taking with
us a quantity of books and tracts. I had a walk with a
young man who has been much among the blacks for
several years past: he also confirms the opinion, that
those who have been destroyed have fallen victims to the
misconduct of the whites, which excited the ire of the
blacks, led them to outrage, and brought retaliation in
return.”


“ There is now a pretty good understanding between
the aboriginal population and the Europeans on the Swan ;
but across the Darling range of mountains, which run
nearly parallel with the river, at about four miles’ dis-
tance from the gorge where it emerges from them to
Guildford, persons do not feel themselves secure, and
several blacks have been shot on the alleged ground of
self-defence. Something requires to be done in this
colony for the civilization and settlement of the native
population, which has been greatly neglected; and the
colonial government, as well as the settlers, are not per-
sons of sufficiently enlightened minds to discover or.
understand the advantage it would be to themselves to
bring these people, who will work if a sufficient motive
be presented to them, into the state of an industrious
peasantry, by instructing them in the relative value of
money and labour, by rewarding them proportionately to
the white labourers for the work they perform.”
“ The blacks are very conscious of money having a
value, and are constantly begging for it, and when they
obtain it they purchase bread; but they have no idea of
the relative value of money and labour, and they are
kept in ignorance of this by inadequate rewards being
given them for the offices they perform: these rewards
are usually in flour and broken bread. They cut wood,
draw water, go errands for the settlers, and a few of the
boys assimilate themselves in some degree with the ser-
vants of the settlers: the little native blacks are also
often the playfellows of the white children; but even
under these circumstances the blacks are growing up in
much the same state of barbarism as their ancestors ;
and it is a question whether the white children do not
learn more of barbarism from the blacks, than the blacks
acquire of civilization from the whites.”
“ In this part of Australia, the natives bury or ma-
cerate the nuts till the rinds become half decomposed,
in which state they eat the rind, rejecting the kernel;
but in New South Wales they pound and macerate the


kernels, and then roast and eat the rough paste. I have
heard from persons of respectable authority, that in the
Swan River country, as well as at King George’s
Sound, the natives have their private property clearly
distinguished into hunting-grounds, the boundaries of
■which are definite, trees being recognized by them as
land-marks, and that the possession rests in the head of a
family : several of these families residing in a district,
form what the white people call a tribe; but these tribes
are not subject to any recognized chief, though a man of
great prowess will often gain great ascendancy among
them. A young man who resided some years at King
George’s Sound, told me, that several tribes of blacks
assembled there once a-year, and held a sort of fair, and
that as different tribes excelled each other in the manu-
facture of different weapons, such as spears, throwing
sticks (woomeras), kylers (boomrings), shields, and wad-
dies, these formed the articles of exchange, as well as the
red ochre, with which they besmear themselves, com-
bining it with grease, and which is only found in certain
localities. In Western Australia the blacks do not prac-
tise the knocking out of a tooth on introducing a youth
to the privileges of manhood; but they perforate the
cartilage of the noses of the boys when about twelve or
fourteen years of age, and a kangaroo-bone is occasionally
worn through the hole, of a thickness equal to a goose-
quill ; they also mark their bodies by cutting them ;
but those of Swan River are not so tasteful in this respect
as those of some other parts of Australia.”
“ Many of the blacks that we passed were lame from
spear wounds in their legs or thighs, that they had re-
ceived during their late conflict: this we also found to be
the case with the Perth natives, few of whom had escaped
without injury.”
“ It is matter of surprise that so little pains are taken
by the civil authorities to prevent these murderous com-
bats, either by general attempts at civilization, or by
magisterial authority : they sometimes take place in the


towns, in the presence of white people, who remain pas-
sive spectators. In this case, however, the chief constable
drove them out of the town, by getting possession of
some of their spears, and breaking them, and by threat-
ening to fire amongst them.”
“ Life for life and blood for blood are sentiments
deeply rooted in their minds, and mixed with super-
stitious notions of the enchantment of those who die
naturally. F. Armstrong stated, that when the boy,
noticed on the 26th as having been shot, was on the
point of death, he, knowing that the theft of Dobbin had
occasioned to himself the fatal injury that was fast has-
tening his dissolution, was overheard requesting another
of his countrymen to avenge his death ; and though this
was many months ago, yet when Dobbin was killed, the
party who had been so charged was overheard to address
the departed youth in terms to this effect; “ Thei'c, my
brother, his flesh is meat for thee.” Some cases of can-
nibalism arc said also to have been traced among these
blacks: the black population of this part of Australia
is considerable, from the statements of George Smyth,
which others admit to be probable, as to various tribes
residing in different localities within about seventy miles
of Perth, and occasionally resorting thither, the number
may fairly be estimated at 1,000 within the range.”
“ These tribes consist of several families residing in a
neighbourhood, having some natural boundary, each of
which families has its distinct hunting ground, with
boundaries acknowledged by the other tribes. And
these are the lands of which the British government has
taken possession without regard to such proprietorships,
yet professing to recognize these blacks as British sub-
jects. It is true, they are an uncivilized people, living
on kangaroos, emus, opossums, iguanas, snakes, grubs,
fish, roots, &c.; but they are nevertheless intelligent
beings, and ought not to be treated with injustice: they
have a strong claim upon the sympathies of the British
public, who ought to adopt measures for their instruction,
and for preventing the effusion of blood which sometimes


takes place through mutual retaliation between them and
the -whites, and at other times through their own bar-
barous customs and superstitions. There are persons in
Western Australia who would gladly co-operate in the
work, but the colony is too poor to do much, unless the
principal supplies be furnished from Great Britain.”
“ A person of our acquaintance told us, that lie saw a
black named Munday, a well known character at Perth,
who was once proscribed, and a reward offered for his
head by the government, and who has two wives,
crossing the river with them in a boat that was badly
trimmed, and by a lurch, spilt a little wheat out of a bag
that was entrusted to one of the women into the water;
upon which Munday exhibited violent anger, knocked
her down with his hammer, a weapon they generally
carry in a belt round the loins, stuck with the handle
downwards behind, and he then run a spear through her
thigh. But though they thus punish others, they often
also exhibit a stoical firmness in receiving punishment
themselves. Thus, if by accident they injure a person,
whether of their nation or European, they will imme-
diately stand forward and put one leg to have a spear
thrust through it, as a return for the injury; and if, as
is generally the case among themselves, the challenge
thus to suffer in expiation be accepted, the parties, imme-
diately after the infliction of the retaliative wound,
recognise each other as friends. I cannot but think that
if proper pains were taken, much might be done toward
leading the aborigines to abandon these and other cruel
practices, which not unfrequently take place even in the
midst of the town of Perth, and in the presence of the
white inhabitants, among whom the notion exists that the
blacks must be made to fear you before they will love
you, and which sentiment has even been promulgated by
high authority in the Supreme Court, notwithstanding
it is an ancient barbarism, exploded in civilized society :
many a poor black has been shot under this persuasion in
Western Australia.”


CHAPTER VIII.
THE WESTERN AUSTRALIAN COMPANY—ITS PROCEEDINGS
-APPLICATION OF PRINCIPLES.
The condition of the colony of Western Australia had
long been a source of regret to the friends of systematic
colonization. They ■were fully convinced of the eligi-
bility of the country as a field for British enterprise, but
they perceived that so long as one man held 500,000
acres, another 100,000, and a third 80,000, without any
disposition to alienate upon a sound system, it would be
the most unmitigated cruelty to promote emigration
thither, inasmuch as both capitalists and labourers would
be subject to the evils pointed out in our first chapter.
In the spring of 1838 a new era dawned upon the
colony, by the appointment of Mr John Hutt to succeed
Sir James Stirling as governor. Mr Hutt had been
long conversant with the principles and practice of colo-
nization, and being thoroughly convinced of the evils
which Western Australia had experienced, he went out
with the full determination of introducing such amend-
ments as the nature of the case w’ould admit.*
The appointment of Mr John Hutt revived the hopes
of those who so much desired the improvement of
Western Australia. A correspondence was accordingly
* Mr John Halt's friends—thoroughly assured of his peculiar
fitness for the office—had earnestly recommended him to the notice
of the colonial minister, Lord Glenelg, to fill the then vacant office
of Governor of South Australia. This recommendation was disre-
garded, and Colonel Gawler was appointed. Colonel Gawler has,
by his extravagance, almost wrecked the colony. Under his fatal
management the sale of land, and therefore emigration, has stopped;
and a considerable time must elapse before the colony can recover
from the shock. It is worthy of remark that the only weak point
in the administration of South Australia is that over which the
government of this country have control, namely, the office of
governor. In almost every other respect South Australia appears
to have been prudently managed, and has succeeded.


opened between Wm. Hutt, Esq., M.P., the present
chairman of the Western Australian Company, on behalf
of an association of gentlemen interested in Western
Australia, and the secretary for the colonies, with a
view to the introduction of some improvements into the
mode of disposing of land, and the transmission of la-
bourers to the colony, but the government did not accede
to the suggestions then made.
Lord John Russell’s acceptance of the seals of the
colonial office, followed by the establishment of the colo-
nial land and emigration board, accompanied with an
assurance that the principle of sale was to be adopted
universally, led to the establishment of the Western
Australian Company,* “for the purpose of investing
money in the purchase and re-sale of lands, upon the
pledge of her Majesty’s government to apply to this older
colony the principles of colonization which have had
such eminent success in South Australia.”
The Company, in the first instance, purchased an ex-
tensive grant in the county of Wellington, near the junc-
tion of the Brunswick and the Collie Rivers, both of
which discharge themselves into Leschenault Inlet. This
country is doubtless well adapted for the purpose of set-
tlement ; but after the purchase had been agreed upon,
and in fact made, the Company learned that the lands
had been resumed by Governor Hutt, in exercise of a
power which he possessed to do so under certain circum-
stances.!
Before this fact was known in this country, the Com-
pany had dispatched a surveying staff in a fast-sailing
* Wiliam Hutt, Esq., M.P., Chairman,
John Chapman, Esq., Deputy Chairman.
directors,
Thos, Holdsworth Brooking, Esq. Jacob Montefiore, Esq.
Henry Buckle, Esq. Geo, Uobt. Smith, Esq.
Charles Enderby, Esq. Capt, Mark H. Sweney, R.N.
James Irving, Esq. Edw. Gibbon Wakefield, Esq.
Charles H. Smith, Esq., Secretary.
Messrs Smith, Payne, and Smiths, Bankers.
Messrs Few, Hamilton, and Few, Solicitors.
f See postscript, page 142.
F 2


schooner called the Island Queen, and had actually dis-
posed of five hundred town and rural sections to form
the first settlement. The allotment of the rural sections
took place, by appointment of the directors, on Thursday
the Bth of October last, and, as in the case of the lands
in the first colony of New Zealand, priority of choice
was determined by lot. On that day a very large as-
semblage of the purchasers of these allotments, and of
others interested in the colony, met at the company’s
house, then on the Adelphi Terrace; and at the hour
appointed, one o’clock, Mr Booking, Mr Buckle, Mr
Enderby, Mr Wakefield, and Mr frying, five of the
directors of the company, entered the room. Before pro-
ceeding with the drawing, Mr Wakefield addressed the
meeting to the following effect:
He stated, “ that before they proceeded to the business
for which they were called together, he was requested by
his brother directors to make a few observations. He
was happy, in the first place, to inform them that there
was not a single defaulter in the payment in full on the
allotments disposed of; that of the five hundred allot-
ments, however, a certain number had been put into the
names of trustees, and thus reserved under the following
circumstances. In the progress of the sale, he remarked,
the directors had observed that a large proportion of the
land had gone into the hands of capitalists and others
in this country, who perhaps had no intention to go out
themselves, or to make an immediate outlay on the lands
they had purchased; and as the success of the whole un-
dertaking and of the future colony would depend upon
there being a large body of actual settlers, the board had
felt it necessary to check the rapidity of the sales, and
secure that object by reserving a certain number both of
rural and town allotments, to be sold only to those who
had a real intention of proceeding to the colony them-
selves, with means sufficient to become valuable settlers.
Acting on this principle, and with the view solely of
thereby adding to the value of the lands and town sec-
tions bought by others, the board had placed in trust
• Now at S 3 Old Broad street.


one Imndred rural allotments, with their annexed town
sections, and five hundred separate town sections, which
would account for the names of Messrs Wright and Jer-
ningham, the trustees, occurring so often as they would
in the drawing. But this arrangement,” continued Mr
Wakefield, “ would make no difference in the amount of
the emigration fund, or fund for improvements in the
town, as the board by these trustees had actually paid
over to these funds, from the capital of this company,
the sums which would arise by the sale of these lots
when actually disposed of.”
In answer to a question put by a gentleman in the
room, Mr Wakefield stated, that in the sale of these re-
served lots to actual settlers, the company would not de-
sire any advantage to themselves, their only ohject'being
to afford facilities to persons really intending to go out
and establish themselves in the colony ; and thereby to
give additional value to the allotments absolutely sold,
and to every species of property in the settlement.
Mr Wakefield’s statement appeared to give very great
satisfaction, and as soon as it was concluded the drawing
commenced, and was conducted with great regularity, amt
at the same time with dispatch.
In one wheel were placed five hundred cards bearing
the name of the purchaser, and the number which his
application bore upon the list; in the other wheels, five
hundred cards with consecutive numbers. The cards
were drawn one by one from the two wheels alternately
by two blue-coat boys. The name of the purchaser, and
number which his application bore, were audibly called
out by one director; and then the number on the card
drawn from the other box, and which number deter-
mined the order of choice, was called out by another di-
rector. The whole of the numbers were drawn in about
two hours.
On the two following days the town sections were
drawn for in a similar manner. The fund thus raised in
a few weeks amounted to 70,000/., and there is no doubt
that if the directors had offered double the quantity of
land for sale, it would readily have been disposed of;


Numbers one of both the town and country sections fell
to the lot of the trustees, and as they drew many other
good numbers, they operate as a strong inducement to
the emigration of actual settlers, under the regulations
which the directors have since made for the disposal of
these reserves.
It was only a few days after this meeting that the
news of the resumption of Colonel Latour’s land reached
the directors, and very fortunately before the time fixed
for the departure of the emigrants. At the same time
the means of repairing the difiiculty presented them-
selves, and the directors at once availed themselves
thereof. Captain Grey had not long before arrived from
Western Australia, bringing with him an account of the
beautiful country he had traversed between Gantheaume
Bay and the Arrowsmith. Lord John Russell very
promptly offered the Company lands in the newly-dis-
covered district, to replace those around Port Lesche-
nault; and the Company having wisely accepted the
offer, immediately called a meeting of the settlers and
buyers of land, in order to take their sense of the transfer
of the site of Australind, and to offer to such as might
object to the arrangement an opportunity of expressing
that dissent, and of receiving back their money.
At this meeting the chairman of the Company ex-
plained the circumstances which compelled the directors
to change the site of the colony. After stating briefly
the object of calling them together, he said—
“ It had been originally intended, as you are aware,
to plant the settlement of Australind on a tract of land in
Leschenault, which had been granted to Colonel Latour.
This land had been represented as being of great fertility,
as convenient for the formation of a large town, and as
being in the neighbourhood of a sufficiently available
harbour. Having ascertained that the Colonial Office
had recognised Colonel Latour’s absolute right to it, and
forwarded notice of such recognition to the colony, the
Company purchased it, and put forth its plan of re-selling
it in sections, and thereby creating an emigration-fund,
and obtaining other advantages necessary for a prosperous


settlement. You know with what favour the Company’s
plan was received by yourselves and the public. Up to
the period of drawing lots for priority of choice of the
sections, everything had succeeded to the utmost wishes
of the Company. At last, when all the land offered for
sale had been disposed of, and a multitude of applications
refused, when an expensive and well-equipped staff of
surveyors had been dispatched to the colony, and every-
thing in readiness for the departure of the emigrants, on,
I think, the 12th of last month, a newspaper was received
in this country, of the date of April last, where the Go-
vernor of Western Australia proclaimed that the part of
land on which the Company was about to found Austra-
lind was resumed by the crown, and that, in a few weeks
after that notice, it would be open to the selection of pur-
chasers in the colony. The fact was, that the governor
had not received the despatch of the Colonial Office, di-
recting him to admit Colonel Latour’s title to the fee-
simple of the land, and he acted under the impression
that the land had lapsed to the crown, in consequence of
the supposed conditions of the grant not having been ful-
filled.”
Mr Hutt then explained the position of the directors
when this startling intelligence reached them. He ad-
mitted that the Governor of Western Australia might
receive the despatch of the Colonial Office in time to pre-
vent mischief,* but in case the land should have been dis-
posed of when the settlers arrived, they would have to
struggle against a set of surreptitious occupants for pos-
session. Under these circumstances they were led to
consider whether any other site existed in the colony,
but objections existed against all that offered.
“At length Port Grey was suggested, as combining all
the advantages which the directors required for the for-
mation of a settlement. Being convinced of the superior
eligibility of this position, the directors wrote a letter to
the secretary of state, suggesting the transfer. Mr Buck-
ton will read from the minutes of the board a copy of
• See Postscript.


that letter and of the answer. [Here the chairman en-
tered into a description of the splendid district in the
neighbourhood of Port Grey, and having read several
documents, proceeded.] Such, then, is the country of
which you are invited to take possession. It seems to
me to unite everything which, under Providence, is best
calculated to ensure prosperity to a body of English
colonists, —unlimited extent of the finest land, sufficient
moisture, the command of the best harbour on the west
coast of New Holland, and an admirable position for a
town. For my part, who have had some experience in
these matters, I feel no doubt that, with these advantages,
Australind, whether you take possession of it or not, is
destined for the highest prosperity—to be another Port
Phillip, another proof of the value of fertile colonial ter-
ritory under a wise system of colonization, and to exhibit,
ere many years are over, in the auspicious brightness of
its rising, the not-to-be-mistaken glory of its English
origin. (Xoud cheers.) I have now stated what has
come within my own personal knowledge respecting the
circumstances which have led to the change in the site of
Australind; but if I should have failed to make myself
understood on any point, I shall be glad to answer any
question that may be put to me on the subject.”
In answer to a question whether there were any navi-
gable rivers in the country discovered by Captain Grey,
Mr Hutt said, that rivers had been discovered, but that
they were not such as the question contemplated. The
rivers in Australia were in general not navigable, but
were useful as supplying water. Mr Hutt then stated
that one of his brother directors (Mr Wakefield) had
had much communication with Captain Grey, and he
would offer some further details on the subject.
Mr Wakefield then rose, amidst much applause. He
said, that in reference to the comparative merits of the
country around Port Lcschenault and Port Grey, he
should state one fact, which his brother directors will
well remember. When Captain Grey first put himself
in communication with the Western Australian Company,
he, Mr Wakefield, had much conversation with him on


the character and capabilities of the newly-discovered,
district; and, after hearing Captain Grey’s report, the
first feeling in his mind was one of regret that the di-
rectors had not known of this district before , they had
made the purchase of the country around Leschenault.
(Cheers.) He had mentioned this regret to several of
his brother directors, and that, too, some time before any
one had the smallest conception that they should be ob-
liged to abandon Leschenault harbour, and seek a site
elsewhere. At the time Leschenault had been chosen, it
no doubt combined all necessary qualifications in a greater
degree than any other part of the colony of Western Aus-
tralia then open to them; but he had never concealed
from himself that the directors would experience a diffi-
culty in the quantity of cheaper land by which they
would be surrounded. Private individuals would be
able to offer land at a price under the Company’s land,
and thus partially defeat the principles by which the
Company were guided. When the news of the resump-
tion of Colonel Latour’s land first reached the directors,
no doubt considerable alarm was felt. There was, at all
events, a possibility that the directors would be compelled
to say to their purchasers—“ Gentlemen, we cannot give
you your land; you must take back your money but
the prompt manner in which they had been met by the
colonial minister relieved them from all difficulty—
(cheers) —and he (Mr Wakefield) rejoiced in the change.
(Cheers.) The Leschenault tract was one entire block
of upwards of 100,000 acres. Of course, in so large a
territory there must be much inferior land; but in the
substituted territory at Port Grey, this liability was ob-
viated by an advantageous arrangement which had been
conceded to them—namely, to choose their lands in
smaller lots, for instance, of 30,000 acres, by which, he
hoped, they would be enabled so to choose as to have no
badland. (Cheers.) The superior character of the new.
district arcse from its geological character, and from its
elevation, A country of considerable height was inva-
riably of superior soil to a country but little elevated


above the level of the sea. Another circumstance, and
which was every way worthy of consideration, was the
superiority of Port Grey to all the harbours on the west-
ern coast. The harbour of Leschenault was, in fact, a
roadstead rather than a harbour. He did not mean to
say that it was not a very valuable acquisition to the
mariner, but what he meant was, that Port Grey w r as
really a port in the proper sense of the word. He
thought, therefore, that they were entitled to congratulate
each other on the change. The directors, in at once
falling in with the arrangement described, had fully
served the interests of the landowners and settlers. The
Company had, in fact, no object in view but their in-
terests, because their own coincided ; their cause was
one and the same. The Company felt assured they were
great gainers by the change, and what was advantageous
to the Company could not be injurious to the purchasers
of land, and to those who were going out as settlers.
[M r Wakefield’s statement was listened to with profound
attention throughout, and he sat down amidst prolonged
cheering.]
Mr J olm Chapman stated, that at a meeting of the
intended settlers Captain Grey was asked the point in
question—what portion of Western Australia he should
prefer as a settlement ?—and his answer was, Port Grey.
Captain Mangles addressed the meeting, and acqui-
esced in all that had fallen from the chair, and eulogised
the course which they had adopted, and, as a nautical
man, spoke favourably of the harbour of Port Grey.
In answer to a question put by a gentleman present,
Mr Wakefield then gave his opinion respecting the cli-
mate, which we have already quoted at length.
After some few other questions the meeting separated,
evidently much satisfied as well with the candour and
decision of the directors as with the prospects of the
settlement.
The change of site being thus arranged in a manner
perfectly satisfactory to a large majority of the land-
owners and colonists, the Company found themselves in


a situation to dispatch the first body of colonists, with
the resident commissioner, Mr Waller Clifton. The
Fairfield accordingly sailed early in January, and reached
Teneriffe after a fine passage of eleven days. She has
■the prospect of a fine run to Port Grey, which she will
probably reach within 100 days.
Since the departure of the first colony the Company
have resumed the sale of lands, including those of the
dissentients from the above arrangement. The following
statement of their plan and terms of land sales will
sufficiently inform the reader of the views of the Com-
pany
“ Upwards often years have now elapsed since Western
Australia was taken possession of as a dependency of the
British crown, when a settlement was formed upon the
banks of the Swan, and in the immediate vicinity of that
river. Perth and other small towns were founded, and,
subsequently, some inconsiderable settlements have been
formed at King George’s Sound, and other points. The
laws of Great Britain are fully established, and the social
condition of the colony is superior to that of many of the
new settlements ; still it cannot be denied that Western
Australia, as a colony, has not, since its establishment,
made any rapid or material advance. This result is
principally to be attributed to errors committed in the
disposal of land, the want of combination in the invest-
ment of British capital there, and the superior facilities
hitherto afforded by government to emigration to other
points of Australia.
“ A new era for the colony has, however, now happily
commenced. Her Majesty’s government have deter-
mined to apply to it those principles of colonization
which have had such eminent success elsewhere; and
the Western Australian Company has been formed to co-
operate in those views, by the investment of capital in
the acquirement of land, and the conveyance of settlers
and emigrants to the most favourable point upon the
western coast of the continent of New Holland, within
the boundaries and under the jurisdiction of the colony
of Western Australia.


“To carry'out these objects, the Western Australian
Company has acquired a right to a large quantity of
land in the colony, which, by special grant from the
Colonial Office, it lias the privilege of selecting in sepa-
rate blocks of 30,000 acres each, within the range of
country between the river Arrowsmith and Gantheaume
Bay. A surveying staff has already been dispatched to
select the most advantageous positions for the Company’s
lands, and a preliminary expedition has sailed for the
purpose of determining the most valuable site for the
town of Australind, which is to contain 1,000 acres, ex-
clusive of reserves for public objects, such as quays,
streets, squares, markets, churches, and public gardens,
in or adjoining the tow r n. These 1,000 acres will be
marked out and divided into 4,000 sections of one quarter
of an acre each ; and 50,000 acres of the neighbouring
lands, to be selected by the surveyor for that purpose,
will be subdivided into 500 lots of 100 acres each.
“ TERMS OF LAND SALES.
“The lands, which will constitute the site and vicinity
of Australind, are allotted for sale to the public in the
following manner;—To each of the lots of 100 rural acres
are attached (to be drawn for separately as after ex-
plained) four town sections of one quarter of an acre
each, which rural acres and tow T n sections (called mixed
allotments) are offered at 101 Z. each ; the remaining town
sections at 101. each.
“Of these mixed allotments and town sections,a portion
has been reserved, and is offered for sale to settlers only;
and the other lots, such as remain unsold, are offered to
the public generally at the above-mentioned prices.
“ The choice of the allotments and town sections thus
offered for sale will be determined by lot, drawn at the
Company’s office in the presence of the purchaser or his
agent (as after explained) and of three of the directors ;
and within one week after the decision of each purchaser’s
priority of choice he will be entitled to receive land
orders, authorising and requiring the officer of the Com-
pany in the settlement to deliver to him, or to his agent;


the allotments or sections to which he is entitled, to be
selected according to his ascertained priority of choice,
subject, nevertheless, to the provisions hereinafter men-
tioned.
“ A large portion of the lots has already been sold, and
the purchasers have received land orders, giving them a
priority of choice according to the numbers drawn by
them. The list of numbers which remain undrawn,
may be obtained at the Company’s office; and persons
who may now become purchasers, will be entitled to
land orders, giving them a priority of choice with the
previous purchasers, according to the numbers to be
drawn by them out of the undrawn list.
“Application for the purchase of these land orders may
be made in writing at the office of the Company, No. 33
Old Broad street, where forms of application may' be
obtained ; and such applicants will be entitled, on pay~
ment of the amount of the purchase-money into the hands
of the Company’s bankers, Messrs Smith, Payne, and
Smith, to attend on Tuesday, the 23rd inst., and every
succeeding Tuesday', at two o’clock precisely (either
personally or by their agents), when their orders of choice
will be drawn, according to the priority of such payments,
in the presence of themselves or their agent, if they
think proper to attend, and of three of the directors who
will be in attendance.
“ The mode of drawing will be as follows:—The num-
bers are placed in four several wheels or revolving boxes,
the settlers’ rural sections in one wheel, and the settlers’
town sections in another wheel; the general rural sec-
tions in one wheel, and the general town sections in
another wheel.
“ These land orders will be transferable at the will of
the holders, on giving written notice thereof to the
secretary of the Company in England, or to the chief
commissioner of the Company in the settlement, in
manner prescribed by the regulations of the Company',
and indorsed upon such land orders.
“The choice of the allotments, of which priority shall
have been so determined by lot in England, will-take


place in the settlement so soon after the arrival of the
first body of colonists who have already sailed as the
actual site of Australind shall have been selected, and
the requisite surveys and plans shall have been com-
pleted, and will be made under such regulations as the
chief commissioner of the Company in the settlement so
authorised shall prescribe. Neglect or refusal to comply
with such regulations in regard to any section will
occasion a forfeiture of the right of choice by the pur-
chaser, and vest it in the Company’s officer on behalf of
the purchaser; and such officer will be directed to pro-
ceed, with the utmost dispatch, in effecting such selec-
tions, unless the purchaser, or some person duly
authorised on his behalf, be present in the colony to
make such selection, so soon as the site of the town shall
have been fixed and marked out, and be ready for selec-
tion of the various sections.
“ Of the money to be paid to the Company by pur-
chasers of mixed allotments, 501. per cent, will be laid out
in defraying the cost of emigration to the settlement, and
■in public improvements therein. Thus, in addition to
the change of system adopted by the government as to
.the public lands of the colony generally, one-half of the
purchase-money of these private lands will be employed
in adding to the value of the property by conveying
population to the settlement.
“ Purchasers of rural land, intending to settle thereon,
will be entitled, out of the fund set apart for emigration,
to an allowance for their own passage, and that of their
families and servants, equal to 50 1. per cent, of their
purchase-money, subject to such regulations as may be
framed by the Company. But persons claiming such
allowance must notify their intention to become resident
settlers at the time of applying for their land.
“ Purchasers of not less than 300 acres of rural land,
not themselves proceeding to Australind, will be never-
theless entitled to a return of so much of their purchase-
money as shall he sufficient to defray the passage of an
agent, provided such agent become an actual settler.
“All persons claiming an allowance out of the erai


gration fund for a free passage to the Company’s territory
in Western Australia, in consequence of their own or
their agent’s intention to settle thereon, will receive land
orders containing special provisions in respect of such
intending settlement; copies of which forms may be had
at the office.
“In the selection of emigrants of the labouring class,
the Company will give a preference to applicants who
shall be under engagement to work for capitalists
intending to emigrate, and to persons purchasing land of,
the Company.
“ Except for cabin passengers, the whole of the fund
set apart for emigration will be laid out by the Company
in providing free passages for young married persons of
the labouring classes, and of unmarried persons under
thirty years of age, as far as possible, in equal proportion
of the sexes.
“ One-half of the whole fund received for quarter-acre
town sections at the rate of 101. each, and which, on the
completion of the present proposed sales, will amount to'
10,000 Z., will be strictly laid out by the Company on
objects of public utility and convenience in the town.
“ In the event of the directors being unable to award
land out of the advertised lots, by reason of the number
of persons who shall have made payment to the Com-
pany’s bankers for the purchase of lots exceeding the
number contained in the lists, it will be at the option of
the applicants so excluded (by the rule of priority of
payment before mentioned) either to be registered for
purchase at the next succeeding sale of the Company’s"
land, or to receive back the purchase-money deposited.”
. This brings the proceedings of the Company down to
the present time; all that relates to the mode of applying
the emigration fund will be found in the next chapter.


CHAPTER IX.
APPLICATION OF THE EMIGRATION FUND NEW TIES—
THE VOYAGE —ADVICE TO EMIGRANTS.
If the reader has bestowed only ordinary care on the
first chapter of this volume, he must be tolerably familiar
with the principles of colonization in which Australind
is about to be settled. We shall now offer a few obser-
vations on the practical application of the emigration
fund. It is in this portion of the system that the indus-
trious emigrant is most deeply interested. It is seldom
that the labouring man possesses the means of trans-
planting himself from one country to another, and
whether we consider the effect of emigration on the
welfare of the individuals removed, or on that of the
whole mass of persons who labour for wages, we must
come to the conclusion that the deep, the paramount
interest in the wise administration of the fund destined
for the removal of labour, rests with them.
• The mode in which the Western Australian Company
apply the colonization fund, is exhibited in the following
copy of their “ Regulations for labourers emigrating to
the new settlement of Australind in Western Australia :
“1. The Company has undertaken to lay out 50 1, per
cent, of the money received from purchasers of land, in
defraying the cost of emigration to the settlement. Pur-
chasers and others may, therefore, submit the applications
of labouring persons, as hereafter described, to the ap-
proval of the Company for a free passage. In the selec-
tion of labouring emigrants, the Company has undertaken
to give a preference to applicants who shall be under
engagement to work for capitalists intending to emigrate,
and for persons purchasing land of the Company.
“2. The Company offers a free passage to its settle-
ment, including provisions and medical attendance
during the voyage, to persons of the following descrip-
tion:—namely, agricultural labourers, shepherds, bakers.


blacksmiths, whitesmiths, shipwrights, .boat builders,,
wheelwrights, curriers, tanners, coopers, farriers, har-
ness-makers, tailors, cordwainers, miners, braziers,
tinmen, millwrights, cabinet makers, carpenters, stone-
masons, brick-makers, lime burners, and all persons
engaged in the erection of buildings.
“3. Persons of the foregoing occupations, who may
apply for a free passage to Australind, must transmit
to the office of the Company, free of expense, the most
satisfactory testimonials as to their qualifications, cha-
racter, and health.
11 4. Such persons must be actual labourers, going
out to work for wages in the colony, of sound mind and
body, not less than fifteen, nor more than forty years of
age, and married. The marriage certificate must be
produced.
. “5. To the wives of labourers thus sent out, the
Company offers a free passage with their husbands.
“6. To single women, not exceeding thirty years of
age, a free passage will be granted, provided they go
out under the protection of their parents or near relatives,
or under actual engagement as servants to ladies going
out as cabin passengers on board the same vessel. The
preference will be given to those accustomed to farm and
dairy work, to sempstresses, straw-platters, and domestic-
servants.
“7. A free passage will also be granted to single men
under thirty years of age, whose qualifications and cha-
racter are satisfactory, provided they are accompanied
by one or more adult sisters, likewise not exceeding
thirty years of age.
“ 8. The children of parents sent out by the Company
will receive a free passage if they are under one or full
seven years of age at the time of embarkation. For all
other children (namely, those between one and seven
years of age), three pounds each must be paid in full,
before embarkation, by the parents or friends, or by the
parish.
“ 9. Persons not strictly entitled to be conveyed out
by the emigration fund, if not disqualified on account of


character, will, at the discretion of the directors, be
allowed to accompany the free emigrants, on paying to
the company the sum of 20?. for every such adult person.
The charges for children are as follows :—namely, under
one year of age, no charge; one year and under seven,
one third of the charge for adults; seven years of
age and under fourteen, one half the charge for
adults ; but if the parents be of the labouring class, the
children will be taken out on the terms stated in regu-
lation 8.
“ 10. All emigrants, adults as well as children, must
have been vaccinated, or have had the small pox.
“11. Emigrants will generally be embarked at the
port of London, but the directors will occasionally ap-
point other ports of embarkation, as circumstances may
require.
“12. The expense of reaching the port of embarka-
tion must be borne by the emigrants; but on the day
appointed for their embarkation, they will be received,
even though the departure of the ship should be delayed,-
and will be put to no further expense.
“ 13. Every adult emigrant is allowed to take half a
ton weight, or twenty cubic feet of baggage. Extra
baggage is liable to charge, at the ordinary rate of freight
per ton.
“14. The emigrants must procure the necessary tools
of their ow r n trades ; and before they will be permitted
to embark, they must provide themselves with an outfit
of clothing, bedding, and other necessaries for the voy-
age, according to the annexed scale. The outfit may be
obtained upon payment to the company, or to the
outfitter, of the prices affixed to the several articles in
the list.
“15. On the arrival of the emigrants at the settle-
ment, after appearing before such board or officer as
may be appointed by the governor of Western Austra-
lia, they will be received by an officer of the company,
who will supply their immediate wants, assist them in
reaching the place of their destination, be ready to
advise with them in case of difficulty, and at all times


to give them employment in the service of the Company,
if from any cause they should be unable to obtain it
elsewhere. The emigrants will, however, be at perfect
liberty to engage themselves to any one willing to em-
ploy them, and will make their own bargain for wages.”
Such are the regulations for the conveyances of emi-
grants, and it is only necessary for us to add that forms
of application may be procured at the Company’s offices,
where ample information is given on the points on w’hich
it is usual to seek it.
On board such ships as the Company may send out,
the most careful arrangements will be made for securing
the health and comfort of the emigrants during the
voyage. In point of space, the law is not stretched to
the utmost, as is too frequently the case in the ships
which convey emigrants to Canada, but ample room is
assigned to each emigrant. The dietary is on the most
liberal scale; each individual has daily one pound of
bread, half a pound of meat (beef, pork, and preserved
meat in succession), three quarts of water, besides rice,
peas, and potatoes, to vary the food, with flour, raisins,
suet, tea, coffee, sugar, butter, pickled cabbage, salt,
and mustard. As these provisions are served out to
messes of six or more, they have been found so abund-
ant, that some of the emigrants to New Zealand, where
the same scale was adopted, have stated that they saved
from their allowance so as to have a stock on their
arrival.
We have already stated that the first body of emi-
grants under the immediate charge of Mr Waller Clif-
ton, the Company’s resident commissioner, went out in
the Fairfield; the surveying staff, however, preceded
the settlers by rather more than four months, and as the
vessel which conveyed the surveying staff was a fast-sail-
ing schooner, named the Island Queen, admirably
adapted to the purpose, there is reason to believe that
in point of arrival there will be a still further gain of
time.
It was on the occasion of the sailing of this beautiful and
fairy-like craft, that the Directors of the Western Austra-
G


lian Company gave their tasteful banquet under the some-
what unsubstantial, and therefore, in this case, inappro-
priate name of a dejeuner, to the friends of the colony at
the West India Dock Tavern in August last. Nothing
could have been better managed, either on the part of the
directors or on that of the experienced purveyor; but what
was most gratifying was the evidence afforded by the meet-
ing of the intensity of the colonizing spirit, and of the
progress which the new principles of colonization are
making in the public mind. There was of course a fair
quantity of speech-making, and some of it was much to
the purpose, and the manner in which these purely color
nization speeches were received was something very re-
markable, and certainly very different to what would
have been the case a few years since.* The chair on
the occasion alluded to was filled, and well filled, by
Mr John Chapman, the deputy-chairman of the board
of directors. Among the speakers Mr Charles Duller,
the member for Liskeard, distinguished himself by some
able and pertinent remarks on the immediate subject of
the meeting, and by a feeling and well-timed allusion to
the late Earl of Durham. Mr Wakefield, on his health
being drunk, remarked on the great progress which
the subject of colonization had made in the public
mind, and he referred to “ this brilliant meeting”-—and
brilliant it really was —for a proof of what he stated.
Many of'the first colonists of Australind were present,
and it must have been extremely gratifying to them to
reflect upon the number and character of those who on
this occasion evinced their sympathy with them by thus
assisting, to adopt a foreign phrase, at the meeting. For
our own parts, we never witnessed a more gratifying
sight.
A few words of mingled information and advice still
remain to be addressed to the intending emigrant, espe-
* We may here observe that another remarkable instance of the
same feature in the public mind has lately been exhibited on the
occasion of the great dinner, given by the New Zealand Company,
at the London Tavern, for a very full account of which see the New
Zealand Journal of Monday, the 15th of February (No, 2S).


cially on the new ties which he will acquire, and on the
economy of his family during the voyage.
One of the first cares of those who are about to emi-
grate, should be to consider well the nature of the ties
they are about to snap asunder, and the new ties which
are likely to spring up around them, for it is On a due
estimate of these that the contentment of the emigrant
mainly depends.
We assume that the reader is of an age to satisfy the
regulation cited above. The eyes of others may per-
haps dwell upon our pages, but our observations are
especially intended for such emigrants as are likely tO
form part of the system we describe—we mean the young
of both sexes.
It has been well observed by Mr Wakefield, that
when a young couple emigrate there is the least possible
disturbance of habit or breaking of ties, because “ they
are already on the move.” This is quite true, and at
that moment, when the spirit is elastic with hope—
When the frame is full of vigour, and the mind is
endowed with its utmost energies, emigration is fre-
quently extremely attractive.
To those who have passed the meridian of life, how-
ever, emigration has no charms. Such persons have
acquired habits and prejudices which cannot be dis-
turbed without great suffering, and we should never
advise emigration to them, unless for the sake of accom-
panying children or other near relations. In such a
case emigration may be resorted to, and for the very
reason that it should be avoided under ordinary circum-
stances. If the intending emigrant will take the trouble
to compare the ordinary force of those ties which are
unconnected with his wife and children, and with his
future prospects and home, with those which the latter
relations constitute, he will soon be convinced that those
from which he is about to wean himself are but weak,
and if parting be a pain, it is soon overborne and for-
gotten in thoughts of the pregnant future. We repeat,
that the intending emigrant should be determined by


the relative force of the inducements to go or to stay,
and he may be assured that he alone has power to strike
the balance.
In doing this, let him not be influenced by a notion of
returning mso many years. He really goes for ever.
Many have pictured to themselves the making of a
fortune in a few years, and returning home; but few
fulfil their original design. The fact is, they make a new
home, to leave which would do greater violence to their
feelings than their original departure. Children, friends,
occupations, all conspire to prevent the emigrant’s
return, by attaching him to his new home; and to go
out with the determination of returning is bad, inas-
much as it continually interferes with the forming of
those new associations which are necessary for the
settler’s happiness and prosperity. The emigrant should
therefore make up his mind that he goes for ever;
otherwise it will be hard for him to believe that he goes
to a home.
After having obtained a passage by complying with
and fulfilling all the conditions, as detailed in the
‘ Regulations for Labourers wishing to emigrate to
Australind’ above quoted, the emigrant will receive
notice of the day the ship is ready to take him on board.
He should then repair to such place as may be appointed,
and from that moment the emigrant will be put to no
further expense, even though the ship should be detained
a month.
The tonnage allowed to each adult emigrant on board
the Company’s ships is half a ton weight, or twenty
cubic feet, for baggage. If they require more space,
they will be required to pay for it at the price paid by
the Company.
In order to provide for the due cleanliness of the
emigrants, the Company have laid down a list of neces-
sary clothing, as the least quantity with which they will
permit an emigrant and his wife to embark. If they
have a good stock, they are in no way interfered with ;
but the Company insist upon their having at least


FOR EACH ADULT.
Male.
Female.
2 fustian jackets, lined
2 gowns, or 18 yards printed
2 pair ditto trowsefrs
cotton
2 ditto duck ditto
2 petticoats, or 6 yds. of calico
2 round frocks
2 ditto flannel, or G yds. flannel
12 cotton shirts
12 shifts, or 30 yds. long cloth
6 pairs of worsted stockings
C caps, or 3 yds muslin
2 Scotch caps
G handkerchiefs
6 handkerchiefs
6 aprons, or six yards check
6 coarse towels
C neckerchiefs
1 pair of boots, with hobnails,
C towels
&c.
1 pair stays.
I pair shoes
C pairs black worsted stockings
4 lbs. soap
2 pairs shoes
1 pair blankets
1 bonnet
2 pairs sheets
Needles, pins, buttons, thread,
1 coverlet
tapes, &c.
4 lbs. marine Soap
2 lbs. starch
enough for health and a decent appearance. The follow-
ing is the list:—
Together with
One mattrass and bolster for each couple, of coloured wool.
Knife and fork, plate, spoon, drinking mug, &c.
On board the Company’s ships, every possible arrange-
ment is made to secure comfort and health during so
long a voyage; but of course much will necessarily
depend on the passengers themselves. The space allowed
is unusually large; proper arrangements are made for
keeping families together, and separating one family
from another; and the single men are divided from the
single women by the whole space occupied by the married
couples. The emigrant will at once perceive the advan-
tage of this plan.
The dietary we have already alluded to. Care is taken
that the provisions are of the best quality, and, in point
of quantity, we have shown that they are more than suf-
ficient. On the whole, the dietary is very much superior
to what is usually within the emigrant’s reach on shore.
The only observation we have, therefore, to make thereon
is, that the very variety of the food, and the fact that
the emigrants take their meals in messes of at least six


persons, affords ample room for the management of a
good housewife. Except in bad weather, the table may
be comfortably laid, the meals regularly served, and, by
the display of a little skill in plain cooking, such as
every young woman ought to possess, the social meal
may be treated as the type of the emigrant’s new home.
In pursuance of this view, the head of the family should
enforce those little observances of order and sober
demeanor, especially on the part of the children, which
give a charm to the family circle of every class. There
is no occasion whereon there is so great a temptation to
relax good habits as at sea, especially during a long
voy r age; hence the greater necessity for the watchful
care of the head of the family.
This is not the only case in which the head of the
emigrant family should be careful to guard against a
relaxation of habits. Among passengers, negligence of
person is almost universally conspicuous. Men neglect
to shave themselves for days together. Women, to
whom personal appearance is really important, neglect
themselves even to a greater extent than the men: “ who
is to see us ?” is what passes in their minds continually.
We answer, your husbands; or if you be unmarried,
perhaps an unknown lover, whose affections may be
either weakened or lost by observing a constant careless-
ness of person on the part of the w r oman of his choice.
Neatness, cleanliness, and order, both of person and of
the berth, are absolutely essential to comfort on board
ship, and we have even seen cases where sailors have
rope’s-ended a brother sailor for a flagrant neglect of
what is so essential to the comfort of all.
But it is to the children that cleanliness is so essen-
tially necessary; and among those who are old enough
to observe it, every effort should be made to enforce it.
We need scarcely point out that in so doing the example
of parents is all in all. If the child is not taught by
example, he cannot be expected to obey precept. He
will not admit that a different rule in such a case should
be made for the child and the adult, and he will
rebel against an order upon which contempt is cast by


him who makes it. “ Men,’’ says a Latin proverb—and
by the word “men” is there meant human beings,—
“ men believe their eyes rather than their ears: the
road by precept is long; that by example is short and
efficacious.*
It may be thought that sea sickness must necessarily
interfere with all good habits, and induce relaxation to
the end of the voyage. This is a prime error. Sea
sickness is a bugbear ; there are many who never expe-
rience it, and most people who suffer are notout of order
more than two or three days. It is seldom indeed that
an individual is found who experiences sea sickness to
the end of the voyage; so that, after the first week,
order and cleanliness should be universally established.
The great evil of a long voyage undoubtedly is, the
mental inactivity which necessarily prevails on board.
Every effort should be made to relieve this. In four
months (the usual length of the voyage), much may be
done in the way of mental culture; and every emigrant
who has a few shillings to spare, should provide him-
self with books of a useful character. If several'of the
emigrants were to do this, a species of circulating library
would be established on board; and if each passenger
had only one book, it is quite clear that they would
amount to more than all could read in sixteen or eighteen
weeks. To make the resources of every ship available,
all the books should be collected at the beginning of the
voyage, the name of the owner written in, and the whole
placed in the custody of a librarian. They should be
then given out, and called in twice a-week, and small
fines established for abuses. As some of the passengers
may be uneducated, reading aloud might be practised
with great advantage; and a discussion society might be
formed, to debate questions connected with colonization,
or the circumstances affecting the condition of the emi-
grants, both in the old and new country. This would
not only relieve the tedium of the voyage, but would
much improve both the speakers and the listeners.
• Seneca.


But, above all things, schools should be opened oh
board for the whole body of the children. There is no
reason why they should not be divided into infant Schools
—girls’ schools and boys’ schools. Many of the young
men and women will probably have been accustomed to
teach at Sunday schools. These should associate them-
selves as a body of teachers, so that the labour might be
divided. The hours of school should not be prolonged
—two hours in the morning and one in the afternoon
Would be quite sufficient; but they should never be
broken in upon, except by stress of weather.
After school hours sports should be instituted, and
even invented, to promote healthful exercise. There are
many games which are known to every one who goes to
sea; and others may be planned, to suit the circum-
stances of the place, as well as of age and sex. We
have seen long-rope, hop-scotch, and a game called
shuffle-board, played for days together at sea with unim-
paired zest; and the occasional disturbance of a lurch
has only served to produce good-humoured mirth and
increased exercise.
There is another source of amusement which we had
almost forgotten, but which may be taken advantage of
where opportunity offers. It will sometimes happen
that, among a couple of hundred settlers, there will be
found five or six or more who play on some musical
instrument. These should be mustered, and if a few are
able to sing—and we have in our experience met some
on board ship capable of singing in parts —a very good
Concert may be got up. Instruction might even be im-
parted to others, and thus the seeds of good taste sown
for future colonial growth.
By these several expedients a long voyage may be
converted into a short one simply by making the time
pass agreeably. If all contribute to the comfort and
amusement of all, the social affections will be greatly
promoted, and the whole body of settlers, instead of
landing with deteriorated habits, will find that they have
become more efficient instruments of happiness to them-
selves and others.


One word, and the subject of the voyage Is at an end.
Let it never he forgotten that the captain is a despot, and
should be obeyed. If he misuse his power on board,
yield while under his control, even if you complain on
reaching your destination.
On reaching Australind, the emigrants, as we have
already explained, “ will be received by an officer who
will supply their immediate wants, assist them in reach-
ing the place of their destination, be ready to advise with
them in case of difficulty, and at all times to give them
employment in the service of the Company, if from any
cause they should be unable to procure it elsewhere.
The emigrants will, however, be at perfect liberty to
engage themselves to any one willing to employ them,
and will make their own bargain for wages.
What course the settler should pursue, or what occu-
pation he should adopt on reaching the country, must
be left to his own determination. All that we can do is
to point out as accurately as our present evidence will
permit the capabilities of the country. This will aid the
intending emigrant whether to fix upon this or that
colony; but as to the particular occupation, that must be
determined by the same purely private considerations, or
perhaps accidental circumstances, which would influence
his choice at home. From a work of this description
it would be absurd to expect more, for the same reason
that it would be ridiculous to rely upon a book to deter-
mine whether a young man just entering into life should
embrace this or that trade or calling. All that we have
pretended to offer in this little work is a faithful exhibi-
tion of the evidence respecting Australind, with such
conclusions as that evidence appears to us to w r arrant.


POSTSCRIPT.
It was suggested incidentally in the foregoing pages*
while speaking of the circumstances which led to the
change of the site of Australind, that Governor Hutt
might have notice of the proceedings for the settlement
of Port Leschenault in time to abandon the resumption
of Colonel Latour’s grant. By the recent news from
Western Australia we learn that such is the case; the
lands in question have not been resumed, and it is pos-
sible that they may hereafter be settled under the aus-
pices of the Western Australian Company ; not that we
are aware of any present intention on the part of the
directors so to do, but as we believe the neighbourhood
of Port Leschenault to be well calculated for a pros-
perous settlement, we mention it as a possible, and we
are even disposed to say probable, contingency.
Under this impression a few extracts on the nature of
the country will not be out of place here.
Port Leschenault, then, is in latitude 33° 15' south,
and longitude 115° 32' east, and is thus described by an
eye-witness;—
“ On Saturday, the 18th of August, we arrived at Port
Leschenault, where we found the American whaler
Pioneer at anchor in the bay. Lieutenant Bull, R.N.,
the government resident, came on board, and brought the
Champion into a safer berth nearer shore, as the weather
was threatening. Here we were wind-bound for six days,
and had thus an opportunity of trying the capabilities of
the anchorage amidst very stormy weather. In describ-
ing the anchorage, I gave the opinions of Mr Belcher
(lieutenant commanding), and the commander of the


Pioneer, whose nautical abilities cannot be questioned.
The bay of Lescbenault, called in the native language
‘ Koombaana,’ is very easy of access; the best mark
for ships approaching from sea is Mount Williams, seen
at a great distance, and bearing N.E. of the bay. The
probable distance from the bay may be about forty miles.
The anchorage is situated in latitude 33° 15' south, and
longitude 115° 32' east. It is perfectly secure.”
Lieutenant Bull also transmitted to the government at
Perth the following statement respecting the perfect
security of the bay of Lescbenault. It is written by the
master of an American whaler, who was there at the
most trying season of the year.
“ It is with pleasure that I find that I have it in my
power to write you a favourable account of the safety of
this bay for a winter harbour. I rode out in perfect
security the gale from the Ist to the Bth of June, and
the heaviest part at single anchor, with only fifty fathoms
of chain out. I therefore consider it my duty to make
this harbour known, and to write my opinion of it as a
sailor.”
Lescbenault Inlet, which is similar to Peel’s Inlet, and
the estuary of the Hutt, empties itself into the bay. It
is fifteen or eighteen miles in length, and two or three
wide, with four or five fathoms water; and although
there is a bar at its sea mouth, Captain Stirling entertains
a confident opinion that the entrance might be cleared,
and the inlet thereby rendered available for the reception
and discharge of cargoes. These would convert it into a
magnificent harbour, and we see no reason why all these
remarkable inlets on the western coast should not be ren-
dered practicable.
Two rivers, the Preston and the Collie, empty them-
selves into the inlet; these, with their tributaries, water
a fine country, which is well adapted for the purpose of
settlement. The official report of the discoverers states, —
“ That the country inland from Port Lescbenault
offers fertile soil and good stock stations; the climate is
decidedly cooler than in this district (Perth), and judging
from the quantity of grass and the verdure of the foliage,


it’ appears to sustain a dry season not so long in duration
as that experienced in this quarter.”
Further examinations have shown that the land is of
fine quality, adapted both to cultivation and the rearing
of stock. These advantages, added to its capacity for
a whaling station, caused Sir James Stirling to open it
out for settlement on that mistaken principle of extend-
ing the quantity and cheapness of land, and scattering
population. As to its eligibility there can be no doubt,
and under a sound system we look forward to the time
when it will become a flourishing settlement.
THE END.
PRINTED BY CHARLES REYNELL, LITTLE PCLTENEY STREET.
