





■
■
ih
i j






“THE CHANTRY,” NEAR IPSWICH,
NOW THE SEAT OF C. B. SKINNER, ESQ.


THE
DIARY
E. C. CLOSE.
W. E. SMITH,
SYDNEY, NEWCASTLE AND LONDON.




EDWARD CHARLES CLOSE was born at Rangamatti,
near the junction of the rivers Sunecoss and Caddada, on
the 12th March, IT9O.
His father, who was a member of the Council in
Calcutta, died before his birth, and, shortly afterwards,
his mother found herself ruined through the failure of
Mesers. Palmer and Co., bankers. When her only son had
reached the age of seven years, Mrs. Close returned to
England with her brother, Mr. Collinson, with whom she
made her home at his residence, The Chantry, near
Ipswich.
As he left England at so early an age, Mr. Close knew
very little of his family or connections. In “ Gentlemen
Commoners of England,” however, is mentioned the
marriage of his father, Edward Charles Close, with
Marrianne Collinson, a descendant of Peter Collinson,
botanist and antiquarian.
Mr. Close received his education from the Rev. George
Rogers, rector of the parish in which his uncle lived, and
subsequently at Hackney School.




DIARY.
Gazetted Bth February, 1808, Ensign in the 48th Regiment*
Joined at Clonony Barracks, 23rd March. Left it 2nd June,
and arrived on the Ourragh of Kildare 6th June. From this we
marched to Dublin about the beginning of August, and
proceeded with a draft of officers to join the Ist Battalion by
Bristol and the Isle of Wight. We embarked on board the
Eagle , transport, lying at Spithead, and sailed on the 13th
September. The Redwing , sloop of war, having got on shore
at the Needles, was obliged to throw all her water overboard,
which caused us to put into Falmouth until the 21st, from
whence, after a most extraordinary passage of seven days
reached Gibraltar on the first of October. Visited the towns of
Algeziras and St. Eogue. The garrison the 48th,
61st, 57th Regiments, and Ist and 4th R. Y. Battalions.
May 26th, 1809. —Received an order from Sir John
Craddock to hold ourselves in readiness to embark.
May 30th. —The eight Battalion Companies embarked.
June 7th. —The 30th Regiment, 2nd Battalion, landed, and
our Flank Companies went on board the transports they had
quitted.
June 9th.—The 61st Regiment embarked.
June 11th.—Sailed from the bay.
June 18th. —Reached Lisbon, a town replete with filth.
The aquaduct here is worth seeing. There are some good
streets, and a few good buildings. Generally, it is a miserable
place.




DIARY.
Gazetted Bth February, 1808, Ensign in the 48th Regiment-
Joined at Clonony Barracks, 23rd March. Left it 2nd June,
and arrived on the Ourragh of Kildare 6th June. From this we
marched to Dublin about the beginning of August, and
proceeded with a draft of officers to join the Ist Battalion by
Bristol and the Isle of Wight. We embarked on board the
Eagle , transport, lying at Spithead, and sailed on the 13th
September. The Redwing , sloop of war, having got on shore
at the Needles, was obliged to throw all her water overboard,
which caused us to put into Falmouth until the 21st, from
whence, after a most extraordinary passage of seven days
reached Gibraltar on the first of October. Yisited the towns of
Algeziras and St. Eogue. The garrison consisted of the 48th,
61st, 57th Regiments, and Ist and 4th R, V. Battalions.
May 26th, 1809. —Received an order from Sir John
Craddock to hold ourselves in readiness to embark.
May 30th. —The eight Battalion Companies embarked.
June 7th. —The 30th Regiment, 2nd Battalion, landed, and
our Flank Companies went on board the transports they had
quitted.
June 9th. —The 61st Regiment embarked.
June 11th.—Sailed from the bay.
June 18th. —Reached Lisbon, a town replete with filth.
The aquaduct here is worth seeing. There are some good
streets, and a few good buildings. Generally, it is a miserable
place.


June 27th.—Embarked on board boats and reached Yiliada.
June 28th—Santerem was the next place which we reached.
This is prettily situated on a high hill, commanding a most
extensive and picturesque view of the surrounding country.
June 30th.—Marched to Grolghao or Gollegao.
July Ist.—Beached Punhete, an irregular little town
situated on an angle formed by the junction of the Tagus and
Zezere. Over the latter river there was a bridge of boats. The
country the whole way from Lisbon delightful, the greater part
of the way enlivened by vineyards and olive groves. The
inhabitants civil.
July 2nd. —Marched to Abrantes, a pretty good town,
situated on a hill. The inhabitants much in the French interest,
and seemed as we approached the frontier to increase in
incivility. Major Ashe fell down suddenly upon our arrival,
before the Regiment had taken up its quarters, and died in a
few minutes. He was buried on the glacis of one of the
bastions.
July 3rd. —Moved to Garviao.
July 4th. —Marched to Niza.
July sth.—Crossed the Tagus in boats to Villavelha.
July 6th.—Went to Castel Branco. The country to this
from Abrantes generally wild and uncultivated, but in some
places beautifully romantic.
July 7th. —Marched to Lodociro, a town tumbling into
ruin, nearly all the houses demolished, and the people verging
on famine, labour seemed to have ceased. The French alone
appeared to have been busy. The infirm and aged were left
almost in a state of destitution, all means of subsistence
removed to the mountains and other remote places.
July Bth. We marched to Zibreira, where we witnessed a
dreadful scene. The inhabitants were suffering either from
plague or famine, it was difficult to say which, scarcely a house
in which someone lived that your heart was not saddened by


groans of the dying. So much misery was not much inducement
to remain in the town, so some of our officers and myself made
ourselves as comfortable as we could about three hundred yards
on the outside.
July 9th. —Marched to Zarza-la-Mayor, which we reached
after crossing a small river, which is the boundary of Spain and
Portugal. Here we bivouacked at about half a league from the
town. Zarza-la-Mayor was the first Spanish town.
July 10th.—Moved to near Morelega. The country flat and
pretty well cultivated.
July 11th.—Marched to a wood beyond Corea, situated on a
hill on the River Alagon. A pleasant town. The houses much
cleaner than those in Portugal. There were more inhabitants in
it than any town we had passed since Abrantes. There is at
Corea a magnificent church, with a beautifully toned organ.
The French appeared not to have injured this edifice at all.
Here we met the German Legion, which marched the day we
arrived. We halted the next day.
July 13th. —Marched to a wood near Gabisteo, or Galisteo.
July 14th.—Reached Placencia, where we found our army.
Halted on some heights beyond the town, near a river. Here
we halted till the 16th.
The towns of Placencia and Galisteo were evidently of
Moorish origin ; both surrounded with walls and small towns
at short distances from each other. The Regiment was placed
in General Stewart’s Brigade, in General Hill’s Division.
Halted.
July 17th.—Reached Malpartida and bivouaced in some
adjoining fields.
July 18th.—Marched to Majados, near which we halted.
The country well cultivated.
July 19th—Marched to near Sentinella, where the patrols
of the enemy had been the night before. The whole way from


Magados to Sentinella one continued wood. From this, after
passing an extensive wood and a plain of some length (on which
we met the Spanish Army) to
July 20th. —Oropesa, situated on the summit of a hill sur-
rounded by an extensive plain, out of which the enemy had been
driven by our outposts that morning. Inhabitants disposed to
be friendly, drawing water for us out of a well as we passed.
We were reviewed by General Cuesta on the evening of the
22nd. The line was drawn up on the Talavera road. The
Spanish army consisting of 60,000 men here formed a junction.
July 23rd. —Marched to Talavera de la Eeyna. The first
part of our road was through a very extensive wood, and the
last over a spacious plain. We passed the dead bodies of several
Frenchmen, who had been killed skirmishing. Their bodies
were horribly mutilated by the Spaniards. Talavera was one
of the best towns we had yet seen, several churches had been
despoiled and some pulled down —so eager was the enemy in
search of plunder. Here are the remains of an amphitheatre.
There were some large houses, but the French had been in
them. A child was discovered lying dead in a recess where a
figure of the virgin had lately stood. We were kept in great
anxiety the whole day.
July 24th. —Moved next day from our bivouac ground to
the banks of the Alberche, expecting every moment orders to
advance on the enemy, who were at a short distance, although
we could not see them for the woods ; but they had fallen back
on their supports. We then returned nearly to our old ground,
where we remained till
July 27th.—
(BATTLE OF TALAVERA.)
When the enemy retreated from the Alberche. The Spaniards had
been sent in pursuit, but on this day they came tumbling in, foot
and horse, in a most disorganized state. We could see the skir-
mishing from the steeple of one of the churches in town. Our


cavalry also returned from the front. Shortly after the whole of
cavalry went to the front. Towards evening we were put in motion,
and took our up a position reaching from the top of a hill to the
olive groves, alongwhich the troops had been bivouacked, and this
composed the centre of our position. The line was continued by
the Spaniards through the olive groves along the front of the
town to the Tagus. The Spanish troops were drawn up in
several lines. Scarcely had this arrangement been made when
our artillery, which had been firing from the summit of a height
in our front, retired, the whole advance retrograding at the same
time. The two pieces of our artillery were quickly replaced by
that of the enemy, which threw shot and shell with considerable
effect on our retreating cavalry. The 48th Ist Battalion was
placed this evening in reserve between the summits of two hills
in a hollow. At 7 p.m. the enemy opened on our position, and
the fire of his guns was speedily answered. There was a terrible
fire for some time along both the English and Spanish lines.
It now began to be dark. The troops composing the advance
fell back by the valley on the left of our position, and the
cavalry retired to a considerable distance in rear. The enemy’s
columns were just visible when our advance fell back. The
whole of the growing wheat in our front had become a dense
mass of smoke from its having been set on fire, as we supposed,
by the enemy to cover his advance. Obscured by this smoke he
approached our line and directed his principal efforts against
the hill we supported. We were put in motion to support the
defence of the position, and advanced obliquely to our left, had
scarcely formed line when a blaze of fire from a body of
grenadiers, whose bayonets almost met ours, gave us the first
information of the situation of the enemy. It was so dark we
could hardly see, when the musketry proclaimed the firers. The
firing, however, was soon terminated. The enemy called out
with consternation “Anglais, Anglais,” and down the hill they
went. Before we encountered the enemy, owing to the darkness
of the night, we passed the spot destined for us, when we
moved to support the troops on the hill, and the Ist Battalion
of Detachments, taking our left wing for the enemy, poured in


two or three volleys, which was at last obstructed by Colonel
Donellan riding in front of their line and telling them they
were killing their own men. Little harm was, very fortunately,
done. The enemy’s guns kept up at this time a smart fire, but
with little effect. The Trench came up to the 29th Regiment,
which was posted on the top of the highest hill, telling
them that they were Germans, and when sufficiently near
charged, hut were soon discomfited ; at about ten p.m. the firing
ceased. During the general attack a French dragoon regiment
had charged through the Spaniards into the town, but were
obliged to retire owing to two pieces of artillery in a redoubt
being brought to bear on them. The French soldiers were
evidently screwed up to fight. Many the following day were
pot valiant, and were certainly led to the attack of the hill
under a belief that it was held by the Spaniards. General Hill
said that night, “ 48th, I give this hill to you, take care of it.”
His bridle was seized by two French soldiers, both of whom
were fortunately shot whilst pulling him down the hill. Colonel
Donellan’s horse was also in their possession for a few seconds,
but was rescued.
O oombien d’actions, combien d’exploits celebres,
Sont demeures sans gloire an milieu des tenebres.
On chaoun, seul temoin des grands coups qu’il donnait,
Ne pouvait discerner ou le sort inclinait.
July 28th.—The fire commenced from the enemy long
before daylight, and was promptly replied to by our guns. The
enemy being aware of the value of our position renewed his
attack on it, and several columns came up the hill and were
repulsed, our troops following them almost to the foot of the
hill, and then returned to their position. Our regiment after
this was placed in front of the hill, and remained there some
time occupying a flat space. Our guns were brought to bear ou
the French retreating columns. The enemy’s guns, which were
numerous, were soon brought to answer these, and in a short
time dismounted and crippled ours, killing a great number of
men and horses. The enemy’s fire was directed at this time
exclusively against the hill. Owing to a good deal of the shot


telling on ns our right wing was wheeled back. We remained
some time fired at in this way. There seemed some appearance
on the part of the enemy to attack the Spaniards, and skirmish-
ing took place in the olive groves. From the force of the
Spaniards we anticipated some movement from them, hut were
disappointed. The enemy began to occupy a chain of mountains
which formed the left of our position, as if to attack our cavalry,
which were in the valley between the hill and the mountains.
Some Spanish light troops were sent to keep them in check, but
little execution was done. The French at last fell back. The
firing slackened, and the enemy began to cook. At about 2 p.m.
the French were again in motion, and appeared to meditate an
attack along the whole front Five or six columns began to
menace the hill. The staff at this time wore very long faces.
The enemy’s shot were flying in all directions. Sir Arthur
went to the summit of the hill by himself, and after some obser-
vation, sent down to the cavalry to charge. During this time we
changed our position to the top of the hill, where we remained
in open column at quarter distance The columns of the enemy
began to deploy, when our dragoons moved towards them. The
23rd Light Dragoons supported by the German Hussars and
heavy cavalry charged. Unfortunately there was a water course
of considerable width along the valley and the front of our
position. _ Into this many of the 23rd fell. A few only got to
the opposite side, and rode round the columns. The hussars
and heavy cavalry remained near the ditch. The loss of the 23rd
was serious. The effect of this charge we duly appreciated, for
the enemy kept in column and eventually retired. Our guns
were very fatal to them whilst thus formed, but they bore it
gallantly. At about 3 p.m. an attack commenced upon our
centre which was received by the Guards and 61st and King’s
German Legion, under General Sherbrooke, who were, owing to
having been thrown into confusion by a too precipitate move-
ment and overpowered by numbers, obliged to fall back in
disorder. The 61st was nearly surrounded in the wood. The
48th were again destined for support, and were formed nearly
in rear of this attack into line. Two columns were advancing


with rapid stride following the broken troops, when we fired a
volley and ported arms. We advanced, fired another volley, and
prepared to charge. A very destructive fire was opened on us
at this time from their guns. They would not, however, stand
our charge. Colonel Donellan having been wounded when we
were on the point of advancing the first time. Major Middlemore
took the command, and it was under his command our charges
were made. The French eventually retreated close under their
guns, and we returned to our former position. The right wing
suffered very much, nearly half the Grenadier Company were
hors de comhat. For a considerable time we had the fight entirely
to ourselves, not a single regiment was near us. All the shot
and shell were directed at us. A squadron of Dragoons came to
our aid at this juncture. They were no sooner perceived than
all the artillery was levelled at them, and they were obliged to
retire from the shower; but, before they did so, our men fell
fast from the shot directed at them. We were ordered to shorten
our front by doubling our right wing in front of our left. The
Dragoons then fell back from our front and the fire slackened.
The aspect of things at this period was somewhat disheartening.
After our charges Sir Arthur sent to thank us on the spot for
our gallant conduct. After that, when riding along the right
line, he observed, “ Forty-eighth, you are like a wall.” A move-
ment was now made to the right by the enemy and evening
began to close. After dark we heard considerable noise amongst
the enemy’s troops in our front, and could distinguish words ot
command. The guns ceased on both sides, and the stillness of
night was only interrupted by now and then a solitary soldier
dragging his maimed body to our rear, where we stood to our
arms. In this state of feverish anxiety we passed the night, in
the full anticipation of an attack in the morning. _ Day broke,
the mist cleared away, and much were we astonished to find
that the enemy had retreated. The plain which had been
darkened by 50,000 men was now without a living soul. Some
distant dust here and there discovered the rear of the enemy’s
movement. The French loss was supposed to be 7,000 or
8,000. They estimated it themselves at 10,000. Our loss was


computed at 6,000 killed and wounded, amongst which were 200
officers. We took 19 pieces of cannon and two standards. The
British troops on this occasion were said to consist of 15,000 men
and the Spaniards 60,000. The latter seemed to sit silent
spectators of the struggle between their allies and the enemy.
July 29th. —We bivouaced in the olive groves, which were
almost burnt up, and whilst there were nearly starved, living four
days on one day’s ration. One day a handful of wheat was given us
in lieu of bread. The Light Brigade and Horse Artillery joined.
General McKenzie and several field officers were killed. The
following day it was appalling to see the dead everywhere
stripped, and in a state of putrescence —their bodies perfectly
black, and the skins of some separated and appearing like a
white gauze article of dress fluttering over their bodies ; and in
this state they continued till they were burnt or buried. The
Spaniards seized all the provisions that were to be had. It
became excessively difficult in consequence to even procure half
a loaf of bread, and when met with it cost a dollar, and very
happy we were to get it at that price.
August 3rd.—Fell back upon Oropesa, where we imagined
we went to attack Soult, who was moving by forced marches on
our rear. Cuesta was left at Talavera to keep our old position
but not relishing his berth he began to retreat, on which Sir
Arthur ordered the army to cross the Tagus at the Puente Arzo-
pisbo, and, having got the river between us and the enemy, to
halt. This was on the 4th of August
August sth.—We reached a wood and halted.
August 6th.—Marched to another encampment near a
village.
August 7th. —Moved to another.
August Bth.—To near Deleitosa, and halted
August 10th. —To Jaraicejo, where we halted. From
Arzopisbo we passed over a mountainous wild country. Our
men had to draw the guns up some of the mountains. We
were obliged to abandon all our wounded at Talavera, and


amongst others that gallant fine fellow Colonel Donllan. At
Jaraicejo we halted ten days, and our distress was eireme, we
had biscuit served out made from meal from which the straw
had not been sifted, and had little else to drink but te mineral
water of the river. The result was soon visible —our ick began
to increase. A little wine was procured from Truillo, three
leagues distant, and when obtained it was scarcely drikable.
August 21st.—Reached the once good town oJTruxillo,
where Pizarro was born.
August 22nd.—Reached Casas del Puerto.
August 23rd.—Reached Majados, a pretty god town.
From this to Casas del Puerto we found several skehtons, and
many fragments of military attire.
August 24th. —Marched to Medellin, a good littletown on a
hill, with an old castle, which overlooked the adjoining 1 country.
We passed over a very good bridge from the north dde of the
Guadiana. An action had been fought here between tie French
and Spaniards in the dry bed of the river, in which the latter
lost 14,000 men. Broken arms and remnants of clothing, &c.,
were lying about in all directions.
August 26th —Passed an extensive plain and reached
Merida, one of the best towns we had yet seen. The remains
of several Roman edifices were to be seen at this place, also a
very fine aqueduct in complete dilapidation. The town is
supplied with water by a clumsy structure which the Spaniards
have substituted for the old Roman one. There are the remains
of three altars dedicated to heathen deities, a,n amphitheatre
and a triumphal arch; a chapel has been erected on the site of a
temple devoted to Yenus. The houses are all of an antique cut.
The bridge is of great length. We remained here several days.
September 3rd. —Marched to Puebla de la Calzada, a neat
little town. We here went into quarters. My billet was upon
one of the principal persons of the place who told us, by way
of convincing us how staunch he was to the cause, that he had
ripped up two Frenchmen with his own hand, and shewed the


spot in which he had buried them, as also where he had his
money concealed, which had nearly been discovered. I was
much pleased at the regularity which prevailed in his house.
After each meal the family muttered prayers to themselves for a
short time, when the children arose and went and kissed the
hands of their parents. When the church bell tolled everyone
muttered prayers, but none quitted their occupation; I have seen
the maid scouring a kettle or a dish, on her knees, muttering
Paternosters.
Whenever anyone was seriously ill, the ceremony of
the Host was immediately put in force. A band of priests
carry this through the streets, with candles burning, and
through whatever street the pageant passes, if it happens to
be at night, lights are put up at the windows of the houses
in the way. A large number of persons usually form the
procession with candles in their hands, and the house and
room of the sick person is filled with them to suffocation. The
heat from so many bodies, lights, and censors must be dis-
tressing enough to the sick, but he is also disturbed by the
vociferation of their responses, and this for about half-an-hour,
when the assembly retreat, making a tremendous noise. Very
few persons could read, and those few very indifferently; as to
writing, they appeared to know little about it. Their habits
were very simple. Their diet chiefly composed of bacon, eggs,
greens, tomatoes, stewed together with vinegar and oil. They
seemed never to indulge in anything solid, and turned up their
noses at a piece of roast beef. All flesh and fowl is minced and
stewed, and ate with either a spoon from one common dish in
the centre of a low table, or simply with the fingers, each person
drawing out a mouthful from the part nearest to him. The
57th Eegiment here joined, us, also the Brigade under Major-
General Oatlen Crawford. On the 14th, heard that Colonel
Donellan died of his wound at Talavera. The enemy buried
him with great honour. A French Grenadier company attended
him to his last home alongside of General Mackenzie.


I was much, amused at a dance given at one of the best houses,
when masters, mistresses, children and servants —some of the
young fry in a shirt and others totally naked—were assembled on
this festive occasion. All the younger part of the assembly stood.
Some of the young ladies danced very gracefully, but the arms
were more employed than their legs. Another luckless wight
and myself endeavoured to get through a dance, but it was a
vain effort. We caused, however, much merriment. There was
a vessel containing water in a corner of the room for any one
who liked it, and this constituted all the refreshment. The
Jubilee of George the 3rd was not neglected here.
The dysentery committed great havoc amongst our regi-
ment ; I had it prettyseverely myself.
November 15th. —Joined the 2nd Battalion at Montejo and
was placed in the Light Company.
December 12th.—Marched to Talavera-la-Beal, a nice town.
December 13th.—Moved to Badajos, one of the capitals of
Spain, and the finest town the army had been in ; very strongly
fortified and very clean. There were some good buildings, both
churches and houses.
December 14th. —Marched to Elvas, the Portuguese frontier
town in this part; a well-constructed fortification. The difference
of the two nations was very apparent; dirt once more began to
abound. There is an outwork here constructed under the direc-
tion of the famous Count La Lippe, whose name it bears, which
is well worth the labour of walking to the summit of the hill on
which it stands to see. Engineers discover defects in the upper
works, which are considered weak and too much exposed. The
cannon on these works are covered with bomb proofs. In the
centre and above all is the Governor’s residence, under which
there is a chapel. The works are numerous, although on a
small scale. The guns on the outworks are very insignificant.
The churches in Elvas are not worth observation. Game abounds
in this part of the country.
December 16th. —Marched to Santa Eulalia, a dirty little
village.


December 17tb.—Reached Assumar.
December 18th. —Marched to Portalegre, a nice clean town,
beautifully situated in the midst of a very romantic country.
We here halted.
December 20th.—Marched to Gaffete, a miserable place.
December 21st. —Marched to Garviao.
December 22nd.—Moved to Abrantes and halted.
December 28rd. —Marched to the pleasant town of Sardoal.
December 24th.—Moved back to Abrantes, where we re-
mained some days. The few Portuguese soldiers that were in
the town were marched regularly to church, and went through
their devotions by beat of drum in several parts of the service.
We witnessed also a grand christening. The child of the Capitao
Mor, being in the nurse’s arms all the time, the venerable Padre
who performed the rite, took some liquid on a brush out of a
small dish and made crosses on the face and breast of the infant.
Some warm water was then put along with the cold in the font,
from which the venerable priest with a silver scollop shell took
the element and poured it over the child’s head. Prayers then
followed, and the ceremony ended. A grand ball was given on
the occasion, to which the garrison were invited, but I was
unable to go.
February 15th, 1810. —Marched to Garviao.
February 16th. —To Gaffete.
February 17th.—Portalegre, where we halted till Easter
Monday.
April 24th.—Marched to a wood abounding with scorpions,
near Alegretta. This movement was caused by some manoeuvre
of the enemy towards Albuquerque.
April 25th.—Back to Portalegre.
May 15th. —Through torrents of rain to Assumai.
May 16th.—Back again to Portalegre. The cathedral here
is a fine edifice. The rites of the Catholic Church are here per-
formed with great effect, from the large number of the priest-
hood. The Bishop was occasionally there and underwent much


shifting —his robes, &c., being often put on and off. When the
service is over the Bishop is undressed at the foot of the altar, and
a purple robe substituted for his other one. Two assistants or
acolytes hear up the skirts of this on his departure. We were
somewhat astonished to observe that an old Padre attended by a
host of acolytes went round every altar of the building—and
these were numerous—and whilst going through a solemn
service to some saint, his younger brethren were amusing them-
selves running about and making grimaces. A part of the 14th
Light Dragoons marched in advance, and the Royals joined on
the 24th. In Portalegre are three convents for Friars and two
for Nuns. At the Convents of Santa Clara and Santa Bernada
several young women had taken up their abode. They gave
one or two tea parties, when our bands astonished them by their
harmony. At 9 p.m. they gave the signal to retreat, “ Viva
Inglaise, viva to do exercete Inglaise.” A very young and
beautiful child of six years of age was forced to assume the
white veil, and to abandon a world for which she had such
charms. Our sick were removed to Lisbon.
We witnessed, among other things, at Portalegre a
burial. The Host was taken to the residence of the de-
funct, who was taken out in an open shell after prayers
had been said, and carried along the streets exposed to
view. The body was in full dress, with abundance of flowers,
&c. On arrival at the Church prayers were said, after which
the body was taken to its grave, and there underwent
much ill-treatment. A flag in the pavement of one of the
yards having been removed, the body was found too long for the
grave, whereupon the legs were doubled up, and from what
followed, inevitably broken. The dirt having been thrown in
and hardly rammed, it was found difficult to dispose of the
remainder. A still harder ramming ensued until the whole was
provided for, when the flag was fitted and we departed, busy
with our own reflections on a scene so revolting. All the houses
in this priest-ridden place are abundantly furnished with saints,
&c. Here we received Sir D. Dundas’ order for Fringo
epaulettes, and also, accounts more soothing, of the thanks of


both Houses of Parliament for the behaviour of the troops at
Talavera, and also that Guadalaupe had been taken by storm.
Visited Colonel (then Captain) Histed at Apalhao, four leagues
from Portalagre. On the ride back a borrowed mare came down
with me, and my collarbone was fractured.
During the Easter week the catholic ceremonies were to us
singular. The whole of our Saviour’s sufferings, &c., are now,
I may say, performed. The Bishop washed the feet of twelve of
the poorest inhabitants of the place, who were meant to repre-
sent the Apostles. St. George’s day is kept with much state,
the Saracens having been routed by that champion.
July 2nd. —The 28th and 39th Regiments went to Caffete,
and the 34th came in from Alegretta.
July 13th.—Marched to Apalhao, when we were joined by
some Portuguese troops, whose appearance was good; they
were in high spirits.
July 14th. —To Niza, where we halted.
July 19th. —To Villa Yilha. It was said that several men
died from excess of heat on this march.
July 20th.—To Savnadas.
July 21st. —To Castel Branco.
July 22nd.—To Atalaya. The enemy about seven or eight
leagues from us. We heard of a smart affair in the north, in
which the Light Division lost many men.
July 30th.-—To Bivouar, near Tinalhas, where we halted*
The enemy represented as being very near. A General Officer
ordered for the day, and a company of each regiment to keep
accoutred all night. A woman was bitten by a centipede or
scorpion in the breast.
August Ist.-—Came to ground near a river at ten o’clock at
night.
August 2nd, —Near Sarzedas, situated on a hill close to a
chain of mountains ; here we halted.


August 12th. —Near St. Domingo, half way between Castel
Branco and Sarzedas. A skirmish between the French and
Portuguese, in which the latter came off with flying colours
and took several prisoners. The news confirmed about the
retreat of the army in the north after some severe fighting.
August 18th. —Came to Sarzidas, and Major-General
Crawford’s Brigade took up our old ground. A troop of French
Cavalry taken by Captain White of the 13th Light Dragoons.
Almeida fell on the 28th August. The Northern Army, which
had advanced to Avercha, fell back on Celorico. Our opponent,
Eegnier, made a feint —we were just moving off when we learnt
that he had returned to his old quarters during the night; we
therefore remained where we were.
September 2nd. —General Crawford’s Brigade, which had
been sent in advance, ordered back next day.
September 13th. —Marched through the Pass of Monte
Guarva, and arrived at 11 at night at Sobriera Formosa, the
road bad and very hilly. This country abounds with chestnut
woods.
September 17th. —Marched to Corticada over a most dread-
fully hilly country.
September 18th. —Marched to Oardegas, and from thence
to Yilla del Rey.
September 19th. —Venda dos Eeyes. Passed Zezere on our
road. The road pretty good, but hilly.
September 20th.—To We set off at six o’clock,
a.m., and got to Cabegos from Venda dos Reyes in the middle of
the day, a distance of three leagues. After a three hour’s halt,
went on the whole night, and arrived at Aspinal at nine o’clock
in the morning. The country, when we could see, very beautiful,
and Aspinal a good town. At four o’clock on the same day we
marched two leagues ; so that altogether, in the two days’ march,
we had been 28 hours on our legs. We arrived that evening at
Miranda de Oorvo.


September 22nd.—Arrived near a small village.
September 23rd.—We went to the river Mondego and re-
turned to our encampment at Starlliguil, and halted. Went to
see the village of St. Andre.
September 26th. —Crossed the Mondego and took up a
position along a height, where we found Sir Arthur (now Lord
Wellington) and the enemy face to face. In the evening some
skirmishing took place, but soon ceased.
September 27th. —1810, Battle Busaco. At daybreak our
division marched to a pass about the centre of our position. The
enemy had in the meantime attacked and been repulsed by the
38th, 88th and 9th British Regiments, and Bth and 16th Portu-
guese. The Portuguese behaved remarkably well. The 70th
French Regiment was dreadfully cut up, as well as the 66th.
The 70th was one of the Invincibles.
September 28th.—Much skirmishing took place, and a gun
now and then was fired.
September 29th, —We returned to our old ground at St.
Miguel. Our division was on the left bank of the Mondego*
whilst the rest of the army retired by the right towards Coimbra.
October Ist.—Marched through Foez de Oronce to Miranda
de Corvo.
October 2nd. —LeavingEspintral on our left we arrived at the
same ground two leagues from thence.
October 3rd.—To within a league of Cabigos. The light
companies halted all day and night a league on the north side of
of Cabigos, and moved at 6 a.m.
October 4th.—To Thomar —a very fine town, but deserted —
where we saw a very fine Moorish fort converted into a convent.
October sth.—Marched through Villa Nova to Torres
Novas, a good town, the houses large and commodious, the
streets wide and very clean. We met on our road this day one
of the most horrible objects I ever saw. He appeared quite
speechless through long fasting, and could only mutter in-


distinct sounds, like the -whining of a dog ; he was learly naked,
his skin almost black, and forming the only cohering of his
skeleton frame. He had been detected carrying i letter to the
enemy and had been incarcerated for his crime. Yhat further
he was to undergo I know not, but his appearanci caused us a
great shock.
October 6th.—Marched to Azembuja.
October 7th. —Through Villa Franka to Ahandra, on
which night it commenced raining, and continued ir some days
to do so. On the march I walked through watr up to my
knees, and sometimes to my middle. We halted at Alhandra
and formed barricades with casks and furniture. Th> inhabitants
having quitted their houses much unnecessary recklessness
followed on the part of our men who made use of he furniture,
some of which was little adapted to the purpose, h form what
was considered an obstacle to the advance of the enmy.
October 10th. —Torres Yedras. Marched to dues, which
had been for sometime inpreparation, and afsr standing
in a close column between the river Tagus and re Alhandra
road until the river had reached nearly to our pouc'es—the rain
the whole time descending in torrents. On the moaing
October 11th.—Went into Alverca, from whih, drenched
as we were, at 9 a.m. again to the Lines, and aftr remaining
some time came back to Alverca.
October 12th.—Moved to Alhandra, and, the ligit companies
of our brigade in advance of the town.
October 13th. —Went on picket. Colonel (olbourne of
the 66th took us up some hills to reconnoitre ; we bid some dis-
course with the enemy in a very friendly way.
October 14th.—A skirmish took place owing ;o the enemy
throwing forward about 500 men against a Portrguese picket
which had taken post on a hill that commanded tleir position.
They fell back after a short time.


October 15tb.—Marched to encampment on the heights of
Alhandra, where we were all provided with tents. The enemy
continued very quiet, and our troops worked very hard at field
works. A detachment of seamen encamped close to our
regiment, who were to answer the purpose of horses and have
charge of some mountain guns. Whilst encamped here we were
always at our alarm posts before daylight. The weather was
very cold and cutting.
Marshal Beresford made Knight of the Bath on the Bth
November at Mafra.
November 15th.—The light companies of our brigade
marched to half a league of Yilla Nova, the enemy having
retired from his late position.
November 16th, —Fell in with the enemy at Yilla Nova,
and a few shots exchanged, but no damage done. In the course
of the day the enemy left the town, and we entered it and
halted.
November 18th. —Marched and passed the Tagus near
Yillada in boats, and went to Mugem over a most horribly
sandy road. I was obliged to sit down by the roadside for some
time, I was so knocked up.
November 19th.—Passing through Almeirim, after a long
march, arrived at Chamusca, a pretty good town, situated on a
very marshy country close on the Tagus. Here we halted.
December 27th.—The light companies marched to Sta.
Marguerida, a straggling village about a league from Abrantes.
1811.
January Ist. —Returned to Chamusca through Carragua
and Puchero.
January 16th. —Came to Banos, opposite Punhete, where
the enemy had constructed formidable works and collected a


considerable number of boats and floats. On our side we made
two batteries, one close to a Spanish encampment, and the other
by a house close to the town.
February 10th.—The enemy passed four boats down the
Tagus, which caused a great alarm. The beacons were set on
fire, and all the troops went to their alarm posts. The night was
very windy. The fires blazed beautifully.
February 18th.—We remained under arms all night.
March 7th.—The rear guard of the enemy left Punhete at
half-past 7 o’clock. Our light company, with the 60th Rifles,
went over the Tagus where we remained till 12 o’clock. On
ascending the height on which the town is situated we fancied
we saw the sentinels at their posts, but on close examination
found they were stuffed figures. At 12 o’clock a party of
dragoons having come round by Abrantes, we went with them
in advance. During the day the whole of the British force was
on the north bank of the Tagus. Our advance came in sight of
the enemy, who were in full retreat along the road from Sante-
rine to Thomar. After waiting some time, expecting orders to
commence an attack, we were withdrawn, and left them to retire
as they pleased. Came back to the Zerene and bivouacked.
March Bth.—Marched and reached Thomar, where the
greater part of the army concentrated. Beresford, it appeared,
had been rather too precipitate crossing the Tagus, the whole
of the division was consequently ordered back to Barguina, a
pleasant little town on the banks of the Tagus. The houses
good, but many destroyed. The habits of the French manifested
themselves, wherever we followed their steps —dirt and filth in all
directions. At Thomar, back yards surrounded with walls were
several feet deep with the offal of beasts, and every kind of
beastliness. In some houses men and animals appeared to have
been inhabiting the same apartments, even up stairs.
March 10th. —Crossed the Tagus and went to Crucificio,
where we halted.
March 18th. —To Rosea opposite Abrantes.


March 19th. —To Garviao.
March 20th.—To Gaffele.
March 21st. —To Portalegre, halted there one night, and
March 22nd. —Marched to Arronches, an old Moorish town,
fortified by a wall with two entrances ; here we halted.
March 24th.—Marched towards Oampo Major and halted
two leagues from Badahos.
March 25th. —Moved towards Gampo Major in three
divisions. The major part of the 13th Light Dragoons, some
Portuguese cavalry, and the light companies of our brigade
were on the left. A troop of the 13th Light Dragoons, and the
Buffs and other regiments in the centre. The right column
was chiefly composed of Portuguese. We commenced our march
to a bill in our front, on which the Prench showed some
cavalry, and on which, it was supposed, they would stand an
attack. The left moved round the hills in flank. The centre
went directly on, upon the road, towards a windmill. The right
a little to their right. The enemy, however, saved us trouble,
and retired until we got close to Campo Major. The cavalry
alone skirmished a little, and drove the enemy to the left of
Campo Major, out of which they retired on our approach—
having spiked their guns. We did not stop here, however, but
went on in pursuit and drove the French along with great loss,
after some very hard fighting with our cavalry. The 13th
followed them until under the fire of Badajos, having taken
nineteen pieces of cannon and several prisoners. The 13th lost
a good many men, and the Portuguese also. The loss of the
Heavy Dragoons was trifling. The infantry were not engaged;
we moved, however, after the cavalry as fast as our legs could
carry us. Towards evening we returned to near Oampo Major
and encamped. Colonel Head, of the 13th, got severely
censured by Lord Wellington for his daring pursuit of the
enemy.
March 26th. —Marched to Elvas, leaving General Cole’s
division, and the Heavy Cavalry, at Campo Major. We halted
for a few days.


April Ist.—We came to Yilla Yigosa, the prettiest town I
had seen by far, and the cleanest. There the Eegent has a
palace, or hunting seat, surrounded by an extensive park.
There are some good churches and convents. The streets wide
and well paved. The palace is faced with marble, and has
some good rooms which are generally floored with red tiles.
In one of the rooms there is a collection of portraits of the
house of Braganga. The greatest curiosity in the place is the
garden of the Governor, where, in about 50 or 100 feet square,
there is more to be seen than is to be found in any garden, I
am convinced, of similar dimensions. Trees cut into various
shapes—elephants, tigers, swans, dogs, &c., &c.; models of
fortified towns, camps, forts, harbours, and all the chief towns in
Spain and Portugal, and all made by the hands of this talkative,
inquisitive, vain, but industrious gentleman. In one corner is a
hermit, as large as life, in a cell; in another a waterfall, the
rock made by the bark of the cork tree, which in the way it is
here arranged produces a fine effect and looks very natural;
indeed, at first you could scarcely discover the deception, Yilla
Vigosa is situated in a complete amphitheatre of hills. An old
castle above the town has a very pretty appearance.
April 4th.—To a camp near Jurumanha.
April sth.—From Jurumanha camp we crossed the river on
a pontoon bridge, and halted on the east bank of the Guadiana.
April 6th. —We went to some hills about a mile from the
river and encamped.
April 7th —We stood to our arms at daybreak and some
shots were fired on our right and rear. The fact was, the enemy
were on the qui vive ; for, this morning, they threw forward 1,500
infantry and 400 cavalry, and also some guns, from some heights
on our right; took a part of a picket of the 40th Eegiment, and
the greater part of a squadron of the 13th Light Dragoons,
commanded by Captain Morris, who had just got a majority in
another corps, but was desirous of seeing the business out in this
part of the country. Marshall Beresford and General Stewart
had very narrow escapes. The horses of the Aid-de-camp of


the latter were taken, for the enemy had commenced at the
bridge and scoured the valley on our right—in the middle of
which were a few houses which the staff occupied—to a house
where Captain Morris’s picket was stationed.
April 9th.—Marched and invested Olivenza. The garrison,
consisting of 200 men, would not surrender. The French had
commenced their retreat, leaving only small garrisons in the
fortified places as they retired.
April 10th. —We left Olivenza to the care of some Portu-
guese troops, and went to Yalverde.
April 11th. —To an encampment near Albuera and halted.
April 15th. —Marched to Sta. Martha.
April 16th.—To Zafra, where we fell in with the enemy’s
cavalry, of which the 13th Dragoons took about 120, besides two
officers. The part of the squadron that had escaped on the
night of the 6th took dire revenge for the loss of their comrades,
and came back covered with blood and glory. After having
been from two in the morning until six at night on our legs, we
came into Zafra—a very good town. The inhabitants very civil,
but much attached to the troops under Mortier, although they
disliked the other Frenchmen who had been there.
April 18th.—Knocked up at four in the morning to take up
a position—nothing, however, occurred, it having been a false
alarm.
April 20th.—Marched to Almendralejo and halted.
April 29th. —Our brigade, under Colonel Colburne of the
66th, marched to Eibiera, and got in at nine at night.
April 30th. —Moved from this again at four in the morning,
and at ten o’clock reached Lera. Started again that evening at
sunset, and passed through Yalencea, and halted in a wood near
Margarilla.
May Ist.—Marched at eleven o’clock at night, and
May 2nd.—Reached Granja; from thence, after a two
hours’ halt, to Azuaga, where we had a skirmish with the enemy,


who continued to effect their escape in spite of the rapidity of
our movements. Halted here for a few hours, and marched at
4 in the morning
May 3rd.—To Berlanga.
May 4th. —To a wood a league from Granja, halted a few
hours, and marched to Puente Ovejuna, and encamped on a hill.
May 6th—Marched at 2 o’clock to a wood 2J leagues, and
after a few hours’ halt moved to a wood about 3 leagues off.
May 6th.—Reached Belalcazar where we found the enemy
in possession of an old Moorish castle, extremely beautiful. We
summoned the garrison, but we could not induce them to
surrender. The commandant came out in his dressing gown to
reply to our summons. We remained here the greater part of
the day, and in the evening, to the great disappointment of the
inhabitants of the town, who seemed very tired of their French
neighbours, we moved off, and at length reached Cabega de
Buey. The country we had passed over lay chiefly at the foot
of the Sierra Morena mountains.
May 7th. —Marched to Campanario after halting at Cabega
de Buey a few hours. The men were completely knocked up,
and we halted a day to recruit.
May 9th. —To La Haba.
May 10th. —To Guerina,
May 11th.—To Almendralego. All miserable places in a
most abominable country ; but tolerably cultivated, and the
wheat remarkably fine. On our return we found the rest of our
southern army had been investing Badajos. We halted on the
12th.
May 13th. —To Yalverde. We were here joined by the rest
of our division.
May 15th. —Marched to our position at Albuera, leaving
a brigade of British infantry and some Portuguese and Spaniards
to remove the stores back to Elvas from Badajos, as the enemy
were advancing to relieve it.


May 16th. — Albueea. — We formed a line along a ridge of
hills with a small stream passable in various places along the
front, the town of Albuera and its bridge being almost opposite
the centre, the Portuguese infantry on the left of our line, and
the Spaniards on our right. After a few cannon shot from the
enemy, he began to move forward his troops as if to attack the
centre by the bridge, which was occupied by a rifle German
regiment, just joined. The morning was heavy and misty, and
prevented us from observing the enemy’s movements distinctly,
in consequence of which the real point of attack was not per-
ceived. Our brigade, however, were sent down to the protection
of the bridge, which had been in our immediate front all along.
The rain now fell in torrents. We remained here some time.
The enemy having approached pretty near the bridge halted,
whilst they pursued their attack to our right, where lay the key
of our position. We at last got orders to move off to the right,
which we did in open column of companies, right in front, and
arrived at the right just as the French were driving in the
Spanish sharp shooters. A very heavy cannonading was
scattering destruction amongst us at this time. Our brigade
began to form line, the Buffs on the right, 2nd Battalion 48th
next, and the 66th Grenadiers being all that could be said to be
formed —in line they were not, our left and rear companies being
in the act of forming—and the 66th moving in echellon to
form. Before the 31st Regiment, which was the last of
our brigade, could open out, we were bayonet to bayonet
with the enemy, and the hostile armies were met to decide the
fate of many, if not of the day. We found the enemy, all
Grenadiers, kneeling several ranks, and pouring in a dreadful
fire up the hill, for they had formed on the one side before we
could effect a similar purpose on the other. Two or three shots
were fired by our regiment, when, irregularly formed as we were,
we charged. The left column of the French became opposed
to the left wing of the Buffs and our right Their centre
column faced our two left companies and the 66th Grenadiers.
Their right column, which had escaped our notice, found its way


to our rear. In less time than I can -write although we were
literally cut to pieces, we stood on the hill like extended light
infantry, many of the intervals filled up by the Spanish sharp
shooters. The French left column was broken, and was the
only part of their troops which stood the charge. They remained
as if powerless until they were bayoneted by our men. The
rear companies fled. The centre column, to which we were
opposed, however, gave way as soon as we charged We kept
advancing until we received an order to retire, when upon
facing about we beheld the mass in our rear firing away
handsomely. Those of the French left and centre columns
that had fled and laid down their arms, resumed the fight and
commenced a murderous fire. Thus were we situated—our
colours in the interval between two columns of the enemy—when
their cavalry filed through the intervals of their infantry and
rode through us in every direction, cutting down the few that
remained on their legs. There was nothing left for it but to
run. In my flight I was knocked down by some fugitive
like myself, who, I suppose, was struck by a shot. This
was in a road among furze bushes. Whilst on the ground
I was ridden over by a number of Lancers, one of whom passing
close to me was about to save me the trouble of recording this
event, when a Spanish Dragoon rode up to him and struck him
with his sabre, which brought him over his horses head. I then
got up and ran again, when I found myself between the French
right column and the 4th English Dragoons, who were in the
act of charging that body. On arriving at the foot of the hill 1
found the Fusilier Brigade formed in line pouring a dreadful
fire into the enemy. The rest of the division now arrived and
were soon hotly engaged. We kept, however, masters of the
field, after eight or nine hours as hard fighting as the greatest
glory hunter could desire. The Buffs, 2nd Battalion 48th, and
2nd Battalion 66th lost their colours and were destroyed. The
31st from remaining in column escaped such a disaster. There
was much effort made to prove that the Buffs had not lost their
colours; but they were seen, along with the others, in the
hands of the enemy after the battle. A piece of one of the Buffs


colours was preserved in an officer’s pocket, it was said ; and
again, that Colonel Stuart ordered a sergeant to put by a scrap
in his pack. One of the Buffs’ Standards was afterwards retaken
by the Fusiliers, and returned to the regiment. Our muster on
coming out of the field was, including non-commissoned officers
and drummers, just twenty-five and six officers, and I was one
of that number.'
Our loss of officers in the two battalions was as follows:—
Ist BATTALION.
killed. Lieutenants —Mackintosh
Leiutenant-Colonel Duckworth Duke
Lieutenants—Ansalda Crawley, B
Page Steel
wounded. Ensign Collins
Captains—Wilson, B • total killed.
Bell 1 Field Officer
French, B 2 Lieutenants
Parsons total wounded.
Morisset 5 Captains
Lieutenants—Herring, B 7 Lieutenants
Wright, B 1 Ensign
O’Donaghue, B
16 Officers. About 100 men left of the Regiment.
2nd BATTALION.
KILLED.
Lieutenants—Lotft
Lyddon
Drew
Ensign—Rothwell
WOUNDED,
Captains—Watkins, B
Wauch
Drought, B
Wood, B
Lieutenants—Johnston, B
Sharp
Yander Meulan
Ensigns—Norman
McDougal
Ensign Gilbert
3 Lieutenants
1 Ensign
4 Captains
4 Lieutenants
2 Ensigns
MISSING.
Major Brooke, B W
Captain Campbell
Captain Allman, B W
Lieutenants —Elwood, B W
Marshall, B W
Jack, W
Brotheridge, W
Woods
TOTAL KILLED.
TOTAL WOUNDED.


TOTAL MISSING.
1 Field Officer 5 Lieutenants
2 Captains 1 Ensign
Total, 23.
Anri 25 men out of about 450. Since dead of the wounds, Captain Parsons,
Lieutenant Sharp, and Lieutenant Shea.
The loss of the enemy must have been very great.
May 17th. —The two armies looked at each other. The
French at last retired.
May 22nd.—Marched to Solana.
May 23rd.—To Almendralejo, where we found a large
number of French wounded, who were disabled from proceeding.
The cavalry followed the enemy to Usagre, where some severe
fighting took place. On the 24th about 300 prisoners fell into
our hands.
June 10th. —The 2nd Battalion drafted into the Ist. On
the same day marched with the non-commissioned officers and
staff to Corte de Pelias.
June 11th. —Marched to Olivenza.
June 12th. —To Elvas, where we halted.
June 14th. —To Estremos, a very fine town.
June 19th.—Went to give over the Company’s accounts at
Sta. Yincente. The siege of Badajos had been raised, and the
army were encamped near Elvas.
June 21st.— Proceeded with the skeleton of the 2nd battalion
to Sta. Eulalia and encamped.
June 22nd.—Marched to Estremos.
June 26th. —Arrived at the beautiful old town of Evora,
replete with curiosities, with more churches and convents than
perhaps any place of its size in the world. The Cathedral is a very
fine building, with one portion of it entirely of marble, which from
its character, seems to have been constructed long after the
rest of the building. I was much struck with this edifice.


At the convent of St. Francisco there is a chapel, the sides
and pillars of which —if not composed—are lined with human
bones. There is a Portuguese inscription over the entrance
importing “ Our bones wait for yours.” There is in this convent
another chapel worthy of interest There are two bodies in this
chapel made with bones, about which much in the shape of
miracle is endeavoured to be imposed ; but certain it is that from
some occult cause the remains do not appear to have undergone the
usual decomposition. We saw little in the other places of worship
which invited our curiosity with the exception of the convent of
the Menino Jesus, where, we understood, was kept in abundant
security a golden figure of Our Lord, which it was supposed had
either been stolen, or wafted itself away to the Brazils, where it
was at length discovered and brought back; but whether the
change was produced by the climate or sea voyage, certain it
was that the image had increased wonderfully in size, although
no doubt could be entertained of its identity. To prevent any-
thing so precious again playing the truant, they had the
recovered figure well secured under a variety of locks. Evora
has been fortified, but like Estremos, the walls are falling into
decay. There are upwards of 26 convents, independent of
churches and chapels. A very fine Aqueduct supplies the town
with water. The Juis de Fora here was very civil, which
deserves recording from its singularity It was said that Lord
Wellington threatened to hang him of Elvas.
July 9th. —Marched to Montim or Nova, a pretty good
town, but in great confusion in consequence of the supposed
approach of the French. From this, at 12 o’clock at night, we
set off, and passing through Vendas Novas and Pegoas, came to
Aldea Gallega,
July 10th. —Which we reached about 3 o’clock next day.
At 5 p.m. embarked on board a packet boat, and arrived at
Lisbon at 8 o’clock, having gone that day 12 leagues by land
and 3by water. We here paid off those men we found at
Lisbon and Beleru, or rather at the latter place.


July 15th.—Received the order to embark fir England.
The wounded officers and others, consisting of 17 in all, the
non-commissioned officers and staff, and all our mess traps were
put on board a small transport brig called the “ Colins.”
July 22nd. —We set sail. At first we encountered adverse
winds, but on the 28th or 29th the wind became irore favour-
able, and we found ourselves on
August 12th.—Opposite Portsmouth after a voytge of three
weeks and two days.
August 13th.—Landed the men on the 13th, aid marched
to Hilsea Barracks. From very few uniforms being imongst us,
we were taken for Frenchmen during the entire route to
Northampton. Whether this proceeded from the akove cause,
our sunburnt countenances, or our habit of communicating our
remarks in Portuguese, certain it is we were not acknowledged
for countrymen. Thus ended my first campaign, the greater
part of which was performed on foot; the early part of it with a
knapsack on my back. But this was of short duration, and only
lasted till an animal could be procured to carry my scanty ward-
robe, consisting of two shirts, a pair of shoes, a pair of duck
trousers, and some shaving and cleaning implements. My boat
cloak, a very airy light one, which I at all times on the march
had strapped to my back, was almost my only bed; unless my
luck led me to a house, the inhabitants of which were disposed
to make me more comfortable, when my sleep from habit was
always disturbed for some nights. My knapsack was my only
pillow in the field. At Albuera my sword, or rather sabre—
for it was a Spanish weapon —was broken in two, in what way I
never could tell —whether it was done by a shot or from the
tread of the Cavalry I never could decide, but think a shot
must have done it—my cap was left on the field, and brought to
me by a fellow soldier.
At Talavera, Lieutenant Duke and myself lay down on the
night of the 28th—after the action—in rear of our company, as
we supposed by a live soldier, but in the morning we found we
had been sleeping with a corpse almost touching us.


When Ensign Yander Meulen was wounded, I went to take
the colours from the Sergeant who held them. When I arrived
at the centre a shell fell. We lay down till it had hurst. My
head was between the legs of a soldier, and a soldier was on my
right and left side close against me. The shell burst; the man
whose legs my head was protected by had half his head carried
off ; the other two were dreadfully mangled; the body of one
was laid bare from his loins to his breast, and both the legs of
the other were carried off near the knee.
We arrived at Northampton, and rested for a while from
our labours.
1812.
June sth. —At 9 o’clock at night came on board the “ Triton
Transport, and sailed from Stokes Bay on the 7th.
June 21st. —Landed at Lisbon. We found the Hospital
had been removed to Santerem, and Officers prevented from
remaining in Lisbon on plea of sickness.
June 29th.—Marched to Sacavim, a small town situated on
the Tagus.
June 30th.—Reached Villa Franca, which we found in
pretty good order, all hands clearing away and re-establishing
order.
July Ist. —To Azambuja, where the French had destroyed
almost every door for fuel. A large portion of the late inhabi-
tants had died of famine and sickness on the left bank of the
river, while the French were in possession of their town.
July sth.—To Abrantes, which we found much improved in
point of strength ; considerable additions had been made to the
works. We remained here a day.
July 7th. —To Garviao.
July Bth.—To Niza and halted.
July 10th.—To Sarzedas.
July 11th. —To Castel Branco and halted.


July 18th.—To Esalhas de Cima, where we were very
civilly treated by one Patron, and drank tea with him in the
evening.
July 14th. —To St. Miguel de Ignacio, a poor, insignificant
village, which had been once walled, but which, with the town,
had nearly ceased to be. From thence proceeded on to Pedrogao.
July 15. —To Moimoa, a miserable village, surrounded with
mountains, situated about a league from Pena Mecor.
July 16th. —We passed over a very beautiful though hilly
country, and arrived at Sabugal, which we found in such a state
that we retired to a chestnut wood in the vicinity and bivouacked.
This town is very romantically situated, and has the appearance
of having been a good town. It had once been fortified. The
remains of its castle and walls were still to be seen. We halted
here a day.
July 18th.—To Aldea de Ponte and bivouacked about two
miles from it.
July 19th. —To Etuero, where our army had been stationed
some time, and given it the appellation of “Acorn Town,” from
having had little but acorns to live upon whilst there. This was
the first Spanish town.
July 20th.—Over a very good road through an extensive
wood, we reached Ciudad Eodrigo, which we found battered to
pieces, after its two last seiges. There were the remains of two
or three large convents. The cathedral must have been a fine
building. We were billeted in the suburbs, which had shared
the fate of the town. We halted here.
July 23rd.—We marched towards Puente de Castillegas,
but stopped at Santos Espiritos, upon hearing the report that
the army were falling back. In the evening, however, we
started for Salamanca, and had the satisfaction of hearing on
the way the result of the battle fought there. We stopped at
Martin de Rio.


July 24tli. —In the morning moved into Sajadilla, at which
place we remained a few hours, and finally brought up for the
day at Aldeaguela de la Bohedo.
July 25th.~- Our servants having missed their road, we were
obliged to live on the charity of a Sergeant of the 44th who
happened to be there with stores ; but the men having at length
arrived, we proceeded to Salamanca, passing through Canada
de Don Diego. Salamanca we found a good town, but much
knocked about; the Cathedral, a most interesting structure ; the
stone work at the entrance is remarkable for its beauty and the
high state of its preservation. The stone was very soft and of a
brown colour, and although 500 or 700 years had passed over it,
scarcely the smallest chip or crevice was visible. The inside is
very magnificent. The pillars which support the roof are of a
prodigious magnitude. The major part of the churches, colleges,
and other public buildings were roofless. Whilst the French
occupied Salamanca they made large exactions on the inhabitants,
and when they found them at all backward in producing the
required sums, they threatened the demolition of the Cathedral,
and the money was soon forthcoming. The famous college,
consisting of 25 different buildings, had been torn down to
construct forts, and the marble pillars now formed beams for a
bomb-proof. The army, we found, had left Salamanca after the
action in pursuit of the enemy.
July 27th.—We proceeded to Alva de Tonnes, a good town,
where we beheld another scene of destruction. The castle,
a magnificent building, dismantled and wantonly abused.
Some of the rooms were in tolerable order, the ceilings of
which were carved. In the round tower was a circular room,
on the walls of which were described some battles, and above
them heathen deities and celestial figures bearing the arms of
the House of Alva, The tower itself, which commanded the
castle and town, we could not ascend, as the French had made a
door-way in the circular room, to which they clambered by a
ladder which, when up, they drew after them. The staircase,
which formerly led to the tower, had been demolished. The


court yard was extremely grand. The magnificence of the
ancient nobility of this country might be easily imagined from
the contemplation of this ducal edifice.
July 28th.—To Beneranda, which we found a pretty good
town, and one of some antiquity by the style of the buildings.
It was, like most other towns which had been visited by the
enemy, supplied with a kind of blockhouse, and furnished
with gates to prevent surprise from the Guerillas. In spite of
these defences they seldom trusted themselves in them in less
number than 100, and all the towns on the main roads were
provided with small garrisons.
July 29th. —Through Cantaracillo and Flores de Avila to
Cisla, and after two hours’ halt, to Fuentes de Ano, where
we found the people in great consternation about the approach
of the French.
July 30th.—We passed through an immense tract of woody
country upon a sandy soil—pines reaching for many miles.
Amongst these we lost ourselves, and went about four leagues
out of our way, but at length fortunately reached Olmeido, after
having gone about seven leagues. Previous to the arrival of our
army in this wood, they had been obliged to carry anything they
could pick up for leagues to enable them to cook their messes,
the inhabitants of the towns using no other fuel than chopped
straw. The sun was so hot that our noses and ears got skinned
constantly. At Olmeido, to our no small surprise, we found a
convent of Nuns. The French had not molested them. We
here came up with a part of our army, and joined our Division—
the 4th.
July 31st. —The army was encamped on the river Segar in
a pine wood. This was the first halt they had made, and the
first cover they had been under for a considerable time.
August Ist. —Moving along the banks of the river came to
our second encampment, distant from the other four-and-a-half
leagues.


August 2nd.—Marched to our third encampment on the
Segar at two-and-a-half leagues distance. This was near Sigovia,
which I went to see afterwards.
August 3rd. —We left the wood and entered upon an extensive
plain. Our head-quarters were at Cuellar. Having passed the
plain we again entered a pine forest, and came to our fourth
encampment near a small stream, and halted.
August 7th. —Came to our fifth camp, passing through
Carbonneiro. The dress of the people of this place was singular.
The women wore a peculiar montiero cap, and their hair braided
into two long tails, which were drawn forward in front of the
shoulders, passed under the arms, and tied behind at the waist;
whilst a pink silk-braided appendage hung from under their cap
behind, reaching nearly to the knees. Their petticoats were of
dark green stuff, and the bodies of brown stuff open in front,
showing the underlinen, across which they were laced. Their
dress was very short, and their stockings of deep red. Their
complexions were very dark. The men were cased in leather.
They were in the midst of harvest, and were handling some
very uncouth implements. We halted.
August 9th. —To an encampment on the Rio Frio, in a park
belonging to a royal palace, about a league from the town of
Madrona, close under a ridge of mountains. We went from here
to see the town of Sigovia, which is a good town, with a castle
and cathedral.
August 11th. —To an encampment on the road to Madrid,
where the 4th, sth, and 6th Divisions halted. This was amidst
the Guadirama Mountains.
August 12th.—Along a fine paved road to within a league
of the town of Guadirama. From this I went over to the
Escorial, and was much disappointed. The French had stripped
the walls of all the valuable pictures it was said had been hung
against them. It is a huge building said to be in the form of a
gridiron. It is pleasantly situated at the foot of the Guadirama
Range.


August 13th. —To an encampment on the Madrid road, close
to the scene of a skirmish between one of our Cavalry pickets
and the enemy the evening before, in which we lost three pieces
of artillery and their Commander, who was taken prisoner owing
to the dastardly conduct of the Portuguese Cavalry.
August 14th. —Came to a camp near Madrid, in the gardens
of King Joseph, amidst the acclamation of the people. Although
the enemy had quitted the town the Eetiro was still in their
possession. The streets were clean, the shops good, and the day
we arrived we were much pleased with the Spanish mode of
indicating joy. We illuminated—so did they—but not content
with this, all the balconies of the large houses were hung with
coloured cloths with deep fringes during several days. After three
illuminations the excitement began gradually to abate. The
people who had paraded the streets now came out in numbers to
our camp. There was a grand ball on the third night, but I was
not at it. The Retiro surrendered, and 2,000 prisoners fell into
our hands. I had the satisfaction of seeing the Balero and
Fandango danced in the first style at the theatre, and that from
a part of the house into which I found I had no business to
intrude, being exclusively set apart for women. The house was
so full that the party I accompanied had nothing left for it but
to enter this forbidden ground. It was said 800 families had
departed with King Joseph. They had aided the French cause
so decidedly that they did not consider themselves safe. The
palaces were magnificent, as far as I saw of them.
August 19th. —We left this scene of gaiety for our old camp.
August 20th.—Arrived at the Escorial, and went into
Cantoonments for some time.
September Bth.—l was detached with an escort to take
prisoners to Salamanca, and, having received my charge, moved
towards, and arrived at, Aspenar the same day.
September 9th. —To Villa Castin, a neat little town.
September 10th.—To San ChDdriau, a poor town.


September 11th. —To Arribalo, a good town. The inhabi-
tants very uncivil.
September 12th.—To Cabega de Eaposo, passing through,
on our way, Aldea Seca, Villa Nueva and Fuentes de Ano.
September 13th. —To La Nava de Sotoval.
September 14th.—To Terradillos.
September 15th.—To Salamanca, where I parted with my
charge, who wrote me an address lauding my humanity and
feeling, and praying my intercession with the Commander to
permit an English escort to take them on their road. For they
learned that Spaniards and Portuguese were to do that duty from
Salamanca to the rear, there being positive orders not to permit
the British troops to go to the rear, either on duty or otherwise.
These poor fellows, however, did not obtain their request, and
some of them, it was said, were stretched on the road by the
muskets of the Spaniards.
September 17th. —Commenced my return to the army, and
stopped at Uerta.
September 18th. —To Beneranda.
September 19th. —To Cabega de Raposa
September 20th. —To Arribalo.
September 21st.—To San Childrian
September 22nd. —To Villa Castin.
September 28rd.—To Aspinar.
September 24th. —To El Escorial, where we found the
division still stationed. We heard that night of the fall of
some of the outworks of Burgos, with the loss on our part of
450 killed and wounded.
October 6th. Marched to Majahunda ; from thence partly
along the Talavera road to Mastoles.
October 7th.—Under torrents of rain to Valde Mouro,
which we arrived at and halted on October Bth.


October 21st.—To Ciemposuelos.
October 26tb. —To Sesena. The French wen once more
in motion, the Division under Soult having entered ranjuez on
the 25th. The bridge over the Tagus was destroyedn the 26th.
The report of the raising the seige of Burgos reaced us this
day, and also that the British army were retiring upn us.
October 28th—On the evening of this day w suddenly
moved to Anudar, close to which we bivouacked. The whole
division here met.
October 80th. —After being in a feverish stat of uncer-
tainty, our baggage was suddenly ordered off, wlch left us
sitting in our great-coats and cloaks until 12 o’clocl when we
were moved off from our ground through Sesena nd Val de
Mouro to a camp two miles from Madrid. As we >assed this
last town we were halted till some biscuit was servd out, and
then went to our ground for the night, having beer nearly 18
hours on the road. It commenced raining when we >ft Anudar,
and continued until about 6 o’clock. As the storewas to be
destroyed we were served with extra biscuit, as mua or more
than we could carry.
October 31st.—In the morning, drenched as u were and
fatigued, we proceeded, and if we halted for a few miutes to let
the baggage pass, our men pulled out their blanker and laid
themselves on the banks on each side of the road, lie inhabit-
ants of Madrid we left in much consternation, for the naturally
anticipated ill-treatment from the enemy.
November Ist.—Came to a camp near Grallij-gao; the
enemy molested us very little.
November 2nd.—We went ding dong to the entmce of the
Peurto de Gruardarama.
November 3rd. —To Yilla Castin.
November 4th.—To camp near Bilayas.
November sth.—To Fuente Ovara.
November 6th.—To near Flores de Avila.


November 7tb.—To a league from Alva de Tormes. In
this retreat the Light and 4th Divisions formed the rear guard.
The troops were nearly starved. We had only three-quarters of
a pound of bread served out in seven days , yet we were severely
reprehended by an order about this time for some irregularity
that took place in search of food, and told we suffered no
privations. Our Division occupied Santa Martha, General Hills
Division, the river at Alva. The Third Division were on the
ground where the Battle of Salamanca had been fought; the
Light Division to our left. It was singular that during this
retreat the enemy had not as yet approached us. The depriva-
tions we suffered were severe ; without bread or spirits, in cold
rainy weather, the men, bare-footed, toiled along the road
dispirited and discontented.
November 11th.—To Calverassa de Ariba.
November 12th. —To half a league nearer Alva.
November 13th. —We moved towards the Tormes. The
enemy manoeuvred the whole day. We were drawn up in
squares to receive Cavalry all the morning ; but in the evening
we retired from the vicinity of the river which the enemy
crossed at various fords, and some skirmishing ensued. The
Bridge of Alva was destroyed, and the town abandoned by our
troops. At dusk we moved to the position near Calverassa
where we remained till about 9 o’clock
November 15th.—And commenced our march to the rear.
Just as we passed the Aripales the Bridge of Salamanca was
blown up. A bullock was killed on the side of the line of our
march, and a man of a mess ordered from the companies to cut
a portion off, the best way he could, the regiment marching the
whole time. The whole army were now in movement on
Rodrigo in considerable confusion, in the midst of a very heavy
rain. We at last brought up for the night in a swampy wood,
and remained there till
November 16th.—When we moved to some ground near
Matella, where the enemy’s cavalry made their appearance, but
on seeing us drawn up in squares, and a gun or two being
fired at them, they retired.


November I7tb.—At 4 o’clock in the morning started,
crossed a river, and drew up near San Munos. The enemy were
close on our rear all this day. About noon they brought up
some guns on the opposite side of the river on the heights and
commenced a cannonade. Some skirmishing took place, the rain
descending in sheets all the time. Whilst in columns under the
enemy’s shot, a commissariat mule brought us some bread, which
we seized with avidity. At dusk we retired into a swampy wood,
where we remained in anything but a state of bliss. Our baggage
had been ordered on before us, so that we were deprived of
tents and any little comforts which our mules carried. An officer
and myself sat ourselves down at the foot of a tree in our cloaks,
the roots of the tree being elevated about two feet from the
surrounding ground, which was all under water.
November 18th.—At four o’clock in the morning we were
on the move, and I was ordered on a baggage guard. We passed
several streams swollen by the rains into almost impassable
torrents ; many poor animals were swept away endeavouring to
pass, and those which got through were much affected with
gripes. We waded nearly up to our middles all this day. At
length the army halted upon a range of hills above Tenebrosa.
November 19th —To ground near Pedro de Tora.
November 20th,—To ground near Gallegos.
November 21st.—Came into contoonments at Villa de Ciervo,
much pleased to obtain shelter against the biting effects of the
nights, which were very cold and severe. A great deal of
baggage was lost, both by the advance of the enemy and the'
rapidity of the currents. We had been lying in our wet clothes
for several nights, and were as comfortless as we well could be,
until our arrival at this village. The dread of knocking up and
falling into the hands of the enemy did not at all diminish the
horrors of this march. Men were to be seen dead along the
roads, and beasts innumerable. Casks of staved spirits and
wine, which the Commissariat were obliged to abandon. Some
who had participated in the retreat of Sir John Moore’s
army declared there was little difference between that and the
present one.


November 28th.—We began our march to Portugal, and
reached a rootless village called La Duneia,
November 29th.—After crossing the Coa reached Freixa.
November 30th. —To Alfadon.
December Ist.—Over a most tremendous road we reached
Corriseada.
December 2nd.—Passing through Merialva arrived at Meida
where we halted. This place is situated amidst mountains.
December 3rd. —Crossed a river and came to Cedovim,
situated on the summit of a craggy rock.
December 4th.—Peached the miserable village of Soito,
being the place destined to recruit the exhausted powers of the
remains of the 48th Pegiment. I was here quartered in what
might be called a house. It had four walls, and a roof of loose
tiles, a corner of which I was obliged to break a hole through,
to enable the smoke to pass off. I was obliged also to hang up
my tent as a canopy and curtains to my bed, as well as occa-
sionlly a covering for myself when it rained or snowed. This
was my parlour, kitchen and bedchamber. I had fixed a large
flag on the floor at the corner, where I warmed my shins, and
where I had the pleasure on such occasions of beholding about
three quarters of a pound of meat and bone stewed to rags—and
this was my dinner ! Our evenings were not quite so comfortless,
for we found the genuine Douro wine mulled, a very passable
comforter, and one which generally tended to allay our cares,
anxieties, shiverings, and sent us well content to bed. I have
sat for hours in the corner of my tenement without a soul
interrupting my solitude. I often conceived myself one of the
Trappists. I walked over to the village of Areas and Benedono.
We were only a short distance from the town of Povoa, which
the regiment had occupied the preceding year.
December 28th. —Moved to Panhadas, where we closed this
eventful year.


1813.
January 3rd. —Moved to Meida, a tolerable town, where we
had some society. Here I worked very hard binging up three
years arrears of muster rolls, which the Adjutant of the
Eegiment, and Paymaster, had suffered to fell into disorder
and never corrected. I had been appointed Aljutant not long
before this and commenced my duties at Soito.
February 11th. —We went to Freixo.
February 28th.—To Villa de Barreira.
March Ist.—To Sourival.
March 2nd.—To Freixadas.
March 3. —To Escalhao.
March 24.—T0 Escarigo. The Division lyng at this time
between the Agueda and the Coa. Whilst at he last place we
had a good deal of drilling, several field day; —indeed it was
time that some steps should be taken to indice regularity of
appearance and movement —the men seemed o have lost all
idea of order. Their dresses were various as fir as the trousers
were concerned, which were of all colours, and as to the move-
ments, little did they care in what way they were done; but
a few weeks brought matters again into pretty -fair order.
May 18th.—We moved to Mata de Lobas, the army being
now once more on the move.
May 19th.—We crossed the Douro, and after ascending for
nearly the whole day arrived, after a most fatiguing march at
IJnoz, a pretty good town. We crossed the river at Barca de
Alvaovu —a bridge of boats— and did not get in till 10 at night.
We halted.
May 21st.—Marched to Moz.
May 22nd —Marched to Fornos.
May 23rd. —Villa Della.


May 24th.—Villa Sindim.
May 25th.—Came into camp near Espinosa, where the sth
and 6th Divisions met us. Here we halted.
May 28th.—Arrived once more in Spain, and brought up at
Braudilanes.
May 29th.—To ground near Menga.
May 31st.—Crossed the Esla, and encamped on its left bank
near Almendra.
June Ist.—Arrived at Molacillas, where w r e experienced a
most frightful storm.
June 2nd.—To Villa Vendimio, having passed through
Villa Nueva and Villa de Don Diago. We here learnt the suc-
cess of our Hussar Brigade, who had fallen in with the enemy
and made 208 prisoners.
June 4th. —Came to some ground near San Ciprean de
Mazote. The Light Division here joined us, The army began
to concentrate, and we proceeded rapidly towards Burgos, which
the French evacuated and blew up. Our division passed within
about four leagues of it.
June sth.—Encamped near Castra Monte and halted
June 6th. —Arrived at Ampudia.
June 7th.—Near Palmeia.
June Bth. —Near Lamora (not that on the Douro).
June 9th.—Near Lintadillos.
June 10th. —Pena dos Campos.
June 11th.—To Villa Sandino, where we halted.
June 13th.—To Los Hormazes.
June 14th.—To Quinta de Nagua.


June 15th. —To Puente de Arenas, crossing the Ebro at the
Puente de la Eeyna. The town is beautifully situated in an
exuberant valley, overtopped with stupendous mountains. The
road, hewn with enormous labour through the rocks, is very
indifferent, and in places dangerous.
June 16th. —To near Medina.
June 17th.—To near Oteo, which is delightfully situated in
a very rich country. The inhabitants appeared, nevertheless,
poor and miserable. "We here got fresh butter from the moun-
tains; bread was, however, very scarce. We were again straitened
for provisions, owing to the celerity of our movements. Our
resources were altogether from the adjoining country, which had
been already well drained. The country we passed over till we
arrived at the Ebro was one continual cornfield, without hedge
or apparent boundary. The towns and villages not of the first
order.
June 18th. —Fell in with the enemy, and had some skirmish-
ing near Asina.
June 19th.—Kept alive by constant skirmishing, we at last
arrived near Monte Yite, where we halted a day.
June 21st. — Vittoeia. —Advanced upon Yittoria, where
the enemy were strongly posted. On our right they defended
themselves for a considerable time, but at length gave way
before the 2nd Division. Our division was completely in
the back ground the early part of the day, but became
smartly employed about 3 o’clock, that is to say the Portuguese
of our division.
This was indeed a glorious day for old England. The
enemy, after some obstinate fighting on our left, fell back,
abandoning his cannon and baggage; the goods and chattels of
Eey Joseph o into the bargain. The troops which arrived first
on the road made some lucky seizures. The plunder was enormous.
The men, from having been very badly supplied with provisions
for some days, ran about catching sheep which were met alongside


the roads, and on halting, mutton was to he seen in abundance,
which was washed down with port wine. The encampment was
like a fair. The 71st and. 28th Regiments suffered very much
this day. Our Division lost scarcely any men. The 48th had
two Sergeants and 16 Rank and Rile wounded, and one man
killed.
June 22nd, —To camp near Salvatierra.
June 23rd. —To a wood, after some skirmishing.
June 24th. —Got upon the high road to Pamplona, where
we saw a gun belonging to the enemy in a ditch.
June 25th.—To some heights near Pamplona.
June 26th. —Moved more to the right, and after having been
kept constantly on the qui vive, at three o’clock marched to
Tafalla,
June 27th.—And halted there.
June 28th. —Passed through Olhete, and turning off to our
left suddenly, and leaving the main road, reached our camp at
Gallipienza; we left our artillery behind this day, the roads
being impracticable for carriages.
June 30th.—Went into quarters at Leache and halted.
July 2nd.—Over a wretched country to Mon Real. The first
league was very bad, after which we got into the main road,
between Pamplona and laca. We here met the Light and 3rd
Divisions We expected to have beseiged Pamplona, but this
did not take place, and we went off to our several encampments,
and halted as far as the 48th were concerned. I was here left
behind by the regiment, having been attacked by fever.
July 3rd.—To a camp near Pamplona.
July 6th.—To another on the west side.
July 14th.—To another on the south side.
July 17th. —The division moved to Ronces Yalles, and I
went with some more invalids to Arazuri and remained there a
day or two.


July 25th.—The Second and Fourth Divisions were driven
in by Soult, who continued to advance until the 28th July.
July 27th. —Under the influence of the most unfounded
reports we moved from the high road to a more retired village
called Sare9as.
July 28th. —To Sardiago, where we heard of the battle of
the Pyrennees, from which the enemy had retreated into France,
occupied his old position, and took up his quarters at Lesaca.
The above action was fought under many disadvantages—the
spirits of the men dejected from being driven before the enemy
for several days—their hearts as well as their wind nearly
broken by scrambling up mountains. The vast disparity of
numbers which always met their sight whenever the enemy
became full in view amongst the passes or in the hollows —the
determination of the enemy to defend their hearths, to which we
had forced them —altogether promised another result. That the
French, therefore, were beaten back, reflected the greatest
credit on those concerned. I had been left at Arazasi almost
at the point of death ; but, having partially recovered, now
attempted to join. During the action, although we were miles
removed from it, we considered ourselves surrounded, from the
reverberated echoes of the mountains, and these notions were,
in a measure, confirmed by the ridiculous reports our Cavalry
thought proper (having nothing else to do) to propagate.
August Ist. —With a few Officers and our Paymaster, we
set off and reached Huerta in the Pyrennees.
August 2nd.—Over a mountainous range to Lance. We felt
incommoded by the heavy mists which we met in these regions.
On our road we passed over a part of the late scene of action,
which was strewn with French dead.
August 3rd.—To Almendas, through a pass of the mountains
called the Pass of Yilate or Puerto Yallete, the road across which
is not only steep, but so rough and bad that we found some
difficulty even in riding. The trees —all beech—are to be seen
for miles growing like rushes, as straight and almost as boughless.
The mountain sides were awfully perpendicular. An old ruined


abbey is the only vestige of a human habitation from Lance to
Almendos. We were lost the next day, and found ourselves in
a good town, the name of which I could not make out from the
inhabitants, Eluete or Elhete. The houses about here were
large and roomy, of two storeys, but very uncomfortable; the
people dirty in their persons, and smoke-dried. A considerable
quantity of maize is grown amongst these mountains.
August sth.—To a small house.
August 6th. —Joined the regiment with my companions at
Echellai.
August 7th.—Moved to Lesaco, where I had a relapse of
my fever, and was obliged to leave the regiment for Passages,
which was close to Eenteria, which was made a hospital station.
August 14th. —Passing through Olyabzum, after a tiresome
ride, to Passages, which I found full of sick and wounded officers
on their road to St. Andero. The town was pleasantly situated
on an inlet of the sea, which, however, we could not see from
the town. There is but one street or alley, which is very clean
for a fishing town. The women appear to row the boats gene-
rally, and are very fresh and ruddy. They row standing, pro-
pelling the oar before them, and occasionally singing very
harmoniously.
The 84th, 85th and 76th Regiments landed and went to
Eenteria.
August 31st. —Had the extraordinary chance of beholding a
place carried by storm in midday, without being a participator
of the toil and dangers. San Sabastian fell into our hands after
a severe struggle. The troops were nearly three hours on the
march before an entrance was effected. We, the spectators,
began to be somewhat alarmed for the result. Some fresh
troops were pushed forward, but were beaten back save one
undaunted soldier, a grenadier with yellow facings, who
remained on the spot he had arrived at, and waved his cap and
took a shot. His comrades, who had fallen back, returned to
his assistance, and eventually entered at the left of the breach,
following the defenders into the town. Nothing could exceed
the steadiness of the 13th Portuguese Regiment on this day.


September Ist. —Joined the Eegiment again at a camp
near a foundry.
September 3rd.—Marched to Lesaca, from which we came
back and encamped on the mountains,
September 6th.—Where we commenced erecting field
works.
September 14th. —To encampment near Echellar. On the
Bth the Castle of St. Sabastian fell into our hands. The enemy
made an attempt to relieve it, but were repulsed with considerable
loss. The Spaniards behaved well in this affair. We remained
at Echellar some time. The Spaniards did the outpost duty in
this quarter, and our division remained perfectly quiet.
October 7th. We moved down to some low ground
immediately under some heights the enemy occupied, from which,
however, the 95th dislodged them. The mountain was called
La Petite Lerhuna, which formed the most commanding part of
their position, and which was immediately in our front —and
taken.
October Bth.—One of the most lovely prospects I ever
beheld was from this mountain top. We could see a large portion
of the French works. The batteries near the sea appeared very
strong and numerous. Pamplona still held out, although said
to be in a decided state of starvation. On this day we arrived
in what we generally know as the “ wet camp ” at Yera.
October 9th.—To another encampment near Yera. The
Spaniards were engaged (October 13 th) the whole day. Early in
the morning the French dispossessed them of a redoubt in front
of our advance, which commanded the village of Zara, where the
enemy were in considerable force. The rain was almost incessant.
It rained, at all events, nearly every night for some time. The
nights of the 27th and 28th it never ceased, as well as the entire
day of the 28th. The animals in camp were objects of pity.
The mountains towards Jaca were covered with snow.


November 10th.— Niville. After many preparations we
advanced against the strong entrenched lines of the French, and
beat them out of them before 2 o’clock at noon. The 48th were
destined to have carried the town of Zara, and the redoubt in
front of it; but we, it seems, overacted our part, for, after
fighting through various obstacles, we planted the 48th
Regiments colours, as well as those of the 40th Regiment, with
scarcely a man with them, on the top of a hill which had been
intended for the attack of the Seventh Division. I took, as
Adjutant, our colours from three wounded officers and placed
them in other hands in the space of less than half an hour.
The Forts, in front of the First and Fifth Divisions, were not
stormed that day; but the enemy finding themselves out-
flanked by our rapid and unexpected advance, retired, having
first blown up the bridges at St. Jean de Luz. We encamped
that night on some heights above it at Bois de St. Pe.
November 11th. —Came a most circuitous road and en-
camped about five miles from Bayonne, where our baggage
reached us next day. We were in the vicinity of Bois de St. Pe
and encamped in rear of it.
November 17th.—To Ascain, Before this, however, the
Portuguese of the 4th and Light Divisions, for want of tents,
went into quarters in the surrounding houses. The Spaniards
were not suffered to enter France, but remained on their
frontier.
November 18th.—The 48th shifted to the vicinity of the
Chateau de Astritz, and I had quarters in the building itself.
December 7th,—About 2 o’clock in the day we received an
order to move, and went to our old encampment at the Bois de
St. Pe, and halted in front of it. The whole army were again
on the move.
December 9th. —Moved to a position near the Light
Division, who occupied a large chapel about a league from
Bayonne, and returned to our encampment.


December 10th.—I was on the baggage giard. A heavy
firing took place along the whole line which listed till dark,
nothing material however occurred, with the exception of three
Glerman regiments leaving the French and coning over to our
lines with their officers, &c.
December 11th.—Everything remained quie. In the even-
ing the baggage "was ordered up and I joinet the regiment.
The following day we expected to have attackid the enemy’s
posts, but in this we were mistaken; we had ths day resumed
our place on the position. Lord Wellington roce along the line
and observed that there would not be a Frenchman in front
the next day, and so it proved, for at 11 that light they went
off to their entrenchments near Bayonne. On’ division got a
sudden order to move.
December 13th.—Marched in the directhn of a heavy
cannonade to the right. The enemy had collected a strong force
at this point, and was endeavouring to dislodge tie 2nd Division,
but in this he was baffled. The 28th and Portiguese behaved,
it was said, remarkably well. We were marcling nearly the
whole day, and crossed the river over a Pontoon Bridge.
December 14th. —Returned to Ustaritz, and vent into quarters
for the night.
December loth. —Moved to Aronce, and ;ell in with the
3rd and 7th Division on our march. The 6th Dvision moved to
the opposite side of the river. The Ist Division was on the left,
and next to them the sth, then the Light, whici was near the
centre of our position ; we were next to the Ligit Division, and
the 2nd on our right. We were close under the French en-
trenchments in this position. I was sent of for the corn
of the Regiment.
December 29th. —Arrived at a small villagi in rear of St.
Jean de Luz.
December 30th —To Renteria, where I remined until


(1814.)
January 3rd.—Where, having received our forage, I began
to retrace my steps, and arrived at St. Jean de Luz, where the
Regiment had been ordered for the purpose of obtaining their
new clothing which had just arrived from England. That
evening Soult began to manoeuvre The British Commander
was hunting when the news was brought to him. He imme-
diately repaired to the front.
January 4th.—The whole army were in motion towards the
right, one division taking up the ground of another. I proceeded
with my Corn party to Arranutz.
January sth.—The French began to show themselves in
great force, and we expected the order to attack. This was, how-
ever, not done, owing to the non-arrival of the 4th Division in
time to support the leading troops. This delay was occasioned
by having a river to cross, during which, however, the enemy
retired.
January 6th.—We returned to Ustaritz. Bayonne seemed
to be strongly fortified, but the incessant rains which had been
falling had done the walls considerable injury. The enemy
were, however, busy repairing damages.
February 15th.—We marched off in a great hurry, and
after clambering over hills and through woods without any
apparent road, came into our encampment for the night, and
were amused during that entire night by shots that were fired at
boats endeavouring to get into Bayonne.
February 16th.—Entered Gascony and halted near a village
called La Bastide de Clemence.
February I7th. : —To a wood near Bidache, almost frozen —
the ground covered with snow. Here we learnt that the troops
opposed to General Hill had withstood the British charge, but
to little purpose. General Bing was wounded. At Bidache is
one of the ancient castles of the Grammont family. This had


been altered for modern warfare, but our advance had been too
rapid to suffer them to complete their intentions. They, however,
destroyed the bridge over the river.
February 18th.—We went into the town, not at all sorry to
get some brick and mortar about us instead of canvas. The
young Count de Grrammont, belonging to our Hussars, was
received here with great cordiality. The town was nearly
deserted, for the French had not even spared their own country-
men, so bent were they on plunder. Sere we halted two days
as the bridge over a branch of the Adour could not be repaired
before.
February 22nd. —Our brigade went towards Hastinges on a
reconnaisance, and then retired to the village of Came for
the night. Hastinges was taken by the Seventh Division on
the 23rd.
February 24th.—We moved to a camp.
February 25th. —Marched and crossed the Gave d’ Oleron
near Forde.
February 26th.—Marched and crossed the Gave de Pau at
St. Crig, and came into the main road from Toulouse to
Bayonne. We halted near Eamous.
February 27.— Orthes, 1814.—Moved against the enemy’s
position near" Orthes. They kept their ground with obstinacy
for some time, and our troops were driven from the village of
St. Bois, through which the main road passed, several times. The
left brigade of our division, and the Portuguese were here
smartly engaged. At last, however the reserves having
arrived, they carried the village, when the enemy commenced a
hurried retreat. We followed them till nightfall, and took some
prisoners.
February 28th. —To a wood near St. Saver.
February 29th.—We passed the bridge over the Adour, and
encamped two miles from it.


March Ist.—The had weather again set in. The 2nd and 6th
Divisions were engaged, and took some prisoners. We went
into quarters. The night of the 2nd and succeeding day were
horrible. The rain fell in torrents, and the wind was awful.
We halted at Borderis for a few days.
March Bth.—To Mont de Marsan, a very good town on a
branch of the Adour.
March 9th. —To camp near Roquefort.
March 1 Oth.—To camp near Captieux, a poor village.
March 11th.—To camp near Bazas.
March 12th. —Went into town and halted. The British
Army entered Bordeaux in the evening. Our biigade and the
Portuguese remained at Bazas. There is a fine Cathedral at
this place, which is said to have been erected by an English
Prince. It is very plain, and has rather a gloomy appearance,
but it invites interest. The females of these parts are remark-
ably plain; we did not see a single face we could call even
pretty. Their dress was singular, having a kind of cap or
starched mountain of white linen on their heads at least 18 inches
high. The country we had passed through from Mont de
Marsan was most wretched —one unbounded sand scattered with
pine forests. We met with much civility. Brandy and wine
very cheap. The market was well attended and supplied.
March 15th.—We went back to Captieux and Roquefort,
after which we turned off the main road and took that to Yille-
neuve; having passed through it, came into camp.
March 17th and 18th.—To near Breson and St. Germain.
A gang of French Banditti infested this part of the country ( and
did much mischief. On our road to St. Germain we passed over
a very sandy country, and halted at some distance in front of it.
March 19th,—Crossed a branch of the Adour called the
Arroz, near which the French had destroyed the bridge. We
proceeded through Plaisance, and halted beyond it. After
remaining some time re-crossed the river, and went into an
encampment near Cotenue on some heights.


March. 20th.—Crossed the Arroz again at 7 o’clock in the
morning and came to Eabastins. A fertile valley appeared on
our right, and very beautiful. The Pyrenees from this looked
sublime. The inhabitants of the villages turned out to look at
us as we passed, which I mention from its singularity, for
generally there appeared a great want of curiosity, the peasants
pursuing their labours as if nothing was going on besides the
work in which they were employed. Although there appeared
no want of men the women seemed occupied in all directions in
the fields. The men were not so tall or well made as the
Basques. The enemy took up a position at Tarbes; but, upon
being attacked, immediately quitted it. Our division was in
reserve. The enemy kept retiring and we followed as fast as
the state of the roads would permit us. We had some very
severe marches.
March 21st. —To camp near St. Groudon.
March 22nd.—To camp near Fries.
March 23rd.—To camp near Lunage.
March 24th. —To Lombes.
March 25th. —To St. Foies, within five leagues of Toulouse
March 26th.—To a wood.
March 27th.—To quarters at Legouvim
March 28th. —To camp near Colonias and halted a day.
March 31st. —To St. Martin, where we again halted. The
climate was delightful; the country well cultivated —not a spot
neglected. The hedges and ditches just large enough to form
boundaries. The houses not of the best description, and the
inhabitants dirty in their persons and habits. The men usually
wear smock frocks or leather aprons of great length with


cocked hats and sabots. We found abundance of poultry and
good bread. The peasants live chiefly on maize bread, and keep
their wheaten bread for their soup maigre.
April 4th. —Received a sudden order to move down the
river. The 2nd Division took up our ground near Toulouse, a
pontoon bridge having been thrown across the Garonne about a
league and a half from St. Tory. The 6th, our division, and the
Hussars crossed it. Luckily our baggage, that is, that belong-
ing to our brigade, managed to get across, when some diffculty
arose from the bridge getting out of order from the strength of
the current, which prevented any other baggage passing till
the night of the 7th. On the sth the enemy sent down large
logs for the purpose of destroying our bridge, but it escaped
pretty well. We were not a little surprised that Soult did not
endeavour to prevent some of these movements. Our two
divisions and the Hussars would have cut a very poor figure had
they come down on us in any force. Our division halted near
Espinasse, where part were quartered, and the rest in camp. We
were kept in great anxiety.
April Bth.—Being Good Friday. —Toulouse.— We advanced
about three quarters of a league towards Toulouse, and halted
near Lauriguet, close to which the Hussars charged the
French Cavalry several times, and took several prisoners.
Colonel Vivian, who commanded in this affair, lost his arm.
We remained inactive till
April 10th.—Easter Sunday, when about 4 o’clock in the
morning we were put in motion, and after some delay in throwing
aside obstructions, marched to the French position near Toulouse.
The Spaniards attacked some redoubts in the centre, and behaved
very well; they lost a number of men. A brigade of the 3rd
Division attacked another redoubt and failed. The 4th and 6th
Divisions moved along the valley on the right of the French
position, and received a plentiful breakfast of shot and
shell. We moved in three lines in columns of sections
close along their position, so that if our division—
which was the nearest to them—were missed, the 6th


Division received the shot, and if it passed them the
Portuguese of the latter divison, who were somewhat more
to the rear, came in for their share. We, however, passed on
not, however, before we had witnessed the powerful effects
of the Congreve rocket. The officer belonging to our Pocket
Brigade went forward with a couple of men to where the Light
Infantry of our brigade were passing along between us and
the enemy; at this period a large body of horse was seen
combi" over the hill and forming in a hollow, from which they
were about to come forth, when whiz went a rocket into the
midst of them, and then another; they waited for no more but
up the hill they went as hard as they could gallop. We
marched under their cannonade for about half a mile or more, we
were lucky in turning the heights before the enemy could well
establish themselves upon them. The rockets completed their
discomfiture, and they retired into the town in confusion.
We advanced towards the town and halted within half cannon
shot. Our own guns were ill-supplied with ammunition, from
the difficulty of getting it over the river. We remained in
three lines, when the French finding we did not pursue
them turned about, and having brought up some guns opened
upon’ us W f e were ordered to lie down. Some companies
were sent to the left to skirmish. More guns being brought up
during the day, our berth was anything but pleasant. We,
however, remained quietly sitting to be shot at until dark, when
we moved to the summit of the heights, and lay on pur arms.
Every man lay down where he stood, so that we slept in line.
April 11th. —We remained waiting orders. The men were
directed to pick up the enemy’s shot that had been fired at us,
and a considerable pile was formed close to where our division
remained. These were intended for our artillery to use, all their
own being nearly gone.
April 12th. —On the night of this day General Bing’s
brigade of the 2nd Division were ordered to attack the town
from the other side of the river, and to get possession of the
bridge but Soult moved off in the course of the night, and
saved a great effusion of blood. The 2nd Division moved


towards Yille Neuve after the enemy, and we halted in a wood
near Bastide de Beaupoire.
April 14th. —A strong rumour about peace prevailed, which
gained ground every hour. Peace it turned out to be, but
Soult, not expecting so effectual an end to his ambitious views,
seemed bent on carrying on the war ; we in consequence advanced
April 17th.—To St. Felix.
April 18th.—Soult took up a position at La Bastide d’Anjou,
which it was thought we were to attack that night, but the
intelligence of the peace being confirmed, we retired through
Landes and Toulouse, and
April 21st.—Reached Tournifucilla, where we went into
quarters.
April 22nd.—To Lisle en Jourdain
April 23rd. —To Aubiet.
April 24th.—To Jegun.
April 25th. —To Busca. Here we went into a large dilapi-
dated chateau, the country about which was most lovely. We
remained here some days.
May Bth. —We went into quarters at Eauze, where we saw
some rather good looking women, being the first we had seen
since our entrance into France, who could boast of any pretension
to even prettiness. There was a ball the first night we went into
the town. General Anson, and the Officers of the 48th and 53rd
Regiments returned this on the following Sunday, that being the
day of festivity in France.
May 31st.—On the preceding night received a sudden order
to move, and arrived at Soz after a long march. Here we beheld
some very nice girls, who insisted on our dancing all night in
spite of our tired limbs. Soz is a nice town.
June Ist. —Over a horribly sandy country reached Castel
Jaloux.


June 2nd, —"Went to Bazas.
June 4th. —Went to Langon.
June sth.—Went into camp near Blanquefort, a short
distance from Bordeaux, through a part of which we passed.
Bordeaux is a very handsome town, and I think the finest 1 ever
was in. The theatre is a fine piece of architecture ; the quay is
striking; the streets are generally very wide and clean; the
churches are very plain. Our soldiers and the inhabitants began
to disagree. The Tight Company of the 27th Regiment became
very troublesome, and all the English were in consequence ordered
out to camp.
June 15th. —We left the camp and traversed the country on
which the vine that produces the Medoc wine is cultivated, for
about three leagues—a deep sand all the way. Tim vines very
diminutive, but loaded with fruit. We halted that night near a
small village, and
June 16th. —Went to Ponillac, and embarked on board the
Alexander , Transport. The following day dropped down the
river to Yerdun Roads, and from thence to Royan Roads.
June 22nd. —Sailed with an unfavourable wind, but arrived
in the cove of Cork.
June 6th and 7th. —Went down to Monkstown.
July Bth.—Disembarked, and marched to Cork.
1817.
March 28th— Sailed from the Cove of Cork with the
Regiment for New South Wales. The Matilda , on which I was
embarked, arrived at Sydney Cove August 3rd, and anchored
at 1 p.m.


1821.
November.—Got the promise of 1,200 acres of land at the
Green Hills, where I commenced operations accordingly, having
sent in my papers to sell out. This land was subsequently, by
Sir Thomas Brisbane, added to, and grants issued for two farms,
one to consist of 1,030 acres, and the other of 1,020. For one
half I was obliged to keep 10 men, and had 10 Government cows
transferred to me. This was again added to, 560 acres, which
made up a grant equal to maximum grants of the day of 2,560
acres. I also bought the two long points of 160 acres for £56.
I also purchased Martin’s farm at Maitland for £lOO. The
head-quarters of the 48th sailed for Madras 1824.
1849.
Eeceived medal and seven clasps, July 12th. Better late
than never ! ! !
Extract from Frank Olboldistane’s letter to his friend is
very suitable :
“ The recollection of these adventures has left upon my mind a chequered
and varied feeling of pleasure and pain, mingled, I trust, with no slight
gratitude and veneration to the Disposer of human events, who guided my
early course through much risk and labour that the ease with which He has
blessed my prolonged life might seem softer from remembrance and contrast.”
September Tth, 1858,
65


GENERAL ORDERS.
Talavera de la Reyna,
July 29, 1809.
The Commander of the Forces returns his thanks to the officers and
troops for their gallant conduct on the two trying days of yesterday and the
day before, in which they have been engaged with, and beaten off the _ re-
peated attacks of the enemy, infinitely superior in number. He has particu-
larly to request that Lieutenant-General Sir J. Sherbrooke will accept his
thanks for the assistance he has received from him, as well as from the
manner in which he led on the infantry under his command to the charge of
the bayonet. Major-General Hill and Brigadier-General Alex. Campbell
are likewise entitled in a particular manner to the acknowledgment of the
Commander of the Forces, for the gallantry and ability with which they
maintained their posts against the attacks made upon them by the enemy.
The Commander of the Forces has likewise to acknowledge the ability with
which the late Major-General McKenzie (whose _ subsequent loss the Com-
mander of the Forces laments) withdrew the division under his command
from the outposts in front of the enemy’s army on the 27th inst., as well as
Colonel Donkin for his conduct on that occasion.
The Commander of the Forces likewise considers Lieutenant-General
Payne of the cavalry particularly, Brigadier-General Anson and his brigade,
who were principally engaged with the enemy, to be entitled to his acknow-
ledgments, as well as Brigadier-General Howarth and his artillery, Major-
General Tilson, Brigadier-General R. Stewart, Brigadier-General Cameron,
and the brigades under their commands respectively. He had opportunities
of noticing the gallantry and discipline of the sth Battalion, 60th and 45th
on the 27th, and of the 29th and Ist Battalion 48th on that night, and on the
28th of the 7th and 53rd, and he requests their commanding officers, Major
Davey, Colonel Guard, Colonel White, Colonel Donellan, Lieutenant-Colonel
Sir W. Myers, Lieutenant-Colonel Bingham to accept his particular thanks.
The charge made by the Guards under the command of Brigadier-General
H. Campbell on the enemy’s attacking column was a most gallant one, and
the mode in which it was afterwards covered by the Ist Battalion 48th was
most highly creditable to that most excellent corps, and to their commanding
officer, Maj or Middlemore. The Commander of the Forces requests that Colonel
Fletcher, the Chief Engineer, Brigadier-General the Honourable Charles
Stewart Adjutant-General, Colonel Murray Quartermaster-General, and
the officers of those departments respectively, and Lieutenant-Colonel
Bathurst, and those of his personal staff, will accept his thanks for the assist-
ance he received from them throughout these trying days.


Copy of a letter from Viscount Oastlereagh, one of His Majesty’s
principal secretaries of State, to His Excellency Lieutenant-
Greneral Sir Arthur Wellesley, K.B.
Downing Street,
21st Aug., 1809.
Sir, —
Your letters of the dates referred to in the margin have been received
and laid before the King. That of the 29th of July, which reports the result
of an attack made on the combined British and Spanish armies near Talavera
de la Reyna, on the 27th and 28th ultimo, by the united corps of Victor and
Sabastiani, and the troops from Madrid, has been received by his Majesty
with utmost interest and satisfaction. The nature of the position occupied
by the Spanish army, and the deliberate purpose of the enemy to direct his
whole efforts against His Majesty’s troops, as it had thrown upon the
British army nearly the entire weight of this great contest, has afforded them
an opportunity of acquiring for themselves the important glory of having
vanquished the French army of more than double their numbers—not in a
short or partial struggle, but in a battle obstinately contested on two succes-
sive days, not wholly discontinued even through the intervening night, and
fought under circumstances which brought the mass of both armies into close
and repeated combat.
The King, in contemplating so glorious a display of the valour and
prowess of his troops, has commanded me to declare his Royal approbation
of the conduct of the whole army.
His Majesty has directed me to signify in the most marked and special
manner to you his gracious sense of your personal services on the ever
memorable occasion, not less displayed in the glorious result of the battle
itself, than in the consummate ability, valour and military resource with
which the many difficulties of this arduous and protracted contest were met
and provided for by your tried experience and judgment.
The conduct of Lieutenant-General Sir J. Sherbrooke has entitled him
to the King’s entire approbation. His Majesty has observed with satisfac-
tion the manner in which he led on the troops to the charge of the bayonet,
a species of attack which on all occasions so well accords with the dauntless
valour of British soldiers.
His Majesty has observed with the same gracious approbation the con-
duct of the several General and other officers. All have done their duty—
most of them have had occasion of eminently distinguishing themselves, the
instances of which, as reported by you, have not escaped His Majesty’s
attention.


In signifying to the officers of the army in public orders His Majesty’s
approbation and thanks, it is His Majesty’s pleasure that they be extended
in the most distinct and particular manner to the non-commissioned officers
and men. On no occasion have they displayed with greater lustre the ines-
timable qualities which they possess as soldiers, nor have they on any former
occasion more nobly sustained the military character of the British nation.
In acknowledging the services of the brave army under your command,
His Majasty cannot refrain from those expressions of sorrow and regret with
which his Royal mind has been affected, at observing the great number of
gallant officers and soldiers who have fallen at the battle of Talavera.
His paternal feelings derive their best consolation on this occasion from
the persuasion that bravery so distinguished, and exertions so heroic, cannot
but have obtained for their country lasting advantages; and whilst the
security and glory of his own empire has been confirmed by the achievement
of his troops, His Majesty trusts that these efforts will not prove unavailing,
under Divine Providence, in the defence of the rights and liberties of the
Spanish nation.
His Majesty has directed a medal to be distributed to the General and other
officers commanding corps in commemoration of the Victory of Talavera, and
has further commanded that his Royal approbation of the services of his
gallant troops in Spain should be published in General Orders to the whole
British army.
(Signed) Castleeeagh.
[copy.]
Ampton, near Bury,
Aug. 17, 1809.
Dear Middlemore, —
The severe wound which I fear Colonel Donellan has received, added
to the general loss which it appears has fallen so heavily upon the Ist Bat-
talion of the 48th, has in some degree damped the satisfaction at the uncom-
mon high commendations I have heard of its gallant conduct in the battle of
Talavera. The Gazette alone speaks highly in its praise, but a letter I have
received from General Stewart (your Adjutant-General) mentions its be-
haviour in such a manner that I must for ever feel a pride in being so nearly
connected with the 48th Regiment. By his account you appear in one
instance to have saved the army. How soon the command devolved upon
you I am yet to learn, but I am certain it could not be in better hands.
There appears to have been more serious direct hard fighting than often falls
to the share of two armies opposed to each other. Future information will,
perhaps, explain to us (who are remaining quietly at home) why the Spanish
troops on the right did not make a movement up the right bank of the


Tagus when affairs began to take a turn in favour of your troops, because I
imagine if two-thirds of the Spanish army had been British, and in the same
situation, that the greater part of the French army might have been anni-
hilated ; but in that case probably the French would not have dared to
attack you at all without very considerable reinforcements ; they will he very
shy of trusting themselves in your hands again. But these are very early
observations for us to make, who are remaining at home, while you are ex-
posed to hardships of all kinds, as well as hard blows; but the glory you
have acquired makes ample amends for all you have gone through, even for
your long confinement on the Rock of Gibraltar. Trusting that I shall soon
hear further particulars from you than the Gazette contains, I shall add
nothing more now than my hearty congratulations for the marked good con-
duct of the Ist Battalion 48th Regiment, and my earnest wishes for the
further welfare and success of the regiment.
I remain always most truly yours,
(Signed) Chaeles Fitzeoy.
P.S.—I had nearly omitted mentioning that the regular march of the
regiment to join the army from Abrantes had been particularly noticed, and
that General Stewart had mentioned it to me some days before the battle.
He will forward any letters to me, better probably than any other convey-
ance, for until I heard from him of your joining Sir Arthur Wellesley I did
not know for certain that you had left Gibraltar.
[copy.]
Aug. 17th, 1809.
My Dear Sir, —
How can 1 congratulate you on the glorious conduct of the battalion
under your command, when you have suffered so severely in leading on to
victory? Trusting,,however, that before this letter reaches you, the worst
effects of your wound may be over, I cannot resist troubling you with
a few lines without waiting till I hear the exact nature of it.
My letter from your Adjutant-General regrets your being so severely
wounded, but that is no more than the Gazette states. General Stewart has,
however, done the Ist Battalion 48th most ample justice, and sets their merits
in the highest possible point of view, both its general gallant conduct, and for
its actually in one instance saving the army. But it may be a long time
before private letters are received, for after the action, when the 2nd Battalion
distinguished themselves in crossing the Douro Colonel Duckworth wrote
to me, and I did not receive his letter till within the last three weeks. I
will not say more at present, from the uncertainty" of this letter finding you


with your battalion or on your passage home, which may be necessary for
your recovery, yet I cannot help adding that in spite of the severe loss the
Ist Battalion appears to have sustained, I have felt a sort of satisfaction at
what I have heard of its conduct, which I can hardly describe. With every
sincere wish for your perfect recovery, and for the welfare of the regiment.
I remain, sincerely yours,
(Signed) Charles Fitzeoy.
To Colonel Donelan.
[copy.]
Sir, —
I am favoured with your letter, and shall forward the enclosures this
day to Lord Charles Fitzroy.
You may believe any thing stated of the 48th Regiment has arisen com-
pletely from a sense of their merits, unbiased by either favour or affection.
I regret the loss of Colonel Donelan. I also am almost sorry any of our
men have made their escape, lest it should induce a change in the treatment
that the enemy have hitherto extended towards us, which has been good in
every respect.
I have the honour to he,
(Signed) Charles Stewart.
Brigadier-General and Adjutant-General.
To Lieutenant-Colonel Middlemore,
Commanding Ist Battalion 48th Regiment.
70


Extracts from an article written in tlie Church Chronicle,
of May 21st, 1866, by the Bishop of Newcastle, on the “ Demise
of E. C. Close, Sen., Esq.”—
The hand of death has taken away one, who, for many years, moved
among' us as a personification of kindly manliness ; one who, with singulai
abnegation of self, consulted at all times the well-being of those about
him, the advancement of the country in which his lot was cast; one who
leaves behind him in the hearts of all who had the pleasure of his acquaint-
ance, a feeling of pained regret that his face will not meet them ag'ain,
that his genial presence has gone, and his generous heart heats no longer
in response to the plea of the suffering or the poor; one who for nearly
fifty years had dwelt in the colony sans peur et sans repvoche ; a good father, a
good man, a Christian, a patriot and a gentleman. He had, during his long
life, met with several accidents which would have been fatal to a constitution
less robust; they gradually reduced his strength, and a paralytic affliction
had latterly rendered any lengthened exertion impossible, and all exercise
fatiguing. But to the last his gentle spirit was master of his mind, and
ruled his conduct and his life for the benefit of others. * * * *
The deceased was a native of Eangamatti in India, where he was born
in the year 1790. He w r as early removed to England, where with the
intention of fitting him for the church, he was educated under the eye of
his uncle, Charles Streyncham Collinson, High Sheriff of the County of
Suffolk. The military enthusiasm of the day, and the excitement of the
wars in which Britain was then engaged, were, however, too much for the
young man, who followed the call of duty in a more material warfare than
that upon which he was preparing to enter; he accordingly joined the
army, under the veteran soldier of India, the Marquis of Wellesley, after-
wards Duke of Wellington, whom he followed in the Peninsular War,
during which he was present in seven of those engagements which reflect
honour on every member of the little band of warriors who first withstood,
and then drove headlong, the choicest soldiers of the Empire. The
memento of his career as a soldier was preserved by him, and occasion all \
worn—a medal with seven clasps bearing the names Toulouse, Orthes,
Niville, Yittoria, Albuera, Busaco, Talavera, names which will never be
forgotten while Britain is remembered, as the friend, of the suffering, the foe
to despotism.
With the 48th Regiment of Foot, in which Mr. Close held a Lieutenant’s
commission, he arrived in the colony in 1817, and four years afterwards, at
the time of his marriage, he received a grant of land, which he selected on the
bank of the Hunter, on and about the site of the present town of Morpeth.
Those who know the place only as it is, have little idea of the laboui involved in
bringing a piece of forest land into cultivation, and fitting it for the purpose


of trade. Mr. Close found the country a dense bush, covered with scrub and
ancient trees, whose arched branches almost concealed the river, and whose
leafy houghs were so impervious to light that to walk beneath them even in
broad daylight was like walking in the dimness of twilight. This dense
forest and bush land Mr. Close set to work to clear, with all the obstacles
and impediments incident to the then lawless condition of an ignorant and
criminal population ; and the result of his labours now is before us in fertile
meads and peaceful habitations. Foi’ forty-five years he laboured unwearied,
working with his own hand where more than mere manual labour was
requisite, and frequently sharing in the mechanical toil which was necessary
for the furtherance of his operations. For many years he acted as a Magis-
trate for the district, and for part of the time, before the Stipendiary Magis-
trates were appointed, the whole of the duties of a Police Magistrate
devolved upon him, though he held no appointment and received no emolu-
ment as such, at a time when it was dangerous to oppose ruffianism, and
scarcely safe for any one with a pretence to honesty or gentlemanly condi-
tion to move without weapons or far from succour. During the whole of this
time, though laboriously occupied for the benefit of the district, and having
no coadjutor nearer than Glendon, he persevered in reclaiming his forest
property and made no enemy. When the colony was placed under a Respon-
sible Government, Mr. Close formed one of the fii’st Legislative Council, a
position which he held for about nine years. He was also for many years
Warden of the district, and in that post his whole course of conduct was
marked by impartiality so strict, attention to duty so unwearied, and
perseverance so determined, that when he retired the whole district
regretted his resignation, and contributed to mark their sense of the integrity
and zeal with which he had studied the interest of the counti’y by presenting
him with a testimonial of esteem in the form of a piece of plate—with a
eulogistic inscription—of the value of about £2OO. The Maitland Hospital,
of which Mr. Close was the President, is greatly indebted to him for the
liberal support he always afforded it, not only by the contributions of his
own purse, but by the advocacy of one who never pleaded warmly for any-
thing which was not calculated to be a benefit to his fellow men. The com-
mittee room is adorned by a good portrait of Mr. Close, in oils, taken at the
expense of some friends of the Institution, and presented by them in token
of their admiration for his character, and in recognition of his exertions on
behalf of the hospital. It would be impossible to enumerate all the generous
acts of a life spent in ungrudging liberality. Mr. Close’s praises ring more
clearly in the hearts of those whom he has befriended and assisted, and with
a truer tone than can be uttered by words : but for the sake of those who
have neither known nor understood him, we may say that in every phase of
his life he shone as a beneficent and self-sacrificing model, whom we should
do well to imitate. As a man kind, gentle, generous, forgiving, yet un-
flinching in the performance of duty ; as a landlord, liberal and unselfish ;
as a friend, trusty and true, not sparing reproof but administering it with
gentle firmness ; in private life beyond reproach ; in public unassuming and


bashful, yet weighty perforce of his known human worth ; genial and cordial
at all times, harsh never, his few words were always listened to with respect
and deference, and whether at his own table, in conversation, at a public
meeting or on the bench, he entered freely and fully into the spirit of the
current business, and showed by the sparkling wit of his replies, the pertin-
ence of his remarks, the pointedness of his decisions, that though a man of
few words, he was one of clear perception and sound judgment. He was
one of the old school, reared in the midst of dangers and difficulties for the
benefit of after ages; and his loss must be severely felt, though softened by
the gradual manner in which it has fallen upon us.
He married September 27th, 1821, at Parramatta, Sophia, daughter of
John Palmer, Esq., first Commissary General of this colony, by whom he
had nine children, of whom four survive, viz., Edward Charles, Robert,
George, and one daughter, married to G. Campbell, Esq., of Duntroon,
Queanbcyan.
Extract from an account given in the Maitland Mercury ,
May Bth, 1852, of a dinner given to E. 0. Close, Esq., on the
occasion of his resignation of the Wardenship of the Maitland
district.
Mr. E. D. Day said he had been honoured by being selected to read
the address to Mr. Close, one of the most gratifying duties he had ever
performed. The whole proceedings connected with this testimonial to Mr.
Close had proved how universal was the feeling of esteem, of respect, of
gratitude felt towards that gentleman. To the address were appended no
less than 660 signatures, and numbers of others would have been added but
that so many of their neighbours and fellow citizens were away at the
gold fields. The address was as follows:
“‘To E. C. Close, Esq.,
‘‘Dear Sir,- —We, the undersigned inhabitants of Maitland and the
adjoining localities, having been informed of your resignation of
the Wardenship of the Maitland District, beg leave to assure
you that we sincerely regret your retirement from a station, the
important duties of which you have long so worthily and
efficiently discharged. We could not indeed allow this event to
pass over without placing upon record the general estimation in
which your public and private character is held; for while strict
impartiality, untiring industry, and courteous manners invariably
marked your public career, the breath of envy, nor the tongue of
slander, have never even assailed the purity of your private life.


Your liberality in relieving the distressed, and your willingness to
alleviate the sorrows of the afflicted, have earned for you (a rich,
a consoling reward) the blessings and affections of the poor.
“ But, although we deeply regret our loss, we cannot fail to derive
some satisfaction from the remembrance that your departure from
office will be the means of enabling you more fully to enjoy in
the evening of a useful and honoured life, the pleasing conscious-
ness of having faithfully performed the responsible duties of your
state.
“ Arrangements have been made for procuring from London a testi-
monial, which we trust you will kindly accept, and hear into your
domestic circle, as a convincing and enduring proof of our regard,
and which we respectfully and cordially present.
‘ ‘ And, in conclusion, we fervently hope that the Almighty disposer
of the lives of men may grant you many years to witness and
participate in the prosperity of this community, every class of
which will ever cherish your memory and revere your virtues.”
Inscription on the Salver presented to E. C. Close.
“ This salver (with a full tea and coffee service) was presented by the
inhabitants of Maitland and the adjoining localities to Edward
Charles Close, Esq., on his resignation of the Wardenship of the
Maitland district, as a tribute of gratitude justly due to his
zealous and efficient discharge of the duties of hia office, and as a
testimonial of the esteem deservedly entertained for his consistent
and practical benevolence, and the unsullied purity of his private
life. Maitland, 1852.”
Extract from the “The Life of Bishop Tyrrell,” by the
Eev. E. S. Boodle, M.A. :
Edward Charles Close was a man whom the Bishop and the Church
could ill have spared—a kindly, conscientious, high principled Christian
gentlemen, ever forward in good and useful works. In early life he had
served under the Duke of Wellington in the Peninsular, and in one of the
seven engagements named on the seven clasps of his medal, he had vowed
while lying down with his regiment under heavy fire—himself untouched
among his dead or wounded comrades—that, if by God’s mercy, his life were
spared, he would build a church as soon as his means should enable him to
do so.


In the year 1817 Mr. Close arrived with his Regiment, the 48th, in New
South Wales, and in 1821, received a grant of land, which he had selected,
on and around the present site of Morpeth.
He had not forgotten his vow. For a while Church building was
impossible. He had settled in the unreclaimed bush. There was not then
a single clergyman on the Hunter River. * * * * But Mr. Close did all
he could. Just and kind to his convict servants, which was far more than
could be said of many of the masters of those evil days, he felt himself
responsible for their good, and he assembled them for prayer on the_ Lord’s
Day. He opened a Sunday School for the children of those around him, and
with the members of his family, taught in it; and when any were sick or
dying, he was found at their bedside, giving and administering remedies,
because there was no doctor, and reading to and praying with them, when
there was no clergyman.
In those days the Government not only gave a site for a Church when
required, but also a grant towards the erection of the building. when
the time came that Mr. Close was able to perform the vow made in his time
of danger, he gave wholly what he had promised —the Church and the site
also. For the parsonage a money grant was given, and though others had
failed to contribute their proportion, Mr. Close did the part which fell to
him.
From the Maitland Mercury, May Bth, 1866.
It is with deep regret that we have to chronicle the unexpected death
of one of the oldest colonists, and perhaps the most respected resident of the
district—Edward Charles Close, Esq., of Morpeth. * * * * In the
year 1817 Mr. Close arrived in this colony with the 48th Regiment of Foot,
in which he held a Lieutenant’s commission. Four years afterwards he
received a grant of land, as was usual in those days, and he chose the site of
the present town of Morpeth, and the land adjoining it, for his settlement.
He settled at Morpeth in the year 1821, and resided there from that time, a
period of forty-five years. He was the first police magistrate of this district,
and that office he held for a number of years. He was eight or nine years a
member of the first Legislative Council of these colonies, and now, like so
many of his contemporaries, he has peacefully passed away. Until a very
late period he was Warden of the Maitland district, and in that capacity, as
in all others, he fulfilled his duties with honour to himself and benefit to his
adopted country. To his credit it can also be said that he filled all these
offices without emolument —he never received a shilling from the revenue of
the colony. * * * *


Throughout life Mr. Close maintained the character of a sincere
Christian. His Christianity was no mere outward show of sanctity. He
was always a liberal contributor to his own church, and to the churches
of other denominations he presented valuable sites for the erection of places
of worship. The poor and afflicted would ever find a helping hand extended,
with the kind words of comfort he would utter As a landlord he was
indulgent in the extreme, especially in seasons of distress ; his sympathetic
heart was ever ready to respond to the appeal of the distressed. His tenants
will gratefully venerate his memory, so long as they retain possession of
memories of their own.
The name of Close is inseparably connected with the town of Morpeth.
Originally the town site formed a part of his grant, and the natural
advantages of its position marking its importance, the town was laid out,
and the “ Green Hills ” of the Hunter gradually rose to its present status—
returning a member to the Parliament of the Colony. Mr. Edward Charles
Close, junior, the eldest son of the lamented subject of our notice, was twice
elected to represent the electorate.
Yesterday shutters were closed in every house in Morpeth, and in many
places in East and West Maitland the same token of respect was visible.
It is but rarely that a whole district is found uniting in deep and sincere
regret for a gentleman, one of "whose prominent characteristics was a very
modest estimate ot his own ability and influence. Mr. Close never was a
fluent or ready speaker at public meetings, and he used always laugh-
ingly to remark that he never was a speaker, nor would he, when appealed
to, ever attempt, even to repeat the expressions he had used, so strong was
this conviction with him. Yet we have repeatedly seen Mr. Close turn the
current of feeling at a meeting where people had got warm and angry. He
was a man of singularly genial and cordial manner, equally pleasant in
demeanour to the rich and poor, the influential and the retiring, and never
arousing himself any angry feeling by his words or acts, and being a man
of strong common sense and clearness of thought, his hesitating short speech
would be listened to with the deepest respect, and would often still the
clamour and anger that more ready speakers had tried in vain to allay. But
though not a public speaker, Mr. Close was eminent for conversational
power, and charmed the most intelligent men by his quiet humour and
genial enjoyment of the passing joke. These qualities, united with his
readiness to take part in nearly all public movements, made Mr. Close, in
the days of his strength, the favourite chairman of this part of the
Hunter. If Mr. Close were present at a meeting, no one seemed to think of
naming any other gentleman for chairman —he was invariably moved into
the chair—nor do we recollect an instance of a counter motion. We have had


among us, and we happily can still number among our leading residents
some true specimens of the ‘ 1 fine old English gentleman but we have
never known any one who was a finer or truer example than Mr. Close.
Some months after Mr. Close’s death, the inhabitants of the
Hnnter River District erected a fine window to his memory in the
church at Morpeth.




W. E. SMITH,
SYDNEY, NEWCASTLE AND LONDON.










