

lII. The Country between Liverpool Plains and Moreton Bay,
in New South Wales. Extracts from two Letters from Com-
mander H. G. Hamilton, R.N., toW. R. Hamilton, Esq.
Collaoy, March 4, 1843.
I mentioned in my last that Henry Denison and myself were
going to the northward in search of a new cattle station. We
returned last night after an absence of nine weeks, and a ride of
1250 miles. We enjoyed it extremely, at least during the fine
weather. After searching in several directions, we were lucky
enough to find a good run on the Richmond River close to water-
carriage. The Richmond is marked in Arrowsmith?s map, though
not quite correctly; it falls into the sea about 50 or 60 miles
S. of Moreton Bay, and is navigable for small vessels about 70 miles
from its mouth; our station is just at the head of the navigable
part of the river, on the S. side, about 30 miles in a straight line
from the coast, and takes in nearly 20 miles of river frontage.
The whole of the country between Liverpool Plains and our
new station is at present nearly a blank in the maps; but it
includes some of the finest parts of the colony, and I shall soon
send you a map of it, for though I had no other instrument with
me than a small pocket-compass, I was able to get a good deal of
information from the different settlers.
We left this on the morning of the 30th of December. Our
first three days? journey took us across Liverpool Plains to the
Commissioner?s on the Peel River; from which the next day we
went to Tam worth, the Company?s station, about 30 miles higher
up the Peel; and the same night we went on to the foot of the
range leading to the table-land of New England, camping at
sunset close to a small water-hole on ff Moonbi Creek.? New
England, including ? Beardy Plains,? is a high table-land, about
150 miles in length, from 30 to 50 broad, and about 60 miles from
the coast; it is a continuation of the dividing range between the
eastern and western waters, and is about 4000 feet above the
level of the sea. The climate is therefore very different from
ours here, and more favourable for the growth of wheat and
vegetables; though decidedly not so good for sheep. This table-
land falls much more gradually to the N.W. and W. than it does
towards the E., and the country between the lowland of the inte-
rior and the dividing range is more suited for stock than the de-
scent towards the sea; indeed there is now very little unoccupied
land left between the heads of the western waters and their junc-
tion with the Darling; and even the latter river is occupied for
above 300 miles of its course. The last accounts from the
Darling are very unfavourable; they are suffering severely from
drought. The country immediately to the E. of the table-land


is of a different character : the rivers, after running a few miles
over a comparatively level country, suddenly fall into ravines fre-
quently 2000 feet deep, and so perpendicular as to be perfectly
impassable for man or beast; at least no one has yet found a way
across them. The old road from New England to Port Mac-
quarie, after following down the leading ridge between the Apsley
and M?Leay rivers, continues along the narrow gorge of the latter,
crossing it above thirty times before reaching the open country.
The scenery, you may imagine, is very beautiful, and the falls
during the rainy season must be grand.
March 24, 1843.
I send with this a map of the country we passed through, with
our route marked in red ink. Ido not pretend that it is per-
fectly correct, having, as I said before, only had a small compass
with me. The parts through which our road does not pass are from
the reports of those living on or near the spot, and they are as cor-
rect as can at present be obtained. The latitude and longitude of
?Wandsworth? may be depended upon, as I got them from Mr.
Hailed, whose station it is, and who had determined them by re-
peated observations ; the positions of ? Shoal Bay ? and, I believe,
? Tamworth,? are already correctly placed in Arrowsmith?s map,
so that the relative positions of the intermediate places are not
likely to be far out. The rivers ?Sovereign? and ?Severn,?
with all the intermediate waters, form the heads of what Arrow-
smith in his map calls ? Dumaresque River,? but it is now known
by the name of ? Severn ? until it joins the ? Darling.? The
? M'lntyre River ? and ? Bandarra ? both run into the ? Gwydir,?
the ? Bandarra? being the principal head; and the ? Macdonald
River? joins the Nammoy. I believe it to be the same as the
Muluerindie of Arrowsmith. With regard to the names, all
within ( ) are those of the persons at present occupying the dif-
ferent stations; some of the others are the native names. None
of them are my own.
To resume the narrative of our journey. From our camp at
the foot of the Moonbi pass, we went to the inn on the ? Mac-
donald? (where we breakfasted), 10 miles off; and after giving
our horses an hour?s rest, proceeded to Salisbury, a station be-
longing to Mr. Marsh, 25 miles from the ? Macdonald.? This
part of ? New England? is principally granite, of a grey colour,
and coarse in the grain; the first we met with was 3 or 4 miles
from the foot of the ? Moonbi? pass, where in many places the
ground was covered with enormous boulders, some of them rest-
ing on other stones of the same kind, but of much smaller size.
The pass itself is a severe pull for loaded drays, but it is the only
road on to the table-land from the S. We remained at Salisbury


one day to rest our horses, and to get a little information as to our
further proceedings. Mr. Marsh recommended our going to see
a station belonging to a Mr. McKenzie on ? Stony-batter Creek,?
in the Bandarra country, which is reckoned the first step off the
table-land to the westward. We left Salisbury on Thursday,
January sth, and rode through a rather uninteresting country to
? Saurnarez,? distant 17 miles; this belongs to Mrs. Dumaresq�e,
now in England. From thence we went to Yarrowitch, a sta-
tion of Judge Forbes?s, where we slept. The latter part of
our road was through a very pretty country, thickly clothed with
grass, though the soil did not look good, being nothing but a
granite sand. We found Mr. Russell in charge of the
station. At the time of our arrival he was out in a small canoe
fishing; but he soon came in with three fine cod?a fish that
I had not before seen in the country, and only to be found in the
western waters ; it is a much better fish than either the mullet or
perch of our rivers. On the following day we proceeded to Mr.
McKenzie?s station, riding through a great part of his run: we
found it quite as good a country as we wanted, well watered, and
the soil good, consisting chiefly of decayed whinstone. That
night we went on to a Mr. Bell?s station, on the ? Macdonald;?
he has only lately formed it, and they had but one small hut up,
so, the night being fine, we took our plaids and slept out. The
next day we rode through the bush to Kentucky and Salisbury,
passing through a very rocky and bad country, consisting chiefly
of granite boulders. We steered our course by compass, and
made Kentucky within a few hundred yards. As it was still un-
certain whether circumstances would admit of our getting pos-
session of this station, we determined to look out for another; and,
after remaining Sunday and Monday at Salisbury, we again made a
start in company with a Mr. Thompson, whom we found living with
Mr. Marsh, and who, having nothing particular to do, had offered
to come with us ; he remained with us till we reached the ? Cla-
rence,? and we found him a very agreeable companion. Whilst
at Salisbury we were told by several people that a fine country
might be found to the eastward, if only the ravines of the
? McLeay ? or ,f Apsley ? could be passed, and that even if we
could not cross them, we might certainly head them; both of
which, from what we have since learned, I believe to be impos-
sible, at least as regards ? McLeay.? The ? Apsley ? ravines we
did not see, but they are said to be of the same description as
the former. On leaving Salisbury, which we did on Tuesday,
January 10th, we determined to try the Apsley; but, from what
we learned at Mr. Rusden?s, we changed our mind and turned
N. again. That evening we stopped at Dr. Thompson?s, and
went on the next day to Mr. Richards?s, who told us that the falls
VOL. xm. s


could not be crossed in any direction, and that the only way of
getting into the ravine was down the old road to Port Macquarie,
and that when at the bottom there was no way of ascending on
either side for many miles, not indeed until the country opens
out towards the sea-coast. Having heard so many different ac-
counts of this extraordinary country, we determined to go and see
it for ourselves. We left Richards?s in the afternoon due N.,
with the intention of not returning, if we could possibly get for-
ward j and after riding about 4 miles over a rather bad and
broken country, the most extraordinary and at the same time
beautiful view opened upon us. Immediately before us lay a
ravine, full 2000 feet deep, if not more, in many parts almost per-
pendicular, and in all so steep as to afford no footing for man or
beast. The rock is principally of a blueish-coloured schist, and in
every other place where we met with the ravines, they were of the
same rock. From the spot at which we halted, we could see
about 10 or 12 miles down the ravine to the eastward, and sor 6
up in a W.N.W. direction, and in the whole of that distance there
was no apparent possibility of either getting down or up. The
opposite land, which was of the same height with that on which we
stood, and not, at the farthest, half-a-mile off, appeared mode-
rately good ; but from all I have since seen, I have no doubt that
the whole of the country marked ? broken ?? in my map, is inter-
sected with ravines of the same character, and more or less broken,
leaving small tracts of good land between them; but as there is
no possible way, as yet known, of reaching them, they are likely
to be left for many years to come in the hands of the blacks, who
do, I believe, now and then cross. Seeing the impossibility of
proceeding, we returned to Mr, Richards?s, and remained there
that night. On the following day we determined to try what we
could do by heading the falls, and for that purpose we went across
the bush to Mr. Cruikshanks?s, where we got a supply of damper
and cheese, to enable us to remain out a few nights. We then
followed down his creek for about 5 miles, when we again met
the ? falls.? The creek that we had been following fell almost
perpendicularly nearly 1000 feet. We came upon the fall so
suddenly, that we were within a few feet of the precipice before
we were aware we were at all near it. Here we rested for the
night. The following morning, after catching our horses, we
again proceeded : we had not ridden above a mile, in a northerly
direction, before we came to another river, which we crossed just
above its fall. The scenery about the latter was more beautiful
than any we had yet seen ; as fine indeed as anything of the kind
I had witnessed in Switzerland. Our object was to get as far to
the E. as possible; but whenever we turned our heads in that
direction, we were stopped by the ravine before us; and after


passing the falls of two other rivers, we arrived a little before
sunset at a cattle station of Mr, O?Connell?s. The stockman
living there told us that there was no use trying to penetrate in an
easterly direction: he had often attempted it himself, but had
always failed. He also assured us that our best chance was to
the N. of the Snowy Mountains?(this name is not from there
being any snow, but from their being topped with bare granite
rocks, which at a distance have a white appearance). We deter-
mined to follow his recommendation, particularly as we heard
there was a stockman living at Ward?s station who he thought
knew of a run out in that direction.
We started ?the following morning, and got to Hall?s about
noon: passing through a fine grazing country with a whinstone
soil. There is no regular road from Hall?s to Ward?s, being
only a marked tree line, and that not easy to find ; so sunset
found us still some miles from the latter, and we had to camp
in a small gully and swamp at the foot of the Snowy Mountains.
The country being very scrubby and thickly wooded, we thought
it prudent to keep a watch over our horses during night, which
we did by taking three hours each. The musquitos here were a
great annoyance. The following day we arrived at Ward?s. It
turned out that the stockman, to whom we had been sent, did not
know of anything worth having, but he offered to come out with us
3 or 4 days if he could get any one to look after his cattle, which
had been frightened a few days previously by the blacks, and re-
quired herding for a short time to quiet them. As no one was to
be found on the spot, Mr. Thompson, who had accompanied us
from Salisbury, offered himself for the service, and after replenish-
ing our stock of damper, we started the next day with our new
guide. After passing another cattle station of O?Connell?s, we
arrived at Coutts? sheep station, in the middle of the day : from
thence we ascended a high mountain to the south, hoping to
get a good view of the country to the south and east. When at
the top, although the weather was rather hazy, we saw enough to
satisfy us that there was no open country to the south of us, or
to the south-east. To the north or east we could see nothing;
another mountain obstructing the view. It is said, and I have no
doubt it is true, that the sea has been seen from this hill: we could
not catch a sight of it on account of the haze rising in that direc-
tion. We had hardly got down, and remounted our horses, when
it began to rain, and soon afterwards so thick a fog came on, that
our guide lost his way. I had luckily observed our direction as
we went, and with the help of my compass we soon got back to
Coutts? station. The next morning being fine, we again started
in an easterly direction, and spent two more days trying to push our
way through a very broken and scrubby country, the rain conti-
s 2


nuing to fall almost the whole time. (The frequency of rain is in-
deed a very striking peculiarity of the whole of the eastern ridge of
New England.) We at length gave up the attempt, not being able
to penetrate a cedar scrub ; and thinking that even if we found a
good country beyond, we should never be able to get a dray, or even
stock into it; we were at one time 3 hours in the scrub, and I don?t
think we made half a mile in a straight line altogether. We tried
also to turn it in both directions, but found it impossible from the
nature of the ground. We therefore, after some deliberation, de-
termined to return to Salisbury, and then proceed by the more usual
route to the ? Richmond River.? We were 4 days before we reached
Salisbury: and after resting one, we started again on the 24th Ja-
nuary. Our first day?s journey, 32 miles, took us to ? Booralong,?
another station of Mr. Marsh?s, from which we rode a short day of
17 miles to ?Wandsworth.? Here we spent the afternoon. If any
settlers ought to get on in this country, the owners of the latter
station certainly should not fail. The party consists of six : three
Halleds and three Everetts, the two families being related; they
do everything for themselves. When we arrived, one was hard at
work as a blacksmith, repairing the drays for going down the
country ; another is a stockman, and looks after a herd of cattle ;
a third takes charge of the sheep, acting at times as shepherd ;
a fourth a carpenter; another a gardener, besides looking after
the horses, of which they have a good many; and the eldest of
the party keeps the accounts, and goes to Sydney to effect sales
and purchases. They built their own house, sawing all the wood
themselves, and put up all the fences, &c. ; and they seem to be in
full enjoyment of all the comforts and necessaries of a settler?s
life.
The following day we passed Wauchope?s and Boyd?s, arriving
in the evening at Turner?s, 34 miles. Most of this day?s ride was
through a beautiful country, particularly after passing the range
between the two former places. This range divides ? New Eng-
land ? from ? Beardy Plains,? though they both form part of the
Table-land ; but the latter is generally some hundred feet lower
than ? New England.? From Turner?s we went to Windeyer?s,
30 miles ; here we had to wait three days to get our horses shod,
the blacksmith who was on the station having no nails, and we were
obliged to send 30 miles to borrow enough for our wants. Our
next day?s ride, 32 miles, was to ? Tenterfield,? a station of
Robert M'Kenzie?s, a settler whom I had often met in Sydney.
This part of the Table-land is a good deal lower than New
England?l should think fully 1000 feet, and it is said to fall
still more towards the north. ? Tenterfield? is only about 60
miles from Darling-downs. From this place we changed our
course to the eastward ; and after riding about 6 or 8 miles over


a nearly level and open country, we began to descend off the
Table-land, and reached ? Hindmarsh?s ? just before sun-set.
It rained the best part of the day, the road bad, and very hilly;
the distance altogether 35 miles. ? Hindmarsh?s ?is a house of
accommodation, but, as you may suppose, not a first-rate inn,
being indeed nothing more than a large hut; nevertheless, as it
turned out to be a very rainy and windy night, we were not sorry
to get under cover. This is the only road off the Table-land lead-
ing to the Clarence, a large river, emptying itself into the sea at
Shoal Bay. The next morning we again started in the rain to
ride 15 miles to Evans?s, at the junction of the ? Clarence?? and
Rocky rivers, where the bad weather obliged us to remain all the
following day. Being now quite off the ?Table-land,? we found
the climate very different from what we had had for the last few
weeks, and every thing growing most luxuriantly : and, from being
so near the mountains, there is no want of rain. The ? Clarence?
here is of no great size ; I do not indeed believe it to be the
principal branch of the river ; there are several others more to the
south only dotted in the map, which must, I think, bring down
a much larger quantity of water. From Evans?s we went to
Hogarth?s, 30 miles, in the valley of the ? Richmond,? and there
got a supply of bread, tea and sugar, to last 4 or 5 days, which
time we thought we might be out in search of a good run. The
whole of the country between ?Hogarth?s ? and the ?Richmond?
is one immense flat, with the exception of a few low ridges. The
first day we followed down ? Myrtle Creek? to its junction with
the south branch of the river, which we found to be 70 or 80 yards
wide, and apparently deep, the water being rather brackish, but
drinkable. The next day we continued down the left bank of
the river for several miles, through a good country for cattle:
the grass so thick that in places we could hardly ride through it,
and well watered by large lagoons and swamps, the latter being
covered with high reeds, which also form a fringe to most of the
lagoons : one of the latter was nearly covered with black swans
and wild ducks. In the afternoon we left the river, and struck
across in a north-westerly direction ; and about half-an-hour be-
fore sun-set, just as we came upon a small creek, where we
intended to rest for the night, we fell in with a camp of Wild
Blacks, with only a few women and children in it, all of whom
made off as fast as they could; but we had not gone a quarter of
a mile further up the creek before we fell in with another camp,
containing some 20 or more men, who, immediately jumping up,
with their spears, ran to the other side of the creek, where they
stopped and began brandishing their arms, and putting themselves
in all kinds of strange attitudes?all speaking together, and look-
ing fierce. Not wishing to come to closer quarters with them.


we quietly rode on, taking care to have our pistols ready in case
they should follow : this they did for some time, but on the oppo-
site side of the creek. At first we did not know whether they
wished to be friends or foes, but after a time they held up green
boughs, which satisfied us that they had no evil intentions ; we
nevertheless would not allow them to approach, and wishing to
get some little distance from them before we halted for the night,
we continued on our way, and they soon ceased to follow us. It
was so late in the evening, that we were obliged to camp not above
a quarter of a mile from them ; and although the natives do not
generally move about at night-time, we thought it prudent to keep
watch all night; but we neither saw nor heard anything more of
them.
The next day we followed up the creek, till we reached the
road leading from the ? Clarence? settlement to the lowest cross-
ing place on the ? Richmond.? We were very well satisfied with
the country we had seen; but not being sure whether it might not
already have been applied for, we made for Stapylton?s, the nearest
station we knew of on that river; we therefore followed up the
road, but when we came again upon the river, we found it too
much swollen by the late rains for our horses to ford it without a
guide; but some five or six miles lower down, opposite to Stapyl-
ton?s, we got a boat sent across for us, and our horses were swum
over without much difficulty. On making inquiries as to what
part of the country was still unoccupied, we were told that the
whole of that lying between Dobie?s and Deep Creek, ifrimedi-
ately opposite, had been granted to a Mr. Evans; but as he had
failed to occupy it within the time allowed, viz. 3 months from
the license being granted, it was still vacant. That part of the land
through which we rode was as good a country as we could wish to
have, and we were told that the whole of it was much the same :
so, without losing time in exploring further, we determined to
make the best of our way to the Commissioner of Crown Lands,
who lives on the ? Clarence.? Settlements have been established
on the banks of this latter river for several years ; but the country
is not so fine, and does not seem so fertile or so abundant as that
of the ? Richmond.?
From the Commissioner?s, as we wished to return home as quick
as possible, having been absent six weeks, we were advised to take
a short cut to the south and west, leading on to the Table-land,
near Coutts? sheep station, at which we had formerly been, when
we retraced our steps, and returned to Salisbury. Our first day?s
journey from the settlement, about 30 miles, took us to the foot
of the hills, where we found another station of Coutts?, and bear-
ing in the map the same name. Thus far we had no difficulties
to encounter. The country between the Clarence and the foot


of the Range is thickly timbered, and presents a great variety of
soil; but it is easily pervious, and the road tolerably good for
horses. Much of this country, in the joint valleys of the ? Cla-
rence ? and ? Richmond,? is favourable for the growth of wheat;
and at ? Foster?s,? a little south of the ? Clarence,? we were
assured that the year before they had reaped 45 bushels of 601bs.
each to the acre.
From Coutts? lower station we were told we could reach the
Table-land in two days?the other station of the same name
being about 30 miles off in a straight line, but nearly 60 by the
road; not wishing to carry with us more than was necessary, we
took only a small 31b. loaf, half a pound of salted meat, and a
little tea and sugar : these last are most indispensable articles
throughout this country, and particularly in the bush.
Soon after we started, the weather, which had been very fine,
changed to rain; and this with fog continued more or less the
whole time we were out, which, instead of being 1 night and 2 days,
as -we had been led to believe, was 4 nights and 5 days. The
road, if you call it such, had been formed by a man of the name
of Craig, about 2 or 3 years ago : it passes through the worst
country it was ever my lot to travel in, and one we never should
have attempted had it been correctly described to us: we were
constantly losing our way, there being little or no track; and al-
though the trees had formerly been marked with notches cut in the
bark every 50 or 60 yards, most of them had grown up, or were
not visible until we were close upon them ; and besides the pre-
cipitous and rocky ranges we had to pass, there were five or six
rivers, or rather torrents, all swollen very much with the rains,
which were to be crossed. Our horses, what with the rain, rough
ground, and crossing rivers, were soon completely knocked up, and
we were obliged by turns to lead and drive them on. However,
we contrived to reach ?Coutts ? upper sheep station in the fore-
noon of the sth day.
H. G. H.
