

PetH
!ai>X /
POLYNESIAN LABOUR TRAFFIC,
AND THE MURDER OF
BISHOP PATTESON.
fThc flvotecbings of a |3ublit JWccfing he lb in jEonboit,
ON THE 13th DECEMBER, 1871.
WITH THE
PRIVATE DIARY OF MR. CONSUL MARCH, OF FIJI.
AND AN INTRODUCTION.
Hontton:
WILLIAM TWEEDIE, 337, STRAND.
1872.


LONDON:
GILBERT AND RIVINGTON, PRINTERS,
st. John’s square.


PREFACE.
The Committee of the Aborigines’ Protection Society, in pub-
lishing a report of the public meeting on the Polynesian Labour
Question, which was held under their auspices on the 13th of
December last, deem it necessary to offer a few words of explana-
tion. A Society, which was established more than a generation
ago, for the express purpose of protecting native races, hardly
needs to apologize for calling the attention of the British people
to the lawless practices which have grown up in the South Seas.
On the contrary, the Society would have been signally wanting
in its duty if it had turned a deaf ear to the appeals which have
been addressed to it, not only by benevolent persons in Great
Britain, but also by colonists in Australia and Fiji. It is a
mistake to suppose that the agitation against the labour traffic
originated in this country. On the contrary, the birthplace of
that agitation Was Queensland itself. Ever since the immigra-
tion began, many of the most enlightened persons in that colony
have never ceased to protest against it, and to express the belief
that its satisfactory regulation —whatever might be the good
faith of the Queensland authorities—was impossible. That the
number of this party is increasing, and that it is daily being
recruited by allies from the ranks of its opponents, are facts
which admit of no question. The altered tone of the colonial
press amply bears out this statement. Perhaps, however, the
most remarkable piece of evidence is that supplied in a letter
recently addressed by Captain Whish to the Brisbane Courier}
This gallant gentleman is described by Acting-Governor O’Connell,
as one of “ the earliest,” and also “ one of the largest employers
of Polvnesian labour in the colony.” In May last, in his place
in the Legislative Council, he moved an address to the Governor,
which expressed “ surprise' and indignation ” at certain state-
ments which had been made (not without adequate authority)
by the Aborigines’ Protection Society. His motion was indeed
a vote of censure upon the Society; an expression of hostile
opinion which the latter could bear with the greater equanimity,
because it was unconscious of having, either by word or act,
exhibited any unfriendly feeling towards a colony, in whose pro-
sperity and good name every Englishman must feel the deepest
1 30th October, 1871.
A 2


interest. Captain Whish, however, does not now speak in that
confident tone which characterized his proceedings in the Legis-
lative Council. After defending the principle involved in the
importation of Polynesian labour into the colony, he makes these
pregnant remarks:—
“ But the procuring of these islanders in the first instance has
been out of the hands of the employer altogether, as a general
rule; and however honourable the latter may be, if he have to
endorse the action of an unscrupulous agent he has also to bear
whatever blame may have been incurred in the transaction.
Hitherto I have been under the impression that the recruiting
was fairly carried on, partly because so many vessels going for men
have come back without them, although the men were there ;
whereas, if kidnapping were practised, they could have got their
full complement; but the history of the last trip of the Jason has
considerably modified my views on this subject. Dismal tales
reach us of cruelty practised on board slave-ships under foreign
flags, and people at a distance confound together into one cate-
gory every thing horrible they have ever heard of slave-ships and
coolie-traders, and conclude that the masters of all ships similarly
engaged are similarly disposed. Upon such misconceived ideas,
this colony has been accused of encouraging slavery.
“ I am quite aware that kidnapping may be called a breach of
the law, just as murder is or any other crime ; and yet the use of
fire-arms is not prohibited because poachers occasionally shoot
gamekeepers. But this is not my view of the case. Any
approach to slavery is to be guarded against as a detestable and
most insidious evil; and before any vessel hailing from Queens-
land should be classed together with such floating hells as the
Dolores Ugarte, I for one would rather abandon any industry for
which coloured labour was considered essential. I have been a
strenuous supporter of Polynesian labour, as long as I verily
believed that all was fair and square; but as soon as I discover
that even the presence of a government agent on board is no
security against violence, kidnapping, and murder (if necessary),
I see but one course to pursue to prevent the recurrence of such
enormities.”
After the revelations which have been lately made, we are not
surprised that Captain Whish has written a letter which argues
a belief on his part that the notorious evils of the traffic far out-
weigh its supposed advantages. The case of the Jason, to which
he refers, has no doubt provoked his just and high-minded criti-
cisms. Mr. Kinnaird, in his luminous speech, went very fully
into that case: but it is desirable to state, that the commander
of the Jason has been committed for trial on fresh charges of
kidnapping, and that the testimony against him on these charges
consists of the evidence of three of his own seamen, who deposed
in the police-court to various acts of kidnapping and outrage.
It is worthy of remark that thus far the cost of the proceedings
has not been defrayed by the local authorities. Mr. Alfred David-


son, of Brisbane, states, “ that the trouble and cost of the com-
mittal by the magistrate have been thrown on private persons ;
and if it had not been for this private act, the thing, with all its
evils, might still be going on.” This is a sufficient answer to
those who have represented that an official machinery for the de-
tection and punishment of offenders exists in Queensland. If the
machinery is there, it has not been brought into operation.
We have published, in an Appendix, a copy of the private
journal of Mr. March, our Consul at Ovalau, Fiji, in order to
show how wide are the ramifications of that slave-traffic which is
now desolating the islands of the Pacific, and how necessary it is
that the British Government —taking a broad view of its duties
and responsibilities —should not only put a stop to the lawlessness
of its own subjects, but also endeavour to conclude a treaty with
France, Germany, and the United States, for the extirpation of
kidnapping and piracy in the Pacific.
7, Adam Street,
Adelphi, W.C., London,
15th January, 1872.


.
•
■
•
.
*
•
.
/
*


THE POLYNESIAN LABOUR TRAFFIC.
A Meeting convened by the Committee of the Aborigines’ Pro-
tection Society was held in the Booms of the Social Science
Association, London, on Wednesday, the 13th of December, 1871,
for the purpose of considering the present state of the Polynesian
Labour Question, with especial reference to the murder of Bishop
Patteson.
The Hon. Arthur Kinnaied, M.P., presided, and there were
also present —Lord Alfred S. Churchill, Sir John Hay, Bart.,
M.P., Sir T. Powell Buxton, Bart., Dowager Lady Buxton, Sir
Donald McLeod (late Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjaub),
General Alexander, Mr. T. Hughes, Q.C., M.P., Mr. W.
McArthur, M.P., the Eev. Dr. Mullens, Secretary of the London
Missionary Society, Mr. Lyons McLeod (late Consul in the
Niger), the Eev. James Davis, the Eev. William Arthur, Eev,
B. Millard (Assistant Secretary of the Anti-Slavery Society),
Mr. Seton-Karr (late Secretary to the Government of India),
Major Evans Bell, Professor Sheldon Amos, Mr. Ewen Davidson
(Queensland), Mr. G. W. Hastings (Chairman of the Social
Science Association), Mr. Edmund Sturge (Hon. Secretary of
the Anti-Slavery Society), Mr. Edwin Pears (General Secretary,
S. S. Association), Mr. Samuel Gurney, Mr. Cowell Stepney, Mr.
W. E. Selway, Mr. P. W. Chesson (Secretary of the Aborigines’
Protection Society), Mr. C. H. Hopwood, Mr. T. P. Bunting,
and many other ladies and gentlemen.
The Chaieman, after referring to their deep anxiety with
reference to the condition of H.E.H. the Prince of Wales,
which would have led to the postponement of the meeting, but
for the importance of there being no unnecessary delay in pre-
senting a memorial to Her Majesty’s Government on the subject
which had brought them together, affecting as it did the lives
and happiness of so many people (hear, hear), said, —
The matter of South Sea Islands emigration has long been
causing anxious thought to those to whom the prosperity of the
coloured races is an object desired equally with that of the more
favoured races ,of men. At the same time, the honour of Great
Britain is concerned in seeing that full justice is done to them.
Many firmly believe that this emigration is not, and never can
be, wholly voluntary, and is liable to such abuse that it is not
using too strong language to say that this traffic in labour for


Queensland and Fiji has degenerated into a virtual slave-trade.
And it is certainly very suspicious when we find the late Acting-
Governor of Queensland, Sir Maurice O’Connell, using this
language in a despatch addressed to the Earl of Kimberley on
the 21st of March last:—
“ But it may be urged that the mode in which these Poly-
nesians are recruited, as it is termed, is an infringement on
personal rights, inasmuch as they are deported from their homes
under the influence of their chiefs.
“ This may or may not be the case, and I would submit that
this is not a matter in which the Government of Queensland
have any power to interfere. The South Sea Islands are inde-
pendent, and under no Protectorate, and it must be presumed
their inhabitants are free to offer their services to those willing
to engage them, suffering, as it is said these islands do, from over-
population and want of employment.
“ But the Government of Queensland have taken, and from the
commencement of this traffic have been anxious to take, all the
precautions necessary to provide against any ill-usage by forcible
abduction of natives from any of the South Sea Islands, in so far
as they could by law control the actions of those engaged.”
It is our duty to impress the Imperial Government with our
determination to oppose any such idea of the relations existing
between the coloured and the white races, and we must hold
them responsible for visiting the extreme penalties of the Im-
perial laws against the slave-trade on all Englishmen, whether
within or outside the limits of the empire, who are proved to be
breaking them. This is not simply a colonial, but an Imperial
question.
The fact is, I fear, that the money temptation is too strong for
the cupidity of selfish men to resist, and nothing but the strong
arm of law which we evoke can be sufficient to restrain them.
Happily we are not acting in this matter in antagonism with the
inhabitants of Queensland. On the contrary, I can state, on the
authority of the late Agent-General, Mr. Douglas, with whom I
had the pleasure of becoming personally acquainted during his
residence in London, that the majority of the inhabitants would
be glad to be quit of the Labour Law of the colony. In letters
which I received from him, dated Brisbane, Aug. 29, and Oct, 4,
1871, he thus writes:—
Aug. 29.—“ Hot much was said during the elections about the
Polynesian question; people were too much engrossed: but
whenever it was alluded to, it was in terms strongly deprecatory
of its perpetuation. No one who professed to be a supporter of it
could get returned by any important constituency. The Govern-
ment are, I believe, about to bring in a Bill further to restrict the
traffic, but I do not think this is likely to come on for discussion
before next November. The result of appointing agents to proceed
to the islands on board the small craft engaged in this traffic has
gone to prove that the previous course of traffic has been far


from spotless in its character. It is now becoming clear, that, so
far as Queensland is concerned, it must come to an end before
long.
“ Coming from San Francisco, we touched at Honolulu, and
saw something of the Hawaiian Islands. I trust that the new
form of government at Fiji will develope itself in a similar
manner to that at the Sandwich Islands, which appears to answer
most admirably. The missionaries have exercised an admirable
influence.”
Oct. 4. —“ I observe by the telegraphic intelligence, that some
notice had been taken of the Polynesian question in Parliament,
and you have been reported to have said that you are not satisfied
with the official explanations. I can well understand that. The
Polynesian traffic to Queensland has been coddled up
The people here are becoming alive to this, and I hope we shall
soon see an end of it. We have no prejudice against race or
colour, but labour which is to be of real benefit to the country
must be free, that is, on the same basis as European labour, and
must not be based on an estimate of its value which would apply
equally to horses or cattle. If you require a colonial authority
to back you in any statements you may make, you are at perfect
liberty to quote me as an authority. . . . Nine-tenths of the
population of this colony of Queensland repudiate the action of
these selfish Polynesian labour-mongers, who have brought us
into discredit with our English fellow-countrymen.”
This opinion is confirmed by an extract from a colonial paper
to this effect:—
“ The South Sea Islander is becoming an expensive as well as
a troublesome part of our population. Upon his advent it was
asserted that he was docile, industrious, and peaceable. He may
have all these qualities, but, if so, those who have managed him
in Queensland have so arranged matters that the South Sea
Islanders give more trouble than any other people in the
country. Special Acts of Parliament have been passed for their
especial benefit; officers have been appointed with the same
object in view; and yet we are constantly hearing of ill-treatment
of these islanders, and the country is brought in for no end of
expense upon their account. Courts of inquiry are set afoot;
several persons are in charge for examination or trial upon their
account; they make quite a feature among the occupants of the
gaols; the neighbouring colonies are getting into a habit of
periodically despatching sailors and other men as prisoners to
Queensland for maltreating, kidnapping, or doing something else
to Polynesians; and by the mail we are assured that the Imperial
authorities are about to put a stop to the whole thing. We
sincerely hope they may, for it is a nuisance—a result which
cannot but follow any attempt to introduce people here upon
terms clearly differing from those of the rest of the popula-
tion.”
The policy of introducing servile labour may almost be


denominated faithless to the English working-men, who are
temoted to emigrate by the favourable descriptions given of the
rate of demand for their labour, and, when they arrive, find the
ground pre-occupied, and, as a necessary result, wages lowered
by the forced importation of an inferior class of labour. And
certainly Parliament cannot be expected to tax the working-men
of England to provide a fleet to keep down slave-trading, caused
indirectly by the laws of Queensland, in order to enable that
colony to import labour detrimental to our own working-men.
For these our colonies are the natural outlet. There alone can
they hope to become possessors of land to any great extent. And
it would be a suicidal policy to close any outlet for home labour
when our population is annually increasing at an enormous rate.
But our immediate business to-day is to bring forward
our reasons for calling this traffic in labour —from the way in
which it is carried on —slave-traffic. And for this we are
not concerned with the treatment that the imported South Sea
Islanders receive in Queensland after they get there. We may
assume, that it is all that can be desired, and that they are effec-
tually protected by law. The question with which we have now
to deal is—How are they obtained ? How are they induced to
leave their island homes? And how are they treated on the
voyage to Queensland and Fiji ? The true answers to these ques-
tions, if we are correctly informed, are very grave; and trust-
worthy evidence goes to prove that the natives are constantly
kidnapped, cruelly betrayed, and violently confined to the hold
of the small trading-vessels; and that all this culminates in
bloodshed, sometimes of the natives, sometimes retaliatory, as in
the case of the lamented Bishop Patteson, who seemed to have
foreshadowed his own doom. I shall first refer to Bishop
Patteson’s testimony, against whom I suppose the insinuation
will not be accepted that he objected to what was being done
because he did not wish to lose servants whom he could employ
at low wages. I say this, because I think it disgraceful that the
testimony of missionaries should be impugned on ground like
this without a rebuke from those in authority. To cry down
men who have, with their lives in their hands, reclaimed savage
islands to Christianity and civilization, ought not for a moment to
be tolerated. In Africa and the South Seas, at least, they ought
to be safe from taunts like these. And while I am on this
ground I must express my astonishment that, in the papers
presented to Parliament, there is an evident leaning on the part
of officials towards giving less credit to the testimony of those
who give evidence against the traffic than of the parties impli-
cated directly in it, whether that evidence comes from a mis-
sionary or from a naval officer. It is quite true that the
character of any Englishman is not to be lightly impugned; but
it is much more than character that is at stake in the case of
the South Sea Islanders, and we are bound by every feeling of
humanity, as well as justice, to inquire impartially whether the


allegations made can be substantiated, that they are forcibly and
fraudulently taken from their homes.
In a letter written in 1869 by Bishop Patteson to the bishop
of Sydney, he says,—
Jam very anxious as to what I may find going on, for I have
conclusive moral (though, perhaps, not legal) proof of very dis-
graceful and cruel proceedings on the part of traders kidnapping
natives and selling them in New Caledonia to the French, and in
Fiji, and, lam informed, in Queensland. Whatever excuses may
be (and have been) made as to the treatment they receive at the
hands of planters, and the protection they may have from a
Consul when landed, it is quite certain that no supervision is
exercised over the traders at the islands. All statements of
‘ contracts made with wild native men are simply false. The
parties do not know how to speak to each other, and no native
could comprehend the (civilized) idea of a ‘ contract.’ One or
two friendly men, who have been on board these vessels (not in
command), and were horrified at what they saw, have kindly
warned me to be on my guard, as they may retaliate (and who
can say unjustly or unreasonably, from their point of view) upon
the first white men they see, connecting them, naturally, with the
perpetrators of such crimes.”
Again, in an extract from the Southern Cross of date
November 6, we find this statement:—
“ In a communication which has been received from the Eight
Eev. Prelate, dated Ist September, on board the mission schooner,
the Bishop states that ‘ about 340 natives have been kidnapped
from the Banks group alone, and taken to Brisbane; that the
traders in these nefarious practices have used his name every-
where, the lie commonly told being that ‘ the Bishop has broken
his leg getting into the boat; he can’t come himself, and has
sent us to take you to him,’ Sometimes the miscreants have
varied their story, as follows ‘ The Bishop is on board, but is
not well; he can’t come ashore.’ ”
And in a letter from the Bishop to Sir G. F. Bowen, Governor
of New Zealand, dated July 4, 1870, he writes :
“ As things now are, it is admitted that this ‘ system of so-
called emigration is likely to degenerate, and probably has some-
times degenerated, into a practice approaching a slave-trade,
perhaps actually amounting to it.’ (Sir William Manning’
Attorney-General of New South Wales.) It is very difficult for
even well-intentioned men to carry on this traffic honestly. The
dialects spoken in the islands of the Pacific are almost innume-
rable. There are no interpreters; men employed by owners of
vessels or by settlers as interpreters are quite unable to commu-
nicate freely, if at all, with the various islanders. A few sentences
of broken English, with here and there a native word imperfectly
understood and badly pronounced, are supposed to convey to the
native’s mind an intelligible idea of what is called a contract.
The vast majority of natives taken from their homes have no


notion of the distance or character of the place to which they are
carried, and of the work they have to do; of the length of time
they are to be kept at work each day; of the time, whether
months or years, when they are to be brought home, if, indeed,
they are taken home at all. A native interpreter (i. e. an islander
who has learned some English, and is used as a decoy to entice
away his own people) is invariably an untrustworthy man in the pay
of the trader, and ready, with any lying story, to induce natives
to leave their home. So also it is very difficult for the captain of
a man-of-war to obtain reliable information of what is taking
place in these islands. How, e. g. at Santa Cruz Island is he to
find out whether any violence has been committed by the islanders
or by traders ? There is absolutely no means of communication
with these natives. lam sure that no white man has set foot on
Santa Cruz for many years except myself, and I cannot speak a
sentence of their language properly. A natural retaliation upon
some perhaps unoffending boat’s crew is, in such circumstances,
the first indication (in all probability) of some unhappy inter-
course with some trading vessel. Ido not see what good can be
done by a man-of-war visiting islands, or rather attempting to
communicate with islanders, where the languages are almost or
wholly unknown. The natives are naturally afraid of the “ great
ships,” the guns, the number of men, except where missionaries
have taught them that these are the very ships they need not
fear, because they are specially sent to provide that justice shall
be done to the white and coloured man alike. A man-of-war can
to some extent check an illegal traffic by occasionally intercepting
vessels engaged in the trade without a licence, and by boarding
licensed vessels, and seeing that they have only the proper
number of natives on board, &c. But it is not possible to obtain
from the great majority of the islanders of the West Pacific any
trustworthy account of what maj» have taken place among them;
and it is useless to hope for any disinterested statement from the
traders.”
The last "testimony that I shall give from him is from a letter
addressed by Mr. Thurston, late Consul at Fiji, to Captain
Palmer, and this is on the depopulating influence of the trade: —
“Bishop Patteson pointed out to me an island (Yalna), the
inhabitants of which he computed at one time at 4,500 men,
women, and children. I went there next day, and saw ‘ every
body,’ so I was' told, and I counted 227 men. A great number
of women were there, but I could not count them.”
I shall* now refer to the testimony of a missionary, which I
hold to be eminently trustworthy. The Rev. John Gr. Paton
writes from the Hew Hebrides, December 19, 1870, to the Rev.
Robert Steel, Convener of the Presbyterian Committee on
Missions residing in Sydney, whom I have heard privately from,
and he enclosed the letter which appeared in the Sydney Morning
Herald of February 13, 1871, which letter also appears in the
Parliamentary Blue Book.


“ Aniwa, New Hebrides,
“ 19 th December, 1870.
“ To the Rev. Dr. Steel, Agent of the New Hebrides Mission.
“My dear Sir,— Having had to go by the island of Espiritu Santo to Lifu
lately, in order to get medical advice for one of our children, permit me to state
what came under our notice in the slave-trade during one day when Ivins' at
anchor in Fil Harbour, Fate. J 6
“ The Wild Duck, Captain Martin, came first to anchor near by us in Fil
Harbour. When the Dayspring's boat went alongside the Wild Duck, three
Santo lads instantly leapt from the deck into the boat, and implored to he set at
liberty, as they did not want to go away in the vessel, but Captain Martin had
them dragged into his vessel again with great difficulty. One of those lads had
been the Rev. John Goodwill’s servant in Santo, so I accompanied him on board,
to see why his lads were being taken away against their will. The captain
refused to let them go, as he said they came voluntarily on board his vessel,
and now he ‘ claimed ’ them as his. There were about thirty natives on board’
neaily all boys. The stoutest of the native men were in irons under the hatch,
as he said that they had been resisting and dangerous to his men. He said
also that the friends of most of the others had been ‘ paid for them.’ ‘ Some got
blankets, some got knives, and one got an axe.’ About 10 o’clock that evening
one of the Santo lads (Mr. Goodwill’s servant) leaped overboard : they levelled
a musket at him, threatening to shoot him, but he swam on, and got on shore,
took a Fate canoe unobserved, got on board our vessel, imploring
and soon after stowed himself away till we were again out at sea. If they had
come or sent for him we had agreed to let them take him, but they did not.
“ The Lyttona (so famous already in Queensland), Captain Winship, caine
next to anchor near us in Fil harbour. At daylight next morning an elder of
the Church at Pago named ‘Lor ’ came to the Day spring, and made the follow-
ing complaint: —‘ The captain of the Lyttona, on his way north, bought three
boys belonging to Pago, Ariss, and Kalsa, from their father—Tapina—for a
musket; and Akow, an orphan boy from Nopopon, for a piece of calico. Now,
the boys cry too much, and want to go ashore again. Yesterday, all men Pago
take calico he give for one boy, and musket he gave for two boys on board to
him, and say—“ Very good, you take him all back again, and let the three boys
come on shore again. He no want any pay belonging to you. But the captain
no let him go. Can you help us ? ’
“Having heard this statement from this intelligent Christian native, after
consultation we agreed to write to the captain the following letter, which we
sent by the native :
„ “ ‘Fate, Qth December, 1870.
“ ‘ To the Captain of the Lyttona.
“ ‘Sir,—A Christian native, belonging to Pago village, has just come on board
the Dayspring to inform us that you have three boys of that village on board
your vessel, who have been sold to you. He has given us the names of the
parties sold, and stated also the amount of payment received for them. We
understand, moreover, that the boys are unwilling to go with you, and that their
friends have bi ought back the payment received for them, to procure their
release, which you have refused to grant. As the pnrchase of human beings is
a violation of the Divine law, and degrading to British subjects, we hope you
will see the propriety of setting them at liberty before you leave this island.
“ ‘We remain yours, &c.,
(Signed) “ ‘John Geddie, missionary at Aneiteum.
“ ‘John G. Paton, missionary at Aneira.
“ ‘John Goodwill, missionary at Santo.’
‘“I h ereb y certify this is a true copy of document sent to captain of schooner
Lyttona.
(Signed) “ ‘ Feed Shepherd, mate of Day spring.
the evening Captain W inship came off to the Day spring, and said, ‘I
don t see what right I have to give up these boys. It would neither pay me nor
my employers to do so.’ We reasoned the matter with him, and informed him


that the natives had brought the piece of calico and old musket to us, and that
if he did not give them up, in the interests of the natives and of our work among
them, we would be necessitated to report the case. He said that what he had
done was common now in the trade, and he resolved to keep them whatever the
consequences might be. We were all present, and Dr. Geddie explained our
views, and the evil consequences of the trade, very carefully to him. He said,
‘ You cannot call it purchasing these boys ; I -only gave their father a present
of a musket, and he gave me the two boys; and another man a present of
calico, and he gave me one boy.’ He sailed soon after for Queensland with the
boys. His vessel was 81 tons, and he said, if I mistake not, that he had 7 b
natives on board . • ; • ' ’ , V *
When the Day spring was at Nguna, last trip, the boats of the vessels Jasow
and Spunkie, from Queensland, came in where the Revs. Messrs. Watt, Milne,
Goodwill, and Captain Fraser were assisting to put up a new mission-honse,
and purchased from a chief four boys for one musket. The Jason s boat took
the boys away. , „ u „
“ When on the same visit the Dayspring lay one night in Havannah Harbour,
Fate, five of these vessels, with natives, wore anchored near by. ihose on
board had been drinking and quarrelling, and during the night kept up a
constant discharge of musketry at each other, and probably in part to intimidate
the natives from leaping overboard to get away. One captain fled from his own
ship to the Dayspring for advice and protection, saying there was mutiny on
b °“ OnAnhva lately two vessels called, and did all they could to get natives
away. They offered a musket for every two boys got on the island. One boat s
crew tried to seize two boys by force, but the natives seized their arms, an
defended the boys, and the boat had to make off hurriedly. A boat of the othei
tried to get away with some young men while giving them tobacco, but their
friends observing made a rush at the boat, when the lads leapt out, and it-also
got away safely. . . • • • • • *
“ Undoubtedly some go willingly, yet I believe that a great majority are
drafted away against their will, as in the case of the Santo lads in the Wit
Duck, and the three Fate boys in the Lyttona. These were the only natives on
hoard to whom we could speak , but the looks of many indicated great sorrow of
heart. The white men were keeping them on board by dread of the knife, t e
loaded revolver and musket, life-preservers, and irons. The use of these the
trade now necessitates; it cannot be carried on without them on our own
islands. When once in the hands of their captors, the natives have no possi-
bility of escape except by death, which some have preferred to slavery. An
armed quard is always kept over them when on hoard such vessels, and all hands
are generally kept ready for any emergency, with knives and loaded revolvers
in their belts.
Evidence confirmatory of the above was given in December,
1868, by Consul Miller, in a letter addressed to Lord Stanley.
Hg says -
“ I feel it my duty to state to your Lordship that the rumours,
which have from time to time reached this island, afford, I
think, ground for fearing that, at all events amongst the still
savage or half-savage islands in the Pacific, fraud and decei
have too often been employed, both in procuring and in engaging
native labourers. In some of these cases the aid, even ot local
chiefs, has, it is said, been secured by a bribe ; in others the
opposition of authorities or relatives would appear to have been
surmounted by stratagem; and when men and women in sufficient
numbers had been sent or enticed on board, the ship, it is re-
ported, has made sail, leaving the execution of the written con-
tracts of service of the deluded islanders to be accomplished at


convenience during the voyage. The absence of adequate super-
vision over transactions wherein the needy agents of recruitment
usually employed, are, in general, remunerated in proportion to
the number of labourers they succeed in obtaining, renders it,
in fact, almost inevitable that abuses must occur in the engage-
ment of ignorant and unprotected natives who, on arriving at
their destination, would seldom find themselves capable of ex-
plaining, much less of substantiating, any act of fraud (not to
say violence) of which they might have been the victims. On
the other hand, when a quarrel amongst the agents employed in
this business, or with any of the seamen serving in the ship,
threatens to lead to some revelation of such misdeeds, the credi-
bility of the outspeaking party would probably be assailed by
some counter-charge of misconduct or insubordination. This
same want of disinterested control at the remote place of em-
barkation leaves besides much room for the overcrowding of
the ship, as likewise for her supplies being insufficiently cared
for; and I consequently apprehend that there must have been
cases giving just cause for the complaint made by the mis-
sionaries, that many of the natives suffer great hardships and
privation on the voyage, and that they are too much at the
mercy of any man who can cajole or force them to take a passage
on board his ship.”
And lastly, I may refer to Captain Palmer, who seized the
Daphne. He writes from the Rosario at Yate, New Hebrides:—
“ Although your orders to me are simply to collect evidence,
I should deem my duty unfulfilled if I failed to state my opinion
that the traffic in natives as at present carried on is in no way
removed from a regular slave-trade, and consequently cannot
fail to be productive of the very worst results to the natives
themselves, as well as to those who have devoted their lives to
the task of bringing them under the influence of civilization, and,
by the Divine blessing, to Christianity. Many hopeful young
men have been seduced or torn away from their homes, who were
under the beneficial influence of the missionaries ; husbands
have been taken from their wives, and daughters from parents ;
many have been brutally treated, and some murdered in cold
blood, by men calling themselves Englishmen, and professing
Christianity. Moreover, these pirates and slavers have openly
said that the demand for cheap labour is so great in Queensland
and Fiji, that they must and-will have the natives ; that they do
not care for men-of-war, but will, if necessary, put on fast
steamers. In conclusion, I much regret having been unable to
lay hold of any of these ruffians who are disgracing our name
and flag, but unfortunately I did not see a vessel of any descrip-
tion to overhaul during my cruise.”
In a letter of later date Captain Palmer says, —
“ H.M.S. Rosario at Sea, between Tauranga and Wellington.
“ You will be glad to hear that the Chief Justice has protected


me from any action for damages that the owners of the Daphne
might bring against me, but the New South Wales Government
want me to pay for all the costs of the prosecution, which is over
200 Z. I had no sooner sent off my letter of remonstrance (as
they had all along led me to believe I should not be out of
pocket) than I got a letter from Mr. Thurston, Consul at Fiji,
telling me that he has found an interpreter, and that the ‘ whole
voyage of the Daphne was a slave trip .’ He has sent all the
papers to Lord Belmore, and until I get them of course I cannot
follow him in his letter.
G. Palmer, Commander, E.N.
“ 3rd December 1869.”
And he thus describes the Daphne :
“We found her,” he says, “ a small schooner of forty-eight
tons’ register, fitted up precisely like an African slaver, minus
the irons, with one hundred natives on board, who had been
brought here from the New Hebrides, having experienced the
pleasure of a dead beat to windward for twenty-one days: they
were stark naked, and had not even a mat to lie upon ; the
shelves were just the same as might be knocked up for a lot of
pigs—no bunks or partitions of any sort being fitted; and yet
the vessel was inspected by a Government officer at Queens-
land!”
In a letter to myself dated January 31, 1871, he says: —
“It is quite an open question whether this native immigration
is not doing more harm than good to Queensland, but there can be
no doubt that the natives themselves are not improved by it. Would
it not then be wise to stop it altogether, considering the frightful
abuses that have already taken place P
“ If, on the other hand, immigration is to go on, there should
be fresh legislation, and that from an Imperial source. When
examined before the Eoyal Commission at Sydney, after my
capture of the Daphne, and asked whether I could suggest any
way of putting a stop to kidnapping, I then gave my opinion
that the whole thing lay in a nutshell, as, if the Queensland
Government had really wished to put a stop to it, they had
only to take care their captains, agents, and supercargoes were
men of known honesty and respectability, and only to charter a few
vessels, and allow no natives to be introduced into the colony except in
t/TISTYI* *
« The Queensland Labour Act professes to do a great deal to
insure fair play, but it is systematically evaded, for the most
notorious ruffians are allowed to get the natives how they can,
as in the case of Eoss Lewin, who was an accredited agent of the
Queensland Government. The deeds of this man, and of many
others of a like type, are only equalled by the West India pirates
of old, and yet he is employed to recruit native labourers into an
English colony. It is worse than useless sending a man-of-war once
a year round the islands, as she can only stop a day or two here


and there, on account of carrying but a limited supply of coal
and provisions, and immediately she leaves, the kidnappers know
they are safe from interruption for another twelve months.
“It ought to be distinctly remembered that any legislation
tor Queensland could not, however, affect the Fiji Islands, as
unfortunately no flag flies over them, and therefore special
arrangements ought to be made to stop the cruelties that go on
at the New Hebrides and Kmgsmill groups. In the despatches
i sent from the islands to Commodore Lambert, when in com-
mand of the Bosano, as well as acting Consul Thurston’s to his
Excellency the Earl of Belmore, Governor of New South Wales
very clear evidence is shown of the shameful acts that are daily
perpetrated under cover of our flag: surely the mass of evidence
as to these horrors is sufficient for any body.”
Mr. Douglas, the late Agent-General for Queensland, with
reference to this letter, wrote to me,—
“ London, 2nd Feb., 1871.
t h t7 e read a P^ a^n Palmer’s note with much pleasure, and
I cordially agree with the general tenour of his remarks. As far
as Queensland is concerned I go farther than he does. The
introduction of Polynesians into the colony is doing, in mv
cpimcm, more barm than good. It gives us a bad name here,
and that is the worst tbmg that could happen to us; for
whatever j ustification we may offer as to our treatment of the
islanders in Queensland, we cannot take sufficient security that
kidnapping may not be carried on under the colour of the
licences granted by our authorities. Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment wish us to develope our system by appointing our own
agents on board the small trading schooners which conduct this
traffic; and it is also considered desirable to secure the intro-
duction of a certain proportion of females -following, in fact the
precedents of coolie immigration. To this it may be urged
“Ist. That it would be most difficult to find thoroughly trust-
worthy men to act on behalf of the Queensland Government in a
business ot this kind.
2nd. The introduction of Polynesian women in iiromiscuous
relationship with the men would also be very bad, and quite
distasteful to a community which strives to establish the consti-
tution of its society on the model of a European standard.
ord. A protected system of Polynesian labour, based upon
what is called recruiting in the islands, carried out under the
authority of a Provincial Government for the benefit of a few
large sugar-plantations, is an unjustifiable competition with free
labour and is calculated to be prejudicial to it. The sugar-
cane is now being grown profitably by small farmers along the
eastern sea-board of Australia, and it is most unfair that they
tat d a s^J e cted to competition resting on such principles.
In JNew South Wales it would not be tolerated a moment. In
Queensland, a new colony, still much influenced by a squatting


and quasi-aristocratic class, public opinion is still in course of
formation —but there can be little doubt as to the eventual
“So much for the Queensland side of the question. The other,
and the still more difficult side of it, refers to the transfer of the
islanders from one island to another island.
“ In this consists the real slavery, for under these circumstances
they do not come under the law of any recognized nationality.”
But we shall be met by the assertion that the evidence on the
side of the traders in labour refutes that which we bring forward.
I shall not stop to argue which is the more likely to be true,
the statements of parties uninterested in the traffic, or those of
agents implicated in it, and deriving their livelihood from it ? But 1
will first refer to Captain Palmer’s testimony, connected with which
we have some trustworthy ground to go on in three facts. First,
that the Chief Justice of Sydney protected him from any action
for damages that the owners of the Daphne might bring against
him. Secondly, that though the New South Wales Government
charged him with the costs of the prosecution, that is, over 200 Z.,
the home authorities relieved him of this responsibility, in the
full consciousness that he had but done his duty in capturing
that vessel. And, thirdly (and for this I feel that great credit is
due to Mr. Childers, the then First Lord of the Admiralty), that
at the same time Captain Palmer (then commander) received his
promotion as a mark of appreciation of his services in the South
Seas, whither he was sent to investigate the facts alleged. >
One of the counter-statements respecting the Jason is from
Captain Coath, under date Maryborough, 15th March, to the
Emigration Agent. He says, — ~
“ While at anchor at Mallasa, I went across the bay to a small
island named Nguna, where the Eev. Mr. Milne was stationed,
and whose letters and papers I had received from Mr. Nelson at
Port Resolution to give him. I landed at the mission-station,
and remained with him for about one hour. WFen leaving to
come in my boat, three natives, who had been to Queensland
before, and who had returned with me on a former voyage,
requested to be again taken to Maryborough. I told them, as it
was getting dark, and I had about ten miles to pull, that I
would bring the ship over the next day. Accordingly, next
morning, it being calm, I started the chief officer, Mr. Irving, in
my stead, to go and bring these men on board. He returned at
noon, saying that the missionary had prevented these men from
going to the ship. I then sent him on shore again, the vessel at
this time endeavouring to sail across the bay. When within
a mile from the missionary-station I saw two shots fired from
the shore, and three men in the water swimming towards the
boat. The men succeeded in getting on board the boat, and said
that the missionary had told two of his Samoa servants to fire on
the boat. There were no fire-arms or any other weapons in the
boat. Next day sent boat on shore at the same place, and


engaged four more islanders, all of whom could speak very good
English and who said the muskets fired on thl previous day
were only loaded with powder.” 1
rrw nd « the CM i f officer ’ John Irvin g> in Ms statement, brings a
most serious charge against a missionary at Nguna of inciting
the natives to fire , and this charge comes up again and again in
the correspondence published, and ultimately appears in an
unt°- SU fV from r - Archer ’ the Agent-General for Queensland,
now in this country. ’
veLeldurinnhi 0 district. I was cffief officer of tho
group after touchffi/T;/ iT” a ™ d at Nguna, one of the Sandwich
35 s?
I h°y. to„S, t to\,St P ' , VT i T W 9 our toll number of natives.
difficulty in getting our fulfcomnlemenT® ex P enence tho slightest
second’ “ri(d"f°’ t ™,“ "’ C,md agreements' to »
btovinf to same to Ttt^ffi
“■ isft :*E5i
(Signed) “ Root. Gray, J.P.,
“ Immigration Agent.”
by T the steteSof “t^ OI S is . met ’ ™d, l think, discredited,
oy the statement of two able-bodied seamen on board the Jason
B 2 ’


published in the Brisbane Courier, 24th March, 1871. The state-
ment is introduced in that journal thus :
“The declaration of the chief officer of the Jason made before the Immigra-
tion Agent in Brisbane, and published by ns a few days ago, has called forth a
statement from James Harper, one of the sailors on board the•. th
last trip The following is a copy of the statement made by Harper, to the truth
of which he made a declaration before the Immigration Agent here on Saturday
last. Harper left the Jason at the beginning of the present month, and holds a
certificate from the master of his ability and good conduct during the voyage.
‘James Harper, able seaman-Was in Jason last trip; the Jason sailed from
Maryborough and arrived at Fatuna; from there went to Resoiution Bay m
Tanna • captain got drunk there ; got no men there; went 30 or 40 miles
from Resolution Bay, but still were on the coast of Tanna; the chief officer
went by himself on shore with boat; came back with two natives to look at t e
vessel when they came the vessel was ready to go, being under sail; these
two natives wanted to go ashore ; captain took them into the cabin to take their
attention off • one of them cried and wanted to go ashore; the captain- took his
to “o natives rushed out of the cabin upon deck, and onejumped
overboard and held on to the guuwale of a boat belonpng to a echooner, the
Mar caret Chissell, from Melbourne, which was near us, in the Fiji trade, the
captain ran for a musket, and threatened to shoot him if he didnt come on
board • he'would not let go the gunwale of the boat, and the mate of the
SnKok a sword and mad? a stab at him; ho then did let go, and I throw
him the end of the mainsheet, of which he caught hold; but he immediately
let go and swam for the shore. Captain Coath ordered the boat to be iowered,
■which was done and I and two others went in it to pick him up, which we did,
and he was brought to the vessel. We put him on board ; ho still sat on deck,
ervin" • the captain threatened to shoot him if he jumped overboard again, the
vessel sailing away. We then went to a place called Black Beach, for water
"k
returned natives from Maryborough, and obtained about 18 islande y
to u 3 way Went to Mow; landed four returning natives; and took on
boardMO Zll who came willingly; tomahawks, &c., being given in exchange
Wftem Left there for Mai; Wed for uutivos but did not get any. Thence for
Taswa on Apii Island; landed two men, and got two men m usual exchange.
Thence to Ambrym, where we landed three men, returned labourers; our chief
officer had paid for k native, who had been to Queensland, to act as interpreter,
Slt?3men On landing at Ambrym, this native ran away; it was
geS sundotn and I was returning to the ship, when I met the chie mate
in asked mo if I had men; I replied. ‘‘No 1- he aud,C; 'l have
lost a man lam going on shore here to see about him ; I waited mmy ,
he weS near the shore, in the boat, but did not land; one of the returned
natives we had landed came to speak to him; the mate asked for the man who
natives we naa lanaou u. ? shove off ” irom the beach ; there were 20
or^O r n n ative a s y kn the beach. When about 50 yards off the beach, the returned
native fired a musket at the boat, and the mate fired in return shots
another island Palma ; the mate went ashore in a boat for men. ihe natives
sMed us as usual by making a fire. The other boat was lowered, I went m
an interpreter. The natives
rushimr towards us I had the boat hauled off into deep water, the vessel being
about seven miles off. I had things in the boat to give in exchange for men,
aucf as tomahawks, knives, beads, and calico. My instructions were to give


two tomahawks and a knife for one man, but I might give three knives or three
tomahawks if trade were difficult. . . . Next morning we saw a fire on
Ambrym, and this native went with us on shore; both boats went. The native
acting as interpreter was in chief officer’s boat; he got two men. The chief
officer gave two tomahawks and one knife for each man. Left and went on
board with boats, and went to Apii, where we met a Fiji vessel, which reported
loss of boat and murder of two natives, part of their crew. The captain of
Jason promised to wait till next day and help to recover the lost boat. Early
next morning the chief officer and I went ashore with both boats. He went to
one place where there was a signal fire, and Ito another. On my nearing the
shore a native who had been in Maryborough spoke to me, and cautioned me
not to land, as the natives had been killing a boat’s crew. I pulled the boat
along the beach towards the mate, who called to mo to ‘Look out,’ as that was
where the boat’s _ crew were murdered; I went in near enough to have some
yams handed me in exchange for beads; both boats returned to the ship; the
other vessel was close to us ; the other vessel lowered a boat and pulled towards
us; the captain of the Jason told his chief officer to stay on board, as he was
going ashore; our two boats and the other ship’s boat went towards the shore •
on reaching shore the boat I was in was first; captain of Jason was close’
behind mo in his boat; he asked me ‘if I had sufficient ammunition ? ’ I told
him I had none at all, but that my muskets were all loaded ; getting near shore
1 stayed in my boat; the captain of Jason jumped out on shore, as did the chief
mate and also the agent of the other ship; they saw the boat they had lost, and
they launched it, and then burned all the canoes and set fire to the houses ; the
natives ran away, but some pigs were shot and taken to the Jason. Leaving
there, went a little farther down the coast of the same island, Apii; the mate
landed the last native we had to return ; I went in my boat with an interpreter
towards a fire about three miles off along the beach ; a native walked through
the water to me, and asked me to take him in the boat as he was not in the
place he belonged to^; he wanted to come to Queensland, but I was to give his
brother the usual price, two tomahawks and one knife; I went to his brother, who
was sitting on the beach a short distance off, and gave him the things; I stayed
there a little time, and got two more men; paying for each man two tomahawks
and a knife. We then went back to the ship, the boats were hoisted up, and we
went round the island that night. Early next morning the cook called me to say
that a canoe with natives in it was ahead of us, and coming towards us; muskets
were passed up out of the cabin, were loaded and put into one of our boats, which
was lowered, and the chief mate and boat’s crew went towards the canoe. On
reaching the canoe he gave the bow-oarsman his revolver, and the bow-oarsman
made the canoe fast to the boat with a rope, and both came alongside the ship.
The natives were on their way to an island about four miles off, and they had
pigs, cocoa-nuts, and other things with them; they and their property and the
canoe itself were taken on board our ship; the canoe was broken up for firewood,
the pigs, &c., taken from them. We went to Vila for wood and water, staying
one day, and then sailed for Maryborough, bringing ninety islanders.
“ I declare the above statement to be true and correct. his
“James Harper, x Able Seaman.”
mark.
“ The following statement from another sailor in the same vessel has also been
handed to us:—‘l declare that the above statement of James Harper is true, so
far as I can say. I was able seaman on board, but did not go away from the
ship in the boats. I saw the canoes burning on the shore at Apii, and I saw the
smoko from among the trees where the houses were said to be burned. Every
islander was procured in exchange for tomahawks, knives, beads, calico, bullets,
gunpowder, gun-caps, and muskets. I see by the Brisbane newspapers that it
is said that some of the natives came to Queensland of their own accord; that
does not mean that tomahawks, gunpowder, &c., were not given in exchange for
them, at least this is the usual course of proceedings,
* Daniel Foster, Able Seaman.’
“ Signed before me, the 16th day of March, 1871.
“ Wm. Brookes, J.P.”


And with regard to the charge brought against the Eev. Mr.'
Milne, the Missionary, I have authority for saying that Mr.Bram-
ston, the Attorney-General for Queensland, has written privately,
stating that Mr. Milne’s explanations have satisfied him (Mr. B.)
that Mr. Milne was not present when the alleged acts of firing
took place. _ . . , „ „ T
As a copy of this letter has been sent to the Colonial Ofiice, 1
think it would have been proper to include it, even if necessary
by printing a separate sheet, in the Correspondence that has
just been published, containing as it does such a serious charge
against a missionary, and that charge, as I have said above,
rather ostentatiously paraded. If testimony given on oath is
thus contradicted, we have wherewith to rebut the charge of
untruthfulness in the testimony given against the labour traffic.
And in a letter which I have received from Sydney, dated 6th
October, 1871,1 hear that the captain, mate, and three of the
crew of the Jason are committed for trial at Brisbane, in conse-
quence of the revelations made by a Government Agent, The
captain of another vessel seized by the Consul at Fiji, Mr. Marsh,
has been sentenced to three years’ imprisonment in Sydney.
Before I conclude, it will be necessary to meet one more argu-
ment used in favour of the trade which I shall give in the words
of Sir Maurice O’Connell, the then Acting Governor, written this
year, and of Mr. Archer, in a letter addressed to the Earl of
Kimberley on the 10th of May last. Sir M. 0 Connell says,
addressing the Parliament of Queensland:
“The importation of labourers from the South Sea Islands,
which, for some time, had almost ceased, has again assumed con-
siderable importance. Despatches will be laid before you, show-
ing that the employment of these islanders in Queensland has
led to representations being made to the Secretary of State for
the Colonies, bv doubtless well-meaning, but ceitainly ill-in-
formed, persons in England, on the hardships and ill-usage they
suppose the islanders to suffer from, and they have even gone to
the length of accusing us of encouraging a slave-trade. This, as
you must all be aware, is a gross and unmerited calumny, for
the very fact of your existence as a Parliament is a sufficient
safeguard against acts of oppression within those limits over
which the jurisdiction of the colony extends. No complaints
have been made by any of the islanders that they have been
brought here contrary to their own free will, nor have any
instances occurred of their not appearing to understand their
agreements. To guard, so far as possible, against any inegu-
larities at the islands, or on the voyage, Government agents are
now sent with every ship ; but the Government of Queensland
cannot be responsible for excesses committed by vessels employed
in seeking labourers for other places. Maintaining a proper
check over such vessels, and over all vessels cruising among the
islands, would appear to be the duty of the Imperial Govern-
ment. For the fair treatment and proper care of the islanders,


while here, and their return to their homes, this Government
will be responsible.”
And Mr. Archer writes:—
• “ In conclusion, I wish to draw your Lordship’s attention to
the fact that every vessel licensed to carry Polynesians is now,
and has for some months past, been obliged to carry an agent
appointed by the Government to see that the Act passed for the
protection of Polynesians is strictly carried out. The Queens-
land Government have thus put the immigration of Polynesians
under as strict a supervision as in the immigration of coolies to
other colonies, and they feel assured that every inquiry made
into the manner in which they have controlled this immigra-
tion, will prove their strong desire to see justice done to the
islanders.”
In harmony with these statements, the following are some
of the official instructions given to the Government Agents ap-
pointed to accompany the labour vessels:—
L You will take care that no oppression or unkindness is
practised towards the Polynesians placed under your protection,
and that the requirements of the 16th and 17th sections of * The
Polynesian Labourers Act of 1868,’ in reference to the number
of passengers and the accommodation to be provided for them,
are strictly carried out, 2. It will be your duty, during the
voyage, to see that the full allowance of water and provisions is
fairly and regularly served out daily to each adult, in the propor-
tions required by the 19th and 20th sections of the Act, and the
medicines are supplied when required. 3. On arrival at the
islands, and whilst engaged in recruiting labourers, you will see
that proper precaution is taken to prevent any wrong-doing, and
that a friendly relation is maintained between the islanders and
those on board the recruiting vessel. 4. No engagement is to be
entered into with any Polynesian labourer except in your pre-
sence and with your sanction, 5. It will be your duty to explain
to each labourer the conditions of the engagement, and to satisfy
yourself that they are understood by him before you allow the
engagement to be concluded. 6. You will be most careful in
seeing that no coercion, undue influence, unfair play, false repre-
sentation, or treachery of any kind, is employed in procuring
labourers, and that perfect freedom of action is allowed to those
open to engagement, 7. On the engagement of the labourers,
you will take care that the following articles of clothing are
supplied to each on going on board ship one flannel shirt, one
pair of trowsers, and one blanket.”
We have the opportunity of seeing how these worked in the
case of the Jason, by Mr. Meiklejohn’s Eeport, from which I make
few extracts:—
“Mr. Meiklejohn has sent in the following report to the Colonial Secretary,
which, on application, we {Brisbane Courier ) have been allowed to publish:
~c T , . “Maryborough, 16th September, 1871.
Sir, 1 desire very respectfully to explain the delay in sending in the report


I have now the honour to present, as Government Agent on board the Jason, on
her voyage from Maryborough to the South Sea Islands and back, in Apiil,
May, June, and July last.
“ When the Jason returned to Maryborough, on the 13th July, I was in an
extremely feeble state, and totally unable to attend to business, haying been con-
fined in the ship’s hold amongst the islanders, handcuffed, and chained to a ring-
bolt for more than three weeks without bedding. This treatment I received by
the orders of the captain, who said I was insane and dangerous. I was delirious
for some time, but I attribute my being so to the captain having drugged me in
a glass of wine, on the 12th of June.
« On the 18th July I saw Mr.Faircloth,the Police Magistrate of Maryborough,
and told him that I had been intimidated in the performance of my duties on
board the Jason, the captain having held a loaded revolver to my head and
threatened to shoot me. Afterwards, on the same day the hon. the Minister for
Works, Mr. W. H. Walsh, saw me, and said that the Police Magistrate had told
him that I had a complaint against the Jason, and he (Mr. Walsh) wished me
for my own sake not to press it, as I should be sworn down. I said that I must
press it. He replied, at all events do nothing for a week, as the public mind
was too much excited in consequence of the election. The election alluded to
was the election for Maryborough, which had taken place the day before, and
Mr. Walsh had been one of the two candidates, and had deen elected. To my
great surprise, on the 20th July, two days after, Mr. Walsh, at the request of
the owners of the-Jason, issued instructions, in the name of the Queensland Go-
vernment, to Messrs. Bligh, Cribb, and Powell, to hold an inquiry into the voyage
of the Jason. It was entered into on the following Monday, the 24th July,
when it must have been well known I was too ill to attend. ...»
“On the 9th August I received a notice to attend on that day, At that date
the Jason had sailed from Maryborough to Sydney with the captain, mate, and
all her crew, who had given evidence to the board. Under these circumstances,
I thought I paid the Board the respect it was entitled to, when I replied to my
notice to attend on the 9th August, that I would attend neither on that day nor
at any other time _
“ The shirts provided were of cotton, and not of flannel or wool, as required
by the Act. The blankets supplied were of thin, poor quality. The islanders
were kept naked until within two or three days’ sail of Fairway Buoy, Hervey’s
Bay, and they suffered much from cold, as it was winter. I believe that nearly
every one of them had a cold or a cough when they landed, and that this want of
suitable warm clothing was to some degree connected with the great mortality
amongst the islanders since their arrival. Out of twenty-four taken by the
Maryborough Sugar Company, seven died within seven weeks.
“With reference to the duties devolving upon me as Government Agent I found
a few days after sailing that I was regarded and treated as a spy, and that any
remarks I made about the way islanders were obtained or treated afterwards
were met with sneers.
“ As to explaining the terms of the agreements to the islanders, the Government
Agent is in the hands of so-called interpreters, who are almost always South Sea
Islanders, and always entirely under the influence of the officers of the ship.
In talking on this subject with the mate at an early part of the voyage, he
asked me how I could know whether the islanders were properly engaged and
understood their agreements. I said I must depend on their interpreters. He
told me that the ship was not going to find interpreters for the Government, and that
if I depended for information upon their interpreter I should be mistaken, for
he would manage him. I said that then all I could do was to report this to Go-
vernment, and that there might be some difficulty in getting another licence. He
replied that a Government Agent could be easily got rid of by giving him a dose
or a lift overboard when nobody was looking. Conversations like this took place
several times at the cabin-table, when I believe both the captain and Mr, Haw-
thorne were present
“ I asked an islander who had been taken from Apii to interpret for us at Am-
brym, under our promise to be landed again at Apii (which promise was,broken
as he was brought to Maryborough, and is now in the employ of Mr. John Eaton)


what these islanders were singing. He said they were telling them on' shore
that a bad wind come and they could not get to Ambrym. and ship come and
catch them.
“These occurrences showed me most clearly that I was quite powerless to pre-
vent any ill doings, and that even my own personal safety depended upon my
being extremely cautious in what I said or did.
“On the 12th June the captain asked me in the afternoon to take some wine
with him, to show him I bore him no animosity. I told him I would do so, but
that I would still do my duty, and that he must not be deceived. Ho said, ‘,lf
I thought you would report me, you would never see Maryborough, as it would
bo very easy to put you out of the way, ’ and that I surely could not be so cruel,
as it would completely ruin him and his family. I had taken about a wine-
glassful of wine out of a tumbler, standing at the time in the cabin in front of
the captain’s berth. Ido not recollect leaving the place where I “was standing.
I seem to recollect being seized and dragged on deck
“ I m ay be permitted to say that my undertaking the office of Government
Agent on board the Jason was owing to my being wishful to see the South Sea
Islands, and to my having always felt an interest in the islanders. What I have
witnessed of the Queensland Polynesian trade has convinced me that it is abomi-
nably and incurably immoral
“It appears necessary to add, that though I have not been requested by the
Government to furnish a report as their Government Agent, it has seemed to me
that to do so would bo only to close appropriately and formally such official rela-
tion—and have the honour to be sir, your obedient servant,
“John Meiklejohn.
“ The Hon. the Colonial Secretary, Queensland.”
If the instructions given by the Government to their Agents
cannot be carried out, the only sensible deduction is, that as the
trade cannot be regulated, it ought to be abolished, and I believe
nothing but its abolition will stop the evils of it, and that this
is called for in the interest of Queensland itself, as well as in that
of the South Sea Islanders. Mr. Douglas assured me that there
was no necessity for it, and that he said this after twenty
years’ experience of Australia, fifteen of which had been spent in
various parts of Queensland.
There has been an attempt to invalidate Mr. Meiklejohn’s testi-
mony, by saying that he was not drugged, but drunk, and
suffering from delirium tremens. Ido not see that this improves
the case in favour of the trade. lie it so, and we then have, on the
testimony of the parties concerned, that the carrying out of the
directions of the Queensland Government for the protection of
the islanders is entrusted to a man whose qualification for the
office was that he was such a drunkard that he had to be forcibly
confined.
A correspondent of the Queenslander, date October 23, 1871,
admirably sums up the case thus ;
“ The whole case is as simple as AB C. A Polynesian Agent
in Queensland wants, say a hundred niggers, for his customers.
He engages the skipper of some little craft to bring them over.
... . If our skipper is very particular in observing the con-
ditions of the licence, he goes to the chiefs, tells them how many
men he wants, and lets it be known for every one he recruits the
chiefs will be presented with a hatchet, or old worn-out musket.
If the chief can spare the men they are put on board. If he


can’t, skipper has to get them in some other way. ... I don’t
suppose any body on this side wants any slavery or kidnapping,
or any thing of the sort; they only want cheap labourers, but they
can’t have the one without the danger of the other, and therefore
better give up trying.”
I have only further to advert to a very suspicious paragraph
in a letter from Sir George Bowen, Governor of New Zealand, to
Earl Granville, dated Government House, Wellington, June 30,
1870, tending to show the vast importance of dealing without
delay with the question, as otherwise the whole of the Southern
seas may become the scene of a virtual slave-traffic, under the
name of free labour:—
“ I would take the opportunity of reporting, that it recently
came to my knowledge that about twenty-five (25) South Sea
Islanders lately arrived at Auckland under contract to work at a
flax-mill in that neighbourhood. I immediately called the
attention of the Colonial Ministers to this fact; observing that
(to omit other considerations) I knew from my own experience
in Queensland, that the introduction of this kind of labour would
give much trouble to both the Government and the employers;
and that in this temperate climate, where there are no sugar
or cotton plantations, there can be no real need for it; while it
might interfere with the, at present, almost purely Anglo-
Saxon character of the population of New Zealand, and might
otherwise produce, ultimately, various social inconveniences. I
added that inquiry should be made forthwith into the circum-
stances of the importation of the South Sea Islanders referred
to above; and that if this sort of traffic is encouraged or per-
mitted it will be necessary to have special legislation on the
subject here, as in Mauritius, Queensland, and elsewhere.”
Mr. F. W. Chesson read the following letters which had been
received from gentlemen unable to be present at the meeting :
“50, Cornhill, 11th December, 1871.
“My dear Me. Kinnaied, —“ lam very glad that you have
consented to take the chair on Wednesday, but much regret that
an engagement of some standing to visit some of my constituents
will prevent my supporting you. I hope that the melancholy
death of Bishop Patteson will direct public attention to the atro-
cities perpetrated by men who disgrace the name of Englishmen
in the Pacific. Our Government ought to interfere. If Great
Britain determines that kidnapping shall cease, we have the
power to enforce our determination. To say nothing of our con-
nexion with Queensland, a rising colony is not likely to despise
the general censure of civilized mankind, while these evil-doers
have been, by our apathy, far too long tolerated.
“ Believe me yours very truly,
(Signed) “ E. N. Fowlee.
“ The Hon. A. Kinnaied, M.P,”


“ Plymouth, 4th December, 1871.
“ Sir, —I much regret my inability to leave home for the
meeting you kindly invite me to take part in.
“ It seems only yesterday that, when in Hew Zealand, Bishop
Patteson was telling me the story about the traders painting
their vessel white like his Mission-schooner, the Southern Cross,
and sending one of their number on shore dressed like a Mis-
sionary, to tell the natives she was the Bishop’s schooner, and that
he was on board, but had broken his leg, and consequently they
must come off and see him. More than one cargo was secured in
this atrocious manner.
“ Bishop Patteson was the beau ideal of what a Missionary
should be —loving, humble, devoted, and intellectual. He was
an accomplished scholar, and, in the opinion of Sir William
Martin, late Chief Justice of New Zealand (no mean judge), his
knowledge of languages and dialects was only equalled by the
celebrated Cardinal Mezzofante.
“At whatever island I touched in the South Seas, the Mis-
sionaries were full of his praises. He knew no difference of de-
nominations ; it was sufficient for him that they were doing their
Master’s work, to secure his cordial co-operation and earnest
prayers, besides more substantial help.
“ You might go a long way before you saw a face in which
nobleness and sweetness were so intimately blended. The best
pictures of St. John, ‘ the beloved disciple,’ give the most correct
idea of that face, which, once seen, can never be forgotten.
“ I feel sure that he would be the last to wish an indiscriminate
shelling of the native village where he met his death.
“ Had I been able to attend your Meeting, I should have
ventured on a few observations in regard to the present traffic in
natives, and which, perhaps, may not be out of place here: —
“1. These massacres will go on among the islands until the
Queensland ‘ Polynesian Labour Act of 1868 ’ is repealed.
“ It is simply a question whether a few planters shall be allowed
to make rapid fortunes at the expense of valuable lives, or not;
and whether all the labour and money bestowed on the work of
evangelizing the mixed races of the South Seas shall be indefi-
nitely thrown back, and, perhaps, abandoned altogether.
“ 2. It ought to be enacted that every islander taken on board
any vessel, and there detained against his will, should be deemed
a slave, which, as Sir Alfred Stephen (Chief Justice of New South
Wales) remarked, £ would be an effectual restriction on kidnap-
ping and pretended assents.’ —See his letter, datedlOth July, 1869,
to Earl Belmore, in Parliamentary Papers No. 6, Sub-enclosure
No. 2.
“8. Owing to the deportation of the islanders to plantations
in the Pijis and New Hebrides, over which groups no flag flies,
it will be necessary to have a fast gunboat told off for island
work, to cruise in conjunction with the French and American
vessels. Germany should be requested to give her full adhesion


to the proposed enactments (indeed all the Powers should), so as
to prevent her own flag from being sullied, like ours has been, by
its being made to cover acts of piracy and murder.
“ The following extract from the Fiji Times will speak
volumes :
“ ‘ The ketch Bismarck arrived at the Eewa on the Ist instant,
with twenty-two labourers from Sandwich (Yate) : as she sails
under Prussian colours, she was not obliged to call at Levuka to
pass her natives.’ —Fiji Times, Oct. 8,1871.
“ 4. It would greatly facilitate matters if the important group
of the Fiji Islands were placed under the joint Protectorate of
England and America, similar to the Sandwich Islands. As to
annexing them, as proposed the other day in Sydney, I do not
think it would be a wise policy with the example of New Zealand
before us.
“ Our Government has had a great deal of dust thrown in its
eyes, and the last handful has been the announcement that the
Queensland Government sends Agents in each vessel that goes for
Polynesians. '
“ Those who know the class of men who (with a few honourable
exceptions) compose the masters and supercargoes of these
vessels, must be permitted to doubt whether the Agents are men
of any higher principle, and whether their presence will be any
guarantee against kidnapping ; for it must be remembered that
Howell of the Young Australian, and Longmuir of the Challenge,
both bore excellent characters from influential citizens.
“ With the evidence before us of the violence and treachery
which are daily practised upon the unfortunate natives, and which
bear such bitter fruit, it ought to be the duty of every English-
man who is worthy of the name, to insist on an immediate stop
being put to them.
“ Apologizing for the length of this letter,
“ I am, sir, very faithfully yours,
(Signed) “ George Palmer.
“ F. W, Chesson, Esq.,
“ Secretary of the Aborigines’ Protection Society.”
“ Camden House, The Glebe, Lee, Dec. 13tb, 1871.
“ Dear Mr. Kinnaird, —A previous engagement prevents my
being present at the meeting this evening, but I cannot refrain
sending you a few lines to express my sympathy with its object,
and to communicate any information I have respecting the
natives of the ‘ New Hebrides ’ group of islands, specially in
regard to the unjust treatment many of them have received from
traders.
“ The Gospel was introduced to the ‘ New Hebrides ’ about
thirty years ago by the Missionaries of the ‘ London Missionary
Society.’ I visited them in 1846, when, although native teachers


had laboured among them some time, they were in such a wild
state that we could not land on their shores. In 1852 I visited
them again, and witnessed a marked improvement. Churches
had been built, congregations had been gathered, schools were
well attended, and great advances had been made by the people
in Christian learning and consequent civilization.
“ The ‘ London Missionary Society ’ has now, for many years,
retired from the islands of the ‘ New Hebrides Group,’ and the
Mission there is wholly conducted by the Missionaries of branches
of the ‘ Presbyterian Churches’ in Nova Scotia, Scotland, and in
the Australian colonies.
This Mission has cost these churches no less than 40,000 Z., and
it is now sustained at an outlay of 4000 Z. a-year. The progress
of the good work of Christianity has been much hindered of late
through the doings of what is called ‘ The labour recruiting
service,’ but which the Missionaries designate as to a large
extent a system of kidnapping, and a modified form of slavery.
In a ‘ Memorial’ addressed by the Missionaries, in July last,
to the General Assembly of their Churches, they say, ‘ This sys-
tem is proving ruinous to the natives. Judging what is not
known by what is well known, it is highly probablo that one-half
of the adult population of this group are away, and the whole
framework of society is becoming fast disorganized.’
“ The practice is y6t only affecting this group, but is fast ex-
tending, and will soon affect every group of islands from Fiji to
China, and must prove disastrous to every colony in Australasia.
“At the Annual Conference of the Missionaries of the £ New
Hebrides ’ on the island of ‘ Aniwa,’ held last June, the attention
of the meeting was called to an affidavit of an officer of a vessel,
who had stated before the Immigration Agent at Brisbane,
that whilst visiting the island of ‘Niguna’ for the purpose
of bringing natives on board, the boat was fired on by natives
on shore, which he said he was led to believe was at the insti-
gation of Mr. Milne, the Missionary.
“ In a report of that Conference, which has just come to me,
the Missionaries say, ‘ In the presence of this meeting Mr. Milne
has distinctly and solemnly denied the truth of the whole state-
ment. The reason why the boat was fired on was this: the
officer was taking away three natives—one man and two women.
One of the women, at least, was married, and was being taken
away against her husband’s will; and it was the enraged hus-
band that fired the one shot, and it was supposed to have been
some person connected with the other woman who fired the
other.’
“ During my years of Missionary work among the islanders of
the South Pacific many instances came to my knowledge of the
natives of ‘ Western Polynesia ’ having been excited to deeds of
cruelty, simply through revenge for injuries they had received
from the white man.
“ I fear to this cause' may be ascribed the lamented murder of


good Bishop Patterson and his fellow missionary labourer ; and
it is to be devoutly desired that measures may soon be put in
action that may tend to bring about the suppression of the
practices of decoy and ill-treatment to which the natives of those
groups are exposed, and which alike interfere with the benevo-
lent aims of our British Government, and so grievously frustrate
the Christian labours of our Missionaries.
“ With kind regards, believe me yours very truly,
“ William Gill.
“ The Hon. Arthur Kinnaird, M.P.,
“ Chairman of the meeting of the Aborigines’ Protection Society.”
The writer of the above letter, the Rev. William Gill, is a
director of the London Missionary Society.
“British Vice-Consulate, Santander, Dec. 7th, 1871.
“ Sir, —With reference to the letter which I had the honour
of addressing you on the 22nd ult., I beg to enclose for your
perusal some extracts from the private journal of my son, her
Majesty’s Consul in the Fiji Islands. I have selected them from
his letters to me, and trust they will serve further to elucidate
the interesting question which occupies you, as well as the
Aborigines’ Protection Society and other philanthropists, and
engages public attention in England.
“The murder of the good missionary, Bishop Patteson, by
South Sea natives in revenge, there is too much reason to sup-
pose, for the kidnapping of their countrymen by British ship-
masters, adds another deed of horrors to the series perpetrated
upon Englishmen in the course of the last twelve months by
those savages. This deplorable event will, if possible, intensify
the indignation with which the South Sea kidnapping trade is
regarded in England, and lead, I trust, to the adoption of ener-
getic measures against it; for it is universally allowed that the
Queensland government has failed to do away with, or even
mitigate, the evil. Even if the death of Bishop Patteson is not
due to the above cause, the disgust with which the South Sea
kidnapping system is viewed in Great Britain will remain as
strong as before.
“ I know how ardently you desire the speedy extinction of a
traffic which disgraces the British flag, and produces wide-spread
suffering and demoralization, although you would see with satis-
faction the establishment of a well-ordered voluntary emigration
calculated to bring the benighted savage of the South Sea
Islands into the bright and hallowed light of civilization and
religion. But is it not an odious mockery —a base violation
of all that is good and sacred —to kidnap him under the pretext
of converting him ?


“ The chief difficulty is, how to suppress this bastard slave-
trade effectually and quickly. Permit me, therefore, to suggest,
as one well acquainted with the question, the following mea-
sures, with such improvements as might be introduced into
them by the wisdom of the Government;—!. To keep two
double-screw composite gun-boats of about 400 tons and 120-
horse power each, cruising amongst the islands most frequented
by South Sea emigrant-ships, with orders to overhaul them
strictly, particularly with a view to their being duly provided
with proper papers, including a permit from her Majesty’s
Consul in Fiji to embark emigrants should they be intended for
that region, and in case of any irregularity, or finding kid-
napped natives on board, to take the vessel to Sydney for adjudi-
cation. And here allow me to observe that the regulations
in this respect should be so explicit as not to permit of legal
quibbling, or misinterpretation by the officer charged with their
execution.
“2. That all British ships proceeding to the South Sea
Islands in quest of labourers for the Fijis should first of all
present themselves at the port of Levuka, Ovalau, to receive
the necessary permit from the Consul there, and fulfil all other
requisite formalities.
“3. Ships with emigrant labourers on board for Fiji likewise
to touch at Levuka, in order to have them examined and regis-
tered at the British Consulate.
“4. The Consul to make a tour of inspection in a gun-boat every
two months at least, or whenever he may deem it desirable, or
for the furtherance of his duties, visiting the different planta-
tions scattered over the islands for the purpose of inquiring
into the condition and treatment of the labourers employed
upon them,
“5. That no South Sea Island labourer should, be disem-
barked in Fiji under any pretext whatsoever until inspected
and registered by the Consul at Levuka,
“ Besides the above regulations, I would recommend the
establishment of a separate Table of Fees applicable to ships
engaged in the South Sea emigrant-trade under the British
flag. For instance:—2 s. 6d. for the registration of each labourer
at the Consulate, Levuka; 2s. 6d. for each labourer inspected
by the Consul; 11. Consul’s attendance on board a vessel; 51. for
a Permit to carry and receive South Sea emigrants, &c., &c.
The proceeds of the fees would go far towards defraying the
cost of the Consular staff, if, as is most probable, they did not
more than cover it.
“ These steps, with the addition of a Vice-Consul and an
official Interpreter attached to the Consulate, and heavy fines
for infractions of the local Consular Regulations, to be levied
after due inquiry by a Court composed of the Consul, as presi-
dent, the Vice-Consul, and one of the principal settlers, or the
commander of a vessel of war, in preference, if on the spot,


would I am sure soon reduce kidnapping shipmasters to order,
and put an end to the South Sea slave-trade.
“ I have the honour to be, sir, your obedient, humble servant,
“ Leopold March.
“ P.S. —Immigrant vessels seeking South Sea Islanders for
Queensland would of course be furnished with their papers by
the Sydney authorities, and subject to search by cruisers.
“ Thomas Hughes, Esq., M.P.”
“ 5, Bishop agate Street Without, Dec. 12th, 1871.
“ Dear Sir, —I have received an invitation to attend a meeting
to-morrow on the above subject. I should like to attend, but a
number of other engagements will prevent me.
“ But there is one point to which you might, perhaps, with
advantage, call the attention of the meeting, in reference to the
appeal which many excellent persons are making for Imperial
interference to put a stop to kidnapping.
“ Imperial interference is not enough, and for this reason; part
of the evil is, and has long been, carried on by vessels sailing
under other flags than British.
“ When I was amongst the Pacific Islands, ten years ago, kid-
napping on a small scale was even then going on, together with
other outrages. The offenders were, at least in some cases, if not
chiefly, sea-captains belonging to the United States, or carrying
the flags and papers of the South American Republics.
“It is evident that mere Imperial interference cannot reach
these offenders; and unless they are restricted, they would
actually profit by a prohibition to British subjects being enforced.
“ What is wanted (but it will involve much difficulty to obtain)
is a combination between several nations, especially Great Britain
and the United States and Prance, to put the evil down, and to
establish a sort of International Police Court in the Pacific, say
at Honolulu, Tahiti, New Caledonia, Sydney, and Auckland.
There must also, of course, be some kind of Marine Police in
connexion with these courts.
“ But all this will be very difficult; yet any other course will,
I fear, be absolutely impossible, at least any other effectual course.
“ Yours very truly,
“Wm. Tallack.
“ R. N. Fowler, Esq., M.P.”
Sir Thomas Powell Buxton said he had great pleasure in
rising to move the first resolution. He need scarcely say that
he felt very deeply the importance of a stop being put to that
part of the immigration which was accompanied by atrocities
which had been referred to by the Chairman. The whole world
knew what England had done in the past with reference to slave-
trading, how for years she had maintained a great fleet for the


suppression of the trade in one part of the globe, and had urged
upon other nations the duty of taking all necessary steps for
the same object. This being so, it was perfectly intolerable that
in the present day Englishmen should be found taking a course
which could lead to no other conclusion than that they were
acting with inconsistency in a case where it suited their own
convenience. (Hear, hear.) Looked at from this point of view, the
question was certainly one of Imperial importance; but at the
same time he thought they should not include the Government
and people of Queensland in any sweeping charge. They should
discriminate between the conduct of different classes. Their
experience in the Mauritius showed that immigration of Coolie
labour might be carried on under proper regulations with
great advantage to the Coolies themselves and to the districts to
which they were taken. (Hear, hear.) They had the evidence
of the Attorney-General, Mr. Bramston, to prove that many
Coolies who had gone back to their native islands had voluntarily
returned to service, and induced their friends to accompany them
to Queensland. So far as these cases were concerned the question
was a purely local one. It might be inexpedient for the Queens-
land Government to encourage the immigration, but so long as
they did so no one at home had a right to say that part of it at
all events was one in which the Imperial Government was bound
to interfere with any stringency. But they knew that the im-
migration had in many cases been accompanied by grievous and
atrocious acts, and this therefore was a point upon which both the
home and colonial Governments must be asked to act with great
stringency. So far as the British flag was responsible for these
atrocities the British Government was bound to interfere for
their suppression. (Applause.) He had much pleasure in mov-
ing, “ That this meeting desires to express its profound sorrow at
the murder of Bishop Patteson, whose labours were so eminently
useful in promoting the social and religious elevation of the
natives of Polynesia; and the sacrifice of whose life may be attri-
buted to the nefarious practice of kidnapping which has been too
long permitted to exist in the islands of the Pacific.”
Sir John Hay, M.P., in seconding the resolution, said he was
sure the deep sympathy felt in this country for the death of the
eminent prelate and missionary whose death they all deplored,
must meet with a response wherever it was known. (Hear, hear.)
Ho death more worthy of the martyr and of the religion they all
professed had been suffered in their days, and if a stop could be
put, to the cause which had occasioned the loss to the country
of so eminent a man, and to the Church so useful a Christian,
it ought to be done at once. He agreed with Sir Powell
Buxton as to the course which public opinion had taken with
regard to this question, in so far as the evil has been attributed
to a want of proper feeling on the part of the Queensland co-
lonists. He was assured by those who had visited Queensland
that the treatment of the Polynesian labourers was all that


could be desired so long as they were on British soil. As
had been pointed out, it was not to be supposed that, in a tro-
pical climate like that of the northern part of Queensland, Euro-
pean labour could be employed for the purpose of enriching
and utilizing the soil; and as Coolie labour must be obtained from
somewhere for the purpose, it would not be wise to debar the
Polynesians from receiving the same benefits from the employ-
ment of their superfluous labour that are now enjoyed by India
and China. (Hear, hear.) But at the same time he thought
it was necessary that the most stringent measures should be
taken in order that labourers should be recruited (whenever
it was done by Englishmen) in a manner conducive to the in-
terests of civilization and Christianity. (Hear, hear.) It must
be remembered, however, that it was not only to Queensland
that these labourers were taken, but that they were taken to the
Fiji Islands and to Hew Caledonia where England had no con-
trol. It might be that in Queensland the Polynesians were
admirably treated, and it would be important to ascertain the
actual facts with great care, lest in putting a stop to what might
perhaps be called a slave-trade, the colonists should be pre-
vented from obtaining free and excellent labour, and civilizing
the aboriginal races so employed. (Hear, hear.)
The resolution was put and carried nem. con.
Mr. T. Hughes, M.P., next proposed, —
“ That a memorial be presented to the Earl of Kimberley, her
Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies, urging
his Lordship to adopt vigorous measures for the total suppres-
sion of kidnapping in the South Seas.”
The hon. gentleman said he should not offer any further
remarks as to the state of things in the South Seas, except to say
that he had had the opportunity of seeing the journal of Mr.
March, British Consul at Honolulu, who said he had been on
board English vessels conveying Polynesian labourers to Queens-
land, and had found it impossible to examine the natives as to
their position and desire to immigrate. These vessels all passed
on their way without his having the power to remedy the state
of things which existed. This only related to English vessels, in
which some pretence was made to keep up the contract system,
and to obtain the consent of the natives. In other vessels —the
Bismarck , a German ship, and the Eugenie, a French craft —
kidnapping was carried on, under Mr. March’s observation,
without even such slight protection as he could afford, and with-
out his being able to interfere in any way. The Chairman had
hit precisely the difficulty in the case. Existing legislation
would be ample and satisfactory if this kidnapping system could
be brought under the definition of slave-trading, because then
British Consuls and naval officers would be able to act in a
summary way, and with some efficiency, even in the South Seas.
This, however, was not the case. Sir Alfred Stephen, in his
celebrated judgment in the case of the Daphne, pointed out the


fact that the system of contract took this kidnapping out of the
view of the African slave-trade statutes. The question, then, was,
what could be done to remedy the present state of things. Some
said that the Queensland Government must be left to determine
what was necessary to remove the stigma from their legislation ;
but he felt that it was an Imperial question, and if the home
and colonial legislatures did not do all that was requisite under
the circumstances, he would prefer that the connexion between
the colony and the mother-country be severed. He did not
think, however, that the necessity for so decided a course as this
would arise. Sir Alfred Stephen suggested, as a means of
meeting the difficulty, that a Prize Court should be established,
but Mr. Lowe—he believed he was right in saying—declined to
adopt the suggestion on the score of expense, remarking, that if
Queensland wanted a Prize Court, she must provide it herself.
This would be all very well if no part of the disgrace which the
want of a Prize Court involved rested upon the shoulders of the
home Government, and therefore it was the more important that
the desirability of establishing such a court should be impressed
upon the Government. (Hear, hear.) What further step could
be taken F He thought the chief vice of the whole system was to
be found in the Piji Islands, which were under no Protectorate,
and that therefore a joint Protectorate on the part of Eng-
land and the United States would be another very great
step in the direction of putting down the kidnapping system
to which they so strongly objected. He believed that at the
beginning of the present year Lord Kimberley suggested that
an Act should be passed making it felony to engage in any way
in bringing Polynesians against their will to Queensland, and, if
some such Act were passed, or the Slave-Trade Acts were ex-
tended to kidnapping, the effect would be very beneficial. (Hear,
hear.)
Lord Alfred Churchill seconded the resolution. He had
not until that day been aware that the case was so strong as
from the opening address of the Chairman it appeared to be.
Without extreme care on their part, this trade, which was
nominally called a free-labour trade, would degenerate into a
slave-trade of the most horrible description, quite as bad as
any thing which had taken place on the West Coast of Africa.
(Hear, hear.) They were told that it was not a slave-trade, and
almost with the same breath came recommendations for the esta-
blishment of Prize Courts,' in order to its suppression, which
struck him as being rather an anomalous state of things, to say
the least of it. (Hear, hear.) He for one desired to exonerate
the Queensland Government from any charge of desiring to trifle
with the question. He believed that Government wished to
regulate it in a satisfactory manner, but they had considerable
difficulties to contend with. It was not easy, for instance, to find
proper persons to act as Agents in order to prevent kidnapping.
He also desired to exonerate the colonists from any charge of
c 2


abusing the trust reposed in them with regard to the employ-
ment of this Polynesian labour. Last week he received a letter
from Queensland, showing that without doubt a number of
colonists treat the labourers in a very fair and honourable
manner, and, so far as he was personally concerned, he had not
heard of any abuses. The abuse existed mainly on board the ships
in which these people were carried —ships trading to the New
Hebrides and New Caledonia, which was a French colony, to the
Fiji Islands, and to Tahiti, which was also a French colony.
This abuse reflected upon England as a Christian nation, who,
forty years ago, paid for the suppression of slavery
in her West Indian colonies, and steps ought therefore to be
taken to remedy the evil. (Hear, hear.)
The Chairman said that Lord Granville, when at the head of the
Colonial Department, offered to supply trained men to act as
Immigration Agents, but the offer was declined by the colonial
legislature.
Mr. McArthur, M.P., supported the resolution. He had no
doubt that the Queensland Government desired to put down
the system of kidnapping, but under the existing state of
things it was impossible for them to do so. Mr. Meiklejohn, a
magistrate of the colony, being very anxious personally to inquii e
into the conduct of the immigration movement, obtained an ap-
pointment as Agent, and went out in one of the ships, the Captain,
of which hereproved for practising kidnapping in hisvery presence.
The captain threatened to murder Mr. Meiklejohn if he divulged
what he had seen, and it was now attempted to defame that gen-
tleman by alleging tbat be was drunk during tbe voyage. Mr. Mci-
klejohn, however, made his statement, and the whole matter was
now undergoing investigation in the colony. He would suggest,
as a means of putting an end to the evil, that Government should
themselves send out vessels for the conveyance of the Polynesians,
and appoint competent men to act as Agents, He did not desire
to prevent immigration altogether, because he believed that
it would, if conducted under proper regulations, prove ad-
vantageous to all concerned. (Hear, hear.) It had been urged that
many of these Polynesians went willingly to Queensland, but the
testimony of many respectable and responsible persons went to
show that, in the majority of cases, they were forced from their
homes, and coerced into going on shipboard, and kept there by
the use of knives, revolvers, life-preservers, and irons. He was
delighted to hear the letter of Captain Palmer read, a letter which
paid a high tribute to that devoted Christian Missionary who had
gone to swell the noble army of martyrs, and which would touch
a sympathetic chord in the heart of every man in this country.
Bishop Patteson long warned the people among whom he laboured
of the danger they were incurring by permitting the exist-
ence of kidnapping. If something could not be done to regulate
the present system, he for one would like to see immigration
abolished altogether. In the Fiji Islands the state of things was


such as to call for the very grave consideration of Government.
(Hear, hear). For one he was disgusted with the cheese-paring
economy of Mr. Lowe in refusing to establish a Prize Court, and
so to discharge what struck him as being an obvious duty
towards the Fiji and Friendly Islands, which were progressing
rapidly in the march of civilization. These islands were the
home of cotton cultivation, and it would be greatly to their ad-
vantage if they could be placed under a joint-protectorate, or
under the protection of England solely: he should prefer the
latter, as he believed the islands themselves would rather not be
connected with America. (Hear, hear.)
Mr, F. W. Chesson remarked that Mr, March, our Consul at
Ovalau, Fiji, was of opinion that ninety per cent, of the traffic
in South Sea Islanders was of the nature of kidnapping; while
Mr. Thurston, who was also in the Consular service, estimated
that four-fifths of the so-called immigrants were kidnapped. (See
“ Extracts from the private journal of Mr. Consul March,” pub-
lished in the Appendix.)
The Eev. W. Arthur, M.A., next addressed the meeting. He
said-the Eev. James Calvert, who had spent nearly the whole of
his life in Missionary labour, had sent to him a letter, dated Sep-
tember 6, 1871, in which the Eev. Joseph Hettleton, also a Mis-
sionary, expressed his belief that the labour-trade would prove its
own cure. “ Three vessels,” said the rev. gentleman, “ came in
last week without their captains : all three had been shot: it is
too risky a life even for adventurers.” He (Mr. Arthur) could
scarcely accept the first phrase. If white blood was shed it was
not the white man who would be put down, but the black; not the
labour-trade that would be put down, but the Aborigines who would
be extirpated. (Hear, hear). There was no doubt that Polynesian
labour must be used if the English employers were to make for-
tunes, but not if they were merely to procure means of living ; so
that in truth the question was between English colonists amassing
fortunes, and the Aborigines suffering the ruin of their happiness,
and the rude severance of their family ties. This being so, there
could not in his mind be any doubt as to the course which Eng-
lishmen ought to pursue. (Hear, hear.) The labour-market in the
colonies, as elsewhere, ought to be regulated by the laws of sup-
ply and demand; and the way to encourage supply was to appeal
to the hopes and not to the fears of those whose labour was wanted.
Let the Polynesian labourer stand in the same relation to the
Queensland labour-market, that the Connaught reaper did to the
English labour-market in harvest-time —that is, let there be per-
fect liberty of contract, and perfect freedom to return to his native
island whenever he pleased, consistently with the terms of the con-
tract into which he had freely entered. (Hear, hear.) With regard
to the English love of fair play, he did not think there was much dif-
ference between Queensland colonists and Englishmen generally.
Any one who had had much experience abroad would know that
Englishmen were very apt to use very forcible arguments in


order to have their wishes attended to. When, some time ago, he
was on the Nile, an English Member of Parliament, who occupied
a boat travelling in the same direction, told him he would never
get on unless he “ walloped ” the natives. (Laughter.) Not liking
either the advice or the duty it would involve of personally in-
flicting punishment, he asked a question on the last point, and
was informed that a bottle of Maraschino given to the local
authorities on the banks of the river would procure the perform-
ance of the duty for him. (Eenewed laughter.) He had no faith
in the non-cruelty of Englishmen when they were away in foreign
parts, freed from the restraints of English social habits, and the
influence of English law. (Hear, hear.) It was absolutely necessary
to keep up the influence of English law in whatever parts of the
world Englishmen might have settled, and he believed this would
be one of the good results that would follow upon the lamented
death of Bishop Patteson. He would conclude by mentioning a
crotchet of his own, which might, perhaps, be useful in settling the
present difficulty. He refused to regard England as the mere
nucleus of what we called dependencies, but preferred to regard
the empire as a heterogeneous whole. Therefore he thought that,
in addition to a House of Commons, and a most venerable House
of Lords, which he hoped would always stand, there should be an
Imperial chamber composed of representatives from the mother-
country and the colonies, through which all measures affecting
the two interests should pass before becoming law. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. Davidson (of Queensland) said, that as an employer of
Polynesian labour, his testimony on this question could not be
accepted as wholly disinterested, but still he would like to make
a few remarks. He was glad to find that due faith was put in
the protestations of the Queensland Government that they de-
sired to do right. The colony had only been founded ten years,
and the colonists who went from the mother-country had settled
there imbued with, the ideas which prevailed at home. They
abhorred slavery, and any thing which might lead to it. A
large portion of Queensland was within the tropics, where Euro-
peans could not possibly engage in field-labour; and it was
therefore absolutely necessary to engage the Aborigines, who
were consequently able to command a high price for their ser-
vices. Bishop Patteson was not opposed to this employment. In
his own words, “ He did not advocate suppression, but regulation.”
While bearing testimony to the disinterestedness of the Missio-
naries labouring in the South Sea Islands, he must give the testi-
mony of a Polynesian, who, having been in Queensland, and
learned the value of labour, returned to his own island and
said, that he there found the Missionaries wanting the natives to
work in their own gardens for nothing. (Laughter.) He was
acquainted with Mr. Meiklejohn, to whom allusion had been
made, and knew him to be a fit person to be employed by the
Government, and one not by any means likely to be found
suffering from delirium tremens; but he must demur to that


gentleman s complaints against the captain of the Jason being pre-
judged. The case was still sub judice-, and be thought the fact
of the Queensland Government having instituted a rigid inquiry
showed that they had no desire to permit irregularities. Captain
Palmer was a person with whom he could not agree. Many of
his _ statements were excessively ill-judged and one-sided, and
their whole scope showed thst he was suffering from disappoint-
ment and displeasure at the way in which he was treated in
Sydney. In addition to this, he had made his statements in
England, where the persons attacked had no means of defending
themselves. He thought it a mistake, to say the least of it, to
attempt to legistate where they had no power to do so. It was
very well to speak of German and French ships, and immigration
to Fiench colonies, but what power had either home or colonial
Governments to interfere with such matters ? The Queensland
people, were, as far he knew, anxious that kidnapping should be
put a stop to; and the best suggestion to that end he had heard
was that goyei nment ships and officials should be alone engaged
in immigration. (Hear, hear.) It was supposed that the em-
ployers of labour gained an undue advantage by employing
Polynesians, but as a matter of fact each labourer cost at least
25Z. a-year; as much as or more than was paid to a Dorsetshire
labourer at home, in addition to which he was housed and
clothed, and able to take back to his own island the money he
had earned. He could further bear his testimony to the fact,
that many of the labourers who came to Queensland returned to
it, and to the same employment, after visiting their own islands
on the completion of a contract, bringing in many cases their
relatives with them.
Mi. Edmund Sturgb said the speech he had just heard re-
minded him very strongly of the able apologies he heard nearly
fifty years ago from slaveholders in the West Indies. He was
himself a planter, and knew the exigencies of managing an estate
but kidnapping in the South Seas led to so much disorder and
rapine, that he thought no remedy would be efficient which did
not at once put an end to the traffic entirely.
The Chairman asked if the proportion of women imported
was not very small as compared with the men.
Mr. Davidson said it was ; but arrangements were being made
to increase the proportion of females.
The Chairman asked if the vessels used in the immigration
were not constructed like real slavers.
Mi. Davidson said it was true that below decks the space was
open and not divided into bunks; but this was necessary for
ventilating purposes in ships which sailed in tropical seas. The
crew generally slept on deck; and immigrants were free to do
the same if they chose.
Mi. Seton Karr suggested, as a means of getting over the
difficulty, that the Queensland Courts should be invested with
Admiralty j urisdiction, and that a “ protector of immigrants ”


should he appointed at Brisbane, to see that when the ships
went out they were all right; and that when they returned they
should land none but perfectly willing immigrants.
Mr. Davidson said police-magistrates were, as a rule, appointed
protectors of immigrants, and that the courts in Brisbane were,
two years ago, invested with Admiralty jurisdiction. It was
quite true (he continued, in answer to a question from the body
of the meeting) that police-magistrates could not always under-
stand the language spoken by the immigrants; but this was
not to be wondered at, as the Fiji islanders had each a separate
language.
The resolution having been unanimously adopted,
Mr. Hastings moved a vote of thanks to the chairman, for
presiding.
This was seconded, and carried unanimously.
The proceedings then terminated.
EXTRACTS FROM THE PRIVATE JOURNAL OF MR* CONSUL MARCH,
OVALAU, FIJI.
Levuka, Ovalau, Fiji Islands, June 22nd, 1871.
A short time ago the Margaret Chessel, a vessel which had left
Melbourne under peculiar circumstances, proceeded in quest of
so-called “labourers” (South Sea Islanders).
Whilst engaged in the traffic, two of the crew were murdered
by natives, and the vessel returned to Levuka with only thirteen
immigrants. I was any thing but satisfied with the examination
I made of them, and strongly suspected that the poor fellows
were kidnapped. Being unable, however, to prove any irregu-
larity, I allowed them to be taken charge of by Mr. Burt. At
my requisition, he presented them to-day at the Consulate.
They engaged themselves for two yams (years), on condition
that they were not to be sent out of Levuka. The charterers of
the Margaret Chessel claim the men as their property, the passage-
money not having been paid.
June 22, 1871. —Went on board the Van Tromp and examined
thirty-three natives. Master impertinent. Passed them for two
years only. Examination not satisfactory for want of a good
interpreter.
June 26, 1871.—A new settler, Colonel Hamilton, from the
United States, called at the Consulate, and volunteered as a
planter, and for the good of the Fiji and humanity, some reve-
lations concerning the nefarious transactions of some English
and American settlers in collusion with shipmasters connected
with the importation of South Sea labourers. He told me some
very startling things ; but as they are embodied in the affidavit
subsequently made before me by one Meader, whom he brought
to the Consulate, I will not note them.


The following is a copy of the affidavit:—
“ William Henry Header, planter at Coro Tonga, Fiji, makes
oath and states as follows:—In January, 1869, the English barque
Anna, of Melbourne, Clarke master, came to the island of Peru
where I was trading. She was then trading under the name of
Hope. I went off to the vessel, and was asked by Fuller and
George Lee to get them some natives to come to Fiji. After
two days of coaxing I consented, and engaged myself to John
Thomas Smith, George Lee, Fuller, and Beck, for a period of
twenty months, and tried to get them as many natives as I could.
On going on board I took with me eight cases of oil, and left
sixteen on shore. I got and shipped about thirty natives, in-
cluding men, women, and children, telling them that at the expira-
tion of twenty months they would all be returned to their homes :
we then set sail for Byron Island. There I went on shore to get
my chest, and a native who lived with me. On returning to the
ship, I was surprised to find those on board firing at a lot of
natives in the water. I asked why they were doing that, but
got no answer. Alongside the vessel were a number of canoes •
and in each there was a white man stationed with fire-arms’
evidently put there to prevent the natives who had gone on
board to return in them to shore. In one of these boats there
were two Tanna men, employed, I think, by Lee. With the
exception often or eleven, all the natives managed to jump over-
boaid, and make for shore. These ten or eleven were kidnapped.
“ Whilst those who had escaped were swimming on shore in
groups, John Thomas Smith, and Fuller took a three or four-
pounder gun, which was on the poop ready loaded with powder, and
a bag of bullets, and aiming it at their midst, fired it off. Before
they did so, I expostulated with them, and asked Mr. Smith what
he was doing, begging him not to fire, as I lived upon the island
and might, on my return, be killed. He paid no attention to my
request, but trained the gun, and fired it off with a torch. One
of the natives was killed outright, and then sank, never to re-
appear, whilst seven others were wounded. This I found out on
a subsequent visit to the place, when I was asked by this same
Smith to make it straight with the people by giving them trade.
I called for the friends of the two who had been killed and
offered them knives and tobacco, which they refused to accept
telling me at the same time that they would settle the matter
later when I returned to live amongst them. Thinking they
meant they would settle me, I took care not to return to my old
home. The body of the man who had been shot was recovered
and in his skull was found a bullet. After this, we braced the
yards forward, and stood clear of the island, with the natives we
had captured. We then started for the Hope Island, but could
not make it in consequence of westerly winds. We remained
there several days, and then sailed for Fiji. We made Lanthala
bay, or point—l don’t know how it is called—and anchored there.
Whilst there, I was desired by Smith to take the natives whom


he had brought to Fiji in the schooner Mary, on board of which
were Thompson, Smith, and Augustus Hennings, the former a
cousin of Smith who was on board the Anna, and general
business-manager on the plantation for which the natives were
destined. We all went to the plantation, where I believe the
natives still remain, notwithstanding that the twenty months for
which I had engaged them have expired.
“ I now wish to state how I knew that the Anna was sailing
under a false name. Soon after joining the ship at Peru Island,
I was going into the cabin when I noticed a lifebuoy hanging up
in the entry with the name of Anna painted in black upon it. I said,
‘ I don’t think this is the barque Hope .’ He said, “ How do you
know ?’ I did not tell him, but dropped the subject, as I saw it
was not one which he liked to talk about. Subsequently to this
conversation, I found out, that soon after leaving Fiji for Peru
Island, the ship’s name had been taken off, and a board with
Hope substituted in its place was nailed on.
“ I heard Frank Bolero and others on board laughing and joking
over the carving of the word 4 Hope.’ I again talked to Fuller,
and told him that I thought it was rather a dangerous proceeding
to be sailing under a false name. He said, ‘ that was their look
out.’ I said, 4 You might be overhauled by a ship of war:’ to
which he replied, 4 that in such a case, the name could be easily
replaced.’ I rejoined, 4 that they might be seen by means of a
telescope changing the name.’ He again said, 4 that was their
look out;’ and evidently objected to talk any more about it.
Whether the right name Anna was replaced before or after we
got to Lanthala I cannot tell; but I know it was replaced.
Before I took the natives to the plantation, I asked Mr. John T.
Smith whether they were going to be passed at the Consulate.
He said it was not necessary, The Anna then, I think, went to
Levuka. I know nothing more ; but I should wish the natives,
that I engaged for twenty months, to be returned to their island.
This breach of faith has put me to great inconvenience and
trouble: and I dare not go back to my house where I resided
thirteen years, and have property to an amount of some 700 1.
sterling.
(Signed) 44 Wm. Heney Meadee.
44 Taken and sworn at her Majesty’s Consulate, Ovalau, Fiji,
this
44 Before me,
(L.S.) (Signed) “Edwaed Maech,
44 H. B. M. Consul.”
June 27, 1871.—Summoned Frank Bolero and Beaver to the
Consulate, to give evidence relative to the doings of the Anna, as
stated in the affidavit of Meader. They are both down the
coast, so some time will naturally elapse before they can come
to Levuka.


June 30, 1871.—Went on board the steamer Waiome, and
inspected 136 natives from the Solomon Islands. There being
no interpreter on board, I put the whole crew on their oath, and
asked them whether they had any reason to believe that the
natives had been irregularly obtained, and whether they believed
they had all come to Fiji of their own free will. They replied to
the satisfaction of their employers, but not mine. Nevertheless
I was obliged to rest content, as far as appearances went, not
being able to hold intercourse with the natives for want of an
interpreter. The supercargo was a man named Hargrave, who
appears to be very successful in obtaining shiploads of these
people.
In the afternoon went on board the Volunteer, to examine
another batch. Having no interpreter or faith in the proceeding
I adopted on board the Waiome, returned without making the
examination.
July 19, 1871.—Horrible murders and mutilations of the
planters Spiers and Mclntosh, residing on the north-east coast
of 1/ itu Levu (Ba Eiver), by the mountaineers of that district.
The murderers are supposed to be the same as those who killed
and eat poor Missionary Baker.
July 19, 1871.—Examination of “ immigrants ” on board the
Defiance and Oriti. Satisfactory, so far as I could not discover
any thing wrong. Nevertheless, I am imformed, and it is an
opinion 1 formed some time back, that ninety per cent, of these
“ immigrant ” labourers have been cajoled or mildly kidnapped,
or violently detained by having the hatches put over them, after
being decoyed into the hold.
. The Oriti only brought 120 immigrants, after having been out
six months. The master reported having fallen in with a French
schooner engaged in systematic slave-trade.
July 27, 1871.—Mr. Beatson, master of the Orili, has given
me some details of the French vessel mentioned above. Whilst
cruising amongst the South Sea Islands he says he met her.
For some time past she had been engaged in kidnapping the
inhabitants systematically. Mr. Beatson could not learn the
name of the captain, but it appears he is a native of Jersey, and
consequently a British subject. With the exception of giving
his name, he was communicative ; and showed Mr. Beatson how
well prepared he was for all eventualities, by producing two
certificates of registry: one 'purporting to have been issued by
the authorities of New Caledonia, and the other by those of
Tahiti. In the former the vessel was described as the Eugenie,
in the other the Imperatrice. He also showed Captain Beatson
the fire-arms, ammunition, cutlasses, irons, hatchway gratings,
with which he was provided, and finally invited him to join and
share in his expeditions. His mode of procuring “ labourers ”
seemed to be as follows: —During the day he anchored off a
village, sent on shore a party of men ostensibly to trade, but in
reality to reconnoitre. He then sailed away, returned at night,


made a razzia on the place, captured as many able-bodied men
as possible, took them on board, and left for some other island.
He did not destroy life, except under special circumstances ; nor
did they often occur, as a panic always followed the confusion
and fright caused by a sustained discharge of musketry and a
general conflagration. Mr. Beatson described the vessel as a
fore-and-aft schooner, painted white, of about 170 tons, Ame-
rican built, carrying a white crew of at least thirty men, and in
all respects armed and equipped as a slaver,
August 3, 1871.—The other day an imported labourer, a native
of the Solomon Islands, was found half buried, with his toes
sticking out of the ground. Had the body examined by Dr.
Freeman. It appears that he died a natural death, and was
buried like a dog. To-day I hear of another, who had been found
sown up in a blanket, and deposited behind Mrs. Cox’s boarding-
house. The body must have been there several days, as it was
quite decomposed. These poor imported people may die without
any notice being taken, in fact like brute beasts; and the
planters object to my supervision over their plantations. I am
sent here to grapple with and put down the wicked trade. lam
expected to do a great deal, but am left alone to fight a host of
unscrupulous blackguards.
August 8, 1871.—Mr. Thurston has returned from his cruise
in search of labourers, and reports that at least four-fifths of
the trade is downright slavery. The natives will not tolerate the
presence of a white man; and the difficulty of getting them to
embark voluntarily for Fiji is becoming greater every day. It
appears that the Consul is a personage of some importance in
their simple minds, and that he is considered in a great measure
to be the cause of the natives not being returned to their homes
at the expiration of their engagements. Can it be that the kid-
nappers make use of my name in furtherance of their rascally
schemes ? The natives little know the hatred with which lam
regarded in consequence of my watching so carefully over the
welfare of these poor people.
