

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES.
THE
SILK INDUSTRY.
SYDNEY CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, PHILLIP STREET.
1594.
116 137—94




DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES.
THE
SILK INDUSTRY.
SYDNEY: CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, PHILLIP STREET.
1894.
Hi 137—01




August, 1804.
The Silk Industry.
The Department of Agriculture in directing exhibits of silkworms to be
prepared was actuated by more than ordinary design and motive. For
many years desultory efforts have from time to time been made by private
persons of all ages and conditions of life, from mere boy and girlhood to
men of great practical experience, as well as of acknowledged skill in rearing
silkworms in countries outside Australia, who sought to establish the industry
and make it profitable hero in Australia. Even the best qualified and most
hopeful all failed, and failed generally from one chief but fatal cause, namely,
the insufficiency of the supply of mulberry leaf, tbe indispensable food for
the silkworms.
The discredit that so long overshadowed the exertions of several ladies
and gentlemen during late years, though amply justifying and worthy of
more generous appreciation, has now given way to more hopeful considera-
tion—and the evidence is now abundant that the whole subject is ripe for a
rational .and sustained effort to bring into being a substantial silk industry
and create an additional spring or incentive to productive energy and
employment for much hitherto unused or unprofitable labour. The G-overn.
ment has undertaken to afford some preliminary or elementary instruction,
and by instruction and example assist for a while to help beginners to learn
methods of rearing silkworms for profit.
For a long while it has been known that a local expert had invented and
carried through successfully year after year a plan or system quite novel
and unique in its character and unknown elsewhere. It is true that, though
in some sense there was no secret about it, and the fact open to view at any
time by any person who chose to see, yet it was at a private gentleman’s
establishment, and further, the fact was patent that no other person had
been able to master the process.
Thus the premises being the already well-ascertained facts—
-Ist. The well-proved and acknowledged suitability of the climate and
natural conditions for commercial production of cocoons in New
South Wales.
2nd. The existence of mulberry trees of all the most useful varieties
and of mulberry silkworms of the best kinds already acclimatised
in the Colony.
3rd. The material advantage, unknown elsewhere, of the power of
using the strictly annual silkworm as stock to be reared at any
period of the year desired, wherever, and whenever, there may be
mulberry-leaf available in sufficient quantity to feed the worms,
the Government was induced to arrange for the instruction of a limited
number of persons of both sexes in the most approved and economical
methods of rearing silkworms, and for the propagation and treatment of
mulberry trees.


The following brief note .appeared in tbo official catalogue of the Indian
and Colonial Exhibition, London, 1880 :
[Extracts from Reports, Colonial Sections, Colonial and Indian Exhibition, London,
1886.]
COCOONS.
Species of cocoon, name and address of producer and exhibitor. —Mulberry-fed silkworm
cocoon ( Ronihyx Mori). Produced by Charles Anthony Brady, Tumbulgnm, Tweed
River, Now South Wales, and exhibited by him in the New South Wales Court, Class
51, No. 332.
Description of cocoon. — Form —Elliptical oblong, with slight medial depression.
Colour —Creamy white inside and outside.
Texture —Fairly compact.
Reeling —Good.
Description of the have of cocoons. —The reelable cocoon thread or have is composed of
two cylindrical fibres or brins, consisting of homogeneous matter (fhroi, Schorlemmer)
surrounded and cemented together by a srrbstance resembling gelatine ( sericin , or silk
gelatin, Schorlemmer), This latter is called “ gum” in England, and “ gres” in France.
As with other mulberry silks, the two brins polarize light very beautifully when the
have is examined with the microscope and polariscope, hut the surrounding silk gelatine,
which forms about 33 per cent, of the total weight of the have, has no polarizing power.
Weight of cocoon. —O’G34 grammes.
Dimensions of cocoon. —32 x 1G millimetres.
Length of have reeled. —ss4 metres.
Weight of have reeled. —oTs9 grammes.
Fibre of have, milligrammes per 500 metres. —144 milligrammes.
Fibre of have in deniers. —2'7o.
Mean diameter of have. —(Vo32B millimetres.
Mean elasticity of have. —lB'l per cent.
Mean tenacity or strength of have. —G'7 grammes.
Percentage of silk reeled from the cocoon. —25'0S per cent.
Diameter, elasticity, and tenacity of the have:—
1. 10 metres from the end at the outside of the cocoon.
2. ~ ~ at the middle of the cocoon.
3. „ „ at the inside of the cocoon.
(J) (2) (3)
Diameter of have in ten-thousandths of a millimetre... 345 345 294
Percentage of elasticity, average of six estimates ... 16’7 22 - 8 14 - 0
Tenacity or breaking strength in grammes, average of
six estimations 7'7 B's 3 - 9
Weight in milligrammes of each 100 metres of have reeled from the cocoon, com-
mencing at the end of the have which is at the outside of the cocoon :
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
41 37 33 28 15 54 metres remained, weighing
5 milligrammes.
The cocoons were ordinary buff-colored, partially sun-dried, but not prepared other-
wise.
Mr. Brady, in a printed circular, states that the climate on the Tweed River furnishes
the mulberry-tree in great abundance, yielding daily supplies of the leaf from the end of
July until April. The soil, he says, is very fertile, the rainy season being from January
to April, and followed by a dry winter.
He states that he has, for many consecutive years, aided by the power of the climate
and country, managed to obtain a continuous hatching of silkworms day by day or week
by week, or, in his own words, “ Assuming that the management of the eggs has been
duly attended to at the proper time .... the continuous hatchings will present
Notf,. - Metre =3O 37 inches. millimetre = 0-000003037 inch English. 100 inches of have of
quality indicated would stretch or extend before breaking to llS’l inches. 1 gramme 0 03527 ounce
English. The diameter and strength of the have or natural pair of fibres are of course (?) double those of
the single fibre or brin.


the strange phenomenon peculiar to New South Wales, of living silkworms in every daily
or periodical stage of progression up to cocooning (every day’s lot must be kept severely
separate)—that is, worms of every stage and daily growth, and through every moult and
change of forms (metamorphosis) contemporaneously, and at the same time the emerging
and coupling of the moths and deposit of the eggs (the graine again). This continues till
operations for the season are finally closed, when the staff employed can respite for a
winter, during which refit and preparations are made for the following season.
“The whole of the natural history of the mulberry silkworm, absolutely unchanged
in its natural annual habit, is in view at one and the same moment—worms hatched on
the day itself, and of every other day, from one day old to full grown ones, actually
making their cocoons, the moths emerging, and new eggs being produced, which arc a
generation to proceed with in a subsequent season. Arranged beforehand, and in the
hands of a skilled person, the process is as much under control as the machinery in a
factory. It is animated, self-reproducing machinery, maintained by supplies of the silk-
worms’ only natural food—the mulberry leaf.”
Many persons viewing the Silkworm Exhibits at the Agricultural Show in
Moore Park, appeared to he impressed with the changed aspect of this
valuable industry presented to their minds on that occasion,—hitherto
neglected here, while largely adding to the wealth and comfort of great
bodies of people —producers of the raw material for silk in Europe and in
Asia. Casting off the silly fancies and childish toying which have so long
pervaded the Australian mind in regard to the silkworm insect, some few at
least of the visitors who thronged around the tables early and late, demanding
attention and explanations, made it evident that they were desirous of useful
information, and to learn more than could be learned in the short time the
exhibition would be open. In short, to be instructed about an occupation
which offers the inducement of profit to almost any one employing him or
herself therein.
The annual aggregate value of the cocoons (sold in the state just as made
by the silkworm caterpillar without any winding or reeling or any other
preparation) raised in Italy and Prance is from about five millions to six and
a half millions of pounds sterling (£5,000,000 to £0,500,000) for each of
those countries. This affords an average return to each individual rearer of
about £9 or £lO in France, £lO or £ll in Italy, while in regions bordering
the Eastern Mediterranean Sea the average reward to each rearer appears to
be from £lO to £l2. In every case the whole time occupied is the same,
namely, about six or seven weeks per annum.
If the cocoons are not sold immediately, or are intended to he kept, they
must be dried so as to destroy the life of the grub or chrysalis inside, or
(preferably) dessicated, that is, so dried that not only is the life within put
an end to and the boring out of the cocoon by the moth avoided, but the
insect itself reduced to dust so dry that when crushed by pressure the cocoon
shall not be soiled nor injured. When thus treated they can be kept for an
indefinite period, and, packed in bales, travel to any part of the world.
Inexact and sometimes extravagant statements having appeared in un-
authorised publications we now mention for general information and to
prevent unreasonable expectations, that the open market value of cocoons all
round is about from 9|d. to 12d. or 13d. per pound weight, according to
quality, in the condition just as completed by the worm. If dried (and of
course in proportion to the degree to which drying or dessication is carried)
the market value will be greater, and double or several times more than in
the “ green ” state. In short, as the cocoon becomes lighter by reduction of
the weight of the moisture, &c., belonging to the grub, the proportion of the
valuable matter, the silk, is greater. It is, however, very generally found
most convenient as well as most profitable for the rearer to sell immediately,
that is, as soon as the cocoons are fit to be taken from the “ hush ” —leaving


the dealers (factors, but most generally the “ Filandas ” and reeling mill pro-
prietors) who employ many hundreds of workpeople all the year round, and
have special facilities for wholesale drying, storing, &c., of the fresh cocoons,
or to reel them at once as far as may be practicable.
The value of mulberry leaf to the grower (the “ plantation ” value) may
be roughly estimated at about £3 or £1 per acre so soon as ready for use,
increasing with age to £7 or £8 and upwards.
By local experience it is known the produce of one acre of mulberry
property grown and fed to silkworms will realise by sale of the cocoons from
£ls to £25, and still more if skilfully and economically used.
The Exhibits.
Although somewhat premature, arrangements being far from complete at
Booral, opportunity was taken of the Agricultural Society’s show in Moore
Park for displaying some of the living silkworms raised at the Government
Silk Station—thus beginning in part a demonstration of the capability of
the Colony for raising cocoons at almost any time of the year —in fact
whenever and wherever mulberry leaf is available for feeding the worms.
Upon requisition the Ofiicer-in-charge forwarded a collection for this
exhibition, consisting of a daily succession of silkworms (in separate lots)
hatched on the days of exhibition as well as on many previous days, showing
a lot of every day’s growth, and through every-daily stage to full-grown ;
mature caterpillars daily “mounting” the “bush,” each day its separate
appropriate lot then due, and actually making their cocoons; also moths
emerging from cocoons every day, and finally accomplishing their life round
of existence by each day’s moths laying fresh eggs. There was displayed
the whole process and life history of the mulberry silkworm insect in all
stages at once, at the same place, all different, yet contemporaneous.
It is true similar demonstrations have been witnessed in this Colony for
years, but the scene of operations formerly of that novel and till then
unexampled process being at private establishments, the evidence failed to
gain adequate attention from the general public, though many leading
citizens recognised its value and prospective importance. Hence the present
action of the Department of Agriculture, with a view to institute a better
understanding not only of the benefit that would accrue to an intelligent
public by much enlarged fields of profitable work, but also to demonstrate
the immensely extended scope arising from our capabilities here of cheaper
production, economy of labour and material, by frequent repetitions of
rearings, the same “ plant ” and utensils, &c., serving again and again, using
up much good mulberry leaf hitherto wasted but which can now be converted
into silk.
The exhibits were taken in hand by Mr. George Yalder, who had passed
a short time at Booral for a little preparation. Mr. Yalder’s report is as
follows :
“ I left Booral on 9th March with exhibits of silkworms for the Royal
Agricultural Society’s show, consisting of 30 trays of silkworms of various
ages, from 1 to 30 days, each day being represented by one tray, and a card
of eggs. The worms were all reared at the Government Silk Station, Booral,
from eggs obtained from Italy and the card of eggs was from Japan. The
Italian worms were stated to bo of. the Gransosso, Novi Figure, Fossombrone,
and other races.
“ The show took place on 21st, 22nd, 23rd, 24th, and 2Gth March. By this
time the older worms brought from Booral were spinning and supplemented


by others hatched out daily. I was enabled to exhibit worms all through
from hatching out, daily also, until ready to spin (make their cocoons).
Then with help of numbers of worms and cocoons received on the morning
of the show from Booral, I exhibited a largo number climbing into bushes
placed for them and making their cocoons. Moths also at same time
were viewed as they emerged day after day from the older cocoons and
proceeded to lay their eggs. Thus completing an exhibition showing at
one view every stage in the life history of the mulberry silkworm, from
the time of its birth, just hatched, come out of its shell (the egg) to the
mother moth again, laying the eggs for- a future year. Such a complete
exhibit of silkworms as this had certainly never before been seen at any
public show, nor in any other part of the world.
“A remarkable feature about these exhibits was that, notwithstanding the
extraordinary disadvantages and vicissitudes to which the worms were
exposed, such as heat (as high as 88° Tah., and probably more), cold (as low
as 53°), sudden changes in temperature, foul air, dust, travelling packed
closely in cases, &c., &c., they went on working day and night without the
slightest apparent injury, thus proving how wonderfully healthy and strong
worms properly roared in this Colony are. Several Italian and French
gentlemen, who had had extensive experience of silk culture in Europe,
said they could not understand how the worms could be so vigorous and
healthy, for in their own countries they had to take great precautions to
prevent sudden changes in temperature, exposure to draughts, &c., or the
whole of their stock would be carried off.
“A general opinion freely expressed by people who professed to under-
stand about silkworms was that the labour required to manage a large
number would be too costly to allow of any profit, but on questioning them
I found their ideas and ‘ experience ’ were gained by keeping a few dozen
or a few hundred worms in very primitive style. On my explaining and
showing how easily a few hundred thousand could be fed and managed their
eyes were opened. Many people told me they had learned more in five or
ten minutes’ chat with mo and seeing the worms than they could gather
from books in as many months.
“ A number of Bathurst gentlemen who were present strongly urged that
the Department of Agriculture should send the exhibit to the Show to be
held in that city on 11th, 12th, 13th April. The Department complying
with their request, I accordingly left on the 9th, taking an exhibit similar
to that shown in Sydney, with the addition of two fine samples of silk
which had been ‘ grow r n and reeled ’at Now Italy. The whole of the insects,
to the great astonishment of the spectators, had travelled during the day
and night about 280 miles from Booral, and arrived in perfect condition.
As was the case in Sydney, the worms proved one of the greatest attractions.
Mr. Williams, local Secretary to the Women’s Silk-growing Association,
and an enthusiast, gave me every assistance, working hard, and relieving mo
greatly in a portion of my duties, which here, as also in Sydney, required
constant attention early as well as late.
“ The next occasion at which the Government silkworms were exhibited
was at the Chrysanthemum Show of the United. Horticultural Societies, in
the Town Hall, Sydney, on 19th, 20th, 21st April. The exhibits were
similar to those at Bathurst, and the worms recently from Booral again
travelled, without loss or injury, to Sydney. What an attraction the worms
were, and the interest they aroused on the subject of silk-growing, was
very pronounced. The Government House party, including Miss Ottmann,
warmly praised the show, the latter lady expressing her opinion that similar


exhibits would bo very useful at schools and colleges. A number of children
from the Deaf and Dumb Asylum were admitted free to this show. Though
the display of flowers was an exceptionally fine one, no sooner did they
discover the worms than the flowers were entirely neglected. This incident
caused a good many conjectures as to whether it would not be well to teach
these children how to grow silk.
“At each show numbers of people congratulated mo on having such a
splendid exhibit, as also did several foreigners resident in the country and
others in town who had had experience, and were familiar with the silk
industry in their own countries. They considered the demonstration most
novel, interesting, most telling, and instructive. So attractive on each
occasion did the worms prove the stalls wore nearly all day simply crammed
with people eager for explanations, while many had to go away without
being able to get near enough to see or hear.”
Conclusion.
It must be well understood that the Government has no intention to pay
students for learning. All that is contemplated is rather to lead the minds
of private persons to exercise their own wits and exert their own energies
for their own advantage, and only so far move in the case of the art of
growing silk as to endeavour to save beginners from mistakes, and spare
them as much as possible from expense of failure in a pursuit new to the
Colony, and to leave euterpriso in this, as in every other direction, to its
own natural dovclopmout.
Sydney : Charles Potter Government Printer.—lB94.


.vv
ft* 1
ft*
A*l
We Leads Competition Follows!!
By Obtaining all your Requirements from
LASSETTER’S,
The LARGEST and BEST HARDWARE HOUSE in the World.
YOU ENSURE BEST QUALITY, PROMPT ATTENTION,
NO MISTAKES, AND A
SPECIAL DISCOUNT
FOR REMITTANCE WITH ORDER.
F. LASSETTER & Co., Limited,
GEORGE, YORK, CLARENCE. RILEY, ALBION, & ANN STS.,
SYUDisriE^r.
READ
44
Australian Tirld,”
A really first-class, up to date, AX! RICULTU RAL JOURNAL,
SPLENDIDLY ILLUSTRATED, and contains information invaluable to
all interested in Fanning or Fruit Growing Industries.
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION, 61- PER ANNUM,
POSTAL ORDER OR STAMPS, to The Manager, Box 511, G. P. 0.,
or 180, Clarence-street, Sydney.
