

The Coloured Labour
Question in
Queensland
BY
j-_ IR,, THACKERAY,
(Editor of the “ North Rockhampton Times.")
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
all booksellers.




The Coloured Labour Question
- - - in - - -
QUEENSLAND
It is not, perhaps, too much to say that no question has arisen m
Queensland which has agitated the public mind to such an extent as that
of coloured labour. In the Press, on the platform, the stump, and even
in t he pulpit the battle has been, and is being, fought with great
determination and vigour. The opinions expressed are of a character so
diametrically opposed that it is with much difficulty that right conclusions
can be arrived at even by those who approach the subject with the most
disinterested motives and a sincere desire to draw fair and honest
deductions. On the one hand we are told that without coloured or cheap
labour, the sugar industry in Queensland mnst languish, and eventually
perish ; on the other hand we are assured that nothing of the kind is to be
feared,’and we are triumphantly pointed to the northern portions of New
South Wales and the southern border of Queensland, where the industry
is said to flourish by the aid of natives of Australia, or immigrants
arriving from time to time from Great Britain and various parts of the
European continent. One set of politicians declare that the coloured race
is seriously interfering with the interests of the white man by curtailing
his field of labour, and will ultimately drive him out of the country,
where all his efforts will not suffice to enable him to provide a
maintenance for himself and family. Another class affirm that the
introduction of the black procures and provides suitable labour for the
white, which he would not otherwise be able to obtain, and that, in fact,
without the assistance of the black he will be totally unable to develop
the resources of the country. “Queensland for the white man," is the
motto inscribed on one banner ; on the other, “ Give us coloured labour,


or an important and constantly increasing industry cannot be carried on
at all, still less flourish.” The Exeter-liall school look with horror and
dismay on what they are pleased to designate as “ Slavery in (he British
dominions,” while the friends of coloured labour treat the idea with
ridicule, and point to the treatment of the kanaka by themselves and
others as a complete refutation of the charge.
It shall be my earnest endeavour to consider the subject in a fair and
impartial manner, and by the light which personal experience throws
upon it, and not on the Incus a non lucendo principle adopted by Mr.
Morrison and others, who have beyond all doubt taken upon themselves
to write on a subject of which they evidently know little or nothing.
It may be accepted as a position to be maintained that th 3 sugar
industry in Queensland is of the greatest possible importance—that
hundreds of enterprising men have expended in the aggregate, millions of
money in the successful opening up of immense tracts of land, which
would have otherwise remained to this day in a state of waste ; that by
their noble efforts the busy hum of machinery has succeeded the solemn
stillness of the primeval solitude ; that towns and villages have risen up
as the result of their efforts ; that trade and commerce have followed in
the wake of their exertions ; and that they are consequently entitled to
the greatest praise, and deserving of the amplest encouragement that is
consistent with the welfare of the State. When it is remembered that,
although it is only a very few years since the first cane was planted by
the enterprising Mr. Spiller on the banks of the Pioneer River, the Port
of Mackay exports some 16,000 tons of sugar, besides what is required for
the use of a large and important district; when it is borne in mind that
the industry has spread witli astonishing rapidity to the Herbert, the
Johnstone, and, indeed, all along the northern seaboard of Queensland, he
must be a poor politician, and an individual bound up in utter selfishness,
who would wantonly strike a blow at an industry which has done and is
doing much, and will do more, not only for the individual benefit of the
pioneers of colonisation, but for the general prosperity of the country.
Assuming for a moment that the sugar industry should be abandoned in
Queensland -from whatever cause—what, I may ask, is to take its place ?
In tropical countries, only tropical products can be cultivated with


anything like a chance of success. It is, therefore, of the greatest
consequence that the whole subject under considers ion should be treated
dispassionately, and in the hope of arriving at just conclusions. Whether
the present Premier of Queensland is the fittest person to hold the scales
of justice fairly remains to be seen. When he was stumping the country
previous to the late general election, his utterances as to the coloured
labour question, varied with the class of hearers he was addressing, and
when in the Assembly he brought in his measure to amend the then
existing laws, he very forcibly reminded one of the celebrated candidate
for Congress, who said, “ Gentlemen, those are my sentiments. I nail
them to the mast, so that they cannot be lowered ; but, gentlemen, if you
don’t like them they can be altered.” And, in like spirit, altered, Mr.
Griffith’s w ere ; so much so that even he, with a large and subservient
majority at his back, paused before he —raised to pow’er as he was on the
opposition to black labour cry—dared to strike a severe blow r at the
interests of ar. industry of so much importance.
Assuming, then, the great importance of the sugar industry in
Queensland, the question arises, can that industry be successfully carried
on with other than coloured labour? And assuming, further, that it can,
would such other labour be forthcoming and available on such terms as
would be remunerative to the planter ?
The sugar industry of Queensland may be said to have come into
existence about seventeen years ago. In 1867 there were six mills,
producing IGB tons of sugar ; but it is within the last ten years that the
colony has assumed the proud position which it now’ holds among the
sugar producing countries of the world. There are at present some 130
mills of larger or smaller capacity in the colony, and it is computed that
the value of the present year’s product will amount to £1,000,000 or more.
The rapid growth of the industry has been, indeed, something truly
marvellous. We shall see this the more clearly if we compare with it the
output of gold and wool—the former yielding £BOO,OOO and the latter
£l,3oo,ooo—and then take into consideration the length of time that each
industry has been in existence, the two latter products having been
extensively fostered and encouraged, while the sugar industry has
depended solely on the indomitable courage and enterprising spirit of its
promoters.


Let us now consider the question of coloured versus white labour.
From a long and intimate consideration of the subject, 1 am personally
decidedly in favour of the former, and I shall now state iny reasons for
holding that opinion. The three great conditions required for the successful
growing of sugar are soil, climate, and labour. Without the last of these, the
two former are of no avail. In order to provide this, the Coolie Act was
brought into existence some twenty years ago, but its operations were never
brought into play. Then it was found that the Polynesian could do the
necessary work willingly and well, and his introduction has not been found
to thrust out the white man, but to find employment, and fairly lucrative
employment, for him where he would not otherwise have been able to
obtain it. By the means that have been used a flourishing industry has
been established where in former days there were only cattle stations.
Maokay will serve as a fitting instance of many other like places. About
twenty years ago Mackay was only a cattle station, and the population of
the whole district was under 150. A T nw there is a European population of
upwards of 7000, and the export of sugar from that place will, during the
present season, amount to fully 20,000 tons. A large and flourishing town,
with its institutions, municipal, religious, morcantle, and scholastic, has
been built on the banks of the Pioneer ; and all this has l>een done, and in
so short a time, by the sugar industry alone, for the district certainly has
“ all its eggs in one basket.” The same may be said of many other towns
and districts along the north-eastern seaboard of Queensland. Labour,
therefore, must be had to carry, on and increase this grand industry, but
not, as we have before stated, at the expense of the common good. Sooner
would v\ e see the industry, with all its results, present and prospective,
perish, than that the European should be elbowed out of the colony.
But admitting that sugar has been cultivated and manufactured in the
northern districts of Now South Wales by European labour only, it by no
means follows that it can be so cultivated in the tropical parts of Queens-
land. It would be very unjust to institute a comparison between the
Clarence Itivcr district in New South Wales and, say, Mackay or the
But dekin in Queensland. The climate of the last-mentioned place is far
more trying to European constitutions in regard to field labour than those
who have not personally experienced its effects would be led to suppose.
Besides, such labour would not be required at all during several months of


the year. In the Clarence district, labour is found to be available from
the southern parts of the colony within forty-eight hours, and when it is
not longer required on the plantations it is easily absorbed by other
pursuits which are available in the district. In the northern parts of
Queensland sugar is the only industry ; so that when the crushing season
is over the then surplus labour would be at a long distance from a market,
and the expenses incident to removal would be very great. Moreover,
white men will never be found in sufficient numbers who will be willing to
do that which is regarded as blackfellow’s work, more especially when they
are placed side by side with others of the same race who are receiving far
higher remuneration for that which is called skilled labour. The work of
a plantation during the crushing season is very heavy, as may be seen by
comparing the cultivation of wheat and sugar. An acre of wheat will
yield, say, half a ton ; but an acre of sugar often gives from thirty to
thirty-live tons ; and this has all to be cut, stripped, and carted to the
mill. It is quite a mistake to suppose that black labour is cheaper than
white In former days the introduction of the Polynesian cost the planter
£6 per head ; now he has to pay £25, and bear the expense of his return to
the island at the termination of his service. The introduction of the
kanaka costs the country nothing, while every sixpence that is earned in
wages is spent in the colony, whereby traders and others are materially
benefited. The European emigrant can be brought for £2, the remainder
of the passage money being borne by the State. It becomes a question,
therefore, for the consideration of tlxose who are so much interested to
consider whether the system which has hitherto prevailed is not far better
than the introduction of hosts of unskilled labourers., from the European
markets, who would, after the expiration of their term of agreement,
lower very materially the scale of wages now prevailing throughout the
colony. The introduction of Chinese for the required purposes should be
opposed by every legitimate means. They possess many of the necessary
qualifications, e.y., steadiness at work, sobriety, and obedience ; but their
habits are so filthy, and they are in many other ways so objectionable,
that they may rightly be classed as the least desirable of all races as
colonists. Added to which they contribute nothing to the revenue whilo
here, and take away all they earn to be spent in China. Other kinds of
coloured labour have been tried, but without success. The importation of


a ship load of Cingalese to Bundaberg dnring the past year was a com
plete failure. The immigrants were, almost to a man, of an unsuitable
description, and the consequence was that the district was over-run with
a large number of poor wretches, who, in many instances, were
absolutely starving, while the indignation of the white population
culminated in litigation and bloodshed. There is danger in the introduc-
tion of any unregulated labour into the colony. Those regulations should
confine men to the pursuit for which they are engaged, and should compel
them to return home when their engagements have expired. Recently, also,
565 Malays were brought in. These men were equal to the kanakas in
physique, and they are men who do their work well ; but they came with-
out proper regulations. They did not come under the Polynesian
Labourers’Act. And what will be the result ? This is a real source of
of danger to the colony. Far better would it be to have coolies or any
other description of labour which is under strict Government supervision,
and with a provision for compulsory return. There are at present
13,235 coloured men in the colony, including 2,500 Chinese introduced last
year, who are under no restrictions as to their return. It will take two
years for their agreements to expire ; but there is the true source of danger
to the working-men of the colony. Surely the experience of other sugar-
growing countries should teach us that coloured labour is necessary to the
successful cultivation of the cane. Any sensible business man will say
that there must be some reason why coloured labour is considered so
essential for tropical agriculture. It is impossible to name a sugar-growing
country anywhere where coloux-ed labour is not necessary. A cane crop
requires a vast amount of labour at the crushing season. Thirty tons of
raw material have to be cut down from the produce of each acre. The
leaves have to be stripped off, the cane loaded into carts, taken to the
mill, and afterwards manufactured. In order to remove this enormous bulk
an immense amount of labour is required, for there are enormous planta-
tions, which cut 1,000 acres of cane in the year, which at 30 tons an acre
means a total of 30,000 tons. In the Mackay district alone it has been
computed that if European labour had to be employed for crushing, it
would require 1,200 men for the harvest commencing on the Ist July, to
work the thirty mills that are in operation. They would object to the
work, which is not only hard but monotonous, and carried on for six


months of the year only. As we have seen, in all the sugar-growing dis-
tricts of the North, there is but the one industry, and no general labour
market. After the crushing season is over, what then would become of
the European population ? It must not be forgotten, too, that in event of
a low class of labour being imported from Germany, Scandinavia, Den-
mark, and other European communities, the immigrants, after a six months’
residence, would become entitled to the exercise of the franchise ; and
taking into consideration that, without depreciating their intellectual
capabilities, they would have little if any knowledge of our Constitution,
serious results might ensue, more especially as they would be mere voting
machines according to the will of their employers for the time being. The
Polynesian and the coolie, however, possess no votes, and that by special
enactment. Out of the expenses of working a plantation the coloured
labourers get only ten per cent., the remainder going to Europeans. The
different branches of trade, mechanics, engineers, and shippers, are bene-
fited, while even the ten per cent, or the greater part of it, is left in the
colony among the storekeepers and other tradesmen,
That irregularities have existed, and continue to exist, in the intro-
duction of the Polynesian, it were idle for anyone to attempt to deny. But
it is equally certain that it is not to the interest of the planters to encourage
them. Instances are painfully frequent of atrocities which are a disgrace
to the fair fame of Queensland. Shooting down in cold blood, shameless
kidnapping, and illtreatment on the voyage to Queensland have, unhappily,
been too common. No matter how anxious the Government of Queensland
may be to prevent irregularities, and to secure fair play for the Polynesian,
there is no recognised form of Government in the islands. The ships go
down there, and no matter how many Governments Agents there may be,
and however anxious they may be to do their duty, abuses of a serious
nature will creep in Cooped up as he is in close companionship with men
whose interests are, in many instances, diametrically opposed to those he
is set to conserve, he is to often apt to be remiss to a culpable extent.
Still, when instances are discovered the perpetrators of atrocities are
severely punished. At the same time it should be borne in mind that
barbarities are committed in other places where there is abundance of
police protection, even in the crowded streets of a metropolis. There is
little or no control over the vessels once they are away from the coast of


Queensland until their return, and the employment of Government Agents
has been, until very recently, regarded as a refuge for the destitute—for
men who were considered to be almost unfit or incapable for any occupa-
tion on shore. There have, it is true, been exceptions to the rule; but
they have been few and far between. That the barter in firearms and
ammunition has been an unmixed evil there can be no question, but how
far the restriction of the trade will act on the recruiting of Polynesians
remains to be seen. The time has long gone by for the traffic in beads and
other worthless articles that are supposed to delight the savage mind
The islander now knows the value of a rifle as well as any storekeeper in
civilised regions, and the motto “ No rifle, no kanaka ” will no doubt come
into common use The island trade will never be carried on satisfactorily
until a better class of ships is used ; and those must be Government vessels,
all the officers of which shall be responsible to the head of a Government
department, and not to owners or agents, whose sole aim is to make as
much money as possible, having little regard to the means, lawful or other-
wise, by which it is obtained. Then, and not till then, will a check be
put on the custom of bringing youths of tender age, whereby the Poly-
nesian death-rate is so fearfully augmented. The ships will doubtless be
longer on each voyage ; the profits will be less in consequence ; but the
present complaint of planters, that the physique of new recruits is far
inferior to that which previously prevailed, will cease to have foundation
in fact. It is almost needless to observe that the cry of the “ slavery ” of
Polynesians is only so much political clap-trap. The kanaka understands
the terms of the agreement he makes, either by himself or friends, just as
well as his employer does. Be can compute money and see that he obtains
value for it as accurately as a European or even an Asiatic. He is quite
aware that he is under the protection of the Government of the country,
and that his grievances will be heard and properly redressed. The Poly-
nesian inspector he knows to be his friend, and from the moment he leaves
his island home to the instant of his return, he is fully cognisant of his rights
and privileges, and that these must be respected under heavy penalties.
There is no doubt, however, that the supply of labour from the
islands is becoming smaller and smaller every year, while in the same
ratio the want of such labour is being perceptibly felt by reason of the
growing proportions of the industry. The output of sugar from Queensland


to foreign ports may now bo stated in round numbers at 40,000 or 50,000
tons per annum ; but, with an always unlimited market, and the given
amount of necessary labour, there is no reason, judging from the past, to
stop short of 400,000 or 500,000 tons as the product of the industry, and
that, within the next ten or twenty years.
In view of the probable failure of the supply of labour from the
islands, and the acknowledged unsuitablility of Europeans as labourers on
sugar plantations, the planters are looking afield m the direction of India
Let us consider this important phase of the question fully and fairly, it
is argued on the one hand that Italian coolies, if introduced at all, would
be detrimential to the working classes, because the country would be over-
run with skilled workmen. e.q., mechanics, watchmakers, and artisans of
every description, who would be willing to work for very small wages, to
the present loss and final extinction of the white population. On the
other side it is asserted with equal pertinacity that, under sufficiently
stringent regulations, the dreaded calamity could not possibly occur, lhe
coolie should be engaged for a specified purpose. His labour should be
strictly confined to the plantations. A sine qua non in the agreement
should be the return of the labourer at the termination of his service. He
should never, though a British subject, be allowed to have the exercise of
the franchise. These regulations should become the law of die land, and
be ratified by the Government of India as well as by the Legislature of
Queensland. If such regulations were made and strictly enforced under
heavy penalties for their infringement, I cannot see that any terrible
danger would be likely to accrue to the colony generally by the judicious
and judicial introduction of the Indian coolies as a .abourer on the Queens-
land plantations. The great want that is now felt in the recruiting of
Polynesians for the service, in that there is no recognised authority at the
islands, would be obviated, inasmuch as the necessary ships and then
officers would have proper supervision of an authoritative kind at each end
of the service. The Indian Government is properly very jealous of the
welfare of its subjects. The regulations under which they would be
allowed to come would be such that the welfare of the labourer would be
provided for. Care would be taken that the terms of the compact were
strictly obseived, and a final termination would be made of charges of
cruelty against those who had no protectors and were unable to protect
themselves. The cry of slavery in Queensland would be no longer heard.
Kidnapping, or the obtaining of labour by surreptitious means, would be
no longer reserted to, and the fair fame of Queensland would be no longer
sullied.
I have endeavoured in the foregoing remarks to show in a succinct
form the importance of the sugar industry of Queensland— greater than the
mining, and even in its infancy, almost equal to the pastoral; the little
dependence to be placed on white men as plantation labourers ; the
deteriorating effects it would have upon their status and wages ; the pre-
sent traffic relating to the recruiting of Polynesians ; the suggested, intro-
duction of the Indian coolie ; and the utter impossibility of prosecuting the


industry without a further supply of cheap, reliable, coloured labour.
Some kind of compromise will no doubt be effected between those who
hold views at present diametrically opposed to each other. The progress
of that compromise, and its result after many a hard-fought battle, wilLbe
an interesting study, and rep'ete with importance.
The above article was written and published in the Victorian
Review ” in 1884, and from that time to the present, the writer has had
no reason to change his views, but rather to have them abundantly
confirmed. The following able and truthful statements by Mr. M. Hume
Black M.L.A., in the Queensland Legislative Assembly, statements
which were never contradicted, are added by way of showing the “ Then
and Present ” position of the Coloured Labour Question.
In the course of his speech in the House on the 7th April, on the
Pacific Island Labourers (Extensions) Bill, the Honourable gentleman
remarked :—I do not think that any subject has been debated in this
House for many years on which such gross ignorance has been displayed
by those who oppose this measure. When I say “ gross ignorance,” j
mean literarly what Isay. The misstatements and false interpretation
and construction given to the country by some hon. gentlemen who have
aired their ignorance on this subject are simply wonderful. It would
really seem as if the question of kanaka labour in this country was an
entirely new subject ; that nothing had been known about it before, that
everything that might have been known about was to its disadvantage,
and that the colony was now asked to enter into some new scheme of
which the dangers were so great as to deter the country from entertaining
it. Those hon. members seem to forget that for the last five-aud-twenty
years kanaka labour has been an institution of the colony. There is no
doubt chat at first there were many abuses : but those abuses, I contend,
have disappeared. They no longer exist, except in the imaginations of
those hon. gentlemen who know little or nothing about the matter, who
depend upon the report of those iniquitous proceedings which took place
in connection with the “ Hopeful ” affair. 1 am very pleased to say that
the present Chief Secretary deserves great credit for his vigour in
suppressing the abuses that formerly existed; and I contend that
whatever objections were then brought to light have been entirely
suppressed, and do not exist at the present time.
This sugar industry was commenced in 1867, twenty--five years ago.
The first export of sugar was 168 tons in that year, and 1 st year the
export reached 70,000 tons. The whole of this industry has been brought
about by the employment of Polynesian labour, which some hon. gentlemen
would now like to take away. The total quantity of sugar produced up
to the present time, in twenty-five years, is 584,908 tons, of the value of
£1,699,600. Now, the cost, reckoning £lO a ton for production —the
wages and expenses of the plantations, and leaving out interest on capital


and steamer freights—the wages paid for producing that quantity ot sugar
in twenty-five years have been £5 849,800. That is the money actually paid
to the workingmen and the storekeepers and others connected with the sugar
industry. Out of that sum the kanaka has got £584,980, and the othei
labour has got £5,264,820. That is the proportion-that is what this
dreaded kanaka has done for the white man. By expending less than
£600,000 on that description of labour —which has done the country no
harm up to the present time —the country has been enabled to expend over
£5.250,000 on European labour and the mercantile interests of the colony.
And this is without a single shilling for interest, or cost of machinery, ot
anything of that kind. During that time we have exported 340, /10 torts
of sugar, of the value of £6,914,200. Is that nothing to be proud of?
This is an agricultural industry. This all comes from the soil. We talk
about wanting to settle people on the soil. W hat other agricultural
industry is there which has been able to show such wonderful results as
this. In addition to what we have exported, we have grown for our own
consumption in that time 244,270 tons-that is the difference between what
we exported and what we produced—of a value, reckoned at £2O per tn,
of £4,885,400. Had we not done that, we should have had to send
£5,000,000 of our money out of the country to buy sugar ; and sugar, how
grown, Mr. Speaker ? Was it to be grown by white labour .Iso ; it was
to be grown by coloured labour in other parts of the> world. Is it not
better that we should have been able to spend £5,000.000 on our own
people, and to be able to save actually nearly £0,000,000 m producing
sugar for ourselves, than to have expended this t 0,000,000 in various
countries to buy sugar grown by coloured labour ? I hope hon. mem era
will look at this from a practical point of view. I have no sentiment
about me. lam speaking from a practical, common sense poult of view,
and if hon. members care to look at it from a sentimental point of view 1
say I decline to follow them. And, looking at the Question from a
practical point of view I maintain that the employment of coloured labour
has been of immense benefit to the colony as a whole, and to the rvorth m
particular. I could dilate to an unlimited extent upon this question, but
I will not. I desire to say a few words on the Bill, which has been almost
overlooked by hon. members in their sentimental rhapsodies. It was
anticipated, when the Chief Secretary’s manifesto was published, that tins
labour would be revived for ten years, and I was disappointed on finding
that there was not a single word in the Bill on that subject. But since 1
have heard the explanation I am quite prepared to accept the Bill as it
stands. I am quite prepared, assuming that the Bill will pass this
House, as I trust it will, to allow' the question to go to the constituencies ;
and I think it is very likely that the discussion which has been elicited
during the passing of the Bill will seiwe to educate the constituencies as to
what the sugar industry really is and what it means. I should have liked
that the Government having recognised the necessity of introducing this des-
cription of labour, had undertaken the whole business of recruiting them-
selves. I know that the planters have incurred a considerable amount of o< Imm
in connection with the recruiting of islanders in the past; still, it is we
known to those who understand the subject that the planters are perfectly
innocent of any irregularities which have been connected with the labom


ships I should have liked the Government to have been able to see their
wav to undertake the whole of the recruiting, charging the cost thereof
to those who employed this labour. The Government have thought
d fferently. Ido not know whether they would be prepared to accept an
amendment in that direction. There is a matter which is referred to in
the 4th clause of the Bill—as to how this labour is to be employed, i
will draw the attention of hon. members to the definition of tropical or
semi-tropical labour as contained in the Act of 1880. That was the
busine s of “cultivating sugarcane, cotton, tea, coffee, rice, spices, or
other tropical or semi-tropical productions or fruits, and of rendering the
product thereof marketable.” “Rendering the product thereof market-
able,” undoubtedly meant the passage of the cane right through the mill
until it became sugar. In the 1884 Act it was considered necessary to
still further define in what w-ay Polynesian labour was to be employed,
and that definition was stated as follows :
“ Field work in connection with the cultivation of sugar-cane, blacksmiths,
wheelwrights, farriers, sug'ar boilers, carpenters, sawyers, splitters, fencers, bullock
drivers, or mechanics;
“The business of grooms or coachmen :
“ The business of horse driving’ or cartihg, except in field work ; or,
“ Domestic or household service.”
I think that if it had been intended to exclude them from rendering the
products marketable, that previous definition ought to have been repealed.
But it was never repealed, and the Act stands now 7 w r ith the interpretation
I have read—the 1880 Act allowing them to be employed in rendering the
products marketable, and the 1884 Act defining wrhat special branches of
labour they should not be employed in. There is no doubt that, under
the belief that these two interpretations should be taken side by side, the
planters have, in many instances, employed kanakas to work in the mills.
My statement the other night that kanakas w r ere, and ought to be,
employed in the mills was based upon this. That is the reason why I
made that statement. It is stated now that they will not be allowed to
work in the sugar factory or in refining. I am not going to delay the
House by referring to that matter now, because when the Bill gets into
committee, as I hope it will, there w r ill be ample opportunity for hon.
members to express their opinions on the subject. I think, decidedly,
that the Government are to bs congratulated upon having taken the
step which they have done, more especially in the present time of
depression. I believe the effect of the legislation w'hich is contemplated
will be, at all events, to lestorfe confidence in one of the best producing
interests we have in the country, and will be not only the means of
enlarging the employment for Europeans, but will be the means of
thoroughly testing and carrying out —which, I believe, will be successful
in the end, if we only give it time —the idea of cutting up all the large,
estates into small farms. I believe sincerely that that will be the effect;
but the necessity for coloured labour until this is achieved is more
apparent to me now than ever it was before.




