

THE
ABORIGINES
AND
THE CHINESE
IN
AUSTRAL IA




THE ABORIGINES
AND
THE CHINESE
IN AUSTRALIA,


jositra cook asd co.,
PRINTERS,
(.EOHbk STREET, SIOREV.


To His Royal Highness
The Duke of Edinburgh, H.G., H.T.,
One pleasant reminiscence in connection with
the visit of your Royal Highness to Adelaide will
be the drive you took through one of the most
beautiful and English-looking portions of the colony,
called the South-Eastern District, to the shores of
Lake Albert, where your Royal Highness made an
encampment for a few days in the wild Australian
bush.
The aboriginal population of the Lake districts was
there collected to exhibit a corroboree; but they first
presented to your Royal Highness an address setting
forth their past heathen condition in contrast with
the blessings they now enjoy under the sceptre of our
gracious .Queen, and their obligation to the Christian
Church for the instruction they have received. It is
much to be regretted that some other exhilirating
recreation requiring the exercise of agility and skill,
or some other dance has not been substituted for the
barbarous “ yentente” or as we have designated it
“ corroboree,” which, in the views of the aborigines
themselves, is necessarily associated with the most
degrading customs.
During the past seven years I have had frequent-
opportunities of making inquiry and observations
respecting the character, habits, and opinions of the


Aborigines, and of the Chinese immigrants on the
gold fields. The following pages contain a few ex-
tracts from notes that were taken in my various
travels through all the settled portions of the Aus-
tralian colonies to promote the circulation of the
Holy Scriptures in connexion with various agencies
of the Christian church, and of the Britishand Foreign
Bible Society.
I venture therefore to ask your Eoyal Highness to
accept this brief record of the missions of the Church
in Australia. Though it has no pretension to his-
torical research or elaborate delineation, it presents a
narrative of accurate facts that I hope may prove
interesting to your Eoyal Highness, especially as it
serves to show distinctly that the wide extension of
British colonization is associated not only with
material and national prosperity, but with the
diffusion of Christianity, and the maintenance of
Christian missions among heathen races.
With the greatest respect,
I subscribe myself.
Your Eoyal Highness’ humble servant,
JOSEPH KIDGER TUCKER, D.D.
Diocese of Sydney, 18(58.


The Aborigines.
I.
Numerous efforts have been made, in the course of
years that are past, to bring the aboriginal population
of Australia under the saving and civilizing influence
of Christianity. Several denominations, having
large and successful Missionary Societies, w ith men
scattered over various heathen lands, have made
attempts to carry on the work of evangelization
amongst these wandering and benighted tribes, and
have entirely abandoned the philanthropic undertaking
as being unsatisfactory and almost hopeless. At the
present time there is no systematic mission sustained
for the aborigines in New South Wales or in Northern
Australia. Missions that were commenced in Queens-
land by the Germans have long since ceased their
operations, and the tract of land that had been
assigned by the Government for their use has
been sold to the descendants of the original staff
of missionaries, at the upset price of one pound per
acre, with all the garden cultivation and improve-
ments, and is now known as “ German Town,” near
the City of Brisbane. More recently there has been
an effort made to renew Missionary work in Vic-
toria, the results of which we hope to review after
giving a brief narrative of South Australian operations,
which we think are not generally known, even among
the members of our own Church.


PORT LINCOLN.— POONINDIE.
One of the most carefully projected and successful
missions to the aborigines is that at Port Lincoln,
originated by the Venerable Archdeacon Hale, now
the Lord Bishop of Perth, which has been conducted
from the beginning by our own Church. Two sections
of land were purchased, and a pastoral run was leased
from the Government with a view of establishing an
industrial farm and self-sustaining mission. About
five thousand sheep with the run were purchased by the
Archdeacon with his own resources for this purpose
in 1830, and during the first three years the Govern-
ment aid amounted to only £l,lOO, after which a
grant of £I,OOO a-year was given to support the
establishment. Within six years one hundred and
ten aborigines had been under instruction, fifty-six of
whom were employed on the station, and twenty-nine
had died. The total expense to the colony of the
Training Institution had been £4250, and the value
of the property had been improved—it w r as then esti-
mated at £7638, of which £2960 was entirely the
produce of the labour of the resident aborigines; in
addition to which a large building for a school and
church, two stone huts and several huts and buildings,
valued at £9OB, had been erected principally by their
labour. The whole of this property was made over
to trustees for the use of the Institution, and it was
determined as soon as possible to make the mission
self-supporting.
Difficulties that were anticipated as peculiar to such
an attempt were overcome, and the experience of the
past seven years has shewn that much good may be
accomplished" in this way without the aid of Govern-
ment, or the trouble of keeping up a long subscrip-
tion list. There are now oti the station a clergyman.


an overseer of the run, and a school-master with
about thirty-five boys and girls under tuition, who are
in good health, having plenty of out-door exercise;
and the whole work is made to be self-supporting by
the produce of the farm. Not less than one hundred
and seventy acres are under cultivation, and the re-
mainder of the land is grazed by a flock of sheep. Last
year the wheat alone produced £6OO ; and the wool has
realised upwards of £ISOO.
The farm is a favourite rendezvous of the tribe, and
a few of the men work with a good will under the
guidance of skilful hands, and the supervision of a
considerate and able overseer. Some who have been
under instruction are moral in their conduct, and
shew that they have a clear apprehension of the sim-
plest truths of the G-ospel. Not a few who have died
at the Mission station have expressed a trust in Christ
and hope of eternal life. With the best arrangements
conducive to health, both in respect to the adults and
the children, the tribe rapidly decreases, and a consi-
derable proportion die from pulmonary disease. The
Rev. 0. P. Hammond, M.D., in a recent report on
the Poonindie Mission, says of the men and their
families : “ The morale is decidedly improved, partly,
I have no doubt, in consequence of the regularity of
the payments for their labour, and the absence of
arbitrariness in dealing with them, and also as I
believe from the system which is now being introduced
by Mr. Newland of letting them ‘ piece-work,’ in any
cases in which the plan can be advantageously applied.
Another source of contentment is, I think, the ar-
rangement by which the married people have separate
rations issued to them weekly, so that each family
cook for themselves, and have their meals in their own
houses, the station cook baking their bread for them,
and cooking for the unmarried lads and men about the


place. The attendance at school lias been fairly
regular on the part of the younger ones, and at the
evening school I have generally some who are desirous
of improving their reading and general knowledge.
But it must not be expected, I think, that men who
are out at work from morning till evening should feel
very well able to give their minds to school-work at
night. The women also have most of them children
who require their attention, and therefore they are not
now so constant at school as formerly. They are
almost all able to read fairly, and write some from
dictation and others transcribing from copies. The
attendance at prayers is, all things considered, fair.”
After seventeen years the permanent results are
small. There are now less than one hundred abori-
gines visiting the station, and not more than thirty-
five children in the school. The families are well
conducted, the men being employed as shepherds and
stock-keepers and in various farming operations.
Many have left the Mission for the purpose of engaging
themselves on the sheep stations of the interior.
MOUNT GAMBIER.
There is also a native school at Mount Oambicr,
under the care of Mrs. Smith, which has been
assisted by the Lord Bishop of Adelaide, and for
which the Government has provided sundry material
comforts. This place is now not only a school for the
young, but a refuge for the sick.
LACEPEDE BAY.
At Kingston, Lacepcde Bay , another native
school has been organised under the auspices, of
a Committee of Synod, a building having been
erected by permission on the Government reserve.


The school-house, which is a wooden building, con-
sists of school-room and dormitory for the children,
superintendent’s room and store room. It has
been erected at the very moderate cost of £llO,
of which £SO has been contributed from a fund
placed at the disposal of the Bishop by Miss
Buedett Coutts, and the remainder by private sub-
scriptions. , Mr. Q-. W. Hawkes, who has recently
inspected the school, says that “ the funds have been
judiciously expendedhe also speaks of the conduct
of the school in high terms —“ All the children were
healthy, and looked bright and happy. The rudi-
ments of writing were being taught to ten of them,
and two boys showed great proficiency on their slates.
They had evidently a taste for writing—it is an
amusement to them.” The race that is now fast fading
away is thus cared for by the Church, but the most
judicious treatment with medical supervision does not
prevent the rapid diminution of their numbers; and
on many of the sheep and cattle stations where a kind
attention has been given to the comfort and instruc-
tion of those who are on “ the run,” it has been found
that no human means can cheek materially their
decrease. In many places where a few years ago there
were from fifteen to twenty visiting the homestead
there are now only five or seven left—in numerous
instances thay are all gone.
LAKE ALBERT.— POINT MACLEAT.
The noble Australian River Murray has no tradi-
tions like the Nile or the Euphrates, or the Thames
and the Rhine; but it flows in a devious course over
nearly two thousand miles of newly-discovered pastoral
land, where thousands of flourishing homesteads are


now scattered, and some millions of sheep and cattle
graze—and it may have a great history in the future.
This wide and ever-flowing stream of fresh water is
poured into the vast and brackish flood of Lake
Alexandrina and Lake Albert; while along the coast
and reaching over fifty miles eastward, divided
from the ocean tide by a narrow line of sand hills,
that are covered with a scanty herbage, is the
Coorong, being well-stocked with fish, and wild fowl,
and flowing with ebb and tide through the Lake into
the open sea in the Encounter Bay. Around these
great Lakes, and beside the shores of the Coorong, a
few years ago, there were separate clans or tribes of
aborigines who were often engaged in war, but the
'remnants of the race now dwell in peace with each
other, living chiefly by fishing and hunting. The
surface of the Lake is in fair weather smooth and
glassy, but it becomes treacherous when the gale
blows ; and the first Missionary who went to reside
with the aborigines not being sufficiently cautious, was
drowned there by the upsetting of the frail canoe in
which he was attempting to cross the twenty miles of
' inland water with a few faithful aborigines, who will
never forget their kind instructor. Another self-
denying and earnest Missionary succeeded to the post
of duty and danger, and during the past nine years
these poor benighted people have been under instruc-
tion, and some have been industriously employed.
The Mission is established at Point Macleay , on the
shores of Lake Albert, and is conducted by “ the
Aborigines’ Friends Association” in Adelaide. About
Jour square miles of land have been reserved by the
Government for this purpose; and the whole ex-
pense of the operations is defrayed by a parliamentary
grant of £5OO supplementing an equal amount raised
by donations and sale of produce from the land. The


report of the last year gives a satisfactory accouut of
the agricultural and pastoral management: —
The Association holds 530 acres of land as a native reserve.
Of these, 250 acres have already been fenced, and the Committee
have given instructions that the whole block should be enclosed
with an inexpensive bush fence. Sixty acres were under crop
with wheat, and produced 1,161 bushels, or within a fraction of
20 bushels to the acre. After supplying the Institution with
flour, the Committee have been able to dispose of wheat, which
has yielded them an income of £lO5 Bs. 2d. There were also
seven acres of land sown with hay, which produced about 10
tons. The flock of 350 sheep which was obtained during the
previous year has increased to the number of 510, notwithstand-
ing that some ewes and wether lambs have been killed for meat.
The revenue derivable from the sale of wool has amounted to
£B6 7s. Id. ; and the Committee have great pleasure in stating
that they were enabled to meet the sheep bill, amounting to
£2Ol 4s. in full, so that the flock is now entirely the property of
the Association. There are two important views which the
Committee have ever taken of these agricultural and pastoral
operations; they are a means of industrial training for the
natives, and they are a source of profit to the Society. It is
most important that the objects of our solicitude should be
trained to industrial habits, and this cannot be better done than
when they are under the eye of the agents of the Mission, while
at the same time they are removed from many snares and temp-
tations to which they might be exposed elsewhere, and are kept
under the salutary influence of those who care for their best
interests, and who have in years past proved themselves their
best friends.
The entire tribe of the Lower Murray, within fifty
miles of Point Macleay, is probably little less than
five hundred, and the number at worship varies from
fifty to one hundred adults and children. The attend-
ance at school and the progress of the children has
been satisfactory, and “ there is good reason to think
that in their case the native superstitions have been
undermined, that a spirit of inquiry has been
awakened, and that some of them have already
received hallowed impressions, which will bear fruit
in after years.” Within the last year three couples
have been married with Christian rites. Two of these
are living in a stouc cottage erected out of their own
savings, and there arc others who arc desirous to


imitate their example. Eleven adults have received
Christian baptism. Of these six are now employed on
the farm. Besides those who have been baptized,
there are several young people who meet regularly in
a Bible class that is held four evenings in the week,
which they attend with great interest and eagerness.
Having conversed with many of these instructed abo-
rigines at Milang and at Groolwa, and having camped
beside their “ wurleys” on the dreary borders of the
desert, we can speak with confidence of the civilizing
and moral influence of this interesting Mission, which
now reaches the scattered tribes that restlessly wan-
der around the Lakes or along the banks of the
Murray, or through the wild territory intervening
between the picturesque scenery and beautiful culti-
vated lands and homesteads of the South-eastern
District and the distant rich pastoral and agricultural
land of Mount Gambier.
Those who are sanguine or romantic in their expec-
tations, and who look for the blossom of the rose in
the midst of the arid wilderness, will be sorely disap-
pointed with the fruits of Missionary labour among
the aborigines. The cleanly cottage home; the culti-
vated garden and field ; the settled village, with hum
of busy toil or noisy mirth; the appreciative taste and
refinements of civilization, may never, by the will of
Providence, appear amongst them: but the simple
message and saving ordinances of the “ glorious Gos-
pel” ministered to them may rescue many from deep
degradation, elevate them in social and moral
tone, and make them partakers of the “ hope of
eternal life.” These are results that consecrate toil,
and crown wearisome labour with a bright and
enduring reward. “He that winneth souls is wise.”


II.
LAKE HOPE.— KOPERAMANA.
The names of Messrs. Burke and Wills, the
enterprising explorers who first crossed the interior to
the Gulf of Carpentaria, will always be associated with
Cooper’s Creek. The only survivor of the party was
there succoured by the aborigines, and when the fact
became known a kindly feeling towards the tribe
was awakened, and a general desire expressed to
send to them Christian teachers. Having received
their temporal hospitality, we wished to send them
the best and most enriching gift with which we could
repay them—those endowments of spiritual blessing
which alone can elevate and ennoble their humanity.
At a public meeting held in Melbourne in August,
1863, presided over by his Excellency the Governor,
Sir Henry Baeklt, it was unanimously resolved
that “ strenuous efforts ought to be made to send the
Gospel to the aborigines at Cooper’s Creek.” In
August of the following year, four missionaries arrived
from Europe to undertake this mission. They were
received with a cordial welcome at a public meeting
in which all denominations united with an enthusiasm
we have never seen surpassed in Australia.
Untoward providential circumstances have occurred
to prevent the full and free commencement of the
work. The long continued drought which extended
over all the Australian colonies, and was severely felt
in the interior, where so many thousands of cattle and
sheep perished, and many families abandoned their
homesteads —rendered it quite impracticable to travel
up from Adelaide into tbe interior to Cooper’s Creek.
Those who knew the country, and the attendant
difficulties of the journey, as well as the impossibility


of frequent communication and regular transit of sup-
plies, endeavoured to persuade the missionaries to
locate near Lake Hope. After three years have
elapsed, a place has been chosen approximate to the
locality lirst indicated, but it is now doubtful whether
the most suitable position in the country has been
selected to establish a self-supporting mission.
Three of the Missionaries had a weary and labor-
ious journey of one hundred and twenty days. They
travelled one hundred and eighty miles northwards
through settled districts without any severe obstacle,
but when they left the beaten track very serious
difficulties, were encountered, for the drought had been
followed by the sweeping flood, the creeks were now
swollen, and the land was soft and boggy, which ex-
posed them to hardship and peril, and also occasioned
the loss of part of their equipment, although they
had the assistance of experienced drivers who were
supposed to be equal to great emergencies. After a
series of delays they reached Lake Hope on the 3rd
of December, 1866, with nearly exhausted funds, and
very slender provisions for future need, and here,
at the last outpost of civilization, it was thought ad-
visable that they should make their home, until they
became acquainted with the habits of the natives, and
what was perhaps of more consequence, until an
opportunity had been afforded for the, natives to make
their acquaintance and learn the object of their
mission.
“ Lake Hope was protected by the police,
whose presence prevented hostilities if any had been
intended; as however the natives were not numerous
in that quarter, and as the brethren had been so long
denied the opportunity of commencing the work for
which they left Europe, it will surprise no one that


they became restless in their inactivity and set out
for Koperamana, some forty miles northerly, where
they built huts and made preparations for more settled
work; but the natives here took advantage of the un-
protected state of their benefactors and soon showed
signs of hostilities, which compelled the brethren to
return to Lake Hope. A second time they attempted
to settle at Koperamana, but were again put to
flight; but subsequently the South Australian
Government granted one hundred square miles
as an aboriginal reserve, and promised police
protection. The missionaries therefore have for a
third time taken up their quarters at Koperamana,
which is surrounded With natives and promises to be
an extensive sphere for their labours.”
YORKE'S PENINSULA.— POINT PIERCE.
The unexpected postponement of the expedition to
‘ Cooper’s Creek’ afforded the Missionaries an oppor-
tunity of visiting the missions, that were in active
operation, and ultimately led to the employment of
one of them in an interesting and entirely new field
of labour on ‘ Yorke's Peninsula ,’ where there is
a tribe of aborigines for whom many had cared
without however having the means or the men
requisite to open and sustain a regular mission. A
kind hearted lady who is a member of the Church of
England, with one of the resident protestant ministers
of Eadina invited one of the missionaries to visit these
aborigines, and at the same time Captain Duncan
offered the use of a “ woolshed” and adjoining build-
ings for the purpose of commencing a mission, speedily
a general committee was formed, and the necessary
small funds were raised on the Peninsula. Marked
success has attended this humble effort, and it was


deemed inadvisable to allow tins good work to be
suspended, although it could only be continued by
reducing the staff designed for the far north. The
wisdom of this final decision of the Committee in
Melbourne is now evident.
Nearly two years have elapsed since this mission
was commenced, and recently we saw upwards of
thirty children cleanly in appearance and cheerful in
spirit collected in school, several of them could read
and write; and around the “ woolshed ” were thirty
of the tribe who were preparing to leave on a hunting
expedition with as many dogs as men, but they all
intended to return on Saturday evening, to rest on
Sunday. In a brief report of the progress of this
mission, it is said of these aborigines—“ a number of
them begin to love the exercise of praise and prayer,
and to evince a marvellous degree of elementary
scriptural knowledge. Their attainments in reading
and writing are far more rapid and satisfactory than
are generally seen among white pupils in the most
favourable circumstances. The inhabitants of these
towns begin to remark how much improved the whole
aboriginal population are becoming in their manners
since the commencement of our mission. Even those,
who do not favour missions on religious grounds,
observe this with pleasure.”
The government has given one square mile of land
at Point Pierce for the permanent establishment of
this mission, and wo saw the surveyors who marked
out the lines of the reserve, and were glad to observe
that there is a well of fresh water on the land,
good fishing and hunting near for the aborigines, and
excellent soil for cultivation. This is also one of the
most central places for the whole tribe on the
peninsula, and every preliminary arrangement affords


promise of success. The government lias granted
£2OO to commence the erection of the necessary
buildings which together with the amount that has
been contributed for this purpose, £IOO, will enable
the committee of management to begin the work
forthwith. The missionary and his people will occupy
tents and temporary huts until the necessary buildings
are completed. Rations for the sick and the disabled,
as well as for the children under instruction are given
by the government. Able men who are gathering
around the missionary, work for all that they receive.
Many who do not feel interested in the spiritual work
of the mission acknowledge that the aborigines are
elevated and improved by the labours of the Mission-
ary. Two or three have given evidence that the
truths of the G-ospel have an influence upon their
mind and life.
Some of the largest meetings that have been held
in the towns of Kadina, Moonta or Wallaroo, were
assembled to support the mission, when considerable
interest was awakened by the presence of sixteen
children neatly attired, who answered a few questions
and sang hymns, after which the missionary, in good
German-English, explained the progress of his work,
in collecting these wandering children from the bush,
and gave a detailed account of the engagements of
each day, and of the formation of a Savings Bank, in
which they might deposit any money they had given
them. The girls had been taught to wash and cook,
and the boys cultivated the garden, and were in various
ways industriously employed. Attention was given
to cleanliness and recreation as well as to instruction,
and moral discipline. It is especially gratifying that
this mission is sustained by the Christian population
of the peninsula, who have contributed upwards of


£2OO within the past two years. Seven years ago,
this vast tract of land was a wide desert, but since the
discovery of copper there, considerable towns have
arisen with a population of upwards of ten thousand.
There are many miles of tramway leading from the
towns and mines to the smelting works, and the jetty
at Port Wallaroo, where upwards of fifty thousand
tons of coal are imported from Newcastle every year.
On this arid tongue of land there are about two
hundred and fifty aborigines. All the water is either
saved in artificial reservoirs, or distilled from salt
water, the district is therefore unsuited for the settle-
ment of a large population.
III.
LAKE HINDMARSH.— WIMMERA.
The Church of the “ Moravian Brethren ” in
Europe has always been pre-eminently missionary.
True to her ancient traditions, she has now her
representatives and evangelists in every latitude and
clime. These men of an apostolical succession are
labouring in various parts of the world with the frank
simplicity of purpose, the devoted self-surrender, and
the glowing zeal that distinguished the early martyrs
of the Church of Christ. Amongst the aboriginal
population, a small band of these singularly earnest
men is pursuing their mission in a simple and
unostentatious manner with great success. An
“ Association ” has been formed in Victoria to “ aid
Moravian Missions to the Aborigines of Australia,’’
with the intention of undertaking the responsibility
of maintaining and directing the mission, not only at
Cooper’s Creek, but also in Victoria, where there are
now two important mission stations occupied.


An attempt was made some years since to form an
industrial establishment at Lake Boga, but after a few
years of hard and apparently fruitless labour, the
place was abandoned, and in 1858 two Missionaries
commenced a mission on the banks of the Wimmera,
near Lake Hindmarsh, where the Government has
assigned three square miles of land as an aboriginal
reserve. The mission was opened in the midst of
discouragement: the people were in a deplorable
condition, all of them were suffering more or less from
disease; and they were not inclined to settle around
the huts that were erected. Persevering effort was at
length successful, and after a loug instruction, sixteen
were baptized, and thirty-five have abandoned a
nomadic life, and now live in fixed dwellings which are
substantial log-buildings. The soil and climate are
not favourable to cultivation. The Moravian Brethren
say:—
The land is only fit for depasturing sheep and a few head of
cattle on it. The flock of sheep counts just now about 900.
This flock of sheep, also horses and cows, came originally and
chiefly from a friend in our neighbourhood, who, with his good
lady, has been the sympathising friend of themission. Another
friend in our neighbourhood has also given us some help. . The
rest of the white population have treated us civilly, and even
friendly. We try to cultivate a plot of ground for hay for cattle
and horses. By means of irrigation, we hare got a fine garden,
which yields abundance of vegetables, also some fine fruit; and
as the garden is getting on, we are in expectation to have by-
and-bye abundance of fruit, grapes and melons.
The people hare imitated our example, and have fenced off a
square block of land, divided into thirteen gardens, which they
have begun to trench. Three families have had gardens for the
last two or three years, and have at times enjoyed fine
vegetables. Several of them hare planted vines and fruit trees.
Lately we bought them a pump and lead pipes for irrigation,
which I hope will be put up after shearing of sheep. But the
principal self-support must come from sheep-farming.


GIPPS LAND. — RAMAHYUCK.
There is also a station at Bamahyuck, Gippa’ Land,
where seven years of faithful toil have been rewarded
with some degree of cheering success. A regular
school was established in 1862, and a new church
building was completed in four years. About two
hundred aborigines and others attended the opening
of the first aboriginal church in the district, and two
young men, who had shewn considerable intelligence,
were baptized. Several young men have come under
the influence of the Missionary, and the experiment
has been made of sending to King George’s Sound, to
bring girls from the school there for the purpose of
marrying these young Gipps’ Land aborigines. Two
of these girls, as soon as they arrived in Melbourne,
were placed in the hospital, and died soon afterwards ;
but others have followed, and a note from the Mission-
ary says : —“ We had the great joy to see again some
young Christian black girls arrive here,”, from
Western Australia, “to be married to our Christian
young men, and two couples were married in our
church, on which occasion there were about sixty
aborigines present.”
Respecting the “ spiritual condition ” of the
Mission, the report conveys pleasing intelligence to
all who feel interest in the welfare of the aborigines :
Christian knowledge is increasing among those who are not
jet baptised. The religious meetings held daily and on Sundays
are generally well attended, and all of them form a well-organised
congregation. The following statement may be of some
interest: —There are now
13 Baptised aborigines.
7 Candidates for baptism, under special instruction.
5 Candidates for baptism besides, who make very little
' progress.
35 Aboriginals live in houses a civilised life.
76 Aborigines are on the station.
13 Little children come to school.
8 Young men form an evening class.
2 Men had been baptised at the Government station on
the Yarra.


Some progress has been made in the instruc-
tion of the young, and one fact given on the authority
of the Committee is equally surprising and gratifying.
The school has been placed under an instructed
aborigine—“ a young, well-educated aboriginal lady.
Elizabeth Flower ,” from King George’s Sound, who
has taken “charge of the school as a salaried teacher. ”
Her abilities and work are spoken of highly, and she
hopes, as soon as a large school is procured to
accommodate more children, “ to pass an examination,
and bring the school under the Board of Education,
She is also playing the harmonium in church. This is
a clear proof that aboriginals can he educated, and made
useful .”
The missionary settlement is gradually assuming
the appearance of a neat township, where there is no
need of a Police Court or a public house. There are
fifteen buildings beside the church on the station, and
some other aboriginal dwellings are soon to be built
and inhabited. It is in contemplation to build a large
boarding-school house for the children who are willing
to come and live there and receive instruction.
Several of the men have laid out small gardens under
the immediate direction of their teachers, and have
ploughed a few acres to grow potatoes for their
support. They have also commenced to grow arrow-
root, which will become useful to support the Mission
in due time. The entire outlay of the station is now
defrayed by the Presbyterian Church.
The girls’ school at King George’s Sound, Western
Australia, is under the care of Mrs. Carafield, who has
given constant attention to the institution for many
years, and has been successful in improving the moral
and religious condition of many of the women. The
experiment of bringing these girls from Western


Australia to Victoria is a dubious oue. To say nothing
of the expense and trouble incurred, it appears
questionable whether these marriage ties will be
permanent and happy in result; and whether they will
tend to improve the resident tribe of aborigines,
amongst whom it is most desirable that the intelligence
and social influence of the Mission should be diffused
by general intercourse. At the same time, it is to be
remembered that intermarriage with other, and often
distant tribes, is not unusual with the aborigines in a
savage condition. These, however, are not marriages,
but rather a cruel subjection —victimizing the women
to sensuality and hard service, and are always
attended with the observance of revolting orgies.
Among the aboriginals, polygamy, exchange of wives,
and forcible seizure of women are all regulated by
laws that are rigorously observed. Ostensibly the
right of disposing of the girl belongs to the parents,
who often give the daughter to a man when she is a
mere child ; but the actual ratification of the promise
is performed by the old men of the tribe, which, of
course, gives them the facilities of obtaining the girls
for themselves, often to their great mortification —and
thus the womenbecome an endless cause of quarrel, and
often involve the tribes in war. The young men also
pass through a barbarous and self-degrading ceremony.
And it is in the presence of these laws and customs
that the Missionaries have made the experiment of
bringing educated girls from Western Australia, in
the hope that they may thus more certainly abolish
heathen customs and advance civilization.
RIVER MURRAY.-YELTA.
Undoubtedly there has been less success attending
the labours of Christian missionaries amongst the


Australianaborigines than has been witnessed amongst
the Red Indians and Esquimaux of North America,
the debased races of Africa, or the cannibal inhabi-
tants of the South Sea Islands, and the comparative
failure cannot be attributed to the mission but must
be sought in the peculiar characteristic of the tribes,
and the circumstances by which they have been sur-
rounded. Not •uufrequently the opinion has been
expressed that the aborigines are sunk below the hope
of civilization, or the reach of any elevating agency
of the Christian Church. The fact that they have no
idea of a Supreme Being, although they have a dim
and mysterious notion of a powerful evil one, that
they have no form of superstitious worship, and no
conception of a future existence, renders it almost
impossible to impress upon their feeble minds and
consciousness the first truths of revelation, the
existence and attributes of God, His providence and
moral government, and the immortality of the soul.
They can scarcely apprehend the idea of purity or of
love ; of the incarnation of the Son of God, and the
grand story of the cross, or of the solemn realities of
the future world revealed in Scripture; and they have
had little to help them in their intercourse with a
superior race.
Without attempting to describe the cruel and heart-
less manner in which they have been driven away
from their hunting grounds and fishing lakes, and
often mercilessly poisoned or shot down for commit-
ting some depredation, or retaliating some wrong,
until they have retired before the tide of civilization,
or disappeared altogether, as in Tasmania, and in
many of the settled districts of Australia; there is
this painful fact to be noted—the immoral character
and brutal conduct of many European settlers and


bushmen, has prevented the aborigines forming any
correct idea of Christianity.
There have been missions sustained in Victoria
since 1853 by the Church of England, and although
they have not made any general or extended impres-
sion on the remnants of the numerous tribes that
were once wandering on the banks of the rivers, and
over the vast plains, yet they have been productive of
ameliorating and salutary influences. After prelimi-
nary enquiry, two missionaries were located on the
Murray, opposite the junction of the Darling with
that river, and the station was called Telia.
A square mile of land was obtained from the
Government to be used by the Church as long
as there might exist a sufficient number of
aborigines to render the settlement there desirable.
During the first two years, the Mission station was
supported by voluntary contributions, since then a
government grant of stores has been given annually.
The country is not suitable for agriculture, and the
reserve is not sufficiently large for a flock of sheep,
so that little has been accomplished industrially ; and
there has been consequently no means of attaching
the aborigines to the station; in addition to which
the settlement of the surrounding districts and the
opening of licensed public houses, has had an in-
jurious moral influence on them. Children have been
taught in the school, and a few young men have been
educated and we may hope also christianized, but the
eflbrts made have been sustained under difficulty and
great discouragement.
The success attending the labour of the missionaries
was for the first six or seven years fairly satisfactory,
when compared with other similar eflbrts. Numbers
of the natives were induced to work for rations and


to remain about the-station, and were thus brought
under the influence of the missionaries ; and the few
children found among them were kept more or less
under instruction, and made fair progress in the sub-
jects taught them. As many as forty natives were
occasionally employed in trenching, while as many as
one hundred and fifty were not unfrequently present
at a time on the station, and several towards the
latter part of the period seemed disposed to settle
down and remain altogether at the station.
But about the year 1862 the prospects of the mis-
sionaries seem to have undergone a change. The
township of Wentworth sprang up opposite to the
mission station, and the facilities for obtaining, drink
which were thus afforded, together with the evil
influence and practices of vicious white men, pro-
duced an effect upon the aborigines beyond the power
of the missionaries to counteract. It became more
and more difficult to keep them about the station,
and the influence of the missionaries over them
gradually diminished.
GIPPS LAND.— LAKE TYERS.
Five years since, a new mission was formed on Lake
Tyers in Gripps Land, the aborigines both children
and adults are gathering near the station and submit
to instruction —several of them are making a perma-
nent location. The excellent missionary giving an
account of his work, and of the thirty aborigines
under his care, says :
“ I may say that we have every reason to be thank-
ful for our prospects. I think they are brighter than
they have been before. The families begin to identify
themselves with the place. This is one great step


towards reform. L They will no doubt spend the
greater part of the year on the station. Of course
they will sometimes wander ; this is not to be avoided,
but they carry with them the influence of the Gospel,
which will in some measure restrain them. I have
noticed this for a long time that they are often kept
from evils which they toould otherwise fall into hut for
the preaching of Christ. I assure you, but for this I
should have been disheartened long ago. The seed
is sown, and it will take effect; and if we continue to
pray to the Lord of the harvest, we shall yet see
abundant fruit.”
LAKE CONDALE.
Another mission was established two years ago at
Framlingham, on the River Hopkins, in the Western
Districts, which has recently been removed to a more
eligible place on the aboriginal reserve at Lake Con-
dale. The reserve consists of two thousand five hun-
dred acres of rich land. The few survivors of the
western tribes are now being brought from Belfast,
Wamambool, and Castle Middie. There are
about fifty children on the station. The government
supplies the stores, and the management and re-
ligious instruction are conducted under the auspices
of the Church.
RIVER DARLING.
More recently two missionaries have been em-
ployed to travel over a wide portion of the interior,
between the River Darling and Cooper’s Creek, to
ascertain whether a station could be successfully
formed for the benefit of the wandering tribes there.
The outlay has been defrayed by the Sydney Church
Society.


In eighteen months these men travelled through
the solitary bush, and searched both the plains and
mountains, the gullies and water-courses for the “ mia-
mia ” of the poor benighted aborigines, but they found
them very sparcely scattered, and generally collected
near the pastoral homestead. They speak of travelling
over twohundredandseventy miles and meeting eighty-
sis aboriginals near the Warrego; over one hundred
and sixty miles from the Upper Bulli and finding only
two small camps, and at Cooper’s Greek they met with
only thirty-five of them; whilst on another journey
of five hundred miles, they saw only two hundred and
ten. They report that it is not possible to bring
these small numbers together, and that an industrial
and self-supporting station could not be established
in that part of the interior. They had to take every
precaution against the cunning assaults of the
aborigines, never camping without a good watch,
making no fires that would indicate their resting
place, and never allowing them to approach with their
weapons ; and they have returned disappointed in not
finding more aborigines in the districts and in the
hostile feelings prevailing amongst them.
The only place they considered to be suitable for a
mission was Tou-hai, which however is too remote
from the settled districts, and would involve great
expense; moreover it is now “ occupied by the
Queensland Police force.” This latter fact should
render it particularly eligible if the tribes could be
induced to gather near.


IV.
The number of the aboriginal population has never
been more than approximately estimated. "When
Europeans first landed, at the close of the last century,
they were very numerous along the coast, and on the
banks of the rivers, but now they are thinly dispersed
over some districts in the interior, and through the
northern portions of Australia. Probably there are
about five thousand within the borders of South
Australia, and ten thousand in Queensland ; only a
few hundreds remain in Victoria and in New South
Wales, while in the settled districts of each of the
colonit s,asinTasmania,they have entirely disappeared.
Xo philanthropic mind can review the various
reasons that have been given for this rapid diminution
of the race without sorrow and humiliation. We are
not however disposed to indulge a sentimental and
useless regret, but rather desire to invite attention to
the condition of the survivors of these tribes,
and to discuss the means that may promote their
elevation and improvement. It must be acknowledged
that past exertions have not been successful to any
considerable extent. One of the Judges of the
Supreme Court in New South Wales, in his “ re-
miniscences of thirty years residence in Australia,”
expressed the opinion that “ the problem has yet to
be solved of bringing even a single aboriginal within
the pale of civilisation.” He says: —
Though many thousands of pounds of British money have
been expended amongst them in endeavouring to make ‘man
mild and sociable to man/ the problem has yet to be solved of
bringing even a single aboriginal of New Holland within the
pale of civilisation. Schools have been formed for their instruc-
tion, and liberal allowances given to teachers and religious in-
structors. Whilst children, and until they arrive at the age of
early youth, they have attended with apparent propriety to
these institutions, formed for their enlightenment; but invariably
on coming to mature years they have thrown oH’ the clothing


provided for their use, taken to tin- woods, and resumed a savage
and wandering life. Though at times they will remain (or many
months, even for a year and upwards, at a settlers station, where
they have been well treated, yet they will stray o(f at length,
and rejoin iheir native tribe. The nearest approach to the suc-
cessful reclaiming of a New Hollander from this rude course of
life is the well known one of Benelong, a native chief, who, in
the Vice-royalty of the first Governor Phillip, showed favourable
symtoms of intelligence. At an early age he was sent to England
for his education, and, after some years’ absence, returned to the
colony. He had so far advanced in external propriety of man-
ners as to be invited to the table of the Governor. Vet eveh
he Soon afterwards doffed his gentleman’s garb, threw the
opossum rug over his shoulders, and, with spear in hand, de-
serted a comfortable home. He preferred as a course of life to
traverse his native forests, and live upon the Wombat, the
Kangaroo, and such vermin as he could there pick up.
Similar instances of painful disappointment are
continually occurring, and we have seen many abo-
rigines who are able to read and write, who speak
English fluently, having been taught for many years
in schools, now roving wildly in the bush. Xot many
months since, we visited a large camp on the Lower
Murray, and saw one intelligent woman sitting in the
smoke of the tvurley , finishing some fancy needlework,
and soon ascertained that she had been educated at
school in Adelaide, and had been known for many
■years as “ Jane,” living in service at Government
House she had married a young man who was equally
well trained, and they had spent some years in service
on the sheep stations, but had now returned to end
their days with their own race. It was painful to
observe, from the peculiar dark gashes on the breast,
that she must have submitted to superstitious and
■debasing rites, although she was accustomed to join
in Christian worship. ' And the Moravian Missionaries
have found that some young men of whom they were
most hopeful have wandered away from the station,
to observe the custom of their race, and to take rank
among the men of-their tribe. Bu t though no single


instance can be given of complete civilization among
the aborigines, and numerous cases may be mentioned
of those who prefer to live in the wurley with wild
freedom, yet it is certain that the labour of the
Missionaries has greatly restrained immorality, im-
proved the habits of many of the Aborigines, and, we
may hope, made them acquainted with Christian hope
and consolation.
Having given a brief statement of facts connected
with the Missions of the Church on behalf of the
Aborigines, it may be useful to offer a few observations
for the guidance of those who desire to extend these
operations or to establish stations in Northern Aus-
tralia. Personal observation as well as inquiry have
convinced us, that a purely religious mission must fail,
and thatindusfrial on suitable and sufficient land
are essential to any probable success. The men are
willing to work where they are rewarded, and treated
with lenity, and the women make good shepherdesses.
Industrial employment may be arranged to allow
ample time for recreation and higher instruction.
There are also two things that should be sedulously
avoided, these are, the keeping of the children too
long in school, confining them too much in close
rooms, and not allowing them sufficient freedom for
exerciseandplay,—and the forcing into prominence the
mere semblance of civilization and of Christianity for
the sakeof developing results. We have seen both these
mistakes made, on some of the mission stations, and
they are each of them very injurious. If the children
who have been accustomed to free air are locked up in
rooms from seven in the evening until seven in the
morning, it will surprise no one that they show
symptoms of pulmonary disease. And if log buildings
are kept clean by the supervision of the wife of the


missionary, and young married aborigines are not
allowed to pass beyond the limit of the station, the
mission will appear to many more like a conservatory
with its tender plants, than like the free beauty and
luxuriance of the gardeu. We must be content with
a natural growth in intelligence, and gradual develop-
ment of good principle, under Divine influence. And
it is perhaps almost needless to add that, for this
arduous work the Church should select suitable
agency. No where can men be found so well adapted
for this particular mission as the Moravian Brethren
are, and they are willing to place themselves under
the guidance of a Committee who can provide the
small amount of funds necessary for the work. These
men connect industry with piety —labour with prayer
—and teach all who are about them to “ provide
things honest in the sight of all men.” They can say,
“ Yea, ye yourselves know, that these hands have
ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were
with me.”


The Chinese.
I.
There are more than thirty thousand Chinese in
the Australian colonies, located chiefly on the gold-
fields, although some reside in the cities, and a few
are scattered over the wide pastoral lands of the
interior. They have come to these shores with the
tide of immigration attracted by the discovery of gold,
which has brought so many thousands of adventurers
from Europe and the East; and they have only one
ambition—viz., to find gold, and then to return to their
own country. They come and go in a perpetual stream
of intercourse between Australia and China, bringing
their merchandise, and carrying back with them
their gold. Considering that they are unacquainted
with our language and laws ; that a large proportion
of them can neither read nor write; that they have
been treated with severity by the Government in each
of the colonies, and with cruelty by the people on the
gold-fields, who have more than once violently assaulted
them, and provoked a riot that has required the inter-
vention of the police and soldiery, and has stained the
auriferous soil with the blood of the contending
races ; it is, we think, remarkable that they have given
so little trouble to the Police Magistrate, or to the
Government. They dwell alone, and carry on but
little trade with the storekeepers, for they patronize
their own merchants, and provide their own supplies ;
and they have less to do with those great institutions on


the gold-fields —the public house and the billiard
room. They indulge in smoking the opium pipe—not
in the cup that inebriates—and we have often seen them
in their retired hut stretched on a board with a wooden
pillow, undoubtedly imported from the Celestial
Empire, indulging in the dreamy reverie or oblivion
that the Emperor of China and many millions of his
people would regard as the perfection of liberty
and the felicity of existence. They are also extrava-
gant gamblers amongst themselves. They have
brought with them and established on the gold-fields
all their peculiar domestic institutions, such as the
■miscellaneous bazaar, —the opium hall, —the gaming
table, —the theatre, where the scenery and acting, the
music and singing are all comic and grotesque,—and
the barber’s shop, which perhaps is the most curious
to the eye of a stranger, where the variety of opera-
tions and the endless jabber are confounding. There
are about one hundred and sixty-six millions of men
in China who require to be shaved every day, and in
this far off land there are several thousands who could
not live in comfort without the services of the barber.
It has been said on high authority, that the China-
man is “ afflicted with a strong hydrophobia,” that he
abhors cold water either as a beverage or for purposes
of ablution and of cleanliness—but the crowd of
visitors and various appliances in the barber’s shop
clearly prove that if the Chinese hold cold water as an
abomination, they are entirely in their element in the
midst of warm water and soap-suds. They are not
habitually dirty, and are never seen in the streets of
Beech worth, Sandhurst, or Ballarat either unshaven or
unwashed, but they are patterns of cleanliness in their
appearance in the public streets. Many of them are
fastidious about their head dress. Their black, lank,and


coarse hair is allowed to grow to a great length
behind, and is carefully platted and wound into an
ornamental bunch at the back of the head as a crown
of honour, of which the Chinaman is as proud as the
nobleman may be with the “ star ” or the “ garter.”
This antique badge of subjection that was imposed
by a conqueror on a subdued race, is now singularly
prized as a manly ornament. And when “ John,” as
he is called on the gold-fields, becomes troublesome
to his neighbours by repeated depredations on the
poultry yard, one of the most painful penalties
inflicted by the magistrates upon him, is the sentence
that he shall be committed to the common gaol for a
short period, and have his head shaven behind. We
have heard some of them say that they consider this
to be a great disgrace. They have also the “ Joss
House” with its little idol and match-pot full of
sticks, and tawdry trappings of coloured cloth and
painted ribbons bearing some moral sentiments. All
that we can either see or learn in this faded and
imperfect imitation of the costly shrines of China
produce only a painful impression on the mind,
relieved however by the reflection that there is freedom
under the mild sceptre of our gracious Queen Victoria
in every land, —even idolatry is free! And while we
abhor an idol, and are thankful for birth in a Christ ian
land, we are free to reason with our fellow man, free
to marshal our forces of Bible-readers and catechists,
and to invite and persuade him to renounce idolatry
and to worship Almighty God.
The Church has not been altogether unmindful of
her responsibility and duty in relation to the Chinese
in Australia. There are Missions conducted for their
religious instruction both in Victoria and New South
Wales ; one has been established at Hallarat by the


Presbyterian Assembly, and one at Castlemaine by
the Wesleyan Conference, and in each of these
districts many of the Chinese have been instructed
and baptized. There is also a mission sustained at
Beechworth under the immediate charge of the
Incumbent of Yackandandah, where several useful
catechists have been trained, some of whom have
been employed in these colonies, while others have
returned to China, and are now rendering assistance
to the Missionaries. One of the men trained there has
now brought his wife and two children and is usefully-
employed among his countrymen as a teacher. On
some occasions when the Lord Bishop or the very Rev-
erend the Dean of Melbourne has visited the district,
as many as twenty have been baptized, and the conduct
of these men has been consistent with their profession
of faith in Christ. Andin New South Wales thereis a
mission atSofala, under the charge of a Clergyman, who
directs the labour of a Chinese catechist. Here a few
men have been baptized. The present amount of agency
appears like a tentative effort rather than a vigorous
mission, and is a mere apology, that serves to shield the
Church against the charge of absolute indifference and
neglect of duty. It is much to be desired that a few
more catechists should be regularly employed; and
that a Chinese speaking missionary should be placed
in some central district where he could have a com-
plete supervision of the whole mission work in these
colonies. There is reason to anticipate that an in-
crease of Missionary labour, if it were well directed,
would be productive of immediate beneficial results.


II.
We have endeavoured in frequent intercourse with
the Chinese to ascertain what are the views they
entertain of the Christianity and civilization with
which they are brought in contact. When they first
arrive in Melbourne or in Sydney, everything about
them is new and strange, but after a few years’
residence the enquiring and intelligent men form
their own opinions, and are willing to express them
frankly. They admire our courts of law, and express
the highest opinion of all they know of our jurispru-
dence. If they do not always obtain a decision of the
court in their favour, they consider that it is the fault
of the interpreter, or that they have their just due.
The interpreter employed by the Government
often levies a heavy charge on his own people
when his services are required, and sometimes
acts treacherously. Some of these men are as
considerate as colonial lawyers, but others are
like the subordinate officials of a court in China. In
cases where justice has been mis-directed, they have
a thorough conviction that our Judges and judicial
administration are alike pure and uncorrupted.
They are equally ready to express their admiration of
the Medical profession. The generosity, unwearied
patience, and superior skill of our medical men are a
marvel to them. Medical practice in China is merely
a system of herbal quackery, or a consulting of the
stars, casting of nativities, and issuing of spells and
incantations, or if it has any pretension to science, it
is a delineation of the “ five elements ” or “ five viscera”
of human nature, in adjusting which the patient
sinks from exhaustion, and suddenly dies. The sick
are left in neglect, and the lepers are cast out of the
dwelling. When therefore they find that the sick are


eared for with assiduity and tenderness in the
Hospital and Benevolent Asylum, and the lepers out-
side the camp are taken and carefully housed, while
our medical men use their skill to alleviate their
suffering and cure their maladies, they express in the
strongest terms their approbation and delight. These
opinions are each of them a compliment to our
Civilization and a fair tribute to our Christianity.
They are not astonished to find some diversity in
the forms of Christian worship and religious profes-
sion, for diversities of faith exist in China. With them
all religions are equal, as they are in Australia, and this
favourite colonial opinion they will tell you has been
cherished by them for more than two thousand years.
They have a total absence of persecution and bitter-
ness on the subject of religion, arising not from apathy,
but from natural politeness. They are as polite as
the Parisians, and would contend that the modern
French nation had taken a copy from their own ancient
“ Record of rites.” They have none of the fanatical
zeal of the Moslem, or the persecuting spirit that has
sometimes disgraced Christianity, and they profess to
be surprised that there is not more of kindliness and
charity amongst those who differ on religious ques-
tions. When strangers meet, it is said that, if religion
is the subject of discussion, they ask in their polite
style —“ To what sublime religion do you belong ?”
and each one pronounces a eulogium, not on his own
religion, but on that professed by the other and con-
cludes with the oft-repeated formula —“ Religions are
many, reason is one, we are brothers.”
To the mind of a highly educated and accomplished
Mandarin, we can conceive that Christianity may ap-
pear to require a long and elaborate investigation.
Philosophical questions may be suggested that would


need much time to wade through them, and it might be
impossible by any argument to overcome his intel-
lectual difficulties. The simple reading of the Holy
Scriptures by the guidance of the Spirit of God,
might produce that conviction of truth which no reason-
ing could achieve. But the thirty thousand Chinese
in Australia are not from the learned class, they
represent the popular mind of the country, and the
question is suggested—at once interesting and need-
ful—what are their views of Christianity, and how
can we best approach them to commend the truths of
the Gospel to their acceptance ? There are certain
tenets held by them that approach the teaching of
Holy Scripture; these are salient points in the
Chinese mind that are not found in the races of
India, nor amongst the untaught tribes of Africa, and
they are like headlands stretching out into the sea
where the sailor knows that if he can only get on the
lee side and drop the anchor, he may reach the shore
in his boat with safety.
Among these tenets are the views they hold of fate.
They have strong faith in their destiny, and submit
to fate with a stoical indifference ; it is fate that has
brought them here, and they work in gangs like
‘ dumb driven cattle ’ only hoping that fate may yet
give them means to carry them home. They gamble
in the hope that fate may make them rich, and they
consult the ‘ sticks ’ in the Joss-house, curious to
know the decree of fate. When they are sick they
endure suffering with heedlessness, and look forward
to death with unconcern, more anxious about their
coffin and interment than about their future condi-
tion, because the one is settled by fixed fate, but the
other is under their own disposal and may affect their
friends. They are ambitious to have their bones sent


to China. Many have been disinterred, and their
scraped and polished bones sent home to lie in the
sepulchre of their families.
Thesenotionsoffate are farenoughfrombeing correct
ideas of the providence of Almighty God, — but the
Bible reader assails this point, and asserting the
existence of Divine Providence, he reads—“ the lot
is cast into the lap, but the whole disposal thereof is
of the Lord,” —“ A man’s heart deviseth his way, but
the Lord directeth his steps.” “ That is my religion ”
the Chinese will reply, and then the reader proceeds to
unfold the Scripture view of Providence—the duty of
prayer, thanksgivings and praise,—and the consola-
tion arising from a personal trust in the Providential
care of God, with contentment and resignation to the
Divine will. These are new ideas, but they are
thrown into his mind in close connexion with what
he has firmly believed from his childhood, and ho
revolves them in his thoughts.
III.
We have become familiar with the personal appear-
ance of this remarkable people. The round face,
elevated cheek bones, and oblique eyes of the Chinese
are a contrast to all our ideas of Grecian beauty.
Their physiognomy indicates no beam of intelligence
or play of fancy,— but rather stolid stoicism, —nor
have they either classic elegance of form, or the grace-
ful gait that distinguishes the Australian aborigines.
Many of their superstitious observances are unique,
they may however be made the means of conveying
higher instruction in divine truth—their fatalism we
have seen may be placed in strong contrast with the
true doctrine of Providence.


Another feature observable in the Chinese mind
is their great veneration of their ancestors. The
system of Confucius, which is the basis of social life
and political government among the Chinese, is a
philosophy rather than a religion. It is a paternal
theory. What the father is to the family, that the
Governor and the magistrate are intended to be each
in his own sphere to the people ; whilst the Emperor
stands in the same relation to the myriad inhabitants
of his vast dominions. They build the tombs of their
fathers, decorate them with inscriptions, and visit
them frequently. They have domestic shrines and
tablets, and a room in every large house for ancestral
worship,—and while they cherish the memory of their
departed ancestor, they are remarkable for their
filial regard, and entire deference to their parents.
We have seen the passionless countenance suddenly
change, with an expression of deep emotion, and
tears start in the eyes, —when some direct reference
has been made to the days of youth and childhood,
and to. the home that is far away in China.
The Bible reader turns to the command in the
Decalogue, ‘ Honour thy father and thy mother,’ —the
first command with promise, and he selects examples of
parental love and filial piety in Scripture history.
The Chinese at once expresses his concurrence and
delight; and then the reader further asserts that
what the Emperor is to his people—the father of the
nation, that God is to all men, and he quotes the
Lord’s prayer, and the words:—“ He hath made of
one blood all nations of men.” He speaks of the
attributes of God —of His moral government —and
of His holy law revealed in Scripture, and ho shews
him how defective the system of Confucius is, inas-
much as it relates only to man’s duty to his fellow


man, and makes no mention of man’s duty to Goo.
He reads, “A son honoureth his father, and a
servant his master; if I then be a father, where is
mine honour? and if I be a master, where is my
fear ? saith the Lord.” If the divine benevolence is
impugned by reference to the storms that desolate
the earth, the drought that burns up the pasture, the
war, disease and crime that prevails in the world, or
the sorrowful trials of good men—he is prepared
with an argument, the force of which the Chinese
mind will appreciate —“We have had fathers of our
flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence,
shall we not much rather be in subjection to the
Father of spirits, and live?” Here again he has
grafted an idea in the mind of the Chinese in con-
nection with the most sacred and influential of his
religious notions.
Another salient point in the Chinese mind is their
faith in immortal existence. Of a future world they
know nothing; it is to them dark and mysterious.
They say of a friend deceased that he has “ saluted
the age” —he has given a final salute and made his
exit from this mundane scene: or they say that he
has “ ascended the sky” —he has passed into a region
unknown —but he is not annihilated. Hence they
visit the graves of their friends with offerings of food,
and make profound genuflexions to the earth In the
cemetery at Ballarat, where many hundreds are
interred, we have often seen them on Sunday bringing
cooked food to spread out on the grass, and slender
tapers of coloured paper to place in a semi-circle and
burn, while they sit in motionless silence, or quietly
rise to bow to the earth in salutation before the grave
or the tomb-stone. Such superstitious rites are not
consistent with the idea that “ death is an eternal


sleep.” They express mysterious fellowship with the
departed, or a longing after communion with spirits
not seen.
When the Chinese retires from the grave the Bible
reader joins him, and tells him that—“ there is a spirit
in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth
him understandingthat when—“ the body returns
to earth,” the “ spirit returns to God, who gave it
and he reads that beautiful passage in the Gospel of
St. John that is so fraught with light and comfort to
the Church in all ages—“ Tn my Father’s house are
man}- mansions,” and although the Chinese cannot see
the allusion to a temple,—home, and worship, he can
understand the social idea of communion, sympathy,
and ineffable blessedness enjoyed by the redeemed
family in heaven. Here a new light shines on his
mind that seems at first only to irradiate his own
sepulchral superstition, but may disclose to him the
true hope of life and immortality.
How striking is the contrast between the idolater
seeking fellowship with the dead at the grave, and
the Church of Christ reposing on His word of promise
—jubilant in hope of eternal life by His resurrection
from the grave, and uniting in the sublime and
catholic prayer—“ And we also bless Thy Holy Name
for all Thy servants departed this life in Thy faith
and fear; beseeching Thee to give us grace so to follow
their good examples, that with them we may be par-
takers of thy heavenly kingdom!”


IV.
The great difficulty of these Missions arises from
the apathy of the Chinese mind. They have a national
pride, and traditional preferences, but they are also
atheistical, and their system of belief refers only to
time and the duties of the present world. They have
been described as “ materialism put in action,” being
sceptical and indifferent to everything that concerns
the moral side of man, and destitute of religious feel-
ings and belief. This has been denied as only a
calumny of the higher life of the Chinese nation.
Certainly religious ideas are utterly foreign to the
minds of the immigrants in Australia, and when the
Holy Scriptures are read to them, although the usage
of words and the idiom may resemble their own litera-
ture and appear simple in the extreme, they are
incomprehensible to them; and they put the teaching
from them with cold indifference as being contrary
to their own current of thought.
The Chinese entertain the most exalted idea of
Confucius, although they know little about his charac-
ter, history and teaching. The Bible reader places
before them the pure and perfect character of the
Christ of the Gospels, to which they listen with evi-
dent interest, —but the grand and distinctive truth of
Christianity that Christ died for the sins of men is
one for which they have no corresponding idea. The
incarnation, suffering, death and mediation of Christ,
and the gracious light and power of the Holy Spirit,
are mysteries of which they do not care to hear.
When however these truths arrest their attention,
and are brought to their mind and conscience by the
Holy Spirit, they pour a flood of light on every other
religious question —they disclose a new and spiritual
life to their view, and awaken in them a concern for


tho enlightenment and salvation of their own race.
Our dependence in this, as in every Christian mis-
sion rests, therefore, not on the persuasion of mere
reasoning, or the moral influence of example, but on
the supernatural power of Divine truth.
¥e wish that we could interest the thinking and
earnest minds of the Church in the fact that there
are now thirty thousand heathen idolaters in these
Colonies who may be influenced by faithful Christian
teachers. They are favourably impressed by our
civilization, they hold some superstitious opinions
that are not hostile to Christianity, and their
heathenism whether refined or debased may be
vanquished by the same weapons of truth that over-
came the subtle philosophy of Greece and Eome,
and the darker barbarism of Europe. To gather up
individuals from among them, and rescue them from
darkness, —to enrol them on the baptismal register
and nurture them in the sacred ordinances of the
Church, for the service and kingdom of Christ, is a
work worthy of sacrifice, —but there are two other
aspects of this Missionary work that are even still
more momentous —one bearing on the moral welfare
of our own population, and the other relating to the
millions of China.
Many of the Chinese are now making a permanent
settlement in the colonies. They have contracted
marriages, and their children are growing up about
them. In many instances these families are in-
dustrious, and well trained —if however the Chinese are
left as untaught heathen, and their children are
neglected, what must the result be ? Half-castes of
an inferior race are always objects of pity, and they
are sometimes very troublesome. They are above
the native race, with whom they associate, and whose


habits they acquire; aud when they are treated
as outcasts by a superior race, they become
reckless and vindictive. This has been wit-
nessed in America and in Africa, where the
half castes are the most impracticable por-
tion of the population. We have no reason to fear
any such consequences from the families of the
Chinese if we give them instruction, —but if they are
neglected and treated with contempt and derision by
the most degraded portion of our digging population,
there must arise a terrible social evil in the colony.
Under the instruction of Christian teachers, these
families may become useful and respectable members
of the community.
The other aspect of this Missionary work relates to
China, where, as among other heathen races, the
spread of Christianity must depend on the employment
of a native agency. The Church indulges the rea-
sonable hope of preparing and sending forth among
the population, from Schools and Churches now
established, —an army of native teachers, who may
carry the knowledge of the Gospel to the homes of
the millions of China. The few men who have been
brought under the influence of Christian truth in
Australia, and who have returned to their own land
are found to be a powerful auxiliary to the work of
the Church. This is a feature of the Chinese mission ■
that has not been sufficiently appreciated. These men
may carry with them the priceless treasure of Divine
truth, and become themselves missionaries to millions
of their own race.
