

The
ARTS COUNCIL
OF AUSTRALIA
N.S.W. DIVISION
A FIVE YEARS’ RECORD
1943-1947


The Arts Council of Australia
N.S.W. DIVISION
Sir ROBERT GARRAN
Sir BENJAMIN FULLER
Dr. EDGAR L. BAINTON
Professor A. K. STOUT
Mr. F. K. BARTON
Mr. A. J. DAY
Miss AILEEN FITZPATRICK
Dr. HANS FORST
Mr. L. G. HARRISON
Miss M. KENT HUGHES
Rev. ALAN TORY ( Co-opted)
President ;
Miss DOROTHY HELMRIGH
Deputy-President:
Mr. L. F. KELLER
Vice-Presidents :
Mr. C. J. A. MOSES
Hon. Treasurer:
Mr. W. L. RODGERS
(Chartered Accountant, Australia)
Members of the Executive :
Mrs. BERTHA MAC SMITH
Mrs. JESSIE STREET
Mr. ERIC KENNEDY
Professor R. C. MILLS
Miss DOREEN JACOBS
Dr. S. L. MACINDOE
Mr. C. R. McKERIHAN
Mr. HAL MISSINGHAM
Miss STELLA SWINNEY
Dr. HAROLD WYNDHAM
Miss CLAIRE STEVENSON
( Co-opted)
Art Advisers:
Music .... Dr. EUGENE GOOSENS
Choirs .... Mr. V. W. PETERSON
Drama . . . Miss BEATRICE TILDESLEY
Ballet Mrs. B. T. EDYE
Art .... Mr. WILLIAM DOBELL
((§■, o§i§if* r s ; j&h
hi 1 frpr% tr e cty£ffi)fyfy
Office 2-5 p.m.
’Phone: to 1 p.m.)


The
ARTS COUNCIL
OF AUSTRALIA
N.S.W. DIVISION
/
A FIVE YEARS’ RECORD
1943-1947
Price One Shilling


Music in Wartime at R.A.N. Establishment, Garden Island, Sydney, 1944.
Pix, photo.
Music in a Factory
Dorothy Helmrich at the Microphone


Australian GEMA—
Its Origin and Purpose
By SIR ROBERT GARRAN, G.C.M.G., K.C.
(This statement from the pen of the eminent lawyer and
scholar, who has done so much for Australia in the fields of
constitutional law and the arts, is reprinted from the first
number of the quarterly “Review” issued by the N.S.UT.
Division of Australian CEAIA. A paragraph dealing with
progress made at the time of writing is omitted, as the facts
appear in their appropriate places in this publication, along
with later developments and in their perspective as seen to-day.')
The central purpose of CEMA in Australia, as of its name-
sake in Britain, is to bring art, in all its forms, to the people;
to encourage them, not only to cultivate an appreciation of all
that is beautiful in music, painting, sculpture, drama, ballet,
and so forth, but also to express themselves in some one or
other of the arts or crafts.
CEMA is based on the belief that art, in the widest sense
of the word, is not a luxury for the few, but a necessity for
all, in a community which aims to develop to the full all the
faculties of its citizens and so enable them to make the best of
life. In all this, the things on which public attention is chiefly
focussed (apart from security from war) are the fundamental
economic freedoms: Freedom from fear and want. The
emphasis, in public discussions, is upon the hoped-for material
benefits: Full employment, economic security, good housing,
and so forth. These are very important and very necessary,
but they are not everything. Material comfort and security
afford opportunities for happiness and welfare; but they do
not by themselves ensure happiness and welfare.
The idea behind CEMA is that to have a better world
we must have better citizens—men and women who not only


have full employment, but are happy in their employment;
men and women who not only have abundant leisure, but
know how to make use of it to develop their bodies and
their minds. Post-war reconstruction must take account, not
only of the material, but also of the cultural and the spiritual.
And this is something for which we cannot afford to wait till
all the material wants are fully satisfied; it should have equal
priority with them.
In short, material comfort gives opportunity for a better life;
but opportunities are not enough unless we know how to
grasp them. What CEMA in Australia is already doing so
far as the means at its disposal allow, and will be able to do
on a much larger scale with adequate financial support, is to
help the people to use their opportunities to foster an appre-
ciation of the cultural side of life.
War conditions, both in the fighting services and on the
home front, have led to remarkable manifestations of eager
response to cultural stimuli. As an illustration, Dr. Malcolm
Sargent has said, with regard to music, that the war has
proved it to be, not a luxury entertainment for the cultured
few, but a refreshing food for the ordinary man and woman
in the street; and he testifies to the tremendous help given
to thousands by contact with something immortal, at a time
when it might seem that everything that mattered was
perishing. And Dr. Sargent’s experience is matched by the
experience of all who are labouring to-day in the cultural field.
CEMA was started in England, during the war, with the
aid of a donation of £25,000 from the “Pilgrims” foundation.
The immediate response was so striking, and the effect on
morale, both in the services and among war-workers generally,
that in the next year the British Government subsidised it to
the extent of £50,000, and has since increased its support
more than threefold. More significant still, the British
Government has recently decided that CEMA must be con-
tinued after the war, and must continue to receive Govern-
ment support, as an essential part of post-war reconstruction.
CEMA in Australia has no official connection with the
British CEMA, from which, however, it received its


inspiration. Largely on the initiative of Miss Dorothy
Helmrich, the well-known Australian singer, interest in the
movement has for some time been growing. Divisions of
CEMA have been formed in New South Wales, Victoria,
Queensland, and the Australian Capital Territory, and steps
are being taken to extend it to other States. Meanwhile, the
existing Divisions have joined together to establish a Federal
Council.
In Australia, CEMA has hitherto been organized on
somewhat different lines from the British. In Britain, as has
been stated above, CEMA began with a substantial
subsidy, and has been closely associated with the Treasury
and Education Departments. In Australia, with no such
munificent backing, it has sprung spontaneously and
democratically from the people, and has had to make shift
with such voluntary contributions as it could collect, and cut
its coat according to the cloth. In Britain, the set-up consists
solely of one Council, which administers its funds. In Aus-
tralia, there is public membership of the organization in the
several Divisions, and a Federal Council, to which the
Divisions send delegates. The Divisions have local autonomy,
and the organization will probably, to some extent, develop
on different lines in the different Divisions, according to local
needs, circumstances and ideas. But the aims are the same
throughout—to bring opportunities for culture to the people
everywhere, in town and country, in Army, Navy and Air
stations, in camps, in industrial areas and groups—in fact,
wherever people, few or many, are gathered together for
work or pastime or residence. The ways in which this can be
done are capable of infinite variation and extension—for
instance, by festivals of the arts, by encouraging local or-
chestras, choral groups, solo and chamber musical per-
formances, dramatic groups, touring concert and dramatic
parties, ballets, folk dancing, lectures, talks and discussions,
art journals, lunch-hour talks and entertainments, exhibitions,
and so forth. And, lastly, by encouraging the establishment
of community centres for cultural purposes, with buildings
suitable for music, drama, art exhibitions, and general
rendezvous of the interested public.


It should be added that CEMA does not compete with
existing cultural organisations; it aims, not to supplement
them, but to work with them and through them and help
them in every way. What it has done in Australia with slender
means is remarkable; what it could do if endowed to the
extent of enabling it to establish a small fulbtime organizing
and administrative staff, is incalculable.
CEMA is non-political and non-sectarian, and has no
affiliation of any kind.
Amateur Drama at Inverell, N.S.W., 1947
Devine, photo.


The Change of Name
During 1947 the CEMA Executive in N.S.W. did a great
deal of work on a revision of the existing constitutions for
the Federal and N.S.W. organisations. Among the matters
which came up was the proposal to change the name of
CEMA to “The Arts Council.” This proposal was not made
in any slavish imitation of the similar change made in Great
Britain by the great organisation which is largely our inspira-
tion and pattern, in our much smaller way and with the
differences due to different conditions. It was merely that the
arguments which led to the change of name in Great Britain
were as valid and as urgent in Australia.
During the war institutions with cryptic initials, which
became their popular titles, sprang up everywhere, but often,
and especially with British CEMA, their wide impact on the
life of individuals, their visibility, so to speak, to every citizen,
made them familiar by their works, and many a citizen knew
what they did and stood for, without bothering to ask what
the mysterious name meant.
In Australia, CEMA was really a post-war growth and
began in a very small way, and its members and leaders had to
explain till they were tired what “CEMA” meant and what it
wanted to do, and not to do. The name was a handicap and a
hurdle the Press found very difficult, especially in the country.
The feeling in N.S.W. was divided. Some argued that we
were getting well known under the old name and we should
have to begin explaining all over again. But not only N.S.W.
had to be considered; there were the other States. Visits by
Miss Helmrich to Hobart and Adelaide had led to the
formation of provisional committees for Divisions in
Tasmania and South Australia. But neither of these com-
mittees would have anything to do with “CEMA”; it must
be “The Arts Council” or nothing, and they have now
formed their Divisions under that title, ready to join with an
all-Australian Arts Council when formed under a new
constitution.
So N.S.W., at its 1947 Annual Meeting of delegates from
branches, approved the change nem. con., and we have three


of the four State Divisions functioning in accord, and, at the
time of writing this note, there is no indication of any
opposition to the change from the Victorian Division of
CEMA.
The change is awkward to begin with, and in this booklet
complete consistency is difficult. Events which happened
while the name was CEMA will naturally refer to “CEMA”
and not to “The Arts Council.” But it must be understood
that there are not —and never have been —two organisations,
but only one, henceforth to be known as the Arts Council of
Australia.
The Arts Council of Australia
(N.S.W. Division)
The State Executive
The President, Deputy-President, Honorary Treasurer and
12 Committee Members are elected for one year at the Annual
Meeting of Delegates from the Branches. This elected
Executive is empowered to co-opt up to eight additional
members. Each Branch sends two delegates to the Annual
Meeting with voting powers. The Executive itself acts as a
Central Branch and appoints two delegates to this meeting.
The other members of the Executive attend the meeting, with
power to speak but not to vote.
The Executive gives approval for the formation of new
branches and is responsible to them for the forwarding of the
objects of the Council. It appoints the Vice-Presidents, who
are honorary members and who have no voting power, the
Secretary, and the Art Advisers.
The Executive meets at least once a month and keeps a close
eye on administration and works to a considerable extent
through ad hoc sub-committees to assist the executive officers.
The Council’s Objects and Activities
The object of the Council is the encouragement of the
Arts. To this end it acts as an agent for the engagement by


branches of professional artists at proper fees; gives advice
to branches and any other bodies which may ask for it in
matters relating to the Arts; furnishes branches with the
names of artists, individuals or groups, who are of approved
standard, and who are willing to accept engagements; co-
operates with branches in organising country tours and visits
to single towns as economically as possible; and to the extent
of its very limited financial resources helps branches which
have incurred losses and gives them limited guarantees
against loss.
The Council also co-operates with other educational and
cultural bodies, where their interests coincide. Thus, a
number of branches make themselves responsible for the local
organisation of exhibitions sent to the country by the National
Art Gallery; some co-operate with the A.B.C. in the local
organisation of visits by its orchestras and soloists on tour.
The Council has recently undertaken at its own expense the
provision of suitable entertainments to various institutions
under the Child Welfare Department, such as visits by pro-
fessional musicians, school dramatic groups, and puppet
shows, and an experiment in giving instruction in drawing
and painting fortnightly at the Mt. Penang Training School
is to begin shortly. During UNESCO month in November
last, four lectures on artistic activities in various countries
were given at the Public Library in Sydney to crowded
audiences.
Official Recognition
The Council is officially recognized in N.S.W. in two
important directions. It is represented by its President on the
Advisory Board of Adult Education, and its President, by
virtue of her office, has been asked by the Federal Govern-
ment to act on the UNESCO National Co-operating Body for
Music.
Finance
Branch members pay a subscription of 2/6 per annum, of
which sixpence is sent to the State Executive. In the early
stages this levy, and a few Life Membership subscriptions of
five guineas, and some donations were its sole resources.


In 1946 a Festival of the Arts was held in Sydney. This was
guaranteed against loss to the extent of £250 by Associated
Newspapers, but the guarantee so generously given was not
called upon, as a profit of £225 was made.
For the financial year 1946-47 the Council received a subsidy
of £6OO from the Adult Education Grant to the Department of
Public Instruction, and this subsidy has been raised for the
current year to £BOO. This subsidy enabled the Executive to
pay the Secretary a salary on a full-time basis, to rent a small
but convenient office for a sufficient time each week-day, to
buy a typewriter and other much-needed office equipment.
Exhibition of Australian Art, Sydney Festival of the Arts , 1946
Department o Education, photo.


The Arts Council and the Amateur
CEMA in N.S.W. from the beginning took the view that one
of its functions was to foster amateur activities. It is a sound
educational principle that any attempt to practice an art or
craft heightens appreciation of the work of the fine artist or
craftsman. This heightened appreciation in its turn, helps to
raise the standard of the amateur’s work, and a virtuous circle
is set up.
In Great Britain the work of amateur groups comes under
the wing of the Carnegie Trust; but there is no such trust or
fund in Australia. The question was how CEMA could do
something in this field. It was obvious that the greatest need
for help is in the country towns, where continuity of amateur
activities is very hard to maintain. In the metropolitan area
there are many amateur groups of those interested in music
and drama which are well established, but most country
towns are strewn with the debris of musical and dramatic
societies, which have had a short life while some one person
with driving force resided there, but which have collapsed
when he left the district—a frequent occurrence, as he is
generally more or less a bird of passage.
It was hoped that a CEMA Branch in a country town would
be able to help overcome this difficulty, by providing a
continuous organisation that is interested in all the arts.
Where there was a well-established and vigorous musical
or dramatic society in existence, it was not CEMA’s
business to try to take it over or to set up a rival group, unless
perhaps the standards of the existing institution were such
that CEMA felt it should and could provide better fare.
But it should co-operate to the full extent that co-operation
was welcomed.
The theory of how CEMA could function may best be
understood by a kind of typical “case history.” A Branch is
formed at an inaugural meeting of all those who seem to
have some interest in the “things of culture,” and who can
be induced to attend. The chairman asks for suggestions of
activities that could be undertaken. Various people volunteer
to act on a Drama, a Music, or an Art Sub-Committee.


Suggestions are made about co-opting other persons who are
not present at the meeting but who are known to be interested
in, or to have had some experience in one or other of the Arts.
A Dramatic Society or a Play-reading Group, a Choir or
Recorded Music Group is established. The word soon gets
around the town, and it is soon found that there are young
people, just from school, or young teachers or bank clerks
who have recently come to the town from the city, where they
had been able and were accustomed to attend concerts and
good plays at the Little Theatres, and perhaps had been keen
amateur participants. As soon as the group begins to function,
as soon as a successful performance has been given, it becomes
a matter of pride that the good work should continue, much
more so than when such a group is started unconnected with
a bigger organisation. A report is required at meetings of the
Branch Committee, and especially at the end of the year. With
a CEMA Branch Committee doing its job, there should be a
far better chance of each of the various groups being kept
alive and continuous.
But there is the question of finance. In some towns the
amateur shows given have made enough money to enable the
Branch to risk engaging professional artists. Other branches
have begun by raising guarantees and engaging professionals,
from whose performances funds have been raised to buy a
good piano, to improve local stage equipment, and so
facilitate both amateur and professional performances. But
what happens when the profits of an amateur show, which has
drawn a full house of the friends and relations of the per-
formers, are all eaten up by the losses incurred by engaging
professional artists, who fail to draw a good house, because it
is feared by many that they will not be able to appreciate such
“high-brow” stuff? Here is where the Arts Council should
be able to step in—and is able to do so to a limited extent only
with its present small funds. It should be able to say to such
a Branch, “We will make good your loss, but you must keep
pegging away. You must engage those same professional
artists, or others of equal standard, again next year.” And it
should be able to guarantee the Branch against loss on such
engagements for one, or two, or three years, according to
what may seem a reasonable period, in view of its resources


Woolloomooloo Children Creep into a CEMA Play, Phillip Park, 1944
Pix, photo.
and the calls upon them. A second and a third performance
are likely to prove more successful, often through the private
publicity given by those who say to their friends, “It is a pity
you didn’t go to that concert; I am sure you would have
enjoyed it,” a gende rebuke which often encourages by
suggesting that “if the Smiths enjoyed it, I suppose we would
have, too. We’ll go next time.” It takes time to build up an
audience for professional shows in many country towns, but
at least one very “difficult” country town in N.S.W. has now
succeeded in building up such an audience, and its Arts
Council Branch, failing the possibility of visits by the Ballet
Rambert, has organised a party of over 100 to come close on
a hundred miles by ’bus to Sydney to see it. (This slight digres-
sion from consideration of amateur work serves to show
the interaction of the interest in amateur and professional
work.)


Then there is the question of standards. The Arts Council
stands for nothing but the highest available standards in pro-
fessional work. But it would be foolish to try to expect too
much in amateur work.
What can one expect of amateur drama, amateur music,
amateur painting, in a country town ? A perusal of a full list of
plays performed and of musical programmes presented by
CEMA’S amateur groups might not satisfy the highbrow
metropolitan critic —professional or lay. The Executive of
the Arts Council does not adopt too lofty an attitude in this
branch of its work, though it does expect a constant endeavour
to raise standards, both of works performed and of their
presentation. It would not be satisfied with the work of a
Branch which merely affords opportunities for exhibitionism
and pleasant social events. But interest must be created,
activity must begin, at almost any level; people must be roped
in, performances must be given which draw good houses and
bring in funds for the Branch, so that it may be able to risk
engaging professional artists occasionally who will bring a
higher standard of work to the town. If amateurs are taking
their work at all seriously, they soon feel the need to see and
hear better work than they themselves can do.
The Art Councils stand for the encouragement of the arts.
But that is no mere abstraction; to encourage the arts for the
sake of the arts means nothing. If the words mean anything,
they mean the encouragement of those practising and those
appreciating the arts —both artist and audience. Too often the
professional artist is contemptuous of the amateur, forgetting
that it is very largely from the ranks of the amateur that his
audience is built. The amateur needs help from the artist, so
that he may become both a better executant and a more
appreciative listener or spectator, thus enriching his life and
developing his personality.
That is the attitude of the Arts Council to amateur work.
Amateur and professional performances must go hand-in-
hand, interact, and help each other.


Branch Activities
ALBURY
Professional Engagements
Music:
1945. A.B.C. Melbourne Symphony Orchestra, conducted by Joseph
Post. Children’s matinee and evening performances.
1946. Basil Jones (violin), Patricia Howard (soprano), Valina
Lewis (piano).
(Owing to the success of the Orchestral Concert, which was
guaranteed against loss by citizens, the A.B.C. has since
included Albury for regular visits by its Melbourne orchestra
and by solo artists. The Branch co-operates in local organisation.)
Drama and Ballet:
1946. Ippen and Vernon (ballet for two).
1947. Wiener Ballet Company.
Amateur Performances
1945. Violin and Piano Sonatas and Lieder.
1946. Noel Coward’s “I’ll Leave It to You.”
1947. Public Reading of “As You Like It” for Schools.
Art Exhibitions
1945. Paintings and Etchings lent by citizens.
1946. National Gallery Exhibition (co-operated with Municipal
Council).
1947. Exhibition organised in conjunction with Municipal Council,
the Council contributing £75 and the CEMA Branch £35
for prizes. Prize paintings to become the property of the
City of Albury.
Group Activities
Recorded music, with items by local artists fortnightly.
Play-readings fortnightly.
Sketch Club.


ARMIDALE
Professional Engagements
Music:
1945. Thea Rowe (folk songs).
1947. Clement Williams (baritone) and Enid Conley (piano).
Drama and Ballet:
1946. “Candida” (Independent Theatre).
1946 and 1947. Bodenwieser Ballet.
1947. Servanto’s Puppets.
Lecture:
1947. Interior Decoration by Margaret Lord.
Amateur Performances
Drama:
1946. “I Killed the Count.”
“Mischief in the Air.”
1947. “George and Margaret” (N.E.U.C. Dramatic Society). Repeat
performance at Tenterfield, Glen Innes and Tamworth.
Three One-Act Plays, repeated at Guyra.
BATHURST
Professional Engagements
Music:
1945. Dorothy Helmrich (mezzo-soprano) and Joyce Hutchinson
(piano).
1946. Harold Williams (baritone) and Kathleen Fitzgerald (piano).
Thea Rowe (folk songs).
Singers of Australia: Valda Bagnall (soprano) and Noel
Melvin (bass).
1947. This Branch assisted the A.B.C. in the organisation of an
orchestral concert.
Roma Sumner (violin) and Stanley Clarkson (bass).
Drama and Ballet:
1945. “To-morrow, The World” (New Theatre League),
Darya Collin’s Ballet.
Ippen and Vernon (ballet for two).
1946. “Candida” (Independent Theatre).
Bodenwieser Ballet.
“Twelfth Night” (Independent Theatre).
“Hamlet” (Independent Theatre).
1947. Jean Anouilh’s “Antigone” (Independent Theatre).
Bodenwieser Ballet.


Amateur Performances
1945. City of Bathurst Orchestra and local artists.
Choral Concert with David Maddison (piano) as guest artist.
1946. City of Bathurst Orchestra and local artists.
Co-operation with Rotary and Apex Clubs in concert for
Food for Britain.
Concert for presentation of prizes to Juvenile Prize Winners in
1946 City of Bathurst Eisteddfod.
1947. Revue by CEMA Musical and Dramatic Clubs.
Art Exhibitions
(In co-operation with National Art Gallery and Bathurst School of Arts.)
1945. “150 Years of Australian Art. (Two lectures by Bernard
Smith.)
1946. “100 Years of Australian Art.” (Two lectures by Gwen
Sherwood.)
1947. Australian Watercolours. Guest speaker: Hal Missingham,
Director of the National Gallery.
Local Exhibitions.
1944. Olive Long and Hal Missingham (in co-operation with Army
Education).
Staff-Sgt. Douglas Barrie (in co-operation with Army Educa-
tion) .
1945. Work of G. Bennett.
Children’s Art.
1946. “Farming Goes to War in Great Britain,” —posters and photo-
graphs (in co-operation with City Council and Junior
Farmers’ Club.)
First Annual Exhibition by local artists.
1947. Work of Kelvin Fleming.
Second Annual Exhibition by local artists.
Lectures and Addresses
1944. Dorothy Helmrich, with a recital by Lesley Newell and
Ronald Johnson and Army Education Documentary Films.
1945. “The Theatre,” Frank D. Clewlow.
Lecture-Recital by Dr. Ewart and local artists.
1946. “Henry Lawson,” George Farwell, for Fellowship of Australian
Writers* Henry Lawson Memorial Fund.
1947. Dorothy Helmrich.
Group Activities
Two recitals of recorded music in 1945 and six monthly
recitals and musicales in 1946-47.
Weekly broadcast of good music on 2BS since May, 1946.
Weekly practices of Music and Dramatic Club since May, 1946.
Art Classes at Technical College, June-December, 1946.
Occasional screening of films and a debate.


Bodenwieser Ballet at Inverell, N.S.W. , 1947
Devine, photo.
BINGARA
A Branch was formed in this very small town in June, 1946, and has
an average membership of about 15. It holds meetings fairly regularly
for music, poetry readings, play readings, some lectures by members,
and has produced a one-act play. It is for such branches that the State
Executive needs funds to guarantee visits by professional artists.
BONDI
This Branch operated from 1944 to 1947, holding regular musicales
given by members and their friends in private houses.
BROKEN HILL
A Branch was formed in this very important mining centre at the
end of 1947, and is receiving financial support from the Zinc Corpora-
tion, with which, and with the co-operation of the Mine Managers’
Association, it has already made history for the town and the Arts
Council by arranging for three performances by the Ballet Rambert.
So successful was this venture that the Zinc Goprporation and the


Mine Managers’ Association are prepared to sponsor further ambitious
engagements, to be locally organized by the Branch of the Arts Council.
Another scheme of wonderful possibilities is the provision through the
Flying Doctor Service at Broken Hill of cultural amenities to the
isolated folk, whom this service reaches by pedal wireless and ’plane.
This work will be supervised by the Branch.
COFFS HARBOUR
Professional Engagement
1945. Dorothy Helmrich (mezzo-soprano), Rosamund Caradus
(piano), and Barbara Kearns (violin).
Amateur Performances
1945. Stage representation of “The Beggar’s Opera” in mime, with
Glyndebourne recordings synchronised.
One-act Plays, by High School and CEMA Group.
Choir and Orchestra, assisted by Therese Spitzer (’cello) and
Gloria Read (piano).
1946. Shadow-shows and Reading of One-act Plays.
Concert by local artists.
Stage reading of “Tilly of Bloomsbury.”
Concert by CEMA Choir, String Orchestra and Soloists.
Three One-Act Plays.
Choral and Orchestral Concert.
1947. Programme of Music and One-Act Plays.
Concert to assist a local singer to go to Sydney for tuition.
Group Activities
Musicales, including performances by members and recorded
music in private homes.
(This Branch in a town of 2,000 people has had peculiar
difficulties, and after a period when it seemed as if continuance
would be impossible, a promising recovery has been made.)
COWRA
Professional Engagements
Music:
1946. Noel Melvin (bass), Della Woods (violin), Kathleen Fitzgerald
(piano).
Clement Hosking (folk songs).
1947. Thea Rowe (folksongs).
Singers of Australia: Noel Melvin (bass), Valda Bagnall
(soprano), Dorothy White (piano).


Drama and Ballet:
1946. “Twelfth Night” (Independent Theatre).
Ippen and Vernon (ballet for two).
1947. Bodenwieser Ballet.
Servanto’s Puppets.
Amateur Performances
1946. Constance Campbell and assisting artists.
1947. Juvenile Concert.
“Rookery Nook” (two nights).
Constance Campbell and assisting artists.
Art Exhibition
1947. Exhibition of Australian Watercolours from National Art
Gallery.
Group Activities
Dramatic Society formed in 1947, which has arranged a one-
act play competition for 1948.
GLEN INNES
Professional Engagements
Music:
1945. Harold Williams (baritone) and Kathleen Fitzgerald (piano).
1946. Harold Williams (baritone) and Kathleen Fitzgerald (piano).
Thea Rowe (folk songs).
1947. Clement Williams (baritone) and Enid Conley (piano).
Thea Rowe (folk songs).
Drama and Ballet:
1946. “Candida” (Independent Theatre).
Bodenwieser Ballet.
GOULBURN
Professional Engagements
Music:
1945. Dorothy Helmrich (mezzo-soprano).
1947. Sydney Musica Viva String Quartet.
Clement Williams (baritone) and Enid Conley (piano).
Drama and Ballet:
1945. Darya Collin’s Ballet.
1946. “Candida” (Independent Theatre).
Bodenwieser Ballet.


Lecture:
1946. “The Theatre,” Frank D. Clewlow.
Lecture-Recitals by Robert McCall.
Amateur Performances
1945. Six One-Act Plays by various schools.
1946. One-Act Plays.
1947. One-Act Play Festival (three nights, at which eight plays by
various groups were performed).
GRIFFITH
Professional Engagements
Music:
1945. Thea Phillips (soprano).
1946. Harold Williams (baritone) and Kathleen Fitzgerald (piano).
Kathleen Tuohy (’cello), Kenneth Stanton (bass), and
Kathleen Dempsey (piano).
Clement Hosking (folk songs).
1947. Boyd Neel Orchestra (in conjunction with Wagga School of
Arts and Special Committee).
Thea Rowe (folk songs).
Ballet:
1945. Ippen and Vernon (ballet for two).
1947. Ippen and Vernon (ballet for two).
Lecture:
1945. “Art in Brazil,” Dr. Ewart.
Amateur Performances
1946. “Aren’t We All.”
1947. Concert: Mrs. Weekes-White (soprano), of Leeton, and Miss
Ferguson (piano).
“The Ghost Train.”
Pantomime, “The Babes in the Wood.”
Group Activities
Drama Group has produced several one-act plays as well as
bigger shows.
Art Group meets regularly for discussions and has formed
a Sketch Club.
Discussion Group reads plays weekly as a University Tutorial
Class.
Film. Group shows Documentary Films.


INVERELL
Professional Engagements
Music:
1945. Harold Williams (baritone) and Kathleen Fitzgerald (piano).
1947. Thea Rowe (folk songs).
Clement Williams (baritone) and Enid Conley (piano).
Drama and Ballet:
1946. “Candida” (Independent Theatre).
1946 and 1947 : Bodenwieser Ballet.
1947. Servanto Puppets.
Amateur Performances
1946. “Legend,” by Drama Group, repeated at Glen Innes Eistedd-
fod.
One-Act Plays and part of “The Gondoliers.”
Group Activities
Drama and Debating Groups function regularly and one-act
plays have been taken to Delungra, in conjunction with the
the C.W.A.
As a result of the Branch’s activities, the Municipal Council
has improved the Town Hall stage and the piano is being
reconditioned or replaced.
KATOOMBA
Professional Engagements
Music:
1945. Florence Taylor (contralto) and Barbara Kearns (violin) as
guest artists at Choral Concert.
1946. Stanley Clarkson (bass) and Joan Esmond (piano).
1947. Lecture-Recital by Livingston Mote, with Florence Taylor
(contralto) and Leone Strudwick (piano).
Drama and Ballet:
1945. “To-morrow, The World” (New Theatre League).
Ippen and Vernon (ballet for two).
1946. “Twelfth Night” (Independent Theatre).
1947. Bodenwieser Ballet.
Amateur Performances
1945. One-Act Plays.
Concert at Leura by local artists.
Open-air Concert.
1946. “Lady in Danger.”
1947. “The Dover Road” (at Katoomba and Lawson).


Group Activities
A “Younger Set” was formed to help in preparation of stage
and to promote all CEMA activities.
The Choral Society has assisted at local concerts for various
causes.
The Dutch community living in the district during the war
gave a fine “return” concert in aid of CEMA and the local
hospital.
Organisation of visits of schools to A.B.C. concerts at Lithgow
and of adults to Sydney for the Ballet Rambert.
By June, 1946, funds raised had bought a piano.
MAITLAND
Professional Performances
Music:
1945. Laurence Godfrey Smith (piano), assisted by local artists.
Athos Martelli (’cello), assisted by local artists.
1946. Daphne Harpur (piano), assisted by local artists.
Drama and Ballet:
1945. Burlakov Ballet.
1946. “Candida” (Independent Theatre).
Ippen and Vernon (ballet for two). Two performances.
1947. Bodenwieser Ballet. Two performances.
Amateur Performances
1945. Concert by Kurri Kurri String Orchestra and Maitland
Dominican Choir.
1947. Concert by Kurri Kurri College Choir and local artists.
Concert by Hunter River district artists, including a stage
performance of Act 1 of “The Marriage of Figaro,” by Irwin
Page and the Kurri Kurri Operatic Group.
Art Exhibitions
1945. Work of local artists.
1946. Work of local artists (February and October).
1947. Contemporary Art (in conjunction with the National Art
Gallery).


Group Activities
Pottery, Dramatic and Ballet Groups were formed in 1945
and the two first still function, though the Dramatic Group
now works independently as the Maitland Repertory Society.
A number of musicales have been held.
In 1946, the Branch approached the A.B.C. for an orchestral
concert, and, though it was too late to arrange one for that
year, Maitland is now included among the country towns
to be visited by the orchestra. Concerts have been given
in 1947 and in February, 1948.
NARRABRI
Amateur Performance
1947. Concert by local artists.
Exhibition
1947. The first venture of this new Branch in a small town was a
very ambitious exhibition in the Town Hall, which included
exhibits of craft and art work and industrial displays. It was
very successful and had great publicity through the north-
west.
TAMWORTH
Professional Engagements
Music:
1946. Harold Williams (baritone).
Thea Rowe (folk songs).
1947. Angela Parselles (soprano), Laurence Orchard (flute), and
Kathleen Dempsey (piano).
Clement Williams (baritone) and Enid Conley (piano).
Drama and Ballet:
1945. Imogen Whyse. Four recitals from Shakepearean plays and
a puppet show.
1946. “Candida” (Independent Theatre).
1946 and 1947 : Bodenwieser Ballet.
Lecture:
1947. Interior Decoration, by Margaret Lord.
TENTERFIELD
Professional Engagements
Music:
1946. Harold Williams (baritone).
John Hannell (piano), George Tiley (tenor), and Russell King
(flute).
1947. Clement Williams (baritone) and Enid Conley (piano).
Thea Rowe (folk songs).


Drama and Ballet:
1946. “Candida” (Independent Theatre).
1947. Bodenwieser Ballet.
Group Activities
A Drama Group produces plays on a small scale.
TORPEDO FACTORY (Neutral Bay)
Professional Engagements
Music:
1946. Lily Kolos (soprano), Reginald Willoughby (tenor) and
Marcel Lorber (piano).
Mary Thomas (soprano), Robert Livingstone (baritone),
Daphne Harpur (piano), and Theodora Stephens (accom-
panist) .
1947. Lily Kolos (soprano), Reginald Willoughby (tenor), Cathleen
O’Carroll (violin), and Hope Donaldson (piano).
Amateur Performances
1947. Music by R.A.N.T.F. Employees. Documentary Films.
Art Exhibition
1947. Arts and Crafts by Employees. Documentary Films.
WESTERN SUBURBS
Professional Engagements
Music:
1946. Frank Hutchens and Lindley Evans (two pianos), with Rosina
Raisbeck (contralto).
1947. Singers of Australia: Reginald Willoughby (tenor), Shirley
Wallwork (soprano), Noel Melvin (bass), and Werner Baer
(piano).
Drama and Ballet:
1946. “Hamlet” (Independent Theatre). For schools.
“Twelfth Night” (Independent Theatre). For schools.
“Candida” (Independent Theatre).
1947. Bodenwieser Ballet.
“The Dover Road” (Kuringai Theatre Guild).
“As You Like It” (Metropolitan Theatre). Two matinees
for schools,


The CEMA Story
When Dorothy Helmrich returned to Australia in 1942
she brought with her news of the work of British CEMA
(as the Arts Council of Great Britain was then called), and
during the many talks given by her both over the air and in
public she told of the wonderful work being done “over
there.” Interest in the movement was keen, and when
speaking at a luncheon at which Mrs. Jessie Street was
presiding she was asked why such an organisation was not
started in Australia. Within a few weeks a band of people
was gathered to discuss the possibility of forming such a
body: Sir Robert Garran, G.C.M.G., K.C., Messrs. W. J.
Cleary (then Chairman of the Australian Broadcasting Com-
mission), R. J. F. Boyer (present Chairman A.8.C.), C. R.
McKerihan (President, Rural Bank of N.S.W.), W. McClel-
land, L. G. Harrison, Bernard Smith (National Art Gallery
Travelling Exhibitions), Dr. S. L. Macindoe, Mrs. Jessie
Street, Mrs. Matheson (Children’s Library Movement),
Dorothy Helmrich.
There was no money available, but somehow the ball began
to roll. The first country branch was started at Bathurst, and
was quickly followed by Goulburn. The Department of
Agriculture, through Mr. Crane, invited Miss Helmrich to
address a conference at Richmond, and the result was to bring
more country branches into being, and thus slowly the move-
ment grew.
A complete plan was evolved, which is being brought into
being more fully each year. This scheme was presented to the
Premier of the day (The Hon. W. J. McKell), who highly
commended it, but thought it would have to wait until after
the war. However, the Director-General of Education (Mr.
J. G. McKenzie) was most sympathetic, and has continued to
be so ever since.
In December, 1944, a Three Arts Festival was produced in
conjunction with the Children’s Library Movement at
Phillip Park. Despite many difficulties, chief of which was the
fact that we had no money at all (all the artists working on a


Co-operative basis), the Library Movement benefited to the
extent of £SO.
About this time another festival was held in Bathurst, and
£25 was voted towards their expenses (by private donation).
The programme covered music, drama and ballet, and was
very successful. At that time, when we sent professional artists
to a town where there was a military camp or hospital, Army
Education would pay all transport costs, and Bathurst was
was one of those towns. In this way we worked very happily
with both the Army and the Navy during the war years.
The personnel of CEMA in Sydney changed from time
to time, and at the end of 1944 and early in 1945 there were
linked with us Sir Benjamin Fuller, Dr. and Mrs. Edgar L.
Bainton, Prof. A. K. Stout, Messrs. F. Hutchens, Hal Missing-
ham (present Director, National Art Gallery), F. D. Clewlow
(Director of Drama, A.8.C.), John D. Moore, J. Rice, F.
Pittock, A. Carter, F. K. Barton, W. L. Rodgers (Hon.
Treasurer for the past three years), Mrs. Garry (President,
C.W.A.), Miss E. Higson, and Mr. L. F. Keller (Department
of Education), who has held the office of Deputy-President
for the past three years.
Mrs. Piat had resigned from the secretaryship and was
succeeded in turn by Mrs. Barbara Bennett and Miss Elizabeth
Harbutt. On 15th May, 1945, at a meeting in Federation
House, when the present State Constitution was adopted,
Miss Regina Ridge joined us as Hon. Secretary, and con-
tinues to fill that important position now on a permanent
basis.
An interesting development at this stage was the appoint-
ment of Lt. Beveridge as Army Education Liaison Officer
(Men), Lt. Crittenden (Women), and Lt.-Commander Hazel
(Royal Navy).
About this time, too, we made our first application to the
Government for a grant of money. In October, 1945, the first
number of the CEMA quarterly Review appeared, edited by
Mr. F. K. Barton. During all this time branches of CEMA
were opening in various parts of the State, and Divisions had
been formed in Victoria and Queensland. South Australia
and Tasmania have since followed suit.


The Chairman of the Overseas Department of the British
Council (Sir Angus Gillan) visited Australia in 1945, and on
his return to London an invitation was issued for a repre-
sentative of Australian CEMA to visit Britain as their guest.
Federal CEMA nominated Miss Helmrich as its representa-
tive, and this visit forged a link of friendship between the two
organisations, which we cherish, and which the British
Council made concrete by the gift to CEMA of a library of
British music and records.
During 1946 CEMA presented its second Festival of the
Arts. By this time we were more firmly established, and Asso-
ciated Newspapers Ltd. gave us a guarantee against loss up to
£250. We are happy to say that there was a profit of £225.
An event of great importance soon after this was the
granting of a subsidy of £6OO for that year from the Depart-
ment of Education, through the Advisory Board of Adult
Education, Miss Helmrich having some time previously been
appointed to represent CEMA on that Board. After the
struggle to keep afloat with voluntary help, this was to us a
lifeline. We could now have a permanent Secretary, and
instead of functioning from the homes of our President and
Secretary, we were promoted to the part-possession of an
office in the city. We could now work from a central point, and
the Secretary’s life was made easier. But—we still have no
telephone!
During 1946-47 Miss Beatrice Tildesley, Mrs. B. T. Edye,
Revs. Alan Tory and J. Gray Robertson, Messrs. V. W.
Peterson and William Dobell, Mrs. Bertha Mac Smith (Country
Women’s Association), Misses Margaret Kent Hughes,
Patricia Walker, Stella Swinney, Aileen Fitzpatrick, Doreen
Jacobs. Drs. Hans Forst and Harold Wyndham, Mr. Jefferson
Day joined the Sydney organisation. Also Mr. Eugene
Goossens, on his arrival to take up the positions of Director
of the State Conservatorium and Conductor of the Sydney
Symphony Orchestra, consented to become our Hon. Music
Adviser.
In 1947, Miss Helmrich was appointed to represent CEMA
on the UNESCO National Co-operating Body for Music, and


Exhibition at Narrabri , N.S.W., 1947
Cornish, photo.
during the month of November, 1947 (UNESCO Month) a
successful series of lunch-time talks was presented at the
Public Library.
The close of 1947 brought some interesting developments
in the country. A branch was formed at Broken Hill, through
the efforts of Mr. P. K. Perrett (Dept, of Education), and was
promised generous financial backing by the Zinc Corporation
and kindred organisations. This support has already made
possible a successful season by the Ballet Rambert, and marks
the beginning of a regular flow of first-class artists to Broken
Hill, Also of major interest is the link with the people of the
“outback” by means of the pedal radio, through the courtesy
of the Flying Doctor Service of Australia. Ways and means
of helping these people are being worked out.


In 1947 we received an increase of £2OO in our subsidy,
bringing it to £BOO, and we would like to record here our
deep appreciation of this help from the Government and
the different bodies on the Advisory Board of Adult Educa-
tion. It is not nearly enough for the work we can do, but it
gives us a certain amount of stability and an opportunity of
proving our worth.
With our change of name to The Arts Council of Australia
came as Vice-Presidents Professor R. C. Mills Director of
Commonwealth Education), Mr. Charles Moses (General
Manager of the A.8.C.), and Mr. Eric Kennedy (Chief
Executive Officer of Associated Newspapers Ltd.).
This outline shows clearly what can be accomplished when
people with disinterested motives and an ideal come together.
Even money could be done without in the early stages, but
now money—and a lot of money—is needed for the realisa-
tion of that ideal.
It remains for us to thank with deep sincerity all the people
who have contributed in work, time and money to make The
Arts Council of Australia the vital organisation that it is
to-day. Our final word of gratitude must go to the Minister
of Education (the Hon. R. J. Heffron, M.L.A.) and the
Director-General of Education (Mr. J. G. McKenzie) for their
recognition of our efforts.
We look to the future with utmost confidence, as must all
our friends who read this account of our history, remember-
ing we are barely five years old.


Three Arts Festival
PHILLIP PARK, EAST SYDNEY, 1944
{ln conjunction with the Children's Library Movement)
Nov. 30. Official Opening by the Minister for Education.
“A Village Wooing” (Shaw) : Minerva Players.
Dance : Carya Collin.
Music : Phyllis McDonald and Frank Hutchens.
Dec. 2. Bodenwieser Ballet.
Dec. 4. Chamber Music: Conservatorium Ensemble.
Dec, 9. Polish-Australian Ballet.
Dec. 11. “Red Oleanders” (Tagore): Independent Theatre.
Dec. 14. A.B.C. Symphony Concert in the Conservatorium Hall.
Festival of the Arts
CONSERVATOR! UM HALL, SYDNEY, 1946
July 17. A.B.C.’s “Tribute to CEMA” : Town Hall.
Verdi’s Requiem (Conducted by Professor Bernard Hcinze).
July 19. Modern Expressive Ballet: Evelyn Ippen and Bettina
Vernon.
July 20. Official Opening by the Minister for Education.
Pre-Classical and Australian Contemporary Music: Mar-
jorie Hesse, Phyllis McDonald, Stanley Clarkson,
Raymond Hanson.
July 2. Mourning Becomes Electra” : Independent Theatre.
July 4. Polish-Australian Ballet.
July 26. Schools’ Drama Night, with Orchestral Interludes by School
Orchestras.
July 27-. Three Choirs Night: Conservatorium Choir, Sydney Male
Choir, Sydney Folk Song Choir.
July 29. ‘Back to Methuselah,” Part I : Sydney University Dramatic
Society.
July 31. Bodenwieser Ballet.
Aug. 3. Sydney Musica Viva Society.
Chamber Works by Purcell, Beethoven, Schubert.
Aug. 1-15 Exhibition of Australian Art. (At Paling’s Galleries.
Management: Morley and Torda.)


“Candida."
Independent Theatre
Tour of Country
Towns , 1946
Noel Ruble, photo.
Thea Rowe in "Christ-
mas is Coning”
(Traditional English
Nursery Rhyme).
Christian, photo


CEMA’s Work in Child Welfare Institutions
Towards the end of 1945 GEMA was approached by the Superin-
tendent of the Mt. Penang Training School at Gosford with the request
that we introduce the lads to things of cultural merit. The request was
accompanied by a statement that the reaction of the boys was un-
predictable.
As an experiment, three artists en route from Brisbane to Sydney
were asked to break their journey to sing and play at the Training
School. The boys listened with rapt attention to a programme of
songs and piano and violin music by Handel, Schubert, Mozart,
Paganini, and other composers. At the end of their programme the
artists asked the boys: “Now what can you do?” A voice at the back
called: “Bill can sing.” Bill was persuaded, and the evening was
rounded off with some community efforts.
So began a regular flow of programmes to Gosford, interrupted for a
few months in 1946 because we were too busy to give the undertaking
proper attention. The initial visit was soon followed by one from a
drama group from the Leichhardt Technical School, which was received
with great enthusiasm. The school is the proud possessor of a good
hall, the stage being equipped with curtains and lighting by the boys
themselves. Needless to say, they like to see their effects in use, and
take a pride in helping to work them.
A memorable occasion was the visit last Christmas of a choir of
girls singing carols. The boys were persuaded to join in the better-
known ones, and the rafters rang with their lusty singing, which was,
incidentally, word perfect through several verses.
A programme now goes to Gosford regularly every three months,
and with it goes an attempt to get the boys to do things themselves.
The work is being extended, though as yet rather spasmodically, to
other institutions. The A.B.C. Birdman went to “Royleston,” at
Glebe, but as this is only a depot, nothing of a permanent nature can be
undertaken there. Concert groups have gone also to Lynwood Hall
School for Girls at Guildford, and the Training School for Girls at
Parramatta.
Latest, and highly successful venture, was the sending of Tony
Servanto, Dutch puppeteer, not only to Gosford, but to the younger
delinquents at Mittagong. Servanto himself and the staff at both
schools were delighted with the reaction of the boys.
It can be recorded here, too, that we have quite recently sent
Servanto to the Fred Birks Activity School at the Royal Alexandra
(Children’s) Hospital. The lady in charge writes; “We had about
60 children altogether. A number were brought down from the wards
on trolleys and in wdieel chairs. Matron and two of the sisters, the
speech and occupational therapists were amongst the audience. The
children loved every minute and were most responsive. It was good to
watch their absorbed, happy faces.”


Waite & Bull, Sydney
