

frtk
THE POWER
OF __
MOUNTED RIFLEMEN.
ILLUSTRATED
BY THE
PERFORMANCES OP THE BOERS
< rtinr UKMAHUISS W rntS BUHIiS
V
IN THE
TRANSVAAL WAR,
AND
SHERIDAN'S MOUNTED REGIMENTS '
IN THE
GREAT CIVIL WAR IN THE UNITED STATES.
\ .
By E. W. O'SULLIVAN, M.P.
V -
* •
QUEANBBYAN :
,1 * *
PRINTED AT'THE “AGE OFFICE,
JANUARY, 1894,
TJXTTT4PV 1894.




THE POWER
MOUNTED RIELEMEN
ILLUSTRATED
BY THE
PERFORMANCES OF THE BOERS
IN THE
TRANSVAAL WAR,
SHERIDAN'S MOUNTED REGIMENTS
IN THE
GREAT CIVIL WAR IN THE UNITED STATES.
By E. W. O'SULLIV , M.P.
QUBANBEYAN:
PRINTED AT THE “ AGE ” OFFICE,
JANUARY, 1894.




PREFACE.
If Australia is ever subjected to an invasion by
hostile forces, the brunt of resistance will be borne
by our citizen soldiery, and the conflicts in which
they engage will probably take place at certain points
upon the coast or in the adjacent bush. For some
I generations to come at least no great pitched battles
are likely to take place with invaders, for the reasons
that so long as Great Britain commands the seas it
ivill be impossible for any hostile power or combination
of powers to land a sufficient number of troops upon
any portion of the eastern or southern seaboards of
Australia, to fight a pitched battle. Predatory
expeditions, and the seizure of important positions
like Byron Bay, Newcastle, Wollongong, or Twofold
Bay, are, however, morally certain to take place.
To rapidly proceed to the scene of such seizure, and
to move with celerity from point to point in danger,
for the purpose of driving off or capturing the hostile
forces before they have time to entrench and fortify,
will be the function of our defence forces. In work
of this character our Mounted Riflemen will be found
to be of great value, and I doubt not that they will
realise the expectation formed of them. This book is
therefore published with the object of showing what
colonial soldiers can do when fighting in mountain
or hush country. In the conflicts described in its
pages, it will he seen that though the Boers had not


been trained in the regular military fashion they were
more than a match for the British in rifle shooting
and bush fighting. It will he the same if our Mounted
Riflemen should ever come in'o contact with the
trained troops of France , Russia, or Germany, under
like conditions. This arm of the service is one,
therefore, that ought to be encouraged. It utilises two
of the strongest natural habits of the young Australian
—love of horse-riding and shooting —and they, there-
fore, take to the training of Mounted Riflemen with
a vim and a vigour which promises to make them
formidable foes to any body of invaders who may
have the temerity to land upon oar shores. It is a
happy coincidence that we have in Major-General
Hutton, the Commander of our Defence Forces, a
gentleman who , next to Sir Evelyn Jlood, has done
perhaps more than any other man to establish Mounted
Riflemen as a popular and effective branch of the
British Army. It ivas the extraordinary perfor-
mances of the Boers in the Transvaal IVar which
taught Sir Evelyn Wood the value of Mounted
Riflemen, and therefore a description of the combats
which made so much impression upon that able
military commander may not be without a similar
effect upon the military authorities of N. S. Wales,
and thus induce a better consideration for our mounted
riflemen in the future than they have received in the
past. If this object is attained, the author will be
well rewarded fur his pains.
Apia Cottage, Wooillahra,
Sydney, 1894.


Dedic^7lO|^,
MAJOR-GENERAL HUTTON (Commanding the
Defence Forces) ;
MAJOR LASSETTER (Commanding the Regiment
of Mounted Rifles) ;
And to
CAPTAIN DIXIE (Commanding the Queanbeyan
Company), and the Officers and Men
op the latter,
This little work is respectfully dedicated by
the Author.




THE POWER OF MOUNTED RIFLEMEN.
By E. W. O'SULLI , M.P.
INCIDENTS IN THE TRANSVAAL WAR
OF 1880-81.
rjIHE British soldier has proved himself the superior of
JL the French, Russian, and other continental troops on
many a well-fought field. Blenheim, Malplaquet, Salamanca,
Talavera, Waterloo, Inkerraan, and other celebrated
battles attest that beyond dispute. In open battle, in
defending a redoubt, or besieging a fortress, he has no
equal when properly led. But the training of the British
soldier has not been of such a character as to fit him for
immediate success in bush warfare. That was shown at
the beginning of the New Zealand War, and still further
demonstrated in the conflict which took place in the
Transvaal—the country across the Vaal River, in South
Africa—some thirteen years ago. There he had to
confront a different kind of foe to that which his drill and
discipline had prepared him to meet. There, in many a
bloody disaster, the British generals were taught the value
of mounted riflemen (or mounted infantry), who are
splendid shots and accustomed to fight in the bush or on
the mountain side.
The Boers, whom the British soldiers had to fight on the
Transvaal, are white men, and the descendants of Dutch
and French Huguenot settlers at the Cape of Good Hope
and other portions of South Africa. They are graziers
and farmers, who correspond almost in every particular to
our selectors. The word Boer, in fact, signifies a farmer
They are great horsemen, and splendid shots, being armed
with breech loading rifles of the Westley-Richards type.
A long series of conflicts with the Zulus, Basutos, Kaffirs,
and other native races made them a warlike people. They


are also devoutly religious, and staunch Tvepuhlicans. The
Boers present a rough but picturesque appearance in the
field. They invariably travel on horseback, and can fight
either there or on foot. They wear soft felt hats with bands
around them, and carry their rifles slung across their
backs and with their cartridges stuck in belts, which are
slung across their shoulders, breasts and waists. The
uniforms and equipment of our Mounted Itities is, in
fact, an imitation and an improvement of the Boer costume
and’ equipment. The Boers govern themselves in two
small nations, called the Change Free State and the South
African Republic. When the residents of the latter were
threatened with annihilation by the Eulus and Basutos,
the Government of the Transvaal or South African
Republic sought the protection of the British, and became
for a time a dependency of the Crown. This connection
was made, however, without consulting the wishes of the
ma jority of the people, and in a short while the indepen-
dent spirit of the Boers aroused them to reassert their
independence, so they hoisted the old Republican flag and
re-established their government. As the British Govern-
ment declined to accede to this demand, war ensued
between them. At this time there were several British
Garrisons in the inland towns of the Transvaal, who were
besieged by the Boers, and it was resolved by Sir George
Colley, the Governor of Natal, the adjoining colony, and
the commander of the British forces, to send an expedition
to relieve them.
THFi BATTLE OF BRONKHURST SPRUIT.
The force consisted of about 200 men of the 94th
Regiment, commanded by Colonel Anstruther, a well-tried
soldier. He was warned that he would probably be
attacked on the journey, hut the Colonel bravely said he
and his men would give a good account of themselves.
About half-past two in the afternoon of the 20th of
December, 1880, the 94th arrived at a shallow stream
called the Bronkhurst Spruit. The band was playing, a
mounted man was in front, and the men were marching in
loose order near the waggons. Suddenly a considerable
body of the Boers rose up in the bush and ravines around the
British soldiers. Colonel Anstruther immediately called a


h,alt, and the order was passed for the soldiers to close up.
Then one of the Boers, bearing a white flag, came to
Colonel Anstruther and handed him a note from Piet
Joubert and other Boer leaders, telling the Colonel to halt
where he was until a reply had been received from Colonel
Lanyon, who was in Pretoria, to the ultimatum of the
Boers. The message also warned Colonel Anstruther that
if his soldiers advanced beyond the stream the. action would
be taken as a declaration of war. The Colonel replied,
like a true British officer, that he would continue his march
to Pretoria, and gave orders for the rear guard to be
brought up. The Boer leaders gave the Colonel only two
minutes to reply, and on receiving the intimation that he
would continue his march, they at once told their men to
open lire. The Boers immediately poured in a murderous
volley, and picked oil" nearly every British soldier in front.
The British returned the lire, and the battle lasted for
about ten minutes. In that short space of time 120 of
the British were either killed or wounded. Nearly all the
officers were also wounded, Colonel Anstruther being shot
in three places. It was useless to contend against such
odds and such skilled marksmen, so the “ cease fire ” was
sounded and handkerchiefs waved by the 94tb to denote a
surrender. The British officers and men showed wonderful
heroism during those awful ten minutes, when they were
being shot down like dogs ; but they were palpably over-
matched in the bush light, and therefore wisely submitted.
Conductor Egerton wrapped the regimental colours around
his body inside bis vest, and, although wounded, he carried
them safely to Pretoria. Colonel Anstruther died a few
days after the fight. The Boers treated the soldiers kindly
when the battle was over ; but there can be no doubt that
these leaders had deliberately planned an ambush for the
British, and took an unfair advantage of them. This was
the least creditable of all the Boer victories over the
British, and I merely mention it to show what fearful
havoc skilled shots and bush fighters can make in a trained
force in so brief a period.
After the disastrous fight at Bronkhurst Spruit, the
Boers audaciously invaded the colony of Natal, and took
up a very strong position at Laings Nek, in order to
threaten tlie town of Newcastle. The word Nek means


the deflection in the ground between two hills, Laing’s
Nek is the lowest point in an unbroken ridge which con-
nects the Majuba Mountains with the Buffalo River, The
position was admirably chosen by Joubert, the Boer general,
as the Boers by fortifying it could, at the same time com-
mand the only road through the mountainous country
leading to the Transvaal. Sir George Colley therefore
made haste to attack them, in order to clear the road to
Pretoria, the capital of the Transvaal, and relieve New-
castle. Placing the latter in a state of defence, he marched
to within a short distance of Laing’s Nek, and established
a fortified camp in a strong position called Mount Prospect.
His force consisted of 500 of the 58th Regiment, 400 of
the 60th Rifles, 70 of the Mounted Squadron, 120 of the
Naval Brigade, 100 of the 21st Regiment, 110 of the
Artillery with their guns, and 80 of the Natal Mounted
Police. Later on he was reinforced by the 92nd High-
landers, who had just done splendid service in the
Afghanistan War, the 2nd battalion of the 60th Rifles
(722 men), the 15th King’s Huzzars, the 97th, 83rd, and
the 85th Regiments. It will be seen some of the crack
regiments of the British Army were included in the forces.
Before any of these reinforcements reached him, however,
Sir George Colley—seeing that the Boers were increasing
in number every day, and still further fortifying their
camp on Laing’s Nek—determined to attack them at once.
Here he met with another disastrous defeat, in which the
superiority of Mounted Riflemen was made manifest in an
extraordinary degree. He went into the battle with artillery,
cavalry, and infantry, nearly 1400 strong, and after the
repulse only 1100 effectives could be mustered at Mount
Prospect. Skilled riflemen and bush fighters once more
proved their superiority over trained men.
THE BATTLE OF LAING’S NEK.
As I have already pointed out, the Boers had entrenched
themselves at Laing’s Nek, the hollow between the
hills, and they also occupied the hills which ran
in a semi-circle from the Nek to the Buffalo River,
and where they dug trenches or rifle pits. Having
neither artillery nor bayonets, they had to trust to their
rifles alone, and they therefore utilised every rock, boulder,


60th Rifles were laid lifeless on the ground. The moment
a piece of artillery was fired the Boers jumped out from
behind their shelter and pelted the gunners terribly as they
spunged and loaded. Major Brownlow, in command of the
38 mounted men of the British, prepared for a charge, in
order to drive the Beers from their cover, but the latter
met the attack by a terrific volley directed at the horses at
a distance of 150 yards. Immediately half the horsemen
were dismounted, but only one was wounded. The charge
had therefore to be abandoned. Captain Greer, of the
Artillery, was killed early in the day, and nearly all his
men were slain or wounded, while over the plateau lay
scores of lifleraen bars de combat. The rapid firing of the
artillery during the first hour almost exhausted the ammu-
nition, and after that they had to reserve their fire fc’ fear
the Boers might attempt a charge. The Boers gradually
kept creeping up towards the British, crawling through the
high grass, or running from stone to stone. Notwith-
standing the heavy puni-Iynent they had received, the
British stood their ground splendidly, and inflicted some
loss on their assailants, one Boer being shot dead as he
rode on a %vhite horse directing his men. At live o’clock
the rain began to fall—it generally does during or after a
battle. A flag of truce was hoisted by the Boers, and the
British ceased firing for a few minutes, but as the enemy
did not respect the truce they had asked for, the battle
recommenced, and continued till the evening. The Boers-
endeavoured to cut the British off from the river crossing,
but a detachment of the 58th Regiment, under Captain
Hornby, which was coming to reinforce the British, scared
them off. When darkness came on the firing ceased on
both sides, and General Colley determined to retreat to the
camp. Nearly all the artillery horses were killed, but
some of those left by the Mounted Squadron were harnessed
up. The surplus ammunition was destroyed. The wounded
were gathered together on the plateau, to be left behind,
the Rev. Mr. Ritchie and Drs. Megan and McLaine
remaining with them. About 10 p.rn. the troops quietly
left the field, and wended their way towards the river
crossing. Once they lost their way' in the bush, but even-
tually found it again, and reached the camp at Mount
Prospect about dawn, after a very rough experience over


slippery roads. The wounded were all taken to the hospital
at Newcastle, and the dead were buried next day, under a
flag of trace. The Boers, who had suffered more than'
usual m this engagement, were somewhat astonished
next morning to And the British force gone. It appears
that they had drawn off to some farm houses two miles
away. The British loss was 150 killed and wounded*
including Captains Greer and McGregor, Several officers
wen* wounded, and no less than 35 horses were shot during
the conflict.
The battle was a fair stand-up fight, in which the superior
skill of the Boers as marksmen and bush fighters again told
in their favour. After this, the Boers sent a considerable
force into the Colony of Natal, and these took up a strong
position on the Biggarsberg, a range of hills running across
the road between the towns of Ladysmith and Newcastle.
It was another strong position, and the Boers freely ex-
pressed confidence in their ability to destroy the 8000
troops which were being sent to re-inforce General Colley,
under the command of Sir Evelyn Wood. Sir George
Colley was anxious to retrieve his reputation, and he,
. therefore, determined to make another attack upon the
Boers at Laing’s Nek. In furtherance of his design he hit
upon a project worthy of Napoleon, but, unfortunately, not
carried out with the genius of that famous commander.
This was nothing less than a night surprise of Majuba Hill,
a high position overlooking one side of the Boers’ Camp at
Laing’s Nek. How he succeeded in that daring achieve-
ment, anti the fatal and disastrous results which followed
the initial success must be reserved for another chapter.
THE FIGHT AND PANIC AT MAJUBA HILL.
On the afternoon of Saturday, November 26, 1881,
‘General Colley and Colonel Stewart might have been
observed taking furtive glances with their glasses at
Majuba Hill, a steep elevation, about 2500 feet high, which
overlooked the Boers’ camp at Laing’s Nek.
That same night, when “ lights out ” had been sounded
at 8.30, an order was passed round the camp for detach-
ments of the 58th and 60th Rifles, 92nd Highlanders, and
the Naval Brigade to parade at once, with three days
rations. All told, there were 554 fighting men, and about


45 of the medical stiff, stretcher-bearers, etc. A start for
Majuba Hill was made at 10 o’clock, General Colley (it
will be seen that he was a determined fighter) again in
command. After a rough journey through the bush path
the expedition arrived at the foot of the mountain, where
two companies of the 60th (140 men) and one of the 92nd
were ordered to entrench and watch the approaches. The
horses of the officers had to bo left here, and when within
400 yards of the top of the hid, so steep was the ascent
that the General, officers, and men had to fairly climb up
by the aid of the grass. A reconnoitring party had reported
that there were, no Boer sentries on the hill, though there
had been some there a few days before. After the arduous
work of climbing had been completed, the men of the
various regiments were told off to their posts, with
Instructions to entrench and wait till daylight. The Boer
camp was below them, a short distance away, and if a few
rocket tubes or Gatling guns had been brought up, the
British might have annihilated the enemy. It had been
arranged that an attack should be made by the artillery
from Mount Prospect as soon as the day had got dear.
Some of the men on the hill got excited at their proximity
to the foe, and expressed their anxiety to be at them. A few
of the Highlanders shook their fists at the Boers, and called
out, “ Come up here, you beggars.” They were on the sky
line, and were observed by the Boers, just then rising to
sing their Sabbath morning hymns, and as soon as the
alarm was sounded the Boers seized their horses and
galloped around the flanks of their camp, to be out of the
way of the artillery, which they expected would open fire.
Had the Highlanders not exposed themselves, it is more
than probable that the Boers would not have observed
them till several hours later, when the artillery from the
camp would have been playing upon the Boers. As it was,
the Boers having galloped around some of the low hills,
dismounted and advanced towards the base of the mountain
in skirmishing order. Soon the occasional firing of a rifle
was heard, and at G a.ra. the Boers had evidently settled
down to the work of driving the British from Majuba Hill.
They crept from boulder to boulder, and gradually ascended
the hill, firing as they came. For three hours the British
and the Boers shot away at each other; the latter, as usual,


having the best shelter and doing the straightest shooting.
By some strange fatality, the artillery in the camp had not
got into action on the plains below at the time appointed,
and the British had therefore to depend upon their rifle
shooting. They stood their ground well, notwithstanding the
execution which the Boers were doing. General Colley and
his staff walked about among the soldiers, encouraging
them in their shooting. Gradually the Boers crept closer,
and a body of them got within 500 yards of the British,
killing Commander Romilly, of the Naval Brigade, as he
called attention to them. Suddenly a terrific outburst of
fire came from another body of the Boers, who had got
still closer, and Colonel Steward called upon some of the
Highlanders to repulse them ; these were followed by some
of the 58th and Naval Brigade. Before these reserves
could get into fighting line, however, the Boers had
advanced still closer, and delivered another of their fearful
volleys, and the reserves fell back in great disorder. They
rallied on the last standpoint of the defence, behind a ridge
of stones on a small flat, where General Colley and his stall"
happened to be, but this retreat had a very demoralising
effect upon the others. A momentary lull took place in
the firing, and the soldiers peered through the smoke to
ascertain the exact position of the Boers. All that could
be seen of the latter was a number of rifle muzzles and
human faces on the ground, the Boers sometimes firing in
that position. The combatants were now not more than 30
yards apart, and the Boers sent a hail of lead into the
British at that distance. Then came the order to “ fix
bayonets,” which was done, but no order to charge was
ever given. Climbing up the mountain-side, a fresh body
of Boers at that moment took the British in the flank, and
the latter became excited and confused. The order to
deploy was given, but not executed by the men, as disci
pline was evidently on the wane. Then there came another
crushing fire from the Boers in front and on flank, and the
British soldiers moved off in twos and threes. The officers
expostulated, and even threatened to shoot those going
away, but all in vain. Then the rest of the British lost
heart, wavered, and fled over the top and down the side of
the mountain, some of them jumping down a precipice 40
feet deep, in their panic. As the British ran across


the hill the Boers shot many of them down ; they also
poured volleys into the ravines on the side of the mountain,
and kept up a fearful lire upon the fugitives till all who
were'not slain or wounded had disappeared into the bush.
General Colley and a number of his officers were killed at
their posts, and several officers and men were taken
prisoners. The companies of the 60th and 92nd Rifles, who
had been left *at the base of the mountain to guard tin*,
approaches, were driven out of their entrenchments by
another body of Boers, and had to fly in disorder to the
main camp, with the loss of 4 killed, 11 wounded, and 22
prisoners. Later on the Boers attacked a laager (circle of
waggons) on the plains, which was held by some High-
landers and Rifles, and these were also driven into the
fortified camp. The loss of the British in killed and
wounded was 235, and 53 were taken prisoners, making a
total of 285. Six of the officers wore killed, nine were
wounded, and six taken prisoners. The total loss of the
Boers, according to the commander, General Joubert, was
one killed and live wounded.
The artillery from the camp, which ought to have begun
the battle, did not get into action until the Boers had got
possession of the hill, and then it did no damage. The
Boers, in their report of the engagements, say they had
only 450 men in the field.
The surprise of Majuba Hill was a brilliant conception
on the part of General Colley, but it will be seen that he
was not supported from the main camp as he ought to have'
been. His men were exhausted by the ascent of the hill,
and therefore grew careless about the construction of
entrenchments. Yet, even allowing for all this, it is
difficult to account for the defeat and utter rout of the
picked soldiers of the British Army. The only reason that
can be assigned for it is the superior shooting of the Boers,
and the clever and courageous manner in which they fought
their way up the hill from stone to stone had created a
feeling of dread in the British. It is a lesson in bush
fighting that the British has taken to heart, and
hence we see so much attention now bestowed upon
mounted riflemen. In fact, the whole of the conflicts with
the Boers have shown clearly that in forest or bush
warfare the colonial soldiers are superior to the best-


trained troops in the world, and it indicates the kind of
tactics which our volunteers should resort to if New
South Wales , is ever invaded by Russian, French, or
other hostile forces. It is pretty certain that these
, would meet with much the same treatment as that meted
out to the British by the Boers, notwithstanding the*
sneers of those who are apt to try to belittle our citizen
soldiery.
There were several sieges of country towns, in which
the British held their own, but the battle of Majuba
Hill concluded the war in the Transvaal, as the Boers
then consented to acknowledge the suzerainty of Great
Britain with regard to native affairs, provided that they
were allowed to have their own government. There were
at that time fully 12,000 British soldiers under Sir
Evelyn Wood in Natal and the Transvaal, and there can
be no doubt that the Boers would have eventually been
crushed by them if the British Government had not taken
a generous view of the matter, and recognised the claims
of the Boers to a -re-establishment of their Republic.
Mr. Gladstone and Sir Evelyn Wood were much blamed
for this generosity at first, but time has proved the
wisdom of their conduct.
SHERIDAN’S RAID AND THE BATTLE OF
FIVE FORKS.
Our next scene is in the great Civil War in the United
States in 1884.
After the famous battle of Winchester, in which General
Philip Sheridan reformed his army (defeated in his absence)
and utterly routed General Early, the Confederate com-
mander, the same afternoon, Sheridan drove the Confederate
forces out of the Sherrandool Valley. Then ho formed a
mounted force of two divisions and a brigade, with four
pieces of light artillery. With these he made a final dash
at General Early, and took 1300 prisoners. Then he made
a cut across the country to Grant’s army before Richmond,
destroying the James River Canal, breaking down all the
bridges, releasing slaves, and destroying 2,000,000 dollars’
worth of property, in addition to a large amount of war
material. Grant at once placed Sheridan in command of a
division on the south side of Petersburg, which was the key


to Richmond, the Confederate capital. General Lee had
concentrated a large force at Five Forks, a position south-
west of Petersburg, and commanding the important
Southside Railway. Grant despatched Sheridan to capture
this position. Two of the brigades were repulsed. Sheridan
at once sent forward his gallant cavalry and mounted
riflemen, who entrenched themselves. They held their
position all night, and next day the riflemen, fighting on
foot, did yeoman service in the fearful struggle which
ensued. Recognising the importance of the position of
Five Forks, the Confederate commander-in-chief made a
desperate effort the next day to drive the Federals away.
The latter, however, held their ground splendidly, and the
fifth corps joined them. Then Sheridan, calling upon his
men, made a rapid wheel to the left, and took the enemy’s
entrenchments in flank. Generals Ayres and Griffin at the
same time fell like a tornado on the left, and the Con-
federates were driven from the field, losing their artillery,
flags, and a number of prisoners. Not satisfied, with
capturing the enemy’s works, General Sheridan called
out to everyone who attempted to speak to him,
“Smash them; smash them ! We have a record to
make before that sun goes down. I want the
Southside Railways.” And “ smash them ” they
did, The Confederates were driven from the field with a
loss of 7000 men, the mounted riflemen following them up
for miles. It was a battle which may be said to have been
won by the mounted riflemen, for if they had not dis-
mounted and fought on foot like lions till the Fifth corps
arrived, General Lee might have driven the Federals from
the strong position of Five Forks. This battle virtually
decided the fate of Richmond. Lee, seeing that he could
no longer hold out, evacuated Petersburg and Richmond,
and fled with his array towards the west. At every turn
he was confronted by Sheridan with his cavalry and
mounted riflemen, and was several times repulsed by the
latter. At last Sheridan despatched the famous telegram
to General Grant : “ I wish you were here yourself. I
feel confident of captuVing the entire army of Northern
Yiginia if we exert ourselves. I see no escape for Lee.”
Brought to bay at Appomattox, with Sheridan and his
troops about to open fire again, General Lee surrendered


his entire army, and the war soon afterwards came to a
close.
Mounted riflemen played a very active part throughout
that war in other battles than Five Forks, and they were
especially useful in the raids made by both Confederates
and Federals.
It is to General Evelyn Wood that the British chiefly
owe the organisation of their Mounted Infantry forces, and
there can be no doubt that General Wood had been led to
a recognition of their utility through what he had seen and
heard of the Boers. Colonel Hutton (our present Major-
General) served under General Wood at Aldershot, as well
as under Lord Wolseley in Egypt, and he lent great
assistance in the organisation of the new arm of the
service.
In the next great war, especially if that be fought in a
rough country like Afghanistan, Mounted Riflemen will
play a very conspicuous part; and if Australia should ever
be invaded by hostilejlorces, it is this branch of the defence
forces which is likely to do the most execution should the
enemy endeavour to penetrate the country districts. The
Boers taught the British their value, and as the exercise of
mounted riflemen brings into play two of the natural
habits of the Australians—riding and shooting—the buff-
coloured boys, with the brigand-like hats and bandoliers,
are likely to become more formidable year by year.
'inr




QUEANBEYAN:
1894.
“The Age” Steam Printing Works, Monaro St.,


3 1508 00812742 0


