

A.S.P. Pamphlet
THE GRIME OF
CONSCRIPTION
BY H. E. Holland.
Price: THREEPENCE.
SYDNEY:
Marxian Press,
115 Goulburn Street,
1912.


WANTED!
(By “DANDELION” in The International Socialist).
Wanted, fifty thousand MEN
(Cowards, don’t apply!)—
Men with muscle, voice or pen,
Fisher to defy!
Wanted, men of grit and tact,
Pluck, and commonsense,
Eager to defy the Act
Passed for Fat’s “Defence!”
Wanted, honest men, to-day,
Pearce’s jails to fill—
Men of nerve who dare obey
God’s “THOU SHALT NOT
KILL”!
Wanted, men of honor, pledged
Not to cringe nor quail
When they’re dragged to the al-
leged
“Labor” Party’s jail.
Join the heroes of our time;
Help those who abhor
Jingo Handy Andy’s crime
Forcing boys to wdr!
Never mind the Jingo Press
Subsidised to lie;
Nor the parsons bought to bless
Those who make men die!
Men of Labor! Ye who toll
Over land and flood,
Never for your master’s soil
Shed your brothers’ blood!
You are given souls divine.
Upward to aspire;
Wallow not, like martial swine,
In war’s bloody mire!
Mothers! Shall assassins train
Gentle sons to dart
Bayonets, to wring with pain
Widowed mothers’ heart?
Countless millions die through
war;
Have not they sufficed?
Shall the cherished sons you bore
Follow “Bobs” —or Christ?
Shall the robbers’ wars be fought
By the poor they spoil?
Shall the workers, owning nought.
Always fight and toil?
"Labor” tools, beneath contempt.
Capital’s decoys,
Traitors, first themselves exempt,
Then coerce your BOYS!
Let not curst Conscription’s
breath
Blast this country, new,
Spreading loathsome vice and
death,
To enrich a few!
Wanted, MEN In ev’ry clime,
Stubborn men who vow
To resist this traitor’s crime;
Come —you’re wanted NOW!


PREFACE.
The writer of this brochure is so well known as an earnest and
vigorous propagandist of the principles of International Socialism and
Industrial Unionism that the task of introducing any product of his
pen is an easy one. Throughout Australasia, and in every country
where there are active workers in the working-class movement, the
name of Harry Holland Is known and respected. His twenty years
battle against the sham, hypocrisy, shame and injustice of the capitalist
system: his several periods of incarceration in the prisons of this State
for no other crime than that of waging uncompromising war against
capitalism and its hirelings; his sacrifice of comfort, ease, and even
health, for the joy of fighting in the front rank of the great class war,
are enough in themselves to ensure him a respectful hearing. But‘
when he writes, as he does now, with a price upon his liberty, and
the gates of the Bastiles of Capitalism yawning in front of .him, earn-
estly warning his class against the “Crime of Conscription,” surely his
words ought to fire his comrades with enthusiasm and determination
to make this pamphlet circulate in every corner of Australasia. Be-
fore these lines are in the hands of readers, Holland may be in gaol
serving a sentence inflicted by an “Unjust Judge” under a law abso-
lutely out of keeping with the times, and our ideas of the direction
in which progress lies. Whether that be so or not, Harry Holland,
with this pamphlet, will inflict a severe parting blow upon the con-
scription conspirators, and one that will keep them busy solacing their
injuries during the three months that they deem they have silenced,
him.
Let all his co-workers and helpers everywhere see to it that the
“Crime of Conscription” goes into the home of every Australian
worker who is willing to receive it.
W. R. W.


Words by W.R.W.
Drawing by Zif Dunstan.


The Crime of Conscription
Alas! that m e n should be so blind,
And laud as gods these scourges of mankind;
Call a man glorious who has led a host,
And him most glorious who has murdered most!
Chas. Mackay.
No man was ever better for being a soldier; every man has
always been worse for being a soldier; and, as some one else has
written; “There never was a slave but a soldier helped to make
and keep him a slave.” To perpetuate slavery has ever been the
function of military organization. To hold men in wage-slavery
is the fundamental purpose of Australian militarism, for Militarism is
one of the important parts of the machinery of the Class State.
Australia differs from the older countries of civilisation in that
their militarism is world-old, and has formed part of their class rule
and dominion, developing in ferocity from the far-off days of Savage-
dom; often writing in rivers of blood its indelibly shameful record
of the days of barbaric splendor acrossthe pages of mediaeval history;
and, in more recent times, milestoning almost every year of capitalist
civilization with countless deeds of myriad-handed murder, rapine,
devastation and desolation, for the benefit of the ruling few.
It is true that there are stains of red blood on the pages of
our Australian history—stains made in the heart-broken and tear-
dimmed convict days, when the soldier’s voice ruled, and the musket
and bayonet and sword and the brutal triangles and the lash of the
flagellator were the instruments of shame with which the ruling
class enforced its commands. There are, too, the bloodstains that
mark whore heroes fell in the stockade at Ballarat in 1851, when
the Government of that day gave its answer to the moderate de-
mands of the working men in the form of leaden messengers of
death and fixed bayonets. But, British military rule on these shores
apart, we have hitherto had no serious Australian military organisa-
tion; and the irrefutable evidence of wrong and shame that the
story of our convict days conveys to us, and the record of tyranny
culminating in planned and organised murder by the ruling class
that the Ballarat incident furnishes, ought surely to have been
sufficient to warn the Australian working class against the toleration
of any system of militarism whatever. But apparently this is not so.


The rulers of Australia, like the rulers of all other countries, are
essentially class-conscious. They know the use value of an armed
force, officered and controlled by men of their class, in maintaining
the system which makes it possible for them as a class to live with-
out work. And so they have made the Australian Labor Party—and
especially Messrs. Fisher, Hughes and Pearce —their compliant tools
in fastening on the workers of this country a system of conscription—
of forced militarism —that is, in many of its phases, much more
tyrannical and repellant from a working-class viewpoint than that
of the European military countries.
Labor Party apologists (and it is remarkable how almost every
anti-working-class paper hastens to defend the Labor Party’s mili-
tarism against the Socialists’ attack) tell us that the Labor Party's
Defence Act is in accord with the “armed nation” demanded by the
German, Austrian and English Socialists, and the national militia advo-
cated by the Belgian and French Socialists. What these apologists ig-
nore is the fact that militarism has grown with the historical develop-
ment of the countries named, and that the advocacy of a citizen army
there is a vastly different thing to the form of conscription that has been
fastened on us in Australia. Besides, even if we endorsed tho
attitude of those European Socialists who advocate a citizen soldiery
—and it is not the purpose of this pamphlet to endorse that attitude —
we would still be obliged to denounce the Australian Labor Party’s
Conscription, for the former demand that the citizen army shall be
free from military control, while our Labor Party’s conscript army is
officered and organised and controlled in accordance with the worst
traditions of established militarism. Moreover, all the European
Socialist bodies declare in favor of the settlement of international dis-
putes by arbitration.
The Labor Party tells us with pride that the Australian Conscript
Army is, moulded on the lines of the Swiss Citizen Army; and the
“Reformers’ Year Book” (1906) prints this: “It is noteworthy that the
Swiss Army .... has shot down more strikers than any other
army.” Bebel, speaking at the 1904 Amsterdam Congress, said: “Tn
Switzerland, in this short summer only, the citizen army has been
called out six times against the workers, who were making use of
their right to combine and associate—even in many small strikes.”
And, as has been printed and reprinted in the Socialist papers of every
country, the “citizen” soldiers of Switzerland have been used against
strikers in 1869 at Vaud; in 1875, at Goschener, where during a strike
they shot four miners dead and wounded many others; in 1901, at
Simplon; in 1902, at Geneva; in 1904, at La Chaux-de-Fonds; in 1907,
at Yverdon, at Orbe, at Vevey, at Montreux, at Lausanne.
Jack London, Socialist and novelist, sums the soldier’s business up
in this wise:
“Young man, the lowest aim in your life is to be a good soldier.
The good soldier never tries to distinguish right from wrong. Ho
never thinks; never reasons: only obeys. If he is ordered to fire on
his fellow citizens, on his friends, on his neighbors, on his relatives, bo
obeys without hesitation. If he is ordered to fire down a crowded


street where the poor are clamoring for bread, he obeys, and sees the
grey hairs of age stained with red and the life tide gushing from the
breasts of women, feeling neither remorse nor sympathy. If he is
ordered off as one of a firing squad to execute a hero or benefactor,
he fires without hesitation, though he knows the bullet will pierce the
noblest heart that ever beat in human breast. A good soldier is a
blind, heartless, soulless, murderous machine. He is not a man. He
is not even a brute, for brutes only kill in self-defence. All that is
human in him, all that is divine in him, all that constitutes the man,
has been sworn away when he took the enlistment roll. His mind,
conscience, aye, his very soul, are in the keeping of his officer. No
man can fall lower than a soldier —it is a depth beneath which he can-
not go.”
Longfellow, in “The Arsenal at Springfield,” writes:
Were half the power that fills the world with terror,
Were half the wealth bestowed on camps and courts
Given to redeem the human mind from error.
There were no need for arsenals nor forts;
The warrior’s name would be a name abhorred,
And every nation that should lift again
Its hand against a brother’s, on its forehead
Would wear for evermore the brand of Cain.
Still our Labor Party proceeds to compel our working-class boys
to look to “the lowest aim in life”; still we proceed to spend our
millions on military organisation, with never an effort to redeem the
human mind from historical and class error.
Forced militarism has been sneaked into the Australian political
system by easy stages.
The first “Defence Act” was introduced in 1903, when the party
that now calls itself “Liberal” was in power.
Clause 35 of that Act provided that the defence force should
(except in time of war —when men of from 18 to 60 years of age
were to be liable for service) be raised and kept up by voluntary en-
listment, volunteers to serve for not less than two years.
Class considerations predominated, of course, and while the volun-
teer could not fall out until his two years’ term had expired, Clause 17
permitted the officers to resign AT ANY TIME (except during war) by
giving three months’ notice! This class privilege the Labor Party
still extends to the officers, but all the vital portions of the Act
relating to working men and boys have been made more stringent.
Clause 119 of the Constitution Act reads; “The Commonwealth
shall protect every State against invasion and on the application of
the Executive Government of the State against domestic violence.”
Taking class advantage of this, and without protest from the
Labor Party, the Liberals —whose party mounted the Nordenfeldt guns
at the Newcastle coal mines in 1888, sent the mounted troopers,
armed with naked sabres, galloping against the people at Circular
Quay in 1890, barricaded the mines at Broken Hill and garrisoned
them with armed police in 1892, sent armed men against the shearers
in 1893 and 1894, filled Minmi with armed police in 1894, turned


Broken Hill into a police-military garrison in 1909-10, in defiance of
the Constitution Act and without molestation from the Fisher Govern-
ment, and whose crimes against the working class would fill a
volume —drafted the following clause, which now appears as 51 of
the Defence Act:
“Where the Governor of a State has proclaimed that domestic
violence exists therein, the Governor-General, upon the application of
the Executive Government of that State, may, by proclamation, de-
clare that domestic violence exists in the State, and may cal! out
the permanent forces, and in the event of their numbers being in-
sufficient, may also call out such of the militia and volunteer forces
as may be necessary for the protection of that State, and the ser-
vices of the forces so called out may be utilized accordingly for the
protection of that State against domestic violence.”
This clause really means that, if there should be a strike at any
industrial centre —say, Sydney, Brisbane, Newcastle, or Broken Hill —
and if the State Government declared that the strike constituted
“domestic violence,” and demanded that the military be employed
against the strikers, the Federal Government would he compelled
to accede to the demand.
A real Labor Government would have immediately taken steps
to wipe such an infamous possibility as this off the Statute Book.
The Australian alleged Labor Government, on the contrary, coolly
proceeded to make it more infamous.
Every conscript compelled to enlist in the Citizen Forces is also
compelled by ihe Labor Government to take the following oath:
“I swear that I will well and truly serve our sovereign lord the
King as a member of the forces of the Commonwealth of
Australia, and I will resist his Majesty’s enemies and cause his
Majesty’s peace to be kept and maintained, and that I will in all
matters appertaining to my service faithfully discharge my duty
according to law. So help me, God.”
Now, as Mr. Fisher and Mr. Hughes and Senator Pearce, and
many other Labor members have often declared in bygone days when
they posed as "Socialists,” the king is the figurehead of the Class
State. The workers can only emancipate themselves from wage
slavery by abolishing the Class State. The king can only maintain
his kingdom by upholding wage-slavery and the Class State. When
the Class State is abolished, the king himself will be abolished —
as king. The oath of loyalty to the king is, therefore, an oath of
loyalty to the Class State —an oath that the conscript will be disloyal
to his own class; that he will treat his own class as enemies. Every
Socialist is a disloyalist; every Socialist is a Republican. Therefore,
if a Socialist as a conscript should take the foregoing oath, he would
either be committing perjury in the strict reading of the law, or he
would be committing an act of gross treachery to his class. He
would, indeed, be pledging himself to shoot his own father and
mother if ordered to do so. It was in full appreciation of the nature
and spirit of a somewhat similar oath that the German Emperor
was constrained to say to the German conscripts:


“I may call upon you to shoot down or bayonet your own relatives
—father and mother, sisters and brothers. My orders in that respect
must be executed cheerfully and without grumbling. You must do
your duty, no matter what your heart’s dictates may be.”
The Labor Government tolerates no conscientious objections, per-
mits no conscript to say he won’t take an oath he reprobates. If
the conscript who is a Socialist or a Republican or a Christian refuses
for conscientious reasons to take the oath —in other words, if he re-
fuses to commit perjury on the Labor Party’s Bible —under the Labor
Party’s law he may be flung into jail and subjected to inconceivable
indignities.
' Senator Rae sought to relieve the Australian conscript of the
“duty” of shooting strikers, when he moved in the Senate on Novem-
ber 2, 1911:
“The Defence Act should be so amended as to clearly set forth
that the object of creating a Citizen Defence Force based upon uni-
versal compulsory military training and service, is for the purpose of
defending the Commonwealth against possible foreign aggression, and,
therefore, under no circumstances should any person so enrolled
be compelled to bear arms against any fellow Australian citizen not-
withstanding anything contained in the oath of allegiance or in any
other conditions of compulsory service.”
This motion was vigorously contested by Senator Pearce, WHO
SPOKE OFFICIALLY AS THE LABOR PARTY’S REPRESENTA-
TIVE, and who declared, inter alia;
“The defence scheme does not merely mean that we will defend
Australia from foreign aggression, but that we will defend the laws
of Australia, NO MATTER FROM WHERE THE ATTACK MAY
COME, if that attack takes the form of force.
“We have, in order to maintain ourselves as a nation, to uphold
the laws of our nation, NOT ONLY AGAINST FOREIGN AGGRES-
SION, BUT ALSO AGAINST INTERNAL AGGRESSION.
“Therefore, I say that our Defence Force is raised and maintained,
not merely for the purpose of defending the country against foreign
aggression, hut also to defend the laws which have been framed
through Parliament.
“We say that the Defence Force of the Commonwealth has been
raised for the express purpose of defending those laws, and it is a
legitimate thing to use the Defence Force for that purpose.
“At present, as far as I know, THE • ONLY WAY BY WHICH
THE COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENT IS ABLE TO PROTECT
ITSELF OR A STATE FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE IS BY
ITS DEFENCE FORCE.”
The Labor Party’s attitude, as thus voiced by Mr. Pearce, is sure-
ly clear enough. It says that, if it should be found necessary, con-
scripts would be expected to shoot working men on strike. In favor
of this attitude the Liberal Senators rallied to Senator Pearce’s assist-
ance against Senator Rae, and when the vote was taken it showed
four Senators (Rae, Gardiner, Ready and Long) voting in significant
isolation against conscripts being compelled to shoot strikers, and


the rest of the Labor Senators and all the Liberal Senators voting
unitedly in favor of conscripts shooting strikers!
To Senator Pearce, and to every Labor Senator who voted with
him, the worker might well exclaim, with Francis Adams;
Coward! You have made the great refusal! You have won the gilded
praise
Of the wringers of his heart’s blood from the worker’s sunless days,
Of the lord and the land-owner, of the rich man who has bound
Labor on the wheel to break him, strew his rent limbs on the ground.
With a vulture eye aglare on brothers, sisters that he had,
Crying, “TROOPS AND GUNS TO SHOOT THEM IP THE HUNGER
DRIVE THEM MAD.”
This determination of the Labor Party re conscripts and strikers
received further exemplification when the Premier of Queensland
made his recent blank-cartridge shot by demanding from Mr. Fisher
the use of the military against the Brisbane strikers. Of course,
everyone knew that the Q. Premier was only making a political move
for vote-snaring purposes; but still Mr. Fisher’s reply is very worthy
of attention. He intimated clearly that if the occasion warranted
it, his Government would be quite prepared to send the military
against the strikers. This is his official reply:
“Whilst the Commonwealth Government is quite prepared to fulfil
its obligations to the States IP EVER THE OCCASION SHOULD
ARISE, they do not admit the right of any State to call for their
assistance in circumstances WHICH ARE PROPER TO BE DEALT
WITH BY THE POLICE FORCE of the State. The condition of affairs
existing in Queensland do not, in the opinion of my Ministers, warrant
the request of the Executive Government of Queensland contained
in your Excellency’s message being complied with.”
In all these things isn’t there a great lesson and a greater warn-
ing for the Australian working class?
If a conscript cannot conscientiously take the oath, he cannot en-
Jist. If he does not enlist, he is liable, under the Labor Party’s law,
to jail with hard labor for six months! Six months’ hard labor for hav-
ing a conscience—a principle! Six months’ hard labor for refusing to
commit perjury! Truly our Labor Party has been aptly named the
Hard : Labor Party!
If any Socialist or Republican or conscientious religious person
advises (or aids) any conscript to refuse to perform any “duty” re-
quired of him (such, say, as the shooting of his own father or brother
during a strike), he or she is liable to be sent to jail for six months’
hard labor by the “Labor” Government! This is set forth in Clause
75.
If the conscripts are ordered out to shoot down men on strike,
and if any one persuades them to desert rather than commit such
an act of murder; or if any one assists a conscript (who doesn’t want
to stain his hands with blood) to desert; or if anyone knows the
whereabouts of a conscript who has deserted in order to evade doing
murderer’s work, and doesn’t become an informer, but rather aids


or assists the deserter to conceal himself, he or she would be liable
to be jailed by the “Labor” Government for one year with hard labor!
This is provided for in Clause 77.
The present Labor Government is. at this moment, hunting down
deserters from the Australian Navy—men who found the life of hell un-
endurable on the great murder-ships of capitalism; hunting them
down with human bloodhounds, to whom the Government pays blood-
money for every victim that is dragged back to slavery and torture,
and the £5 or more that is so paid as blood money is deducted from
the paltry sum doled out as wages to the victim!
Clause 98 provides for the infliction of the death sentence for
mutiny. Thus, it a strike occurred at Newcastle or any other indus-
trial centre, and the miners’ sons who were conscripts were marched
out against the strikers, and if they refused to kill their own fathers
when ordered to do so by their officers, they could be tried by court
martial for mutiny, and shot for refusing to obey orders. In this
matter the Labor Party has abolished trial by jury, and instituted
trial by class-trained, class-biased officers. And Clause 102 declares
that any member of the Defence Force may be tried and punished
by court martial.
This is copying the letter and the spirit of the British Army Act,
which provides: “Every person subject to military law who commits
the following offence: that is to say, disobeys in such a manner as to
show a wilful defiance of authority any lawful command given per-
sonally by his superior officer in the execution of his office, whether
the same is given orally or in writing, or by signal or otherwise, shall
on conviction by court martial, be liable to suffer death, or such less
punishment as in this Act mentioned.”
In France and Germany—countries whose militarism was born
away back in the days of savagedom and grew and developed along
with barbarism; countries where political capitalism of the
Blue-Black bloc and the bourgeoisie rules, and no “Labor” Party holds
the reins of power—a conscript doesn’t enter upon service until he is 20
years of age; in Switzerland he commences at 18 years of age. In no
other conscript country have they dragged in the 12 to 14-year-old
schoolboys. In no other conscript country do they put a gun in the
hands of a boy of 14 and send him strutting the streets in military
uniform. It has been left to the Australian “Labor” Party to do this—
to drive boys from the home and the school; to start to revive all
the latent blood-lust that lingers as a legacy from the brute past.
One of the principal achievements of “Labor as Lawmaker” —that
is, the Labor Party as Lawmaker —in 1910, almost immediately after
its great victory at the polls, was the extension of the tentacles of
the military octopus. The term of compulsory training service was
lifted from two to seven years! The boy of from 12 to 14 was dragged
in and called a Junior Cadet, and was required to drill for 120 hours
in the year—nearly three working weeks. The boy of from 14 to 18
became a Senior Cadet, and was required to put in four whole days,
12 half days, and 24 night drills. Young men from 18 to 25 years
became members of the Citizen Forces, with a liability of 16 whole day
drills, eight of which must be in camps of continuous training.


The cadets get NO PAY. The burden of the deductions from tneir
wages for time lost attending drill falls on them and their working-class
parents; for special care has been taken to insert a proviso that the
employers shall not be required to pay a conscript any wages for
time so lost. We are thus confronted with the spectacle of an alleged
Labor Government, supported by the strength of trade (or craft)
unionism compelling working-class boys to learn how to kill working
men in defence of their masters’ property, and refusing to pay them
for the work they do! Who can wonder that our talented writer,
“Dandelion,” should feel constrained to tell us that the flag that floats
over the citadel of political “Labor”-on-the-make is the Non-Union Jack?
On the other hand, when certain drills and encampments eventuate,
they are made to fall on Saturdays and holidays, so as to inconvenience
the employer as little as possible; and thus what time the boys are
made to work for nothing, they are robbed of their holidays and play-
hours —already far too limited!
Clause 134 of the Defence Act originally read:
“No employer shall prevent, or attempt to prevent, any employee
who is serving, or liable to serve, in the Cadets or Citizen Forces from
rendering the personal service required by him, or from attending any
camp of instruction appointed to be held by the Head-quarters of the
Commonwealth or any Military District, or in any way penalise, or
attempt to penalise, any employee for rendering or being liable to
render such personal service, or for attending such camp, either by
reducing his wages or dismissing him from his employment or in any
other manner:
“Provided that this section shall not be construed to require an
employer to pay an employee for any time when he is absent from
employment for the purpose of training.
"Penalty: One hundred pounds.”
In 1911, without anyone knowing what was being done, the Labor
Party sneaked in a far-reaching amendment, which added the words
“parent or guardian” after the word “employer” in the first line; and
the penalty of £lOO provided by the earlier Capitalist Government for
the wealthy employer was made by the Labor Government to apply
to the case of the wage-working parent!
This is another of the achievements boasted of by the Labor
Party in the record headed “Labor as Lawmaker!”
So determined were the members of the Labor Government that
a fine of not less than £lOO should be inflicted on working-class
parents who refused to let their children learn the trade of murder
that they sent a barrister of the Supreme Court to the Glebe Police
Court to insist, in the case against the writer, that the magistrate
had not power to go below the £lOO minimum!
Such a fine as this the rich man could always pay; but in every
case it would mean certain jail for the working man! And, again, it is
a “Labor” Party law!
Clause 135 makes a boy of 12 years of age (and upwards) liable
to a penalty of not less than £5 and as high as £lOO, if he fails to
attend the required number of drills.


The “Liberals” who made the original Act' gave us a class con-
structed measure, but even they were not sufficiently shameless to
fix legal responsibility on schoolboys of 12 to 18 years, and a proviso
was added to Clause 135 as follows: “No penalty shall be recoverable
against a cadet under this section until the end of the year in which
he attains the age of 18 years.”
The Hugheses and Pearces and Fishers of the Labor Party re-
fused to tolerate this; and in 1911 they enacted that boys of from
12 to 18 years should be held legally and criminally responsible; and
in the case of both the writer at Sydney and Alf. Giles at Broken Hill,
the boys were prosecuted as well as the parents, although the Labor
Government had been previously notified that the parents would not
permit the boys to drill. Which demonstrates that part of the policy of
the so-called Labor Government is to jail young boys for acts done
by their parents!
Sub-clauses 4,5, 6, and 7 of Clause 135 provides that in addition
to any penalty (fine or jail or both) inflicted on the defaulting boy, he
may be committed to the custody of military officers, who may re-
lease him (for the convenience of his employer apparently) for such
periods as they think fit and may call upon him to return to custody
at stated times, and if he fails to return may arrest him anywhere
with or without warrant.
This is a monstrous power to bestow upon military officials.
Confinement under military law in the custody of officers, where
the boy is deprived of every vestige of protection, is certainly far
more objectionable than confinement in a jail, especially when the
character of quite a number of the officers employed by the Labor
Government is taken into consideration. An officer, under such condi-
tions, may strike and otherwise illtreat a boy, and if the lad strikes
back he renders himself liable to severe penalties—to long terms of
imprisonment, and possibly to the death sentence.
The British Army Act —the provisions of which certainly apply to
permanent soldiers in Australia, and which could easily be made to
reach the cadets —sets forth that any person subject to military law
who “strikes or uses or offers any violence to his superior officer
shall, upon conviction by court martial, be liable to suffer death,” etc.
The Labor Party’s Defence Act gives the officers power to inflict
fines and other penalties on the boys WITHOUT ANY FORM OF
TRIAL WHATEVER.
In Clause 136 of the Defence Act the Labor Party decrees that
any boy who defies the provisions of the Defence Act shall be boy-
cotted and blacklisted from public employment; and to facilitate this,
the boys now employed by the Labor Government are being compelled
to produce certificates from military officers to prove that they are at-
tending drill!
The working class should never forget that those heroic parlia-
mentarians (who are prepared to shed the last drop of blood of the
schoolboys in defence of this magnificent country) FIRST OF ALL
EXEMPTED THEMSELVES,


Originally, other than in the case of patriotic parliamentary men,
judges, parsons, and other non-producing and worthless members of the
community, there was no legal exemption whatever from military train-
ing; but in 1910 the Labor Government, in compliance with the com-
mand of the church, inserted a clause exempting theological students!
But no exemption was provided for the useful worker with con-
scientious objections.
Clause 64 provides that the Governor-General may, in time of
war, authorise any officer to assume control of any railway for trans-
port for naval and military purposes; and it only requires a general
railway strike throughout Australia, and domestic violence proclaimed,
and domestic violence finally interpreted into civil war, to make it
possible for Mr. Fisher to repeat Briand’s infamy by ordering the con-
scripts to man the railways under military law —to make scabs of them
by force of military law, with the death penalty menacing them if
they should refuse.
Clause 141 might have been inserted as a humorous contribution.
It declares that any person who has been convicted of any disgraceful
or infamous crime or anyone of notoriously bad character shall not be
eligible to enter the Defence Force. As if participation in any scheme
of murder did not constitute a disgraceful and infamous crime and
render the participants liable to be regarded as of notoriously bad
character.
There is a fiction abroad that the conscripts are never to be
employed outside Australia. But the Act declares that boys can be
drafted from the land forces into the naval forces at the will of the
military authorities; and, as W.R.W. pointed out in a recent number of
“The International Socialist,” when speaking recently at Nowra,
Senator Pearce described how he, representing Australia, had
met the representatives of England, Canada, South Africa,
and New Zealand (in secret, of course) during his “Coro-
nation” trip, and how an arrangement had been entered into
for the naval forces of the “oversea dominions” to act together under
certain circumstances. This is but the thin edge of the wedge, and
certainly the lad who is foolish enough to become a conscript soldier
may, when England’s rulers enter upon their next robber war, find
himself pressed for service abroad, to leave his bones rotting in a far-
off land.
These are only some of the striking features of this remarkable
anti-working class law, made and administered by our alleged Labor
Party.
Under its provisions sons of working men are lined up and
ordered about, and made to race around, and sworn at, and often
struck, by officers drawn from the ranks of the master class.
Under the Conscription Act, scores of boys have been prosecuted
in the police courts and fined, and some of them have been herded with
criminals and driven to Darlinghurst Jail in the Labor Party’s “Black
Maria.”
Evidence has been given by the boys themselves of the manner
in which they have been ill-treated by the officers, but the magistrates
always believe the officers as against the boys,


The sons of the wealthy—hundreds of them —are refusing drill;
but these are never prosecuted. In every case so far prosecutions
have been directed against working-class boys and parents.
Where working-class boys have been prosecuted, and have stated
on oath that they were prevented by their employers from drilling, no
prosecution has been instituted against the employer.
Neither the working-class boys, on whom the immoral burden of
the whole scheme falls, nor their parents were consulted about this
monstrous law; the workers as a class were never consulted about
it. It is the illegitimate product of the interests that gave birth to the
British press-gang system.
It is indeed doubtful if the so-called Defence Force is even consti-
tutional under our class-made Constitution Act; but, if it is, this is
only so by reason of the Press Gang System and other laws that would
have to be digged from the graves of long-rotten kings. And surely
this is not something on which even an alleged Labor Party might
pride itself.
If it should be conceded that a “Defence Force” is necessary,
would not the first thought be that the defenders should be the men
and not the little boys? And would not the second thought be: Let
those who own Australia fight for Australia? The workers do not
own Australia. The capitalists are the owners; and, through the
politicians (whom they also own), they desire to do their fighting by
proxy—in other words, to make the workers they rob fight to preserve
the system under which they are robbed. The capitalists and their
agents, the Labor politicians, have built their Conscription Scheme on
the assumption that the Australian workers are wholly ignorant as
a class.
The British unionists —on strike for 30s. a week —hooted the uni-
form of the Australian cadets whenever they saw it during the Coro-
nation proceedings. They knew what it meant. Only just previously
British capitalism had brought its message to the workers with ball
cartridge, and it was a message of bloodshed and murder.
The Amalgamated Miners’ Association at Broken Hill refused
to take part in the local Hospital demonstration if the Labor Party’s
cadets marched in the procession; the same union denounced the
Conscription Act as a politically propped military scheme of the capi-
talists devised to wreck the aims and activities of the organised
workers, and advised the conscripts to remember their class interests
and point their rifles accordingly; the Barrier Labor Federation de-
manded that Mr. Josiah Thomas should move for the repeal of the
Defence Act; the Newcastle and Maitland miners, in spite of the
organised efforts of the two sitting Labor members (Messrs. Watkins
and Charlton) backed by the Delegate Board, and also in spite of the
fact that the working-class side was not permitted to be stated, re-
pudiated the Conscription Act by a majority of over 1500 votes!
The 1912 Conference of the Australasian Socialist Party, held at
Adelaide, denounced the vindictive and vicious prosecutions of work-
ing-class boys who conscientiously refuse to accept service under
the Conscription Act, and directed the attention of the working class


to the fact that when the “Labor” Party failed In its efforts to make
trained murderers of the sons of the workers, it at once set out to
make criminals of them.
The same conference recommended that all working-class boys
who are liable for conscript service should refuse to take part in any
drill or parade, that they should refuse to drill if committed by the
courts to military custody, that working-class parents should refuse
to permit their sons to drill, and that no fines whatever should be
paid by either parents or boys.
The evidence tendered by the officers themselves in the police
courts when endeavouring to jail the boys shows that the drill grounds
and rooms are often orgies of larrikinism.
Larrikinism, ruffianism and immorality inevitably belong to
militarism.
For the sake of the boys’ own moral welfare, working-class parents
cannot afford to permit their sons to drill.
For the sake of their class emancipation working men cannot
afford to let their sons train for murder —the murder of the working
men themselves.
It is not in any sense an exaggeration to say that more than
50,000 boys are either wholly or partly refusing drill.
THE SOCIALISTS COUNSEL ALL WORKING CLASS BOYS TO
REFUSE DRILL.
The Socialists counsel all working-class parents to refuse to per-
mit their sons to drill.
The Australasian Socialist Party—the fighting, revolutionary move-
ment of the conscious working class in Australia —in its Principles and
Policy declares itself uncompromisingly hostile to ALL forms of
militarism, recognising that while the present Class State exists, the
armed forces will be used to buttress up capitalism and to hold down
the workers. All the energies of the working class, it proclaims, can
be most profitably utilized in building up our industrial and political
organizations, which shall finally render war impossible, and which
organizations, by international affiliations and alliances between the
working classes of all nations, are even now the chief guarantee of
the peace of the world.
In the Socailist manifesto to the Conscript Boys of Australia, pub-
lished in July of last year, Dora B. Montefiore wrote:
“Now is the' time to protest against the folly of this compulsory
training in organised murder. Now is the time to make up your minds
NEVER TO TAKE THE MILITARY OATH, which deprives you of
will and conscience. . . . The army you lads should enlist in is
the Industrial Army. The only enemy you have to fight is Capitalism,
and the only State of the future under which you working lads will
not be robbed of the greater part of the wealth your labor creates
will be the Socialist State. Workers of the world, instead of taking
payment from the capitalists to fight each other, should unite to
fight the capitalists, and take over for themselves the land, work-
shops, mines, and factories; and produce the wealth they are creating
for their own uses, instead of for the few who now exploit and govern


them, and who, In the organising of this compulsory military training,
are only preparing an army of legalised murderers to defend their
stolen wealth.”
In concluding this booklet, let me repeat the words I wrote, from
the verandah of the Coast Hospital, in “An Open Letter to the Right
Hon. Andrew Fisher, M.P., P.C.,” and which appeared in the anti-mili-
tarist number of “The International Socialist” of September 23, 1911:
“You have but heard the rumbling of the Anti-Militarist, Anti-
Capitalist Revolt. It is a rumbling that is destined to grow Into a roar
of class-conciousness. We, the Revolutionary Socialists, shall propa-
gate the idea of the general strike to block you and the class whose tool
you are from marching armed forces against the workers of this or
any other country. You see, we Socialists are not patriots! We will
propagate the idea of desertion on the part of the conscripts when
you and the class whose tool you are desire them to march to the
killing of other workers. You see, we Socialists are not murderers!
We will drill into our sons a knowledge of ‘where their class interests
lie, and in which direction they should turn their rifles’ on the day when
you send them out with ball cartridge against the workers on strike;
and our teaching will make that a dangerous day for your poppinjay
officers, who will order them to murder their fellow men. You see,
we are not traitors to our class! We will teach our boys to remem-
ber on the day you want them to make war on the men of other coun-
tries, whether in support of the unjust wars of England or not, that
insurrection Is more Justifiable than war! You see, we know the game
you are capable of playing! ... We shall teach your baby army
—your boy conscripts—how utterly criminal is your murder scheme,
how reprehensible your treatment of those lads you are forcing into
conscription, and how justifiable our propaganda in the direction of
what the capitalist press (which upholds you) describes as inciting
to insubordination.”
The workers can stop all wars when they are internationally
organised as a class. There is thus no need (other than the interests
of the robber class) for the workers to participate in military organisa-
tion.
The one and only Justification that could exist for working-class
military organisation in Australia would be to shoot the Capitalists of
Australia if they should rebel against the workers on- the day tM
workers decide to TAKE AND HOLD the land and "1
duction stolen from the workers, and now in the 1
talists. But military organisation Is really unneces
pose, provided we have scientific and revolutiona
political organisation.
To propagate these ideas, and also to demand
infamous Conscription Act, this pamphlet Is writtt
membered that History has furnished no instance o
law disappearing from the Statute Book of any c
immorality was first challenged and its penalties d *
consciously upright and intelligently fearless among
ly, there is little hope of securing the repeal of the SYDNEY.


immoral, and criminal law of Conscription until by breaking it-—by
declining to become parties to its wickedness —we force a recognition
of it’s gross immorality and criminality and its general anti-working-
class nature upon the working-class community.
LET US, THEN, AS HONEST MEN AND WOMEN BREAK THIS
CLASS-MADE LAW, at the same time demanding its repeal.
For the sake of our class, our children, and our children’s children,
let the Australian working-class declare: NO CONSCRIPTION SER-
VICE; NO DRILL —whether in the drill hall, on parade, or in military
custody—and NO FINES PAID.
So shall we break down the most remarkable and at the same
time the most infamous Statutory crime ever perpetrated against the
working class by the ruling class of any country; and, so shall we
help to make possible a world with neither soldier nor slave —the world
of Ingersoll’s vision, “where thrones have crumbled and kings are
dust, and the aristocracy of Idleness has perished from the earth;
A WORLD AT PEACE, adorned with every form of art, with music’s
myriad voices thrilled, while lips are filled with words of love and
truth —a world in which no exile sighs, no prisoner mourns; a world
on which the gibbet’s shadow does not fall; a world where labor reaps
its full reward, where work and worth go hand in hand; ... a world
without the beggar’s outstretched palm, the miser’s heartless stony
stare, the piteous wail of want, the livid lips of lies, the cruel eyes of
scorn;” ... a world in which “life lengthens, joy deepens, love
canopies the earth; and over all, in the great dome, shines the eternal
star of human hope.”
Then, as Robert Blatchford has sweetly written:
When our bodies are dust, in the wilderness blowing,
When our souls are red blooms, ’mid green foliage glowing,
When our names ’neath Oblivion’s poppies have perished,
Happy children of children we fathered and cherished
Shall behold noble vistas of freedom before them
On the roads we built well, for the love that we bore them.
tarxiau Print., Goulburu-st., Sydney.


THE AUSTRALASIAN
SOCIALIST PARTY
(Affiliated with the International Socialist Bureau)
Headquarters; 115 Goulburn Street, Sydney
With Branches in Various States.
Stands for the Socialisation of all the means of Production,
Distribution, and Exchange.
Its methods are Revolutionary action on the Political Field and
Revolutionary Unionism on the Industrial Field.
For Particulars as to forming Branches etc., write to
The General Secretary,
A.S.P.,
274 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.


The Leading Anti-Militarist Paper.
. THE .
INTERNATIONAL
. SOCIALIST .
Official Organ of
THE AUSTRALASIAN SOCIALIST PARTY.
Published at 115 Goulburn Street, Sydney.
Edited by H. E. HOLLAND.
Written by the best working class and literary talent in the
Commonwealth, and contributed to by the World’s
Socialist Writers.
The International Socialist
is the Australian Journal of Revolutionary Socialism and
Industrial Unionism.
Subscription; 4s. per year.
O. W. JORGENSEN,
Manager.
