



BXASfWKB’S
ETNA SUSS IKS Il'IM SUM,
136, BOUSES STRESJT, EAST,
FILTERS, all sizes. PORUS WATER MONKEYS.
Wine Coolers, Pearl White American Dinner
and Breakfast Ware,
Riel} Cut and Pressed Glasses, in Claret Jugs, &c,
CHINA BREAKFAST AND TEA SETS.
TABLE SETS FOE LARGE OS SMALL FAMILIES,
Toilet and Kitchen Ware in great variety, ffc.
Store sind Hotel Keepers well supplied.
English Stone Ginger-beer-boltles and Glass Lemonade-
bottles in air quantity.
LEICESTER’S PATE?IT FLOATING BALL
WASHIHG MACHINES,
k HE calculated to wash from six to twenty-four dozen clothes per hour*
jGL with a saving: of half the soap, water, and firing. / Bolliug clothes
may also be dispensed with.
Purchasers can lest the machine daily at twelve o’clock, on the pre-
mises, 202, Bourke Street, East, hot water being provided.
Melbourne Hospital, 14th November, 1857.
I consider it for all purposes of cleansing linen everything that can be desired.
J. WILLIAMS, House Steward.
50, King William Street, Col ling wood, 4th December, 1857.
Pdfcrnitme to communicate to you my entire satisfaction with the machine purchased
from you a few weeks ago. If it is found such a boon in a small family of four per-
sons, I can readily understand how great a blessing it will prove in a much larger
family. Strongly recommending these Machines, believe me, &e.
Caroline Cl arson,
204, Bourke Street East. 17th December, 1857.
Having proved the value of your Washing Machines, I shall strongly recommend it
to all my personal acquaintance whose e ject is to study economy.—H. Barker.
Melbourne, 22nd December, 1857.
I have much pleasure in testifying to the very efficient manner your Patent/Wash-
ing Machine has washed every description of dirty clothing at my house.
John Miscamble, Vet. Surgeon,
24, King William Street, Coiling wood, 7tb Jan lB5B,
Mr. Leicester,— Sir, I feel hound strongly to recommend the use of your Patent
Washing Machine. On our first trial, and in about three hours, we turned out the
fortnight swash, cleaner than could have been effected by the most skilful haridwasher,
and when fully accustomed to the operation, l am sure the same amount of work can be
dispatched in much less time.- I am. &c., Tkos. Reid.


|JlWfulfil
THOUGHTS OH THE LAST BATTLE.
A SERMON
Delivered on Sunday Evening, Mat 13, 1855, by the
REV. C. H. SPURGEON,
AT EXETER HALL, STRAND.
c ‘ The sting of death is sin; and the strength off sin is the law. But thanks be unto God, which
giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.”’—l Cor. xv. 56, 57.
*While the Bible is one of the most poeticall of hooks, though its language is unutter-
ably sublime, yet we must remark how constantly it is true to nature. There is no
straining of a fact, no glossing over a truth.. However dark may be the subject, while
it lights it up with brilliance, yet it does nott deny the gloom connected with it. If you
will read this chapter of Paul’s epistle, so jusstly celebrated as a master-piece of language,
you will find him speaking of that which is to come after death with such exultation
and glory, that you feel, “If this be to die, then it were well to depart at once.” Who
has not rejoiced, and whose heart has not been lifted up or filled with a holy fire while
he has read such sentences as these : “In a moment, in the twinkling of aii eye, at the
last trump : for the trumpet shall sound, ancd the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and
we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal
must put on immortality So when this conniption shall have put on incorruption, and
this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that
is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. 0 death, where is thy sting ? 0 grave
where is thy victory ?” Yet with all that majestic language, with all that bold flight of
eloquence, he does not deny that death is a gloomy thing. Even his very figures imply
it. He does not laugh at it; he does not say, “ Oh, it is nothing to die ;” he describes
death as a monster ; he speaks of it as having a sting ; he tells us wherein the strength
of that sting lies; and even in the exclamation of triumph he imputes that victory not to
unaided flesh, but he says, “ Thanks be to* God who giveth us the victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ.”
When I select such a text as this, I feel that I cannot preach from it. The thought
o’ermasters me ; my words do stagger ; thiere are no utterances that are great enough to
convey the mighty meaning of this wondrous text. If I had the eloquence of all men
united in one, if I could speak as never man spake, (with the exception of that one
godlike man of Nazareth) I could not compass so vast a subject as this. I will not
therefore pretend to do so, but offer you such thoughts as my mind is capable of pro-
ducing.
To night we shall speak of three thiings : first, the sting of death; secondly, the
strength of sin; and thirdly, the victory offaith
I. First, the sting of death . The aipostle pictures death as a terrible dragon or
monster, which coming upon all men, musff be fought with by each one for himself: He
tells us of no bridge across the river Death ; he does not give us the faintest hope that it
is possible to emerge from this state of existence into another without dying: he des-
cribes the monster as being exactly in ouir path, and with it we must fight, each man per-
sonally, separately, and alone ; each man imust die ; we all must cross the black stream ;
each one of us must go through the iron gate. There is no passage from this world into
another without death. Having told us, then, that there is no hope of our escape, he
braces up our nerves for the combat; butt he give us no hope that we shall be able to
. slay the monster ; he does not tell us thatt we ca i strike our sword into his heart, and so
overturn and overwhelm death; but. polluting to the dragon, he seems to say, “ Thou
«&nst not slay it, man; there is no hopm that thou shouldst ever put thy foot upon its


THOUGHTS ON THE LAST BATTLE
»eck and crush its head; but one thing can be done—it has a sting which thou mayest
extract; thou canst not crush death under foot, but thou mayest pull out the sting which
is deadly ; and then thou needst not fear the monster, for monster it shall be no longer,
but rather it shall be a swift winged angel to waft thee aloft to heaven.” Where, then,
is the sting of this dragon ? Where must I strike ? What is the sting ? The apostle
tell us that “ the sting of death is sin.” Once let me cut off that, and then, though death
may be dreary and solemn, I shall not dread it; but holding up the monster’s sting, I
shall exclaim, “ 0 death, where is thy sting ? 0 grave, where is thy victory ?” Let us
now dwell upon the fact, that “ the sting of death is sin.”
1. First, sin puts a sting into death from the fact that sin brought death into the
world . Men could be more content to die if they did not know it was a punishment. I
suppose if we had never sinned there would have been some means for us to go from this
world to another. It cannot be supposed that so huge a population would have existed,
that all the myriads who have lived from Adam down till now conld ever have inhabited
so small a globe as this ; there would not have been space enough for them. But there
might have been provided some means for taking ns off when the proper time should
come, and bearing us safely to heaven. God might have furnished horses and chariots of
fire for each of his Elijahs’; or as it was said of Enoch, so it might have been declared of
each of us, “He is not, for God hath taken him.” Thus to die, if we may call it death,
to depart from this body and to be with God, would have been no disgrace ; in fact, it
would have been the highest honour : fitting the Ipftiest aspiration of the soul, to live
quickly its little time in this world, then to mount and be with its God; and in the
prayers of the most pious and devout man, one of his sublimest petitions would be, “ 0
God, hasten the time of my departure, when I shall be with thee.” AVhen such sinless
beings thought of their departure they would not tremble, for the gate would be one of
ivory and pearl—not as now, of iron—the stream would be as nectar, far different from
the present “ bitterness of death.” But alas! how different! Death is now the punish-
ment of sin. “In the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.” “In Adam all
die.” By his sin every one of us become subject to the penalty of death, and thus, being
a punishment, death has its sting. To the best men, the holiest Christian, the most
sanctified intellect, the soul that has the nearest and dearest intercourse with God, death
must appear to have a sting, because sin was its mother. 0 fatal offspring of sin, I only
dread thee because of thy parentage ! If thou didst come to me as an honour, I could
w r ade through Jordan even now, and when its chilling billows were around me I would
smile amidst its surges ; and in the swellings of Jordan my song should swell too, and the
liquid music of my voice should join with the liquid swellings of the floods, “ Hal-
lelujah ! It is blessed to cross to the land of the glorified.” This is one reason why the
sting of sin is death.
2. But I must,take it in another sense. “ The sting of death is sin :”—that is to say,
that which shall make death most terrible to man will be sin , if it is not Jor given If
that be not the exact meaning of the apostle, still it is a great truth, and I may find it
here. If sin lay heavy on me and were not forgiven—if my transgressions were unpar-
doned—if such were the fact, (though I rejoice to know it is not so) it would be the very
sting of death to me. Let us consider a man di ing, and looking hack on his past life’:
he will find in death a sdng, and that s&ng will be his past sin, Imagine a conqueror’s
death bed. He has been a man of blood from his youth up. Bred m the camp, his lips
were early set to the bugle, and bis hand, even in infancy, struck the drum. Fie had a
martial spirit; he delighted in the fame and applause of men ; he loved the dust of battle
and the garment rolled in blood. He has lived a life of what men call glory. He has
stormed cities, conquered countries, ravaged continents, overrun the world. See hi*
banners hanging in the hall, and the marks of glory on the escutcheon. He is one of
earth’s proudest warriors. But now he comes to die; and when he lies down to expire
what shall invest his death with horror? It shall be his sin. Methinks I see the
monarch dying; he lies in state; around him are his nobles and his councillors; but
there is somewhat else there. Hard by his side there stands a spirit from Hades ;it is
the soul of a departed woman. She looks on him and says, “Monster! my husband
was slain in battle through thy ambition : I was made a widow, and my helpless orphans
and myself were starved.” And she passes by. Her husband comes, and opening wide
his bloody wounds, be eries, “ Once I called thee monarch; but by thy vil® covetousness


THOUGHTS ON THE LAST BATTLE*
thou didst provoke an unjust war. See here these wounds— l gamed them in the aeige.
For thy sake I mounted first the scaling ladder; this foot stood upon the top of the wall,
and I waved my sword in triumph, hut in hell I lifted my eyes in torment. Base wretch,
thine ambition hurried me thither” Turning his homed eyes upon him, he passes by.
Then up comes another, and another, and another yet: waking from their tombs, they
stalk around his bed and haunt him ; the dreary procession still marches on, looking at
the dying tyrant. He shuts his eyes, but he feels the cold and bony hand upon his fore-
head ; he quivers, fcr the sting of death is in his heart. “ 0 Death !” says he ; “to leave
this large estate, this mighty realm, this pomp and power—this were somewhat, but to
meet those men, those women, and those orphan children, face to face; to hear them
sa y in o- “ Art thou become like one of us?” while kings whom I have dethroned, and
monarchs whom I have cast down shall rattle their chains in my ears, and say, “ Thom
wast our destroyer, but how art thou fallen from heaven, 0 Lucifer, son of the morning!
how art thou brought down as in a moment from thy glory and thy pride !” There you
see the sting of death would be the man’s sin. It would not sting him that he had to die,
but that he had sinned, that he had been a bloody man, that his hands were led with
wholesale murder—this would plague him indeed, for “ the sting of death is sin.”
Or suppose another character—a minister. He has stood before the world, proclaim-
ing something which he called the gospel. He has been a noted preacher : the multitude
have been hanging on his lips ! they have listened to his words ; before his eloquence
a nation stood amazed, and thousands trembled at his voice. But his preaching is over ;
the time when he can mount the pulpit is gone ; another standing-place awaits him,
another congregation, and he must hear another and a better preacher than himself.
There he lies. He has been unfaithful to his charge. He preached philosophy to charm
his peonle, instead of preaching truth and aiming at their hearts. And as he pants upon
his bed!, that worst and most accursed of men—for surely none can be worse than he—
there comes up one, a soul from the pit, and looking him in the face, says, “ I came to
thee once trembling on account of sin, I asked the road to heaven, and thou didst say,
*Do such and such good works,’ and I did them, and am damned. Thou didst tell me an
untruth ; thou didst not declare plainly the word of God.” He vanishes only to be
followed by another : he has been an irreligious character, and as he sees the minister
upon his death-bed, he says, “ Ah! and art thou here ? Once I strolled into thy house
of praver, but thou hadst such a sermon that I could not understand. I listened; I
wanted to hear something from thy lips, some truth that might burn my soul and mak£
me repent; but I knew not what thou saidst; and here I am.” _ The ghost stamps his
foot, and the man quivers like an aspen leaf, because he knows it is all true. Then the
whole congregation arise before him as he lies upon his bed; he looks upon the motley
Group, he beholds the snowy heads of the old. and the glittering eyes of thejuung ; and
lying there upon his pillow/he pictures all the sins of his past life, and he hears it said,
“ Go thou ! unfaithful to thy charge ; thou didst not divest thyself of thy love of pomp
and dignity; thou didst not speak
“ As though thou ne’er might’s speak again,
A dying man to dying men.”
Oh ? it may be something for that minister to leave his charge, somewhat for him to die;
but worst of all, the sting of death will be his sin ; to hear his parish come howling after
him to hell; to see his congregation following behind him in one mingled herd, behaving
led them astray, having been a false prophet instead of a true one, speaking peace, peace,
where there was no peace, deluding them with lies, charming them with music, when he
rmo-ht rather to have told them in rough and rugged accents the word of God. Yerily it
is true, it is true, the sting of death to such a man shall be his great, his enormous, hii
heinous sin of having deluded others. .
Thus, then, having painted two full-length pictures, I might give each one of you
miniatures of yourselves. I might picture thee, 0 drunkard, when thy cups are drained,
and when thy liquor shall no longer be sweet to thy taste, when worse than gall shall be
the dainties that thou drinkest, when within an hour the worms shall make a carnival
upon thy flesh ; I might picture thee as thou lookest back upon thy mis-spent life. And
thou, 0 Wearer, methinks I see thee there with thine oaths echoed back by memory to
thine own dismay. And thou man of lust and wickedness, thou who hast debauched and


Thoughts on tub last battle.
seduced others, I see thee there, and the sting of death to thee, how horrible, how
dreadful! It shall not be that thou art groaning with pain, it shall not be that thou aft
racked with agony, it shall not be that thy heart and flesh faileth, but the sting, the sting
shall be thy sin. How many in this place can spell the word “remorse V* I pray you
may never know its awful meaning. Remorse, remorse ! You know its derivation ;it
signifies to bite. Ah! now we dance with our sins—it is a merry life with us—we take
their hands, and sporting in the noonetide sun, we dance, we dance, and live in joy.
But theu those sins shall bite us. The young lion we have stroked and played with shall
bite ; the young adder, the serpent whose azure hues have wed delighted us, shall bite,
shall sting, when remorse shall occupy our souls. I might, but I will not tell you, a few
stones of the awful power of remorse : it is the first pang of hell; it is the ante-cham-
ber of the pit. To have remorse is to feel the sparks that blaze upwards from the fire of
the bottomless Gehennam ; to feel remorse is to have eternal torment commenced with-
in the soul. The sting of death shall be, unforgiven, unrepented sin.
3. But if sin in the retrospect be the sting of death, what must sin in the prospect
be f My friends, we do not often enough look at what sin is to be. We see what it is :
first the seed, then the blade, then the ear, and then the full com in the ear. It is the
wish, the imagination, the desire, the sight, the taste the deed* but what is sin in its
next development ? We have observed sin as it grows; we have seen it at first a very
little thing, but expanding itself until it has swelled into a mountain. We have seen it
like “ a little cloud, the size of a man’s hand,” but we have beheld it gather until it
covered the skies with blackness and sent down drops of bitter rain. But what is sin to
be in the next state ? We have gone so far, but sin is a thing that cannot stop. We
have seen whereunto it has grown but whereunto will it grow ? for it is not ripe when
we die ; it has to go on still; it is set going, but it has to unfold itself for ever. The
moment we die the voice of justice cries, “ Seal up the fountain of blood; stop the
stream of forgiveness : he that is holy let him be holy still ; he that is filthy let him be
fi thy still.” And after that the man goes on growing filthier and filthier still; his lust
developes itself, his vice increases : all these evil passions blaze with ten-fold more fury,
and, amidst the companionship of others like himself, without the restraints of grace,
without the preached word the man becomes worse and worse ; and who can tell where-
unto his sin may grow P I have sometimes likened the hour of our death to that cele-
brated picture which I think you have seen in the National Gallery, of Perseus holding
up the head of Medusa. That head turned all persons into stone who looked upon it.
There is a warrior there with a dart in his hand .* he stands stiffened, turned into stone,
with the javelin even in bis fist. There is another with a poignard beneath his robe
about to stab ; he is now the statue of an assassin, motionless and cold. Another is
.creeping along stealthily, like a man in ambuscade and there he stands a consolidated
rock : he has looked open that head, and he is frozen into stone. Well, such a death.
What I am when death is hehl before me, that I must be for ever. When my spirit goes,
if God finds me hymning his praise. I shall hymn it in heaven ; doth he find me breath-
ing out oaths, 1 shall follow up those oaths in hell. Where death leaves me judgment
finds me. As I die, so shall 1 live eternally.
“ There are no acts of pardon passed
In the cold grave to which we haste ”
It is for ever, for ever, for ever! Ah! there are a set of heretics in these days who
talk of short punishment, and preach about God’s transporting souls for a term of years
and then letting them die. Where did such men learn their doctrine, 1 wonder? I
read in God’s word that the angel shad plant one foot upon the earth, and the other
upon the sea, and shall swear by him that liveth and was dead, that time shall be no
longer. But if a soul could die in a thousand years it would die in time; if a million of
years could elapse, and then the soul could be extinguished, there would be such a
thing as time; for talk to me of years, and there is time. But, sirs, when that angel lias
spoken the word, u Time shall be no longer,” things will then be eternal; the spirit
shall proceed in its ceaseless revolution of weal or woe, never to be stayed, for there is
no time to stop it ; the fact of its stopping would imp'y time, but everything shall be
eternal, for time shall cease to be. It well becomes you then to consider where ye are
and what ye are. Oh! stand and tremble on the narrow neck of land ’twixt the two un


THOUGHTS ON HE LAST BATTLE.
bounded seas, for God in heaven alone can tell how soon thou raayest be launched upon
the‘eternal future. May God grant that when that last hour may come we may he pre,
pared for it ! Like the thief, unheard, unseen, it steals through night’s dark shade..
Perhaps, as here I stand, and rudely speak of these dark, hidden things, soon may the
hand be stretched, and dumb the mouth that lisps the faltering strain. Oh ! thou that
dwellest in heaven, thou power supreme, thou everlasting King, let not that hour intrude
upon me in an ill spent season ; hut may it find me rapt in meditation high, hymning
my great Creator. So in the last moment of my fife 1 will hasten beyond the azure, to
bathe the wings of this my spirit in their native element, and then to dwell with thee for
tsver,
“ Far from a world of grief and sin,
With God eternafiy shut in.”
IT, “ The strength of sin is the law.”
I have attempted to show how to fight this monster —it is by extracting and des-
troying its sting. I prepare myself for the battle. It is true I have sinned, and there-
fore I have put a sting into death, but I will endeavour to take it away. 1 attempt it,
but the monster laughs me in the face, and cries, ‘‘ The strength of sin is the law.
Before thou canst destroy sin thou must in some way satisfy the law. Sin cannot be
removed by thy tears or by thy deeds, for the law is its strength, and until thou hast
satisfied the vengeance of the law. until thou hast paid the uttermost farthing of its
demands, my sting cannot be taken away, for the very strength of sin is the law.” Now,
I must try and explain this doctrine that the strength of sin is the law. Most men think
that sin has no strength at all. “ Oh,” say many “we may have sinned very much, but
we will repent, and we will be better for the rest of our lives; no doubt God is merciful,
and he will forgive us.” And we hear many divines often speak of sin as if it were a
very venial thing. Inquire of them what a man is to do ? There is no deep repentance
required, no real inward workings of divine grace, no casting himself upon the blood of
Christ. They never tell us about a complete atonement having been made. They have,
indeed, some shadowy idea of an atonement, that Christ died just as a matter of form to
satisfy justice ; but as to any literal taking away of our sins, and suffering the actual
penalty for us, they do not consider that God’s law requires any such thing. I suppose
they do not, for I never hear them assert the positive satisfaction and substitution
of our Lord Jesus Christ. But without that how can we take away the strength of
sin ?
1. The strength of sin is in the law, first, in this respect, that the law being spiritual
is quite impossible for us to live without sin. If the law were merely carnal and
referred to the flesh, if it simply related to open and overt actions, I question even then
whether we could live without sin ; but when I turn over the ten commandments and
read, “ Thou shalt not covet,” I know it refers even to the wish of my heart. It is said,
“ Thou shalt not commit adulterybut it is said, also, that whosoever looketh on a
woman to lust after her hath already committed that sin. So that it is not merely the
act, it is the thought; it is not the deed simply, it is the very imagination, that is a sin.
Oh, now, sinner, how canst thou get rid of sin? Thy very thoughts, the Inward work-
ings of thy mind, these are crimes—this is guilt and desperate wickedness. Is there
not. now, strength in sin? Hath not the law put a potency in it ? Has it not nerved
sin with such a power that all thy strength cannot hope to wipe away the black enormity
of thy transgression ?
2. Then, again, the law puts strength in sin in this respect'—that it will not abate
one tittle of its stern demands. It says to every man who breaks it, “I will not forgive
you.” You hear persons talk about God’s mercy. Now, if they do not believe in the
gospel they must be under the law ; but where in the law do we read of mercy ? If you
will read the commandments through, there is a curse after them, but there is no pro-
vision made for pardon. 'Hie law itself speaks not of that; it thunders out, without
the slightest mitigation, “ the soul that sinneth it shall die.'* If any of you desire to be
saved by works, remember one sin will spoil your righteousness; one dust of this earth’s
dross will spoil the beauty of that perfect righteousness which God requires at your
hands. If ye would be saved by works, men and brethren, ye must be as holy as the
angels, ye must be as pure and as immaculate as Jesus; for the law requires perfectipn,


THOUGHTS ON THE LAST BATTLE.
and nothing short of it; and God, with unflinching vengeance will smite every ma»
low who cannot bring him a perfect obedience. if I cannot, when I come before his
throne, p ead a perfect righteousness, as being mine, God will say, “ You have not ful-
filled the demands of my Jaw; depart, accursed one. You have sinned, and you must
die.” “ Ah,’’ says one, “ can we ever have a perfect righteousness, then ?” Yes, I will
tell you of that in the third point ; thanks be unto Christ, who giveth us the victory
through his blood and through his righteousness, who adorns us as a bride in her
jewels, as a husband arrays his wife with ornaments.
3. Yet again, the law gives strength to sin from the fact that for every transgression
it will exact a punishment. The law never remits a farthing of debt :it sajs, “ Sin
punishment.” They are linked together with adamantine chains; they are tied, and
cannot be severed. The law speaks not of sin and mercy; mercy comes in the gospel.
The law says, “Sin—die; transgress—-be chastized; sin—hell.” Thus are they
linked together. Once let me sin, and I may go to the foot of stern justice, and, as
with blind eyes, she holds the scales, 1 may say, “ Oh Justice, remember, I was holy
once; remember that on such and such an occasion I did keep the law.” “Yes,” saith
Justice, “ all I owe thee thou shalt have ; I will not punish thee for what thou hast not
done; hut remember you this crime, O sinner?” and she puts in the heavy weight.
The sinner trembles, and he cries, “ But canst thou not forget that? Wilt thou not
cast it away ?” “ Nay,” saith Justice; and she puts in another weight. “ Sinner, dost
thou recollect this crime “ Oh !” says the sinner, “ wilt thou not for mercy’s
sa l Je —?” “ I will not have mercy,” says Justice; “Mercy has its own palace, hut I
have nought to do with forgiveness here ; mercy belongs to Christ. If you will be saved
by justice you shall have your full of it. If you come to me for salvation, I 'will not
have mercy brought in to help me ; she is not my vicegerent; I stand here alone with-
out her.” And again, as she holds the scale, she puts in another iniquity, another
crime, another enormous transgression; and each time the man begs and prays that he
may have that passed by. Says Justice, “Nay, I ™ust exact the penalty; I have sworn
1 will, and I will. Canst thou find a substitute for thyself? If thou canst, there is the
only room I have for mercy. I will exact it of that substitute, but even at his hands I
will have the utmost jot and tittle ; I will abate nothing; I am God’s justice, stern
and unflinching, I will not alter, 1 will not mitigate the penalty.” She still holds the
scales. The plea is in vain. “Never will 1 change!” she cries; “bring me the
blood, bring me the price of its utmost; count it down, or else, sinner, thou shalt die.
Now, my friends, I ask you. if ye consider the spirituality of the law, the perfection it
requires, and its unflinching severity, are you prepared to take away the stiug of death in
your own persons ? Can you hope to overcome sin yourselves ? Can you trust that by
some righteous works, you may yet cancel your guilt? If you think so, go, O foolish
one, go ! O madman go ! work out thine own salvation with fear and trembling, without
the God that worketh in thee ; go, twist thy rope of sand; go, build a pyramid of air ;
go, prepare a house with bubbles, and think it is to last for ever ; hut know it will be a
dream with an awful awakening, for as a dream when one awaketh will he despise alike
your image and your righteousness, “The strength of sin is the law,”
111. But now, in the last place, we have before us the victory of faith. The
Christian is the only champion who can smite the dragon of death ; and even he cannot
do it of himself, hut when he has done it he shall cry, “ Thanks he to God who giveth
us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.” One moment, and I will show you
how the Christian can look upon death with complacency through the merits of Jesus
Christ.
First, Christ has taken away the strength of sin in this respect, that he has removed
the law. We are not under bondage, but under grace. Law is not our directing prin-
ciple, grace is. Do not misunderstand me. The principle that I must do a thing—
that is to say, the principle of law, “ do or be punished ; do, or be rewarded,” is not
the motive of the Christian’s life ; his principle is grace : “ God has done so much for
me, what ought Ito do for him ?” We are not under the law in that sense, but under
grace.
Then Christ has removed the law in this sense, that he has completely satisfied it.
The law demands a perfect righteousness ; Christ says, “Law, thou hast it; find
fault with me ; I am the sinner’s substitute; have I not kept thy commandments t


THOUGHTS ON THE LAST BATTLE.
Wherein hare I violated thy statutes ?” “ Come here, my beloved,” he says, and
then he cries to Justice, “ Find a fault in this man ; I have put my robe upon him ;
I have washed him in my blood ; I have cleansed him from his sin. All the past is
gone : as for the future, I have secured it by sanctification ; as for the penalty, I have
borne it myself; at one tremendous draught of love I have drunk that man s destruction
dry • I have borne what he should have suffered ; I have endured the agonies he ought
to have endured. Justice, have I not satisfied thee ? Did I not say upon the tree, and
didst thou not coincide with it, «It is finished ;it is finished 1 Have I not made so
complete an atonement that there is now no need for that man to die and expiate his
guilt? Do I not complete the perfect righteousness of this poor once condemned, hut
now justified spirit ?” “Yes," saith Justice ;“I am well satisfied, and even more
content, if possible, than if the sinner had brought a spotless righteousness of his own.
And now what saith the Christian after this ? Boldly he comes to the realms of death,
and entering the gates there, he cries, “ Who shall lay anything to the charge of God s
elect ?” And when he has said it, the dragon drops his sting. He descends into the
grave ; he passes by the place where fiends lie down in fetters of iron ; he sees then
chains, and looks into the dungeon where they dwell, and as he passes by the prison
door he shouts “Who shall lay anything to the charge of God s elect ? They growl
and bite their iron bonds, and hiss in secret, but they cannot lay ought to his charge.
Now see him mount aloft. He approaches God’s heaven, he comes against the gates,
and faith still triumphantly shouts, “ Who shall lay anything to the charge of Gods
elect?” And a voice comes from within : “ Not Christ, for he hath died ; not God, for
he hath justified.” lieceived by Jesus, faith enters heaven, and again she cries, \\ ho
even here amongst the spotless and ransomed, shall lay anything to the charge of God s
elect ?” Now the law is satisfied, sin is gone ; and now surely we need not fear the
sting of the dragon, but we may say as Paul did, when he rose into the majesty of poetry
—such beautiful poetry that Pope himself borrowed his words, only transposing the
sentences, “ 0 grave, where is thy victory ? 0 death, where is thy sting . #
If it were necessary to night I might speak to you concerning the resurrection, and
I might tell you how much that takes away the sting of death, but I will confine myse f
to the simple fact, that the sting of death is sin, that the strength of sin is the law, and
that Christ gives us the victory by taking the sting away, and removing the strength ot
sin by his perfect obedience, , . .
And now, sirs, how many are there here who have any hope that tor them Christ
Jesus died ? Am I coming too close home when most solemnly I put the question to
each one of vou, as I stand in God’s presence this night, to free my head of your blood ;
as I stand and appeal with all the earnestness this heart is capable of, “ Are you pre-
pared to die ? is sin pardoned, is the law satisfied f 0;m you view the flowing
“ Of Christ’s soul-redeeming blood,
With divine assurance knowing,
That he hath made your peace with God ?”
Oh! can ye now put one hand upon your heart, and the other upon the Bible, and
sav “God’s word and I agree; the witness of the Spirit here and the witness there
one. I have renounced my sins, I have given up my evil practices ; I have
abhorred my own righteousness ; I trust in nought but Jesu’s doings; simply do 1
depend on him.
“ Nothing in my hands I bring,
Simply to ihy cross I cling.”
If so. should you die where you are—sudden death were sudden glory.
But, my hearers, shall Ihe faithful with you? or shall I belie my soul. Which
shall it be ? Are there not many here who, each time the bell tolls the departure of
a soul might well ask the question, “Am I prepared?” and they must sa y* “
I shall not turn prophet to-night; but were it right for me to say so, I fear not °£ e
half of you are prepared to die. Is that true ? Yea, let the speaker ask himself the
question, “Am I prepared to meet mj Maker face to face Oh, sit in your seats
and catechise your souls with that solemn question. Let each one ask himselt, Am
: prepared, should I be called, to die?” Methinks I hear one say with confidence


THOUGHTS ON THE LAST BATTLE.
u I know that my Redemer liveth.” “ Let him that thinketh he stttndeth take heed lest
he fall.” I hear another say with trembling accents,
“ Ah Iguilty, weak, and helpless worm.
On Christ s kind arms I fall;
He is my strength and righteousness,
My Jesus and my all.’*
sweet words ! 1 would rather have written that one verse than Milton’s
“ Paradise Lost.” It is such a matchless picture of the true condition of the believing
soul. But 1 hear another say, “ i shall not answer such a question as that. lam not
going to be dull to-day. it may be gloomy weather outside to day, but 1 do not want to
be made melancholy.” Young man, young man, go thy way. Let thine heart cheer
thee in the days of thy youth ; but for all this the Lord shall bring thee to judgment.
What wilt thou do, careless spirit, when thy friends have forsaken thee, when thou art
alone with God ? Thou dost not like to be alone, young man now, dost thou? A
falling leaf will startle thee. To be alone an hour will bring on an insufferable feeling
of melancholy. But thou wilt be alone - and a dreary alone it will be—with God an
enemy! How wilt thou do in the swellings of Jordan ? What wilt thou do when he
taketh thee by the hand at eventide, and asketh thee for an account : when he says,
“ What didst thou do in the beginning of thy days ? how didst thou spend thy life ?”
When he asks thee, “Where are the years of thy manhood ?” When he questions
thee about thy wasted sabbaths, and enquires how thy latter years were spent? what
wilt thou say then ? Speechless, without an answer thou wilt stand. Oh, I beseech
you, as ye love yourselves, take care ! Even now begin to weigh the solemn matters of
eternal life. Oh ! say not, “ Why so earnest ? why in such haste?” Sirs, if 1 saw you
lying in your bed, and your house was on fire, the fire might be at the bottom of the
house, and you might slumber safely for the next five minutes ; but with all my might
I would pull you from your bed, or I would shout, “ Awake ! awake ! the flame is under
thee.” So with some of you who are sleeping over hell’s mouth, slumbering over the
pit of perdition, may 1 not awaken you ? may I not depart a little from clerical rules
and speak to you as one speaketh to bis fellow whom he loves? Ah! if I love you
not 1 need not be here. It is because I wish, to win your souls, and, if it be possible, to
win for my master some honour, that 1 would thus pour out my heart before you. As
the Lord liveth, sinner, thou standest on a single plank over the mouth of hell, and that
plank is rotten. Thou haugest over the pit by a solitary rope, and the strands of that
rope are breaking. Thou art ike that man of old whom Dionysius placed at the head of
the table ; before him was a dainty feast, but the man ate not, for directly over his head
was a sword suspended by a hair. So art thou, sinner. Let thy cup be full, let thy
pleasures be high, let thy soul be elevated, seestthou that sword ? The next time thou
sittest in the theatre, look up and see that sword; the next time thou art in a tavern,
look at that sword ; when next in thy business thou scornest the rules of God’s gospel,
look at that sword. Though thou seest it not it is there. Even now ye may hear God
saying to Gabriel, “ Gabriel, that man is sitting in his seat in the Hall; he is hearing,
but is as though he hears not; un«heath thy blade ; let the glittering sword cut through
that hair; let the weapon fail upon him and divide his soul and body.” Stop, thou
Gabriel, stop ! Save the man a lit e while. Give him yet an hour, that he*may
repent. Oh. let him not die. True, he has been bere these ten or a dozen nights, and
he has listened without a tear , but stop, and peradventure he may repent yet. Jesus
backs up my entreatj, and be cries, “ Spare him yet another year, till I dig about him
and dung him, and though he now cumbers the ground, he may yet bring forth fruit,
that he may not be hewn down and cast into the fire.” I thank thee, O God ; thou wilt
not cut him down to-night; but to-morrow may be his last day. Ye may never see the
sun rise, thou you have seen it set. Take heed. Hear the word of God’s gospel, and
depart with God’s blessing. “Whosoever believeth on the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ shall be saved.” “He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved.” ‘f He is
able to save to the uttermost all that come unto him.” “ Whosoever cometh unto him
he will in no wise cast out.” “Let every one that heareth say come; whosoever is
athirst let him c6me and take of the water of life freely.” ' • ' „


COAIiS. COALS. COALS.
& ®® a
DELIVER IN ALL PARTS OF TEE CITY AND SUBURBS
BEST ENGLISH AND COLONIAL
AT CHEAPEST RATES.
WEIGHT GUARANTEED.
CITY COAL COMPANY OFFICE!
16, KING STREET, NEAR THE WHARF.
O. . PALL MALL, SANDJIUSST. ,
41 v. . i


A. T. STEfEiS,
Tea, Coffee, and Colonial Merchant,
96, Elizabeth Street, Melbourne.
IMPOSTER OF WINES, SPIRITS, AND BOTTLED BEER.
PRICES CURRENT.
I have much pleasure in handing you my Prices Current, and feel fully assured
that the advantages offered there will fully compensate for perusal of the same. The
Tea, Coffee, and Colonial Markets have undergone a great change since my last.
The primary article —Teas. Common and inferior kinds remain much the same,
hut the finer sorts have considerably advanced in price ; this result I fully anticipated
from our position with the Chinese Empire, knowing full well, from their sluggish
and dilatory nature, that a period of time would elapse ere the proper amount of at-
tention would be devoted to the Crops, and a still longer period before we could
derive any benefit from the same.
Monopoly always ranging where advantage is to be gained, induced me to secure a
fair share of Fine Teas, consequently I am enabled to offer greater advantages to my
numerous patrons than I should have been under ordinary circumstances.
TERMS—Strictly Gas en Delivery .
Slack Teas.
Common to Good Congou 2 S
Fine Rich Pekoe-flavored Congou—strongly recommended 2 6
Superior Blnck Tea 2 9
The very Finest Congou # 3 0
This is the best Black Tea imported. It being the best there cannot
beany better, consequently higher price-
Green Teas.
Finest Gunpowder imported 4 o
Young Hyson, fine 3 0
Finest Ouchain, fine fresh burnt 3 6
Stevens’s Mixture, in 1 lb. £$ 2 lb. Air-tight Packets 3 0
This is a judicious mixture of the Finest Scented Teas, judiciously blended. To
any one preferring high-flavoured Tea tins is indeed a luxury.
A very superior Mixed Tea, strongly recommended 2 (5
Coffees-
The Coffee Market has undergone a great change since the issue of my last Price
Current, having in most cases considerably advanced; but I however, make no alter-
ation, but request attention, as before, to
The Best Old Mocha 1 6
This Coffee has attained the highest popularity as an article of general consumption.
Universal taste and judgement are the the best umpires: and an article wonld soon
gink into oblivion if it had nothing more to rest upon than the empty professions of its
vendors. STEVENS’S COFFEE has been before the Public of Melbourne for
eighteen months, and has commanded most extensive patronage.
Stevens’s concentrated Turkey Coffee
Packed in air-tight Canis ers expressly for Family use, 1-lb, 2.1 b, 3ib, 4-lb and 6 lb
tins. Roasted, Ground, and Packed on the premises hourly.
N.B, As a security to the Public, a fac-siraile of A. T. Stevens’ signature is OR
each canister, without this none are genuine, and .to imitate which is felony.
The finest Jamica Coffee 1 4
The Finest Plantation 12
The Finest Ceylon, | 1 0
in Canisters, of 1-lb. 2-lh, 3-lb, 4-lb, and 6 A ihu)
CARTS AND V A NS. —Families waited upon fw orders, dnd goods delivered
punctually by A. T. Stevens' Carts and Vans , as under .-—Monday —North
Melbourne, Prahran, Brunswick, Park Side and South Yarra. Tuesday—Haw-
thorne, Kew, Boroondara, St. Hilda, Brighton, North Melbourne and Brunswick.
Wednesday —Richmond, South Yarra, Prahran, Emerald Hill and Sandridge,
Thursday — Pork Side, Flemington, Pascoval, St. Kilda, Brighton, and Oolbngwood.
Friday —Emerald Hill, Sandridge and Richmond. Saturday— Collingwood,
Flemington, Park Side, and Pascoeval. Two Express Carts to all parts of Melbourne
and its Suburbs every day.
