





“ Here we are,” as the Clown says in the
Pantomime ; hut why are we here ? Be
not too hasty, gentle reader, but permit us
to refer you to our Gazette. You will
there find the only apology we can make
for our appearance. May we always be as
welcome as our task is of preparing this our
first number for publication ; and if we can
“ raise the laugh or cause the merry jest to
go round,” happy indeed will be our lot.
Your excuses, though, gentle reader—your
excuses are claimed. We are as yet in the
position of an infant, so let your criticisms,
if any, be favourable, and, by your approv-
ing smiles, encourage us to proceed in, we
hope, our good cause. Our duty we will
endeavour to do, but leave the rest to you.
In your hands we place ourselves, and rise
or fall by your verdict. May our columns
cause many a laugh, few tears, and no
blushes. Politics we eschew—being Con-
servative in our desire to retain all the good
in our noble Constitution, but Liberal in
our wish to do away with all the bad. So
with these few words we launch our frail
barque on the sea of Public Opinion, and
wish a prosperous voyage to The Orient’s
Observer.
OUR DEPARTURE.
slowly rise from their muddy bed, and our
noble ship creaks and groans, and groans
again, as our powerful friend in front,
vomiting forth volumes of smoke and dirt,
slowly and yet surely draws us towards the
entrance of that noble work, Plymouth
Breakwater. Our Captain, confident in the
ability of his officers, spends a few moments
in a last conversation with one who, through
many arid many a long year, has piloted
the good ship “ Orient ”on her many suc-
cessful voyages, but who now leaves us,
though seemingly far from willingly. The
hand of sickness has lain heavily on him,
and he is advised to rest for a while on his
well-earned honours ; and for once Captain
Lawrence sees with evident sorrow his
noble ship depart without him, though in
the charge of a well-tried friend in whose
ability he has every confidence, and to
whom our readers will, we are sure, join
with us in wishing every success. But we
are proceeding on our way, and the moment
soon arrives for the few friends on board
who now crowd the gangway, to bid adieu.
A dull, heavy splash is heard, the tow-line
is let go, and the steamer slowly turns her
head towards the shore, stopping a moment
alongside to pick up our friends and
Captain Lawrence, who now, standing un-
covered in his boat, receives with evident
feelings of sorrow the cheers of all on board,
for those cheers, though meant to express a
hope of returning health to the recipient,
mean also farewell; but, as the last cheer
Plymouth, 2nd June, 1862, 6 p.m.
We’re off—we’re off! “Heave away,
my lads heave away.” The anchors


dies away, the steamer slowly moves for-
ward, and is soon lost in the darkness that
is now fast shrouding the face of the ocean;
the wind gradually fills our sails, and the
good ship “ Orient ” moves on her way. So
let’s wish her and her good Captain a happy
and successful voyage, and a speedy arrival
at the port of our destination, where may
every success attend such of our readers as
seek fame and a fortune in the far distant
country, and as happy a return to Old
England.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
In answer to numerous enquiries, we beg
to inform our readers that—
1. The “Orient’s Observer’’ will be
published every Saturday morning, back
numbers from 7th June, 1862, being pub-
lished on Thursday mornings.
2. Anonymous contributions will not be
received, the name being required in all
cases, as a guarantee of good faith, though
not for publication.
3. We cannot undertake to return rejected
communications.
4. All communications intended for our
issue of Thursday must come to hand by the
Tuesday evening previous, and those for
Saturday’s issue, by Thursday evening.
5. The paper will be in the custody of
the Editor, to whom all applications for
perusal must be made.
6. Although this, our first issue, is dated
7th June, 1862, it is not published till 3rd
July, 1862, For the reason for this, we
must refer our readers to another part of
our columns.
POET'S CORNER.
Oh ! call it by some other name,
For “friendship” sounds too cold;
Where love is but a worldly flame,
Whose shine must be of gold ;
And passion, like the sun at noon,
That burns in all he sees,
Awhile as warm, will set as soon
Then call it none of these.
Imagine something purer far,
More free from stain of clay,
Than friendship, lore, and passion are.
Yet human still as they ;
And if thy lips for love like this
No mortal word can frame,
Go ask of angels what it is,
And call it by that name.
GAZETTE.
All insertions in this Gazette are by
authority, and our readers are requested to
note the same.
At a Meeting, held on board the “ Orient,”
27th June, 1862
It was proposed by Mr. Walker, and
seconded by Mr. Faulkner— “ That Capt.
Harris do take the chair.” Carried nem.
con.
Proposed by Mr. Marshall, and seconded
by the Eev. Thomas Field— “ That a paper
be established on board the ship, and that
the same be called ‘The Orient’s Ob-
server.’ ” Carried nem. con.
The Secretary then took the votes of
the meeting for the establishment of a Com-
mittee, and reported as follows Mr.
Cossins, 5 ; Mr. Davis, 5 ; Captain Harris,
4 ; Rev. Thomas Field, 3 ; Mr, Marshall,
2; Mr. Small, 1 ; Mr. Walker, 1. Upon
the Secretary putting it to the meeting, it
was unanimously resolved—“ That the first
three gentlemen on the list, namely, Messrs.
Cossins and Davis, and Captain Harris, be
requested to act as a Committee.”
Proposed by Mr. Cossins, and seconded
by Mr. Yarndell— “ That Mr. Davis be
requested to act as Editor.” Carried nem.
con.
Proposed by Mr. Cossins, and seconded
by Mr. Davis— That the thanks of this
meeting be accorded to Captain Harris for
his able conduct in the chair,” Carried
unanimously.


Tor the comfort of the passengers and
safety of the ship, Captain Harris hopes that
the following rules will be strictly attended
to:—
I. Third-class passengers are not al-
lowed to be aft the mainmast, except in
cases of sickness.
2. Second-class passengers to take the
lee side of the poop.
3. All lights to be extinguished at 10.30
p.m., except the night lights, which will be
attended to by the officer of the watch.
4. No smoking allowed on the poop
before 9 p.m.
5. Passengers are requested not to talk
to the man at the wheel.
6. Should there be any complaints, the
same to be made to the Captain in writing,
through the chief officer, when they will be
promptly attended to.
7. No smoking allowed below.
Notice is Hereby Given, That all phil-
lipeans, not called before the secon d break-
fast bell, shall stand over till after 8 bells
(noon).
BY DESIRE.
LOG.
Tuesday, June 3, 49.47 N,
48.19 N.
Thursday „ 5,
Friday, „ 6.
47.51 N,
6, 47.12 N,
A Conundrum.
By my first a kind of lettuce is known;
My second are things that few like to own
My whole is the name of a party on board.
To whom our best wishes we freely accord.
Nautical time observed throughout.
Long. Winds. Bar,
L 5.20 W. | | 30.15 f
ST. 6.35 W. NW, SW. 30.30 E
I ssw, )
ff. 9.3 W. ] SW. J 29.80 S
1 NW, )
ST. 10.26 W. \ SWby S. j 29.46 S
un. V.
ce is known; To be Sold N
few like to own; broken and wbi
, , , to Mr. Walker.,
party on board, Mr yValker is
ive freely accord, from his mother,
To be Sold a
broken and wffirn-
to Mr. Walker,, B:
Mr. Walker is es
from his mother.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
FOUND, a SCARF and PAPER COL-
LAR. Upon stating particulars, the
owner may have the same.—Apply to the
Editor of “ The Orient’s Observer.”
T7IOUND, a Small PAIR of SCISSORS.
_L —The owner can have the same upon
applying at the Office of this Paper.
LOST, a White Ivory-Handled PEN-
KNIFE, with three blades, and marked
on the side “G. W. Davis.” Supposed to
have been dropped near the forecastle, on
the right-hand side. The finder will oblige
by handing it to the Editor of “The
Orient’s Observer.”
Remarks.
6 p.m. Weighed, and
steamed to the Ram Head;
night foggy and squally,
with rain. Noon—Lizard
bore NE 15 miles, from
which we take our depar-
ture.
Dull and misty; passed seve-
ral ships.
Squally and foggy, with
rain ; heavy sea.
Squally; gloomy, with rain.
VARIETIES.
I a great bargain, several
brn-out Corkscrews. Ap)dy
-Bachelors’Hail. N.JJ. —■
s expecting p. fresh supply


Wanted, by a young man of evangelical
principles, Board and Lodging in a family
where his Christian example may be
considered an equivalent.—Address, 4 ‘ Mr.
Modest, care of James Squaretoes, Esq.,
Below.”
Wanted, a Good Cook. One with wooden
legs preferred, as the kitchen floor is damp.
—Apply to Mr. Cossens, Assembly Rooms.
Chaius ! Chairs !! Chairs !!!—Those
in want of the above should apply at once
to the old-established maker, where the
largest and best stock in the town is always
to be found. The elegance of their finish,
and economy in price, are too well known
to need notice here.—Address, “Mr. Y.
Hat, 5, Regent- street, Cuddy Town.”
Lost, by one who can ill afford it, a Good
Temper. Though rusty and out of order
from long disuse, yet it is still, even in its
defective state, so essential to the owner, and
its non-appearance is so severely felt by his
friends as to occasion this advertisement, in
the hope of its restoration. If sealed up,
and left at our office, a suitable reward will
be given.
The Question of the Day.—To Gen-
tlemen : What corps do you belong to ?
To Ladies : What is your diameter ?
The Fish in the River. —We are sure
that all who take an interest in our noble
river (and who among our fellow -townsmen
do not ?) will be rejoiced to hear that active
measures have at last been taken to remedy
a crying evil, viz. : the want of a proper
supply of food to the fine and numerous fish
/ -
which add so much to the beauty and value
of our river, and to the enjoyment of our
fellow-townsmen. The last few days we
have noticed, with pleasure, many persons
engaged in placing in the river large quan-
tities of prepared food. But even a good
thing may be overdone, so we are requested
to state that, for the present, parties are to
refrain from increasing the stock of food in
the river ; but, not wishing to stop a move
in the right direction, we shall not fail to
refer again to the subject in a subsequent
issue.
Sale by Auction, This Day. Mr.
George Robins has the honour to announce
that he has received instructions from the
proprietor to offer for Sale, by Auction, on
the Capstan (unless previously disposed of
by private contract), All and singular, that
Capital Messuage and Tenement, with all
its Appurtenances belonging thereto, known
as “ The Umbrella,” lately in the occupa-
tion of Mr. Little, and situate and being in
Poop Town. Cards to view may be had of
the Anctioneer as above, at the usual Inns
in the neighbourhood ; or of the Editor, at
the Office of this Paper.
To Correspondents. —We refuse to
insert any articles about crinoline, unless
covered with a silver dress. Any common
makeshifts might stay our sale, and the
collar of our dignity is made of stiff paper.
’Tis but the revival of a cruel custom to set
steel man-traps.
/
/* -•- * '
Published on board the Orient, by Order of
the Committee.—July 3, 1862.


SHIP “ ORIENT,” 14th JUNE, 1862.
“ BECTE LOQDOE.”
THE WEEK.
Again we resume our editorial pen —for
the second time we bite off the end and
write—what? Let’s pause, let’s ask our-
selves and our friends one question. Has
our first number, our first attempt, pleased,
amused, or instructed our readers ? We
trust so, and their kind eulogiums, which it
has been our good fortune to receive, war-
rant us in auguring well for the future of
our endeavours. So we issue this, our
second number, with mixed feelings of gra-
titude and pleasure. It is our intention to
present our readers, week by week, with a
short resume of the principal events hap-
pening therein, and we trust “ The Week ”
will not be the least acceptable part of our
publication.
Though we commenced our first number
with our departure from Plymouth, all
relating to our good ship cannot fail to be
interesting to our readers, so we shall from
time to time, as space will permit, publish
short accounts of our voyage, and of events
relating thereto. Some of our fellow-
passengers joined the good ship in London
and enjoyed a trip down the Channel; to
one of these our readers are indebted for a
short account of “ The trip down Channel,”
which appears in this number, and which
we are sure, will be read with pleasure
by all.
(imnfs
No. 2.
We are now, as it were, shaking down
into a somewhat settled mode of existence.
Our ladies, we were glad to see, began the
week by appearing regularly each morning
on the poop ; and, by the time we write,
the sunny light of their fair countenances
are one by one illuminating the]cuddy-table,
and their improved looks and pleasant
smiles proclaim that the worst is over, and
that they are now really beginning to enjoy
the fresh air, and, we hope, the gentle-
men’s pleasant company.
Among accidents and offences this week
we must really place the winds, which
seem determined, either not to blow at all,
or else exactly from the quarter they are
not wanted from; however, it is but early
days yet to grumble, though the continual
inquiry every day, particularly from the
ladies, is “ Are we out of the bay yet ?”
and the continual answer “ No, not yet.”
Whales have been keeping us company,
more or less, all this week; their frolics
cause much merriment. Our amusements,
too, are shaking somewhat into form. Our
readers will notice some few remarks on
the same in another part of our columns,
though the heat, that is now getting day
by day greater, interferes somewhat with
our pleasures. We are glad, however, to
hear mooted two subjects, both agreeable
as you near the tropics, viz., a shower-bath
in the morning and an awning to cover the
poop. Wc trust both will be carried out
satisfactorily, and they will prove, we are


sure, agreeable on all sides. On Sunday-
last Divine Service was held at 10 a.m.,
and an impressive sermon was preached by
our fellow-passenger, the Reverend Thomas
Field, and whom we are indeed fortunate
to have amongst us. On Friday last we
fell in with the Dutch barque, “ Abblas-
sendram,” the captain of which courteously
supplied a want that was becoming felt by
all, namely, of a good supply of flour.
However, our stock being now increased,
matters are somewhat mended, and we
trust the week has passed agreeably to
all.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
In answer to numerous inquiries, we beg
to inform our readers that—
1. Anonymous contributions will not
be received.
2. We cannot undertake to return re-
jected communications.
3. Although this, our second issue, is
dated 14th June, 1862, it is not published till
10th July, 1862, for the reason for this we
must refer our readers to our first issue.
THE TRIP DOWN CHANNEL.
London, 28th June, 1862.
The ship at last is ready for sea, and the
starting day has come, many think, too
quickly. The little tug joins issue with
her larger sister, and by some hidden
power takes us down the stream, threading
her way in an almost incredible manner,
through the maze of ships she must pass
through. To the amazement of some who
were waiting to be picked up, the ship
passed Gravesend. All, however, got on
board safely; one hirsute-looking gent,
indeed, followed us down the river in a
steam tug. Just as we considered our-
selves fairly started, the pilot gives the word
to drop anchor on account of the tide.
We accordingly lay-to all night, and at
5 o’clock next morning the steamer takes
us in tow again, and off we go. There is
a nice little breeze springing up, and the
good ship seems to try to jump ahead of
the tug, and seems to know that she is
going to revel again in her own element,
under the partial control of those men, who
saved her but a short time since from a
fearful end. With the tug we lose our
river pilot, a good man, no doubt, but
rather too fond of hearing his own voice,
and using long, fine words (id est, Capt-
ing) sesquipedalia verba!!! There is no
place like a ship were acquaintances are so
readily found, and, before the end of the
second day, there seemed to be a mutual
good feeling between officers and passen-
gers ; our captain being all one could wish,
and doing every thing he could to make us
all happy.
We had a long beat down Channel, there
being a succession of head winds, and
rains, &c.; but, about 6 a.m., on Sunday
morning, the pleasant news was passed
amongst us, as we lay in our bunks, that
we were off the breakwater.
The thought of an hour or two on shore
was a treat to every one, even after such a
short trip, and after hardly allowing time
for breakfast, we hurried on shore in the
first boat that presents itself, determined
to make the most of our time, and to en-
joy the land for the last time for many
weeks.
advertisement
T OoT, a SMOKING CAP, beautifully
U embroidered with red braid.—Whoso-
ever will hand the same to the Editor, will
be handsomely rewarded.


THE SPIDER AND THE SILK-
WORM.
{Translated from the French.)
A spider to a silkworm one morning did
say,
“In all your little spinnings how very
much delay;
See me, how very fast my cobwebs I do
make,
And to cover o’er a wall what a little time
I take.”
“So be it,” said the silkworm, “ yet thy
web is very frail,
And after you have spun it, it nothing will
avail.
But as for me, my work a century has
stood,
And if I make but little, I make that little
good.”
A CONUNDRUM.
My second is the latin of my first, and
my whole a quadruped.
Answer to the conundrum in our last.—
“ Cossins.”
The Abblassendram, the courteous
captain of which sent such gallant mes-
sages to the ladies on Friday last, supplied
us with a very necessary article, namely,
flour, the want of which struck not only
our good captain, but our fellow passengers
also. Soon after leaving Plymouth, the
supply put on board in London, by some
oversight or other, was, if any, but small,
and that small quantity was fast disappear-
ing when it was agreed to by all “ that
flour must be had ” —but how to get it ?
There came the rub. On Friday last,
however, we fell in with the Abblassen-
dram, from Sunderland to Shanghai, with
coal; after a series of signals from both, we
“ hove to,” and a boat commanded by our
first mate put off for the Dutch barque,
and soon returned with a good stock of
flour —a perfect God-send. Bravo, Dutch
Captain ! !! After returning salutes, we
both again set sail, and we soon lost sight
of, and left far behind, our courteous
friend, to whom we wish a more prosperous
voyage than he has yet experienced, hav-
ing had to put into Dieppe with the loss of
a bowsprit.
AN ACROSTIC.
M iriam, if we meet no more
I n this world of troubles sore,
R emember me—forget me not—
I n whate’r clime be cast my lot,
A nd when we are, perhaps, apart,
M ay thou remember one fond heart.
OUR AMUSEMENTS.
As our sayings and doings on board will,
we have no doubt, be interesting, not, per-
haps, so much to ourselves, as to our friends
in the old country, into whose hands, we
trust, a stray number of our paper may
find its way, we will just say a few words
as to how we manage to amuse ourselves.
Manage, we say, because, among such a
small number and for such a length of time,
without hardly change of any sort, our
amusements, after a time, must necessarily
grow stale and insipid. The never-failing
cards, chess, backgammon, and draughts,
serve, however, to wile away many a weary
hour; quoits, in which the ladies join, and
are even becoming dangerous rivals for the
gentlemen, have a large share of patronage.
The piano is well used, and several of our
gentlemen being proficient in singing, and
the stock of music on board being large,
the soul-inspiring tunes of “ Aunt Sally ”
and “In the Strand ” are often heard.
We were pleased at noticing an attempt at
“ treading the light fantastic toe ” the
other evening, but until our deck music (a
concertina) improves, but little will be
done ; a polka or two seeming to be the
extent of our musician’s ability. Gym-
nastics are also coming in vogue, for which
the ship and rigging afford ample space
and opportunity. In these few remarks,
we are afraid, we have exhausted the whole
stock ; unless, indeed, we include “ eating
and sleeping,” which we have heard re-
marked “ seem our only occupations;” but
this we consider a libel on our community,
and treat it as such. We shall, however,
as time progresses, refer again to the sub-
ject under review, and hope to have to record
a grand victory at quoits by the ladies.
We are requested to call the notice of
our friends below to Rule No. 2in the Ga-
zette of our issue of 7th inst, and to beg a
little more attention thereto. Parties walk-
ing the deck also, by keeping to the right-
hand side, will not only add to their own
convenience and comfort, but to that also
of others, and much confusion will be
thereby saved.


LOG.
Fautical time observed throughout.
Squally, with rain; overcast
and gloomy.
Overcast, with little rain ;
gloomy and squally during
night; day fine.
Gloomy squally night; fine
day; Highland Cape Fines-
terre bears SE by S; several
ships in sight.
Gloomy and squally; much
Squally night; fine day; tur-
bulent sea.
Gloomy misty night; fine day.
Helling off! Selling off!! Selling off!!!
O For the rest of the voyage only.
Messrs. Claxton, Steward, and Company
beg to inform their numerous friends and
the public at large, that they have deter-
mined upon offering for sale, without re-
serve, the whole of their prime and new
stock of goods, consisting of Cosmetics,
Pomades, Scents, &c.
Pipes of every sort and mate.
Drapery in all its branches.
To insure a ready sale, the above will be
sold at ruinous prices, so
Apply at once at the OU Established
Shop, No. 1, Regent Street, Cuddy Town.
A few prints of the International Exhibi-
tion, also of the ship “ Oricrt,” to be sold
very cheap.
VARIETIES,
To be sold a large stock of virtuous indig-
nation, of no use to the owner, and of less to
his friends. Will be sold cheap. No reason-
able offer refused. Address, Mr. Uneven,
care of Jas. Squaretoes, Esq., Below Town.
The news-room of the “ Orient ” is so
well ventilated, that it takes two members
to hold a paper, whilst a third with a
monkey jacket buttoned up to his chin, and
Fine day; spoke and boarded
Dutch barque, Abblassen-
dram, from Sunderland to
Shanghai; supplied us with
flour.
a sou’wester lashed to his head with a piece
of spun yarn reads it.
Gymnastic School and Fencing Academy.
Mizen Place, Poop Town.
Principals, Messrs. Vamdell and Camie.
The school re-opens, after the recess, on
Monday next. Hours of attendance, 10 to
4 ; Saturdays, 10 to 2. Fee for each
course, one broken neck.—N.B, The noble
art of self-defence taught.
Wanted a respectable nurse, of a serious
turn of mind, in a small family. The
duties, which are not onerous (as the size
of the infant will be little) do not com-
mence before 7 p.m. Apply at No. 3,
Regent Street, Cuddy Town.
To be sold cheap, several dozen of birds,
including some fine larks, for ready money.
The above will be sold a bargain, as they
are fast departing this life. Address, “The
Hopper,” to care of the Editor.
Found himself in a fix, a young gentle-
man who, in a party of ladies, indulging
himself in pert observations on the extrava-
gance of their dress, had his eye suddenly
turned to the absurdities of his own.
Published on board the “ Orient,” by order
of the Committee, 10th July, 1862.


“ RECTE LOQDOR.”
THE WEEK.
Every little breeze that sprung up last
week was immediately put down as the
N.E. Trades, and all seemed disappointed
upon being informed that such was not the
case, “ but only the outskirts, as it were.”
However, on Sunday morning last every-
body was pleased in the extreme upon being
informed that the “ stiff breeze then blow-
ing was really the trades,” and all looked
forward to a good week’s work, and were
not disappointed, for this week the good
ship has proved even to the most incredu-
lous that “ she can go,” though by no
means doing her best. However, we have
hitherto passed everything we have come
across. At daylight a sail is seen over the
bows a mere speck on the horizon, and by
nightfall she is spoken to and far out of
sight astern ; but now that we have fairly
got into the “ trade,’’ we may hope that we
may make up somewhat for lost time.
On Sunday the usual services were held;
and let us, while mentioning the fact, add
our hopes to those expressed in the notice
inserted in another part of the paper, that
all able to do so will attend the practice of
church music, and so endeavour to improve
a beautiful and impressive part of our
services.
This week has seen carried out two sub-
jects mentioned in our issue of last week,
SHIP “ ORIENT,” 21st JUNE, 1862.
No. 3.
namely, the bath and the awning. A few
improvements are, to our idea, wanted,
though, in the former, namely, a curtain or
two to make it somewhat more private, and
so more acceptable to the ladies, and a
slight alteration in the top, which, being
now hardly sunt enough, cannot contain all
the water, and a considerable quantity is
therefore lost.
Most of our fellow-passengers have, no
doubt, heard of the fire which last voyage
all but destroyed our noble ship, and well
nigh hurried into eternity upwards of 100
souls ; but, under Providence, and thanks
to the heroic conduct of officers and crew,
all were saved to relate the events of those
few fearful days, and to one of them we are
indebted for the short account, abridged
from the Shipping and Mercantile Gazette ,
which appears iu our present number.
Our readers will also find, in another
part of our present issue, a list of ourselves,
and we hope that in after years it may be
the cause of many a pleasant recognition.
Yesterday all eyes were strained to endea-
vour to catch once more a glimpse of the
land, Cape St. Antonio bearing some dis-
tance to the S.W. However, the distance
was too great, and a little mist that at the
time prevailed prevented anything from
being seen, notwithstanding which, all de-
clared that they saw “ something.”
It may not, perhaps, be out of place to
state here that, provided it meets with the


approval and support of our fellow passen-
gers, it is our intention, upon reaching
Adelaide, to have the paper printed and
sold to cover expenses ; and we hope its
perusal in after years may recall many a
pleasant thought, and wile away perhaps
many a weary hour.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
In answer to numerous inquiries, we beg
to inform our readers that—
1. Anonymous contributions will not be
received
2. The “ Orient’s Observer” will be pub-
lished every Saturday morning, back num-
bers from 7th June last being issued on
Thursday mornings.
3. All communications intended for our
issue of Thursday must come to hand by the
Tuesday evening previous, and those for
Saturday’s issue by Thursday evening.
4. Although this our third issue is dated
21st June, 1862, it is not published till 17th
July, 1862. For the reason for this we
must refer our readers to our first issue.
THE SEA EDITS FAREWELL,
Wait, -wait, ye winds, till I repeat
A parting signal to the fleet
Whose station is at home ;
Then waft the sea boy’s simple prayer,
And let it oft be whispered there,
While other climes I roam.
Farewell to father, reverend hulk,
Who, spite of metal, spite of bulk,
Must soon his cable slip ;
But ere he’s broken up I’ll try
The flag of gratitude to fly,
In duty to the ship.
Farewell to mother, first-rate—she
Who launched me on life’s stormy sea,
And rigged me fore and aft.
May Providence her timbers spare,
And keep her hull in good repair,
To tow the smaller craft.
Farewell to George, the jollyboat,
And all the little craft afloat
In home’s delightful bay.
When they arrive at sailing age,
May wisdom give the weather gauge,
And guide them on their way.
Farewell to all on life’s rough main ;
Perhaps we ne’er may meet again,
Through stress of stormy weather.
But, summoned by the board above,
We’ll harbour in the port of love,
And all be moored together.
Midship House, 17th July, 1862.
OUR BATH
Is now fitted ; and, though simple in the
extreme, is much relished even by the ladies,
who, every morning, may now be seen
(though name it not) as so many editions
of “ The Woman in white.” But as others
perhaps may like to know how- a
bath may be made and fitted on board ship,
a few words on its construction may not be
out of place. Four pieces of canvas, four
feet by nine feet, stitched together at the
edges, and stretched top and bottom by a
slight frame of woodwork, the top being
covered with a piece of canvas pierced with
holes, hung from the poop in front of the
cuddy door, the side nearest the cuddy being
provided with a door for ingress, forms the
apparatus. It is fixed in the morning, when
the decks are being washed, and each per-
son is limited to three buckets of water —a
quantity all agreed sufficient, though the
heat that is now being felt says more might
perhaps be agreeable.
Notice is Hereby Given, That Miss
Nicholson has kindly consented to attend in
the cuddy on Thursdays and Saturdays, at
2 p.m., for the purpose of practising sacred
music for the Sunday services, and it is
earnestly requested that all who can do so
will lend their assistanc e on such occasions.
T. Field, M.A., Hon. Chaplain.
A CONUNDRUM.
The name of a planet, or the God of War,
Will give my first ; you then with care
For a diminutive must seek,
Which Shakespeare oft made FalstafF speak.
Combine the two, and you will see
A lover of Terpsichore,
And friend well known to you and me.
Answer to the conundrum in our last—
“ Toad.”


We are indebted to the pages of our con-
temporary, “ The Shipping and Mercantile
Gazette,” for the following condensed ac-
count of the fire which occurred on our good
ship on her last homeward voyage :
Monday, 4th November, 1861, saw the
ship leave Adelaide, with 70 passengers, a
cargo principally wool, and several cases for
the Great Exhibition. A4O days’ passage
found her at the Cape, where four days were
pleasantly spent. On Thursday, 2nd Jan.,
1862, lat. 11° 46’ S., long. 9° 50’ W, about
9 a.m., smoke was seen to issue from the
steerage. After a short search, the seat of
the fire, now visible to every one, was found
to be in the ’tween decks. The hatchways
were then, by orders of Captain Lawrence,
battened down, holes cut in the deck, the
hose inserted, and for many and many a
weary hour did crew and passengers, now
divided into regular watches, pump and
pump till the joyful news went round that
they were gaining on the fire ; and here
let it be said to the credit of the fair sex on
board, that, even in the greatest danger,
not the slightest panic or confusion was
observable amongst them. In fact, so far
as they were concerned, it would have been
difficult to have told that anything unusual
was occurring.
In the meantime the boats had been
stowed with necessaries, and were towing
astern; the cutter and lifeboat, however,
unfortunately fouled and broke adrift. Soon
after daylight, on the 3rd, a sail was observed
ahead. Before noon the Dutch barque
“ Commisaro des Honings vander Hein”
was spoken, and informed “ that the ship
was on fire.” A few hours after, the ladies,
children, and some stores were safely put
on board the barque ; and on January sth
the two ships in consort anchored in Cla-
rence Bay, Ascension, where the friendly
services rendered by H.M.SS. Arrogant and
Moeander soon made our ship again ready
for sea. Till 18th January, both passengers
and crew enjoyed themselves to their hearts’
content, and received every kindness on all
sides. On that day the ship again set sail,
and sighted Old England once more on the
21st February. And here let every expres-
sion of thankfulness be made to Captain
Lawrence, officers, and crew of our ship, for
their heroic conduct in a time of great dan-
ger and distress, which, under Providence,
has been the means of allowing us to meet
on the good ship, and make, we hope, a
quick and prosperous voyage to our desti-
nation.
OURSELVES.
As we hope our paper may be read not
only among ourselves, but also by our friends
in the old country, and that a stray number
may be kept and referred to at times, and
its perusal in after years amuse, a list of
ourselves may not be unacceptable ; so we
this week give a list of the cuddy passen-
gers. Next week we shall furnish our
readers with some interesting particulars
regarding the ship, her officers, and crew:—
Captain John Harris ; Dr. F. G. Nash,
F.R.C.S., medical officer; Rev. Thomas
and Mrs. Field ; Mr. and Mrs. J. D. Cossins
and two children ;* Mr. and Mrs. S.
Small ;* Mrs. Masters ; Miss Nicholson ;
Miss Hill ;* S. Marshall ;* A Varndell ;
A, Walker ; S. Faulkner ; A. Carnie ; B.
Wyatt; and G. Davis, Esqrs.
Those m arked thus * are old residents in the
colony, and well known there. Our captain
and doctor have both made many voyages
to, and resided from time to time in, Ade-
laide, the latter being well known there as
colonial surgeon for many years. In the
second cabin there are sixteen passengers
and seventeen in the steerage.
ADVERTISEMENT.
FOUND, the following articles, viz. :
A POCKET KNIFE, part of a
LADY’S HEAD-DRESS, and a Small
SILVER PENCIL CASE.—The owners,
upon stating particulars and paying ex-
penses, may have the same by applying to
tire Editor, at the Office of this Paper.


LOG.
Nautical time observed throughout.
Date.
Long.
Winds.
Saturday, June 14, 35.29 N.
15.03 W
30.32
Sunday, „ 15, 34.12 N,
Monday, „ 16, 32.06 N
17.20 W
N. by W,
30.35
19.63 W.
30.30
Tuesday, „ 17, 29.18 N.
21.56 W.
30.30
Wednesday, „ 18, 26.18 N,
Thursday, „ 19, 24.09 N.
23.41 W
E.N.E.
30.15
24.30 W.
A FINE OPENING is offered to a Young
Man of unexceptionable character, with
a slight taste for Land Surveying. A mo-
derate premium will be required. N.B. —
A comfortable passage guaranteed.
VAE.IETIES.
To be Sold, by Public Auction, a Pack of
Playing Cards, very much the worse for
wear, but well adapted for gun wadding.—
Apply to J. D. Cossins, Assembly Rooms,
Cuddy Town.
Pipes ! Pipes ! Pipes ! —Thos. Parson,
wholesale and retail manufacturer of the
above, begs to inform the trade and the
public generally that the best are always on
Sale at his Manufactory, opposite the Assem-
bly Rooms, Cuddy Town. N.B. —Pipes
mounted in gold or silver, and covered by a
new process.
A young man one day, on the main deck,
eating cheese full of mites, remarked:—
“ Now, I am doing the same as Sampson,
slaying my thousands and tens of thou-
sands.” ‘‘ Ah,” replied a wag, “ and with
Remarks.
Line blue sky.
Fine day ; misty.
Overcast and gloomy.
Fine day ; signalled French
brig.
Overcast, dull, and gloomy.
Fine day ; very clear hori-
zon.
Overcast and gloomy, but
tine. Cape St. Antonio
bears S. 50° 9’ W. Dis-
tance, 272 miles.
weapon
i—the jaw-bone of an
Notice is Hereby Given, That all B—
found straying after this date will be shot,
and parties possessing the same are required
to have them registered according to law.
So fail not thereof. God save the Captain.
Catch ’em all Alive, Oh! Blue
bottles, black beetles, and flies. Catch ’em
all alive, oh ! B— B— caught by the day,
week, or dozen.—Apply to] Mr. Y. Hat,
Regent Street, Cuddy Town. N. B. —
Powder provided.
LATE ADVERTISEMENT.
LOST, a Handsome BRIAR-ROOT
PIPE, with Amber Mouthpiece, and
mounted in Silver. The finder will be re-
warded upon applying to the Captain.
Published on board the Orient, by Order of
the Committee.—July 17, 1862.


SHIP “ ORIENT,” 28th JUNE, 1862.
“HECTE jLOQUOE.”
THE WEEK.
Our editorial faculties seem, as it were,
afflicted by some cause or other, for as we
write, the ideas flow either sluggishly or not
at all; not that the week does not yield the
usual amount of talk and adventure; for,
were we to say so, our columns would belie
us. Has not one of our fellow-passengers
striven well nigh to drive in his uppermost
story? And has not a porpoise died game
on the quarter-deck ? And a thousand
other wonderful events happened, too nu-
merous to mention; but “ we give thee all,
we can no more, though poor the offering
be,” and leave the rest to the indulgent
criticisms of our kind friends.
Perhaps the said editorial faculties have
evaporated with the N.E. trades, which this
week have left us; or rather, may be, we
have left them. Be this, though, as it may,
calm and variable monopolises much space,
under the head of “ Winds,” in our this
week’s “Log;” and, day by day, the fact
shows itself that better must be done to
reach Adelaide within 85 days, for all agree
it will never do for us to be out longer; but
there is plenty of time yet to make even
more than an average passage, and sin-
cerely we hope, both for the credit of the
ship and of her good captain, that it may
be so.
This week we were much pleased to see
(Dmnfs (Dtomi;.
No. 4.
a decided improvement in our dance music;
and, now, of a fine evening, polka, waltz,
and quadrille, follow one another with
ball-room regularity; but we do not men-
tion the fact here to praise ourselves, but
our musicians, and we must, one and all,
congratulate ourselves upon having amongst
us one who shows such a decidedly musical
talent, that even amid his work, and that
not of a description to raise the ideas or to
soften the feelings, and with little or no
practice, he can still retain musical abilities
which will find him a welcome wherever he
goes.
Though we are not seemingly doing
much in getting on our way, yet slowly
and surely we are nearing the Equator, and
this was agreeably brought to our minds
on Tuesday evening last by a sight of the
southern cross, which appeared over the
bows, and cheered, we believe, the hearts
of all.
Sunday passed away quietly. As usual,
service was held, morning and evening, and
sermons preached by our respected clergy-
man, the Eev, Thomas Field.
Some interesting statistics regarding the
ship, to be found in our columns, will, we
are sure, be read with pleasure by all;
and some few thoughts and reflections on
the power of the winds and mighty deep,
and of the ingenuity of man, may be drawn
therefrom.


THE FIRST DISASTER ON BOARD.
On Thursday morning last, as one of
our gentlemen, while under the invigorat-
ing effects of a bath he had just taken,
proceeded to call a “ lady fair,” propelled,
no doubt, by his gallantry, he sought to
reach the entrance to the fair one’s boudoir
by a somewhat quicker process than the
usual old style of using his legs, and, there-
fore, took to leaping and flying in a manner
most acrobatic. But an obstacle presents
itself; a large cane-bottomed chair stands
in the way ; but Adonis never was more
anxious to reach the object of his affections
than “ our gallant gent ” was to inform the
fair lady that “ all was ready,” so, instead
of going through the somewhat, perhaps,
longer, but safer, process of removing the
obstacle, he takes it at a leap!!! But our
modern Adonis was not, unfortunately,
blessed with those appendages commonly
called wings, and cuddies have ceilings, so
that the head of our now-cooled, but lately
“ too-ardent gent” comes somewhat into
contact with the hard wood; this was, per-
haps too hard, but it effectually cured his
ardour, and confined him for some hours to
his cabin, where the doctor recommended
him to seek that rest and quiet not to be
obtained elsewhere, which soon effectually
cured his wounds. Much sympathy was
felt for the poor fellow by the ladies, par-
ticularly by the one somewhat unwittingly,
perhaps, the cause of “ the first disaster on
board.”
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
In answer to numerous inquiries we beg
to inform our readers that—•
1. “ The Orient’s Observer ” will be
published every Saturday morning.
2. All communications intended for the
week’s issue must come to hand by Thurs-
day evening.
3. Anonymous contributions will not be
received; the name being required in all
cases, as a guarantee of good faith, though
not for publication.
4. We cannot undertake to return re-
jected communications.
5. Although this, our fourth issue, is
dated 28th June, 1862, it is not published
till 24th July, 1862. For the reason for
this we must refer our readers to our first
issue.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
POUND, a white cambric POCKET-
HANDKERCHIEF. Whoever has
lost the same and applies to No. 4, Oxford
Street, Cuddy Town, giving full particu-
lars, may have the article for a small
consideration.
T OST, Stolen, or Strayed, a MEER-
J.J SHAUM PIPE, silver-mounted, with
amber mouthpiece, and covered with cha-
mois leather. Whoever will return the
same to the Editor, will be rewarded ac-
cording to merit.
One Bottle of Grog Reward.
LOST, a child’s small drab VECUNA
COAT. Whoever will restore the
same to the owner, at the Assembly Rooms,
Cuddy Town, shall receive the above re-
ward.
LOST, A BOOK, entitled “ MONTE
CRISTO.” Whoever will restore
the same to the owner shall be handsomely
rewarded. Apply at No. 4, Regent Street,
Cuddy Town.
Answer to conundrum in our last.—
“ Marshall.”
A PORPOISE.
As we were busily engaged, turning over
in our editorial mind, on Tuesday morning
last, the means to be adopted for the estab-
lishment of a paper on board; and as idea
after idea and difficulty after difficulty
crowded into our now somewhat excited
brain, but were as quickly laid aside, the
idea booked, and the difficulty, either really
or fancifully, overcome; all of a sudden our
labours were brought to a somewhat abrupt
termination by a great state of excitement
that seemed to pervade the rest of the
ship, so as to render thinking impossible,
and a sober thought unobtainable. Throw-
ing aside our pen, we proceeded to see the
cause of “ the row and the racket all along
the Orient Packet,” and found, stretched
on the quarter -deck, “ all covered with
wounds and glory,” a porpoise, that had
been harpooned by one of our foremast
men, not yet dead, and seemingly deter-
mined to die game; however, the deadly
steel soon did its work, and, with a struggle-
ugglc-uggle, the unfortunate denizen of the
deep soon gave up the ghost. We have


not often seen such a large brute, which
seems truly to partake somewhat of the
qualities and form of a pig and fish. The
eatable parts —more like rumpsteak than
LOG.
Nautical time observed throughout.
Saturday, June 21
Sunday, „ 22
Monday „23
Tuesday, „ 24
Wednesday ” 25
Thursday, „ 26
Friday, „ 27
Last week a short, and somewhat cur-
tailed account of ourselves appeared in our
columns, and, carrying out a promise there
expressed, we this week give some few par-
ticulars of our ship, her officers, and crew.
The ship was built in 1853, by Messrs.
Thomas Bilbe and Company, in Nelson
Dock, London, and is of 1,032 tons register,
though capable of carrying 1,600 tons
burden. Being a favourite ship, she is
much sought after by passengers, especially
by colonists; and on one of her homeward
trips carried 94 passengers of all classes.
Adelaide, South Australia, to which (if
we safely arrive this passage) she will have
made six voyages, has always been the
port of her destination, except in 1853,
when she was first built, she was chartered
by the Government and sent to the Crimea,
and there used as an hospital ship for the
anything else—were soon separated from
the rest of the oily carcass, which was
thrown overboard, to make a meal for the
first shark that came across it.
Remarks.
Overcast and gloomy ; Cape
St. Antonio bears S. 17° 10”
73 miles.
Overcast, gloomy, and foggy;
signalled English ship 3rd
O. No. 680, Sunderland to
Shanghai 26 days.
Foggy and gloomy.
Overcast; oppressive atmo-
sphere.
Overcast; a S.W. swell (sail
ahead).
P.m. signalled English barque,
“ Queen Hortense,” Swansea
to Shanghai, 31 days out;
rain; sheet-lightning in the
Overcast, gloomy, with squalls
passing and showers; caught
a shark.
brave fellows wounded during the war with
Russia. Except during her homeward
trip from the Crimea, when Captain Balen-
tine commanded her, and for this voyage,
when we sail under Captain Harris, Cap-
tain Lawrence has always had the com-
mand, and, by his urbanity and general
courtesy, rendered himself a favourite with
all who have sailed with him; and under
him she has made one of the quickest
passages on record to Adelaide, viz., in
seventy-five days. The total length of the
ship is 215 feet, her breadth 36 feet, her
mainmast rises 140 feet from the deck, and,
for the sake of security, 22 feet below; when
in full sail she carries on 3 masts 41 sails,
formed of upwards of 4,600 yards of can-
vass, and uses upwards of 1,500 fathoms of
rope of all sorts to rig and fix the same.
Besides our captain, there are 4 mates,


the Ist, Mr. Irvine, having made many
voyages in the ship. Bound to the ship
are 8 apprentices, or midshipmen, Eng-
land’s future sea-captains. The crew con-
sists of 16 able, and 2 ordinary, seamen,
under the immediate command of the boat-
swain. A head-steward and 3 under, with
2 cooks, a stock-keeper, butcher, and water-
man, look after the eating department.
Two carpenters and a sailmaker play no
inconsiderable part in our community;
which, if our readers will take the trouble
to put the figures together, they will find
to consist of 96 in all ; and to feed the
same, large quantities of provisions, both
fresh and salt, are needed; and we left
Plymouth with 26 sheep, 15 pigs and a sow
in pig, 16 dozen fowls, 7 dozen ducks, 2
dozen geese, \ dozen turkeys, not forget-
ting a cow and calf, the latter of which
has since been turned into veal. Immense
supplies of preserved and salt provisions
lie in the ’tween decks, sufficient both for
the outward and homeward voyages, the
quantities of which are only known to that
wonderous being, the steward; but we may
state that 1,000 eggs will be consumed on
the two voyages.
On freight there is a miscellaneous
cargo, and the following live stock: —36
rams, 3 dogs, and 12 rabbits, and a whole
host of birds, gold fish, and other favourites
for our fair colonial friends.
FISHING EXTRAORDINARY.
It is seldom our pleasing lot to record a
more successful day’s fishing than that
which, on Monday last, fell to the lot of
a well known and highly respected inha-
bitant of the adjacent town of Below, who,
after three hours’ of the most persevering
work with the rod and line, succeeded in
pulling to the brink of our noble river—
his bait, uninjured. We are given to un-
derstand that the fortunate fisherman then
wound up his line, and went home to dinner,
extremely satisfied with his day’s sport.
mo BE SOLD CHEAP, a PAIR of
X BOOTS, now, unfortunately, of little
use to the owner, on account of the diffi-
culty he experiences in getting into them.
Their size being so gigantic, they are only
suited to a good Walker. —Apply to Queer
Legs, Esq., care of the Editor.
To Schoolmasters and others.
T OST, Stolen, or Strayed, about fifty
X-J days since, the letter “ H,” last seen
with “ Aan, ’am, Ain, ’is, ’an.” Whosoever
will give such information as shall lead to
his recovery, will be handsomely rewarded;
and, if this should meet the eye of dear H,
he is earnestly requested to return to a
large circle of sorrowing friends. —Apply
any day, in the Cuddy, from 3J to 5 p.m.
ASSEMBLY BOOMS, REGENT STREET.
Lessee and Manager, Mn. Cosstns.
Grand Vocal and Instrumental Concert,
For this evening only.
Programme.
Underture.—“ What are the Wild Waves
Saying?’’—Band.
Song.—“ The Mousecatcher’s Son.”—
Sig. Yamdelli.
Chorus. —“ Haul Taut the Main Brace.”—
The Company.
Doit. —“ Did it.”—Madle. Nicholini and
Sig. Faulkini.
Song.—“ Luff, there ! Luff!” —
Mad. Masterini.
An interval of ten minutes.
Part Second.
Chorus.—“ Very much so, and so on.” —
The Company.
Solo. —“ The fish that in the briny deep.”—
Sigs. Varndelli and Faulkini.
Doit.—“ Won’t do it.” —Sig. Litlini.
Song.—“ Taking the sun.”—Sig. Davidis.
Finale.—“ God save the Queen.” —
The Company.
Piano Mr. Winkles.
Conductor Sig. Wyattini.
Stalls, 55.; Boxes, 45.; Pit, 25.; Gallery, 6d.
Refreshments of the best quality may be
obtained at the bar.
N.B. No pipes allowed.
Published on board the “ Orient,” by order
of the Committee, 24th July, 1862.


SHIP “ ORIENT,” sth JULY, 1862.
“hecte loquoh.”
THE WEEK.
At last the line is passed, and the S.E.
trades carrying our good ship on her course ;
and the temper of our good Captain (though
tell it him not), which has not been the best
for the last week, wonderfully improved
when finding, on taking the Sun yesterday
at noon, that we were four miles south of
that which has been in everybody’s mouth
for the last ten days or fortnight. But, if our
readers will refer to our log, they will there
find that a continuance of contrary winds
and calms has attended our passage for the
last week. Though, now we are over, let’s
hope the worst is also over, and that now
we shall experience nothing but fair winds,
and plenty of them. But in our pleasure
there is missed a personage who usually
attends the ship at this time—we allude to
Neptune and his motley crew. From ru-
mours that have reached us, this is to be
placed to the debit of certain individuals,
who seem, in a manner most annoying, to
have forgotten certain small perquisites
usually allowed to our hard-working and
deserving seamen. This, we feel confident,
is not by any means creditable to the parties
concerned ; and these few remarks of ours
will, we trust, remedy the evil justly com-
plained of. But should they not have the
desired effect, the delinquents may rest
assured we shall do more than ventilate the
0 mid's (Dbsmm.
No. 5.
subject. We seldom take upon ourselves
to write aught but pleasantly ; but, in our
position as journalists, we must see justice
done to all parties. So, should the case
require it, and seemingly it does, we shall
not rest till sounds of merriment from the
forecastle proclaim that “Grog, O!” is the
order of the day, or rather, of the night.
We understand, however, that a move is
being made, and the subject mooted of
sending something to the forecastle, which,
we have no doubt, will have the effect of
causing Neptune to appear. We are glad
of this, for it does seem to us a pity that
old customs, which are, as it were, part and
parcel of “ Jack,” should be allowed,
through want of proper support from those
in a position to aid them, to fall to the
ground. So we hope next week to be able
to record much merriment, caused by the
frolics of Messrs. Neptune & Co.
Though hitherto somewhat unfortunate
in winds, our piscatorial pursuits proceed
with a success most gratifying. We have
to record this week the capture of two
sharks, both young ; though it does strike
us that little was gained by again confiding
to the deep the carcase of a young shark,
such as was done on Saturday last ; clean
decks may be very agreeable, but to our
worldly mind, a dish of young shark is more
so. We are now surrounded by large
quantities of flying and other fish, and soon
hope to see on our dinner table a dish of
either fresh fish or sea fowl.


Of “ Accidents and Offences ” it is our
pleasing duty to record but few. One of
our ladies, on entering the bath on Tuesday
morning, unfortunately struck her foot,
and for a time suffered much pain from the
blow. Under the care, though, of our
talented medical officer, she is now nearly
recovered, and may again be seen enjoying
the fresh air on the poop, though not yet
able to do much more than sit, without the
aid of some friendly arm. Sundry straw
hats have taken a fancy to the briny deep
during this week ; but, as they were mere
“men of straw,” their absence will, we
trust, not be very severely felt. On Sunday
last, the usual services were held by our
respected clergyman, who again preached
one of his appropriate discourses, taking for
his text St. Luke xiv., 22 v. The day
passed off quietly, as usual, though during
the night we were visited by very heavy
rain, and during a violent squall one of our
boats was seriously damaged.
We are sorry to say that a paragraph,
which appeared in our issue of 7th June
last, has given umbrage to one of our fellow
passengers ; but, confident that aught we
had inserted could not cause offence to any
one, a public meeting was called, and the
sentiments there expressed were only such
as could cause us to redouble our ener-
gies to improve our pages, and so repay,
if possible, in some measure, the kind words
used on that occasion.
OUR EDITOR.
Come, look at our paper,
And learn, ere yon look,
That all are expected
To fill a small nook.
You may quiz as you please,
But the penalty is,
That you likewise leave something
For others to quiz.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
In answer to numerous enquiries, we beg
to inform our that—
1. Anonymous contributions will not be
received.
2. We cannot undertake to return rejected
communications.
3. The “ Orient’s Observer ” will be
published every Saturday morning, back
numbers from 7th June last being issued
on Thursday mornings.
GAZETTE.
Notice. —lt is particularly requested that
gentlemen in bathing costume will not
appear on the poop after 7.30 a.m.
By Desire.
ADVERTISEMENT
ONE PENNY REWARD.
LOST, on Wednesday evening, between
10 and 11 p.m., a WHITE POCKET
H ANDKERCHIEF, marked “ Miriam E.
Hill ” Whosoever will return it to the
owner, at No. 6, Regent Street, Cuddy
Town, will receive the above reward.
CONUNDRUMS.
Take a Latin imperative of the verb “to
give,” of “ strength ” then take the Latin
nominative ; combine them for the name of
a gentleman, who will make the “ Observer”
succeed if he can.
For infants and horses my first is'much
used ;
My second a theme on which poets have
mused ;
My whole by the ladies is abused on board,
And to which their good wishes they do not
accord.
When from the Ark the world came forth
in pairs,
Who first heard the sounds of boots upon
the stairs ?
Answers are requested.


OUR PISCATORIAL PURSUITS.
We were, we are happy to record, visited
with much success this week. On Satur-
day a shark was observed near the ship,
evidently on the look-out for a dainty
morsel; and this he got with a vengeance,
in the shape of a piece of salt pork covering
a few inches of good steel, which he found
but difficult to digest. So voracious was
the brute that he at the same time seized
the bait and a small hook belonging to a
gentleman who, from his cabin window, was
quietly enjoying the pleasure of bobbing for
more harmless game. He was with but
little difficulty hoisted on board, and proved
to be a very young one, some four feet long ;
and, after causing some merriment by his
antics, was soon despatched, and as soon,
by the order of the boatswain, we believe,
thrown overboard, much to the annovance
of the ladies, who wanted “just another
look at the dear creature.” On Monday,
another still smaller was captured ; and,
though most carefully preserved from the
boatswain’s profaning eyes, during the night
disappeared—took it into his head, we have
no doubt, to rejoin his brethren.
OUR FIRST DIFFICULTY.
A public meeting was held on the poop
yesterday, 4th July, 1862—Captain Harris
in the chair.
Mr. Davis stated that a letter had been
received from certain parties, complaining
that “ A certain paragraph in the 4th page
of the ‘Orient’s Observer’ of 7th June,
1862, was personally offensive, and that they
would request the same not to be repeated.”
The 4th page of the said paper was then
read ; and Mr. , after stating his ob-
jections to the paragraph headed “ Sale by
auction, this day,” avowed himself as the
writer of the letter referred to.
The Chairman then put it to the meet-
ing, “ Whether the article referred to con-
tained aught offensive to Mr. ,” when
it was unanimously resolved—“ That, in the
opinion of this meeting, nothing personally
offensive was to be found in the article
headed ‘ Sale by auction, this day;’ and that
the meeting feels surprised that Mr.
should take offence at that which was merely
meant as an innocent amusement to, and
for the diversion of, the readers of the
‘ Orient’s Observer.’ ”
A vote of thanks and confidence was then
passed to the Committee of the “ Orient’s
Observer,” and carried unanimously.
Above, our readers will find the abridged
report of a public meeting, held yesterday,
by desire of the Committee of Management
of this paper, on the receipt of a letter com-
plaining that a paragraph, headed, “ Sale
by auction, this day,” which appeared in
our paper of 7th June last, was personally
offensive. The Committee being appointed
by the passengers at large, held its autho-
rity directly from them, and could not, or
ever would, recognize the right of a single
individual to dictate what they should or
what they should not publish ; and, though
at all times most careful that nought should
appear in the paper that could in any way
be construed into an offensive remark
against any of their fellow-passengers, they
must state they will still continue to insert,
as they think fit, such little quibbles such
as is now, they feel confident, the cause of
an unjust complaint. Indeed, the results
of the above meeting confirm their opinion ;
and they shall, though sorry that offence
has been taken, still continue to publish
“ The Orient’s Observer,” with the success,
they hope, which has hitherto attended
their efforts to please and amuse their
fellow -passengers.
THE BATH
Is, we are happy to say, in its improved
form, receiving all the support possible.
Every morning sees all our gentlemen, and,
we are happy to say, nearly all our ladies,
enjoying its invigorating and healthy use,
and the hot weather we now have makes in
doubly enjoyable. In fact, it is looked
forward to by every one on board as a good
thing, of which they cannot have too much.


LOG.
Nautical time observed throughout.
Date.
Long.
Winds,
Saturday, June 28,
5 21 N
22 52W
Calms, vari-
ables.
30.08
Sunday, „ 29,
4 13„
23 45 „
24 10 „
S. and S.W.
30.10
Monday, „ 30.
3 46 „
Calms, squalls
30.10
Tuesday, July 1,
Wednesday, „ 2,
Thursday „ 3,
2 57 „
2 47 „
23 46 „
26 13 „
26 44 „
S.W.. S.S.W.
5.8. W., S.W
30.05
30.05
2 07 „
30.08
to S.S.W.
In the midst of our editorial labors,
sundry sounds that reach our ears proclaim
that Neptune is under weigh, and we shall
next week not fail to give an account of
the “ Old Boy ” and his doings
THE LADIES’ COMPLAINT.
Oh ! ladies, dears, what shall we do ?
For we’ve got no one to speak to.
To begin : There’s Mr. Walker,
You’ll agree he’s no talker ;
After that comes Mr. Wyatt,
So very remarkably quiet.
To follow ; There’s Mr. Faulkner ;
Now, I’m sure he don’t talk ; nor
His darling cousin, Mr. Yarndell;
What he says a word you can’t tell;
And then, including Mr. Small,
With the other eight don’t talk at all:
So I propose we form a club,
And see if they don’t leave their rub.
Remorse has so preyed on the insane
writer of the above (who, we are happy to
say, is not of the fair sex), that, to drown
it, he seized the cards and played till he
had won or lost (we forget which) some
dozens of beer. —Ed. O. O.
Remarks.
Squally throughout; passed
three large ships trying to
get southward.
Squally, with rain; atmos-
phere very oppressive.
Calms, squalls, and rain ;
very dirty, pitch dark
night.
Squally, gloomy.
Gloomy, squally.
The weather to-day is much
the same as last few days ;
calms and variable winds
appear to be our lot.
First number of the paper
issued.
Signalled a troop ship run-
ning northward. This is
the finest day we have had
for a long time.
WATER! WATER! WATER!
Notice is Hereby Given, That all
persons, after this date, requiring more than
three buckets of water for a bath in the
morning, will be liable to a penalty not
exceeding one bottle of grog weekly.
By Order of the Waterman.
RECEIPTS FOR COURTSHIP.
2 or 3 dears, 2 or 3 sweets,
2 or 3 balls, 2 or 3 treats,
2 or 3 serenades, given as a lure,
2 or 3 oaths —how much they endure !
2 or 3 times led out from the play,
2 or 3 soft speeches made by the way,
2 or 3 tickets for 2 or 3 times,
2 or 3 love-letters, writ all in rhymes,
2 or 3 months keeping strict to these rules,
Can never fail making a couple of f
Our readers will notice that this week we
present them with a portrait of our Editor
in full costume, who acts also as his own
newsboy.
Published on board the “ Orient,” by order
of the Committee. —sth July, 1862.


“ REOTE LOQDOB.”
THE WEEK,
Welcomed in with squalls and rain, has
proved fruitful of talk and adventure to our
fellow-passengers. Neptune has appeared
and departed in all his usual glory; though
not without a mishap, as our readers will
find upon reference to another part of our
columns. On Saturday last our main-top-
gallant and royal sails, with the spar, were,
in a squall, carried away, though not lost;
and, thanks to the energy of our officers
and men, not many hours elapsed before
things were again all in order, and the
sails set to the breeze, that, despite squalls
and rain, has fortunately attended us all
this week till yesterday morn, when a
calm set in, and the sun rose, showing near
us two ships, one of which, the “ Tyburnia,”
on Thursday, lay near us all day, and con-
versed on the usual topics, till the sun
going down prevented further conversation;
the other, the “ Blanche Moore,” from
Liverpool to Melbourne, with emigrants,
with which we exchanged signals, and to
which our boat put off, bringing back
sundry barrels of flour, very acceptable to
us; our boat then made a second journey,
freighted with sundry presents for our
friends in the “ Blanche Moore,” and hav-
ing several of our passengers on board.
On the way they met a boat coming from
our consort, which soon came alongside,
SHIP “ OKIENT,” 12th JULY, 1862.
No. 6.
and exposed to the admiring eyes of our
fair ladies the handsome countenances of
some half dozen officers and passengers,
who soon made themselves at home, and
left, we hope, with the good wishes of all
on board; we are certain with those of the
ladies, who were, however, made to feel some-
what of the “ green-eyed monster,” upon
our boat returning, the gentlemen being
full of the charms and beauties of a certain
“ dark-eyed fair ” whom they had had the
pleasure of seeing on board the “ Blanche
Moore.” However, “shadows are fleet-
ing,” so are pretty girls, at sea; and
though we may have seen the last of the
“ Blanche Moore,” we may rest assured we
have not heard the last of “ the pretty
girl.”
THE FIRST SPAR LOST THIS
VOYAGE.
Last week began and ended with, more
or less, in sailor’s phraseology, “ dirty
weather,” i.e., squalls a very unusual
thing in the S.E. trades —but, poor
“ Orient!” you seem fated, tied, as it
were, to bad winds, squalls, and calms ;
and on Saturday morning last it seemed as
though all the “ dirt ” in the vicinity was
collecting to give us a “ benefit,” and
squall followed squall from early dawn,
till “here comes another,” and a conse-
quent retreat below, seemed the order of
the day. Soon after noon matters looked


very threatening, and in consequence of
some repairs, the stays of our main-mast
being loosened, some apprehension was felt
for the safety of our top-gallant spar,
which now bent visibly to the wind. All
were quietly conversing on the poop, when
a sudden and very powerful squall arose,
and, without almost the slightest noise,
our main-top-gallaut spar, with top-gallant
sail and royal set, snapped in two and fell
over to leeward; it was fortunately, how-
ever, not lost, the leeward stays and hal-
liards showing the goodness of their make,
by holding the spar, yards and all. Upon
the accident being known, some consterna-
tion was observable in the countenances of
our ladies; but our captain’s exclamation
of “ Oh, that’s nothing!” soon made mat-
ters look brighter, and the hands being
ordered aloft, before nightfall, a new spar
was fixed, the yards again placed in posi-
tion, and the sails set.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
In answer to numerous inquiries, we beg
to inform our readers that—
1. Anonymous contributions will not
be received.
2. We cannot undertake to return re-
jected communications.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
LOST, a PEN-KNIFE, with three blades,
and the handle of buckhorn. A
handsome reward will be given to the
finder upon producing the same to the
Editor of this paper.
One Bottle of Beer Reward.
LOST, on or about the Ist instant, a
Russian leather CARD-CASE filled
with cards, with the owner’s name en-
graved thereon. Whosoever will bring the
same to the owner, shall receive the above
reward.
NEPTUNE AND HIS DOINGS,
Though forming part of last week’s
events, from causes explained in our last
issue, necessarily receive notice here; we
must content ourselves, though, with a
short account, as the space at our command
forbids more.
Late on Friday evening, certain inquiries
for “ old do’ ” &c., denoted that some-
thing unusal was in the wind, raised, we
have no doubt, by sundry potations, the
result of a small collection in the cuddy;
and, about 8 o’clock, sounds of merriment
issuing from the forecastle proclaimed that
Neptune, accompanied by his better-half
and little Nep., was approaching the main
deck; he shortly appeared, decked out in
all the “tag, rag, and bobtail” that Jack
so delights in; and, after the usual interro-
gations, accompanied with Jack’s never-
failing songs, the “ Old Boy ” again re-
tired to his briny home. His chariot of fire
was, however, untimely extinguished by the
elements, which proved even a match for
their master. He, however, left behind
him a souvenir in the the shape of the
following letter, which we publish:—
“ Equator , 4 th July, 1862.
“ Dear Friends,
“ I have now come to receive you
with a hearty welcome to the southern
climes. It is always with great pleasure
that I board an English Merchantman,
having tested, in days of yore, the gene-
rosity of all British subjects. I boarded a
vessel a few days ago, from London, and,
with great pleasure, I was informed that
my favourite ship, “ Orient,” was shortly
expected; for I have a great partiality for
regular traders that come this way. I
must now conclude with my hearty thanks
to you for the generosity you have shown
to my sons, by drinking my health at your
expense; wishing you all a more favour-
able passage than you have hitherto had,
and a hearty welcome to the Land of Gold.
“ I remain,
“ Your fishy friend,
“ Neptune.
“ Adieu.”
Our captain, too, was also honoured with
a communication, in which Nep.’s opinions
of his friends were freely stated. The
absence of the usual accompaniments to
Neptune’s presence will, we fancy, not be
regretted, as they are often carried to an
excess by no means necessary or agreeable.


The “ Tyburnia,” which we signalled
yesterday, on account of, we presume,
being in the vicinity of the Hotspur Shoals,
requested us to burn a light during the
night. This we did; but, strange to say,
she did not answer; our locality, evidently,
being all she wanted to know.
THE “BLANCHE MOORE,”
From Liverpool to Melbourne, with upwards
of 400 emigrants on board, yesterday, in a
calm that unfortunatety visited us, lay
near us, and soon after daybreak signalling
commenced, and after the usual amount of
pro and coti,, it ended with a boat, com-
manded by our energitic Ist mate, making
for the ship, that lay some four miles dis-
tant ; after an interval of some hour and a
half, they returned with a small stock of
flour, which, despite the supply we pro-
cured from the “ Abblassendram,” was
still wanted on board ; the boat imme-
diately returned with sundry presents for
our emigrating friends, in the shape of
potatoes, novels, and newspapers. Soon
after their departure, a boat was seen to
be lowered from the “ Blanche Moore,”
which presently arrived alongside, contain-
ing some half dozen passengers and officers,
who were cordially welcomed, and, after a
slight repast, made a tour of the ship,
but were soon again obliged to return to
their vessel, being bid adieu to by our fellow-
passengers, who, ladies particularly,
seemed to vie with one another who
should cheer the loudest. Anon, our boat
arrived, its occupiers pleased with their'
visit and the courteous behaviour of the
captain of the “ Blanche Moore,” to whom,
and to our emigrating friends, let’s wish a
prosperous voyage and much good fortune
in the land of their adoption.
Before our friends left us, they left be-
hind them the following small memento of
their visit, which we publish with much
pleasure.
“ The chief officer, purser, and saloon-
passengers of the “ Blanche Moore,” beg
to return their thanks to the captain and
saloon-passengers of the “ Orient,” for the
very kind reception given them on board,
and hope they will have a quick and pro-
sperous voyage.
“ At Sea, July 12, 1862.”
THE MEETING OF THE SHIPS.
Two barques met on the deep mid sea,
When calms had still’d the tide;
A few bright hours of summer glee
There found them side by side.
The voices of the fair and brave
Rose mingling thence in mirth;
And sweetly floated o’er the wave
The melodies of earth.
Moonlight, on that lone, sultry main,
Cloudless and lovely slept;
While dancing step, and festive strain,
Each deck in triumph swept.
A little while such joy was cast
Over the deep’s repose,
Till the loud singing winds, at last,
Like trumpet-music rose.
And proudly, freely, on their way
The parting vessels bore,
In calm or storm, by rock or bay,
To meet —Oh! never more!
Never to meet—not to be near—
To aid in hours of woe.
And thus bright spirits mingle here,
And ties are formed below!
12 th July, 1862.
CONUNDRUMS.
Join to my first, which is an exclamation,
Anything or nothing, in a French accepta-
tion,
But, truly, these must always be
Joined together before tea!
Do this, and then you will not fail
To name the ship in which we sail.
My first is the name of a party on board.
My second oft destroyed by fire and sword;
And my whole in our sea has lately been
Trying some fresh honours for her crew to
glean.
ANSWERS TO CONUNDRUMS.
1. “ Davies.”
2. “ Cribbage.”
3. The editor regrets his inability to give
an answer to this, none having reached
him.


LOG.
Nautical time observed throughout.
Friday, „ 11
VARIETIES
To the Editor of the “ Orient's Observer .”
Sir, —Will you allow me, through the
medium of your influential and widely-read
columns, to call attention to a crying abuse,
crying, I say, sir, because nought seems to
remedy it; neither your well-rendered re-
marks, or our ridicule. I mean, sir, the
abuse of crinoline—not the use of it—far
be it from me to wish to reduce your fair
readers to the consistency of shadows; but
may I request you to insert in your next
“ Gazette ” “ All ladies are to restrict then-
circumference to three yards.”
“ By Desire.”
and, by doing so, you will oblige
Your obedient servant,
Homo.
[Though inserting the communication
of our correspondent and inviting further
remarks on the subject, we must add that,
having always the greatest respect for the
ladies, we do not either agree with the
Remarks.
Squally and dirty; ship pitch-
ing heavily, carried away
main-top gallant mast, sent
a new mast aloft.
Squally and dirty; ship pitch-
ing heavily; signalled French
brig standing northwards.
Gloomy, passing showers, tur-
bulent sea.
Gloomy, squally, and dirty;
very turbulent sea; three
ships in sight, standing
southwards.
Overcast, gloomy, squalls, and
calms; turbulent sea.
Fine day; signalled English
ship, “ Tyburnia,” London
to Bombay, 43 days, all
well.
Fine day, passing showers; a
large ship in sight, evidently
trying to get south; signalled
and boarded the English
ship, “ Blanche Moore,”
from Liverpool to Mel-
bourne, 47 days, all well.
opinions of the writer or shall we insert his
desires in the “ Gazette.” —Ed. O. o.]
By appointment—Breeches-maker to her
Majesty.
Thomas Jackson, Cross-Leg Street,
Below Town, artist in draping the real
figure ; only maker of the original 16s.
trowsers. Coats and vests equally cheap.
Gentlemen’s own materials made up.
N.B. Repairs neatly executed.
Japhat Newland, in returning thanks
for much attention and many favours re-
ceived, begs to inform his friends that the
Guv: has turned up, but the maternity
being missed, he is about to look the old
woman up and so on. J. N. has been
sorry to hear many unfavourable remarks
regarding his “ hymeneal proceedings,”
and hopes his friends do not feel offended
at the same.
Published on board the “ Orient,” by order
of the Committee, 12th July, 1862.


SHIP “ ORIENT,” 19th JULY, 18G2.
"IIECTE LOQrOU.”
THE WEEK
Must, if our readers will kindly excuse
us, be a short one—not exactly the week
proper, but our usual article, for the amount
of other matter which it behoves us to
insert this week leaves the space at our
disposal but small. Our readers will read,
we are sure, with much pleasure, letters
from correspondents in other parts of the
ship, which will be found in other parts of
our columns, and express a hope with us
that week by week their able pens may tend
to the pleasure and amusement of all. This
week the good ship has been proved and
found not wanting ; and it must be a cause
of congratulation to all that nought in the
shape of a vessel that we have yet come
across has taken the palm from the “ Orient.”
Long may she “ go and do likewise.” The
winds this week have for once been won-
derfully favourable ; and in these latitudes,
the horror of poor captains, where contrary
winds and calms generally abound, we have
had good N. and N.E. winds, which are
fast carrying us below the latitude of the
Cape, where, if we can only get a good
westerly breeze, we may yet reach Adelaide
within the ‘‘Orient’s” usual time. It is
gradually and gradually getting colder, and
day by day thicker and warmer costumes
appear. At present it is delightful in the
extreme, and very agreeable after the great
mn (Orii'nt’fi (Db.*s error.
THE “ TYBUKNTA,”
No. 7.
heat of the tropics. Cape pigeons, in great
numbers, now surround the ship, and are
falling victims to the treacherous threads
that fly from the stern ; we shall hope to
see some preserved and stuffed. We beg
to call the serious attention of our readers
to the notice as to gunpowder that appears
in our this week’s Gazette, and trust that
all will see the advisability of it, and at
once conform to what is. no doubt, more
than an official notice, namely, a universal
desire.
Which we slightly noticed last week,
proved herself worthy of the cognomen she
bears, viz., commodore ship of Messrs.
Soames & Co.’s (her owners) fleet, by main-
taining a close race with us from the time
we first signalled her, on Friday last, till
Tuesday, when she stood away to the east,
and towards middle day was lost to view.
She had at times even got rather ahead of
us; and though her position caused some
little excitement on board, no anxiety was
felt, as w r e all knew that, give the old
“Orient” her head and the wind, and
there are but few ships afloat that will leave
her astern ; and though sailing against a
crack ship, at the time the “Tyburnia”
w’as lost to view she w'as no way astern.
Most of the time she was in sight w r e kept up
a running fire of signals ; and her captain
seemed to know we were beating him, for


he paid us the compliment of saying “ We
were a fast sailer.” While thanking him
for the same, we cannot help saying, “ Stale
news, Captain and he found his compli-
ment was by no means an empty one. And
here we must congratulate the owners and
Captain of our ship for possessing such a
fine vessel —one that has hitherto passed
everything she has come across, even the far-
famed and fast-sailing “Tyburnia” in-
cluded ; and we hope that from this time
till our arrival in Adelaide, we shall be able
to bear testimony to the same fact, and have
no cause to regret our congratulations.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS
In answer to numerous enquiries, we beg
to state that—
1. Anonymous contributions will not be
received, the name being required in all
cases as a guarantee of good faith, though
not for publication.
2. We cannot undertake to return rejected
communications.
3. The “ Orient’s Observer” will be pub-
lished every Saturday morning, back num-
bers from 7th June last being issued on
Thursday mornings.
4. The paper will be in the custody of
the Editor, to whom all applications for
perusal must be made.
GAZETTE.
All insertions in this Gazette are by
authority, and our readers are requested to
note the same.
NOTICE.
Passengers are requested to bring all
gunpowder now in their possession to the
chief officer, for the purpose of placing the
same in the magazine.
All parties neglecting to comply with the
above will be held responsible ; and Twenty
Shillings Reward will be given to any one
giving information of such neglect.
By Order.
After this date all articles found, and
handed to the Editor for safe keeping and
advertising, will be delivered to the owner
upon payment of sixpence each article, the
same to go towards the expense of printing
the paper.
CONUNDRUMS.
My first is a bird, my second a tree ;
Now, put them together, and then you will
see
A name not forgotten by many on earth,
Having saved them from death, and been
in at their birth.
My first a letter of the alphabet or two ;
My second is what we must all surely do ;
My third is used by schoolboys dapper,
And my whole essential to our paper.
Below Town, 17th July, 1862.
Answer to conundrums in our last —1.
Orient; 2. Nashville.
To the Editor of “ The Orient’s Observer .”
Dear Mr. Editor, Having perused
the columns of your valuable paper from
week to week, and derived much pleasure
and profit therefrom, we thought that a few
lines from us who reside at a distance might
be interesting to some of your readers.
Although we cannot boast of such a fertile
inventive genius among us as the originator
of that curious and complicated specimen
of a pigeon net which afforded us so much
amusement yesterday, yet we cannot but
recall to mind with feelings of pride the
exploit of one of our townsmen, who, a few
days ago, with unequalled dexterity and
skill, managed to entice an unwary shark
from its natural element, and, amid triumph-
ant shouts, to drag it to the forecastle. And
no later than yesterday, another of our
fellow-townsmen succeeded in capturing
a Cape pigeon, which, we regret to say, was
suffered to escape before our fair friends
had an opportunity of satisfying a laudable
curiosity by examining its beauties. We
have observed with satisfaction the gallant
manner in which our noble ship, guided by
her still nobler captain and ctcw, has


breasted the mighty deep, and think that
none of our neighbours will show themselves
so devoid of all esprit de corps as not to
regard our victory over the far-famed “ Ty-
burnia” as a special subject of congratula-
tion.
Hoping that we may soon have an oppor-
tunity of addressing you again.
We remain,
Yours faithfully,
Suburban Correspondent.
LOG.
18 69 „
Long.
Saturday, July 12,
16 59 S
35 15W.
Sunday, „ 13
33 15 „
Monday, „ 14,
Tuesday, „ 15.
21 34 „
24 32 „
31 16 „
29 06 „
Wednesday,,, 16,
28 15 „
26 44 „
Thursday, „ 17.
31 00 „
25 15 „
Friday, „ 18,
33 33 „
23 30 „
Really the ingenuity displayed on board
our ship, particularly by one of our fellow
passengers, is beyond belief In fact, if
chips and rubbish bore any relation to the
number of articles made and invented, we
should soon have enough to stock half-a-
enough to stock half-a
dozen “ genera] shops’’ - chairs, snuff boxes,
sea-bird traps of the most novel description,
apparatuses for raising water, windmills, and
countless other articles too numerous to
mention, day by day start into life, but,
somehow or other, as quickly start back
again,— i.e., disappear. Where to ? No one
knows, of course; and, to sum up, our space
is not sufficient to detail all. In fact, almost
anything may be obtained or made to order
from an “ elephant to a nightcap ! ”
Nautical time observed throughout.
Winds.
S.E., E.
N.E. by E.
Bar.
30.10
E.N.E., N.E.
Variable.
E.N.E., calm.
30.10
30. 1 0
30.10
30.30
We have noticed with much pleasure
two specimens of the workmauship of our
carpenter’s mate —a workbox and snuffbox
of inlaid woods, the latter being made from
the timbers of the ship partly destroyed by
the fire last voyage ; and we advise all who
wish to possess a memento of our voyage
to purchase one at once, and, at the same
time, encourage “Deputy Chips” to make
a greater variety of things from the same
material.
Remarks.
Eine day. “ Tyburnia ”
showed long. 36° 25’
Signalled the “Tyburnia”
and barque “Uncas,” from
Coquimbo to Swansea, 60
days ; will report us.
Fine day.
Fine day ; lost sight of the
“ Tyburnia.”
Gloomy ; very sudden gusts
of wind ; heavy and con-
fused swell.
Gloomy and very dirty, with
sudden gusts of variable
winds and calms.
Gloomy and misty ; very
heavy swell.
from: no end of special
CORRESPONDENTS.
We have much pleasure in informing the
public in general, and the readers of the
“ Orient’s Observer” in particular, that the
Farm (our place of residence, by the way),
situated in that delightful rustic locality
known as Ram Alley, has of late been con-
siderably improved, by the widening of the
said alley at each end, so that now two
individuals can almost at one and the same
time walk from end to end of it without
experiencing any further annoyance than
sticking fast in the middle or thereabouts.


much to the edification and amusement of
the inhabitants of the Farm, who are thereby
reduced to that interesting predicament in
which Moses was once placed on the extin-
guishment of the candle, viz., in the dark.
The object of our present letter now natu-
rally opens itself to every inquiring and
thinking mind, but to prevent anv mistakes
or misapprehension, we should state that all
those Avhose fathers are not glaziers, and
more especially those who may have any
relatives in the stone-cutting line, are parti-
cularly requested to frequent this truly
delightful resort one at a time, thus afford-
ing the residents of the Farm a slight chance
of those two great requisites “light and
air.”
The Farm, Ram Alley, Mid Town
18th July, 1862.
To the Editor.
Sir, —Knowing that your columns are
open to all inquiries relating to scientific
subjects, I should feel obliged if vou would
permit me to ask, through the medium of
your journal, whether any true account can
be given of the cause of the strong westerly
winds which we expect to meet with in the
southern _ latitudes which we are rapidly
approaching ? Fvery process of inductive
reasoning would lead us to suppose that the
direction of these winds would be easterly,
in consequence of the rotation of the earth
on its axis from west to east, nor can I at
present see any satisfactory solution to this
apparent anomaly in the winds, which, if I
am rightly informed, exists in high latitudes,
both in the northern and southern hemi-
spheres.
Apologising for occupying so large a
space in your valuable paper, and trusting
that some of your scientific readers may
give me some light on this interesting sub-
ject,
Believe me, Sir,
Yours truly,
Investigator.
To the Editor of the “ Orient's Observer.''
Sir, In answer to the letter on crinoline,
which appeared in your last number, permit
us to say that “Homo ” is labouring under
a delusion in supposing that any lady on
board “ The Orient ” exceeds three yards
in circumference. The contrary has been
most satisfactorily proved, which, we think,
precludes the necessity for any further
remarks on the subject.
We feel obliged to you, Sir, for defending
this most useful and comfortable article of
dress, to which the experience of some of
the gentlemen on board can testify.
We remain, Sir,
Yours obediently,
Us, We, & Co.
7 o the Editor of the “ Orient's Observer.”
My dear Mr. Editor, —What will those
men do next ? Oh ! that horrid Captain.
But perhaps it was not him. He is usually
such a nice young man ; and there was no
name to it. Do you know who it was ? I
oh, I remember. Well, this morning
there appeared in the Cuddy a notice so very
official looking, that “ Passengers are re-
quested to bring all the powder (or their,
I could not make out which) now in their
possession to the chief officer.” Would you
believe me, Mr. Editor? Are they going
to make us (poor dears) give up those little
necessaries to a woman’s existence ? Why,
there’s Saunders’ Face Powder or Bloom
of Minion, Violet Powder, Rogers’ Tooth
Powder, and all the other powders—so
many—enough to fill their horrid Magazine.
Not that I use them. Oh, no. Only, I
have some dear friends who do, and they
are going to make us forego them. Oh, the
horrid creatures! Do, Mr. Editor, fight
our battles for us, like a dear.
I am, ever dear Mr. Editor,
Your affectionate friend,
Ax Unprotected and
Fainting Female.
E.S. —What is their horrid magazine ?
lam sure I don’t know—l suppose a sort
of chemist’s or hairdresser’s shop. And
what about the doctor’s powders ? Surely
they are not going to lock them up also.
Oh, the poor children !
Anxious to allay the fears of our fair
friend, we hurry to state that the powder
referred to is gunpowder, and not those
little harmless preparations she never uses,
of course. So that we hope Saunders & Co.
will still sell their commodities, and the
children live. Ed. O. O.
“ Don’t come near me, Betsy ; you’ll set
me on fire.” “ Why, Bill ?” “ Oh, your
hair is so red !” “ No, Bill, you are too
green to burn.”
Published on board the “ Orient,” by order
of the Committee, 19th July, 1862.


“ EBCTE LOQUOE.”
THE WEEK
Ought to be put down in red letters in our
paper, as being one marked by doing the
best week’s work (considering the latitudes)
we have yet done, decidedly. On Thurs-
day last w r e did the best day's work; 320
miles is not done by every ship in one day.
A few more such days and moderate winds
for the rest of the voyage, will find us in
Adelaide even earlier than the 20th August.
One or two nights last week it blew in
good earnest. On Sunday night an arm
of the figure-head was either blown or
washed away; we trust the old gal!! has
received no serious injury therefrom. Per-
haps its the loss of an arm that makes the
ship give such fearful lurches at times, to
the horror of “ The stewards,” and danger
of the crockery, which is sent flying in
every direction, and the contents of sundry
soup tureens, &c., improving, no doubt, the
dresses of any unlucky lady who may
happen to be in the way; but, at the same
time, causing much amusement to all; for
the greater the lurch and the larger amount
of China consequently broken, the greater
the laugh. The rain that now confines us
below, and sundry exclamations of ennui
from the ladies, naturally suggest the idea
of games, &c., to pass the hours that hang,
perhaps, somewhat heavily. Charades of
an evening seem, to us, well suited to the
SHIP “ ORIENT,” 26th JULY, 1862.
No. 8.
weather, the great heat preventing any-
thing of the sort, and we shall hope to have
a small corner filled next week with the
account of some charades, which, we are
sure, cannot fail to cause much fun and
amusement. Our readers will notice in
another part of our columns an account of
a lottery that was yesterday drawn for, and
much speculation will, no doubt, be ex-
pressed as to who will be the lucky pos-
sessor of the prize; and much fun caused
by auctions and other sales of tickets as
we near our destination. Certain tickets
will, of course, increase much in value, and
large prices be given for the same.
On Wednesday last we saw caught a
very fine specimen of mollyhawk, and are
pleased to hear the success with which it
has been skinned and so far preserved, and
trust the lucky possessor may be enabled to
keep it till our arrival in Adelaide, and
there have it properly stuffed, when, we are
sure, it will be a fine ornament for a hall
or room.
Upon reference to our “ Gazette,” our
readers will find a notice offering a reward
for information of some person or persons
who, on Tuesday evening last, stole a ham
from the meat safe on the poop. It is
painful for us to put such in our columns,
and we trust that, what at present is some-
what of a mystery, may soon be cleared up.
If meant for a practical joke, we can assure
the perpetrators Tis but a poor one; and if
otherwise, very ungenerous to those who are


trying, we feel sure, to do all they can to
make everybody happy and comfortable.
While on this subject, we cannot help
drawing notice to a nuisance lately carried
to an extent by no means pleasant or
agreeable ; we allude to the practice of
making noises, talking loud, &c., after the
generality of passengers have retired to
rest, and in other ways disturbing the repose
of all those who have sought the rest and
quiet of their cabins. We feel sure, when
it is brought to the minds of the offending
parties, they will do so no more, particu-
larly now, as the rolling of the ship is
enough to keep all, except those accustomed
to it, without any other, and, we feel confi-
dent, unnecessary noises.
GAZETTE.
All insertions in this Gazette are by
authority, and our readers are requested to
note the same.
Notice.
Whereas, some evil disposed person or
persons did, on Tuesday last, steal from the
meat safe a ham ; whosoever will give infor-
mation of the offender or offenders shall
receive Five Pounds Reward.
By Order.
ADVERTISEMENT
FOUND, in a Lady’s Brush Bag, a
MEASURING TAPE. The owner
can have it on application to Mrs. Teazer,
26, Cross Street, Cuddy Town,
THE WINDS AND WEATHER
Ought, perhaps, at sea, to be classed toge-
ther and treated as a whole, for when the
former is favourable, nobody much minds
the latter ; and such has been the case with
us this week, the winds, generally speaking,
being all one could desire ; and the wea-
ther Well, perhaps the least said
about it the better. Continual rain is hardly
a cause of complaint when we are doing
more than 320 miles a day. However, at
times even the winds can get too good, or
rather too strong, which they did on Sunday
night last, when the mizen topsail was ren-
dered unfit for use by sundry rents and
tears that might be observed in it ; and the
ladies also complain somewhat at times.
“ Sleep ! Oh, no, my dear could not sleep
at all, the ship rolled so much ; and there’s
such a creaking, don’t you think it’s dan-
gerous ? There’s too much sail on, I’m
sure.” And another —“ There’s not suffi-
cient sail on, I’m positive and so on ad
libitum. But these are small matters. The
ship is over the meridian of Greenwich, and
has her head turned with a good wind
towards Adelaide ; and if we possess the
date of 20th August, 1862, in the lottery,
we should say we were certain of the prize.
To the Editor of “ The Orient's Observer .”
Sir, —The past week has been meagre of
events of importance in our locality ; but
we must not omit to mention the famous
capture of a mollyhawk by one of our
townsmen. The process of skinning this
wonderful bird afforded much amusement
to eager spectators. Its measurement from
wing to wing was seven feet seven inches,
and from bill to tail forty-one inches, and
will, when stuffed, form no insignificant
addition to the collection of the naturalist.
Our quiet locality was startled the other
day by reports of a dexterous and daring
robbery of a ham, which was stolen from
the safe on the poop ; and we think the
safe has, in this instance, belied its name by
allowing the ham to escape so easily from
its grasp.
We are happy to say that our anticipa-
tions of a speedy arrival at our destination
seem likely to be realized, as our ship has,
within the last week, amply proved that she
is not undeserving of her reputation for
speed. Hoping that the next time we
address you we may have something more
interesting to relate,
We remain,
Yours faithfully,
Suburban Correspondents.


ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
“ Farewell to Nancy ” held over for con-
sideration.
Anonymous contributions will not be
received.
At the time of our going to press the
usual letter from “ No end of Correspond-
ents ” had not appeared.
CONUNDRUMS.
One-third of an ass,
One-third of a man,
One-third of an ape,
And a portion of land ;
Add the length of an ell.
And then you’ll survey
A word and a name.
What is it, I pray ?
Put down five hundred,
Add the fifth of a heart,
And then add six more,
And what doubles a tart.
These, properly placed,
Will give you the name
Of a dapper young man
Who is writing for fame.
My first is just twice as much as you,
My second a rich perfume when new,
My third is a place all men wish to shun.
My fourth does sit with the King on his
throne.
My fifth always shows the masculine form,
My sixth’s always found near the end of a
storm
Now put these together, and they’ll quickly
show
The name of a passenger all of us know ;
He’s tall and he’s small, and no doubt he’s
a pet ;
And should you dispute him he’ll lay you a
bet.
ANAGRAMS.
The words “No more stars,” properly
transposed, will give you the name of a very
learned body of men. Terrible poser.
Transposed will recall to the memory a
celebrated English statesman.
Answers to conundrums in our last :
1. NASH. 2. Editor.
AN ACROSTIC.
B etimes at early morn,
W hen birds fly round the ship,
Y ou’ll see a nice young man,
A nd something like a whip,
T o which is fixed a leaden thing,
T rying to catch them on the wing,
B ut all his efforts seem to fail.
Why don’t he try salt on their tail ?
A LOTTERY
It being proposed to hold a lottery of the
ship’s passage, the idea was quickly taken
up, and a subscription list filled, under the
following regulations :
To consist of 32 tickets, each ticket to be
marked with a date, commencing with Ist
August, 1862, ending with Ist September,
1862, both inclusive (nautical time), and
drawn for from a hat or bag, one at a time.
Tickets to be 2s. 6d. each, and the drawer
of the date either of the pilot coming on
board or anchoring at the Lightship, Ade-
laide (which first happening), to have the
prize, £4 ; but if the ship should not arrive
till after Ist September, 1862, the money to
be returned.
Disputes, if any, to be referred to the
Captain.
The lottery was drawn yesterday, and
much amusement was caused by parties
stating the dates they had drawn. The
possessor of every date from 20th August
downwards was told he was sure of the
prize, and every unfortunate individual who
happened to draw any other date soon told
by his looks that he thought his 2s. 6d.
worse than lost. As it may interest our
readers, and perhaps be the cause of rectify-
ing any mistakes that might hereafter occur,
we shall state the dates that were drawn,
and the parties who drew them.
Capt. Harris drew Ist and 20th August ;
Dr. Nash, 15th, 23rd, and 29th August;
Mr. Cossins, 16th and 18th August; Mr.
Yarndell, 6th and 19th August ; Mr.
Faulkner, 21st and 30th ; Mr. Wyatt, 4th ;
Mr. Carnie, 26th and 31st August; Mr.
Davis, Bth and 17th August, and Ist Sep-
tember ; Mr. Irvine, 13th and 9th August;
Mr. McKinnon, 27th and 28th August;
Mr. Eoss, 14th ; Mr. Kobson, 25th ; Mr.
Wren, 7th ; Mr. Jackson, 10th ; Mr. De-
cent, 3rd ; Mr. Toms, 2nd and 24th ; Mr.
Harcourt, 22nd ; Mr. Haffner, 12th ; and
the steward, sth and 11th August. We
shall also be happy to drink the health of
the fortunate winner, at his expense.


23rd July, 1862.
Dear Mr. Editor,— ln reply to the
scientific enquiry of “ Investigator,” in the
last number of your valuable journal, I
would make the following remarks, which,
if not fully explaining the cause of westerly
winds in high latitudes, may in some mea-
sure elucidate the subject.
When the S.E. trade, or, I should rather
say, the trade winds, reach the equatorial
regions, they become rarified, ascend, and
are carried towards the Poles in a diame-
trically opposite direction. If in the S.E.
trade you look aloft, you will see the higher
clouds moving from the N.W. As you
approach the limit of the trade, say, 28° S.,
the wind has assumed an easterly direction,
and the upper current may be seen blowing
from the west. This upper current, as it
gets into high latitudes, is condensed, de-
LOG.
Long.
Saturday, July 19,
Sunday, „ 20,
37 14 S.
40 2 ,’,
20 30W,
17 01 „
Monday, „ 21
39 54 „
12 35 „
Tuesday, „ 22,
38 43 „
8 50 „
6 06 „
0 34 E.
Wednesday, „ 23, 38 52 ~
Thursday; „ 24, 40 25 ~
Friday, ~ 25, 41 46 ~
6 46 „
Unmanageable boys or youths (up to 30
years) made perfectly tractable and gentle-
manly in one year, by a Captain on the sea,
of twenty years’ experience, whose peculiarly
persuasive, high moral and religious train-
ing at once elevates children of peculiar
tempers and disposition (because not under-
stood) to the level of others. A most liberal
education, including modern languages, sue
Nautical time observed throughout.
Winds.
E.N.E.
N. to W.
S.S.W., s.w.
S.E., & calm
30.10
29.90
30.30
Calm, N.W. 30.26
N.N.W..N.W. 30. 5
N.W., N.
29.80
scends, and retaining its direction, blows
round the globe from west to east. There
appears, therefore, to he an atmospheric
current, moving, if I may so say in a per-
pendicular circle from about 28° S. towards
the Equator, and from the Equator towards
the Polar regions. If, from electric and
other causes, there should be an interrup-
tion to this perpendicular circulation, and
the ratified air be pressed down and assume
an horizontal one, may it not account for
those cyclones which so frequently com-
mence within the tropics, and which so
seldom occur in high latitudes ?
The westerly winds in high latitudes tend
to counteract the easting in the trade winds,
and preserve an equilibrium
Yours faithfully,
Senex.
Remarks.
Gloomy and squally.
Squally; heavy, confused
sea; ship labouring very
heavily.
Squally; heavy beam sea ;
ship labouring very hea-
vily.
Squally, with hail showers ;
much sea.
Gloomy; glasses falling.
Squally; gloomy ; very
dirty.
Squally ; very dark; thick,
rainy weather
cessful preparation for every examination
and vocation in life, and every gentlemanly
comfort, on moderate terms.
Address, “T. Hopper, Esq., Cuddy
Town.”
Published on board the “Orient,” by order
of the Committee.—26th July, 1862.


SHIP “ ORIENT,” 2nd AUGUST, 1862.
“ RECTE LOQUOE.”
THE WEEK
Has been, to say the least, a very uncom-
fortable one; a continuation of rains and
bad weather necessitates staying below,
which causes bad headaches and drowsi-
ness that produces ennui, and thins the
attendance at breakfast; many preferring
that meal in their cabins, and endeavouring
afterwards to seek a little sleep, denied them
during the night by the rolling of the ship;
however, we are progressing on our way,
and, amid all the evils that attend us, this
fact is sufficient to cheer all, even our good
captain, whose face is generally speaking,
both compass and barometer at once. With
the exception of bad weather, nothing par-
ticularly demands our attention this week;
may be, however, as we proceed, we shall
find somewhat to relate, even if it’s only
the upsetting of the medicine chest, which,
on Wednesday last, during dinner, nau-
tically speaking, broke from its moorings
and ran down the doctor’s chair, which
it smashed to pieces, at the same time turn-
ing sundry bottles upside down, and caus-
ing much commotion among the salts,
which strewed the floor. As accidents
never'come singly, that night we experi-
enced the worst storm or gale we have yet
had. All day matters looked gloomy, and
squalls were frequent, but as night came on
it began to blow in good earnest, at times,
one would fancy sufficient to drive us bodily
into the sea; lightening, accompanied with
terrific peals of thunder, illumined the
whole of the sky, adding, if possible, more
to the effect of the sea, now running moun-
tains high, and storms of hail —and such
hail—and rain made matters more and more
uncomfortable for those obliged by duty to
remain on deck. The course of two whirl-
winds, that were visible during the previous
day, were watched with much curiosity ;
and a white squall would have caused simi-
lar interest, had not its violence rendered a
retreat below absolutely necessary. On
Sunday only one service was held, viz., in
the morning, and that under difficulties;
the roughness of the weather and heavy
sea rendering two almost out of the ques-
tion. A charade, performed by four of our
fellow-passengers, on Monday evening, af-
ptc (irirnfs llsfrwi(.
THE WINDS AND WEATHER
No. 9.
forded a great deal of amusement; and we
hope to have to report the same next week;
but it must be remembered that, among
such a few as we are, all must endeavour
to amuse, and not expect a few to do every-
thing.
In one of our previous numbers we in-
serted a paragraph to the effect that “ All
articles found an i handed to the Editor for
safekeeping and advertising, will be de-
livered to the owners upon payment of six-
pence each article, the same to go towards
the expense of printing the paper.” This
was not meant to make money, but merely
to make careless persons pay for the trouble
they gave others; nor was it meant to en-
courage a system of taking articles, left for
a moment in the cuddy, that seems to per-
vade some, if not all, of our fellow-
passengers, thereby often causing much
annoyance to the owners. A joke is a joke,
but when carried too far, and articles in
daily use taken and kept for days, it
amounts to a nuisance the sooner stopped
the better.
Again this week demand a few words.
The former, on the whole, has been favour-
able; the latter, as usual, which is not say-
ing much for it; but northerly winds and
rain, we presume, generally come together in
these latitudes; but hail, such as fell on
Wednesday night last, has not often been
seen by the generality of our passengers.
The first white squall we have experienced
this voyage occurred also on Wednesday,
and almost immediately two whirlwinds ap-
peared in sight, having a mo*t curious, but,
at the same time, awful appearance. Hap-
pily we escaped their vortex, but felt their
effect very severely in the gale during the
night which tried the good ship, her spars
and yards. Happily all proved good, and
no accident occurred, despite the wind,
which blew at times with the greatest fury,
from S.S.W. to N.W., and a tremendous
confused sea which knocked the ship about,
well nigh shooting everybody out of their
bunks, and effectually preventing sleep;
however, it has now gone down somewhat,
though still enough of it to make the pro-
duction of our paper a matter of some
difficulty.


ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Anonymous contributions will not be
received.
TO A YOUNG LADY.
AN ACROSTIC.
M aiden. heed not flattery,
I t should not be heard by thee;
R eceive not, then, a compliment,
I t oft’ is breath but idly spent;
A nd let your friends by actions prove,
M ore than by words, how much they love.
Ist August, 1862.
To the Editor of the “ Orient's Observer.”
Sir, —The sea-going qualities of our ship
have been tested in no ordinary degree; for
some time we have been tossed about by
winds and tempestuous seas; and when
seated at the breakfast-table the faces of
many tell tales of sleepless anxiety. But
we are happy to find our ship has passed
the ordeal unscathed, and we cannot speak
too highly of the energy and assiduity of
those who have brought us thus far in
safety across the trackless sea.
We are glad to find ourselves still accom-
panied by those beautiful birds, who seem
as if they were sent by Providence to cheer
the heart of the mariner on his dreary
voyage.
The weather this day encourages us in
the hope that ’ere another month presents
itself we may have safely arrived at our
destination. We are, sir,
Yours faithfully,
SuRBURBAN CORRESPONDENTS.
Below Town.
CONUNDRUMS.
My first cannot be done by moles,
My second is found in salmon, not in soles,
My third is u<ed as an exclamation,
My fourth is first in every nation,
My fifth and sixth guess, i.e., find out,
My whole some call a lazy lout.
First take the beginning of nothing
And just add one and one hundred,
Then add two perpendiculars united on one,
And a something that never is ended,
Add one-fourth of a girl and whole of a boy,
You’ll then have the name of a miss
Which we hope will be always kept free
from a stain
Till it ends in connubial bliss.
For answers to conundrums in our last,
see next page.
FRIGHTFUL ATTEMPT at SUICIDE.
The quiet village of was on Thurs-
day last thrown into the greatest excite-
ment by a report that Mr. G (for
obvious reasons we refrain from publishing
the unfortunate young man’s name) had
attempted self-destruction. Prom reports
we glean that the young man, who is re-
lated to the best families, had for some time
lived in the most reckless style; few were
the nights that saw him at home, and many
the morning's sun that shone on his dissi-
pated head as he returned from a drunken
bout at a neighbouring tavern: but at last
the pangs of conscience caused him to leave
his worthless life, and to show his repent-
ance was sincere, he placed himself upon
half allowance of meat and drink, (some
say, though, through want of the necessa-
ries). Some of his aristocratic relations,
pleased at the change, placed at his dis-
posal, through the kindness of the Steward
of the Household, a place at the council
(cuddy) table. On the night of Wednes-
day, he and all his family retired to rest as
usual, but on Mr. C , a visitor to the
family, entering his room on the following
morning, he was horrified to find the unfor-
tunate young man suspended by the neck
to the ceiling. With a promptitude most
laudable, Mr. C immediately cut him
down, and upon restoratives being admini-
stered, the would-be suicide was restored to
that life his own foolish act had well nigh
deprived him of- The lesson, however,
was severe, though the effect of his foolish
act has been to reduce him much in condi-
tion, (we are informed, though, that he is
fast recovering under proper treatment), so
we may yet hope to see the now reformed
and penitent Mr. G in his proper place
at the council (cuddy) table, and may we
add the hope that he may in every way
prove himself both useful and agreeable to
those who, dispite his former conduct, now
place him in that position his birth and
connections might have led him to expect.
—Communicated.
Answers to conumdrums in our last: —
1. “ Small.”
2. “ Davis.”
3. “Walker.”
ANAGRAMS.
1. Astronomers.
2. Sir Robert Peel.


LOG —Nautical time observed throughout.
Date.
Long. | Winds.
Remarks.
Saturday, July 26
Sunday, „ 27
Monday „ 28
Tuesday, „ 29
Wednesday „ 30
Thursday, „ 31
Friday, August 1
40 25 S
40 49 „
40 24 „
36 18 „
38 49 „
39 31 ,
39 09 „
11 21 E. N.W.
14 0 „ ci m .&variable
15 47 „ S.S.E.
16 47 „ s.S.E.
22 1 ~ Calm, S.W.
27 19 „
W. to N.W.
31 45 „
Variable.
S. to N.W
N.W.
OUR AMUSEMENTS
Have lately been somewhat at a discount,
one cause or another, we suppose, has pro-
duced this, though we must state we are
sorry to see a greater and more growing
liking among our ladies for the quiet and
retirement of their cabins. Gentlemen,
look to this ! May it not be somewhat
your fault ? Have you been remiss in your
gallantry, or failed to amuse those to whom
we are indebted for many of life’s greatest
pleasures? Perhaps, and most likely, the
rain which has fallen almost continually the
last week may cause a drowsiness only to
be relieved by “ stern lockers.” The piano
has been out of tune, though now, we be-
lieve, once again all right ; quoits on wet
decks are of course out of the question, but,
as our readers will notice, a new amuse-
ment, Charades, has sprung into life : long
may it continue to amuse, as we are sure it
did the other evening.
A CHARADE.
On Monday last we were pleased to see
that a hint thrown out by us last week was
taken up, and a charade produced and acted
in a manner very creditable to the per-
formers, and amusing to our fellow pas-
sengers. The word chosen was “ Marriage,”
the number of performers four, and in the
first act there were four characters, viz.,
.Mr. and Mrs. Upwold, their daughter
Jemima, and her betrothed, Mr. Nazeby.
The latter comes to the farm, (the old
people carrying on the profitable business
of farmers), to pay a visit to his betrothed,
and settle the usual interesting prelimi-
naries to tbe event, which is settled for the
Thursday following. The fair Jemima
played her part admirably, even to reality,
for more than one remarked she failed not
to blush at interesting moments Full
scope was given for the introduction of the
Published on board the “ Orient,” by order of the Committee, 2nd August, 1862.
Overcast, gloomy, squally, with rain.
Overcast, gloomy, with rain, very
dirty sky.
Very heavy squalls, ugly, dirty sky ;
ship pitching and labouring very
heavily.
Very squally, with much lightning
in S.E.
Ugly, dirty sky, much lightning all
over the horizon, much confused
sea, squally, white squalls, glasses
falling, 2 whirlwinds, travelling to
E.N.E.
Hurricane, gale, squall, with rain,
lightning ; this is a fearful gale,
ship behaves herself nobly.
Thunder, lightning, rain, variable
winds, heavy confused sea, ship
labouring very heavily at intervals.
first syllable, which, by charade license,
was contracted into Ma I !
In the next act we find Jemima, now
Mrs. Joseph Nazeby, installed in her home
at the farm, giving some directions to a
plough boy, visited by her mother, and
awaiting the return of her Joe, who. anon,
appears, but his usual quiet pipe and glass
(which he declares are now becoming a
necessary part of his existence) are dis-
turbed by the entrance of Mr. Brown, of
Mark-lane, who has taken a run into the
country to purchase some rye ; the bargain
is soon concluded, with the usual haggling
over the odd sixpence, and here the
audience began, as it were, “ to smell a
rat,” but also to be much pleased with the
acting, which showed in the performers a
knowledge of real life and a fund of wit
and humour which we hope they will not
fail again and again to amuse us with. In
the third scene Mr. and Mrs. Upwold, now
much advanced in years, in fact having
reached a good old age, receive a long pro-
mised visit from their daughter and her
husband, the former visiting once again,
after years of absence, the home of her
childhood. Little was here needed to be
said to produce the third syllable, in fact,
the scene spoke for itself. The whole word
now demanded the attention of the players,
and the breakfast table of two brothers,
one in the army and the other in the navy,
receiving a farewell visit at their hotel
from their two sisters, afforded an oppor-
tunity of producing an antiquated news-
paper, supposed to be the morning’s
*• Times.” from which the marriage of
two enamoured beings was read, and the
usual comments made thereon.
The audience were then requested to
guess the word; one or two soon did so,
but the great majority failed to find out
our first charade.


No. of young men going a courting
1357
Of which have actually popped and been
accepted
422
Do. do. and been refused
25
No. who are anxious to pop, but cannot screw
up their courage
643
No. who have been lilted
47
No. hunting fortunes
1178
No. confirmed old bachelors
293
Of which not worth having
290
Of which would do as a last resource
3
No. of widowers who wish to marry again
2
No. of widows do. do
470
No. of young ladies actually in the market ..
4649
Of which actually have had offers
494
Of -which waiting in dreadful suspense ..
1973
Of which will ask Mama
1
Large numbers have popped to Gentlemen,
but their number is so large, they are
not to be enumerated
No. of young ladies qualified to make good
wives
Of which can make a pudding
127
Of which darn their husbands stockings....
25
Ofw'hich learned in the languages (of flowers
included)
3082
Of w'hich know' how to spend their husbands’
money
No. of single Ladies above thirty
4
[Mrs. Kditress, our own Jemima, declares
the above returns are false, and, with the
usual failing of her sex, is dying to know
where we procured them from, but certain
secrets are our own, and not even known
to the wife of our bosom.]
JJwjjjjlpwl to (firipfa [Aug. 2,1862.
To the Editor of the “ Orient's Observer."
Sir, —Having noticed a most extraordi-
nary appearance about the Moon the last
time I saw it, I naturally asked the cause
and was told, to my great astonishment, it
was “squiffy. " Now, as Ido not quite under-
stand the meaning of the term, 1 appeal
to you, hoping you will help me out of my
difficulty, and inform me at the same time,
if the Moon is always “ squiffy ” in these
latitudes. I am, &c., A Constant Header.
[Not being literary enough ourselves, we
referred our Correspondent’s query to a
scientific friend who, after three weeks of
the most laborious work and research, has
informed us, for the satisfaction of “ A
Constant Reader,” that ‘‘squiffy” meant
“turning mouldy,” evidently a stage in
the decay of the green cheese , Our scienti-
fic friend also charged us £5 ss. for the
opinion, and we will thank “ A Constant
Reader ” to send us a cheque for the same.
—Ed. 0. O.]
Oranges ! Oranges!! Oranges!!!
MESSRS. LITTLE and SOFT (London),
are open to purchase any quantity of
Oranges, of South Australian growth, for
cash. N.B. —A few smart active young
men, who thoroughly understand Orange -
growing, may obtain good situations; and
only a small premium required. Apply to
Messrs. CUDDLE and HUGGER, Agents,
Orange Grove, Adelaide.
PRO SPECTUS
GRAND JUNCTION MATRIMONIAL RAILWAY.
(Capital Unlimited.)
OO
Directors.
Hymen, H G., (Chairman).
Messrs. Joy, Bliss, Swansdown, Silkins, Feathers,
Gemwell, Golding, Argent, and Sweetenham.
Bankers— Messrs. Whitelace, Orangeblossom, & Co.
Brokers— Messrs. Fit & Bindem.
Solicitors— Messrs. License & Bands.
Secretary and Manager —Cupid.
It is proposed to construct a line of Railway from
the Town of Single-blessedness to the City of Wed-
lock.
It has been, for a long time, well-known that the
enormous natural resources of the Town of Single-
blessedness stood in great dread of development.
It is proposed to effect this by a Grand Junction
Railway with the thriving City of Wedlock. The
advantages to be derived from this scheme are so ap-
parent, that the Directors are convinced they have
only to make it known to procure its full apprecia-
tion from a discerning public.
The Superintendent, at every Station on the line,
will be a locksmith duly qualified.
The Police on the line will be selected from the
ranks of the Matchmaking Mamas.
Preferential Shares will be issued to the rich and
beautiful.
The Directors reserve to themselves the right of
making a Divorce Line through the territories of Sir
Cresswell CresswelJ, should they think proper so to
&>• By Order,
CUPID, Secretary and Manager.
To the Editor of the “ Orient's Observer."
Dear Mr. Editor, —Perusing a back number of your
valuable paper, a few days since, an advertisement
reached my eyes setting forth the loss of the letter
“ H,” requesting his return, &c. Dear Mr. Editor, I
am that much abused personage, and to you I will
set forth my wrongs and plead for, at least, com-
miseration ; well, to proceed—l attended, as desired,
in the Cuddy, and the treatment I there received was
worse than shocking. Would you believe it, I was
called “ a hanimal,” and my “ heye ” was alluded to!
fearing that such might continue, I have determined
once more to retire into seclusion, from which, not
even an advertisement in your columns shall draw
me. Ever dear Mr. Editor, your much abused friend,
H.
Remember me to my friEnds a, e, i, o, u.
As our readers are aware, there are on
board, several likely young men, and
numerous enquiries have been addressed
to us requesting particulars as to the state
of the Matrimonial Market, in Adelaide;
anxious always to promote the good cause,
and please the ladies, to do which we have
become large shareholders in the Grand
Junction Matrimonial Railway, we insert
the following statistics, showing, at the
same time, the rivals our Adonises will
have to encounter :
For Speedy Sale, the lively “ Mem.”
She is a trim little Yacht, of nearly 20 tons, a
regular clipper, can carry sail, is sharp, good fore-
foot, small in the w r aist, a handsome model, well found
in cotton and other sails, rigging in good condition,
and will have a fair amount of ballast on going to sea.
We_ advise young men wanting a model Yacht, to
be quick about it, for there have been several offers
made for her. As w'e have made several pleasant
cruises in her company, we know her good qualities
Address the Assembly Rooms, Cuddy Town.


“ KECTE LOQUOR.”
THE WEEK.
Grumbling seems to have been hitherto
our only, at least, our principal theme ; at
any rate, if our readers will take the trouble
to make a retrospect of our previous num-
bers, they will find that, though now and
then a word of congratulation or hope for the
future creeps in, we are generally lamenting
our hard lot, and the ill luck that continu-
ally attends our good ship ; but now, let us
look to the bright side of the picture, and,
forgetting the past, hope, and somewhat con-
fidently, that the 23rd inst., and who will
not say perhaps the 21st, may find us at
least in sight of our destination. Though
our labours are at all times pleasant ones,
we shall be pleased beyond measure if but
one more number of our paper is published
on board, though we shall not fail to furnish
our readers with an extra, and, in news-
paper phraseology, with a grand number
after our arrival, giving an account of our
arrival, and of the hearty reception that,
we feel sure, awaits our noble ship, favourite
as she is with the good people of Adelaide.
But we are diverging somewhat from our
usual theme, viz., the events happening
during the present week. But here let us
apologise for a slight omission which we
made last week, viz,, of an account of ‘‘ A
Birth on board,” which appears, though, in
our present number, with a hope that all the
SHIP “ ORIENT,” 9th AUGUST, 1862. No. 10.
little dears may survive ths dangers that
await them on their journey through life,
and live to increase, in their way, the pros-
perity of the Australian Sheep Farmer.
Sunday, with the usual accompaniment
of praise to our good God, who has hitherto
carried us across the mighty deep, and pre-
served us from its dangers—passed away as
usual, but during the night a ship was
passed, no one knows where bound to, but
guesses were made that its destination was
the same as our own. Before morning,
though, it had disappeared, been left long
behind ; it passed very close to us, which
shows the necessity of a good and vigilant
look out, particularly in these latitudes,
where icebergs abound ; hitherto, though,
we have not seen any, and our readers
will, we are sure, join with us in a hope
that we shall not, for they are but ugly
customers to come across, especially in a
fog, such as has attended us, more or less,
all this week. Rain, and continual rain too,
seems our portion, but what mind we, when
the wind continues favorable, and plenty
of it ? and we may, we think, say, without
exaggeration, that we have done a good
week’s work, although not without accident,
a stunt sail or two, and a boom, being
destroyed yesterday ; but they are but slight
matters, and hardly worth attention.
Another charade acted on Monday last,
much amused all ; our readers will find a
short account of the same in another part


of our columns, where we shall be happy
to see similar accounts for the few short
days that, we hope, await us on hoard.
We would fain see some original poetry
of a character worthy of our noble ship, in
our last issue, and somewhat appropriate to
the occasion; we therefore request contri-
butions of this nature, which will be received
up to Saturday next, the 16th instant; the
contribution thought most worthy will then
be set to music (original) by one of our
fellow-passengers, and be published in our
last Number, which will be issued, as before
stated, after our arrival in Adelaide.
OUR FEATHERED SONGSTERS,
As we write, by their sweet song enliven
our labors; in fact, could you shut your
eyes to the objects around you, you might
almost fancy, minus the rocking of the ship,
that you were ashore. In many of the
cabins a canary or two is to be found ; one
or two in the cuddy, more than the others,
seem to vie with one another who shall
sing the loudest and during meals keep up
a continued duet ; now and then, a black-
bird, thrush, or lark, a little more lively
than his brothers, sends forth a note; the
cow proclaims at times, with soniferous
note, her presence ; the squeak of the pig is
rather too often heard ; and regular chorus
is kept up by the ducks and chickens on the
poop, particularly when the butcher heaves
in sight; a ram, also, now and then, his
thoughts perhaps reverting to the green
fields of Old England, or impatient for his
dinner, informs the public, in his way, of his
ideas or desires. But we are straying some-
what from our proper topic, viz., the birds,
who, though, we are sorry to say, have, from
one cause or another died in large numbers,
and the number now on board is hardly a
tithe of what were with us when we left
Plymouth. One Mr. Blackbird, with a
rashness before unheard of, committed sui-
cide by jumping overboard, the door of his
cage having been, by accident, left open.
We hope the few now alive may reach
Adelaide all right and well, and there en-
liven the heart of many a one, for years,
perhaps, an exile from his native land.
A CONUNDRUM.
Take half my first, and five one finds,
The other half is the same,
My second is used by inquiring minds,
And my third always goes with fame ;
My fourth is found with the Siamese,
My fifth is also found with these,
And my whole is to be found in the cuddy,
Large in size and somewhat ruddy.
Answers to Conundrums in our last.
1. Carnie.
2. Nicholson.
A BIRTH ON BOARD.
Stop, dear reader, excite not yourself,
there is no “ mother and child, as well as the
circumstances will permit,” unless, indeed,
you make tender inquiries after the shep-
herd hitch, who, on the morning of Sunday
week last, brought into the world six pups,
“ all alive and kicking.” The event, how-
ever, had beon looked forward to with
tremendous interest. No dog, not even
Punch’s Toby, we are sure, received so
much attention or excited so much interest,
as did the mother of six pups, bora in a
bird cage, and there nursed, till the light of
day came, or, rather, the darkness of nine
days passed away, when they were removed
elsewhere, there to receive from mammy
the first canine lessons, and the caresses of
the ladies, who are always requesting a
look, particularly at the bob-tailed one.
ADVERTISEMENT.
POUND.— A SILK POCKET HAND-
KERCHIEF, with the initials A.H.W.
The owner may receive the same by apply-
ing to the Emtok, and paying expenses.


A CHARADE
Another charade was plaeyd on Monday
last, but we must content ourselves with
only a short notice. The word chosen was
“ Humbug.” A rainy morning, with a gent
confined to his home, who amused himself
with nought but humming, stood well for
the first Act. A scene at an inn, where
something we will not mention was rather
plentiful, produced the second syllable ; and
the whole word was rather too well brought
before the audience by a scene in a lawyer’s
office, who looking over certain papers,
preparatory to agreeing to a marriage settle-
ment, found them in such a state as would
virtually render them of no value, and
caused him, in his excitement, to use words
perhaps he might afterwards repent of;
the timely arrival of the fair party con-
cerned prevented a rumpus—but the cha-
rade was easily guessed by a much pleased
audience.
To the Editor of the “ Orient's Observer .”
Sir, —The passage of the “Orient” draw-
ing to a close, “ Old Salt, the father of all
sailors,” cannot part with his chddren (the
lady and gentlemen passengers of the
“ Orient”) without a sincere prayer for
their health and happiness in the land of
their adoption, and so,
With every joy and pleasure gay
May all their hours roll sweet along,
Till life and beauty glide away,
Like the rich cadence of a song. .
May friendship shed its gentle rays
Around their path and make it bright,
And love serenely gild their days,
With a more pure and holy light.
LOG
Nautical time observed throughout.
Saturday, Aug. 2
Sunday, „ 3
Monday, „ 4
Tuesday, „ 5
Wednesday, „ 6
Thursday, „ 7
Friday, „ 8
And in that future happy time,
Their earlier friends, perchance, forgot;
Say, will they read this careless rhyme,
And the “ Old Orient” remember not?
Remember not ! And can it be
The joyous memory ever die,
That all my heart doth feel for them
Is but a fleeting whispered sigh ?
Yes, it is written in our lot—
That lot so varied, dark, and strange,
We meet, we part, and are forgot,
In painful and perpetual change.
But why this idle gloom on me ?
Oh! be again the gay and free ;
They will not to their dying day
Forget the “ Orient” or me.
I remain, dear Mr. Editor,
Yours sincerely,
Old Salt,
Father of all Sailors.
At the time of our going to press the
usual letter from “ Suburban Correspon-
dents” had not arrived.
Messrs. Sirrah and Jackson, thankful for
past favours, beg to tender their services to
all who may require fitting, before tbe arri-
val of the “ Orient” at Adelaide. All those
gentlemen whose clothes are too big for
them on account of sickness, &c., may de-
pend upon their being properly taken in by
applying to Mr. Jackson. Those who have
grown too big for their clothes, may depend
upon Mr. Sirrah and staff taking them
doAvn to unreasonable dimensions.
Remarks,
Squally, but fine,
Squally, lightning in W., but
fine.
Light winds, fine weather,
misty.
Overcast, misty.
Squally, rain and fog. Passed
through a shoal of whales.
Squally, fog and rain, very
dirty.
Squally, foggy, thick, and


TO BE SOLD BY AUCTION,
By Mr. Varndele,
On or about the 25th instant, at the Light-
ship, Port Adelaide, unless previously
disposed of, of which due notice will be
given,
* LL that valuable Surplus Stock and
Stores saved during the voyage of the
“ Orient” from England, consisting of Seven
SHEEP and One Half, all in prime condi-
tion, together with what Pigs, Poultry,
Potatoes, Flour, and other articles too nu-
merous to particularize. Also, One good
COW, a prime Guernsey, in full milk.
The Auctioneer begs to call particular
attention to the above Sale, a first-rate
chance for an embryo Butcher, or Stock
Farmer about commencing.
Approved Bills at three months, if they
can he got, for sums over £2O; but the
Auctioneer can refuse any bill without
assigning a reason, and demand cash for
the same.
N.B. —The above stores were all shipped
for the especial use of the passengers, but,
from sickness and other causes, they have
not been consumed ; consequently, must
now he sold for the benefit of Whom it
may Concern.
LATE ADVERTISEMENT.
TjIOUND, a QUEER-SHAPED
COMB, colour indistinguishable. For
the payment of “ One dozen bawbees ”
(paltry) he, she, or it may have it on
application at 7, Little Street, Red Hill;
or to the Editor.
POETRY.
God speed the stately “ Orient,”
And bear her safely o’er
The foaming waves that roll towards
Australia’s distant shore.
In those dear isles we love so well,
But now so far away,
Are loving friends and kindred dear
Who for our safety pray.
And many a heart would swell with grief.
And tears dim many eyes,
If aught betel the gallant bark
As o’er the deep she flies.
A noble band directs her course,
Stout hearts and steady hands,
But all in vain without His aid
Who winds and waves commands
Swift as the birds that round her fly
She cleaves her watery way,
Graceful she parts the heaving tides
’Mid clouds of fcam and spray.
And, as His hand the seabird guides
Safe through the tempest’s roar.
Oh! may He guide the “ < rient’s” path
Swift to the much wished for shore.
E. P. E E.
And do you really want, mama.
To know my lover’s name ?
It is too bad of you mama!
Indeed it’s quite a shame.
His name begins with W,
The second letter’s A,
The next to that is L, mama,.
And then, mama, comes K,
And after K comes E, mama,
There’s yet one letter; well.
Letter the last is H, mama,
That’s all I have to tell.
Missed, from his usual place at the Cuddy
Table, Mr Wee Corkscrew, supposed to be
laid up with an attack of, as Mrs. Parking-
ton says, “ Delusions tremendous,” on ac-
count of his liking to his bottle of claret.
The right of translation (into coin) is
reserved.
Published on board the Orient, by Order of
the Committee.—August 9, 1862.


“ RBCTE LOQDOB.”
THE WEEK,
The last, perhaps, we shall spend on
board—at least, the last complete week ;
though the thought brings joy with it, who
will but acknowledge that it is tinged some-
what with sorrow: sorrow at having to part
with so many kind friends, friends of but a
few months’ acquaintance, but we hope,
and sincerely trust, true friends, who, if
ever it should come to pass, will not fail to
recognise and renew an acquaintance which,
though short, we cannot help saying has
been agreeable. But let’s leave this painful
subject; next week we shall have to take
leave of our kind friends, but only as jour-
nalist, and in our official capacity, we hope
it will be but a sorry task, despite the plea-
sure of being once more ashore. But we
hope to meet again, in our private capacity,
many, if not all, of those who have endea-
voured, by their contributions and support,
to keep afloat hitherto, and carry on to so
successful a termination, “ The Orient’s
Observer.”
Though not wishing to take praise to
ourselves, we need not inform our read-
ers, ours has been no easy task; besides the
usual labours coincident with an Eidtor’s
life, there are many our readers arc, per-
haps, unaware of. Much labour and trouble
is necessary to collect together sufficient of
interesting matter among such a small num-
ber as our community consists of, and the
difficulty in writing occasioned by the rock-
ing of the ship, is not the least of numberless
inconveniences that well nigh, at times,
drive us frantic; but the kind encourage-
ments and praise of our friends have hitherto
carried us through, and to them, and not to
ourselves, is perhaps due the success of our
paper.
Yesterday, shortly after noon, we passed
Cape Lewin, and, as we write, are in Aus-
tralian waters; a joyful sound indeed, and
SHIP “ORIENT,” IGtli AUGUST, 1862.
No. 11.
one that gives us hope that, despite our
previous forebodings, this will, if the winds
prove but moderately favourable, be quite
an average passage ; in fact, that on
or before the 21st instant, the day we
are due, we may drop anchor in Adelaide,
Up to the present time, though now and
then we have done but badly, we have made
a very good passage on the whole, Cape
Lewin in 73, and from the Cape to Cape
Lewin in rather better than 16 days, This
is, we are sure, a cause of congratulation to
all, especially to our good Captain, for
whose sake, if for no other cause, we have,
all along, wished a short and pleasant pas-
sage, though its beginning did not seem to
forbodc it.
Lately we have made some splendid runs,
though not without accident or annoyance;
the patent reefing apparatus of the maintop
sail is out of order, and the sail necessarily
remains a fixture, and on Sunday the sea
was so rough that it was considered impos-
sible to hold Divine Service.
Two charades have been performed during
the week, and though that on Thurs-
day was stated to be the last, we trust
another yet may be performed early next
week. Our readers will find a short account
of the two above mentioned in another part
of our columns.
Two festive scenes have taken place this
week: one on Tuesday, the occasion being
marked by some champagne the unmarried
gentlemen presented to the lady passengers;
and the other on Thursday, when the cele-
bration of the birth of a lady now on board
took place. We wish more of these inte-
resting events had happened during the
voyage, as they are occasions of much mer-
riment, and are much enjoyed by all.
To the Editor of “ The Orient's Observer."
Dear Sir, —Another week has now passed
over our heads, and we are still pursuing
our course over the briny ocean towards


that island which will be to many of us our
future home.
We are now within Cape Lewin, the
most westerly point of Australia, and each
one is calculating the number of days which
are likely to elapse ere we arrive at our des •
tiuation. We shall now soon be scattered,
according to our respective vocations; but
although we may be separated by time and
distance, and may never even again meet,
it must not be supposed that all the ties of
friendship and companionship which may
have been formed during our intercourse
with one another, will be rudely dissolved
and rent asunder when we reach our jour-
ney’s end.
That natural principle of benevolence,
the existence of which in the mind of man
we cannot dispute, will prevent our regard-
ing any one of those who have shared with
us the dangers of the deep, as strangers.
Wherever we may he we shall rejoice with
them in their prosperity, and be ready to
lend them a helping hand should they be
in adversity. We hope that the words of
the poet will not he verified by them, “ For-
tuna multis dat nimis, satis nulli.”
When we land on the shores of Australia,
many of us will meet with new scenes and
new faces, hut we shall still be subjects of
our widowed Queen, and, as such, will have
a common interest, and never, we hope,
cease showing our loyalty to that Sovereign,
over whose dominion it is the Englishman’s
proud boast, “ That the sun never sets.”
Wishing happiness and success to all, we
will conclude with the words of the Immor-
tal Bard:
“ Oh, that this too, too solid flesh
Would melt, thaw, and resolve itself
Into a ” Adieu!
We are, dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
Suburban Correspondents.
Below Town, 15 th Aug. 1862.
A DEATH ON BOARD,
Last week the account of “ A birth on
board ” appeared in our columns; this week
we have to recount the death of one the
fine rams belonging to the Hon. J. Baker.
We are happy, however, to have to state
that it is not due to the fault of anyone on
board; the greatest care having been taken
of these valuable animals. The one in
question had been sickly from the com-
mencement of the voyage, in fact, was put
on board in such a state, that we heard
opinions freely ventured “it could never
stand a long sea voyage,” and the sequel
has proved the veracity of the statement.
On Wednesday it was opened, and showed
a mass of disease that must have caused it,
for some time past, to suffer most excru-
ciating pain; in fact, the death that relieved
the poor brute from its sufferings was the
greatest mercy that could happen.
CONUNDRUMS.
My sisters are black, white, yellow, and red,
Myself, I am blue and was annually wed,
And, which you’ll consider a very strange
thing.
Whene’er I was married I swallowed the
I am single, yet been double,
And have seen much trouble,
I’m two of what commands a servant,
And been admired by many a gallant,
I’m not the “ Mistress,” yet a lady.
Did you find me out, what said ye?
My first, though forming part of a male,
Is oft turned by some into female;
My second we could hardly do without,
’Tis better than ale, beer, or stout;
My whole on hoard is liked by all,
Large in size, though perhaps not tall.
Answer to Conundrum in our last.—
Wyatt.
The winds during the past week have
generally been somewhat strong, and the
weather wet; as we near the land, too,
squalls are frequent, and in one yesterday
a new jib was split into three pieces.


CHARADES.
So much have charades risen in favour
that two have been asked for and performed
this week. On Monday the word chosen
was “Ringlet.” A jeweller’s shop and an
enamoured couple purchasing “Hymen’s
handcuffs ” produced the “ ring.” Lodg-
ings to Let, with an eccentric Irish man
servant, brought the second syllabic some-
what forcibly before the audience.
A barber’s shop, the proprietor of which
receiving a bribe for a ringlet, to be taken
from a certain young lady’s head, made a
mistake, and produced to the eyes of the
enraptured gent a ringlet, not the one he
was in quest of, but taken from another and
m.irried fair. After the usual hubbub,
matters settled down somewhat, but the
audience soon guessed the word. On
Thursday a little more preparation was
bestowed on what was stated to be the last
charade (though we must express a hope
it will not be so—Monday night, we hope,
will see another), and the comic element
LOG.
Date.
Long.
Winds.
Saturday, Aug. 9,
44 00 S
77 52 E
Sunday, „ 10, 44 50 „
85 8 ~
90 8 „
Monday, „ 11,
44 46 „
N.N.W.
Tuesday, „ 12, 44 44 ~
Wednesday,,, 13, 44 57 ~
Thursday, „ 14, 44 40 ~
94 30 „
101 25 ~
107 50 „
S.W., N
N.E.
N.E.
Friday, „ 15, 45 04,,
11415 „
On Tuesday last the unmarried gentle-
men, to show, as was somewhat timidly
stated by their spokesman (visions of en-
raged husbands starting up before his
excited imagination), their affection for the
ladies, gave them a treat of champagne ;
and. as a matter of course, the usuul amount
of speechifying followed. “ The Ladies ”
followed. “ The Ladies ”
•proposed by Mr. Davis, coupled with
“ The Pups,” and several other toasts that,
it seemed, had been neglected on other
Nautical time observed throughout.
30.10
29.75
29.62
Remarks.
30.00
30.00
was brought more into use than on former
occasions. After some deliberation, “Band-
box” was chosen. A travelling German
band, with instruments of the most novel
description—a portmanteau doing duty for
an organ—performed the first scene. In
the second, a condensed representation of
the well -known comic farce of “ Box and
Cox ” delighted the audience ; and a scene
at a railway station, with a fidgetty old
lady, anxious for the welfare of her lapdog,
“ Mora,” and who has lost her Bandbox,
but is assured by the gallant guard that it
is on its way by telegraph, and soon it and
Flora arrives. Much fun was occasioned
by one of our gentlemen taking the part of
the Old Lady ; and it seems to us the more
comic the charade the better it pleases.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Anonymous contributions will not be
received.
We cannot undertake to return rejected
communications.
Squally, foggy, rain, and very
dirty.
Misty, squally, hard gale, very
dirty.
Heavy squalls with hail, very
heavy confused sea; ship labor-
ing very heavily. Broke patent
of the maintop-sail yard.
Squally, gloomy, confused swell.
Squally, with rain; very dirty.
Squally, with drizzling rain,
looking very dirty in the N.E.
Squally and gloomy, with drizz-
ling rain. This appears to be
a dirty N.E. wind set in. Wc
are now 16 days from the meri -
dian of the Cape of Good Hope.
occasions, though the conglomeration was
not very complimentary—was the first toast.
and was responded to by the Rev. Thomas
Field, who, anon, was called upon to respond
to his own health (drunk with much ap-
plause), which he did in a very neat and
well-turned speech. The healths of the
Captain, Doctor, Editor of “ The Orient’s
Observer,” Mr, Yarndell, Mr. Small, and
Mr. Cossins, were in turn drunk and re-
sponded to by those several gentlemen, and


a very pleasant evening ended with the
usual accompaniment of music.
A BIRTH DAY ON BOARD.
We omitted to mention in our previous
numbers that, on the 16th June last, the
birth-day of Mr. Marshall, one of our pas-
sengers, and a well-known and highly-
respected resident for many years in the
colony, occurred, his health and long life
was duly drunk. On Thursday the birth-
day of Miss Nicolson (our talented musical
genius on board, who, besides her services
in the cause of “ Pan,” has, by her pleasant
manner and kind forethought, rendered
herself a favourite with all) came round,
and her health was drunk in the evening
amid rapturous applause ; and we cannot
help joining in the wishes expressed by our
good Captain on the occasion, viz.:—“That
one who has always been at the service of
all who might require her to play the piano,
and who, moreover, lends her valuable
assistance in conducting properly the ser-
vices of the Sunday, may meet with every
success and blessing in her new home, which
we are sure her good heart deserves.”
[We have received the following anony-
mous contribution ; and, departing for
once from our established rule, insert it,
and only have to add that we freely receive
the apologies of the unknown writer for any
sins he may fancy he has committed.—
Ed. 0. O.]
Mr. Editor, —I have had enough of your
humbug, and won’t stand any more of it.
lam not the man you think I am. lam a
hard-working, industrious farmer, and wish
to be left alone. If 1 have not conducted
myself as I might, I hope you and others
will forgive me. For instance, my conduct
on the poop in the evenings some time ago
was, I must say, rather bad ; at least, so
the sailors say ; and if, in the cuddy, or in
my own cabin, I have acted wnongly, please
forgive me ; and, as we soon hope to be on
shore, let us part good friends ; and I can
only say, if you or any of my fellow-passen-
gers should pay me a visit, you shall have a
warm reception, for I am naturally of a
very warm disposition, and I will show you
all over my extensive farm, where I grow
everything for my own use, even down to
jams and marmalade, and the clay to make
the pots to put it in. Everybody in the
colony knows my name, and the road to my
estate will be easily found.
I am, Mr. Editor,
One who Knows
A Thing or two.
Died, August 12th, at the Farm,
Ham Alley, Mid Town, after a long and
painful illness, Sir Aries Wooley Ram,
deeply regretted by his son, Sir Isaac
Mutton, and a numerous circle of
friends. The whole of his valuable
effects have been placed in the efficient
care of Messieurs Butcher, Barry, Coley
& Pups. His loss, we are sure, will be
deeply regretted in the colonies.
I am going to tell you, without any flam,
All about the passengers that am
On board the ‘’Orient” clipper.
Well,shuffle the lot, and when you’ve dealed,
Up comes the Bev. Thos. and Mrs. Field ;
Then next there comes, for they’re all the
go,
From the Assembly Rooms, Cossins & Co.;
And after that comes Mr. and Mrs. Small,
Both very young, somewhat short, so not
tall ;
Then most obliging of ladies, Mrs. Masters;
And her who sings “ Carolina Plasters ”
It is, of course, I mean Miss Nicolson ;
Then Miss Hill, so lull of frolic and fun ;
Then, of the gents, there’s, so meek and
quiet,
Curious, machine-making, Mr. Wyatt;
And, the most useful, Mr Marshall;
Then, Mr. Yarndell called Betsy, not Sal ;
And his charming cousin, Mr. Faulkener,
Though it is said he don’t talk much ; nor
Long-legged, but good-hearted, Mr. W'alker,
And whom they also say is no talker ;
But, as I near the end, up comes Carnie,
Always laughing, and so full of blarney;
And, to wind up with, there’s Mr. Davis,
A rummy cove—in fact, a “ rara avis.”
About to expire, in the hope of a
speedy resurrection to life in Adelaide,
the “ Orient’s Observer,” where it will
be published, and may be obtained
everywhere.
Published on board the “ Orient,” by order
of the Committee.—l6th August, 1862.


SHIP “ ORIENT,”
25th AUGUST, 1862
“eecte loquor.”
THE WEEK
A rather lengthened one, brings with it
much sorrow intermingled with joy, for as
we write, though we and all have reached
our desired haven in health and safety, yet
we have parted, parted perhaps to meet no
more, but we trust not so, and fervently
hope that it may be our good fortune to
meet with and rejoice in the prosperity of
many, if not of all of those who, through
many a long week, were our companions,
and who, moreover, tried by everything
that lay in their power to second our
endeavours to make our publication worthy
of our noble ship, and to whom our most
heartfelt thanks are fervently given for
much kindness received on many occasions.
We are, perhaps, but too proud in stating
that the request contained in our issue of
9th inst. has been acceeded to, and with
much pleasure we this week present our
readers with a song, “ The adieu to the
Orient.” May its beautiful words and appro-
priate music often recal many a pleasing
thought, and tend to remind the listeners of
those to whom we are indebted for it, and
to whom, in the name of all our fellow
travellers, we beg to tender our warmest
thanks.
The week, though a momentous one, we
shall notice but in a few words. On Thurs-
SH (Brunts dtertiq.
No. 12.
day morning we came in sight of Kangaroo
Island, but the wind being from the north,
to get to port, it became necessary to beat
up the gulf, which took much time, and
it was well towards Sunday night before
we came to anchor. Had a favourable
wind been blowing, we should, without
doubt, have made a splendid passage : as it
was, 82 days looks remarkably well, and
must be, we are sure, a cause of great
pleasure to our good Captain. Coming up
the gulf, expectation ran of course very
high as to the time of our anchoring, and
all eyes were bent towards the shores which
were plainly visible to the naked eye. The
excitement of the moment must be the ex-
cuse for a lady who declared she saw a
sheep, but, upon examination through the
glass, it proved to be the “ lighthouse.”
But after all it was a very pardonable mis-
take, considering the likeness between the
two, and we suppose a pair of “ Sam
Weller’s glasses,” turned inside out, were
on the nose of the fair party in question.
Another charade, performed on Monday,
met with much favour, and is shortly
touched upon elsewhere in our columns.
Of course, after so pleasant a passage, we
could not separate without expressing in
writing our thanks to our good Captain.
Mr. Irvine also came in for his share of due
thanks, and a letter to the Doctor afforded
him, we are sure, immense pleasure. Both
testimonials appear in this issue, and every-


body who signed them, we are sure, did so
from their hearts, for a more pleasant pas-
sage than this, “The Orient’s” seventh,
could not be, and all our fellow passengers
have left with many regrets, yet the
pleasure of being ashore will soon cause
the regret to wear away, yet none we are
sure will forget the “ Orient” or her pas-
sengers.
To Captain John Harris and the Chief
Officer of the ship “ Orient.”
We, the undersigned passengers, per ship
“ Orient,” beg to tender our sincere thanks
to Captain Harris and his chief officer, (Mr.
Irvine), for their kind attention and uni-
versal desire to please, during a very
pleasant passage, and, at the same time, our
congratulations on the speedy termination
of what at first promised, through contrary
winds and bad weather, to be a long voyage.
Ship “ Orient,” 22nd August, 1862.
(Signed), ~
Thos. Field, M. A., E. Masters,
Mrs. Field, G. Nicolson
G. Nicolson,
J. D. Cossins, M. E. Hill,
L. Cossins, A. Walker,
A. Walker,
L. Small, Benjamin Wyatt,
M. Small, Geo. W. Davis,
Mr. Boss, Thos. Robson,
Mrs. Ross, J. W. Jackson,
W. Whetter, John Raine,
C. Whetter, Ed. Tacey,
E. A. Boase, C. F. Decent,
A. Ross, T. Juelch,
R. Ruff, C. Dyer,
W. C. Cockerill, M. Byrns,
Jno. Coy, M. Hartne
M. Hartney,
J. O’Donnell, J. McNally,
G. Bennett, G. Broomha
F. G. Nash, F.R.C.S,
Ship “ Orient,” S2ud August, 1862.
To Dr. F. G. Nash, F.E.C.S.,
Dear Sir, —We cannot allow you to de-
part from amongst us without expressing to
you the feelings of deep regard that your
presence during the voyage has inspired
within us, and request to be permitted to
bear testimony in this humble manner to
the uniform courtesy and friendship that
you have invariably shown towards all,
apart from any reference to that medical
skill and kind attention you have exhibited
in, fortunately, the few cases that have re-
quired your attention. We trust the voy-
age has proved a pleasant one to you, and
that when we separate, though perhaps it
should not be our lot to meet again, you
will sometimes bestow a thought upon
those who, wishing you every (success and
happiness, and a speedy return to your
family, beg to inscribe themselves
Your sincere friends,
(Signed),
Thos. Field, M. A., M. E. Hill,
M<*s. Field, S. Marshal]
S. Marshall,
o s. Cossins, A. Yarndell,
L. Cossins, A. Walker,
L. Small, L. Faulkner,
M. Small, B. Wyatt,
E. Masters, A. Camie,
G. Nicolson, G. W. Davis,
Mr. Ross, S. V. Jackson,
Mrs. Ross, Thos. Robson,
W. Whetter, Jno. Raine,
C. Whetter, Ed. Tacey,
E. A. Boase, C. Dyer,
A. Ross, F. Juelch,
R. Ruff, E. F. Decent,
W. C. Cockerill, M. Byrns,
Jno. Coy, M. Hartne
M. Hartney,
G. Broomhall,
Jno. O’Donnell, G. Bennett,
J. McNally,
G. Broomhall.


OTJR FAREWELL.
Is but a sorry task; yours, dear readers,
has been hitherto a pleasant one, and our
sincere thanks are due to you for having
accorded to us, during our short existence,
your meed of approbation. It is barely
more than two months since you rejoiced
at our birth, smiled at our infant progress,
and cheered us in our success, and now has
arrived the time when we must say good
bye, and bid a hearty farewell to all, we
cannot but hope that our, your, wish of a
prosperous voyage to “ The Orient’s Obser-
ver” has met with its full realisation, and
let us add, we sincerely trust that our
humble endeavours to please have met with
the approval of all, and have in some small
measure contributed to make our voyage as
pleasant a one as, happily, it has been.
More we could write, but let us bid a kind
and fond adieu, and in the words of our
song sincerely hope that —
Oh, may those she safely carried
From friends at home to these distant
lands,
Find health and peace, and all they hoped
for
Attend the labours of their hands.
THE LAST CHARADE
Was not, as we hoped, performed on
Thursday week, but on Monday last.
“ Muffins” was chosen. A well-known
furrier’s shop was the scene of the first act,
and though name it not, shop lifting was
the order of the day, and a “ muff” being
missed was found secreted under the shawl
of the erring fair. A crotchety old gentle-
man, with his wife and daughter, enjoying,
or rather, we should say, not enjoying a
fish dinner at a tavern, finds fault with every
thing, and to sum up declares the salmon
all fin and tail, and his sudden and angry
exit brought the second act to a close. In
the third, the “cries of London” afforded
ample scope for much fun. Of course the
blind muffin man, with his bell, white apron,
and basket appeared. “ Tutors all hot, all
hot, all hot,” caused great fun by his appear-
ance, a water can supplying the place of
his portable stove, “ Any hare or rabbit
skins,” drowned everything else, and least,
but not last, came, “ Hany hairnaments for
your fire stoves.” The scene could not fail
to cause an immense amount of fun and
laughter, and, in theatrical language, “ the
curtain fell amid immense applause ”
AIR, “EXCELSIOR.”
The shades of night were falling fast,
As across the deck a sailor pass’d.
This youth he bore upon his back
The main-top-gallant-stun’-sail-tack.
To set the sail.
The sail it was up in the top,
The tack he must reeve in the block,
Then one end to the clue he’ll bend,
The other down on deck he’ll send.
To set the sail.
To clear the sail away he’ll start.
Then cry out, “ Hoist away, be smart! ”
And as he’s lighting up the gear,
He’ll watch and see that all goes clear,
To set the sail.
Now his part of the work is done,
The officers’ but just begun.
He, when it’s high enough, will shout,
“ Belay, lay aft, your tack haul out,
To set the sail.”
“ Again on the halliards take a pull,
“ Trim down the sheet, the sail is full.
“ Haul your turns well, taut as yon belay,
“ Then all will see the proper way
To set the sail.”


tl&UO (
f
M ; jv.
I had a dream! Methought I was
a wanderer on earth, from pole to pole,
and that a voice continually met me at
every lonesome spot, and screeched, with
fiendish pleasure, “ Starve ! ” My spirits
well-nigh drooped under this continued per-
secution. But, just at this extremity, one
all smiles, and with looks beaming with
benevolence, touched me, and bid me be of
good cheer, and asked me why I was so
sad ? I told him my piteous tale. He
seemed moved, and said, “ You need not
suffer so ; put yourself under my guidance.
I am the Good Genius of the way thou
goest.” I seemed to gain fresh strength
from his words, and I followed him. The
Good Genius led me to a dark cavern,
when, upon touching a silver lamp with his
wand, a soft radiance was shed around.
“ See, my friend,” said he, “ all stores which
Nature supplies for the use of man, and for
his comfort, are here in abundance ; more-
over, no one who trusts me fails, in the
hour of sickness, to be supplied with all
those whole.'ome and pleasing confections
which tend so much to alleviate the troubles
of the suffering body. See all in profusion,
and last, not least, behold a perennial spring
of sweetest water, always flowing, at which
you may, without stint, slake your parching
./ v y' h
n - otc«* di
MONDAY, 25th AUGU®£ ) IB62.
LOG.
Remarks,
Squally; much sea; damp,
dirty and unpleasant.
Squally ; very dirty; ship
labouring heavy.
Gloomy, but line ; less sea.
Ugly, dirty, rain, squally,
and variable winds.
Squally ; this is a hard gale,
and very dirty ; heavy
confused sea, ship labour-
ing very heavily; glasses
falling.
Squally ; less sea.
8 a.m.—N. 62—07 E.
Cape Borda, 263 miles.
thirst.” I clapped my hands with joy, and
quickly assented to the terms of the Good
Genius, who, directly he saw my eagerness
to be with him, became hard and grasping
more than others ; but what cared I for
pelf in such a case ? I had found a way to
escape from my troubles and anxieties
I awoke—it was eight bells on board the
“ Orient.” I rubbed my eyes, and soon,
alas ! came the conviction that it was but a
dream, and that the long passage was true,
but the cave was the cave of
Been - done - In.
To Captains of Ships, and others.
Lost, stolen, or strayed,
from the good ship “ Orient,” on or
about Friday, 11th July, 1862, a Copy of
“ The Orient’s Observer.” Last seen making
its way towards a large ship, presumed to
be bound for Melbourne. Any one giving
information of its whereabouts, and applying
to the sorrowing Editor, shall be rewarded
according to merit.
IF Mr- L B ,or the present
possessor of a Pocket-Handkerchief,
taken {by mistake, of course ) from “'1 he
Orient,” will return it to the owner, he will
oblige. It is supposed to have followed to
look after the lost Copy of “ The Orient’s
Observer.”
Published in Adelaide, by order of the
Committee, 25th August, 1862.




? m if ‘ mi. ... mf/3- .
I K?*
mfawsM til k ■ a
** V ‘ ; - "? . .... ~ ' "' _ ? . l*s '
S£&a&ss ‘ 7 ■»-
~4r f '
-_ f f
