



. . ‘i v . s&v&r wwm ■■
.
>, ■ . - - ...
' * * - v * „ ‘ 1 { v-
'
,
.
* .' * 4
.v;V’•• ■ « .,, ■. ■ , ' . . .■ -» ! . .• ... . * i.- -.\ - v’-r.’ ...
•
,
• . •• • ."•• • v ’ i. *7. ;V‘v V'/- :.v.{• '
■ ■ :. '. ."■ \
: v -V >,■«':■. ■ .. .
;
■ - " v , ■■
v ‘ ' ' • ■ ‘ . ' , • . ' / : • . - '
■
= ■ -■ v-;-; • v-
• : ' • -
•
• *■" ■-
.
.
? ,
v - ,
•
"V V,;.v >v ■ ■ ■ •'?• * '.v. v ••. , • >; ; ;
•
’
■
-
■* °
; = ■


CONSTITUTION OF THE COMMONWEALTH




THE DRAFT BILL
TO CONSTITUTE THE
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA,
AS ADOPTED BY THE CONVENTION OF 1891.
EDITED BY
G. B. BARTON,
OF THE MIDDLE TEMPLE, BAKKISTER-AT-LAW.
|p|) Juithoritri;
SYDNEY : GEORGE STEPHEN CHAPMAN, ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER.




PREFACE.
The object in view in the present publication is to present
the draft Bill to constitute the Commonwealth of Australia in
a convenient shape for reference, with such editorial notes
as will enable readers, not accustomed to the study of Con-
stitutions, to make themselves acquainted with its provisions
without much difficulty. The bill itself has been drafted with
an evident desire to make matters as clear as possible to the
general reader; but the language of the law is always more or
less a foreign one to him ; and since the machinery of a Federal
Constitution is necessarily complex in construction and intri-
cate in details, the most ingenious draftsman is liable to be
misunderstood in his simplest clause. But an editor is at
liberty to substitute plain English for terms of art, and to
explain their meaning, when necessary, by a little commentary
of his own. This is all that has been attempted on the present
occasion.
12 June.




The Convention.
At a sitting of tlie National Australasian Convention, held in
Sydney on the 18th March, 1891, a committee was appointed for
the consideration of the Constitutional Machinery and the dis-
tribution of Functions and Powers in the Federation; a second,
for the consideration of provisions relating to Finance, Taxation,
and Trade Regulations; and a third, to consider the question of
the establishment of a Federal Judiciary, its Powers and Func-
tions. The two latter committees were directed to report to the
first on the respective subjects remitted to them; and on the
result of their deliberations being so reported, it was authorised
to prepare and submit to the Convention a bill for the establish-
ment of a Federal Constitution. The delegates from each colony
then proceeded to choose the members of the three committees;
two from each colony being appointed to act on the first com-
mittee, and one on the second and third. The committees con-
sisted of the following members ;
Committee on Constitutional Machinery and the distribution of Functions
and Powers :
-i.- c< .1 irr n \ Sir Henry Parkes.
New South W ales 1
Edmund Barton.
xt' i • I Duncan Gillies.
Vlctorxa Alfred Deakin.
~ . j i Sir Samuel Walker Griffith.
Queensland j Andrew Joseph Thynne-
c ~ . , t \ Thomas Playford.
South Australia gir John w f Uiam Downer-
rp . ( Andrew Inglis Clark.
Tasmania ( Adye Douglas.
t r/ i i 1 Sir George Grey.
New Zealand j Capt> w f Uiam j> usse n R UBse ll.
xxr i. a . i • \ John Forrest.
M estern Australia j Sir James George Lee . S teere.
Committee on Provisions relating to Finance, Taxation, and Trade Regulations :
New South Wales William McMillan.
Victoria James Munro.
Queensland Sir Thomas Mcllwraith.
South Australia Sir John Cox Bray.
Tasmania William Henry Burgess.
New Zealand Sir Harry Albert Atkinson.
Western Australia William Edward Marmion.


Committee on establishment of a Federal Judiciary, its Powers and its
Functions :
New South Wales
George Richard Dibbs.
Henry John Wrixon.
Arthur Rutledge.
Charles Cameron Kingston.
Andrew Inglis Clark.
Sir Harry Albert Atkinson.
John Winthrop Hackett.
Victoria
Queensland
South Australia
Tasmania
New Zealand
Western Australia
On the 31st March, Sir S. W. Griffith, Chairman of the
Committee on Constitutional Machinery, submitted to the
Convention a draft “ Bill to Constitute the Commonwealth of
Australia,” together with the reports from the two other
committees. The bill was referred to a Committee of the
whole Convention on the following day ; and its several clauses
were accordingly discussed from day to day until the Bth April,
when they were finally agreed to; the bill being adopted on the
9th, It was resolved, as a recommendation of the Convention,
on the motion of Sir S. W. Griffith, that provision should be
made by the Parliaments of the several colonies for submitting,
for the approval of the people of the colonies respectively, the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Australia, as framed by
the Convention. It was further recommended, on a motion by
the same delegate, that so soon as the Constitution should be
adopted by three of the colonies, Her Majesty’s Government
should be requested to take the necessary action to establish it,
in respect of those colonies.


The term “ Commonwealth.”
The bill sets out with the usual introduction in the shape of
a short preamble, reciting that certain of the Australasian
colonies —the names of which will be inserted in the bill when
it comes before the Imperial Parliament—have agreed to unite
in one Federal Commonwealth under the Crown, and under the
Constitution as defined in the bill. The mode by which the
colonies so agreeing will express their desire to unite is not
specified; a blank is left for the purpose, which, like the names
of the colonies uniting, will be filled up when the bill is intro-
duced into the Imperial Parliament.
The preamble is followed by eight enacting clauses, the first
of ’which gives the title of the proposed Act as “ The Consti-
tution of the Commonwealth of Australia/’
The word Commonwealth ” was much more familiar to
the ears of Englishmen in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries
than it has been at any time since. Shakspeare’s plays make it
evident that it was in common use among all classes in his time,
and that it had no such political meaning attached to it as it
acquired in later years. That it meant nothing more than the
State or community, without any reference to the form of its
government, is manifest from the following passages :
And in the administration of the law,
Whiles I was busy for the Commonwealth,
Your Highness pleased to forget my place,
The majesty and power of law and justice,
The image of the King whom I presented,
And struck me in my very seat of judgment.*
Since thou wert King, and who is King but thou ?
The Commonwealth hath daily run to wreck, f
* Third Part of Henry IV., act V, sc. 2.
+ Henry VI., act i, sc. 3.


Hear him debate of Commonwealth affairs,
You would say—it hath been all in all his study.*
And now, forsooth, takes on him to reform
Some certain edicts, and some strait decrees
That lie too heavy on the Commonwealth, f
Let us on,
And publish the occasion of our arms;
The Commonwealth is sick of their own choice. f
The political writers of the same period also used the word
in the general sense of a State or established community, no
matter what the form of government might be. Hobbes so used
it in his Leviathan, published in 1651 :
And because the sovereignty is either in one man, or in an assembly
of more than one, it is manifest there can be but three kinds of Com-
monwealth. When the representative of the people is one man, then
is the Commonwealth a monarchy ; when an assembly of all that will
come together, then it is a democracy, or popular Commonwealth ;
when an assembly of a part only, then it is called an aristocracy.§
The title chosen by James Harrington for his treatise on
government — f f The Commonwealth of Oceana”—was not selected
for the purpose of securing the favour of “ the Lord Protector of
the Commonwealth ” to whom it was dedicated, but because it
was the proper scientific term for his subject, according to the
usage of the time. So much was this the case that the Kings
and Queens of the period used the word in the same sense in
their addresses to the Lords and Commons; James the First was
even pleased to call himself “ the Great Servant of the Com-
monwealth.” Locke’s use of the word in his treatise “Of Civil
Government,” shews the distinction formerly observed between
the two things :
By the same act, therefore, whereby any one unites his person,
which was before free, to any Commonwealth, by the same he unites his
• Henry Y., act i, sc. 1.
+ Second Part of Henry IV., act iv, sc. 3.
J Ibid, act i, sc. 3.
§ English Works (ed. Molesworth) Vol. 111, p. 171.


possessions, which were before free, to it also; and they become, both of
them, person and possessions, subject to the government and dominion
of that Commonwealth, as long as it hath a being.
The establishment of Oliver Cromwell’s government, with
the title of a Commonwealth, which was no doubt chosen by the
Republicans in order to propitiate the Commons of England, led
to a great change in the ordinary meaning of the word. It
maybe seen in Milton’s treatise, “ The Ready and Easy Way
to establish a Free Commonwealth,” published in 1659-60, in
which the word is used throughout as an equivalent to the term
Republic:—
A free Commonwealth, without single person or house of lords, is
by far the best government, if it can be had.
Now is the opportunity, now the very season, wherein we may
obtain a free Commonwealth, and establish it for ever in the land, with-
out difficulty or much delay.
From the time of the Restoration to the present the word may
be said to have gradually disappeared from the conventional
language of political writers, as much as it has done from ordi-
nary conversation. But there is a decided tendency at the
present time to revive it. A commentary on the principles of
British Government was published some years ago by Homer-
sham Cox, under' the title of “ The British Commonwealth
and the recently published work of James Bryce, in which the
political institutions of the United States are criticised with so
much power, is entitled “The American Commonwealth.”




Draft of a Bill as adopted by the National Australasian Convention,
9th April, 1891.
HENRY PARKES, President.
F. W. WEBB, Secretary.
DEAET 0E
A BILL
To Constitute the Commonwealth of Australia.
Preamble.
WHEREAS the Australasian Colonies of [here name the Colonies
which have adopted the Constitution ] have by [here describe the
mode by which the assent of the Colonies has been expressed ] agreed to
unite in one Federal Commonwealth under the Crown of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and under the Constitution
hereby established: And whereas it is expedient to make provision for
the admission into the Commonwealth of other Australasian Colonies
and Possessions of Her Majesty : Be it therefore enacted by the Queen’s
Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in the present Parliament
assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows :
Short title.
1. This Act may be cited as “ The Constitution of the Common-
wealth of Australia.”
Application of provisions referring to the Queen.
2. The provisions of this Act referring to Her Majesty the Queen
extend also to the Heirs and Successors of Her Majesty in the
Sovereignty of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Australia.
Power to proclaim Commonwealth of Australia.
3. It shall be lawful for the Queen, by and with the advice of Her
Majesty’s Most Honorable Privy Council, to declare by Proclamation
that, on and after a day therein appointed, not being later than six


months after the passing of this Act, the Colonies of \Jiere name the
Colonies ivhich have adopted the Constitution ] (which said Colonies and
Province are hereinafter severally included in the expression “ the said
Colonies”) shall he united in one Federal Commonwealth under the
Constitution hereby established, and under the name of “ The Common-
wealth of Australia” ; and on and after that day the said Colonies shall
be united in one Federal Commonwealth under that name.
Commencement of Act.
4. Unless where it is otherwise expressed or implied this Act shall
commence and have effect on and from the day so appointed in the
Queen’s Proclamation; and the name “ The Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia” or “The Commonwealth” shall be takeffto mean the Common-
wealth of Australia as constituted under this Act.
States.”
5. The term “ The States” shall be taken to mean such of the existing
Colonies of New South Wales, New Zealand, Queensland, Tasmania,
Victoria, and Western Australia, and the Province of South Australia,
as for the time being form part of the Commonwealth, and such other
States as may hereafter be admitted into the Commonwealth under the
Constitution thereof, and each of such Colonies so forming part of the
Commonwealth shall be hereafter designated a “ State.”
Repeal of 48 and 49 Viet., chap. 60.
6. “ The Federal Council of Australasia Act, 1885,” is hereby re-
pealed, but such repeal shall not affect any laws passed by the Federal
Council of Australasia and in force at the date of the establishment of
the Constitution of the Commonwealth.
But any such law may be repealed as to any State by the Parliament
of the Commonwealth, and may be repealed as to any Colony, not being
a State, by the Parliament thereof.
Operation of the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth.
7. The Constitution established by this Act, and all laws made by
the Parliament of the Commonwealth in pursuance of the powers con-
ferred by the Constitution, and all Treaties made by the Common-
wealth, shall, according to their tenor, be binding on the Courts,
Judges, and people, of every State, and of every part of the Common-
wealth, anything in the laws of any State to the contrary notwith-
standing : and the Laws and Treaties of the Commonwealth shall be in
force on board of all British ships whose last port of clearance or
whose port of destination is in the Commonwealth.


Constitution.
8. The Constitution of the Commonwealth shall be as follows
THE CONSTITUTION.
Division of Constitution.
This Constitution is divided into Chapters and parts as follows ;
CHAPTER I.— THE PARLIAMENT :
Part I.— General ;
Part ll. —The Senate ;
Part 111. —The House of Representatives ;
Part IV. —Provisions relating to both Houses
Part V.—Powers of the Parliament :
CHAPTER lI— THE EXECUTIVE GOVERNMENT :
CHAPTER lII— THE FEDERAL JUDICATURE ;
CHAPTER IV.— FINANCE AND TRADE :
CHAPTER V— THE STATES :
CHAPTER VI —NEW STATES !
CHAPTER VII— MISCELLANEOUS;
CHAPTER VIII— AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION
CHAPTER I.
THE PARLIAMENT.
Part I. — General.
Legislative powers.
1. The Legislative powers of the Commonwealth shall be vested in
Eederal Parliament, which shall consist of Her Majesty, a Senate,
and a House of Representatives, and which is hereinafter called “ The
Parliament.”
Governor-General.
2. The Queen may, from time to time, appoint a Governor-General,
who shall he Her Majesty’s Representative in the Commonwealth, and
who shall have and may exercise in the Commonwealth during the
Queen’s pleasure, and subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
such powers and functions as the Queen may think fit to assign to
him.
[Exception has been taken to this clause, and others referring
to the Governor-General, on the ground that they propose to
confer “ enormous ” powers on her Majesty’s representative—


sucli powers indeed as have never been granted to any Governor
in these colonies. This contention overlooks the fact that, under
parliamentary government, the power nominally placed in the
Governor’s bands is really granted to the people; because it can
only be exercised by bim tbrougb bis Executive, who are virtu-
ally appointed by the electors. It follows that, by increasing
the range of power to be vested in the Governor-General, the
measure of constitutional freedom to be enjoyed by the people
would be proportionately enlarged.
The truth of this proposition may be proved by the experi-
ence of Canada under the Act which established the Dominion
in 1867.* It does not contain any similar danse to the one above.
It enacts that the executive Government and authority of and
over Canada shall continue and be vested in the Queen ; and
that all the powers, authorities, and functions which, under any
Act of Parliament, were previously vested in and exercised by
the Governors of the various Provinces forming the Dominion,
either individually or with the advice of their respective Execu-
tive Councils, should be vested in and exercised by the Governor-
General, either individually or with the advice of the Privy
Council, as the case might be—so far as they were capable of
being exercised after the Union, and subject, with certain ex-
emptions, to abolition or alteration by the Canadian Parliament.
The result of these provisions was that, when the first
Governor-General of Canada was appointed, the great difference
between such an officer and a Governor under the old system
was not recognised in the instructions given to him. JSTo change
was made in the stereotyped list of powers, authorities, and func-
tions contained in the official documents issued on his appoint-
ment ; and consequently he stood in much the same position, so
far as they were concerned, as the Governor of a province under
the old regime. It was not until 1876 that this matter was
brought specially under the notice of the Imperial Government
by a despatch from the Earl of Dufferin, then Governor-General,
which was written at the instance of his Ministers in reply to a
*The British North America Act, 1867.


circular despatcli from tlie Colonial Office received in the previous
year. The Secretary of State for the Colonies, having in view
the revision of the existing system with respect to the commis-
sions and instructions issued to the Governors of colonies on their
appointment, had thought proper to invite the attention of the
various Governors then in office, and their responsible advisers,
to the matter, with a view to their submitting such alterations
and amendments as might appear advisable in the case of the
particular colonies they represented. Lord Dufferin, having-
consulted with his Ministers, enclosed in his despatch a memo,
on the subject drawn up by a sub-committee of the Canadian
Privy Council, in which the usual instructions given to Governors
were declared to be not only inapplicable in the case of the
Dominion, but in many respects objectionable. Canada under
the Union, they said, was something more than a colony; it was
a group of seven colonies federally united under an Act of the
Imperial Parliament; and it was therefore clearly entitled to the
amplest measure of self-government in the administration of its
affairs. The powers which the Dominion Government claimed
to exercise should, therefore, be formally recognised and em-
bodied in the instructions issued to the Governor-General, and it
ought to be established as a fundamental principle that he must
act in all cases on the advice of his Ministers.
This assertion of right on the part of the Canadian Ministers
gave rise to a correspondence between the Governor-General and
the Earl of -Carnarvon, then Secretary of State for the Colonies,
which extended over nearly two years, and ended in the formal
concession of almost every point contended for. Among the
amendments which they suggested, was the omission of several
clauses which were still inserted in the instructions, although
they were either obsolete or superfluous on the one hand, or, on
the other, such as should be left to be determined by the
application of constitutional principles. The particular instruc-
tions referred to were, those which concerned the transaction
of ■ business by the Executive Council: which authorised the
Governor, in certain contingencies, to act in opposition to their


advice; wliicli prescribed tbe class of bills lie should
reserve for tbe consideration of tbe Imperial Government ; t and
others relating to matters which, under the Union, were neces-
sarily dealt with by the provincial governments as subjects of
local administration or legislation.
It was in accordance with the understanding arrived at on
this occasion that a new code of instructions was drawn up, with
the commission given to the Marquis of Lome, on his appoint-
ment as Governor-General in 1878. The powers and functions
conferred on him were set forth in the Letters Patent constituting
the office, the instructions accompanying them, and the com-
mission, The essential difference between the old system and
the new is thus stated by Todd : — c<: In their substantial omissions,
at well as in their positive directions, these instruments clearly
indicate the larger measure of self-government thenceforth con-
ceded to the Dominion. This increase of power, to be exercised
by the Government and Parliament of Canada, was not merely
relatively greater than that now enjoyed by other colonies of the
Empire, but absolutely more than had been previously entrusted
to Canada itself, during the administration of any former
Governor-General.”
It is evident, therefore, that so far from the increase of power
conferred on the Governor-General of Canada under the Federal
Constitution involving any restriction of the rights, liberties, and
privileges previously enjoyed by the people, they actually obtained
larger powers of self-government than they had possessed at
any time before; and that not relatively, but absolutely. It is
sufficient to mention, as an illustration of the change thus brought
about, that the practice of reserving bills for the Queen’s assent
has been virtually discontinued in Canada ; and that the exercise
of the veto is confined to cases in which the local Act is either
in conflict with Imperial interests, or repugnant to Imperial laws
extending to the colony.
It is further asserted that this clause is objectionable be-
cause (1) by the terms of the draft Bill, the Letters Patent and
the instructions containing the powers and functions which the


Queen is authorised to confer on the Governor-General, will
become part of our statute law as soon as the Constitution is
proclaimed; (2) because, in this colony. Letters Patent and in-
structions are nowhere made part of the statute law; (3) because
by such means “ a thousand openings for interference in our
affairs ” might be made by the Imperial Government; and (4)
because the words, “ powers and functions,” are evidently in-
tended to mean something more than provisions to regulate the
Governor-General’s action in allowing, disallowing, or reserving
bills, being those matters provided for in subsequent clauses of
the draft Bill (57, 58, 59), which substantially agree with the pro-
visions of the Imperial Act 5 and 6 Viet., c. 76 (ss. 31, 32, and 33)
preserved in force by the Imperial Act authorising her Majesty
to assent to our Constitution Act (18 and 19 Yict., c. 54, s. 3).
So far as these objections relate to a possible extension of
powers and functions, they are sufficiently answered in the pre-
ceding paragraphs. But it may be added that, even in the
event of such an extension taking place, the draft Bill provides
that the additional powers and functions to be conferred could
only operate “ subject to the provisions of this Constitution.”
They could not, therefore, be opposed to its spirit, still less to
its letter. Although there is no similar clause in the Canadian
or the South African Act, it is desirable that the draft Bill
should provide for the appointment of a Governor-General;
and in view of the facts already mentioned with respect to the
Governor-General of Canada, it is also desirable that the powers
and functions with which he is to be invested should form the
subject of mature consideration both here and in England. The
provision in the draft Bill would enable the Colonial Office to
carry out the views of the Australian Parliaments on the subject,
which will probably engage their attention before it is sent to
England. It is not possible to see how such a power can be
/properly described as “ dangerous,” when wo recollect that the
Earl of Carnarvon in 1878 showed so much readiness to acquiesce
in the views of the Canadian Ministers; and it is absolutely
certain that they never complained of “ a thousand openings ”


having been made for “ interference in their affairs/’ when the
revised instructions were issued to the Governor-General in that
wear.
It is not correct to say that “ royal instructions are nowhere
made part of our statute law.” They are virtually incorporated
with it in the Act authorising her Majesty to assent to our Con-
stitution Act, which distinctly enacts that “the instructions to
he conveyed to Governors for their guidance ” in relation to the
allowing, disallowing, and reserving of hills, shall apply to all
hills passed hy our Parliament. Apart from that, it is quite clear
that all the Letters Patent, Instructions, and Commissions issued
to the Governors of this colony since the days of Governor Phillip,
form part and parcel of our constitutional law.]
Salary of Governor-General.
3. The Annual Salary of the Governor-General shall be fixed by
the Parliament from time to time, but shall not be less than Ten
thousand pounds, and shall be payable to the Queen out of the Con-
solidated Eevenue Pund of the Commonwealth. The Salary of a
Governor-General shall not be diminished during his continuance in
office.
Application of provisions relating to Governor-General.
4. The provisions of this Constitution relating to the Governor-
General extend and apply to the Governor-General for the time being
or other the Chief Executive Officer or Administrator of the Govern-
ment of the Commonwealth, by whatever title he is designated.
Oath of Allegiance.—Schedule.
5. Every Member of the Senate, and every Member of the House
of Eepresentatives, shall before taking his seat therein make and sub-
scribe before the Governor-General, or some person authorised by
him, an Oath or Affirmation of Allegiance in the form set forth in the
Schedule to this Constitution.
Governor-General to fix times and places for holding Session of Parliament.—Power of dissolution
of House of Representatives. - First Session of Parliament.
6. The Governor-General may appoint such times for holding the
first and every other Session of the Parliament, as he may think fit,
giving sufficient notice thereof, and may also from time to time, by
proclamation or otherwise, prorogue the said Parliament, and may in
like manner dissolve the House of Eepresentatives.
The Parliament shall be called together not later than six months
after the date of the establishment of the Commonwealth.


Yearly Session of Parliament.
7. There shall he a Session of the Parliament once at least in every
year, so that twelve months shall not intervene between the last sitting
of the Parliament in one Session, and its first sitting in the next Session.
Privileges, &c., of Houses.
8. The privileges, immunities, and powers, to be held, enjoyed, and
exercised by the Senate and by the House of Representatives respec-
tively, and by the Members thereof, shall be such as are from time to
time declared by the Parliament, and until declared shall be those held,
enjoyed, and exercised by the Commons House of Parliament of the
United Kingdom, and by the Members thereof, at the date of the
establishment of the Commonwealth.
[The corresponding clause in the Canadian Act* provides
that the privileges, immunities, and powers with which the two
Houses may be invested by an Act of the Canadian Parliament
“ shall not exceed” those possessed by the House of Commons
in England. The provision in the draft Bill does not adopt this
method of limiting parliamentary privilege, but leaves the matter
entirely open to the wisdom of the Federal Parliament, which
would be guided by circumstances in dealing with it. The
Canadian principle was not discarded for the purpose of enabling
the Federal Parliament to claim more extensive privileges than
those of the House of Commons, but because it involved an
obvious difficulty —that of determining whether the privileges to
be claimed actually exceeded those of the latter House or not. It
is not easy to define, with any exactness, the “ privileges, im-
munities, and powers” to which parliamentary bodies are or may
be entitled; and it would be unsafe to fix an arbitrary limitation
upon them. The course adopted in this instance has been cen-
sured on the ground that it would enable the Federal Parlia-
ment to claim “absolutely unprecedented powers” for itself, and
that those powers would probably be used in the direction of
rather than that of popular freedom. There is nothing
in the language of the Bill to justify that view of the matter.]
* The British North America Act, 1867, s. 18, amended by 38 and 39 Yic,,
c. 33, s. 1.


Part ll. —The Senate,
Senate.
9. The Senate shall be composed of eight members for each State,
directly chosen by the Houses of the Parliament of the several States
during a Session thereof, and each Senator shall have one vote.
The Senators shall be chosen for a term of six years.
The names of the Senators chosen in each State shall be certified by
the Governor to the Governor-General.
[Tbe principle on which the Senate is to be elected is taken
from the Constitution of the United States, which provides that
the Senate shall be composed of two senators from each State,
chosen by the Legislature thereof, for six years, and that each
senator shall have one vote. The system adopted in the Dominion
of Canada excludes the elective principle altogether; the Senate
there being composed of not more than seventy-eight members,
nominated for life by the Governor-General, and possessing a clear
property qualification to the extent of over £BOO. In adopting
the American form of Senate, the draft Bill recognises the fact
that it is more consistent with democratic principles than the
Canadian; and, moreover, that the experience of a century has
amply confirmed the judgment of the statesmen who devised it.
An Upper House, composed of men nominated by the Crown for
life, on a property qualification, is no doubt more in accord with
the principles of the English Constitution than one established
on the American system ; but such an institution would not be
calculated to harmonise with the views of the Australian demo-
cracy in the present day.
This provision has been termed " anti-democratic/' because
it places the right of electing the members of the Senate in the
hands of the State Parliaments, instead of giving it to the
electors direct. Such an objection is at once met by the fact
that the principle on which it is proposed to form that body has
stood the test of time in the most democratic of all governments.
The most important point that has to be considered in connection
with any political institution, is the prospect of its stability; and
as the only two instances in which an Upper House has been


successfully constructed are tire House of Lords and the American
Senate, the framers of a Federal Constitution are practically
bound to choose either one or the other as their working model.
In this instance, they have clearly been guided by democratic
principles in choosing the American Senate as the basis on which
they pi’oposeto construct a second Chamber.
The reasons which prevailed with the American statesmen
when they framed the Senate on principles unknown to the
English Constitution, apply as forcibly to the circumstances of
these colonies as they did to those of the States. It is not diffi-
cult to see that they were virtually constrained to adopt the
course which seemed best to them. If the election of senators
had been placed in the hands of the electors by whom the House
of Representatives was returned, the great object in view in the
construction of a second Chamber would have been defeated.
For in a federal constitution, the States require to be repre-
sented as States, and that can only be effected by placing the
election of their representatives in the hands of the State Legis-
latures. In our own case, the object of State representation
could not be attained, if the election of senators were placed in
the hands of the whole body of electors. We know, as a matter
of daily observation, that the electors of each district habitually
vote for their representatives exclusively in the interest of their
own districts, and that questions of national importance are, as a
rule, subordinated to those of purely local concern. If the elec-
tion of senators wore to be determined in the same way, the
result would be that local interests would again predominate
over the far weightier interests of the State.
By transferring the election of senators from the electors
generally to their representatives in the State Parliaments, no
violence would be done to democratic principles, for the election
would still bo virtually controlled by the people. But, on the
other hand, it would be conducted on different principles and with
different ends in view. Exclusively local interests would dis-
appear, and votes would not be influenced by the prospect of
obtaining “ a share of the public plunder ” for a particular district.


The great interests of the State would be protected and pro-
moted; the men elected for the purpose would be chosen by the
members of the State Parliaments on the ground of their proved
capacity to represent it; and in each case, the senators would
possess the confidence of the Parliament of their own State,
which, through them, would be enabled to enforce its policy on
State questions in the Senate.]
Mode of Election of Senators.
10. The Parliament of the Commonwealth may make laws pre-
scribing a uniform manner of choosing the Senators. Subject to such
laws, if any, the Parliament of each State may determine the time,
place, and manner of choosing the Senators for that State by the
Houses of Parliament thereof.
Failure of a State to choose Senators not to prevent business.
11. The failure of any State to provide for its representation in the
Senate shall not affect the power of the Senate to proceed to the
despatch of business.
Retirement of Senators.
12. As soon as practicable after the Senate is first assembled the
Senators chosen for each State shall be divided by lot into two classes.
The places of the Senators of the first class shall be vacated at the
expiration of the third year, and the places of those of the second class
at the expiration of the sixth year, from the commencement of their
term of service as herein declared, so that one-half may be chosen every
third year.
Por the purposes of this section the term of service of a Senator
shall begin on and be reckoned from the first day of January next
succeeding the day of his election, except in the case of the first
election, when it shall be reckoned from the first day of January pre-
ceding the day of his election. The election of Senators to fill the
places of Senators retiring by rotation shall be made in the year
preceding the day on which the retiring Senators are to retire.
[This provision for the periodical retirement of a certain pro-
portion of the senators is also taken from the Constitution of the
United States, with some variation. In the latter, the senators
are divided into three classes ; those of the first class retire at


the end of the second year, those of the second class at the end
of the fourth year, and those of the third class at the end of the
sixth year. Under this system, one-third of the whole body is
chosen every second year. According to the plan adopted in the
draft Bill, one-half of the whole number will retire every third
year, and consequently half the Senate will be renewed at inter-
vals of three years. The principle of retirement by rotation is
unknown to our Constitution, but it is established in Victoria,
South Australia, and Tasmania, with respect to the Legislative
Council, which is elected.*]
How vacancies filled.
13. If the place of a Senator becomes vacant during the recess of
the Parliament of the State which he represented the Governor of the
State, by and with the advice of the Executive Council thereof, may
appoint a Senator to fill such vacancy until the next Session of the
Parliament of the State, when the Houses of Parliament shall choose
a Senator to fill the vacancy.
Tenure of Seats of Senators elected to Senate owing' to vacancies.
14. If the place of a Senator becomes vacant before the expiration
of the term of service for which he was chosen the Senator chosen to
fill his place shall hold the same only during the unexpired portion of
the term for which the previous Senator was chosen.
* The rotation principle was in great favour among the Republicans of the
seventeenth century. The earliest mention of it in English political history occurs
in a pamphlet published by James Harrington—the author of “ The Common-
wealth of Oceana ” —in 1660, which he entitled—- “ The Rota : or, a Model of a
Free State, or Equal Commonwealth.” The nature of the scheme may be gathered
from Anthony Wood’s account of the Rota Club, established by Harrington and
his friends:—
“ The model of it was that the third part of the Senat or House should rote out
by Ballot every year (not capable of being elected again for three years to come),
so that every ninth year tire Senate would be wholly alter’d. No Magistrate was to
continue above three years, and all to be chosen by Ballet. This club of Common-
wealthsmen lasted till about 1659.”—Athense Oxon., Vol. 11, p. 591.
Milton, who favoured a perpetual Senate, pointed out an objection to this
scheme in his pamphlet on “ The Ready and Easy Way to Establish a Free Com-
monwealth,” published shortly after Harrington’s appeared : —“ For it appears not
how this [retirement by rotation 1 can be done, without danger and mischance of
putting out a great number of the best and ablest, in whose stead new elections
may bring in as many raw, unexperienced, and otherwise affected, to the weakening
and much altering for the worse of public transactions.”


Qualifications of Senator.
15. The qualifications of a Senator shall be as follows:
(1) He must be of the full age of thirty years, and must, when
chosen, be an elector entitled to vote in some State at the
election of Members of the House of Representatives of the
Commonwealth, and must have been for five years at the least
a resident within the limits of the Commonwealth as existing
at the time when he is chosen ;
(2) He must be either a natural born subject of the Queen, or a
subject of the Queen naturalised by or under a law of the
Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, or of the Parliament of one of the said Colonies, or
of the Parliament of the Commonwealth, or of a State, at
least five years before he is chosen.
Election of President of the Senate.
16. The Senate shall, at its first meeting and before proceeding to
the despatch of any other business, choose a Senator to be the President
of the Senate ; and as often as the office of President becomes vacant
the Senate shall again choose a Senator to be the President; and the
President shall preside at all meetings of the Senate ; and the choice
of the President shall be made known to the Governor-General bj a
deputation of the Senate.
The President may be removed from office by a vote of the Senate.
He may resign his office ; and upon his ceasing to be a Senator his office
shall become vacant.
Absence of President provided for.
17. In case of the absence of the President, the Senate may choose
some other Senator to perform the duties of the President during his
absence.
Resignation of place in Senate.
18. A Senator may, by writing under his hand addressed to the
President, or if there is no President, or the President is absent from
the Commonwealth, to the Governor-General, resign his place in the
Senate, and thereupon the same shall be vacant.
Disqualification of Senator by absence.
19. The place of a Senator shall become vacant if for one whole
Session of the Parliament he, without the permission of the Senate
entered on its Journals, fails to give his attendance in the Senate.


Vacancy in Senate to be notified to Governor of State.
20. Upon the happening of a vacancy in the Senate the President,
or if there is no President, or the President is absent from the Com-
monwealth, the Governor-General shall forthwith notify the same to
the Governor of the State which the Senator whose place is vacated
represented.
Questions as to qualifications and vacancies in Senate.
21. If any question arises respecting the qualification of a Senator
or a vacancy in the Senate, the same shall be determined by the
Senate.
Quorum of Senate.
22. Until the Parliament otherwise provides, the presence of at
least one-third of the whole number of Senators, as provided by this
Constitution, shall be necessary to constitute a meeting of the Senate
for the exercise of its powers.
Voting in Senate.
23, Questions arising in the Senate shall be determined by a major-
ity of votes, and the President shall in all cases be entitled to a vote ;
and when the votes are equal the question shall pass in the negative.
Part 111. —The House of Representatives.
Constitution of House of Representatives.
24. The House of Representatives shall be composed of Members
chosen every three years by the people of the several States, according
to their respective numbers; and until the Parliament of the Common-
wealth otherwise provides, each State shall have one Representative
for every thirty thousand of its people.
Provided that in the case of any of the existing Colonies of New
South Males, New Zealand, Queensland, Tasmania, Victoria, and
'Western Australia, and the Province of South Australia, until the
number of the people is such as to entitle the State to four Repre-
sentatives it shall have four Representatives.
Qualification of electors.
25. The qualification of electors of Members of the House of
Representatives shall be in each State that which is prescribed by the
law of the State as the qualification for electors of the more numerous
House of the Parliament of the State.
[The main principles on which the House of Representatives
is to be elected are taken from the Constitution of the United


States. The American House of Representatives, in its earliest
form, was composed of members chosen every second year by the
people of the several States ; the number of members was not to
exceed “ one for every thirty thousand ” of the population ; the
representation was apportioned among the States according to
their numbers, a fresh apportionment taking place every ten
years; and the electors in each State were required to have
“the qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous
branch of the State Legislature.” These principles are not less
democratic, in their origin and character, than those which relate
to the composition and election of the Senate; but they have
been described here as “ anti-democratic,” mainly on the ground
that the electoral system is not based on the principle of “ one
man one vote.”
A little consideration of the matter will show that the
authors of the draft Bill had good reasons for following the
precedent set them by the American statesmen. In both cases
there was the same difficulty to be met, arising from the different
electoral systems established in the different States. The founders
of the American Union did not think it wise or prudent to pre-
scribe a uniform system of qualifications as the essential basis on
which the elections for the House of Representatives were to be
conducted. Such a procedure was practically impossible, for
many reasons, but chiefly because it would have involved a
violation of a fundamental principle of the Constitution—that
the internal affairs of the States were not to be interfered with
where interference could be safely avoided. The soundness of
their judgment becomes evident when we recollect that a jealous
regard for independence in matters of internal government has
always formed a leading of State politics. The same
feeling exists among these colonies, and is certain to make itself
felt in every attempt to frame a federal constitution. It may be
safely asserted that, if the draft Bill had contained any provisions
involving a reform of the electoral system in the colonies, it
would have been pointed out as another “ strangely impertinent
interference ” with their rights.]


Provision for case of persons not allowed to vote.
26. When in any State the people of any race are not entitled by
law to vote at elections for the more numerous House of the Parlia-
ment of the State, the Representation of that State in the House of
Representatives shall he reduced in the proportion which the number
of people of that race in the State bears to the whole number of the
people of the State.
Mode of calculating number of Members.
27. When upon the apportionment of Representatives it is found
that after dividing the number of the people of a State by the number
in respect of which a State is entitled to one Representative there
remains a surplus greater than one-half of such number, the State
shall have one additional Representative.
Representatives in first Parliament.
28. The number of members to be chosen by each State at the first
election shall be as follows: \_To he determined according to latest
statistical returns at the date of the passing of the Act^\
Periodical reapportionment.
29. A fresh apportionment of Representatives to the States shall
be made after each Census of the people of the Commonwealth, which
shall be taken at intervals not longer than ten years. But a fresh
apportionment shall not take effect until the then next General
Election.
Increase of number of House of Representatives.
30. The number of Members of the Mouse of Representatives may
be from time to time increased or diminished by the Parliament of
the Commonwealth, but so that the proportionate representation of
the several States, according to the numbers of their people, and the
minimum number of Members, prescribed by this Constitution, for
any State shall be preserved.
Electoral Divisions.
31, The electoral divisions of the several States for the purpose of
returning members of the House of Representatives shall be deter-
mined from time to time by the Parliaments of the several States.


Qualifications of Member of House of Representatives.
32. The qualifications of a Member of the House of Representatives
shall be as follows :
(1) He must be of the full age of twenty-one years, and must when
elected be an elector entitled to vote in some State at the
election of members of the House of Representatives, and
must have been for three years at the least a resident within
the limits of the Commonwealth as existing at the time when
he is elected;
(2) He must be either a natural born subject of the Queen, or a
subject of the Queen naturalised by or under a law of the
Parliament of Great Britain and Ireland, or of the Parliament
of one of the said Colonies, or of the Parliament of the Com-
monwealth, or of a State, at least three years before he is
elected.
Disqualification of Senators.
33. A Senator shall not be capable of being elected or of sitting as
a Member of the House of Representatives.
Election of Speaker of House of Representatives.
34. The House of Representatives shall, at its first meeting after
every General Election, and before proceeding to the despatch of any
other business, choose a Member to be the Speaker of the House,
and as often as the office of Speaker becomes vacant the House shall
again choose a Member to be Speaker; and the Speaker shall preside
at all meetings of the House of Representatives; and the choice of a
Speaker shall be made known to the Governor-General by a deputation
of the House.
The Speaker may be removed from office by a vote of the House, or
may resign his office.
\
Absence 'of Speaker provided for.
35. In case of the absence of the Speaker, the House of Representa-
tives may choose some other Member to perform the duties of the
Speaker during his absence.
Resignation of place in House of Representatives.
36. A Member of the House of Representatives may, by writing
under his hand addressed to the Speaker, or if there is no Speaker,
or he is absent from the Commonwealth, to the Governor-General,
resign his place in the House of Representatives, and thereupon the
same shall he vacant.


Disqualification of Member by absence.
37. The place of a Member of the House of Representatives shall
become vacant if for one whole Session of the Parliament he, without
permission of the House of Representatives entered on its Journals,
fails to give his attendance in the House.
Issue of new writs.
38. Upon the happening of a vacancy in the House of Representa-
tives, the Speaker shall, upon a resolution of the House, issue his writ
for the election of a new member.
In the case of a vacancy by death or resignation happening when the
Parliament is not in Session, or during an adjournment of the House
for a period of which a part longer than seven days is unexpired,
the Speaker, or if there is no Speaker, or he is absent from the Com-
monwealth, the Governor-General shall issue, or cause to be issued, a
writ without such resolution.
Quorum of House of Representatives.
39* Until the Parliament otherwise provides the presence of at least
one-third of the whole number of the Members of the House of
Representatives shall be necessary to constitute a meeting of the
Plouse for the exercise of its powers.
Voting in House of Representatives.
40. Questions arising in the House of Representatives shall be
determined by a majority of votes other than that of the Speaker ;
and when the votes are equal, but not otherwise, the Speaker shall
have a casting vote.
Duration of House of Representatives.
41. Every House of Representatives shall continue for three years
from the day appointed for the first meeting of the House, and no
longer, subject, nevertheless, to be sooner dissolved by the Governor-
General.
The Parliament shall be called together not later than thirty days
after the day appointed for the return of the Writs for a General
Election.
Writs for General Election.
42. Eor the purpose of holding General Elections of Members to
serve in the House of Representatives the Governor-General may
cause Writs to be issued by such persons, in such form, and addressed
to such Returning Officers, as he thinks fit.


Continuance of existing Election Laws until the Parliament otherwise provides.
43. Until the Parliament of the Commonwealth otherwise provides,
the laws in force in the several States for the time being, relating to
the following matters, namely: The manner of conducting Elections
for the more numerous House of the Parliament, the proceedings at
such elections, the oaths to be taken by voters, the Returning Officers,
their powers and duties, the periods during which Elections may be
continued, the execution of new "Writs in case of places vacated other-
wise than by dissolution, and offences against the laws regulating such
Elections, shall respectively apply to Elections in the several States of
Members to serve in the House of Representatives.
Questions as to qualifications and vacancies.
44. If any question arises respecting the qualification of a Member
or a vacancy in the House of Representatives, the same shall be heard
and determined by the House of Representatives.
Part IY. — Provisions relating to both Houses.
Allowance to Members.
45. Each member of the Senate and House of Representatives shall
receive an annual allowance for his services, the amount of which shall
be fixed by the Parliament from time to time. Until other provision
is made in that behalf by the Parliament the amount of such annual
allowance shall be five hundred pounds.
Disqualifications of Members
46. Any person—
(1) Who has taken an oath or made a declaration or acknow-
ledgment of allegiance, obedience, or adherence to a Eoreign
Power, or has done any act whereby he has become a subject
or citizen or entitled to the rights or privileges of a subject
or a citizen of a Eoreign Power ; or
(2) Who is an undischarged bankrupt or insolvent, or a public
defaulter; or
(3) Who is attainted of treason, or convicted of felony or of any
infamous crime ;
shall be incapable of being chosen or of sitting as a Senator or Mem-
ber of the House of Representatives until the disability is removed by
a grant of a discharge, or the expiration or remission of the sentence,
or a pardon, or release, or otherwise.


Place to become vacant on happening of certain disqualifications.
47. If a Senator or Member of the House of Representatives—
(l) Takes an oath or makes a declaration or acknowledgment of
allegiance, obedience, or adherence to a Foreign Power, or
do,es any act whereby ho becomes a subject or citizen, or
entitled to the rights or privileges of a subject or citizen, of
a Foreign Power; or
(2) Is adjudged bankrupt or insolvent, or takes the benefit of
any law relating to bankrupt or insolvent debtors, or becomes
a public defaulter; or
(3) Is attainted of treason, or convicted of felony or of any
infamous crime ;
his place shall thereupon become vacant.
Disqualifying contractors and persons interested in contracts.—Proviso exempting members of
trading companies.
48. Any person who directly or indirectly himself, or by any person
in trust for him, or for his use or benefit, or on his account, undertakes,
executes, holds, or enjoys, in the whole or in part, any agreement for
or on account of the Public Service of the Commonwealth, shall bo
incapable of being chosen or of sitting as a Senator or Member of the
House of Representatives while he executes, holds, or enjoys the agree-
ment, or any part or share of it, or any benefit or emolument arising
from it.
If any person, being a Senator or Member of the House of Repre-
sentatives, enters into any such agreement, or having entered into it
continues to hold it, his place shall thereupon become vacant.
But this section does not extend to any agreement made, entered
into, or accepted, by an incorporated company consisting of more
than twenty persons if the agreement is made, entered into, or accepted
for the general benefit of the company.
Place to become vacant on accepting office of profit.—Exceptions.
49. If a Senator or Member of the House of Representatives
accepts any office of profit under the Crown, not being one of the
offices of State held during the pleasure of the Governor-General,
and the holders of which are by this Constitution declared to be
capable of being chosen and of sitting as Members of either House of
Parliament, or accepts any pension payable out of any of the revenues
of the Commonwealth during the pleasure of the Crown, his place
shall thereupon become vacant, and no person holding any such office,


except as aforesaid, or holding or enjoying any such pension, shall he
capable of being chosen or of sitting as a Member of either House of
the Parliament:
But this provision does not apply to a person who is in receipt only
of pay, half-pay, or a pension, as an Officer of the Queen’s Navy or
Army, or who receives a new Commission in the Queen’s Navy or
Army, or an increase of pay on a new Commission, or who is in
receipt only of pay as an officer or member of the Military or Naval
Forces of the Commonwealth and whose services are not wholly
employed by the Commomvealth.
Penalty for sitting when disqualified.
50. If any person by this Constitution declared to be incapable of
sitting in the Senate or House of Representatives sits as a Senator
or Member of the House of Representatives, he shall, for every day on
which he sits, be liable to pay the sum of one hundred pounds to any
person who may sue for it in any Court of competent jurisdiction.
Standing Rules and Orders to be made.
51. The Senate and House of Representatives may from time to
time prepare and adopt such Standing Rules and Orders as may appear
to them respectively best adapted—
(1) For the orderly conduct of the business of the Senate and
House of Representatives respectively :
(2) For the mode in which the Senate and House of Representa-
tives shall confer, correspond, and communicate with each
other relative to Votes or proposed Laws adopted by or pend-
ing in the Senate or House of Representatives respectively :
(3) For the manner in which Notices of proposed Laws, Reso-
lutions, and other business intended to be submitted to the
Senate and House of Representatives respectively may be
published for general information :
(4) For the manner in which proposed Laws are to be introduced,
passed, numbered, and, intituled in the Senate and House o£
Representatives respectively:
(5) For the proper presentation of any Laws passed by the Senate
and House of Representatives to the Governor-General for his
assent : and
(6) Generally for the conduct of all business and proceedings of
the Senate and House of Representatives severally and collec-
tively.


[This provision is taken from our Constitution Act; but it
omits the concluding part of the section (35) which requires the
rules and orders to be laid before the Governor, and to be
approved by him, before they can take effect. In this respect
the draft Bill again follows the democratic lead of the American
Constitution, which gives each House the power to determine
the rules of its proceedings, without reference to any higher
authority.]
Part Y.— Powers oe the Parliament.
[The legislative powers proposed to be conferred on the
Federal Parliament will extend only to certain classes of subjects,
which are enumerated for the purpose of distinguishing its powers
from those of the State Parliaments. The draft Bill does not
attempt to define their legislative powers, which are consequently
left untouched, except so far as relates to the specified subjects
with which the Federal Parliament is expressly authorised to
deal. In this respect, the Bill adopts the principle established in
the United States, where the federal powers conferred by the
Constitution are strictly delegated powers ; the result being that
as to matters not specified as being within the exclusive jurisdic-
tion of Congress, the States retain all the powers vested in them
by their respective Constitutions.
The Canadian Act is based on a very different principle ; it
enumerates and defines the subjects with respect to which the
Provincial Legislatures have exclusive powers of legislation, and
gives the Dominion Parliament authority to legislate on all
matters outside them; at the same time specifying, “ for greater
certainty, but not so as to restrict the generality ” of that power,
the various classes of subjects with respect to which it should
have exclusive authority to deal. The effect of an arbitrary
division of power is to surround the Provincial Legislatures with
a system of limitations, and consequently to give rise to frequent
conflicts of opinion with respect to their powers as compared
with those of the Parliament above them.]


Legislative powers of the Parliament.
52. The Parliament shall, subject to the provisions o£ this Consti-
tution, have full power and authority to make all such Laws as it thinks
necessary for the peace, order, and good government of the Common-
wealth, with respect to all or any of the matters following, that is to
say :
1. The regulation of Trade and Commerce with other Countries,
and among the several States ;
2. Customs and Excise and bounties, but so that duties of Customs
and Excise and bounties shall be uniform throughout the Com-
monwealth, and that no tax or duty shall be imposed on any
goods exported from one State to another ;
3. Raising money by any other mode or system of taxation ; but
so that all such taxation shall be uniform throughout the Com-
monwealth ;
4. Borrowing money on the public credit of the Commonwealth;
5. Postal and Telegraphic Services ;
6. The Military and Naval Defence of the Commonwealth and the
several States and the calling out of the Forces to execute and
maintain the laws of the Commonwealth, or of any State or
part of the Commonwealth ;
7. Munitions of War;
8. Navigation and Shipping;
9. Ocean Beacons and Buoys, and Ocean Light-houses and Light-
ships.
10. Quarantine;
11. Fisheries in Australian w r aters beyond territorial limits ;
12. Census and Statistics ;
13. Currency, Coinage, and Legal Tender ;
14. Banking, the Incorporation of Banks, and the Issue of Paper
Money;
15. "Weights and Measures ;
16. Bills of Exchange and Promissory Notes ;
17. Bankruptcy and Insolvency ;
18 Copyrights and Patents of Inventions, Designs, and Trade
Marks;
19. Naturalization and Aliens ;


20. The Status in the Commonwealth of Foreign Corporations, and
of Corporations formed in any State or part of the Common-
wealth ;
21. Marriage and Divorce ;
22. The Service and Execution throughout the Commonwealth of the
Civil and Criminal Process and Judgments of the Courts of the
States ;
23. The recognition throughout the Commonwealth of the Laws, the
Public Acts and Records, and the Judicial Proceedings, of the
States ;
21. Immigration and Emigration ;
25. The influx of Criminals ;
26. External affairs and Treaties ;
27. The relations of the Commonwealth to the Islands of the
Pacific ;
28. River Navigation with respect to the common purposes of two
or more States, or parts of the Commonwealth ;
29. The control of Railways with respect to transport for the pur-
poses of the Commonwealth ;
30. Matters referred to the Parliament of the Commonwealth by
the Parliament or Parliaments of any State or States, but so
that the Law shall extend only to the State or States by whose
Parliament or Parliaments the matter was referred, and to
such other States as may afterwards adopt the Law ;
31. The exercise within the Commonwealth, at the request or with
the concurrence of the Parliaments of all the States concerned,
of any Legislative powers with respect to the affairs of the
territory of the Commonwealth, or any part of it, which can
at the date of the establishment of this Constitution be
exercised only by the Parliament of the United Kingdom or
by the Federal Council of Australasia;
Any matters necessary or incidental for carrying into execution
the foregoing powers and any other powers vested by this
Constitution in the Parliament or Excutive Government of
the Commonwealth or in any department or officer thereof.


Exclusive powers of the Parliament.
53. The Parliament shall, also, subject to the provisions of this
Constitution, have exclusive power to make laws for the peace, order, and
good government of the Commonwealth with respect to the following
matters : —•
1. The affairs of people of any race with respect to whom it is
deemed necessary to make special laws not applicable to the
general community ; but so that this power shall not extend
to authorise legislation with respect to the affairs of the
aboriginal native race in Australia and the Maori race in New
Zealand;
2. The government of any territory which may by surrender of
any State or States and the acceptance of the Parliament
become the seat of Government of the Commonwealth, and
the exercise of like authority over all places acquired by the
Commonwealth, with the consent of the Parliament of the
State in which such places are situate, for the construction of
forts, magazines, arsenals, dockyards, quarantine stations, or
for any other purposes of general concern;
3. Matters relating to any Department or Departments of the
Public Service the control of which is by this Constitution
transferred to the Executive Grovernment of the Common-
wealth ;
4. Such other matters as are by this Constitution declared to be
within the exclusive powers of the Parliament.
Money Bills.
Money Bills.
54. Laws appropriating any part of the public revenue, or imposing
any tax or impost shall originate in the House of Eepresentatives.
Appropriation and Tax Bills.
55. (1) The Senate shall have equal power with the House of
Eepresentatives in respect of all proposed Laws, except Laws imposing
taxation and Laws appropriating the necessary supplies for the ordinary
annual services of the Grovernment which the Senate may affirm or
reject, but may not amend. But the Senate may not amend any pro-
posed Law in such a manner as to increase any proposed charge or
burden on the people.
(2) Laws imposing taxation shall deal with the imposition of
taxation only.


(3) Laws imposing taxation except Laws imposing duties of
Customs on imports shall deal with one subject of taxation only.
(4) The expenditure for services other than the ordinary annual
services of the Grovernment shall not be authorised by the same Law
as that Avhich appropriates the supplies for such ordinary annual
services, but shall be authorised by a separate Law or Laws.
(5) In the case of a proposed Law which the Senate may not
amend, the Senate may at any stage return it to the House of Repre-
sentatives with a message requesting the omission or amendment of any
items or provisions therein. And the House of Representatives may,
if it thinks fit, make such omissions or amendments, or any of them,
with or without modifications.
[ln dealing with the question of money bills, the draft Bill
has marked out a plan of procedure which differs from the estab-
lished practice in England, in the United States, in Canada, and
in this colony. It represents the result arrived at after a con-
siderable conflict of opinion as to the rights of the twm Houses
on the question involved. The Constitution Acts of this colony
and of Victoria, which were framed with the intention of embody-
ing the practice of the English Parliament as far as possible,
provide merely that all money bills shall originate in the As-
sembly. The Canadian Act, which is based on the same principle,
also follows the same precedent. But the Constitution of the
United States, while providing that “ all bills for raising revenue
shall originate in the House of Representatives,” gives the other
House a power unknown to English practice by adding —“ but
the Senate may propose or concur with amendments, as in other
bills.” These words had the effect of placing both Houses on
the same level as regards money bills, with the single exception
as to the right of initiating them. The power of proposing
amendments has been freely exercised by the Senate at all times;
but whatever differences may arise between the twm Houses are
usually settled by means of conference and compromise.*
The plan adopted in the draft Bill has the sanction of both
the English and American systems. On the one hand, it follows
the English practice by saying that the Senate may reject a
* Bryce on the American Commonwealth, vol. I, p. 136.


money bill, but may not amend it. On tbe other band, it follows
the American practice, to some extent, by saying that where the
Senate may not amend a money bill, it may return it to the lower
House at any stage, with a message requesting the omission or
amendment of any items or provisions in it. But that is all it
can do ; because this power is restricted by the further provision
that the Lower House, if it thinks fit, may make such omissions
or amendments, or modify them. Those words convey a clear limi-
tation of the right of requesting amendments ; because they re-
serve the power of finally dealing with them to the Lower House.
This course of procedure is recommended by the fact that it
has been in force in South Australia for many years past. It
was originally adopted there as a compromise of the difficulties
which had arisen between the two Houses on the subject of
money bills; and since that time it has been found to work so
effectively that it is now regarded as an established practice.
A proof of the success which has attended it may be seen in the
fact that, at the first meeting of the Parliament of Western Aus-
tralia, it was resolved to adopt it as a means of averting diffe-
rences of opinion between the two Houses on financial questions.
The evidence in its favour thus afforded by the representatives
of two colonies was strong enough to justify the adoption of this
practice in the draft Bill. But in face of this testimpny, it is
confidently asserted that, although it has been successfully
adopted elsewhere for the purpose of averting collisions, it will
infallibly give rise to them when the Federal Constitution comes
into existence. The Assembly was recently told that, “in this
matter, upon which there should be no risk of collision or dead-
lock, there is every opening for incessant quarrels between the
different provinces in the Senate.” This statement was made
without any attempt to support it by either argument or evidence.
Its value may be ascertained by comparing it with the statement
made by the Premier of South Australia, when speaking on the
subject in the Convention :
I would say that, considering the compromise arrived at was the same
as that arrived at in South Australia over twenty years ago, between the


Legislative Council and the House of Assembly, and that it has worked
so exceedingly well for that period, we, in making the compromise con-
tained in the bill, have not departed from any powers we possess ; that
is, we have not gone outside the colonies to adopt a mode by which we
may get over the difficulties of co-oi’dinate powers between the two
Houses. We have, adopted a system which has been in operation in
one of the colonies for many years with very happy results. Therefore,
we have just as much right to say that by adopting the South Austra-
lian compromise, which has worked so well for so many years, we have
adopted a compromise which will work well for the Commonwealth of
the future, as we have to say that, if we had adopted the American
system, which, I contend, exists under different conditions and apart
from responsible government, it also would have worked well.*
This evidence was confirmed by that of a delegate from
Western Australia, who said :
All I can say is that, in the first assembling of our two Houses in
Western Australia, when this very question came up, we carefully studied
matters in South Australia; and we were convinced, from the frequent,
the effective, and the conciliatory application of the system, that it was
a course of procedure that deserved consideration. The result was that,
in the very first question that arose between our two Houses, we adopted
the South Australian mode of procedure, and, in consequence, an amend-
ment of a highly desirable character was made in legislation relating to
finance. Therefore, I look upon the practice as the established practice
of Western Australia as well as of South Australia, fj
Recommendation of money votes.
56. It shall not he lawful for the House of Representatives to pass
any vote, resolution, or Law for the appropriation of any part of the
public revenue, or of the produce of any tax or impost, to any purpose
that has not been first recommended to that House by message of the
Governor-General in the Session in which the vote, resolution, or Law,
is proposed.
Royal Assent.
Royal assent to Bills.
57. When a law passed by the Parliament is presented to the
Governor-General for the Queen's assent, he shall declare, according
to his discretion, but subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
either that he assents to it in the Queen’s name, or that he withholds
assent, or that he reserves the Law for the Queen’s pleasure to be made
known.
* Official Report of the Debates, p. 922. f Ibid, p. 741.


The Governor-General may return to the Parliament any Law so
presented to him, and may transmit therewith any amendments which
he may desire to he made in such Law, and the Parliament may deal
with such proposed amendments as it thinks fit.
[The power of suggesting amendments has been described
as an “extraordinary ” and a “ dangerous” one, even if confined
to verbal alterations of the bill. Although there is no provision
to that effect in our Constitution Act, there is one in the Consti-
tution Act of Victorians. 36), and also in that of South Australia
(s. 28) —worded as follows : —•
It shall be lawful for the Governor to transmit by message to the
Council or Assembly, for their consideration, any amendments which he
shall desire to be made in any bill presented to him for her Majesty’s
assent; and all such amendments shall be taken into consideration in
such convenient manner as shall, by the rules and orders aforesaid, be
in that behalf provided.
The provision in the draft Bill which confers the power of
proposing amendments on the Governor-General was, no doubt,
suggested by this clause, which has stood the test of thirty-five
years'’ experience in the neighbouring colonies. That there are
good reasons for taking advantage of that experience cannot be
denied by any one acquainted with the character of our legis-
lation. However well and carefully a bill may be drafted in the
first instance, the alterations made in it when the Houses are in
Committee usually introduce a great deal of doubt and difficulty
as to the precise meaning of the clauses altered, the result being
that the intentions of the Legislature are frequently defeated.
Such a result, of course, is not anticipated by the legislators
who propose the alterations, nor is it observed until the law itself
has become the subject of discussion. Under the present system,
no means are provided for curing the defects thus occasioned,
or preventing the mischievous consequences to which they occa-
sionally give rise.
The established practice in the matter is this : as soon as
a bill has been passed by both Houses, it is sent by the Clerk of


Parliaments to tire Governor, who thereupon directs it to he sent
to the Attorney-General with an official letter requesting him to
peruse it, “ with a view of ascertaining whether there is any
objection to his Excellency the Governor giving his assent to it;
or whether he is required, under the provisions of the Constitu-
tion or any other Acts, or the Royal Instructions, to withhold his
assent to the bill, or to reserve it for the signification of her
Majesty’s pleasure.” The questions which the Attorney-General
is requested to answer being purely constitutional, he confines his
attention to the constitutional aspects of the bill ; so that he does
not undertake to say whether it is defective from a technical
point of view, nor does he pretend to suggest any amendments
for the purpose of improving it. If there is no constitutional
objection to it, he returns it with an official letter, stating his
opinion to that effect; whereupon his Excellency gives his assent
to the bill, and it then becomes law.
Under the system proposed by the draft Bill, this practice
would be altered so far that the Attorney-General of the Com-
monwealth would be requested to examine the bills sent to him
by the Governor-General from a technical as well as a constitu-
tional point of view; to point out any defects in them he might
notice, and to suggest such alterations as he might think neces-
sary for the purpose of carrying out the intentions of Parliament
with respect to the bills. Any alterations which he might propose
would probably be considered by the Federal Executive Council,
who would then advise the Governor-General on the subject. On
such occasions, the Council would perform the duties of a Court
of Revision, and with this result—that instead of the bills passed
by both Houses being finally dealt with as a matter of routine,
they would undergo an examination which would probably
reveal any errors or oversights that might have previously
escaped notice. The attention of Parliament would then be
directed to any matter that might require it, so that the true
purpose of every bill would be tolerably certain of accomplish-
ment. Functions of this kind would be strictly constitutional.
There is no pretence for the supposition that the power of


proposing amendments under such conditions, would be either
prejudicial to the liberty of the people, or derogatory to the
dignity of Parliament.]
Disaliowance by Order in Council of Law assented to by Governor-General.
58. When the Governor-General assents to a Law in the Queen’s
name he shall by the first convenient opportunity send an authentic
copy to the Queen, and if the Queen in Council within two years
after receipt thereof thinks fit to disallow the Law, such disallowance
being made known by the Governor-General, by speech or message, to
each of the Houses of the Parliament, or by proclamation, shall annul
the Law from and after the day when the disallowance is so made
known.
Signification of Queen’s Pleasure on Bill reserved.
59. A Law reserved for the Queen’s pleasure to be made known
with respect to it shall not have any force unless and until within two
years from the day on which it was presented to the Governor-General
for the Queen’s assent, the Governor-General makes known by speech
or message to each of the Houses of the Parliament, or by proclama-
tion, that it has received the assent of the Queen in Council.
An entry of every such speech, message, or proclamation shall be
made in the journal of each House, and a duplicate thereof duly
attested shall be delivered to the proper officer to be kept among the
records of the Parliament.
CHAPTER 11.
THE EXECUTIVE GOVERNMENT.
Executive power to be vested in the Queen. 1
1. The Executive power and authority of the Commonwealth is
vested in the Queen, and shall be exercised by the Governor-General as
the Queen’s Representative.
[lt is contended that this clause, as it stands, vests the Execu-
tive power in the Governor-General independently of the Execu-
tive ; and that it ought to have concluded with the words “ acting
by and with the advice of the Federal Executive Council.'” If
.these words had been inserted, they would not amount to any-
thing more than surplusage. Parliamentary Government being
established as the basis of the Federation, the Governor-General


could not act otherwise than “ by and with the advice of the
Federal Executive Council/’ unless he was prepared to take the
responsibility of acting without it or against it. The correspond-
ing clause of the Canadian Act says that “ the Executive Govern-
ment and authority of and over Canada is hereby declared to
continue and be vested in the Queen.” It says nothing about
the Governor-General; the framers of the Act evidently thinking
it unnecessary to declare in set terms that the authority of the
Queen should be exercised by him, or to prescribe the mode in
which he should exercise it under parliamentary government.]
Constitution of Executive Council for Commonwealth.
2. There shall be a Council to aid and advise the Governor-General
in the government of the Commonwealth, and such Council shall be
styled the Federal Executive Council; and the persons who are to be
Members of the Council shall be from time to time chosen and sum-
moned by the Governor-General and sworn as Executive Councillors,
and shall hold office during his pleasure.
[lt would appear from these provisions that the Federal
Executive Council is intended to resemble, in character and func-
tions, the Privy Council of Canada. The number of its members
is not limited, so that it wdll probably exceed that of the ministers
appointed to conduct the departments of State ; and they are
not required to sit in either House. The clause which constitutes
the Council is taken from one in the Canadian Act (s. 11), which
provides for the establishment of a Privy Council, officially
termed “the Queen’s Privy 'Council for Canada.” At the present
time it numbers fifty members, of whom fifteen are members of
the Cabinet, including two without office. The other members
of the Council include the High Commissioner for Canada in
London, three Lieutenant-Governors, two Chief Justices, three
Judges, several ex-Cabinet Ministers, Queen’s Counsel, senators,
members of the lower House, and other men of distinction.
This body is evidently formed on the model of the Privy
Council of England, which has always comprised a large number
of distinguished men, and out of which has been evolved, by a
series of constitutional developments, the body familiarly known


as tlie Cabinet. Tbe Canadian Council, therefore, is a practical
illustration of tbe statement in tbe preamble of tbe Act—tbat tbe
Constitution was designed to be “ similar in principle to tbat of
tbe United Kingdom.” It is in keeping witb this principle tbat
tbe Act makes no mention of tbe Cabinet or Executive, and conse-
quently tbat body—by which the whole Federal Government
is administered—is, technically speaking, unknown to tbe statute
law of Canada.]
Application of provisions referring to Governor-General.
3. The provisions of this Constitution referring to the Governor-
General in Council shall be construed as referring to the Governor-
General acting with the advice of the Federal Executive Council.
[lt is argued that this clause does not sufficiently provide
for tbe action of responsible government, because tbe term “ Go-
vernor General in Council ” is used only in two clauses, referring
to matters of administration—tbe establishment of departments,
and tbe appointment and removal of officers. It is not used at
all, it is said, in connection witb any great act of executive power.
This objection arises from a singular misapprehension as to the
meaning of the clause in question. In tbe first place, it is nothing
more than an interpretation clause; tbe object being tbe removal
of doubts as to tbe definition of tbe term “ Governor-General in
Council.” Tbe corresponding clause in tbe Canadian Act states
tbat “tbe provisions of this Act referring to tbe Governor-General
in Council shall be construed as referring to tbe Governor-General
acting by and witb tbe advice of tbe Queen’s Privy Council for
Canada.” There was a clear necessity for a statutory interpre-
tation of tbe term “Privy Council,” because tbat body was a new
institution in Canada when tbe Act was passed; and in tbe absence
of some such definition, doubt might have arisen as to tbe meaning
of tbe words “ Governor-General in Council.” There is a similar
necessity for defining tbe term here, because “ tbe Federal Ex-
ecutive Council” is, at present, an institution unknown to tbe law
in Australia.
In tbe second place, tbe reason why tbe draft Bill speaks
sometimes of a “ Governor-General,” and at other times of a


“ Governor-General in Council ” is because, in the former case,
be is referred to in his capacity as the Queen’s Representative
and the depository of the prerogatives of the Crown ; while in
the latter case, he is referred to in his capacity as the head of
the local Executive Council, assembled for the purpose of trans-
acting official business. For instance, the command in chief of
all the military and naval forces is vested by clause 9 “ in the
Governor-General as the Queen’s Representative ” ; and the cor-
responding clause (15) in the Canadian Act enacts that the com-
mand-in-chief “is hereby declared to continue and be vested in
the Queen.” That form of expression distinctly recognises the
constitutional doctrine that the chief command of the military
and naval forces of the Empire is vested in the Crown, as one of
its prerogatives ; although, as a matter of fact, the actual adminis-
tration of the forces is controlled by a Secretary of State, who is
immediately responsible to Parliament.
The objection taken to the language of the draft Bill in this
matter might be applied with equal force to our own Constitution
Act. The power of appointment to public offices under the
Government is vested, by section 37 of that Act, “in the
Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council ”; but the
power of appointing a President of the Legislative Council, of
summoning a Legislative Assembly, of fixing the place and time
for holding sessions of both Houses, of proroguing and dissolving,
is vested (sections 7,9, 30) in “ the Governor.” As a matter of
fact, we know that in each of these cases the power is really exer-
cised by the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council.
The reason why the Act does not say in express terms that it
shall be so exercised, is because it would not be constitutionally
correct to do so —the thing to be done in each case being clearly
an exercise of the prerogative. In the case of appointments to
subordinate offices, the act is an administrative one, which requires
the sanction of the Governor as President of the Executive
Council.]
Ministers ot State.—May sit in Parliament.
4. Eor the administration of the Executive government of the Com-
monwealth, the Governor-General may, from time to time, appoint


Officers to administer such Departments of State of the Common-
wealth as the Governor-General in Council may from time to time
establish, and such officers shall hold office during the pleasure of the
Governor-General, and shall be capable of being chosen and of sitting
as Members of either House of the Parliament.
Such Officers shall be Members of the Pederal Executive Council,
and shall be the Queen’s Ministers of State for the Commonwealth.
Kumber of Ministers.
5. Until other provision is made by the Parliament, the number of
such Officers who may sit in the Parliament shall not exceed seven,
who shall hold such offices, and by such designation, as the Parliament
from time to time prescribes by Law, or, in the absence of any such
Law, as the Governor-General from time to time directs.
[At this point, it will be seen, the draft Bill differs from the
Canadian Act by making special provision for the appointment
of Ministers charged with the administration of the various
departments of State, of whom not more than seven, in the first
instance, will have seats in the Federal Parliament. As it was
not absolutely necessary that special provision should be made
on this subject —seeing that the establishment of parliamentary
government on the English model involves the introduction of
responsible ministers—it may be inferred that the object
in view was to leave no room for doubt as to the nature as
well as the form of government intended to be established. The
terms of the clauses referred to (4 and 5) make it sufficiently
clear that the Federal Government will be administered on the
principles which characterise responsible government in England
and the colonies. On that point there can be no doubt. Al-
though the Canadian Act says nothing whatever about Cabinet
Ministers, or responsible government, we know that the Do-
minion is governed on precisely the same principles as the
mother country; and seeing that the provisions of the draft Bill
are explicit on the subject, there is no reason to suppose that
any other form of government is contemplated by it.
Notwithstanding the positive terms in which this intention
is expressed, it is contended that the draft Bill not only makes
no provision for the establishment of responsible government.


but designedly omits or excludes it. There is nothing whatever
to support this view of the matter,, Avhich seems to owe its origin
to the academical opinions expressed by certain members of the
Convention with reference to the value of responsible govern-
ment as a political system. The discussion on the subject was
of a purely speculative nature, such as might be expected to
take place in a meeting of statesmen convened for the purpose
of discussing the principles and practice of government, with a
view to the framing of a Federal Constitution. Eesponsible
government may be said to have been on its trial in these
colonies for thirty-five years ; and it was inevitable that, in such
an assemblage as the Convention, which included statesmen from
all the colonies, the merits of that system should be freely criti-
cised. It is a totally different thing to say that the speakers who
referred to it were opposed to its introduction in the scheme of
government they had under consideration ; that they fought
against its introduction; and that they succeeded in excluding
it from the draft Bill. The use of the term “responsible” was
objected to by the chairman of the drafting committee on the
ground that it was not necessary, being nothing more than an
epithet, and that the thing itself was sufficiently provided for.
It is only necessary to point to the Canadian Act, and the Con-
stitution Act of this colony, to show that that view of the matter
is a sound one. In neither of those Acts is there any special
provision for the establishment of responsible government, and
yet it- has been in force under each of them ever since they were
passed.
It is also said that the word “responsible” was omitted
in order that another form of government might be introduced
at some time hereafter, if it should be found desirable to do so.
Supposing that to have been the case —and there is nothing in
the draft Bill to warrant the supposition—any change in that
direction would have to be made under the conditions imposed
with respect to amendments of the Constitution, that is to say,
by the deliberate judgment of the people, expressed by their
representatives in Parliament, and in special Conventions sum-


moned for the purpose. And further, even supposing that any
such ultimate change was kept in view Toy the drafting com-
mittee as one of the possibilities of the situation, such a treatment
of the subject is not fairly open either to suspicion or censure.
They were bound to recognise the fact that change is one of the
laws of existence in the political as well as in the physical world;
and that no Constitution, which is not elastic enough to adapt
itself to circumstances, can hope to survive ‘‘’the sad vicissitude
of things/’
The misapprehension which has arisen on this point appears to
have been increased by an argument raised during a discussion
in the Convention on the word “ responsible,” The late Attorney-
General of Victoria, bearing in mind some remarks made by the
judges of the Supreme Court, in Ah Toy’s case, on the fact that
the word “responsible” does not appear in the Constitution Act,
desired to introduce words into clause 4 which would have the effect
of placing the Federal Ministers in the same constitutional position
as that occupied by Ministers in England—in order that they
might, when the occasion arose, exercise the prerogatives of the
Crown as freely as they are exercised in England. The question
debated in Victoria was, whether Ministers of the Crown in that
colony possessed the power to prevent Chinese from landing; it
was held that they had not; and from that decision the Victorian
Government appealed to the Privy Council, which allowed the
appeal. To meet such contingencies as this, the Attorney-General
of Victoria moved in the Convention that the words, “and shall
be the Queen’s Ministers of State for the Commonwealth,” should
be added to clause 4. That was done, and he was satisfied that
all doubt as to the position of Ministers was removed by those
words. It follows, therefore, that their powers and functions
will be in all respects analogous to those of Cabinet Ministers in
England.]
Salaries of Ministers.
6. Until other provision is made by the Parliament there shall be
payable to the Queen, out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund of the
Commonwealth, for the salaries of such Officers, the sum of fifteen
thousand pounds per annum.


Appointment of Civil Servants.
7. Until other provision is made by the Parliament, the appointment
and removal of all other officers of the Government of the Common-
wealth shall be vested in the Governor-General in Council, except
officers whose appointment may be delegated by the Governor-General
in Council to some other officer or person.
Authority of Executive.
8. The Executive power and authority of the Commonwealth shall
extend to the execution of the provisions of this Constitution, and the
Laws of the Commonwealth.
Command of Military and Naval Forces.
9. The Command in Chief of all Military and Naval Eorces of the
Commonwealth is hereby vested in the Governor-General as the
Queen’s Representative.
[An objection lias been raised to this provision on the ground
that it does not limit the purposes for which the forces of the
Commonwealth are to be available. As there is only one con-
ceivable purpose for which military and naval forces can be
raised in the colonies —that is, defence against invasion —it
cannot be considered a defect in the draft Bill that it omits
to specify that purpose. The task of framing regulations for
the government of the forces, and providing generally for the
conduct of matters relating to defence, is properly left to
the Federal Parliament. The Canadian Act is equally silent on
the subject, and for the same reason. One of the first measures
passed by the first Dominion Parliament was the “ Canada
Militia and Defence Act, 1868,” which, according to Todd, secures
the exercise of all powers under the Act in a constitutional
manner. Matters of immediate concern to the Queen’s regular
forces, military and naval, while serving in Canada, are left to
the direct control of the Imperial authorities ; while those which
concern the disposition and management of purely local forces
are regulated by the Governor-General, with the advice or consent
of his Privy Council or Cabinet. The local administration is
placed under the charge of a department, known as the “ Depart-
ment of Militia and Defence,” which is represented in Parlia-
ment by the “ Minister of Militia.” Reasoning on this analogy.


the framers of the draft Bill followed a sound precedent when
they left subordinate questions to be provided for by the Federal
Parliament.]
Immediate assumption of control of certain Departments.
10. The control of the following Departments of the Public Service
shall be at once assigned to and assumed and taken over by the Ex-
ecutive Government of the Commonwealth, and the Commonwealth
shall assume the obligations of any State or States with respect to such
matters, that is to say—
Customs and Excise,
Posts and Telegraphs,
Military and Naval Defence,
Ocean Beacons and Buoys, and Ocean Lighthouses and Light-
ships,
Quarantine.
Powers under existing Law to be exercised by Governor-General with advice of Executive Council.
11. All powers and functions which are at the date of the establish-
ment of the Commonwealth vested in the Governor of a Colony, with or
without the advice of his Executive Council, or in any officer or authority
in a Colony, shall, so far as the same continue in existence and need
to be exercised in relation to the government of the Commonwealth,
with respect to any matters which under this Constitution pass to the
Executive Government of the Commonwealth, vest in the Governor-
General, with the advice of the Federal Executive Council, or in the
officer or authority exercising similar powers or functions in or under
the Executive Government of the Commonwealth.
CHAPTER 111.
THE FEDEEAL JUDICATUEE
Supreme Court of Australia and Inferior Courts.
1. The Parliament of the Commonwealth shall have power to
establish a Court, which shall be called the Supreme Court of Australia,
and shall consist of a Chief Justice, and so many other Justices, not
less than four, as the Parliament from time to time prescribes. The
Parliament may also from time to time, subject to the provisions of
this Constitution, establish other Courts.


Tenure of office.
2. The Judges of the Supreme Court of Australia and of the other
Courts of the Commonwealth shall hold their offices during good
behaviour, and shall receive such salaries as may from time to time be
fixed by the Parliament; but the salary paid to any Judge shall not be
diminished during his continuance in office.
Appointment and removal of Judges.
3. The Judges of the Supreme Court and of the other Courts of
the Commonwealth shall be appointed, and may be removed from
office, by the Governor-General by and with the advice of the Federal
Executive Council; but it shall not be lawful for the Governor-
General to remove any Judge except upon an Address from both
Houses of the Parliament praying for such removal.
Appellate Jurisdiction.
4. The Supreme Court of Australia shall have jurisdiction, with
such exceptions and subject to such regulations as the Parliament
from time to time prescribes, to hear and determine appeals from all
judgments, decrees, orders, and sentences, of any other Federal Court,
or of the highest Court of final resort now established, or which may
hereafter be established, in any State, whether such Court is a Court
of Appeal or of original jurisdiction, and the judgment of the Supreme
Court of Australia in all such cases shall be final and conclusive.
Until the Parliament makes other provisions, the conditions of and
restrictions on appeals to the Queen in Council from the highest
Courts of final resort of the several States shall be applicable to appeals
from such Courts to the Supreme Court of Australia.
Appeals may be made final in all cases.
5. The Parliament of the Commonwealth may provide by law that
any appeals which by any law have heretobefore been allowed from
any judgment, decree, order, or sentence, of the highest Court of final
resort of any State to the Queen in Council, shall be brought to,
and heard and determined by, the Supreme Court of Australia, and
the judgment of that Court in all such cases shall be final and conclusive.
Power of the Queen to allow appeal to Herself in certain cases.
6. Notwithstanding the provisions of the two last preceding sections,
or of any law made by the Parliament of the Commonwealth in pursu-
ance thereof, the Queen may in any case in which the public interests
of the Commonwealth, or of any State, or of any other part of the
Queen’s Dominions, are concerned, grant leave to appeal to Herself
in Council against any judgment of the Supreme Court of Australia.


Extent of power of Federal Courts.
7. The Parliament of the Commonwealth may from time to time
define the jurisdiction of the Courts of the Commonwealth, other than
the Supreme Court of Australia, which jurisdiction may be exclusive,
or may be concurrent with that of the Courts of the States. But
jurisdiction shall not be conferred on a Court except in respect of
the following matters, or some of them, that is to say: —
(1) Cases arising under this Constitution ;
(2) Cases arising under any Laws made by the Parliament of the
Commonwealth, or under any treaty made by the Common-
wealth with another country;
(3) Cases of Admiralty and Maritime jurisdiction ;
(4) Cases affecting the Public Ministers, Consuls, orother Eepre-
sentatives of other countries ;
(5) Cases in which the Commonwealth, or a personsuing or being
sued on behalf of the Commonwealth, is a party;
(6) Cases in which a Writ of Mandamus or Prohibitionis sought
against an Officer of the Commonwealth ■
(7) Controversies between States ;
(8) Controversies relating to the same subject matter claimed
under the laws of different States.
Original jurisdiction.—Additional original jurisdiction may be conferred.
8. In all cases affecting Public Ministers, Consuls, or other Eepre-
sentatives of other Countries, and in all cases in which the Common-
wealth, or any person suing or being sued on behalf of the Common-
wealth, is a party, or in which a Writ of Mandamus or Prohibition is
sought against an Officer of the Commonwealth, and in all cases of
controversies between States, the Supreme Court of Australia shall
have original as well as appellate jurisdiction.
The Parliament may confer original jurisdiction on the Supreme
Court of Australia in such other of the cases enumerated in the last
preceding section as it thinks fit.
Actions against the Commonwealth or against a State.
9. Nothing in this Constitution shall be construed to authorise any
suit in law or equity against the Commonwealth, or any person sued
on behalf of the Commonwealth, or against a State, or any person sued
on behalf of a State, by any individual person or corporation, except
by the consent of the Commonwealth, or of the State, as the case
may be.


Number of Judges.
10. The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, or of any other Court
of the Commonwealth, may be exercised by such number of Judges as
the Parliament prescribes.
Trial by jury.
11. The trial of all indictable offences cognisable by any Court
established under the authority of this Act shall be by jury, and every
such trial shall be held in the State where the offence has been com-
mitted, and when not committed within any State the trial shall be
held at such place or places as the Parliament of the Commonwealth
prescribes.
CHAPTER IV.
FINANCE AND TRADE.
Consolidated Revenue Fund.
1. All duties, revenues, and moneys, raised or received by the
Executive Government of the Commonwealth, under the authority of
this Constitution, shall form one Consolidated Revenue Fund, to be
appropriated for the Public Service of the Commonwealth in the manner
and subject to the charges provided by this Constitution.
Expenses of collection.
2. The Consolidated Revenue Fund shall be permanently charged
with the costs, charges, and expenses incident to the collection, manage-
ment, and receipt thereof, which costs, charges, and expenses shall
form the first charge thereon.
Money to be appropriated by law.
3. No money shall be drawn from the Treasury of the Common-
wealth except under appropriations made by law.
The Commonwealth to have exclusive power to levy duties of Customs and Excise and offer
bounties after a certain time.
4. The Parliament of the Commonwealth shall have the sole power
and authority, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, to impose
Customs duties, and duties of Excise upon goods for the time being the
subject of Customs duties, and to grant bounties upon the production
or export of goods.
But this exclusive power shall not come into force until uniform
duties of Customs have been imposed by the Parliament of the Com-
monwealth.


Upon the imposition of uniform duties of Customs by the Parliament
of the Commonwealth all laws of the several States imposing duties of
Customs or duties of Excise upon goods the subject of Customs duties,
and all such laws offering bounties upon the production or export of
goods, shall cease to have effect.
The control and collection of duties of Customs arid Excise and the
payment of bounties shall nevertheless pass to the Executive Govern-
ment of the Commonwealth upon the establishment of the Common-
wealth.
Transfer of officers.
5. Upon the establishment of the Commonwealth, all officers em-
ployed by the Government of any State in any Department of the
Public Service the control of which is by this Constitution assigned
to the Commonwealth, shall become subject to the control of the
Executive Government of the Commonwealth. But all existing rights
of any such officers shall be preserved.
Transfer of land and buildings.
6. All lands, buildings, works, and materials necessarilyappertaining
to, or used in connection with, any Department of the Public Service
is by this the control of which Constitution assigned to the Common-
wealth, shall, from and after the date of the establishment of the
Commonwealth, be taken over by and belong to the Commonwealth,
either absolutely, or, in the case of the Departments controlling
Customs and Excise and Bounties, for such time as may be necessary.
And the fair value thereof shall be paid by the Commonwealth to
the State from which they are so taken over. Such value shall be
ascertained by mutual agreement, or, if no agreement can be made, in
the manner in which land taken by the Government of the State for
public purposes is ascertained under the laws of the State.
Collection of existing duties of Customs and Excise.
7. Until uniform duties of Customs have been imposed by the Par-
liament of the Commonwealth, the powers of the Parliaments of the
several States existing at the date of the establishment of the Com-
monwealth, respecting the imposition of duties of Customs, and duties
of excise upon goods the subject of Customs duties, and the offering
of bounties upon the production or export of goods, and the collection
and payment thereof respectively, shall continue as theretofore.
And until such uniform duties have been imposed, the Laws of the
several States in force at the date of the establishment of the Common-
wealth respecting duties of Customs, and duties of excise on goods the
subject of Customs duties, and bounties, and the collection and pay-


ment thereof, shall remain in force, subject nevertheless to such
alterations of the amount of duties or bounties as the Parliaments
of the several States may make from time to time; and such duties
and bounties shall continue to be collected and paid as theretofore,
but by and to the Officers of the Commonwealth.
On establishment of uniform duties of Cnstoms and Excise, trade within the Commonwealth
to be free.
8. So soon as the Parliament of the Commonwealth has imposed
uniform duties of Customs, trade and intercourse throughout the
Commonwealth, whether by means of internal carriage or ocean navi-
gation, shall be absolutely free.
Apportionment of surplus revenue.
9. The Revenue of the Commonwealth shall be applied in the firs t
instance in the payment of the expenditure of the Commonwealth,
which shall be charged to the several States in proportion to the
numbers of their people, and the surplus shall, until uniform duties of
Customs have been imposed, be returned to the several States or parts
of the Commonwealth in proportion to the amount of Revenue raised
therein respectively, subject to the following provisions :
(1) As to duties ok Customs or Excise, provision shall be made for
ascertaining, as nearly as may be, the amount of duties collected
in each State or part of the Commonwealth in respect of
dutiable goods which are afterwards exported to another
State or part of the Commonwealth, and the amount of the
duties so ascertained shall be taken to have been collected in
the State or part to wdiich the goods have been so exported,
and shall be added to the duties actually collected in that
State or part, and deducted from the duties collected in the
State or part of the Commonwealth from which the goods
were exported :
(2) As to the proceeds of direct taxes, the amount contributed or
raised in respect of income earned in any State or part of the
Commonwealth, or arising from property situated in any
State or part of the Commonwealth, and the amount con-
tributed or raised in respect of property situated in any State
or part of the Commonwealth, shall be taken to have been
raised in that State or part:
(3) The amount of any bounties paid to any of the people of a
State or part of the Commonwealth shall be deducted from
the amount of the surplus to be returned to that State or part.


After uniform duties of Customs have been imposed, the surplus
shall be returned to the several States or parts of the Commonwealth
in the same manner and proportions until the Parliament otherwise
prescribes.
Such returns shall be made monthly, or at such shorter intervals as
may be convenient.
Audit of Accounts.
10. Until the Parliament of the Commonwealth otherwise provides,
the Laws in force in the several Colonies at the date of the establish-
ment of the Commonwealth with respect to the receipt of revenue and
the expenditure of money on account of the Government of the
Colony, and the review and audit of such receipt and expenditure
shall apply to the receipt of revenue and the expenditure of money on
account of the Commonwealth in the respective States in the same
manner as if the Commonwealth, or the Government or an Officer of
the Commonwealth, were mentioned therein whenever a Colony, or the
Government or an Officer of a Colony, is mentioned or referred to.
Equality of Trade.
No preference to one State over another.
11. Preference shall not be given by any law or regulation of com-
merce or revenue to the ports of one part of the Commonwealth over
those of another part of the Commonwealth.
The Parliament may give effect to this prohibition.
12. The Parliament of the Commonwealth may make laws prohibiting
or annulling any law or regulation made by any State, or by any authority
constituted by any State, having the effect of derogating from freedom
of trade or commerce between the different parts of the Common-
wealth.
[A power to annul any law or regulation that might be made
by a State Parliament for the purpose of defeating the policy of
the Commonwealth on the subject of free-trade between the
States, is obviously a necessary power ; for otherwise there would
be no means of maintaining the policy as an integral part of the
Constitution. This power is accordingly given to the Federal
Parliament; but it could not be exercised in the case of any
law or regulation that was not clearly designed to derogate
from—that is, to restrict or prevent —that free interchange of


goods or products between tlie States, wbicb will form the
basis of their commercial relations. It follows, therefore, that
no law or regulation could come within the meaning of this
clause unless it directly tended to restrict or prevent such a system
of interchange; and as the only means by which that result
could be accomplished would be the imposition of duties, the
clause would operate only in the case of laws or regulations
of a protective character, imposing duties on goods imported by
sea or carried across the border.
It is asserted that the clause in question is intended to have
a much wider operation, and that it would include the regulations
made by the Commissioners of Railways in this colony, by which
differential rates for the carriage of goods are charged on some
of our lines. These rates are charged for the purpose of divert-
ing traffic from certain points in the interior to Sydney, in order
to prevent its passing to Melbourne, Adelaide, or Brisbane, as
the nearest port; and it is essential to the prosperity of Sydney,
it is said, that this policy should be maintained. But the aboli-
tion of the rates would have the effect of defeating that policy,
and causing the traffic in question to flow into its natural
channel outside our borders.
This construction of the clause is, on the face of it, a forced
one. In the first place, it has never been contended, before this
question was raised, that the differential rates constitute a viola-
tion of the principles of free-trade. The commercial policy of
the country has always been based on free-trade; the policy
itself has formed the subject of party discussion for many years;
but on neither side has it been alleged, until the present time,
that the differential rates were framed, or are kept up, in the in-
terests of a protectionist policy. As they do not involve any tax
on products, but, on the contrary, offer facilities for traffic in the
shape of reduced charges, it is impossible to place them on the
list of protective laws or regulations. If they* operate in that
direction, they can only do so indirectly and remotely; and the
clause in question was certainly not intended to apply to cases
of that description.


In the second place, if it was intended to place the traffic
charges on State railways under the control of the Federal Par-
liament, the power of control would have been given'in express
terms. It would not have been left to implication, for this
reason, that it would constitute a direct interference with the
internal administration of the States, and consequently a direct
violation of a fundamental principle of the Constitution, formu-
lated in clause lof chapter v. It is expressly declared in that
clause that all the existing powers of the Parliament in each colony,
which are not withdrawn from it, or exclusively vested in the
Federal Parliament, shall remain untouched. Among those powers,
that of controlling the railway system in all its branches is one of
the most vital; but there is not a line in the draft Bill which can
be said to withdraw it from the local Parliament, or vest it in that
of the Commonwealth. The power of interference with the
railways vested in the latter is expressed in sub-clause 28 of
clause 52, which together give it a concurrent power to make
laws as to “ the control of railways with respect to transport for
the purposes of the Commonwealth.'” That is a necessary power
to vest in the Federal Parliament, for obvious reasons ; but it
does not affect the control of the railways for any other purpose
than that stated, and certainly not for any commercial purpose.
The construction sought to be placed on clause 12 is based
on the remarks made by some members of the Convention during
the discussion on the draft Bill. One of the South Australian
delegates having expressed his desire to know whether its pro-
visions would enable the Federal Parliament to put an end to
the differential rates charged on onr railways, the chairman of
the drafting committee informed him that the only form of words
that would express such a power would be “ control of railway
tariffs,” but that the committee did not see their way to insert
any such words. The extent to which they were prepared to go
was expressed in clause 12. This statement was followed by
some general remarks on the subject, which amount to this:
the Federal Parliament will have power to annul any law made
by a State which would really interfere with freedom of trade,


by prohibiting it from going through a State to its natural port.
This statement does not pretend to contradict the previous one,
that the power to abolish a railway tariff could only be given
by express words ; all it says is that a State law prohibiting
freedom of trade might be annulled. Although the two things
are quite distinct, considerable doubt seems to have been
raised on the subject; from which we may see the folly of seek-
ing to interpret the draft Bill by incorporating with it all the
conversation that took place in the Convention. The speeches
made by the delegates may be usefully referred to for information;
but the bill must be read in its own light, and not in that of the
debates.]
Consolidation of Public Debts of States.
Public debts of States may be consolidated by general consent.
13. The Parliament of the Commonwealth may, with the consent of
the Parliaments of all the States, make laws for taking over and con-
solidating the whole or any part of the public debt of any State or
States, but so that a State shall be liable to indemnify the Common-
wealth in respect of the amount of a debt taken over, and that the
amount of interest payable in respect of a debt shall be deducted and
retained from time to time from the share of the Surplus Revenue
of the Commonwealth which would otherwise be payable to the State.
CHAPTER V.
THE STATES.
Continuance of powers of Parliaments of the States.
1. All powers which at the date of the establishment of the Com-
monwealth are vested in the Parliaments of the several Colonies, and
which are not by this Constitution exclusively vested in the Parliament
of the Commonwealth, or withdrawn from the Parliaments of the
several States, are reserved to, and shall remain vested in, the Parlia-
ments of the States respectively.
Validity of existing laws.
2. All Laws in force in any of the Colonies relating to any of the
matters declared by this Constitution to be within the Legislative
powers of the Parliament of the Commonwealth shall, except as other-


wise provided by this Constitution, continue in force in tbe States
respectively, and may be repealed or altered by tbe Parliaments of tbe
States, until other provision is made in that bebalf by tbe Parliament
of the Commonwealth.
Inconsistency of Laws.
3. When a Law of a State is inconsistent with a Law of the Com-
monwealth, the latter shall prevail, and the former shall, to the extent
of the inconsistency, be invalid.
Powers to be exercised by Governors of States.
4. All powers and functions which are at the date of the establish-
ment of the Commonwealth vested in the Governors of the Colonies
respectively, shall, so far as the same are capable of being exercised
after the establishment of the Commonwealth in relation to the govern-
ment of the States, continue to be vested in the Governors of the States
respectively.
All references to the Queen to be through the Governor-General.
5. All references or communications required by the Constitution
of any State or otherwise to be made by the Governor of the State to
the Queen shall be made through the Governor-General, as Her
Majesty’s Pepresentative in the Commonwealth, and the Queen’s
pleasure shall be made known through him.
[Under a federal form of Government it is necessary to pro-
vide for the conduct of external affairs in which the federated
colonies, or any of them, may be interested; and that can only
be done by concentrating the administration of such affairs in the
Federal Executive Council. It follows as an inevitable con-
sequence that there can be but one official channel of communi-
cation between the Commonwealth, or any of the States composing
it, and the outside world. The communications which, under
the present system, pass between the Secretary of State and the
Governors of the various colonies would, under a federal
government, necessarily pass between the Secretary of State and
the Governor-General; in other words, the Governors would be
addressed through him, and through him also they would address
the Imperial Government. It would be obviously impossible to
maintain the present practice a day after the Federal Constitution
came into force. It is not merely that such a practice would be in the
highest degree inconvenient, as requiring the Secretary of State to


correspond with six or seven colonies after they had virtually
become consolidated into one State. There is a stronger, and
a conclusive, reason in the fact that the Federal Government,
being necessarily interested in the external affairs of each colony
in the federation, would have a clear right to be consulted with
respect to any communications that the Governor of a colony
might propose to send to the Secretary of State. If, for instance,
during a period of agitation on the Chinese question, all the
Governors were to address themselves to him independently of
the Federal Government, it would clearly be tantamount to
taking the whole matter out of their hands. The policy of the
Commonwealth would have to be collected from half a dozen
sources, each of which might present independent and possibly
conflicting views on the question, as compared with the others.
The result would be that one of the main objects of all federa-
tions—a united front against the outside world —would become
impossible.
Notwithstanding the obvious necessity for the provision in
question, it has been censured as a “ strangely impertinent inter-
ference with the independent rights of the several States/’
which would enable the advisers of the Governor-General to
“ prevent unfettered communication” between them and the
Imperial Government. There is nothing in the clause to warrant
any such inference. The right of free communication with the
Secretary of State would not be fettered, merely because a letter
or a telegram to him had to be addressed to the Governor-
General in the first instance. Every colonist has the right to
address the Secretary of State on any subject he pleases; but his
letter must be sent through the Governor of the colony in which
he resides, or it will not receive any attention in England, That
restriction has never been attacked on the ground that it
fettered, or tended to fetter, the right of free communication
between the colonists and the Home Government. On the con-
trary, the reasons in favour of it are so clear that it has been
universally recognised as not only a just, but a necessary restric-
tion. The same line of reasoning will apply in the case of a


communication passing between tbe Australian Governors and the
Colonial Office. The right would remain exactly as it was
before, and the practice would be altered only so far as the
necessity of the case might require.
There might be some colour for the objection if the draft
Bill had followed the terms of the Canadian Act, by substi-
tuting for the present Governors a system of Lieutenant-
Governors, to be appointed by the Governor-General and to
hold office during his pleasure. Such an alteration in/the
existing Constitution would do more than subordinate the Go-
vernors to the Governor-General; it would, in effect, place them
under the immediate control of the Federal Executive Council.
But no such change is contemplated. The Governors of the
States would remain as they are now, subject to any alterations
as to the mode of appointment and tenure of office which the
State Parliaments might think fit to make.]
Saving of Constitutions.
6. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution the Constitutions
of the several States of the Commonwealth shall continue as at the
date of the establishment of the Commonwealth, until altered by or
under the authority of the Parliaments thereof in accordance with the
provisions of their respective Constitutions.
Governors of States.
7. In each State of the Commonwealth there shall be a Governor.
Appointment of Governors.
8. The Parliament of a State may make such provisions as it thinks
fit as to the manner of appointment of the Governor of the State, and
for the tenure of his office, and for his removal from office.
Application of provisions referring to Governor.
9. The provisions of this Constitution relating to the Governor of a
State extend and apply to the Governor for the time being of the State,
or other the Chief Executive Officer or Administrator of the Govern-
ment of the State, by whatever title he is designated.
Members of Senate or House of Representatives not to sit in State Parliament.
10. A member of the Senate or House of Representatives shall not
be capable of being chosen or of sitting as amember of any House of
the Parliament of a State.


Member of State Parliament not to be Member of the Parliament of the Commonwealth.
n. If a member of a House of the Parliament of a State is, with
his own consent, chosen as a member of either House of the Parlia-
ment of the Commonwealth, his place in the first mentioned House of
Parliament shall become vacant.
A State may cede any of its Territory.
12. The Parliament of a State may at any time surrender any part
of the State to the Commonwealth, and upon such surrender and
the acceptance thereof by the Commonwealth such part of the State
shall become and be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Parlia-
ment of the Commonwealth.
States not to levy import or export duties, except for certain purposes.
13. A State shall not impose any taxes or duties on imports or
exports, except such as are necessary for executing the inspection laws
of the State ; and the net produce of all taxes and duties imposed by
a State on imports or exports shall be for the use of the Common-
wealth ; and any such inspection laws may be annulled by the Parlia-
ment of the Commonwealth.
Nor levy duty of tonnage, nor tax the land of the Commonwealth, nor maintain forces.—State
land exempted from taxation.
14. A State shall not, without the consent of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth, impose any duty of tonnage, or raise or maintain any
military or naval force, or impose any tax on any land or other
property belonging to the Commonwealth; nor shall the Common-
wealth impose any tax on any land or property belonging to a State.
State not to coin money.
15. A State shall not coin money, or make anything but gold and
silver coin a legal tender in payment of debts.
Nor prohibit any religion.
16. A State shall not make any law prohibiting the free exercise of
any religion.
Protection of citizens of the Commonwealth.
17. A State shall not make or enforce any law abridging any privi-
lege or immunity of citizens of other States of the Commonwealth, nor
shall a State deny to any person, within its jurisdiction, the equal
protection of the laws.
65
OF THE COMMONWEALTH,


Recognition of Acts of State of various States.
18. Tull faith and credit shall be given, throughout the Common-
wealth, to the Laws, the Public Acts and Records, and the Judicial
Proceedings of the States.
Protection of States from invasion.
19. The Commonwealth shall protect every State against invasion
and, on the application of the Executive Government of a State,
against domestic violence.
Custody of offenders against laws of the Commonwealth.
20. Every State shall make provision for the detention and punish-
ment in its prisons of persons accused or convicted of offences against
the laws of the Commonwealth, and the Parliament of the Common-
wealth may make laws to give effect to this provision.
CHAPTER VI.
NEW STATES.
Admission of existing Colonies to the Commonwealth.
1. Any of the existing Colonies of [name the existing Colonies which
have not adopted the Constitution ] may upon adopting this Constitu-
tion be admitted to the Commonwealth, and shall thereupon become
and be a State of the Commonwealth.
New States may be admitted to the Commonwealth.
2. The Parliament of the Commonwealth may from time to time
establish and admit to the Commonwealth new States, and may upon
such establishment and admission make and impose such conditions,
as to the extent of Representation in either House of the Parliament
or otherwise, as it thinks fit.
Provisional government of Territories.
3. The Parliament may make such laws as it thinks fit for the
provisional administration and government of any territory surren-
dered by any State to and accepted by the Commonwealth, or any
territory in the Pacific placed by the Queen under the authority of
and accepted by the Commonwealth, or otherwise acquired by the
Commonwealth, and may in any such case allow the representation of
such territory in either House of the Parliament to such extent and
on such terms as it thinks fit. . .


Alteration of limits of States.
4. The Parliament of the Commonwealth may, from time to time,
with the consent of the Parliament of a State, increase, diminish,
or otherwise alter the limits of the State, upon such terms and con-
ditions as may be agreed to, and may, with the like consent, make
provision respecting the effect and operation of any such increase or
diminution or alteration of territory in relation to any State affected
Saving of rights of States.
5. A new State shall not be formed by separation of territory from
a State without the consent of the Parliament thereof, nor shall a State
be formed by the union of two or more States or parts of States, or the
limits of a State be altered, without the consent of the Parliament or
Parliaments of the State or States concerned.
CHAPTER VII.
MISCELLANEOUS.
Seat of Government.
1. The seat of Government of the Commonwealth shall be determined
by the Parliament.
Until such determination is made the Parliament shall be summoned
to meet at such place within the Commonwealth as a majority of the
Governors of the States, or, in the event of an equal division of opinion
amongst the Grovernors, as the Governor-General shall direct.
Power to Her Majesty to authorise Governor-General to appoint Deputies.
2. The Queen may authorise the Governor-General from time to
time to appoint any person or any persons jointly or severally to be
his Deputy or Deputies within any part or parts of the Common-
wealth, and in that capacity to exercise during the pleasure of the
Governor-General such of the powers and functions of the Governor-
General as he deems it necessary or expedient to assign to such Deputy
or Deputies, subject to any limitations or directions expressed or given
by the Queen, but the appointment of such Deputy or Deputies shall
not affect the exercise by the Governor-General himself of any poweror
function.
Aborigines of Australia not to be counted in reckoning population.
3. In reckoning the numbers of the people of a State or other part
of the Commonwealth aboriginal natives of Australia shall not be
counted.


JAf-p
fZ \ "lO j
r o (oi
68 DRAFT CONSTITUTION OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
CHAPTER VIII.
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION.
Mode of amending the Constitution.
1, The provisions of this Constitution shall not he altered except in
the following manner: —
Any law for the alteration thereof must be passed by an absolute
majority of the Senate and House of Representatives, and shall there-
upon be submitted to Conventions, to be elected by the electors of the
several States qualified to vote for the election of Members of the
House of Representatives.
The Conventions shall be summoned, elected, and held in such manner
as the Parliament of the Commonwealth prescribes by law, and shall,
when elected, proceed to vote upon the proposed amendment.
And if the proposed amendment is approved by the Conventions of
a majority of the States, and if the people of the States whose Conven-
tions approve of the amendment are also a majority of the people of
the Commonwealth, the proposed amendment shall be presented to the
Governor-General for the Queen’s assent.
But an amendment by which the proportionate representation of any
State in either House of the Parliament of the Commonwealth, or the
minimum number of representatives of a State in the House of Repre-
sentatives, is diminished, shall not become law without the consent of
the Convention of that State.
THE SCHEDULE.
I, A. 8., do swear [or do solemnly and sincerely affirm and declare] that I will be
faithful and bear true allegiance to Her Majesty Queen Victoria, her heirs, and suc-
cessors, according to law.
(Noth. —The name of the King or Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Ireland for the time being is to be substituted from time to time.)
Sydney : George Stephen Chapman, Acting Government Printer.—lB9l.




