

954
PRICE ONE * SHELLING.
r • * •
Printed for, the Proprietor by W. i\l. Maclardy, 319 Cecrge Street, Sydney. Published by 11. A. Thompson & Co., 79 Market Street, Sydney ;
238 Little Collins Street, Melbourne; 17 Furnival Street, Holborn, London; and all Booksellers.
(All Riohth Rkskhvbd.J
1 v ?


• >% l
Regular Fortnightly Shipments Received of all the Latest London Shapes.
MOUNTCASTLE& §oNs
QeoncE S T SYDNEY a Alb Em S T BRISBANE
° ,m^ rTers & MAIjK) FACTORERS
(polsEY &&5 (ELE^R D 0 MS
I tt/jjti /in /I tv//m>nn nil mlil. V. iiP t. n « ...IVI L fYt _ * ft
-f
«
When ordering number or hat wilt be sufficient
p. MOUNTCASTIE & SONS,
SYDNEY <fe BRISBANE
DAHMS & CO.,
BETWEEN KING & MARKET STREETS),
Will Repair your Watch, and Guarantee
it to keep Accurate Time for 12 Months.
Prettiest Wedding and Xmas Presents
in the City in Jewellery, Electo-Plate and
Watches.
m# a p


The Story of Our Continent
TOLD "WITH
BRUSH -A-dSTID PB]Sr.
FIRST SERIES.—EXPLORATION.
AUSTRALIA lias two stories ; one is darkened by the
l>M 7 J
shadow of the old penal laws ; the other illuminated
by the heroism and fortitude of those who spent
their lives in the service of discovery. It is with
the latter, and its many striking episodes, forming
land-marks in the history of the country, that
these pages will deal.
-Jikm
The work of exploration, which in reality means the gradual settlement of the
continent, has embraced in its course so great a proportion of the romance of our past, that it
naturally presents for the artist an attractive field, as yet much neglected. Following the
footsteps of the leaders of the army of reclamation, Australia will not be found to be the flat
expanse of monotony it is so often represented. With Hume we shall gaze for the first time
on the snowy heights of the Australian Alps ; raise the cheer with Sturt and his brave crew
as their boat floats on the united waters of the Murray and Darling, or turn dejectedly
back with him after a last despairing look across the hovering haze of the heated plain ; stand
with Eyre on the ridge of scorched scoria, and see outstretched the gleaming, salt-encrusted
bed of Lake Torrens, or mark his weary footsteps round the frowning cliffs of the Great
Bight ; witness poor Kennedy fall beneath the deadly spears in the tropical jungle of the far
north, or force our way with stubborn Stuart through the belts of impenetrable hedgewood.
This record should appeal to Australians as does the battle-roll of the nations to those whose
fathers won the fight for freedom, The wide area of the, mysterious South Land has been
the scene of our struggle, with Nature instead of man arrayed against us, and ours has
been the victory.
A marked feature in our story is the utter absence of any native traditions of the
remote past. Prior to the advent of the Europeans, all is silence, save for such romantic
tales as are always circulated about the unknown. The Malay fishers knew the north coast
and, when the monsoon was favourable, visited it ; but they held none but the most distant
intercourse with the natives, and only landed for the sake of drying the sea-slugs they came
in search of.
In the archipelago to the north it was, however, very different ; there we find traces
of a civilization older than any we can boast in Western Europe. In Java, the remains of
beautiful temples attest the high standard of culture reached in the past ; the dynasties of
the ruling families are recorded in the national history, and the calm graven face of Brahma


looked down upon prince and ryot, centuries before the white man planted his usurping loot
on the land. So too, in Borneo, where every tribe has its roll-call ©f dead chieftains, and ancient
excavations wrought in search of gold, tell of the time when sultans and rajahs were a
mighty power in the land. In the Caroline Islands a vanished race has left its mark in ruins
of massive proportions, built with stone that must have been transported oversea, for no
similar formation exists on the islands themselves.
All these teeming lands have a history of great antiquity, the fragmentary pages of
which lead to the belief that the men of that far off age spread their adventurous sails for
Africa on the west and America on the east, and obtained a footing on all the sunny islands
of the tropics, save the one great land to the south, whose inhospitable shores they scorned.
Throughout these stirring times, when our forefathers were rude savages, Australia, as we
now call it, was dumb.
The naked natives who harassed the Malays were, to all intents, the same in habits
and appearance as those who dogged the footsteps of the Jardines hundreds of years
afterwards ; changeless in their mode of life, unaltered in their ignorance and indifference of
aught save the daily struggle of the hunter for bare existence. As Dampier contemptuously
described them, so they are now, a people without a history. If a pestilence had swept them
all off, fifty years would have effaced almost every sign that they had ever existed. They
have lived and died without leaving a more lasting memorial than a mark on a tree, or a
scratch on a rock.
To a great extent the degraded appearance of these aborigines and their obvious
poverty, served to warn the early navigators of the hopeless nature of the country for the
establishment of trading factories. Where such people lived, no rich barter could be
expected. Where arts and agriculture were unknown, what profit could the merchant
adventurers of the seventeenth century expect to realise ? Still, the Dutch, with the
pertinacity of their nation, resolutely explored the northern and western coasts, only to find
the same sullen and forbidding front everywhere presented to them. If they landed they
had a difficulty in obtaining the seaman’s first requisite in those days, fresh water. Often-
times the inhabitants fell upon them unawares, and more than one sailor of the Dutch East
India Company left their bones in New Holland. The captain of the Pera summed up the
opinion arrived at in the curt words : “In this discovery were found everywhere shallow
waters and barren coasts, islands altogether thinly peopled by divers cruel, poor and brutal
nations, and of very little use to the Dutch East India Company.”
In 1606, a yacht from Bantam named the Duyfhen , sighted the low-lying coast of the
eastern side of the Gulf of Carpentaria. They had cruised round the south-west coast of New
Guinea ; had mistaken the mouth of the strait through which, a few months afterwards,
Torres tediously tacked and wore ; for a deeper indentation of the unknown country they
were exploring, and now skirted the mangrove-fringed shore, searching for the mouth of a river
where they could re-fill their water casks. It was no child’s play, for the Indians, as the
sailors called them, were blood-thirsty and treacherous, and from the safe covert of the man-
groves, showered spears amongst the crews of the boats sent ashore with the barracos.
Those, be it remembered, were not the days of breechloaders and revolvers. Save for some
slight defensive armour and the tough doublets of the visitors, the combatants would be
almost on a point of equality as regarded weapons. In the narrow saltwater creeks, bordered


by mangroves, up which the boats would seek for the mouth of some fresh water river, the
unencumbered natives with their unerring spears, would be more than a match for the
ponderous Europeans with their swords and matchlocks. This was the reception tendered
to the white men, who, according to the most authentic source of information we
possess, were the first to set foot on the mainland. At a small headland about
latitude 16 deg. S'. the Duyfhen's cruise ended, provisions were short, and in an
attempt to land and discover something of the country they were attacked by the
aborigines and several men were killed and wounded. With an unfavourable report
they returned stating that they had been worsted by giants eight feet high, and the one
Australian record of their voyage is the name on the map, perpetuated from the old Dutch
charts, of Cape “ Keer Weer” (Turn again.)
Scarce better fortune befell the next voyagers to ruffle with their keels the waters of
the Gulf. While off the coast of New Guinea, Jan Carstens, of the Arnhem , and eight of his
crew fell beneath Papuan spears and arrows. The companion ship, the Pera , eventually
sailed down the same track as the Duyfhen for another degree south, and at the mouth of a
small river, the Staaten, turned back like their predecessor, with the opinion already quoted.
Gerritz Poole was the next victim to fall by the same hands that laid Carstens low, and in
the same place.
Evidently the Dutch navigators kept wide of the Gull coast afterwards, for -when
Flinders in his survey of Australia sought to verify many of the headlands marked by them
as entrances of rivers, he found that they were islands, and the rivers non-existent.
If the land had many dangers, the seas that washed the long, lonely western coast
were no less to be dreaded. Many a gallant Indiaman that was vainly watched for in
Batavia was supposed to have found a last port off the surf-beaten coast of de Witts or
Endracht’s Land. One wreck has left behind it a story written in blood, the horrors of which
can scarce be parallelled.
- EDNESDAY, 4th of June, 1629, the good ship Batavia , Captain Pelsart
in command, struck on a perilous reef of rocks off the western coast,
known as Houtman’s Abrolhos. She was one of a fleet of eleven,
bound for the Indies, and had been separated from her consorts during
a week of storm and tempest. The night was fair, Francis Pelsart
|| / sick in his cabin, and the numerous company on board deep in
slumber ; suddenly the look-out called to the pilot that the sea ahead
was white with froth ; next moment the vessel struck heavily.
Rudely awakened, Pelsart rushed on deck to find bewilderment and
consternation amongst all. The ship was bumping dangerously, and in reply to his hasty
interrogations, the captain could only get the unsatisfactory reply that they were aground on
an unknown coast that no man had ever heard of.
When daylight came they saw three islands close to them, one, larger than the
other two, destined to bear the ill-omened name of “ Batavia’s Grave.” The crew set to work
heaving the cannon overboard in an attempt to lighten the doomed ship, but the storms that
had followed them from the Cape of Good Hope burst forth once more, and the vessel com-


menced to break up. Pelsart therefore proceeded to land his company, and eighty of them
were conveyed to the large island, with stores and provisions, before the increasing sea
compelled them to desist.
Amongst the motley crowd of adventurers on board were many turbulent spirits,
and these, finding themselves released from restraint in the tumult of the hour, commenced to
broach the wine and spirits, and incite the others to insubordination. Pelsart went ashore in
the last boat to restore order. The next day the rest of the crew and passengers were
landed on the large island, and one of the small ones, but trouble still continued in
consequence of a failure to discover fresh water. In the end, when mutiny was almost
rampant, Pelsart, at the unanimous request of the whole company, started in one of the
ship’s boats, rudely decked over, to try and discover a more favourable spot to transfer the
shipwrecked people to. He soon made the mainland, but was unsuccessful in his search
for water, and sailed north, skirting the coast and landing wherever there seemed a chance
of obtaining their object. Nothing but pools of rain-water were found by them, and, after
suffering great hardships and pursuing their investigations to the north-west point of the
continent, they abandoned the adventure and sailed for Java, being finally picked up by one
of the Company’s vessels on the 2nd July.
On board the Batavia , occupying the position of supercargo, was an ex-apothecary,
of Harlem, named Jerome Cornells. He had found many kindred spirits on board, and with
them had concocted a plot to seize the ship and turn pirate. The stormy weather thwarted
their plans, but the accident of the wreck and the absence of Pelsart brought them to life once
more. Cornell’s had a narrow escape, having been left on the wreck for two days, whence he
drifted ashore on a spar. Pelsart removed, Cornell’s assumed command and dispatched
Webehayes, one of the petty officers of the ship, with a boat’s crew to look for water on the
third, and unoccupied island. Cornelis now considered that his time had come. Webehayes
and some of the men he could not trust, were away, the rest he and his fellow-conspirators
determined to deal with summarily. In cold blood they murdered, with a few exceptions,
the unfortunate and unsuspecting members of the conqmny who had not joined the conspiracy.
The few who escaped committed themselves to the sea on an improvised raft, and, by great
good fortune, reached the small island where Webehayes had gone to look for water.
Elated by their success, the mutineers held high carousal, and debated on their
future movements. It was settled that, should Pelsart return to their rescue in another ship,
which, from his long delay they concluded probable, they would take him by surprise and
seize the vessel. In the event of his not returning, they would build some sort of vessel out
of the timbers of the Batavia. In either case it was necessary to exterminate all who were
not friendly to them, lest they should either bear witness against them or forestall them by
warning Pelsart.
Cornelis was elected to the barren honour of Ruler over “ Batavia’s Grave,” and a
body-guard enrolled and tricked out in fantastic red uniforms found in the cargo of the
wrecked ship. An expedition was undertaken to the second island, where most of the
women and children were, and the murderers, who had possession of all the weapons,
recommenced their bloody work. With the exception of five women and seven children,
every soul was brutally slaughtered. Meantime Webehayes and his crew had found a supply
of water on the third island, and, having made three large fires, the signal agreed upon,


Natives attacking a boat’s crew from the “ Duyfhen.” in the Gulf of Carpentaria, 1606
waited for a visit from the main island. The hrst intimation ol what had happened came in
the raft containing the survivors of the first massacre. Naturally they made preparations
against an attack, and improvised whatever weapons they could. Flashed with their late
butchery, a party of twenty-two well-armed men came against them, but they were met
with such a determined onslaught, that they were fain to return discomfited. Another and
stronger jjarty of thirty-seven next set out, but Webehayes and his men, amongst whom
were some French soldiers, were ready for them, and, moreover, had now some weapons
taken from the bodies of those killed in the first encounter. The second expedition fared
worse than the first.
Cornells resorted to treachery. Ostensibly he opened negotiations with the sturdy
Webehayes, secretly he endeavoured to corrupt some of the soldiers with a bribe of 6,000
livres, part of the treasure of the Batavia. The soldiers were faithful and communicated the


terms of the offer to Webeliayes, who laid a trap into which the wretch Cornells fell. With
four or five companions he was allowed to land, under the impression that he had gained his
end, and that the French soldiers would assist him. He was immediately surrounded, made
prisoner, and his companions, with the exception of a man named Wonterloss, killed.
Wonterloss escaped to the boat, reached the large island and mustered up the whole party to
attack Webeliayes and rescue Cornelis. A third time they were repulsed and forced to retreat.
Hardly was the fighting over when a sail hove in sight in the north, and before
long the Sardam frigate, with Pelsart on board, dropped anchor off the scene of the tragedy.
Pelsart lowered a boat and had left the ship when he was met by a boat with
Webeliayes on board, who informed him of the horrors that had taken place. returned
to the ship and none too soon, for two shallops, with crews in uniform, and armed to the teeth,
came swiftly out. Pelsart was prepared, and the mutineers coming within range of the
cannon, were ordered on board with the alternative of being sunk. In a short time they and
their fellows on the island were in irons.
The Sardam, had divers on board, brought from Guzarat, and the work of recovering
the treasure commenced, and was in part successful. Meanwhile the fate of the prisoners
had to be decided on. Their guilt was too black for any thought of mercy. The yard-arm
was their fate, but the question arose as to whether the execution should not take place at the
headquarters of the Company. The Sardam was not a very large vessel; the prisoners were
numerous ; the recovered treasure on board was a temptation, and the men were noted
desperados, careless of life. It was decided in order to avoid any possible danger to carry
out the sentence then and there. There was no attempt made by the prisoners to deny their
guilt, and there was the overwhelming evidence of the surviving witnesses. One of the
villains, named John Bremen, confessed that, with his own hands, he had murdered and assisted
to murder, twenty-seven persons. With the exception of two, Jerome Cornelis and his
followers suffered a shameful death on the scene of their crime. The two men, spared for the
time, were doomed to what in those days would be considered a worse fate. On the
barren coast of New Holland, which, to their fearful fancy, would be peopled with wild
beasts and wilder savages, they were left to repent and die.
One can imagine their feelings as the boat pulled from the beach where they had
been landed. The hardened buccaneer, defiant to the last, and the softer, younger culprit,
some clerk of the Company’s, led away by the specious tongue of Cornelis, broken down at
his fate. When the sails of the Sardam sink below the horizon, they will look their last
upon the outer world, for, after the fatality to the Batavia , the Abrolhos will receive a wide
berth. They are alone, lost in a great continent, with* death by hunger, thirst, and violence
menacing them every day. They have been spared truly, but only to live a life of hourly
anxiety. These unnamed criminals and their unknown fate fill the opening chapter of the
European settlement of Australia. Most unwilling pioneers of the civilization that now
surrounds us !
When Tasman started on his second voyage of discovery, he had instructions to
visit the scene of the wreck, and make enquiries (presumably from the natives) with regard
to these two men, with a view of finding out from them anything they might have learnt ol
the country during their enforced residence in it. If they desired it, he was instructed to
give them a passage to Batavia. Tasman’s journal has been lost, and the accomplishment
or no of his mission is not recorded. '


After Dampier’s second voyage in the Roebuck , the west coast was left to its
original , loneliness for many long years. The Dutch sent one more expedition of three
ships to the north coast, under Martin Van Delft, in the beginning of the last century,
and then, for over sixty years, Australia was once more a dumb, forgotten land.
The growing power of the English East India Company, and their own waning fortunes,
had confined the operations of the Dutch Company to their most immediate branches of trade,
and, there is also no doubt, that they knew far more of New Holland than they ever divulged.
They had, therefore, no longer any interest in the voyages of discovery formerly undertaken
by them, and any shadowy claims, that they might once have advanced to its possession,
were allowed to fall into forgetfulness.
The question may well arise, —What would Australia’s destiny have been had the
physical formation of the country presented a different nature ? In such a large continent, there
can be little doubt that a more diversified formation, favouring extensive arable lands,
intersected by large navigable rivers, would have developed a different race, partaking of the
earliest civilization common to the east. Instead of a barren country, despised as the
abiding place of only a few wandering tribes of starving savages, the glories of the past and
forgotten nations of America might have been rivalled in Australia, and a people of unknown
racial type, with new arts and strange industries, have found a place in the world.
What would have been the outcome ? It is not hard to guess.
A nation occupying such an extensive territory would have been the dominant
power of this part of the equatorial and sub-equatorial world. Their fleets would have
threaded the Archipelago and borne ambassadors to the courts of Asia. Their fame and the
names of their cities would have been voiced throughout Ind ; the lust of conquest would
have been awakened in the breasts of those, who slew the heathen and pillaged their cities for
glory of Christ and proof of His divine love ; and another Cortes have led a victorious
company of fanatics throughout the land. The blight shed by the conquerors would have
reacted on themselves. We have but to look at the Sjianish and Portuguese colonies of the
present day to imagine what an Australia would have now existed. An enervated and
listless upper class with just enough energy to quarrel amongst themselves for temporary
possession of the power of governing and levying taxes. A middle class aping their vices ;
and a peon population of mongrel descent; part stockman, part shepherd, part miner and
wholly thief. From such a fate has the stern and unkindly character of our continent
saved her.
By a strange and singular freak, hardly to be accounted for after all by the physical
nature of the great island, for powerful nations have flourished on a more unpromising soil,
it has been given to the Australians to write their history, beginning from the end of the
eighteenth century, on a blank page.


11.
S the first Englishman to visit New Holland, Dampier is a remarkable personage
in the history of our continent. He was a good observer, and whatever he
saw of the somewhat repellent west coast he faithfully described, and his full
narration of his voyages are most interesting after the meagre accounts
furnished by the Dutch captains. He himself, on his first visit, when he
occupied a subordinate position on board, was threatened with the same fate
as that of the two mutineers of the Batavia , for some utterances which
provoked the wrath of his companions. , Likp a sensible man, Dampier
resolved to keep a still tongue in future, and leave the company at the
first opportunity, which he did ; otherwise he might possibly have never made his second
visit to this country.
Dampier’s cruise in Southern waters was not without result, he discovered and
named New Britain ; and, above all, the completeness of his journal has given us a life-like
picture of the adventurous navigator of those days ; and the plain homely nature of his
language is as realistic in tone as the most modern school could desire. Birds, beasts, fishes
and plants, alike afford material for his descriptive powers, whilst the unfortunate natives
never ceased to be objects of his contempt. A short extract or two from his journal will
exemplify his forcible and yet careful style.
“The land animals that we saw here were only a sort of racoons, different from
those of the West Indies, chiefly as to their legs, for these have very short fore-legs, but go
jumping upon them as the others do (and like them are very good meat), and a sort of guano
of the same shape and size with other guanos described, but differing from them in three
remarkable particulars, for these had a larger and uglier head, and had no tail, only the
stump of a tail which appeared like another head, but not really such, being without mouth
or eyes, yet this creature seemed by this means to have a head at each end. ... I never did
see such ugly creatures anywhere but here. The guanos, I have observed to be very good
meat, and I have often eaten of them with pleasure ; but, though I have eaten of snakes,
crocodiles and alligators, and many creatures that look frightful enough, and there are but
few 1 should be afraid to eat of if pressed by hunger, yet, I think my stomach would have
scarce served to venture upon these New Holland guanos, both the looks and smell of them
being so offensive.”
Dampier’s “ racoon ” was probably a species 01 striped wallaby common to the
western coast, and identical with the Kangaroo a bandes of Mr, Peron. As to the “ guano,”
as he terms it; the large, sleepy, tailless lizard he describes is common enough all over
Australia, but some of them on the west coast are of a more repellent appearance than the
more generally common species. His intercourse with the natives was not, however, always
of a peaceful character. Like most of the ships that visited the New Holland coast fresh
water was an essential want that received the first consideration. After many fruitless
attempts, Dampier landed at a spot where a number of fires held forth hopes of finding the
much needed supply.


“ Betimes in the morning I went ashore with ten or eleven men to search for water.
We went armed with muskets and cutlasses for our defence, expecting to see people there,
and carried also shovels and pickaxes to dig wells. When we came near the shore we saw
three tall, black, naked men on the sandy bay ahead of us ; but as we rowed in they went
away. When we were landed I sent the boat with two men in her to lie a little from the
shore at an anchor to prevent being seized, while the rest of us went after the three black
men who were now got to the top of a small hill about a quarter of a mile from us, with
eight or nine more men in their company. They, seeing us coming, ran away. When we
came on the top of the hill where they first stood, we saw a plain savannah about half a mile
from us, farther in from the sea. There were several things like hay-cocks standing in the
savannah, which, at a distance, we thought were houses, looking just like the Hottentots’
houses, at the Cape of Good Hope ; but we found them to be so many rocks. We searched
about these for water, but could find none, nor any houses, nor people, for they were all
gone. Then we turned again to the place where we landed, and there we dug for water.”
Whilst their well-sinking was in progress they noticed a number of natives
approaching them, and the idea occurred to Dampier as it has to many men since in the
like position, that by capturing one of these aborigines, he could obtain from him the
information he desired concerning a water supply. Taking two men with him he proceeded
to attempt to put it in execution. As they approached, the natives gave way, so Dampier
and his sailors concealed themselves behind a sand hillock, and a small party of natives
came suddenly close to their hiding place. One of the sailors was a young man noted
for his fleetness and he at once gave chase and overtook the natives who turned and stood
at bay.
“ He had a cutlas, and they had wooden lances, with which, being many of them,
they were too hard for him. When he first went towards them I chased two more, but
fearing how it might be with my young man, I turned back quickly and went up to the top
of the sand-hill, when I saw him near me chiefly engaged with them. Upon their seeing
me one of them threw a lance at me that narrowly missed me. I discharged my gun to
scare them, but avoided shooting any of them, till finding the young man in great danger
from them and myself in some, and that though the gun had a little frightened them at first,
yet they soon had learnt to despise it, tossing up their arms and crying ‘ pooh, pooh, pooh,’
and coming on afresh with a great noise, I thought it high time to shoot one of them, which
I did. The rest seeing him fall made a stand again, and my young man took the opportunity
to disengage himself and come off to me ; my other man was also with me who had done
nothing all this while, having come out unarmed ; and I returned back with my men design-
ing to attempt the natives no further, being very sorry for what had happened already.”
After all this skirmishing, Dampier and his men only succeeded in getting some
unpalateable brackish water, and soon afterwards he left the inhospitable coast for good.
Any errors he falls into in his account of New Holland, are sufficiently patent and easily
accounted for. Dampier did not return, like many of his predecessors, with marvellous tales of
gigantic savages or some such legend as the one once current, that, “ under the torrid zone,
there is a nation, every man of which has one large, flat foot, with which, when he lies on his
back, he shades himself from the sun.”


These and similar travellers’ tales are easily accounted for by the desire of the
Dutch to deter other nations from visiting New Holland, and from New Guinea and its war-
like inhabitants being* counted as part of the mainland. Although Torres made his way
through the Strait at the very beginning of the seventeenth century, it must be remembered
that the account of his doing so was not made public at the time ; nor was he aware that he
had passed to the immediate northward of Terra Australis , for he was actually seeking to
verify its existence ; and, beyond a doubtful mention of sighting high land to the South, there
is no reason to suppose that he saw or guessed anything of its position.
This confusion of New Guinea with Australia led to a good deal of misconseption
on the part of those who were desirous of initiating a rival Company to the Dutch East India.
Australia was credited with a great deal more natural fertility than it possessed, even after
Dampier’s time. Many proposals were published to take advantage of the supposed trade of
the unknown land, amongst them one which has a decided flavor of West Africa about it.
The writer advocates a headquarters settlement being established in New Britain or Juan
Fernandez, rather a wide choice, and hints about certain profitable speculations in
“ blackbirding ” as it is now termed. “It would indeed in this case be absolutely necessary
to settle Juan Fernandez, the settlement of which place being under the direction of that
Company (The South Sea Company), if it could be so, as, very probably, they might fall into
some share of the slave trade from New Guinea, which must prove wholly advantageous
considering the opportunity they would have of vending those slaves to the Spaniards in Chili
and Peru.”
It is to be feared that very little profit would have been made out of either Papuans
or Australian aborigines, the difficulty of catching any number would have been
considerable, and the mortality on the voyage wholesale, nor is it likely that the few
survivors would have been found of much value for labour purposes on arrival ; in fact, the
brand of Australians would not have become popular in the slave market. There is,
however, a cold-blooded frankness about the proposal that is refreshing.
M. Peron, the distinguished French Naturalist, who visited us during the first years
of this century, had far different views for the native population. However Utopian they may
appear, they are distinctly opposed to slave trading. Civilization he thought would be
the means of totally transforming their natures. “ Let us now look to the probable, nay,
certain results of a departure from the wild life, an abandonment of their - ferocious and
vagabond habits. Let us suppose these people collected together in more numerous societies,
resident in villages, and peace with general consent, succeeding to those eternal and sanguinary
wars which destroy so much of the population. Property now will excite emulation, and the
necessity of preserving this property from individual depredation, induce the union of the force
of the mass, and the formation of laws of general convention.”
“ Here fancy fondly pictures the domesticated kangaroo swarming around the cabins
of the improved natives, the cassowary, even more readily tamed, presenting them daily food,
and its large and excellent eggs ; the black swan multiplying its broods on Die neighbouring
waters ; and the beautiful lyre-tailed pheasant, with the superb minura of the Blue Mountains,
repaying with their numerous progeny and their eggs, the attention and care of their masters,”
Alas for the realisation of this picture !


Amongst the earliest of the navigators credited, without any particular reason, as
having touched at Australia during his voyage round the world, is Magellan, or Magahlaens,
according to the Portuguese spelling. In the account of the voyage, that ended so
disastrously for the Captain General, there js not even the most distant allusion to our
continent to be found. Magellan’s voyage, however, is most interesting to Australians, both
as being the first circumnavigation of the globe, and from the manner of death so
closely resembling the fate of our own Captain Cook. Properly speaking, Magellan himself
did not actually succeed in sailing round the world, as he met his death in the Philippine
Islands. Virtually, however, he may be said to have done so, as he had almost reached the
limit of the Portuguese traders, at the Malaccas, and out of his fleet of five vessels and two
hundred and thirty-seven men, oile vessel with eighteen survivors reached Europe after three
years battling with wind and waves all over the world. Magellan’s cruise was beset with
adventures. When entering the straits that bear his name, below Cape Horn, the captains
of the other four vessels formed a plot against him, which was discovered, Magellan was a
man who evidently believed in strong measures. One traitor was flayed alive, one stabbed,
and another, in company with a priest, marooned amongst the giants of Patagonia. Next
the Sant Antonia , in command of a disappointed rival, Emanuel Gomez, deserted, and, having
picked up the two abandoned men, returned to Spain,
Across the unknown ocean, which they called the Pacific, on account of the
favourable weather they experienced, the adventurers sailed beneath the strange
constellations that they were the first to notice. The two clusters of stars that bear the
name of the skilful navigator, and the constellation that Australians seem to consider that
they have an entire monopoly of, “ when in the midst of the ocean we discovered in the west
five stars of great brilliancy in the form of a cross.”
Although they were not beset by storms, famine and sickness played havoc with
them, and for months the only land they sighted were two lonely islets, that they called
“ The Unfortunate Islands.”
r rhe manner of Magellan’s death is worth narrating as a faithful picture from the
history of those times, a last glimpse of the early discoverers before turning down that page
of our story. The best account is by the Chevalier Pigafetta, a volunteer in Magellan’s ship.
At the Philippine Islands, the Spaniards, who carried their dogmas hand in hand
with their swords and their trade, found themselves fully employed in converting and
baptising the heathen kings and their subjects, spreading the glory of the King of Spain,
and establishing trade centres. The kings were to be found on every island ; one of them
informed them that “ gold was found on his island in lumps as large as a walnut, and even
as an egg, mingled with earth, and that they used a seive for sifting it.” After the alleged
conversion of many hundreds, and the performance of a miracle by Magellan, the skirmish
occurred that terminated his career. A certain section of the people on one island declined
to follow the general example, and Magellan threatened to bring them to order at the point
of the lance. They defied him, and replied that they had also lances. Declining all
assistance from the lately baptized monarch, Magellan landed with a company of forty or
fifty men, and was immediately attacked by three battalions of the natives, some fifteen
hundred strong. The Spaniards were in full armour, with the exception of their legs, and


their miisqueteers and crossbowmen poured volley after volley into the enemies’ ranks, but
could not check them. At last a poisoned arrow struck the Captain in the leg. He then
ordered a slow retreat, but the majority flew precipatately, and only some seven or eight
remained with the captain. Pigafetta relates* the end thus :—“We retreated gradually, still
continuing to fight, and were now a bow’s shot from the islanders, and in the water up to
our knees, when they renewed their attack with fury, throwing at us with the same lance
five or six times over, as they picked it up on advancing. As they knew our Captain they
chiefly aimed at him, so that his helmet was twice struck from his head ; still he did not
give himself up to despair, and we continued in a very small number fighting by his side.”
This unequal combat was maintained for an hour, until Magellan received a thrust through
the bars of his helmet. He pierced his opponent in return, the lance remaining in the body,
then he essayed to draw his sword, but his arm was disabled. Then came the end. The
islanders pressed on him ; one cut him on the leg with a sword, and he fell on his face.
“Thus,” says the chronicler, “ perished our guide, our light, and our support.”
Inspired by the defeat of the Spaniards, the friendly monarch threw off his newly
acquired Christianity, and laid a plot in which some twenty more of the adventurers fell
victims, amongst them Juan Serano one of the captains appointed in Magellan’s place. His
fate was tragic. Bound and wounded he was led to the shore whence he entreated those on
board to ransom him with merchandise. This they unfeelingly refused to do. “Juan
Serano continued to implore compassion of his fellow-gossip by assuring him he should be
massacred the instant we set sail; and finding at length that all his entreaties were in vain,
he uttered deep imprecations and appealed to the Almighty on the great Day of Judgment
to exact account of his soul from Johan Carvajo his fellow-gossip. He was however
disregarded and we set sail without ever hearing afterwards what became of him.”
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA


GENUINE CASH SALE,
To continue till Christmas
Mr. W. M. Maclardy invites inspection of a large Shipment of Choice and
Tasty Art Goods which he has just opened, suitable for Christmas and New Year Presents, and
which he is enabled to Sell at Less than English Wholesale Cost.
The Shipment consists of—
TOILET CASES, MANICURE SETS, JEWEL CASES, SHAVING CASES,
WORK BOXES, GLOVE CASES, CIGAR CASES,
HANDKERCHIEF CASES, LADIES’ DESKS AND ALBUMS,
In Oxydised Metal, Plush, and Plush and Metal combined.
These goods are well worth paying a visit to see because they are really Works of Art, and
there is no such chance anywhere else in the City of buying such goods so cheaply.
MR, MACLARDY also begs to point out that as he is determined to relinquish the Fancy
trade by the end of the year and only keep a Stock of Mercantile Stationery for his regular
customers (which will not require a front shop), all other Fancy Goods and Stationery should
command a ready sale.
All Goods not disposed of by the end of the year will be offered In quantities to the Trade or
sent to Auction.
SAMPLES OF SOME OF THE PRICES:—
USUAL PRICE, SALE PBICE
Leather Bags ... ... ... ... 205., 175., Bs. 6d. 125., Bs. 6d., 4s. 6d.
Cigar Cases ... ... ... ... 205., 17s. 10s., 7s. 6d.
Cigarette Cases ... ... ... ... 155., 145., 10s. 7s. 6d,, 75., ss.
Purses ... ... ... ~. ... 2s. 6d. to 30s. Is. 6d. to 15s.
Box Stationery ... ... ... ... Is. to 4s. 6d. to 2s. 6d.
Card Cases ... ... ... ... Is. 6d. to 12s. 6d. Is. to Bs,
Office Bells ... ... ... ... 2s 6d. to 12s. 6d. Is. 6d. to 10s.
Mathematical Instruments in boxes ... ... Is. 6d. to 20s. Is. to 14s
All other Fancy Goods reduced in proportion.
A fine chance for Committees of Fairs and Bazaars.
W, M. MACLARDY,
Printer and Stationer,
319 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY


H« nUINQ fc Lmtk«»
33S G-EOBG-B STREET.
HAVE ALWAYS ON VIEW A MAGNIFICENT STOCK OF
PIANOS, ORGANS, &c.
9 * ’
THEIR SPECIALITIES ARE THE
OSTEIN WAY AMERICAN PIANOS.**-
The manufacture 6f Steinway Pianofortes was commenced in New York in 1853, and their supremacy—artistic, scientific
and structural—over all other Pianofortes is a fact which has long since passed beyond the arena of discussion, and is now fully
recognised throughout the civilized world.
JULIUS FEURICH, UEBEL & LECHLEITER AND CARL ECKE
By musical connoisseurs these are considered to be the finest Pianos manufactured in Germany, and their sterling qualities
have been abundantly proved by long and varied experience in the trying climate of these colonies. They are undoubtedly the most
dependable and effective Pianos obtainable at the price.
THE VICTOR AND BELLING PIANOS.
Manufactured specially to our order. Their sterling merits have been so thoroughly proved in these colonies during the past
10 years, that they have become unquestionably the most popular of all low-priced Pianos. Our principle from the first has been to
put forth none but thoroughly reliable Instruments, and, as a result, we have now the Largest Piano Business in Australia.
PISHOS BY Slrlr. (OTHER WElrlr KHOWH MSKERS.
The ESTET ORGANS From £ll 11s.
240,000 ALREADY SOLD.
Are celebrated for Power and Quality of Tone, Handsome Cases, and Excellence of Workmanship and Finish.
LATEST PUBLICATIONS ALWAYS IN STOCK. TlbirTfT^«Tr#r* , ‘
PARCELS FROM LONDON BY EVERY MAIL.
music.
*•0
•“'p
BOOSEY’S BAND AND ALL OTHER KINDS OF MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS
Sent to any part of the Colony on our EASY TIME PAYMENT SYSTEM. Pianos Tuned, Hired or Exchanged.
Illustrated Catalogues Post Free on Application.
